

GUIDING PRINCIPLES
j / 4
In the Production of
WOOL AND MUTTON:
WITH
H ints on Cattle Breeding.
ANDREW ROSS, M.U>.,
Masteb in Suegeey of the Univeesitf of Glasgow ;
Formerly for-several years Assistant Mciiical Officer, under Dr. Digby, to the Smdh District
of the West London Union, and Assistant Sanitary Inspector for the City of London.
And also, formerly,
Assistant Surgeon ('Mh Cambridge Militia, quartered at Palatine Square Barracks,
. Dublin.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PRINTERS, 186 PITT STREET.




GUIDING PRINCIPLES
In the Production of
WOOL AND MUTTON:
WITH
H ints on Cattle Breeding
ANDREW ROSS. M. 0..
Master in Surgery of the University op Glasgow ;
.Formerly for several years Assistant Medical Officer, under Dr. Digby, to the South District
of the West London Union, and Assistant Sanitary Inspector for the City of London.
And also, formerly.
Assistant Surgeon GGth Cambridge Militia, quartered at Palatine Square Barracks,
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PRINTERS, 186 PITT STREET.
1878.
r/5D?6 ■




lASS3S ) r |SO£ltf>
14-1 -H-,
PREFACE.
The Author has been induced to lay these papers and letters before
the public in pamphlet form, in compliance with the request of
several friends. The paper on the “ Guiding principles in the pro-
duction of wool and mutton ,’ was originally written and submitted
to the Secretary of the Agricultural Society of New South Wales,
for the purpose of being read before that Society, in reply to one
which had previously been read by Mr. George Henry Cox, on the
same subject. Not being a member of the Society, and the paper
not having been entertained as anticipated, I somewhat felt con-
strained to place it in the hands of the S. M. Herald for publica-
tion, and that journal at once condescended to publish the paper in
a series of letters which appeared in the Sydney Mail of the 22nd
and 29th August, and 12th September, 1874. The subject is one
surrounded with deep interest, and to none more so than our stock-
owners or the breeders of sheep and cattle throughout the colony.
In commenting on the merits of the paper the Sydney Mail of the
29th September, 1874, remarks as follows :
“This week will be found a second letter on the principles
THAT SHOULD GUIDE BREEDERS OF SHEEP IN THE PRODUCTION OF
wool and mutton, by Dr. Andrew Ross. The subject is the same
that was treated some time ago by Mr, George Henry Cox; and
our correspondent addressed his remarks to the Agricultural
Society, in response to an invitation to do so, but they came too late
for the discussion. Being submitted to • us, some portions seemed
so much to the point that space was given. The writer, in giving
the results of some years’ experience as a sheep-breeder, deserves a
hearing. What he says respecting the adaptation of grass to the
sheep should have the attention of all graziers. It is too often the


case that a man thinks that when he has selected his variety of
sheep and mated his ewes, and done all that is prescribed by the
scientific rules for good breeding, there is nothing more to be
effected. This is but one-half of his work however. Having
adapted his shes|) to the soil and climate, he has to adapt the grass
to the sheep, else his labour is likely to prove futile. The vital
properties of the animal depend on its food ; if this is wanting
they will be wanting. Some of the native grasses are highly
nutritious, but they will not bear close feeding, and quickly dis-
appear under pressure. Should they not be replaced the grasses
that do duty will generally be found unequal to the task, and the
stock dependent on them are lowered in character, they lose
stamina, and are readily seized by disease. Nothing but a careful
attention to the kind and quality of the grass, then, can ensure the
breeder the results he anticipates from selection. He who places
much dependence in blood must not be neglectful of what the blood
is formed. Nor must he trust entirely in climate. There is very
much truth in the remarks of our correspondent with respect to
the effect of a lowered quality of grass in producing a correspond-
ing degeneracy of body. Many of the flocks of the colony show a
marked tendency to disease of late. Mr, Ferrers, in his pamphlet,
has dwelt upon causes of this circumstance, and ai’rives at the same
conclusion as Dr. Ross. The views of the latter have the advantage
of being derived from his own experience.
Xl Molong, New South Wales,
“January 1, 1878.”


GUIDING PRINCIPLES IN THE PRODUCTION
OF WOOL AND MUTTON.
The property of the kaleidoscope is such that, turn it which ever way
we will, it invariably assumes new and interesting forms. The same
rules then which apply to this optical instrument are, in a measure,
equally as much applicable to any new hints or suggestions that may be
thrown out in regard to sheep-breeding, &c. The subject of our text
then, is one that becomes equally as instructive, interesting, and debatable
as it happens to be dealt with from different and distinct stand-points of
view. In attempting, therefore, on the present occasion to deal with a
subject so diversified and important, I must at the outset crave the
Society’s (or reader’s) indulgence and forbearance,'should the ideas and
hypothesis now herein set forth not happen to be exactly in accordance
with the popular voice or the opinions entertained by recognised standard
authorities. Some people seem to think that sheep-owners do not devote
a sufficiency of care and attention to the rules pertaining to the proper
breeding and culling of flocks, while others again complain of the
disastrous effects of indiscriminate crossing, and the insane attempt to
breed the same class of sheep in every portion of this large and variable
territory. So far such assertions may sound feasible enough, but there
are other laws, we must understand quite as capable of bringing about
these apparent changes as those that have just been enumerated.
Mr. Cox, in a recent paper which he read before the Agricultural Society
of New South Wales, in Sydney, expresses his opinion On these points :
were ruined by the introduction of Rambouillet, Nigretti, Saxon, and
other fine woolled rams, undoing all that our fine climate had effected
for generations past in establishing the qualities for which our wool was
so renowned.” By Mr, Cox’s assertion it is to be observed then that it
is entirely owing to climate (query how and in what way does it operate T)
and not to any special or particular breed of sheep that has given our
wool so great a standard and degree of perfection. He insists, too, that
the chief cause of this deterioration in our wools, and the alteration in
the type and character of our Australian merinos, is attributable to the
introduction of the fine woolled class of sheep previously alluded to.
Now if climate or its influence alone be the only real original cause in
operation in bringing our wool to so high a state and degree of perfection,
what need he or any other person be alarmed about the introduction of
a few foreign sheep, since the climate, I am sure, is quite as unaltered
and good now as it was fifty years ago. If the climate is the sole cause


of the mischief (as implied) in the fu-st instance, it surely stands to
reason that its salutory effects must be equally beneficial in the second.
If it benefitted the early Austi’alian merino it must surely also, on the
same principle, still continue to benefit others— i.e., the same climatic
influences must still exist now as it did then, iri’espective of breed or
importations. But I take exception to so undefined and vague a
doctrine—an objection so wholesale, sweeping, and universal; and firmly
maintain the principle that the real source of the deterioration of our
wool, and alteration in the type and character of our sheep (if there be
really any change at all) is wholly owing and traceable to the operation
of another and totally different set of causes —endemic, either climatic or
foreign—than those which he has specified. It is not directly
attributable, in my candid opinion, to the importation of a few head of
foreign sheep (no matter of what class, breed, or quality), or yet to
indiscriminate crossings, or the want of proper judicious management in
breeding and culling; but rather, I hold, that the more probable secret
and cause of the wide-spreading evil arises from more potent and deeply-
rooted causes over which the majority of our sheep-owners have, until
lately, and that, too, only but in a very partial and imperfect manner,
paid but little or no attention to. Of course lam now alluding to the
slow but insidious wholesale destruction, deterioration, and degeneration
that is taking place of our native herbage and grasses, owing to the
abominable practice which has been so long prevalent in these colonies
of grazing sheep on the same runs year after year without either rest to
the land, reparation of vegetation, or reproduction of seeds, thereby
causing the various kinds of grasses that are best suited to the constitu-
tion of the sheep to die out altogether, or else to become so altered in
type, growth, and chemical composition, as to be utterly unfitted to
maintain the animal in anything like a uniform healthy thriving con-
dition, far less expect to find the production of a good class or sound
sample of wool. It is just as possible to produce scurvy or a cachectic
state of constitution in sheep as it is in man on a sameness and insuflici-
ency in the quality, composition, and elements of the food or vegetation.
If the constant cropping of land with the same kind of crop has the
tendency to exhaust the soil, so also, on similar principles, must the
system of perpetual grazing of sheep over the same area of country be
to the destruction of vegetation, at least to those plants that are most
conducive to the health and sustenance of the animal. Let us for a
moment turn our attention back to the time when our merinos were first
introduced into these colonies by Mr. Macarthur, and then compare the
profuse richness and superabundance of native grasses and succulent
herbage that was in existence in those days, to the inferior sorts—the
scanty, meagre, almost juiceless dried roots and grasses which exists on
the majority of our runs nowadays. And is this fact not enough proof
to convince all, even the most biggoted or sceptical, that the evil is one
that has arisen not so much from the importations of foreign sheep as to
the slow but sure deterioration that has been going on in the nature and
character of our native grasses and vegetation, owing to the unnatural
and suicidal policy that has hitherto been so unremittingly pursued in


four system of sheep-grazing during so many long years'? It is folly, then,
<to talk of the importation of fine woolled sheep having ruined our flocks,
when we have more powerful and transparent causes at work hastening
our downfall, and staring us so visibly in the face almost at every step
we turn. Had no change occurred in the first instance in the nature of
our vegetation, neither also, probably, would there have been any failure
or injury arising from the importation of fresh blood, no matter of what
type, class, or breed, coarse or fine. Had our pasture lands remained in
their original state of unadulterated richness, so also, in proportion, the
fruits of fresh breeds and our labours would have been visible in our
flocks at this day. The radical cause, then, of the mischief is one, in my
opinion, that is more or less attributable to the yearly deterioration in
our pasture lands arising out of our bad and perpetual system of grazing.
There were few or no noxious weeds, burrs, thistles, trefoil, and grass
seed, &c., to contend against in these early days of the colony. The
herbage, we may say, remained then in its original state of unsophisti-
cated purity. Not so now, for our runs are yearly becoming more and
more invaded with all kinds of rubbish which exercises, more or less, as
the evil increases, its baneful effects on the constitution of sheep and the
production of wool. Yes, vegetation then existed in all its lovely
attractive verdure, virgin richness, and unalloyed purity—so luxuriant
and plentiful, in fact, that it was often with some difficulty to tell which
way a flock of sheep was travelling, only by the movements in the tops
of the long juicy grasses. But through the system of perpetual grazing,
aided of course by the annual recurrence of bush fires, the only relic we
have now left of these galore bygone days is a few all but worthless
sapless roots and grasses that in moderate or even extreme dry weather,
become so dry and bamboo-like that sheep must either eat them or else
starve. The consequence is, flocks have now to travel ten times the
distance in search of food, or in order to get a bellyful, that they did
only a few years back, or during the time of these good old early days of
the colony. In fact, from this one cause alone, together with over-stock-
ing, they either now remain in a kind of half-starved state or are ill and
irregularly fed, always trusting to Providence for rain, min; and grass,
besides being studded and devoured with the endless irration of prickly
grass seeds, often found more numerous in their pelts than wool on their
backs. And yet, in the face of such pasture, poverty, and stubborn facts
like these—the hot-bed that causes us to be invaded with so many fresh
plagues, epidemics, and distempers—what other remedy is there left for
us to follow, but to try to bring about a new and improved radical reform
in our present system of grazing? Taking all from the land and putting
nothing back, no, not even allowing it to run its own regular natural
course of reproducing and multiplying. As our pasture lands keep
diminishing in feeding properties, so also on the same scale must the
type of our sheep alter accordingly, and thus the quality and production
of our wool must consequently also diminish in value. To keep up the
.growth and waste of sheep, and the production of a good sound class of
wool, our pasture lands and grasses must be more strictly attended to,
in place of continuing to eat down every fresh blade of grass almost as


fast as it springs tip. Crossings with fresh blood is a good rule (in its-
own place), which may be serviceable enough, but to look upon this as.
the only royal road to secure either success or perfection is the height
of madness that is likely to end in the ruin of both sheep and master.
It is as impossible to maintain sheep in first-class health and thriving
condition on an insufficiency of food as it is man. Yet out of the millions
of acres of lands in these colonies that are now used as sheep-walks,
how many owners are there who have ever really tried to conserve one
single class or blade of grass belonging to our native herbage, or yet to
improve their extensive tracts of country by the introduction of artificial
grasses 1 Can we safely say that the number is even one in a thousand?
No, we rather doubt it! And yet a few of our earlier pioneers and more
successful sheep owners, surrounded, too, probably, by more advantageous
circumstances in the shape of climate, grass, and water, affect to prove
that the cause of deterioration of our wool and sheep is more owing to
the injudicious system of importing a few fine-woolled foreign rams,
together, of course, with a want of proper care and attention in the art
of culling and breeding, than to any other exciting cause or set of
physical or meteorolgical laws. But cull, breed, or import as we will, if
the class and quality of grass be not in existence, our labour, be it ever
so vigilant and diligent, must naturally prove abortive. As much
attention must be paid to the nature and quality of the pasture, and
perhaps more so than to the mere routine or mechanical process of
culling or breeding, how puerile and absurd in reason to think that
breeding alone can ever form the main source from which the character-
istic of our sheep or the quality of our wool is to be permanently
maintained. Culling, I feel certain, is a thing that would be less required
were closer attention to be paid by sheep farmers to the way in which
flocks are depastured, and less to novelties, or breeds this, and breed that.
Sheep are either the tool of man or else of nature. When of man, they
must be regularly fed on good food or artificial gi-asses; of nature, they
but adopt themselves to surrounding circumstances, in the shape of plenty
good food, pasture, water, climate, and other outward causes.
By artificial grasses they are more readily improved, whereas when
left to nature to pick up what few precious roots or blades that may
chance to come in their way, they not unfrequently, a priori, dwindle
or degenerate in size, health, character of wool, and productiveness.
Overstocking is another prolific source of this baneful evil. Quantity
rather than quality seems to be nearly the one predominant motto of all
masters. Thousands of sheep, unlimited scope of magnificent fattening
country and little wool, in place of studying reduced runs, fewer but
more select numbers, good grass, and then plenty of wool. The return
of wool is exactly in proportion to the care and attention that has been
paid to the flocks, the nature of the runs, or the kind and quality of the
pasture. Stinted feed produces indifferent stinted fleeces, and a brittle,
harsh, defective, yolkless wool. A regular superabundance of sound,
grass produces a healthy secretion of yolk, heavy fleeces, and a choice
firm, fine, elastic fibre of wool. The breaks or flaws in wool but too
truly indicate regularities or irregularities in the quantity or quality of


the grass or season, the same as the growth of trees exhibits large or
small circles in their woody fibre according as the seasons happen to be
dry or drooping. It is monstrous to think that sheep can ever be main-
tained in the same uniform condition without proper attention being
paid to the nature of the food on which the animals have to live and
grow wool and mutton. When feed is plentiful the wool may be of a
coarser nature, but what is lost in quality is gained in the increased
quantity, fatness, and flavour of mutton. We may just as well expect
to find good silk from silkworms, fed on an inferior sort of mulberry, as
look for sound wool, good sheep, or fat mutton when the animals are
fed on an inferior juiceless herbage. Grass, then, and not breeding
altogether, is, I contend, the great sine qua non to ensure satisfactory suc-
cess in sheep farming and the production of type,, wool, or mutton. Sheep
fall away in condition quite as readily as man when the supply of food
becomes either irregular or defective in quality, and thus various dis-
tempers are not unfrequently the result. From these few remarks it
will now be apparent that once the sheep farmer has secured and started
with any particular breed, his success must now in a great measure
depend more upon the attention that he pays to his pasture lands and
the system of grazing them, in culling or breeding. I contend that the
system of grazing that has been so long in vogue in these colonies has
been, and will assuredly continue to be, one of the greatest bugbears and
death-blows to sheep farming and wool growing in these colonies—worse
to lessees, in fact, than the want of a proper security of tenure of land.
It is impossible that nature can bear the onefe continued strain that is
now being put upon her native grasses year after year, grazing sixteen:
million sheep on the same runs without the slightest rest to the land,
reparation or chance of the reproduction of fresh seeds or grass.
If closer attention were to be paid to the study, habits, virtue, and
time of flowering and seeding of some of our native grasses, much
national loss of sheep, of deaths, mutton, beef, and wool would be
avoided, and stockowners would not remain half so much at the mercy
of severe or periodical droughts, which tell so severely on sheep and the
production of wool. Sheep are either at feast or famine height, and we
have no regularly established permanent grasses that will withstand the
vicissitudes of all sorts of seasons and weather. The increase in the number
of store-sheep but too truly affords an index to the real poverty of many
of our runs. Improve our grass lands first, and then we adopt the most
effectual measures of transforming crawlers into marketable, wool-bearing
sheep. When feed is scarce or of an indifferent quality, it is nothing
but natural to suppose that sheep must naturally suffer materially from
being driven and dogged backwards and forwards to different parts of a
run. Paddocks are probably a decided improvement; but these again,
nor yet the parcels of sheep in them, ought not to be too large. Good
grass lands, in small divisions, will keep and fatten many more sheep
than when they are of a greater extent. Our Government. I think,
ought to adopt some means of acquiring a more familiar knowledge,
acquaintance, and description of the nutrative value of some of our
Australian or native grasses. By this means graziers would have an


■opportunity of becoming familiar with the good from bad sorts, the late
from the early, and the hardy from the too delicate. If we had some
kind of list or classification of our grasses, graziers then would be
furnished with a much better way of distinguishing the exact nature of
each respective run, instead of, as at present, relying wholly upon the
too vague and absurd way of describing runs as being composed of gum,
. appletree, pine, myall, yarran iron-bark, salt-bush, scrub, as the case
may be. To give the reader an idea of some of our numerous English
grasses, that sheep are so fond of, let us enumerate a few of them.
There is the sweet-scented vernal grass, meadow foxtail, smooth-stalked
meadow grass, short blue meadow grass, rough-stalked meadow grass,
sheeps’ fescue, round-headed cocksfoot grass, Welsh fescue, narrow-
leafed meadow grass, hard fescue, meadow fescue grass, ryegrass, crested
dogtail grass, fertile meadow grass, yellow oat grass, meadow catstail
grass (or Timothy), Bents, and we may add turnips, red and white
clover, lucerne, oil-cake, beans (and straw) and peas, sugar beet, mangel-
wurtzel, &c. How advantageous, then, would it not be to the colony
were we possessed of some kind of list of our Australian grasses, but in
• our present condition I question if many of our graziers are competent
to tell of what kind of grasses their runs are chiefly composed, or to
distinguish one class or tribe of this numerous family from another.
Our Agricultural Society would do well to offer some attractive prize
for the best collection of our native grasses, by this means it would open
up a most useful and invaluable source of practical information on a
subject which at present is but either little or imperfectly known.
Were this to be done it might have the effect of bringing a variety of
collections from all parts of the interior, so as to become the means of
demonstrating the intrinsic value of one district from another by the
mere classification of grasses alone. To say the least, this branch of
farming is as worthy of being awarded a special prize as sheep, wool, or
breeds. Nothing surely can be of more importance in realising either
•of these three latter characters than good food or suitable grass. In
fact it is to the quality of the grasses alone that beef or mutton is made
to assume its peculiar aroma or flavour. A great deal of our colonial
mutton (from this cause) is almost entirely destitute of taste or flavour,
and insipid. As a consequence of this the mutton naturally lacks
strength and nutriment when consumed as an article of diet. Lacking
this natural nutrative principle it rather tends to excite a morbid craving
for meat than to appease the natural wants of the appetite. We see
. this better illustrated in the various forms of tea in common use —some
good some bad. Those containing the most essential oil are the most
refreshing, those with the most tannin the most unwholesome. The
better the aroma and flavour the better tea is as an article of diet. To
secure satisfactory success in the management of sheep there must (it is
nothing but reasonable to suppose) be rest or rotation in grazing, as well
as rest and rotation in the growth of grains or cereals. The one, to my
mind, is as absolutely necessary as the other, in order to maintain the
grasses in their nominal healthy form and rotation necessary to fit them
. for pasture land. Why is the colony of late years becoming so much


.overrun with an inferior class of herbage, weeds, and rubbish 1 only
because far more attention is evidently paid to the selection of different
breeds than in trying to preserve a constant permanent supply of suit-
able grass on which the animal has to live. The first object to be
.attained should be to secure a good crop of grass, and then breed second ;
but in place of which it is more often breed first, and the animal may be
left afterwards to live the best way it can. Some people seem to think
if it bears the name of good blood or breed, it is enough to produce good
wool and mutton without anything else. The majority aim at getting
perhaps a few good rams, a bull, or a thorough-bred. When they have
done this they think they have done enough, whereas food of the right
stamji is of more importance to the progeny than simply trusting to
breeding alone. Be grain ever so good it will never ripen to perfection
in unworked foul land. The same rule holds good with regard to sheep-
farming as with grain-growing—the one must have well tilled land, the
other good pasture. But year after year flocks are depastured on the
.same runs without the slightest rest or variation; the consequence is,
every fresh blade of grass that sheep are most fond of is eaten down
almost as fast as it springs up, leaving those grasses and foul weeds to
grow, that by instinct sheep will neither touch nor yet eat. The natural
consequence is that many of the most useful plants and grasses that
grew so luxuriantly in the early days of the colony are now, by this
perpetual system of grazing, either completely desti’oyed on some runs,
or else they are never allowed to show their verdant heads above the
ground. I put the question for the squatter to determine himself, if it
is not a patent fact that the carrying capabilities of our waste lands or
runs in average seasons irrespective of free-selections, have not now
seriously diminished in value of late years 1 And if so, what other way
can we account for this exhaustion and general failure, but in the way
in which I am now endeavouring to elucidate and point out to the best
of my ability. Not one man in a thousand but what must answer in the
.affirmative, especially if he knows anything of the physiology of sheep
and the growth of vegetation. The evil is one that most assuredly takes
its rise from this one source, and one only, however much we may wish
to try to deceive ourselves in the matter. Only take a ride over any of
our squattages nowadays and I’ll warrant that the experienced eye will
have no difficulty in readily detecting the want of many of our most
useful, valuable, and fattening grasses, especially our annuals or summer
grass ; pooh, pooh the matter as we will, but the naked truth and stub-
born facts remain the same for all that. Under these disastrous circum-
stances what rational man then will attempt to deny but what the
alteration in the character of our vegetation is not the absolute and
direct course of the deterioration of our sheep and the original soft silky
quality of our wool 1 To think or say otherwise, is but to attempt to
contradict that Scripture passages which distinctly says that “all flesh
is grass.”
The true secret and success then, in sheep farming (once fairly
started) is to look to the quality of the feed upon which sheep are to be
fed. Avoid, if possible, that most ruinous and unnatural of all systems,


viz., perpetually depasturing sheep year after year over the same runs
allow runs to rest, or give them a spell for a season; by this means, in
place of the best herbs which go to form the main food of sheep, being
eaten down almost as fast as they spring up, especially after rains, by
adopting this wise principle of protection and partial rotation, be allowed
time to grow up to vigour and maturity, and thus come to renew them-
selves again from fresh seeds instead of being so constantly cropped
down by the sheep to the very roots through mismanagement. When
squattages are fenced in and then subdivided into convenient or ordinary
sized paddocks, it would be an excellent plan to adopt, to let some of the
paddocks spell for a few weeks or months, so as to have an abundance
of grass for the ewes during the beginning of the lambing season.
Where some such rule as this to be regularly and strictly adopted, the
grass would not only be allowed to get a fair start, but the ewes at the
same time would then have no difficulty in filling their bellies, and thus
have less walking to perform in going in search of food, by this means
richer and better milk would be produced, and as a natural consequence,
better lambs and a stronger constitution, if not a greater increase of
wool and mutton. Lambing carried on at some miserable, barren-
station—where there is probably hardly a vestige of food to be seen,,
barring, perhaps, trefoil clover—is anything but a satisfactory way of
securing a good percentage of lambs or good constitutions. The chief
study seems to be, take as much out of the land as possible with the
most economical outlay and expense. Sheep farming any more than
grain growing, is not to be managed in this slovenly haphazard way. To
get a fair and favourable return from either, a fair share of labour and
attention must be expended in the matter ; it is here where the care of
a practical sheep farmer should be most particularly bestowed, and not
at culling or other periods of the year. If ewes are starved or neglected
at lambing it only helps to inflict a corresponding and extra degree of
trouble afterwards in the way of regulating and culling crawlers ; to
cull, simply means to cure some previous defects that have arisen from
neglect at lambing time. The absence or scarcity of food is synonymous
with the word failure ; but good food and good paddocks means plenty
of milk, good lambs, wool, and success with little or no culling ; the
smaller the flocks the less need for culling, the larger the greater, of
course, the increase of crawlers, since a small flock is easier to manage
than a large one. The ratio, in my opinion, increases exactly in propor-
tion to the number contained in a flock, for it is possible to manage 500
successfully, while 1,000 may oft be left to chance.
The laws of nature are quite as unerring and immutable in
quadrupeds as in man. It is no more possible to make a child healthy
and strong on milk that is impoverished than it is to rear lambs on the
milk of ewes that are half-starved or ill fed; the law is quite as fickle
and irrevocable in the one case as in the other.
Another thing that tends materially to interfere with the quality of
our wools and type of our sheep is the absurd practice of wool-brokers
presuming to import sheep on speculation, or advising their clients on
some near cut to improve, perhaps, some supposed faulty wool or breed,.


If the sheep farmer is unable to transact his own business without the
.aid of such petty assistance, it would be safer and better for him to sell out
at once than trust himself in any such hands. When he wants to obtain
reliable advice as to the intrinsic quality and worth of his wool, be it
clothing or combing, let him seek it of the manufacturer and not of the
wool-broker, whose duty it is to be always fault-finding, in order to be
able to buy to advantage to again sell at a high profit. This is one of
the first downfalls and bug-bears to many an active and really enter-
prising sheep farmer. The wool-broker is almost certain to find some
excuse to depreciate the clip, no matter how well the wool may have
been got up or shorn from the best possible breeds. It is either too dry,
• dirty, full of burrs, grass seeds, brittle or uneven in the staple, straight
.and non-elastic, yolkless, or else a thousand other little kind of defects,
so much so that, do one’s very best, and it seems almost a matter of
impossibility to grow a thorough sample or class of wool to please
broker or wool speculators. Upon this, suggestions time after time are
gratuitously made to cure this defect and that other imaginary imper-
fection. The breed in the first instance is perhaps changed, perhaps the
processes of washing or packing ; and when the next year comes round,
will-o’-the-wisp like, he finds his wool quite as faulty as ever, and just as
far off in obtaining his purpose as if he had never made the slightest
alteration. Shuttlecock and battledoor like, he is tossed to and fro
between the broker and the stud-breeder until he finds his purse either
exhausted, or else his flocks completely ruined, and nothing now, perhaps,
but the Insolvency Court staring him in the face. To sheep-farm
successfully, start with what you consider an eligible description of
sheep, and then stick to it in preference to becoming the mere butt or
toy of illiterate advisers. The capitalist who can keep his wool to suit
the market can always manage to secure his own price, but a struggling
farmer is ever at the mercy of his agent or broker ; thus one reason why
wool varies so much in price and value in the same district, on two
adjoining runs, and almost with the same identical breed of sheep.
Viewing the matter then impartially and nationally, I hold that
the principles upon which the rearing and breeding of sheep and the
production of wool should depend are ; —l. At starting be particular to
select some eligible breed, and then afterwards stick to it. 2. Periodical
rest of land, so that the various grasses composing the pasture may have
an opportunity of reproducing themselves from fresh seeds, especially the
■choicer sorts, otherwise cultivate roots and artificial grasses, &c. 3. All
runs which constitute the majority of our large squattages should be
subdivided into smaller holdings, so that agriculture, domestication, and
grazing may be more properly and profitably combined. 4. Select only
.such breeds of sheep, or even cattle, that from experience are found most
suitable to certain districts and conditions of climate. 5. In open
■exposed situations the flocks should be provided with suitable shelter,
plenty of water, and an abundant supply of never-failing grass. It is
impossible to believe that every run or district can afford the same
uniform conditions alike in the management of sheep, or even cattle.
The breed must suit the locality, and not the locality the breed. It is


here where so many mistakes begin in sheep farming. How absurd to-
think that the same class of sheep will thrive alike in all localities and
circumstances—on hilly lands and on plains, on scrub and saltbush
country, or in the district of Mudgee compared with that of Kiandra or
New England. The geography and geology of our country must be first
thoroughly studied, as well as the nature and qualities of our indigenous
grasses, ere we may ever expect to bring the art of sheep-farming and
wool-growing to its proper degree of perfection and national gain. It is
nothing but natural to think that, as improved rules of husbandry
extend, so also will the grazing capabilities of the soil and colony be
made to support a much larger number of sheep than sixteen millions.
In place of, as at present, reckoning four acres to the sheep, the time
will come when it will probably be reversed into four sheep to the acre.
It is impossible, however, to look for any decided improvement in this
direction until our absurd leaseholds of the Crown are turned into free-
holds. It is to the latter alone where we must look for anything like
special, permanent, and progressive benefit arising from sheep-
management and the production of wool. The sooner, then, that
leaseholds are transmogrified into moderate-sized freeholds, the better it
will be for the future of this colony. The present uncertainty of tenure
attending Crown leaseholds places them in an anomalous inconsistency
in regard to judicious sheep-management. It is equally as glaring an
absurdity to imagine that forty-acre free-selection farms—aye, or even a
100 acres—will ever pay until the area is made sufficiently large to
enable him (the farmer) to combine agriculture with grazing. ’Tis the
height of madness to think otherwise. It is self-evident, then, that
neither the lessee of the Crown nor yet the selector will ever be in a
position under present circumstances of advancing the breeding of sheep
or the production of wool in these colonies. Our only hope is confided
in the freeholder with his 500 to 5000 acres. It is in his hands alone
where sheep are most likely to be properly managed, to raise a favorable
profit, and to keep up the repute of the colony for wool-growing, and the
type of our Australian merinos. Climate, I readily admit, exercises a
powerful influence in stamping the character of our wool, but he who
rests contented with stud breeds and climate alone, without the aid of
agriculture and well-husbanded grasses, but deludes himself and the
country into the bargain.
When the foundation is once fairly laid, the next grand test is to
endeavour to keep it so. It is here where the skill and science of the
practical from the non-practical sheep farmer is most revealed. The
experienced hand pays attention to food and good paddocks as well as
breed, whereas the inexperienced one trusts simply to breed alone, and
thinks that any sort of rubbish is fit for sheep to live on. A successful
from a non-successful farmer (all things being equal) is tested by these
principles and these only.
The flock-master may take a ride over his run, and because he
happens to find abundance of grass growing probably in every direction
in which he has travelled, thinks that by this indication alone he must
naturally and rashly conclude that there is no scarcity of food for his


flocks. Were he a painstaking scientific person, this very proof ought
to be enough to convince him that something is wrong, otherwise, with
his sheep so constantly grazing on the run, the grass ought not to be so
plentiful as it is. And what, in almost every instance, is the cause of
this superabundance of ground forage (such as it is), only that it is not
congenial to the animal’s constitution—not, in fact, the natural elements
on which his flocks like to ruminate and graze on, and consequently it
remains a palpable index on the run to show where the missing link
between the soil, grass, and sheep is awanting. To an observing sheep-
master no lesson could possibly be more practical than to see a run
invaded in this manner with tall, worthless, rubbishing grasses that
remain there, as it were, permanent fixtures in the soil, and choking up
the more tender herbs on which sheep thrive so well, and are so fond to-
browse and luxuriate, Nothing I can conceive could have brought about
this melancholy state of affairs so much as the bad system of grazing
which has been carried on in these colonies for so long a number of years.
—taking all from the land and putting nothing back in return—not
even a single attempt made to conserve in any shape or form our most
invaluable indigenous grasses. All is devoured indiscriminately and
unremittingly, and yet in the face of such stubborn facts as these, which
no rational person can well deny, how is it possible for our wool to
possess the same firmness in texture and silky softness now as it did in
the early days of the colony 1 lam clearly at a loss to furnish any other
information that can so readily and, to my mind, conclusively explain
the matter than this. It is hard, lam well aware, to convince minds
that are perhaps wedded or prejudiced to some favourite or particular
breed and locality, but facts nevertheless remain the same, no matter
whether that choice rests on the Leicester, Southdown, Cheviots, Spanish,
Saxon, Merinos, Anglo-Merino, or the Australian type of Merino, &c.
Each and all must be supplied with those grasses that are best fitted for
their animal economy and the production of wool and mutton. How is
it possible to make wool healthy, sound, and elastic without yolk ? Just
as well expect vegetation and trees to grow without sap. Good secretion
of yolk affords nourishment to the wool and protection to the sheep
against inclement states of the weather. It is upon this principle that
tar is used in cold climates as a dressing for sheep to afford them that
protection against bad weather, which the insufficiency of yolk is unable
to furnish. And where, we may ask, is this yolk and the abundance of
potash it contains to come from, only through the vegetable matter on
which the sheep have to live 1 But when potash or yolk producing class
of plants are at discounts on a run how absurd, then, to think that sheep
can either thrive, or produce good wool or mutton. Oh, says the stud-
breeder, change your rams or breed; but change and change until dooms-
day, unless the primary evil be first radically rectified, viz., proper food and
grass, the defects and failures must still continue to remain the same.
The chief reason why sheep thrive so much better on a box-timbered
country is because of the large quantity of potash that this sort of wood
contains. Any one may readily satisfy himself on'this point by looking
at a box tree as it is burning. However green it may be, it will always


be found to burn freely, leaving behind a large quantity of nice fine white
wood ashes, and which contains so large a per centage of this alkali, viz.,
potash, at least compared with that of other kinds of timber which
usually grow on our runs. This potash in solution is taken up by
vegetation, and sheep, therefore, in vegetation come to get the benefit of
it in this way. In all box countries (purely on this account alone), the
grazing capabilities of a run must always remain high. The sheep, too,
thrive better, are freer from disease, and produce excellent samples of
wool that is neither so brittle or yet subject to so many flaws or irregu-
larities in fibre. It is owing to the absence of potash in yolk, or its
that causes some sheep to be harder in the washing than others.
Sheep, with plenty of yolk, and grazed in a box country, need com-
paratively speaking little or no washing, or artificial appliances in
washing. It is where the country is otherwise timbered, generally
. speaking, where this difficulty is most likely to happen. The breed may
give type to our flocks, but it is the grasses alone whereby we must ever
look for a continuation of good qualities in the production of wool or
growth of mutton. But let us return to the squatter, where we left him
on his run. To a person of any experience such a blunder is perfectly
Transparent, for although he may have noticed abundance of grass (such
as it is), still the question might never have occurred to him “if this
grass which he has seen so plentifully distributed over the run is the
right sort of stuff on which his flocks delight to feed T No, probably
not; and the same grass may reach to his saddle-flaps and yet not a
single stem of it will never disappear, and not a blade of it will the sheep
probably ever touch from one year’s end to the other. There are scores
of indigenous grasses in the colony that sheep will never touch, and if
they do many of them are not only utterly unfit for food, but even
noxious to their constitution. ’Tis a pity but what our Government
- could be induced to appropriate a small sum of money from the
Treasury for the purpose of being expended in the way of making a
suitable collection (for publication) of our Australian grasses—■distin-
guishing those that are suitable for sheep from those that are not.
Graziers then might, for a small outlay, have at their command a ready
means of knowing good from useless and indifferent grasses, and therefore
be able to conserve or propagate those only that are found most valuable for
pasture land and grazing purposes. It might be interesting to some to
know that according to experiments made by Linnaeus in Sweden, that
the pastoral lands in that country are composed of no less than 387
different sorts of grasses. Of this number there are no less than 141
different kinds thatsheep will not touch. It surely would be a capital thing
rfor this colony if we had some such ready means of making ourselves as
■ familiarly acquainted with our Australian grasses that they have in
Sweden. If ever we have a school of agriculture established in the
• colony, I hope the “ grasses' ’ will be one of the subjects that is taught
in the curriculum of study. It is practical information of this description
That we stand in most need of in a young country like this, so that we
might know what course to pursue in sheep management, so as to enable
rus to continue to retain our prestige and standing in the British wool


-market. But let the value of our grasses once go down, and it is evident
that many of them are now fast disappearing, and our name as wool-growers
is lost for ever. It is quite as incumbent upon us to strive to keep up the
nature and quality of our pasture lands as it is to become possessed of
any special or particular breed. The one is as essential an element
towards securing our permanent progress and success as the other—the
former perhaps more so than the latter. To import foreign breeds alone,
simply means that we are going the shortest way (although perhaps not
the most lasting) to curing evils arising from our own negligent mis-
management in the system of grazing. He who will devote attention to
the nature and quality of pasture land may readily enough dispense with
the name and novelty of going beyond his own domain or colony for
fresh blood. Were this rule not strictly adhered to, stud-breeders would
■ever fail, like their neighbours ; but this is one of the grand secrets in
the link of their success--viz., grass as well as blood. It is not breeding
alone, but grazing, in the strict sense of the word, that forms the great
fundamental principles of sound sheep-farming. What, need we ask,
would sheep —aye, or even stud-breeds—be without a sufficient supply of
wholesome food 1 Of course, they would all very soon perish, and their
prize wool and pure blood with them. The first law in nature —viz.,
vegetation—should ever be accorded the precedence, and then breed
next; but the rule seemingly that is most thought to be established or
inculcated into the minds of ignorant persons is breed first, and their
food second. According to this rule of thumb reasoning, if sheep only
possess breed, no matter on what description of grass they may afterwards
be fed, they must as a matter of course all turn Out successful graziers.
Such hollow sham delusions are more like the reasonings of fools
than the reflections of sound practical thinkers and judges. In speaking
of Swedish grasses I may as well here take the liberty of incidentally
reraai’king tlxat the same rule applies to the grazing of cattle and horses
■as sheep. There are scoi’es of grasses in existence in these colonies that
sheep won’t touch ; arxd if not poisoxious they are at least by natural
instinct avoided by them as unsuitable to their nature. From experi-
.ments made on the subject by Linnaeus it has been found that horses ate
262 species, and refxxsed 212; cattle ate 276, and refused 218 ; while
sheep took readily 387 species, and refused oxily 141. Vide “ The
Veterinarian,” 1833, p. 532. A list of the grasses may be seexi in the
second volume of the “ Amcenitates Academicxe.” Of what incalculable
.advantage, iix this point of view alone, would be the institution of similar
experiments axxd the collection of such useful information in New South
Wales. How readily, then, might not our farmers be enabled to rid
their pastures of all bad weeds by cultivating those that were not only
safe, but wholesome. We have a great portion of the machinery already
in existence ixx these colonies in the shape of our shepherds for the
workixxg out and making a collection of such useful, valuable stores of
information on this all-important subject. Shepherds in tendixxg their
flocks could easily watch the grasses that are mostly refused by sheep
and those they ax-e most fond of eating; by this xneans they might be
to make a suitable collection of the vaxdous sorts, good and


bad, for the use of their masters, while their masters again might have
the specimen afterwards forwarded to the Government for special
classification, etc. We should probably hear less then of stock dying
from poisonous herbs or unknown weeds ; if so, it would be the fault of
owners, who could not then plead ignorance, or the want of reliable
information, as an excuse to guide them in the matter.
But let us halt for a moment, only to turn our eyes over this vast
extensive territory and richly endowed laboratory of nature, and there
do not we see scattered around us on every side ample proof of this wise
provision of nature fully exhibited to us in other classes of the vegetable
kingdom, to wit, in our numerous varieties of timber which occupy the
land conjointly with vegetation. We have cedar, gum, box, iron-bark,
apple-tree, yarran, pine, myall, wattle, river oak, and even saltbush,
currajong, &c., all growing in their own peculiar latitude and habitat.
It is the same, then, with the different breeds of stock as it is with the
varieties of timber. Each will exist only in its own zone or peculiar
soil, or as nature has destined it to be in accordance with the nature and
structure of its particular constitution. Man is the only animal that is
an exception to this rule, for by nature he k a cosmopolitan. Situa-
tion, food, and climate then furnish the general type, and not man’s
fanciful and fastidious notions of breeding, or the supposed inter-
mixture of blood this with breed that. Who can change the colour
of the Ethiopian! Some people may argue and ask to know
what knowledge or experience I can have of sheep, since lam not
possessed of any; but I answer that the faithful but stern schoolroom
(Nature) is alike open to me to gaze upon her treasures as it is to them.
Although I have no flocks of my own, this surely does not debar me
from watching and observing the flocks of others. Besides, I have had
the experience of some of the best judges in England and Scotland, and
none more so perhaps than from my old friend Mr. James Crosbie, who
was for upwards of twenty years land-steward to the Hon. Octavius
Buncombe, Esq., M.P., Waresley Park, near Cambridge. A more
thoroughly practical and experienced person than Mr. Crosbie in that
locality is not to be found. It was he who first introduced the potato
as a rotation and fertilizing crop, and which has now become so
deservedly popular and profitable to the farmers in that quarter.
A s the plough extends in these colonies, so also, I firmly believe,
will the evil effects of long or short droughts diminish. The ground is
now so completely trodden down by sheep and cattle that when rain
falls it is as rapidly again carried off into our creeks. No so when land is
once subject to the plough, for the soil, then, I hold, is made to retain any
moisture that may fall; and as the water gradually sinks downwards
into the earth, so also must it not be more likely to again burst forth in
the shape of numerous springs 1 By this means the plough is one of the
cheapest and most effectual ways of conserving a supply of water on a
run in the shape of springs. Ploughed land, I contend, acts as a kind of
sponge, a sourt of filter, natural harbinger, or reservoir of springs. This
is an action that is readily enough proved, especially where land has been
drained, and it known that drains will often continue to run during the


most protracted dry weather. In this district I know of several farmers
who have now an ample supply of permanent water on their farms where
water was never previously known to exist, and there is no other way
in which I can account for the change, only that the rains percolated
through the ploughed lands, and thus arises the newly made and most
serviceable springs.
In an extract that appears in Mr. Cox’s paper, we have I think
sufficient proof to show that the nature of our indigenous grasses
exercises quite as much influence on the nature of our wool as what
arises from climate. The paragraph alluded to reads as follows :—“ As
long as 1828, before a Committee of the House of Lords, Mr. Henry
Hughes, woolbroker, London, says :—The Australian and Yan Dieman’s
Land wools have been of varied qualities, but all possessing an extra-
ordinary softness, which the manufacturers here so much admire, that
that they are sought for far more than any other description of wools,
from that peculiar quality which is supposed to arise from climate alone.
Other wool staplers and merchants speak of our wools in similar terms.”
Now the practical and logical inferences to be deduced from these
remarks is—“lf our wools possessed such fine qualities of softness in
the year 1828, why do they lack this virtue and quality at the present
time 1” If the quality of softness sprang originally from climatic
influences alone in 1828, surely the selfsame result must still occur now
as it did then, unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that our
climate during the interval has been altering for the worse ; and this fact
I am convinced can never be conclusively established by any of our
known physical or meteorological laws. How are we then to arrive at
any satisfactory explanation in this vexed matter, only in the way I
have in this paper been endeavouring to point out, viz., through the
rapid disappearance, degeneration, and deterioration that is most unmis-
takably taking place in our indigenous grasses, and brought about by so
unnatural and perpetual a system of grazing. This sudden change in the
silkiness of our wool is not owing to the want of proper care in culling,
or yet to the importation of a few foreign sheep ; but the chief cause is,
in my opinion, wholly attributable to the insiduous waste that has been
taking place in the character of our pasture lands. Pooh, pooh it, those
who like and tell me probably that we have more grass at the present
time than we know well what to do with. This may be all true enough,
but this is entirely owing to the excessive rains and floods we have lately
had. This is an exception, perhaps, to ordinary seasons; and exceptions
therefore have no right to govern general rules. Taking one year with
another, it is, I think, self-evident that we suffer oftener from a scarcity
of grass, especially in summer, than otherwise, and this is the ground
upon which I take my stand. So long as the supply of food continues
irregular, so long, also, I say, will wool continue harsh, irregular,
defective, &c. This I believe to be the only manner in which we can
reveal the matter in a time, honest, and scientific light,
Let the unbiassed mind only think and reflect rationally on the
matter, and I wonder how any one could entertain any doubt as to the
radical source of the injury. For upwards of fifty years sheep have been


regularly depastured on tlie same runs without interruption, rest, or even
allowing the natural grasses to either seed or reproduce themselves ; and
this I believe to be the genuine source that is bringing about so
disastrous a reformation in the character of our sheep and quality and
production of our wool.
What with the immense amount of money that has been expended
in sheep-breeding, and the importation of so much foreing blood, our
flocks this day ought to shear from 6 lbs. to 7 lbs. of wool per head, in
place of which the average barely exceeds 1 lb. to 21bs. This does not
speak much for our progressive sheep-breeding or farming. Let our
giant runs be once subdivided into smaller or moderate-sized holdings,
where an effective system of domestication, agriculture, and grazing may
be combined, and I will warrant that the colony will not only produce
better, but even a more abundant supply of wool, beef, mutton, and
tallow and hides to boot. The time must come, whether we wish it or
not, when the present slovenly and cheap system of grazing must make
room for more natural and profitable systems of sheep management. The
first step towards retracing our steps is to begin at the root of the evil,
viz., more vigilant circumspection over our native grasses, then our wool
will soon stand as high in the wool market as it did in the year 1828.
The proof of my assertion is the sameness, or nearly so, of all our wools
over the colony, as all, or nearly all, graziers follow pretty nearly alike
the one system of grazing over the same runs year after year. Where
an exceptional price has been obtained for wool, it is either because
sheep have been paddock fed, supplied with artificial grass, or else the
old fashioned rules in grazing have been departed from. It is evident, I
think, even to the most shallow minds, that the same knowledge and
experience of sheep and wool could not possibly have existed in the
colony in 1828 as it does at this present day ; and yet with all our
boasted improvements, breeds, and progressive knowledge of the quality
of our wool, it ranked higher apparently then than it does now, with
the exception perhaps of one or two isolated cases. What more rational
view, then, of this all-important matter can be taken than to attribute
our decay to the ruinous and scandalous systems of perpetual grazing
that has been carried on during this period by the majority of our sheep-
owners. Once begin by conserving our long neglected native grasses,
and our wool unquestionably will soon resume its first original pristine
soft silkiness which was the pride of the English wool market and
foreign manufacturer in the early days of the colony. The secret and
antidote to reclaim us from our pitiful condition is plain and palpable to
all possessed of a grain of ordinary sense, aye, even making every
allowance for improvements in machinery, in working up the wools
{clothing or combing, sheep-washing, and even transit to market). All
wools in those early days (irrespective of breed) were possessed of the
■one uniform quality, viz., a silky softness. Cross, import, and breed as
we will, but grass is undeniably the great fundamental principle that
has undergone the most vital change during this period. Too much
attention has been expended in trying to obtain some mythical fashion-
able breed, in place of concentrating more circumspection on the land on


which they are to be depastured. I could furnish more minute details
of the chemical changes arising in the wool and grass, but I fear it
would only tend to render this paper too cumbersome and complex. My
main object in these perhaps rather lengthy remarks is with the view of
trying to elucidate the matter in as few and plain language as possible,
so that the purport of the paper may at a glance be definitely under-
stood and clearly comprehended by all. I hesitate not to say that we
have*now a sufficient number of sheep (16 millions) of our own out of
which to raise a superior type of Australian merino, and to maintain
our position in the wool market, without going to the unnecessary
trouble and expense of importing any fresh blood, or at least for many
years to come, provided we take a little more trouble in trying to
improve our impoverished pasture land, either by conserving the best
and most useful sorts capable of withstanding all kinds of seasons, or
else resort to the more general cultivation of artificial food. Again,
some people run away with the absurd idea that because they spend a
few pounds annually in the purchasing of a few imported rams that they
are going the right way to work to improve their flocks and to secure for
themselves the name of being thorough clever sheep farmers. Nothing
can be so absurd, for it is conduct like this which rather tends to display
their ignorance than curing perhaps some imaginary imperfections. No,
we have abundance of thorough practical stud bi’eeders in these colonies
without running away with the foolish notion that imported sheep are
any better than bur own, and that have in every sense of the word
become thoroughly acclimatised. The latter is a consideration in the
way of adding fresh blood to our flocks of no mean importance, and
ought not to be lost sight of by fresh blood adventurers. It is just as
well to beware in time of sheep speculators and importers of all sorts of
foreign rams. No doubt there are plenty that will probably continue to
the end of the chapter to speculate in all sorts of fresh blood and breeds,
as regular as he would every year in laying in his annual supply of
rations for the station, but more probably out of the bare name or
novelty of the thing than with the view of acquiring any real practical
benefit therefrom. It sounds well no doubt in the ears of the ignorant
to hear of a person having paid from 30 to 300 guineas for some
supposed choice breed. Such bargains often have an injurious effect in
misleading the unguarded by aping their example, and therefore fritter
away money that might be move usefully expended in otherwise
improving their run. But passion rules as much in sheep farming as in
anything else. It is not the breed alone but the price paid for it that
stamps the quality of the article. Many would rather allow themselves
to be ensnared by the ever shifting rules of fashion, than put themselves
to the trouble of studying common sense. An eligible breed at starting,
and good pasture land (ail things being equal), will not only produce
good samples of wool but a good class of sheep, no matter how the sheep
may be washed, packed, and got up, be it by spout-washing, chemicals,
soda, potash, hot or cold water, or by any other process. If wool be
originally bad in its growth, all the washing processes in the world will
never afterwards redeem its qualities or defects. The numerous


fashionable processes resorted to in sheep and wool washing are but in
keeping with their kindred delusions, viz., buying all and sundry sorts
of imported rams, so as to keep up a blank profitless system of
appearances. No matter how or under what processes wool may have
undergone in washing, it must all again be subject to a final scouring
when it comes to reach the English or Continental market. The manu-
facturer of the raw material, it must be admitted, knows better than the
grower how wool should be washed to suit his purpose. Why- then
expend so much useless money and labour to no other advantage,
seemingly, but to please the ever shifting whims and caprices of
merchants, wool-brokers, &c.
One word more and then I have done. Oleagineous aud saccharine
producing plants furnishes the chief source of supplying caloric to the
animal economy, whereas salt (chloride of sodium) goes principally to be
expended in keeping up a more active state in the process or ox'gans of
digestion, viz., in this way —the chlorine unites with hydrogen (of
water) and goes to form HCL., an ingredient so abundantly contained
in gastric juice; while the soda, on the other hand, goes to the liver to
aid in the formation of bile. The bile is to the animal economy what
tannic is chiefly to the vegetable. It is the part alone that preserves or
prevents a too rapid decay taking place in animal or vegetable matter
before it has undergone a thorough process of assimilation or digestion—
one of the best and most excellent laws in the household of Nature.
Without bile or tannin all things would soon assume a speedy tendency
to run into decay and putrification. They are the chief elements, in
fact, of retaining vitality the longest together. It is likewise to the
presence of tannin in wines which causes them to keep so well. Its
presence is easily detected by producing a kind of styptic taste in the
mouth, or, as some would call it, a dry astringent pi'operty. Who
knows but what footrot, catarrh, &c., owes its origin in some obscure
degree to the absence of a sufficiency of oleagineous or saccharine matter
in the food the animal consumes—and thus the means of lowering the
standard of vitality below par. Yital matters like these ought to arouse
deeper attention and interest amongst some of our flockmasters, and not
all become stud-breeders and importers of sheep, or plodding away year
after year in the one same never ending and never varying groove of
dull routine, careless, perhaps, of even devoting one moment’s serious
reflection on the intimate state of connection that exists between food,
health, and disease, action and reaction, or repletion from a state of
inanition or semi-starvation. I shall cite but one simple instance in
illustration of this immutable doctrine, and which any person at but a
very trivial expense may readily enough prove for himself, if so inclined
and fond of research. It is this ; Take say six domestic fowls, say of
any breed; feed three out of the six on the best sorts of food and grain,
and while so doing be particularly careful of preserving their eggs.
Again, take the other three, or remainder, and allow them not a morsel
of any sox*t of food, only what they may accidentally happen to pick up,
then presex-ve their eggs also in a sinxilar manner. Now let the eggs of
each sort be separately hatched and the chicks of the oxxe’s that were


•well fed will be fine, strong, healthy birds, whereas the others, or ones
that were ill-fed, will be miserable looking, late, half-starved, sickly
things, that will scarcely ever afterwards thrive or fatten, feed them as
we will. This is no imaginary case, but facts that any one may readily
■enough subject to the test for his own satisfaction. The same thing,
then, that happens to fowls must happen also to ill and irregularly fed
sheep, especially during lambing time.
Nay, a greater proof still is, that travelling bullocks and teams
(horses) are not nearly now in half such good condition on the roads
that they were only a few years back. And why 1 Simply because feed
every day is growing scarcer and scarcer, travel in which ever direction
we will; and not alone scarcer, but the quality of the grass is positively
■even also degenerating in strength and nourishing principle, through
being so much cropped down by travelling stock. This is no chimerical
idea, for the proof of the assertion is to be seen any day by looking
narrowly at our horse and bullock teams as they travel along our roads.
Of course in wet drooping seasons feed, generally speaking, is better,
but in these remarks my aim at feeding is rather directed at average
than exceptionally good seasons. The logician, therefore, must not pre-
tend to take me on the hop, and point me to the late favourable weather
and state of vegetation, as a refutation of my statements. Taking one
season with another, summer in particular, I hold that our stock is
rather under than over fed, so much so, that their life is one of either a
•feast or a famine. Were graziers to pay more attention to the
■ durability and nature of our grasses, these evils might in a great
measure be easily mitigated. As the principles of grazing is now con-
ducted, stock is entirely at the mercy of the elements, in place of being
under the care and dominion of man. He provides nothing for them
only salt, and sheep cannot live upon salt alone. It is food that ought
to be provided, and not new fangled notions of breed. It is impossible
that sheep ever can be managed properly remaining as we are under
■such iniquitous system of grazing—thousands of sheep each, and thou-
sands and tens of thousands of acres of land on which to run and
feed them.
The error is one of man’s own making, and not of Nature or God.
Sugar, as we all know,“is a general product of grass, and one of the
most serviceable ingredients in building up the animal economy. But
.the next question that arrests our attention is “ how many grasses are
there in existence in our pasture lands that possess this useful saccharine
•quality in any useful degree?’ It seems to me that they are but very
few indeed, compared with the enormous extent of country included in
our sheep walks. A moderate per centage of saccharine matter in vege-
tation is essential towards the maintenance of an animal in health, and a
uniform thriving condition as any of the other numerous ingredients
which go to form the support of sheep, and the production of mutton
and wool. The merino is a breed, no doubt, that is noted more for the
production of its wool than mutton, since a well fed carcase seldom or
■ever exceeds 60 lbs. in weight. Wool is the chief product that is looked
.to be derived from this breed; for mutton and coarse wool we must go


to the Southdown, Cheviot, Leicester, (fee. This grass degenerations
which we have, I think, so fully explained, robs the grass of much of its
natural sweetness and nutriment, or rather I should say it is never
allowed to become properly developed, since the grass is eaten down
almost as fast as it springs up; the consequence is it is robbed of one of
the most essential elements in nature that conduces so much to health,
strength, and nutrition. The majority of people seem to think that they
do right by perpetually dosing their sheep with salt or salt and iron, but
I contend that were sugar in some shape or form, to be more generally
used that it would be more likely to benefit their constitution than
impoverishing their blood with so much saline matter. It is the disinte-
gration of oil or sugar principles (the carbon) that forms the com-
bustible materials out of which the functions of respiration is chiefly
carried on, and no one surely can deny but what sheep have to
the same as v man. Since this is the case it surely stands to reason that
sugar might be found a useful condiment to sheep in many instances, to
wit perhaps in catarrh, worms in lungs, (fee., at least it might prove a
better agent in these cases than salt or salt and iron. It might be
administered to them in various ways or forms, or what would be better,
viz., through the more general cultivation of sugar bearing plants as.
turnips, sugar cane, sugar beat, mangolds, and I may add oil cake, <fec..
I do not throw out these hints as being positive facts, but only by way
of crude (yet rational) suggestions to be taken for what they are worth.
Of course I am well aware that many English grasses would never
stand the scorching summer heat qf our climate, but a selection of our
own indigenous or acclimatised ones ought surely to be made and pre-
served, in order to, if possible, be the means of prolonging the virtues of
our pasture lands in sheep-breeding and in the production of first-class
wool and mutton.
ANDREW ROSS, M.D.
Molong, New South Wales,
August 18th, 1874.
P.S. — Should this paper be the means of inducing only a few of our
more painstaking squatters and practical farmers to try the growth ofi
artificial grasses, or of conserving the best of some of our native or
indigenous ones then I shall be gratified and well rewarded for the
trouble 1 have taken in writing this lecture. I have been actuated by
no other motive in taking up this all-important subject than a sincere
desire to try to make my humble services useful and beneficial to the
colony, and further, if possible, with the limited means at my command,
the ends of the wool grower and grazier on the one hand and the agri-
culturist on the other. Hoping that each and all will aid to the best of
his ability in trying to build up the future bulwarks of this new world
or great Southern Empire, which is but yet only in its merest state of
infancy. Energy—eneigy is all that is required to develop our hidden
and unlimited sources of pastoral, agricultural, and mineral wealth. Our
motto should be export (especially grain, flour, sheep,, wool, beef and.
mutton) rather than import.
A. R..


HINTS ON CATTLE-BREEDING AND DISEASE.
No. 1.
IMPEDIMENTS TO THE IMPROVEMENT OF
STOCK.
{To the Editor of the Town and Country Journal, March 18, 1871.)
Sir, —What would the value of cattle be to any one, whether pure,
imported, fourth-rate class, or even hybrids, without land on which to
feed, graze, and maintain them? Here, then, in attempting to deal
fairly and minutely with the question, the core or kernel of the case
under the influence of legitimate research, is readily enough brought to
light and made to stare us honestly and clearly in the face. It is not
“how our cattle are inferior,” that we have, correctly speaking, more
particularly to deal with. Neither is it the indirect, but rather the
direct primary cause which leads to the production of this evil which
should constitute the main fundamental answer to the solution of so
important and perplexing a question, viz.,—“how our cattle are inferior.”
The bare phrase, as the term implies, places the whole onus and respon-
sibility on the shoulders of cattle owners, and imputes nothing, you
perceive, to the more radical defects in our existing land laws, which is the
direct and most fertile source of the great mischief. Some judges attribute
the cause of this deterioration to want of adherence to correct rules of
breeding; second—to mismanagement, prejudice, and ignorance; third—
to frequent recurring shortness of grass and water. I entirely differ
from this theory of the laws of breeding, as I cannot believe that any
person who has carefully studied the laws of Nature could possibly have
subdivided them into such a group, more calculated, I admit, to attract
attention to secondary effects than the discovery of the true original
cause or causes which lead to the production of inferior cattle.
The order in which I would be disposed to place them would be as
follows, viz. ;
Ist, and the all important one, viz.—Bad land laws which foster,
rather than prevent, the existence of the very evil complained of, by
offering tempting premiums in the shape of rapid and handsome fortunes,
by enabling graziers to hold immense tracts of uninclosed waste Crown
lands, at a mere nominal rental, for no other purpose apparently than
seemingly to enable them the more readily to trangress these very laws
of breeding so much prized, and which he so earnestly seeks to inculcate.
2nd. The system of branding which engenders crime and cattle-
stealing.
3rd. The want of proper and judicious domestication, improved cul-
tivation, artificial grass, in short, better quality of food and smaller runs.


These are a sample of what I should deem the most active and
important causes. To grapple then effectually with a subject avowedly
sode trimental to the general interest of the colony, but to cattle owners
in particular, and so prolific a source, too, in filling the country with
crime and our gaols with criminals, which annually swallow up large
sums of revenue to keep up an expensive system of what is termed the
administration (1) of justice, is surely a matter not only deserving deep
and honest well-directed consideration, but a place in your widely-circu-
lated journal, if the matter is ever intended to be finally and thoroughly
subdued and brought under the dominion of well-regulated and better,
at least more advantageous, and correct laws. In entering on the con-
sideration of the question I entirely divest myself of all sectarian
prejudices, and in the sequel shall take a glance at what may not only
be accidentally visible or floating on the surface, but also to things
deeper.
The cause, then, of this so-called general error—mismanagement
and ignorance—is not so much traceable to owners, as it is indirectly,
if not solely, attributable, I believe, to dilatoriness and incompetency,
coupled, probably, with a considerable degree of fickle unwillingness (on
account of the vast counteracting influence which the very evil has pro-
duced) on the part of the State to devise or bring forward a more
suitable enactment to check or mitigate the further progress of the evil;
or by the introduction of a more adequate and useful measure than the
present Crown Lands Occupation Act, fitted to carry out the principles
of a better system of breeding than what can possibly be expected to exist
under what seems to be a useless Act, and under which one man would
not be permitted to imperfectly occupy extensive tracts of country, or a
series of runs to his own disadvantage, the injury of the revenue, and
the disadvantage of the commonwealth. The main cause, then, of the
abuse is palpable, I am sure, to any one (if their reason is not blinded),
and satisfactorily enough traceable to the defects and imperfections
existing in the present Occupation Act, because the Act allows one indi-
vidual to hold unnaturally large extensive tracts of uninclosed bush
country over which so few cattle, compared with the extensive area, are
permitted to run and graze with little if any care, management, or
control, except, perhaps, at mustering or branding time.
It is impossible for any experienced person to pretend, in the present
woeful circumstances of our land laws, to view the matter of breeding
impartially, carefully, and consistently on public grounds, without open-
ing up the land question—a much more important element in the case
than merely looking with a grazier’s eye at the secondary effects exhibited
in the want of uniformity in our cattle and the increasing diversity in
type and breed existing among our herds—so clearly assignable, I think,
to want of sounder and better land measures. I would reduce the
present size of the holdings, and sub-divide them into smaller runs, where
a correct system of breeding could be satisfactorily and practically
accomplished. Such contingencies would then, on smaller runs carrying
not more than a few hundred head, become tlxe exception, rather than
the rule, and be of inestimable benefit, besides in settling and conducing


to the advance and common interest of the colony by attracting a better
class of farmers and graziers from England and Scotland. But this
improvement will never take place so long as the land is allowed to be
locked up and monopolised by a few individuals who will neither use it
themselves nor allow any one else to do so. Here, then, is the bane and
the antidote. To talk, however, of ignorance and mismanagement in
the face of such facts is perfectly ridiculous, and displays not only a
want of taste, but a very superficial knowledge indeed of the matter.
In short, it is asserted that one individual alone occupies on the Lachlan
upwards of one million and a quarter of acres of Crown lands at an
annual rental of a little better than £I,OOO, or at the rate of a fraction
of a penny per acre ! What does the reader think of this scope of
country for a cattle run? Yet graziers are charged with ignorance of
the correct rules of breeding, while they are allowed seemingly to hold
an extent of country sufficient for an empire, in which to carry out this
very (obnoxious) principle of breeding from models and perfect animals.
On this theory what, I ask, would an individual do, supposing his whole
herd consisted of models or a superior quality of breed, and how are they
to be maintained in first-class order and condition when the grazing
■capabilities of the land are actually only assessed at the fabulous, yet
ridiculous, value of a fraction of a penny per acre ? I don’t pretend to
be an expert at figures or to a deep understanding of such matters, still
I am competent to distinguish the difference between sense and nonsense,
breeding, feeding, and starving of cattle, or a farthing’s worth of grass
and a pound of pure blood. Fourpence worth gf grass (sixteen acres)
to feed a £I,OOO pure-bred short-horn bull ! how much grass, then, will
it take to feed a kangaroo rat ? And this is only one of hundreds of
other cases in the colony, where 5, 10, 20, 25 square miles and-upwards
are leased in large blocks, the grazing capabilities of which are assessed
at not a whit higher rate of rental than the former. If the grazing
capability of the land is not worth more than the fraction of a penny per
acre, what is to be done with and how are these pure-bred stud animals
to be fed on such poor miserable worthless cheap herbage ; or are such
cattle likely to improve or degenerate on such stinted meagre elements
of living ; or, in the name of fortune, how are they to subsist; or what
will the taste and flavour of their meat qualities be ; or must they
become imitators of their marsupial companions by transforming the
gum leaves into rich flavoured, mellow, marble-grained sirloins, cooked
and done up after the style and fashion of the aborigines with their
perfumery savory oppossum on the coals ? All the pickled logic and
sauce in the world will never make white black, or black white; but
grass valued at a fraction of a penny per acre, is something equivalent
to giving away the land on the old Peppercorn principle. Such puerile
reasoning is only fit to be thrust down the throats of flats and fools,
not a scarce commodity, either, in Hew South Wales. lam sorry to
say when such things are openly tolerated by what is commonly termed
a thinking people, possessed of manhood suffrage and the ballot, let us
view the matter in another light, and I am sure the rottenness of the
■Crown Lands Occupation Act is apparent to the dullest comprehension,


viz., the Free Selector, before he can occupy his bare forty acres of con-
ditional purchase, has to pay a deposit of ss. per acre on the land, or
£lO to the State—whereas the squatter, on the other hand, can hold any
amount of country by merely paying a fraction of a penny per acre as an
annual rental. Now what is the difference 1 At this rate and reckoning
the squatter to pay a yearly rental for the land—we’ll say of only one
farthing per acre—it will then, you perceive, take him 240 years (or
four generations) to pay an equivalent sum of 55., the deposit paid by
the selector, and 960 years (sixteen generations) to redeem the land at
the upset price of £1 per acre, saying nothing about the interest the
selector has to pay annually besides. Are such palpable stubborn facts
as these not enough to stagger the sense of any reasonable person 1 If
the land wont pay when let at a fraction of a penny per acre, how, then,
is it possible to expect the selector to live who has to pay ss. or 240 years’
purchase 1 Is the comparison between free selection and squatting not
shamefully odious 1 England, with all her mighty strides of civilization,
cannot produce laws to surpass the generous land laws of New South
Wales. No wonder that our finances are disorganized. No wonder
that the stream of immigrants has ceased to flow. No wonder trade is
stagnant and the prosperity of the colony on the retrogade, when the
x'evenue from the back-bone of our waste lands is yearly diminishing..
The number of sheep and cattle are increasing, but strange to say the
annual rental of runs ai’e falling away. The squatter is becoming x-icher
and richer, whereas the colony is growing poorer and poorex'.
As he refers to the injurious effects of intennarriages with close'
relatioxxs in the human family, he may as well look at the other side of
the question also, viz., the influence of climate in retailing or px’omoting
the late or early development in man. If the law be correct in one case
it surely must be as correct ixx the other. Showing that climate
(ix'respective of breeding) exei’cises an immense influence in moulding
the late and early development of symmetry and constitution of evexy
animal. If earlier in man in tx’opical regions, a priori , it must also be
eax’lier in animals. An animal, therefore, years old hex-e, would
be equivalent to one 4 years old in England. This law, I think, cannot
be controverted, and must be kept in view in our selection, breeding, and
management, rather than following pen and ink sketches of what cattle
ought to be. Hark ! I think I hear some one shouting or praying for
fixity of tenure and longer leases, as if fifty years renewal of leases was
not enough fixity of tenure to occupy land at the low px*ice of a farthing
per acre, without asking or dreaming of further extension. Clamoux-ing
for compassion to take away the soul also, seeixxg they have so long
enjoyed the use of the body, and which has made many of them rich and
mighty men, a thing, I am sux’e, a few years back vexy few would ever
have dreamt of obtaining but for this cheap grass and glorious land
liberty. What is more natural than that they should cling with hugging
parental affection to the system from which they have derived all their
inxnxense benefits, and now they have feathered their nests, it’s charitable
to beg that their family and families may be permitted to do the same.


In regard to what is done in England there is about as much con-
sistent analogy between Jack Ketch and Tom Thumb, as between
farming and grazing in England and farming and grazing in New South
Wales. But as I have not had the luck of enjoying an inspectorship,
it is not likely of course that I can know much about the nature and
history of cattle. I may, however, stand a chance for a professorship
in the new veterinary college I see looming in the distance, for if cattle
owners are so ignorant of the common rules of breeding, then, of necessity,
they must be sent to college to learn them. I hope, therefore, some of
our patriotic M.P.’s will see this and move in the ensuing session for
the sum of £lO,OOO to be placed on the estimates to build the college,
as really and truly I am getting sick and tired of erecting bark-huts,
calf pens, stockyards, serving out rations, branding, weaning, speying,
breeding, and spoiling breeds, mustering wild brutes, eating tough beef,
feeding loafing travellers, isolated stockmen, digging out bogged cattle,
•dam making, shifting cattle through droughts, paying high wages, and
getting small and few returns, and after all it appears I am entirely
ignorant of the management of cattle ! For the future, then, I’d like
to turn my attention to a professorship in this new college where I
would be certain to get my snug little screw of £BOO a year for doing
little or perhaps less than nothing; but occasionally to give a bit of
advice to some old stager’s son who might be anxious to obtain a little
-colonial expexfience, but don’t relish the idea of travelling a few hundred
miles inland where there is no Sabbath, theatre, opera, or nice select
.society, and where there are but kangaroo hunting, duck shooting,
moonlight bivouacking after opossums, and lastly, in wet weather, the
pleasure of sleeping twenty-one hours out of the twenty-four. When
not lecturing, of course in my leisure I’d write startling articles for the
Press on the art of duffing, iuocculation, branding without singeing the
hair, cramping of the animal’s muscles, or disfiguring the delicate hide,
feeding cattle on the elements of nothing, or farthing-grass, and the easy
royal road to fortune.
A GRAZIER.
tlnd February, 1871
No. 2.
OUR CATTLE STOCK AND WHAT THEY
MIGHT BE.
(To the Editor of the Town and Country Journal, 2nd May, 1870.)
Sir, —I have persued with no little degree of interest Mr. Bruce’s first
of a series of contributions on the above subject, and published in a late
issue of your paper. As I take a deep interest in all such matters, I
hope you will not deem a few remarks on the article either an unwar-
rantable out-of-place impertinence, or an uncalled for encroachment on


your valuable space. In the first place, then, Sir, I cordially accede
every due merit and credit to Mr. Bruce, for his able letter and zealous
endeavours, if not to succeed in improving our cattle stock, at least to
deepen the attention of stock-owners to so important a subject. In
saying this much, I cannot, on the other hand, so readily admit that he
has treated the matter with that degree of perspicuity which is likely
either to be understood, appreciated, or beneficial to the great bulk of
our cattle-owners ; and I am convinced this inevitable conclusion will
be arrived at by a large portion of those who have, like myself, taken
the pains to read his letter. I will then as briefly as possible, at least
as succinctly as the subject will permit of, give you my reasons for
saying so, and leave your readers to judge whether the inferences I have
drawn therefrom, are either ill or well founded.
The article, too, emanating from such an authority as the chief
inspector, evidently gives it a greater currency for correctness and
practical utility, which another individual writing on the same subject
will not so easily attain ; but what the more surprises me is, seeing it
comes from such an authority, that he should deal with the subject in
such an unsystematic way—not seemingly to me likely to promote the
end he seeks, apparently, to promulgate—else why confound the collec-
tive word stock with the collateral term breed 1 Surely cattle stock
implies all and every kind of breed of the genus hos or bovidos ; but breed
don’t include every kind of cattle. In speaking, therefore, of a “ perfect
animal,” or model, as he terms it, it is a meaningless assertion, unless
coupled with the particular breed, to render the allusion clear, definite,,
and distinct.
A model or “ perfect animal” may mean an animal of any of the
different breeds according to its own particular class ; but when used
generally it’s an expression without a distinction, because there are so
many different varieties of cattle familiarly known to us by some out-
ward particular characteristic quality, colour, form, feature, mark,
situation, or distinction. It is by this means a purchaser or stock-owner
is enabled, according to his own views and requirements, to strive to
retain and perpetuate the one he sees best suited and adapted to his own
individual purposes—whether it be for ornament, work, breeding, milk,
butter, cheese, or the shambles. A horse, in reality, is an animal, yet a
horse is not a cow: thus the necessity in saying a a perfect animal, or
model, to specify the particular class alluded to, for it is evident there
are models and perfect animals of every breed. To talk, therefore, of a
perfect animal without naming the classification, seems to me to indicate
more inexperience than sagacity. You may as well say a perfect man—
a perfect horse—or a perfect dog, &c., so far as the class belongs. Many
negroes are perfect men, as far as the general meaning is concerned ; that
is to say, they are true types of their respective race by classification.
So with the dog, and the species familiarly known to us as the grey-
hound, spaniel, setter, Newfoundland, shepherd’s, terrier, pointer, and
bull, &c. ; and so, too, in dealing with the ox tribe—the writer must
clearly distinguish the class to which the “ model animal” belongs, so as
to be perfectly understood on the subject. Unless this is adhered to.


then, it reminds one of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream of the great image,
interpreted by the prophet Daniel, which consisted of a head of gold, a
breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass, the legs of iron,
and the feet part of iron and part of clay, So I suppose Mr. Bruce’s
image or model of a perfect animal is to consist of something like a
short-horn or Teeswater head and hide, Lancashire horns, Hereford
neck, Devonshire eye and ear, West Highland chest, brisket-and
symmetry, polled Angus and Galway rump and loin, Alderney and
Ayrshire colour, tail-fur and mellow feel, Suffolk legs, the blood and
disposition of the Orkney, and a little of the flesh of each, and all mixed
up together to form, I suppose, this so-called perfect animal—a puzzle
for the naturalist—suitable for the stock-breeders of New South Wales.
At least such is the only sort of picture of perfect animal I am able to
draw from reading the letter. I don’t know what image other readers
may make of it. While Mr. Bruce fulfils the duties of chief inspector,,
he is only amenable to the Government; but when he condescends to
descend from that official seat to publish opinions through the Press,
then, Sir, I think the matter is open for any one to challenge, and he to
defend it if he thinks proper. Ido not pretend to be a judge of stock,
but lam sufficiently up in nomenclature to be able to know a bull from
a billy-goat, a horse from an elephant, a cow from a sheep, and a pig
from a dog ; and although Mr. Bruce states that our stock-owners have
not have not the same opportunities (the worse for the colony) here as
at home to learn the essential points and to become competent judges of
cattle, then it’s all the better for him, as, on this account, they will be
the less able to judge of the standard of merit and practical utility to be
derived from his ti’eatise on our cattle stock ; and as so, then, I much
question if many of them will really be able to carry into practice the
theories in regard ‘to the development of this perfect animal, especially
in the face of an avowed defective experience and knowledge. The
The beginning or text of his first letter is—“ What they might he.”
Now, I ask the reader, or practical stock-breeder, what practical utility
is to be gained by dividing the question into three heads—viz., “ Quality,
form , and meat or how is it to avail the present stock-breeders of New
South Wales when prime beef is actually retailed in Sydney at Id. and
2d. per lb., and Wollongong butter at sd. and fid. 1 whereas beef in
England ranges in price from Bd. to Is. per lb., or perhaps a trifle more—
a certain inducement where there is population and consumption, to
develop every variable result from breeding; but here the demand is so
limited, and the population so small, there is no stimulant in existence
but the boiling-down establishment to cause speculation, or even atten-
tion to the matter of breeding. And the beef of the wild scrubber
realizes often to the owner and carcass butcher as much as the finest
flavoured, marble-grained meat of the best thoroughbreds. The quantity
even now, and annually increasing, is far in excess of the demand; so
that beef, no matter whether tender, juicy, rich or mellow, is all the
same to the boiling-down establishment, provided the carcass, whether
horse or any other animal, only yields plenty of “ tallow,” to send to
England to grease her steam-engines, trollies, trucks, and waggons, &c.


Suffice it to say, this is the breed wanted for the colony—those that will
yield the greatest amount of “ tallow,” the least amount of flesh, with
the smallest outlay. Nay, further, it may with truth be said the animals
best for the colony are those only fitted for a state of nature for
Australia is yet in infancy, or almost in a state of nature, or perfect
wilderness, where cattle are allowed to roam at large in the open bush,
. and to become wild. It is not so with them in England, &c. There
they are cared for, domesticated, housed, regularly fed, and carefully
classified and bred ; and where they are too, moreover, exempt from all
such rough usage to which bush cattle ai’e subject, viz., branding, ear-
marking, drafting, mustering, and a host of other injurious sources of
treament, utterly unknown to England. Even if they did possess a little
breeding under this treatment, I guess it is very soon knocked out of
them, as stockwhips and daring horsemen are not the best companions.
Domestication then, in fact, is absolutely little known, if even cared for
in the colony.
Population, cultivation, and agriculture will in due time do more
good in working out the worse for better breeds than all the philosophers’
theories in the world.
Instead, then, of adopting or approving of Mr. Bruce’s subdivisions
or rules for breeding, viz., quality, form, and meat, I should feel disposed
to classify them under the three following heads, as the more effectual,
if not more natural, system of enabling the breeder to arrive at any
particular perfection of stock :
1. Domestication —which should be thorough, as it not only tends
to alter the animal’s disposition, but its very form, appearance, and
appetite.
2, Climate and situation considerably alters and influences their
nature, form, and tout ensemble, even the hair, fur, and hide, it being
wisely provided by nature that everything should be adapted to the
rigours of its situation.
3. Food—which should consist of the very best in regular abundant
supply, according to the hygienic economy of the animal. By this means
the animal is allowed a fair chance of developing form and quality —very
essential desiderata.
By the fiist rule or “ domestication,” good temper, docility, and
contentment is secured, and an aptitude for fattening. By the second,
or “ climate”—it is particularly desirable that the breed should be
adapted to the climate, soil, and situation, as these circumstances more
than anything tend considerably to mould the symmetry, early maturity,
and condition of the animal, no matter what the breed may be. By this
1 don’t mean to assert that the Australian climate is unfavourable or
adverse to cattle or breeding, but some districts, as in England, Scotland,
Ac., are in these respects more eligible and better adapted than others
for particular classes, which hoves the owner to study and discover.
Even in external.appearance, fui', hair, and hide, the climate affects a
wonderful variety of chances.
By the third, or “ Food,” a regular and abundant supply of rich
and proper kind is needed, as it tends to make small legs, neat heads,


little necks, good quality, and general symmetry. A scarcity, or
improper kind or quality, and long drooping of the animal’s head in
grazing, tends, on the contrary, to large head, thick jaws, thick neck,
and long bad quality, general deformity, and thick legs, having to travel
far in search of food.
Nay, the animal’s very ears through domestication may be con-
sidered smaller, at least less fan or cocked shaped, as in the wild state,
owing to their being constantly erect on the qui vive for some alarm.
It is preposterous, however, to talk of the largeness or smallness of
the animal’s intestines or stomach as an indication of breeding. In every
case these abnormal variations are attributable and in proportion to the
quality, regularity, and nature of the food. Where it is furnished in
large or small quantities the stomach and intestines dilate and contract
in a proportionate and corresponding degree. Small intestines are
rather characteristic of the wild animal ; they are even shorter, owing,
probably, to the precarious nature of their subsistence
To advocate, then, any invariable rule of breeding or class of cattle
stock for the colony, without taking these different and cogent circum-
stances into consideration, would be about as unwise as to confine the
navigation of ships to some one particular tract on the mightly, bound-
less, variable ocean. Climate, pasture, locality, and soil, have great
influence in causing the formation of so many different breeds. Some
are large, some small, through one or other of these causes acting
separately or combined. Indeed, it is natural to think that the native
element and habitat of any animal should have a peculiar influence in
the original development of their characteristic distinctions. For
instance, take the Teeswater or short-horn, transport it away from its
own native mild and sheltered climate, rich, verdant pasture lands, and
domestication, to a wild, bleak, cold, barren district, and I have no
doubt in time it will degenerate in symmetry, condition, and general
appearance in keeping with the sudden change, and vice versa with
inferior cattle on good lands and climate.
The climatic conditions and variations are just as diversified here as
in England - therefore, it is incumbent on the stockowner that he should
study local circumstances as he would breeds, because what may be
found to suit one district and arrive at early maturity, may act quite the
contrary in another. Extremes are not to be arrived at without exer-
cising patience, caution, and practical attention, keeping in view the
choice of breed suitable to the locality, the owner’s wants, anticipations,
and public demands, whether it be in regard to beef, milk, butter,
cheese, the shamble, or for the express sale of pure thoroughbreds itself.
It is by this general method rather than by any golden rule of treatment
that the stockowner will be able to make his occupation a satisfactory
and profitable undertaking, and thus in time become a successful and
practical man. Always bearing in mind that in this manner all animals
are fitted and destined by nature to fill up some particular and peculiar
situation and purpose. It is all very good to talk of the esteemed short-
horn, West Highland and polled Angus, or the Lowlands rich flat and


valleys ; but the mountaineer must be content with the cattle best fitted
for his situation ; even should they be smaller they are at least better
flavoured and finer-grained, and to him they are probably just as valuable
and profitable, if not as much prized, as the best bred short or long horn
in the world. Circumstances, then, and not golden rules, choice, or
fashion, must ever continue to regulate the regard for special breeds, and
theoretical, fanciful notions of “ what they might he." But it is useless
prolonging these probably desultory and uninteresting remarks on such
a subject, for experience (the best of all teachers) teaches us the breed
that has been found the most prolific and profitable for the colony—that
is “Duffing,” or perhaps got by sire the “ Poundyard.” Instances, I
dare say, have been known where stockmen, overseers, &c., have collected
herds of cattle where their masters failed to live 1 And possibly, too, a
single cow in New South Wales, bred in this way, may have been known
to drop as many as ten, fifteen, or twenty calves in the year. Can
England, Ireland, or Scotland, with all their boasted thoroughbreds,
short-horns, and long-horns, fine climate and rich pastures, produce
anything equal to this for prolificness ? No. Then it is nonsense, Sir,
yet awhile, to talk of breeding, crossing, or importing when actually
colonial cows possess, it’s thus said, in some instances, the extraordinary
quality and prolific property of breeding like rabbits. Our gaols, or
cumbersome statute books might possibly be able to solve or explain the
mystery; and, perhaps, there may be as many more equally guilty,
though undiscovered escaped birds, outside as in—yes, I say escaped !
but God, in His inscrutable wisdom, seeth and knoweth all things; and
while it may gratify petty vanity and perishing ambition here, assuredly
it will sink it deeper hereafter.
Apologizing for trespassing so severely on your liberal indulgence
and valuable space,
I am, <kc.
9th May, 1870. AH.
No. 3.
CATTLE BREEDING.
(Th the Editor of the Town and Country Journal, September , 23, 1871.)
Sir, —The literary critic and anatomist derive their information, not so
much by building up as by pulling down and dissecting the structure of
substances which come under the notice of their investigations ; but in
such operations, I would not give a fig for an explorer who cannot throw
some new or fresh light on the subject which he undertakes to investi-
gate and expound. In attempting therefore to deal with the general


principles of cattle breeding, as we find it in New South Wales, it must
be admitted, I think, that it is in no way like cattle breeding in
England, as there the facilities are not only greater, but the laws are to
;a great extent fixed, whereas here we have still the raw material to be
worked up into permanent or special forms. It is not exactly then a
i reliable test of an individuals fitness or unfitness to deal with this
subject, to endeavour to shine, by introducing numerous extracts and
• quotations from various authorities, simply with the view of backing up
certain preconceived theories. The proper place for quotations to my
Taney is only where corroborative proofs are required and when the
statements put forth either happened to be afterward challenged or else
refuted by a second person. Resorting to them however, in first
instances, appears to me tantamount to a tacit acknowledgment of a
want of faith in one’s own arguments or ability to master the matter,
and therefore honest criticism is rendered powerless, at least it cannot
well be directed against simple statements until the extraneous halo
which many authors often artfully interweave round their subject by a
prolific effusion of other peoples’ views, is first dispelled. No doubt
•extracts are excellent things in their own place, and do frequently help
to give apparent strength to many rash or random statements; but when
Improperly used they are merely the borrowed ideas of others in place of
relying on our own knowledge—practical experience. It is better surely
to use only a few plain facts than submitting contributions subject to
The suspicion of being chiefly borrowed plumage, or something worse
than counterfeits and unworthy of confidence. By adhering to this
rule art and science may be benefited and become a progressive study,
and thus the latent virtues of many useful problems come at length to
be successfully and satisfactorily worked and brought to perfection
instead of remaining tied down to the one never-ending uniform barren
monotonous groove. As plain facts are of more intrinsic value to our
■subject than worthless speculations or crude fallacious theories, I will
•endeavour in the sequel to adhere as closely as possible to this rule in
attempting to fill up so interesting and important a matter as our cattle
••stock and breeding. It is stated then that the cause of deterioration and
the heterogeneous character so generally visible among our cattle is
•chiefly, if not entirely, attributable to “ ignorance and mismanagement ”
•on the part of stockowners, either as regards the want of perfect know-
ledge, or else an indifference to the correct rules which regulate the laws
•of breeding. Not willing to see graziers silently pocket so unique and
flattering a compliment, let us endeavour to see how far this assertion is
borne out by facts. In the first place then we know that several enter-
prising sheepowners in the Northern or Queensland territory, have,
from time to time, and at very long prices, frequently imported stud
sheep from New South Wales, die., with the view of improving their
flocks. And what has been the result 1 In place of the experiments
proving beneficial as was anticipated, it has only tended to show that
sheep with first-class clothing wool in New South Wales deteriorates in
value, and their wool into hair or something much allied to it when
.removed into Queensland or other hot climates, clearly proving that it is


not altogether the quality or breed of sheep, but, rather the climate, and
perhaps the uncertain stinted or exuberantly rich pasture which affects
and develops the characteristic quality of clothirg or combing wool.
Climate, locality, and pasture from this should be studied, and sheep-
owners should not run away with the erroneous idea that what is con-
sidered a stud, or first-class animal, in one district will either remain so,
or throw a similar quality of animal in another. In regard to Queens-
land we have proof now that the law in this respect is precarious..
Experience then points us to the fact that to obtain first-class wool in
Queensland it must be by selecting coarse or inferior sheep rather than
stud or fine woolled animals. Climate and not rules of breeding teach
us from this how to accurately manage sheep in order to obtain the most
profitable staple and better class of wool than following pedigrees or
stud books, at least as far as locality and district is concerned. I must
confess I am at a loss to clearly understand exactly the kind of laws
that are meant or which are transgressed ? Surely it’s not intended to
imply that the coupling of stud animals with certain qualities or
peculiarities is to constitute the only essential element in carrying out
correct rules of breeding 1 lam inclined to believe that breeding con-
sists of some more valuable rule or guiding principle than this. It
strikes me forcibly that it includes a far more extensive and serviceable
order of laws than this, viz., training, or through domestication with a
constant supply of wholesome and nutritious food fitted for the nature
and habits of the animal. But this part cannot be fully examined in
all its bearings without opening another grave point in the consideration
of the matter, viz., the “ land question.” These rules, or laws, if we
may term them, are evidently of greater if not more utility to the breeder
than the mere choice of coupling particular animals with the view of
developing some vague ever changing character or result, as if nothing
else was needed but merely breeding from select animals, and afterwards
leaving the good or bad progeny to shift for themselves. If this is
what is meant, surely then it is an absurd senseless law 1 The same
may be said too, of fruit trees, flowers, &c., as of cattle when neglected.
As a more striking proof of the primary value and efficacy of care and
domestication, I may cite the result of the influence of the spread of
civilization, and the marked difference it exercises in the formation of
society, and then contrast this with the animal in its wild uncontrolled
state. This may be considered an unequal and unfair parallel, yet it is
sufficient nevertheless to show how cattle may become inferior when
such rules are not properly followed. Mark, too again the remarkable
disagreement that there is between the character of the European under
civilized laws and the aboriginal native, or inhabitant of Negro land
under their primitive savage rude modes of life. In the former case we
have education, intelligence, refinement, obedience, love, taste, and
order; in the latter, ignorance, barbarism, and animal propensities exist
in a most unmistakeable degree. It is evident that the influence derived
from the laws of domestication must likewise be an infinitely more
important element in moulding the inward or early outward symmetry
of the progeny of animals into good or bad qualities, than the mere-


:act of coupling particular breeds to produce some supposed special
.character or quality, combined with nothing else since they are left
afterwards to take cai’e of themselves. In rude ages bodily strength
was considered the only ruling distinction in the human race ; but as the
world advances, intelligence and learning become the great sovereign
moving power. To talk therefore, simply of breeding without recog-
nising other great laws, as domestication and feeding, is in my candid
opinion something like uttering sheer nonsense, It is said, too, that
-cattle transmit good or bad hereditary qualities to their progeny, but to
obtain this result in any high degree, I contend that the originals must
first be thoroughly and effectually domesticated, t. «., rendered sus-
ceptible of receiving impressions, before they can either give or transmit
them to others, and this can only be accomplished by domestication and
careful feeding. Unless the animal’s wild temper and habits are first
rendered docile and tractable by judicious systems of supervision, then
per force, inferior cattle must prevail, and their bad qualities as a matter
of course will also continue to be transmitted downwards. Take again,
for instance, the case of “ drunkenness ” in the human family, and wit-
ness the sad havoc and injurious effects this vile vicious habit inflicts on
many thousands of poor, innocent, unfortunate children ! If natural
laws are inflexible in their effect and unerringly impartial in their
administration—then it may be said that “ like begets like,” tame begets
tame, wild begets wild, drunkenness begets drunkenness, domestication
begets domestication, and so forth. The quibbler will naturally then
tell us that “ bad breed or inferior cattle will only produce inferior
cattle.” But let those who think so hold hard, and first answer this
one question,—viz., What constitutes breeding! Why, blood of course.
And what again constitutes blood! Naturally enough the answer must
be, “ a regular supply of wholesome nutritious food.” So that this,
therefore, when coupled with proper food, and judicious domestication
forms, in my humble opinion, the only natural and effectual way of
approximating or even realising the full effect of the laws of true breed-
ing. The converse of which assuredly will lead to deterioration,
diversity, and degeneration the self-evident cause of most of our inferior
cattle in the colony. In purchasing stud, prize, or first-class animals,
we don’t, in the strict sense pay for blood or extra breeding. No ; I
contend that we merely pay for the extra care which has previously
been bestowed on these animals, in order to bring them to that high
degree of perfection, either in the originals, or by faithfully carrying out
the great unerring laws of nature in their progeny, and which in time
become diversified or developed exactly in proportion, and the inverse
ratio to which the laws chance to have been either regarded or dis-
regarded, in a small or large degree, regular or irregular manner, well or
ill-nourished, trained, or allowed merely to run wild or unattended to.
No man is fool-hardy enough, surely, to say that there is any real
-difference (except perhaps in the colour of the skin,) in the anatomy,
physiology, or blood of a white miu and a black. The arbitrary dis-
tinction is not in the intimate structure of the frame, or different powers
-of repletion and assimilation, but merely in outward circumstances,


cause and effect, acting inwardly on the mind in proportion to the-
degree of care, education, training, and, perhaps, the kind of food each
received. So the real value of the European as compared with the
Negro or blackman is merely recognised according to this high or low
standard of education and care each has received in early infancy,
whether descended from white or black parentage. But the phase-
“ inferior cattle ” may be still further more closely interpreted, and it
may be asked, what has God ever made on this earth inferior or
imperfect 1 Nothing, certainly. Man, therefore, only attempts by such
invidious expressions to ape the Deity, by presuming to create some-
thing extraordinarily superior by assuming to transgress God’s most
bountiful, inexhaustible, and unerring laws. Let man provide the
necessary food, care and shelter for the animal as he ought, and it don’t
want any of his new-fangled ideas of what regulates or constitutes
correct laws of breeding. Neither is it at all necessary to subject cattle
to the same rules of caprice and fashion as a tailor would, who makes
the man by the cut of his clothing—ever changing to please a vain,
empty fancy. So it is in cattle-breeding when not guided by the dictates
of the ordinary laws of food, shelter, and .domestication. By these three
rules any man, I believe, may readily and profitably improve the sale of
his stock without resorting to fashionable laws, or even following the
current idea of always needing to import fresh or pure blood. It’s
proper care which makes good cattle, and good food, no one can deny,
produces good blood. The idea of endeavouring to improve the breed of
stock on any other principle is as absurd as it is absolutely preposterous.
Only starve and neglect a few ofi our so-called thoi’oughbreds, and in a
few generations they will soon become inferior enough to defy the most
practised judge to tell what they are or what they have been. The
Darwin theory of selection here is so far true, but it wants something
else besides selection to make a thoroughbred animal, and proper food,
shelter, and domestication is needed besides to keep them so. Let
stockowners once deviate from these rules, and breed, or pure blood as it
is commonly termed, will very soon dwindle into inferior enough types.
A deficiency or impoverished state of living is the sure forerunner of
scrofula, and scrofula, I firmly believe, is the true parent of tubercle and
consumption, lacking the proper constituents or quality of vital or
germinal matter in the blood corpuscles. The domestic fowl, when
regularly fed on grain or seed, produces an egg much richer in nutriment
than the egg of the fowl that is left to its own precarious resources.
Ripe or mature grain or seeds always contains a great abundance of
protoplasm in a concentrated form, consequently the best and richest
food of all. Again, are stockwhips known in England or Scotland, or
is it necessary to muster or drive cattle by men on horseback 1 No ;it
is the exception, if at all. Why 'I Because cattle there are nearly all
domesticated. Neither is it customary to leg-rope or bail cows before
they are to be milked, far less,requiring yards or frothy-mouthed and
equally wild-looking horsemen to herd them. As a curiosity, some
person, I trust, will add a stockwhip with thong twelve feet in length
and one and a-half inches in thichness to our museum, as a relict of the i


system of early stock-breeding in New South Wales. Withal, the time
will come, I hesitate not to say, when this colony will not only produce
a superior type, but boast also of her local breed of cattle, as the
Lachlan, Hunter, New England, Bogan, Castlereagh, Macquarie,
Darling, Kiandra, and others, as distinctly as the Devon, Hereford,
Suffolk, Shorthorn or Teeswater, Angus, Galloway, Ayrshire, Highland,
&c., are recognised and met with at home. Nay, I believe better, as
here we have the virgin soil and all its luxuriant strength to work upon,
whereas in England much has now to depend on forced cultivation,
manures, and other artificial processes, as in many places the body of the
land has long since been fairly exhausted, and so it will come to such
here, unless husbandry is conducted on some better principle or more
economical rules, in place of perpetually continuing to plunder the land
from year to year, cropping and grazing, as it is unfortunately too
frequently the practice in the colony.
Instead of exporting preserved meat, our cheese and butter, if
properly looked after, and produce from better grasses or pasture land,
would soon become a surer if not a more profitable investment. But no,
the one great end of all colonial grazing is the never-ending wool, wool,
beef, beef. Butter and cheese as article of export are little cared for as
a future industry. The Wollongong people, nevertheless, deserve well of
the colony for the zealous way in which they have attempted to foster
and establish this new industry as essential to the welfare and progress of
the colony, as cotton, sugar, tobacco, or even wool-growing. If it is the
law in breeding that like begets like, how is it fin racehorses that so
much training is required to develop particular muscles and for the
reduction of others, or what need for having them so regularly fed and
carefully trained to produce strength and swiftness if breeding can do
sol Take again the brawny arm of the blacksmith; what makes the
muscles of his arm so firm ] Only the laborious nature of his work.
But if like begets like, does his family inherit this peculiar feature which
is developed only through hard work ] No ; then the rule in these cases
is not infallible. It is said, again, that better breeds fatten quicker and
more kindly than hybrids or mongrels. This may very easily be
explained, on the principle that what costs money is sure to be better
cared for, not so much perhaps for the bare quality as the long price
probably paid for the article, so that then it may receive more care and
better fare than the one which is considered more common and less
valuable. Should the well-bred one weigh 2001 b. heavier that the
scrubber in the same space of time, this, as I have already said, may
probably be more owing to the extra care and food than to quality.
What really does the Australian stockowner expect of his cattle, to be
grazing them from year to year on the same run ; the same dry, pre-
carious pasture ; without the slightest change or even the smallest cent
of outlay for their improvement, either in fresh grasses or a better and
different class of food ] In breeding from stud animals, it is acknow-
ledged that “ like begets like,” then let the same law act equally as
unerring in regard to grazing, for how is it possible to expect to raise
good stock on dry, stinted, worthless herbage ] The grand difference


between Colonial and English stock seems to me to consist in this ; that
in the latter they are well cared for, and feed on a greater variety of
food, consisting of, viz., meal, oil-cake, hay, clover, beans, peas, rye-
grass, kail, turnips, vetches, mangelwurzel, the best of grasses, and
many other things; but in the former case, they are nearly all left
entirely to nature to pick up what few precarious roots or blades of
grass they can find—in short, what Providence or the land will produce
in our uncertain season—for it is either a feast or a famine. Under
such circumstances, is it at all remarkable that our cattle should be
otherwise than inferior when subject to such wide vicissitudes 1 Allowed
to roam from sunrise to sunset, week to week, and year to year, on the
same run and the same juiceless stubble or bamboo-like grasses, unfitted,
seemingly, to be converted into any other purpose except coarse hides,
large bones, wild temper, and tough, inferior, insipid flesh, with black or
ochery-coloured-looking blood. All here is left entirely to the mercy of
Providence. It is foolish to argue on such a subject, for the grand mis-
take or cause is as obvious as noon-day. If pretending guides are
determined to enlighten us on the subject, let them do so on some
natural philosophic or scientific grounds, and not to be stuffing us from
time to time with a parcel of childish nonsense. Skipping the main
question, and selecting here and there certain points only to suit special
crotchets of their own in place of handling the matter on some broad,
sound principle. In breeding, is it not shameful to see cows go short of
grass and water 1 ? Under such circumstances, what rational person can
expect to find calves anything else but inferior and dwarfish? The
cause, it is said, is attributable to droughts. No such thing ;it is the
abominable practice with most of our stock-owners of grasping for
numbers to the destruction of the run, in place of looking to quality.
Careless of what or how they eat, suffice to say, all they care for is to
count their herds by the hundred or the thousand and trust to Provi-
dence. This is the prime rule pervading all stock-breeding in New
South Wales, and will probably continue so until a radical change takes
place in our woefully defective land laws. When the present runs are
subdivided into smaller areas and our large herds reduced into a more
manageable size, then we may talk of improvement, or a better quality
of stock, and less evils resulting from droughts, floods, and such like
causes. If cattle are too small for the soil, they will soon rise to the
size it can maintain; and the reverse, if they are larger than it is
calculated to support. Systems of breeding may answer the purpose
near centres of civilization, where there are railroads, markets, and good
grass paddocks ; but he must have a very superficial knowledge of bush
or colonial life, who thinks of attempting such great reforms when
everything is under the dominion and ruled by the mighty, rude, un-
cultivated wilderness, and the few who are privileged to occupy it at
such a fabulously low rate of annual rents. In the present imperfect
state of our land laws, and the disgraceful way in which millions of
acres are controlled and managed, such things are but the veriest bosh
or clap-trap to delude innocent and unthinking people, especially at a
distence, of the real condition of bush life or the state of cattle-breeding


in New South Wales. Let me, as a ready illustration, only instance the
case of the Bathurst Plains, an open, unsheltered country for many
miles around. Will any man of ordinary sense or judgment tell me
that such an unsheltered bleak country is a fit place to graze or even
maintain cattle (or indeed stock of any kind) in good, sound, healthy,
thriving condition, either during the pelting rains or biting cold winds
of winter, and in cold, frosty, moonlight nights, or even during the
scorching heat of a midday summer when the grass is completely burnt
up or crisp, and utterly void of its natural juices, without food or the
slightest covering, shelter, or protection whatever 1 Under such circum-
stances and unnatural treatment, is any practical person bold enough to
tell us that the purest of best-breed cattle or stock of any kind are not
to a very considerable extent deteriorated in value, usefulness, and con-
stitution when subject to the same uncongenial relentless home both
summer and winter. If this is denied then we must also deny the effect
of the existence of heat, cold, and starvation. I contend, then, that
domestication, food and shelter, are of greater importance to stock-
owners than fanciful notions of stud animals or any other rules of breed-
ing. It does not matter what the breed consists of so long as animals
are properly managed, regular feed, sheltered and protected. I believe
they will in time improve exactly in proportion to the amount of care
and attention they receive, whereas, on the other hand, even the best or
first-class must, as a natural consequence, pinch and deteriorate when
carelessly turned adrift into open paddocks, and there left to pick up
what few stinted juiceless blades of grass they can find. Neglect in the
■ originals is undoubtedly more marked in the progeny. Throughout the
length and breadth of the colony no such thing as housing cattle, or
even milkers and calves, is ever (so far as I know) known They are
invariably turned adrift summer and winter in all kinds of weather,
cold, frost, rain, heat, fog, and snow. John Bull would hesitate to
subject his pets or thoroughbreds to the same rule which some of our
colonial breeders do. He knows too well the proverb which says “ The
man that is merciful and kind to his beast, the beast is kind to him.”
The Bathurst people may tell me that this theory is all bosh, and that
their cattle or stock suffer no inconvenience or injury from being
exposed on this naked, miserable-looking, huge plain. But I verily
believe if they studied their own interest a little more, and economy or
present necessity a little less, they would long ere this time have had
their naked paddocks on this magnificent plain all enclosed by hedges or
clumps or trees planted here and there (were it only for ornament), at
least something better than three-rail fences to afford a little more
shelter and comfort to the poor brutes during the bitter cold frosty
weather, and moonlight nights of winter, or the scorching heat of
summer’s burning sun. It is much to the credit of Mr. Bayly and the
Coxes, of Mudgee, for the high and wide reputation they have justly
earned as sheep-farmers, and the painstaking way in which they have
brought their sheep and wool to such a state of perfection, not, I verily
believe, by the simple act of breeding alone, but more by the humane
way in which they have studied to combine this breeding with good


paddocks, and a better and richer quality of pasture. I firmly believe-
this is the true secret of their success, and long may the colony boast of
the experience of such men—our greatest benefactors. To be successful
I contend that the same rules must also be as strictly adhered to in
cattle-breeding.
A. ROSS.
Molong, August 25th, 1871.
No. 4.
WORMS IN SHEEP.
/To the Editor of the Herald, date June 20, 1871.)
Sir, —I have long felt a desire to offer a few remarks in reference to the
nature of “fluke” in sheep, and the parasitic disorder at present so
prevalent amongst these animals now affords me a favourable oppor-
tunity of so doing. The present parasitic epidemic then, is a matter not
only of deep interest to the flock-master in particular, but one of vital
importance to the whole community in general, for while its uninter-
rupted continuance may occasion a serious depression in the market
value of stock, and the quality, growth, and price of wool, it may, on
the other hand, if prompt measures are not now adopted for its speedy
suppression or amelioration, be the means even of endangering the state
of public health through the consumption of the infected meat should
the existence of the ailment be now permitted to spread.
From recent microscopic investigations it has been proved beyond
doubt that various parasitic animals are now to be found in innumerable
quantities invading the lung, stomach, and intestines of the sheep in
various localities throughout the colony, either in different stages of
their development, or else in three separate and distinct classes.
The next great question to be considered is how they came to get
there, how are they to be got rid of, and what are the best and simplest
measures to be adopted in order to prevent any future extension or
further rapid increase of the evil 1
In the specific line I shall not attempt to offer any definite opinion,
suffice to say at best the whole aspect of this part of the question is one
as uncertain and vague as it is yet wrapped in much perplexing obscurity
and disappointment. I shall, therefore, leave this important, yet
mysterious point to charlatans (another not uncommon species of trouble-
some parasite) and others who are fond of secret wonders and novelties
to the bent of their inventive ingenuity in the discovery of “infallible”
vermifuges and a multiplicity of other supposed never-failing althal-
mintic antidotes. My chief object is at present writing on the subject,
is more with the view of throwing out a few hints that may be of some


service in the way of “ prevention,” rather than offering a direct cure
for the disease. The first thing, then, that I would recommend would
be the immediate destruction of all useless “ dogs ” generally found
about every sheep establishment, for if they are not the chief source and
origin of fluke and other worms, they are at least, in my opinion, from
their not over-nice carnivorous propensities, a very great element or
auxiliary in the propagation and fostering of the direful mischief. Take,
for instance, the miserable half-starved-looking animals generally found
accompanying a tribe of blacks, and who can wonder but what these
very ugly predaceous brutes hatch millions of parasitic larvae of taenia,
which become scattered on every run in their unsettled peregrinations
through the bush, and thus in this primitive nucleus are afterwards
picked up by sheep and cattle (Cysticercus tenuicollis) in the act of feed-
ing or in water.
The experiment of Kiichenmeister and others have proved that the
ripe joints (or proglottides) of the taenia or tape-worm are the true cause
of “ sturdy ” in sheep, and the entozoa are even developed within fifteen
to eighteen days after they have been swallowed. More careful experi-
ments may likewise reveal the fact that they are equally as instrumental
in generating the hydatid disease so familiarly known to us as fluke,
which may only perhaps differ in appearance because the latter inhabits
the liver, seeing that they both belong to the same non-sexual or encystic
group of entozoa. It appears, therefore, to have been clearly enough
demonstx-ated by reliable experimentalists that the cerebralis
(the cause of sturdy or staggers) of the sheep proceeds from the ova or
first embryos of taenia, and it is most probable that those are obtained
in the first instance from the dog. Indeed, Yan Siebold says, “that
those flocks which are entirely without dogs, and are stall fed, are never
affected with the sturdy.” The same opinion is supported by many-
other authorities on the subject. Dr. Carpenter writes (p. 622) —“ The'
close resemblance between the ‘ head ’ of certain cysticerci and that of
certain taenia first suggested that the two might be different states of the
same animal ; and experiments made by those who have devoted them-
selves to the working out of this curious subject have led to the assured
conclusion that the cystic entozoa are nothing else than cestoid worms
whose development has been modified by the peculiarity of their position.”’
Here, then, it is rendered evident that fluke is but a chrysalis of the-
taenia or tape-worm.
Y. Siebold even mentions “ a remarkable example of the prevalence
in 1851 of cystic entozoa, or a hydatid disease affecting the liver, peri-
toneum, and subcutaneous textures in the human subjects inhabiting
Iceland; and considers it extremely probable that the disease, consisting
in the development of cystic entozoon, depends on the introduction of
the ova of a taenia or tape-worm into the body, and that this arises from
the immense quantity of dogs kept in Iceland for the purpose of herding
sheep and cattle.”
We have in these illustrations ample proof, then, of the existence
and origin of cystic entozoa not only in sheep, but also in man, engen-
dered solely through the tape-worm which infests dogs. I contend.


therefore, that dogs are a fertile source in the production of the mischief
by causing the wide dissemination of millions of larvse, which are after-
wards swallowed by other animals, and there developed in their new
situation. The relation, in fact, between the cystic and cestoid entozoa
exists only ill the different stages of their development, and nothing else.
The veterinary surgeon and pathologist cannot now rest satisfied
with the mere discovery and appearance of these animals which inhabit
.sheep, and of the spmptoms to which they give rise, or even stop con-
tented with the administration of some wonderful fancied parasitic
nostrum. No ; but it behoves them rather to carefully study their various
kinds of development and obscure modes of reproductive generation.
Their very life and form, in fact, as they inhabit and migrate from cavity
to cavity, tissue to tissue, or from one animal to another. By this
means we may then be enabled to fairly and openly grapple with the
disease and arrive at the best source of acquiring information—viz.,
“ prevention,” as the surest and speediest way of attacking the root of
the evil, and thus prevent, if possible, the disease from not only assum-
ing an epidemic character, but what is more to be dreaded —viz., fixing
it as one of the endemic diseases of the colony. Much credit is mani-
festly due to Dr. Morris for the valuable information he has already been
able to collect on this alarming subject. It behoves others also, who can
•command the use of a microscope, and are interested in the progress of
the colony and the advancement of science, to bestir themselves in a
similar like useful manner, by giving the matter their most serious
attention and consideration, seeing that in the event of the disease being
now fairly allowed to establish itself it may ever afterwards be regarded
as a scourge as much to be dreaded amongst stock in future as the
occasional appearance of pleuro-pneumonia, catarrh, scab, mouth-disease,
foot-rot, or rinderpest, &c.
It is with the view, therefore, in aiding in some little • degree in
arresting the progress of the evil which induces me more particularly to
notice the matter in these few cursbry remarks, in hopes that it may
also stimulate others to careful study, and watch its characteristic features
and changeable (if not alternate) phases, in place of allowing every item
of time and attention to be wholly absorbed in merely watching the
effects of a host of useless, and perhaps fruitless remedies, that possess
neither sense, chemistry, nor therapeutic virtue (like inoculation) to
commend them ; except ignorant pretensions wrapped up in little packets
with more regard to the order of £ s. d. than the pathology of disease,
or aiming at effecting any radical cure or improvement in the disorder.
We already know, from past experience, the amount of havoc likely to
accrue to sheep under the influence of fluke. How much more alarming
then must the information not be to the flockmaster when he is told
.and knows the fact by looking at the microscope that these very lung
and intestine entozoa are now producing fecundated ova in millions,
which may again be picked up by other animals that are yet unaffected.
•Such a fact is enough to strike terror into sheep farming,—at least to
the discovery, if possible, of some effectual means whereby both cause
and cure of the pestilence is to be overcome, ere one of the chief ruling
interests of the colony is irretrievably lost and blighted.


No suggestions on the matter therefore, be they ever so crude or
irreconcilable with any known law or reason, should at the present time
be lightly thrown aside as worthless ; for as the colony is yet but in its
state of infancy, so too are many of the various orders and types of
diseases surrounding us, and to which daily and yearly the laws of the
climate ax’e in due course of time giving birth through the favourable
and unfavourable nature of the seasons, such as we have lately learned
and experienced.
It is well known that parasities of animal organism have long
existed in man and animals in every grade of development; but it has
only been since the beginning of the present century that any really
systematic progress has been made in this branch of knowledge, and
which now renders entozoaic diseases one of interest and magnitude to
the microscopic pathologist and helminthologists. If any faith is to be
placed in the common supposition that certain classes of disease come
and go in particular cycles ; assuredly then this is one of those
unaccountable cycle visitations, for I do not suppose the oldest hand in
the colony can ever remember hearing of a similar disease as the one
now attacking sheep.
The disease nevertheless is not one probably either of actual sudden
outburst, but one rather the result of some long steady progressive deve-
lopment or perhaps the successive stage of an extraordinary pheno-
mena of metamorphoses of ova of some species of these parasites,
facilitated probably enough by the wetness of the late season, and the
rank acid nature of the vegetation acting reciprocally on the animal
economy, and thus causing the development of a disease which may
have previously been merely remaining latent and negative, awaiting the
occurrence of more favourable circumstance (as the warm wet weather)
to bring forth its devastating fruits into more active existence. I say
again then that dogs are in a great measure an active agent in establish-
ing the mischief, for sheep cannot generate fluke of themselves, and the
spontaneous generation theory of worms is too absurd to be entertained
as the source of its origin. But the larvse may exist in a secondary state
in the carcase of sheep, which, when consumed by dogs, may again be
transformed or matured in their bodies, and afterwards come to be
dropped on the runs and again picked up by the sheep on the pasture,
and thus may form the link or real germ formation of cystic entozoa.
We must either look for genesis of the disease in this manner, or else
assign the cause of the worms that have been discovered in the lung and
intestine as the progeny of some winged insect, the ova of which may
either probably have been impregnated on the discharge arising from
foot-rot sores, or else deposited in the diseased state of the foot itself,
and thus the ova either becomes scattered about on the run, or else
deposited in the water and afterwards swallowed by the sheep in the act
of feeding or drinking. It is a well known fact that sheep have suffered
considerably during the last few months with foot-rot, and what is more
natural than to suppose that these very worms may be the ova or
embryos of some insect fostered through the discharge arising from the
prevalence of foot-rot.


The 'worm as found in the lung Dr. Morris calls strongyrus, a
species of the Nematoid. In his description he says “I am not award
that it has ever been described before.” If it has not previously been
.described, it is strange why he can so readily designate it by the name
•Strongylus, for seemingly it must then rather be some fresh species,
: seeing that this worm—at least the S. gigans, inhabits the kidneys,
exclusively, whereas apparently now it is also found to exist in the
lung. Those who have worked in this field of labour, have observed
that the entozoa of several genera or species previously supposed to con-
stitute distinct animals are now shown to be only the early or transitory
state of those which reach to maturity in other forms. This lung
Strongylus then, may be one of those immature species, though it is
found to be sexually complete even to the very ova and embryos. Of
course, I do not wish to find fault with Dr. Morris’s statement, but it
does seem strange to find this worm in the lung, when its place we are
told is exclusively confined to the kidney, and thus rather of the cystic
family—non-sexual and non-reproductive. True, it may be of aberrant
.form or the product of larvae of different species.
But no doubt to form any accurate idea of the origin and entrance
of these parasites into the bodies of animals, it is necessary to under-
stand their modes of reproduction, their transmigrations from one
animal and one part of the same animal to another, and the varied
metamorphoses of their individual forms. Of course I am aware that
the views entertained by Professor Allan Thomson help to bear out his
assertion. Professor Thomson says—“ That all sexually mature entozoa
are known to inhabit the alimentary canal of animals, or the cavities of
lungs, or some other parts in immediate or free communication with the
external air ; or if parasitical during the early period of their existence,
they are ascertained to leave the body of the animal they have previously
inhabited and attain to maturity in the free state. The non-sexual
entozoa, on the other hand, while parasitic, all live enclosed in cysts,
situated either in the parenchyma of organs, or in close internal cavities,
within secreting tubes, blood-vessels, &c. Now these last, the non-
: sexual parasites, are all proved to be incomplete animals.”
By this it is rendered evident that the lung, stomach, and intestine
worm are all sexually complete, and thus are all capable of producing
thousands of fecundated ova, which make them so destructive to life in
the present epidemic. Whereas the cystic or vesicular entozoa, so long
;as they remain in an encysted condition (as fluke) do not arrive at
maturity or sexual perfection —therefore are non-reproductive ; but the
moment they become free, they at once arrive at maturity and sexual
perfection ; and, therefore, in this state do often readily enough find
their way into the stomach and alimentary canal of the dog, where they
are metamorphosed and matured, and again find their way back into sheep
in the shape of Taeniambryos. The rank acid herbage of the late season,
impairing the sheeps’ digestive organs, may have-likewise helped to effect
the migration of the fluke downwards, the caudal and vesicle becoming
destroyed, leaving only the head part and booklets of the previous cysticus
.or cestoid entozoa, and thus, perhaps, form a species of taenia, seeing that


they have been found several feet in length in sheep in the Dubbo
district.
Their reproduction in this state is by the disintegration of the
lower segments, which contain the ova and embryos, and as these are
expelled, so are they again picked up in the shape of cysticerus cellulose
or species of embryo tape-worm.
“ There can be no doubt,” says Professor Thomson, “ that the
occurrence of tape-worm is dependent on the introduction into the ali-
mentary canal of these solex larvae, accidentally or with food. The
solex is the result of the undigested parts of the head of cysticus—and
their localities and intermediate stages of life vary much in different
species of taenia, as is seen in sturdy. The embryos of one species may
choose the liver, where, by an alteration of generation, it is converted
into a cyst from the interior of which are developed the head and booklets
•of the future taenia. This is proved to be the case with caenurus of the
sheep, and it is not unlikely that the ova, or embryos of the taenia of
the dog form the cystic-fluke. Possibly the discovery or existence
•of these new entozoa may cause a difference in the fluke, though, strange
to say, all four apparently are found in the same animal at the one period.
These complicated parasitic changes appear (indeed almost proved)
to take place in a variety of ways, of which the following may be taken
.as a rough example :
1. By the ova or embryos leaving the body of the inhabited animal
with the foeces or other excretions.
2. By their being taken into the bodies of other animals with their
food and drink.
3. By migrations, or directly piercing the integument or other
tissues, entering blood vessels, and thus carried to other
situations.
A. ROSS, M.D.
Molong, Ist June, 1871.
P.S.—I fully believe the recipe given by my brother in the Herald,
■on the 6th of April, is the most rational and useful method of cure, viz.,
by salt, sulphate of iron, and turpentine (or perhaps petroleum would be
better), and dry fodder.
Sulphate of soda has been found beneficial in the destruction of the
vegetable parasite called Sarcina Yentriculi. In this case it might also
prove of advantage through the evolution of the SO2 in the stomach.
No. 5.
FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE.
(To the Editor of the Herald, February 2, 1872.)
Sir, —The recent outburst of some new kind of cattle plague in our
midst is a matter pregnant with as much usefulness as it is for regret.
.It unquestionably tends to arouse new and deeper fields of research into


the nature of these precarious visitations, aud assists, too, moreover, in
placing many difficult scientific problems more succintly before the public
in their proper light and true character, so that they may become more
clearly and definitely understood in place of contentedly remaining mere
inactive subservient spectators of its appalling havoc, and under the
guidance of some fallacious speculators or other vague crudity and
absurdity of the dogmatist. The appearance of a new disease amongst
us at once sets the functions of thought and comparison into full and
vigorous exercise, and in so doing it the more readily and satisfactorily
enables us to calmly review the history, nature, and treatment of one
disease with another, their origin, progress, probable consequences, and
ultimate effects. In fact it may be said to take the general routine
business of cattle ailments out of the hands of the herdsman and place
them under the more correct supervision of the scientific thinker, whose
duty it is, properly speaking, to devote his time and attention to dealine
with matters of such delicate, abstruse, and oft-perplexing a nature. Wg
have plenty of first-class judges of stock, breeders, and even importerse
but in regard to the matter of an outbreak of disease the public interest y
should be entirely guided, if possible, to correct conclusions, interference,
or legitimate action in these matters by the opinions of good sound
authorities and our best and most trustworthy scientific practitioners, as
the rash unthinking acts of the illiterate, unscrupulous, and unskilful
may lead to as great a loss and a vast amount of public inconvenience
on one hand, as the disease, when allowed to continue, may inflict
equally as disastrous and serious consequences on the other.
Before any kind of measure is, then, set in motion, either for the
purpose of dealing with the disorder, confining it within certain limits,
or" for its future exclusion from the colony, it is just as well that some
earnest attention should be directed to the immediate consideration of
some of the difficulties surrounding the question ere making rash
attempts to enforce laws which may afterwards prove, by greater practice
and experience, to be not only futile and unnecessary, unjust in principle,
but productive also of much irreparable mischief and injury. From my
standpoint of view, I look upon the appearance of the disease as one of
much vital interest and great salutary scientific importance, as it tends
to demonstrate apathy and deplorable ignorance manifested by some of
our leading authorities on the most common rules which regulate the
laws pertaining to infectious and contagious diseases, and the utility and
inutility of quarantine regulations in checking the spread of contagious
disorders, encumbering commerce, and interfering with trade.
Some few years back, a certain class of ignorant, irrational bigots,
more noted for mistaken zeal, or perhaps self-interest, than sound
knowledge or a just judgment, impatiently insisted aye, even to this
very day on the passing of an Act making it compulsory on all herds-
men throughout the colony to inoculate their cattle with viius foi
pleuro-pneumonia. But since the sudden appearance of the foot-and-
mouth disease in our midst, they are as dumb on the new ailment as the
dumb animals are themselves, and clamour for the speedy enactment of
some measure for the purpose of prohibiting the further introduction of


all foreign stock, for at least twelve months, or until such time as the
disease may have disappeai*ed, or else abated, in England ; insisting on
the grand utility and charming efficacy to be derived from inoculation
with virus in pleuro, and yet, on the other hand, now clamouring for
Legislative action in order to shut up our port against the further
importation of cattle with doubtful foot-and-mouth disease ! This is a
shifting of scenes and medical principles and no nonsense. What
rational man can understand the twisting of science or the laws of
contagion and infection in this way 1 In the one case virus, through
inoculation, is lauded as a perfect panacea for eradicating all cases of
pleuro ; but here, in foot-and-mouth disease, its efficacy seemingly is
entirely ignored, as if to characterise more glaringly the absurd fallacy
entertained of inoculation by its most devoted advocates, if our port is
now to be completely closed against the further introduction of fresh
cattle and blood—in the one case persistently avowing the effective
nature and true principle of curing disease by disease, and in the next
striving to stultify the very fact and virtues that were claimed for virus-
inoculation by soliciting a closure of the port against the further fresh
importation of stock, whether of sheep, cattle, or pigs,—as all apparently
are alike liable to be affected with the disorder. If virus will cure
pleuro-pneumonia, then, on the same principle, it must by its disciples
be acknowledged as a cure in cases of foot-and-mouth disease. The
principle and theory in both cases are exactly the same ; but the idea is
one of the greatest of our palpable absurdities and errors. The presence
of such a disease amongst us teaches one valuable lesson, viz.,—the
amount of faith and utility that is to be placed iu inoculation, for if it
is good in the one case it must surely be equally serviceable also in the
other. But our stockowners, I guess, would rather see Mr. Foot-and-
mouth disease kept out of port than be foolish enough to try the remedy
of inoculation with its virus. If inoculation has such a wonderful,
salutary, and capricious effect in curing pleuro, why, in the name of
sense, should the identical self-same virus and operation not act as kindly
and beneficially in checking the career and extension of foot-and-mouth
disease ? Or who is clever enough to describe the exact difference
between pleuro virus and foot-and-mouth disease virus 1 the nature of the
one disease and the nature of the other 1 how the one disease comes and
how the other goes 1 and what occasions their different stages of action
and reaction, dormancy and activity, and how virus can so readily cure
pleuro, and now comes to be rejected for foot-and-mouth disease 1 I
desire the supporters of the inoculation doctrine to tell us in what way
they differ, and why now shrink from enforcing their so-called unerring
principles demanded for pleuro in place of seeking to shut up the port
and trying to keep out the foot-and-mouth disease 1
I have long paid close attention to the subtle nature of the laws of
contagion and infection, but I confess I have yet to learn in what way
or on what rational scientific grounds one disease can be so readily cured
in this way and not in another 1 The thing seems to be an inexplicable
difficulty. In fact, I can account for it only on the principle that people
now-a-days are more fond of mistaking and confounding wild nonsensical


speculations for solid practical scientific truth and reasoning. In other
words, it seems nothing more nor less than the indication of the up-
growth of another of the numerous specimens of a shallow delusive
species of quackery, which seem to have the power of fastening on to
some ignorant infatuous people’s minds without rhyme or reason, and
they cling to their dogmas (even when plainly and boldly refuted) with
a stubbornness as discreditable as it is disgraceful to our advanced state
of scientific knowledge, learning, and education.
What clearer or more unmistakable proof can we have of this
unsatisfactory method of attempting to cure disease than only to compare
pleuro with foot-and-mouth disease, and why should inoculation be
acknowledged as an infallible charm in the one case and not in the other,
seeing they are both of a contagious and infectious character 1 In the
latter, one would suppose it would have some show of applicability, as
by the vesicles on the mouth and feet (and from which seemingly it
derives its name) it is distinctly marked as an exanthematous disorder,
though I believe the eruption is merely a secondary s) mptom, and not
the primary source or cause of the disease.
The question of the laws of contagion and infection treated in this
ambiguous kind of manner asked for it in pleuro defies an explicit,
rational, satisfactory, or scientific answer; but it elucidates the fact, if
it is possible to carry clear conviction to the breast of every right-minded
thinking person, that inoculation for pleuro-pneumonia is nothing else
but a monstrous piece of the grossest absurdity, the conception of a
shallow, ignorant scepticism, or minds utterly unable to comprehend the
real nature of the disease, or the mighty force and mysterious workings
of the laws of contagion and infection, capable enough of pleasing a
parcel of fools, but never calculated to eradicate the enemy or captivate
the attention of sound reason or judgment. Until it can be demonstrated
to possess virtues of an unchangeable or irresistible character, then I
say inoculation for pleuro or any other disease (vaccination excepted)
must be regarded as one of the greatest delusions of the age. a sop pro-
mulgated by some needy adventurer merely to please a few, but a
dangerous weapon when placed in the hands of the ignorant. Pretending
to treat disease on scientific principles while Ave remain in total ignorance
of the real disease itself, its nature, origin, and its most stealthy mode of
movements seems to savour much of the. abhorrent art of quackery.
Better have ineffectual or no quarantine-laws at all than the establishment
of such an outrageous principle as the curing of disease by disease, or
what would be more correctly termed the principle of scattering disease,
mischief, and danger broadcast over the face of the land, a wicked device
unworthy of the lowest dens of the devil and his angels.
In attempting to grapple with so vital yet mysterious a subject,
direct interest too often, I fear, warps men’s minds and helps to dictate
erroneous notions and conclusions and improper procedure in thes(
matters. Making a few temporary shifts in place of resolutely diving
into the very heart and secrets of the enemy. Under the circumstances
it becomes our duty to endeavour to discover if possible whether the new
cattle plague be one emanating from the effects of climatic influence,


malaria, or virus, or if it be of an hereditary or indigenous nature, or
whether it is likely to be only temporary or permanent in its effects,
i.e , liable to occur to the same animal oftener than once 1 Judging by
the unsatisfactory nature of the reports which have lately appeared in
the Press on the subject, I am inclined to believe that the disease is of
an hereditary type, and that it will occur to the same animal more than
once, and that it primarily springs from virus or a malignant animal
poison. In the first instance the disease, in my opinion, was developed
in our port through subjecting of cattle to a. too close state of confinement
while the monkey engine was at work on board ship, and not from the
nature of the food. Not that this caused a spontaneous origin of the
disease, for I believe that it must have remained latent, or in an incipient
state in the cattle, throughout the whole voyage, and only broke out at
the port in consequence of the two days’ confinement to which they were
subject, and which acted as the predisposing cause in developing the
symptoms from which the cattle were reported to be suffering when on
or taken to Garden Island. The disease, in the strict sense, may not be
exactly indigenous to the colony, neither is it, perhaps, strictly so
speaking, of spontaneous origin, nor yet was it excited in the colony or
contracted by any possible contagion or infection ; but the germs (for in
the first instance surely it must have had some origin) I contend were
all along remaining latent in the animals’ constitutions, and only subse-
quently became developed through predisposing idiopathic causes, viz.,
the confinement, and thus the presence and cause of the disease now in
question. In my mind there cannot be a doubt but that the whole of
the cattle are now all more or less tainted with the latent germs of the
malady, and which will yet, at some future day, while under or being
subject to the influence of similarly acting predisposing agency or causes,
burst forth again in all its violence and fury. I believe it is now impos-
sible to exclude the disease from the colony, for cattle that have been
imported here since 1843 (the time the disease first broke out in England)
must have long ago brought the germs of it with them to the colony ■
but the reason why it has probably never yet become developed here
may be owing perhaps to the absence of the necessary amount or exact
class of predisposing causes which makes it so troublesome and prevalent
in England. The colony, I believe (through the importation of stock
from England within this period, especially during 1868-9, when the
disease was at its height) is already overrun with the latent germs of
the distemper, although perhaps it has never yet possibly been carefully
noticed or forced into existence, through the want of this necessary pre-
disposition to make it reveal itself to us.
Upwards of two thousand localities in England have been infected
with the disease within the last few years, and therefore it is nothing
but natural to suppose the cattle that have been imported from an
infected country within that period are almost certain to have brought
it here with them, and that the germs of the complaint may be still
lurking in their constitution though it has never yet been discovered, or
perhaps made its appearance to be sufficiently recognised as such. That
the disease will yet break out amongst our colonial stock (without further


importations) I have not the slightest doubt in my mind, and suspicious*
looking cases have lately occurred to cattle and pigs in this district to
warrant this very conclusion, however much many might wish to conceal
the matter. I believe the nucleus of disease is already here in abundance,
and only awaiting the proper predisposition to ripen the pestilence into
a reality. If the germs could lay dormant in these cattle for three
months, and only broke out at the end of the voyage, it is just as possible
to suppose that scores.of others have likewise arrived previously to this
with the same germs or symptoms still lurking in their constitution.
We know this to be a fact from the nature of ague (malaria), &c. ; but
in the present instance the morbid poison, I believe, it of purely animal
origin, or virus. The more it is concentrated the more contagious and
infectious it becomes, and the more diluted with good fresh air and
adequate sanitary regulations the more harmless it is.
There cannot be a doubt in my mind that the disease owes its
“first origin ’ to the bad system and defective sanitary arrangements
required for the conveyance of sheep and cattle to market by steamboats
and railways. Keeping large numbers huddled together for hours, and
perhaps for days, under ail manner of hardships, in close, ill-ventilated
cribs, without fodder or water, or the impossibility of being able to lay
down to rest their wearied legs! In consequence of this kind of
treatment, the animals in course of time soon lose their appetite or cud,
their hairy coats begin to stare on end, mouth parched, dry, and feverish,
legs wearied and sore, and ultimately they succumb to a malignant
species of “irritative fever,” which in place of being called the foot and
mouth disease ought to be termed the “railway and steamboat cattle
fever or plague.” The more often it occurs unheeded in this manner,
the more it tends to establish a highly-infectious and contagious type of
disease or what I should be disposed to designate it by the name of
“asthenic malignant fever.” The vesicular eruption is but the secondary
symptoms, and ought not to be mistaken for the real disease. That
sheep and cattle have first contracted the disease in this manner, I have
no manner of doubt, as like “ typhus fever,” it extends and increases in
virulence in proportion as sanitary laws have been at first more or less
neglected or ignored. And so too with sound healthy animals, when
carelessly conveyed to market in this manner.
Pigs in all probability have contracted the disease, not so much
through direct infection or contagion itself, as by being fed on milk
taken from cows while suffering from the vesicular eruption of the udder,
the operation of milking breaking these vesicles, and their contents
afterwards becoming mixed with the liuid and then consumed by these
animals. Several instances of the disease is reported to have occurred
in the human family in this way. It is stated that the disease was first
imported into England with stock from the Continent. This does not
imply that it broke out on the Continent, but rather that it was developed
in consequence of the defective arrangements that existed for the con-
veyance of stock by steamship and rail from the Continent to England,
and through England, Ireland, and Scotland. This is the light in which
I look on its origin and extension, and the way in which it was, in my


belief, first generated. Surely, it stands to reason, that if a lot of
ruminant animals are closely packed for hours or days together, in ill-
ventilated quarters and during inclement weather, without food or water
or the possibility of being able to rest their wearied legs, “ irritative fever ”
must be the natural consequence of such cruel unnatural treatment,
accompanied with a dry parched state of the mouth, leading to apthous
excoriations or raw denuded sores, a loss of appetite and cud, and a
general weakness and soreness of the legs through want of space to lie
down. The repeated occurrence of this baneful condition has, therefore,
in my opinion, tended most materially to foster the extension of the
evil, and now given to it its most contagious and infectious character.
When better arrangements are provided for the transportation of stock
by water and by rail, I believe we will then hear less of the prevalence
of this devastating scourge. Until the matter is more cax’efully looked
after in this direction, it seems to me useless either txying to arrest its
progress, or attempting to mitigate its numerous evils. The chief soixrce
of its existence is apparently coxxfixxed within a vexy limited space indeed,
and therefore, to do effective battle against the enemy, it must be by
improved sanitary systems in the conveyance of stock to market,
enfox'cing mox’e rigid quarantine rules and the more frequent use of dis-
infectants, in place of adopting the unwise suicidal principle of txying to
prohibit the total importation of all stock by shutting up our port against
commercial enterprise axxd the prosperity of the colony. Our owxx rail-
roads and steaxxxboats, if any way defective in this respect, are just as
likely at some time or other to exxcoux’age the occxxrrence of the disease
hex’e as it is in Englaxxd, even should xxo fresh importations of foreign
stock be permitted to arrive in the colony. The elements capable of
giving birth to the disease are already here, and all that is now wanted
ixx my opinion is the necessary amount of predisposition, hardship, or
starvation requisite to set it in motion. It is xxot altogether quarantine
laws that will ever check its progress ; it is a x’adical refoxanation in the
evils I have now attempted to poixxt out. Perfect cleanliness, judicioxxs
management, and inflexible sanitaxy rules, or such other measxxx'es as are
usually fouxxd most applicable for the suppression of typhus fever. If
sanitaxy laws arc rigidly adhered to there is little fear of a fxxrther
importation of virus, the necessity of shixtting up oxxr port, or the passing
of Contagious Diseases (animal) Acts. This is the whole secret of the
case, and the only thing that most attention should be dix-ected to. Let
us only remember what happened to the prisoners that were crowded
together in the Black Hole at Calcutta, and I think it is enough to
explaixx the matter as fully as if a thousand sheets of paper were written
on the subject.
If the coxxgregatioix of human beings has the effect of px’oducing and
spreading typhus fever in man, the same cause surely must exercise a
prejudicial influence oxx the health of animals 1 Morbid animal exhala-
tions or blood poisoxx must arise as much in the one case as in the other,
and which ixx tinxe is calculated no doubt to give rise to fevex’, and the
secondaxy symptoms so conspicuously max-ked in the well-developed
vesiculur eruption visible on the tongue, moxxth, lips, fauces, feet, and


udder, &c,, of animals affected with what is familiarly known under the
name of “foot and mouth disease.”
Until these important sanitary laws are better understood and more
generally acted on and practised, it is useless, I fear, attempting to
combat the disease in any other way, or by any less effectual measures
or other complex machinery.
In concluding these rather lengthy remarks, in case I may in any
way be misunderstood, I may briefly state that my chief object in writing
is to deal with the subject in an out-spoken, clear, honest manner, and
not (as some may at first sigh readily suppose) with the view of ridiculing
science, compounding opinions, or offending any one ; or of condemning
any particular ship; or of .casting censure or reflection on officers
belonging to any ship, crew, or company. The food in this particular
instance (no matter how used, or what state it was in wdien consumed)
I contend was not the immediate or exciting cause of the outbreak of
this new complaint. Its incubation, I feel certain, is attributable to
quite a totally different set of causes and reaction, and which I have
already endeavoured to explain in a previous part of my letter. Damp,
moist, mouldy, ill, sour-smelling hay, or indeed food of any other kind
in this state would produce a totally different class of symptoms than
those that were witnessed in this case. Food when consumed of an
unsound quality or in a state of semi-decomposition and fermentation,
expends its effects and developes its symptoms chiefly, if not solely, on
the animal’s lungs rather than on the extremities. Physiology (through
the oxidation, aeration, and circulation of the blood) fully explains the
reasons of this function and animal mechanism.
Any person may easily satisfy himself on this point and fact by
simply paying a little attention to horses that are fed for any length of
time on mouldy hay, mouldy bi’ead, corn, wheat, barley, or oats, &c.,
and they will find that the animal very soon begins to suffer from a
nasty dry cough, and becomes quite short winded ! It is a fact, but do
not be foolish enough to put it down as a case of congestion of the lungs,
when it is merely a reaction arising from the unhealthy and unnatural
nature of the food. By substituting sound food these symptoms very
soon disappear, and the horse will speedily again become as right as ever.
This analogy at once shows the difference that exists between sporadic
symptoms and food, and real disease and food. Persons any way skilled
in horseracing know too well the force and value of this single fact—
that good, sound, strong, healthy food wins the race, and not the horse
or any supposed amount of jockeying. The blood must inherit its pro-
toplasm or vitality, and these are obtained not from the air alone, but
entirely through a sound, healthy quality of the food. The better and
purer the air, of coui'se, the better and stronger, a priori, these proto-
plasms, and thus the stronger and healthier the animals. The function
of disintegration of the stomach first sets these protoplasms in motion,
but it is the lungs alone that subsequently brings them to healthy
maturity and perfection. Anything which arrests this salutary and
necessary operation (to Avit, close confinement) disturbs the growth of
the blood’s vitality, and thus the liability to lung disease. But here,


lung disease arising from this cause should not be confounded with
“foot and mouth disease,” arising, in my firm belief, from a totally
separate and distinct source and set of causes. Let us weigh the disease
physiologically, pathologically, thoroughly, and scientifically, and not be
shutting our eyes to its existence or passing it by with a few mere
meaningless, superficial, random expressions. This logic is simple and
surely easily enough understood, and so it points us to the best way to
solve our difficulties, and probably too, the method (at least an approxi-
mation) of incubation of eruptive fevers, of which “ foot and mouth
disease ” is classed as one, or blood poison arising through concentrated
animal exhalations which contaminate the air, and again become breathed
and rebreathed by animals, till disease and plagues is the consequence.
Those who may think they can refute these assertions, or can make the
matter any. more lucid, let them do so, and the public will benefit by
their labour. It is a public matter, and the subject will be none the
worse for a little extra ventilation and exchange of thought, as ideas are
as much liable to become stale, stagnant, rancid, and infectious as either
food or disease. We are told that pleuro-pneumonia walked into our
domain some few years ago, and robbed us to the tune of something like
over two millions of money! The same thing happened, too, perhaps,
in the case of scab, catarrh, worm disease, &c. ; but with all this sad
experience, and these visitations, I ask to know what public information,
documentary or scientific evidence, have we to produce, or have we
collected, on one or other of these national and matters 1
Nothing whatever ! All is a perfect blank, except what the Press was
generous enough to collect on the matter, and free circulated for the
guidance and information of the public. Some thousands of pounds were
lately squandered away on a royal commission to inquire into the
working of our gold-fields ; but when a highly infectious epidemic visits
our shores, and now threatens to engulf one of our leading and best
interests, a royal commission to inquire into such a grave matter is a
thing altogether out of the question ! Oh no; such a thing would be
both preposterous and useless, so disease is allowed carte-hlanche to come
and go and play havoc with our interests almost as it likes, as far,
seemingly, as any necessary useful medical steps are taken to understand
these matters —the nature of disease, its ravages, and extension. Again,
it seems a wrong and somewhat arbitrary principle to entrust all such
important matters, involving very great interests, to the consideration
and decision of a few individuals, or even to one or two perhaps favoured
persons. Better far to appoint some Medical Board or Commission
to inquire into all matters pertaining to public health, as the most
satisfactory and rational way of dealing with these affairs. In Melbourne,
a Commission, composed of medical men, has lately been appointed to
inquire into the prevalence of “ diphtheria” in that locality. A step in
the right direction. It would become our Government to take a lesson
from this example in the way of acquiring useful (perhaps valuable) in-
formation that would be a source of guarantee and protection to public
property, and the general health of the community in this and other
matters. Then we might safely echo the watch-word, “Advance Aus/ra-


lia,” in place of allowing the seeds of disease and plagues (through
dilatoriness, ignorance, or stubbornness) to become replaced and
scattered broadcast over the land, and breathing terror, destruction, and
defiance at every step it moves along over our wide sunny clime and rich
fertile soil.
The importance of the subject is pleaded as an excuse for the use
of your columns on this occasion.
Yours, &c.,
ANDREW ROSS, M.D.
Molong, 26th January, 1872.
No. 6.
COLONIAL FARMING.
(7h the Editor of the Town and Country Journal March 5, 1870.)
Sir, —The pursuit of Agriculture in New South Wales is not of the
most attractive character. The term in its proper acceptation indicates
more than mere growing grain, or erecting here and there a rickety slab
hut covered with bark in some isolated and obscure but, perhaps, choice
favourable piece of land in the trackless forest of this mighty wilder-
ness, hewing down the huge trees which encumber the gx'ouiid, and sub-
sequently disposing and arranging their ponderous buts and scraggy
limbs into some rude temporary fence. Such laborious, toilsome, profit-
less, works finished, if his iron-hoofed patience has not ere this time
completely flagged, he now, properly speaking, from being a labourer, a
hewer of wood and drawer of water, commences in reality the battle
for independence. His success, as a farmer now entirely depends on the
way in which he may treat the land, and upon the ingenuity and
vigilenee employed in warding off the approach of the most frequent and
common enemies with which he has now to contend, viz., grub, smut,
rust, blight, &c., but especially precarious seasons. Want of all the
constant attention to these matters must assuredly tend to and insure
the success of his labours. Farming may not seem a pleasant or profit-
able occupation to many of those who are now embarking in the pursuit,
probably for the first time in their lives. In this pursuit courage is
needed for the endurance of hard toil and many unforeseen difficulties.
No man, however, I believe, can really succeed in farming who is not in
some sense an enthusiast in agricultural matters. No matter whether
he labour in the boundless forest of America, Australia, or in the most
favoured agricultural districts in the world, taste for the pursuit is an
indispensable element of success. But many of our free selectors of this
time in New South Wales, I fear, have embarked “ in land speculation ”
who have no qualification for farming pursuits.
The necessity of establishing some public school or institution
where the elements of agriculture might be taught on moderate terms to


the rising generation is a desideratum. In those institutions our youth
might he taTight, for example,- the beautiful system of mutual depen-
dence existing between the animal and vegetable kingdoms ; and the
perpetual circulation of certain elements through both ; the growth of
vegetation ; the food of plants, and the importance of the mineral
kingdom, in regard to their proper nourishment and healthy growth ;
the different soils, and their various qualities, a true knowledge of which
is essential to the farmer; the nature of each crop and the various
ingredients extracted from the soil and atmosphere composing them, <kc.
I will now offer some suggestions for the benefit of intending
farmers. Having first made a judicious selection which is a primary
thing, the rest is comparatively easy. Then, there can be no better
guide to the inexperienced person who wishes to free select than merely
to follow the appraisements of squatting runs, for where the runs are
valued at a high rental it must be taken as a pretty correct indication of
the quality of its grazing capabilities, and it is generally admitted that
land which grows good grass will grow good grain, at least, within the
ordinary temperate latitudes. Get a list of the various runs in the
colony which have been appraised, and by the highness or lowness of
the rental the person will be able at a glance to make choice of a
suitable run, district, and locality where he can secure a farm of good
land for himself and his family. Having secured for himself a home,
the next duty to be entered on is cultivation. Some simply useful
elementary instructions as a means to the end, 'together with a little
practical knowledge of the direct relations of geology to agriculture
which throws so much light on the nature and causes of these diversities
are requisite. When the farmer knows the quality of the soil under his
control he is more fully prepared to judge the degree of cultivation
required for each crop, as it would be useless for him to subject both
rich and poor land to similar treatment in all respects. In some dis-
tricts the soil is very rich, and on this account the land may be a long
time in becoming exhausted; in othei-s, however, it is much sooner
exhausted by cultivation, and, therefore, requires more careful and more
expensive management. The question in vogue of taking all from the
land and of putting nothing back, either in the shape of manure or by
burning it on the land, is too prevalent.
Crops are annually assuming a more visibly stinted and precarious
growth ; not so much through the changeableness of the seasons, as I
believe, from the exhaustion of the land by constant cropping and the
want of manures to supply these deficiencies. If the soil, as I said,
contains the necessary substances of fertility, plants will grow and thrive
on it; but, there are other kinds of food essential to plants besides what
is obtained from the soil, viz., carbonic acid, water, and ammonia, which
are furnished by the atmosphere, but without the former or alkalies,
earths, salts, and metals derived from the soil, these latter substances, be
they ever so abundant, are of little use. Water being a solvent is, how-
ever, the most indispensable agent, as through it the whole food of
plants, especially that derived from the soil, can alone enter them. If a


soil be rich in alkalies sulphates, and phosphates, and contains a suf-
ficient quantity of soluble silicates, which is the chief ingredient to the
stems of grasses and cereals, it is fertile for all nutritious crops, the
atmosphere alone in this case furnishes all the carbon and nitrogen they
require. Next, the ashes of wood, straw, leaves, &c., consist entirely of
matter extracted from the soil by plants, and thus the necessity of
guarding against impoverishing land by wholly removing them every
year, especially the straw, which many of our amateur farmers treat as
merely worthless rubbish, since generally as the wheat is thrashed out,
they leave it in a heap to lay and rot, or else set tire to it on the spot;
and thus the constant robbing and loss to the land from year to year of
one of the most essential elements of nourishment to the stems or straw
of the future crop which, in time, by this yearly drainage must
naturally result in future stinted dwarfish growth, scanty crops, and
unsuccessful farming, What is said of the farmer in regard to the
straw may likewise be said with equally as much truth and propriety of
the grazier and is sheep, who also from year to year continually pastures
the same flocks over the same runs, to the detriment of the land, the
grass, the sheep, the wool. How is it possible (any more than in the
case of the land from continuous cropping) for sheep, be they ever so
originally well bred, to maintain a healthy state, a proper class of staple
wool, when in reality a large quantity of their natural food, viz., the
alkalies, are so regularly removed from the soil in the wool, by this per-
petual and obnoxious system of pasturing the same sheep over the same
runs 1 No attempt was ever made, even by our best flockmasters, to
restore to the soil the substances continuously extracted from it. What,
I ask—makes sheep, taken from old impoverished runs, thi-ive and
fatten so well when removed to the “ salt bush country 1 ?” only this very
patent palpable fact, viz., the abundant supply of the natural inorganic
substances furnished them in the fresh food, so essential to their health
and progress. “ Salt ” may supply them with soda, an ingredient of
bile and probably suppressor of fluke, while the chloride may go to assist
the animals weakened stomach to digest the hard, insipid, unnatural,
sapless grass which they are compelled to live on or else starve. I
wonder such an intelligent class of men as squatters, do not pay closer
attention to the natural food of the animal and its hygienic economy, in
place of wasting time, running here and there over the colony in search
of better stock, whereas the actual fault does not rest so much in the
defectiveness in the breed, but rather, as I have endeavoured to show,
evidently in the deterioration of the land arising through over grazing,
which of late years, moreover, I verily believe, has been one of the chief
causes in our pastoral lands and first-class staple wool becoming so
rapidly depreciated in quality and value, and, so far as I can see, will
most probably continue to decline still further, if at least more attention
is not soon paid to this subject, or a better system of grazing than has
hitherto existed, be adopted, or artificial food grown to supply these
deficiencies, and fulfil the act of raparation and correction. “ Nature ”
in New South Wales does a very great deal for the squatter, a vast deal
too much perhaps for the outlay she receives, and from their treatment


■derive from the land more, probably, than they oft deserve ! But, how-
ever inexhaustible her stores at times may be in replenishing his thirsty
wants still she finds she cannot always so benevolently bestow charity.
It is a known fact that potash forms a large per centage of the sub-
stance of unwashed first-class raw wool, in some instances it is stated to
be as high as one-third of its entire weight, but in ordinary wool, if
«ven only reckoned at 10 per-cent., the amount thus annually extracted
from the land by sheep is indeed something great and very detrimental.
Assuming as a basis of rough calculation, one flock to contain 1000
sheep, and the fleece of each to average 2 lbs. weight; the whole number
then would yield 2000 lbs. of wool, and 100 lbs., or nearly one cwt. of
potash extracted from the land by one flock in one single year, so that
reckoning the total number of sheep in the colony to be 15,000,000, the
amount extracted from the land by them in one year would be equiva-
lent to 669 tons 13 cwt., say at 4|-d per lb., or £2 per cwt., would
realise the value of £26,786, which, irrespective of the injury to the
land, is a loss to the colony by being (in wool washing) washed into
rivers, creeks, wool establishments, or into the sea. If this amount be
lost in one year what must not the loss have been to the colony by this
process during the last twenty or thirty years 1 Moreover, in what way,
I ask, during this long period, has the squatter (with all his clamouring
for fixity of tenure and longer leases) been endeavouring to keep up the
grazing capabilities of his run 1 On the other,hand, under such circum-
stances, how need the squatter, in the face of his own simple manage-
ment, rationally expect to keep up the quality of his sheep, or even the
price or proper staple of the wool, when yearly the quality of the
pasture is so insiduously, but certainly, becoming more and more altered
and innutritions. And thus, probably, one cause for so many runs
becoming invaded by a class of useless dry grasses, rank weeds, &c., all
of which so utterly unfitted as nourishment for the true hygienic
economy of the animal. Consequently deterioration, in every sense of
the word, and probably one of the most prolific sources of many of the
diseases amongst our stock, as Cumberland, catarrh, scab, fluke, lung and
and cutaneous disorders, &c. The puzzle is how this special drainage of
metals from the soil has not ere this time forced itself on the notice of
some of our acute colonial stock breeders. If they would only devote
quarter the time they generally do, counting the number of their
crawlers, studying different breeds and the various qualities and classes
of wool, to try and improve the quality of the pasture on the different
portions of their runs, then they might expect their sheep and wool to
improve, but, I fear, not otherwise.
Molong, 1 ith February, 1870.
F. Cunninghame & Co., Printers, 186 Pitt-street, Sydney.


I ml to
flsQd&
f\J


JUST PUBLISHED.
To be had from the Author on receipt of P. 0.0. or stamps. Only a few
copies left.
The Power of Mind over Matter;
Or,
Thoughts Suggested on Reading Nichols’s Confession
of the Parramatta River Murders.
By Dr. ROSS, Molong.
Price is. 2d.
By the same Author,
JOTTINGS ON VITALITY;
Or, The Physical Basis of Life.
Price 2s. 8d
Also, by the same Author,
TYPHOID EEVER;
Its Pathology and Treatment, with Practical Hints on
the Preservation of Health in Tropical Countries.
Price 3s. 3d.
Will shortly Appear,
The Immortality of the Soul;
!
Ok, Life Beyond the Grave


