

GUIDE
TO THE
ZOOLOGICAL
AND
ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY'S
GARDENS,
ROYAL PARK.
Corrected according to the present arrangements of the
Gardens.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Melbourne:
FERGUSSON & MITCHELL, PRINTERS, 55 & 57 ELIZABETH STREET.
1890.






ENTRANCE TO GARDENS.


GUIDE
TO THE
ZOOLOGICAL
AND
ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY'S
GARDENS,
ROYAL PARK.
Corrected according to the present arrangements of the
Gardens.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Melbourne:
FERGUSSON & MITCHELL, PRINTERS, 55 & 57 ELIZABETH STREET.
1890.


HOTELS CLEARED.
vV
A
to
%
TELEPHONE ."KTO. 1125.
F. C. EASTWOOD,
WHOLESALE BOTTLE MERCHANT
AND MARINE STORE DEALER,
130, 132, 134,135 Rae St., and 27,29,31, 33 Seacombe St., Nortl| Fitzroy.
F.C.E. begs to notify to persons dealing in the country that he receives
all description of Marine Stores at Railway Stations or Wharves, pays
freight and returns cash for same every Saturday. Having the largest
stock in the colony, and being in a position to give the highest market
price, consignees may depend on being dealt with liberally. • Orders for
Washed and Unwashed Bottles executed with despatch.


INDEX.
PAGE
1 The Milk House ... 9
2. ~ Bustard’s Enclosure 10
3. ~ Wallaby Paddock XO
4. ~ Eagles’Aviary ... 11
5. ~ Pheasant Aviary ... 11
6. ~ Flamingo Paddock
and Pond ... 11
7 & 8 Monkeys ... 11
9. The Wombat’s Cave 12
10. ~ Gull Paddock ... 12
11. ~ Owl House ... 12
12. ~ Enclosure & Pond 12
13a. ~ Goat Yard ... 15
13b. ~ Ruffed Lemur ... 15
14. ~ Crocodile House ... 15
15. ~ Land Tortoise En- 15
closure
16. ~ Wolf House ... 15
17. ~ Hyama and Puma
Cages IS
18 & 19. Waterfowl Ponds 16
20. The Yak Paddock ... 16
21. ~ Water-buffalo Pad-
dock ... ... 16
22. ~ Brahmin Cattle
Paddock... ... 16
23. ~ Lower Pond Pad-
dock 17
24. ~ Mandrill Monkey.. 17
25. „ Pig-tailed Monkey 17
26. ~ Wild Boar’s Yard 17
27. ~ Leopard House ... 17
28. ~ Lion & Tiger House 18
29. ~ Bear House ... 18
30. ~ Rockery and Pond 18
31. ~ Reptile House ... 18
32. ~ Guinea Pig Yard ... 22
33. ~ White Rat’s Yard 22
34. ~ Fresh-water Turtle
Pond 22
35. ~ Indian Otter
Pond ... ... 22
36. „ Parrot Aviary ... 22
37. ~ Peacock’s Lawn ... 22
38. ~ Song Bird Aviary 23
39. ~ Elephant Walk ... 23
40. ~ Squirrel House ... 23
41. „ Cockatoo House ... 26
42. ~ Platypus Pond ... 26
43. ~ Monkey House ... 26
44. „ Monkey and Bear
House ... ... 28
45. ~ Coypu Rat Pond... 28
46. ~ Guinea Pig Cottage 28
47. ~ Rat Castle ... 28
PAGE
48. The Little Log Cabin... 28
49. ~ Egyptian Geese ... 28
50. ~ Bear Pit ... ... 30
51. ~ Band Stand ... 30
52. ~ Refreshment Room 30
53.
54. ~ Deer Paddocks ... 30
55. J
56 & 57. Pheasant Aviary ..
58 The Old Bush Home ... 32
59. ~ Duck Pond ... 32
60 & 61. Porcupine Enclo-
sure ... ... 32
62. The Small Mammal
House ... ... 32
63. „ Larger Mammal
House ... ... 34
64. ~ Red Deer Paddock 34
65. ~ Nylghaie’s Paddock 34
66. ~ Wapiti Deer ~ ... 34
67. ~ Kangaroo Paddock 34
68. ~ Ibex Enclosure 34
69. ~ Museum ... ... 40
70. ~ Pelican Enclosure 41
71. ~ Antelope Paddock 41
72. ~ Dove and Pigeon
Aviary 41
73. ~ Lemur’s Cage ... 41
74. ~ Alpaca Paddock ... 41
75. ~ Trotting Cattle En-
closure ... .. 41
76. ~ Llama Paddock ... 43
77. ~ Guanaco Paddock 43
78. ~ Cassowary Enclo-
sure ... ... 43
79. ~ Rhea Paddock ... 43
80. ~ The Emu Paddock 43
81. ~ Deer Enclosure ... 43
82. ~ Goat Paddock ... 43
83. ~ Anoa Paddock ... 47
84. ~ Formosa Deer Pad- v
dock ... ... 47
85 & 86. Burchell’s Zebra
Enclosure ... 47
87. ~ Rusine Deer Pad-
dock ... ... 47
88. ~ Shelter Shed ... 47
89- ~ Bactrian Camels ... 47
90. ~ Water-buffalo Pad-
dock 51
91 ~ Gnu’s Yard ... 51
92 ~ Camel Yard ... 51
93 ~ Ostrich Paddock.. 51
94. ~ Orang-outan, &c.
House ... ... 51


FOR REFRESHMENT ROOM LOOK No. 52, PAGE 17.
Where you can obtain
OAKLEY, ADAMS & CO.’S Famous Wines.
Telephone No. 857.
THE MOST EXTENSIVE CELLARS IN THE CITY.
OAKLEY, ADAMS & CO.,
WmsriE] MEK.OHAIsrTS,
IMPERIAL CHAMBERS, BANK PLACE,
COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
(opposite mitre tavern).
•»» ■■
Awarded 7 First Prizes and 4 Special Mentions at Melbourne Centennial
International Exhibition, 1888-9, also Medals at the Paris
Exhibition, 1889, and elsewhere.
♦—
A Large Stock of old matured Wines always on hand, Samples of
which may be tasted at our Cellars.
List of SALES of VICTORIAN WINE at the Commissioners’ Bars,
Melbourne Exhibition, 1888-89;


Fergusson & Mitchell,
Would draw the attention of Artists and
Drawing Masters to their large and well-
assorted Stock of
Drawing # Painting
MATERIALS.
peciaf (Uerm6 j?or
THE LATEST DESIGNS IN
floral anb Xanbscape Stubtes
From the Best English and Continental Houses.
BIRTHDAY & WEDDING PRESENTS,
purses, Mallets, Carfc Cases, &c.,
MOUNTED IN GOLD AND SILVER.
55 and 57 ELIZABETH STREET,
MELBOURNE.




GUIDE
TO THE
Zoological & Acclimatisation Society’s
GARDENS,
ROYAL PARK.
Corrected according to the present arrangements of the
Gardens.
The Gardens comprise an area of 50 acres, and are
situated in the centre of the Royal Park, about a mile and
a half from the General Post Office, and can be reached by
train from Spencer Street to Royal Park Station on the
Coburg, Fitzroy or Heidelberg Lines, or by the Brunswick
Tramcars which leave the Flinders Street Station at the
lower end of Elizabeth Street every few minutes and
deposit passengers at the 4 main entrance gate, or by cab
direct.
At the entrance are a number of cages, containing
Macaws, Cockatoos and Parrots of different kinds ; some of
the birds talk and are very amusing.
To follow the numbering of the Guide it will be necessary
to turn to the right on entering the main gate.
I—THE MILK HOUSE,
Where several cows are kept stalled and where visitors can
procure milk fresh from the cow at a small charge. Similar
milk houses are to be found in many of the Continental
Zoological Gardens.


2. THE BUSTARD’S ENCLOSURE.
The Bustard ( Eiipodotis Australis ) is known by the
colonists as the Native Turkey, It is excellent eating and
is much sought after on that account. The hen bird lays
only one egg, depositing it on the bare ground. Formerly
they were numerous in the neighbourhood of Melbourne,
but they have now been driven farther inland ; they are still
abundant on the western plains and on the open Saltbush
country of the Lower Murray. They are difficult to
approach on foot, but it is easy to get within gunshot of them
on horseback or driving. The natives used formerly to capture
them in an ingenious manner by means of a snare; they
approached their intended victim against the wind under
cover of a large bush grasped in the left hand, while in the
right was held a long slender stick, to the end of which
was fastened a large fluttering moth, and immediately below
a running noose, w r hile the bird unconscious of danger, was
eyeing and pecking at the moth, the noose was dexterously
slipped over its head by the cunning Black and the
astonished bird at once paid the penalty of its curiosity with
its life. In this enclosure is a cage containing a pair
of Ruffed Lemurs.
3. THE WALLABY PADDOCK.
There are several varieties of these pretty little animals
generally represented in the Society’s collection, all of
which breed regularly. The yellow-footed Rock Wallaby
{Petrogale Xanthopus) of South Australia is of a light-brown
color and its long tail is striped or barred like a tiger’s.
It is a very handsome animal, and comes from the Gawler
Ranges, high rocky ranges lying N.W. of Port Augusta, S.A,
The gloved Wallaby ( Hahnaturus Mam'cntus). The black
Wallaby {U. Ualabatus); this variety is found all over the
southern part of Victoria, and in some parts of the country
are so numerous as to be a very serious nuisance. The
Padymelon (H. Billardien ). The short-tailed Wallaby
{H. Brachyurus). Bennett’s Wallaby (H Bennettii) from
Tasmania, &c.


4.—THE EAGLE’S AVIARY
Contains some fine specimens of the Great Australian
Eagle ( Aquila Audax). These birds are very destructive
to young lambs. In other compartments of the aviary are
specimens of the white-bellied Sea Eagle ( Haliaetus Leu-
cogaster). The White-breasted Sea Eagle (. Halliastur Leu-
costernus) from North Australia. The Whistling Eagle
(LT. sphenurus). A number of hawks of different kinds,
the African and Indian Vulture, the Giant Kingfisher or
laughing Jackass, the Crow, the piping Crow Shrike, which
possesses a very sweet and melodious note, and a fine speci-
men of the Brown Condor {Sarcorkamphus Aquatorialis)
from South America, and other birds.
S.—AVIARY.
This aviary is of the same size as the Eagle aviary. It
contains a number of beautiful Pheasants, and several
Curassows, and other birds.
6. —THE FLAMINGO PADDOCK & POND.
There are a large number of birds in this enclosure,
foremost among them a small flock of Flamingoes from
Egypt ( Phcenicopturus Antiquorum). Several beautiful
Demoiselle Cranes ( Anthropoides Virgo). A number of
Crowned Cranes ( Balearica Chrysopelargus ), and Stanley
Cranes ( Tetrapteryx Paradisea). The Southstone Plover
(ypdicnemus Grallarius); this bird has a most melancholy
wailing cry, which is often heard at night in the Australian
bush. The White-fronted Heron. And in the pond are a
pair of Black-necked Swans (Aix Galericulata).
7 and B.—MONKEYS.
Two small houses containing several varieties ot Mon-
keys.


9.—WOMBATS’ CAVE.
There are three varieties of these curious burrowing
animals confined here. The Victorian Wombat (P/ias-
colomys Platyrhinus ). The Tasmanian Wombat {P. Wom-
batus). And the South Australian variety, the Hairy-
nosed Wombat {P. Latifrons); this variety has much softer
fur than the others. They live in burrows which are often
very extensive ; it is a hard matter to dig a wombat out of
his hole. Their food consists of vegetable matter, grass and
roots of different kinds. They are nocturnal and are seldom
seen in the day time. Their flesh is like delicate pork.
10.—THE GULL PADDOCK.
In it are a number of Jameson’s Gulls {Xenia Jamesonii ),
Coots and Water Hens of several varieties, Plovers,
and several Land Tortoises from Natal.
11.—THE OWL HOUSE,
Which at present contains specimens of the Great Owl of
Northern Europe ( Bubo Maximus'). The Powerful Owl
{Athene Strenua ), the largest and strongest owl found in
Australia. The American Horned Owl {Bubo Virginianus ).
The Chestnut-faced Owl (Strix Casta naps), found both in
Tasmania and Victoria. And the Boobook Owl {Athene
Boobook ), generally known as the Mopoke from its peculiar
note. In the forests of Gippsland and other mountainous
parts of the colony its answering call may be heard through-
out the summer nights, much resembling the note of the
European Cuckoo. Other varieties of Owls are at times
represented in these cages.
12.—AN ENCLOSURE WITH POND.
Which at present contains the White Ibis {Threskiornis
Strictipennis ), Glossy Ibis {Plegadis falcinellus), Straw-necked
Ibis (Carphibis spinicollis) , the Pacific Gull (Larus
Pacificus), also several Coots of different varieties.


FERGUSSON & MITCHELL’S
“ ySccliltj llfimndti; ”
Saves time and annoyance of searching through newspapers
for time of Arrival and Departure of Mails, and Departure
of Intercolonial Steamers, these items being collected in
a handy form, and can be seen at a glance.
To Importers it is invaluable, giving the advertised date
of sailing, the actual sailing date, and the number of days
out, also date of arrival in Melbourne of Steamers and Sailing
Vessels from all Foreign Ports.
Bach subscriber is supplied with a neat cedar frame,
with glass in front and slide at back, which is refilled by
our Messengers every Monday morning.
Subscription, One Guinea per Annum, Payable in Advance.
THE SABBATH SCHOOL AND MISSIONARY RECORD.
EDITED BY THE REV. W. S. ROLLAND.
Twenty-four pages, is. per annum.
CIRGTJLATIOIT 5000 MOTTTHLY.
As an addendum to the course of Bible reading in Sabbath-schools, teachers
will find this little pamphlet invaluable for imparting instruction in Mission work
to the young.
THE PRESBYTERIAN MONTHLY & MESSENGER
OF THE CHURCHES OF AUSTRALIA & TASMANIA.
jEZDITIEID ZB*V IRZEV. J".
Forty pages. Price, 3s. per annum ; posted 4s.
This excellent periodical is now entering on its fifth year of publication, with a
guaranteed issue of over 5000 monthly. As an advertising medium, circulating as it
does through all Presbyterian congregations in the colony and elsewhere, it cannot
be surpassed.
FERGUSSON AND MITCHELL, PUBLISHERS.


WILD BURRHEL SHEEP
PROGENITOR OF THE SHEEP


13a.-THE GOAT YARD.
There is a very large
and curious Goat from
Patna, in India, in this
enclosure, nearly as large
as a small donkey, also a Wild
Burhee Sheep.
13b.— In this cage are a pair of
Ruffed Lemurs from Madagascar,
They are the largest and mostf
beautiful of the Lemur tribe, and'
are extremely graceful in their move-
ments.
14.—THE CROCODILE HOUSE.
This building contains a pair of Crocodiles lately brought
from Calcutta, also a smaller one from Java, and at one end
is a small cavern and pond for frogs.
15. —A small enclosure in which are several Land
Tortoises.
16.—THE WOLF HOUSE.
In this building are two specimens of the Coyote or
Prairie Wolf of America (Canis latrans ), a pair of Indian
Wolves (Canis Pallipes ), two Hybrid Wolves (Canis
borealis and (Canis occidentalis ), and a pair of Marsupial
Wolves ( Phyla anus Cynocephalus ) also a pair of Leopards
and a pair of Pumas.
17. —HYAENA AND PUMA CAGES.
These cages contain a fine pair of Pumas {Felis con
color), sometimes called the Silver Lion.
In another compartment is a Spotted Hyaena from
South Africa ( Hytzna crocuta ), and in the third division a
pair of Striped Hyaenas ( Hycena striata ), from India.


18 and 19.—THE WATERFOWL PONDS.
The present collection of Waterfowl consists of Magpie
Geese ( Anseranas nielanolenca), Chinese Geese (Auser
Cygnoides ), White Swans ( Cygnus olor ), Black Swans
(Cygnus atratus ), Grey-lag Geese (Auser ferus), Cape Barren
Geese ( Cereopsis nova Hollandia ), Brent Geese ( Bernida
Brenta), Toulouse Geese, Black-necked Swans ( Cygnus
nigricollis ), Maned Geese (. Bernida Juba fa), Egyptian
Geese ( Chenalopex ALgyptiacd), Upland Geese (. Bernida
Magellanica ), Snow Geese, and Spur-winged Geese (Plec-
tropterus Gambensis), &c., &c.
The Native Encampment is erected in front of one of
these ponds (No. 19). It is an exact representation of the
Blacks’ Camps of fifty years ago.
20. THE YAK PADDOCK {Bos Grunniens).
These curious animals are natives ot Thibet, where they
are used for domestic purposes, their great peculiarity being
their long shaggy hair and bushy tails, which in some
Asiatic countries are greatly prized as an ornament.
21. WATER BUFFALO {Bubalus Buffelus.)
These animals come from Southern Asia, where they are
used for cultivating the paddy fields and other purposes.
There are large herds of them now in the neighbourhood of
Port Darwin, North Australia, the increase of a few taken there
many years ago by the Government of New South Wales.
22—THE BRAHMIN CATTLE PADDOCK.
{Bos Indicus.)
These are also an Indian variety; they are there univer-
sally used for drawing carts and ploughing the ground with
the rude native plough.


23. —LOWER POND PADDOCK.
There are a great many Ducks and other Waterfowl in
this fine sheet of water. In the grounds surrounding it are
several swings for children. This is a very pretty part of the
gardens, and it forms a pleasant picnicing ground.
24—MANDRILL MONKEY (Cynocephalus Mormon).
This cage is divided into two divisions. One contains
a pair of Yellow Baboons. In the second division
is a splendid example of the Mandrill ( Cynocephalus
Mormon). This extraordinary-looking creature is from
Africa. It is one of the rarest and most valuable monkeys,
very few Zoological Gardens possessing a specimen.
25.—PIG-TAILED MONKEY.
A small cage containing a Pig Tailed Monkey ( Macacus
Nemestrimus ), from Java. They are very savage and spiteful
creatures.
26.—WILD BOAR’S YARD.
This enclosure is divided into three compartments; in
the first are some Indian Wild Boars, and in the other
two some native dogs ( Canis Dingo'). These dogs are
capable of partial domestication, but they will always destroy
poultry or lambs if they get the opportunity. The aborigines
used to tame them before the white men came to Australia,
and they had numbers of half starved mangy dogs in their
camps. They are very destructive to sheep, and every
settler’s hand is against them. In the Mallee country
especially, they have become very numerous of late years.
The true dingo is unable to bark, but they make up for iti n
howling; there is no more lonely or depressing sound i n
the stillness of night in the Australian bush than the howl
of the wild dog.
27. —THE LEOPARD HOUSE.
Which contains a pair of Black Leopards from the Malay
States {Delis Leopardus var. niger), a very fierce and un
tameable animal. A fine example of the Panther (Leopardus
various). And several Indian Leopards (Delis Leoiardus .l


28. —THE LION AND TIGER HOUSE.
Contains two Lions and two Lionesses. The largest Lion is
a grandson of the famous Lion Hannibal, supposed to have
been the finest specimen ever seen in captivity. In other
compartments are .several fine Tigers from India and
Java.
29.—THE BEAR HOUSE.
Is divided into three compartments, and contains a
Himalayan Bear from India ( Ursus Tibetanus). A large
American Black Bear ( U Americanus). A Malayan Sun
Bear (U Malayanus), and a Brown Bear (U. Arctos.)
30. ROCKERY AND POND.
On the pond are some Mandarin Ducks from China
(Aix galericnlata), and in the water a number of Chinese
Gold Carp.
31. THE REPTILE HOUSE.
This building is built of brick and iron with plate glass
front, and is divided into compartments, which at present
contain Pythons from the Malay Peninsula, Rock Pythons
(P. molurus) from India, Carpet Snakes (Morelia Variegata).
They are found in the N.W. parts of the colony and in some
districts of New South Wales, and are non-venomous. The
Diamond Snake (Morelia Spilotes) from New South Wales,
also a non-venomous variety. In other divisions are Tiger,
Copperhead, Brown and Black Snakes, some of the most
venomous reptiles found in Victoria. In separate compart-
ments are a number of lizards of different varieties.


THE REPTILE HOUSE.






32.—GUINEA PIGS.
A small house and yard which contains a number of
white and grey Angora Guinea Pigs.
33.—A SMALL ROCKERY & YARD,
In which are a number of White Egyptian Rats {Mus
decumanus ).
34.—A SMALL POND AND ENCLOSURE,
Which contain several Fresh Water Turtle (Chelodina
Longicollis). The aborigines used formerly to catch large
numbers of these creatures and put them to a very horrible
death. Round a good sized fire a number of turtles
would be placed upright, with a couple of sticks at the back
of the shell to prevent them falling over; here the unfor-
tunate creatures were allowed to roast slowly to death,
the picanninies shrieking with laughter at their contortions.
35—THE INDIAN OTTER POND & YARD.
This enclosure contains a fine pair of Indian Otters, a
rare and valuable animal.
36.—LARGE PARROT AVIARY.
This is the largest Aviary in the Gardens. It contains a
laro-e central compartment in which are two hollow dead
gum trees for the birds to build in. There are a large
number ot beautiful Australian Parrots confined here and
they have room to fly about. Every year about Christmas
the stock is replenished, as the young birds are brought into
Melbourne for sale about that time from the bush. On each
side of the Parrot House are two other divisions in which
are a number of Doves and Pheasants of different varieties,
and other birds
37.—THE PEACOCKS’ LAWN.
This Enclosure is surrounded with a high iron and wire
netting fence, and in it are kept a large number of gaudily
plumaged birds—Pea Fowl, the common variety, and the
White, Crown Goura Pigeons from New Guinea, Curassows,
Pheasants, White Guinea Fowl, &c., &c.


FERGUSSON & MITCHELL,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
CHROMO LITHOGRAPHERS,
Easterners, Engravers,
SHOW-CARD MANUFACTURERS,
book-binders
General printers & publishers.
Warehouse :
55 and 57 ELIZABETH STREET,
MELBOTJEUE.
Factory :
YARRA BANK.
Telephone No. 182.




38.—SONGBIRD AVIARY.
This is one of the prettiest exhibits in the Gardens, as it
is full of small birds of different kinds —Canaries, Finches
of many varieties, Linnets, Goldfinches, and many other
birds too numerous to mention.
39. THE ELEPHANT WALK.
This circular enclosure is found to be a great improve-
ment on the straight walk formerly used ; it is also much
safer, as no one is allowed within the ring fence. The walk
is kept exclusively for the use of the Elephant, which is in
full view of the visitors from the outside of the fence, or from
the grass plot in the centre. The Elephant “ Ranee ”is a
very quiet animal, but it is wrong and foolish to tease animals,
as many are fond of doing; notices are therefore posted near
the ticket-box and on the outside of the fence, warning
people not to tease the Elephant or go within reach of her
trunk. “ Ranee ” parades every day (Sundays excepted),
from ii to 12, and from 2 o’clock to half-past 4 o’clock in
the afternoon, unless the weather is wet. On holidays,
when there are a great many children anxious to ride,
she remains longer in the ring. In the centre of the grass
plot is a summer-house with seats and a table, for picnic
parties and others.
40. THE SQUIRREL HOUSE.
This pretty little
building attracts
much attention, and
children are fond
of watching the
squirrels as they
jump nimbly about
among the branches
provided for them. There are several wire wheels in the
cage, and the little creatures are very fond of getting into
these and going round and round as if their very lives
depended on it. The present collection is a very fine one.


41—COCKATOO HOUSE.
There are a number of Cockatoos of different
varieties caged here. The White Cockatoo ( Cacatua
Galerita)-, the Corella or long-billed Cockatoo {Lianetis
tenuirostris); Lead-beater’s Cockatoo (C. Leadbeaterii); the
Rose Cockatoo (C. Roseicapilla ); and the White Cockatoo
of the Solomon Islands {C. Ophthalmica). In separate
divisions are some handsome Macaws. The Red and Blue
(Ara Araganza) and the Blue and Yellow ( Ara Ararauna ),
from Brazil. In another compartment are some Satin
Bower birds. *
42.—THE PLATYPUS POND.
The main walk divides on each side of this pond, which
is round, with a small island in its centre, covered with large
and luxuriant ferns. It was formerly devoted to the
Mandarin and Summer or Carolina Ducks, but lately it has
been slightly altered and prepared for the reception of
Platypi, which will in future be kept here, and where it is
hoped they will thrive. The duck-billed Platypus (Orni-
thorhynchns paradoxus) is indeed the most singular animal
in Australia. They are found in most of the inland rivers
and creeks, where they live in burrows lined with dry
leaves in the banks, the entrance to which is generally
under water, but carried up into dry ground. They breed
about the month of September or early in October; the
young are produced from a soft egg, something like that of
the snake. The young ones which number from one to
three, are very helpless at first.
43 —THE MONKEY HOUSE.
This building is only used for a Monkey House in the
summer, the former occupants having been placed in the
new Monkey House No. 94.




44.—VARIOUS ANIMALS.
The opposite building is of the same size and construction
as the Monkey House, except that it is divided into several
compartments, the first of which contains two Rhesus
Monkeys, the second a pair of Monkeys, the centre of the
building is occupied by a Sloth Bear and a Brown Bear,
and the two remaining divisions contain an American Black
Bear, and a Ring-tailed Coati.
45. —THE COYPU OP BEAVER RAT {Myopotamus
coypus) POND.
This singular animal which comes from South America,
is very similar in appearance to the beaver, but it is smaller
and has a long pointed rat-like tail, instead of the short
flat tail of the true beaver. It has also the same habits and
instincts.
46.—GUINEA PIG COTTAGE,
A little structure in the Swiss Cottage style. It contains
a large number of Guinea Pigs (Cavia cobay a), who lead a
happy life in their pretty residence.
47.—RAT CASTLE.
A model of an old Norman Castle built of brick. Its
retainers and defenders being a colony of Black Guinea
Pigs.
48.—THE LITTLE LOG CABIN.
Was erected to show visitors, especially children, who have
never been in the bush, the kind of dwellings formerly to
be met with within a very short distance from Melbourne.
A number of Black Angora Guinea Pigs live in it.
49.—SMALL PADDOCK & POND.
There are at present in this Enclosure a pair of Egyptian
Geese, and a Sarus Crane from India.




50.—THE BEAR PIT.
Contains two very fine Brown Bears from Russia ( Ursus
Arctos). Visitors are requested not to feed them while on
the pole, as doing so may cause them to fall off and be
seriously injured.
51.—THE BAND STAND.
52.—REFRESHMENT ROOM. ,
Where visitors can obtain Tea and Coffee and other
Refreshments or Fruit. There is ample room for a large
number of visitors to obtain shelter from the weather
here in case of rain.
53, 54, and 55.—DEER PADDOCKS.
These contain the following varieties :
The Formosa Ueer ( Cervus pseudaxis) from Formosa,
China, a beautifully spotted deer, the first of which was
presented to the Society by R. S. Fussell, Esq., of Foo-
chow.
The Hog Deer {Cervus porcinus) India ; this is a small,
hardy variety. A number have been liberated at different
times by the Society.
The Rusa Deer (C. Rusa) from Java; this variety have
likewise been liberated.
The Fallow Deer (C. Dama ), Europe; there are numbers
of these deer in different parts of the Colony, notably on
the Upper Yarra, the produce of some liberated a good
many years ago by Paul de Castella, Esq. The Fallow
Deer makes the best venison.
The Axis Deer ( C. Axis) and theSAMBUR Deer (C. Aris-
tolclis) have likewise been introduced and acclimatised.
The former are to be found on the Grampians and the
latter in the Kooweerup Swamp in considerable numbers.
56 and 57.—LARGE PHEASANT AVIARY.
This enclosure contains a number of Pheasants in its
compartments ; and two large divisions, in one of which
are a number of Blackbirds, and in the other Thrushes.




58. —THE OLD BUSH HOME.
This is another little building erected as a memento of
old times. It is an exact representation of a shepherd’s
hut of thirty years ago, before runs were fenced in. It is
built of slabs with bark roof, and all the details are faithfully
carried out.
59.—THE DUCK POND.
This small sheet of water is sub-divided and examples of
the following varieties may be seen here. The Paradise
Duck of New Zealand (Carsarca variegata), the Chestnut
Sheldrake (C. tadornoides) ; this handsome variety is found
in Victoria. The black Indian Duck, a very fine, handsome
bird. The English Wild Duck (Anas Boschas). The
Australian Black Duck (Anas superdliosa), and several
others.
60 & 61.—SMALL ENCLOSURES,
In one of which are several Porcupines from India and
South Africa (Hystrix Cristata). In another there are
usually several Echidnas (Echidna Hystrix).
62.—SMALL MAMMAL HOUSE.
There are a number of small animals in this cage in its
different divisions. First the series of Opossum, comprising
the Sooty Opossum of Tasmania (Phalangista Fuliginosa) ;
the short-eared Opossum (A. Canina), from the
mountainous districts of Victoria; the common Opossum
(P. Vulpina( ; the ring-tailed Opossum (P. Viverrina) ;
also the short-headed Phalanger (Belideus Breviceps), some
flying Squirrels ; the Kangaroo Rat (Bettongia Cuniculus) ;
the Native Cat (Dasyurus Viverrinus); the Civet Cat
(Bassaris Astuta) and ( Viverricula Malaccensis)-, the Musang
from Sumatra ( Paradoxurus Musang a) ; and several Caracal
Lynxes from India and Africa.


DEER PADDOCKS.
SMALL MAMMAL HOUSE.


63.—THE SECOND SMALL MAMMAL HOUSE.
This cage is divided into six compartments, and contains
the following animals :—The Tasmanian Devil (Sarco-
philus Ursinus); the Racoon ( Procyon Lotor ); the
Common Fox ( Vulpes Vulgaris) : the Binturong (Articlis
binturong); the Bengal Fox yCanis Bens>alensis), a pair of
English Badgers and several Silver-backed Jackalls from
South Africa.
64—PADDOCK.
In this paddock are a pair of Red Deer, presented to
the Society by the Earl of Derby.
65.—THE NYLGHAIE’S PADDOCK.
The Nylghaie ( Boselaphus tragocainelus ), is a native of
India. It is a large variety of the Antelope. It is some-
times called the Blue Ox.
66 -WAPITI DEER PADDOCK.
The Wapiti or Carolina Stag ( Cervus Canadensis) is an
American variety, and is one of the largest. Its flesh is
pyppllpvjf
67. KANGAROO PADDOCK.
Which contains specimens of the following varieties : —The
Great Kangaroo ( Macropus Giganleus); the Red Kangaroo
(. Macropus Rufus'), found in Riverina. The males of both
varieties are powerful animals, and attain a height of six feet
when full grown ; and the Mallee, or Black Kangaroo
(M. Melanops ). Four of the Kangaroos in this paddock are
pure white; they are Albinos of the red variety. In one of
the divisions are some Euro Kangaroos, Black Wallaroo
Kangaroos, Red Wallaroo Kangaroo, and others.
68. THE IBEX PADDOCK.
The enclosure contains several Ibex from the Sierra
Nevada in Spain, and from Suakim on the Red Sea.


WAPITI DEER


H Journal of ÜBobemla.
P PAPER which is, as well as claims to be, a reflex of
Melbourne life—crisp, readable, epigrammatic, pungent,
with that curious under-knowledge of men and things which
belongs only to those who pass their lives “ behind the scenes,”
and, above all, independent of advertisements ; such was the ideal
which led to the conception of
“BOHEMIA.”
To the outside public “Bohemia” is an unknown community
—fresh, unconventional, and, above all, original. Up to the
present it has had no voice, but now, thanks to special enterprise,
the general public may look on at the spectacle, and they may
join in the chit chat of the clubs, the whispers at the stage wings,
the gossip in the Speaker’s gallery, and the lobby. They may
mingle for 3d. a week in that mysterious entrancing life, which
one-tenth of society passes, while the other nine-tenths are, or
ought to be, in bed.
(Uix&cnpilori
3C>. a Cop*?.
12s. 6&. a \?ear, posted
Publishers, ;JferoUSSOn & tflMtCbdl,
55 & 57 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


WAPITI DEER.


H
&
*
XV
\>
AX<5
\
Xv
vYV
w-
vV
a
XV
vYv® ,A>° Ai
v\XV>Ao>
\P AX
©Q>
V*
\V
A
\s>
f
o
aF-
~
V
0 A y< &
e-
V-
*
o
A
8
A-
V
&
*p
A
P
A
**>
VV
<<< v
fc* v
s




69.—THE MUSEUM.
This building is divided into several compartments. In
the divisions on the west side are several interesting ex-
hibits. In one is a representation of the playing place of
the spotted Bower Bird. These bowers are quite inde-
pendent of the birds’ nests, which are built on neighbouring
trees. They first construct a covered passage or bower
about three feet long, and near it they place every white or
bright object they can find, such as the bleached bones of
animals, pieces of white or colored stone, feathers, shells,
etc., etc.; the feathers they place on end. When these
curious playing places were -first discovered, they were
thought to be made by the native women for the amuse-
ment of their children. More than a bushel of small
peices of bleached bones or shells are often found at one
of these curious sporting places. Sometimes a dozen or
more birds will assemble, and they delight in chasing
each other through the bower and playing about it.
There are several varieties of these birds in Australia, but
they all construct bowers. The one exhibited in the
Museum was found in the neighbourhood of Lake Albacutya,
in the Wimmera country, and is now shown exactly as it
appeared in the Mallee. In the next division the Platypus
and its burrows are shown. These curious animals com-
mence their long burrows under water, and work upwards
into dry ground. The nest is constructed in a little
chamber, and is made of dry leaves and grass, and is very
w r arm and comfortable; there is a second entrance on dry
ground, The young are found in the months of September
and October, and occasionaly both a little earlier and
later; they generally have two or three at a time.
A third division contains the Lyre bird and its nest-
They build generally in a fern tree gully, either on a fern or
sometimes on the ground beside a fallen fern tree; they
only lay one egg.
In the division on the eastern side of the building are a
number of stuffed specimens of birds and animals that have
at one time lived in the gardens.


70. —THE PELICAN ENCLOSURE.
There are several fine Pelicans here, which were brought
from Egypt, and are the same variety as those seen in such
large numbers on the swamps bordering the Suez Canal.
71—THE ANTELOPE PADDOCK,
Which contains two species of Antelope. The Indian
Antelope ( Antilope cervicaprd) and the Bay Antelope {Ce-
phalophus dorsalis ) from Africa. The former are very abun-
dant in certain parts of India.
72. —THE DOVE & PIGEON AVIARY.
This building contains a number of pigeons and
doves. Bronze-winged Pigeons ( Phaps chalcoptera ),
the Wonga Wonga Pigeon ( Leucosarcia picata ), the
Crested Dove {Ocyphaps lop holes), and the pretty little
Peaceful Dove ( Geopelia tranquilla ), all from different parts
of Victoria.
73.—LEMUR AVIARY.
This aviary contains a number of Lemurs from
Madagascar.
74—THE ALPACA PADDOCK.
The pair of Alpacas confined here have been only lately
obtained from Europe ; they are natives of South America,
being most numerous in Patagonia. Their wool is valuable
as an article of commerce.
75.—TROTTING CATTLE ENCLOSURE.
In this paddock are a pair of small Ceylon Trotting
Cattle, used by the natives there to draw light carts called
Hackeries. The Bull, though full grown, only measures
33 inches in height.


TROTTING
CATTLE


76.—THE LLAMA PADDOCK.
This enclosure joins the the Guanaco paddock, and in it
are a handsome pair of Llamas (Llama Peruana).
This animal is a native of Peru, and in former days it was
largely used as a beast of burden by the Natives. It can
carry a load of loolbs.
77. THE GUANACO PADDOCK.
In this enclosure are a pair of Guanaco (Llama Huanacd)
from Patagonia (South America). It is a member of the
same family as the Llama. It has a very disagreeable habit
of spitting at every one within its reach; it is therefore
enclosed in a double fence.
78. CASSOWARY ENCLOSURE.
This enclosure contains several Cassowaries from North
Australia, They are quarrelsome birds and have to be kept
separate and, therefore, each bird is confined in a separate
enclosure.
79 —RHEA PADDOCK.
This pair of birds were procured last year. They are
natives of South America and are very numerous in some
places. They differ from the Ostrich in being much smaller
and having three toes instead of two as in the former bird.
80. —THE EMU PADDOCK.
Several Emus are kept in the enclosure. Several young
ones are bred in the gardens every year ; the time of nesting
is in the Winter.
81. DEER ENCLOSURE.
Contains several pretty spotted Axis Deer from India.
82. GOAT ENCLOSURE.
This enclosure contains a pair of Long-legged Goats from
India.


THE LLAMA




WE GIVE
"The Best Value in Victoria.”
•
WE SELL
For Cash Only.
■*
WE GUARANTEE
The Quality of our GOODS.
FRANTsNOwTci-
-405 \ 407 Sydney Road,
BRUNSWICK.
The following Departments are always kept thoroughly
assorted with the SEASON’S NOVELTIES, and our prices are
always the Lowest:—
Millinery
Mantles
Underclothing
Dressmaking
Gloves
Ribbons
Umbrellas
Laces
Manchester
Dresses
Costumes
Silks.
Clothing
Tailoring
Mercery.
Hats.
TH-A-IMIS PASS THE POOR.


83.—ANOA.
(Anoa depresstcornis ).
The Society have been fortunate in securing a pair of
these rare animals; they are the smallest variety of the
Family Bovidoe , and though small are very fierce. They
have a great antipathy to deer and horses, and they will
attack any animal however large it may be.
84.— FORMOSAN DEER.
In this Paddock are a pair of Formosan Deer {Cervus
pseudaxis ) from China.
85 & 86.—BURCHELL’S ZEBRA.
The Society possesses a fine pair of Burchell’s Zebra
(Equus Burchelli ). This variety, which inhabits the plain
country in the neighbourhood of the Orange River in South
Africa, is a quieter and more tractable animal than the
common Zebra of the mountain district#.
87.—RUSINE DEER.
Several Rusine Deer are kept in this enclosure. They
are a Java variety, which were introduced into the Mauritius
many years ago, that Island being now stocked with them.
They are frequently called Mauritius Deer.
88. —A shelter Shed, near the main gates, for the con-
venience of visitors in wet weather.
89. —Two small enclosures recently erected, one of which
contains a pair of Golden Agouti, and the second some
Viscachas, from the Brazils, a curious burrowing animal
something of the same nature as the Australian Wombat.
89.—THE BACTRIAN CAMEL YARD.
(Catnelus Bactrianus ,)
The Society possesses a fine specimen of this animal. They
are found in Central Asia, Thibet, and China. T. hey are a
much better-tempered and more gentle creature than the
Arabian single-humped Camel.






Whose Bread is SECOND TO NONE IN THE COLONY?
FORD BROTHERS’.
Who has the oldest established BREAD FACTORY in Brunswick?
FORD BROTHERS.
ESTABLISHED
1654
©
(S
k
■
4
w
BRUNSWICK- FRIES • BREAD -FACTORY:
FACTORY: Corner of WESTQN <& E WING STS.,
REFRESHMENT ROOMS: SYDNEY ROAD,
BRUNSWICK.
Who supply the greatest number of PRIVATE FAMILIES?
FORD BROTHERS.


90.—BUFFALO PADDOCK.
This enclosure contains several Indian Buffaloes. —
Bos Indicus.
91.—THE GNU.
The animal confined here is the White-tailed Gnu
(Connochodes Gnu) from South Africa, it is a recent aquisi-
tion. In their native country they roam about in large
herds and when pursued or frightened they put their heads
low down and flourish their tails and go along in regular
fries at full gallop. In captivity they are frequently very
vicious.
92.—THE CAMEL YARD.
A Common Camel is kept here, it was recently procured
from South Australia, where they are kept in large numbers,
to take the place of the one that recently died. It is not yet
old enough to be used for the purpose of carrying children,
but will probably be so used next year.
93—THE OSTRICH PADDOCK.
Contains two specimens—male and female. The Ostrich
was introduced into Victoria more than twenty years ago
by the Society. For some years they were located on the
Wimmera, on one of Sir Samuel Wilson’s stations. They
were then transferred to the Messrs. Officer Brothers,
Murray Downs station at Swan Hill, on the Lower Mur-
ray. Here, under the able management of those gentlemen,
the birds increased to over one hundred. In 1884
the station was sold, and the flock transferred to Kerang,
where they now are. The feathers command the highest
price in the London market.
94. —This building, which has lately been erected, is
heated throughout, as it is found that the more delicate
kinds of Monkeys cannot stand our winter. In the first
compartment on the right-hand side are a ne pair o
large Orang-outans. These animals come from tropical




LITTLE’S SOLUBLE “PHENYLE”
DISINFECTANT.
TRADE
C 6 H B
MARK.
A PURIFIER AND DEODORISER OF IMPURE AIR
AND BAD SMELLS.
Best, Safest, anb Surest
MON-POISONOUS.
P
S a wash for Dogs, Horses, and all kinds of
animals is unsurpassed.
Used in the Society’s Gardens,
A sure cure for Mange and all Skin Diseases,
certain death to all insect life.
Sold by all Chemists and Storekeepers in Australia.
Wholesale: flDords, little S, Son,
488 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


Borneo, and are found in the dense forests which cover
parts of that island. They are gentle in disposition, and
afford a great deal of amusement to visitors by their human-
like antics.
In the second compartment is a large male Guinea
Baboon with a female Chacma Baboon. The two species
are very closely allied; the structural differences between
them being small. It is a most interesting study to the
student of anthropology to compare the differences in dis-
position and structure between these Baboons and the
Orang-outans in the adjoining cage, the latter being the
type-genus of the family Simiidae, whilst the former are much
lower in the scale.
In the third compartment two Green Monkeys and a
Black-handed Spider Monkey live together in perfect
harmony. The Green Monkeys are cordially detested in
Africa, their habitat, by all and sundry who grow crops
of any kind, as they always assemble in troops and carry
out daring robberies in a wonderful manner under the
leadership of tried veterans. The Spider Monkey comes
from Central America, and is a good specimen of the family
Cebidae. In climbing it always makes use of its tail as a
fifth hand.
The fourth compartment contains some Black Apes from
the East Indies; and a young Chacma Baboon has also
quarters in this compartment, much to the disgust of his
companions, on whom he is everlastingly playing pranks
with a rollicking freedom gravely deprecated by the victims,
but which highly delights the occupants of the adjoining
cage.
In the fifth division a happy family of Macaque-Rhesus
and Bonnet Monkeys while away the time by playing inno-
cent tricks on each other, and they are seldom quiet long.
As changes are constantly being made in a Zoological
Garden, it is possible that changes may be made in the
Arrangements before this Edition is disposed of.




:
Fergusson &.Mitchell, Printers, Hopetoun Chambers,
55 & 57 Elizabeth Street.




