



Sbackell, wwt« & Co.
£and Salesmen
ECHUCA.^
THE OLDEST ESTABLISHED FIRM IN THE
NORTH OF VICTORIA.
Magnificent Wheat Land from £4 10s. to £6 IGs. per acre.
Loamy, Rich, Friable Land, suitable for the intense culture of Citrus
and other fruits, lucerne and maize, and commanded by water,
£9 to £2O per acre.
Fattening Land of very heavy carrying capacity, £5 10s. to £7 10s.
per acre, all on easy terms.
"Write ns to-day for full information
Shackell, White €$ Co.
LAND SALESMEN
Echuca, Victoria.


UNION i CLUB HOTEL
HARE STREET, ECHUCA
Mrs. M. T. O’BRYAN, Proprietress.
This house, which has recently been rebuilt, has
every modern convenience and is most centrally
situated. Good Cuisine can be relied on. Best
Brands of Liquors only stocked. Cabs meet all trains. Reasonable tariff for holiday makers and week
enders. Most up-to-date House in the Northern District. TELEPHONE No. 32.
■ UMI ——«lS— ———— m
TELEPHONE 62.
FEDERAL BAKERY
J. T. MORELAND
Baker, Pastrycook and Confectioner
PacKenham Street, Echuca East
Catering for Picnics, etc., etc-
MRS. E. SIMMONS
Hare Street, Echuca
Dairy Produce and Cooked Meats. Hot Pies, Tea and Coffee Summer Drinks
Refreshments at all hours. Ice Cream in Summer Months.
——W HI I—Mill I■■ I ■ —I Hill I il II I I———l
M. O’BRYAN
Grocer and General Produce Dealer
CORNER OF
MITCHELL and PACKENHAM STS.,
ECHUCA
All Kinds of Produce Fought and Sold


'f EARRINGS ||>f
in gold or silver. / Wr ) § y>-
@ set witb cameos ' 0 T 7 0 A \SSI7
li Aquamarines, & STUDS
O Turquoise, Etc. Gold, F; out 3/- LINKS
Jk Fresh Desi g ns - JL Collar 5/6 Gold 1 2/6 to 50/-
™ Silver 1/- Silver 1/6 to 7/-
BRACELETS
Spring, Flexible, with Watches, also Nellie
Stewart, Cable, Basket and Fancy, set with
various precious gems.
Hundreds to select from. Designs, the latest.
Quality guaranteed. Workmanship, the best-
The most comprehensive stock of Watches, Jewellery, Stg. Silver, E.P. Silverware, Clocks, Leather Goods,
Optical Goods, Etc., Etc., also the completest stock of duplicate parts and material for repairing every
description of Watches, Clocks, Musical Boxes, etc. The Repairing Department is under the management
of Mr. JAS. DOWNIE, who, without doubt, is Victoria's best Watchmaker. Established 1 882.
WATCHES A SPECIALITY. Repeaters, Chronographs, and ail other kinds in stock and repaired.


Cl Ecfiucfl '
The Capital of the Irrigable florth
fCHUCA, an important town on the
Murray and Campaspe Rivers, where they
junction, is 144 miles in a northerly
direction from Melbourne, and 55 miles
from Bendigo by railway, and is the
capital of the irrigable north of Victoria.
The town is well laid out and the sto ets
planted with trees It covers an area of
4308 acres, and is about 2j4 miles long
and 2 miles wide. Situate between two rivers it forms
a peninsula. All the streets are wide and macadam-
town must bring in its train a much larger town popu-
lation, and there is evidence of this visit le at the
present time
There are 930 dwellings, and the valuation of pro-
perty for rating purposes a general rate of
1/9, and a health rate of 4d. in the £. produce a
revenue of ,£7,700. The assessments are 1325, and
there are 742 rate-payers on the rate book. The
Mayoral allowance being £25 per year. Loans £"16,700
Sinking Fund £2 952 odd. The Council meet at the
Town Hall the last Monday in the month at 7 p.m.,
and the Town Clerk is in attendance at the Town Hall
daily from 9 a.m, till 5 p.m.
BIRDS EYE VIEW OF ECHUCA
ized, particularly the tw r o main business ones, High
and Hare Streets, which are well supplied with stores
with up-to-date stocks of every conceivable description
of merchandise, and here one can be supplied “from a
needle to an anchor,” one might say. The present
population is between 4,000 and 5,000, but the rapid
advance of settlement on the irrigation blocks near the
The public buildings are well distributed about
the town, and, indeed, with the exception of the stores
in the main streets, there is plenty of air spaces between
the buildings, instead of, as is so often the casein most
of our Victorian towns, their being crowded so closely
together that there is not room to swing the proverbial
cat between them. The health of the inhabitants*'in


ECHUCA, The Capital of the Irrigable North.
this respect has been well cared for by the wise and
far-seeing city fathers. The public buildings consist
of the Court House, situate at the end of High and
Hare Streets at their junction, where it stands alone
facing both streets. Branches of 5 Banks ; Mechanics’
Institute, with Reading Room, in which some very old
and valuable volumes of the Classics are to be found;
a fine Club, two State Schools, Technical, Grammar
and Ladies’ School, also a High School, seven
Churches, and a fine Convent and School of the
Brigidine Sisters Order. Town Hall, Telegraph,
Rostand Money Order Office, Savings Bank, and 15
Hotels. Then there are two large Saw Mills engaged
in reducing the fine red gums of the local forests to
logs for transport; Brick Works, two Flour Mills,
Gas Works, and a Fire Station. The Chilling Works
the busy shopping night, when the streets wear quite
a lively appearance and make one wonder where all the
people come from.
The climate is notable for its light, dry air, and
mildness in winter, which is a boon to sufferers from
chest complaints and delicate people. It is a great
recouping place for the jaded and run down business
man and Ins family to spend a holiday in ; the drives
through the farming districts are both charming and
instructive, the scenery, for plain country, being some
of the best.
Echuca was founded in the year 1853 by one
Henry Hopwood, a native of Bolton, Lancashire,
England, to whose memory a monument in granite is
POST OFFICE, ECHUCA
and Bacon and Butter Factories are large up-to-date
establishments.
The sporting proclivities of the public are catered
for by Football, Cricket, Rowing, Tennis, Racing,
Rifle, Coursing and Golf Clubs, in fact, almost every
sport is catered for and has its club.
The Hospital is a very fine building just on the
borders of the town, and the ladies of the Benevolent
Society have provided some nice cottages for the old
and infirm folk The Temperance and Masonic Halls
are also fine buildings.
Wednesday is the local half-holiday, and Saturday
erected in Victoria Park. Hopwood was a far-seeing
man, and, whilst engaged as manager of a boiling-
down establishment lower down the river, saw the
possibilities in the future of the present site becoming
the township in consequence of its suitability as a
crossing place on the river from the Victorian to the
New South Wales side, so he selected the spot to build
the store upon. After a time he obtained a hotel
license and ran the store in conjunction with it, on the
spot where the Echuca Club now stands. He then
purchased the goodwill of a punt from a man named
Isaacs, who was using it higher up the river, and re-
rffOvTng it to the crossing place opposite his hotel,
diverted the traffic in that direction, which augmented
his profits at the hotel and' store, and being the


ECHUCA. The Capital of the Irrigable North
only storekeeper he held a monoply of the trade of the
district on both sides of the river. It is not surprising
therefore, that he soon reaped the golden harvest for
his enterprise; such sums as per 1,000 being paid
by drovers for crossing their sheep over the Murray
River. The hotel soon became the resort of squatters,
boundary riders, shearers, drovers, etc., who carried
out the then honored custom of knocking down their
cheques with Hopwood after weeks and months hard
work in building them up. Hopwood, who was a
very progressive man of keen business abilities, was
revered by his patrons, who styled him the “King of
Echuca,” a name that stuck to him to the last. He
worked hard for the progress of the town, which of
course meant success to himself, and thus earned the
sale of town blocks continued till 1859, when it was
stopped by the Government, thus enhancing the blocks
privately owned, and from then, it may be said, the
progressive movement of Echuca began ; businesses of
every description sprang into existence like mushrooms
in the night, and the future prospects of the town
were regarded as second only to those of Melbourne.
Although this prediction has not eventuated, still it is
impossible not to see that the future oi Echuca, under
the irrigation system of farming, is enviable, and those
who desire to get into a good thing on the land or in
business could do much than casting their lot
in Echuca.
Evidence of the first steamer which navigated the
GOULBURN RIVER, NEAR ECHUCA.
good opinion of everyone in the district. The punt in
course of time became inadequate for the requirements
of the traffic, and Hopwood’s next step was to build a
pontoon bridge to supply the further demand for
crossing accommodation from shore to shore. This
facilitated the ingress to Echuca of his customers and
was a boon to the travelling public.
In .1855, the town was surveyed by the Govern-
ment Surveyor, and the first,land sale held in August
of that year —the upset price of the town blocks being
£8 per acre, and most of them changed hands. The
Murray waters is still visible on the New South Wales
bank of the Murray, where a portion of the hull of the
“ Eady Augusta,” which Captain Cadell piloted in
1853, after becoming useless was cast ashore there and
has become buried in the silt by the action of the tide.
Her stem is an exhibit in the Mechanics Institute, and
bears a suitable inscription to enlighten visitors on her
past history. After the advent of the “Eady Augusta”
came steamers in quick succession from all the rivers
in the district, the Murrumbidgee, River Darling, and
Edwards Rivers, and from thence Echuca became the
trading port for steamers from Goolwa in S.A. (1,600




ECHUCA. The Capital op the Irrigable North.
miles river distance), Walgett on the Darling (1,678
miles), Gundagi on the Murrumbidgee (1,160 miles).
Albury on the Murray (301 miles), and for several
hundreds of miles up the Edwards River, but the
opening of the railway from Bendigo assured the per-
manency of Echuca as a shipping port for the north.
This took place in 1864 and brought Echuca within
6 hours railway journey of Melbourne, besides giving
an enormous impetus to the river trade and diverting
it to a great extent from Adelaide, S.A., where (from
the Murrumbidgee and Darling Rivers) most of it used
to go previously.
In 1576, a line was constructed to Deniliquin on
the New South Wales side of the Murray by a private
company, which of course did away the re-loading of
residents have to feel ever grateful for the beautiful
avenues of trees planted in their streets (which is the
most beautifying step in any township).
The era of prosperity which dawned upon Echuca
when the railway was opened was visible on every
hand in 1876. Immense areas of land were cut up by
the Government and thrown open for selection from
the Campaspe to the Loddon on the west and the
Goulburn on the east, and the country became dotted
with settlers from all parts who took up the 320 acre
blocks, and, who, notwithstanding the periods of dry
seasons, have done well on their selections. When the
programme of the Government of locking the Murray
eventuates, which is rendered more necessary since
irrigation has been established, Echuca will rival the
SHIPPING ON THE
goods in Echuca for the New South Wales side of the
Murray which was a loss to Echuca.
In 1878, it was found necessary to erect the
present bridge over the river (whicli is regarded as the
finest iron bridge in the Southern Hemisphere) in place
of the crazy structure that was doing duty for both
road and railway traffic up to that time. The cost of
this bridge was ,£120,000, which was a joint expendi-
ture of Victoria and New South Wales.
Echuca was constituted a borough in November,
1864. E. Homan. Esq. being first Mayor, Mr. C. E.
Pascoe, Town Clerk, and to this latter gentlemen the
RIVER MURRAY.
all-famous Mildura settlement, and prices as high as
,£ioo per acre for orchards will be easily obtainable.
The formation of the soil is lower silurian with
recent surface drift, and fruit trees of all kinds thrive
well in it ; Oranges, Lemons, Peaches, Apricots,
Grapes, and Tomatoes being amongst those which
give the most prolific results.
Present day settlers on the irrigation blocks, sold
and being sold, have not to face the hardships of the
pioneers of the north, who often lost life as well as
crops, stock and money through want of rain in season,
but have all things made easy for them by the efforts


ECHUCA. The Capital of the Irrigable North
of their predecessors and a paternal Government, who
have brought the water to their doors and invite them
to make homes in the midst of civilisation, good markets
for their produce, and within easy access by rail or
river of the Capital City (Melbourne) and the sea
board within a few hours journey with good roads from
the township to their holdings.
Education is also well attended to for the rising
generation, for besides the usual State School, there
is a fine College under the supervision of the Brigidine
Nuns, and a High School with a competent staff of
teachers.
The National Park covers 300 acres, where the
walks and drives inspire one with a desire to worship
way for the agriculturalist and where a few years since
sheep were grazed, to-day large belts of wheat, oats,
and other grain are grown, and in the place of the
land producing shillings per acre profit it now runs
into pounds per acre. As to the prospects here for the
small irrigation farmer an instance may be given of a
man who, 2 miles from the township, on a fraction of
an acre of land which he irrigated with a hand pump
from a well, made the astounding sum of /- from
a plot of beans 17 x 10 yards, and from tomatoes and
beans grown in two months his returns worked out at
about per acre. This gives the intending settler
some idea of what is possible under irrigation.
There is no better country to be found than that
between Echuca and Mathoura when properly treated.
campaspe river, echuca
nature for her bountiful supply of the beautiful. In
the cultivated portion are Violets, Narcissus, and all
other sweet smelling flowers growing in abundance as
though wild, and the avenues of trees are magnificent
to behold. Here a fine arch was erected to James
Mackintosh, on the visit of the Sir Henry B. Eoch,
Governor, in September, 1884. It is constructed of
red gum logs, cut from trees for which this district is
so famous, and which, to prove the endurance of this
class of timber, is as sound to-day as at the time of
erection.
The land in and around Echuca is exceedingly
fertile, and it is only within the last few years that
under closer settlement, pastoralist has had to make
So rich is the soil that superphosphates and other
fertilizers are unnecessary, in fact they spoil rather
than improve the crops. It is in this district that the
Government are purchasing a further large area of
land for cutting up and which will be shortly thrown
open for selection.
The early settlers in this district owe their success
to the abundance of rich natural grasses which, with
the sufficient rainfall, supplied ample food of excellent
fattening properties for their stock, and the fertility of
the soil, which in average seasons of rain, gave forth
abundant harvests, and even in those days wheat
growing and sheep farming spelt success. The large,
sound and healthy ewes of the northern plains being


Railway Time=Tables.
TO ECHUGA.
From Melbourne, via Bendigo.
Melbourne depart ... 6.40 a.m, 4-5° P- m -
Woodend ~ ... 96 ~ 6.30
Gastlemaine ~ ... 10.32 ~ 740
Bendigo ~ ... 12.2 p.m. 845
Echuca arrive ... 2.15 ~ 10.23
From Ballarat, via Oaylesford and Woodend.
Ballarat depart ... ... ... 7-55 P- m -
Daylesford depart ... ... 3.15 p.m.
Woodend depart ... ... 6.30 p.m.
From Ballarat, via Maryborough and Gastlemaine.
Ballarat depart ... 7.25 a.m. 1.10 p.m.
Maryborough depart ... 1020 a.m. *5.25 p.m.
Gastlemaine depart ... 7.40 p.m. 7.4 pm.
*6.6 p.m. on Wednesdays and Fridays.
From Melbourne, via Seymour and Toolamba.
Tu. Th.
Daily Sat.
Melbourne depart ... 605 a.m. 4 p.m
Seymour depart ... 9.20 a.m. 6.15 p.m
Toolamba ... ... Ir.l3a.rn. 8.15 p.m'
Echuca arrive ... 2 p.m, 10.10 p.m.
FROM ECHUCA
To Melbourne, via Bendigo
Mon. Tu. Other Days Daily
Echuca depart 8 a.m. 835 a.m. 4.30 p.m.
Bendigo arrive 11.13 a.m. 11,13 am 6.25 ~
Gastlemaine ~ 12.50 p.m 12.50 p.m. 7.40 ~
Woodend ~ 2.26 pm. 2.26 p.m. 9.14 ~
Melbourne ~ 3.55 p.m. 3.55 p.m. 10.55
To Oaylesford, via Woodend.
Mon. and Tues., 8 a m.
Other Days, 8.35 a.m.
Echuca depart
6.45 p.m. daily
Woodend depart
Oaylesford arrive
Mon., Wed. and Fri. 8.5 p.m.
Tues., Thur. and Sat. 8.51 p.m.
To Ballart, via Gastlemaine and Maryborough.
Mon. and Tues. Other days
Echuca depart ... 8 a.m. 8.35 a.m.
Gastlemaine depart ... 4.17 p.m. 4.17 p.m.
Maryborough depart ... 6.45 ~ 6.45
Ballarat arrive ... 9.37 ~ 9*37
To Melbourne, via Toolamba and Seymour.
Mon., Wed., Fri. Daily
Echuca depart ... 5 a.m. 2.55 p.m.
Toolamba arrive ... 7.10 ~ 6
Seymour arrive ... 9.15 » 8. 12
Melbourne ... ... 12.16 p.m. 11.8
Note —Tickets upon Ballarat via Maryborough
Dine are available via Oaylesford. Melbourne Tickets
are available either via Seymour or Bendigo.
Mail Arrangements.
Mails close at Echuca Post Office for Bendigo and Melbourne line (and branches) Monday and
Tuesday, 7.35 a.m.; Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, 8.10 a.m. Daily at 4 p.m- Due at
Melbourne 4 p.m. and 11 p.m. Goulburn Valley line via Toolamba and Seymour, daily at 2,30 p.m., and at
11 p.m. on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday. Due Toolamba 6 p.m. daily and 7.10 a.m. on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday; Seymour, 8.12 p m. daily; Melbourne, 11.8 p.m. daily and 12.16 p.m. on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday.
Mails are due at Echuca Post Office from Melbourne, 7 a.m, and 2.15 p.m.; Goulburn Valley, 2 p.m.
Coaches run from Echuca to Torrumbarry (16 miles), Gunbower (26 miles). Kow Swamp (30 miles),
Eeitchville (32 miles), Weeweerup (36 miles), Kerang (63 miles), Patho (21 miles), Cohuna (41 miles),
Kerang East (55 miles) and Wharparilla (7 miles).


; W
M


ECHUCA. The; Capital op the Irrigable North
held in the highest esteem in all markets, and secure
highest prices. The soil also lends itself to the prolific
production of oat crops, but the conditions of to-day
are as paradise to those of that time when the settler
was dependent on the natural rainfall, whereas to-day
with the blessing of irrigation he is to a great extent
independent of the vagaries of Dame Nature.
The returns for 1910 of wheat throughout the
district averaged from 28 to 33 bushels per acre, and
even in 1911 when only 416 points of rain tell in the
spring months, a year which showed the lowest regis-
tration (for the period mentioned) on record, 46 points
bition from this district took First Prize against the
world’s competitors, and these were produced under
ordinary conditions.
The district around Echuca, on both sides of the
Murray, is justly celebrated for its sweet and succulent
oasturage, and the raising of fat lambs for export has.
become one of the leading rural industries. In dry
seasons lucerne hay has been found the best for feeding
ewes as it is a better milk producer than any other
and the lambs produced in this district are quite equal
to anything reared and obtained in New Zealand, where
turnips and other artificial foods are used.
VIEW OF THE
having fallen in December, too late to assist the growth,
the yield reached as high as 24 bushels per acre, but
crops on fallowed land under like conditions gave
27 to 31 bushels. The grain country of this district
will also fatten all classes of stock, a condition which
does not obtain in most other wheat belts Two to
four tons of hay can be grown to the acre on land that
carries two sheep to the acre, and fattens prime in the
Autumn when prices are high. The land values, which
are on the increase, rule from to £5 per acre for
plain land, £6 to £Sjioj- for timbered farm lands, and
from to for land commanded by water.
Some samples of wheat sent to the Chicago Exhi-
RIVER AT ECHUCA.
Recently this year 19,731 fat lambs were sent away
from the Echuca district, a fact which speaks volumes
for the nutritive qualities of the natural herbage on
which the ewes where depastured. In this domain of
agricultural enterprise there is almost unlimited scope
for profitable expansion. As a matter of fact the fat
lamb industry has only been seriously taken in hand
in the Echuca district within recent years, and the
results attained demonstrate that under proper a system
of fodder conservation it will pay handsomely.
Mcssrs, Shacked, White & Co., whose business was
established in 1864 by the late Mr. Shacked and Mr. A.
W. H. White, who with his partner Mr. Wilson, now
2


$
n
r
■
. ' ' ' . ‘ |
Pr' §jjp
.
P§ i^k
[/faff* ten. Stf" -I .4 * > , "®l
JJJJ
nn
| | ’ 1 i ,.«< . i' y "p~ ~ : ■- — y-... .*..
~|.- ' ' ■ i|r -f J||Pp| C
. fl *
1 jfe ..
f G j'Xii lL-i •...■■IIpLSk'
iWsm — '" .■
jT*fefe|g*r
*, .,« | ’’ <**. . ' Ijff !|| ||
” ■" f '*’ ' ‘ ' !
Sai5j;>
|HBS»1? : Mi$M - - w
. . < i •
%WWr«A»..-* .m >jWS _
F • ;
„ — rt***
-r 4
i . ,- * *'--■
hm
|-'*^i_ ,: lp-
gg%-; * ,
\|VmT
3
IjUfEt- =
* : f — . i
| ' , ''
£mqgs£z‘
, . ,
teSS^ZZ'
. e ;
WOOL BARGE
, ECHUCA WHARF.
M
I
%


ECHUCA. The Capital op the Irrigable North.
carry on the business. The subdivision of about
36,000 acres in the estates of “Wharparilla” in 1906,
and “ Torrumberry ” in 1908, was carried out under
their immediate supervision, and there is no one better
posted up in the suitability, nature or value of the
country in this district than Mr. Wilson, who makes it
his especial study, and has at present some acres
under offer to the Government for purchase for irri-
gation and closer settlement blocks. This land is to be
(with other blocks recently resumed) thrown open for
most profitable to engage in. Amongst the illustrations
will be found one of a mob of brood mares from which
a good annual revenue is made.
The wool that crossed the river wharf at Echuca
for transhipment to the train for Melbourne was 90,000
bales, which had been brought down the rivers by boat
to Echuca, which is the nearest shipping port on the
Murray for all parts of the surrounding country, and the
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, ECHUCA.
settlement next or the following year, and intending
settlers should apply to this firm for full information in
regard to this portion of the country.
Amongst other things that Echuca is famous for is
its horse-breeding, and here the irrigation of the land
and the cultivation of lucerne paddocks assists materially
this industry which, in competent hands, is one of the
advantages of cheap water carriage should not be lost
sight of by settlers.
Both sides of the River Murray are well supplied
with good springs of water which can be struck at a
depth of from 100 feet sinking, and of which there is an
abundant supply, the value of which is palpable to the
farmer ; and this, in addition to the natural rainfall is


ECHUCA. The Capital of the Irrigable North.
sufficient to allow of conservation on a large scale.
Many farmers to the north of the town thus impound a
sufficient supply for all stock and domestic purposes.
Experience has proved mixed farming in this
district to be highly remunerative. Wheat growing
associated with sheep breeding has proved a great
success wherever it has been pursued by capable
farmers. Fat lambs are easily grown as the nature
of the natural grasses is so valuable in its feeding and
fattening properties and those sent from this district
always top the market. A yarding of 7,500 sheep fed
of 4,400 acres of natural grasses is something to be
acre of lucerne. Dry and lean years cause him no
concern, in fact they are in the very nature of things
his most profitable experiences.
On the irrigated holdings in the district maize is
also a profitable crop to grow, which reaches from ten
to twelve feet high and produces, as green feed, up to
30 tons to the acre.
Then the large, solid bullocks raised on the natural
grasses are the best evidence possible of the richness of
the soil No manure, other than the droppings of the
animals, is used, and no other fodder than that ot the
VICTORIA PARK, ECHUCA.
proud of and this is to the credit of Mr. Tomlinson, of
Echuca.
There is, however, an even more attractive future
before Echuca district than this represents Wheat
growing and the raising of fat lambs are industries that
are assuredly going to work wonders in many of the
surrounding fertile areas, but the irrigation ditch is
destined to accomplish an even greater transformation
scene in the Murray frontages, of which Echuca is the
centre. A small holder within 3 miles of the township
on a few acres of ground makes a good living for
himself and family by the growth of lucerne. On one
occasion, by cutting the crop and hand feeding it, he
kept 4 milch cows in full profit on the produce of one
grasses is required ; in consequence of the mildness of
the climate no shelter is required in the winter, and yet
the finest quality of fats is sent in enormous quantities
to market and bring top figures.
Dairying is also profitable, as the rich grasses
furnish an abundance of good feed for the milch cows,
and many cases of success are in evidence where
nothing else but these grasses are used for feeding. In
one case on a 36 acre farm the owner earned sufficient
to enable him to retire. For several years he had
earned an average of per month from the sale of
milk from the cattle on his farm, which he afterwards
sold at £3O per acre.


ECHUCA. The; Capital op thr Irrigablp North.
Regular sales of live stock are held at the sale yards
in Echuca, on alternate Saturdays, and periodically at
Kyabram, Tongala, Gunbower, Barmah, and McCoy’s
Bridge by the auctioneers of the town.
Timber Industry. —An idea of the value of the
red gum timber in the Echuca district, where there are
two Saw Mills busy cutting it into logs for transport to
all parts of Australasia and abroad, may be gained from
the fact that a tree felled by Mr. C. B. Opitz, of the
Mathoura Saw Mills, Echuca, cut out 8,000 feet of good
timber, Mr. McGee also obtained one which gave
8,500 feet. These are really forest giants and go to
prove the fertility of the soil in which they grew, and
there is a supply for many years to come.
ARTHUR COOMBES
Tobacconist and Hairdressing Saloon
Bare Street, Eehaea
First Hairdresser from Railway Station and Main Street.
No waiting to be attended to. The acknowledged best Hairdresser in Echuca.
Large stock of Pipes, Fancy Goods. Best brands Cigars and Tobaccos stocked


t » ■// //
' j
WOODUND GLADE, VICTORIA PARK, ECHUCA
K


Brigidine Convent and College, Gehuca
THE BUILDINGS.
These are extensive
the most extensive in the
Northern parts of Vic-
toria. The engraving in
this booklet of the ex-
terior of the Convent
only gives a partial view
of the magnificent block
of buildings. It does not
show the School or
Academy portions.
Neither does it give a
view of the Chapel, which,
is acknowledged to be a
gem of architectural
beauty. The Grounds
are spacious, giving
large room for the recre-
ation of the children.
There is a Tennis Court. Some years ago a Sanatorium was established not far from the Convent. It was
there only for a short time, and within the past two years it has been taken away entirely from the town,
to Macedon.
CLIMATE. The Convent is situated in one of the healthiest and most beautiful parts of the town, being
within almost a hundred yards of Victoria Park —covering an area of about eighty acres. It is a well
recognised fact, admitted by all the leading members of the medical profession, that the climate of Echuca is
not surpassed for its health-giving qualities in any part of the world. The children are allowed walks and
recreation in the Park under the supervision of the Nuns.
ADVANTAGES. The Educational Advantages of the Echuca Brigidine Convent are well known to the
people of the town and district. Perhaps no other College in Victoria has such a record of successes in
examinations of every kind. There is scarcely a profession for which pupils have not passed their preliminary
examinations from the Convent. When matriculation was the test for students entering the University and
for most of the learned professions, the students of the Brigidine College always succeeded with honour to
themselves and credit to their School. In the Day School boys as well girls are educated.
MUSIC. Every branch of the musical art is taught at the College—Piano, Violin, Singing, &c. Special
Teachers are set apart for this, as well as every other branch of education.
The plain, homely, domestic qualities of the children are seen to no less than every other part of their
■education. It cannot be said of the children leaving the School that any attempt was made to develop talents
or tastes which they did not possess to the neglect of those they did possess. It may not be possible to make
a child a brilliant scholar if he or she does not possess the necessary talent, but every child can be taught the
duties and qualifications which go to make a useful and refined member of society. The talents and abilities
■of each particular childcare observed by the Sisters, and according to these the child’s education is developed.
BOARDERS. As a Boarding School the Convent offers great advantages. It has all the appointments
of a first-class Boarding College. The dormitories are large and thoroughly ventilated. The Children’s
Refectory is also up-to date. Parents who will apply to the Mother Superior for the Prospectus will find
that the education and keep of their children in the Convent is less expensive than to keep them at home
without any of the educational advantages. Boarders who are not Catholics are received as well as Catholics,
and non-Catholic children attend their own respective Churches according to the wish of their parents.
It is a fact that in the greater part of the Riverina District of New South Wales, North and West
from Echuca, for hundreds of miles there is not a Boarding School; and many parents in these districts
who would like to give their children a term at a good Boarding School think the difficulties of distance,
principally, too great. Echuca, as far as these places are concerned, is very favourably situated. On application
to the Mother Superior of the Convent, a Prospectus of Education Charges, &c., will be at once forwarded.
Children bring back more to their home than the cost of their education in the refinement and
sound religious training they receive in a first-class school.


J. M. CAMPBELL
COACH BUILDER, FARRIER and GENERAL SMITH,
High Street, Echuca.
HORSES’ TEETH ATTENDED TO. Your Recommendation Respectfully Solicited.
Agknt For BUCKEYE HARVESTER CO., OSBORNE BINDER, &c.
NORTHERN AND RIVERINA AGENTS ** *
McKENZIE 6 CO.
Auctioneers, Land, Sheep and Cattle Salesmen
Regular Auction Sales of Sheep and Cattle as under: -
ECHUCA —Every Saturday
KYABRAM —Fortnightly, second and fourth Tuesday.
DENILIQUIN —Monthly, first Thursday
FINLEY —On dates to be advertised.
LAND AND CLEARING SALES A SPECIALITY.
LISTS OF STORE STOCK AND PROPERTY ON APPLICATION.
Representatives—Kyabram, Mr. BEN GODDARD
Finley, Mr. C DRUITT


Places and Items of Interest.
The Echuca Progress Association is an active
body, presided over by Mr. A C. Ostrom, President,
and Mr. Crothers.
The Echuca District Hospital is situated at the
south end of the town within easy walking distance.
Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library is open
from 12 noon to g p.m.
The Town Hall and Court cf Petty Sessions
are next door.
The Race Course and famous Plumpton may be
reached by driving some three miles along the Toolaraba
line, while the Agricultural Show Grounds and two
Rifle Ranges may be visited at the same time at the
extreme south of Echuca.
Victoria Park is prettily situated at the Northern
end of the town. An invigorating before-breakfast
exercise is to walk around the Park, which follows
the course of the Murray the whole way.. This Park
is one of the few natural ones in the State. Here will
also be found the Sports Ground and Tennis Courts.
Mr. Adam Alton, F.R.H.S., ably fulfils the duties of
Curator to the borough. A walk through the Park
will bring you to the Junction of the Campaspe. Alton
Gardens are alongside the Presbyterian Charch.
The Echuca Wharf, although at some periods of
the year not very active, may be inspected after a few
minutes’ walk from any of the hotels. The Murray
Bridge is a feature of Echuca. Constructed of iron,
it is perhaps one of the finest and largest in Australia.
A walk across carries one to New South Wales and
into the Municipality of Moama. The Mayor will
make visitors welcome. Moama is a very old town,
and is connected with Deniliquin by rail—a distance
of 43 miles. Moama boasts some very fine buildings.
Echuca buildings worthy of inspection are the
Post Office, Anglican Church, Roman Catholic
Church, and Presbyterian Church, while other
denominations in our midst are : SViethodist, Baptist,
Church of Christ and Salvation Army. There is also
a Convent, State School and Masonic Temple
There are two fine Flour Mills (X- Kickham
Milling Co., proprietors).
The famous Milo Bacon Company (W. G Boyle,
Manager), have their works on the Murray River at
Echuca East, at a distance of about a mile and a half
from the Post Office.
Adjoining the Milo Works are the Redgum Mills
of Mr. W J. Nicholas. Situated too, at the foot of
the Murray Bridge, may be seen the Mills of the
Murray River Co.
There are seven Medical Benefit Orders with
branches at Echuca; — M .U. 1.0.0. F.. 1,0.0. F.,
A.N.A., H.A.C.8.5., Druids, A.0.F., as well as
branches of the 1.0,F., Orange and Masonic Insti-
tutions
Echuca is served by a daily newspaper, the
“Riverine Herald,” and by a tri-weekly, the “Echuca
and Moama Advertiser.”
Echuca boasts two first-class Brass Bands —the
Victorian Rangers and Federal, between which a
healthy rivalry exists.
There is an efficient Fire Brigade, and detach-
ments of Light Horse, Infantry and Senior Cadets.
Scholastically the town is served in the higher
education by a District High School, Convent, and
Technical Art School.
Echuca has three Social Clubs —the Echuca,
Border, and Working Men’s Club.
Sports are governed by the Athletic Association..
Their Boxing Day fixture is not excelled by any
similar gathering in the State.
Swimming may be indulged in at places set apart
without any charge. Arrangements can be made for
any visitors desirous of boating on the Murray, or
having a day’s fishing.
Rowing, Football, Cricket, Tennis, Golf, Rifle and
Gun Clubs and Race Meeting are well supported here..
THIS SPACE RESERVED FOR
SIMS BROS., Butter Factory,
ECHUCA.
3


W. W. MOORE & SONS
Timber Merchants, Ironmongers, and Contractors
Carry the Largest Stock in the North in all departments.
Estimates submitted for work in any part of the country.
We make a speciality of Corrugated Iron Tanks.
Quality the Highest. Prices the Lowest.
Wall Papers and
Decorations in endless variety.
Bar and Rod Iron, Wire, plain and
barbed, and every requisite required in the
building trade.
Fied It. Sterling
Solicitor
“THE TIE KIHG”
FOR VICTORIA AND NEW SOUTH WALES,
Gent’s tttercer and Outfitter
EGHUGA AND WYCHEPROOF (VIG.)
MOAMA (N.S.W.)
(Crothers and Daly, Sea Lake).
HIGH STREET, ECHUCA
(Opposite Bank of New South Wales)


C. LENNE f- J. ENDEY
NURSERYMAN & SEEDSMAN
High Street, HARE STREET, EGRUGA
1 IS THE
Echuca.
Fruit and Citrus Trees of Every
Description
Ornamental Trees, Etc., Etc.
M. CABLE
BAKER, PASTRYCOOK
AND CONFECTIONER,
HARE STREET, EGRUGA
Afternoon Teas provided at
own residences.
LEADING TAILOR of the District
Is the oldest established, and carries the
largest up-to-date stock of Serges and
Tweed Suitings of every approved pattern,
style and quality.
The rolls of Suitings to select from (not
traveller's patterns).
For workmanship and reasonable prices
he cannot be equalled by visiting tailors’
travellers.
ALARM CLOCKS
—FROM—
3/6 to 15/-
12 months guarantee and guaranteed to wake
you up in time for your train.
H. LEWIS
Ulatehmakep, Jemeller and Optician
High Street, Echuca
Dust proof, open face, screw case Watches
2 years guarantee Price from 25/-
Silver Plate of the first grade in stock.
Glasses for the comfort of your vision.


R. E. BEER
THE UP-TO-DATE IRONMONGER
HIGH STREET, ECHUCA.
Iron Gates and All Kinds of Machinery
WHEAT BUYER
AGENCIES:
FIRE ASSURANCE
LIFE ASSURANCE
MOUNT LYELL MANURES
H. V. McKAY’S HARVESTERS AND IMPLEMENTS
“LISTER” SEPARATOR AND SHEEP SHEARING MACHINES
BARB CYCLES
“SUNSHINE” MOTOR CARS
R. E. BEER, THE UP-TO-DATE COMMISSION AGENT


R. E. BEER
THE UP-TO-DATE FURNISHER
Royal Arcade purnitare UUarshouse
High Street, Echuca.
Linos.
Dining Room
Suites
Floor Cloths
Table Cloths
Bedroom Suites
Prams
Wicker Suites
Co-Carts
Tables
Sideboard
Blinds
Dressers
Wire Mattresses
Safes
Kapok
Flock
Bedsteads
Curtains
Bedding
Pictures
Jardiniere Stands
Overmantels
Easy Chairs
Clocks
Platedware
Jardinieres
Vases
Gramaphones and Records
MUSIC !
MUSIC !
MUSIC I
PIANOS ORGANS
Agent for ALLEN & CO.’S Thurmer, Lipp, Carl Ecke, Feurich,
and Bechstein PIANOS ESTEY ORGANS


TALBOT’S
HAIRDRESSER AND TOBACCONIST
HARE STREET, ECHUCA
Every description of Smokers' Requisites
in Stock.
The Famous V.V. Pipes J/ h each
a special line
Large and New Stocks of Fancy Goods
Peterson, L. & Co.'s Pipes
Razors Ground and Set
Try Our American Shampoo
B. G. OSTROM’S
Fine Boot Palace
HIGH STREET, ECHDCA
EVERY PERSON that DRIVES a
VEHICLE requires to be careful of what
he rides in
Not only is LIFE AND LIMB AT
STAKB, but the Great Cost in upkeep of
inferior articles must be counted with.
JWIIIIIEH & IHIMiER
HIGH STREET, ECHUCA
Employ only Skilled Workmen, and uses
only well-seasoned Timber and the Best
Material in other parts —and at a cost that
will bear comparison with any Australian
Coach Builders.
CALL AND INSPECT.
TELEPHONE 129
GEO. SOMAN
GENERAL DRAPER AND
CLOTHIER
Hare Street, Eetuiea
Qeo- Sullivan has the largest
stock of General Drapery in
Hare Street, Echuca, His
values are ectual to city values


John Watson & Go. ™ FaH s'cox
SHEEP and CATTLE SALESMEN mnmoi-o
PLUMBER and IRONMONGER
BENDIGO. He gives Best Va]ue in
GALVANIZED IRON WATER TANKS,
WIND MILLS, WATER PIPES, TAPS AND
FITTINGS, MILK AND CREAM CANS*
ECHUCA, ROCHESTER, ELMORE, BOORT,
Agent for —
CHARLTON, WYCHEPROOF, LALBERP, The World-famed “DOMO” SEPARATOR-
WYCHITELLA, PYRAMID HILL, and The Cream of Separators.
The World-famed “DOMO” SEPARATOR—
The Cream of Separators.
The 'GOSS AIR" GAS MACHINE,
The Lighting Wonder of the Age.
SWAN HILL.
Write or Call for Quotations before going elsewhere.
NOTE ADDRESS—
Land Valuators. Financial Agents,
and Property Salesmen.
HARE STREET, EGfUIGA.
n. mapfleld
WATCHMAKER AND JEWELLER
Bigh Street, €cbuca
Watch, Clock and Jewellery Repairs a Specialty.
Motto:
PROMPTNESS and EFFICIENCY.
KING
THE CLOTHES KING
If your Suit or Costume needs cleaning,
I will clean it at a very reasonable charge.
If it needs dyeing I will dye it.
If by any reason you wish to part with
it, I will buy it.
Or if you wish to buy a good Suit or
Costume, I will sell you one for less than half
the price you would have to pay anywhere
else.
All my dyeing and cleaning is done by
the very latest process.
Every article I Sell I Guarantee Clean,
and every article I Buy I pay Cash for and
give top price.
W. KING
Dyer and Cleaner
High Street, Echuca.


Telephone No. 152 (Echuca) Private Telephone No. 157
H. C. HOLMFIELD
Motor and Cycle Agent, Proprietor Motor Garage
Heygarth Street, Echuca.
Petrol
Motor Cars
Motors
and Bicycle
Fitted
Furnishings
to Boats,
always
on hand.
Agent for the leading manufactures of Motor Car and Cycles.
Repairs of every description carried out by competent workmen
m. POOh^
Gentlemen’s Tailor
OF —-
MITCHELL STREET, BENDIGO
Ytfif/J El'.HUGjl periodically.
Wear a “POOL” Suit and toe in the Fashion®
Nothing better in Australia.
ECHUCA ADDRESS
UNION CLUB HOTEL


Che C. Kkkham Flour mill Co. CM.
| .
!
EC HU C A has two
well equipped flour
milling properties that
have a grinding cap-
acity of 40 sacks an
hour. The Robinson
System of machinery
installation is of the
most modern character.
Both mills are the
property of the L.
Kickham Flour Mill
Co., Ltd. The six
stores, connected with
the two mills, have a
holding capacity of
220,000 hags of wheat.
The mill at the
corner of Darling and
Anstruther streets was
built about twenty
years ago, and is situ-
ated immediately op-
posite the main railway
line, from which two
sidings conveniently
connect with the mill
and stores. This mill
is very conveniently
placed, and has one of
the largest grain silos in the Commonwealth, with a holding capacity of 100,000 bushels, which is fed by an elevator and
conveyors with a working power of 1,500 bushels an hour.
The original owners of what is known as the High-street mill were Messrs. D. Stratton & Co., but six years ago this mill had
the misfortune to be burnt out. and a complete re-planning and replacement of the milling plant was arranged under the
skilful management of Messrs. Thomas Robinson & Son, Ltd., of Rochdale, England, and Sydney, who supplied their heavy
double diagonal roller mills with rolls 10 in. and 13 in. x 40 in., purifiers, centrifugals, double-ended centrifugal scalpers, &c.,
‘in fact entirely remodelling the mill on their own system. Two years later the property passed into the possession of the L.
Kickham Co. This mill is also connected with the main railway line by a siding.
Naturally, visitors from the city do not expect to find an excellence in existence which is usually associated with metropolitan
mills, and the town of Echuca has every cause for justifiable pride in the splendid character of the installation under notice.
The first impression which forcibly strikes the mind is the ease and rapidity with which every portion of the premises is under
control. With such an immense storage capacity, as can readily be understood, a considerable area of ground is covered.
The bags are usually stacked thirty high, yet every bag from end to end, the centre, and the sides, can with equal ease be
picked out and dealt with just as the will of the milling engineer directs, so as to secure a perfect blending of the different
kinds of wheat. With the elevator system in vogue one man can stack as many as 100 sacks in half an hour, and when two or
three men are employed for this purpose the time is correspondingly lessened.
The mill was, at the time of visit, working night and day, and a glance at a huge stack of flour ready for despatch revealed
its destination as Delagoa Bay. Upon enquiry one learns that enormous quantities of flour are shipped away to other South
African ports, England, Ireland and Scotland. Every advantage is taken of the use of machinery to minimise handling, and
the elevator system is reduced to a science - So much is this the case that the appearance of a man carrying a sack of flour
excites attention and is remarked upon as an anomaly.
Both plants are lit throughout with electric light, and multitubular boilers supply the motive power in High-street, whilst
Cornish boilers are installed at Darling-street. The fuel used in the two furnaces is wood, of which there is a plentiful and
economical supply in the vicinity. The quality of the flour assures a large local demand, and the trade in different parts of
the Commonwealth, speak in high terms of praise of the “Kickham” product.


BORDER FOUNDRY
ESPLANADE, (Opposite the Wharf)
Engine, Boiler & Agricultural Works, Iron, Steel & Brass Founder
Orders Promptly Attended to.
Old Cast Iron and Brass Bought.
J T. FREEMAN, Proprietor.
R. Chambers’ Coffee Palace
ROBERT CHAMBERS
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
Baker, Confectioner, fruiterer,
6rocer, etc.
ECHUCA and MOAMA.
Balls, Weddings and Tea Meetings Catered for
at Melbourne Prices.
Wedding and Birthday Cakes always on hand.
Epergnes, Cutlery, Table Linen, Glassware and
Marquee Lent on Hire.
Accommodation for 16 Boarders. Good Table-
Good and Large Stabling and Yard. Good Accommodation for Travellers. Wharf at Back
MODERATE TARIFF.
