

B I “" PHOTO-ART. |
| I BATCHELDER & Co., 41 COLLINS ST. EAST, |
S H PHOTOGRAPHERS and ARTISTS (Established 1854), execute Commissions in all S
” || IT styles or Portraiture—Plain, Colored, Mezzotint—on Moderate Terms.
to § JAMES HOPE, HUXLEY, PARKER & CO.,
I xgj 4 Importer of gg
S | CHINA, GLASS, AND EARTHENWARE, MOHUMESTAL MASONS,!
£2 H 48 COLLINS ST., EAST. C0RNER or
gg Samples and particulars exhibited at above address. RUSSELL and LITTLE COLLINS STS. g||
M | FERGUSON & URIE, NICHOLSON & ASCHEEBEEG, I
S | GLASS STAINERS PIANOFORTES AND MUSIC DEPOT, I
B 10 COLLINS ST., EAST. 21 COLLINS ST., EAST.
ra I MELBOURNE m 1 IJ) ft PHILADELPHIA |
|h#
| 8 HOW TO SEE IT! |
| 3-A. COMPLETE G-tllDE,®
| With PLAN of BUILDING and GROUNDS.
<1 | By FRANK W. FENTON. H
U I PRICE SIXPEKTCB. i
&q M m
EH || W. H. WILLIAMS, Printer and Publisher, 68 Elizabeth street, Melbourne. gg
S3 M MMMmmMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMmMMMmmmMMMmmMmmmsI ||
'Z 1 HOSIIS KESIAUBAJ1, DUNCAN’S CAFE,
86 Boubke street.
£ || HOA1E1 IVKHlgH BATHS, ROYAL ARCADE.
24 BOUBKE STREET. T n R&
|| UONIFN BATHM HOTEL, 6 billing.
26 Bouhkb STREET, Scotch Pies y Biscuits , Cakes , <£<:., of Vie first quality . §§
LAW, SOMNEE k co„ HENKEL & PATERSON, *
° i SEED MERCHANTS, LAMP manufacturers,
OQ M ’30 LITTLE COLLINS ST. EAST.
‘ 87 SWANSTON STREET. (5fe Exhibits 2208 to 2210.)
Ch T. GITTUS,
( TO 1 90 SWA -
CLEMENTS' New CAFE and HOTEL, 56 v Sfreet
The Dining Booms and Hotel furnished with every regard to oomfort of visitors.
CD
5=3
&
o
"o
a
M
90 SWANSTON STREET,
UMBRELLAS
_ jm* In Silk, Russell Silk, Sateen, Zanella, Alpaca, Ac.
Carriage Umbrellas. Walking Sticks and Canes_
PARKER & Co.,
OYEN RANGE AND M
43 Little Bourke st. East, Melbourne. ||
3
HI
o
c/ 5
O
cj
X
tc
P>
Hi
W
JO
W
o
g
>
2
o
r-*5
o
o
£
»■*
in
a>
o
o
>-3
13
CD
n
W
;>
in
H
W
»
2
>
n
>
a
w
STRALIAN MUTUAL PROVIDENT SOCIETY. FOR LIFE ASSURANCE.
ranee Funds, £1300,000. N. MAINE, Resident Secretary.


VISITORS TO THE EXHIBITION
Who have no catalogue to refer to may be at a loss to
know what some exhibits are for. This page is devoted to a
description of some prominent ones. On entering, and close
by Alcock’s Billiard Table, is a Wire Netting, stretched on a
frame, not unlike what a farmer would use to cover a
cart containing prize pigs; this is a PATENT SPRING-
MATTRESS, and those who have purchased them say
they are the best in the colony. Go and do likewise.
Most visitors make for the Machinery Room, and near
the back door may be observed a Cupboard, not unlike
what you see every day, out of which extends a Pipe,
and alongside is a Drum made of iron; this is an
apparatus for MAKING GAS OUT OF PETROLEUM
SPIRIT, and capable of supplying 45 burners. Close by
is an Ornamental Lamp Post, on which there is a NEW-
FASHIONED LAMP, which is lit and extinguished by a
torch, without any ladder. If you see it at night observe
how well it distributes the light. In making your way
back to the main hall, enquire at Hodgson’s Gas Stove
for a tart; then drop in at Pickersgill’s bar, invest in a
Bottle of Beer, and ask them to shew you how expedi-
tiously the Machine on the counter will Remove the
Cork from the bottle and throw it away. By this
time you may feel tired’; stroll into the main hall and
look for three handsome IRON CHAIRS, with stuffed
crimson seats and backs, and, if not occupied, sit in one
to rest yourself for five minutes ; observe the mechanism
of the seat turning up. Should you visit Sydney, remem-
ber that 650 similar seats will be found in the New
Theatre Royal there. If you wish to know who exhibits
these novelties, note—
I‘LEAN BROS. & RIGG.
IMPORTERS, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
and (gmtal Ifonnumgws,
69 ELIZABETH ST., MELBOURNE,
Where you are invited to pay a visit to see more
novelties, when it best suits your convenience.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
W. B. WOOD,
CHBM IST,
8 BOURKE STREET EAST,
SOLE MAKER AND PROPRIETOR OP
1),. BLAIRS JEW COJIPOOn of
COD LIVER OIL AND lODIDE OF IRON.
Extract of Report of Medical Society,
Araus February sth, 1874.—“ Dr. Blair exhibited a new combination of Cod Liver Oil
and Iron, and described the mode of its preparation It looked like very rich cream, and was so
agreeable to the taste that several members drank a portion of it and expressed themselves
highly pleased with the flavor. It was pronounced a valuable addition to the Materia Medtca,
considering the extremely nauseous qualities of Cod Liver Oil, especially when mixed with any
preparation of Iron. It was generally agreed as desirable to make use of in practice.
SOLD IN BOTTLES, 25., '3s. 6d., and 6s. EACH.
AIjSO PROPRIETORS OF
wood’s skin ointment
For all Diseases of tlie Skin, For Ulcerated Legs and Old Sores,
For all Affections of the Scalp, For Pains in Chest or Si de,
For Swollen Glands and Sore For Discharges from the Nose or
Throats Eftrs*
SOLD IN POTS, Is. 6d., 2s 6d., and ss. EACH; OE PERFUMED FOE THE
SCALP, 3s. 6d.
Prescriptions and Family Recipes carefully prepared, and oil orders packed and forwarded
to their destination with despatch.
ADDRESS —
OPPOSITE THE GENERAL POST-OFFICE.
(Late William Sterry & Sons),
WINDOW BLIND MANUFACTURERS,
125 RUSSSLL STRUT
(Opposite Temperance Hall),
Melbourne
Hon. Mention Intercolonial Exhibition, 1866-67. Bronze Medal
Sydney Exhibition, 1870.
MAKERS OF THE PATENT SELF-ACTING VENETIAN BLINDS,
SPANISH, ORIENTAL, AND WIDE BLINDS.
(EDM) BUIiS- mS-FMWTm
ALL WORK GUARANTEED.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
HORACE STEVENS,
SURGICAL AND MECHANICAL
85 COLLINS ST. EAST,
«|gf» Two doors from Baptist Church, same side as
Town Hall.
OLIVER LEVEY,
riding Jlatcrial Manufacturer
AND IMPORTER OP
TYPE, PRESSES, MACHINERY, &c., &o.
Also Bookbinders’ and Lithographers’ Presses and Materials.
KxMMts, l©s. 158? t® ISM ii MaeMnery Annexe.
WILLIAM DETMOLD,
IMPORTER OF
PAPER AND STATIONERY,
Account Book Manufacturer,
BOOKBINDER AND PAPER RULER,
44 COLLINS STREET EAST. MELBOURNE.
EXPORT ORDERS PROMPTLY EXEC UTED.


ADVERTISEMENTS,
HAIR! HAIR! HAIR!
THOMPSON’S HAIR VIGOR
Restores Grey Hair to its original color without dyeing it—Produces a new growth on bald
spots.—For preventing dandriff and the Hair from falling out—As a hair dressing it is unequalled
by any other preparation in the world.
TOOTH AND COMPLEXION POWDER
Imparts a fragrance to the breath that is rare and delightful; prevents all tartar and discoloration
and completely arrests the progress of decay, at the same whitening such parts as may already
have become affected ; also imparts a delicate bloom to the cheeks that is perfectly harmless,
and will not wash off.
THE GREAT PURIFIER OF THE BLOOD.
Thompson’s Celebrated Blood Pills, for the cure of Blotches, Boils, Pimples,
Tumours, Ulcers, Sores, Piles, Gout, Rheumatism, &0., and all blood and skin diseases.
THE GREAT PURIFYING APERIENT
MEDICINE.
The Compound Sarsaparilla Pills. A reliable remedy for Indigestion, Costiveness,
Dyspepsia, Biliousness, &c.
J, D. THOMSON, CHEMIST, to.,
122 BOURKE ST. EAST,
(Opposite the Waxworks),
Importer of I.R. Water Beds, Cushions, Pillows, and Bottles; Urinals for day and
night use, Trusses, Respirators, Inhalers, Invalids’Feeding Cups, Spitting Cups,
Bedpans, Hot Air Baths, Hot Water Bottles, Air Beds, Cushions, and Pillows; Ice
Bags for head and spine, Cornets for deafness, Silk Elastic Anklets, Knee Caps and
Stockings, Enema Apparatus, Galvanic Batteries, &0., &0., &o.
By Royal Letters Patent.
BANNISTER, MILLIGAN & CO.,
ADVERTISERS
ALL OVER THE WORLD
RAILWAY CARRIAGES, OMNIBUSES, STEAMSHIPS, COMMERCIAL
AND WAITING ROOMS, &0., &c.
MELBOURNE OFFICES:
48 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST,
FIRST DOOR FROM SWANSTON STREET,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
By Special Appointment to H.E.H. the Duke of Edinburgh.
MANUFACTORY, 132 RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE.
ALCOCK & CO.’S PATENT REVERSIBLE
COMBINATION DINING AND BILLIARD TABLE
Arranged to present the correct height, either for Dining or Playing on
when placed in position.
CAN BE ALTERED TO EITHER PURPOSE IN ONE MINUTE
The Legs are made to unscrew, so that the Table can be packed for Carriage
in a small case.
IMIIIUI® GHIHNKTPIKCXS,
OUR OWN MANUFACTURE.
Workmanship Guaranteed of First-class.
LOWEST PRICES.
COMPETITION DEFIED!
WILSON, CORBEN & CO.,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE “IXL” CYLINDRICAL
HAND-FEINTING MMHWi,
The most Useful, Durable and Economical ever Invented for
Town and Country Storekeepers.
E. COLTMAN, PATENTEE & MANUFACTURER.
Rubber Stamps, all sizes and descriptions. Brilliant inks.
WILL MIST 91 HM. W998, Til. 6UUSB,
Lilli, SOTT9I BiSS. M.
NO STORE IS COMPLETE WITHOUT ONE.
135 LATROBE STREET EAST,
MELBOURNE.
ROTHWELL’S
JlabMe an!tr 3l)anu'ss ||tafactorji,
92 GERTRUDE ST., FITZROY.
Carriage, Buggy,
Goods guaranteed
Gig, Trotting,
of best Materials
Cab Harness
manufactured on
first-class
Workmanship.
the premises,
WHIPS, BITS, SPURS, LADIES’ AND GENTLEMEN’S RIDING SADDLES
ALWAYS ON HAND.


M Mi. unlif
w~ f>
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
Messrs. SCOURFIELD & COULTAS,
AND GENTLEMEN’S MERCERS,
52 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE
(From Messrs. Buckley and Nunn’s),
Abe now showing their Spring and Summer Coatings, Trouserings,
Vestings, together with a large assortment of Shirts, Scarfs, Collars,
Hosiery, Gloves and Hats, embracing the very latest patterns and
designs for the coming season.
The success attending Mr, Coultas as head cutter at Messrs. Buckley and
Nunn’s warrants us in the belief that our garments for style, fit, &c. cannot
fail to give our patrons entire satisfaction.
S, and C. hope that by supplying none but first-class goods at the lowest
possible remunerative prices they may meet with a large measure of support.
SCOURFIELD & COULTAS, near Garten’s Hotel.
CARR & SONS,
OLD BLIND S
PAIN TED
REPAIRED
STEAM
WINDOW BLIND
FACTORY,
Spring Street
MELBOURNE.
BLINDS FITTED WITH
CARR’S IMPROVED
CHECK ACTION.


GUIDE
TO THE
VICTORIAN INTERCOLONIAL
EXHIBITION,
1875;
PREPARATORY TO THE
PHILADELPHIA EXHIBITION, 1876;
WITH
fLAN OF THE fIJILDINGS & |ROUNDS
Of the Melbourne Public Library, National Museum,
and Gallery of Art.
OPENED ON SEPTEMBER 2nd.
Compiled by FRANK W. FENTON.
Price Sixpence.
MGbauws:
prAuted and published by w. h. Williams,
yr 68 Elizabeth Street.
/ 1875.


%
>
4
■ .
■
«
■
<■


.
.
/
'
.
-
,


(Being those of the PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS, and NATIONAL GALLERIES of Victoria.)
L A T R 0 B E STREET
t f p % :1 H $ -4- SL 4 ’i- £_ * I -t A i fc. (f. L ft » - n L-
\ [T- ~ ! - 1 <L - -'2- »-* "i-.t- v. a- V t’u ‘ *. V t «- L
* ?:. c.. I JAPANESE COURT, 0 « 2l «.]
& * ■ ,, N\ — H - UJ
*" 'f» *" 1 .----- V __j r 4.
- n r —-i . . I 1-
e *- »-Li, - ; V.i J . r— r ---,■ 1 * t‘ “*
* t !p“! 3 I r --J Jforyuee j I | t-
* » 8 | NORTH COURT ;AJ I LL! LS&L; -ST |l| MACH.nbrJj, t *- cc
I 1 , | { I i 1 1 ,l x i i 0 P
L . t- v « ; ' *A ! -> Hl.'J *1 1 J z 9 H
. ■■■]■■■ :■ ii<ii[-i 1 rnuv-’-vTi ■ u
I t JT !ffl i ■ V:! 1 ill V. --' LVjl CO
I & ! , i '! I O ife/wdriiar 1 ~ “ -' !
/ i=| A r I or--, ' Lj . I
-j I * ; j jl[ 1 1 I j !_ J!fiu£z>ier£
Z J 1 K ; CARRIAGES |
o & 1 4V [j_i\ — - —!- J
| r rp 1 , f ! i i 1 . • Zeaffter
H o' Vir*- il!' -I
t c , ”, 1 ■; 1 .; I < ■: i . ’ L -
c n «L a 'TV ...... r—. | LU I r -.j y
»■ , SOUTH COURT '.L j * | ! ‘J } I FF’--' ,1
Z *• P L' 0 ! i ' i | 11 ' I V r Z, fe&y I w
( )| i. 1 —"* , ( I
--- J p 1 j • i ! * i ' —i _j
,3 1 ' T P
5 ' j— 1 ] " i 1 1 “—| . 3
V I J_ d&Z-fteZure GezSery I
CO 5 I I t Si&Z&yOcZr? 0J? _j — —I I • a:
fV v <L_ I- t- t- ?V
v L - o, * 0_1 ■gr— ?
LITTLE LONSDALE STREET
VICTORIAN INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION, 1875.
(Piiiladelphia Exhibition, 1876.)
•/cafe; Zh(& ib zzsz. Jnc/i.


KEY TO PLAN.
The Plan opposite this page is intended, to aid the visitor on his tour of the
Exhibition, or to enable him to find any particular portion of the exhibits,
without unnecessary trouble. The names of the different departments are
shown in legible characters, and the dotted lines define the course adopted in
guiding the visitor through the buildings, which is as follows :
The visitor, entering from Latrobe street, passes into the Great Hall, and,
taking the direction shown by the inside dotted line, he commences on the
right and pursues his way round the inner portion of the Great Hall until he
finds himself where he commenced. He then crosses over to the Tasmanian
Court, and repeats his tour of the Great Hall, this time, however, passing in
and out of the stalls which are erected around the various pillars supporting
the building, and at the same time completing his observations of the exhibits
ranged against the main walls.
Once more the visitor finds himself at the entrance, and, still following the
course of the dotted line, he enters the Japanese department, taking care to
commence upon the right hand side. At the top of the first compartment he
crosses over to a second one, part of the Public Library ground floor, at the
other end of which he turns round, and, keeping to his right, passes down the
other side, and through the first room, thus making the tour of both compart-
ments.
The Great Hall is then re-entered, and, taking thh passage immediately on
the left of the centre fountain, the visitor proceeds to the Carnage Department;
after inspecting which he passes up a few steps which will be found against
the die-sinking stall where the Exhibition Medal is being struck, passes by
the Refreshment Bars, and enters the Machinery-in-motion department. He
first takes the right-hand side, after passing round which he makes a tour of
the opposite side and then out into the Machinery Yard.
After this he returns to the Great Hall, and then concludes his visit by an
inspection of the Rotunda, in which will also be found the Colonial Wine Bar.
The Lost Property Office, which is shown on the Plan, is immediately on the
right after entering from Latrobe street before passing the Pay Boxes. Season
Tickets can also be obtained in this department.
The New Picture Gallery is shown, to enable the visitor to proceed thither if
he feels inclined after leaving the Exhibition. The dotted line from the
entrance to the Public Library shows him how to reach the New Gallery by
way of the old Gallery, and a covered passage which takes him directly into
it. The dotted line from the old Picture Gallery represents the covered passage
just referred to.
The Plan is accurately drawn to a scale of 64 feet to an inch.


• • ' . ■
.
,
■


CONTENTS.
Plan ...
Key to Plan 3
Introduction ... 7
Commissioners 9
Judges *0
THE EXHIBITION, AND HOW TO SEE IT 11—44
The Great Hall 11—18
The Organ 13
Tasmanian Court ... ... ... •••
South Australian Court ... ••• ••• 19
Singapore Court ••• ••• 19
Great Hall (continued) ... ... ... •• ••• ••• 19—23
Japanese Courts
Carriage Department ••• 25—29
Refreshment Rooms 29—30
Machinery in Motion 30—38
Machinery Yard 38—41
The Waterfall ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 33
The Huge Boiler ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 40
The Paintings in the Great Hall 41—43
The Rotunda 43—4 4
The National Gallery 45—51
The Victorian Intercolonial Exhibition, 1875 —Facts, Data,
Statistics, &c., &c 52—60
Past Victorian Exhibitions 61
Places worth Visiting, Cab Fares, &c 62


STRINGER & Co.’s
Fill FlilLlS* EAiiiE,
BAKING POWDER, CURRIES, &C.
Awarded FIRST PRIZE Medals—
Melbourne, 1872.
Sydney, 1873.
London, 1873.
Melbourne, 1875.
MANUFACTORY:
43 and 45 King st., Melbourne.


INTRODUCTION.
Not to have been to the Exhibition at once puts us in
an uncomfortable position, for during the period it
remains open it is, in every family circle and office, or
amongst business men, the all-absorbing topic of con-
versation. Again, to have been there and to have so
seen it as to miss many important exhibits is still more
annoying, and makes us dissatisfied with ourselves and
those of our acquaintance who may prove themselves
to be better sightseers by their having made them-
selves conversant with some particular novelty which
we on our visit entirely overlooked. The visitor with
an Official Catalogue in his hand is certainly able to
discover the name of the exhibitor and the nature of
his exhibit by means of the official number, but he has
nothing to show him where to commence or terminate
his tour of the Exhibition, or in what particular position
any special exhibit is to be found. The object of this
“ Guide, ’’ then, is in brief words to supply this informa-
tion, and, by taking the exhibits in the order in which
they are placed, to enable the visitor to “see” the
Exhibition, and to gain particulars of the exhibits,
without repeatedly turning over the pages of a volu-
minous catalogue containing a quantity of information in
which he takes no particular interest and which is
primarily supplied for the perusal of those outside the
colony, or intended for the information of the social
economist. The articles sent in for exhibition have been
arranged in divisions and groups. Of divisions there are
26, of groups 93, besides those containing the articles


from other colonies and foreign countries. The total
number of exhibits is put down at 4289.
It will be seen that in the present work I have not
confined myself to a simple enumeration of the various
exhibits, but have given in those instances requiring it
a few lines of explanation.
There will be found at the end of the “ Guide ” some
pages of interesting data regarding this and previous
Exhibitions, places in Melbourne worth visiting, cab
fares, &c., which should be found of great utility to
country visitors.
I will not leave the “Guide” in the hands of my
readers without a few hints, to those who are not
thoroughly posted up, as to the best time to visit the
Exhibition.
The Exhibition on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Friday, and Saturday, is open from 12 noon until 5
p.m., and from 7 till 10 p.m. The charge for admis-
sion on these days is One Shilling, morning and
evening.
On Thursday the hours are from 12 noon till 5
p.m., the charge for admission being Two Shillings
and Sixpence; and from 7 till 10 p.m., when the
charge for admission is One Shilling.
The visitor having business in view will find the
morning hours better suited to his purpose, while those
on pleasure bent will probably prefer the evening, when
the promenade is enlivened by the strains of the
orchestra, and the numerous gas jets and other
illuminations, together with the varied toilets and buzz
of the crowded assemblage, lend an additional charm
and brilliancy to the scene.
THE AUTHOR.


ROYAL COMMISSIONERS.
ROYAL COMMISSIONERS FOR VICTORIA.
Sir Redmond Barry (President).
The Hon. James Joseph Casey, M.P.
The Hon. James Forrester Sullivan. M.P.
The Hon. Caleb Joshua Jenner, M.L.O.
The Hon. Samuel Henry Bindon.
The Hon. Sir John O’Shanassy, K.C.M.G.
The Count de Oastelnau.
James Munro, Esq., M.P.
Joseph Bosisto, Esq,, M.P.
Rev. John Ignatius Bleasdale, D.D.
The Hon. Sir James M‘Culloch, M.P,
The Hon. John Thomas Smith, M.P,
James Gatehouse, Esq., Mayor of Melbourne.
John MTlwraith, Esq.
Leslie James Sherrard, Esq.
The Hon. John Alexander Macpherson, M.P.
John Hanks, Esq., Mayor of Emerald Hill.
George Collins Levey, Esq., Secretary to the Commissioners.
Secretary to the Royal Commission of New South Wales—Chas. Robinson.
i, Esq,
Esq.
Secretary to the Royal Commission of South Australia—C. J. Coates,
Messrs. H. P. Welch and Co., Agents.
Secretary to the Royal Commission of Tasmania—H. M. Hull, Esq.
Messrs H. P. Welch and Co., Agents.
IMPERIAL JAPANESE COMMISSIONERS.
M. Hashimoto. Haruo Sakata. Robert Page, Esq., Secretary.


JUDGES.
Agricultural and Mining Engineering, &c.: C. F. Cresswell, W.
Elsdon, J. Mitchell, T. E. Rawlinson, K. Watson, J. Woods.
Agricultural Products : W. Bayles, M.L.A., J. Carson, C. F. Cresswell,
J. L. Dow, T. J. Laby, A. Lincolne, T. Lang, M. M'Caw, J. Sharp.
Animals, &c.: F. R. Godfrey, E. Howitt, C. Le Souef, Wm. MUulloch.
Animal Products, &c.: W. Bayles, C, F. Cresswell, Wm. Gillbee, T. M.
Girdlestone, J. Kirkland, G. Lyell, M. M‘Caw, G. Nicholson.
Beer and Spirits : C. R. Blackett, James. Hay, J. Hicks, G. N, Hopwood,
E. James, W. Johnson, M. Lang, G. D. M'Cormick.
Boots and Shoes : D. Bedggood, J. Carson, J. Faulkner.
Boats and Steam Vessels ; H. A. Coffey, R. Fullarton, W. H. Ranter,
H. J. Stanley. _ _
Carriages and Buggies: T. Gittus, B, Lee, T. Lee, F. B. Parrott, J.
Rawlings, C. L. Stoneman, W. Williams.
Clothing &c. : 0. Fenwick, J. H. Halliburton, W. T. Moffatt, A. King,
S. G. King, G. Stirling, J. Morris, S. Wallworth.
Educational Apparatus, &c. ; J. E, Bromby, M. H. Irving, S. W.
M‘Gowan, J. Reed, E. W. Ward, G. Foord, J. D. Kirkland.
Fine Arts : T. T. A’Beckett, J. Blair, 0. R. Campbell, H. de Castella, W.
Johnson, J. Hicks, J. A. Panton, R. Twentyman.
Firearms, &c.: W. A. D. Anderson, W. fi. Ranter, W. H. Snee.
Fibrous Substances : 0. F. Cresswell, R. Fullerton, M. L. King, T. S.
Ralph.
Gas, Coke, &c.: A. Dempster, J. Hicks, R. S. Inglis, R. M'Dougall, J. S.
Purves, T. Roberts, E. W. Ward.
Jewellery : J. Aarons, J. Reed, W. K. Thompson, F. Walsh.
Leather : J. Carson, J. Lambert, T. Loader, A. Robertson. H. Sanders.
Locomotives, &c. : W, Elsdon, R. G. Ford, T. B. C. Robinson, A. K.
Smith, W. Williams.
Machines, &c. : J. P. Atkinson, C. F. Cresswell, W. Elsdon, R. Fullerton,
J. Harwood, A. Lincolne, A May, J. Mitchell, G. Moore, R. M'Dougall,
A. K. Smith. _
Minerals, &C. : W. Johnson, W. G. Lempriere, J, S. Morley, J. C.
Newberry, Joseph Reed, G. H. F. Ulrich. k
Musical Instruments : E. Ascherberg, W. Blazey, J. Bnddee, J. Hill.
Paper and Cardboard : F. Von Mueller, J. M'Cutcheou, J. C. Newberry,
A. Shaw, R. H. Thatcher.
Physical Development, Medicine, Law, Religious, Educational,
Scientific, and Benevolent Institutions : W. Clarke, E. G. Fitzgibbon,
J. Fulton, H. J. Hart, H. H. Hayter, C. M'Carthy, J, B. Motherwell, C. H.
Pearson, G. Techow. .
Tobacco, Perfumes, Varnishes, &c.: C. R. Blackett, Dr. J. Blair, T.
Broadbent, C. F. Cresswell, Dr. T. M. Girdlestone, W. Hogarth, Wm. Johnson,
J D. Kirkland, F. C. Lange, L. A. Moody, J. C. Newberry, C. D, Plunkett.
Wine : W. S. Bailey, Dr. J. Blair, Rev. J. J. Bleasdale, B. C. Burstall,
T. Cooper, W. Gillbee, R. K. Hammond, F. C. Klemm, Capt. Middlemiss,
L. A. Moody, W. J. o‘Hea, J. A. Pan ton.
Wool: J. H. Clough, J. H. Halliburton, H. Parker, J. Renard, P. N,
Walker, S. Ward.
Wood as Material ; J. Aarons, W. Harrison, J. Hicks, S, H. Roberts,
T. H. Thwaites, W, W, Wardell.


[To assist the visitor to proceed at once to “see” the Exhibition, the order of
the title is inverted, and the account of the object, origin, data, fic,, of this
and preceding Exhibitions, mill be found at the end of the “ Guide.”]
THE EXHIBITION, AND HOW TO SEE IT!
WHERE TO COMMENCE
Is always, and very naturally, the first question the visitor
asks himself, and having presented our season ticket 01 paid
the necessary shilling or half-crown, we pass in from Latiobe
street, and find ourselves at that end of
THE GREAT HALL.*
Pausing for a moment to take a cursory bird’s-eye view of the
building, we then betake ourselves to the object of our visit,
and, looking forward, we commence upon the right hand side
of the centre of the hall; the first object arresting our ciitical
attention being the exhibit of Mrs. Horsey, of the Royal
Arcade, whose specimens of embroidery on silk give a fair
idea of what fingers, skilfully trained to the needle, may
accomplish. The elegant samples of hair-dressing shown by Mr.
Brown next claim attention \ the exhibit of the Melbourne
Shirt Company, which serves to illustrate a new colonial
industry, being next in order. Bonnet shapes, a never-failing
source of interest to ladies, exhibited by Messrs. Shaw and
Sutton and C. Bissmir, come next, and will doubtless receive their
* This hall was built for the first exhibition held in connection with the Public
Library, in the year 1866, after the old ” Exhibition Building, in William
street, had been condemned ; and it has been used for the same purpose on sub-
sequent like occasions ; and, during the intervening periods, has been adapted
to such varied purposes as the exigencies of the Trustees of the Public Library
may have required it to fulfil.


share of attention from the fair reader. Corsets, an important
article of feminine attire, are shown by Madame Decourtet,
Mrs. Edgecombe, and Mrs. Rhodes, all of whom claim special
advantages for their own particular manufactures. The
provision against a rainy day, umbrellas, Messrs. Gittus, Leven>
and Muller, bring before our notice, and the reader must decide
in whose favor he inclines. Millinery is not left out in the cold,
and the beautiful specimens exhibited by Mr. Richmond are
certainly suggestive of warm weather ; for taste and beauty
they compare favorably with any of the imported articles.
Head-gear, in the shape of felt hats, is shown by Messrs.
Buchner (sun hats) and Mr. James E. Turner, who also shows
several interesting phases of the process of manufacture. Boots
■of all descriptions are next before us, and we must divide our
attention between those made by the Deaf and Dumb, Mr.
Rosier, Mr. Gillespie (of Goulburn, N. S. W.), and Mr. Hatton,
whose specimens are handsewn. Mr. Harrigan, the tailor, now
appeals to us ; and we then come to the numerous exhibits of
the Victorian Woollen and Cloth Mills, Geelong, whose tweeds
have already become so celebrated for their excellent quality.
Another mill, the “ Albion,” sends up tweeds, &c., and one cannot
but admire their quality. Saddlery and harness must then have
their share of our examination, and we take the exhibits of
Messrs. Blake and Grattan, Mr, Rothwell (who is awarded
second prize), Messrs. Robertson and Wagner, Mr. Thomas
Eyton (second prize), and Messrs. Alderson, in the order in which
they are mentioned. The case of trunks exhibited by Messrs.
Pausacker and Evans having been inspected, we come to Mr.
C. R. Martin’s show of regalia, which looks bright, and has
every appearance of good quality. Our attention is now
arrested by the sympathetic electric clock shown by Mr. John
Partridge ; and we then come to a fine show of jewellery, con-
sisting for the most part of silver ware, trinkets, &c., comprising
the exhibit of Messrs. Edwards and Kaul. Hair jewellery is
shown by Mrs. Gant, and is well worth inspection. Some
elegant specimens of gold and silver embroidery, shown by Mr.


IBurrage, will be seen next; alongside'of which are the specimens
of the celebrated Danish Filagree, introduced to this colony
and exhibited by Miss Christien. We now come to the hand-
some stand of Messrs. Whitney, Chambers and Co., whose
specimens of silver and electro-plate cannot fail to be admired.
Messrs. Kilpatrick are next to the fore with an extensive collec-
tion of watches, plate, and jewellery. A case of surgical instru-
ments is exhibited by Mrs. Jcrnes. Mr. Iliftes artificial teeth
next claim attention, and we then pass to the stand of Mr.
Josephs, the watch and clock maker, where a small electric
clock will be observed, showing the hour in London, New York,
St. Petersburg!!, Paris, Berlin and Melbourne, the hands moving
.at minute intervals. A clock mounted upon a carefully carved
fret stand, shown by Mr. Thicthener, will be found next the
.show case of Mr. A. B. Mier, the dentist, of Collingwood. The
“inside of things,” —sausage casings, &c., shown by Messrs
Dunkley and M'Bride, are next in order. Colonial-made pianos,
of colonial wood and fittings, will be found to the right of the
imposing array of optical and other instruments shown by Mr.
'Gaunt.
We have now arrived at the southern end of the Great Hall,
and find ourselves against The Organ built by Mr. George
Fincham, which was lately removed from the Fitzroy Town
Hall. This instrument claims space for description, not only
-on account of its size and embellishment, but for its intrinsic
value. It is very badly placed, as far as its appearance is con-
cerned ; for, being sideways to the spectator walking down the
main hall, the front is hidden until he is standing right before it.
The front is Gothic, grained in maple and oak, with illuminated
pipes of spotted metal —this last-named material is manufac-
tured by the builder. The great organ, CC to G,( contains
double diapason, open diapason, horn diapason, clarabella,
principal, flute, twelfth, fifteenth, trumpet, and mixture (three
ranks) ranging from 16ft, to 2ff. in the fifteenth, and 728
pipes in all. The swell contains double diapason, open dia-
pason, stop’d diapason, principle, mixture, cornopean, and


clarinet, ranging from 16 feet, to 4 ft. in the principal, 44&
pipes in all. Pedal organ CGC to E, contains open diapason,
bourdon, pi incipal ranging from 16ft. to Bft. in the principal—
-67 pipes; total 1,243 pipes. 4 Couplers, great to swell, swell to
pedal, and great to pedal, and prepared also for coupling super
octave to great organ and super octave to pedal organ. Three
composition pedals to great organ and two to swell; two
manuals and radiating pedals. We now
CROSS THE TRANSEPT
and turn our eyes northwards, when, facing the noble instru-
ment just noticed, we shall find a collection of Victorian clays,
shown by Mr. Bowman. Chemicals and various acids from the
works of Messrs. Gumming, Smith and Co., are next examined ;
passing by which we come to the specimens of coffee, chicory
mustard, spices, cocoa, &c., shown by Messrs. J. F. M‘Kenzie and
Co., of Queen street. Those desirable aids to vision, candles,
are shown by Messrs. Kitchen and Sons, whose tasty stand at
once attracts attention. Colonial soap, fancy and mottled, and
tallow candles, represent the firm of Tilley and Clack. - Pro-
ceeding, we come to the exhibits of preserved meat shown by the
Western Meat Preserving Company, Colac, and the Melbourne
Meat Preserving Company. Sauce for fish, meat or game, will
be found in profusion, the manufacture of Messrs. Tong and
Hurst. Gelatinous substances, glue and gelatine, although not
very inteiesting, deseive a glance, and as we now come to the
stand of Mr. Sugden and Mr Fitt, we give them and Mr.
Swain’s dry soap a few moments before passing on to the cases
forming part of the Museum, which, even if seen before, will
certainly stand another inspection. Blacking, blue, and other
most desirable household requisites, now stare us in the face,
and we are at once interested in Messrs. Lewis and Whitty’s
collection. Chemicals again predominate, and we must nob
overlook the exhibits of Messrs. Hood and Co., Mr. Sullivan
and Mr. Bosisto, the latter being especially interesting, as it


contains numerous preparations of the now celebrated Euca-
lyptus. Young and Co.’s maizena having been inspected, we
ring the “ Bell ” for matches, and come to the Kensington
Maizena and Starch Company’s display of their commodities.
We then pass to Messrs. Stringer and Co.’s sauces, pickles, and
curry and baking powders ; bestowing our attention en passant
upon the farina from Richardson’s factory at Ballarat. Some
fine vinegar, which cannot, however, be tasted, is shown by
Messrs. Guthiel, Buttner and Co., a survey of the bottles of
which will suffice. Fry and Sons next attract our gaze with a
display of their London chocolate, and we then come to the
elaborate case (in itself a novelty) of Messrs. Robert Harper
and Co., which will be found to contain specimens of this firm’s
coffee, spice, mustard, &c. Norris’s condition spice for cattle,
&c., next claims our notice. The Turkish crescent reared aloft
will now point out to us the pj’ramid of lollies from the works
of Messrs. Strachan and Co., after which sweet things we must
pause to criticise the blacking, baking powder, &c., made by the
Australian General Manufacturing Co,, who appear to find
everything in their “ line.” We are then reminded of mission
work by the samples of arrowroot prepared upon the aboriginal
stations at Lake Tyers and Lake Wellington. Next we inspect
Messrs. Wright and Payne’s display of jams, and the process of
manufacture which jam tins undergo, as shown by the same
firm, Lollies again claim our attention, this time Messrs. Dillon
and Burrowes being the manufacturers ; after which the jams of
Mr. Mil ward will make us wish that some one would break the
glass that prevents us sampling them. After the baking powder,
made by Mr. Hunt, of Goulburn, the pile of fragrant weed,
consisting of “ High Admiral,” “ Two Seas,” “ Navy,” and many
other favorite brands, shown by Messrs. Heinecke, will be ex-
amined with especial interest by devotees of the “ cloud.” Bis-
cuits and jam go well together, and we pass from the floury
morsels of Messrs. Smith and Sons to the preserves of Mr
Cunliffe. And now comes an object of great interest to ladies,
a magnificent bridal cake, made by Mr. Duncan, Royal Arcade.


Some will remember the time when the knife was with all due'
honors inserted in their own cake, while the majority will pro-
bably look forward to that important epoch in their lives which
will make them another’s for “ better or worse.” If we are not
careful we shall now run into the lofty pyramid of crisp biscuits
shown by Messrs. Swallow and Ariell; after inspection of which
we again come to tobacco and tobacco-knives, the former shown
by Messrs. Dudgeon and Arnell, the latter by Mr. Benjamin
Groom. We now cross the
AVENUE LEADING TO CARRIAGE DEPARTMENT,.
And the first object upon the opposite side to attract our atten-
tion are a number of wood carvings executed by machinery,
shown by Messrs. Bruce. Rubber stamps must now engage-
our attention, the “IXL,” which is a roller machine, appear-
ing to be a well constructed little piece of mechanism, which
should command a large sale. Clark’s patent American stamp
is also worthy of special attention. The impressions from the
stamps of both manufacturers are wonderfully clean and dis-
tinct. Some large Bibles shown by Mr. James are well bound.
Messrs. Stokes and Martin’s case of medals must not be passed
by, as they form a very interesting feature. The electrotypes
shown by Mr. W. Calvert are beautifully executed, and indicate
to what perfection this branch of trade may be brought. The
manufacture of brushes in the colonies is now upon a firm basis,,
as an examination of the specimens shown by Messrs. Stone
and Robottom and Mr. J. Zevenboom (the founder of the industry)
will prove. Another rubber stamp is now a claimant for atten-
tion, in the shape of that exhibited by Mr. Lambert. Mr.
Chas. Troedel exhibits some specimens of engraving, which we
do not fail to note. After inspecting the die-sinking of Mr.
Roezler, we come to the wonderful papyrograph shown by the
Anglo-Australian Press Agency, by means of which some-


hundreds of copies of a manuscript letter can be obtained. It
is of great utility for printing circulars, and the visitor will
doubtless have the circular of this “ Guide ” handed to him by
the operator. After noticing this marvellous invention, we
turn to the lamps shown by Messrs. Henkel and Paterson, re-
splendent with plating and varnish, and of excellent quality.
Some beautiful specimens of painting on silk, executed by Miss
Maria Brearly, must then be admired, and we next come to Mr,
Murphy’s patent ventilators for private houses, public halls, &c.
A bunch of grapes, worthy of the land of Canaan, the woik of
Mr. Pinner, is next in turn, and the visitor will note that it is
carved from one solid piece of wood. A grand array of medals
next confronts us, which are casts of those awarded to the
Singer Sewing Machine Company. Specimens of book-binding
are shown by Mr. Geo. Robertson ; and after theii inspection
we go in for shoddy, Messrs. Ironson and Rutheifoid being the
exhibitors. We then inspect the stereotype and electrotype
blocks of Messrs. Azzopardi. Next comes a handsome case,
shown by Messrs. Rocke and Co., of curtains and hangings.
Wilson’s ventilators having then been viewed, we pass to
Porta and Son’s bellows ; and then meet with the ventilators
of Messrs. Pepper and Murphy. Billiard tables next come in
for their share of our attention, Messrs, ihomas and Co. s
manufactures being now in view. Again turning to the side,
we notice some specimens of granite, &c., shown by Mi. James
Taylor, of Sandhurst, which presently give place to the Mel-
bourne Glass work Co.’s display of empty bottles. The terra
cotta ware of Mr. Luke Nolan must next be inspected ; and
we then come to several specimens of artificial floweis, the
work of various fair artistes, lurning from them we our
attention to Mr. Scurry’s plaster medallions ; and then admire
the 100 table, consisting of over 1000 pieces of wood, con-
structed by Mr. Richard Brice. Jhe tone of Mr. Weatheiills
pianos must then be ascertained.; and we can now tuin our
eyes to the samples of English table glass exhibited by Mr.
Jas. Hope. A grand stand of iron and tinware made by Messrs.


Hughes and Harvey is the next claimant for our attention ; and
then Mrs. Edward Paley’s tables are candidates for admiration.
We come next to Mr. Antonia Perugia’s three statues, “ Sacred
Heart,” “ Virgin and Child,” and “ Virgin of Conception.” We
must then view the splendid billiard tables exhibited by Messrs.
Alcock and Co.; the electric marker (their invention) is attached,
and, being in full working order, can be tested by the visitor.
Some more artificial flowers are now to be seep ; and we then
come to the handsome sideboard exhibited by Messrs. Rocke and
Co. The inspection of Mr. Cooke’s library book-case concluded,
we again find ourselves at the spot from which we commenced,
and we now cross over to the
TASMANIAN COURT,
In the north-west corner of the hall, where we interest ourselves
with a number of exhibits illustrating the natural products of
Tasmania, while the views hung around the walls give the
visitor an idea of the scenery “ on the other side.” In the right
hand corner will be found a spinning-jenny, made of Tasma-
nian myrtle, by Dr. J. Coverdale. A number of bales of Tasma-
nian hops are also open for inspection, after which we come to
Mr. Cresswell’s collection of Tasmanian seeds ; we then turn
our attention to a collection of shells and a few samples of
wool. This brings us to the case of Mr. Bidencope, who shows a
good selection of the various descriptions of felt hats. Turning
to the right we then come to a collection of sweet things, in the
shape of jams, jellies, &c., Messrs. Holroyd, Kennedy and Co.,
Messrs. Johnson Bros., and Mr. Latham, of Hobart Town, being
the exhibitors. The visitor will next observe a number of
articles manufactured from Tasmanian dogwood, tea-tree, pine
knot, &c., shown by Mr. G. Hooper ; next to this collection will
be found a blackwood box, shown (together with the other
boxes) by the Rev. G. Price, of Launceston, the wood of which
it is made being portion of a pile of the Tamar bridge in use
fifty years ago. We next turn to the exhibits of J. R. Castray, of


Hobart Town, 21 cubes of wood, polished to show their respec-
tive value as veneers; passing by them, we come to an
elaborate collection of shells, the inspection of which concluded,
we now find ourselves at the
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COURT.
NORTHERN TERRITORY.
In this court many interesting objects will be found, consist-
ing of native weapons, specimens of minerals, woods, and other
natural productions, which speak for themselves, and need no
further description here. Passing on, we then come to the exhibits
intended to represent the products of
SINGAPORE.
The various specimens of tin, gambier, tapioca, coflee, &c.,
have all been collected and forwarded from Singapore by
Messrs. Bonstead and Co., and Mr. D. Little, the chairman of the
Raffles Library Museum and Garden.
After taking leave of this department, we must now turn to
the right, and it will be necessary, in pursuing our journey
southwards, to pass in and out of the pillars dividing the aisle
from the centre transept of the hall, and in so doing w’e now
again come to the
EXHIBITS OF VICTORIA.
First observing the artificial hair shown by Mr. Herbert
Haselden, we then give our attention to the sewing machines
of Wilcox and Gibbs and Wheeler and Wilson, and gain any
information we may require from the fair attendants, who are
always ready to answer the most trivial question. On the left-
hand side will be seen a clever contrivance, the invention of
Mr. David Carter, of Kew, consisting of a table with patent


movement for lowering a sewing-machine out of sight when-
not in use. We next come to a specimen of flower-painting
on silk, the work of Miss Addis, of Richmond ; some fancy-
work on silk, the work of Mrs. Hatfield, of Prahran; and then
to some specimens of colonial lace shown by Miss F. E. Leahy
and Co., of Emerald Hill. The exhibit of Mr. Win. Memmot,
the comb manufacturer, of Carlton, next demands attention;
after which we inspect the novel lamp shades formed of paper,
figures cut out with scissors being pasted upon their exterior
surface; and passing the seaweed flowers of Mrs. Flatou, we
come to the blankets, &c., both on the right and left, exhibited
by the Victorian Woollen Company. Passing these, and a set
of harness shown by Cobb and Co., we come to the cases of
Mrs. Timbrel 1 and the Ladies’ Sericulture Company, both con-
taining specimens of raw silk in various stages. Next to these
we find the curled hair of Messrs. Williamson and Co.; passing
by which we come to a number of exhibits of harness and
saddlery. Messrs. Gregg and Son first claim our attention, and
we observe that they have taken a second prize ; then Mr. John
Garbutt’s articles must be inspected, who takes the first prize.
We then find a number of walking-sticks, manufactured by
Messrs. Lewis and Co., of Little Collins street, some of which
are made by machinery in imitation of the natural stick. Mr.
Milton’s life-belt is next in order; and we then come to some
specimens of engraving by Mr. Altman, of Richmond, an
amateur. This brings us to the stand of harness shewn by
Alderson and Sons, which has taken second prize. We then
give a few moments to the inspection of Mr. Leighton’s port-
manteaus, opposite which we find the exhibit of Mr.
the whip manufacturer, to whom has been awarded first prize.
Corks cut in Victoria by John Gale and Co. next demand a
passing glance. Mr. Whitfield’s cutlery will bear critical
inspection; and we then come to a ladies’ saddle, very taste-
fully got up by Mr. John Elder, of Sydney (this takes third
prize). A beautiful specimen of coral in a glass case will next
attract our notice; passing by which we stay to admire the


many useful articles manufactured at the Blind School. Again
turning ourselves round, we see the humane poleaxe exhibited
by Mr. Graham Mitchell. Cornish’s life-preserving articles
then occupy some moments; passing which we observe two
models of ships, which are for sale; then a case containing a
set of bagpipes made by Mr. Bichard Gilmore; and, next,
the jewels exhibited by Messrs. Spink. Artificial teeth again
claim attention ; the exhibit of Mr. Charles Beade, of Swanston
street, although in point of show inferior to the other
exhibitors, is certainly superior to them so far as regards the
workmanship and general finish of the articles themselves ;
the case is only distinguished by the number of the Official
Catalogue, 3525. We then examine Mr. Sturtevant’s specimens
of electrotypes ; this brings us to a case containing models of
native implements, to which the fourth prize has been awarded-
Turning round, we find several specimens of English kinder-
garten work, and we observe the new patent advertising
medium introduced by Messrs. Bannister, Milligan and Co.
One would have thought that all the means of advertising had
been exhausted, but it is evidently not so, as by this novel
principle business cards can be distributed in every omnibus,
railway carriage, or other conveyance in the colony. Its
simplicity and evident usefulness should commend it to the
entire business public. We now come to the exhibits from
the Penal Establishment, consisting of a stand of cast iron
goods, mats, brushes, &c. Turning round this stand we
come to the exhibits of the various Artisan Schools of Works ;
passing by which on the left we come to a number of specimens
of vegetable products. On the right hand wall will be found
photographs of the various State Schools, after which a peculiar
tarry smell will easily enable us to find Mr. Miller’s specimens
of rope and cordage. In this department will also be found one
or two articles belonging to the Tasmanian Court, notably a
large slab of ebony and a quantity of Tasmanian hops. We
now turn to the left, examining en 'passant the numerous
specimens of grain. Immediately.


BEHIND THE ORCHESTRA PLATFORM
will be found two South Australian exhibitors; Mr. L. A.
Chance, who has a fine collection of pickles and sauces,
and Mr, Wurm, whose raisins, currants, &c., are evidently
of first rate quality (first prize). Passing straight on, and
crossing the centre of the great hall once more, we shall find in
a corner on the left some preserved milk prepared by Mr. Se-
combe, of Ulladulla, N.S.W., next to which is the stand of S.
A. Clarke and Co., of Brunswick st., Fitzroy, whose really excel-
lent sauces form an interesting collection. Mr. Bagot’s preserved
meat next claims our attention. We then retrace a few of our
steps and come to a table upon which will be found several
bottles (securely corked) of ale and stout; passing which we
pause to examine the blinds exhibited by Messrs. Carr and
Sons ; their quality is first class, and the way in which they are
put together speaks well for the manufacturing capabilities of the
firm. Mr. Reed’s vinegar receives a passing glance, and we then
notice a number of bottles, in a case, containing distillates of
various classes of wine. Messrs. Rowlands and Lewis exhibit
here their specialties; and we then inspect Davis’s patent
sash, which, by a very simple contrivance, turns inside out. Gor-
don and Co.’s cordials glanced at, we stay to examine Messrs.
Smiths’ soap, which brings us round to a stack of various
papers made at Mr. Ramsden’s mills upon the Yarra. Next to
this we find an ornament in colonial stone by Mr. Ayter.
Following down on the right-hand side, we find numerous
specimens of statuary, mantelpieces, &c., from Chambers and
Clutten, and then a fine enamelled slate mantelpiece from the
■works of Train and Co., Emerald Hill. Next, observe several
cases of stuffed parrots ; and then attention will be arrested
by a magnificent plate of looking glass, silvered by a new
process and exhibited by Solomon and Co. Several large pier
glasses in handsome frames are also shown by this firm. Campi
Bros, display some magnificent drawing-room glasses. Mr,
James M‘Ewan shows an elaborate sideboard; the epergnes


upon which are sent by Jas. M'Ewan and Co., whose mag-
nificent marble mantelpieces, fireirons, grates, &c., come next
in order. Next to these will be found some specimens
of the new process of illumination upon glass, called
Diaphanie ; a new garden vase, by C. Pepper ; and a stand of
“yale” locks. Hodgson Bros.’ Venetian blind must next be
inspected, and the elegant fittings, tapes, &c., admired.
Following straight down, in the right-hand corner we find
Mr. Norman’s frames, &c., while the windows contain speci-
mens of stained glass from the factory of Fergusson and Urie.
Over our heads are a number of gas fittings, of all descrip-
tions, shown by Douglas and Cameron. As we pass by, Fer-
gusson and Urie’s window excites our admiration. We pause
next to examine a further collection of the exhibits of Huxley,
Parker and Co., and the models of Mr, E. N. Gerard.
We have now arrived at the extreme right hand (or north-east)
corner of the entrance to the hall, which we find appropriated to
W. H. Rocke and Co., who exhibit a magnificent colonial black-
wood suite of furniture, fitted in blue and canary satin. This-
concludes the tour of the Great Hall, and, with the reader’s
permission, we will now proceed to the
JAPANESE COURTS,
which are situated in what is known as the Statuary division of
the National Gallery. This building runs parallel with Latrobe'
street, and the entrance to it is immediately on the right, sup-
posing we were re-entering from that street. We commence
this department upon the right hand side, the large vase show-
ing us our starting point. We observe in a number of glass
cases, which run along the stand, various toys used to amuse
the little Japanese, and which will doubtless before long come
into the hands of the juveniles of other nationalities. We also
observe a number of ornaments for the hair, composed of wool,
silk, and other materials, woven into flowers, &c. Ranged
above these cases are a number of interesting wax dolls, whoso


smiling countenances appear to ask to be bought, and several
handsome China vases. Further on we find boxes of tooth-pow-
der, fans, etc. Above these will be found three models of a state
procession; all the numerous figures are of porcelain, and evince
great care and patience in their production. Baskets, fans,
and cigar cases must next be admired. Some lacquered cabinets,
and a number of paintings on cloth come next; these are fol-
lowed by a number of fans, of all shapes and sizes, trays, boxes,
and other small articles, made of colored straw. A number of
specimens of wall paper will be found next, some of the de-
signs being very elegant. These bring us to a large assortment
of Japanese cups, saucers, etc., many of them being beautifully
decorated in gold and colors, the porcelain being of the finest
biscuit. An entire dinner service comes next, followed by a
number of large bowls, which, although very handsome, would
appear somewhat awkward upon a colonial dinner table. Ano-
ther array of cups and saucers now demand our inspection, over
which some interesting specimens of painting and embossing
upon silk will be found. We now enter a small passage to the
left, and find ourselves in a
SECOND CHAMBER OF THE COURT
(Part of the Public Library buildings fronting Swanston street).
This is filled with specimens of Japanese porcelain and enamel
ware. The wire enamel vases demand our special attention for
the curious manner in which the various articles are manufac-
tured. The wire is first bent to the required design, and the ena-
mel is then filled into the spaces thus left, after which the burn-
ing takes place, and the surface is finally polished with sand. We
proceed to the top of this department, turn round, and, passing
down the other side, come again to the passage, and find our-
selves upon the second side of the first Japanese department,
where we notice a number of Japanese silks, muslins, velvets,
■etc., ranged above the glass cases, level with the counter. In
these cases we notice numerous small articles, such as


neckerchiefs, fancy boxes, trays, etc.; and in the last case a pen.
with inkstand attached, intended for suspension from the
girdle, will be found interesting. We now come to a collection
•daggers, followed by four curiously made swords ; passing by
which, we come to a suit of Japanese armour, through which, it
is said, no sword will pass. Three more swords will also be
noticed, arranged upon a stand, around them being a number
of bronze figures, ornaments, etc. A book of Japanese paint-
ings is next open for inspection, and will give us some idea of
the fine arts in that country. Papiermache is now well repre-
sented, some of the articles, particularly a large bowl, being
beautifully wrought. Boxes, cigar cases, trays, etc., will be
found in profusion ; after which we come to two or three cases
containing specimens of Japanese jewellery, rings, watch chains,
etc., and a number of small boxes made of ivory and other
materials having delicately-wrought ornaments in solid gold,
etc., upon their exterior surface. Numerous interesting ivory
models of boats, etc., come now, followed by another most com-
plete collection of papermache trays, boxes, etc., which brings
us to the end of the Japanese collection.
Passing out, we once more enter the Great Hall, and proceed
to the fountain in the centre. Turning to the left there we see
a passage, and taking the right hand side we pass along it, and
find ourselves in the
CARRIAGE DEPARTMENT.
Immediately upon entering, our attention is drawn to the
table, upon which will be found the Wheatstone and other
electrical machines, all in working order, from the Telegraphic
Department. After bestowing a few minutes upon them, we
—still keeping to the right—now come to the exhibit of Mr.
Mourant’s wooden taps. Then follow exhibits of leather by
Mr. Ruoke and Mr. J. J. Smith, whose sole-hides are a promi-
nent feature. Next to them comes the exhibit of the Footscray
Tannery; then Wallis and Co.'s pyramid of binding leathers;


the Australian Tannery, Geelong, to which has been awarded
first prize, being last.
Bacon, hams, &c., cured by-'Watson, Paterson and Co., next
invite inspection; and then we find samples of cheese from the
Stratford, Heidelberg and Bacchus Marsh dairies. Mr. Borsa’s
sausages, etc., come next in view. Enclosed in pink gauze, we
now find the joints of meat preserved by Hall and Co.
Passing by the trophy of Australian woods, we next notice
the Victorian Varnish Company’s exhibit; and then turn round
the corner and give our attention to the carriages shown by
Abbot, Downing, and Co., Concord, U.S.A. Mr. Buncle’s
horseworks come next; and then the earth scoop of Mr.
Robinson. A quartz-crushing machine (Cliff’s Patent Disc) is
shown by the Langlands Foundry Company ; and next comes
the engine shown by Corbett and Son. A smut mill, a most
useful machine made by Corcoran, Mill and Co., of Mark Lane,
London, is the next object of interest, together with two of
the same firm’s millstones. A donkey-engine is shown by
McColl, Anderson and Co., and next to it will be found
Milliken’s patent pumping-wheel.
We now turn round, and, crossing over, we come to the
earth-closet of Mr. Higgins ; next to which is an engine by the
English firm of Marshall, Sons and Co., shown by Robinson and
Co., their agents here. McComas’s water-lift, which we shall
see in working operation later on, comes next; and we then
come to a Clayton and Shuttleworth corn screen. Mr. D.
White shows the advertising buggy made for Mr. Gaunt, next
to which will be found a remarkably light American carriage,
made in San Francisco, and shown by Lord, Son and Co. Mr.
Houghton exhibits a number of perambulators (for price, not
quality).
We now come to exhibits of pottery, etc. Mr. Cawkwell
exhibits some well made tiles and terra cotta ware, consisting
of garden ornaments, vases, etc. Next comes Duncan and
Fraser’s American wheel-setting machine ; and we then come
to the exhibits from Baldock’s pottery. Mr. Cornell’s, of the


Brunswick pottery, is next in order, and we must admire the
general excellence of his goods. Mr. Harris, of the North
Fitzroy pottery, comes next, and shows some very tasteful
articles in terra cotta, encaustic tiles, etc. We now come to the
stand of Mr. Guthrie, of Sandhurst, who exhibits filters, tea
pots, and other domestic articles. The carbon filters of Dahlke
and Holt next attract our attention ; after which we stay to
inspect Mr. Pittard’s scales, the patent lever table weighing
machine being a most useful novelty. Against the wall will
be seen a case of wooden handles manufactured by Davey
and Co., while next to the last-mentioned weighing machine
will be found specimens of the bellows manufactured
by Porta and Sons. Passing on, we come to a fine
array of Williams’s washing and wringing machines ;
and we then inspect Bogle’s household help, noting the while
the celerity with which the attendant cleans knives, polishes
boots, etc., by its aid. Next to this is a washing machine, for
which special advantages are claimed, exhibited by Whitney,
Chambers and Co. At the back, against the wall, two fine
casks for storing wine are shown by A. and R. Caughey. Mr.
Weighman’s basket ware is now entitled to a fair share of our
criticism. Gray, Waring and Co.’s casks, made entirely in the
colony and fitted with the patent bush, will be found next
those of A. and R. Caughey. Against the wall, in front of them,
are Delict’s willow chairs, which appear to be well and strongly
constructed. Next to these will be found the stand of wire-
work shown by Greer and Ashburner, comprising quartz
gratings, etc. Chas. Dickie and Son’s bird cage, which is very
handsome, next demands our attention, and behind it we notice
a number of meat tins printed by Browning’s new process.
We then come to Hodgson and Co.’s exhibit of wirework,
amongst which will be found their self-acting rat traps. Fresh
air and country scenes are next brought into prominence by
Mr. Turnbull’s churns, of which there is a good display. Rowden
Bros.’ galvanised iron and general tinware is now at hand, and
invites our inspection ; after which we turn round, and, re-


tracing our steps, direct our attention to the extensive display
of the various descriptions of
CARRIAGES.
The first, as we now stand, is an Albert phseton, shown by
Alexander McDonald and Son, and is turned out in excellent
style. We then come to a two-seated single top buggy, shown
by H. Samwells ; and next to it is a two-wheeled side-car, to
seat three persons, and which gives great facilities for easy
exit and entrance, its total weight being 2| cwt. This and
the C spring phaeton next it are shown by the same maker.
We now come to two vehicles exhibited by Mr. Daniel White,
the first being a sporting phaeton, of polished wood, with iron
perch, pole shafts, and four-in-hand harness; the second, a
Goddard buggy, patent lever top, steel axles, and wrought iron
case-hardened boxes, with pole, shafts and lamps. Wm.
Crutch is the next exhibitor, and has here five exhibits to
represent him ; the first is a C spring queen’s phaeton, with two
seats, which can be removed at pleasure, with shafts and lamps ;
the next is a phaeton buggy, with extension top pole, patent
wheels, eccentric lock, and king bolt in front; the next,
a Brougham, with a patent dial for directing the movements of
the coachman (this is a most useful invention; the dial is
directly in front of the coachman, and by the simple turning of
a small handle fixed inside the carriage, a hand is made to point
to “ stop,” “ turn,” “ home,” and other directions in every day
use); next, a double-seated imitation Abbot’s buggy, with pole,
shafts and lamps ; and the last, a jump seat buggy, with shafts
and lamps. We next examine the American express waggon,
shown by the Victorian Carriage Company, and then turn to
the right and go down the other side : the first to arrest ©in-
attention being a landau carriage, shown by Robertson, Wagner
and Co. Near to this is a pony Queen’s phaeton, made by the
Victorian Carriage Company ; followed by the three exhibits
of Stevenson and Elliot. The first of these is a light wag-


gonette, with patent wheels ; the second, a mail phaeton, for
two or four horses, in the French style; and the remaining
one, a landau, with patent hood, patent steps, and patent
fittings for the inside steps, Mr. John Galland’s two phaetons
are next in order, the first being a “ Victoria ” and the second
an “Albert;” followed by the exhibits of Ewing Bros,, the
first of which is a piano box buggy, the second a coal box
buggy, the third a Victorian phaeton, and the fourth a G
spring landau.
PASSING BY THE ENTRANCE TO THE GREAT HALL
We find in the corner the bent wood and other wooden manu-
factures of Mr. Perry ; after examining which we turn to the
circular stand of Stokes and Martin, where the Exhibition
medal is being struck and sold to the public at the price of one
shilling. After a few moments’ inspection of this interesting
operation, we turn to the left, and, ascending a couple of steps,-
find ourselves at the
ENTRANCE TO THE REFRESHMENT BAR.
On the left hand of this corridor will be found photographs
from the studio of Mr. Perry ; on the right, those of Messrs.
Batchelder and Co., which old established firm fully maintains
its great prestige. On the left hand, in the centre of the
corridor, will be found the
OYSTER PAVILION
Catered for by Barnard and Co. ; and on the right hand side,
the entrance to Pickersgill and Co.’s refreshment bar. Next to
this, on the left hand wall, will be found photographs executed
by Mr. Nettleton, and on the right hand wall those from Mr,
Hubert, of Sydney, whose specimens are executed in a most
superior style. A few feet farther on will- be found


ANOTHER REFRESHMENT ROOM,
Presided over by Yassy and Co., where light refreshments, in
the shape of pastry, etc., can always be obtained. Staying for
a few minutes in this quarter to refresh the inner man, we
commence our tour with renewed energy, and, passing by
these desirable departments, we at once enter another imme-
diately facing us, which, by the constant clatter and noise
coming from it, we at once discover to be the
MACHINERY-IN-MOTION DEPARTMENT.
This department will be found of more than ordinary interest,
and is in fact the most important portion of the Exhibition, as
it serves to illustrate those various branches of manufactures
which are upon a firm footing in the colonies, and will give
the visitor, in a greater proportion than any other part of the
building, an adequate idea of the progress which has been made
in the manufacturing power of the colonies.
Turning to the right from the entrance, the first objects to
attract our attention are the kitcheners shown by Whitney,
Chambers and Co., which are placed against the wall, and upon
the top of which will be found a Stead’s patent ventilator, also
shown by the same firm. Immediately facing these are the
stoves exhibited by Hodgson and Co., which are described by
the firm as the most economical and perfect gas-cooking stoves
ever invented. They claim for the 10s. stove that it is
capable of cooking a dinner for twenty-five persons for the sum
of 6 Jd., with as little trouble as is required to cook for two
persons with the ordinary colonial oven or range. Next to
these will be found the stoves shown by James M‘Ewan and
Co. In the right-hand corner of the room will be seen a fine
collection of pumps, etc., from the foundry of Mr. John Danks;
immediately opposite to which, on the left, are Walker’s patent
gas-stoves. Mr. Hugh Lennon’s ploughs, of which a great
variety are shown, will be found to the right and left of the


visitor ; next to them, on the left, being a small treadle fret
saw, samples of wood cut by it being upon the table for
inspection. Passing on, we next come to Briscoe and Co.’s
exhibits, which comprise a portable forge, patent Eclipse cooking
range, and upon the side counter a large assortment of various
tools; after inspecting which we again turn to the right-hand
wall, and view the various printers’ materials exhibited by
Mr. Oliver Levey, which are all of first-rate quality, the brass
rules and circles in particular being equal if not superior to
any London work of the same kind. Next is Roberts’ Venetian
blind lath painter, which appears to be an invention of incal-
culable value to the trade. Opposite this machine, upon the
left, are Jeans’ patent reflector gas-cooking stoves, for which
the following advantages are claimed : a larger heating plate,
a better-diffused flame and burners, with less gas, and a stronger-
made and better-looking article. There is also no gas inside
the oven. The prices range from £5 upwards. We now come
to a counter display of the scales manufactured by W. and T.
Avery, and Morgan’s patent plumbago crucibles, which are
undoubtedly the best in the market, shown by Briscoe and Co.
Opposite to these, on the right, against an
ENTRANCE FROM THE CARRIAGE DEPARTMENT,
will be found specimens of lead and tin tubing, rolled sheet
lead, and composition gas pipes, hydraulic pressed, shown by
Mr. John MTI wraith, of Little Collins street. Turning to the
left, we notice Parker and Co.’s gas stoves, kitchen ranges,
champion ovens, and yacht and challenge stoves. The champion
oven being ventilated with hot-air circulation, produces a flavor
in all meats or poultry equal, if not superior, to roasting before
the fire. The door, when open, forms a table on which the
dish is drawn out and the meat turned round, thus avoiding
the risk of carrying a hot dish to the table. The small door
underneath the oven precludes the possibility of the cook’s
dress catching fire, and also effects a saving of one-half the
fuel consumed by ordinary ovens, while the construction of the


fire-place permits of the use of either wood or coal. By the
arrangement of the top all waste of fuel is avoided, either wood,
coal or coke burning with equal advantage. The moveable
grate in front, when down, forms a rest for saucepans or flat-
irons, and when up is very useful both for keeping the fire
compact and toasting bread.” Next to Parker’s exhibits come
Raleigh’s patent colonial ovens. Opposite them is Wilding and
Co.’s travelling box wool press, and Glenister’s axle trees;
followed by a glass case containing hydrants, etc., shown Mr. J.
Banks. Turning to the right, we find the ornamental iron
castings and register grates made by Mr. William Hutchinson.
To the left of these will be found the exhibit of Mr. Alfred
Stoneman, consisting of a pair of buggy side spings, a pair of
elliptic side springs, a pair of spring cart side springs, and a
perambulator. Some bells cast by Mr. James Hill are next
in order; beneath which are the following samples of manure,
shown by James Macmeikan and Co., of Footscray, viz., bone
dust, animal guano, superphosphate of lime, vine manure, and
patent perfection manure. On the right will be found a
number of horse shoes, intended for various purposes. Next
to these is Lewis and Co.’s stand, where the interesting
process of manufacturing imitation-natural sticks will be
observed in full operation. Lewis and Co. are the founders of
this new Colonial industry ; they only commenced business a
few months ago, and their goods, being found to be so
much like the natural article, already command nearly the
whole of the Colonial trade, to the exclusion of the imported
article. Opposite their stand will be found a number of
specimens of raw and manufactured iron, shown by the Victorian.
Iron Rolling Co., of Franklin street. Mr. J. Brysdale’s and Mr.
Wm. Mitchell’s grease must now receive our attention; Mr.
John Liston shows samples of artificial grease, for axles and
general use, and lubricating grease for locomotives and ma-
chinery. In a glass case we find the exhibits of Mr. Andrew
Potter, of Wellington street, Colling wood, consisting of high
pressure water taps, Faulls’ self-acting glass conducting lubri-


cators, etc. Next to these we find a collection of tools, shown
hy Mr. William Howitt, of Little Latrobe street, among them
being mash, spalding, bricklayers’, and diamond hammers,
pitching tools, brick bolsters, handdrills, blockaxes, etc., etc.
Mr. John Barker (whose exhibits will be found in a glass case)
shows a collection of bolts and nuts \ opposite to which, upon
the right, will be found the patent frilling machines, in full
operation, the deft fingers of Mr. Geachs opeiatois turning
many yards a minute of narrow strips of linen into frilling
ready for use by the milliner or underclothing manufacturer;
these machines are all worked by means of a small sewing
machine engine, which fulfils its duties in a most satisfactoiy
manner. Opposite these, upon the left, will be found coach
and omnibus axles, break screws, bolts for wire puncheons, and
cheese press screws, exhibited by Joseph Royal and Son, of
Carlton, and the handframe for making tallow candles, pewter
work, etc., shown by Mr. C. H. Selle, of Carlton.
In the right hand corner is Riddell’s patent gas bath. The
inventor claims for it that 27 gallons of water can be raised 45
degrees fahr. in 16 minutes by the consumption of 25 cubic
feet of gas, at a cost of 2|d., which, if carried out into practical
use, should entitle it to a place in every house.
Facing the bath, and opposite the counter running parallel
with the wall, are Wallis’s patent gas-cooking stoves, for which
the following seven special advantages are claimed : 1 st, an
open roaster ; 2nd, free from all contact with gas ; 3rd, a well-
ventilated oven ; 4th, no confined vapour ; sth, a regular dif-
fused heat; 6th, a broiler free from smoke ; and 7th, a hot
plate filled with patent air, and gas burners ranged for boiling,
stewing, or frying. The prices are said to be of a most econo-
mical nature.
Behind the stoves, upon the wall counter, will be found a
model of a horizontal hydraulic engine, which can be used
with steam, and will drive a 6-inch centre lathe for wood or
iron turning. It is made and exhibited by Mr, E. T. Biggs,
of Hawthorn, an amateur engineer. Next to this, under a


glass shade, will be found a brass model of a high-pressure
engine, which is occasionally shown in motion. Passing on, we
come to model of a double-furrow plough, with improved
governor steerage, made by Mr, William Hay. Two working
models of steamboats are the next objects of interest, the first
being a model of a screw steamboat, 24- inches long, 4-| beam,
and 4- inches deep, which will work for an hour, with attention,
by means of compressed air ; the other is a model for a paddle
steamer, of the same dimensions, which will also work for the
same length of time. An embossing lever press is shown and
manufactured by Rudolph Wolf, of Little Bourke street East;
it claims a share of our inspection. Next to it will be found
an interesting model of a patent steam coach, intended for use
upon ordinary roads without rails, and which is worked by a
rotary engine. A new compound metal, which has been
christened phosphor-bronze, manufactured by the Phosphor-
Bronze Company, of Cannon street, London, a,nd shown by the
agent for Victoria, Mr. John R. Temperly, of Queen street, is
the next claimant for attention. The castings obtained with
this metal are very clean, and the finest line in the mould is
well defined. .It has been found capable of adaptation to many
purposes, not the least important of which is the manufacture
of tools for use in gunpowder factories. This metal, unlike
iron or steel, cannot be made to emit sparks, and by the em-
ployment of tools made of this substance much of the danger
attending the manufacture of explosive compounds is removed.
A portable kerosene cooking apparatus, on Sibley’s patent,
which is small and very compact, is shown by James Prince, of
Victoria Parade, while next to it will be found a Sibley’s patent
kerosene lamp, shown by the same exhibitor. Immediately
opposite these, upon the left-hand counter, is a candle mould
for composition candles, and .a model of a direct-acting steam
battery for quartz crushing. Next to this will be found an
assortment of bootmakers’ tools, saws, etc., shown by Alexander
Marsden, of Stanley street, Collingwood. And now comes an
interesting collection, in a glass case, of mineral ores from New


'Caledonia, shown by Mons. Edouard Adet; opposite which,
upon the wall counter, are a number of samples of antimony.
We have now come to the •
ENTRANCE TO THE MACHINERY YARD,
But we pass it for the present, and turning to the left we
observe a large model of a full-rigged screw steamer in woiking
order, made and exhibited by D. Davies, of West Melbourne j
next to this is a lithographic stone, with a drawing of the
map of Australia upon it. A number of castings from
Adelaide then claim our attention ; which bring us to the last
exhibit upon this counter, a roll of various qualities of safety
fuse, shown by Perry, Hunter and Co., of Sandhurst; opposite
these will be found a number of machines for use in boot
factories, shown by Mr. Hugh Nelson, of the St. Crispin Iron
Works, Hotham ; passing these, we turn to the left, down the
centre avenue, when the first rtiachine to attract our attention
is Stienbech’s toe-cap punching machine, which can be used
for any size or pattern; next to this are specimens of star
antimony (Ist prize) and crucibles, shown by Bright Brothers
and Co., of Flinders lane ; next to these will be found a case
of bolts, nuts, rivets, &c., exhibited by Wilding and Co.,
amongst them being specimens of the fastenings used upon
the permanent way of the Tasmanian railways, and of which
they are now engaged in manufacturing a large number for
the Deniliquin and Moama Railway Company. Wilding and
Co.’s implements, including their champion excavator and
champion drainer, occupy the space behind the case previously
mentioned; opposite these will be found Robinson s patent
“ Little Gem” washer, which appears to be a machine of great
utility; it weighs only five pounds, and fits any tub, and is
said to last for a decade ; the price, £2, is certainly a very
reasonable figure. Mr. William Hill’s “ fumopellenter, or
smoke-disperser, for the cure of that universal malady, smoky
chimnies, will be found next in order; after which will be
found Sharp’s patent sheep support, which requires a little


explanation, as it is a mystery until understood. It consists-
of two cylinders or rollers cut in half crosswise, which revolve
upon concealed axles. The sheep to be washed is held upon
or between these rollers, and is easily kept in position. Ey
using this machine much labour is saved, and a great deal of
unnecessary pain to the sheep is prevented. We now cross-
the
CENTRE ENTRANCE FROM THE CARRIAGE DEPARTMENT,
and come to the front side of the display of tools shown by
Briscoe and Co., which are followed by Mr. Hugh Lennon’s
ploughs. This brings us again to the
ENTRANCE FROM THE REFRESHMENT BARS,
and we turn round and find, in the left-hand corner, Speeding’s
patent hop press; in front of which is the “ Polymachinum,”
for strengthening the muscles of the chest, arms, &c., shown by
Alcock and Co., which can, if it so pleases him, be tested by
the visitor. On the right of this, somewhat in the background
CD * O f
is a threshing-machine, shown by Messrs. T. Robinson and Co.,
and a patent broadcast sower (hanging against the pillar), also
shown by the same firm. We now come to the interesting
collection of machinery shown by Mr. Buncle, of the Parkside
Ironworks. The first to attract our attention is a slotting and
punching machine; the next is a patent oat-crusher, which
can also be adapted for crushing maize; following this is a
chicory-cutting machine, which cuts the slices of a uniform
size, and so ensures the equality of the roasting. We then
turn to a large tobacco-cutting machine, and next pause to
observe the No. 1 chaff-cutting machine, which separates the
chaff, after it is cut, from the straws which have missed the
knife; the chaff of a proper length is removed by an endless
roller band to a convenient distance, while the long straws are
caught up and carried by an elevator to a shoot which causes
them to again pass through the machine. A circular saw-
bench, fitted with the latest improvements in saws, comes


next, and, after examining the copying-press, also made by
this exhibitor, we pass to the various sizes of chaff-cutting
machines, which will be found next to it. Another circular
saw is the next claimant for attention, and it is specially
adapted for cutting firewood.
The clatter of the shuttle will now draw our attention to the
Jacquarie steam-power loom, shown by the Melbourne Woollen
Mill Company. This loom is now in full operation, and the pro-
cess of weaving the black-and-white check plaid tweed, which
slowly winds itself upon the roller beneath the loom, can be
viewed with much interest by the visitor. In consequence of the
elaborate mechanism of this and another power-loom which we
shall come to presently, great difficulty was at first experienced
in getting them into working order; all these obstacles are,
however, now overcome, and the process of manufacture goes
on smoothly and uninterruptedly. A somewhat lofty machine,
resplendent with blue paint, will be found to be Williams com-
pound lever wool press, which is a very durable instrument. Neat
this, on the right, are three small engines, by Brown and Co.,
which are chiefly remarkable for their light construction and
moderate price. A splendid horizontal engine, a pair of 18'
inch lathe head stocks, centrifugal pumps, and axle arms, etc.,
represent the firm of Wright and Edwards, and show first-class
workmanship and finish. Opposite to these are a numbei of
agricultural implements, from the factory of Swan and White;
after which we turn to the steam-power loom exhibited by the
Victorian Woollen Cloth Company, Geelong. This loom is, like
that of the Melbourne Company, in operation, and the work of
the two looms can be compared by the visitor. Passing on, we
see on the right a jute loom from M‘Phersons factory, which is
occasionally in operation, under the superintendence of a female
operator. The manufacture of combs will now occupy the
attention of the visitor for a few minutes, not longer, unless
he is impervious to the disagreeable odour which results fiom
the manipulation of the bone, horn, &c.; Mr. Wm. Memmott is
the exhibitor of this local industry. In the left-hand corner


the art of printing in colours is being shown for our edifica-
tion; we accordingly interest ourselves in the process—or
rather processes—which Mr. W. Calvert’s popular picture-books
undergo before being ready for distribution in the nursery.
Leaving this interesting corner, and having perhaps purchased
one of the pictorial alphabets, or some other book produced in
the Exhibition, we stop to examine an apparatus for making
gas from petroleum, exhibited by McLean Brothers and Bigg
by means of which it is stated sufficient gas can be generated
to supply forty-five burners at a cost of four shillings per
thousand cubic feet. The apparatus is neat and compact By
means of descending weights of about 1 cwt. or so, which
operate on a pulley of two three-sheaved blocks, and a wire
rope, air is compressed by a fanning apparatus. The air so
compressed is forced into a receiving-chamber, into which
oidinaiy petroleum is admitted in minim quantities; the
compressed air has the effect upon the petroleum of making it
assume a gaseous form, which is inflammable, and car* be con-
sumed from the ordinary burners used for the consumption of
common coal gas. The apparatus has not yet been shown in
opeiation, but if it fulfils all that is promised it will prove
of great utility in those parts of the colony where gas is not
manufactured. Next to this are the sausage-machines of
Lugton and Sons; the larger one looks quite melancholy as its
large knife slowly ascends and descends upon air. It is very
compact, and is fitted with wrought-iron spindle and gun-
metal rack. This concludes our inspection of this department,
and, passing out of the door immediately facing the sausage-
machines, we find ourselves in the
MACHINERY YARD.
Here the first object to catch the eye is the immense water-
fall, constructed by Wright and Edwards to show the quantity
of water which can be raised with one of their centrifugal
pumps. This pump, which can be worked by a steam engine


nominally 12-horse power, is capable of throwing up 20,000
gallons of water per minute. The fountain or waterfall thus
produced forms a most attractive feature, and, finding this to
be the case, the Commissioner shave gone to some expense in
erecting rock work and surrounding it with ferns to give
additional effect to the scene.
Arrangements are also being made for its illumination by
night with variegated lime lights, which will produce a very
brilliant effect. After inspecting this novelty, we turn to the
right, and betake ourselves to a consideration of the various
rock drills which are candidates for our approval.
The first is the Burleigh rock drill, exhibited by Messrs.
James Service and Co. There are also shown with this
machine the air compresser, steam-engine, and air-receiver
necessary for the proper working of the drill. The engine
consists of two 12-in. cylinders, and is of eight-horse power.
It works two air-pumps, forcing the air through valves which
prevent its return into an iron receiver fi feet by 2J feet, at
a pressure of 45 feet to the square inch, and it is the expansion
of this compressed air which gives motion to the drill. The
drill, which is star-faced, hammers upon the rock to be bored
with a rotary motion. The machine is placed upon an iron
tripod, and, being fixed in a universal joint, can be brought to
bear upon any required spot.
The next machine is the “ Kainotomon” rock drill, which is
not, however, entered for competition. Next to this will be
found the “ Warsop” rock drill, which differs from others in
being operated upon by a hammer, while the drill itself
remains at the bottom of the bore, rotation being given to it
by hand-power. It only requires a very light pressure, about
1G or 18 lbs., and it appears at present to be at a disadvantage
from too high pressure.
The next in order is of greater interest, from the fact that it
is entirely a colonial production, made by .Mr. Michael Ford,
of Sandridge road. This machine is self-acting, works with a
common drill, or jumper, and requires no 'tripod, but can be


fixed with a 5 in. prop, which can be screwed on the roof of a
drive. It is provided with a steadying-bar, and a 1| in,
pointed rod, which is tightly screwed against the face of the
surface to be bored. The drill, which is 1| in., gives 500
strokes a minute, with an air pressure of 40 lbs., making five
revolutions in the same period, the length of its stroke being
about 4 in.; two feet of solid bluestone can be bored through
by it in five minutes, and it will bore through 4 feet without
any sharpening of the drill. This machine, which appears to
be about the best exhibited, is shown in operation on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday only.
Next to this, in front of the large engine, will be found one
of Tyler and Co.’s (of London) patent universal steam-pumps;
and we then come to
THE HUGE BOILER
made and exhibited by Wright and Edwards. This is a multi-
tubular boiler, of 80-horse power, and is fitted with 80 Galloway
tubes. The engine is 12|-inch bore, and the cylinder 21-inch
stroke. All the steam power required in the exhibition is
supplied by this boiler, the different machines being put in
motion by belting from the shafting running through the
machinery room, or by steam pipes specially laid on. As might
have been expected, this firm takes the first prize, no other in
the exhibiton at all approaching them.
After leaving this we cross to the other side, where, at the
extreme right, we shall find a set of railway points, made by
the Langlands Foundry Company. Next to these are M’Comas’s
water lifters. The one on the right is a inch patent pump,
and with one man it can raise 160 gallons a minute. The other
is a 7-inch pump, intended to be used with a 2-horse power
engine, and which raises 18 gallons with every revolution. A
boy working this can raise 100 gallons a minute.
Next to these machines is the “Empire” windmill for pump-
ing purposes, fitted with reefing gear and self-acting adjust-


merits. This machine is well known in the colonies, and has
proved itself of great utility in places where intermittent
labour is required. Raleigh’s patent colonial oven now forms
an interesting feature, and if the weather is fine the visitor
•can, if he chooses, taste the various joints, pastry, etc., cooked
by its means, which are handed round for that purpose by the
attendant. It is said that with this invention a dinner for
eight persons can be cooked, and at the same time 10 gallons
of water heated to boiling point, at a total cost for fuel of one
penny, and ocular demonstration is afforded of what can be
done with a few scraps of fuel which would scarcely be suffi-
cient to light an ordinary tire.
Passing by this we come to O’Keefe’s patent gas apparatus,
by means of which it is claimed that with an outlay of £lOO
(exclusive of piping, etc.), an apparatus of sufficient dimensions
to supply forty burners can be erected. The quality of the
gas is good, of which the visitor may judge, as in the evening
the lighting of the machinery room and the gas crown in the
machinery room is effected by gas supplied from this apparatus.
Next to this will be found an erection composed of Wilson’s
patent grooved bricks. Passing on, we come to two boilers
■exhibited by Munro and Co., of Queen street. The first is a
multitubular boiler, with water-bridge; and the other a Cornish
boiler, with Galloway tubes and waterbridge.
The next exhibit in this direction is an arch, built of North-
cote bricks ; after inspecting which we retrace our steps, and,
passing by the threshing plant, consisting of engine, thresher,
and elevators, exhibited by Munro and Co., we return to
THE GREAT HALL,
where we can now join in the general throng, and take a
leisurely turn round before entering the Rotunda, noticing as
we so the various
O
WORKS OF ART
which are liberally scattered all round the building, but most of


which are hung too high to allow of more than the most casual
observation. As we enter the Hall from the Carriage Depart-
ment, immediately over our heads, in the front of the balcony,
are three specimens of needle-work on canvas, while to the
right and left of the balcony are several fine works in oil.
The work on the right, numbered 3169, is a copy (by
Jacques Beltrami) of “ The Transfiguration,” the last and
greatest oil painting by the illustrious master Eaphael. The
original, which is now in the Vatican at Rome, was suspended
over his body for public homage while the last traces of his
master-hand were Still visible upon the canvas.
On the left is another magnificent work in oil (No. 3170),
copied by the same artist from the original by Domenichino.
This work, the acknowledged masterpiece of this great artist,
is considered to be second only to “ The Transfiguration ” of
Raphael.
Passing round, on the left (No. 3179), is the “Madonna de
San Francisco,” copied by Jacques Farini from the original, by
Andrea del Sarto, in the Uffizi Gallery,
No. 3174 is a copy (by Jacques Beltrami) of “ The Virgin and
Child,” by Murillo, in the Corsini Palace,
The next is a painting by Soutre, “ Michael Angelo attending
his favorite servant.”
On the left-hand side of Joseph’s electric clock is a copy, by
P. Farasyn, of the “ Card Players,” by Valentine, in the Gallery
of Pictures at Antwerp; while on the right will be found a
copy, by Jacques Beltrami, of Guido’s “Aurora,” a fresco in
the Rospilosi Palace, on the Quirinal Hill, Rome.
On the left of the entrance to the Rotunda are Nos. 3157 and
31 63 ; the first of these is an original Reubens, “ The Adoration
of the Magi,’’ and the second the “ The Rape of Proserpine,” by
Correggio.
On the right-hand side of this entrance, the chief work
of art is No. 3166, “Joseph telling his Dream,” by Piallo
All these paintings, which are the principal ones, are exhi-
bited by James Purves, Esq., Glen Isla, Richmond.


"Ws now give a few moments’ attention to the patent theatre-
seats shown by M'Lean Bros, and Rigg, which are distributed
throughout the hall, and of which some particulars will be
found on the inside page of the front cover of this “ Guide.”
We now pass through the entrance on the right-hand side at
the centre of the Great Hall, facing the fountain, and find our-
selves
IN THE ROTUNDA.
The Rotunda has been appropriated almost exclusively to
works of art, and, turning to the right from the entrance, we
pass from one object of interest to another. The first to attract
our attention is the “ Entombment,” by Vandyke, No. 3159 ;
the next is a view of Venice by moonlight, by Colie, which is
numbered 3462. The various specimens from the pencil of
Mr. Samuel Calvert are next in order ; followed by a folding
screen, with the following exquisite paintings upon it No.
3151, “ Descent from the Cross,” Triptich, P. P. Reubens ; in
front, “The Salutation of the Virgin,” and “the Presentation in
the Temple ; ” at the back, “St. Christopher,” and “.The Infant
Saviour and Hermit,” copied from the original in Antwerp
Cathedral, by P. Farasyn.
In glass cases, ranged opposite Mr. Calvert’s specimens, are
casts of various classes of fruit grown in the colonies.
Another work, No. 3483, will be found on the right, which is
a most peculiar production, “ The Marguerite of Louvain,” by
Lagge. _ e M
Still passing round, we come to Guido’s “ Beatrice Cenci,
copied by Jacques Bethami, which is numbered 3172. An oil
painting, “Candle-light,” by Schalker, No. 3122; a nameless
“Hebe,” No. 3205 ; and a view of “ A Party of Skaters,” which
•calls up memories of the past in the “ Old Country,” by Geo.
Morland.
In the immediate centre of the Rotunda is a fixed case, con-
taining specimens of choice glass, which is surrounded by hot-
house and other plants from the nurseries of Perry Brothers.


There will also be found the cases of Mrs. Cohn and Mr. L.
H. Hart, containing natural curiosities, furs, etc. ; that of Ford
and Co., containing samples of their sun hats; and a glass con-
taining some delicate growing ferns, exhibited by James Scott
and Son, of Hawthorn.
Distributed throughout the Kotunda will be found most of
the pictures shown at the last exhibition of the Victorian
Academy of Arts, which, having in most instances the title of the
work and the name of the artist attached, speak for themselves,
and do not need any description in this Guide.
The visitor will now have effectually seen the whole of the
Exhibition to advantage, and must be left to follow his own
inclinations during the rest of his stay in the building. While
in the vicinity of the Public Library, however, we should
recommend him to pay a visit to the new Picture Gallery, and,
thinking he will probably take our advice, some interesting
notes respecting the principal works of art exhibited there, for
which we are indebted to the catalogue issued by the trustees,
are attached, and, placing them before him, we take our leave,
trusting that our endeavors to act as his “guide, philosopher,
and friend,” have not been wholly futile.


THE NATIONAL PICTURE GALLERY.
The New Picture Gallery is entered from the Public Library by way
of the old Picture Gallery, which now contains part of the Techno-
logical Museum (a dotted line on the plan at the commencement of
this “ Guide ” shows the direction to be taken, entering from Swanston
street).
It is lighted by a series of skylights of thick ribbed glass, let into the
outer roof, and an inner floor of ground plate glass, which is placed on
horizontal panels in the ceiling.
The light strikingfrom the roof descends through the horizontal panels,
and is diffused in the Gallery. Such a distribution of the whole volume,
obviates its being subdivided into pencils of rays, as occurs when
introduced through side windows—rays which vary in direction at
different seasons of the year and hours of the day—and it admits of
each wall being used with equal advantage, and all the pictures being
examined under conditions most favourable for the full appreciation of
their merits.
The roof is ventilated by a number of air-flues in the walls, carried
up from the basement and opening into the enclosed space of the
lantern in the roof, supplying a constant current of cool air, compara-
tively free from dust. Thus the glass forming the ceiling of the
gallery is to a great extent kept free from the deposit of matter calcu-
lated to obscure the light. Trap doors at convenient points have been
provided to enable the attendants to clean the lantern when it is
necessary. The ventilation of the gallery itself is provided for by
gratings inserted in the floor, and also by flues carried up the walls
from the basement, opening into the space in the frieze of the cornice
above the pictures. The escape of the vitiated air is provided for by
openings in the ceiling leading into flues in the walls.
Turning to the right from the entrance, the first important picture to
attract our notice is, “ Samson Slaying a Philistine,” by W. E.
Frost, A.R.A,
William Edward Frost was born at Wandsworth, in Surrey, in 1810.
In 1829 he was admitted a student of the Royal Academy, and com-
menced his career as a portrait painter, in the course of the next


fourteen years painting upwards of three hundred portraits. He
became, in 1839, a competitor for the gold medal of the Academy,
the subject being “ Prometheus Bound.”—and won the prize. In the
competition at Westminster Hall of 1843 he gained a prize (in the
third class, of £100) for his well drawn and graceful cartoon, “ Una
alarmed by Fauns.” In the same year, an Art-Union prizeholder select-
ed his ‘‘Christ crowned with Thorns” from the Royal Academy, Por-
trait-painting was now abandoned. Pictures in the exclusive class for
which this painter is now known followed, and found ready pur-
chasers : a “ Bacchanalian Dance,” “ Nymphs Dancing ” (both 1844) •
“Sabrina ” (1845), since engraved by the Art-Union; “Diana and
Action (1846). The last was recognised as an advance on every
previous effort, and secured for him his election as Associate of the
Academy that same year. In 1847, “Una and the Wood Nymphs”
was purchased by Her Majesty. The “ Euphrosyne ”of the succeed-
mg year, commissioned by Mr. Bicknell, also attracted the notice of
royalty, and procured for him a command to paint the principal group
for the Queen. Among his principal subsequent pictures have been
the “Disarming of Cupid,” painted for Prince Albert; “Andromeda”
(both 1850); “ Wood Nymphs,” and “ Hylas ” (1851 ; “ May Morn-
mg (1852) ; “Chastity” (1854). Spencer and Milton, in their minor
poems, have throughout been the sources whence Mr. Frost has drawn
suggestions,"allegorical or literal, for his “graceful wreaths, so to
speak, of fair and delicate forms.”
The next important work is the “ Buffalo Ranges, Victoria ” bv
Nicholas Chevalier. ’ J
In the year 1863 the Pine Arts Commission resolved that out of the sum
placed at their disposal by the Government, the sum of £2OO
should be “ expended in the purchase of a painting or paintings by an
artist or artists resident in Australia, provided that the painting or
paintings possess sufficient merit to qualify it or them to compare
favorably with the works of eminent living artists in Europe ln
January, 1865, the competing pictures were viewed, and the painting
of the Buffalo Ranges, by N. Chevalier, selected for purchase.
The Buffalo Ranges is the name given to a tier of lofty mountains lying to
to the north-west of Buckland, and running north and south between
the Buffalo and Ovens Rivers.
AI. Nicholas Chevalier is a native of Russia. (Having drawn success-
fully for the illustrated periodicals of the day, he found leisure at
length to devote hunself to the higher branches of his art. A painter
of great industry he sought and obtained the patronage of His
Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, during that Prince’s visit to
this colony. He accompanied His Royal Highness to England in the
Valatea, and made drawings of objects and places of interest during
the voyage. On his arrival in London he was honored by several
commissions from those connected with the Court, and has since
achieved for himself a secure position among artists resident in
The next is “A Question of Propriety,” by Edwin Long, of London.
A replica of this picture was exhibited in the Exhibition of the
Roya Academy for the year 1871. The Censores y Veadores-
literally the Censurers and the Seers’’—travelled the country in
the interests of morality. Francesco Pacheco, himself an artist of
merit, and, in 1618, Censor of Pictures to the Inquisition, relates in
his rarely found Arte de la Pintara, published in 1649 at Seville how


the good fathers who composed (this critical court not only took to
task the painters of sacred subjects, and made their comments upon
the “impropriety of exhibiting angels without wings, and saints with-
out clothes,” but pushed their researches into all matters of public
amusement. They reviewed the Ballos de Zingaras or gipsy dances,
and inspected, with not unkindly severity, the Zarzuelas, or musical
farces, which set a-gaping the honest winesellers of Andalusia. Any
sentiment which smacked of heresy was excised, any attitude which
prompted to aught but respectability of manners, was forbidden ; in
a word, the Censores y Veadores performed for the artists, dancers,
and dramatists of Toledo and Seville those offices which are per-
formed now-a days by the Censor of the Press for the Parisian, and
by the Lord Chamberlain for the English playwright.
Then comes “ Druidical Monuments,” by G. E. Herring.
“ In the glimmer of the dawn
They stand, the solemn silent witnesses
Of ancient days—altars or graves ? ”
Then “ Depart du Fianc6,” by G. Koller.
Guillaume Roller is a native of Vienna. He studied at Dusseldorf
under Cornelius, Lessing, Bendemen, and Eetkel. Until the year
1859 he lived at Antwerp. At present he resides in Paris. This
picture was purchased from M. Gambart, the well-known dealer.
Passing on, we come to “Autumnal Showers,” by Peter Graham;
and “A Travelling Tinker,” by E. Opie.
Another fine work, “ The Departure of the Pilgrim Fathers,” by
Charles West Cope, R.A., is the next in prominence.
This is the original picture from which was painted one of eight frescoes
in the Peers’ Corridor, in the Houses of Parliament at Westminster.
“ The conditions having been mutually agreed on betwixt the company,
the merchants and the Leyden agents returned with the two vessels
to Delft Haven, the port of Leyden. On their arrival, all needful
preparations were speedily made ; and on the twenty-first day of
July, 1620, the whole congregation met for humiliation and prayer,
when Mr. Robinson preached, with deep emotion, from Ezra, viii.
21, 22. . . , After the solemnities of the day were closed, the
members of the church who were to remain at Leyden ‘ feasted us
that were to go,’ observes Mr. Winslow, ‘at our pastor’s house,
being large, where we refreshed ourselves, after tears, with singing of
psalms, making joyful melody in our hearts, as well as with the
voice, there being many of the congregation very expert in music ;
and indeed it was the sw'eetest melody that ever mine ears heard.
After this they accompanied us to Delft’s Haven, where we were to
embark, and they feasted us again ; and after prayer, performed by
our pastor, where a flood of tears was poured out, they accompanied us
to the ship, but were not able to speak one to another for the abun-
dance of sorrow to part.
Passing on, of next importance is “La Premiere Niege Sur L’Alm—
The First Snow on the Alps,” by Otto Wejoer.
The Alm is the name given to the summer pasture lands of the Alps.
These pastures are only available during a short pericd of the year.


During the long winter, the cattle brought down into the valleys are
stalled in warm stables and fed with cut hay. At the dawn of sum-
mer, however, the “Alp pasture” is open, and the herdsmen take
their stock to the mountains.
A little further on will be found a most effective picture, a view of
“ Rotterdam,” by James Webb.
Rotterdam is the second city of Holland, both in commerce and popula-
tion. It is built on the Maas, and has as many canals as streets,
communication being maintained by bridges. At the junction of the
Maas with the Rotte there is a large dyke, whence the name Rotter-
dam. Along the river is a fine quay, one mile and a quarter in length,
planted with trees, and called from that circumstance Boompjes—the
Little Trees.
This is followed by a “ Winter Morning, near Heidelberg,” by Louis
Buvelot (see note to “ Waterpool at Coleraine”).
Above this is a gem of art, “Psyche aux Enfers” (Psyche in the
Shades), by Eugene Ernest Hillemacher, presented by Gustave
Curcier, Esq.
Next to this is a small but very fine picture—“ La Belle Yseultby
T. P. Bedford.
“ Then the king (Anguish, of Ireland) for great favor made Sir Tramtrist
(Tristram) to bee put in his daughter’s ward and keeping, because
shee was a noble snrgion. And so when she had searched his wound,
found in the bottom of his wound that there was poyson,
and within a little while she healed him, and therefore Tramtrist
cast great love to La Beale Isoude, for she was at that time the
fairest lady of the world, and there Sir Tramtrist learned her to
harpe, and she began to have a great fantesie unto Sir Tramtrist. ”
Wright, Hist, of King Arthur, vol. ii. p. 17.
A view of Mount Kosciusko (seen from the Mount Hope Ranges,
Victoria), by Eugene Von Guerard, will be found next.
Eugene Yon Guerard was born in Vienna, where his father, Bernard
Von Gudrard, was court painter. At a very early age he evinced a
strong predilection for art, and was sent to Italy when fifteen years
old, where he studied the old masters- In Rome he became the pupil
Giovanni Bassi, and the young painter made rapid progress in art, his
tastes lying chiefly in the direction of landscape. In 1832 he pro-
ceeded to Naples, where he remained for six years ; two of his
earliest works having been purchased by Queen Isabella. Recalled
to Germany by the death of his father, he established himself at
Dusseldorf, where he prosecuted the study of architecture, perspective,
and the history of art, at the Royal Academy, from 1839 till 1846.
In 1852 he emigrated to Australia, and in 1854 fixed his residence in
Melbourne, Victoria. During the last ten years, he has visited the
wildest and least-known portions of the Australian continent and
the adjacent island of Tasmania, and has done much to render
Australian scenery familiar to European eyes.
This brings us to the top of the Gallery, where, upon the wall to the
right-hand side of the doorway, will be found three pictures, that in


the centre being a “ Madonna and Child.” Original by Murillo.
Copied by Mr. Malony.
Bartolome Estevan Murillo was born at Pilas, five leagues from
Seville, in 1613. He was a pupil of Velasquez, and his first great
work was the fresco in the Convent of San Francisco. He painted
several pictures for the churches of Cadiz, Grenada, and Cordova.
In 1669 he executed a magnificent picture of the Immaculate Concep-
tion, for the Cupola of the Franciscan Monastery. The splendid
series of the “ Life of Jacob ” enriching the palace of the Marquis of
Santiago, at Madrid, were completed by the year 1678. At the close
of the year 1681 Murillo went to Cadiz to paint the “ Marriage of
St. Catherine ” over the high altar of the church of the Capuchin
Convent. Before he had finished his work he fell from the scaffolding.
and died in the year 1682.
On the right of it is a group of “Italian Peasants,” and on the left—
“ On the Ice at Stockholm,” by P. W. Cedergrew, M.S.A.A. Crossing
over, on the left hand side of the doorway are three paintings, the
centre of them being “The Marriage of St. Catherine,” by Sir
Anthony Van Dyck.
Van Dyck was born at Antwerp, 1599. His father was a painter on
glass, and his mother obtained some celebrity for her ingenuity in
needlework. In 1615 he became a pupil of Rubens, and soon rivalled
his master. In 1516 he travelled into Italy. His first public work
on his return was the celebrated “ Saint Augustine in Ecstasy. Com-
missions flowed in upon him, and the principal public edifices in
Antwerp, Brussels and Ghent were embellished with the productions
of his pencil. One of the most admired of his performances at this
epoch is the “Christ Crucified between Two Thieves:” In 1631 he
settled in London, by the special invitation of the King (Charles L),
who bestowed on him the order of knighthood. He married the
daughter of Lord Gowrie, and, dying in 1641 in Black hryars, was
buried in St. Paul’s Cathedral with the pomp due to his extraordinary
abilities.
This example of the artist’s brush was imported into England in 1820,
and sold to George IV. for 2,400 guineas. It was exhibited in the
British Gallery in 1826 and 1827.
On the right and left of the last mentioned are two minor works of art.
Passing down the other side, the first to attract our attention will be
“ Memories of First Palm Sunday, by Edith Courtauld.
“Palms strewn in joy are gathered now in tears.”
This is followed by “Rachael Going to the Well,” by Frederick
Good all, R.A.
“Frederick Goodall was born in London, September 17, 1822. He
commenced his artistic studies at the age of thirteen, under the direc-
tionof his father, Mr. Edward Goolall, the emigent engraver. At
the age of fourteen, he gained the Iris medal of the Society of Arts
for a drawing of Lambeth Palace. He then commenced his first oil-
picture, “ Finding the Dead Body of a Miner by Torchlight; ’ for
which the Society of Arts awarded him the large silver medal. In
1839, when but seventeen, Goodall exhibited his first picture at the


Academy “French Soldiers drinking in a Cabaret ” —a very clever
production. The “Tired Soldier” of 1842 was purchased by Mr,
Vernon, and may be now seen in the Vernon Gallery—a remarkable
picture for a youth of twenty, painted with a free hand and a keen
eye for reality and character. In 1852 he was elected an Associate
of the Academy, and in 1863 a Royal Academican.
“A Waterpool at Coleraine,” Victoria, by Louis Buvelot, is of much
importance.
M. BuvelCt is an artist who has made Victoria his home, and it is
unnecessary to refer to the position which he occupies in the small
artistic world which the thoughtful friendship of a few men of taste
has created in this city. He received his art education at Paris, in
the studio of Flers, and has contributed to our various exhibitions.
Among the best known of his paintings maybe mentioned “The
Woodspoint Road,” which obtained the Gold Medal at the Inter-
national Exhibition, in 1872-73- The “Waterpool near Coleraine”
was painted for the Exhibition of Objects of Art, which was held in
March, 1869, at the Great Hall of the Public Library. It was taken
from a sketch made on the spot in November, 1867, and was
purchased by the Committee of the National Gallery in 1871, -
After which “ Bunyan in Prison,” by G. F. Folingsby, will engage our
attention.
Bunyan, John, born at Elstow, near Bedford, in 1628, was indicted
and committed to Bedford gaol, November 12th, 1660, as a “ common
upholder of several unlawful meetings and conventicles; to the great
disturbance and distraction of the good subjects of this kingdom.”'
He had by his wife four children, one of whom, named Mary, was
blind. This daughter, he said, lay nearer his heart whilst he was in
prison than all the rest; and that the thought of her enduring
hardship would be almost sufficient to break his heart. He is here
represented with his daughter Mary by his side, preaching to his
fellow prisoners. He might have had his liberty if he would have
engaged not to preach any more ; but Bunyan was too sincere in his
purpose, and too deeply impressed with the reality of his call to the
work, to enter into any such engagement. He remained, in conse-
quence, a prisoner, as he expressed it, for conscience sake, till 1672.
“The Italian Brigands,”by M, Layraud, a fine work in the centre, will
not fail to occupy us for some moments, as to appreciate it requires
more than casual inspection.
“ This large and striking picture, which formed one of the principal
attractions of the French annexe in the International Exhibition of
1871, has received a variety of interpretations. It is generally sup-
posed to represent the Marquis of Lome and the Princess Louise as
captives to Brigands ! The male captive certainly happens to bear a
very considerable resemblance to the young Marquis. The painter
doubtless chose a fair-haired northern type for the victims in his
picture, as affording the strongest artistic contrast tothe swarthy, black-
haired, villancus and brutal aspect of their captors. The scene is laid in
a rocky defile, probably of the savage Abruzzi, the desolate haunt only
of the vulture and of worse creatures, who make a prey of the living
as well as the dead. A couple of mounted travellers have been way-
laid and captured, their attendants very likely killed, and here, to


this mountain fastness, they are brought to await the chance of then
being ransomed with some heavy pa> ment by relative or friend, or,
failing that, to be murdered and possibly mutilated. While a couple
of the crew guard their horses and rifle their baggage, the rest gather,
threatening and truculent, round the unfortunates, and the chief
with a revolver in one hand and a pen in the other, presents to the
male victim a paper with the hard terms of release for tim to sign on
pain of instant death.” —[lllustrated London News, September 16,18/1.)
Some considerable interest attaches to the biography of M. Layraud, the
young ‘•shepherd-painter.” as he is called, of this vigorous y and
admirably executed wo. k. Born of humble parents in the ullage of
Koche sur-le Buis, in the department of the Drome, a viliage
on a steep rock, he was hardly twelve when he was sen^ + .b irds
fields as a shepherd-boy. He learnt to net patr.dges and other birds,
of which he exactly imitated the cries and songs ; and during the
winter he tracked through the snow and snared martens and foxes
By the sale of his game, the skins of these animals, and two lamb.,
which represented his worldly substance, he realised 250 francs a
with this little fortune, which be regarded as inexhaustible he betco
himself to Marseilles. There the Council General of tdJHrome
seeing the promise of the young painter, with enlightened solicitude
votedasuS of 800f., afterwards raised to WOOL .with which he pro-
ceeded to Paris to prosecute his studies. Admitted gratuitously into
the ateliers of Robert-Fleury et Coignet, his progress was very rapid.
In 1863 he obtained the second grand pnx de Rome and the first on tne
following year. Six years were spent in the French Academy
Rome, and now the “ shepherd painter ” takes his place as one of the
most rising historical painters of the French school.
The next, after passing this, undoubtedly the finest in the Gallery, is
the “ Weald of Kent,” by Samuel Bough, A.B.S.A. Selected by
the Trustees.
The Weald of Kent is the name given to a wooded dial not,galled by
the Britons Coit Andred, and in Saxon, Andredsleaz, or Saltw, Andred,
the great wooded chase. In former times it was nothing but a wild
desert, the haunt of deer and swine, and is set down by Halstead and
other local historians, as being 120 miles in extent, commencing at
Winchelsea, in Sussex. Its present dimensions, however, are not so
large.
A remarkably realistic picture—“ Adam and Eve finding the dead body
of Abel,” by N. Carta, Professor of Painting in the Academy of ban
Lucca, at Borne; and “Arab Prisoners,” by J. E. Hodgson,,
selected by Mr. Alfred Taddy Thomson ; will be found.
The last work of importance is “ The Martyrdom of St. Sebastian.”
Painter unknown.
Saint Sebastian was a celebrated Christian Martyr cf the tt ' rd ceDtu J7‘
He is supposed to have been a native of Na.bonne, in France, ne
served as a captain in the Praetorian guard under Diocletian. Hav g
refused to abjure his faith, he was tied to a tree and pier
arrows, A.D. 288.
With which we terminate our tour of inspection.


THE
VICTORIAN INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION,
18 7 5.
The Victorian Intercolonial Exhibition was opened on Thursday,
September 2nd, at 12 o’clock. The ceremony was an imposing one.
The Great Hall, which had been the scene of many other like occasions,
was inconveniently filled with several thousands of season ticket
holders, and the invited guests ; and large crowds had gathered outside
the building to view the arrival of the Acting-Governor, Sir William
Stawell, his suite, and the military display made by our Victorian
Artillery Force. Sir Redmond Barry, the president of the Royal
Commission, together with the Commissioners, received His Excellency
at the Public Library gates, and conducted him to a dais erected in the
centre of the Hall. The members of the Ministry, the commissioners
of the Exhibition, the trustees of the Public Library, the Japanese
commissioners, the members of both Houses of Parliament, foreign
consuls, and officers of the staff and of the volunteer force, surrounded the
dais. The National Anthem having been played, Sir Redmond Barry
read an opening address, stating the objects of the Exhibition, and
including many interesting facts. To this His Excellency replied in
suitable terms, and then declared the Exhibition duly opened. Three
cheers were then given for the Queen, and three cheers for His
Excellency, and the ceremony concluded with the playing of “ Rule,
Britannia.”
FACTS, DATA, &c.
In th e following particulars we have availed ourselves freely of the
carefully prepared voluminous reports published by the respective daily
press of Melbourne; but in doing so we would be exercising scant justice
to th e proprietors, managers, and literary and mechanical staffs of those
newspapers if we did not acknowledge the spirited enterprise and skill


manifested in the preparation of the reports, regarding which it may
be safely affirmed that the work could not have been better or more
completely executed in any city in the world.
“ The present Exhibition is the fifth Victorian, and second Inter-
colonial Exhibition held in Melbourne. Considering the comparatively
short time that had elapsed since the exhibition of 1872, it was very
unlikely that another exhibition would have been in this colony
for several years, but when it became known that in 1876 there was to
be a great Industrial Exhibition in Philadelphia, in celebration of the
centennial anniversary of the independence of the United States, the
necessity of securing the adequate representation of the Australasian
colonies at it became at once apparent. This exhibition, it was announced,
would be international and universal, and would include a representation
cf all natural and artificial products, all arts and manufacture and
industries, all the varied results of human skill, thought, and imagina-
tion. Concerted action on the part of the colonies was felt to be
essential, if they wished to make an adequate display of their varied
resources. All that one colony could contribute would occupy but
small space in a centenary exhibition which is to cover 50 square acres
cf floor space, but an Australian court would assume dimensions that
would command attention, while it would comprise so varied a collec-
tion of valuable products and manufactures as would compel admira-
tion. Early in September, 1874, commissioners were appointed to
make preliminary inquiries, with the view of ascertaining whether
united action should be taken by all the Australian colonies, and they
unanimously arrived at the conclusion that, to secure an effect creditable
to the colonies, they must act in concert, and that it was indispensable
that a preliminary exhibition should be held in order that the objects
to be tranmitted to Philadelphia should be compared and the best of
their kinds selected. For the convenience of concentration and of ship-
ment, they recommended that the exhibition should be held at Mel-
bourne. Letters were addressed to the Governors of Hong Kong,
Manilla, New Caledonia, and Fiji—of Java, Batavia, Singapore, Ceylon,
Reunion, Mauritius, and the Cape of Good Hope, explaining the
advantages likely to arise by assembling at Melbourne examples
of the natural products of so many different z mes of latitude, but
unfortunately the limited time available for the collection of exhibits
has prevented most of these colonies from contributing. On December
23, 1874, a Royal Commission was appointed, and Mr. G. C. Levey
was appointed secretary. He had experience with the Victorian Exhi-
bition of 1872, and subsequently at the London International and
Vienna Exhibitions of 1873. The duties of the commissioners were
to take measures to secure the effectual representation of the arts, manu-
factures, products, scientific inventions, and new discoveries of Victoria
at Philadelphia, and to arrange for a preliminary exhibition in Mel-
bourne, to which all the British, French, and Dutch possessions in


Australasia and the neighboring islands were invited to exhibit. At
first it seemed probable that some of the colonies would refuse to be
represented at the preliminary exhibition, on the ground that the
exhibition, if held at all, should be opened at Sydney, as Mr. J.
Joubert, the secretary of the Agricultural Society of New South Wales,
had been the first to propose the union of the colonies at Philadelphia,
Owing, however, to political reasons, the New South Wales Govern-
ment neglected to take any steps to carry the suggestion into effect.
“ Happily, all difficulties were eventually removed, and New South
Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, and Western Australia agreed to-
send contributions. It is to be regretted that the Queensland and
New Zealand Governments refused to grant any assistance to persons
who were desirous of Exhibiting at Melbourne, and the consequence is
that the resources of these colonies will be quite unrepresented. The
Government of Western Australia also neglected to provide funds for
representing that colony at Melbourne and Philadelphia, but some few
exhibits have been received from private persons. It was believed
that His Majesty the King of Siam would contribute an interesting
collection, but the exhibits have not arrived. It was also expected,
from advices received, that Fiji, Hawaii, and Netherlands-India would
be represented, but various reasons have operated to prevent their
sending contributions. It is very satisfactory that Japan should have
forwarded such a large and interesting collection, and that officials of
high rank in the Government should have been accredited to act as
commissioners here. There names are Haruo Sokata and M. Hashi-
moto. They have both visited Europe, and the former was attached
to the Japanese Commission at the Vienna Exhibition of 1873.
They are accompanied by two other officials, M. Funaki and K.
Eda, who are connected with' the Agricultural Department of
Japan, and whose mission here is to collect information relative to
agricultural pursuits, the process of sheep breeding, and the method of
settlement on the lands. The most suitable place in Melbourne for a
large Exhibition is undoubtedly the Great Hall of the Public Library
and the numerous buildings attached to it. It was here the Exhibitions
of 1866 and 1872 were held, and the Trustees of the Public Library
accordingly willingly acceded to the wish of the commissioners to
secure these buildings for a similar purpose on the present occasion. It
was found necessary to increase the accommodation, so a new building,
100 ft. by 60 ft., was erected on the unoccupied ground fronting
Latrobe street. It is a substantially built iron and wood structure.
At the termination of the Exhibition it will revert to the trustees of
the Public Library, and will be utilised as a theatre for the pupils in the
scientific schools. The cost was nearly 20007. About another 10007,
has been sgent by the commissioners in re-decorating the Great Hall
and other buildings placed at their disposal. The remaining 30007. of
the Parliamentary vote has been spent in conducting the general
business of the Exhibition. It is anticipated that the expense of the


Philadelphia Exhibition will amount to about 4000£. more. The space
provided for exhibits amounts altogether to 78,000 ft., more than
twice as much as was occupied in 1872, and considerably in excess of
that required for the Intercolonial Exhibition of 1860. The number
of exhibits is, moreover, very much larger than on any previous
occasion.
STATISTICS OF VICTORIA.
“As the exhibits are of a nature to give great prominence to the
■manufacturing industries of Victoria, it may be well to mention some
of the information recently collected in reference to them by the
statistical authorities of the colony. It appears that up to March 31
of the present year there were in operation in Victoria 2281 manufac-
tories and works. Of these 161 were grain-mills, employing 749
hands; 107 were breweries, employing 925 hands; 172 stone quarries,
employing 1009 hands; and 296 brickyards and potteries, employing
1271 hands. The quantity of grain operated on during the year was
5,371,866 bushels of wheat, and 233,150 bushels of other grain. The
flour made was 114,929 tons, and the value of the machinery and
plant was £224,650; of the land occupied, £58,388; and of the
buildings used, £206,625. The beer brewed during the year was
13,653,531 gallons; the value of the machinery and plant employed,
£159,313; land occupied, £68,846; and of buildings used about,
£211,784. The value of stone raised during the year was £81,338.
The number of bricks made during the year was 83,337,000, valued at
£164,266, and of pottery, £24,802. The machinery employed was
worth £45,785; of the land occupied, £52,251; of the buildings
used, £53,858. In addition to these industries there were 1545
manufactories and works in operation, employing in the aggregate
20,442 males, and 4649 females, employing machinery valued at
£3,330,363, occupying land valued at £798,595, and buildings valued
at £1,591,362.
“These 1545 manufactories and works were classified as follows:
16 account-book manufacturers and manufacturing stationers, 30 steam
printing establishments, 1 organ building establishment, 9 pianoforte
manufactories, 44 agricultural implement manufactories, 1 bellows
manufactory, 4 cutlery works, 46 engine machine munufactories, I
instruments of precision manufactory, 96 coach and waggon, &c.,
manufactories, 16 saddle and harness manufactories, 4 saddletree, &c.,
manufactories, 13 ship and boat builders, 1 floating dock, 2 graving
docks, 5 patent slips, 5 bedding manufactories, 5 chemical works, 16
dye works, 4 essential oil manufactories, 1 fuse manufactory, 7 ink
and blacking manufactories, 1 match (vesta) manufactory, 4 powder
(blasting) manufactories, 5 salt works, 1 tar distilling and asphalte
works, 6 woollen material and cloth manufactories, 42 boot factories,
43 clothing factories, 2 fur manufactories, 14 hat and cap manufac-


tones, 4 oilskin waterproof clothing manufactories, 1 jute manufactory,
1 oilcloth manufactory, 15 rope and twine works, 7 cheese factories,
21 meat-curing establishments, 8 biscuit manufactories, 6 confectionery
works, 8 jam manufactories, 1 macaroni works, 3 maizena, oatmeal, and
starch manufactories, 1 rice-mill, 123 aerated waters, gingerbeer, liqueur,
&c., works, 10 coffee, chocolate and spice works, 1 chicory mill, 4
distilleries, 18 malt-houses, 3 sauce and pickle manufactories, 2 sugar
refineries, 12 tobacco, cigar, and snuff manufactories, 3 vinegar works,
25 boiling-down establishments, 14 bone and manure manufactories,
6 brush manufactories, 3 curled hair manufactories, 2 catgut manufac-
tories, 47 fellmongers and woolwashing establishments, 2 flock manu-
factories, 9 glue and oil manufactories, 1 morocco and fancy leather
manufactory, 43 soap, candle, and tallow works ; 87 tanneries, 4 whip
manufactories, 5 basket manufactories, 6 blind manufactories, 1 broom
manufactory, 185 chaff cutting and corn crushing works, 14 cooperage
works, 3 earth-closet manufactories, 4 fancy-box manufactories, 1 last
manufactory, 172 moulding, framing, turning, and sawmills; 1 myall
pipe manufactory, 1 paint and varnish manufactory, 1 paper manufac-
tory, 5 paper bag manufactories, 14 gas works, 2 cement (patent)
manufactories, 3 glass manufactories, 2 glass works, 27 limekilns, 17
marbleworks, 3 stone breaking works, 6 stone-sawing and polishing
works, 1 ice manufactory, 5 water-works, 4 antimony smelting works,
1 bell foundry, 2 electroplate works, 1 fireproof-safe manufactory, 9
manufactoring goldsmiths and jewellers, 24 iron and tin works, 65
iron, brass, and copper foundries; 2 lead works, 2 tin smelting works,
3 wire-working establishments. The manufacturing stationers em-
ployed 446 males and 146 females; steam printing establishments,
1155 males and 12 females; agricultural implement manufactories,
666 males; engine machine manufactories, 1249 males; coach and
waggon manufactories, 1129 males, and 11 females; saddle and
harness manufactories, 243 males; ship and boat builders, 54 males;
woollen and cloth manufactories, 350 males and 162 females; boot
manufactories, 1540 males, 269 females; clothing factories, 589 males,
3308 females; hat and cap manufactories, 89 males and 66 females;
the jute manufactory, 40 males and 50 females; rope and twine works,
207 males ; meat-curing establishments, 407 males; biscuit manufac-
tories, 236 males and 13 females; confectionery works, 145 males and
13 females; aerated waters, &c., works, 533 males and 35 females;
sugar refineries, 270 males; tobacco and cigar manufactories, 403 males
and 13 females; fellmongers and woolwashing establishments, 904
males; soap and candle works, 354 males and 24 females; tanneries,
947 males and 36 females; chaff cutting and corn crushing works, 568
males and 30 females; moulding, framing, turning, and saw mills,
2788 males and 12 females; iron and tin works, 459 males; iron,
brass, and copper foundries, 1400 males. The capital invested in the
machinery and plant of the works was as follows:—Iron, brass, and
copper foundries, £109,952; waterworks, £1,472,500; moulding,


framing, turning, and sawmills, £182,140; soap and candle works,
£56,071; tanneries, £44,974; sugar refineries, £80,000; woollen and
cloth manufactories, £97,000; boot factories, £14,608; meat-preserving
establishments, £22,325; clothing factories, £12,513; engine machine
manufactories, £135,709 ; agricultural implement manufactories,
£27,583. These statistics show that since last Exhibition the number
of manufactories has increased by 372, and employed 8223 more
persons than in 1872.” —\The Argus.]
“ In a country like Victoria its mineral produce is of primary impor-
tance. It was the discovery of gold that gave the great impetus in
the first instance to population, and subsequently to all the essentials
which go to build up or establish a nation. The total area of the
auriferous and quartz ground actually opened up is 1063 square miles,
and the number of distinct quartz reefs known to be auriferous is 3398.
From the commencement of the publication of statistics relative to tEe
yield of gold, up to the 31st of December, 1874, the amount of vein
quartz crushed has been 11,441,638 tons 6 cwt.; the yield of gold
therefrom has been 6,477,640 oz. 6 dwt., or an average of 11 dwt.
6.49 gr. per ton. During the eleven years ending 31st December,
1874, the quantities of tailings, mullock, &c., treated were 1,663,033 tons,
which yielded 299,116 oz. 4 dwt. 2 gr. of gold, or an average of 3 dwt.
14,33 gr, per ton. During the six years ending the 31st December,
1874, the quantities of pyrites, blanketings, &c., operated on were
25,445 tons 4 cwt., yielding 70,551 oz. 0 dwt. 14 gr,, or an average of
2 oz. 15 dwt. 10,88 gr. per ton. Statistics show that during the past
two years and nine months 3,351,467 tons 7 cwt. of washdirt yielded
214,767 oz 10 dwt, 12 gr. of gold, or an average of 1 dwt. 6.76 gr.
per ton. The yield of gold in the year 1874, from 967,069 tons 9
cwt. of quartz was 573,220 oz. 17.5 dwts., or an average of 11 dwt.
20.21 gr.; from 69,431 tons of quartz tailings and mullock the yield
was 6866 ozr 11 dwt, 10 gr., or an average of 2 oz. 16 dwt, 7.82 gr.
per ton; from 6725 tons of pyrites and blanketings the yield was
18,941 oz. 14 dwt. 13 gr., or an average of 2 oz. 16 dwt. 7.82 gr. per
ton. The number of miners employed in Victoria on the 31st
December, 1874, was 45,151, of whom 32,971 were Europeans, and
12,180 Chinese. The number of quartz miners was 14,473, and the
number of alluvial miners was 30,678. During the past nine years
there has been an increase of 33,523 in the number of persons engaged
in farming, manufactories, &c., and there has during the same period
been a decrease of 27,065 in the number of gold miners. The total
gold exported and minted during the year 1874 amounted to 1,155,971
oz. 19 dwt,, and the value of this quantity divided amongst the mean
number of miners employed throughout the year will give an average
of £99 Bs. 3.07 d. per man. There has been no higher average than
this during the past eighteen years, except in 1868, when the quantity
of gold exported was 1,657,498 oz., and the average per man for the
year was £lO4 18s. 8.75 d. Many of the quartz mines are now woiked


at great depths; and there is, as far as can be gathered from the
returns, no diminution in the yield of gold in the deeper levels. There
is one shaft at Stawell, Magdala mine, over 1600 feet in depth, one
1420 feet, one 1260, and two more than 1000 feet in depth.
« The total amount of silver raised in Victoria from ore is 12,468 oz.,
of which 180 oz. were raised in 1874. The total quantity of silver
that has been obtained in Victoria is 36,625 oz. 15 dwt., of which 760
oz. was raised in 1874, and 11,146 oz. was extracted at the Mint. The
total export of silver ore has been 10 oz 6 dwt,, and the total export of
silver 16,368 oz. 6 dwt. The largest yield of silver during 1874 from
one mine is 276 oz., representing a value of £69. This was obtained
at Wilson’s-hill in the St. Arnaud district. The next large yield was
from Crysolite-hill, St. Arnaud, and was 68 oz., representing a value
° f “isince the discovery of gold up to the 31st December, 1874, about
182 tons of iron ore have been raised in Victoria, of which 130 tons
were raised during the year 1874. Samples have been received, for
analysis of brown iron from Daylesford, brown ironstone from
Traralgon Creek, Gippsland, and from Lake Tyers, Gippsland, mixed
hematite and brown iron ore from Wilson’s Promontory, and micaceous
iron ore from the Grampian Mountains. These ores contain from 26
to 72 per cent, of iron. It is estimated that over 50,000 tons could
be easily obtained for smelting. As yet no sufficient quantity of
Victorian iron has been smelted to allow of the metal being used for
manufacturing purposes. During 1874 the number of men engaged
in raining for iron was 27. One lease to mine for iron was in force on
31st September, 1874, extending over an area of about 46 acres, and
another over an area of 320 acres. About 30 tons of red ochreous
clay have, since March, 1874, been raised near Bendigo.
“Previously to the 31st of December, 1873, about 1255 tons of
copper ore were raised in Victoria, and up to the same date 31 tons
10 cwt. were smelted, which at 11 21. per ton would give 351K
About 70 tons of regulus brought 19692.
“ The value of the tin ore raised up to the end of 1874 was estimated
at 325 847 Z. During 1874, 290 tons 2 cwt. of black sand, valued at
16 3331, were raised, of which 112 tons were exported, 152 tons were
smelted ’in the colony, of which 49 tons 2 cwt. were shipped to
England, and 103 tons 2 cwt. were consumed in Victoria. The
smelting’ of Victorian tin is confined to the Ovens district, the prin-
cipal smelters being the Wellington Company, El Dorado ; W G.
Hensley, Reed’s Creek; Ah Moy, Reed’s Creek, and Tien Sing. One
Melbourne firm of tinsmiths used during 1874 about 22 tons of
Victorian tin in the manufacture of solder, which at the average price
paid per lb. represents an outlay of 2420 1. ; another firm consumed
about 20 tons, for which they paid from 9d. to Is. per lb. The El
Dorado sand yields 73 per cent, of tin, the Ovens sand 30 to 71 per
cent., and the Koetong sand 65 to 72 per cent


“ Up to the end of 1874, the quantity of lead ore raised in Victoria
amounted to 518 tons, representing a money value of 4200 Z., of which
111 tons, valued at 1110 Z., were raised during 1873. Up to the end
of December, 1874, about 67 tons of lead ore have been exported.
Experiments in smelting have not been successful. Early in 1874 a
trial smelting of two tons of lead from Murrindal, Gippsland, was
made in Melbourne, and a yield of 60 per cent, of lead was obtained,
the metal being valued at 2 21. 10s. per ton.
“ The total amount of antimony ore that has been raised in the
colony is 11,198 tons 4 cwt. 3 qrs. 91b., representing a value of
80,870 Z. Of this quantity 588 tons, valued at 4707 Z., were raised
during the year 1874. There are four antimony smelting works in
Victoria, one of which employs steam power. The number of hands
employed is 64. The value of the plant is estimated at 3900 Z., that
of the land 1150 Z., and that of the buildings 2900 Z. The localities
in which the ore is principally raised are Ringwood and Costerfield,
“ ( 1 A sample of nearly pure bismuth from Snowy Creek, Gippsland,
was received for analysis in 1874. The outer portions of the sample
were found to contain carbonate and oxide of bismuth, with ferrugin-
ous clay. It contained no gold or silver. One license to search for
bismuth over an area of 320 acres was issued during the year 1874.
“ The total quantity of coal raised in Victoria is 5456 tons 8 cwt.,
valued at 8233 1. During 1874 about 2909 tons were raised, valued
at 4363* Z. Of this amount 2879 tons were raised in the mine of the
Western Port Coal Mining Company, and nearly the whole of the
quantity raised was forwarded to Melbourne, and disposed of at
market prices. Five seams of coal, varying from 9 inches to 4 feet in
thickness, were opened on a lease at Rosedale, At Griffiths’ Point the
coal has not yet been reached, though the shaft has been sunk some
250 feet. In the mine of the Kilcunda Association, a shaft about
250 feet deep has penetrated through clay, blue sandstone, and small
riders of coal, half an inch to three inches in width.” —[The Aye.]
THE GRAND EXHIBITION AT PHILADELPHIA,
In connexion with which that of Melbourne is now being held, was
organised as part of a gigantic commemorative celebration of the
hundredth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence by the
United States of America. The United States Centennial Commission
entered zealously upon their labours, and the results of their overtures
to the civilised nations of the world soon showed that the enterprise
would be attended with all the success that was hoped for. The
buildings, five in number, are erected in Fairmount Park, Philadelphia,
which has an area of 4000 acres. The several structures comprise a
principal hall, an art gallery, and three chambers, for agriculture,
horticulture, and machinery respectively. The main hall is of gigantic
proportions. The ground plan is a long parallelogram, intersected


longitudinally by several broad paths, and transversely by narrower
ones, making compartments for special groups of exhibits. The hall
is 1880 ft. long and 464 ft. wide. At each of the four corners of the
hall a tower rises to the height of 75 ft., and in the centre there are
other towers 120 ft. in height. The art gallery is in the modern
renaissance style, and is built of granite, iron, brick, and glass. This
building is designed to remain as a permanent memorial of the
Exhibition. This structure has much more architectural beauty than
the main hall. The ground plan is 365 ft. long and 210 ft. wide. From
each side extend arcades 90 ft. long and 40 ft. high, which connect with
pavilions, having each a frontage of 45 ft. and 60 ft. high. The central
section is approached by a flight of 13 steps. From the centre of the
structure a tower arises, the walls of which are 85 ft. square, and are
surmounted by a dome of a unique design, constructed of glass and
iron, and rising to the height of 150 ft. from the ground. It terminates
with a colossal ball, on which stands the figure of Columbia, with out-
spread hands. At each corner of the base of the dome is a figure
typifying a quarter of the world. The inner cornice is surmounted by
a cornice with candelabras, and at each end of it is an allegorical
figure representing science and art. The iron doors are relieved by
bronze panels, having the coat-of-arms of all the states and territories,
and in the centre of the main frieze is the United States coat-of-arms.
The rear, or north front, is of the same general character as that to
the south, but has no arcades. Between the pavilions is a grand
balcony 275 ft. long and 45 ft. broad, and being 40 ft. from the ground
it overlooks the whole panorama of the park grounds. In the interior
are—a hall 82 ft. x6O ft., and 53 ft. high; a centre hall 83 ft. square
under the dome j and east and west galleries, each 98 ft. x 48 ft., and
35 ft. high. The centre hall and galleries form one grand hall, 287 ft.
long and 85 ft, wide, and will hold 8000 persons, being nearly twice
the dimensions of any other hall in the United States. Attached to
the galleries are smaller ones, each 89 ft. x 28 ft., which, with the
pavilion rooms form two side galleries 210 ft. long. A corridor 14 ft.
wide extends along the whole length of the north side of the centre
hall and main galleries, and opens into 13 rooms, designed for studios
and smaller exhibition rooms. All the galleries and the central hall are
lighted from above, and the pavilions and studios from the side, the
latter being designed especially for the exhibition of sculpture. The
cost of the art gallery will be defrayed by the State of Pennsylvania
and the city of Philadelphia jointly, the estimated amount being
1,199,873 dol. The Exhibition is to be opened on the 10th May,
1876,’and closed on the 10th November following.
“ Victoria sends wine, grain, skins, furs, woods, seeds, specimens of
natural history, leather, and many articles of local manufacture. The
Victorian Commissioners ship the goods and pay the expenses of the
exhibitors. The colony has thus an excellent opportunity of adver-
tising its varied capabilities.” —[The Argus^\


PAST VICTORIAN EXHIBITIONS.
The First Victorian Exhibition was opened with all due ceremonial by
Sir Charles Hotham, on the 18th of October, 1864. Victorian industries were
then in their infancy, and as an Exhibition this first attempt could scarcely be
called a success. The number of Exhibitors was 428. It was held in a wooden
and glass structure built for the occasion from the designs of Messrs. Merrett,
on the site of the present Mint, and remained open for two or three months.
The building was afterwards known as “The Exhibition Building,” and until
pulled down to make way for the Mint, was the scene of many festivities. Mr.
J. G. Knight was the secretary.
The Second Exhibition was held in 1861, preliminary to the London
International Exhibition of 1862. It was held in the old Exhibition Building,
to which, however, numerous additions had been made. The exhibitors
numbered 1703, and their exhibits were of a varied and interesting character,
and well displayed the resources of the colony. One of the most noticeable
features was a gilded obelisk, designed by Mr. J. G. Knight, the Secretary to
the Exhibition, representing the quantity of gold exported from Victoria
during the years from October Ist, 1851, to October Ist, 1861, equal in value
to £104,649,728. This Exhibition, which was very successful, remained open
for 10 weeks, closing on the 7ch of December, during which period it was
visited by 68,000 people, exclusive of season ticket holders, and some 10,000
school-children, who were admitted free.
The Third Melbourne Exhibition of Natural Products and Works of Art
was opened by His Excellency Sir John Henry Thomas Manners-Sutton, on
the 24th October, 1866, and was a magnificent undertaking in comparison with
those preceding it. The buildings used for this exhibition consisted of the
great hall, the rotunda and side courts, and the iron annexe leading into
Bussell street. The refreshment room was beneath the picture gallery. In
this exhibition separate courts were allotted to New South Wales, South Aus-
trallia, Tasmania, New Zealand, Western Australia, New Caledonia, and
Batavia. Very few exhibits were received from one or two of these latter
places, however. This Exhibition was a great success, a result to which the
musical performances given both in the afternoons and the evenings during the
time it remained open contributed not a little. Mr. Knight was again the
Secretary.
The Fourth Exhibition was opened by His Excellency Sir John Henry
Thomas Manners-Sutton, on the 6th of November, 1872, preliminary to the
London International Exhibition of 1873. It remained open for 64 days,
closing on the 16th January, 1873. During this period it was visited by
160,746 persons. This Exhibition was also a great success, and the musical
attractions were again introduced. The colonies were well represented at the
London International Exhibition of 1873, nearly 700 exhibits being forwarded.
This Exhibition was the last one held before that for-which this “ Guide ” is
issued, particulars respecting which have been already given. Mr. G. C. Levey
was the Secretary to the fourth exhibition,


A FEW HINTS TO COUNTRY VISITORS
TO THE EXHIBITION.
PLACES WORTH
Acclimatisation Society’s Grounds,
Royal Park—Open daily from sunrise
to sunset. Sundays, from 1 p.m.
Alfred Graving Dock, Williamstown.
Alfred Hospital, Commercial Rd., near
St, Kilda.
Benevolent Asylum, Victoria street w.
Botanic Gardens. —Daily from sunrise
to sunset. Sundays, from 1 p.m.
Burke and Wills’ Monument, Collins st.
Carlton Gardens. —Always open.
Deaf and Dumb Institution, St. Kilda
Road.—Open to visitors, 10.30 to 11.30
a.m,; 2to 3 p.m,, Fridays, Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays excepted.
Fitzroy Gardens. —Always open.
Flagstaff Gardens. —Always open.
Government House (nearly completed),
Botanical reserve.
Horticultural Gardens, Survey Pad-
dock.—Daily from sunrise to sunset.
Immigrants’ Home, Princes’ Bridge.
Industrial Schools, Princes’ Bridge.—
Orders to inspect obtainable at Indus-
trial Schools Office, King street.
Melbourne Hospital, Swanston street.
Admission to view the arrangements
at any time.
Melbourne Cemetery.—Daily from sun-
rise to sunset. Sundays from 2 p.m.
As most of these places are
some
town, we append the following list of
VISITING.
Melbourne Athenaeum, Collins st. east.
—Strangers can be introduced by
members to privilege of reading-room
for one month.
Melbourne Cricket Club Ground, Yarra
Park. Matches every Saturday
throughout the season.
Melbourne Orphan Asylum, Emerald
Hill.
National Museum, at the University.—
Daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Observatory and Monster Telescope.
—Reserve east of St. Kilda road.
Visiting day, Wednesday, from 2 to 4.
Parliament Houses, Spring street.—
Strangers are admitted to view the
Chambers between 10 a.m and 4 p.m.,
or when the House is not sitting.
Public Library, Museum, and National
Gallery of Victoria, Swanston street.
—The Library is open daily from 10
a.m. to 10 p.m.; Gallery and Museum,
12 to 4 in Winter, 1 to 5 in Summer.
Royal Mint, William st. —Viewed upon
an order from the Deputy Master-
Town Hall, Swanston street.
“The Cerberus” and “The Nelson,”
in Hobson’s Bay.
University Gardens.—Daily, from sun-
rise to sunset. Sundays, from 1 p.m
distance from the centre of the
MELBOURNE CARRIAGE AND CAB FARES.
By the Day— For any twelve hours between 5 a.m. and 10 p.m.—carriage
£3 ; cab, £1 10s. 6 ’
By the Hour— First hour, carriage, 65.; cab, 3s, ; subsequently, ss. and 2s.
6d. One-half extra between 10 p.m. and 5 a.m.
By Distance —Not exceeding a mile, carriage (for one or two persons), 25.;
cab, Is. For three or more, carriage, 45.; cab, 2s. For every half-mile
beyond, one-half the rate per mile. Half-fare back when over two
miles from the stand.
For Calling off the Stand, and not further employing, carriage 25.; cab, Is.
For Omnibuses and Omnibus Cabs— Between 6 a.m. and 7 p.m., 3d. per mile;
between 7 and 10 p.m., 4d. per mile; between 10 p.m and 6 a.m., 6d.'
per mile.
For Detention —Every fifteen minutes (except for the purpose of returning)
carriage, Is. 6d.; cab, Is.
T he driver of every hackney carriage is bound to produce on demand a copy
of the Fares as fixed by the City Council, and also to have a copy fixed
conspicuously inside his carriage.


A. E. RiCHBOSB,
(Late WAKLEY) ,
/ -t
97 & 99 BOURKE STREET EAST,
Respectfully requests the atte7ition of
visitors to the Exhibition to his exhibits:
Millinery ... No. 1886 and 1887
Silk Costume ... No. 1828
Jacket and Apron ... No. 1829
Novelties of the very Newest
STYLES opening daily at the above
address , direct from London and
Paris.


& 35 Latrobe sw
BOWDEN BBOTHEB-Se
MANUFACTURERS of
Cm anfr |nmfom,
other Lamps.
Preserving
Tins for
Meat, Fruit,
Kettles for
Toilet Ware.
Price Lists on Application.
Baths.
Buckets.
Washing
Tubs.
Portable
Ovens.
Receptacles
for Closets.
Ventilators
for Churches,
Schools,
Public
Buildings,
&c.
74 LITTLEoCOLLINS STREET, near Russell street,
Galvanising' Works, 35 Latrobe street, Melbourne.
RELIANCE WORKS.
NUTTING- & LEEK,
15 LITTLE COLLINS ST. BAST,
SI vim & piirtt movitcvs*
MANUFACTURERS OF
Plunge, Pillar, and Shower Baths with Force Pumps. Hip and Sitz Baths. Sponging and
Children’s Baths. Portable Shower Baths and Toilet Sets, in variety, special patterns.
Gas Stoves, with Cooking Utensils. Outside Lamps, all descriptions.
Tea, Coffee, and Wine Heaters, in Brass, Copper, and Block Tin,
iIAMPEBS AXI) PREFERS.
Perforated Brass, Tin, Zinc, and Copper, in a variety of ornamental patterns.
ARTISTIC JAPANNERS AND WHOLESALE MANUFACTURERS.
JOHN ZEVENBOOM,
WHOLESALE
||aint mib (Sratral liras li Hlamtfadurtr,
AND
BRISTLE MERCHANT.
Warehouse—223 Elizabeth st. Factory—l 2 a’Beckett st.


PAPYKI
written
blotting pat
be printed frc
press.
The Papyrograpu, v -_
the principal public offices, inclhcux.^
Lands, Customs, Volunteer, &c., and is ..
Companies, and other large institutions.
The Papyrograph is a time and money savo,
be struck off in a comparatively short time, at the cot ,• ,
For circulars, issuing notices of meetings of public bodies, for schoo. examination papers,
for multiplying architectural and engineering plans and designs, for amusement on board ship,
for amateur journalism, and for library use, the Papyrograph may be employed with the
greatest advantage. . ~ ■ ‘ ... .
The Papjrograph may be seen daily in operation at the Exhibition, and at the offices of
ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN PRESS AGENCY,
49 Collins Street West, Melbourne.
Established 1857.
MR. G. KNIGHT, MEDICAL CALVANIST,
159 RUSSELL STREET
(Between Little Bourke and Lonsdale streets),
MELBOURNE,
Has On Sale and For Hire, from lOs.
KNIGHT’S LIFE-PROLONGING APPARATUS
Everyone their own physician. Preserve your life as though you were
eoincr to live for ever; and live in the vigor of man, although you may die
to-morrow. Then purchase one of Mr. Knight’s Galvanism and Magnetism
Apparatus, which is specially constructed, and is strongly recommended_ by
the medical profession as a curative agent for all Nervous Diseases, Physical
and Generative Debility, Rheumatism, Paralysis, Lumbago, bciatica, and all
the forms of Nervous Pains, &c., &c. ......
N B —Upwards of 200 of these Apparatus I have sold and supplied to the public this year,
leaving the rest of nervous sufferers to judge for themselves how much good they are doing, and
my sale fo' the last fourteen years is over 2000, and are sent to all parts of the Australian
colonies, ‘indeed, the extraordinary rapidity with which this instrument is conquering the
prejudices and captivating the convictions of the most truly learned and intellectual members
of the medical profession and laymen generally seems to warrant the tnuniphant rondusion
that Galvanism and Magnetism will speedily become the only system of medication that will he
tolerated by an enlightened people-a system at once superseding the employment of all
destructive drugs, and the mutilations and horrors that have so long prevailed in the practice of
medicine and surgery throughout the world.
Price List—£l 10s., £2, £3 10s., £4 10s., £5 ss.
N.B.—All machines bought of Mr. G. Knight are guaranteed to work well for twelve months.
All kinds of Machines Bought or Exchanged. Dealer in all kinds of scientific
apparatus. Magic Lanterns, &c.
T E B IVI S C -A. Si IT .
Orders from the country or abroad, by a remittance for payment in Melbourne, will receive
immediate and careful attention. Post-office orders to be made payable to George Knight, at
the chief office ; or stamps, if in the colony of Victoria ; cash or P.O, order from all other parts.
Batteries of all kinds on Sale. Trade Supplied. Repairs done,
Buv vour Machines of the Maker, and if anything gets out of order you will have it made good
Free of Charge.


imi
tjiiß,
, nxed, and repaired.
" EXHIBITED IN MACHINERY ROOM:
Riddle’s Patent Gas Rath, in operation.
Improved Patent Reflectors, for Gas and Kerosene.
Reflecting 1 Lamps, for Gas or Kerosene.
ESTABLISHED 1882.
Comnttwial, gtosit, & ®£mtal
PRINTER,
AND MANUFACTURER OF
MEDICAL GUMMED LABELS,
©8 3BL3ESMB3BTEE MLBOTMBo
A large variety of Chemists’ Labels kept in stock.
Estimates promptly forwarded for every description
of work, from a card to a poster, and from
a circular to a newspaper.
W. H. Williams is prepared to su
NEWSPAPERS to districts where none ,
cessful American and English principle), by
newspaper can be issued to subscribers at a
inferior one printed altogether on the spot, a
for plant, etc. SUPPLEMENTS supplied
weekly, fortnightly, or monthly (including A
NATIONAL
I IBKARV OF AUSIRAi 1 *


I
hatJonaT
"rJsltil;


fi
0
Ph
•<1
hi
<
0
T. F. CHUCK, for Excellence in PHOTOGRAPHY.
THE PRINCIPAL FURNITURE WAREHOUSE.
40 & 42 COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE,
IMPORTERS & MANUFACTURERS OF FURNITURE,
Carpet Warehousemen, Decorators, and Artistic Designers of the
LATEST LONDON AND PARIS NOVELTIES,
SUITED TO EVERY CLASS OF HOUSEHOLD.
THE CHEAPEhT HOUSE XJN THE TRADE.
a
0
*1
>
Sideboards
itrnTnnnr
Carpets
Wilton, Brussels,
Tapestry, and
Dutch.
Book Cases ||i|
SMB?
Wardrobes ffi||
yieff j
Pier Glasses |
i|; I "fj (pal ' m
lli U If fl [ ] I
Pi 1 Unjl L
. IHJ _ p
pl'JL! J||lL
Floor Cloths
r
a
0
>
U
•
Occasional Chairs
Curtains,
In Lace, Leno,
Net, Satin, Silk
and Rep
1 III
Lo# Tables | 1
Chiffonieres f
- - - - hi J
ill! * FURNITURE. Tfw
1, Waaaa«g5&5
H
inOC((Ei.C-yfc~;
Parisian Cabinets sipi
Bedding
Davenports
AND
Canterburies ■ DB
Bedroom Suites
DI
Iron and Brass
Bedsteads 0A
„ BE
Wholesale and
Wet all.
-AWINGROOM SUITES
IN SATIN,
SILK REP,
CRETONNE.
NINGBOOM SUITES
IN MOROCCO,
Roan leather,
HAIR CLOTH,
K LIBRARY SUITES
DROOM SUITES
IN HUON PINE,
MAHOGANY,
CEDAR,
Blankets
Sheetings
Towelling
Table Linen
Wholesale and
Wetail.
Price Lists on Application.
An IMMENSE STOCK to select from at most REASONABLE TERMS.
ORDERS BY POST PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
40 & 42 Collins Street East, Melbourne.
AWARDED PRIHCE OF WALES’ MEDAL, LONDON EXHIBITION, 1874.
