

Guide
for Building & Rigging the
Vee-Jay One-design Boat
1952


build a better
Vee-Jay
with
GIANT
RESWOOD
★No Scarf Joints ★ Guaranteed Waterproof
Build your new boat with Giant Reswood, the amazing
plywood that was extensively used in landing barges
and Army ducks during the war. Giant Reswood was
a sensational wartime success, because it offers two
big advantages.
ONE—Giant Reswood is supplied in one large sheet
without scarf joints, and therefore without weaknesses.
TWO—Giant Reswood is completely waterproof. Each
sheet goes through the Boiling Water Test before
delivery.
AVAILABLE IN THE SIZES YOU WANT
As well as standard 7' x 3'—6' x 3' Reswood sheets
SMALLER SIZES ON REQUEST
Inquire at your local hardware store or direct
A PRODUCT OF RALPH SYMONDS LTD.
Morley Avenue, Rosebery


Ho.
Length.
Breadth. Thic\ness. Material. Remar\s.
Keel
1
12ft.
4in.
lin.
Spotted Gum
D.A.R.
Frames
4
10ft.
2in.
|in.
Pacific Maple or
Deck Beams
2
10ft.
2Jin.
lin.
Col. Pine
Pacific Maple or
99
Building Frame
2
12ft.
6in.
l^in.
Col. Pine
Oregon
Off saw
1
6ft.
6in.
l|in.
99
Build. Fr. Strut
1
3ft. 7in.
3in.
2in.
Hardwood
D.A.R.
Chines
2
12ft.
llin.
iin.
Oregon or
Stringers
2
12ft.
lin.
lin.
Pacific Maple
Oregon or
”
Frame Bracing
2
12ft.
lin.
iin.
Pacific Maple
»
Stem
1
1ft. 9in.
6in.
2in.
Oregon
99
Tuck
Sides
Bottom
Deck
Cockpit
Centreboard Case
Deadwood 1
6ft.
6in.
l^in.
3/16in. Waterproof
Plywood
Clear Oregon Off Saw
Chafing Keel
.1
12ft.
Ijin.
lin.
Spotted Gum
D.A.R.
Stiffener
1
3ft. 3in.
4in.
lin.
Pacific Maple
Gunwhales
2
12ft.
lin.
lin.
Spotted Gum
Rudder
I
3ft.
18in.
lin.
Pac. Maple, Pine
Tiller
1
3 ft.
2in.
lin.
or Plywood
Spotted Gum
99
Bumpkin
1
5ft.
3in.
2in.
Oregon
D.A.R.
Mast
1
17ft. 9in.
2£in.
2Jin.
Clear Oregon
Off Saw
or if Hollow
2
17ft. 9in.
2Jin.
liin.
99 99
D.A.R.
Boom
1
10ft.
2in.
2in.
>> 99
Off Saw
Spinnaker Pole
1
7ft. 6in.
Hin.
1 Jin.
„
NOTE: Dressed timber. All sizes shown
are after dressing (including ply).
GUIDE FOR BUILDING AND RIGGING THE VEE JAY
ONE DESIGN BOAT.
Schedule of Suggested Material Requirements.
Fastenings and Fittings.
Frames l|in. x 12 Copper Nails.
Chines and x 10 Brass countersunk head screws.
Stringers
Keel l£in. xlO „ „ „ >,
Centreboard Case llin. x 10 „ „ „ »
Ply Fastening iin. x 6 „ „ » >.
Sail Track to
Mast lin. x 7 „ „ „ >,
Deadwood 1 only 4iin. x lin. and 1 only Sin. x lin. bronze bolt and nut.


SHIP CHANDLERS & BOAT SUPPLIES SPECIALISTS
• SINCE 1863 •
%
Complete Stocks of
Paints Varnishes Painters' Accessories
Copper Roves Nails Sheathing, Etc.
Cunmetal & C.P. Ports Vents Pumps, Etc.
Small Tools & General Hardware
CALL IN - INSPECT OUR STOCKS
PAUL & CRAY PTY. LTD.
82-84 Sussex Sf., Sydney Tel. 8X2121 — l5 lines


Horse 1 only 30in. x gin. soft brass rod screwed Sin. both ends.
Rudder fittings.
Bumpkin bolt 4in. x gin. bronze bolt.
Cleats, sheaves, blocks, gooseneck and bobstay fittings.
Sail track for mast —14ft. of iin. “Marconi Track.”
RIGGING: Main and jib sheets 40 feet of lin. cotton rope.
Main and Jib Halyards 5/3 2in. dia. plow steel wire or |in.
cotton rope as required.
Shrouds and bobstay 5/32in. dia. plow steel wire.
SUNDRIES: 50 feet iin. dia. cotton lacing. 1 ball yacht marlin, whipping
twine and friction tape.
Before attempting to make a start with the job, first study the plan
carefully and become familiar with the type of boat you are about to build,
bearing in mind that it is to be built upside down. If possible, you should
go to the nearest Club sailing Vee Jays and inspect the already constructed
boats and seek advice from competent builders.
BUILDING FRAME: On to the two 12ft. lengths of 6in. x l£in mark off
the position of the frame slots as shown on the plan; then mark off the
depth of these slots; the shape of your boat will depend upon the accuracy
of these measurements, so check them carefully before commencing to cut
the slots. The ends should then be shaped, distance pieces cut and the
whole fastened together, taking care to keep everything square and true.
FRAMES: There is no restriction on the internal construction of the Vee
Jay boat, but the most satisfactory method has found to be framing, taking
care not to make the boat any heavier than is necessary.
Draw the shape of each frame on the floor, not forgetting to set back
to allow for the thickness of planking on sides and bottom; now cut the
frame timber to the various lengths and nail the deck and bottom pieces
temporarily in their correct position along these lines, making a welhfitting
butt joint in the centre of the two bottom pieces. (Do not mind if the
ends overlap; these can be trimmed off after the frame is complete.) Put
a dab of glue on these pieces where the side pieces and joining gussett will
lie, and then tack these down in position. When the glue is properly set
the holes for the rivets may be drilled without moving the frames, care being
taken that no rivets are put in where the chine and stringer notches
are to be cut. The frame may now be taken from the floor and the rivets
hammered tight. Now mark off and cut the notches for chines, stringers
and keel, also for the stiffener batten on the deck beams of frames No. 1,
2,3, and 4. It is advisable to leave the chine, stringer and keel notches
in frames Nos. 1,2, and 3 until they are set up in the building frame, as
you will then be able to get them to the proper angle.
ERECTING FRAMES: Place each frame in its respective slot on the
building frame (deck beam in slot), taking care that all centres are in line
and midway between the two planks, and secure with nails or screws so
that they may be taken out when the boat is ready to lift off the building
frame. The tuck frame should also be secured to the building frame with
a couple of temporary nails.
STEM: Cut stem to shape shown on plan and bolt in position on the
building frame, taking care that you will be able to get the bolt out again
when the sides have been put on.
KEEL: Fit keel to stem, then spring down and tie to tuck, making sure
that the bottom of all slots are a good snug fit. Two brass screws
to each frame.


s
£ -
•' Mali
iv -rf
SO MUCH
DEPENDS
ON THE
SAILS
P. CO/.5 S CO.
Makers of Fine Sails
169 DARLING ST.
BALMAIN
WB 3393


The builder should now check the spring of his boat by taking a
vertical line up from the bottom of the keel at the tuck siin., and taking
a taut line forward so that it just touches the centre of the keel. The
vertical measurement at the stern should be siin. Care should be taken
not to let these measurements fall below those stated, since it will affect
the sailing qualities of your boat. On the other hand, it must not be more
than the stated tolerances or your boat will not be acceptable for registration.
CHINES: Bend the chines into their position around the frames, seeing
that all notches are properly fitted. Fit to stem as in plan and pull the
other ends in to the tuck with rope or a sash cramp (both sides at the
same time, to avoid pulling frames out of line), bore and screw to stem
and then each frame and finally to tuck. Let the screw heads in so that
they will be out of the way when planing down to the bevel of the frames;
leave the cramps on stem and tuck overnight to allow the timber to set
itself before too much strain is put on the fastenings.
STRINGERS: Bend and screw the stringers into position on the frames,
using the same method as for chines.
FAIRING: Plane the keel, chines, stringers and frames so that the planking
will lie truly in position,, taking special care to see that the faces of chines,
keel and tuck will make a good joint for planking. Cut small notches, about
■gin. x £in., with a chisel close against the keel on both sides of the bottoms
of all frames, so that water may run through when draining the boat.
The whole of the framework should now be painted or varnished.
Before fixing the sides, varnish the insides and cover all jointings with
old paint which has been thickened with red lead or with a prepared sealer.
Fix while this is wet and you will be sure of a tight joint.
Fit the tuck, the sides, and then the bottom.
Plane a flat along the centre line of the bottom on which to bed the
deadwood and rubbing strip. Cut out and fit the deadwood, then cut out
the centre board slot on the rubbing keel and fix in position.
The sides and bottom may now be cleaned off, rubbed down and given
their first coat of paint or varnish, not forgetting to bore two iin. drain
holes in the tuck close in to either side of the keel and as close to the
bottom as possible.
The boat may now be lifted out of the building frame and turned right
side up and chocked level, taking care to ?ee that it is not twisted.
CENTREBOARD CASE: Construct the centreboard case to the size as
shown on the plans, then carefully fit to keel, bed it down on a piece of
felt which has been soaked in old paint and screw down to keel. The felt
covering the keel slot should now be trimmed out with a sharp knife.
Plane off the top of the centreboard case and fit stiffener batten and
screw down in position.
BUMPKIN BOLT: The bumpkin bolt will be fixed through the deck beam,
being pushed up from the inside. Cut a notch on the top to allow a nut
to be screwed down so that it will be below the underside of deck planking,
the threaded portion will then project enough to go through the bumpkin
and allow of the nut for tightening down.
MAST STEP: Construct the mast step to neatly fit the bottom of the mast.
The mast step should be so braced that the weight of the downwards thrust
of the mast is taken on the top of the lower portion of Nos. 2 and 3


ANTHONY
HORDERNS’
SHIPS CHANDLERY
DEPT.
CAN OUTFIT ALL
v.r*
To complete the course without mishap,
good fittings for your VJ are a must. Our
complete range emphasises lightness com-
bining with strength and durability.


frames. The fore and aft positioning of the mast step should be made with
the mast in position through mast hole in stiffener.
HORSE: A couple of cleats, 6in. x 2in. x lin. hardwood, should be
to the inside of the tuck frame for securing the horse. This being fatted
and bolted down before fitting the cockpit but after deck is fatted.
Shroud plates and rudder fittings should now be fitted.
The deck may now be fixed in position.
COCKPIT: Construct the cockpit and fasten in position.
The gunwhale moulds may now be fitted in the same way as were the
chines and stringers, finally shaping it after it has been fixed.
RUDDER: Cut the rudder to shape as shown on plan from a single piece
of lin. waterproof plywood; fasten the pintles in position and then screw
on the two cheek pieces, finally rounding up all edges and finishing oft. ihe
tapered hole for the tiller should be cut before fixing the cheek pieces.
Construction of Hollow Mast.
MATERIAL: Two pieces clear, straight, close grained Oregon 2£m. x
x 17ft. 9in. long, having the grain running diagonally through at an angle
of about 4? degrees.
CONSTRUCTION: Taking your dimensions from the plan and laying
the two gluing surfaces together, set out the taper of the outside of the
mast, using the joint as the centre line, then taking the pieces apart and
setting out centre lines on the gluing surfaces of both pieces again set out
the taper on these pieces. Next rip the two pieces down, leaving a little
timber outside the lines for final finishing and you will have when the two
pieces are laid together, a rectangular tapering piece with its dimensions
across the flat surface corresponding to those of the finished mast.
On the gluing surfaces mark out the sections to be hollowed, leaving
the walls lin. thick and leaving solid sections at the top, bottom and staying
positions as indicated on the plans.
Before commencing the hollowing it is a good plan to make tinplate
gauges corresponding with the inside shape of the mast. One gauge to suit
the top tapering section and one to suit the bottom straight section. Ihese
will assure you of cutting away just the correct amount of timber.
Then using a |in. gouge or grooving plane hollow out the sections
marked taking care not to damage the gluing surfaces.
The mast is now ready to be glued together and a large number of
cramps will be needed to make a good job of this. If cramps are not
available, wooden ones consisting of screwed wood squares and two wedges
can be made and will be found quite satisfactory. At least eighteen will
be required as the cramps should not be more than about one foot apart.
Only the best Casein Glue should be used and if mixed and applied
according to the directions it will make a joint that is stronger than the
wood itself and give many years of satisfactory service.
First make sure that the cramps arc ready at hand and spread the glue
thickly on both halves and then put the two pieces together. Gently tighten
down each third cramp, watching that the two halves do not slip out of
position. Having got both halves nicely in position, you may then go along
and tighten the rest of the cramps. The whole job should be carried out
on a level floor and then left for 48 hours before taking off the cramps.


VEE-JAY AND VEE-ESS
EQUIPMENT
FOR BUILDING
Large range copper nails, brass countersunk screws,
caulking compound, marine waterproof glues, paints
and varnishes, marine waterproof plywood.
SPECIAL FITTINGS FOR VEE-ESS
Tubular backstay bracket.
Sliding gunmetal rudder gear.
Gunmetal gooseneck (2|" diameter) with arm
attachments for flat boom.
Extension tiller arm swivel attachment.
STANDARD FITTINGS FOR BOTH
VEE-JAY AND VEE-ESS
Rudder gear, hauses, centreboards, goosenecks,
cleats, blocks, etc.
Vee-Jay canvas cockpits, Vee-Jay deck bilge pumps.
Sails (mainsail, jib and spinnaker) made from first
quality material and by first class sailmakers.
Kopsen Foot Bilge Pump—ideal for Vee-Ess.
SPECIAL STAINLESS STEEL FITTINGS
For strength and lightness.
Shackles—bow and dee—jV and
Thimbles—heart and lanyard—three sizes.
Halyard Clips—plain and swivel types.
Blocks—six types for to 2" wire rope and wire halyard blocks.
Light type swivel shackle unit.
Wrife for details or inspect in our showroom.
W. KOPSEN & CO. PTY. LTD.
376/382 Kent St., Sydney
Phone 8X6331 (II lines)


The mast can then be rounded to the desired shape in accordance with
the plan and varnished.
If the slotted (internal track) type is required the slot should be made
before gluing.
The mast should be stepped and carefully plumbed up before fastening
down the mast step. Care should be taken to see that the track is quite
straight, as, if carelessly put on, it will affect the proper setting of the sail.
With neat workmanship and careful rigging, these masts will amply
repay the work put into them, which, after all, is only a few hours more
than would be spent in making a solid stick, the outside dimensions and
shapes of which are the same as for the hollow job.
Measurement of Boats.
All Vee Jay one design class sailing boats shall be required to conform
to the measurements as set out on the plans and Club measurers shall submit
such measurements of boats applying for registration as shall be required
by this Association.
If you wish to sail your boat in this Association do not deviate from
what is shown on the plans or what is written in these instructions and do
not take advantage of any apparent omission from the plans without first
contacting the Association for permission, otherwise registration may be
refused.
MAST: Must not be revolving or steam bent, and two black rings, lin. in
depth, are to be painted around the mast, 14ft. 6in. apart, and between
which the luff of the mainsail must be set.
Length of mast, 16ft. 3in. above the deck, plus or minus 3in.
Min. diameter at head, liin.
Min. diameter at foot, 2iin.
The mast hole in the deck must be the same shape as the mast where
it passes through the deck and not more than greater in diameter than
the mast at this point.
BOOM: One black ring, lin. in depth, is to be painted around the boom
at a distance of 9ft. 6in. measured from the after side of the mast with the
boom in position and the sail when set shall not be stretched beyond this
ring.
Boom may be round, flat or square, but shall not be more than 4in.
deep. It shall have a minimum diameter of or equivalent.
SPINNAKER POLE; Maximum length, 7ft. 6in. Maximum length of
snotter for attachment to mast, 14in.
CENTREBOARD: Shall be of 3/16in. to iin. metal and shaped to design.
May be mild steel or alloy.
A recess in the deck for the purpose of sinking the top of the centre-
board flush with the deck will not be allowed.
PLANKING': To be 3/16in. plywood (finished siz,e). No boat may be
built from any other material unless with the approval of the Association.
RIGGING: Mast and boom may be rigged in any manner.


GIANT
RES WOOD
if GUARANTEED WATERPROOF
if NO SCARF JOINTS
if 25 FEET LENGTHS
NOW AVAILABLE IN THESE
SPECIAL BOATBUILDING SIZES
25 ft. across grain x 7 ft. with grain 3/16" —5 ply
SMALLER SIZES ON REQUEST
Inquire at your local hardware store or direct
A PRODUCT OF RALPH SYMONDS LTD.
Morley Avenue, Rosebery


SAILS: Must be within limits stipulated on the plans. They may have
any number of battens, which mav be any length. The number and widths
of cloths are optional. The headboard may be any material, but shall not
be greater than 4in. x 4in. x 6in.
Tolerances Allowed.
Overall length of hull lift. 6in. + or Jin.
Height of Stem - H§ in - + or “ *in-
*Length of Stem (along Stem) 12jin. +or 4in.
Depth of for’ard end of centre case (including rubbing keel):
Ift. 2 9/16in. + or iin.
Cockpit—Maximum . 30in. long x Min. wide x lOin. deep
Minimum 15in. long x 12in. wide x 2in. deep
Stem to centre of mast at deck 3 ft. 9in. +or iin.
Spring at Stem . - H in - + or n ‘
Spring at Tuck - s|in. +or Jin.
Length of bumpkin outside stem - max. 3ft. Oin. min. 2ft. Oin.
Stem to front end opening of centre case sft. Ijin. +or £in.
Length of opening of centre case max - Ibin.
Width of deck at first frame 2ft. 4sin. +or ?in.
Width of deck at second frame 3 ft- 3 iin. +or ain.
Width of deck at fifth frame 3 ft. 4jin. +or iin.
Maximum width of deck •••■ 3ft. 6sin.
Beam at chine at first frame Ift. 3 gin. +or sin.
Beam at chine at second frame .. 2ft. sain. +or sin.
Beam at chine at fifth frame 2ft. llin. +or sin.
Maximum beam at chine 3ft. lin.
Width of tuck at deck 2ft. 9iin. +or iin.
Width of tuck at chine 2ft. 4gin. +or iin.
*Maximum depth of tuck 9|in. +or sin.
*Depth of tuck at chine 6 11/16in. +or sin.
*Depth of “V” of tuck - liin. +or Jin.
Depth of Deadwood and Rubbing Keel 6in +or Jin.
CENTREBOARD:
Thickness 3/16in. to iin.
Length - 4ft. +or sin.
Width Hin. + or Jin.
RUDDER:
Width Ift- Biin. + or iin.
Length - 2ft. 6£in. -I - or sin.
Front edge to bottom - - Ift- 2iin. +or iin.
*NOTE: All measurements are between verticals or horizontals with the
exception of length of stem and depths of tuck which are along the surface.


RACING SAILS
for Vee Jays
as used by
Vee Jay, "Bewitched," Sydney Harbour Champion,
1951-52
G. L. FOGG
128 Pacific Highway,
Phone: JF 3669 Greenwich, N.S.W.


Specification of Limitation of V.J. Sails.
GENERAL: All sails shall be dry and laid on a flat surface.
MAINSAIL: A diagram of the outline of the linear measurements of the
sail shall be drawn on a flat surface, measurements to be as follows:
Luff Line 14ft. 6in.
Foot Line 9ft, 6in.
Draw a straight line from the highest point of the luff to the outside
end of the foot. This line shall be 15ft. Oin.
Draw in a headboard 4in. down the luff, 4in. down the leech and 6in.
maximum width.
Draw a line parallel to and 6in. away from a line joining the outside
edge of the headboard to the clew.
Draw a line from the clew parallel to the luff. The intersection of this
line with the previous line will give the maximum leech line.
Bisect the line from the highest point of the head to the clew which
shall be point A. Bisect the luff which shall be point B. Extend BA to
cut the maximum leech line at C.
Lay the sail on the above diagram and peg the tack to its corresponding
point. Stretch the luff and foot until all wrinkles along the ropes disappear
and peg in those positions. Smooth out the roach with the flat of the hand.
Should any portion of the sail overlap the outline of the diagram ft
is oversize.
Mark the point on the luff at B and also the point on the leech where
the line BC cuts it. Release the corners of the sail, fold along the line
made by joining these two points and measure along the material of the
sail. This measurement shall not exceed sft. llin.
JIB AND SPINNAKER: The tack shall be pegged, the luff stretched taut
and the head pegged. A tension of 4 pounds shall be put on the clew,
the pull being applied in a line which is a continuation of that which bisects
the angle formed by the intersection of the foot with the leech of the sail. The
luff shall be measured in a straight line between the foot of the sail where
it meets the luff rope or wire to a point at the head where the leech meets
the luff rope or wire.
The foot will be measured in a straight line between the inside of the
luff rope or wire where it meets the foot and the inside of the rope on
the leech at the clew.
The leech will be measured in a straight line from inside of the luff
rope or wire where the luff meets the leech' to the inside of the rope on
the foot at the clew.
Bisect the luff at point A and bisect the leech at point B and mark.
Release the sail and fold along the line AB. Measure across the sail
along the material at fold AB.
The maximum measurements shall be as follows:
Jib Luff 9ft. Oin. Spinnaker Luff 10ft. 6in.
Leech 7ft. Sin. Leech 10ft. Oin.
Foot 4ft. 9in. Foot Bft. Oin.
Along Fold AB 2ft. 7Jin. Along Fold AB 4ft. 9in.


NOTES
W /A?' A*%' Orejoo.
Proves A/V So/tfi.
Dec* 6ev*s f f? /ft «-
C /ones */'*'J*' 3 .,
sf/'/peri «?/»' <9 ''^ t>/ ’


NOTES


NOTES
STAMPERS & GILDERS PRINT


jpinyL
at
3 1508 00920622 3
W. SALTON & SON
Sailmaker and Motor Trimmer
162 VICTORIA ROAD, DRUMMOYNE
■Phone: WA 2569


o
DURALUM
CENTRE BOARD
Light, non-corrosive ,
these shaped and drilled Duralium Centre
Boards are readily available from the Ship
Chandlery Department at the “Specialty
Hardware Store” . . .
Nock c Kirby's
Here are some of the large range of accessories
also available: —
A. Stainless steel Goose Neck, fixed.
Stainless steel Goose Neck, sliding,
and E. Plain size overall snap hooks made from
Swedish light metal alloy.
Stainless steel block sheave.
Stainless steel Mast Tangs.
B
D
Q
9
Q
• SHIPS’ CHANDLERY, Ist FLOOR
Nock & Kirby’s, 417-421 George St., Sydney
