

■ I ' *1>
Guide to . . . j jn
J-Jp
MUSEUM OF TECHNOLOGY AND APPLIED SCi.
Harris Street, Broadway, Sydney, New South Wales
THE COLLECTION OF EXHIBITS
in the
GOOLBDRN MUSEUM
This guide does not claim to do more than
indicate the nature of the principal exhibits,
and is in no way a catalogue. For detailed
information regarding the exhibits the visitor is
referred to the descriptive labels in the cases.
A. R. PENFOLD,
Sydney, 30th January, 1950
Director.
[Price 3d.]


" %\
>(**.( »■


MUSEUM OF TECHNOLOGY AND APPLIED SCIENCE
Harris Street, Broadway, Sydney, New South Wales
Guide to
THE COLLECTION OF EXHIBITS
in the
GOULBUKN MUSEUM
This guide does not claim to do more than
indicate the nature of the principal exhibits,
and is in no way a catalogue. For detailed
information regarding the exhibits the visitor is
referred to the descriptive labels in the cases.
A. R. PENFOLD
Sydney, 30th January, 1950
Director.
[Price 3d.]




|7 JUN
Guide to
The Exhibits in the Goulburn Museum
GLASS
Situated on the left side of the building as the visitor enters
the Museum are three wall cases devoted to glass and its
manufacture. The first two describe its production. A
range of raw materials, a model of a melting pot, and
examples of clear and coloured glass are exhibited. The
stages in the manufacture of a cut glass vase are clearly
illustrated by a range of specimens. The third case contains
examples of glass made in Venice, Bohemia and England.
Attention is directed to the delicate and intricate forms of
the Venetian glass, the rich colouring of the Bohemian, and
the clear and decorative cut and quality of the English
glasses.
FLUORESCENT EXHIBIT
On the wall next to the glass is a spectacular display
of the phenomena of fluorescence. The ultra-violet rays
from a “black lamp” situated inside the case causes the
specimens to glow. The visitor can view the specimens in
their natural state by switching on a light by means of a
switch on the outside of the case. The beauty of the plastic
flowers, the richness of the uranium stained glass rose bowl,
and the effectiveness of the drawing with flourescent crayons
are noteworthy. Fluorescent powders are used in television
receiving tubes, radar screens, fluorescent light tubes, etc.
FOSSILS, SHELLS AND MINERALS
Before leaving this section the visitor may turn to the
table cases in the centre of the floor. In these cases a
careful selection of fossils, shells, and minerals provide a
most interesting display. The visitor will learn from them
something of the great age of our earth, and delight in the
beautiful forms and colours of the shells.
The minerals too, exhibit a beauty which must attract
the visitor, especially the delightful specimen of Malachite.


GOLD NUGGETS
The models of gold nuggets in another case nearby
represent some of the ’famous finds by gold miners of the
eighteen-nineties.
MECHANICAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
Proceeding to the large case in the centre of the
Museum the visitor will be immediately attracted to the
display of mechanical musical instruments. The Musical
Box with its brass cylinder and steel comb ; the “Polyphone”
with its perforated steel record ; and the Edison Phonograph
with its cylindrical records, may be familiar to many. Not
so familiar, however, is the Mechanical Whistling Bird in
the gilded cage. The bird whistles with true perfection and
harmony, and accompanies its song with the characteristic
movements of the natural bird. (A demonstration can be
arranged through the attendant.)
PLASTICS
The developments in plastics form a colourful and
interesting display. The exhibit in the large wall case
describes the manufacture of plastic moulding powder
starting from coal. A steel mould and an article moulded
therein are shown together with a selection of articles of the
phenolformaldehyde group (often called “Bakelite”).
Specimens of “ Perspex,” “ Polystyrene,” “ Nylon,” “Casein ”
and less familiar plastics such as “ Polythene,” “ Melamine,”
etc., are shown.
RADIO
On the floor opposite the Plastics is a pyramid-shaped
case exhibiting a five valve radio set. It is laid out on a
6' x 3' board to show the component parts of a radio set. It
is connected up with an Oscilloscope so that you may “ see ”
as well as hear the music and speech of the broadcast,


PHOTO-ELECTRIC CELL
Aptly termed the “ Electric Eye ” the Photo-electric Cell
is one of the most ingenious devices developed in the field
of electronics. It has a wide variety of uses. A shaft of
light, a shadow, an opaque body, a transparent body, smoke,
steam, or coloured objects, etc., may activate this sensitive
cell, and thereby set in motion certain apparatus or gadgets
directly connected to it. The principle is graphically demon-
strated by means of the exhibit in Case C 5.
The light from the model car shines through the hole
in the garage door onto a photo-electric cell within. The
light acting on the sensitive cell generates a small electric
current which passes to an amplifier where it is boosted to
operate a switch. This in turn operates the mechanism
which opens and closes the garage door.
GEMS—TRUE OR FALSE?
A small wall case alongside the Photo-electric Cell
exhibit describes various types of gemstones that often
bedeck our jewellery. Some are true, some are synthetic,
some are false (paste). A study of the examples described
in this case may assist the visitor to assess the value of
jewellery in his possession.
ENGINEERING MODELS
There are two pyramid-shaped cases devoted to a
display of model steam engines. The stationary types have
now mostly been displaced by internal combustion engines
and electric motors. The steam locomotive still remains a
powerful servant of man. By turning the handle provided
on one case the visitor can set the models in motion.
ORIENTAL APPLIED ARTS
The large case across the far end of the Museum houses
a display of Oriental Applied Art, which embraces the most
skilful arts practised by the Chinese and Japanese.


Overlook the comical fierceness of the Japanese warrior’s
mask, and note the beautiful construction of the 18th century
armour. The braided silk is skilfully laced between the metal
and lacquer ware leaves, and the ornamentation is very good.
Note the rich gold thread needlework of the Chinese
Mandarin’s robe and the Japanese needlework picture of a
“ Lion and Lioness both are striking examples of the
skilful needlework entailed in producing different subjects.
The Oriental craftsmen by reason of their patience and skill
can provide works of great art, irrespective of the materials
with which they work. Hammered iron is converted to a
pleasing silhouette; enamelled designs on copper form
beautiful cloisonne ware ; engraved designs filled with gold
become amazing work of Damascene; wooden shapes
covered with many layers of natural varnish are finished as
brilliant lacquer-ware. The beauty of the Chinese por-
celains is too well-known to need description.
The examples which have been selected from the main
collection in Sydney represent a high standard of Oriental
Art.
PENCIL MANUFACTURE
Continuing our circuit, the first wall case opposite the
Photo-electric Cell contains an exhibit describing the manu-
facture of lead pencils and coloured crayons.
GEIGER COUNTER
The exhibit in Case C 6 demonstrates the Geiger
Counter. As explained in the label, the Geiger counter is
a sensitive electronic apparatus capable of indicating the
radiations from radio active substances.
By turning a handle situated in front of the case the
visitor can bring a piece of radio-active mineral towards the
the Geiger cell. As it draws near, the clicking noise increases
gradually until the mineral specimen passes over the Geiger
cell. At this point a swishing sound indicates the release
of thousands of radio-active particles given off from the
mineral,


CAPACITANCE RELAY
“ Control Without a Switch ” is the title given to the
next electronic wonder exhibited. By placing your hand on
the disc in Case P4 you can set in operation the propeller
of the aircraft. The mystery is simply explained on the
accompanying label.
ANCIENT AND MODERN POTTERY AND
PORCELAIN
Some indication of the remarkable development of the
world’s oldest industry may be obtained by a study of the
pottery and porcelain in Case 398. The museums of the
world collected an amazing collection of pots covering a
period of 6,000 years. Apart from the uses made of these
vessels by the peoples of their times, they have proved
invaluable in tracing the evolution of our civilisation.
POTTERY AND PORCELAIN—FORMS AND
DECORATION
Case C 4 contains a collection of Pottery and Porcelain
for the purpose of illustrating various shapes and decoration.
Each specimen is appropriately labelled.
HOW TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN PORCELAIN
AND POTTERY
Porcelain is translucent; pottery is opaque. The charac-
teristic feature of porcelain is demonstrated in Case Cl by
an interrupted light providing a moving shadow on a
porcelain plate. The earthenware plate does not transmit
light.
LITHOPHANIE PLAQUE
A further illustration of the translucency of porcelain
is demonstrated by the Lithophanie plaque in the same case.
The visitor may operate a light switch and illuminate
the plaque. The picture that is seen is due to light and
shadow produced by the varying thicknesses of the subject
on the porcelain plaque.


OK\- o^U r ( 4'
< | r*v
33916 2.50 Alfred Henry Pettifeßj Government Printer.


|(® ( " * % 3» i
jf/
3 1508 02074866 6


■
.
* v _
-
V ' ,
.
. .
'
f
