

GUIDE TO THE LIMESTONE CAVERNS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
AUSTRALIA.
JENOLAN, WOMBETAN, AND YARRANGOBILLY.
IMMIGRATION AND TOURIST BUREAU,
CHALLIS HOUSE, MARTIN PLACE,
SYDNEY.




THE CAVES HOUSE.


Guide to
The JENOLAN CAVES
New South Wales.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
ISSUED UNDER THE DIRECTION OP
The Honorable S. W. MOORE, M.P.,
Minister for Mines and Agriculture.
Price 2s. 6d.
BY O. TRICKETT, L.S., M.S.
(COPYRIGHT.)
W, A, Gullick, Government Printer, Sydney,


The ONL Y DAIT Y SET \'ICE to the Jenolan Coves
eooper’s Grand Hotel.
UNDER VICE-REGAL PATRONAGE. -
G~S S"3 <TD
The PRINCIPAL HOTEL at MOUNT VICTORIA for
TOURISTS & FAMILIES en route to the Eaves,
to 2Etstt Jenolan Cabrs anti JHottntatn
JENOLAN CAVES.
First Day. —Leave Sydney by 5-27 p.m. train for Mount Victoria, supper and stay
night at GRAND HOTEL.
Second Day. —Drive to Jenolan Caves, arrive in time for afternoon inspection.
Third Day.— V isit Caves, making two inspections.
Fourth Day. —Drive to Mount Victoria, stay night at GRAND HOTEL.
Fifth Day.— Leave by 6*15 a.m. train for Sydney, arriving at B’iss a.m.
COST - £3 17s. 3d. (including all Travelling and Hotel Accommodation.)
JENOLAN CAVES AND
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
First Day. —Leave Sydney by 5*25 p.m.
train for Mount Victoria, supper and
stay night at GRAND HOTEL.
Second Day. —Drive to Jenolan Caves,
arrive in time for afternoon inspection.
Third Day. —V isit Caves, making two
inspections.
Fourth Day. — Drive to Mount Victoria,
stay night at GRAND HOTEL.
Fifth Day . —After breakfast, Drive to
G' vett’s Leap, Katoomba, and Went-
worth Palls, lunch at Toll’s Hotel,
Wentworth, and leave by the 1-44 p.m.
train for Sydney, timed to arrive at
4 - 28 p.m.
COST JT - - £4 15s.
“ (including all Travelling and Hotel
Accommodation).
/s by Cooper’s Coaches.
BLUE MOUNT AINS.^zJtM
JENOLAN CAVES AND SIGHTS.
ble Coach
ts
This
Sample of our Comforta
THE GRAND HOTEL,
Cooper’s DAILY Coaches and Motor
Service from MOUNT VICTORIA
to the JENOLAN CA VES.
We recommend the Coaches as
Cheaper, Safer, and More Reliable
than the Motor Cars. -
CITY BOOKING OFFICE,
108, PITT-ST., SYDNEY.
Telephone 3578.


To the Caves by Motor Car is the proper Way to go
You save one day’s time! One day’s expenses!
And have a most enjoyable ride compared to horse-drawn vehicles.
"1C
*
%
,all $ cac stoHt
V,
JOHN RICE
Has Coaches or
Motor Cars,
Medlow Bath,
Blue Mountains,
N.S.W.
Tell Your Friends!
To leave Sydney by 5'27 train
for the Hydro Medlow Bath,
Stop the night there, and join a party next morning to motor to the Caves.
Supper, Bed, and Breakfast at the Hydro. - - - - 10 s. Od.
90 miles of motor-driving, Return Fare 355. Od.
Or by Coach from Medlow Bath, 255. Return.
The motors ale the biggest in Australia, 22 to 26 horse-power Daimler Cars.
They glide along like railway trains, and your outing is more enjoyable.
Even if you have made the mistake of going otherwise, Return by Motor
Car and Visit Medlow Bath Hydro.
4
■or*
V
m
ft*
>
' t
V
A
k.


the caves
HOTEL, JENOLAN,
. . AND . .
riS.W. RAILWAY REFRESHMENT ROOMS.
jLrssrr = * HARRY SMITH.
Pirst-class Qccommodation. Reasonable ©aniff.
Special onranaements for Pardies and Ramilies.
HAMPERS ARRANGED AS REQUESTED.
ATER BATHS DAY AND NIGHT.
Visitors can stay as long as they desire over the
time booked for by paying the ordinary tariff.
It will be necessary for Visitors to take whatever
Spirituous Liquors they require, as the sale of same
. . is prohibited at Jenolan. .
♦ ♦ COACHES DAILY. ♦ ♦
Inspection of the Caves Daily, at 10 a.nn. and 3 p.m.
FOR ALL PARTICULARS ADDRESS
HARRY SMITH, Railway 'Refreshment Rooms, SYDNEY RAILWAY STATION.
HOT AND COLD
/
THROUGH TRIPS TO THE
. . CAVES . .
ARRANGED BY THE LESSEE.
First-class Bedrooms and Attendance at
Alonnt Victoria Railway Refreshment Rooms
and Jenolan Caves Hotel. cJ


INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDITION.
The first edition to the Guide to the Jeno/an Caves was issued in 1899. Its popularity became at once
established, and there has been an increasing- demand for it ever since. It is evident that the booklet is
regarded by visitors, not only as an assistance in understanding the intricacies and origin of these beautiful
caverns, but also as a memento of an interesting trip.
The success of the publication, for which great credit is, I think, due to the Author, Mr. Oliver
Trickett, has now rendered the issue of a second edition necessary; and owing to the very important caves
which have recently been discovered by Mr. Wiburd, the present Caretaker (also, to some extent, by
Mr. F. J. Wilson, his predecessor), and Guide Edwards, it will be found that much interesting matter has
been added to the Guide-book, both as regards letter-press, plan, and photographic illustrations.
The new River Cave is generally admitted to surpass in beauty, and in the quaintness of some of its
delicate formations, any of the caves previously discovered; and the occurrence of a human (aboriginal)
skeleton, firmly embedded in the calcareous deposit of the floor, is an additional source of interest.
A considerable amount of work, in the way of cutting passages and erecting ladders, will require to
be done before the new caves can be declared open for public inspection ; nevertheless, some temporary
improvements which have been effected render it possible for active persons, who do not object to some
rough travelling, to view the River Cave and some of its branches, on the understanding that they do so at
their own risk.
During the year 1904 the Jenolan Caves were visited by 3,800 persons, who made over 10,000
separate inspections.
E. F. PITTMAN
Government Geologist and Under Secretary for Mines .
Sydney , 18 th January , 1905.


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Introduction 7
Regulations 9
Plans and Sections.. .. .. .. 77-79
Railway Time-table 80
Routes to the Jenolan Caves .. .. 11
From Mount Victoria; from Tarana;
from Bathurst; from Katoomba.
The Jenolan Caves 20
Situation; History; Formation of the
Caves; Geology.
Improvements made for the Convenience
of Visitors 25
The Grand Archway 28
The Carlotta Arch .. .. .. 30
The Devil’s Coach-house, or Easter Cave 32
The Nettle Cave 34
Sculptor’s Studio; The Willows ; The
Ball Room.
The Arch Cave 36
The Belfry.
The Lucas Cave 37
The Cathedral; The Slide; The Music
Hall ; The Shawl Cave ; The Exhibi-
tion Cave; The Curtain j The Broken
Column; The Canopy; The Prosce-
nium; The Mafeking Cave ; The Tipsy
PAGE.
Cake; The Jewel Casket; The Ter-
races ; The Home of the Fairies ; The
Bridge; The Lurline Cave; The Bone
Cave ; The Snowball Cave ; The Crystal
Fountain.
The River Branches of the Lucas Cave 43
The River Cave; Mons Meg; The Temple
of Baal; Orient Cave ; Skeleton Cave.
The Elder Cave 52
The Crystal Cave; The Coral Cave.
The Jersey Cave 53
The Imperial Caves 53
The Left Imperial Cave 54
The Architect’s Studio ; The Bone Cave ;
The Shambles ; The Margarita Cave ;
The Vestry ; The Lady Carrington Cave ;
Minnie’s Grotto ; The Wilkinson Cave ;
The Snow Drift; The Fairies’ Grotto ;
The Grotto Cave; The Lucinda Cave;
The Diamond Grotto; The Encamp-
ment ; The Mystery ; Katie’s Bower.
The Right Imperial Cave .. .. 58
The Underground River; The Grecian
Bend ; Ridley’s Short Cut; The Salt
Pans; The Crystal Rock ; The Shawl
Cave; The Confectioner’s Shop; The
Coral Grotto; Lot's Wife; The Crystal
Cities; The Showroom; The Grand
PAGE.
Stalactites ; Cook’s Grotto ; Josephine’s
Grotto; The Grand Alabaster Column ;
The Mystery ; The Battlefield ; Nellie’s
Grotto; The Vestry; The Lily of the
Valley ; The Fairies’ Bower; The Crystal
Palace ; The Garden Palace ; The Bridal
Veil; The Gem ofthe West; TheFairies’
Retreat; The Queen’s Diamonds.
The Jubilee Cave 66
The Left Branch, Jubilee Cave ... ... 67
The Pebble Grotto ; The Marble Arch ;
The Round Tunnel; The Alabaster Hall;
The Water Cavern; The Throne.
The Right Branch, Jubilee Cave.. .. 69
The Prince’s Chamber; Marble Grotto.
The Gem of Jenolan 70
The Victoria Bower.
The Red Cave 71
The Aladdin Cave 72
Unopened Caves 74
The Bushranger’s Cave and McKeown’s
Hole; The Mammoth Cave; The
Frenchman’s and Glass Caves; The
Bottomless Pit.
The Caves District 75
The Kanangra (Kowmung) Walls .. 75-76
References.. .. .. .. ..76


REGULATIONS
The following are some of the Regulations which have been issued for the management and
preservation of the Jenolan Caves.
No person will be allowed to enter any Cave unless accompanied by the Caretaker or an authorised Guide.
Visitors are conducted through the Caves by the Caretaker or a Guide, for which service no charge is made ;
but the admission of a visitor to any Cave is to be by ticket only, which may be obtained at the Jenolan Post Office.
Until further notice, charges for tickets will be—For a first inspection, two shillings each person ; for any further
inspections, one shilling each person. These charges are for the use of artificial lights. No visitor is permitted to
inspect any Cave until the prescribed form of ticket has been collected.
No employee is permitted to take any visitor into any Cave which is not open for public inspection.
Caves to which temporary access only has been provided, such as the Aladdin Cave and the “River”
branches of the Lucas Cave, may be inspected, but only after authority to visit them has been obtained from the
Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture, the Government Geologist, or the Inspector of Caves. Each visitor to
the “ River” Cave will be required to purchase a special form of ticket prepared for the purpose.
The Caretaker, who is also a special constable, may exclude from the Caves any person who is guilty of
improper conduct.
Any person found breaking, defacing by writing or marking, or otherwise injuring or removing any rock,
stalactite, stalagmite, or other part of the Caves or Arches, or their improvements, or injuring the improvements
or the vegetation on any part of the Reserve for the Caves, will be prosecuted with the utmost rigour of
the Law. All rocks and specimens of whatever description in the Caves and Arches are the propertv of the
Government.
B


The shooting or trapping of any animal or bird, or the destruction or removal of the eggs of any wild bird
within any part of the Reserve for the Caves is prohibited, except in cases where the removal of noxious animals or
birds has been directed by the Government.
Visitors are permitted to camp on the Caves Reserve, but only in such places as are set apart for the purpose,
which the Caretaker will point out. These places are also indicated bv notice-boards.
No fishing will be permitted in the Jenolan River until the trout fish have become established.
CASCADE, LEURA FALLS.
No vehicle or material of any sort is to be stored or deposited
in the Grand Archway, or on the road between the Reservoir and the
Coach House.
Stock found on the Caves Reserve will be impounded and the
owners prosecuted.
All employees are under the supervision of the Caretaker,
subject to instructions from the Department of Mines.
Visitors are requested to insert their names and addresses in
the books provided for the purpose, and to read the published Regu-
lations relating to the management of the Caves, which are posted in
conspicuous places.
The Caretaker is instructed to immediately report to the
Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture the name and address
of any employee, visitor, or person infringing any Regulation pub-
lished for the information of the public, or any Regulation or
Instruction issued for the guidance of employees. Any officer failing
to comply with any Regulation or Instruction will be severely dealt
with.
Special directions to Guide: —Visitors are to be treated with
courtesy. Expressions of undue familiarity are to be avoided. Incivility
to any visitor will be severely dealt with.




VIEW FROM GRAND ARCH LOOKING EAST.


ROUTES TO THE JENOLAN CAVES.
Route from Mount Victoria.
THIS is a good driving road, 36 miles in length. From Mount Victoria the Old Bathurst Road is followed for
seven miles. At two miles is the deep cutting known as the Victoria Pass. Here a magnificent panorama
is spread out before the spectator. To the left lies the Cox River Valley, of which many glimpses are
obtained further on. To the right towers Mount York, while all round are mural precipices and fern-clad gorges cut
out of the massive sandstone rock. An interesting description of the Blue Mountain Valleys is given by Darwin, in
his Geological Observations, &c., 1876, part 1, chapter vii, page 151.* He says: —
“ It is not easy to conceive a more magnificent spectacle than is presented to a person walking on the summit-plains when,
without any notice, he arrives at the brink of one of these cliffs, which are so perpendicular that he can strike with a stone the trees
growing at a depth of between 1,000 and 1,500 feet below him. On both sides he sees headland beyond headland of the receding
line of cliffs, and on the opposite side of the valley, often at a distance of several miles, he beholds another line rising up to the same
height with that on which he stands, and formed of the same horizontal strata of pale sandstone.”
The late Mr. C. S. Wilkinson also refers to them as follows :—f
“The vastness of the depth and extent of the precipitous gorges and valleys of the Blue Mountains inspire one with feelings of
silent awe and wonder, and impress the minds of some persons with the notion that such enormous ravines in the mountains must
have required violent convulsions in the earth’s crust for their formation ; but if we examine the rocks on all sides of the valley we see
no breaks nor signs of violent disturbance. The various beds of rock in horizontal strata may be seen to continue uninterruptedly
around the sides of the valley, and the succeeding layers of rock, as we descend one side of the ravine, gradually approach the
corresponding layers on the other side, until at the bottom, in the bed of the watercourse, we find that they actually join, which they
would not do if the sides of the ravine had been violently torn asunder. We perceive, therefore, that the various outcropping strata
must once have been continuous right across the valley or ravine, and that they have been removed by some agency without
disturbance of the underlaying beds. What then is the agency? Not volcanic fire., but running water. Look at the sloping surface
* See also Darwin’s Journal of Researches, 1839, p. 522.
+ C. S. Wilkinson, L.S., F.G.S., “Railway Guide,” 1886.


THE VICTORIA PASS.
of any earth cuttings
or embankments
that have been
exposed to rain
action ; see the
miniature ranges
and i n terven ing
valleys that the
water draining off
has furrowed out.
Notice the minia-
ture precipices left
where the harder
earth material has
resisted the action
of the running
water ; also at the
bottom of the em-
bankment, where
the incline ceases
and the water flows
gently, how it de-
posits in miniature
alluvial flats
the earth it has
scooped out and
washed down from
above. Now, could
we look down from
a considerable
height, and, as it


were, take a bird’s-eye view of the Blue Mountains, exactly similar features would be presented to us as we observed in the earth
embankment. Wherever the soft clay strata of the Coal Measures exist, there are sloping surfaces; where the harder Haivkesbury
rocks appear, there are cliffs ; while the easily-disintegrated clay-beds have been washed away, even to the undermining the overlying
sandstone. The latter has resisted to a great extent the denuding agencies, and been left in projecting masses which, at last,
having the supporting soft strata removed, break away and roll in great bosses down the sides of the hill, perhaps as far as into
the bed of the stream below, a perpendicular cliff being left where they broke away from the main mass of rock.
Of these valleys and their origin, Dr. A. R. Wallace writes (.Nineteenth Century , 1893, vol. 33, page 391)
“Readers of ‘ Lorna Doone’ must have been interested in the curious valleys occupied by the Doone Outlaws in an
almost impregnable stronghold. The only considerable valleys which can be classed as originally inaccessible > though, of course,
no valley any more than any mountain is absolutely so) seem to be the \ osemite, in California, and the vallejs of the Grose
and Cox Rivers, in New South Wales. In some respects the valleys carved out of the great sandstone plateau of New South
Wales are even more remarkable than the Yosemite itself. . . • • • • the ravines w'hich discharge their
waters into the little Cox River occupy an area of 1,212 square miles. The whole forms the basin of this mountain stream,
and is bounded by cliffs increasing from about 1,000 feet near its outlet to about 2,500 feet near its western limits ,
the valley bottom being not much above sea-level, and the only
outlet being through a gorge about a third of a mile wide. It is
to the late T. Beete Jukes, Director of the Geological Survey of
Ireland, that we owe the full establishment of the principle that
valleys of all kinds, from the most open to the most narrow and
profound, are hollows worn by erosion.' 1 ' Some considerable amount
of decay is still going on in the giant clifls of the Blue Mountains.
Though in the life of a man a block may seem unchanged,
in a few thousand years it may have entirely disappeared, and such a
lapse of time probably bears a less proportion to the period occupied
by the valley formation than does a single hour to the life of a
man Every characteristic the valleys possess is fully
explained by that simple theory of earth sculpture by atmospheric
agency.”
THE ROAD NEAR THE CAVES, PAGE 12.
* Student's Manual of Geology, by J. Beete Jukes, 3rd edition (edited by
A. Geike, F.R.S.), p. 45°-


The action of running water, frost,
snow, and wind had eaten into and under-
mined the sandstone rock. It was merely
a question of time. This interesting sub-
ject is further referred to by Professor
T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.R.S., F.G.S.
BRIDGE OVER McEWON’S CREEK AND ROAD THROUGH GRAND ARCHWAY.
(President’s Address,
Royal Society New South
Wales, 1896), as follows:
“ The valleys of the Blue
Mountains have been formed
through sub-aerial erosion, and
do not owe their slopes or
positions to any original de-
pressions in the sheets of
sediment of which they were
formed.”
Of the comparative nar-
rowness of the valleys at
their lower ends, he says :
“I n the westward portion of the Blue Mountains the soft
strata of the Coal Measures, which underlie the sandstones
of the Hawkesbury Series, stand high, and have thus been
much exposed to denudation, and have led to a constant
undermining of the sandstones wherever these softer rocks
have been brought within reach of denuding agencies. As,
however, the soft strata of the Permo-Carboniferous Coal
Measures dip eastwards at a more rapid angle than the river
channels, which also flow eastwards, it follows that in the east
portion of the Blue Mountains the rivers leave the strata of
the Coal Measures and flow over the hard sandstones of the
Hawkesbury Series, so that no undermining action is possible
on the eastern area ; hence the narrowness of the river gorges
near the eastern escarpment.”
Returning to the description of the route to the Caves : For some distance after leaving the Victoria Pass
a remarkable land-mark may be distinguished in a solitary tree perched up on the end of Mount York. The
road rapidly descends to Big and Little Hartley, and at seven miles the Old Bathurst Road is left behind at the


crossing of the River Lett, a tributary of the Cox River, over 1,000 feet below the summit of the Victroia Pass.
From this point the distances along the road from Mount Victoria and from the Caves are marked on mile-posts.
The Cox River is shortly (8% miles) crossed at the Glen Roy Bridge. The road now ascends. Fine views
of the Kanimbla Valley are met with at intervals. The road to Bowenfels branches off at miles, a road
into the valley at 14 miles, Lowther at 15
miles, mile-post marked £’), and a road
into the Ganbenang Swamps at 15% m des.
The half-way houses of Hampton are reached
about mid-day, one at 18 miles ( M ' B j J 8 ‘ ), and
the other at 19 miles. Here lunch is served
while the horses are being changed. Several
branch roads are passed after leaving Hamp-
ton, namely, from Rydal at miles, from
Oberon, at 21 miles, and the bridle-track
from Katoomba at miles. The highest
point on the road is in the vicinity of the
25th and 26th mile-posts. On either side of
the Katoomba track the road reaches an
altitude of 4,000 feet or over. From Hampton
the track is comparatively level until within
a few miles of the Caves, where the descent
is rapid (about 1,500 feet) along a siding
which winds round the steep slopes of the
creeks and watercourses which feed the Jenolan
River. Nearing the Caves, McKeown’s Creek
DEVIL’S COACH-HOUSE, AS SEEN FROM HILL ABOVE ROAD.
is crossed over one of the most beautiful little bridges in the State, built of the Caves limestone. Lo the
right lies the Devil’s Coach-house or Easter Cave, through -which the flood-waters of McKeown’s Creek pass.
Below, the “ Underground River ”(*>., subterranean water-way of McKeown’s Creek) supplies the motive power
for the electric lighting of the Caves. Above, on the left, can be seen the passage to the Lucas Cave. Perched


high up in front is the Carlotta Arch, and near it the entrances to the Nettle and Arch Caves. The road now
passes under the immense limestone cavern named the Grand Archway. (Mile-post marked (“g J O C ) A short
distance further on the Caves House is reached, in time to allow the visitor to inspect one of the Caves during the
afternoon. The road throughout is picturesque and beautiful. Of the geology of the country through which it
passes it may be said, briefly, that it commences in the plateau of the Blue Mountains, formed of deeply-eroded
EVANS' CROWN.
Hawkesbury sandstones (Triassic Series). It descends
shortly through the Upper Coal Measures and Upper
Marine Series, then from Hartley to beyond Hampton
through granite of Carboniferous age, and finally,
before reaching the Caves limestone, through Radio-
larian shales (Palaeozoic rocks) intersected by felstone
dykes.*
M otor-car Trips via Mount Victoria.
In addition to the coaching route described above,
arrangements may be made at Medlow Baths or
Blackheath for journeys to the Caves by motor-car,
via Mount Victoria.
Route from Tarana. +
There is a well-made road from Tarana Railway
Station to the Caves, 35% miles in length. For a long
time the routes from Bathurst and Tarana were the
only coach-roads to the Caves. The road from Tarana is not without natural objects of much interest. Within
two miles from Tarana are some huge bosses of granite perched on the summit of the hill known as Evans*
Crown. These remarkable rocks, which stand out very conspicuously amidst the forest-covered ranges, are splendid
examples of atmospheric denudation. They are the remaining portions of the mass of granite that once surrounded
* From map by Prof. T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.G.S., 1896.
f Mostly taken from the description by C. S. Wilkinson, L.S., F.G.S., in the *' Railway Guide,” 1886.


them, and are the silent witnesses of the
enormous denudation which eroded the present
valleys and swept away that granite mass ; they
therefore teach instructive lessons in physical
geology. Shortly after leaving Tarana the road
crosses the Fish River, at Mutton’s balls Bridge
(2% miles) ; then for six miles it ascends granite
hills, until an elevation of 3,500 feet above sea-
level, or 950 feet above Tarana, is attained. The
next 10 miles is marked by undulating country
of Silurian schists and sandstones. Hazelgrove
is passed at 13 miles from I arana, and the
village of Oberon at 16 miles. Near Oberon
there is a picturesque view looking down into
the valley of the Fish River Creek. The grassy
hills and alluvial flats here seen afford rich
pasturage, and formed the site of one of the
earliest settlements in the district, made about
sixty years ago. A clear running stream, named
OBERON ROAD, NEAR CAVES HOUSE.
the Duckmaloi River, one of the tributaries of
the Fish River, is crossed at miles. (Anglers will find rainbow trout abundant in the Duckmaloi.) e
village of Edith is passed at 26 miles. The road then gradually ascends until the Great Dividing Range is
passed over, at an altitude of 4,120 feet above the sea, at a point called “The Porcupine.” At 30 miles the road
comes to the end of a high range, at a spot once known as the “Top Camp,” or Top of Caves Hill. 1-rom tis
point, looking towards the east, a fine view may be obtained. Immediately in the foreground lies a deep valley,
and in it, not a mile distant, are seen craggy masses of grey limestone, in which the Caves are situated ; beyond
this the valley gradually widens, with wooded hills rising, as it were, one behind the other, up into high ranges
on either side ; whilst in the extreme distance appear the Blue Mountains, marked with that horizontal line o
yellow sandstone cliffs which indicates the Hawkesbury sandstone formation overlying the Coal Measures. From


t /i °f C ' amp an excellent zig-zag road has been formed down the side of the steep range to the small area
of level land on the edge of which the Caves House stands. Near the “Top Camp” the tourist’s attention is
drawn to the fact that the descent is now very rapid, by a cyclist’s notice-board fixed on the roadside, which bears
t e egend “Cyclists. Dangerous Hill.” The fall is about 1,200 feet in miles. The zig-zag has its
advantages. At each turn a new view is presented of the splendid panorama formed by the ridges of the Caves
limestone, and the densely-wooded gorges and mountains which surround it.
Route from Bathurst.
The Caves may also be reached from Bathurst, from which they are distant about 36 miles south-easterly, in a
irect line, and about 48 miles by road, via Oberon. The greater distance involved by taking the Bathurst Road,
instead of that from Tarana, is somewhat compensated for by the fine scenery to be obtained from the Macquarie Plains,’
the fish River Valley at O’Connell, and the extensive view of the country, so diversified with plains and hills, to be
seen towards the north when ascending the “ Mount.”
Route from Katoomba.
this is a bridle-track. It was defined by Mr. W. M. Cooper, Surveyor of Public Parks, in 1884.* On leaving
Katoomba, 3,350 feet above sea-level, the Old Western Road is followed for one and a half mile to the “ Explorers’
Iree. Ihe traveller learns from an inscription that this was the farthest distance reached by Messrs. Blaxland
Lawson, and Wentworth in their first attempt to cross the Blue Mountains in May, 1813. A previous unsuccessful
attempt had been made by Mr. George Bass, in 1796. Later on, in the year 1813, Mr. G. W. Evans, Deputy
Surveyor of Lands, continued the work of exploration, and surveyed a road from the Explorers’ Tree to the Bathurst
Plains. The construction of the road from Sydney to Bathurst was completed on January 21, 1815. Returning to
the description of the Caves track: The Megalong Cleft is reached at 2 miles from Katoomba (3,280 feet above
sea-level). his fern-clad and romantic gorge has been named Nellie’s Glen, and is a favourite resort of tourists, it
contains the cascade known as the Ethel Fall. The traveller is now on the edge of the Kanimbla Valley, part of the
great depression of the Cox River Valley, which reaches a width of 7 miles, and a depth of 2,500 feet. From
the loot of the gorge, having descended 600 feet in a quarter of a mile, the track follows the xMegalong Creek,
assing t e egalong Station, the creek is left at six and three-quarter miles from Katoomba (at 1,870 feet),
he track then runs along a siding, above which is the Pinnacle Hill, while far below lies the Cox River. At
Track from Katoomba to Jenolan Caves, W. M. Cooper, Sydney, 1885.


io> 4 miles (940 feet) the crossing of this river is reached, near its junction with the Gibraltar Creek, and may
be made dry-shod in ordinary seasons. This is a picturesque spot, well worth the journey so far. The river-bed
is strewn with large grey granite boulders, over which the water foams in cascades in flood-time. Looking back,
the bold outline of the sandstone cliffs, which bound the edge of the tableland, 2,500 feet above the spectator,
can be seen. From the Cox River the track follows up the Gibraltar Creek, which is crossed three times. At
\ 2 '/, miles the Mini Mini Range (2,310 feet) is passed over, and at miles the Little River is reached. Half a
mile further on this river is crossed. The track then rises up the Black Range, which is followed until the road
from Mount Victoria to the Caves is met with, at an altitude of nearly 4,000 feet above sea level, 21 miles from
Katoomba, and 8 miles by road from the Caves. (See description of route from Mount Victoria.) If desired,
the bridle-track may still be
followed. It passes over Mount
George. The Caves are reached
by it in 7 miles. Here and there
on the Black Range striking
views are obtained of thickly-
wooded and fern-clad gorges, of
mountain peaks, and of the sand-
stone cliffs which flank the table-
land along which the Great
Western Railway runs. The
track is not well defined in places,
but the trees are blazed along
its course at intervals of about a
chain. It is practicable and in-
teresting, but not an easy route
either on horseback or on foot.
The homesteads of a few settlers
are met with between Gibraltar
Creek and the Little River.
THE THREE SISTERS, KATOOMBA.


THE JENOLAN CAVES.
HE LIMESIONE CAVES Of 1 NEW SOUTH WALES, of which there are many, have the
reputation of being more attractive than those of any other part of the world.
The J enolan Caves are exceptionally beautiful, and contain an endless variety of enchanting
and interesting formations. The stalactitic and dripstone growth in them is majestic and massive
cn * n P^ aces ; * n ot her places it is remarkable for its delicacy. Columns and stalactites, which are feet
jj * n diameter, are succeeded by clusters of tinv glistening pendants or by fragile traceries like filagree
wor k- 1 here are draped forms like shawls, which are curiously ornamented with coloured bands,
" .0 owing to the presence during certain periods, of some iron in the solutions of carbonate of lime from
which they were formed. Some growths are translucent; others are opaque and snowy white or
tinted with charming colours. I here are coral bowers and fairy-like grottoes, “ Nature’s jewel caskets,” which blaze
with the light reflected from myriads of crystals. Crystalline deposits, which resemble sparkling cascades, here and
there grace the walls. All these beautiful things must be seen to be appreciated.
From some observations, the temperature of the majority of the Caves was found to be 52 0 , although as low a
temperature as was recorded in some of them. In the vicinity of the present underground waterwavs the
temperature probably varies.
The different caverns have been named and are described in their order further on.
Situation.
I he Jenolan Caves are situated on the eastern watershed of the great range which divides the waters of the
fish and Cox Rivers, and occur in the deep valley at the head of the Jenolan River, which feeds the Cox River, a
tributary of the Nepean and Hawkesbury Rivers.


History.
Two of the last survivors of the Cox River aborigines, “Betsy Grant and “Jenny Clay, informed
Mr. W. Mylecharane, L.S., that the Caves and the limestone ridges surrounding them were known to the blacks
under the name “ Binoomea.”
Kerry & Co., Photo.]
CAVE ...
EXPLORATION.
[Copyright.
The first white man to discover them was a bushranger named McKeown, who
used a small cave as a retreat. This is known as McKeown’s Hole, and is situated on
the bend of the creek of that name, which runs through the main caves three miles
further down. Their locality was first made public by Mr. James Whalan in 1841,
who, when following the tracks of a stolen horse,
discovered McKeown’s Camp, and subsequently
assisted the police to capture the bushranger.
Before leaving the locality, Mr. Whalan found the
Great Archways which form part of the series of
caverns known as the Jenolan Caves.
They rapidly began to attract attention. Many
excursions were made to them. A description of a
visit to the Caves (including the Elder Cave) was
published in the Bathurst Advocate of the 30th
December, 1848. At that early date the necessity
for protecting the caves was shown by the writer’s
statement :—“ We loaded ourselves up with the
curiosities of the place.”
They were first called the Bindo Caves, from a small cattle-
station, some 12 miles distant, owned by Mr. P. Mylecharane,
whose relatives made frequent visits to the Caves over fifty years
ago. They were subsequently known as the Fish River Caves, although on the Cox River watershed, but
were finally named the Jenolan Caves, after the parish in which they are situated, by Gazette notice dated
ioth August, 1884. The name Jenolan is derived from the native name Jen-o-lan, signifying a high mountain.


As time went on their fame spread, and they were visited by many adventurous spirits, who were not deterred
by the wild country to be traversed, the want of accommodation, and the perils and difficulties of exploring
caverns whose direction and extent were little known.
SURVEYING IN CAVES.
The Lucas Cave was discovered in 1858 by N. Wilson,
C. Whalan, and G. Falls. Since that date the most
important discoveries made have been the Imperial Cave,
by J. Wilson, in 1879, the Aladdin and Mafeking Caves, by
F. J- Wilson, in 1897 and [9OO, respectively, and the
River Cave and branches, by J. C. Wiburd and J. C.
Edwards, assisted by R. I. Bailey, in 1903-1904.
The Government did not recognise the necessity of
protecting the Caves for some years after their discovery.
However, on the 2nd October, 1866, an area of six and a
quarter square miles of country surrounding the Caves was
reserved, and on the Bth March, 1867, Mr. Jeremiah Wilson
was appointed Caretaker, at the modest salary of per
annum. F'rom that date up to the present time neither
expense nor trouble has been spared to open up the Caves,
to make them easy of access, and to add to the attractions of
their surroundings.
On the 18th January, 1902, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Trusts Act, the Minister,
and the Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture, and the Government Geologist were appointed trustees of
the Caves reserve, which is now 6,000 acres in extent.
Formation of the ('ayes.
Ihe Caves Limestone extends from the Grand Archway, with a comparatively unbroken outcrop, IV. io° W.
three miles, and S. 6 E. two miles or more. It lies almost directly across the main valley, whose two principal


creeks, instead of cutting down the limestone barrier, found it easier to excavate subterranean channels, and so
formed the Caves. Limestone, next to gypsum and rock-salt, is more soluble in water than other portions of the
earth’s crust.
“It is perhaps not out of place to trace some steps in the. course of Time that are forcibly presented to us. What a circle in
the laws of Nature is suggested ! First, the decaying vegetation of some ancient forest is invisibly distilling the gas known as
carbonic acid ; then a storm of rain falls, clearing the air of the noxious gas, and distributing a thousand streamlets of acid water over
the surrounding country, which, as it drains off, not only wears the rocks it passes over, but dissolves them in minute quantities,
especially such as contain much lime; then, laden with its various compounds, flows off to the distant sea, where reef corals, lying in
fringing bands round the coast, are slowly absorbing the lime from the water around them, and building the fragile coatings that
protect them during life. Slowly, as the land sinks, the coral-bank increases in height, for reef corals can only live near the surface of
the water; and soon a considerable thickness has been obtained, while below the upper zone of live corals lies a vast Charnel-house
of dead coral-coverings; then comes a change;—suitable temperature, or some other essential condition, fails, killing out all the
corals. Through long ages other deposits accumulate over them, gradually crushing and consolidating the coral-bank into a firm
rock. At last a convulsion of the earth’s crust brings it up from the buried depth in which it lies, leaving it tilted on its edge, but
still, perhaps, below the surface of the ground; rain, frost, and snow slowly remove what covers it, until it lies exposed again to the
sunlight, but so changed that, only for the silent but irresistible testimony of the fossil forms of which it is composed, it were hard
to believe that this narrow band of hard grey rock was once the huge, but fragile, coral-bank glistening in the bright waters with a
thousand hues,”*
Then commences the process of Cave-making. The decaying vegetation of the surrounding forest produces
carbonic acid ; the rains spread over the ground ; the acidulated water dissolves the limestone rock, forming tunnels
and caverns, and the dissolved lime is partly deposited
“ in the beautiful and fantastic forms of stalactites and dripstones, but chiefly carried away in solution down the Caves Creeks, into
the Jenolan River, on to the Nepean and Hawkesbury, and so out to sea at Broken Bay. Arrived in the waters of the Pacific, it is
partly absorbed by fish, Crustacea, shell-fish, and tiny organisms on our coasts, and partly carried southwards by the East Australian
current; and later, northwards into waters warm enough to support the life of the coral polyp, as at Lord Howe Island. Here it is
taken up by the polyp, and converted into beautiful coralline structures. Thus history repeats itself, and the coral polyps of to-dav
construct their stony skeletons out of the material which formed the bones of their Palaeozoic ancestors.”!
* L. H. G. Young, Railway Guide, 1886.
t Professor T. W. F. David, 8.A., F.R.S., F.G.S.


It may not be uninteresting to note the points in which these Caves differ from the largest Caves in the world,
namely, the Mammoth Caves of Kentucky, whose channels have been estimated to be 150 miles in length.* The
Mammoth Cave limestone has a capping of 70 feet of sandstone. The known Caves ot New South Wales are in
limestone, which outcrops on the surface. The temperature is about the same in both, but the air in the Mammoth is
so dry that timber placed in it as far back as 1812 shows no sign of decay, nor iron any sign of rust. In the Jenolan
Caves, timber commences to rot, and iron to rust, with great rapidity. The marvellous beauty and wealth of
ornamentation of the Caves of New South Wales is doubtless in a great measure due to their humidity. The walls
and ceilings of the Mammoth Cave exhibit incrustations of crystals of gypsum (sulphate of lime), and the floors of its
caverns contain large quantities of saltpetre. These are almost absent from the Jenolan Caves. The latter depend
for their decoration on deposits of carbonate of lime.
Some Caves have a much greater depth than those of Jenolan. For instance, the Armand Cave, Lozere,
Southern France, is 680 feet deep. This cave is also remarkable for its stalagmites, which occur like a forest of
palm-trees from 50 to 90 feet in height.f
All limestone caves are not entirely formed by running water. In the Wind Cave, Missouri, with its 97 miles
of caverns, the shapes of some of the chambers are due to jets of water forced up from intermittent hot springs or
geysers. This cave, as well as others in Missouri and in South Dakota, contains chambers which are marvellously
beautiful. +
For those who are interested in the study of Caves, or speleology, reference may be made to the official reports
contained in the Geological Survey publications of the countries in which Caves exist, and to “Cave Hunting, &c.”
(W. B. Dawkins, London, 1874), “Celebrated American Caverns” (Dr. H. C. Hovey, Cincinnati, 1882),
“ Les Abimes ” (E. A. Martel, Paris, 1894).
Geology.
The Jenolan Caves limestone is probably of Lower or Middle Devonian age. Its dip is steep W. 10 S. at 6o°,
with a thickness of between 500 and 600 feet, corresponding to a surface width of between 600 and 700 feet. It
contains the fossils— Cyathophyllum , Hcliolites , Orthoceras, Crmolds, and bivalve ; Pentameris Knightii,
Paleoniso Brazieri , hoxonem antiqua.\\
* See The Century Magazine , 1898, Vol. LV, No. 5. pp. 643 to 658, “The Mammoth Cave,” by J. R. Proctor, formerly State Geologist of Kentucky,
f Scientific American, 1898, Vol. LXXVIII, No. 15, p. 228. J “Cave Regions of the Ozarks and Black Hills,'’ L. A. Owen, Cincinnati, 1898.
$ C. S. Wilkinson, F.G.S. || R. Etheridge, junr.


On its western side are Radiolarian shales and argillites capped by basalt. Below it, on the eastern side, are
Radiolarian shales, argillites, and coarse volcanic agglomerate with large lumps of Favosites , Heliolites , &c. The
rocks on the west are intruded by basic dykes, and those on the east by felsitic dykes more or less perpendicular.*
“ The floor of the Grand Archway is in some parts of ,red earth, the thickness of which has yet to be ascertained. The worn
and polished edges of many of the rocks indicate that for a long time this cave has been the resort of wild animals, and probably of
man also, whose remains may lie buried here. Masses of breccia occur in places, consisting of large and small pieces of limestone
aud other rocks cemented together with carbonate of lime. Thin veins of nitre, or saltpetre, occur in this breccia, and also fill
crevices in the solid rock of the walls. This nitre has been chemically formed by oxidation of the ammonia given off during the
decomposition of the excrement of animals. Nitric acid is thus produced, which, combining with some of the potash and other
alkalies present in the earth and rocks, forms an impure variety of saltpetre ”f
In some'of the branches of the Right and Left Imperial and Jubilee Caves, superficial deposits of phosphatic
substances occur. These may be either in the form of (1) thin veins on the marl composing the floors, and
containing up to 30 percent, of phosphoric acid; or (2) a white pulverulent substance, closely allied to Minervite,
with 40 per cent, of phosphoric acid ; and (3) in the nodular form, with 10 per cent, of the acid. A fungoid
efflorescence, with 76 per cent, of carbonate of lime, also occurs in some of the caves.J
Limestone, honeycombed with caves, occurs at intervals over the eastern part of New South Wales, from north
to south, and is in all cases hard and compact. In this respect it differs materially from the soft foraminiferal
limestone of Recent Age in West Australia, which also contains caverns of considerable beauty.
Improvements made for the Convenience of Visitors.
The Caves were made known to the public in 1841, as already mentioned. For years after visitors had to camp
under such shelter as was provided by the Limestone Arches. For the purpose of recreation, money was subscribed
for a dancing-platform which was erected in the Grand Arch in 1869- I his platform has long since disappeared.
A first effort to cater for visitors was made by the then caretaker, Jeremiah Wilson, in 1879, when he erected a
kitchen, and, in the year following, four bed-rooms and a dining-room. These structures he gradually remodelled
and enlarged. Unfortunately for him, a large portion of the buildings he had erected were burned down in
March, 1895.
c
* Professor T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.R.S., F.G.S. fC. S. Wilkinson, F G.S., Railway Guide, 1886.
\ J. H. C. Mingaye, Records Geol. Survey of N. S. Wales,'B99, VI, Part 2, pp. 1 n-116.


THE ....
CAVES ...
HOUSE ...
SURVEYOR-GENERAL’S ORIGINAL CAMP ON SITE NOW OCCUPIED BY APPROACHES
TO CAVES HOUSE.
The accommodation for visitors was now inadequate, and in the
year following The Hon. Sydney Smith, then Secretary for Mines,
who had for many years taken an active interest in the
development of the Caves as a means of public recreation,
determined that a building should be erected which would
meet with the requirements of the ever-increasing number
of visitors. Mr. Jeremiah Wilson’s premises were
accordingly acquired by the Government, and the first
wing of a new structure was completed early in 1898,
from designs by the Government Architect.
This building is of attractive appearance, solidly
built of the
Caves lime-
stone. It con-
tains a dining-
room capable
of seating sixty
guests, and has
a detached bil-
liard-room. It
containsseveral
bath -rooms,
and has an
ample water
supply from
two reservoirs
a short distance
up the Camp
C r e ek . A


WATERFALL AND BATHING POOL, JENOLAN RIVER.
bathing-place is also provided in the Jenolan
River, below the Grand Archway, at a place
known as the Second Waterfall.
I he Caves House is leased to Mr. H. Smith,
who commenced to cater for the public on the
Ist July, 1898. It is surrounded by tastefully
laid-out gardens, and is reached by first-class
l lu &§y~ roac ls constructed by the Government at
very large expense. Visitors may rely on being
as comfortably housed as at any other resort
for holiday-makers in the Mountains. Within
a stone’s throw of the house is a pretty little
kiosk, occupied as a Post and Telegraph Office.
Near it is a double kiosk, in which photographs
may be obtained.
The first improvements made in the Caves
were in a large measure due to the great interest
taken in them by the late Mr. C. S. Wilkinson,
Geological Surveyor-in-Charge, and Mr. P. F.
Adams, then Surveyor-General.
At an early date, ladders of wood or wire
rope were placed where hempen ropes had
previously been used for access to dangerous
or difficult passages in the Caves. As time
went on, these primitive improvements were
gradually replaced by steps cut out of the rocks
or formed of cement, and by massive iron stair-
cases. Dangerous places have been bridged


over, or railed off with wire rope and netting. * Easier means of access are being continually provided. In 1898
new passages were cut through the sides of the Grand Archway into the Lucas and Imperial Caves. The
entrances to the Caves are protected by iron doors, and the delicate formations by wire netting.
\ isitors are now able to inspect the Caves without danger or inconvenience, under the supervision of
careful guides, who, in addition to the electric light, are provided with magnesium lamps for the better illustration
of the marvellous formations which embellish the interior of the grottoes and temples contained in the different
caverns.
Ihe electric light was installed in the principal Caves in 1887. An engine placed in the Grand Arch was
at first used to supply the necessary power for the dynamo, but this form of motive power was found to be
unsatisfactory, and it was replaced, in 1890, by the erection of a Leffel wheel, which is driven by the underground
waters of McKeown’s Creek.
Notice-boards are erected at various points which indicate to visitors places where camping-out is permitted.
The caretaker will point out these places if requested.
For several years, beginning in 1899, Rainbow and Salmon trout fry and yearlings have been released in the
Jenolan River. The fish are rapidly increasing and will afford abundant sport to anglers when established.
The Grand Archway.
North-easterly from the Caves House, and 300 yards down what was known to earl)' visitors as the Camp
Creek, is the tunnel-shaped western entrance of the Grand Archway. From this point the waters of the creek have,
in the course of ages, cut their way right through the solid limestone mountain and formed the Grand Archway,
450 feet long', 40 to 70 feet high, w'ith a varying width of from 35 to 180 feet. The huge rocks and boulders
which marked the course of the old waterway through the Arch have been levelled to form part of the excellent
roadway which connects the Caves House with Mount Victoria. Near the eastern end, on the northern side,
are the new and old entrances to the Imperial Cave, while over the rock-strewn floor on the southern side rise


the stone steps which lead into
the Lucas Cave. These works,
carried out for the convenience of
visitors, have in a measure modi-
fied the original appearance of
the cavern, but its main features
remain unaltered.
“ Its proportions and outline are
gloomily impressive and awe-inspiring.
It is like the portico to some great
castle of Giant Despair. Its entrance
is a marvel of natural architecture,
and one wonders how so spacious a
roof can remain intact under a weight
so enormous.”*
From a seat on the steps to the Lucas Cave,
the visitor may in comfort view most of the
various points of interest. He is reminded by
the wallaby-polished surfaces of the rocks of the
time that has elapsed since they were thrown
down. Looking across the roadway, he sees the
gigantic rock called the “ Old Camp,” where
visitors used to rest before other accommodation
was provided. “ Here for many years, in the
midst of the wallaby-drives, near to the haunt of
a lyre-bird (native pheasant), the first caretaker
of the Caves, Mr. Jeremiah Wilson, had his
sleeping place.” 4 "
GRAND ARCHWAY BEFORE CONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY.
In front of the Old Camp stands
the massive “Pulpit Rock.” Away
above this is the “Organ Gallery,”
or “ Loft,” so called from the
grouping and form of a number
of columns and stalactites. Below
the “ Loft,” to the left, is a stalag-
mite which has taken the form of a
recumbent lion. A stalagmite on
* S. Cook, “Australian Wonderland.’’


the right looks
like a man’s
face. If the
spectator allows
his fancy to run
riot, he may con-
jure up many a
ghostly figure from
the fantastic forms which
rise dimly from the gloomy
recesses of the cavern. There
are several chambers running from
the sides of the Archway. The largest of these is called the “ Elitch of
Bacon Cave,’ which is somewhat extensive, and requires the services of a
guide to explore. It is not very attractive. It contains a number of
pendant rocks, in shape and colour resembling sides of bacon. Hence
its name.
The Carlotta Arch
THE VARLOTTA ARCH.
is perched up above, and lies between the Devil’s
Coach-house, or Easter Cave, and the Grand
Archway. It pleases the eye, whether the
Ikv. spectator looks at it from the roadway 200
feet below and catches a glimpse of the
wooded slope beyond, or sits under its
tinted fringe of stalactites and views
the valley below. Inside it is from
40 to 60 feet high and 40 feet broad.
It is reached either by ascending the
flight of steps that rise from the upper
entrance to the Nettle and Arch Cave
and pass under it, or the visitor may
take a path which commences opposite
TiW the Caves I louse, winds round the hill
ifr slope, and branches in several directions.
One branch zig-zags directly up the hill, and
drops down to a seat in front of the Arch ;
another passes the Elder Cave, and may be
followed thence either to the foot of the Arch or to
its summit. Having arrived at the latter point, the


E. J. Cooke , Photo.
WALLABIES ON LUCAS ROCKS.
spectator stands on a narrow natural bridge, railed in on
either side with iron standards and wire rope. This
bridge connects the rugged limestone bluffs which
overlie the Coach-house and Grand Archway and form
part of the huge natural limestone dam which stretches
across the creek valley. The view is superb, and is
only excelled by that from the Lucas Rocks. Looking
back, the entrance to the Elder Cave nestles in a
hollow below, while the zigzag road to Oberon is seen
mounting the steep hillsides. .South-easterly the road
to Mount Victoria winds its way above the rocky bed of
the Jenolan River, the music of whose waters can be
heard as they tumble over rocks and form cascades on
their journey seawards. The visitor may now partly
retrace his steps and take a peep into the Easter Cave
from one of the railed-in openings in its roof, named
the Look Down, and finally travel through it on his
way back to the Caves House. Or he may walk to the
Pinnacle Rocks which stand 320 feet above the floor
of the Grand Archway, and from thence reach the
path homewards, or continue his wanderings to the
Lucas Rocks. The most complete view of the Caves
House and its surroundings, and of the direction and
extent of the craggy grey limestone ridges, is to be
obtained from the summit of the Lucas Rocks, 500
feet above the roadway. The Lucas Caves lie under
their slopes. The Rocks are also reached by a track
which commences opposite the Caves House, passes
along their western side, and terminates at their southern


end. The view from the top well repays the little extra exertion needed to climb up to it. Below is the House,
looking, with its romantic environment, like some Swiss chalet. All around are views of rock and crag and
mountain ravine, relieved by glimpses of the roads to Tarana and Mount Victoria as they wind their serpentine
way up the mountain slopes. Wallabies may be seen here and there leaping from rock to rock, or peering at
the visitor from some sheltered nook or crevice. A clear view of their agile and graceful movements is obtained,
as they are not molested, and are therefore comparatively tame.
“ Perched upon this pinnacle, with terrible depths on each side, and awe-inspiring grandeur at every turn, the beholder is
apt to realise how very small is the space he fills in the economy of Nature, how inadequate is language to'express deep emotions
of the mind, and how marvellous are the works of the Creator.”'"
*S. Cook, “ Australian Wonderland.”
The Devil’s Coacth-house, or Easter Cave.
In pre-historic ages this arched cavern was the waterway of McKeown’s Creek, which, unlike the
channel of the Grand Archway, nearly follows from north to south the general direction of the Caves limestone.
In flood-time, the surplus waters of the creek still pour in a foaming torrent over the rock-strewn floor of the
Cave, but in ordinary seasons the creek drainage sinks underground some three miles up stream, then
probably finds its way under the Mammoth Cave, reappears in the “ L nderground River” of the Imperial
Cave, and finally gushes out of the rocks a few feet above the bed of the Jenolan River, at the eastern end
of the limestone bridge over McKeown’s Creek. Ihe water is utilised as a motive power for the electric light.
Ihe southern entrance to the Coach-house is somewhat narrow, and is partly blocked by a massive rock
standing sentinel-like at its mouth. At 60 feet from this entrance the cavern opens out to an enormous size.
It reaches a height of 160 feet. At its northern entrance it is about 120 feet wide. It is about 400 feet in
length, and can be traversed from end to end without difficulty. Standing within the Cave, the spectator is
assisted in his endeavour to realise its immense size by the light thrown in from openings high up in the
roof, brom the surface at one of these openings to the floor is 280 feet. Looking north, the massive stalactite-
fringed arch frames in Nature’s grandest style a lovely picture of the romantic wooded glen beyond. “At one


moment, the vastness and silence under the dome fix the attention of the observer on the mute but beautiful
forms time has slowly amassed under it ; at the next, the wild song of the lyre-bird re-echoes through the
cavern and draws the eye to the sunlit slopes without.”* Now and then a wallaby may be seen hopping from
NORTH ENTRANCE, DEVIL’S COACH-HOUSE.
rock to rock on its way
to some sheltered recess.
Near the southern end,
the cavern has an upper
chamber named the
Nettle Cave, described
elsewhere. From the
edge of this chamber is
obtained the finest view
of the Coach-house.
Below it are the huge
boulders and rocks
through which the storm-
waters tear their way in
flood-lime. Many of
these rocks are so highly
polished by the feet of
wallabies that their sur-
faces now resemble glazed
earthenware. Others are
ripple-marked, and “ re-
flect a thousand jets of
light from the facets of
their crystals.”*' The
* Railway Guide, 1886.


sides of the cavern are seen to be adorned -by pinnacled columns or gracefully-folded curtain stalactites. The
roof is decorated from end to end with stalactites up to 20 feet in length. These formations are tinted in a most
varied and charming way, and enchant the spectator with Nature’s painting. Some are tinged with delicate hues
of green, others with blue, or orange, or yellow, while others again have tints of pink or fawn.
The Nettle C ave.
this Cave received its title from the abundant growth of nettles on the slopes outside. It is an
upper chamber of the “ Coach-house. ’I he light in it varies from daylight to twilight and semi-darkness.. It
has two entrances ; the upper one will be noticed in the description of the Arch Cave ; the lower one is an
iron-barred gateway at the top of a steep flight of concrete steps, which rise from near the eastern end of the
Grand Archway. Ihe track inside is circuitous. At a short distance, and a little to the left, is the Sculptor’s
Studio, so called because here groups of stalagmites occur which have the appearance of unfinished statues.
These are surrounded with massive pillars, columns, draped stalactites, dainty grottoes and alcoves. Many
grotesque forms are modelled and pictured. Here is the likeness of a woman with a large bonnet. To the
right of the Studio is a gloomy hole, which descends into the Coach-house. It is railed off for the protection
of visitors. A little further on are stalagmites which represent a bird and animal in combat; another is like a
gigantic mushroom. Looking back in the direction of the Sculptor’s Studio is the Cemetery, where the
stalagmites look like tomb stones. In the debris on the floor may be seen myriads of small bones of
bats, &c., which tell of the lapse of time since the cavern had its first occupants. A short distance to the
north, where an opening in the Nettle Cave joins an inner wall of the Coach-house, a scene of surpassing
loveliness is unfolded before the spectator. In front are the tinted stalactites, columns and draperies which
embellish the Coach-house, and have been referred to in the description of that Archway. At the upper
end of some stone steps cut out of the rock are the beautiful bright green formations, termed the Willows,
because of the resemblance they bear to the graceful foliage of the willow. Above these is a stalagmite
like a fat sheep ; another resembles a petrified, gnarled and knotted tree-trunk 2 feet in diameter. The
Guide will also point out in various places other fantastic resemblances to forms in the world outside,


such as The Hand of Joshua, immense Lobsters, The Judge’s Wig, an Infant in bold projection on the
western side of the Coach-house, &c. The Ball Room is now entered. Placed here and there between
the ceiling and the level floor of this little “ plateau of Terpsichore ” are the Corinthian Columns,
groups of columns and stalagmites which are all more or less attractive. To the right of the steps
leading to the Ball Room “is a figure like ari orator in the act of exhortation. The forehead is bald,
long white locks are flowing on
to the shoulders, one arm is
upraised, and the pose gives
an idea of earnestness and
force. In front, just below the
bust, is a reading-desk fringed
with stalactites.”* The Nettle
Cave is of exceptional interest
and beauty. Although it con-
tains none of the delicate for-
mations of the “ night” Caves,
the visitor to Jenolan should
riot fail to inspect it, and, if
possible, when it is lit up by
the golden rays of the morning
sun as they pass through the
Coach-house, for then Nature’s
master-hand in the art of colour-
ing is best appreciated. Near
the Willows stand the wooden
flight of steps leading into the
Arch Cave.
THE WILLOWS.
* S. Cook, “ Australian
Wonderland.”


The Arch Cave.
THE ARCH CAVE.
I his cave at one time
possessed considerable
beauty. Its discovery
followed closely upon
that of the Main Arch-
ways, long before the
appointment of a care-
taker. It therefore
suffered from the depre-
dations or carelessness
of such early visitors as
had no regard for any
loss that posterity might
suffer at their hands. It
is related that “a Goth
from Bathurst destroyed
no less than five columns
in i860.”* The Cave,
however, still contains
much that is beautiful
and worthy of inspection,
and is about 100 yards
long. It is entered from
urn , .. , the Nettle Cave, near the
W.Mows, by ascending a wooden staircase and a few steps cut in the rock. It is shortly noticed that each foot-tread
gives out a hollow sound, and indicates how thin is the floor which separates tin's part of the cavern from the Nettle
* S. Cook, “'Australian Wonderland.”


Cave underneath. The passage is now wide and roomy, and is decorated here and there with many stalactitic and
dripstone forms. In the centre is a slender and graceful column reaching from ceiling to floor. Two tiny stalactites
may be seen which are still in course of formation. They are barely an inch long. As they have been under
observation for the past thirty years, they form an object-lesson on the slow growth of some of the formations, and
consequently on the irreparable damage that is done \Vhen any of them are injured. Proceeding along the passage,
on the right are some draped stalactites of a brownish tint. The end is reached at the Belfry, so called from a group
of irregular and massive stalactites which give out musical sounds when struck. These sounds may be heard in the
Nettle Cave, and what is more singular, in the Imperial Cave also. A return is now made along the passage, some
stone steps are ascended, and an exit is made at an iron gate which forms the upper entrance to the Arch and Nettle
Caves. Easterly, the limestone is precipitous, and access is therefore cut off' in that direction. Westerly, a steep
flight of stone, steps rises under the Carlotta Arch and terminates near the track which leads to the house.
The Lucas Cave.
This Cave is named after the Hon. John Lucas, M.L.C., who for some years represented the constituency
in which the Caves are situated. It lies below the eastern slope of the Lucas Rocks, on the southern side of the
Jenolan River.
“The floors are for the most part strewn with blocks of limestone, many of large size, which have fallen from the roof and
sides. In several places, high above a man’s height, are to be seen old water-lines so strongly marked that it is evident the water-
level must have remained constant for considerable periods of time. Apparently, there have been two periods of dripstone growth,
one of remote age and local in character, in which the stalactites are remarkably thick. The newer growth exhibits fantastic and
beautiful forms, from the hollow reed and semi-transparent veil to the snow-white dome stalagmite, the crystal-fringed pool, the
wave-lined floor, and the crooked fringed shapes that are turned in all directions.”*
The old entrance was reached by following a serpentine track over the limestone mountain. Mr. F. J. Wilson,
the late caretaker, discovered a new means of access through the southern wall of the Grand Archway.
This convenient route has now been made available by enlarging natural tunnels, levelling their floors,
* L. H. G. Young, “ Railway Guide,” 1886.


and erecting starrways. It will repay the visitor to the Lucas Cave to precede the Guide and rest for a while midway
on tins new pathway. S.tt.ng ,n comfort within a railed-in platform erected on the cliff face, one is able to appreciate
the scene of majestic beauty which is there presented. To the left is the entrance to the Grand Archway and the
pinnae ed summit of its overly,ng mass of limestone. In front are the precipitous bluffs, in which are the entrances
to the Carlotta Arch, the Nettle Cave, and the Devil's Coach-house, daintily festooned with creepers and the evergreen
foliage of indigenous shrubs. Below lies the beautiful little limestone bridge over McKeown’s Creek, while ever and
anon the Jenolan River waters give out melody as they tumble over its rocky bed, which winds through denselv-
wooded and picturesque gorges. There are two wooden stairways in the passage leading to the Lucas Cave Near
the top of the second one is an opening to the cliff face, through which the insulated wires for the lighting of the
Cave are brought. The next point of interest is at the foot of some steps in The Ante-room, where a stalagmitic
deposit occurs which resembles a huge jelly-fish and is named The Medusa. Overhead is a group of stalactites
while the walls of this part of the passage are marked by attractive stalactitic formations. The visitor shortly
enters the vast cavern named the Cathedral, at the foot of the steps leading from the old entrance. High up is
seen a whitish canopy, which has been named the Pulpit Rock or Organ Loft. On the sloping floor to the left are
several large dome-shaped stalagmites, and at the end of the cavern is another, much more massive than the others
but similar m appearance. Above it is a remarkable representation of a man’s face on the wall. This majestic
cavern is so lofty that the roof is only dimly seen, even with the aid of the magnesium light. Passing on, a glimpse
is o tamed, on looking back, of a large fluted and draped formation, too high up to be distinctly seen. The visitor
now arrives at the Slide, a slippery incline down which it was at one time necessary to make undignified progress.
Steps are now cut to the right, and lead through a passage which is more or less decorated with stalactitic growth.
t the foot of these steps is the Music Hall, so called from its fine acoustic properties. Here a weak voice sounds
u and sonorous. Ihe chamber is low. Its floor was at one time white and beautiful, but the tramping of many
feet has rendered it common-place. To the left of it is a pretty little grotto containing pure white stalactites, &c.
. till descending, the Shawl Cave next claims attention, at the entrance to the Exhibition Cave. On the sloping
roof are some white lime draperies, and groups of banded and frilled scarf-like sheets of lime, which hann- in graceful
folds, and are very beautiful. The sloping roof is of considerable length, and is faced by a wall which is more or less
attractively draped by stalactitic growths. Here and there are formations like frozen waterfalls. At some distance on
t te left, on the perpendicular face of a huge rock, hangs the Curtain. This is a white and tinted formation, with
long, straight, but still graceful folds. It appears to be about 15 feet in length and in width. To the right are some


tilted stalag-
mites. Passing
on, the visitor
stands in the
centre of the
vast Exhibition
Cave, which is
250 feet long and
140 feet broad,
and of consider-
able height *in
places. Close by
is the Broken
Column, which
attracts universal
interest, and has
been pictured in
many photo-
graphs and
illustrations. It was at one time a
grand pillar, uniting roof and floor.
It appears to have been gently
fractured by the sinking of the massive rock at its base, and now consists of
two sections, the lower part being separated from the upper by a space of
io inches. As the Guide throws the magnesium light over the cavern,
tinted draperies and sparkling stalactites are seen to ornament it here and
there. To the right is the Canopy. Here the lime has coated graceful curves,
and then formed stalactitic draperies, which terminate in a fringe of beautiful
long stalactites. Near at hand are fantastic forms, such as a blackfellow’s
THE BROKEN COLUMN.
THE BRIDGE. PAGE 42.
THE CURTAIN. PAGE 38.
“Nulla Nulla,” a Woman and Child, an Arm and Hand, &c.
In front is the Proscenium. This is a large arched opening
fringed with
stalactites and
decorated above
with reddish-
brown shawls
marked with
bands of a darker
tint. On its right
side are some
beautiful forma-
tions, which in-
clude a fine


semi-transparent white shawl, and a broken column
much smaller than the one alreadv noticed. In
ft J
process of time, the broken parts of this column
will probably re-unite, for three small stalactites are
now growing from the edges of the base of the
upper part. The left side of the Proscenium is
handsomely decorated. Here and there on the
“.Stage” are small stalagmites, which may be taken
to indicate the actors. A larger stalagmite in front
is called “The Russian’s Face.”
Passing through the Proscenium, a crystalline
and amber-tinted formation named the Tipsy Cake,
is seen ; then a fine white column. An ascent up a
long flight of steps on the right takes the visitor to the
Mafeking Cave.
io to 20 feet broad, 80 feet long, and from 15 to
40 feet high. This superb cavern contains dainty
grottoes packed with stalactites, silk-like shawls,
translucent white pillars, &c. Sparkling cascade
formations descend from roof to floor in tints of
amber, brown, and terra-cotta, and are surmounted
by other charming forms of dripstone; near the
entrance is a stalagmite named The Greek Quoit
Player.
Returning to the main Lucas Cave, a roof
decorated with small stalactites is succeeded by a
THE PROSCENIUM.


massive crystalline “cascade.'' Rising from the cascade
is a conical stalagmite, which has been named “ Fusi-
yama ” (Fujisan), from its resemblance to a sacred
mountain in Japan. Under the ornamental roof formed
by the Cascade is the Jewel Casket, one of Natlire’s
treasure-houses. The Casket is contained in a small
recess, and can be viewed by one person only at a time.
The rock which forms its roof has been tilted at some
period, and the fragile crystalline pendants hanging from
its ceiling are not perpendicular. The floor and sides
sparkle with die light reflected from innumerable tinted
crystals, which dazzle the eye with their splendour. Gems
of all kinds, diamonds, opals, agates, &c., appear to have
been scattered about with a prodigal hand. The pathway
now runs north-westerly along the eastern boundary of the
Exhibition Cave. (The “Canopy” is near the limit of
its western boundary.) On the right of the pathway are
the Terraces, a series of beautiful white and cream-
coloured formations, which here and there are like cas-
cades whose waters had been congealed as they descended
from ledge to ledge. Among other objects of interest is
a formation which resembles a water-jug artistically
designed in terra-cotta. Passing on, and then looking
back, a stalagmite is seen in which there is a remarkable
likeness of Sir Henry Parkes in profile. English visitors
see in this stalagmite the features of Lord Salisbury.
Looking forward, “The Bishop” stands on the summit
of a large stalagmitic formation. Among other diminutive
stalagmites is one said to resemble Her Majesty the
D
O. Triekett, Photo.
SHAWL AND PILLARS MAFEKING CAVE.


Photo. by O. Trickett.
THE MINARET. PAGE 44.
Queen, with crown and coronet. Farther along,
when the arc light is switched on, the head of a
red Indian is disclosed, and the charming grotto
named the Home of the Fairies comes into view.
Attractive brown and crystalline draperies hang from
the edge of the ledge which forms its floor. The
grotto contains innumerable white and brown pen-
dants and columns, and some beautiful stalagmites.
A huge chasm is here spanned by an Iron Bridge.
Forty-five feet below this bridge, 250 feet below the
dome of the Cathedral Chamber, and over 500 feet
below the summit of the Lucas Rocks outside, an
incandescent light illuminates the pellucid waters of
a still and silent pool some 16 feet deep. This pool
is connected with the waterway which drains the
belt of limestone on the south side of the Jenolan
River, and forms many of the caverns in the River
Cave. Looking across the yawning gulf, the view is
sublime. Huge rocks lie piled, one over the other,
as far as the eye can reach, and mark in a vivid
way, the manner in which the cavern was formed.
Successive pools of water caused the floor to subside
periodically until the present permanent water-level
was reached. After each subsidence, rocks—some
of them many tons in weight—have fallen from the
roof and sides of the cavern and so formed its rugged
and broken floor. The end of the Exhibition Cave is
now reached, and the visitor enters the passage which
leads to the Lurline Cav e. On the wav the Guide


calls attention to a formation like an old lady in the act of stooping. The Lurline Cave contains numerous
grottoes and recesses embellished with beautiful tinted and coral-like formations, and some fine white stalactites
and columns. Further along is the Bone Cave, so called from many fragments of bones being found in it when
first discovered. (The Bone Cave overlies the Skeleton — see Skeleton Cave.) In an alcove off this chamber,
a stalactite io feet 8 inches long hangs within a cluster
of attractive stalactites and columns. Near at hand is
the Irish Corner containing curious formations like
potatoes. Next comes the Snowball Cave, whose
roof and walls are covered with deposits like snowballs
and cauliflowers. Finally, a beautiful crystalline
formation named the Crystal Fountain, with over-
hanging stalactite and the fossil remains of a wallaby
are passed on the way to daylight in the Grand
Archway.
Kerry & Co., Photo. ]
Copyright.
THE STYX.
(RAFT USED IN EXPLORATION NOW REPLACED BY PUNT.)
The River Brandies of the
Lucas Cave.
By the discovery of the “ River” branches of the
Lucas Cave (1903—1904), over half a mile of caverns of
unrivalled beauty and grandeur has been added to the
revealed treasures of the Wonderland of Jenolan.
These branches are all contained in the system of
channels which have been excavated by the under-
ground waters that run from south to north and find
their way through the western bank of the Jenolan
River, opposite the outlet of the underground waters of
the Imperial Caves.


Kerry & Co., Photo
[Copyright.
THE FURZE BUSHES.
The River Cave.
Starting from a point about
25 feet from the western end
of the Lucas Bridge, a descent
is made to the mammoth tumbled rocks forming the
floor of the Exhibition Cavern. From here, a pathway
leads down to the present waterway, and an ascent
is then made into the Tower Chambers. In these
will be found groups of beautifully tinted pillars, superb
cream-coloured terraced stalagmites, including that
named The Minaret.
A ledge at the end of the Tower overhangs The
Precipice, which terminates in a partly concealed pool
varying in depth from 35 to 45 feet, according to the
season of the year. From this ledge a weird and awe-
inspiring scene is presented to the spectator, sombre
walls, whose contour is lost in inky darkness, bound a
chasm which seems to terminate in the far distance in
a dismal pool which has been named the “ Styx.”
On descending, however, the gloom is rapidly dispelled
and a stream of pellucid water is disclosed, to cross
which a comfortable punt is provided. On leaving
the punt a fine pillared recess, Neptune’s Cabinet,
is seen on the left. Following along the Red Passage
a cavern is reached which contains a series of beauti-
ful groups, including The Sisters, The: Queen’s
Canopy, and the Sentries. Ascending thence to the Junction Chamber, the Shower of Shawls comes
into view. This beautiful formation is one of many amber and chocolate tinted mantles which decorate and drape a
series of rounded ledges. Above these, the walls are graced tier on tier, with massive fluted pillars, draperies, and
cascades. Still higher are the lofty and grand Mons Meg caverns, which are referred to later on.


Leaving the “ Shower of Shawls,” a network of
passages, commencing with the Hammer Chamber, is
reached. Several of these zig-zag their way into the
underground waterway, while others communicate with
upper and spacious caverns richly furnished with elegant
dripstones, among which may be noted Esther, a fine
white stalagmite, and a crystalline deposit named The
Frozen Sea. Following the most direct route, narrow
corridors lead to curious, deposits which resemble the
potatoes of the “Irish Corner” near the Bone Cave,
passing under The Camel’s Back, past the entrances
to the Temple of Baal, and the Orient Cave
(described later on), the Furze Bushes, and “ The
White Gum Tree,” fantastic, yet exquisite and dainty
designs in lime of deciduous vegetation, are brought to
view. Deposits of clean sand carpet, in a fitting way,
the approach to Olympia. In this gorgeous chamber
the central figure is the Grand Column, a mammoth
amber-tinted fluted stalagmite, supported by a secondary
column, from the base of which the crystalline floors
descend in graceful curves to a symmetrical mantle
hanging over a beautiful bower. AH round the Grand
Column are pillars, stalactites, shawls and draped
recesses, some majestic and imposing, others diminu-
tive, but all resplendent in shining tints of varied
hues. A cloister-like room and narrow passages lead
thence past the long shawl named The Sounding
Board to the splendid Tent Canopy or White
Temple, at the back of which are snow-white pillars,
O. Trickett, Photo.
THE GRAND COLUMN.


and clear pools in crystal basins. Next comes a reddish tinted mantle
which hangs from a ledge for 25 feet or more, and partly conceals some
O. Trickett, Photo.
THE SHAWL (MONS MEG BRANCH).
very fine bunches
of translucent
“Mysteries.” Be-
low this again, a
snow-white stalag-
mite faces another
but smaller mantel
under whose pro-
tection nestles a
grotto of beautiful
lime deposits.
Further on the
cavern narrows,
but contains a
series of enchant-
ing and fairy-like
bowers, festooned
and garlanded
with crystal lime
O. Trickett, Photo.
THE TENT CANOPY, OR WHITE TEMPLE.
sprays which carpet the floors, jut out from the
walls, or grace the ceilings. In the near vicinity are
a number of low and tortuous passages, which are
mostly unsurveyed and are unlikely to be opened
for inspection. These contain formations known as
The Fortifications, Enchanted Forest, Red Temple,
Fairyland, Kddystone, Diana’s Grove, Daisy Bed,
Hanging Garden, &c.


Moris Meg
Brancf].
This is an upper chamber running from the formation referred to as the
“Shower of Shawls” to “Olympia.” It is lofty in places—upwards of 40 feet-
and is named from a huge fallen pillar 22 feet long and 5 feet in diameter which
lies on the floor like some ancient dismantled cannon.* Near this pillar are some
beautiful terraced stalagmites, and a superb banded shawl 20 feet long and 4 feet broad, which is especially
interesting on account of its unusual size. Looking back from a point above these formations, a splendid
group of shawls and dripstones in tints varying from a delicate amber to a deep chocolate are revealed by
the magnesium lamp. As the path upwards is followed, the skeleton of a bat embedded in the side of a
small stalagmite may be noticed. Next, a group of columns are seen forming a background to a tall yet
slender white column of beautiful and chaste design named Cleopatra’s Needle. Near the latter are floors
with deep fallings of crvstalline deposits dividing irregular basins which lie at the foot of sparkling walls.
THE DELL BLUE MOUNTAINS.
From a coign of vantage near the upper rims of these basins, an imposing view
is obtained of the general features of the loftv and capacious caverns which
extend downward to beyond the mammoth shawl. Ascending to the highest
point in the cavern a yawning chasm—a veritable pit of Eblis—opens downwards
to the lower passages near the stalagmite “ Esther.” On one side of this hole is
a large shawl united to a stalagmite. To the right is the Grey Grotto. Descend-
ing by an uninteresting passage, whose walls are marked with the scratches of
bats, access is gained to a superbly decorated portico, forming the entrance to
the Chamber known as Olympia and which has already been described.
The Teiriple
of Baal.
0
This is the western branch which leaves the River
Cave a short distance north of the Furze Bushes.
After travelling - for 250 feet through narrow and
tortuous passages in a general westerly direction and
passing on the way some shawls, a large cavity named The Dragon’s Den
and some Mystery formations, an entry is made into the magnificent cavern,
The Temple of Baal, which is 200 feet long and reaches a width of 60 feet
* Mons Meg is the name of an ancient cannon standing outside Edinburgh Castle.


and a height of 80 feet. In the centre is a superb, glistening, and pure white stalagmitic mass 30 feet across ;
on either side are white and reddish banded shawls of great length, hanging from chocolate tinted walls which
curve upwards to a lofty dome. Artistically grouped
against the chocolate background are clusters of curled
and twisted lime sprays, the whole forming a scene of
O. Trickett, Photo.
THE TEMPLE OF BAAL.
O. Trickett, Photo.
THE GEM OF THE SOUTH.
majestic and impressive beauty. Near the western end
of the Cavern is the Gem of the South Canopy'.


i his is an entrancing - piece of natures unrivalled workmanship. Entwined with delicate filigrees, are
silk-like shawls, and slendei translucent pendants from each of whose tips hangs a shining crystal
drop of water,
“ Half hesitating as a maiden might,
To seek the wonders of an unknown step
And launch itself in space.”
—Haviland.
Dainty pure white stalagmites and pillars add their quota to the beaut}' of this canopy. Looking back,
an upper chamber is seen in which a wealth of chocolate fringes, billows of crystalline rocks, and
innumerable other fantastic lime deposits meet the eve.
The Orient Cave.
“ Thick with sparkling Orient gems,
The portal shone inimitable on earth.”
, —Milton.
This is an upper branch of the River Cave, which rises
from near the Furze Bush and runs in a southerly and
south-westerly direction. After climbing up sparkling
frozen cascades, past crystal walls, and a beautiful canopy,
richly festooned with twisted lime sprays, &c., a halt is
made at a glorious basin whose floor and sides are formed of masses and bunches of amber crystals.
Surrounding it are sparkling formations, terraced minarets, tinted shawls, and slender pillars extending to a
height of 30 feet, which all vie in adding splendour to the scene. At this point the Cave branches to the
west and south.
Western Branch,
Orient Cave.
In the ascent over crystalline floors many beautiful cream and amber tinted
dripstones are passed, among which a folded shawl like soft wool in texture with
knots and fringes, is a special feature. Near the uppermost level is the lofty Egyptian
Co lonnadk in which gorgeous shawls merge either into fluted pillars or amber tinted
cascades. High up are terra-cotta pillars, oriental in their design and colouring. Beyond the latter is a
striking collection of stalagmites named the Group of Pilgrims. Somewhat lower and in proximity to an
imposing fluted column measuring some 30 feet from top to base, and named The Pillar of Hfrculhs,
fine shawls are to be seen. They are of exceptional interest, being marked alternately with a broad and dark
band and then a pure white and translucent band. The branch terminates in a splendid chamber containing
fine shawls and other attractive dripstones.


Southern Branch
Orient Cave.
Rising over a ledge canopied by the
Diamond Wing, a passage- of over 200
feet in length runs southerly. It is com-
plete from end to end with a succession of
enchanting bowers and grottoes, decked with tendrils, garlands, and
festoons. Here and there long crystals, like branching antlers, ser\e
to carry silk-like ribbons. Interspersed with the grottoes are spark-
ling pools, tinted pillars, shawls and canopies. Occasionally a
beribboned garland seems to glisten with a silvery radiance. Close
inspection shows this to be due to tiny rills of lime-charged watci
which are silently, yet imperceptibly, adding further floral tributes.
“ The ever-playing shuttles, which
Weave the fairy fabric.”
The Branch ends in a reddish
tinted hall in which there is a
fine canopy.
SKeletori Cave *
I 5 ro-
ceeding
about
Ho feet north-westerly down the
“Underground River' from the
ladder leading up to the Main
River Cave, after crossing the
water twice on the way, an entry
to the Skeleton Cave is found on
Kerry & Co. , Photo.
[Copyright
THE PILLAR OF HERCULES.
DELICATE LIME
TENDRILS
AND ARABESQUES.
THE DIAMOND WING
ORIENT CAVE.
* R. Etheridge, jun., and O. Trickett—Annual
Report, Department of Mines, for 1903,
p. 137; Records Geological Survey of New
South Wales, 1904, vn, Part 4, pp. 325.


the eastern bank. During periods of flood the water rises, and access to this cave is not then possible. It
extends north-easterly 250 feet to a deep pool which appears to be part of the main waterway, and thence
westerly 200 feet. At 150 feet from the entrance the skeleton of an aboriginal lies partly embedded in the
stalagmitic floor. It has probably lain in its present position for a period, extending long before the colonisation
of Australia. How the unfortunate man got there is difficult to conjecture, knowing the antipathy the
Australian aboriginal has to enter any place where daylight is excluded. It appears possible he fell
O. Trickett, Photo.
THE SKELETON.
through the opening from the face of the cliff high up
in the Cathedral, thence groping in the intense darkness
to have rolled and tumbled into the Bone Cave, and from
thence through a chasm which appears to have existed at
no distant date immediately above where the skeleton now
lies. Perhaps future investigation may help to elucidate
the problem. Beyond the place where the skeleton is
located the cave is beautifully decorated. Among other
chaste designs is a charming bower in which a semicircle
of translucent dripstones hang gracefully over a dainty
crystalline basin filled with water which has been named
the Bath of Venus.
“No favoured eye was e’er allowed to gaze
On lovelier spectacle in fairy days.”
Within view of the bath, fine and imposing pillars and
draperies frame the opening to an enormous cavern. A
sheer drop here of 22 feet discloses a pool of beautiful cleat-
water 30 feet deep. Beyond this a series of splendid
grottoes, cascades, crystal shawls, and fantastic filigrees
occur. To a beautifully white crystalline deposit, the name
of The Dove’s Wing has been given.


The Elder Cave.
This Cave received its name from an Elder 'Free growing in its mouth, which is situated in a picturesque
hollow, near to, and on the track leading to the Carlotta Arch. It has been found impracticable to excavate passages
such as those which make inspection so easy in the other Caves open to the public. The visitor should therefore be
provided with a costume in which he or she can stoop, creep, or crawl, as occasion may require. It is also necessary
to attend strictly to the instructions of the Guide to avoid the danger of accident. Having entered the iron gateway,
a passage of some 80 feet, more or less ornamental, leads the visitor to a cavern into which the sun shines through a
grated opening at the surface, and gives a pleasant glimpse of daylight. File journey is then continued downward,
and a rock, known as the “ Butcher’s Block,” is passed. A ladder is seen further on, which leads up into the
Lyceum Cave (late Elysium). The latter is some too feet in length, but is not now particularly attractive, and is
seldom visited. Opposite this is a hole which has been followed down into the left branch of the Imperial Cave.
Passing onwards, care is taken to avoid a deep chasm which descends to the Right Imperial. The Crystal Cave is
then entered, and the passages become more attractive. The first chamber contains a grotto, ornamented with
stalactites and some draped formations. The left side of the chamber is decorated bv some fine stalactites
a column, and some thin “shawl” formations. On the opposite side, a ripple-marked floor, a stalagmite, a
cascade formation, a small grotto with crystalline deposits, and a few tinted pillars and stalagmites are successively
viewed. At a short distance, a chamber is entered which contains some stalagmites and stalactites, the latter much
mutilated, and a ledge of rock, under which are some dull-coloured coral-like formations. A good view is obtained
of another chamber, at a higher level than the last, which is very beautiful, although much mutilated. In it are
many stalactites, stalagmites, pillars, and shawls; some tinted, others white. In a recess on one side is a small and
pretty grotto. A return is now made, and a narrow and broken passage is entered. This leads to a fair-sized
cavern. The visitor may here choose between two paths, one of which leads to the Jersey Cave (see page 53), the
other to the Coral Cave. The latter will now be described. Descending directly under the chambers last traversed,
a halt is made at the hole known as Ridley’s Short Cut. This is a chasm 56 feet deep, down which a visitor
accidentally fell, and was found some time after in an unconscious condition. This once dangerous spot is now
protected by wire-netting. The Coral Cave is then entered. This beautiful cavern is over 150 feet in length, but
its roof is low. Near the entrance, innumerable eoral-like formations grace the walls and roof; on the floor are dainty
little forms like pine-trees. Further on is a beautiful fringe of stalactites. Then the pathway passes over a very


thin layer of formation, below which is a hole 12 feet deep, the sides of which are formed of gravel and drift. The
end of the cavern is particularly beautiful ; its floor, roof, and sides are covered with white deposits, of which some
are like balls of wool or snow, or bunches of grapes, while others are coral-like. This cavern is of special interest,
as its splendid decoration differs so greatly from that of the other Caves. A return is now made by way of the
Imperial Cave. '
The Jersey Cave.
A steep flight of steps rises from the foot of the chasm known as Ridley’s Short Cut.* From their
summit a narrow passage leads to a hole through which an entry may be made from the Elder Cave. The
Jersey Cave is usually entered from the Elder Cave, after the visitor has inspected the latter. A descent down
another flight of steps and an iron stairway takes the visitor to the narrow cavern known as the Jersey Cave.
In places the passage between the wire-netting does not much exceed 1 foot in width, and is therefore occasionally
inconvenient to traverse. A white crystalline drapery-like formation, some 20 feet in height, is first met with ;
this is succeeded by tinted pillars and stalagmites, having a white background, which is decorated by a fringe
of stalactites. Further on are groups of curious stalagmites, encrusted with coral-like growths, some of which
resemble fir-trees. Overhead, small reed-like pendants hang from a white roof. A very beautiful grotto is seen
on the left, in which are some pure white crystalline stalactites, draped formations, and a dome-shaped stalagmite.
A large chamber is then entered, in which is a dull-coloured “Cascade” formation. Further on, the roof is
decorated by coral-like growths and slender pendants. Here is seen a stalactite which resembles a turkey
gobbler’s head. Opposite this is a diminutive grotto, with ornamental pillars and a terraced entrance. Peculiar
and fantastic forms, one of which looks like the gnarled root of a shrub, columns, pendants, and coral-like growths
continue to the terminal chamber. This is dome-shaped, and contains a few tinted and coral-like stalactites, and
some reddish-tinted drapery formations.
* See description of the Right Imperial Cave.
The Imperial Caves.
The Imperial Cave was discovered by Mr. Jeremiah Wilson in 1579, when, in company with a number of
other adventurous spirits, he descended a chasm in the Elder Cave and landed on the floor of the Imperial Cave.
Further exploration enabled him to find an entrance from the Grand Archway. This means of access was


superseded in 1898 by a much easier route, also from the Grand Archway. Once through the iron gate which
guards the entrance, the visitor enters the wonderful- subterranean chambers where through long ages eternal
darkness reigned supreme; now, under the electric and magnesium lights, the hidden beauties of the caverns
and grottoes are revealed to the entranced spectator. At a short distance from the entrance is the “ Woolshed ”
Chamber, whose roof and walls are ornamented by deposits somewhat like fleeces of wool. The passage now
branches into what are known as the Right and Left .Imperial Caves.
The Left Imperial Cave.
An entry is made into this branch by ascending a flight of steps and an iron staircase ; a pebbly drift
containing fossil bones, named the “ Gravel Pits,” is passed on the way. A first halt is made at the Architect’s
Studio. I his cavern contains three lofty chambers, varying in width from 12 to 30 feet. Many fantastic formations
which have been likened to architectural studies are met with in the “ Studio.” The chambers are also profusely
adorned with a great variety of stalactitic and stalagmitic growths, some of which are very massive, while others are
delicate and fragile. In a recess near the end of the Studio is a stalagmite, about 6 feet high, which tapers gracefully
upwards from a base only two inches in diameter. After ascending a flight of steps, a low-roofed, and therefore
somewhat inconvenient, passage leads to the Bone Cave. The floor of this cavern was, when first discovered,
strewn with small bones—hence its name. Groups of stalactites hang from the roof, some of which are semi-
transparent, while a few reed-like pendants may be seen in recesses in the walls. At a few paces further is the
chamber named the Shambles. Here are numerous massive stalactites which resemble slaughtered sheep, sides of
beef, &c. Returning by way of the Architect’s Studio, the Margarita Cave is next in order. This Cave was
named after the wife of Lieut.-Colonel Cracknell, Superintendent of Telegraphs, when it was first illuminated with
the electric light. It is remarkable for the large size of its stalactites. Near the centre of the chamber is a
small stalagmite named Queen Victoria. Just behind the latter is a form like a diminutive horse’s head. A cavern
named I he Vestry is sometimes visited at this stage. It contains two passages, one above the other, in which are
some fine stalactites. The next chamber is the Lady Carrington Cave, a large cavern, a part of which overlies
the Right Imperial Cave, at a point where that Cave in its turn overlies the “Underground River.” The
Lady Carrington Cave is about 60 yards long, 10 to 20 feet high, and 20 to 40 feet wide. It is profusely
decorated by beautiful stalactitic growths, and contains many charming recesses. One stalagmite is known as


the “ Madonna and Child," although the resemblance is somewhat indefinite. Another small stalagmite on a
rocky projection looks like a woman on horseback. At the back of the “ Madonna ” is a daintily-festooned
recess named Minnie’s Grotto. Here are a profusion of delicate white pendants, and some of the fantastic
growths which have been termed “Mysteries." Beyond a long flight of steps is seen a face in profile, which
has been named “Napoleon." To the right, near their foot, a narrow tunnel descends to the right branch and
to the Underground River. The ascent of the steps and further progress along a serpentine passage brings the
visitor to the Wilkinson Cave, named after the late C. S. Wilkinson. At the entrance is the “Anteroom,” a
highly-ornamented chamber. Near by on the right is a sparkling crystalline rock. On the left is a grotto in
which the formations are like those of the “Crystal Cities” in the Right Imperial. The floor of this grotto is
terraced, while from its roof hang clusters of lime deposits like coral. Further on is the Snow-drift, This is
a glistening white mound, over which hang long thin semi-transparent stalactites. The snow-drift is prettily
set off by a shallow basin at its base, which frequently contains a little pool of clear pellucid water. A flight of
steps is now ascended, to the right of which are numerous groups of stalactites. Near the summit of the
steps an incandescent lamp throws light into a cavern 20 feet below, in which is seen a group of stalactites.
A descent is then made down another flight of steps. On their left a glimpse is obtained of several thin white
semi-transparent “shawls" of considerable beauty. At the foot of these steps is the Fairies Grotto. This
charming grotto contains innumerable pendants which have tiny and fantastic growths on their surfaces. Near
a brown-tinted “ drapery" formation are some diminutive and beautiful white semi-transparent “shawls."
One stalagmite on the floor has been named “ The Bishop." Turning back to the Lady Carrington Cave
two chasms are passed, down whose gloomy depths peeps may be taken to holes which lead to the Right
Imperial and to the Underground River. The Grotto Cave is next entered. This cavern contains many
fantastic and interesting formations, among which is a gigantic fluted column. The next halting-place is the
Lucinda Cave. In the passage to it are many recesses of rare beauty. These nooks sparkle with calcite
crystals, and are decorated with innumerable fragile stalactites. The Lucinda Cave is lofty and of considerable
width. From the roof depend myriads of tiny stalactites. To the right is a magnificent formation, like a
cascade whose waters had become congealed in graceful curves as they descended from ledge to ledge.
It is sprinkled with crystals which sparkle like diamonds. Near by are draped alabaster-like columns and
a fringe of delicately-tinted pendants. At its base, the cascade spreads out in ripples and terraces which have
formed a “series of basins, the rims of which run in and out like frilling, and represent in miniature


THE MYSTERY.
the water-lines of pretty inlets. The edges of
these basins are about two inches in height,
covered under the frillings with sparkling coral
forms. Ihe ripple marks on the inside have per-
fection in every segment, and in every cell lurks
tremulous light. ”* On the opposite side of the
cavern are beautifully-banded shawls which hang
in graceful folds. One of them is spotted with red,
and has a red border. A small hole in the floor
is seen which continues down to a chamber on
the right of the iron staircase leading to Katie’s
Bower. In a tiny recess is a marvellously
beautiful and fascinating grotto called the
Diamond Grotto. The aperture through which
it is viewed is small in size. Its floor is composed
of crystals of dazzling brightness, disposed in
waves and curves. For a height of 6 inches its
walls are covered with amber-coloured crystals ;
above these are others of paler tint. A tiny pillar
is seen which is remarkable for its beauty. Its
top is draped, and it stands on a base of rich
yellow crystals. On one side of this liliputian
chamber is the Encampment. Here, inside a
miniature fortification, a mass of coloured crystals
represent a number of tents, arranged in rows
with soldiers bivouacking here and there. On
the wall above are some curious little clumps of
fantastic and twisted lime deposits. Turning back
* After S. Cook.


and descending some steps, a marvellous canopy
called the Mystery is next viewed. This is an
extraordinary, but beautiful, formation which
projects 8 feet from the wall. It has grown in
a most irregular manner. Some of the deposits
of which it is formed project outwards, then
twist or curl and terminate in a perpendicular
pendant ; others turn upwards, some twist and
twine over and around each other and baffle the
spectator in any endeavour to realise the laws
which governed their growth. Below the
Mystery, and a little to the right, is a massive
white and graceful drip formation, above which
are some very fine draped and tinted stalactites.
The opposite wall is beautifully decorated by
terraced and variously-tinted formations. A
column near at hand has been named “Pompey’s
Pillar.” Descending an iron staircase, the visitor
enters the large cavern named Katie’s Bower.
Some steps are now ascended. Half-way up, on
the left, is a cavity which is richly garnished
with amber-tinted crystals. Above the steps the
roof is seen to be richly ornamented with
fringes, a cluster of fine pendants, and some
draped forms of stalactites. To the right are
several curtain-like sheets of formation, 30 feet
long, which sparkle with crystals. They are of
a reddish tint, and have a white border. The
visitor now looks down into the terminal
n
KATIE'S BOWER.


chamber. On the right of its entrance are white canopy-like formations brilliantly decorated with large crystals.
Clusters of white and tinted stalactites depend from the roof, and delicate lime draperies hang in soft folds on
the walls. In the lower part of this chamber are two basins of still and pellucid water, which serve to complete
a picture of rare loveliness. The interiors of the basins are covered with crystals, which in one are clear and
white, and in the ether are of a terra-cotta colour. An object of interest, if not of beauty, may be seen on
one of the walls, in the shape of a petrified skeleton of a bat. Katie’s Bower lies under “The Fairies’
Grotto,” mentioned above.
The Right Imperial Cave.
The first point of interest in the right branch of the Imperial Cave is found in the Underground River. At
about 120 feet from the steps which lead to the Left Imperial Cave, a descent of 50 feet down a concrete stairway lands
the visitor on the edge of the Underground River. Here the waters of McKeown’s Creek, which find their way
beneath the surface some two miles distant, are again seen. The current is considerable, but the water is so limpid, and
its surface so unruffled, that the eye detects no motion until the Guide places a small piece of lighted candle on the
water. The lighted taper coquettes for a while with the back water running round projecting rocks, and placid pools,
but is shortly borne into the main current, when it sails away rapidly and is soon lost in the distance. The channel
is about 10 fett wide and 12 to 18 inches deep, and runs very nearly in the direction of the limestone belt— i.c.,
from north to south. Following it upwards for a short distance, stalactites hanging from the arched roof of the
tunnel are seen so perfectly mirrored in the water below that the spectator finds a difficulty in realising that the
lower portion of the beautiful picture is simply a reflection of the rocks and pendants above ; each portion of the
ornamented roof has its duplicated presentment below. Reascending the stairway, the descent of a few steps on
the right of the passage takes the visitor to the Grecian Bend. This is the name given to an attractve formation
like the back of a lady’s mantle. Below it is a variously-tinted cascade. Among a group of stalactites is one
whose upper part is reddish in tint, while the lower part is white. Fragments of fossil bones may be seen in the
rocks on one wall of the chamber. Returning to the main passage, another opening to the Underground River
and caverns which lead upwards into the Left Imperial is passed. A halt is made at a lofty chamber, known
as Ridley’s Short Cut, which communicates with the Elder Cave, 56 feet above. At its summit an
incandescent light gives the visitor a good idea of its height, and shows the point from which the Imperial Cave


was discovered. To the right are attractive
“cascades” and other formations,
while nearer the spectator are
two large white “shawls.”
One of these is 20 feet
long and 18 inches deep.
Further on to the left
is a lime basin called
the Salt Pans,
which contain some
coral-like deposits
and small bones
coated with lime.
On the right is the
Crystal Rock.
This is a beautiful
salmon-col ou red
formation of con-
siderable width,
sparkling with the
light reflected from
many crystals. Above
it hang some attractive
stalactites. The next point
of interest is the Shawl Cave.
Here are three fine shawls,
hanging at right-angles from the
sloping roof. One is about 14 feet long and
2 feet deep. Under the magnesium light,
THE SHAWL CAVE.
these thin sheets of lime are seen to be
semi-transparent, and to be marked
by bands of uniform width, whose
colours vary according to the
amount of carbonate of iron
deposited with the lime.
The roof is decorated
by dark-red and
cream-coloured
stalactites, which
hang in long
fringes. One of
these pendants is
strangely like a
plucked goose.
Near the end of
the chamber are
three compara-
tively narrow
“shawls.” Passing
f to the left of some
massive stalactites,
ornamented with coral-
like deposits, the Confec-
tioner’s Shop then claims
* attention. Here are long rows of
pendants, resembling different forms
of the confectioner’s art. Under a sloping
rock is one slender and delicate column,


out of which has grown “ The Lady’s Finger.” Next comes the Coral Grotto. This fine chamber varies in
height from 3 feet at the opening to 20 feet inside. It extends to the “Crystal Cities,” and is decorated from end
to end by pillars, columns, and pendants, many of which are covered by coral-like deposits. The grotto is not
CORAL GROTTO.
entered, but a fine
view is obtained of its
beauties with the aid
of the magnesiumand
electric lights. The
passage which passes
round the left side of
the Grotto contains
some fine white sta-
lactites, and a red-
dish-tinted formation
likean elephant’s head
and trunk. Standing
aloneon the right side
of the passage is a
very fine semi-trans-
parent white stalag-
mite, 5 feet 8 inches
in height, named
Lot’s Wife. This
stalagmite owes its
growth to the irregu-
lar drip from two
diminutive stalactites
overhead. A little
further on is the


chamber named the Crystal Cities. This beautiful spot is at the northern end of the Coral Grotto already
referred to. Here lime crystals have taken the form of a group of liliputian cities. Miniature walls and ramparts
surround crystal forests and lakes, which appear to be crowded with inhabitants. A fringe of stalactites overhead
adds to the attractions of this chamber. Close to the “Cities” is a “cascade” formation, marked by graceful
curves dotted over by sparkling crystals. This is followed by the Showroom,
a richly-ornamented cavern containing many draped forms. The central figure
is a tapering white stalactite, which rests on a terraced stalagmite. Overhead,
tinted and white stalactites depend from a roof rendered very beautiful by
snow-white deposits. A little further on are the Grand Stalactites. These
are amber-tinted and of elegant form, and are flanked by two fine columns, one
on each side. * The passage here also contains numerous smaller, but attractive,
stalactites. On the floor a curious deposit resembles a shoulder of mutton.
Opposite, are some stalagmites like bottles. From the Grand Stalactites the
passages branch. Taking the left passage first, a halt is made at a small recess
named Cook’s Grotto. Here are delicate pendants, many diminutive stalag-
mites, and a beautiful little column. Further on, to the left, are massive
terraced and draped amber-tinted formations. Near these is a semicircle of
columns, stalactites, and stalagmites, named Josephine’s Grotto. On the
lower part of the sloping roof are bunches of white pendants. The Grand
Alabaster Column, 14 feet high and 2 feet in diameter, is now seen on the
right. In close proximity are four smaller pillars, two of which are joined
together near the top, and are known as the “Giraffe’s Fore Legs.” On the
left is a formation named “The Smoked Ox Tongue.” This is succeeded by
the Mysteries, which are not so large as the “Mystery” in the left branch of
the Imperial Cave, but are decorated by similar fantastic and grotesque forms
LOT'S WIFE.
of lime deposits. Some of these are delicate and beautiful, but puzzle the spectator to account for the many
peculiarities of shape which present themselves. Close to the “Mysteries” is the Battlefield. Here, in a
diminutive and beautiful nook, are multitudes of curious forms, which are not unlike soldiers fighting in a
field scattered here and there with war impedimenta and dead and dying warriors. A figure is seen like a stag


leaping from a rocky precipice into space. A few steps further and Nellie’s Grotto comes into view. This
finely decorated spot is on the left-hand side of the passage, and is between 3 and 4 feet high. Its outer edge
is formed of a semicircle of stalactites, columns, and stalagmites. On either side is a long fringe of tiny stalactites ;
CRYSTAL CITIES OR FORTIFICATIONS.
one of the stalagmites
is singularly like an
artistically designed
candlestick. About 25
yards north of Nellie’s
Grotto is the Vestry.
This chamber contains
a large irregularly-
shaped column, and a
group of stalactites
adorned with coral-like
deposits. Shortly
after leaving the Vestry
a pathway, some 300
feet long, mostly cut
through drift, passes
under the Jubilee Cave
and terminates in a
somewhat large and
sombre cavern, in the
northern end of which
is the chamber named
the Lily of the
Valley. Its floor is
about 5 feet above that
of the cavern. It is


lavishly ornamented with many semi-transparent white formations, and compares favourably with any of the
beautiful chambers already described. The passage to it is tedious, and it is therefore seldom visited. Returning
to the Grand Stalactites, the ascent of some steps to the right leads to the hairies’ Bower. Here is the
“Diamond Wall,” 20 feet high, and 15 feet broad, which
sparkles with the light reflected from a thousand' crystals.
Over the Diamond Wall are chambers difficult of access, not
yet opened. They contain many varied and dainty deposits.
In the centre of the Fairies Bower is a fine white stalagmite.
The roof is lofty, and is decorated with small stalactites which
are pleasantly set off by the bluish tint of the roof. Tea\ ing
the Fairies’ Bower, the Crystal Palace is entered. This is
a long avenue abundantly adorned with a beautiful collection
of pure white pillars, lime shawls, curtains, and draperies, and
occasional chocolate and reddish tinted formations. Further
along is a beautiful white formation coated as if with hoar
frost, and a fine group of crystalline amber-tinted columns
and stalactites. In a small recess is a “ Jewelled Casket,”
which is filled with delicate and sparkling amber-tinted crystals.
Opposite this are some attractive crystalline drapery formations
and a glistening white “Cascade.” The floor is terraced and
rippled by a dark-brown formation covered with crystals. Ihe
Garden Palace is next viewed. I his is a tiny nook, under
a ledge of rock. It contains many forms of rare loveliness.
One small stalagmite standing in the centre is of a bright-amber
tint. The remaining formations are white and semi-transparent.
Many little deposits are seen on the floor which look like tufts
of fine grass. Opposite the Garden Palace is a group of
variously-tinted stalactites, and a very beautifully marked but
small “shawl.” In a recess on the left is the Bridal Veil.
THE SHOW-ROOM.


GRAND STLACTITES. PAGE 61.


NELLIE'S GROTTO. PAGE 62.


This is an exquisite representation of a veil of gossamer and fine lace, so thin that the colour of the rock it covers
can be distinguished. A fringe of stalactites is then passed under, and some fantastic forms are seen on the wall.
On one transparent pendant monkeys appear to be climbing a pole. A side view is then obtained in the “ Stalagmite
Cave” of the Bridal Veil, already noticed. Here are some fine stalagmites and stalactites, and a white lustrous
“Cascade” formation. A halt is next made at the Gem of the West. This is one of the most fascinating
CRYSTAL PALACE. PAGE 63.
formations in the Caves. It consists of a white canopy, whose
upper portion is decorated with irregular deposits like creepers
tied, knotted, or twisted round each other. The lower part is
composed of many beautiful glass-like pendants. The visitor
is now close to, but on a higher level than the Vestry
Chamber of the Right Imperial Main passage. A branch to the
right leads, after passing through a narrow and low tunnel, to
the Fairies’ Retreat. This is a beautiful grotto, filled with
brilliant amber-tinted crystals, some of which are 3 inches long
and sharply pointed. On one side is a line of graceful and delicate
pillars, each of which rests on a base of crystals. This Cave is
seldom visited, owing to the discomfort of traversing the low
passage. Some small chambers lie beyond it, but are not yet
open for inspection. Returning to the “ Fairies’ Bower,” the
visitor completes the inspection of the Right Imperial Cave by
viewing the Queen’s Diamonds. This is a recess of small width
and height, which extends back for some distance. Its roof and sides are closely covered with clusters of many-
sided sharp-pointed crystals of dazzling brilliancy.
The Jubilee Cave.
I his Cave was named in commemoration of the Jubilee Year of the reign of Her Majesty Queen Victoria.
It consists of a series of narrow passages, which are decorated from end to end with innumerable lovely
white and translucent formations, remarkable for their purity and elegance of form. Many of them are rendered


very beautiful by a crystalline coating like hoar frost.
They are relieved here and there by others of an amber
tint, and by many fragile deposits which occur in tufts
like grass and moss modelled in ice, or curl and twist
in garlands round stalactites and stalagmites. Ibe lattei
are similar to the grotesque and fantastic growths which
have been named “ Mysteries ” in the descriptions of the
other caves, but appear in greater variety and delicacy
of form than in those Caves. Branch passages lead to
the Red Cave, the Alabaster Hall, and the Gem of Jenolan.
For the sake ‘of brevity, the more prominent features
only will receive special mention. The Jubilee Cave is
entered by ascending a flight of steps, which rise from
the passage to the Lily of the \ alley, where that passage
passes under the Gem of the West branch of the Right
Imperial Cave. At the top of the steps is the junction
chamber, which has been named the Slattery Cave aftet
the Hon. T. M. Slattery, who was at one time Minister
of Mines and Agriculture. Here the caverns, which form
the Jubilee Cave, branch to the right and left.
Left Branch-
After passing groups of stalac-
tites, a crystalline and ripple-
marked floor, and another coated
as if by a thin sheet of ice, the Pebble Grotto is reached.
Here are some large pebbles, cemented together by pale and
amber-tinted moss-like crystals. Below them a fringe of
stalactites partly hides a delicate film of lime drapery, so
thin that the contour of the rock behind is seen. Near it,
CEM OF THE WEST. PAGE 66.


"MYSTERY" FORMATIONS. PAGE 70.
on the opposite side, is the Marble Arch, where a
remarkably fine group of stalactites hang arch-like over
some fine stalagmites. Passing other groups, some
beautiful stalactites are seen, which depend from
rounded forms studded over with small crystal spikes
like the quills of a hedgehog. The next point of
interest is the Round Tunnel, a funnel-shaped aperture
extending back at right-angles to the passage for a
considerable distance. It is decorated by stalactites
which depend from the centre of its roof in an unbroken
line. Further on a beautiful passage ushers in the
Alabaster Hall. The walls of this superb chamber
are graced right up to its conical-shaped roof, 40 feet
overhead, with white and amber-tinted draperies, stalac-
tites, and crystalline formations. On one side is a
canopy something like the “ Gem of the West,” but
whiter and more crystalline. This canopy partly hides
an exquisite white walled grotto ornamented with trans-
lucent pendants and glistening pinnacled stalagmites.
Here and there are clusters of fantastic lime-sprays,
which curl or twist or spring straight out from groups
of stalactites. They fascinate the spectator with their
wonderful beauty, and linger long in his memory.
Near the passage to the Alabaster Hall a steep flight
of steps leads down to the Water Cavern. On the
way stalactites, cascade formations, crystalline basins,
rocks strongly marked by fossils, and diminutive
“ shawls ” in an early stage of growth are passed, and
the visitor makes a halt at the Throne. Here two


small canopies of lovely pure white crystalline
deposits surmount an equally fine “draped forma-
tion. In this part of the cave are seen stalactites
coated over with mud, showing the comparatively
recent period during which it formed a passage for
flood-waters. Now new deposits are making their
appearance in the form of pure white pendants,
which stand out in bold relief from their mud-stained
neighbours. Pwo little cavities, like birds nests,
are seen, in each of which are a number of little
white lime nodules resembling eggs. The last
chamber is muddy and uninteresting. It is of con-
siderable length, and terminates in a pool of water
which probably communicates with the present
underground water-way. The visitor now retraces
his steps and proceeds to inspect the
Right Branch-
A fringe of the “Mystery”
type of lime deposits, and
a delicate crystalline film,
marked by “ shawls ” in an early state of growth, are
noted. The visitor then pauses to admire a deeply-
indented and irregular roof, adorned by orange,
brown, and yellow-tinted formations. b nder some
stalactites further on is a beautiful little grotto in
which white and icicle-like pendants hang over
amber-tinted stalagmites. Near by is a terraced floor
like the “Crystal Cities,” but formed on a smaller
scale ; and a remarkably fine crystalline film of lime
which decorates a wall. To the right a little nook
THE ALABASTER HALL.


GEM OF JENOLAN.
contains a formation like a snowdrift. On the opposite
side is a white crystalline cascade and a formation
resembling eider down. These are succeeded by bright,
white, amber-tinted, reddish, and lovely salmon-tinted
growths. One stalagmite looks like a poodle modelled
in Parian marble. The passage to the Gem of Jenolan
here branches off to the left, and is described further on.
The Prince’s Caverns are now entered ; they contain
the marvellously beautiful Marble GrotTo. Here
myriads of stalactites depend from a white crystalline
roof and walls, which appear to be covered with hoar
frost. Occasional salmon-tinted deposits set off the
white formations in a charming manner. Some of the
stalacites and stalagmites are particularly fine. Similar
fascinating forms are found in the passage and a grotto
to the right. An amber-tinted column is here adorned
by a variety of spikes and crystals, and a fine stalactite
is seen with a tiny point which rests on an attractive
stalagmite. In the terminal chamber is the Pin
Cushion. Here fragile sprays spring upwards from a
ledge of rock in bunches like glass needles or tufts of
the sedge plant, and in curious shapes like curled and
twisted ribbons. From near these grottoes a passage,
decorated with dripstone deposits similar 10 those which
adorn the other parts of the Jubilee Cave, leads to
The Gem of Jenolan.
The Gem of Jenolan may be said to be divided
into three chambers, although they together form one
cavern. On entering the lower chamber the spectator


is lost in admiration of the superb spectacle which it presents. Innumerable pure white or tinted stalactites
cover snow-white crystalline walls. Diminutive stalactitic growths like hoar frost add to the beauty of these
walls Right up to'the apex of the dome-shaped roof the ornamentation continues without a break. A steep
incline and a fringe of large white stalactites divides the middle from the lower chamber. The same marvellous
wealth of dripstone formations occurs here. The glistening white pendants are so closely packed that tey
appear to merge into one another at their bases. Beautiful beyond description as are these chambers, in t e
upper chamber an even more beautiful exhibition of fascinating forms has been provided by Nature’s master-hand.
It has been named the Victoria Bower. The roof is dome-shaped, but not so lofty as that of the lower
chamber On the left are two snowy-white translucent columns, surrounded by large crystalline, white, or
amber-tinted stalactites, and by smaller ones, on which are coral-like growths. The larger column is about 6 feet
hio-h. Its base, is some 2 feet in diameter, beautifully terraced ; from thence the column tapers gracefully upwards.
The smaller column is festooned with fantastic lime-sprays. On the right is a fine slightly-terraced column When
the magnesium light is held behind this it is seen to be semi-transparent, and to be of a soft, warm, pinkish tint.
The visitor will leave the Gem of Jenolan with a feeling that nothing in Nature can exceed it in beauty. In the floor
of the lower chamber a hole gives access to tortuous and difficult passages, which open into grottoes and chambers ot
unusual beauty. * A distinctive feature is found in the first of these. A crystalline greyish-blue formation has been
deposited for some length on the floor, and represents in an exquisite manner, a mountain stream with three sparkling
waterfalls ; its banks are marked here and there by cascades, whose waters appear to have frozen as they fell.
* Not yet open to the public.
The Red Cave.
(,Unopened Owing to the Difficulty of Providing Easy Access.)
Near the junction of the right and left branches of the Jubilee Cave, and within sight of a dangerous hole which
descends into the “Gem of the West" branch of the Right Imperial Cave, a somewhat difficult ascent, over or under
broken rocks, leads to the Red Cave, so called from the reddish tint or many of its formations. The first object to
attract attention is a singularly beautiful pinnacled white stalagmite, over which hangs a fine white stalactite. Ihe
magnificent main chamber is then entered. Here are enchanting varieties of pure white, amber, or reddish-tinted


THE RED CAVE.
stalactites, stalagmites, “draperies,” and “cascades.”
Two “shawls” are exquisitely marked. A little basin
contains many-sided amber-tinted crystals with sprays
of other crystals springing from their sides. Numerous
rocks have fallen since the dripstone growth first
commenced. This is evidenced by one huge rock,
many tons in weight, which has been tilted as it fell.
The stalactites which once depended from it now point
upwards. Little clusters of tiny stalactites are seen
pendant from the ends of two fine stalactites, where the
latter have been broken, probably by the vibration
caused by some falling mass. A branch of the Red
Cave has been named Paradise, because of its marvel-
lous beauty. It will be sufficient here to say that its
walls sparkle as if covered with diamonds, and that
among its attractions are highly-ornamented alcoves
and grottoes, many little basins resplendent with snow-
white or amber-tinted crystals, an unusually fine
collection of fantastic growths known as “ Mysteries,”
and two white, translucent, and crystalline stalagmites
unequalled for their beauty.
The Aladdin Cave.
This magnificent Cave is situated at the foot of
a cliff, 3 chains west of McKeown’s Creek, 2 chains
southerly from the Glass Cave, and 30 chains north
of the Grand Archway. The entrance is about 130 feet
above the level of the creek. The main chambers are


about 80 feet below the entrance, and are reached by scrambling along a passage for some 150 feet. As in the
case of the Elder Cave, it has not been found practicable to make the passages as easy or convenient as those of
the other caves which are open to the public ; but the descent is perfectly safe, and is not difficult for persons
of active habit. There are two main chambers. The southern one is about 20 ft. x 23 ft. x3O ft., and is
marvellously beautiful. It contains an infinite variety of fascinating forms of cave embellishment. Sparkling
crystal “cascades” and “drapery” formations grace walls dotted throughout with crystals, which twinkle like
stars, and when the magnesium light is thrown into some remote corner, crystal spangles
“ Glitter like broken up moonbeams on the wavelets of a summer sea. *
On one hand are bunches of reddish-tinted coral-like crystals ; on another are myriads of diminutive stalactites,
and groups of* larger ones, some reddish, others cream-coloured or snowy-white or translucent. Looking
through a fringe of stalactites, which remind one of Nellie’s Grotto in the Imperial Cave, is seen a fairy-like
grotto. In the foreground are some exceptionally graceful and semi-transparent columns, whose beauty is
enhanced by the remains of an older column which lie in ruins at their base. Beyond this is a crystal basin
with a ripple-marked margin. To the left of this, bunches of reddish-tinted crystals reflect a thousand lights
from their many facets. In the background are many tiny pillars and delicate pendants. It is not easy to
convey any adequate idea of the exquisite beauty of this Cave, which must fascinate those who are not easily
moved by the results of Nature’s handiwork. It requires to be seen to be appreciated.
“. . . . . . all alight
As with the quintessence of flame
A million tapers flaring bright
From twisted silvers looked to shame
The hollow-vaulted dark and stream’d
Upon the mooned domes aloof.”
—Tknnyson.
* S. Cook


Notes on Unopened Oaves North and South office Main Caverns.
From the Grand Archway the limestone belt extends northerly for about 3 miles, and is dotted here and
there with caves. Some of these are attractive, but have not been improved owing to the difficulty of making
them convenient of access. The most distant are the Bushranger’s Cave and McKeown’s Hole, which are
ORPHAN ROCK, KATOOMBA.
small, and have little beauty, but are of historical interest, as they were
used as hiding-places by a bushranger named McKeown, and thus led
to the early discovery of the more important Caves. At a little over
one mile from the Grand Archway, on the eastern side of M‘Keown’s
Creek, is the entrance to the Mammoth Cave. This Cave is of large
extent, and is difficult and dangerous to explore. It contains many vast
and gloomy caverns, whose floors are strewn with huge rocks. Here
and there are chasms which descend to the level of the present under-
ground waterway. Lower down M‘Keown’s Creek, on its opposite side,
and a little under half' a mile from the Grand Archway, are the
Frenchman’s and Glass Caves. Both these contain many beautiful
deposits, and may in the future be opened, especially if they are found
on exploration to be connected with branches of the Imperial Cave.
Half a mile southerly from the Grand Archway is the Bottomless Pit,
said to be over 300 feet deep, and to contain some fine formations. For
a detailed description of the Mammoth, Glass, and Frenchman’s Caves,
see “The jenolan Caves,” by J. J. Foster, 1890.


REMARKS ON THE CAVES DISTRICT.
It will be gathered from a perusal of the descriptions which are given of the routes to the Caves that the
countrv they traverse presents much to interest the tourist, artist, and geologist alike ; but wild and impressive
as is the country between Katoomba, Mt. Victoria, or 'Parana, and the Caves, yet beyond the latter, to the
southward, Nature has carved out the land in equally bold and rugged fashion.
At the Kanangra (Kowmung) Walls, Thurat Plateau, the artist will meet with dizzy precipices,
graced by many fern-clad cascades and waterfalls, and
he may find attraction in what appear to be the rude
drawings of aboriginals in a rock-shelter. For the
sportsman, game is abundant, as it is practically undis-
turbed. Good fishing is also to be obtained. For the
geologist there are many points of interest, from the
mural precipices of Hawkesbury sandstone to the coal-
seams which crop out below the sandstone at the “Walls,”
or in the mineral deposits of the Tuglow River and its
tributaries.
This mountain plateau is 17 miles S.S.E. of the Caves,
on the bridle-track to Picton, and is easily reached on horse-
back, and with some inconvenience by buggy. Arrange-
ments to visit it can be made with Mr. j. C. Whalan, of
jenolan.
THE KANANGRA WALLA.


In order to add to the interest of the book, has been made to, or extracts taken from, the
following :
THE KANANGRA WALLS.
The Railway Guide of New South Wales. Third Edition, 1886. From
papers supplied for that work by the late C. S. Wilkinson, L.S.,
F.G.S., and the late Lamont H. G. Young, C.E., F.G.S.
Track from Katoomba to Jenolan Caves, by W. M. Cooper, 1885.
Geological Observations, &c., 1876. Second Edition. Part I, Chap, vii,
p. 15 1, by Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S., &c.
Nineteenth Century, 1893. Yol. 33, p. 391. Paper by Dr. A. R.
Wallace, LL.D., F.R.S.
Anniversary Address, by the President, Royal Society of N.S.W., 1896.
Yol. xxx. By Professor T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.R.S., F.G.S.
The Jenolan Caves: An Excursion into Australian Wonderland, 1889,
bv Samuel Cook. (Reprinted from the Sydney Morning Herald.)
The Jenolan Caves, by J. J. Foster. Published by the Government of
New South Wales, 1890.
The work is illustrated by reproductions from photographs by the artists attached to the photographic
branches of the Government Printing Office and Public Works Department, by Mr. Cooke, by the late
Mr. Rowe, by Kerry & Co. of Sydney, and the Author.
I have especially to thank Mr. W. A. Gullick, Government Printer, for the excellent manner in which the
Guide Book has been produced.
O. TRICKETT.


PLAN
SHOWING LOCALITY OF THE
JENOLAN CAVES
NOTE —The Wombefan Caves are situated 14 miles south of Jenotan
Caves (about 55 auks by road and track via Mou*t Werongj
The Colon.; (Hindoo*) Caves are situated on the eas. of the Kowmung
[liver, X miles S.t. ot Jenotan (about S 2 miles by track via Kanangra Walls)
47294
Photo-liihiyraphcd by
A. Gutliek, Government Printer,
Sydney. N.S. W


THE JENOLAN CAVES
Photo-lithoynphed by
W. A. Gullick, Government Printer,
Sydney, KS.W.


Railway
Arrangements.
The Journey by Rail to Mount Victoria, or to the Railway
Station from which the Coach Journey to the Caves is to
be made, has been rendered much more comfortable within
recent years. The trip over the Blue Mountains, although
abounding in scenes of great beauty, was at one time a trial to many passengers, owing to the
sharpness of the curves causing severe oscillation where they had to be passed, and the old style of
carriage did not add materially to the comfort of the travellers. These drawbacks, however, have
been done away with, the Railway Commissioners spending many thousands of pounds in “cutting
out ” the sharp curves, improving the line generally, and laying down a double track, while the
carriages now used are commodious, and afford easy running.
The Train Service also is specially drawn up so as to meet the convenience of those travelling.
During the ordinary week-days a morning and an evening train are provided, while the excursion
traffic is specially well catered for.
At week-ends Excursion Trains are run on Friday nights and Saturday mornings from
the metropolis at convenient times to the tourist centres, not only on the Western (Blue Mountains)
line, but also on the Southern, the North Coast, and the Illawarra lines. By these trains, full
particulars of which are found in the railway time-tables, tickets are issued at the popular rates of
2d. and id. per mile return, so that a passenger may travel from Sydney to Mount Victoria and
return, first-class for 12s. Bd., or second-class, 6s. 4d. In the Summer Season additional Express
Trains leave Sydney for the Mountain stations on Friday evenings and return about 9 a.m.
on Monday morning, enabling business-men to have a splendid rest and change in the Hill Country
with a minimum of expense and loss of time travelling. The railway journey to and from Mount
Victoria, may be put down to occupy about three hours.


GUIDE to
The Wombeyan Caves
New South Wales.
Geological Survey of N.S.W.
ISSUED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
The Mon. S. w. Moore, M.F.,
Minister for Mines and Agriculture.
Price,
One Shilling.
(copyright.)
BY
O. TRICKETT, L.S., M.S.


COACH INFORMATION.
At the present time there is no regular Coach Service to and from
Wombeyan Caves; but the following charges have been quoted by
various Livery-stable Proprietors for the conveyance of Visitors :
From Mittagong (44 miles), by special arrangement.
From Bowral (43 miles) —
1 Passenger ... ... 1 os. per day.
2 » 15 s-
-3-4 „ ... ... 20s. „
5~ 8 » 3 0s - ».
10 „ ... ... 40s. „
From Moss Vale (48 miles) (for Return trip of three
days)—
1-2 Passengers ... ... 10s.
3-4 » £5
From Goulburn (50 miles)—
sor 6 Passengers ... £1 per head.
10 Passengers ... ... 15s. ~
Further information on application at the
GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU,
Phillip & Bridge Streets.
RAIL FARES.
Ist. 2nd
Sydney to—
Mittagong and Return (78 miles)—
Daily ... 18s. od. iis. gd.
Week-end ... 13s. od. 6s. 6d.
Bowral and Return (81 miles) —
Daily ... 18s. 6d. 12s. 3d.
Week-end ... 13s. 6d. 6s. gd.
Moss Vale and Return (87 miles) —
Daily ... 20s. 3d. 13s. 3d.
Week-end ... 14s. 6d. 7s. 3d.
Goulburn and Return (136 miles) —
Daily ... 40s. 6d. 275. od.
Week-end ... 225. Bd. 11s. 4d.
(In Summer.)
Holiday Excursion Tickets are issued Daily to Mittagong, Bowral,
and Moss Vale, and 2d. and id. per mile Return Tickets each
Friday and Saturday by specified trains. (See Railway Time
Tables.)


ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
Caves House ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Sandstone Archway ... ... ... ... Bowral Road 10
Scene in Victoria Archway ... ... ... Creek Cave 13
Grand Stalagmite Fig-tree Cave 15
The Judgment Seat ... ... ... ... do 16
The Tub and The Basins ... ... ... ... Basin Cave 18
The Mermaid’s Cave ... ... ... Wollondilly Cave 20
Broken Column and Mystery Chamber ... do 22
Lot’s Wife and The Cockatoo ... ... do 23
Grotto in Enchanted Corridor ... ... do 24
Enchanted Grove ... ... ... do 25
Scene in Pantheon... ... ... ... do 26
Curtain and Mantles Kooringa Cave 27
The Sentinel and The Throne ... ... ... do 29
Chocolate Fringe Junction Cave 31
The Rapids... ... ... ... ... ... do 32
Scene ... ... ... ... ... ... Bouverie Cave 34
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Introductory ... ... ...' ... ... ... ... 5
Goulburn Route ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Bowral Route ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 9
Creek Cave... ... ... .. ... ... ••• u
Victoria Arch ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Sculptor’s Studio ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Arch Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 14
Belfry, Bathroom, Bushrangers’ Hall ... ... ... 14
Fig-tree Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Grand Stalagmite ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Judgment Seat ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Trophy, &c. ... ... ... ... "... ... ... 17
Basin Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... J 7
South Branch ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
North Branch... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Wollondilly Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
The White Passage ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Fairies’ Grotto, Dorothy’s Bower ... ... ... ... 21
Miranda’s Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Cathedral Cavern ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Lot’s Wife and The Cockatoo... ... ... ... ... 25
Enchanted Corridor ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Kooringa Cave ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 28
Grand Column Museum ... ... ... ... ... 28
Crystal Terrace Mantles ... ... ... ... ... 28
Throne, Niagara Falls ... ... ... ... ... 30
Guineacor Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Forest Creek Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Tinted Cave .. ... ... ... ... ... 31
Junction Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
South Branch ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
North Branch... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
Bullio Cave... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 33
Shawl Palace and Bouverie Caves ... ... ... ... ... 34


Department of Mines,
Sydney, 21st February, 1906.
The success which has attended the publication of Official Guide-books to the Jenolan and
\ arrangobilly Caves has shown the advisability of issuing - a similar pamphlet for the use of
visitors to the Wombeyan Caves. Opinions are divided as to the respective merits, from a
sightseer’s point of view, of the Caves at the three localities mentioned; and although Jenolan
has perhaps an advantage over the others in regard to accessibility from Sydney, it is
confidently believed that visitors, and more especially tourists from abroad, who travel as far
as Wombeyan and Yarrangobilly, will admit that they have no reason to regret the trouble
they have taken to inspect these wonderful caverns.
The Guide-book, which has been well prepared and illustrated by Mr. O. Trickett, of
this Department, will form an interesting souvenir for the visitor. Appended is a map of the
Caves, drawn from careful underground surveys by the same gentleman.
E. F. PITTMAN
Under Secretary for Mines.


The Wombeyan Caves.
INTRODUCTORY.
THESE Caves are situated 50 miles north-easterly from Goulburn Railway Station (coach
northerly to Taralga 28 miles, thence 22 miles north-easterly and easterly by vehicle), or
42 miles west of Bowral Railway Station by vehicle.
There are numerous livery stables at Goulburn, and at Bowral and the townships near the
latter, namely, Moss Vale, Berrima, Mittagong, &c., where vehicles may be hired.
A comfortable accommodation-house is provided at the Caves, where the caretaker caters for
visitors at reasonable rates. It is also a postal receiving-office—weekly mail.
The known Caves comprise—
The Creek and Fig Tree Caverns.
The Wollondilly, Kooringa, Guineacor, Basin, Tinted, and Forest Creek
Caves ; and the following unopened Caves, Junction, Shawl, Bouverie,
Bullio, Palace, Glass, and Grant’s. The last two are unattractive.
Of the early history of the Wombeyan Caves there is little record. The
Creek Cave appears to have been known to stock-breeders over sixty
years ago. About 1864 Mr. Charles Chalker was appointed Guide.
Owing to his explorations and to those of his brother (Mr. T. M. Chalker, the present caretaker),
many triumphs of Nature’s handiwork have been brought into notice, which rival in their


fascinating beauty and their grandeur, the enchanting crystal palaces which have made the Jenolan
Caves famous the world over.
The Wombeyan Caves lie in the bosom of wild mountains in a belt of limestone about
two and a half miles long by one mile wide. The rock is composed of a coarsely crystalline
white marble, veined with yellow, and is surrounded by igneous rocks. Fossils have been found
which show that the limestone bed is an old coral reef of Palaeozoic age, which has been
subjected for vast periods of time to intense heat and pressure. Nearly all traces of the original
organic structure of the corals and shells have been obliterated, and the old atoll has been
converted into a bed of more or less crystalline limestone. Through this limestone runs the
Wombeyan Creek, a tributary of the Mares Forest Creek, which in its turn is a tributary of the
Guineacor Creek, an affluent of the Wollondilly River.
On the Wombeyan Creek is a picturesque little valley hemmed in by the grey cliffs and
crags which guard the treasures of the “Hidden Wonderland.” In this valley the Government
has erected a comfortable accommodation house, stables, &c., for the use of visitors. Convenient
paths lead to the entrances of the several caves. The grassy flats which surround the house
make admirable pleasure grounds, and ideal spots may be chosen for camping by picnic parties.
In the hills outside the caves’ limestone, game is more or less abundant.
ROUTES.
The Wombeyan Caves have the advantage of being connected by road with
two widely-separated points on the Southern Railway Line, namely, in a
northern direction from Goulburn (136 miles from Sydney), and in a westerly
direction from Mittagong, Bowral, Moss Vale, &c. (78 to 87 miles from Sydney).
Goulburn Route.
From Goulburn (2,074 feet above sea-level), comparatively level country is
traversed for the first 30 miles or so. The hamlets of Tarlo (8 miles),
Chatsbury (13 miles), Myrtleville (23 miles), are successively passed, and a


O. Trickett.
Photo.
CAVES HOUSE.


rest is made at Taralga township (28 miles). At 34 miles, “ Richlands,” notable for its creamery
and butter factory, is entered. This estate probably received its name from the wide extent of its
fertile basaltic soil.
On leaving Richlands the road rises by easy grades to the summit of the Great Dividing
Range, which separates the rivers of New South Wales which flow into the ocean on the east
from those which run westerly and inland. Locally it divides the waters of the Wollondilly River
from those of the Abercrombie River. The top of the range is about 600 feet above Taralga, or
about 3,300 feet above sea-level. For many miles to the north it is fairly level, and may some
day be traversed by a road, which will form a connecting link between the Wombeyan and
Jenolan Caves.
The Wombeyan route follows the range northerly for about 6 miles, and then turns off to
the right along a densely-wooded spur. The slates, basalts, and quartzites which have hitherto
been met with are left behind at about 15 miles from laralga, and the road winds downward
round the precipitous mountain slopes of the granite and porphyry which nearly surround the
Caves limestone. Evidences are met with at every turn of the battle with Nature, which took
place before pick and shovel and blasting powder smoothed the way for the traveller.
But the views are magnificent. Pause for a moment on the road as it passes sharply round
a corner carved out of the rock face. An awe-inspiring precipice yawns at the traveller’s feet.
Before him is a wild expanse of wooded glens and ravines enclosed within a vast amphitheatre of
mountains, which are backed up again by other mountains, as far as the eye can reach. In the
centre of the sweeping curve of hills is the Caves limestone. On a slope which does not appear
so very far away, can be seen a black opening; this is the entrance to the Glass Cave. The
journey is continued still on a downward grade to the beautiful flat in which the Caves House is
situated at 50 miles from Goulburn and 1,900 feet above sea-level.


Bowral Route.
A new road, connecting - Moss Vale, Berrima, Bowral, Mittagong, &c., with
the Wombeyan Caves, was opened with some ceremony on the 29th January,
1900.
Selecting Bowral (2,210 feet above sea-level) as the nearest of the above townships, the visitor
travels westerly through a picturesque range of hills, among which towers the Gib Rock, from
which the so-called trachyte is quarried. This stone is used in the erection of many fine buildings
in Sydney,
Pleasant, open, well-grassed land and comfortable residences lie on either side of the road
for the first mile or two. Wade’s Hill is ascended at 5 m d es 1 the roads from Moss Vale,
Mittagong, &c., come in at about 7 miles. The tramway to the once famous Joadja kerosene
shale mines is crossed at about 8 miles. The Saw-pit Waterhole lies on the right at 11 miles,
and the gates near the High Range homestead, church and school, are left behind at 12 miles.
Ten chains beyond the 18th mile-post from Bowral (post marked £ It) (2,55° feet), the
road passes through a tunnel cut through the sandstone ridge, and runs under the shadow of
weather-worn and precipitous rocks which tower overhead and form the southern escarpment of
the range. The road then approaches the edge of the opposite or northern slopes. A cleared
space opens up a magnificent panorama, which takes in the Burragorang Valley, stretches
away northward to Katoomba, and gives a view of the craggy hills which overlook Ihe
Peaks (Yeranderie) silver mines. Bold headlands appear one after another on each side of the
valley until lost to view in the distance. Each headland ends abruptly in a mural precipice of
sandstone, from which a forest-clad slope descends rapidly to the Wollondilly River, over 1,500 feet
below. Between the slopes, wild ravines buried in shadow, serve to bring out in strong relief the
beetling cliffs above them.
This wild confusion of mountain and glen forms a glorious picture, which the traveller
leaves with reluctance. The sandstone is cut off by porphyry near Mount Bullio (2,720 feet—2l


miles). From the summit of this mount,
which is not far from the road, another
superb panorama may be viewed. The
change of rock formation is noted in the
rounded contour of the hills, which slope
gently to the road as the grassy flats
surrounding Bullio homestead (22*4 miles)
are entered. Below the 25th mile-post
Gr.v.' 30 k 25) g°°d water may be found in
The Reedy Creek Springs. Again fine
views open out as the well-graded road
winds along the slopes of porphyry and
granite mountains, which dip steeply into
the river below. At about 27 miles horses
may be watered at a trough on the road
side. The track doubles round the heads
of Consecration, Horse, Cox’s, Bantry, and
Willshire Creeks, passing on the way The
Pinnacles and the Perpendicular Rock, high
up on the hill side.
The Wollondilly River is crossed at
the foot of Mount Tallegang, 32 miles
from Bowral, 10 miles from the Caves, and
over 2,000 feet below Mount Bullio. A
long ascent is now made up the northern
O. Trickett.
Photo.
SANDSTONE ARCHWAY—ROAD TO CAVES FROM BOWRAL, &C.


slopes of granite ranges, whose precipitous sides terminate in a mountain ravine called Jock s
Creek. After a while the Pass of Killicrankie is reached. Here the track has been hewn out of
the solid rock, and appears to hang almost, perpendicularly over the creek, hundreds of feet below.
As it mounts upwards, passing the Tilt Creek at 6/ 3 miles from the Caves, and twisting round the
heads of numerous gorges, views of impressive grandeur and beauty are obtained. In every
direction are rugged peaks and verdure-clad mountains and glens. The summit is named Martin s
Pass (2,500 feet). From this point, miles from the Caves, the road descends by gentle grades,
the granite disappears, and is replaced by limestone, which continues to the beautiful little valley
in which the Caves House is situated, 1,900 feet above sea-level and 42 miles from Bowral. Ihe
Wombeyan Creek passes round the house, and meanders through groves of stately oaks to the
rockv archway which forms the threshold of the Caves.
Filled to overflowing with views of mountain and ravine, crags, and romantic glens, the
restful appearance of the grassy flat guarded by bold limestone bluffs gives one a feeling of
contentment rarely experienced.
CREEK CAVE.
The Caves House Valley is crossed by a limestone ridge, which in ages
past formed a barrier to all but flood-waters. In course of time the confined
water tunnelled its way through the limestone for a distance of 900 feet
underground. This subterranean waterway forms the main channel of the Wombeyan Creek, and
is known as the Creek Cave. It was naturally the first discovered cavern at Wombeyan. The
same tunnelling process is now going on, for at a still lower level the silent waters of a subterranean
stream run under the Creek Cave, reappear in a narrow channel in the Junction Cave, and finally
bubble up from under a rocky bluff on the banks of the Wombeyan Creek, near its junction
with the Mares Forest Creek.


It is perhaps not out of place to trace some steps in the course of Time that are forcibly presented
to us. What a circle in the laws of Nature is suggested ! First, the decaying vegetation of some ancient
forest is invisibly distilling the gas known as carbon dioxide; then a storm of rain falls, clearing the air of the
noxious gas, and distributing a thousand streamlets of acid water over the surrounding country, which, as it
drains off, not only wears the rocks it passes over, but dissolves them in minute quantities, especially such as
contain much lime ; then, laden with its various compounds, flows off to the distant sea, where reef corals,
lying in fringing bands round the coast, are slowly absorbing the lime from the water around them, and building
the fragile coatings that protect them during life. Slowly, as the land sinks, the coral-bank increases in height
for reef corals can only live near the surface of the water; and soon a considerable thickness has been obtained,
while below the upper zone of live corals lies a vast Charnel-house of dead coral-coverings ; then comes a
change ; —suitable temperature, or some other essential condition, fails, killing out all the corals. Through long
ages other deposits accumulate over them, gradually crushing and consolidating the coral-bank into a firm rock.
At last a convulsion of the earth’s crust brings it up from the buried depth in which it lies, leaving it tilted
on its edge, but still, perhaps, below the surface of the ground ; rain, frost, and snow slowly remove what
covers it, until it lies exposed again to the sunlight, but so changed that, only for the silent but irresistible
testimony of the fossil forms of which it is composed, it were hard to believe that this narrow band of hard
grey rock was once the huge, but fragile, coral-bank glistening in the bright waters with a thousand hues.*
Then commences the process of cave-making. The decaying vegetation of the surrounding
forest produces carbonic acid ; the rains spread over the ground ; the acidulated water dissolves
the limestone rock, forming tunnels and caverns, and the dissolved lime is partly deposited
in the beautiful and fantastic forms of stalactites and dripstones, but chiefly carried away in solution down
the Wombeyan and Mares Forest Creeks, into the Wollondilly River, on to the Nepean and Hawkesbury, and
so out to sea at Broken Bay. Arrived in the waters of the Pacific, it is partly absorbed by fish, Crustacea,
shell-fish, and tiny organisms on our own coasts, and partly carried southwards by the East Australian current;
and later, northwards into waters warm enough to support the life of the coral polyp, as at Lord Howe Island.
Here it is taken up by the polyp, and converted into beautiful coralline structures. Thus history repeats itself,
and the coral polyps of to-day construct their stony skeletons out of the material which formed the bones of
their Palaeozoic ancestors.!
*L. H. G. Young, Railway Guide, 1886. t Professor T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.R.S., F.G.S.


O. Trickett.
Photo.
SCENE IN THE VICTORIA ARCH, CREEK CAVE.
Although the Creek Cave is occa-
sionally of considerable width, it is narrow
in places, especially near the lower end.
Flood-waters are thus dammed back, and
sometimes rise nearly to the roof, choking
the channel with piles of debris swept down
with the flood. Here and there driftwood
may be seen on ledges over 40 feet above
the floor.
At the upper entrance is the Vic-
toria Arch (sometimes called The
Church), 350 feet long, 100 feet high, and
90 feet wide. Sunlight streams in from
an immense sink-hole, 250 feet long, with
precipitous sides. From the surface at the
edge of this hole to the creek bed the depth
is about 250 feet. The floor of the Arch
is strewn with massive blocks of marble,
which have fallen from the roof, and
boulders of metamorphic and igneous rocks
brought down by floods. From its rugged
walls many fantastic forms stand out in
bold relief. One group, high up, is known
as the Sculptor’s Studio.
At certain hours of the day the
cavern is flooded with sunlight, and a scene


of rare beauty is unfolded. The pillars and dripstones which grace the walls are then resplendent
with exquisite neutral tints of pink and blue, mauve, purple, or green showing in sharp contrast the
shadows behind them, and the sombre picture presented by the fallen debris on the floor. From
the right-hand side of the cavern a ladder and a steep flight of steps lead to an upper gallery,
named The Arch Cave, an attractive pillared recess from which a fine view is obtained.
As the Creek Cave is followed downwards south-westerly, many an interesting feature is
noted. Here and there are hollows containing pellucid pools of water between curving walls
of glistening white marble, decorated in places by grand, massive, and graceful opaque white
dripstones. Passing a recess, called The Belfry, and the Bath Room pool, the cavern
widens, and an entry is made into the Bushrangers’ Hall, from whose lofty sides many
branches open at an elevation of 20 feet or over.
Those on the right embrace Chalker’s Cave, in which are some attractive white pillars,
the Sounding Board, a fine example of the “shawl” formations, the Ox Tongue, the Vestry,
and The Cloister, containing many opaque white forms of dripstone, and The Pulpit, where the
spectator views the cavern beneath, while standing in a coral-like basin 11 feet long and 3 feet 6
inches wide. Smaller basins grace its sloping sides ; above it are massive opaque, white, and
“draped cascades.”
To the left of the Bushrangers’ Hall are branches of the Fig Tree Cave. The latter is
generally entered from an opening in the cliff face, 180 feet from the outlet of the Creek Cave and
160 feet above it.
FIG TREE CAVE.
Writing in 1862, Dr. James Cox states that the floor of the Fig Tree
Cave was, in some parts, so deeply covered with an amorphous powder
(bat dung, &c.) that it was impossible to wade through it. The trampling
of many feet has consolidated the powder long since, but the process is no doubt accountable


O. Trickett.
Photo.
GRAND STALAGMITE, FIG TREE CAVE.


O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE JUDGMENT SEAT, FIG TREE CAVERN.
for the tarnishing of many of the formations.
Dr. Cox mentions the occurrence of floors
remarkably fine and crystalline. These are
not now to be seen. Near the entrance on
the cliff face are holes in the rock-strewn
floor of the cavern. A difficult descent down
one of these holes terminates in the present
subterranean water-way.
An immense chamber is shortly en-
tered. It is 200 feet long, 70 feet wide, and
50 feet high, sculptured in grand style. Ih
the centre is a majestic pile of white car-
bonate of lime deposits, named The Grand
Stalagmites. Near by, on the wall, an
impressive series of draped forms has been
named The Judgment Seat, The sides
of the chamber are honeycombed with
numerous passages which lead to other
chambers and to the Creek Cave. Their
ramifications are so irregular that the reader
is invited to refer to the plan to obtain some
idea of their direction.
The principal points of interest in the
branches of the Fig "Free Cave, taken in the
order in which they may be viewed, are as
follows :


Surrounding the main cavern are The Nave, Drapery, Ceiling Room, Gunyah, Ball
Room, and other chambers. In these are many fine examples of dripstone, mostly opaque
white in colour, and very massive in character. Among them may be noted The Organ, a
group of fluted columns, and The Trophy, a splendid cluster of draped stalactites in the Drapery
Chamber, which is the highest point in the Fig Tree Cave. Leaving the main cavern, one
passage descends to the Bushrangers’ Hall through a small opening known as The Blow Hole,
where the draught is so strong occasionally as to be heard some distance away. Near it is
The Canopy and some large fluted pillars.
* Another passage ends in the Drawing Room, a pillared recess overlooking the Creek
Cave.
BASIN CAVE.
This Cave lies about three-quarters of a mile south-westerly from the Caves
House on the southern side of the Mares Forest Creek, from which it is
distant about 200 feet. The climb up the steep bank is a stiff one, rising
as it does 160 feet to the entrance.
Near the entrance are the Giant Stalactites and the Statuary. A descent takes the
visitor to the Main Transept, a lofty chamber, where water lodges after rain in the hollows of
a rippled floor.
Southern Branch.
After travelling through passages in which there are heavy deposits of loam, an ascent is
made in the Dome Chamber, the commencement of a large cavern 170 feet long and 40 feet high.
A fine stalactite, named the Kangaroo’s Tail, is found on the right. To the left are the curious
stalagmitic cavities known as The Basins, from which the Cave receives its name.
They are shaped like swallows’ nests, are firmly cemented on to the rock, and vary in size
from that of a small pocket to huge tanks, which might be used as swimming baths when full of


THE TUB.
water. With respect to the origin
of the Basins, Professor T. W. E.
David, 8.A., F.R.S., writes as
follows :
The sloping rock on which they
stand once formed the bed of an under-
ground stream, which had dissolved
and worn a passage for itself through
the marble, and descended at this
point through a series of small cascades
into its channel below. At the bottom
of each cascade a small basin would be
scooped out by the mechanical action
of falling water, and a ridge of stalag-
mite would form at the outer rim,
where the water being shallow and
exposed to air currents, was most ready
O. Trickett.
Photo.
BASINS BASIN CAVE.


to part with its lime. These ridges once formed, grew faster at their summits than at their sides, because the
rim, over which the water trickled, was still the point of greatest evaporation, and consequently of greatest
precipitation of stalagmite; and in this way they would be gradually built up into the delicate walls now
constituting The Basins.
A solitary specimen of these, The Tub, is near the track. It is 5 feet deep and s}4 feet
broad. The outer stalagmitic wall has a level rim, and varies in thickness from inch at the
rim to 6 inches or more at the base. The others occur on the sloping sides and summit of an
ancient cascade. Those on the slopes are used as steps, and are therefore tarnished, but at and
near the top the basins sparkle with crystals, are cream and amber tinted, and superbly beautiful.
The roof overhead is richly decorated with small translucent stalactites. Over the southern slope
hangs a graceful canopy.
Continuing the journey of inspection, and passing under an irregular roof packed with small
helictites and bluish-tinted stalactites, a descent of 45 feet down a wire rope ladder gives entry
to the Pyramid Chamber, a lofty, rudely-sculptured cavern some 60 feet high. Its weird and
irregular walls are here and there covered with massive reddish-tinted dripstones, shawls, &c. The
decorations of the roof are imperfectly seen owing to the great height of this chamber. Narrow
passages, on which there is much moist clay, continue to the end of the cave. Small richly-
furnished grottoes break the monotony of the path in places. At the end is The Loin
Dome, from whose apex descends a fine brown-tinted “ Cascade,” with massive fluted pillars
on either side.
Northern Branch.
On the right of the Main Transept is a recess named The Bower, containing a fine
group of white columns and lime draperies.
To the left a passage leads into the Ball Room, whose rugged walls rise up to a height
of 60 feet or more. On its south-eastern side a lofty cavern, with snowy white roof and


Kerry & Co.
Photo. Copyright.
THE MERMAID'S CAVE, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.


lime-draped walls, communicates with the entrance to the Main Cave. Westerly a tortuous and
narrow pathway leads up and down to the Marble Loft and the White Temple. The latter
is a very beautiful chamber, although not extensive. In its centre is a massive fluted, crystalline,
and creamy white column surrounded by other fine dripstones. Its roof is snow white, and sets
off the attractions of the chamber in a charming way.
WOLLONDILLY CAVE.
The Wollondilly Cave, with its quarter of a mile of passages, is the
pride of the Wombeyan Caves.
Its main entrance is about 1,100 feet south-westerly from the Caves
House, 180 feet above it, near the top of the limestone ridge which crosses the Wombeyan Creek.
The White Passage. —After descending an iron stairway and a flight of concrete steps, a turn
is taken to the right into the White Hall. Some draped forms of dripstone at once meet the eye —
graceful columns flank the pathway on either side. Some of these are exceptionally interesting, for
they are formed over the roots of trees, which probably hung suspended from the roof of the cavern for
a long period before they were transformed into limestone pillars. Passing groups of beautiful drip-
stones, the visitor stoops under “ The Arch of Politeness,” and enters an avenue which runs
between a fascinating series of grottoes, chief among which is the Fairies’ Retreat. Stalactites and
stalagmites of great beauty are seen at every turn, with here and there a mammoth pile of dripstones.
A crystalline dome surmounted by a thin column is specially noticed. The White Passage terminates
in the Mystery Chamber, which is surrounded by recesses, each of which contains white and tinted
stalactites. Many of the latter are grotesquely moulded, and give the chamber its name.
Returning to the foot of the steps under the main entrance, the Fairies’ Grotto, to the
left, is found to be filled with charming groups of lovely forms. Passing on, a circular pathway
runs under Dorothy’s Bower, which sparkles with the light from many translucent and crystalline
stalactites.


Miranda’s Cave comes
next, with some magnificent
crystalline draperies, which are
seen to advantage from a point
half-way up an iron stairway.
They hang over a huge mass of
dripstone which has fallen from
O. Trickett.
Photo.
BROKEN COLUMN, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.
MYSTERY CHAMBER.
the roof, is slightly tilted, and is
known as the Broken Column.
Twenty feet below the next passage
is David’s Cave, a circular labyrinth
studded with lovely forms from end
to end. High above the passage
the Guide throws his light on the


O. Trickett.
Photo.
LOT’S WIFE AND THE COCKATOO, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.


dainty pendants which enrich the roof of The Loft. The latter is subsequently entered from the
Star Chamber, where long parallel lines of translucent stalactites hang overhead, and extend to
Ihe Loft and a\va\ beyond, until lost to view in the distance. Behind and below them on either
side are many beautiful forms on walls and floor.
Leaving the Star
Chamber, a narrow open-
ing on the right if
followed, discloses a
wonderful group of cu-
riously interlaced lime
sprays, which run out
horizontally, upwards or
downwards, or twist in
and out of one another, in
such a way as to thor-
oughly bewilder the visitor
who attempts to solve the
law which governed their
growth.
(Seldom visited, owing to the
difficulty of access.)
An iron stairway
now descends to the floor
of the immense Cathe-
dral Cavern, whose very
vastness brings vividly to
O. Trickett.
Photo.
GROTTO IN THE ENCHANTED CORRIDOR, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.


the senses the reality of the profound blackness of these chambers of perpetual night—a blackness
which is rendered more impressive by the unbroken silence which prevails; when, lo ! the
Kerry & Co. Photo. Copyright.
THE ENCHANTED GROVE, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.
Guide lights the magnesium
lamp and a brilliant scene is
revealed. Rising to a
considerable height is a
white crystalline wall, sur-
mounted by two fine stalag-
mites. Pendant from the roof
above are some “ shawls,”
semi-transparent, silk-like in
their texture, gracefully folded
and exquisitely marked—finer
'than any production from the
weaver’s loom.
Near at hand is the
majestic pile of pure white
crystalline columns and
“ draperies” which form The
Temple. In the foreground
are two fine white stalagmites,
one of which is known as
Lot’s Wife ; the other is
curiously like a Cockatoo carved in Parian marble. Further on, the pathway lies between
mammoth rocks which have fallen from the roof in ages past, and a descent is made to a narrow


O. Trickett. Photo.
SCENE IN THE PANTHEON, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.
avenue some ioo feet below the level of the
entrance. The passage is continued along
cuttings through the ripple-marked floor of
an old water-way.
Leaving this somewhat sombre avenue,
the visitor enters a fairyland of bewitching
forms, which are unsurpassed for their
delicacy and beauty, in the Enchanted
Corridor. There are crystalline basins,
whose brown-tinted rims, mounting one
above the other, are daintily frilled and
curved. At times they are filled with pellucid
water, Canopies of tinted and white stalac-
tites alternate with long white crystalline
pillars, sparkling domes, and groups of
fragile pendants like icicles. One charming
little recess, exhibiting forms like crystal
candelabra, has been named the Mermaid’s
Home. Occasional rich golden “draperies,”
and sparkling deposits like frozen cascades,
add their tribute to the fascinations of this
treasure trove.
A few feet off the track an immense
white stalactite, whose sides are curiously
decorated by tiny lime sprays, hangs on


O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE CURTAIN AND MANTLES, KOORINGA CAVE.


guard before some fine “shawls” and an amber-tinted “cascade.” The passage just traversed ends
in the wide and long, but low, Enchanted Grove. Crystalline domes, graceful pillars, translucent
stalactites, stretch away until lost in the distance.
(( The ever-playing shuttles which weave the fairy fabrics ”
are here seen in tiny glistening rills of lime-charged water, which flow down the sides of the pendant
dripstones. These feed the crystal drops which shine like diamonds and tremble on the tip of each
pendant.
Returning, a narrow avenue runs easterly to a point immediately under the Fairies’ Grotto.
Here are some fine stalactites, but mutilated by early explorers as far back as the year 1865. They
hung at the entrance to a branch corridor which is richly furnished. Passing on, a magnificent hall
named The Pantheon is entered. Above a crystalline “cascade” are chaste arches, canopies
and grottoes, while fine pillars mount upward from its base to stately columns beyond.
A rock-strewn cavern is ascended, and daylight is once more reached at a short distance south-
easterly from the main entrance to the Wollondilly Cave.
KOORINGA CAVE.
This charming cavern is not very extensive, but anything it may lack in
size is compensated for by its surpassing loveliness. Its entrance is near
that of the Wollondilly Cave, and, like the latter, somewhat steep stairways
give access down a shaft-like opening. At the foot of the stairway stands the Grand Column, a
majestic pure white and wax-like stalagmite, with a draped and terraced base. Near it are some fine
striped shawls. Following the cavern to the left, The Museum is found to contain a grotto, in the
centre of which is a lovely column, crowned by variously coloured stalactites, dotted occasionally with
white forms like snowflakes. Further on is the superb Crystal Terrace, whose sides are radiant
with innumerable crystals which sparkle like diamonds.


Near the centre of the cavern is a rock platform, a few feet above the general level of the floor.
Here a tinted and terraced pillar, named The Sentinel, challenges admiration, and guards a glistening
stalagmitic deposit delightfully tinted in white and slate colours.
Nestling between the rounded bosses of the stalagmite is a
THE SENTINEL.
O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE THRONE KOORINGA CAVE.


dainty little pool, like a fairy lake surrounded by fairy castles made of precious stones. Remains
of massive pillars lie prone on the platform, and serve as the base of more recent stalagmitic growth,
which bear mute testimony to the immense age of the cavern. Beyond these, a grand fluted column
ushers the visitor into the last chamber, where the superb Mantles decorate numerous ledges.
Charming domes rise here and there ; around them, lime draperies and translucent stalactites depend
from the walls and roof. A collection of beautiful forms is found in The Throne, and the Niagara
Falls exhibit a series of reddish tinted and pure white crystalline deposits, which exquisitely
represent frozen cascades.
Nothing can be more enchanting than the Kooringa Cave, teeming as it does with fascinating
forms from end to end. Unopened passages continue in the direction of the River Cave.
THE GUINEACOR CAVE.
This Cave is close to the Accommodation-house. It is not very
large, although its chambers are lofty. Near the entrance are
several groups of stalactites, covered with quaint little twisted
forms. Below the principal group are some terraced stalagmites. At the further end of the cavern a
beautiful white crystalline stalagmite stands at the foot of massive amber-tinted and brown draped
forms. With these exceptions the cave is not particularly interesting.
FOREST CREEK
CAVE.
The entrance to this Cave lies westerly from the Basin Cave, and some
20 feet up the steep northern bank of the Mares Forest Creek. At the
end of a narrow passage, in which are some small “shawls” with serrated
edges, the visitor pauses on the bank of a subterranean stream.
The guide proceeds to a pool some 8 feet deep and throws his light on the clear unruffled
waters, when a startling presentment of the roof is seen so perfectly mirrored in the pool that
it is difficult to realise that only a reflected image is produced. After heavy floods, debris
collects on the surface of the water, and prevents the interesting illusion from being observed.


TINTED CAVE.
The entrance
to this Cave
lies immedi-
ately over the Mares Forest Creek
Cave. The cavern is a short one,
running - parallel with the perpen-
dicular limestone cliffs which here
bound the Creek on both sides.
Midway, the passage is connected
with an arched opening in the cliff,
about 30 feet long, attractively
decorated with tinted dripstones.
At the end of the passage is a dome-
roofed chamber. The visitor is at
once delighted with the charms of
this lovely creation of Nature.
To the left is framed a lovely
view of the clear waters of the creek
as they dance merrily on their way
to the Wollondilly River. From
the dome, tinted lime draperies
descend and terminate in a coloured
waterfall formation. Close at hand
the lime has formed a pulpit, graced
by draperies festooned with garlands
of coral-like flowrets—each a beau-
tiful study in soft neutral tints.
Kerry & Co.
Photo. Copyright.
CHOCOLATE FRINGES, JUNCTION CAVE.


THE JUNCTION CAVE
(Unopened).
This Cave is situated near the junction of the Wombeyan and Mares
Forest Creeks, half-a-mile south of the Accommodation-house. There
are two entrances. The lower one is about 20 feet above the Wombeyan
Creek. From this entrance a narrow, difficult, and tortuous passage leads
Kerry & Co.
Photo. Copyright.
THE RAPIDS. JUNCTION CAVE.
to the centre of the Cave,
but it cannot be made prac-
ticable for visitors. In the
passage are many remark-
able lime barriers, which
extend from side to side of
the channel and to within a
foot or so of the roof.
The upper entrance is
about 130 feet above the
creek. From it, irregular
passages lead easterly to
the main caverns, which run
both north and south.
South Branch.
This branch contains
many fine examples of drip-
stone growth. Among a
fine series of stalactites,
pillars, and draped forms,
one stalagmite curiously


resembles a dressed monkey sitting in an easy attitude in an arm-chair. The branch ends in a large
and very dry cavern, 116 feet long by 70 feet high, containing some thin pillars and interesting
terraced formations.
i
North Branch.
This cavern is magnificent. A superb dome-shaped stalagmite, partly covered with a cream-
coloured crystalline deposit and partly faced by a red and white fluted formation, forms an
imposing buttress on the southern side of a grand and fascinating example of the “ diamond
waterfall” formation.
Two exquisite basins adorn the brilliant slopes of this “cascade”; cream-coloured walls
flank it on either side and sparkle with a thousand crystals. Near its foot is another enchanting
“cascade,” whose frozen waters are bright with tints of white and grey. Above it on the right
is a little canopy-covered recess. A charming mantle of dark brown drapes another mantle of
white. Underneath, reed-like and curiously-twisted stalactites add their tribute of beauty. Rising
upwards from the canopy for 40 feet or over, the sloping wall is covered with tinted “draperies.”
Northerly, a shawl stalactite rests on an ornamental base. In the background is a fine collection
of shawls, pillars, and dome stalagmites, both white and tinted. Some of the shawls are 15 feet
long. One of them is like a white blanket bordered with reddish-tinted bands. Further on is a
marvellously beautiful thin, dark-red column, supported on a uniquely decorated stalagmite, which,
in its turn, rests on a crystalline “cascade,” Near it some white draperies hang from the roof,
one cluster being like a silken skirt with many folds. From this point, looking down a steep
crystalline slope, is seen the present subterranean waterway.
The waters of the Wombeyan Creek run underground before they reach the Creek Cave,
then pass under the Fig Tree Cave, reappear at the foot of the slope abovementioned, and finally
join the flood channel of the creek south-westerly from the upper entrance to the Junction Cave.
BULLIO CAVE.
I his Cave is situated between the Tinted and Shawl Caves. It is small
in extent, but is not wanting in beauty.


THE
SHAWL CAVE
(Unopened).
O. Trickett.
Photo.
SCENE, BOUVERIE CAVE.
Recently
discovered,
near the
Tinted
Cave. Lim-
ited in extent. Decorated
throughout with crystalline
draperies, amber-tinted, and
striped shawls. Contains a
little grotto packed with trans-
lucent crystalline stalactites.
THE
PALACE CAVE
(Unopened).
This is a
very beau-
tiful but
small cav-
ern, which
is entered from the top of the
limestone ridge near the Koo-
ringa Cave.
THE BOUVERIE CAVE
(Unopened).
I HIS Cave is situated 17 chains south-west of the western entrance to
tt r 11 11 T 1 . , ir 1 • -
the Wollondilly Lave. It has been explored for a distance of over
3°° feet, but the broken nature of its tortuous passages of access render
them dangerous to open for inspection. The Cave contains one large and gorgeous chamber and
many dainty little grottoes, resplendent with beautiful crystals and white and tinted dripstones.


THE WOMBEYAN CAVES
County of Westmoreland


WOMBEYAN CAVES
For additional plans, see Ann. Rep. of Dep; of Mines and Agriculture, for 183 7,' 1838. 1301.
62724
Photo-lithographed by
W. A. Gullick, Government Printer,
Sydney, N.S. W.


Guide to
Yarrangobilly Caves
New South Wales.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Issued under the direction of
The Honorable S. W. MOORE, Esq., M.P.,
Minister for Mines and Agriculture.
Price, One Shilling.
By O. TRICKETT, L.S., M.S
(COPYRIGHT.)
w. a. gullick; government printer.


COACH
INFORMATION.
COOMA. Fares.
s. d.
For Bombala—daily (Sunday ex.), 9-20 a.m. ... ... 20 o
Nimmitabel ~ ~ ... ... 10 o
Colombo ~ ~ ... ... 20 o
Bega „ „ 30 o
Delegate ~ ~ 30 o
Berridale... ... ...
Dalgatty t
Jindabyne ... ... J
Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday, at
io*3 a.m.
f 7 6
. 10 o
V 126
Mount Kosciusko, by arrangement—
1 passenger, £5 return.
2 passengers, £9 10s. return.
3 )> £'3 »*
/- Including guide, saddle
< horses, camp, and meals
after leaving Jindabyne.
Adaminaby ... ...
Kiandra ... ... ... C
*Yarrangobilly Caves ... '
Daily (Sunday
excepted),
10-45 a.m.
r 12 6
\ 2 5 o
35 °
Bobundarra—as arranged ... ... ... ... 10 o
*Varrangobilly Caves, and return via Tumut ... ... 40 o
*Tuross Falls and Brown Mountain.
TUMUT.
*For Kiandra, Tuesday and Friday, 1-15 p.m.—
Single 20 o
Return ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 o
*Yarrangobilly Caves, Tuesdays and Fridays, 1-15 p.m.—
Single ... ... ...
Return 3
mail
( | ays
j 15 o
) 22 6
„ other days 30 0
*Do. and return via Cooma 40 0
*Tal bingo 6 o
* Special trips arranged to suit requirements.
RAIL FARES.
Single. Return.
Ist, 2nd. Ist, 2nd.
s. and. s. and, s. and. s. and.
Sydney-Cooma (266 miles) ... 51 9 34 9 77 9 52 3
Sydney-Tumut (322 miles) ... 62 o 41 5 93 o 62 6
(Available for 6 months.)
1st. 2nd.
Hoi.iday Excursion. . . '
s. d. s. d.
Sydney-Cooma (266 miles) ... ... ... 69 o 46 3
Sydney-Tumut (322 miles) ... ... ... 82 6 55 6
(At Holiday times only.)
Sydney to Tumut and Return, via Cooma, or
vice veisa *58 0 *39 6
(Available for 2 months.)
* Issued only through Messrs. Cook & Son, 4 Hunter-street.
SPENCER'S FALLS, JINDABYNE.
FURTHER INFORMATION MAY BE OBTAINED AT THE GOVERNMENT
TOURIST BUREAU, SYDNEY.


ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE.
The Caves House ... .. t 6
Maffra Lake, Monaro ... 8
Catch of Trout ... ... • ••• 9
Tumut River, near Township ... ... ••• i°
Entrance to Lobb’s- Hole ... ••• • ! 4
Glory Hole Cavern ... ... • ••• *5
Entrance South Branch Glory Hole Cavern, showing
Lyre Bird’s Nest *6
Grand Stalactites, Queen’s Chamber .18
The Indian Bower ... ... ... ... 20
Scene near the Broken Column . 21
The Wedding Cake ... ... ... ... 21
Jack Frost's Hall ... ... ... ■ ••• ••• 22
Group of Stalactites ... ... 2 4
Temple of the;Thousand Idols ... ... .. 24
The Burmese Temple ... ... ••• ... • 24
Shawls ... ... ■ ... 25
Grotto under King Solomon’s Temple ... ... .. 26
King Solomon's Temple ... ... ... ... ... 27
Aladdin Cave ... ... ... ... 28
CONTENTS.
PAGE"
Preface ... ... ... ... • . 6
Introductory ... ... ... ••• 7
Accommodation ... ... ••• 9
Fishing ... ... ... ... ... 9
Routes ... ... .. ... ... ... ii
Tumut ... ... ... .. ... ... ii
Cooma .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Glory Hole Cavern... ... ... 15
Northern Branch ... ... ... ... ... 16
The Jersey Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Harrie Wood Cave * ... ... ... ... ... 22
The Castle Cave ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
The River Cave ... ... ... ... ... 26
The Copper Mine Cave ... ... ... ... ... 26


THESE Caves are situated 65 miles north-west of
Cooma Railway Station, via Kiandra ; 47 miles
south-south-east of Tumut Railway Station. Mail coaches travel between Tumut and Cooma, via
the Caves, but vehicles are generally hired by intending visitors. The Railway Commissioners
offer special rates for the return trip. A Postal-receiving and Telegraph Office, and a comfortable
Accommodation House, have been provided for the convenience of the public at the Caves, added
to which there is a natural tepid bath at the thermal spring. Splendid fishing is provided by
the rainbow trout which
have been liberated in the
Yarrangobilly River. The
known Caves comprise :
The Glory Hole -
Caverns.
The Jersey Cave.
The Harrie Wood
Cave.
The Castle Cave.
The River Cave.
The Grotto Cave (un-
opened).
The Copper Mine Cave
(temporarily closed).
O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE CAVES HOUSE


INTRODUCTORY.
A complete climatic change is afforded
to the residents of the lowlands by a
visit to the Alpine district in which the Yarrangobilly Caves are situated. It
is a region of mountain, glens, and limpid streams —
“ Where the air is clear as crystal, and the white stars fairly blaze
At midnight in the cold and frosty sky” —
where the dawn breaks cool and bracing, and children are rosy-cheeked and sturdy.
The Caves contain treasure-houses which no dream of hastern art can equal. Ihe vastness
of the Glory Hole Caverns ; the mammoth stalactites of the Queen’s Chamber; the weird and
stupendous Cathedral Ruins ; the exquisite forms and dainty colouring of the Jersey Cave ; the
richly-sculptured pillars of “ lhe lemple of the I housand Idols ; and the gorgeous drapery of
King Solomon’s Temple unite in their grandeur and bewitching beauty to enthral all spectators.
They occur in a belt of limestone from half a mile to i mile in width, and 6or 7 miles long. Ihe
frontage of this belt to the Yarrangobilly River is singularly impressive. For miles precipices
and battlemented outcrops dip their toes in the crystal waters of the rapidly-running river. I hey
are weatherworn, carved here and there with grotesque shapes, scored and pitted with holes and
crevices, many of which indicate the entrances to unexplored caverns with which the limestone is
honeycombed. Two miles up stream from the Caves House the river has cut its way through the
limestone, and now flows under it. Not very far away, but on the top of the plateau, a curious
weathering of the limestone has taken place, forming a labyrinth of huge pinnacled rocks, like
tombstones marking the graves of a race of giants.
Like many other Caves in this State, those of Yarrangobilly appear to owe their discovery
to pioneers in search of new country for stock. In this connection, Mr. S. M. Mowle informs me
that they were explored by the late Sir Terence Aubrey Murray in 1839. It was a difficult place


to reach in those days. Mr. Mowle relates that on one of
their trips they lost their norses, and had to call in the
assistance of a tribe of blacks to carry their impedimenta; further, that many human bones were
found during their explorations. The large Glory Hole Cavern became a favourite camping place
for cattle when the winter snow lay on the ground.
As the years rolled on, gold was discovered at Kiandra, 14 miles away, roads were formed,
the Caves became better known, and what was once a wild cattle ranch, remote from civilisation,
MAFFRA LAKE, MONARO.
is now a pleasant resort for
tourists. During- recent years
new and beautiful caverns have
been found. The names of
J. Bowman, W. E. Williams,
Charles H. Kerry, H. Bradley,
&c., are among those who have
been associated with these
discoveries. As the known
caverns are limited to a very
small portion of the limestone,
it is probable that many other
beauty spots will from time to
time give up their hidden
treasures to the wondering
gaze of future generations.
O. TRICKETT.


ACCOMMODATION.
Commodious buildings have been
e rected for the convenience of visitors.
They are pleasantly situated in a grassy nook sheltered by densely-wooded
hills, and limestone cliffs 200 feet high. At the foot of these cliffs Rule’s Creek disappears under-
ground, and gives an example of the manner in which caves are formed.
One feature of the accommodation provided is found in the tepid bath. About half a mile
south of the Caves House, a spring gushes out of the mountain side, the waters of which have an
average temperature of about 80 degrees. A bath, 28 feet x 14 feet x 5 feet deep, has been erected
hfcre. Local residents affirm that the water has marvellous healing properties, and it may not
unreasonably be expected that this spring will some day be the site of a luxurious spa.
Analysis of Water. —Organic ammonia, or albumenokl ammonia, '026 parts in 1,000,000 parts; Chlorine, '8
grains per gallon.
Analysis of Solids. —Carbonate of lime, 6-552 grains per gallon ; silica, -868 grains per gallon; alumina, trace;
chloride of sodium, 1-318 grains per gallon; strong trace of strontia, nitrates, and undetermined, -306
grains per gallon. Total, 9-044 grains per gallon.
FISHING.
Close at hand, the Yarrangobilly River is a first-
class trout stream. Liberated by Mr. 11. Bradley
for the Fisheries Department in 1897, rainbow
trout have made rapid progress. Hundreds of them have
been caught here, up to five pounds weight, during the
season 1904-1905. Along the stream, with its slippery stones,
its rapids, and its deep holes, the trout finds a congenial
home. Amid scenes of surpassing beauty, the angler will
find a week pass all too rapidly. —(Extracted from “ Trout
Fishing in New South Wales , 1905 .”)
CATCH OF TROUT.


McRae.
Photo.
TUMUT RIVER, NEAR TOWNSHIP.


ROUTES.
The traveller to the Yarrangobilly Caves has
a choice of two routes by rail from Sydney,
namely: —Via Cooma (265 ,miles from Sydney), thence 65miles north-westerly by
coach. Via Tumut (318 miles from Sydney), thence 47 miles southerly by coach. From the
Victorian Border a bridle track, via Tumberumba, leads to the Caves through mountain scenery.
Tumut Route.
The township of Tumut (900 feet above sea level) is a prosperous and
substantially-built town, charmingly situated in the midst of flower gardens,
avenues of stately European trees, orchards and farms, which are encircled by
151ue-clad mountains.
On leaving the township, the River Tumut is followed for over 20 miles. At 6 miles it is
crossed at Jones’ Bridge. This is a beautiful spot, on either side of which ranges dip down to
narrow flats covered in due season with waving crops of maize, while enchanting glimpses of the
babbling river are obtained through openings in its luxuriant fringe of willows.
Bowler’s Flat (17 miles), where there is a modest accommodation house, forms a handy
stopping-place. The foot of Talbingo (1,350 feet) is reached at 23 miles. The road now rises
2,000 feet in the next 6 miles. The journey up this somewhat steep incline is relieved by grand
views of valley and ravine, and of mountains scarred by high bluffs of rock, which, as peak
succeeds peak, fade in the distance in the bluish haze which lends so much beauty to mountain
scenery on a grand scale. A comparatively level road now passes through thickly-timbered ridges,
and drops into the hamlet of Yarrangobilly (3,550 feet), near the head of the river which gives the
Caves their name. Here is seen the rugged grey outcrop of the northern extremity of the Caves
limestone. The Yarrangobilly Inn (3,600 feet) is passed at 40 miles, and at 44 x / 2 miles (4,100 feet)
a finger-board indicates that the Caves route branches to the right off the main Kiandra Road.
After a rapid descent, a winding course is taken round precipitous cliffs of limestone, below which


the limpid waters of the Yarrangobilly River make merry in
their haste to join the I umut. On every hand are massive
outcrops of bluish grey limestone, whose majestic walls are set off by the well-grassed river slopes
on which they rest, and by the varied tints of the thickly-wooded mountains in the background,
which they mutely seem to challenge. Now a bright shaft of sunshine brings out vivid tints of
green, olive, and soft blue, which merge into dark russet, greens, greys, and purples with each
passing cloud. Again the scene changes as the joyous notes of birds usher in another flood
of sunshine. Ihe Caves House is now close at hand, and the pleasant drive terminates at
4634 miles (3,200 feet above sea level).
Cooma Route.
Cooma (2,500 feet above sea level) is an extensive town in the centre of
the far-famed Monaro pastoral district. In the vicinity are deposits of gold, copper,
silver, tripolite, &c. The road to the Caves passes near the shade of umbrageous
willow trees into open country and up some scrubby hills, w’hose tops are covered with indigenous
pines. Yeat the road, on the left, at 3 miles from Cooma, and 900 feet above it, a magnificent
view may be had from the top of Mount Gladstone. The town is seen to nestle in the lap of gently
sloping hills, while westerly, through Jindabyne, ridge and mountain rise one behind the other for
60 miles to the region of perpetual snow, known as the “Roof of Australia’’—the pleasure
ground of the Alpine-climbers of the Commonwealth, where Kosciusko rears his hoary head
7»3 feet abo\e sea level, and marks the birthplace of many a mountain stream and river.
Following the road through undulating and well-grassed country, Pine Valley {y/ 2 miles),
Black Creek (6% miles), Bridle’s Creek (gtf miles), Wambrook (11% miles) are successively passed,
and the road begins to mount up wooded ridges to the Monaro Dividing Range, which separates
the Murrumbidgee waters from those of the Snowy River. A welcome cup of tea awaits the
traveller at Rhinefalls (3,700 feet), 15 miles. Resuming the Journey, the top of the range (4,000
feet) is passed at miles. Descending into the valley of the Snowy River the country becomes


more open. Erying-pan Plain is crossed (20 to 22 miles).
Outcrops of a beautiful blue granite and a boldly-marked
quartz reef are noted on the roadside/ and the village of Adaminaby (3,500 feet) is entered at
30 miles. It contains some comfortable hotels, and is a convenient resting-place. Proceeding
on the journey, the Eucumbene River is crossed in scrubby country at 36%' miles; Hughes Creek
at 38 miles. The river is again crossed at miles, near the further end of a fine plain named
Providence Flat, which is worked for gold. Beyond Alpine Creek (43 miles) the road makes a
wide detour round the base of Mount Alpine. As the wooded slopes of the mountain are left
behind, Waterloo Creek is crossed, and the Rocky Plain is entered at 46 miles.. The road shortly
winds upwards round Sawyer’s Hill. On the descending grade, open plains, which here flank
the Eucumbene River on either side, come into view. Kiandra is seen in the distance, with
its white background formed by the huge open cut made by miners on New Chum Hill.
At the river crossing, wide areas of upturned ground bear testimony to the eager search for gold
in days gone by.
Kiandra (4,600 feet), 51 miles, is famous for the richness of its auriferous deposits, and for
the opportunities it affords in winter-time for the old-world sport of snow-shoeing. I hat the snow
lies deep at times is brought prominently into notice by tall black poles which skirt the road on
either side of the township, and serve to guide the traveller from mishap when Nature spreads her
winter mantle of white over the land.
Leaving Kiandra, the road winds its way up and down gently undulating and open country
and ascends the Monaro Range again, which is topped at 58 miles (52nd mile-peg from I umut).
Here is a basaltic plateau which divides the main sources of the Murrumbidgee River on the east
from the head waters of the Yarrangobilly River, a tributary of the Tumut, on the west. To the
south is the watershed of the Eucumbene River, an affluent of the Snowy River, which finds its
way to the sea through Victoria.


From Bullock Hill (4,700 feet), 59 miles, the road
runs down hill to the Caves. At 60 miles are some extensive
and beautiful views. lo the north-east the Long Plain stretches for miles, with the Peppercorn
E. C. Andrews.
Photo.
ENTRANCE TO LOBB'S HOLE.
Ranges in the back-
ground. To the north
are the lofty peaks of the
Fiery Range. At 61
miles (51st mile-post from
Tumut, via Caves) the
road bifurcates, the right
branch leading direct to
I umut. The left branch
is followed, and soon be-
gins to descend rapidly
round thickly-wooded
slopes, with openings
here and there, which
disclose magnificent
panoramas of the moun-
tains and glens which
skirt the Yarrangobilly
River on either side
and are lost to view near
the Lobb’s Hole Copper
Mine.


GLORY HOLE CAVERN.
At 65 miles from Cooma the road
turns abruptly to the right, through
crags and cliffs of limestone, to the
Caves House (3,200 feet).
GLORY HOLE
CAVERN.
One-third of a mile
from the Caves House,
100 feet below it, but
still high above the
Yarrangobilly River, which it faces, is
the Glory Hole Cavern, a vast
amphitheatre, 200 feet x 150 feet x 80
feet high, with a large opening in the
centre running up to the surface of the
limestone, 185 feet above the floor.
When the sun’s rays pass down the
shaft and give a warm tint to the blue
walls of the cavern, one realises the
fitness of its name. At the foot of a
mound of fallen rocks, under the open-
ing, are several peculiar stalagmitic
deposits with flat green-covered tops
and rounded sides, picked out in white
and red. The most massive of these is


called the Sacri-
ficial Altar, and
one might fancy it
had been used in re-
mote ages for mak-
ing peace offerings
to the gods, before
visitors ventured into
the region of silence
and darkness be-
yond. Within view
is the iron-barred
entrance of the
South
Branch,
guarded by
an immense
monolith,
appropriately
named TheSknti-
nk l. In one of
the nooks of this
pillar a Lyre Bird
has built a nest, and
brings out a young
one each year.
ENTRANCE SOUTH BRANCH GLORY HOLE CAVERN SHOWING LYRE BIRD’S NEST.


Passing- through the gateway, the spectator faces The
Cathedral Ruins, sculptured in awe-inspiring grandeur.
Pure white columns, minarets, towers, and pinnacles stand in groups, or rise tier upon tier and
give mute evidence of the giant hand which gave them birth. A veritable phantom city, in
which massive structures appear, only to vanish and give place to others as the magnesium light
slowly travels from point to point of the vast cavern.
To the left, many a tortuous passage winds its way through The Maze, where hundreds
of short pillars join roof and floor. The main pathway, however, is on the right, and rises up the
Ascent of Mount Kosciusko to the Blow Hole, where the pent-up air from the caverns ahead
sometimes roars in its impatience to join the warmer atmosphere outside. Emerging from the
Blow Hole, a draped crystalline formation, named “The Mistletoe,” is seen on the left. Here
a huge cavern is entered, 500 feet long, 140 feet broad, and of great height. Its irregular floor
is strewn with rocks, which are occasionally decorated with crystalline and tinted deposits. Among
the latter are the formations named The Wedding Cake, The Judge’s Wig, and the Lamb’s
Fleece. Overhead are myriads of diminutive stalactites.
The lofty Grand Dome forms the further end of the cavern. It reaches a height of
180 feet, measured from the floor to a small aperture which connects this part of the cave with
the surface.
After viewing two fine “ cascade ” formations a return is made, and the Northern Branch
is entered from the northern and outer side of the Glory Hole Cavern.
North
Branch.
An arched passage ushers the visitor into the Music Hall, a large chamber
which has fine acoustic properties. Grotesque forms of dripstone hang from its walls
in places, which have been named The Old Curiosity Shop and Paddy’s
Market. Some of the odd shapes resemble dressed poultry. Passing on, a


narrow pathway leads up into the wonderful
Queen’s Chamber, whose vast roof is
closely packed with mammoth corrugated
stalactites, some of them many tons in weight.
Another marvellous collection of similar huge
stalactites is found further on in the King’s
Chamber. On one side of the latter are the
remains of what has been a beautiful crystal
grotto.
Between the King’s and Queen’s
Chambers The Frozen Waterfall is found
at the end of a narrow and earthy tunnel.
Under the dark red-tinted and crystalline
dome-shaped roof of a small cavern, a thin
film of lime has been deposited for a width
of 5 or 6 feet and a depth of 30 feet on the
wall. It daintily represents a sparkling water-
fall. The roof is dotted over with the peculiar
diminutive stalactites which are known as
“mysteries” or helictites.
The dripstones in the Glory Hole
Caverns are remarkable for their immense
size, and afford evidence of the ages which
have elapsed since they first commenced to
form.
O. Trickett.
Photo.
GIANT STALACTITES QUEEN’S CHAMBER.


THE JERSEY CAVE.
The entrance to the Jersey Cave
lies to the left of the road to Tumut,
at a distance of'3o chains from the Caves House, and 140 feet above it.
As far as explored, the cave extends into the mountain for 500 feet in a northerly direction.
From the entrance, the descent of stone and iron stairways takes the visitor into Chaos —an odd
name given to a cavern whose floor is strewn with masses of broken rocks. From thence another
iron stairway passes down over an amber-tinted and crystalline cascade into an attractive chamber.
The roof is white, and dotted with coral-like and curiously-twisted stalactites. To the left is a
group of amber-white and reddish pillars, named The Piano. In the centre is a massive black
stalagmite with a crystalline base. It is surmounted by a little white form, curiously like a dog.
Other crystalline and draped dripstones grace the walls. To the right, in a crevice, are some dark
red-striped sheets of lime, named The Sides of Bacon.
Passing thence under the fragment of a huge column, which possibly laid there ages before
the present dripstones were formed, and over a rock-strewn floor, The Centennial Hall is
entered, and the glories of the Jersey Cave begin to unfold themselves to the spectator in a wealth
of colour and an endless profusion of exquisite forms.
Passing under some massive red fluted columns, named The Organ, the hall is found to
contain large stalactites, terraced stalagmites, dark and sparkling “cascades,” and a series of
exquisite grottoes, in which are The Madonna, The Child in the Niche, Paddy Carey’s
Carrot, &c.
In the Studio, on the right, are The Curtains, Pompey’s Pillar, The Kangaroo’s
Tail, and other stalactites, gorgeously decorated with the twisted dripstone growths. Up to the
left is the enchanting Indian Bower, a beautiful canopied recess, in which is a dainty silk-like
“shawl,” among many other exquisite and variously-tinted forms.


Ihe Alhambra Hall comes next. Here on the right
are several “ shawls,” one of which is a superb amber-tinted
sheet of lime hanging in graceful folds, and known as the Jersey Shawl. Near it are two
fine white stalagmites, named The Paraffin Candles.
In front of some fine terraced formations, surrounded by groups of stalactites and draped
forms, is Cleopatra’s Needle, a splendid thin terraced
column, 31 feet high. Further on is The Gem of the West,
O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE INDIAN BOWER. PAGE 19.
(BACK AND FRONT VIEWS).
a finely-decorated
canopy.
The next corri-
dor is named The
Flower Garden,
from the cactus-
like clusters of
dark-tinted crys-
tals which are
dotted here and
there within a bor-
der of crystals.
Jack Frost’s
Hall now comes
into view. Here
are numerous
fluted and terraced
columns, white


SCENE NEAR THE
BROKEN COLUMN.
O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE WEDDING CAKE.
and ambe r-
tinted stalac-
tites, shawls, &c., myriads of diminutive reed-like
forms, a crystalline white stalagmite, called The
Wedding Cake, &c. Next is the enchanting Titania’s
Bower, closely packed with beautiful forms. In the
distance is the massive column She. Between it and
the spectator is the Queen’s Canopy, —a fine amber-
tinted column — The Hermit, and The Broken
Column. Unlike the Broken Column at Jenolan, this
pillar has fallen out of the perpendicular, and is
cemented at the broken ends. Here and there are
some draped forms of a pinkish tint. Near by are
The Porclpines —odd little rounded forms, bristling
with short spikes.
Cesar’s Column, a massive fluted stalagmite,
stands at the entrance of the terminal chamber, where
the following objects of interest claim attention :
The Dome, a beautiful pink and brown tinted and
draped canopy ; The Medusa, wax-like in texture,
hanging over terraced white stalagmites. High up
are some beautiful shawls, pillars, Sic. Among these is the Virgin
Mary, modelled in pale brown. The cave evidently extends both to
the north-east and north-west, but has not been explored beyond “ 1 he
Dome.”


Returning to the chamber “ Chaos,” a passage of
some 200 feet runs southed v to The Grotto of Oddities.
This grotto contains a series of small canopies, from which depend many fragile and reed-like drip-
stones, among others of a larger size. Some have bulbous bases. Slender columns lend their aid to
the beauty of this chamber. It is seldom visited, owing to the inconvenience of inspecting it.
HARRIE WOOD CAVE.
On the southern side of a steep
gorge, three-quarters of a mile
from the Caves House and 30
feet above it, is the entrance to the Harrie Wood Cave,
named after the first Under Secretary for Mines in New
South Wales.
Higher up the gorge is a fine waterfall, between
which and the cave the water runs underground, passes
through the uninteresting “ River Cave,” and finds an
exit south-westerly in the banks of the Yarrangobillv River.
The Harrie Wood .Cave is not very large, little
over 200 feet in length, 60 feet in width, and 25 feet in
height ; but it contains a splendid collection of massive
stalagmites and terraced pillars, exquisitely coloured in warm
tints of cream, amber, and terra-cotta. A winding stairway
is traversed downwards from the entrance. As the last
vestige of daylight disappears, group upon group of
gorgeous columns and draped and gracefully moulded
stalagmites are viewed as they mount, one above the
other, on the sloping floor to the right. Here and there
among these beautiful formations are little stalagmites
O. Trickett. Photo.
JACK FROST'S HALL. PAGE 20.


somewhat like rudely-carved images. This part of the
cavern is known as the Temple of the Thousand Idols.
To the left, Nature has formed alcoves tvhich might be taken to represent scenes from an Oriental
fairyland. Below these is the Burmese Temple, remarkable for the rich luxuriance of its
decorations and the splendour of its terraced pillars.
At the end of the cavern are The Twin Mysteries, two large stalactitic growths, festooned
with eccentric little lime deposits. Near them are lime-shawls and some exceptionally fine
stalactites.
Unexplored chambers exist below the “Mysteries,” and are probably connected with the
underground waterway noted above.
THE CASTLE CAVE.
Beyond the Glory Hole and Harrie Wood Caves, ioo feet below and
nearly one mile from the Caves House, in the face of a perpendicular
limestone cliff, is the entrance to the Castle Cave, whose passages
extend north-easterly and easterly for 600 feet into the mountain. Large opaque white stalactites
are shortly seen. In an alcove is the miniature presentment of a duck. Passing a channel which
communicates with the surface, The Coralline Grotto is viewed, and the cavern roof rises to a
lofty height as the Dome Chamber is approached. Here is a large boat-shaped block of
limestone, named Noah’s Ark, surrounded by coral-like dripstones. Then a passage ornamented
with brown and reddish pillars, terraced cascades, &c., introduces the visitor to The Joss House,
an exquisite little canopied structure in the Moresque style of architecture, flanked on either side
by beautiful forms in various tints. This is succeeded by terraced deposits of a wax-like texture,
which cover the walls in places. Some odd and daintily-tinted little stalagmites and a diminutive
bust of Sir Henry Par'kes next claim attention. Above the latter a beautiful draped and
fringed “cascade” is set off by groups of translucent white and tinted stalactites.


Passing- up some stone steps,
from which a side view is obtained
of reddish basins with frilled edges,
a wealth of colour is found in the
Fairy Bower. Here are coral-like
stalactites and pillars, which rest on a
rippled floor. Further on a beautiful
“ shawl,” exquisitely folded, hangs in
front of a white background, which
is dotted here and there with trans-
lucent white or coral dripstones.
Near by is the Pagoda stalagmite.
The charmingly-decorated Queen’s
Boudoir serves to admit the visitor
to the Grand Dome, which reaches a
height of perhaps 90 feet. From every
ledge of this cavern depend groups of
stalactites, some clear as crystal, some
tinted, some of exceptional length.
High up is a weirdly-shaped growth,
named The Mistletoe, but the chief
feature of the chamber is the mam-
moth stalagmite named The Trigo-
nometrical Station. Although of
GROUP OF STALACTITES.
TEMPLE OF THE THOUSAND IDOLS.
O. Trickett.
Photo.
THE BURMESE TEMPLE. PAGES 22, 23.


great size, it is symmetrical in form, and its warm-tinted and
crystalline sides run in graceful curves from summit to base.
The Coral Grotto comes next. Here are splendid crystalline amber-tinted “ cascades,"
graced by many a flowing curve. Overhead myriads of stalactites depend from a “coral” roof,
while attractive stalagmites decorate the floor.
Below the Trig. Station, and extending from the Queen’s Boudoir to the Coral Grotto, is
the enchanting Aladdin Cave, which is resplendent from end to end with translucent tapering
stalactites which overhang crystalline
floors. (This chamber is not yet open for
inspection.) Unexplored caverns extend
to the east. Following the explored pass-
ages, which now bear south-westerly, the
crowning glory of the Castle Cave is
revealed to the spectator. This is King
Solomon’s Temple. From gracefully-
rounded snowy-white ledges, rendered
luminous by myriads of crystals, which
sparkle like diamonds, hang gorgeous,
orange-tinted shawls. Under the canopy
thus formed are grottoes of exquisite
beauty. No dream could conjure up any
scene to outrival the splendour of this
masterpiece of Nature’s handicraft. Near
by is The Nymph’s Bath, a little pool of
pellucid water, enclosed within a crystalline
O. Trickett.
Photo.
SHAWLS. PAGE 22.


basin, and surrounded by pure white “shawls.” A fragile
stalactite hangs over the centre and supports a circular
disc on the surface of the water. On either side are lime deposits like frozen “ waterfalls,” flanked
by white and tinted draperies.
The end of the cavern is found in the
Crystal City, a lofty chamber decorated
with beautiful pillars, pencil stalactites, and
other charming forms from floor to roof.
O. Trickett. Photo.
GROTTO UNDER KING SOLOMON'S TEMPLE.
THE RIVER
CAVE.
This Cave is about 20 feet
above the Yarrangobilly
River and 200 feet below
the Caves House. Descend-
mg from the entrance, dirty and uninter-
esting passages are traversed to a dismal
abyss, at the bottom of which is the sub-
terranean waterway which carries the
waters from the gorge near the Harrie
Wood Cave to the Yarrangobilly River.
There is nothing attractive in this cave.
THE COPPER MINE
CAVE.
This cave is situated
near the northern
end of the Yarran-
gobilly Limestone—
4 miles as the crow flies from the Caves


O. Trickett.
Photo.
KING SOLOMON'S TEMPLE. PAGE 23.


House. The waters which have formed it enter the limestone
in three places, and have their exit at a point a mile south-
westerly. The known passages probably represent a very small part of the caverns which may be
discovered in the future. Some discomfort is experienced in exploring them. The subterranean
channel is followed up-stream for 500 feet, by wading through icy-cold water. An ascent of 30
feet is then made to chambers some 300 feet in length and of remarkable beauty.
As the cave is so far from the Caves House, it has been found difficult to protect it from
mutilation. The attractive chambers have, therefore, been closed with iron bars set in cement.
O. Trickett.
Photo.
ALADDIN CAVE. CAVE.


YARRANGOBILLY CAVES.
For additional plans, see Ann. Rep. of Dep. of Mines and Agriculture, for 1867 % 1863.
54534-
Photo-lithographed by
W. A. Gullick, Government Printer,
Sydney.


THE YARRANGOBILLY CAVES.
For additional plans, see Ann. Rep. of Dep. of Mines and Agriculture, for 1837 /83d
54534
Photo-lithographed by
W. A. Gullick, Government Printer,
Sydney, N.S.W.








