

"GUT” FISHING LINES.
WHAT THEY ARE.
How they are made.
How to judge them.
How to treat them.
and
THE GREAT ILLUSION.
FISHING, AND FISHING
COMPETITIONS,
and how to run them.
Issued by the Proprietors of the
"GEISHA” and the "CHERRY BLOSSOM'*
Polished (both registered), Unpolished
Brands of
FISHING LINES
to the
FISHERMEN OF AUSTRALASIA . . .
The contents of this book are original, are COPYRIGHT and
lave this book, please lend to another fisherman.
Publishing House, 69 Nelson Street, Roielle—W 1385.


FORWORD
The title of this book should have been, “The Romance of ‘GUT* Fishing
Lines, or the Disease of Fishing. Its causes, effects, and cure; together with
any other subject that has crossed what passes for the mind of the Author
during the writing thereof.”
It is presented to the Fishermen of Australasia in the hope—
That it will dispel the erroneous Ideas now prevalent in regard to so-
called “GUT” fishing lines;
Will explain the difficulties of marketing the lines, and put buyers and
users wise to things they should know;
Will inaugurate a new basis for judging fishing, and fishing feats; and
a new and happy era of truth;
Will generally help Fishermen and the sport of fishing;
AND—
Because it gives us an opportunity to get even with the blighters who
have made our life a misery for thirty blarsted years.
Despite a few jokes (puzzle, find ’em), and some little “berley,” the contents
can be accepted as correct and authentic, and all information given may be
relied on.
In the writing of a book for the ordinary public, judging by the majority of
literary efforts offered for consumption, it would seem that all that is necessary
is to attach a 1 horse-power dynamo to a type-writing machine, stuff the
machine full of empty paper, turn on the switch, and let her go.
But, in writing for Fishermen, the case is entirely different, as we know that
we are addressing a discriminating audience, who know every trick which is
to be known about their sport, and often, a damn sight more.
Our effort, therefore, has been a pleasure, written with all our soul, and the
bottled-up petulance of our thirty years of travail, and we have the satisfac-
tion of feeling that Fishermen are kindred spirits, who will understand us, be
our thoughts ever so high, or our language ever so low.
Although we hope the early part of the book will also interest Queensland
Fishermen, matter of special interest to them will be found in the later pages.
Our Fishing Lines are distributed by wholesaders. We do not distribute our-
selves, as we have not the necessary resources; but we invite correspondence,
enquiries and suggestions, or particulars of any extraordinary catch on our
lines.
Address: Box 1121, G.P.0.,
SYDNEY.
Fourth Edition.
Fortieth Thousand.


WHAT “GUT” LINES ARE.
GUT, —animal sinew gut—would be about as serviceable for fishing
purposes, as an umbrella would be for keeping a fish dry, on a wet day, if
the fish was in the water, and the water was eighty feet deep. The word
‘GUT” is simply a fancy frill, used perhaps and probably, as a delicate
suggestion of refinement. Otherwise: It has no application.
So-called “gut” lines are not gut at all. The real basis of the lines is
SILK, —silk-worm silk—and “Silk” says Webster, “is the strongest, the
most lustrous, and the most valuable of all textile fibers.” Webster, although
an American, that time, hit the truth.
There are, however, about as many degrees of quality in silk, as there
are eggs in a cod-roe, and the difference between the wild silk of China, and
to-day’s cultured product of Japan, is, metaphorically speaking, the difference
between a Phar-lap at his top, and a spavined knock-kneed knacker looking
forward with introspective resignation to a joy ride in the dead-horse cart,
and appearing as the savory item on the lion’s menu, at the zoo.
As, as you have already noted above, there is another worm involved
in this matter of silk fishing lines, beside the worm who is writing this book;
a few words from this worm, for that worm, will perhaps not be out of
place; though it is difficult to confine one’s remarks to the Silk-worm AS
a worm, for the reason, that it is, for three out of the four stages of its
life, not a worm at all, but something else.
The worm it is, however, which actually produces the silk, though,
except for the matter of feeding, the CULTURE of the worm is really
achieved through the culture of the moth, a back-handed sort of way of
going forward.
There are many kinds of grubs and other insects which produce silk
in more-or-less quantities and qualities, but the best-known producer is the
grub of the BOMBYX MORI moth, and it is this moth,—originally from
China—which the Japanese have cultured through hundreds and hundreds
of years, to an almost incredible extent.
For instance. In a natural state, the moth has wings with which to fly.
This, in order that it shall be able to move about and find its food and mate.
But, —when in culture —as the mulberry bush on which it returns to life
from the chrysalis stage IS its food, and the bush is also covered with mates,
it has had no need to fly in all the years, and so to-day, the wings are
merely relics of a purposeful past, and are now, in truth, only stiff and
useless encumberment.
1


But listen, also, to this, you fish-yarn spinners. Not only have the
WINGS become atrophied, but even the jaws, mouth, and teeth are ossified
and useless, and, for generations and generations the moths have not been
able to use them.
Hard to swallow this? Yes, but it is true all the same, and the
explanation is as follows:
From the egg comes the worm: from the worm comes the chrysalis:
from the chrysalis comes the moth, and the moth stage is the one and only
period in the four-cycled career, in which Nature’s law, “the perpetuation
of the species,” exerts its force; and so, without a-do, the moths set about
the business.
The male moth manfully plays his part, then dies a martyr’s death; the
female lays her batch of eggs within the next few days, and then dies daintily
too; neither of them ever having given a thought to either eating, drinking,
or sleeping, during the whole period of breeding, and, —Oh! what devotion
to duty.
The greatest factor in the QUALITY of Silk, is the delicacy of the vege-
tation on which the silk-worm lives.
Actually, silk is produced by the worm, to be used to make and cover
the cocoon-shelter, or house, in which the worm is to lie dormant during
the chrysalis stage; but, Just at the completion of the task, the human factor
comes in, and both chrysalis and house are sacrificed to the uses and needs
of man, —the best (if you buy the right Lines) to the Fisherman.
ONE honestly industrious worm, giving its full attention to the job,
produces in all anywhere between four to five thousand yards of filament;
the thin, gossamer-like basis of the ordinary spider’s web; but most of this
has to be torn or scratched off the cocoon, it being too closely aglutinated
to “run.”
Only about one thousand yards can be got off in one unbroken length,
and this is, of course, by far the more valuable of the two sorts.
Each kind of silk is processed in an entirely different way. The (loss
or short-ends stuff is twisted or SPUN in the same way as raw cotton is,
and although it makes a good enough WEAVING thread, it naturally lacks
tensile or long-ways strength, but, being cheap, it is of this kind, inferior
fishing lines are made.
The long filaments, however, are another proposition altogether. When
the top silk on the cocoons has been stripped down to where the ends of
the filament which will “run” have been picked up, those ends are led, each
through a separate guide, on to a large wooden wheel. The cocoons—
the number being according to the thickness of the thread wanted—are
dropped into a tub of water, and as the revolving wheel pulls at the silk,
and the drag of the water holds the cocoons back, the filaments come reeling


off the cocoon on to the wheel, and thus you have “THROWN” Silk, and
it is from these thrown threads, that “GEISHA” Fishing Lines are made.
But, this is not all.
As we have said, different feeding produces different qualities. Different
qualities have different properties; the one great objective of all culture
being to produce a silk with the greatest amount of natural tenacity, elas-
ticity, and ductility, and in the last analysis, the great test is its crepe-ing or
crinkling properties, for only the very highest qualities will crepe, at all.
In the manufacture of our Lines only “NAGAHAMA” thrown silk is
used exclusively; a silk which has, for years, stood pre-eminent amongst all
the silks; apparently because of some peculiarity in the soil of the district,
and the extra-fine texture of the food, and—this is not guff, it is truth.
Our Lines are made to the highest possible standard, as well as to competitive
prices.
HOW THE LINES ARE MADE.
There are seven distinct and separate operations in the making of a
“gut” Fishing Line, each and every one of them needing the experience and
ability of a craftsman; for, as with almost everything, poor workmanship
can easily spoil good material, and good raw material must he always but-
tressed with human ability, and technical skill.
The most important feature in the manufacturing processes is probably
TENSIONING. This is the twisting of the Line to an exact and accurate
tension, which, whilst avoiding over-tightness and consequent straining and
kinking, must be just tight enough to assure maximum strength, and at the
same time allow the Line to lie true or flat in the water. Over-twisting
tends to exhaust the silk, whilst under-twisting spells weakness.
Waterproofing is most important, too. It is a jealously guarded Japanese
trade-secret, and is done, first to keep the line in tension, then to strengthen,
and finally to prevent sagging or “sogging.”
A very simple experiment to prove the effect of water on silk that
has NOT been waterproofed, and to prove the value of waterproofing, can
be made with a short piece of ordinary silk twist.
Hold one end in each hand, then get someone to just wet or dampen
any part of the length. Then pull it to break, and it will be found that the
twist will always part where wetted.
With proper tensioning, waterproofiing, and the various other processes,
you get a Line which lies straight, has maximum strength, is not affected
by water, and along which is telegraphed to the user, the slightest touch
of a fish. This enables the STRIKE to be made without a preliminary
taking up of slack as is necessary with water-soaked cord Lines, and Lines
made of similar materials, and this is really the difference between catching
a fish, and the fish catching itself.
3


HOW TO JUDGE LINES.
As the proper judgment of Lines before use requires great technical
knowledge, together with delicate and expensive instruments, not much as-
sistance in this matter can be offered here to the User, but in a general way,
gumption can be applied as follows:
(1) See that the Line is ROUND. A flat (defectively made) Line
will look heavier than a perfectly round one, yet be half as
strong.
(2) See that the Line is not too heavily dressed. Dressing adds to
the thickness, but the strength of a line lies in its “GUTS,” —the
silk inside—not in its dressing. It is the silk too, which costs
the money, though DRESSING may SELL as well to the un-
initiated, and is far more profitable to the maker.
(3) Buy only a Brand, the proprietors of which have all to lose if
the Line is not up to the mark. The worst thing that could
happen to the “GEISHA” Brand would be the issue of inferior
quality, for it costs too much to establish a good name for a
Line, to sacrifice it through poor quality, for extra profit.
HOW TO TREAT THE LINES.
The best way to tell you what to do with Lines, is to tell you what to
don’t.
DON’T wind off a new Line, dry. Soak it in water (not hot) for a
few minutes; then, —and this is important—carefully examine the coil for
the RUNNING end. Drop the coil over, say, a bottle standing on a flat
surface, and as you wind off, let the pull of the winding gently work the
coil around the bottle, and you will have no difficulty.
DON’T put Lines on small or square corks. Use round ones. Sharp
turns in winding are conducive to trouble and annoyance, besides being
ill-treatment.
DON’T leave Lines exposed to the sun or weather after using, and then,
months later expect them to be as good as new. Like everything else, they
respond to good treatment and consideration.
DON’T treat them with acids, chemicals, or anything of the kind. They
are supplied by the maker in the best possible condition for the best results,
and he would give them other treatment if they wanted it.
DON’T blame the “blarsted” Line every time you lose a fish or have
a break. The fish may be too big for the Line: the Line may get caught and
cut by coral, rock, or shell, etc., beneath the water: the fish may have teeth
and be able to bite through the Line: the Fisherman may be a mug, and
when responding to the bite, give a heave that would break a ship’s anchor
chain, let alone a fishing Line.
4


But, no. Of course we are wrong in suggesting this last. It is NEVER
the fault of the Fisherman. Well, anyway, it never has been. Not in all
the thirty years we have been listening to their complaints, and during the
whole of which long time, we have had to show an indulgent and sympathetic
concern. The Fisherman I Never. Perish the unworthy suggestion; and
perish it at once.
All the same though, we know pretty well how it goes.
A boat, fine day, smooth water. An hour or two of keenness, then a
slow-down, as there is nothing doing.
Presently, a slothful enquiry from the brains of the party, as to what
about a drink? Cork pulled; and in the true socially democratic fisherman
manner, the bottle passed from one to another; and, just as you sit half-,
twisted on the seat, with the bottle-to-your-lips-with-one-hand, and the Line
held carelessly with the other, then, —oh yes, it is always then—comes that
bite of bites, and that frantic jag that would break any Line except a
“GEISHA.”
Of COURSE, the line slips through your fingers. Of COURSE, you
lose the feel of the fish; and of COURSE, you start your, “Well, of all the
rotten b . . . . y Lines, you ever” “NO!” “He's on!” “Look out!”
“LOOK OUT!” “Take the bottle, —take the bottle can’t yer?” “Oh, oh!”
“What have 1 got here?” “Eh, what!” “Steady. S-t-e-a-d-y.” “Tilt the
boat. Tilt the boat, 1 tell yer, and we’ll float it in.” “LOOK!”
“Phew.” “What a bonzer, eh!” “Look at that.” “What Oh! What Oh!”
“Me for the wonder fisherman.” “Pip, pip!”
Yes, you blighter. YOU are the wonder fisherman of course.
No thought for the worn, worried, and prematurely aged old cove,
who has sacrificed his life to bring to you a fishing Line which enabled you
to land that fish, not BECAUSE of yourself, but in SPITE of yourself.
Yes. You are the wonder fisherman alright a-l-r-i-g-h-t,
we DON’T think. W-E D-O-N-T T-H-I-N-K. H-U-H,—H-U-H; and
this last, just as scornfully as printer’s type can make it look, and as sar-
castically as you, yourself, can make it read.
And now let us tell you, that we find that we feel a bit relieved, and
feel too, that, at least some of the money the publication of this book is going
to cost SOMEBODY, will be money well spent; for we have been waiting for
years for an opportunity to tell you face to face, something like what we
have just told you, only a blamed sight more so; and would too, but for
the laws against profanity, and calculations to upset the King’s peace, so
we will let it go at that; and with that generous magnanimity which oozes
out of us, as shown by our every word, we will now proceed to take OUR
share of the troubles which unfortunately, but necessarily, occur between us.


When we chided you for holding that bottle when you should have had
your attention on fishing, you may think that we meant to put all the blame
for EVERYTHING on you.
We do not. We certainly do NOT. We must he just, for, if there is
one admirable attribute in our noble character which stands out quite as
prominently as all the others, it is our sense of Justice. We must be just.
Therefore, we have got to admit that now and again, a faulty Line WILL
get out. How could it be otherwise, in view of the quantity we sell? —a
quantity which would astonish you if we gave you the figures, and would
astonish us, too, if there was only a little more profit in it.
But, after all, profit is a pretty sordid sort of thing, isn’t it? It is
really only mentioned here, so that you may see with what cavalier contempt
we regard it. We are not interested in it in any way. Not at all.
All the same, that stoney-hearted Banking-Ogre, who has the honor
of being our financial leaning-post and debt-redeemer; is always telling us
that this altruistic spirit of ours, is not business, and that it must, eventually,
lead us down to penury and poverty.
Well, if it does, whose fault is THAT going to be? He knows we are
not an ORDINARY business man, doesn’t he? And everyone knows that
genius requires chaperoning; and the greater the genius, the more the need.
Don’t they?
Very well, then. Let HIM look after HIS end of the gams; and we will
look after ours. Definitely, We are determined to continue, as we hope
to go on; and as for overdrafts and profits? BAH!
So back to the Lines. Consider their make, and the delicacy of their
make. Consider it all, from the handling of a single silk filament, not much
thicker, than a stout, spider’s-web film, to the finished article. The throwing,
the twisting, the tensioning, the waterproofing, polishing, coiling, tying,
labelling, and the tremendous quantity of them, and then, we think you
will admit, that if a FEW faulty ones DO get out, THAT, is really the only
thing which is NOT 1 wonderful about It all.
But, make no error. They ARE only few. We have a thorough and
an almost perfect system of examination; the only weak factor in it being,
human fallibility, and therein lies the trouble; as do all human troubles for
the matter of that.
Sometimes, Lines are returned to us with the intimation that they were
in two or more pieces when opened. That can be true, and we admit it is
most annoying to the User; but it is occasioned by the fact that in tying the
joined, but separate coils, the tie has caught up TWO strands instead of
one, and in dividing the lengths when selling the Line, the seller has CUT
the two strands, and thus one coil, or both, are turned into two pieces
each, instead of one each. Actually, if the coils were untied and the out-
of-place strand or strands were put into their right position, the Lines would
be what they should be, —that is—continuous lengths.
6


But il is our business to see that Lines go out properly coiled and
properly tied, and we do our utmost to achieve that, but we don’t ALWAYS
succeed, and whenever the trouble, here dealt with, DOES occur, we make
good by replacement, with pleasure.
Sometimes Lines come back with the complaint that there is a JOIN (not
a Knot) in the length. This generally turns out to be a small portion of the
very strong paste used for the labels, which has accidentally got on to the
Line, and which when dry, certainly looks like a join. It is easily removed
by scraping with a sharp knife, but there is some danger of cutting the Line
in doing this, so we prefer to have it returned, and to make it good, for
it is OUR responsibility.
Once, now and again, we get one back with the complaint that there
is a - knot in it. And there IS, too. Some wretch of a workman having
slummed his job, and the Examiner, ditto; and on these occasions, it would
either do you good, or make you ill, to hear our gifted flow of eloquent
profanity.
But, again considering our quantities, it is really surprising that com-
plaints, and grounds for complaint, are so few, and wherever there is reason
for them, we offer our apologies; will aways make good, and that in our
pleasantest manner.
And now, let us say a word of appreciation to you, Mr. Fisherman, as
a class.
When we first put the “GEISHA” on the market, we put a tag on
every one of them, INVITING complaints, and undertaking to replace any
Line “that did not give fair service, under fair conditions.’* YOU to be the
judges of such conditions; —in other words—we placed our destiny entirely
in your hands.
Let us tell the world, on your behalf, you much maligned Fishermen,
that during the whole five years or so, during which you had the open oppor-
tunity to treat us unfairly if you wished, it did not cost us FIVE pounds a
year to meet every claim made, and we are prepared to make a statutory
declaration to that effect.
This says a lot for the Lines, of course, but a hundred times more for
youp* honesty and upright principles, and whilst we rail at you in fun, we
can’t forget the foregoing fact, and we have the greatest pleasure in acknow-
ledging it here.
GENTLEMEN: We raise our glass,—no—our HAT to you. The louzey
profits we just manage to scrape together, won’t stand a glass, and only
JUST a hat; and THAT only about once in fifteen years. The way we have
to slave for nothing, is nothing short of a damned shame.


And Now
THE GREAT ILLUSION.
There is one great trouble connected with the marketing of fishing
Lines, which is a source of continuous worry and loss, to the honest trader
and the Line User.
Lines are sold to NUMBERS, but unfortunately, and contrary to what is
generally thought, THERE IS NO FIXED STANDARD FOR THESE
NUMBERS.
Under the present state of our laws, any maker or supplier can call
any thickness or strength, any number he pleases, for there is nothing to
prevent him doing so.
When a Buyer asks for a number 10-2 inch nail, or a number 12-1 4
screw, he knows exactly what he is going to be supplied with; but if he
asks for a number 6 gut fishing Line, he will get any thickness the maker
or supplier of the particular brand he is offered, cares to call, or regard, as
a number 6, and the Buyer is deceived and suffers.
*ln Queensland, the Line generally sold as a number 6 is, roughly,
three so-called sizes THICKER than a so-called 6 in New South Wales; and
in any of the States a Buyer may buy three or four so-called number sixes
of different brands, and every single one of them WILL BE A DIFFERENT
SIZE.
This lack of a standard is the reputable Suppliers greatest curse. Present
economic circumstances demand, more than ever, that the most of the best for
the least money, shall be a supplier’s only claims to continued Public support;
and the BEST article at the cheapest possible price, is to-day’s absolute
necessity.
Especially is this so where inferior quality and inferior strength, means
the defeat of the very purpose for which the article is made, and is used, and,
whilst on this matter, let us, in passing, refer to the cash-catching advertise-
ments often appearing in the papers, which scream their wares with “Our
Lines are this, that, and the other. Look at the PRICES!”, and then follow
up with, say, No. 3 at so much, No. 4 at so much more, and so on.
Good legerdemain patter alright. Directs your attention to one place,
whilst the trick is being performed in another. Those numbers, and those
prices, convey absolutely nothing from the point of view of value, and less
than that when it comes to intelligible truth.
If it was half-a-pound of butter they were offering, you would, at least,
know, or expect, that you would GET half-a-pound, and that, at the price
advertised; but these NUMBERS for Fishing-Lines, are simply numbers, and
*See later pages.


convey nothing as to weight, size, quality or value, or anything else for
the matter of that, except perhaps, supreme confidence in the gullibility of
the Public.
You don’t fish with NUMBERS. You fish with LINES. And it’s a
LINE you want to buy, not a number; and if your fishing methods haven’t
more sense in them than these empty advertisements have, then you won’t
be as successful catching fish, as the advertisements are in catching you.
And then, NUMBERS out of it. What about QUALITY? What about
STRENGTH? And, —another point to watch—what about LENGTH, for, —
and here again the rotten looseness of the business—stated lengths have
pretty much become like bottle sizes; under which, a quart is about four-fifths
of a quart, the transaction saved from being iniquitous, by the use of the
respectable word “reputed.”
A few yards short on a line, owing to their being so expensive, can
really be important enough to represent a good margin of profit, as you
will realize if you think it over; 4 yards short in 40 is 10% —and those few
yards short may actually mean the loss of that big fish, when LENGTH means
the ability or otherwise to “play it”, and—but oh! you poor fish of Fisher-
men, we haven’t the heart to go on disclosing these wiles and baits that you
yourselves are victims of, before you, in turn, try to victimise YOUR victims,
by much the same methods; and, but for the fact that those advertising
jokers, when beating you, beat us, we would say with vicious venom, “and
good enough for you too”, for you don’t seem to mind being victimised, and
your easy readiness to suffer this kind of thing, annoys us.
Instead, —such is the generosity of our nature, —we are trying to show
you how to take care of yourselves; and now, gentle general reader, or you,
you big husky blighter,— as the case may be—since we have hande'd you
these few clouts of loving reproof, will you kindly step out of the ring, and
watch us whilst we figuratively don the “mits,” and verbally—in writing-
knock the stuffing out of our friends the Storekeepers and other trade sup-
pliers of “Gut” Lines to Fishermen, and to those who fish, but who are not
fishermen.
And now Mr, Storekeeper, when the next oily-tongued Commercial
Ambassador calls on you, soliciting orders for some new and unknown brand
of Line, isn’t it up to you to realize that it is no use you asking him his
prices for, say, number fours, or number sixes, and then comparing them
with the “GEISHA” prices ON NUMBERS ONLY?
Surely you will know now, that numbers, —mere numbers—mean
nothing? That you might as well ask him the price of his bird lime, or
oakum, and then compare those prices with the prices of “GEISHA” Lines;
for, from the point of view of relative values, you would achieve as much,
seeing that numbers ONLY, offer no basis for comparison whatever.
Remember, too, that these silk fishing Lines are very valuable, and cost
big money.
9


Prices to you vary, of course, according to the Silk-market, Exchanged,
Duties, and other factors over which we have no control, but at the time of
writing this book, lines are worth roughly, round about SIX SHILLINGS per
ounce weight, wholesale; or nearly 4d. (fourpence) per PENNY-WEIGHT, —
about five times the present-day value of silver.
Let us tell you that it takes very little difference in thickness to make
a very big difference in STRENGTH , and very little difference in
THICKNESS to make a hell of a difference in PRICE.
To emphasise this fact, —and it is the secret of proper buying—please
consider the following practical illustration.
The black lines below are actual and exact-sized photographic repro-
ductions of the “GEISHA” and the “CHERRY-BLOSSOM” standards of
thicknesses for the numbers shown.
Both these brands belong to us, and later, we will explain the WHY of
these differences. Here, we are simply using these two because they both
ARE ours, and for the purposes of this illustration only.
First, note the slight difference in each increasing size of the one
brand, and then the other. Next, compare the differences in thicknesses of
the two brands for the same numbers; and then carefully digest the facts
given underneath.
“GEISHA.”
N<M
NQ2
“CHERRY-BLOSSOM.”
NO |
KQ2
No. 2 “GEISHA,” thongh only so little heavier than No. 1 “GEISHA,” is
100% STRONGER and about 35% DEARER than No. 1.
No. 1 “CHERRY-BLOSSOM” is 100% STRONGER and 70% DEARER than
No. 1 “GEISHA,” and
No. 2 “CHERRY-BLOSSOM” is 100% STRONGER and about 50% DEARER
than No. 1 of the same brand; and these tremendous differences in values
apply, in progression, to ALL the different thicknesses of both standards of
gauges, although, of course, in a diminishing degree, as, as you will realize,
when you remember that it costs more—relatively—for the MAKING than
for the MATERIAL of the THINNER Lines than it does for the thicker ones,
and you may not believe it, but the Japanese makers calculate these fine
differences to the very last degree.
Now, surely, Mr. Buyer, this diagram, and these facts, will bring home
to you the avenues and pitfalls for error and, we regret to say, deception,


which can be, and is, practised with these Goods, and surely too, this illus-
tration will help you to apply intelligent judgment to any cheap-price
proposition in future. They are written and offered purely for that purpose,
for all we ask for our Lines is sound comparison and fair judgment.
Actually, the only correct way to compare values, —even if you could
prove to yourself that the quality is the same, —is by WEIGHT, and on fine
or gold-scales at that; for, as you can see, the margin for take-down is a
terrific one, owing to the high value and variety of the raw material, and
consequently, the finished article.
We are not attacking anyone in disclosing this. We are simply stating
the case as it is, and showing how, and why, It is so necessary for Trade-
Buyers to BEWARE! and to avoid trickery.
On reading over what we have written, we fear that, in flogging these
matters as we have done, we have become somewhat wearisome to you, and
we really would apologize, but for a bitter and biting experience we once had.
Listen to this.
Once, while pacing the deck of a ship, with a casual fellow-passenger,
who was a somewhat casual gentleman, we got into the discussion of a subject
in which we —meaning I—were deeply interested.
After a few rounds of the deck, our friend backed up to the taffrail and
whilst he leaned leisurely against it, we stood in front of him, still pumping
in our pet Ideas.
Now, we are nothing, if we are not considerate, and, as It suddenly
dawned on us that we were practically monopolizing the conversation, and
that he might not be so keenly interested as we were, we stopped to be
courteous, and with apologetic sincerity, we hoped that we “are not boring
you.”
“Not at all, not at all,” said the said gentleman, with a languid stretch
of his arms, and a lazy yawn, “I’m taking no b y notice.”
No, we are NOT offering any apologies; thank you.
FISHING.
As the contents of this chapter must be, necessarily, somewhat technical,
the general reader will perhaps prefer to skip it. All the same, we wish to
warn you, that if you do, you will be missing many gems of wit, and scin-
tillating shafts of bludgeonous satire; and, having told you this, we will on
with the work.
We, the writer of this book, whilst claiming to have more technical
knowledge of “Gut” Fishing Lines, than, probably anyone else in Australia,
have too much modesty about us to venture far on the subject of actual
fishing, but there are, we think, a few matters which may be mentioned to
advantage, despite the handicap of said modesty.


In a subsequent chapter, we shall show what we think should really be
the basis of judging all fishing feats, and will try to tell you why.
Here, we will confine ourselves to one or two matters which in our
opinion deserve attention, and discussion of which, we hope, may help fisher-
men in general.
It must be understood, of course, that fish and fishing, differ in different
localities. Australia is a big country. Fish around Thursday Island are
different to the fish around Perth, and as the fishes differ, so the need for
different Lines, and different methods of using the Lines.
LIGHT LINE FISHING. Where the fish are of the small species,—say
Black-Bream, —as fast movers and fierce fighters, for their size, as can be
found or desired, —it is necessary, as everyone knows, to use light gear,
owing to the innate shyness of the fish; but it puzzles us why so much risk
is taken of the loss of the fish, after hooking, by even the most expert of
fishermen.
The lighter the Line the less does it appear to the fish as a thing of
consequence or consideration, and the bait is thus a bait without the com-
plication which a THICK Line would be.
To the fish, anything it doesn’t understand, or anything out of the
usual, is naturally, a matter for suspicion. Remember, but for those very
suspicions, that fish would not BE that fish to-day. It would be, mostly,
some chemical constituents of some other fish; for all fish eat fish, and fish-law
is, every fish for itself or for some other fish, according to its ability to look
after itself, both offensively and defensively.
Thus the fish is for ever on the alert. It has got to be, for it only has
to make one mistake to preclude the necessity or possibility of making any
more, for ever-more.
Still, that fish has to live, and to live it has to eat, and to eat it has to
use its mouth; so, if that fish is any size or age, that size and age proves
that it has had enough sense, for a long time, to only open its mouth on a
proper occasion, and then only for the proper purpose; and, MY! what
trouble MAN would avoid, eh!, if he only acted on the same principles, and
in the same way.
But our business here, is fishing, not moralizing. What we are really
trying to say is that, for every good reason, a fish must needs look askance
at any bait which looks to be what it is, and that the bait which succeeds,
is the bait which looks most like what it “ain’t,” and it doesn’t look like that
to a shy fish if it is dangling on the end of a perfectly obvious THICK Line.
So it boils down to this; the lighter the line used for “Shy” fish, the more
likelihood of the fish taking the bait. .Everybody knows this, so we need
not labor it more. Indeed and perhaps, we have labored it too much already,
and if ycu think so Mr. Reader, may we kindly ask you to remember that


WE are writing this book, and if our confounded pen won’t stop when it
should, and WILL insist on running away with us now and again, well, it’s
our pen, our paper and our book, not yours,—yet.
"But,” as the fellow said when the dynamite exploded him into a
thousand fragments, “we are digressing.”
What we THINK we were saying is that LIGHT Lines are far more
effective than HEAVY Lines in catching shy fish, and if that is so, —we
mean, if we WERE saying that—well we also wish to add that light lines,
though, are only made to take light strains.
Thus the lighter the line, the more advantage to the fish, and the less
to the fisherman, and thus, of course, the greater the chance of breakage.
Therefore, in our opinion, for this class of fishing, LONGER Lines should
be used, for whilst in the ordinary run of things, the three-quarter pounder
can be landed on a 40 yards, some-day that 41b. grandfather Bream is going
to take hold of the other end of that 40 yards, and then, when it breaks at
the end of the run, and you have lost that fish, and your temper, you are
going to blame the Line of course, and not the short length which limited
your chance of doing something worth while in fishing.
80 yards would have increased your chances one hundred per cent.
100 yards would have given you one and a half times or one hundred and
fifty per cent, more chance, and more, because at the end of a “run” the
fish’s strength is less than it is at the top. of the “run” and it comes in fact,
to this. Given a Line LONG enough, an expert fisherman should kill almost
any weight of fish—in reason—but, he has got to be a FISHERMAN and not
a mere Yanker-in of fish, and killing a big fish with a little weapon is really
the essence of the sport, as It Is in every other sport.
Longer Lines than “eighties,”—loo and even 200 yards can be supplied
in light lines as well as heavy, but they are seldom used under number
“sixes.” Why? That is the puzzle we began with, and you can supply the
answer. We can’t,
SWIVELS.—Where medium and heavy lines are used on rods, it is
almost imperative to use a swivel to obviate the twisting or kinking of the
line.
It Is not the fault of a well-made line that it kinks. It is the method of
Its use.
In the first place, every line must have a natural twist, for, as we have
shown in a previous chapter, it cannot be made without it. If, however,
the natural movement of the Line Is not interfered with when in use, the
Line will lie straight despite the twist the maker put in; that twist being the
Studied result of the maker’s art.


If, though, you check this natural “lay** of a Line, then you must expect
trouble.
A Reel, we think does do this to some extent. Tie a lead sinker on
the end of a LOOSELY hung long length of line, and you will find it hangs
true and quiet when you let the line slide between your fingers. Now tie
the same sinker on to the end of a line which is tightly reeled. Then let the
lead run, and according to the tightness of the wind on the reel, and the
length you lead out, you will see the sinker turn. Thick ropes clearly estab-
lish this cause of kinking: sailors fully understand it, and when you see one
who is coiling a rope on the deck, giving it a flap or shaking it straight, he
is simply rectifying the twist of the coil, against the natural twist of the
rope. That is why rod fishermen should use swivels, or, at any rate, should
not growl about the LINES kinking, if they don’t.
“TEGUSU” (Registered) GUT CASTS. In contra-distincti-n to LINES
being “SO-CALLED GUT,” TEGUSU CASTS are REAL SILKWORM GUT.
They are extensively used for fine fishing in many parts of Australia,
their advantages being, thinness, great strength, in relation to that thinness,
and INVISIBILITY in water.
A fine-fisher who uses “Tegusu” casts will have 50% better results
than a fine-fisher who doesn’t. BUT, to use them, HE MUST BE A FISHER-
MAN, for naturally they have their limitations, and their use calls for the
utmost fishing skill.
A few words as to what they are and how they are made, should be
interesting and educative, so here they are.
Hark back to the Silk-worm. The worm eats the mulberry leaves.
Some constituents of them go to keep him alive; most of the rest goes to
make the fibroin or the treacly substance which the worm, later, spins into
silk, and the balance passes through the worm’s system as waste, in the
natural way.
The fibroin is stored by the worm during manufacture, in two sacks or
ducts extending the whole length of its body, one on each side.
When these sacks are full, the worm has achieved the object of that
phase of its life, so it fasts for three days and nights, to give all it has eaten,
time to digest and mature, and then, and not till then, it forces the fibroin
up to its spinnerette just under its mouth, takes the two ends as one, and
works incessantly, spinning the vicid treacly stuff into the four to five
thousand yards of SILK, we have already told you about. Note that it is
the SPINNING that turns the fibroin into silk. Without the spinning it would
remain like hardened gum.
Now, just at the end of that fast, again comes in the brain and accumu-
lated knowledge of Man.


Before it starts to spin,—that is, when the fibroin is the gum-like sub-
stance in the ducts, —the worm is taken between the finger and thumb of
one hand; the fibroin is squeezed out to a point by gentle pressure, then,
both ends of the liquid are taken together between the finger and thumb of
the other hand and pulled out in one long, thin, colourless thread.
Exposed to the air, this thread of gum soon hardens somewhat. It is
then rolled on flat boards to roughly round it; then pulled through very fine
holes in a steel plate to finish the rounding: stretched on boards to complete
the hardening, and finally, each length is polished by hand to make them
transparent, and it is this transparency which makes them invisible in water,
and so valuable to fine-fishermen.
Whilst we are about it, we may as well tell you, that although so
extensively used, and so valuable, in fishing, fishing is not their primary or
most important use. They really were first made, and are mostly used, for
surgical sewing, having entirely displaced silver wire which used to be used
for that purpose; for, whereas, wire stitches had to be taken out after the
wound healed, “Silk-worm” Gut slowly dissolves in the flesh, and thus
obviates the painful operation of stitch extraction.
But, back to fishing.
Only the middle, or live, and polished parts of the lengths are used in
fishing, the two ends being dead or dry, owing to inability to treat them in
processing. Users, therefore, have to cut out the live or good length, and
to facilitate this the casts are coiled in a very ingenious way, that way being
shown by sketch below.
If you cut at the point indicated, and then gently shake the coil apart,
you will have secured all the good or usable length of the coll, in one opera-
tion, the dead ends falling away in short pieces; this being a small but good
proof, of concern and consideration for fishermen.
The, CASTS are classed and sold according to thickness and weight,
the heavier, being the stronger and dearer.
There are limitations to thicknesses, of course, as no worm can hold
enough fibroin to make VERY thick, and at the same time LONG casts, but
it may be added that the Japanese worm is the only worm which produces
fibroin which CAN be pulled out to the lengths these casts are —that is—


three or (our feet. Users of them, will have noticed that the SPANISH Gut
Casts are made up of lengths of about twelve to fourteen inches of gut
KNOTTED TOGETHER. The reason for that is, that Spanish Silk-worm
fibroin will NOT pull out so finely as Japanese—in other words, —is not of
the same fine quality. The makers of KNOTTED casts would give anything
to avoid those knots, but it can’t be done; not with Spanish worm gut, or
any other known, except the Japanese.
HORSE-HAIR TRACES. In some places, somehow, these traces got
their name. How or why we do not know. Probably a distant similarity to
horse-hair, earned it for them.
Anyway, and however that be, the truth is, they are merely UN-
POLISHED “TEGUSU” Casts.
They lack the invisibility-in-water of the polished article, and are sold
in long lengths, uncoiled, to the same weights as “TEGUSU” Casts are, and
which of'the two, —“Tegusu” or “Horse-hair”—the fisherman uses, is a matter
of the fisherman’s fancy, and a matter of price. Of course the so-called
Horse-hair traces are cheaper than the polished "Tegusu” as the polishing
is a tedious process, and, there are many Casts lost by breakage DURING
the process.
HOOKS.
We suppose that there is nothing—excepting “Gut” fishing Lines—
about which more tripe is talked, than there is about FISH HOOKS.
We once had a man, and he an expert too, prove the quality of a hook
to us by BREAKING IT!, following up the action with the convincing(?)
remark that “a good hook will always break.”
Will it? Alright then. We ourselves prefer to use a hook which ac-
cording to this reasoning, isn’t a good one, and which won’t break. When
WE go fishing, we go to catch FISH if we can; not to prove our hooks are
good by seeing them BROKEN by fish. We want fish, not broken hooks.
Broken hooks are no use to us, as we haven’t yet thought up a use for them,
though, of course, we may someday, for we often surprise ourselves with our
own ingenuity. But, anyway, for the present, we say again, we DON’T
want broken hooks.
What that chap really meant to say, was, the HARDER or more highly
tempered the steel the hook is made of, the better and more expensive the
quality OF THAT STEEL, AS STEEL, but this by no means means, the
better the hook.
A fish hook is for fishing purposes; not to show how hard steel can be
made, and a PROPERLY TEMPERED steel hook, which WON’T break, will
serve fishing purposes far better, we venture to assert, than a hook which will
break, will.


As a matter of tact, tke quality of a fish hook—tor its particular pur-
pose, is shown, when in a tussle with some fish which really is too big and
powerful for that particular hook, has taken hold and, say, straightened it
a bit, or pulled it out of shape, for a mis-shapened hook CAN bring the fish
in, but we have never seen a BROKEN hook do that yet.
No, the fact is, it is not the hardness, but the TEMPERING which counts.
That means that a hook must not be so hard that it will break, nor so soft
that it will bend or straighten too easily; but it must be hard enough to keep
its point and barb, and do its work, and that is where the Hook-maker’s art
comes in.
Although all British Hooks are made of SHEFFIELD STEEL, Redditch,
England, is the home of the World’s best fish-hook makers. It has been
that for donkey’s years, and making fish hooks, is one of those highly
specialised trades in which experience is everything.
The steel itself can be from almost malleable, to diamond hard, but the
best hook, is the hook which stands up to the work it is intended to do, and
is produced without sacrifice of quality, at the most economical price. As
we have hinted before, in this day of hard-up-ed-ness, wasteful expense is
an economic crime; and all this is meant to convey to you the fact that a
GOOD hook need not be an expensive hook, high prices and absurd claims
notwithstanding.
And, there is another side to this.
A hook is put at the end of a Line, the Line is the connecting link
between the hook-^-fish—and the fisherman. That Line may have a breaking
strain of say 5, 10, or 20 pounds, and so on. If so, what is the use of having,
and paying for, a hook which will take, say, 30 lbs. or MORE than the LINE
will stand? No chain is stronger than its weakest link. Everybody knows
that. So why use expensive hard and double extra-strong hooks, especially
when that very expensive hardness, is a weakness, as we have pointed out.
Fishermen: One half of this “Extra-extra, double-double, special-special,
etc., etc.,” is guff, the other half is profit at your expense. Think this over
and then come back to earth and the HAVERFORD (registered) hook, the
hook built for its job, and sold at reasonable prices.
We may add that unlike “Gut” Lines, all British hooks are made to
one standard of sizes. That standard is known as the “Redditch Scale,” so,
in the case of hooks, there is no chance of scaling you in the matter of
SIZES, anyway, if you make it your business to know them, but there is
plenty of room for it in the matter of supposed qualities and prices, and it
seems to us that that little avenue has been, and is being worked pretty
well, and showing good returns; and in these times, this kind of thing, is
not to be ignored, is it?


KNOTS.—As a good deal of trouble and loss of fish is occasioned by
bad knots, and Lines are often unfairly blamed when the knot-tie-ing is
really at fauft; we give hereunder illustrations of some useful knots adapted
to the needs of fishermen.
Let it be understood that we did NOT invent these; and that we do not
sell ’em; so this page, at any rate, is clear “bunce” to you, Mr. Fisherman.
Always soak Lines or Gut in water before tying.
(1) Simple method of attaching two
pieces of Line or Gut by means of
two simple knots.
(2) An extra safe tie which has added
security to No. 1.
(3) Double block knot. One of the very
best for joining Lines.
(4) Single Water Knot. Simple and safe.
(5) Double Water Knot. Safer and
Sounder than No. 4.
(6) Bow Line. A safe tie, and a slip
knot.
(7) An easy tie to a loop.
(8) Bend Knot. With safety stop.
(9) Safe, pull-out knot for loop.
(10) Tie for two loops.
(11) The very best and safest hook tie.
(12) Another tie for a flat shank.
(13) Tie for turned down eye.
18


And Now
FISHING AS A SPORT.
Fishing, as now carried out in Australia, is the bungest-rules sport
there is. Excepting, perhaps, Politics, no game of any kind is the “Rafferty”
game the Fishing game is. Why? Well, let us see.
In the first place, as we have already shown, there is at present, no
real standard upon which to base or judge the merits of any particular
fishing feat.
When now, you hear Bill Jones skiting about catching an eleven pound
Jewey “on a number 3,” it would be unkind, not to say, bad taste, but
unfortunately entirely fair under present circumstances, to say, “Yes, Bill,
but what SIZE was that number 3?”
This, surely, is a wretched position for Bill; for there never yet was a
fisherman named Bill, or any other name for the matter of that, who ever
deserved to suffer even a hint of scepticism, or a single subtle shaft of
suspicious interrogation.
Understand. We think Bill’s catch, probably was as exceptional, and as
extraordinary, as Bill thinks it was. It may have been even GREATER than
Bill thinks it was; although this, perhaps, is not VERY likely; but so long
as there is this looseness about sizes and numbers, so long will Bill and all
Fishermen, be open to the penalties of inexactitude; and, —alas, for their
reputations.
Now, if Bill had specified a “GEISHA” No. 3, then all the world would
have known, how truly great Bill’s achievement really was; that is, if all the
world knew what it should know, and will know, after the publication of
this monumental work; and that, bring us to this.
The only proper way to judge fishing feats: the only proper basis for
firfhing competitions, is to base them on the BREAKING STRAINS of the
Lines used.
When a man has landed, say, a 41b. bream, on a Line the breaking
strain of which is, say, 21b., he has landed 21b. weight of fish per lib. break-
ing strain of the Line, and clearly, that was not merely a matter of hooking
the fish and pulling it in. That was fishing.
Not once could the man have allowed that bream to exert on the Line
anywhere near its own full weight, for obviously, if he had, the Bream would
have broken it. NO. He has pitted the human brain and faculties against
the brute strength of the fish.—if that expression can be allowed in regard
to a fish—the weak media (Line) he used gave all the advantages in the
duel, to the fish, and yet the man must have been the master throughout
the whole of the contest, for he finally landed the fish.
That man has reason to be proud of his ability; his success; and his
sportsmanship; for the Bream had plenty of chance, and this was no case
of “shooting a sitting rabbit.”
19


On the other hand, had the man pulled in a ten pound Bream OH a
Line, the breaking strain of which was say TWENTY pounds, well, there
would have been nothing astonishing about that, except the impossible size
of the fish, and the hefty size of the LIE. As a fishing FEAT it would be
up-to-putty; for on a line of that strength, the man could have pulled in,
say, a three feet shark, or something equally large and powerful, and that,
without doing anything astonishing either.
Now, take a fishing Club outing: a prize for the biggest fish; a prize
for the most fish, and so on.
The BIGGEST fish is entirely a matter of luck. The MOST fish, more
luck. In neither case do the conditions offer any encouragement to, or
inducement for, the development of fishing skill.
The fisherman can use any kind, or strength, of Line he pleases, and
the knowing ones will simply use one strong enough to yank the fish in,
once it is on the hook. But that kind of thing isn’t fishing. It is only applied
mechanics, and even as such, is about as inspiring a performance as, say,
using a ten-ton-crane to lift a tiddler.
NO. This biggest fish business—mere bulk, and no other consideration,
—is all wrong. It keeps the sport of fishing steeped in the primitive prin-
ciples of the Stone age; that period when there were no principles, save
savagery and strength.
Look! There can be more finish, touch, and delicate artistry in the
landing of a 2-lb. bream on a 1-lb. Line, than in the landing of all the big
sleepy old flatheads that ever lazily wangled their lethargic bulk at the end
of a well-rope.
And isn’t it the cultured artist of every sphere, who always deserves,
and occasionally receives, the homage and appreciation of his fellows?
Isn’t it the cultured artist too, who, though he may find his ability and
genius over-looked in the rush and stress of this mercenary and sordid world,
always, and still, has the ethical satisfaction of knowing HIMSELF for
exactly what he is? If not; then we are going to be damned well disap-
pointed about the writing of this book; and all the finest fishermen are going
to pass out to an in-glorious glory, bereft and bereaved of even the satis-
faction of being self-satisfied.
And now, dear reader, nothing but the inexorable necessity to follow
our theorem to its logical conclusion, —oh the merciless cruelty of logic—
and the necessity of providing a scientific basis for the sport of fishing, would
make us do what now has to be done, for, we are afraid it MAY look like
advertising.
Still, if we are to put fishing and fishermen on that plane which, con-
sidering the native attributes of both, they both deserve, we must risk the
possible suspicion, and soothe our uneasy feelings with the fact that, after
all, the CAUSE is the thing, so, here goes.


NUMBER
FILAMENTS
NUMBER OF
AVERAGE BREAK-
1
TO A THREAD
375
THREADS
15
1NG STRAIN
LBS.
2
2
500
20
4
3
600
25
61
4
700
30
8
5
800
35
10
6
1000
40
12
7
1250
50
14
8
1500
60
17
9
1750
70
19
10
2000
80
22
11
2500
100
25
12
3000
120
28
13
3500
140
34
14
4000
160
38
IS
4500
180
45
16
5000
200
48
17
5500
220
57
18
6250
250
62
19
6700
275
G8
20
7500
300
76
Hereunder, we set out tke
CERTIFIED SPECIFICATION
of the
“GEISHA”
(registered)
POLISHED FISHING LINES.
“The best the world can produce.”
All details are guaranteed correct, and never vary, whilst the quality is
always the quality of the
“GEISHA”
NOTE.—After the publication of this information, we fully expect that some
unprincipled competitors will exaggerate and enlarge on it, to their own
ends. We therefore make this
CHALLENGE!
Wc will give ONE HUNDRED POUNDS to any charitable institution
nominated, if THICKNESS for THICKNESS, and PRICE for PRICE, any
other make of LINE will give a greater breaking-strain than the “GEISHA,”
or FIFTY POUNDS if any other Line will show as much. This challenge is
a standing challenge, and is made without restrictions or artful conditions
of any kind whatever. (The “CHERRY-BLOSSOM” Line only, is excepted.)
(See later.)


Now, then. Having the foregoing basis to work on, the rest is easy.
Put this specification in your pocket, and suppose another fishing com-
petition. Suppose also the end of the day, when each man is submitting his
visually-proven report —that is—producing the actual fish.
Hush. Hear now, the clarion tones of the brass-throated, self-appointed
announcer; whilst you watch the Secretary do the work.
William Jones . . one 7lb. = 112 ozs. Jewey on a No. 8, Brkng. Strain I7lb.
Geezer Gaut . . a 31b = 48 ~ Bream ~ 1 ~ ~ 2,,
Skeeter Bray ... a 6lb. = 96 ~ Flat „ 4 ~ „ 8,,
Bluey While . . a 5 Jib. = 88 ~ Squire „ 3 „ „ 6| „
and so on.
And here is the formula for victory.
Bill Jones has landed 6.6 ozs. of fish per lib. Breaking Strain of his line.
Geezer Gaut,, ~ 24
Skeeter Bray ~ ~ 12
Whilst Bluey chips „ „ ~ „ „
Wl fh 13.54 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ „
And therefore, the placings are as follows:—Geezer 1, Bluey 2, Skeeter 3,
and Bill Jones 4.
Note that, although Geezer actually landed the SMALLEST fish, he
landed it on the relatively WEAKEST Line, so that when next you see Geeze,
proudly perambulating the city streets with a laurel-wreath of Fish-fins
around his brow, and a haughty, smirky smile across his jowl, you will pause
to look and offer, that silent homage, which will then be due from you, and
due to him.
Easy, isn’t it? No more guessing. No more disbelief. Geezer, the
proven winner by dead weight of fish, and simple arithmetic. Every sterrick
of every fin he flaunts, a tribute to his prowess, and a Jewel in his crown.
My! When you come to think of it, what a wonderful reformation it
will be, that the adoption of our method will bring about.
Yesterday, under the old loose system of every man his own liar, the
fisher’s word was a by-word, and a call to disbelief.
Then, for a fisherman to even BEGIN to tell his exploits, was to start
the funny man of the bunch addressed, into assuming the role of a wireless
broadcasting announcer, and interrupting the sequence with “Hullo!”
“Hullo!” “One B L speaking!”, and he didn’t mean it as a station-indicator
either.
Then, the merest suggestion of fishing in conversation, was to invite
nasty crimination and spiteful opposition: even a Politician’s reputation was
better than a fisher’s, and there were none to do him honor, —nay, not one.


But with the adoption of our system there will come a time, when “a
Fisherman’s simple affirmation” will be the dictionary definition of the word
‘‘truth,” and the secondary alternative in the same book, “the very golden
metal in a currency of truth.” No more the hurtful slander of “a Fisherman’s
yarn” suggestion, no more the curling lip of rude contempt; when they say
“all men are Liars, and all deserve hell’s fires,” they’ll hesitate, and qualify,
“the Fisher, of course, exempt”; and though this last crack is about fourteen
miles out of metre, think what it all will mean.
And when that great day dawns, and an awakening public conscience
demands that Justice shall be done to the memory of We, who wrought so
great a reformation in the Fisher’s social status, and brought the sport of
fishing unto honesty and truth; the last findable copy of this work will be
produced from the national archives of the World’s greatest literary treasures,
and with joy and understanding, will be offered, and accepted, as a living
proof to prove, THAT CHAP WAS US.
Then, after the enthusiastic public appeal for funds has been formally
declared closed by the representative Committee of Management, and the
resultant two-and-seven-pence-ha’penny solemnly dedicated to the splendid
purpose of erecting a classic monument to perpetuate our great and glorious
life; we visualize, in happy satisfaction, the doleful image of a long, thin,
cadaverous looking bloke, with a clerical collar, and a stag-horn moustache;
perched high aloft on a World’s-Greatest-Sculptor’s conception of so noble a
theme, and wroughten tablets of imperishable bronze placed there beneath
us, readings—
(' H E CAVE HIS CENIUSTO FISHERMEN S
. AND HIS LIFE J
Selling 'Geisha' fishing lines I
f The besTTbe wor/c/ Cd/?prot/acp)
but though this is the end of us, —dead, immortalized, and up-the-pole,—it
is not, by any means, the end of our subject, so please read on.
A TRADE CONFESSION.
From a purely literary point of view, we are artist enough to know that
the last chapter should really be the end of this book; for, though we some-
how suspect that we have a goodly conceit of ourselves, —as you have prob-
ably suspected, too, —we cannot at this moment, anyway, think of a finer or
better ending for us, than going away down the Ages through an admiring
posterity; our memory revered, our monument a Mecca and a Shrine for
fishermen, and a, DRINKING post for dogs.
Still, although now, literally speaking, dead, and our epitaph emblazoned
in letters of gold, on those bronzen tablets aforesaid, there are yet many
things relating to our subject, demanding our attention, and the master-touch
of our gifted pen; so, flickfiilly brushing aside this monument-al incident,
and determinedly ignoring our illustrious death, here’s to ’em.
23


for one tiling, we are not sure that we kave yet written quite enough
to assure that the expenses of its publication will bankrupt us altogether;
though we ARE quite sure that what we HAVE written, will necessitate
enough expense to cause our kindly and benevolent Banker many worried
days, and more sleepless nights.
If, however, he hasn’t the moral stamina to withstand us when we make
our pathetic appeal for funds with which to publish this work, well, the
responsibility for the results of such unmanly weakness, will be his, not ours;
—he will receive no maudlin sympathy from us, for, though our path were
strewn with sleepless Bankers, we must go on; we—must—go—on, for this
wilful bally pen of ours, simply refuses to stop.
So, now for the confession.
Every word of what we have written, and the thousands more that we
could have written about the “GEISHA” fishing lines, applies also to the
“CHERRY-BLOSSOM” brand of lines too, BUT—and note this carefully—
ONLY TO THOSE TWO BRANDS, and to NO OTHERS, whatever.
How does this come about? Well here it is, and this is especially
interesting to Queensland and Northern Rivers Fishermen.
We once heard a Doctor say that “all Fishermen are mental” but we
hasten to assert that we think that that Doctor was TOO emphatic and that
we do not agree with him—at least, not altogether.
Certainly fishermen have their fads and fancies. Heaven, and we, know
they have, —but then, what class of humanity hasn’t?
But, what may seem madness to a mere Doctor, Is probably inner know-
ledge, of a special kind, of his special subject, in the fisherman. Anyway
we hope it WILL be, after the careful perusal of this book, and then, be
damned to Doctors and their sycophantic opinions.
All this was to have been a clever and stealthy approach to open up
our new theme, but somehow we seem to be as far off that as ever.
Never mind. What we really want to get at is this. Different States;
different fishes. Different fishes; different ways.
In all the States of Australia EXCEPT Queensland (and the northern
rivers of New South Wales) a POLISHED Line Is used. In Queensland only
an UN-polished Line is used, and there is quite a deal of argument as to
which is the better of the two.
The truth is, each—the “Geisha” (v/hich is polished) and the “Cherry
Blossom” (which is UN-polished)—is as good as the other in the matters of
material and make. They are made of the same silk, by the same maker,


NUMBER
FILAMENTS
THREADS
BREAKING-STRAIN
1
500
20
LBS.
4
2
750
30
00
(M*
3
1,000
40
12
4
1,250
SO
14
5
1,500
60
17
6
2,000
80
22
7
2,500
100
25
8
3,250
130
33
9
3,750
150
39
10
4,500
180
45
11
5,500
220
57
12
7,000
280
70
13
8,000
320
78
14
9,000
360
84
15
10,000
400
90
16
11,000
440
98
in the same factory; the difference being in finish only. Polishing makes a
line pliant and supple, whilst the unpolished lines are slightly stiffer and
more wiry.
It would seem though, that each kind has its own advantages according
to the use it is put to —hand-line or rod—and, according to the fisherman’s
own way of using it; AND we believe, for ROD fishing the wiriness of the
UN-polished line is advantageous because it springs more quickly from the
reel, and thus adds to the length of the throw or cast.
It is not for us, however, to argue which is the better. In our opinion
BOTH are the better, and there is no other line on earth like either, but
there IS something more for us to tell you.
These two brands, although both belong to us, are sold under DIFFERENT
standards of thicknesses to NUMBERS.
Therefore, in order that the weight-of-fish-and-breaking-strain methods
shall be also adoptable for users of the “CHERRY BLOSSOM” Line, we give
the certified specification for them hereunder: —
Specification of the
“CHERRY BLOSSOM”
(registered)
UN-polished FISHING LINE
Which is ALSO
“The best the World can produce”
Now, the first thing that a reader will want to know, and rightly so too,
is, “why these differences, and all this silly confusion?”


Well, this is the way of it.
Up North they have big fish; therefore they mostly need heavy lines.
The “CHERRY BLOSSOM’* and its standard became the most popular line
on that market BEFORE the present owners bought the name and rights.
On buying them, we continued to supply to the fishermen of the North,
the lines they were used to and wanted, and though it would make our busi-
ness far easier if both brands of lines were sold on one specification, we
prefer the extra trouble and difficulties of running the two lines individually
and independently, rather than trying to force on fishermen what they do
not want; —which Job, let us warble, would be a pretty stiff task.
In Queensland, the “Cherry Blossom** Line is the only line that counts,
and its thickness standards are thoroughly well known, and rigidly adhered
to; but the difference between the THINNER New South Wales standard and
the QUEENSLAND standard, causes no end of difficulty and misunderstand-
ing right throughout the Northern Rivers Districts, where BOTH lines are used.
A comparison of the two specifications given, should therefore, be very
enlightening and helpful.
It will, of course, be readily understood that though the prices for the
two different makes of lines—Polished and UN-polished—are the same for
lines of the same thicknesses, the prices of the “Cherry Blossom** Lines on
the Queensland standard, are, much higher than the prices for the thinner
“GEISHA** of the same NUMBERS owing, of course, as we have explained,
to there being a greater quantity of silk in the thicker Queensland, “CHERRY
BLOSSOM,** Lines.
To differentiate, we refer to the “GEISHA** specification as “New South
Wales thicknesses,’* and the heavier “Cherry Blossom** standard as “Queens-
land thicknesses,’* and users and buyers of lines, must carefully note this.
We can, and do, supply the Unpolished Lines to the New South Wales
standards of thickneses and prices if required, but if wanted to that standard,
THEY MUST BE ORDERED THAT WAY.
We hope that this explanation—though involved—will clear up all the
difficulties and misunderstandings that have heretofore obtained, for we have
nothing to lose, and everything to gain by the fishermen knowing “the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.**
Either one or the other brand of our two lines is procurable from every
reputable fishing-line seller, in every State of Australasia.
Please see that every line you buy carries either the “GEISHA** or
“CHERRY BLOSSOM’* brand and


TAKE NO OTHER
and with them USE “THE HAVERFORD” (Registered) Hooks, for only the
best are good enough for YOU, or good enough for US.
Since writing the foregoing, and in order to help the fishing reform
along, we have decided to arrange that every label, on every line, and on
every number of line, shall carry that line’s tested, average breaking-strain.
The label could then be accepted as a certificate of proof of line and
strain used, and would establish the fisherman’s bona-fides, ipso-facto.
In doing this, we know, as we have said before; that it will be open to
unscrupulous competitors to work a point on us, after we have set the ball
rolling, but our standards have been our standards ever since we have been
the “GEISHA” and the “CHERRY BLOSSOM,” and all the tricks that any
opposition can work, will not alter them. Our lines, our standards, and we,
are here to stay.
If you will buy your lines on GUARANTEED breaking-strain and price,
and ignore NUMBERS (although numbers must still remain for reference)
altogether and absolutely as a factor in value, we are not one bit afraid that
ANYONE can offer you a more honest, or a better article for your money,
than we can: Indeed, we DEFY them to offer you as good, or NEARLY as
good.
Remember: We are the INTRODUCERS of this new system of honesty:
that we have had thirty years of experience: that we know our beans: and
that we are the ONLY people in Australia equipped with the instruments
and machinery necessary to the system, and the safeguarding of you.
And now, except for the few original yarns which follow, and which
are submitted in respectful trepidation; our task is done, our race is run;
and in meekly laying our lowly literary offering at your feet, we beseech your
kindest consideration, we hope for your appreciation, but we absolutely
damned-well DEMAND, a dscent acknowledgment at any rate, for the work,
wear, tear, toil, mental effort and MONEY we have put in, and up, in our
struggle to present you with this valuable and accomplished work; for
B—R—O—T—H—E—R: ALL THIS, WE DID FOR THEE.


ALL DONE BY KINDNESS.
“I ’ate a liar,*’ said Bill, looking as though the thought harrowed
his very soul, “and a bloke wot lies about fishin’ ain’t no good to ther game.”
“Yer see,” he continued, as he took my proffered cigar, “because some
blokes lie, it sort of makes it *ard for the man wot tells ther truth.”
“Besides, there IS funny things wot happen, but because of the bad name
wot liars give to fishin’, a bloke ain’t of’en anxious to tell about ’em some-
times, because ’e ken expect that they won’t believe wot ’e’s saying, and a
cove don’t like ter be ’urt. But you know me, and I’ll tell yer about the
shark that ‘Geezer’ trained.”
“Mind yer,” Bill prefaced, with a view of getting a fair reception for his
effort, “it wasn’t ezactly trainin’ either, but it was as much trainin’ as makin’
a dorg lick his chops by plasterin’ butter eround his mouth, and yer got to
note that there was brains and gratitood too fer ‘Geezer’ ter work on, and
that’s wot made it jake.
We was down at ‘Jindergig,’ and was campin’ on ther beach, though we
put most of our time in in fishin’ in the bay inside, which is a good wide sheet
er water.
“Well, it was on the second day after we got there; a nice, bright, quiet
morning, and we/adn’t ’ad not more than four bottles of shick, when ‘Geeze*,
who was looking quietly over ther side er ther boat, says, ‘Bill, eh! look at
this,’ and rite along side ther boat 1 seen about a three-foot shark a-swimmin*
in the water. I reached for ther stousher, but Geezer said, ‘No! don’t do
that!’, and with a choke in ’is Adam’s apple, wot I couldn’t understand, he
said, ‘Ther poor cow’s ’urt.*
“Ther fish was ’urt alright. ’ls left ’and fin was draggin’ about like it
was broke by bein’ run over, and ther fish ’isself looks pretty crook, like ’e
was suffering from a shock.
“Geeze lay out er ther boat, and with ’is right ’and shoo’d the shark
closer in alongside, and then, gently fingered the damaged fin, and put it more
to shape.
“Grabbin’ er piece er ther bait box lid, he makes er sort er splint; clapped
it on ther fin, and warped it up with er bit of ‘Geisha* line. Then he gives the
?hark a easy push off, and we seen ’im going great.
“That was the second day, I told yer. Well, ’ere comes ther bag er tricks.
“The next mornin’ erbout ther same time o’ the day, we was fishin’ there
ag’in, and who should we see but old bummy-fin, a-workin’ round ther boat.
“ ’E was actin’ sorta strange, and seemed like *e wanted to ’tract our
tention to ’im, and Geezer, bein’ proud of ’is job, fingered him about in a
tender, mother’s way.
“That though, ain’t all the sharko wants, as it was easy fer ter see, and
after er time, Geeze puts one ’and under his throttle, and the other under
’is tail, with the idea of liftin’ ’im to ther other side of ther boat where ’e
seemed ter want ter go. Besides, Geeze thought that there might be some-
thing wrong with ther splint, and ’e wanted a closer ‘quiz.’
28


“So *e lifted ’ira tender and gentle, ther shark stiffening up like ter make
it easy, and then, just as Geeze got ’im strait athwart ther boat, he chucked
up one er the finest squire I ever want ter see.
“Geeze put the shark back in ther water on ther other side, and we both
’as a look at the squire; and whilst we was arguin’ about it bein’ an accident
or not, along comes old sharko again.
“This time we could pretty well tell what he wants, cause there was a
pleased sort of grin in ’is eye, and he wagged ’is tail without moving away,
like givin’ ’is seif a double oncore.
“Geeze lifted him across again, and there yer was—another squire aflap-
pin’ in ther well.
“That morning ’e brought us seven, and then ther beer bein’ all gorn, we
went back to ther camp.
“The next five days it was just ther same. Whenever we went out in
the boat, ’e was there soon after we killicked, and was always on the job.
“On ther sixth day, Geezer took ther splint off, and sharko was another
fish. ’E snapped and splashed and kidded about, like a colt let out ter grass.
“Then Geezer begun to train ’im proper. Squire’s er bonzer fish, but
we was feelin’ like er change; so Geeze chatted the sharko quiet next day, and
sort er put it to ’im. Sharko tried to understand alright, but ’e couldn’t not
quite jerry. He made a few blind fits and starts, then looked like he was goin’
ter cry, and was trying to say he was dam well ashamed of ’is-self; but Geezer
kept up the patter.
“All of er sudden, the shark shoots off like a shot, ’nd erabout three
minutes after that ’e was back again, and we ’ad a pearler BREAM. After
that, it was like failin’ off a log. All Geezer ’ad to do was to say the name
of the fish we wanted, and there them fish was ’ome.
“In a week and three days, Geezer used to tell that shark wot time to be
on deck, and when we’d ’ad enough, and we never used ouV lines no more,
the ole time we was there.
“Mind yer, ’e took er bit of liftin’, and Geezer got the idea to make ’im
shoot the fish inter the boat, without the liftin’ across. Sharko seen the
notion quick, and done ’is level best, but we was about two ’ours late that
day, because that ’e was tryin’. ’E’d come at the boat, and rear up like a
dorg, but owing because ’e ain’t got no front legs he couldn’t make a go.
’E couldn’t spit ’em in either, because of ’is teeth ‘turned in.’
“He tried twice to goin’ fore and aft, alongside of ther boat ter swing
’em in, but that ain’t no good too, as ’aving no neck ’e couldn’t jerk ’is ’ead;
so yer couldn’t blame the shark cause Geezer ’ad to lift, except that Geezer
’ad to do it all, ’cause the shark won’t work with me.
“When we ’ad ter come away, old Geezer’s ’eart was broke because ’e


’ad to leave ’im, and 1 was ’eart broke too, cos Geeze, ter drown ’is sorrer,
had swigged the last three bottles of beer, all unbeknown to me; and both of
us cried like children, as we pulled ther skiff ter ther shed.
“That shows yer what can be done be kindness, and er little common-
nouse,” concluded Bill, “but 1 don’t suppose no one will believe it, because
of them liars 1 said about before, though, all the same, it’s TRUE.”
THAT TRAINED SHARK.
“I told yer about the shark wot Geezer trained down at ‘Jindergig’,”
t:aid Bill, as he caressingly fingered the beer-dew from off his ragged mous-
tache, “Well yer gotter know wot ’appened after, to get the true strength of
the tale.
“Whilst we reckoned ‘Jindergig* was a good place right enough, we
don’t go there no more for between three and four years, on account of it
being too far away, and we ain’t got the time. When we did go it was like a
new place. The place was all altered along of the storms, the entrance was
different, and, no, nothin’ seemed like it used to was, except the water.
“Er course.” he continued meditatively, as he took three of the four
cigarettes out of my case, “We don’t forget the good go we ’ad the last time
we was there, and for a start the fishin’ went dead slack, and we sort of won-
dered why we don’t ketch no fish. After a bit we chucks it in, and the day
being ’ot and sunny, Geezer said he’d ’ave a swim whilst 1 cook up the chow.
Geezer goes into the water an done a bonzer splash, and is just standin’ in
water up to ’is waist as he chips to me at the fire. ’E was ’appy like a kid
—for a wash does do like that after yet get over ther first shock—and I sees
’an turn and look down into the water at something what was brushin’ along
beside ’is leg, and then, all of a sudden, ’is face goes like a corpse, and ’e
nearly dies of fright.
‘With a shout what meant blue terror, ’e comes makin’ for the land,
while, alongside of ’im, is the biggest shark I ever seen inside. Wot beat us
was ’ow Geezer got away. That shark could ’ave ’ad ’im easy, but ’e don’t
try to at all, and so whilst Geezer gits ashore 1 runs down from the fire, and
we both stand there watchin ’that shark as he lays lookin’ at us, and) lazily
flappin’ ’is fins. And then we got it right. Lookin’ close, we seen the marks
of the ‘Geisha’ line wot Geeze *ad trussed the left ’and fin with, and as we
slowly comes to recognise our old cobber, e broke into ’er grin, whilst ’is
eyes was sort of saying’ ‘I knew yer wouldn’t know me*—and so, we certainly
didn’t.
“Well, after that, why Geeze walks inter the water and began rubbin’ the
sharko’s nose and fondling ’im erbout like a long-lost brother.
“The sharko does ’is bit ’er joy, too —’is tail and fins a-waggin’ flippant
like a dorg, and ’is eye is askin’ Geezer plain as plain could be, where, ’ed
been all this long time, and why *ed gorn away.


“’£r corse, the shark was growed. *E was now a slap-up, big and husky
feller erbout nine feet four inches long. ’ls face was ’ard and strong, and
unless yer looked ’ard to see ’is gentle nature, ’e was erbout as invitin’ as a
crockerdial’s jaws. Still Geeze never seen this, of course, and ’im and sharko
was doin’ the returned old-friendship act like two new recovered brothers,
until about an ’our after, Geeze told ther shark ‘well that’s enough, and I’ll
see yer in the mornin’.’
‘‘That night old Geezer seemed upset cause the shark ain’t into camp,
but he drinks its ’ealth erbout twenty times, and me, because 1 paid for half
of the swig, ’ad to keep up with ’im, so the shark was there in spirit, whilst
we was there in beer,”
‘ Next morning’ we goes fishin’, and we’d ’ardly got the boat ten yards
out before sharko joins the percession, and we goes to a spot ter kellick.
Over goes the lines, and away goes sharko. Every now and then he comes
back to ther boat again, but neither ’im nor us don’t get no fish. Mind yer,
’e may a got ’em, but ’e’s too big now to lift, and he can’t throw them into
the boat, as 1 told yer before, and—well, we don’t get ’em, that’s all, and
there ain’t nothin’ doin’.”
“The next day and the next was the same, and we ’ventually begun to
see that if we was to get any fish at all we ’ave ter drop the sharko; so, one
mornin’ we sneaked off without a noise, got kellicked pretty good, started
ter fish—and there was the shark again. Fer days we played at ’ide and seek,
but we couldn’t get no win, and it’s my opinion that sharks ’as got er sense
er smell wot ’elps to find their prey, or they never sleeps at all. Things was
gettin’ desperate, and was wearing on our goats. No-wheres, no-how could
we beat the blighter, and we could never give ’im the slip.”
“After erbout a week of this our nerves were like a cross-cut saw;
Geezer’s temper is worse than usual, and I am a miserable frayed out coot.
“Next mornin’ though, we thinks we got ’im beat. We landed a few of
the best; things was goin’ good, and this time we thinks we’re rite, alrite,
and are goin’ ter have er good time. It was the best and only fishing’ we ’ad
struck on the trip, and we eat our chow and beer like we’d bumped a golding
casket,”
“All was goin’ merry like the marriage bell wot fool blokes write
erbout; and then, just when it was ’umming, up comes the blarsted .shark
again.”
“I’ve seen Geezer do ’is block er time er two; I’ve seen him blind mad
and wantin’ to smash somethink, any think wot was in ’is reach; but I never
seen ’im broke rite up, and gorn like ’e went when ’e seen that shark ergain.
He broke out cryin’ like a petulint kid, and glares fer somethink to commit
six murders with, and then, with great big tears of futile rage er-runnin*
down ’is corregated face, he chucks ther stretcher, and bottle after bottle at
ther shark, with curses too orfal to think.”


“The shark seemed took by surprise at the bombardment, and looks
sort of ’e was ’urt; but ’e ain’t ’urt, not arf like I am, for three of them
bottles was full, and there ain’t any left. We don’t do no more fishin’; we
hauls the kellick quick, and Geezer and me pulls the four miles back without
speaking a word.
“That afternoon we strikes ther camp and monies away ’ome in disgust,
and we ’ain’t never been ther same to one another rite up to yet.”
“Yes,” said Bill, “Kindness and trainin’ is all rite in its way, but yer
don’t want too much gratitood, do yer?—Not, certainly, from er shark.”
“I ONCE CAUGHT A FISH.”
Away, back down the years of time, on the morn of a salubrious night,
an innocent, sweet and lovely boy was born to happy parents. In the
greatness of their joy, and because of the demands of the registration laws,
they later gave him a name, and he was registered as “WILLIAM,” though
they called him Goo-goo; Lipsey-wipsey, and pretty things like that.
When, in the fulness of time, Goo-goo became “Willy” to them, and
“Will,” “Bill,” “Snitch” or “Pinkey” to his playmates, he still retained
many of the charming attributes of his innocent baby-hood, and doting
parents had nothing to worry about in the development of his boy-hood
character, or the trend of his moral outlook.
Youth saw him a bright and happy youngster with a good poise; a
game and likeable open-ness, and a lad in whom there was no guile. With
adolescence, came the sense of conscious man-hood, marking him down to
become a gem in his prideful parents’ crown, and a credit to his Sunday-
school training.
Soon, the sweet sad malady of life struck him on the full. Marriage
saw the consummation of youth’s most enthralling dream, and thus did Bill
become a happy father, a good husband, and that type of decent, ordinary
Citizen, on the basic worth of which, our national greatness is built.
Here, Bill’s worldly stance was absolutely sound. A sincere and honest
decency made him as reliable as a rock, whilst through his every word and
action there issued a golden bond of faith. If ever sterling moral worth
pointed the straight hard way to an ultimate Heaven, Bill’s character was
that sign-post, and Bill’s rectitude that track.
Alas. One fateful day Bill went, with friends a-fishing, and the bug
of that insidious depravity, finding an opening somewhere in Bill’s hitherto
impregnable armour of virtuosity, was soon to lay him low, and lead him
down the slippery road of scaley exaggeration, to fishy ill-repute, and moral
degradation.
Bill caught a fish! In fact he caught several fish. But THE fish that


Bill caught, and which we specifically and sorrowfully mention, was not an
ordinary fish, but that kind of fish which fishermen describe as “as big as
that,” and thus.
Thereafter, Bill’s fall was swift, complete, and absolute.
That fish became his stock in trade: his central law of gravity: the hub
around which his everything, and all the world, revolved.
Home, garden, the flowers therein; even the very children, and the
sweet fine things of life, all, —all, were now as nothing, whilst the consuming
objective of his existence, became the irresistible desire to use those fulsome
words, “I once caught a fish,” and then to tell in graphic detail, the when,
the why, and how.
His wife, poor thing, bravely but slowly gave way under the stress,
and became a nervous wreck. Friends began to shun him in self defence,
and once casual victims pretended to be in a hurry and passed him with
furtive curse-ry glances; fearing to stop and take the risk of Bill’s now worn
and boring recital of how he “once caught a fish.”
Through constant repetition, that fish grew to be a fish the like of which
there never was on earth. The line, from being a number 10, gradually
grew less and lesser ’till it stood at number 3, whilst every detail of the
catch had finally developed into an epic effort. Mid-life, saw his tale going
strong with every promise of further improvement in the maturity of age,
and age saw this come true, as Bill still “caught a fish.”
Inexorable life rolled slowly on, as life is destined to. Time’s cruel
dimning of those once keen faculties showed them lustre-less and tired, and
when at last, Bill passed away, to the tune of “Angels calling,” a wan but
happy smile, stole gently o’er his dial, as a weak and expiring murmur told
the wrought and anxious watchers at his bed-side, that he “Once had caught
a fish I”
On the morning after the night before, upon which Bill passed out to
glory, he duly arrived at the gate and presented his passport to Peter, the
keeper, in the full and certain assurance that everything was jake.
Peter, however, that morning, seemed to be in a querulous, nasty mood,
and demanded further particulars from the applicant, asking Bill what had
he ever done that should lead him to think he was entitled to the issue of a
harp.
Bill, true to his life-long obsession, began ‘’Well, I once caught a fish—”
“Ho! Did you?” snapped Peter, with vinegary asperity, “Well, turn to
the left, and down the steps.” “You forget,” he said, with a callous smile,
“THAT I ONCE WAS A FISHERMAN TOO.”


The foreging story was written BEFORE the Fisherman’s truth era.
Had it been written AFTER, the ending, of course, would have been as
follows:
Bill, true to his life-long obsession, began, “Well, I once caught a fish—”
“Hoi” “Did you?” said Peter, his vinegary asperity melting into a
warm, and welcoming smile; “Well, that’s fine, and we’re glad to see you,
young man. Turn to the right, and up the golden stairs. Take that special
pair of wings out of the glass show case: that big, gold-plated harp, you’ll
find in the corner, —the one with the mullet-gut strings;—and twang your
lies to all the skies, for, —since that bloke wrote that book, —we know that
they are true.”
LIBEL.
The following letter (written by ourselves to ourselves) serves to show
the necessity for our great fishing reform movement. *
Sir, —1 wish to protest through your columns, against the general and
malicious assumption of untruthfulness in Fishermen.
Ever since a couple of fishes, with a' help of five loaves, fed a multitude
of people, and the whale swallowed Jonah, it seems to be accepted that a
fishing truth shall NOT he accepted, except with scorn and derision, and I
protest against that false and unjust general idea, with righteous indignation.
Fishermen, suffering under the conscious knowledge of this outrage,
are, in n*y opinion, more careful to stick to the exact details of the truth,
than any other particular body of men, and indeed, it may be this very par-
ticularity which is, in a way, responsible for their suffering.
When a fisher tells, not how he CAUGHT, but how he LOST a fish
even, there is always the sap-headed waggist, ready to finish the recital with
the fatuous suggestion that “it was the biggest ever/’
And so it was. That is why the fisherman lost it. It’s the biggest fish
that breaks the tackle, isn’t it? And just as one finds something he is
searching for, in the last place he looks for it (for he’d be a bit of an ass
to go> on searching after he had found it), so, it isn’t the 2oz. Cockney which
puts the strain on the line, and the hearer’s imagination.—And yet these
disbelieving blighters, wallowing in their own lack of understanding, fail
to appreciate this elemental fact.
And so with the fisher’s details. Who ever saw a blue like the blue of
the hue some bloo-ming artists put into their pictures, and yet it is not the


accepted thing to call those artists a liar. No. What the crass-headed public
does there, is to kid to think it fine, thereby hiding their own ignorance and
lack of moral pluck, and it seems to me, that that is the frame of mind
which fishermen must strive to create in THEIR public, and in this regard,
I have a suggestion to make, so here it is.
What about every fisherman arming himself with a nobby-headed waddy ?
—This waddy to be a nice, hefty, four-pounder, with a fisherman’s coat of
arms, and the motto “Truth or death” set in the head with, say, three-quarter
inch, protruding, bright steel fish-hook barbs, —the points for impact, and
the barbs for laceration.
Make it mandatory that this implement of conviction shall not only be a
part of every fishing kit sold, but shall be carried always and everywhere
by fishermen, to be used as occasion may require, to buttress u;> the truth;
and so, whenever a doubting Thomas showed signs of disbelief, a kloot on
the kalitzer would soon knock him into a more sensible degree of Christian
toleration, or turn him into employment for the Undertaker which last, let
me warble, is about the only good purpose such people will ever really serve.
True, there may be some little difficulty in carrying this magician’s wand
about, but a short piece of leather at the handle end, with a slit for a back
brace button to go through, would Ist it dangle in a quick-draw, handy
position, whilst a nicely shaped steel plate sewn into one cheek of the seat
of the pants, would get over the danger and difficulty of the carrier sitting
down, and, there you are.
Then, with the yarns intended to be told, all ready on his lips, and the
emphasiser dangling at his back-end, a fisherman would sally forth, with the
world at his mercy, instead of, as now, being the butt of its ridicule; and by
this means, an end would quickly be pul to the irritating disbelief that we
have suffered so long, and feel so much.
Clearly understand, that though 1 admit there will be some cases where
actual killing will be perhaps rather drastic, 1 am advocating, in applying
this method of dealing with the difficulty, that nothing short of the full and
gruesome blotting out of the scoffdr will properly suit our purpose, and, —I
go further. The more gruesome and ghastly we make each such death, the
more the moral effect will be; until, in perhaps another ten thousand years
or so, 1 can see the time, when, instead of being the byword it now is, a
fisherman’s simple affirmation will take the place of the police-court oath of
to-day.
“Fishermen, awake!” Arise! I say, and—any other ejaculatory phrase
of that kind the printer can ring into the text. How much longer are we
going to meekly sit down under this stigma of un-veracity? How much
longer are we going to put up with the thoughtless contumely of people
who have no knowledge of our services to inventive art, and no idea of
what “truth” means to us.
We have stood the pr:sent state of affairs too long, Eh! far too long,


and things cannot go on if they remain as they are; but with the adoption
by us of this bludgeon of flaming truth, wielded by a band of determined
high-handed performers, a lasting impression will be made on those respon-
sible for the insults to us, and on the moral tone of the present unthinking
rabble of the earth.
Certainly, we may now and again, bump constituted authority; and
may-be, some of us will be called upon to answer with our lives, to the
present unjust and short-sighted man-made laws. But even so, and then,
when was ever a great reform carried to fruition without sacrifice, and
anyway, “how can man die better than by facing fearful odds, for the ashes
of his fathers,” and the fishes of his yarns? And, so I say unto you again,—
“Arise! Gird on your bludgeon.” Take a couple of good stiff drinks if you
feel you want ’em; and then, with that wonderful spirit of the old Crusaders,
march forth upon your insidious enemies, and demand that they shall accept
your truths or receive their dot-and-carry,—the carry by the Undertaker,
or the Corporation cart.
Onward, truthful fishers! Onward unto war; and, —I am with you.
Yours in the Cause,
PIS CATORI AL.
THE FISHER AND THE TRUTH.
“When I was a kid,” said Bill, as he set his pewter down squarely on
the counter, “They used ter tell me erbout er cove wot they called George
Washington—ther chump wot couldn’t tell er lie.”
“Well, I dun-no, but I took er bloke out fishin’ once, wot ’ad all I’ve ever
’eard erbout ther Georgie coot, done to a frazzle, and then some.”
“Ther feller I’m totin’ fer ther fisherman’s golden ’arp, was a funny
old chap, with a face like nothink that never was; and er manner wot was
a cross between a bull pup, and er roughy; and yet, wot I’m goin’ ter tell
yer proved ’is inside core was right alright, ’nd that ’e was made of good
fisherman stuff.”
“’£ ain’t er cobber er mine, yer understand. ’E was wished on me by
Geezer, ’nd I’m ter give ’im er day out at ther ’Awkesbury, the old Cove ter
find the boat ’nd beer, ’nd me ter find the onions.”
“Er course, not knowin’ ’im too good, when we make ther break in ther
train, I goes easy-like at first, but we gits on very well, though it narked
me a bit to find the poor old blighter was rather deaf, and, er course, er bit
’ard to talk to.”
“ ’Ow-some-ever, 1 told 'im er fish yarn er two, ter while away ther


time, *nd though I don’t got ’im eggsited eggsackly, ’e smiles er good-oh sort
er smile when I says it was ‘as big as that,’ ’nd nods ’is ’ead in chorus.”
“Then ’e pitches me er couple or two, which ain’t too bad neither, ’nd
’ere we are at the brino, before we knows we are.”
“We lugs ther lime juice ’nd other tack over ter ther boat, shoves off,
goes out to the near point of the Island, *nd after er drink or two, we,
settles down to fishin’ like fishin’ should be fished, but ther ain’t not any-
thing doin’.”
“After er bit, we shifts eround to ther Channel, but ther luck’s still
onkey-doo, so we jazzes about ’ere ’nd there, ’nd over, but we don’t get not
nothink all ther mornin’.”
“In the afternoon it was ther same, ’nd I can tell yet it was ther bum*
mest go I’ve ever struck, though we fished both ways of ther tide.”
“The old covey took it well though, but I think ther good supply of
shick ’elped ’im as well as me, but with ther sun goin’ down over ther
bridge, and six hours ’ard wear now tellin’ on ther seats of our pants, I’m
ready ter call it cr day, whenever ’e passes the word.”
“But ’e keeps keen to the last, ’nd just when I’m wound in, ’an am
clearing up ther boat a bit, as er sort of gentle ’int that it’s time ter git er
move on, somethink takes ’old of the old man’s line, ’nd legs it like er streak.”
“Dad turns ’im at er-bout sixty yards, ’nd begins her ’andle ’im like an
hartist, ’nd look!—let me tell ye ’e’s some daddy fisherman, too.”
“Out, ’nd back, down ’nd out ergain, ther line goin’ off ther cork like
ther scuttle of ’er sewin’ machine; ’nd then, after erbout forty minutes of
give, ’nd take, ’nd shazzy, ’e gently floats ther fish up to ther side of ther
boat, ’nd we sees the biggest Jew-fish that was ever caught in them waters,
not barrin’ even them wot blokes ’ave dreamt they caught.”
“After we glimpses ’im, ’e puts up ’er last drownin’ splash, ’nd then,
floatin ’side up ’nd natty, ’e’s ours ter get inter ther boat.”
“I’m standin’ ready with ther gaff, ’nd lookin’ ter get a hold, ’nd I’m
just thinkin’ ’ow queer fishin* is, when we goes all day without ’er bite, ’nd
then gits a fish like that, just when we’re chuckin’ it in.”
“But the old bloke is takin’ it funny like, somehow. ’ls face is regis-
tering about fifteen kinds of commotions, ’nd then, sort of pullin’ ’is-self
together, ’e lays ’is beautiful ‘Geisha’ line flat er-cross the edge of the boat,
reaches for ther knife, ’nd before I can stop ’im, cuts that lovely fish er-way
ter freedom, sayin’: ‘No, Bill. If we took that fish in, they’d only call us a
pair of liars, *nd we don’t want that, boy, do we?’ ”


BILL’S OCTERPURSE.
seen a Science bloke says that Octerpurses carry ink to ’ide their
get-erway, when they want ter kid they’re where they ain’t. Well the
Science bloke is wrong,” said Bill, “and I ken prove it. Because they never
seen ’im use it only when ’e’s ’ad er nacident, and spilt it (and, er corse,
moves away faiom the blot), they say ’es coverin’ up ’is tracks; but that
’ain’t ther true reason more than if ’e didn’t.”
“1 knowed a bloke’s missus once, wot throwed er bottle of ink at ’er
loreful ’usband, and it hit ’im too, but that don’t prove that chuckin’ ink at
’usbands is ther natural use fer ink, or that throwin’ ink is ther natural
way ter prove er woming’s love.”
“No! They got it all wrong. Ink was made for wot every kid knows
it was; that’s ter ’rite with ’er course, and the Science bloke wot says it
ain’t, is jumpin’s ter delusions. Besides, ain’t er nocter’s fingers built for
fine and flexin’ work? Well, don’t that show ther nature of ’is bottle of
ink-o, too?”
“Now, I’ll tell yer,” he said, as he wiped the beer froth from his
moustache, “erbout er nocterpourse wot set old Geeze and me. We was
down to * ’Ungry Point.’ The place yer know, where ther inlet don’t go out
except at ther top of ther tide. We ’ad ’ad a good time too with ther
fishin’, but we’d found out that ther was times to fish and times to not; when
ther fishes wouldn’t bite. Some places is like that, though some blokes
think they ain’t; but we’d done the Inlet up and down, and knowed it to er
bean. Well, this was a NOT time, but as yer can’t fairly drink and not fish,
we was doing a bit of easy.”
“We ’ad kellicked ther boat on er big flat of erbout eighteen inches er
water, just off ther bank of ther deep—the idea being to lay out er sight
on ther flat, and drop ther lines down inter the channel.”
The flat behind was flat alright, and spread er long way around, the
’ole place bein’ bottomed with er mass of long and shimmery grass-blade
weed.”
“Well, we gets er few sizeable fish, but slow fishin’ ’ain’t no good down
there, and I was almost nearly ter sleep, when Geeze said, quiet and funny-
like, ‘Eh, Bill! Wot Oh this cow!’ and lookin’ where 'e said, in ther shaller
and ther weeds, 1 seen the biggest b octerpurse that 1 never ever seen.”
“He must er been erbout six feet erway, eye-in’ us like ten black and
lurkin’ ’orrers.”
“Ther wicked look of ’is eyes made ice-calls down me spine, and started
me ’air to sproutin,’ and of all the ’ates 1 ever ’ated, 1 ’ated that thing most.”
“I grabs er scull, Geeze grabs one, too, and standin’ up in ther boat,
we tries to spear ’im both to once.”-
“The Oc. don’t go much on that er course, and shifts all ways together


like, to farther back in the shaller, thought he can’t go fast or quick because
of the tanglin’ weeds.”
We seen *im do ther slither; Geeze lets out ther kellick line, an we
poles ther boat over to ’im again, and Jabs ’im ernother couple er denny-
azers.”
‘This time one of us must have biffed ’im sideways, and made ’im
spill ’is ink. His long arms lashes eround like the sale of er ship, and in
ther dark of ther black, he manages to skedaddle another yard or two, and
then lays low fer a bit.”
‘Presently we sees ther weeds a-waving agin, and Octo is trying to
work ’is way underneath ’em, and get erway sly like, all unbeknownst to
us. But ther moving grass-weed gives ’im away, and we afters 'im like
dorgs a-chasin’s of er cat. Yer see, we was edging ’im further and further
into ther shaller—we, being between ’im and deep water, so we deals out
ther stoush quick and hefty, to keep *im movin’ on.”
“The Oc knows now though, that ’e’s gettin’ into water where there
’ain’t none, and 'e sees it’s a fight or a finish.”
“There’s ernother spill er black; another splashin’ mass, and then all
of er sudden, ’e comes straight at ther boat.”
“We seen ’im cornin’, and knowed it was our turn to defend, and when
them tenterkles of ’is comes creeping and waving up over the side of ther
boat, Geeze and me think it time to take ter ther water ourselves, so we
does a skitzeedo out over the other side, to port. I ’ain’t kiddin’ we done
this fer fun. We both ’ad our boots and trousers on, and when we stepped
out, we was about up ter our neeze in water and weed, and it ain’t too good
or pleasant; but then, Occo was meanin’ trouble for us, so we both reckoned
at once that if he was goin’ ter board ther ship, well, we might better well
be out; and out we are.”
“We watches for ’im to come aboard, but when he don’t, and as ’is
feelers begin to disappear from the gunnels, we decide he might come
underneath, so we ’ops inter the boat again.”
“And now it's 'im and us. First we loses ’im, and then we finds 'im, —
ther movin’ of ther weeds givin’ us ther clews. We poles and jabs and
stabs like maniacs; old Occo sparrin’ good with side-step, come and go, but
all ther time, we are movin’ over space like, and we begins ter think ’e’s
ours.’*
“But we ain’t quite ser clever as we think. The Octer spies er bit er
boulder under ther surface, and makes fer it like ’ell, whilst we give ’im
hurry Up in the ’ope to jab 'im ded before ’e gits there.”
“The rock don’t look a nookery to us, and it don’t give ’im much
charnce, but ther must er been some openin’ somewhere, fer we seen the
cow crawl underneath, and out er sight.”


"Then, after a bit, two blearly venmous eyes looks through er sort er
flat-way slit in the rocks, and gives us er dirty smirkin' grin, wot says
“I've got yet beat."
“We tries to push ther flat of ther blades inter ther crack to spoil 'is
ugly face, but we couldn't do it no-hows, and we felt er pair of blinkin'
coots, and as savage as 'em, too, because 'ed uchred us."
“We ken see 'im alright yer understand, and 'e ken see us, too, but we
can't get at 'im, and then, just as we're coolin' down, and smotherin' up
our nark, a long thin twiney feeler comes stealin' out around ther rock,
and writes a word on the water in deep good shiney ink."
“We don't get it fer a minute, because ther swine is writin' left-'anded
and back-wards, but when 'e'd got it done, well, it insulted both our family
prides, for he made it plural number, so's ter mean both Geeze and me."
“Ther diggers' used ter call their cobbers wot that blarsted Oc wrote
us, but they always said it kind like, whilst the Oc wrote it to 'urt."
“Geeze cried and swore things back at 'im in er frenzy of er temper,
but ther cow 'ad got ther best of us, and we couldn't do no more."
“That's 'ow 1 knows that Octoes carry ink with 'em ter write with, and
er pen to use it, too, and that they can write too in er langwidge what a
publisher can't print. So there you are."
“1 wonder, though," concluded Bill, as he knitted his furrowed brow,
“whether all Octers is cac-handed, and are all of 'em skollers, too? Do
they get it from er teacher, or do they learn it our er books?”




"STRUTH!
ITS A
GEISHA
