

"SUN"
Farm Implement
H. V. McKAY


H. V. McKA^
FARM IMPLEMENT MANUFACI
Sunshine Harvester Wc
SUNSHINE
Head Office and Works:
Sunshine, near Melbourne, Victoria, Au
BRANCHES:
Melbourne Office and Showrooms;
102-104 Spencer St. (exactly opposite Raihva
New South Wales Office and Show Roo
27-39 George Street West* Sydne;
South Australian Office and Showroon
56 North Terrace, Adelaide.
London Office : Amberley House,
Norfolk Street, Strand, W.C.
STATE AGENCIES IN AUSTRALIA
Weal Australia:
SANDOVEB.-& CO., Hay Street, Pei
Queen^nd’:
The ■& Country Cc
• BrisbaneOand Tphwoomba.
AUSTRALIAN TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESSE:
McKay, Sunshine, Melbourne. McKay, Sunshjm
McKay, Sunshine, Adelaide.
REGISTERED ADDRESSES FOR OVERSEA CA
“Sunshine," Melbourne. “Mackaysun,’
Codes used : A.8.C., Fifth Edition ; Western t
Bentley's Complete Phrases.
INSPECTION INVITED AT ALL


“SUNFLOWER" ONE-WAY DISC CULTIVATOR


The “Sunflower” Disc Cultivator
(PATENTED)
Reduces to a fine tilth a larger acreage per day
than any other Implement.
■pp CULT1VATOR was invented m 1 907, since when many thou-
[jj sands have gone into use throughout Australia and in other countries.
Sv _. fallowed land it cuts and buries all weeds, and will work success-
fu% * n ran k growths sufficiently heavy to pull up any tyne implement.
On stubble land and in light to medium soils it is used as a plough,
and will turn over the soil to a depth of five inches. In both cases it thoroughly pulverises
the earth and leaves the surface smooth and ready for the grain drill. The discs are
18-inch diameter and are spaced only six inches apart. Their working angle, in relation
to the line of draught, is sufficient to ensure that all the soil is turned over —none being
missed. As the discs work all one way there is no ridge or furrow left, and the ground
is kept level. There are three sizes. The 7-disc requires three horses; the 10-disc, four
horses; and the 13-disc, five horses. The horse-power stated is for shallow work on
fallow. In heavy soils, and when used as a plough, more horse strength is needed.
One acre per disc per day is a fair day s work, but there are authentic records of as
much as twenty acres per day with a 13-disc. By a unique patented device it is easy to
work either size with one, two, or even three discs taken off. By shifting the rear wheel
along the back beam this wheel is made to track in the desired furrow, and the line of
draught and disc-working angle is not disturbed. Special attention is called to this
feature, as it is often of great advantage to be able to reduce the width of cut and
consequently the draught.
In construction the “ Sunflower” is solid and of ample strength for its work. The
three wheels have oil-retaining dust-proof bearings, and the stub axles are renewable
at small cost. The disc-gang bearings are recessed in order to resist the end thrust, and
this construction also enables the wearing surfaces to be run in a continuous oil bath.
Two powerful levers and racks provide for exact depth regulation and for lifting the discs
clear of the ground when travelling. The front furrow wheel is hand-steered by lever,
while the land wheel is swivel, and is controlled by the team by a rod connected to the
pulling chain. The whole steering device places the cultivator under perfect control.
Some hundreds of Agriculturists have written letters in appreciation of the value of this-
Implement m up-to-date farming. Printed copies of these letters will be posted gratis on request.
MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS^UNSHINEjyi


THE "SUN” TWIN-DISC CULTIVATOR (STUMP JUMP)


The “SUN” Twin-Disc Cultivator (stump Jump)
(PATENTED)
The Problem of Cultivation in imperfectly cleared', rooty, stumpy, stony,
or scrubby land is completely solved by the use of this Implement,
EjTjte'i/HE great success of the “Sunflower” One-way Disc Cultivator created
Si a demand for an implement which would do similar work without
\2 / breaking in stony ground or in rough Mallee scrub. The “Sun”Twin-
Disc suits this purpose exactly, and in consequence is largely in use
where stones abound, and in all new cultivation areas in which the land
is not yet entirely freed of stumps, roots, and other obstructions. In fallow it is a splendid
stirrer and cuts and buries all weeds most effectively. In stubble or in light soil it ploughs
to a depth of five inches, and turns over every inch of the soil. The seed bed which it
makes is so well tilled and levelled that further harrowing is rendered unnecessary. The
jumping device is so perfect that any pair of discs rise to ride over an obstacle without
increasing the strain, and return to work so quickly that no soil remains uncultivated. Its
work amongst stones is marvellous, and it can safely be taken into the stoniest paddock
that is worth cultivating. In Mallee it will cut the shoots even up to two or three years’
growth, and in one operation leave the land in first-class condition for seeding. Farmers
having rough country to cultivate should not delay in verifying these statements by
independent inquiry. It is made in three sizes, namely, 8-disc, for three horses; 10-disc,
for four horses; and 12-disc, for five horses. The horse strength stated is for shallow work
on fallow; more horses are required for deeper work and on heavy soils. The discs are
made of the toughest and strongest steel procurable, and are 1 8-inch or 20-inch diameter
and spaced six inches apart. Ample weight and great strength are provided in the
construction of this Cultivator. The discs are set m pairs, each pair revolving on an
independent axle and bearing of special design. The jump arm is of spring steel, and is
controlled by a strong spiral spring which conveys compound pressure to the discs by means
of a toggle joint. The levers are convenient and powerful, and provide for depth regulation
and to raise the gang clear of the ground. The three wheels have renewable dust-proof
boxes. Both front wheels are swivel, and are controlled by team steering gear. The front
furrow wheel may also be steered from the driver’s seat by lever and rod.
A Special Booklet is issued in which are noted Farmers' Experiences of
the wide range of utility of this Implement. Posted gratis on request.
MM H. V. MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE MfH)'!
1 -- ■ -- ■ mi ■ IhrA. .^cSt


"SUNNIE” DISC PLOUGH


The “Sunnie” Disc Plough
Recommended for deep or shallonv discing
in light to medium soils.
HIS PLOUGH is built with that solidity and strength which charac-
JJ m terise Australian-made implements, and yet it is sold as cheaply as the
® lightly constructed disc ploughs of foreign manufacture. It is largely
1SIK “ secl . In maize-growing districts, and in all parts where loamy lands
require deep tilling and thorough pulverization. It has great clearance
between the discs, and consequently will work well in rank weed growths and bury them
satisfactorily. It is light in draught, convenient to handle, and invariably gives satisfaction
to those who use it.
It is made in 1,2, 3, and 4 furrow sizes, and the leading disc may be removed to
reduce the number of furrows by one. The discs are 23 in. diameter, and the width of
furrow is adjustable for either 7 or 9 in. By a patented device the set of the discs may be
simply and quickly altered for more or less breast and more or less undercut as desired.
This is effected by the use of a semi-ball and socket connection on the disc carriers, and
by manipulating the clamp bolts the desired set is obtained without loss of time.
The frame is of best spring steel braced m such a manner as to give rigidity and
strength. The three cast iron wheels have rims of ample tread, and are set at the angle
which gives most grip. Each wheel has a removable box, which has a large chilled
wearing surface and is dust-proof and oil-retaining. The front wheel is adjustable to
regulate the width of furrow, and is solidly supported in all positions. The rear wheel is
free swivel when the stop is lifted (by foot pressure), and enables the plough to turn to near
or off in its own length. This stop is adjustable to give the rear wheel more or less
inclination to land as desired. The levers are admirably placed for convenience in steering
and for raising the discs clear of the ground in travelling, and for adjusting the depth of
the work. The discs are made of the best steel, and are tough and strong to give good
wear and prevent breakages. The disc bearings have large chilled surfaces; they are oil-
retaining and have dust-proof caps. Mouldboard scrapers are supplied, and serve to
clean the discs as well as to assist in burying weeds and stubble.
jgjil H.V. MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS. SUNSHINE ||s||{


THE “SUNRAY" DISC PLOUGH


The “SUNRAY” DISC PLOUGH
(PATENTED)
With this Plough there is no need to <wa.it for rain before ploughing;
it is guaranteed to plough the hardest soil ,
I, TERMING CONDITIONS in Australia have made it necessary that
T-7 (gu a plough be available which will penetrate and turn over the soil when
JCv* it is baked stone dry and almost brick hard. The “Sunray will do
this work, and hence is largely used for fallowing. It will work success-
fU1 ly where the mouldboard plough is useless. In ti-tree, grass tree, or
in tussocks, it does surprisingly well, and in all cases it thoroughly pulverises the soil to any
reasonable depth and buries grass or weeds.
The sizes made are 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 furrows, the discs are 23 in. diameter, and the
width of furrow is adjustable to or 8 in. In all sizes the front disc may be removed
and the number of furrows reduced by one. Hand-steering gear is provided, but for
bullocks or traction engine work automatic steering gear is recommended and is supplied
at a small extra charge.
A special patented feature of this plough is the adjustability of the discs for more or
less undercut and more or less angle to land. This is accomplished by the aid of a semi-
ball and socket device on the disc carrier. Any adjustment is quickly and rigidly made
by merely slackening and tightening the clamp bolts.
The strength of this plough is enormous, and is obtained by using spring steel of
heavy section for the frames, which are cross braced to meet great strains. It is mounted
on three cast iron wheels of ample weight, provided with renewable boxes which are
dust-proof and retain the oil. These boxes have large chilled surfaces, ensuring long
service and free running.
The levers (three in number) for steering, and for raising and lowering, are all placed
handy to the driver’s seat, and have the most ample leverage for their work. The rear wheel
is free-swivel as soon as the driver’s foot is applied to the stop lever, and the plough may
then be turned to the near or the off in its own length. The rear wheel stop is adjustable to
allow more or less angle on this wheel as desired. The front furrow wheel may be set in
or out to suit either width of furrow, and its carrying arm is strongly supported. The disc
arms are of great strength and are warranted to be equal to all reasonable strain, and to
them are clamped the disc carriers. The discs are provided with mouldboard scrapers,
which serve as cleaners and also assist to completely turn the soil, to bury stubble, weeds, etc.
A Booklet called “Disc Ploughing" (posted gratis on request), gives useful particulars
of the work of this Plough under varying conditions.
jHHjI H.V. MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE jjJI


THE "SUNRISE" STUMP JUMP DISC PLOUGH


The “Sunrise” stump Jump Disc Plough
(PATENTED)
The Plough of the Pioneer. Enables him to plough his paddocks before
they are completely cleared of stumps, stones, roots, etc ,
THOUSANDS of acres of Australian soil would remain
\3) ri| t§o) unploughed but for the fact that this implement permits the farmer to
L§? 11l WA § et to work, in many cases years before his ground is sufficiently cleared
t° allow of the use of a set plough. It will break up virgin ground of
the hardest nature, and will do perfect work in mellow soil. It is in large
demand for traction engine ploughing, and has no equal for that class of work.
The sizes made are 2,3, 4,5, and 6 furrows, and the width of furrow may be set to
either in. or 8 in. The discs are 23 in. diameter. In all sizes the front disc may be
removed and the plough reduced in size by one furrow. The discs are set with just the
amount of undercut and breast which experience has proved to be the best. A special
device provides for giving more undercut when the ground is in a leathery condition.
Automatic steering gear goes with each plough, making it suitable for bullock or engine
ploughing. It is easily handled, and may be turned either to right or left in its own length.
The jumping device is perfect. The resistance of the heavy spiral spring is adjust-
able by nut and thread to suit the hardness of the soil. The spring pressure is conveyed
to the discs by means of a toggle joint in such a way that it receives the greatest pressure
when in the working position. As the disc rises to clear a stump or stone this pressure is
neutralised by the increased leverage of the toggle plates, so that the strain is diminished
until the obstacle is passed, when the disc immediately returns to its work and no soil is
left unploughed.
The frame is best spring steel, rigidly cross-braced. The three cast iron wheels are
fitted with renewable, oil-retaining, dust-proof boxes, which have chilled wearing surfaces.
The front wheel adjusts in position to regulate the width of cut of the front furrow.
Powerful convenient levers provide for depth regulation, steering, and to lift the discs clear
for travelling. An adjustable stop on the rear furrow wheel axle regulates this wheel for
more or less inclination to land. The disc bearings have large chilled wearing surfaces,
and are provided with caps which retain the oil and exclude dust and grit. Mouldboard
scrapers are provided which clean the discs and also assist to turn the soil and bury weeds.
A booklet is issued giving many instances of the special value of this Plough
under different conditions. Posted free on request.
[^^^^PIT^TMcK^^^IJNSHIMETiAR^ESTER~W^RKS, SUNS


“SUNLOCK” MOULDBOARD PLOUGH


The “Sunlock” Mouldboard Plough
A Plough for the Ploughman who takes pride in clean even
furrows. Its polished mouldboards are glass hard on the
■ face, and clean in the stickiest soil,
' s a favourite in the Riverina and in all parts where the sticky nature of
LH the soil demands a self-cleaning board. The greatest care is bestowed
on the shaping, tempering, and polishing of its soft centre mould-
boards, which are renowned for non-clogging even under the most
difficult conditions. The width of furrow may be altered at will from
7 in. to 9 in., or to any intermediate width. This is accomplished in the simplest fashion
by sliding the body beam clamps along the diagonal frames. The adjustment is effected in
a few moments, and is a very great convenience. The compound lever steerage device
enables the ploughman to vary the width of the front furrow instantly, and to keep the
work even and straight. When finishing, the front furrow can be cut out entirely if neces-
sary. When it is desired to reduce the number of furrows, either the front or back body
may be detached from the plough, but for work in hard ground it is preferable to remove
the front body.
The frame is made of warranted spring steel and will resist very severe strains.
The body and foot are forged from one piece of toughest steel, and are wrought to an
accurate fit for mouldboard and share. The feet take “D” shares, and one set of wrought
steel shares is supplied with each plough. A strong adjustable rear-stay is fitted to
each mouldboard.
A set of knife coulters is provided with each plough ; but disc coulters are supplied
instead when so ordered, at a small extra charge. Each plough is equipped with a seat
for the driver. The levers are amply powerful, and will lift the shares clear of the ground
for travelling, or adjust the depth of furrow to a nicety. The three cast iron wheels are
fitted with removable boxes with chilled wearing surfaces. They are dust-proof and retain
the oil.
The “Sunlock" Plough is made in 2, 3, and 4 furrow sizes, and each plough is fitted
and finished by skilled workmen under the best expert supervision obtainable.
||ggg| H.V. McKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE |g||


THE "SUNRISE" STUMP JUMP MOULDBOARD PLOUGH (SHORT BOARDS)
THE "SUNRISE" STUMP JUMP MOULDBOARD PLOUGH (LONG BOARDS)


The “Sunrise stump Jump Mouldboard Plough
The Mallee Farmer's Plough,
A necessity in all roughly cleared districts,
“SUNRISE” STUMP JUMP MOULDBOARD PLOUGH
ml jM is known all over Australia for its first-class work in stumpy and stony
j/(Cj ground. By its use many thousand acres of roughly-cleared land have
keen y ears before they were fit for cultivation by an ordinary “set”
plough.
The frames are made of best spring steel. They are solidly and rigidly braced to
give ample strength to the foundation of the plough. The four wheels have wrought iron
rims and spokes, and removable boxes which retain the oil and are dust-proof. The front
wheels (coupled) are swivel, and respond automatically to the steerage control of the
team, and a hand-steering lever is also provided and is of great assistance in straightening
the furrow and in turning at the headland. The rear of the plough, even in the largest
sizes, is easily raised by the long compound pressure lever, which also has an adjustment
to give a specially high lift when travelling on the road. The jump beams and bodies
are of spring steel, and special attention is directed to the superior construction of the jump
hinge, which is composed of an accurately fitting turned steel spindle working freely in a
pair of bearings clamped to the frames. The mouldboards are of hard surface steel of
the most approved curve and shape for slump jump work. The wrought steel shares
are the solid double rivetted socket pattern, PN foot. The jump control gear has compound
adjustments to provide for easy jumping where stumps and stones abound, or to hold the
shares firmly to their work in hard soil. The whole construction of this plough makes it
easy of management, and its shares and boards ensure first-class work in all kinds of soil.
In all sizes the front body may be removed when desired to reduce the size of the
plough. Width of furrow 8| in. One set of wrought steel shares is sent with each plough.
The “ Light” style is built in 2,3, 4,5, and 6 furrow sizes. Its frames are 1\ in. x £ in.,
bodies 4 in. x £ in., both of spring steel. It has P.N. feet, shares and short mouldboards.
The “ Heavy” style is built in 3,4, and 5 furrow sizes, with frames of 1\ in. x | in.
and bodies of 41 in. x £ in., all spring steel. It has P.N. feet and shares and short boards.
The “Heavy’’ style in 3 and 4 furrow sizes can be supplied with long mouldboards
■of the No. 1 Australian pattern, and in this case it is equipped with “D”feet and shares.
jUll H.V. MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE |jej|


The “Sunrise” Stump Jump Harrows
Avoid breakages by using Stump Jump Harrows. On stony or stumpy land they are
a necessity. In well cleared paddocks their work is as good as that done by “set” harrows.
The teeth are of tough steel 1 £ in. x g in. and are 9 in. long. This gives immense
strength and ample clearance. Each section is flexible, being hinged at every joint.
This permits any row of teeth to jump when an obstruction is met with, and ensures
long life to the harrow and easy work for the team. Each section has 20 teeth,
cutting 2 i inches apart. Weight per section, 80 lbs. The Hardwood Draught Bar
is strongly braced and has an adjustable hitch. It is supplied with or without wheels.
Made in four sizes :—
Three section covers 1\ ft.
Four section covers 1 Oi ft.
Five section covers 1 3\ ft.
Six section covers 16J ft.
In addition to the Implements described in this book, the Sunshine Harvester Works supply
Reapers and Binders, Mowers, Reapers, Hay Rakes, Side Delivery Rakes, Potato Diggers,
Spring Tooth Cultivators, Corn Crushers, Ensilage Cutters, Field Rollers, Horse Hoes, Road
Graders, Plough Shares, Lubricating Oils, Steam Traction Engines, Portable Steam Engines,
Portable and Stationary Oil Engines, and Threshing Machines.
An Illustrated Catalogue or Circular of any of these lines will be posted gratis, on request.
SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE |||B||


The Australian Zig-Zag Harrows
With Patent Central Draught.
Fitted with Oval Tines of Flardest Steel, driven, not screwed. They will not
shake loose. The Central Draught ensures uniformity of work, increases the strength,
and reduces the draught. They are constructed with four beams and have 20 teeth per
section. The tooth lines are two inches apart. The Harrow Bar is made of selected
seasoned Hardwood, well braced, and with adjustable hitch. Made in six sizes :
MEDIUM.
Two section covers 7 ft. 0 in.
Three section covers 10 ft. 6 in.
Four section covers 13 ft. 0 in.
Weight, I cwt. 0 qrs. 22 lbs.
Weight, 1 cwt. 3 qrs. 5 lbs.
Weight, 2 cwt. 1 qr. 16 lbs.
LIGHT.
Two section covers 7 ft. 0 in.
Three section covers 10 ft. 6 in.
Four section covers 13 ft. 0 in.
Weight, 1 cwt. 0 qrs. 0 lbs.
Weight, 1 cwt. 2 qrs. 0 lbs.
Weight, 2 cwt. 0 qrs. 0 lbs.
In addition to the Implements described in this book, the Sunshine Harvester Works supply
Reapers and Binders, Mowers, Reapers, Hay Rakes, Side Delivery Rakes, Potato Diggers,
Spring Tooth Cultivators, Com Crushers, Ensilage Cutters, Field Rollers, Plorse Hoes, Road
Graders, Plough Shares, Lubricating Oils, Steam Traction Engines, Portable Steam Engines,
Portable and Stationary Oil Engines, and Threshing Machines.
An Illustrated Catalogue or Circular of any of these lines will be posted gratis, on request.
11311 H.v. MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE |||3|


The “Hercules’’ Horse Works
HHESE HORSE GEARS are of unrivalled strength, as (with the
exception of the poles) they are made entirely of iron and steel. A
glance at the illustration shows the extreme simplicity of design of the
machine, all complications being done away with. The bed plate is
a massive casting with lateral and transverse strengthening ribs on the
under side. The studs, of
great diameter, are of steel,
lathe-turned and accurately
fitted to the bed plate. The
crown wheel is of ample
weight and strength, with
the pole bearers and lugs
cast to it.
The second motion
is in two parts for easy
renewal, consisting of a
shrouded pinion clutched
to a bevelled cog-wheel.
The latter drives a bevelled
pinion keyed to the spindle,
and the total increase of
speed is 22 revolutions of
the spindle to one of the
crownwheel. Special atten-
tion is called to the clutch
coupling on the spindle. In
this the pawls are operated by spiral springs, and provide a perfectly effective releasing gear so
that the poles cannot run forward on to the horses when the latter stop. By altering the
position of pawls the gear may be made to drive to left instead of to right if desired.
Poles and pole stays are included in the equipment of each machine, also I3i feet of
steel shafting and a driving pulley 3ft. 9 in. in diameter by 4 in. face. Hardwood bed
logs and anchor bolts are supplied to special order, also swingletrees.
Made in Three Sizes. No. 3, one horse; No. 2, two horses; No. I, four horses.
lElil H. V. MCKAY, SUNSHINE


THE “MAXIM" CHAFFCUTTER, WITH ELEVATOR AND HANDY BAGGER


"MAXIM"
CHAFFC UTTER


The “MAXIM” Chaffcutter
Unexcelled as a stationary Chaff cutting Machine for Farmers' use, Safe to work, of large
capacity, and built to last. No farm should lack a Chaffcutter —a good "Maxim."
BHE “MAXIM” CHAFFCUTTERS are at work on thousands of
farms throughout Australia. Many of them have been in regular use
for close upon twenty years, giving no trouble to their owners except
for oiling, and costing nothing for repairs. The sample produced is
clean cut and marketable without sieving. If the knives are kept sharp
the machine does the rest. When driven by horse gear the No. 2 Machine will easily cut
one ton per hour, and when fast driven by engine power this quantity can be more than
doubled. The safety lever is located in such a position across the feed box that the
feeder can work it under all conceivable circumstances. It gives him a perfect insurance
against the possibility of serious accident, as the feed rollers reverse immediately this lever
is moved. No sacrifice to cheapness is allowed in the making of this machine. The frame
is of selected seasoned blackwood, morticed, bolted, and stayed to a complete rigidity.
The knife wheel is heavy, correctly balanced, and is securely keyed to the main spindle.
The knives, of best tempered steel, are secured to the arms by three bolts, and in each
arm four set screws are provided so that each knife may be accurately set to the mouth-
piece. The feed rollers are lathe-turned and mesh exactly, so that even feeding is made
certain, and winding and choking is prevented. The bevel pinions are of cast steel. The link
joint of the top roller spindle ensures even driving as the roller rises or falls with the feed.
A lever and weight are provided to adjust the rollers to the necessary grip. Both “stop”
and “reverse” motions are provided, and are worked by the safety lever described above.
Three change pinions are supplied, giving three lengths of chaff cut, viz., $, J, and | inch.
“Maxim” Chaffcutter No. 2—3 knife; 9a in. mouth; for 2-Korse gear.
“Maxim” Chaffcutter No. 2X.—3 knife; 91 in. mouth, with extended, rail, lengthened
spindle, extra bearing; fast and loose pulleys; for 41 b.h.p. engine.
“Maxim” Chaffcutter No. 4A.—3 knife; in. mouth ; for 2-horse gear.
“Maxim” Chaffcutter No. 4AX.—3 knife; 81 in. mouth, with extended rail, lengthened
spindle, extra bearing; fast and loose pulleys; for 3 b.h.p. engine.
These Chaffcutters can also be supplied with elevators, 10, 12, 14, or 16 feet long,
equipped with plain hopper spouts for delivery into a bin, or with double delivery handy
bagger spouts for bagging. Sieve gear and attachments can also be supplied if required.
HARVESTEFrWORKS, SUNSHINE ||g|||


«c
Scott” Petrol Engines
Stationary and
Portable Types.
5 and 7
' -r
\A h
eL J
■
E!
: ■
t
Please ask for Special Sectional Catalogue and Quotations. Cash or Terms.
MANUFACTURED AT SUNSHINE


mm
“Scott” Petrol Engines
Manufactured at Sunshine.
A Substantial, Simple, and pliable Engine for Farm Work and
Light Fewer Furposes,
Stationary and Portable Types in two sizes, viz. :
5 and 7 Brake Horse-power.
The “ SCOTT ” is the result of a long series of costly experiments with
Internal Combustion Engines, the object being to produce an engine second to
none in strength, symmetry, and design, together with durability and smooth-
ness of operation.
The Factory has been equipped throughout with machinery specially
designed and manufactured for the correct and economical production of
engines, and the whole plant is the most efficient and most modern of its kind
in the world.
“ SCOTT” ENGINES
Stand first for Strength and Reliability. Every engine is thoroughly
tested before leaving the factory.
ECONOMY.
Remarkably low Petrol Consumption.
EFFICIENT LUBRICATION.
All engines are fitted with the latest modern Forced-feed System.
REGULAR RUNNING
Controlled by a Centrifugal Governor.
CLEANLINESS.
Unusual freedom from carbon deposit.
SIMPLICITY.
Magneto Ignition. No batteries or lamps to go out of order.


METAL GATES
For Farm and Garden
SUNSHINE METAL GATES are handsome, durable, and strong. They are
constructed entirely of steel and iron, and defy all conditions of climate. The joints are
chill-moulded and will not work loose under any circumstances. All gates are supplied
complete with hinges, fasteners, and the necessary bolts or coach screws, ready for erection.
They are well painted,
ornamental in appear-
ance, and impart an as-
pect of prosperity wher-
ever used —in garden,
park, or paddock.
Style No. 1 is a six-
bar gate of very solid con-
struction. It is a great
Style No. 1. —Bar Gate, 6,7, 8, 10, and 12 feet wide x 4 feet high.
favourite with cattlemen. With its diagonal braces and chilled joints it is proof against
sagging and twisting, and will outlast a generation of ordinary usage. It is 4 feet in
height and is made in six sizes, viz.:—6, 7,8,
10, and 12 feet, with diagonal stays; also 3 J
feet, without diagonal stays. The catch is a strong
casting, which may be embedded into the post,
leaving no projection to injure a horseman’s leg.
The wrought iron latch is adjustable to project
further forward in case the gate post shifts—a
feature which commends itself to all users. It is
self-latching when the gate is pushed to. Eye-
bolt hinges are used and can be supplied of any
length to suit the hanging post. For openings of
14 or 16 feet a pair of 7ft. or Bft. gates is used,
equipped with a centre chain fastener.
Style No. 1 .—Bar Gate, 3½ feet (only).
HHI H. V. MCKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE |g|j|


The Tubular X Stay Gates, though of light construction, are so scientifically braced
and stayed as to give lengthy and satisfactory service. The X stay gives the vertical
rigidity of a bicycle frame and prevents all sag, while the three vertical and five horizontal
twisted cables make
the gate stock proof
and add greatly to its
strength. The joints
are all butted and
chill-moulded, so dis-
pensing entirely with
sockets and threads
which weaken K and
injure the pipe. Style
Style No. 5. —X Stay Gate, Cable Braced, 10, 12, and 14 ft. wide x 4 ft. high.
No. 5 is equipped with heavy split-pattern cast iron hinges, with bolts to suit any diameter
of post. The latch and catch are the same as supplied with the Bar Gate (Style No. 1).
Style No. 6 is the
same construction as
above but is covered with
best galvansied rabbit-
proof wire netting 3 ft.
high, 1 in. mesh, 17
gauge. Many farmers
prefer to hang rabbit-
proof gates on the sides
of posts; for this purpose
a wrought iron catch to
drive is supplied.
Style No. 6.—X Stay Gate, Cable Braced and Rabbit Netted,
10, 12, and 14 feet wide x 4 feet high.
For rabbit-infested districts it is not only necessary that a gate should be wire netted,
it must also have square bottom corners, as rounded off corners leave space for young
rabbits to pass through. Particular attention is called to the square bottom corners of the
Sunshine Gates, which are achieved not by threads and sockets but by chilled moulded
joints which increase the strength of the gate.
Sunshine Gates never sag. If properly hung they will remain in position for years
without any sign of sagging. They never decay, and will outlast many sets of wooden gates.
\MM\ H.v. McKAYTsU^sijNifH^E^


Style No. 7 is also of the X stay construction, but is completely covered with galvanised
wove wire 5 in. x 3 in. mesh,
and is stock and fowl-proof.
It is a very handsome gate
for front entrances.
The 14 ft. size (only),
in styles Nos. 5,6, and 7
is made with a double X
stay. All gates can be
supplied with ornamental
iron work scroll on top.
Style No. 13. —Frame Gate, 3, 3½
and 4 ft. wide x 4 ft. high.
Style No. 7. —X Stay, Wove Wire, 10, 12, and 14 feet wide x 4 feet high.
The Frame Gate, Style No. 13, is a light and orna-
mental hand gate for garden, lawn, etc., or to use as foot
passenger entrance at the side of drive gates. The frame
is of great strength, having but one joint. The galvanised
wove wire is 5 in. x 3 in. mesh, making it dog and fowl-
proof; but, when so ordered, the lower half is woven to
1 in. mesh, making the gate rabbit-proof also. The same
hinges are used as for X Stay Gates, but patent self-
closing hinges can be supplied if desired. The latch is
a fixture, and the catch is a patent double tumbler fastener,
permitting the gate to be opened either one or both ways.
jjjjl H.v. McKAY, SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS, SUNSHINE [|||||
METAL GATES—continued.


McKAY’S
IMPROVED SACK-DUMPING
TRUCK
This truck is designed to simplify the work of bag-
ging grain, and, in addition to making the work easier,
enables it to be thoroughly done. The mouth of the
sack is held wide open by the spiked ring. The bag
may be shaken up as often as desired by means of the
McKAY’S BAG-LOADER.
This is a wonderfully useful invention for the Farmer. Many
thousands have been sold throughout the Commonwealth, and
all users state that they would not be without it even if its cost
were ten times greater. It is a device whereby the horse is
used instead of the man to load wheat on to the waggon. It
does away with the most back-breaking labour of harvest time.
It is made m two sizes, to suit low or high waggons. It is
supplied at a low cost, and should be found on every farm.
lever, which, when not in use, is firmly held by the bracket, as shown in the
illustration. The construction is extremely rigid, and being of iron tubing the
truck is very light and is not affected by the weather. The wheels are large
and wide-tyred, thus being adapted to rough stubble land, and easily moved
when fully loaded.
McKAY’S TUBULAR SACK TRUCK
This neat little truck is a general favourite. It is particularly adapted for
field work and general work about the farm. The wheels are large and wide,
being 1 I inches diameter and 2h inches tread, and pass smoothly over rough,
uneven surfaces.
harvester works, sunshine


THE “SUNSHINE” HARVESTER,
WOOD FRAME
Please ask for SPECIAL CATALOGUE of the SUNSHINE HARVESTER.


Please ask for SPECIAL CATALOGUE of the SUNSHINE HARVESTER.
THE “SUNSHINE" HARVESTER— STEEL FRAME


“SUN" HOE DRILL
FRONT VIEW)
(Please ask for Special Drill Catalogue)


DISC DRILL (FRONT VIEW)
(Please ask for Special Drill Catalogue.).


VIEW OF THE SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS
D. W. PATERSON CO,. PRINT. MELBOURNE
