

HAECKEL'S
FRAUDS AND FORGERIES.
By ASSMUTH and HULL.


HAECKEL'S
FRAUDS AND FORGERIES.
By J. ASSMUTH, S. J.,
PROFESSOR OF BIOLOGY, ST. XAVIER’S COLLEGE,
AND
ERNEST R. HULL, S. J.,
EDITOR OF THE EXAMINER, BOMBAY.
Bombay, Examiner Press.
Retailed by B. X. Furtado & Sons, Bombay;
B. Herder, London, and St. Louis, U. S. A,;
Wm. P. Linehan, Melbourne; E. J. Dwyer,
Sydney ; L. Gille & Co., Sydney ;
P. J. Kenedy & Sons, New York.


PLATE I.
SPECIMENS OF KEIBEL’S EXPOSURES.
(See page 9.)
(1) HAECKEL’S “COPY." (2) SELENKA’S ORIGINAL.
Folds
Eye
Jaws
Heart
Ann
Backbone
Line showing )
what Haeckel >
has out off. J
Leg
I). Yelk-Sac
N. Navel
Haeckel takes Selenka’s genuine figure of a Macaque embryo, cuts
off such essential parts as the arms, legs, heart, navel, yelk-sac, so as
to make it as much like a fish-embryo as possible, and then labels it
“ Embryo of a Gibbon in the fish-stage.” Haeckel excuses himself
by pretending that the omitted parts are not essential.
(3) HAECKEL'S“COPY” (4) HIS'S ORIGINAL
Ear
Jaws
Folds
Heart
Nose
Backbone
Log
Arm
Compare the full embryo of a man, figured byHlisdrom life, with
Haeckel's diminished figure. Haeckel omits such essential parts as
the arms, legs, heart, so as to make it as much like a
possible, and then labels it u Embryo of a man in the fish-stage.”
This is not merely a mutilated copy, hut a free invention, and is
absolutely unlike the reality as observed hy others


PLATE II.
SKELETONS OF APES AND OF MAN.
(see Page 85.)
1 HUXLEY'S ORIGINAL PLATE (REVERSED.)
Man. Gorilla. Chimpanzee Orang. Gibbon.
Hosier's plate displays many differences between man and the apes :
o. g„ the bent posture of the apes, the turued-up position of their feet, etc.
II HAECKET'S MODIFICATION OF THE ABOVE.
Haeckel substitutes two new figures, makes the feet of the apes fiat like
those of man, straightens up their hacks, cuts off the neckbones of the gorilla,
and creates an impression of sequence altogether untrue to nature, so as to
support his theory of descent.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Frontispiece:—
Plate I. Falsified Copies of Embryos.
Plate 11. Huxley’s and Haeckel’s Apes.
The Charge against Haeckel :
Fart I. The Three Exposures ... ... 1
Part 11. The Brass-Haeckel Controversy ... 12
Part 111. Further Testimonies ... ... 23
Part IV. Our Correspondent’s Letter... ... 38
The Charge against the R. P. Association:
Part Y. Rationalist Press Reprints ... ... 60
Part VI. Further Examination of Reprints ... 72
Part VII. Reprints concluded; Final Verdict ... 82
Appendix: An Attempted Reply ... ... 92
Printed and Published by Joseph Iqnatius Fonseca at the
Examiner Press, 39, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay, 1915.


preface.
The following essay took its rise from a short article
in The Examiner of May 23rd, 1914, which contained
a charge of complicity against the Rationalist Press
Association for its circulation of Haeckel’s popular
writings ; the justice of which was challenged by the
Honorary Secretary of a local branch of the same Asso-
ciation. The whole of the matter was provided by
Father J. Assmuth, S. J., of St. Xavier’s College, Bom-
bay, who had full and first-hand evidence before him.
All that the Editor of The Examiner had to do was to
throw this matter into literary shape. The articles were
published in The Examinee July 11th to August 22nd,
1914. In reproducing them in book-form some repeti-
tions, and also some allusions of purely current import
have been omitted. On the other hand, many points
have been strengthened by additional matter. A short
appendix has been added, dealing with a pamphlet
written in reply to our articles.
The incident of the challenge was highly convenient ;
for it drove us both to work over the subject thoroughly.
As Haeckel’s books are in wide circulation, and are
read by a large number even of Christian readers, much
to their detriment, we hope that this book will just
come handily to meet a current need. A waggish cor-
respondent suggested that its title should be “ IJaeckel
Heckled and the Riddle Riddled ,” but we prefer to
confine this suggestion to the preface. It is our inten-
tion later on to deal with the whole of Haeckel’s monis-
tic doctrine in a more direct manner ; but this scheme
will have to wait its turn.
ERNEST R. Hull, S. J.,
Jan. 31st, 1915.
Editor of The Examiner.


THE HAECKEL CASE.
PART I.
THE THREE EXPOSURES.
In the Examiner of May 23rd 1914 there appeared a
“contributed” article entitled Rationalism and Rationa-
listic Methods. After defining the term “ rationalism ”
in the words of the Rationalist Press Association, the
writer went on to criticise the soundness of the ration-
alist standpoint, and then asked : “ What are the
methods used to propagate rationalistic thought ? ” He
proceeded to answer as follows :—“ The Rationalist
Press Association proclaims from the housetops : ‘Truth,
so far as it bears on the life and aspirations of mankind,
or on the universe to which common experience intro-
duces us, belongs to all men. This (their birthright)
the R. P. A. seeks to restore by making the truth of
nature and science increasingly accessible to all.’ Truth
is the ever recurring strain. How do they propose to
spread truth among all men ? By the most shameless
frauds and forgeries. For instance, there is E. Haeckel
of Jena in Germany. The R. P. A. has made him an
honorary associate, and has thrown a translation of his
Riddle of the Universe broadcast among the people.
Now Haeckel’s love of truth and methods of spreading
truth were made known to the world in 1908. Three
times he has been convicted of forgery ”... [here
follow certain details] ... “ What can we say of his
friends who praise him as ‘ one of the most thoughtful
men of science in Europe,’ and who spread his book in
cheap editions all over the country in order to cheat
people out of their religion ? Yet such a production is
advertised by the R. P. A. as ‘a unique exposition, both
from the philosophical and the historical point of view,


o£ nineteenth century thought on the central problem
o£ life.’ The rationalists cry ‘Truth, Truth,’ but there is
no truth.”
Thus far the article. > Shortly afterwards we received
a letter from the Honorary Secretary of a branch of the
Rationalist Press Association, complaining that he con-
sidered this charge, as far as it is directed against that
association, to be “highly defamatory and libelous;” and
even with regard to Haeckel he questioned the soundness
of the indictment, and put forward a certain counter-
statement in defence. Now it is certainly not our
wish to maintain in print accusations against anyone,
whether an individual or a corporate body, without being
quite sure that they are justified by the evidence.
We have therefore decided to take up the challenge and
submit the whole matter to a careful examination.
The subject divides itself into two parts : (1) What
is the accusation against Haeckel, and how far is the
accusation substantiated ? (2) Given that it is fully
substantiated, how far is the Rationalist Press Associa-
tion implicated by the patronage which they extend to
Haeckel’s books ? As point No. 1 stands altogether dis-
tinct from point No. 2, we have decided to tackle that
first by itself; Desirous to obtain first-hand sources, we
have enlisted the services of a German scientific professor,
a Berlin Doctor in Biology, who was in Germany at the
time, an eye-witness of the whole recent controversy,
and is familiar with most of the literature bearing on
the case. The following is the outcome of his notes on
the subject :
SOME GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
Introductory Remarks. —Any plate or illustration
given without comment by an author in a scientific work
can only be taken to mean a faithful representation of
what the author has actually observed in the course of


his investigations, microscopic or otherwise. If the
picture is borrowed from some other scientist, it mnst
be labelled such, and must be an exact copy of the ori-
ginal. If a borrowed picture is in any way changed or
modified, it is a universally established custom among
scientists to state this in clear terms, besides indicating
the original of which it is a modification. If the
picture is not a representation of an object really seen,
but merely an illustration of the author’s view or theory,
it must be so described in express terms, (e. g. “ Schematic
Figure”),* so as to prevent the reader from imagining
that it represents a real object.
Similarly with regard to the written text of scienti-
fic books. Only ascertained facts must be categori-
cally put forward as such. Theories must be clearly
labelled as theories, and hypotheses as hypotheses.
Moreover, nothing must be stated as universally true,
if reliable authorities have put on record observations
proving that the thing asserted is not universal. In
any case the existence of investigations giving results
contradictory to those put forward by the author ought
to be mentioned.
The infringement of these principles, when arising
from carelessness, haste, looseness of mind, or pre-
judice and special pleading, tends to deprive a scientific
writer of all reliability. And if the infringement has
been deliberate, without the foregoing excuse, it opens
him to the charge of fraud or of forgery in greater or
less degree, according to the degree or kind of misre-
presentation, whether in plates or in text, of which he
has been guilty.
# Wasmann {Stimmen ans Mcn ia-Laach , Yol. 76, p. 303) defines a sche-
matic figure as one “which is expressly intended to bring out only
certain features of the object, and these in a form reconstructed
according to the view of the author. The difference between ‘ sche-
matic’ and ‘non-schematic’ figures lied precisely in this: that the
latter are meant to represent the object as the author has seen it, the
former as he has imagined certain features of it.”


That Haeckel has been guilty of the infringement of
these rules, both in his plates and in the text of some of
his books, has been clearly demonstrated at three differ-
ent dates, viz., 1868, 1875 and 1908. In the following
list, all the most important falsifications, unlawful
modifications and free inventions of pictures perpe-
trated by him are given as far as they have been proved
such by competent authorities. General statements of
untruthful character, which are not bound up with
particular figures or illustrations, have been omitted.
FIRST EXPOSURE —1868.
Rutimeyer vs. Haeckel. —The first edition of The
Natural History of Creation was published in 1868.
In it Haeckel stated that the ova and embryos, not only
of different vertebrates, but also of man, are, at certain
periods of their development, all perfectly alike. In
proof of this assertion he inserted side by side on
page 242 three pictures of ova labelled as those of man,
monkey and dog respectively ; and on page 248 three
pictures of embryos, labelled as those of the dog, fowl
and tortoise. The accompanying text pointed out (p.
249) that there was in neither case any difference to be
discovered between the three—which everyone looking
it the pictures would certainly take to be a fact. This
statement caused some sensation in the ranks of the
embryologists and anatomists, and soon led to an ex-
amination, the result of which was startling. L. Riiti-
meyer, Professor of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy
at the University of Basle, proved in the Archiv fur
Anthropologie (Vol. VIII, 1868, page 300) that in each
case the same identical woodcut had thrice been repeated
side by side ; the title underneath alone being changed.
Haeckel later on ( Anthropogeny, 4th Ed. 1891) took
notice of this accusation, acknowledged the fact, and
confessed that it was “ a piece of extraordinary folly.”


But the confession was not accompanied with any pro-
per amendment. He could not of course continue to
issue his triple impression of the selfsame block. Nor
could he produce three genuine blocks proving the
identity of the three ova or embryos, because in fact they
are not identical [see later] . What he did was to shirk
the issue, and subsequently to reproduce only one copy
of each incriminated block, giving to the one a single
inscription, and to the other a collective inscription.
For the rest, not being able to put forth any plausible
excuse for his way of acting, he followed his usual
course: he showered upon Prof. Eiitimeyer, a man
universally esteemed as a most conscientious worker, a
flood of the grossest invectives, “as untrue in their sub-
stance as ungentlemanlike in their form” —to use the
expression of Prof. His.
SECOND EXPOSURE —1875.
(1) His vs. Haeckel. —Other falsifications of plates
in the same Natural History of Creation (Fifth Edition)
were pointed out by W r . His, Professor of Anatomy
at the University of Leipzig, in his work on Our
Bodily Frame and the Physiological Problem of its
Development (Leipzig 1875) in the following terms :—.
“ Unaltered, however, and increased by two new figures,
there appear in the fifth edition of the Natural History
of Creation those larger plates which are intended to
prove the identity of form between the embryos of a
dog and a man, and also between those of a fowl and a
tortoise. Some of these figures are copies, others free
compositions. The copies are those of the figure of a
tortoise ; of a dog, said to be four weeks old [Of.
Bischoff Plate XI 42 B. Embryo of dog of 25 days];
and of a man, also said to be four weeks old [Of. Ecker,
leones Physiol. Plate XXX. 2, where no age is given].
Even these are copies treated freely ; and the liberties


taken are all in the direction of supporting the wished-
for identity. Thus, the frontal portion of the dog is
lengthened by 3 mm., while the frontal portion of the
man is shortened by 2 mm. and narrowed by 5 mm. —
the eye being shifted to suit. On the other hand, the
coccyx of the human embryo is made double the original
length ” [thus bringing it into close resemblance to the
tail of the dog]. So that in this case, to say nothing of
figures freely invented, even the copies are falsified, so
as to give a false support to that identity which is
necessary for Haeckel’s theory of the affinity of man
with the vertebrate animals.
The falsifications of the plates in Haeckel’s Evolution
of Man are also pointed out by the same author (W.
His) in the same pamphlet. He writes: “Numerous
embryological illustrations are given in the Anihropogeny.
Part of them are reprints of the woodcuts from Koel-
liker’s History of Evolution ; the others are furnished by
Haeckel himself. They are partly inaccurate in the
highest degree, and partly pure inventions :
(a) Figure 42, the primitive germ of man (magnified
40 times] in a form resembling the sole of a shoe, is an
invention. No observer has yet seen this stage ; and
judging from the material so far collected, I am confi-
dent that, if observed, it could not have this shape or
dimensions.
(b) Two figures of human embryos on page 272 are
also inventions ; for they represent an allantois, which
is not only distinctly figured, but also expressly describ-
ed, as a conspicuous vesicle—whereas it is well known
that in man it is never visible in the form of a vesicle.
(c) The majority of illustrations on plates IY and
Y, showing embryos, are inventions. To take one
gross instance, the embryos of the fish and frog exhibit
a vertical curve in the brain as emphatically marked as
it appears in those of the tortoise, fowl and mammals,


[in which animals it does exist, while in the fish and
frog it is wanting].
“ It cannot be argued (concludes the writer) that we
ought to be indulgent because these are intended
rather to be schematic [or hypothetical] figures. No
less than twenty-four of them (three each of eight
different animals) are placed side by side with the inten-
tion, clearly expressed in the text, to prove their similarity
as a fact. Nor can Professor Haeckel be excused on
the plea of want of skill in drawing, or want of knowl-
edge of the methods for securing exact contours. In
short, Professor Haeckel’s method of dealing with illus-
trations is a frivolous playing with facts—”
[Hardly frivolous, we should say, when he makes his
plates the demonstration-basis of his scientific conten-
tions. A more just description would be “ a criminal
playing with his readers and with the truth.” — Ed.
Ex.]
(2) 0. Semper, Professor of Zoology and Compara-
tive Anatomy at the University of Wurzburg, shows in
his Open Letter (Hamburg 1877) that Haecke.l in his
Anthropogeny (Evolution of Man) third edition, inserts
a number of pictures of things which no man has ever
seen—namely, Plate IY. Fig. 7 ; p. 207, Figs. 52 to 56 ;
p. 224, Figs. 62—67 ; Plate 11. Figs. 12—17 ; Plate Y.
Figs. 10—12.
Semper states that in the last-named figures all possi-
ble things have been fantastically added or subtracted.
Of Figs. 62—69 (p. 224—227), he declares to Haeckel:
“ These schematic illustrations do not therefore represent
schematised observations, but only your own speculations
made without any observation ; and which are, more-
over, in part at least directly refuted by established
facts.”
With reference to Haeckel’s often repeated excuse
that his own figures were only meant to be schematic


illustrations, Semper insists on the fundamental principle
of true science that “ one must at least have seen what
one figures.” And when Haeckel quotes in his defence
the example of the great naturalist K. A. von Baer,
Semper rejoins ( Open Letter , p. 19) ; —“ You know the
saying : Si duo faciunt idem non est idem (If two do
the same thing, it is not the same thing). There-
fore tell me honestly between ourselves : do you re-
ally believe that your so-called schematic figures of
primitive animals are on a par with those of Baer ? Baer
schematised only things which he himself had observed ;
while your schematisations are not based on actual
observation of any real objects, but only on the idea of
them existing in your imagination.”
THIRD EXPOSURE 1908.
Keihel vs, Haeckel. —ln 1907 Haeckel published a
lecture on The Problem of Man and Linrufs Primates
(Frankfort, 1907) in which representations of embryos
of man and various types of animals were given for the
purpose of proving their resemblance or approximate
identity. The Zoologist, Dr. Brass, formerly first assis-
tant of the famous Professor Leuckart of the Univer-
sity of Leipzig, in his brochure entitled: The Ape Pro-
blem (Leipzig, 1908) was the first to point out and
substantiate quite a large collection of forgeries perpe-
trated in this lecture. The result was a heated discus-
sion which has obtained the name of the Brass-Haeckel
Controversy—the particulars of which will be given
separately later on. Here we decide to leave this
controversy alone, and take up by preference the more
concise treatment of the case by F. Keibel, Professor of
Anatomy at the University of Freiburg in Baden, who
is acknowledged as a far greater authority than Brass,
and who a year later corroborated almost every detail of
Brass’s indictment.


Writing in the German Weekly Medical Journal
1909 No. 8 he says :
‘ •Let us look at the illustrations in Haeckel’s pamphlet
on ‘ The Problem of Man,’ Plates 2 and 3. The sandal-
shaped embryonic discs of the pig, Plate 2 Fig. 2, seem to
be taken from my Standard Table of the Development of
the Pig (Jena 1897) but they are strongly schematised ;
especially the third stage shows far-reaching alterations.
In the second series (on the rabbit) the first stage is in-
correct, being an altered copy of the antiquated figure
162 in Koelliker’s Handbook of 1879. In the third
series (on man) the first stage is a bad copy of an
embryo described by Count Spee, though the resem-
blance can still be recognised. The second and third
stages are both products of the imagination, for which
embryos of Tarsius and Semnopithecus [both belonging
to the monkey tribe] have been made use of to a fairly
large extent. The embryos of man at this stage, such
as nave been observed, have a totally different appear-
ance.
“Of the nine figures given on plate 3, figures F 1 and
M 1 [representing embryos of the bat and of man] are
again mere products of fancy. Figure Gr 1 [representing
the embryo of a gibbon] is modelled after Fig. 18 of
Selenka’s posthumous works published by me. Haeckel
has in this case, as in all other figures, omitted the
funiculus abdominalis together with the yelk sack. Here,
as elsewhere, the removal (one might even say the sup-
pression) of these organs has been done clumsily, So as
to erase portions of the definite body as well. It is true
that Haeckel has probably left out these parts in order to
facilitate comparison with anamniotic animals. Still I
do not think these tamperings with the figures fortunate,
though this might be regarded as open to question. In
any case such schematisings should be definitely in


dicated. Selenka’s figure represents a Macaque (Cer-
cocebus cynomolgus) while Haeckel labels his modi-
fication o£ it as a Gibbon (Hylobates). Figure F 2
[embryo of a bat] is modelled after one of my...illustra-
tions. Besides the removal of the umbilical cord, the end
of the tail is slightly changed. The embryo figured by
me in Hertwig’s Handbook Yol. I, 2, p. 132, Fig. 58 a,
is of Vespertilio murinus, while Haeckel calls it an em-
bryo of a different kind of bat, namely the Rhinolophus.
Again, Embryo G 2 is marked by Haeckel as that of a
Gibbon. In reality however the picture is that of a maca-
que embryo (Cercocebus cynomolgus) of which he has
shortened the tail [C£. Solenka, Anthropoid Apes. Fasc.
5 edited by Keibel. Wiesbaden 1903, p. 857, Fig. 28].
Embryo M 2 is apparently a copy of the human embryo
given by His in the Atlas to his Anatomy of the Human
Embryo [plate 10, Fig 12, and plate 13, Fig. s].
Haeckel has considerably changed His’s illustration.
“Finally—to omit further detailed instances—in his
festival publication Unsere Ahntnreihe [Series of our
Ancestors] Jena 1908, which pretends to be a scientific
work, Haeckel prints quite a number of illustrations
which are absolutely open to objection, including several
of those which figured in his Problem oj Man.”
The glaring falsifications thus pointed out by F. Keibel
can be conveniently summarised as follows:—(1)
Keibel’s embryo of a common bat is changed by Haeckel
to suit his argument, and labelled embryo of a horse-
shoe bat. (2) Selenka’s embryo of a Macaque is changed
by Haeckel to suit his argument, and labelled Gibbon
embryo. (3) His’s human embryo is changed by Haeckel
to suit his argument, viz., instead of 33 primitive vertebrae
he gives it 35, adding a tail which makes 44 vertebrae
altogether ; straightens the characteristic curve of the
spinal column, cuts off a large portion of the brain space,


and then puts it in parallel with the animal embryos,
to which the original bore only a slight resemblance.*
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
In all the instances given above, Haeckel never in a
single case quotes the authority from whom he takes the
picture, nor does he breathe a word about the alterations
he has thought fit to make; he simply gives the pictures
as if they were drawings from specimens actually
observed by himself. Only experts, well acquainted
with the whole range of embryological literature, were
able, after much careful investigation and collation of
the respective works, to trace Haeckel’s “doctorings”
to their source.
As these accusations have all been put forward by
experts of high repute, well qualified to pass a technical
judgment on the merits of the case, and proved to ocular
demonstration by reproducing Haeckel’s plates side by
side with the originals from which they are deviations ;
and as the evidence has been before the public for years
and has never been refuted, we consider it proved on
intrinsic grounds that Haeckel has been, one might say
almost habitually, guilty of falsifications both in plates
and text, which can fairly be described as “ shameless
frauds and forgeries.”
# These descriptions become far more effective when accompanied
by the plates in which Haeckel’s false figures are put in parallel with
the true originals. In reprinting these articles we have managed to
reproduce a few typical examples, which will be found on plate I.


PART II.
THE BRASS-HAECKEL CONTROVERSY.
In our account of the third exposure of 1908, we have
relied on F. Keibel’s summary ; first, as being the work
of a high class authority, and secondly, as being free
from the heat of controversy. Far better known, how-
ever, to the general public in this connection is the
name of Dr. Brass, the Zoologist, who was the first to
make the exposures afterwards confirmed by Keibel.
As this controversy effectively brought Haeckel’s
character and methods before the notice of the public
at large ; and as efforts were made, and are still made,
both by Haeckel and by his followers, to represent the
affair as a victory instead of a defeat, we shall devote
this article to its treatment apart.
HOW THE DISPUTE AROSE.
The origin of the discussion occurred in this way.
On April 10th, 1908, Dr. A. Brass, delivered a lecture
in Berlin on Primitive Man. He strongly criticised
the theory which maintains that man is descended from
the apes, and incidentally made the following remark :
“ Likewise some of the resemblances of embryos, as
maintained by Haeckel, are based on erroneous views ;
and Haeckel himself has had the misfortune to put a
human head on an ape embryo, and vice versa.” Several
newspapers gave an account of this lecture, including
the sentence just quoted. Whereupon Haeckel, in a
letter to his friend and ardent admirer Dr. Breitenbach,
described Brass’s statement as “an impudent lie” and
“ a bold invention,” and even threatened Brass with
legal proceedings for “ wilful calumny.”* Breitenbach
* This threat of legal proceedings occurs frequently in Haeckel’s
controversies. It rather impresses the man in the street; but there
are no signs that Haeckel ever acted on it. In one place in his writ-
ings he confesses that there might then be danger of being convicted
himself on account of what he calls “ surface reasons.”


at once gave publicity to Haeckel’s letter in his paper,
the Neue Weltanschauung (No. 3, 1908). To this letter
Brass replied in the Utaatsbiirger Zeitung (April 25,
1908), and in the Volk (same date). Here he became
more definite in his charge, and pointed out specifically
two cases of misrepresentation perpetrated by Haeckel:
the embryos of a Gibbon and of man in Haeckel’s
Problem of Man and Linnes Primates. Haeckel took
up the matter again in the Nexie Weltanschauung (No.
4, 1908) and somewhat later in the Mmchener JSeueste
Nachrichten, and boldly asserted that these two figures
were exact copies from well-known authors [a state-
ment which has been refuted by Keibel in our pre-
vious article]. He went on to accuse Brass of “ wil-
ful and bold untruthfulness ” and “ accusations raised
in bad faith remarking that “ unlike myself, Brass is
not anxious about truth and enlightenment ” —together
with other strong and abusive expressions.
This article by Haeckel brought matters to a head.
Brass proceeded to justify himself by putting his accus-
ations before the general public, so that all might
judge of their correctness. This he did by publishing
his pamphlet: The Ape Problem (Leipzig 1908). It
contains, in forty-two closely printed pages, an exhaus-
tive exposure of all the frauds and forgeries to be
found in Haeckel’s Problem of Man, accompanied by
four clearly printed plates, in which Haeckel’s doctored
figures are placed side-by-side with the originals from
which they had been taken. [The main charges made
by Brass coincide with those of Keibel as given in our
previous article.]
Since some of Haeckel’s followers have attempted to
discredit Brass’s attack as something aggressive and
“ uncalled for,” it is important to realise that while
his original accusation was very mildly expressed
(“ erroneous views” and “misfortune”) he was gradual


ly forced to take up the matter vigorously in his own
defence, on account of Haeckel’s strong attacks on his
veracity.
haeckbl’s defence.
Brass’s pamphlet, especially on account of its
plates, was so clear and convincing that no one to this
day has been able to deny its correctness. The only
policy which could be adopted by Haeckel was a
combination of personal abuse with flimsy excuses.
Thus, even before Brass’s conclusive pamphlet had
appeared, Haeckel in the Neue Weltanschauung (No. 4)
had already explained the incriminated Gibbon and
human embryos in the following way : —“ I myself did
not draw the figures in question, but had them faith-
fully copied by a draughtsman from the works quoted.”
One can easily believe that the figures were copied by
somebody else; but it is quite certain that they were
not faithful copies. And surely a mere draughtsman
would not make such serious changes unless instructed
to do so by Haeckel himself; or, even if he did, Haeckel
could not have been so simple as to have overlooked
the changes, especially as the originals were quite
familiar figures. Such an excuse evidently could not
hold water.
Haeckel himself must have recognised this. For al-
though the “ draughtsman excuse ” is still sometimes
met with in repetitions of the controversy, Haeckel
himself later on, when replying to Brass’s pamphlet,
seems to have abandoned it as too utterly uncon-
vincing. So nothing remained but to make an open
confession, which he published in the Berliner Volks-
zeitung of December 29th, 1908.
The text of this confession ran as follows :
“To cut short this unsavoury dispute, I begin at
once with the contrite confession that a small fraction
of my numerous drawings of embryos (perhaps 6 or 8


per cent.) are really, in Dr. Brass’s sense, falsified—all
those, namely, for which the present material of obser-
vation is so incomplete or insufficient as to compel us,
when we come to prepare a continuous chain of the
evolutive stages, to fill up the gaps by hypotheses, and to
reconstruct the missing-links by comparative synthesis
After this compromising confession of “ for-
gery ” I should be obliged to consider myself “ con-
demned and annihilated,” if I had not the consolation
of seeing side-by-side with me in the prisoner’s dock
hundreds of fellow-culprits, among them many of the
most trusted observers and most esteemed biologists.
For the great majority of all the figures—morphologi-
cal, anatomical, histological, and embryological—that
are widely circulated and valued in the best text- and
handbooks, in biological treatises and journals, would
incur in the same degree the charge of “ forgery.”
All of them are inexact, and more or less “ doctored,”
schematised, or “constructed.” Many unessential
accessories are left out, in order to render conspicuous
what is essential in form and organisation.”
This apologia was supported later on by two of
Haeckel’s admirers in the Allgemeine Zeitung of Munich.
Both of them, Dr. Forel of Lausanne and Dr. Roux of
Halle, insisted that Haeckel’s procedure did not detract
from his great merits to science, or weaken the theory
of evolution. Dr. Forel explained that Haeckel let his
imagination run away with him ; but on the other hand
he denounced the professor’s adversaries as pharisaical
accusers ; while Dr. Roux remarks that Haeckel merely
overstepped the bounds which separate his facts from his
deductions.” [ See Examiner, April 10th, 1909.]
THE DEFENCE EXAMINED.
Such being the defence put forward by Haeckel, let
us consider its import. First, it involves the confes


sion that a certain number of Haeckel’s pictures do not
represent real objects, but are hypothetical construc-
tions, or else representations of real objects adapted,
doctored or falsified. If we look at the figures thus
treated—and we have seen most of them—we find they
are just those which are used to prove an identity of form
between the ape or other animals and man, and there-
fore to give evidential ground for the conclusion that
they have a common descent. If these had been clearly
marked as schematisations or theoretical constructions,
and if they had been used as such in the text, all
would be well. But the very essence of the charge
against Haeckel is that he put them forward without any
such labelling, and made use of them in his argument
as if they were realities of nature. A scientist may
make as many conjectural sketches as he likes in
illustration of his theory ; but he must let the reader
know that they are merely conjectural sketches which
follow from his theory, and not representations of real
objects which prove his theory. Even where the
pictures are in the first instance treated as schematic,
Haeckel has a trick of using them afterwards as if
they were real objects ; or (according to Roux) he
first creates an imaginary object by deduction, and
then uses it as a real object for induction. We have
actually observed Haeckel perpetrating this trick in his
Middle of the Universe, and can witness therefore to
the truth of the German professor’s charge.
Now everybody ought to see that this is, in the first
place, an extremely unscientific thing to do ; and
secondly, an extremely misleading and dishonest thing to
do. It supplies the theory of evolution with an
appearance of demonstration which is fictitious. What-
ever accumulation of arguments a scientist brings
forward in support of his theory as a theory, he has no
right to add arguments which, if true, would seem


to prove it as a fact , but which are not true because
they rest on a faking of illustrations.
The fact that Haeckel on his own confession has
perpetrated these enormities ; that he has put forward
fictitious figures as if they were real ones, and faked
copies as if they were genuine ones, and built his argu-
ment upon them—thus (in the words of his defenders)
“ overstepping the line between his facts and his de-
ductions ” and “ letting his imagination run away with
him ” —is quite sufficient to show that Haeckel’s actions
justify the stigma of “ fraud and forgery” and that he is
a man to be distrusted.
Haeckel’s confession, however, contains also an ex-
cuse. To clear himself of the charge of deceiving his
readers, he declares that he has after all only done
what all other embryologists and biologists have done.
Such sort of excuse only makes matters worse. If
true, we have here the greatest blow ever struck against
the reliability of scientific men, and against the current
method of pushing the evolution theory. It almost
looks like a conspiracy against the truth. But for-
tunately we are not required to accept this damaging
accusation. Prof. Haeckel himself has been proved to
act in this way, and has been forced to confess it. A
man capable of practising such deceit has already
created a presumption against his own truthfulness ;
and to try and bring the rest of scientific men under the
same condemnation is an easy way of throwing dust into
the eyes of the public, and escaping under the cloud
thus raised. Until other scientists are really proved to
be guilty of like dishonest tactics, we are bound to as-
sume that they, at least, are honest men.
Some of the German scholars have, moreover, pro-
tested against this charge by making a distinction.
They admit that schematisation has its proper place in
deduction, as in the working out of a general theory;


but it must never be used to give countenance to an
inductive argument. Nor must any schematised figure
be printed without clearly indicating its character.
Thus F. Keibel (already quoted) points out that
Haeckel’s method is not the method followed in good
handbooks and textbooks ; and Hensen offers a like
repudiation. Similarly Prof. Reinke of the University
of Kiel (In the Interests of Science, Godesberg, 1909,
p. 34) says : —“lt is an unheard-of thing for Haeckel to
say that all scientists treat illustrations borrowed
from other authors in the way he has treated them.
The very contrary is the case. I know of no single
author who does not indicate in the margin the
exact source from which a picture has been taken. In
all such cases either the original is copied exactly; or,
if minor details are left out (which, however, must never
be prejudicial to the meaning of the whole figure) they
always state that the copy is schematised.”
If scientists in general have not hastened to
defend the collective body from this accusation, it is
only because they know that it is too obviously untrust-
worthy to need refutation. So while our particular
confidence in Haeckel is gone, our general confidence
in the honesty of eminent scientists remains.
THE KEPLEK-BUND.
Still the fact remained that Haeckel had cast a slur
on the general body of scientists in Germany. In or-
der to show the gratuitousness of this charge, the
Kepler-Bund—perhaps the largest Natural History
Association in Germany—took up the matter. A cir-
cular was prepared and sent round to the zoologists,
anatomists and embryologists of the German universi-
ties, with a request to answer the following questions :
(1) Do you approve of Haeckel’s methods, as exposed
by Dr. Brass, of filling in missing-links in evolutional


series ? (2) If Haeckel changes original drawings of
Selenka and His and then gives them different names,
do yon think them to be lawful schematisations ? (3)
Do you acknowledge as true what Prof. Haeckel main-
tains, namely, that other scientists follow a course
similar to his own in this matter ? (4) Are you of
opinion that a protest should be raised against such an
accusation, in order to restore public confidence in
science ?
This circular had a somewhat different effect from
what was expected. It is true that a small number—
fifteen in all—answered the questions proposed to them;
and also that not one single professor said a word in
defence of Haeckel, or took up his cause. But out-
side these, a considerable number of scientists were
annoyed with the steps taken by the Kepler-Bund,
They feared that some kind of vexatious supervision
over their publications might he inaugurated, and res-
ented this possibility as an unwarranted interference.
In order to express these feelings, a number of them,
instigated by Prof. Babl of the University of Leipzig (an
old pupil of Haeckel’s), drew up and signed collectively
a document which is now famous as “ the declaration
of the forty-six.”
VERDICT OF THE FORTY-SIX.
This joint declaration was published in the Miin-
chener Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 8, 1909, and ran as
follows :
“ The undersigned professors, directors of laborato-
ries, etc., herewith declare that they do not approve
of the method of schematising which Haeckel has in
some instances made use of. At the same time, in the
interests of science and professional freedom, they
condemn in the sharpest manner the warfare waged
against Haeckel by Brass and the Kepler-Bund. They


declare moreover that the evolutionist idea can suffer
no detriment from a few inaccurately produced
embryo-diagrams.”
VERDICT OF THE THIRTY-SEVEN.
The Kepler-Bund did not take this rebuke lying
down. They organised another circular, for which
they secured the signatures of twenty-six specialists in
various branches of biology, and of eleven other pro-
minent men —representing altogether nineteen univer-
sities, botanical laboratories, etc., in Germany, Switzer-
land and Austria, including Haeckel’s own university,
Jena—thirty-seven names in all. This document was
published in several papers simultaneously (Augsburger
Postzeitung , Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, etc.).
The part of it which directly concerns the Brass-
Haeckel controversy runs as follows :
“In response to a statement published in the news-
papers under the signature of a number of zoologists
and anatomists, we, the undersigned professors, directors
of scientific institutes, etc., members as well as non-
members of the Kepler-Bund, beg to state the follow-
ing :
. . . .We are in complete agreement with the Kepler-
Bund when they declare it to be a matter of honour to
insist that uncompromising love of truth, together with
strictest personal sincerity, should be looked upon as
indispensable features of German scientific research.
Whosoever offends against these foundations of scien-
tific investigation and teaching, deserves severe repu-
diation. Though opinions may differ ever so widely as
to what the truth is in individual cases, yet about
truthfulness itself we must all agree, otherwise science
loses the ground from under its feet. What should we
say if a historian, in order to push through a favourite
opinion of his own, were to alter the letters of an


inscription ? Haeckel’s want of conscientiousness when
popularising scientific facts and philosophical ideas has
been shown up not only by Dr. Brass but by others as
well. We refer first and foremost to William His,
who as early as 1875, in his classical book Our Bodily
Frame, ruthlessly condemned the wilful alterations
perpetrated by Haeckel with regard to the material of
scientific research made use of in his arguments. We
cannot assent to a laxity of opinion which regards as
unimportant such alterations of the illustrations of other
scientists as have been discovered in Haeckel’s writ-
ings by Riitimeyer, His, and Brass ”
Besides this collective rejoinder V. Hensen, Professor
of Physiology at the University of Kiel, writing on
Truthfulness in Morphology (Unsere Welt, April 4,1909)
says : “In a declaration published in the Vossische
Zeitung, forty-six scientists, in a certain discus-
sion on Haeckel’s confession, have called the latter’s
falsifications “ schematising, ” and thus pardoned them.
An Areopagus of forty-six representatives of morpho-
logical science, who occupy the front rank, surely
ought not first to cast a veil over the facts of the case,
and then pardon Haeckel’s deliberate untruthfulness
as mere inexact reproduction.” Then, apostrophising
personally one university professor, he goes on ;
“ I maintain that you will not in all your publications
find anything which even remotely approaches to such
frauds and mischievous products of fancy as those
which Haeckel has offered in great numbers to his
defenceless lay audiences.”
THIRTY-SEVEN PLUS FORTY-SIX.
Although the intrinsic evidence of Haeckel’s mis-
conduct is absolutely demonstrative, the extrinsic testi-
mony—namely, the condemnations by other scientists—


appears at first sight less impressive in consequence of the
compromising answer of “the forty-six,” who, though
they said that “ they did not approve ” of Haeckel’s me-
thods, yet at the same time “condemned sharply” the
violent crusade made against him. Still two things are
clear from the document. First, they did after all ex-
press their disapproval of Haeckel’s method; and if it had
been nothing but what was customary among biologists,
they could hardly have found any ground for disapproval.
Secondly, the expression of this disapproval was given
with reluctance; and therefore it has a far stronger
testimonial force than the mildness of its terms would
suggest. We think the answer of “ the forty-six ” is
easily explainable. The campaign of Brass was con-
ducted in a somewhat noisy and turbulent manner, and
they did not like the idea of being implicated in the
affray. Professional men, whatever their own opin-
ions, do not like being dragged into public and forced
to commit themselves to the signature of a collective
document—which would look like combining against
a brother-professor and proceeding to kick him when
he was down.
But the mainspring which set the circular of “the
forty-six” in motion—so at least we are assured on the
personal knowledge of our informant—was that well-
known battle cry “Freedom of science,” which, in Ger-
many especially, is always being proclaimed in and out
of season : “Science must be absolutely free and unfet-
tered. A scientific worker—especially a professor in
a University—may in the course of bis investigations
arrive at any conclusion, may give expression to any
theory or idea ; and no tribunal in the world has any
right to censure him.” Such a tribunal “the forty-six”
suspected—though wrongly—was in process of for-
mation among the Kepler-Bund. It was chiefly for
this reason that they repudiated its interference as


something contrary to “ the interests of science and
freedom of teaching.”
It remains, however, that the verdict of “ the forty-
six,” though a mild one, was still a condemnation and
not an approval. It was a verdict not for but against
Haeckel. Hence in conclusion it is correct to say that
the methods of Haeckel, in the instances which had
been exposed, were condemned by 46 plus 37—that is,
by eighty-three men of good position in various branches
of science and learning, besides others who published
their comdemnations apart.
Thus the outcome of the Brass-Haeckel controversy
is an additional corroboration of the intrinsic evidence
that Haeckel has been convicted of “ shameless frauds
and forgeries.”
PART III.
FURTHER TESTIMONIES.
Our first article contained a statement of the three
exposures of 1868, 1875 and 1908, giving details of the
pictorial falsifications of Haeckel. Our second article
dealt in particular with the Brass-Haeckel aspect of
the last-named exposure. In this third number we
corroborate the foregoing evidence by collecting to-
gether some other pronouncements by various authors,
showing the estimate at which Haeckel is held in
scientific circles. Nearly all the authors quoted are men
of altogether independent thinking, free from attach-
ment to any theological school —which might be suppos-
ed to prejudice their minds against Haeckel. The two


who are theologians in any sense o£ the term are clearly
indicated: —
(1) L. flutimeyer, Professor of Zoology and Com-
parative Anatomy at Basle University, in the article
quoted in our first paper, says that some of the illustra-
tions in The Natural History of Creation have been
invented by the author, while others have been “ wil-
fully modelled or generalised.” He calls this way of
acting “ a sin against scientific truthfulness deeply
compromising to the public credit of a scholar.”
(2) W. His, Professor of Anatomy at Leipzig Uni-
versity, in his work on The Form of our Body and the
Physiological Problem of its Development (Leipzig
1875) after passing some strictures on Haeckel’s figures,
says: —“ Prof. Haeckel’s methods are a frivolous
juggling with facts, more dangerous than the foregoing
juggling with words. I myself have been reared to
believe that among all qualifications of scientists, reli-
ability and unconditional regard for actual truth are
the only ones that cannot be dispensed with. lam of
opinion that if this qualification is wanting, all others,
be they ever so brilliant, lose their splendour. Though
some, therefore, venerate Haeckel as an active and
undaunted party-leader, yet by the way he conducts the
battle he has in my opinion renounced the right to
stand on a par with serious scholars.”
(3) C. Semper, Professor of Zoology and Compara-
tive Anatomy at Wurzburg University, in Haeckelism
in Zoology (Hamburg 1876) says : —“lt is not enough
that Haeckel lays down hypotheses as if they were
established propositions. Even the facts of observation
(Beobachtungstatsachen ), which form or are supposed to
form the basis of his system, can no longer be accepted
by zoologists as realities. By way of example:—ln his
Evolution of Man he figures a very early stage of the
individual development of man as if he had seen it


himself. As a matter of fact no scientist so far has
ever seen it.” Semper also says to Haeckel:—“l truly
admire the way in which you reject all dogma with
horror, while at the same time you thrust on your readers
dogmas which are not only unproved, but are often un-
provable and false. In short, I admire your proficiency
in the art of leading the public by the rotten strings of
your so-called scientific investigation.”
(4) Adolf Bastian, Professor of Ethnology at the
University of Berlin, one of the most illustrious scholars
of his profession, in the postscript to his Open Letter
(Berlin 1874), addresses Haeckel in the following
blunt terms : —“Thus I am afraid I must adopt the
opinion, hitherto so repugnant to me, that there is
nothing in you but wind and gasbagging; and, as some
signs apparently indicate, a dangerous ignorance, even
of things which may still be taken as belonging to
your branch of learning. The testing of your know-
ledge on these points must be left to zoologists and
physiologists. As to myself, I feel now almost sorry
for having condescended to answer you.”
(5) Y. Hensen, Professor of Physiology at the
University of Kiel, in his Plankton Expedition and
Haeckel's Darwinism (Kiel 1891), referring to some of
Haeckel’s statements regarding that expedition, says :
“This is explicit enough. But then one can never trust
Haeckel.” A little further on we read: —“This is
Haeckel’s way of fighting an enemy. He picks out
part of a statement, and by the aid of his imagination
gives a nonsensical account of it; then he attributes
the whole to his opponent, and refutes it with triumph.”
(6) K. Brandt, Professor of Zoology at the Univer-
sity of Kiel, the companion of Hensen on the Plankton-
Expedition, replied to Haeckel’s attack in a similar
strain (See Haeckel's Views on the Plankton-Expedition,
Kiel 1891): —“It is characteristic of Haeckel’s po


lemics that he tries, in the first place, to make his
antagonist look ridiculous or to represent him as
utterly stupid. And in order to do this any expedient is
considered fair. A cursory perusal [of his opponent’s
work], and a perversion of this or that sentence, are
sometimes sufficient to achieve this result ; otherwise,
something else must be attributed to the author, which
he has not said.”
(7) W. Roux, Professor of Anatomy and Director
of the Anatomical Institute of Halle University (quoted
in a pamphlet entitled In the Interests of Science , Godes-
berg, 1909, p. 42), mentions a method repeatedly used
of Haeckel which is described as follows : “He starts
from a principle which is supported by many facts, or
which he believes to be so supported, and proceeds to
fill in the gaps by deductive reasoning. Then he turns
round and makes use of these imaginary objects by
which the gaps are filled, as if they really existed, and
as if they furnished additional inductive evidence.”
[Thus, assuming that man was descended from the apes,
he filled in the missing-links from his imagination ; and
then made use of these imaginary missing-links as if
they afforded so many proofs of the unbroken descent.]
This method, says Roux, “is not to be approved of.”
(8) F. Keibel, Professor of Anatomy at Freiburg
University, in his article in the Medical Weekly Journal
already quoted, says : —“From what I have said so far,
it clearly appears that Haeckel has in many cases either
freely invented embryos, or reproduced the illustrations
given by others in a substantially changed form ; and
this not only when it was a matter of filling up gaps by
means of hypotheses, but even without stating that it
was a matter of diagrams and hypothetical forms. It
must be pointed out that this is not the method followed
in good handbooks and textbooks ; and that such a
practice can only be termed altogether unscientific.


Brass has therefore, in the substance of his contentions,
justly raised objections to Haeckel’s illustrations of
embryos.”
The same author, when exposing Haeckel’s falsifica-
tions in the Problem of Man (already given) adds the
following strange suggestion by way of excuse : “ Im-
agination and the fanaticism of the founder of a religion
make him see things as he represents them.”
(9) H. Obermaier, Professor at the Institut de
Paleontologie Surname, Paris, in his work on Primi-
tive Man (Berlin Yol. 1., p. 375), says:—“ Mention must
here be made of embryology. We must leave out of
count exaggerated and one-sided views, which attempt
to exhibit the human embryo as a kaleidoscopic mosaic
of ancestral relics. Much less need we take notice of
certain falsifications by which Haeckel has duped his
readers down to the present time. These [falsifications]
as well as himself, must fall under the condemnation
of any serious audience.” [This writer is a Catholic
priest, but also an anthropologist of international
repute.]
(10) Dr. Koelsch of Zurich, in a long article on the
Haeckel-Brass controversy in the Miinckener Neueste
Nachrichten —the chief organ of anti-religious liberalism
in Southern Germany—referring to Haeckel’s attempt to
incriminate other scientists, writes: “When I read
these lines by which Haeckel sought to justify him-
self, I blushed with shame for him” [See Examinee,
May Bth, 1909]. He adds with a somewhat sardonic
humour : “Haeckel reminds me of the Englishman who,
on reaching a place where a mountain was marked in his
Baedelcer and finding that there was no mountain there,
observed solemnly : 4 There is something wrong about
this country.’” \_Rome, March 7th, 1909].
(11) Dr. Paulsen, a Protestant Professor of Philoso-
phy at the University of Berlin, writes [about The


Riddle of the Universe ] : “I have read this book with
burning shame ; —shame for the condition of our people
in general and philosophical culture.” [Month, Oct.
1910]. “That such a book should be possible, that it
should be produced, printed, bought, read and admired
among a people that has had a Kant, a Goethe, and a
Schopenhauer — this is truly lamentable.” [Examiner,
May 23rd, 1914.]
(12) Professor Otto Hamann, in E- Haeckel und
seine Kampjweise (p. 2), writes : —“ Why, it will be
asked, do you at this time of day undertake to combat
this ‘Champion of Darwinism ’ ? Has not the man been
long ago found guilty of untruths ever afresh charged
against him, of which his own works are evidence ?
True, I reply, so it is. But the great public cannot
conceive and comprehend that all which is proffered by
Haeckel as fact and truth, is but fancy, or at best
hypothesis.” {Month, Oct. 1910.) In the same pam-
phlet he says: “Formerly I worshipped the man;
and I defended his excesses against other zoologists,
until the time came when he lied even to myself.”
(13) Professor Chwolson of the University of St.
Petersburg, one of the leading physicists of our time, in
his Hegel, Haeckel, Kossuth und das zwolfte Gehot,
thus writes :
“We had set ourselves the task to enquire how
Haeckel behaves towards the twelfth commandment:
[Thou shalt never write of aught about which thou
knowest nothing] ; whether, in regard of scientific
questions which lie outside his special branch, he exhibits
that thoroughness and deep seriousness which would
make him one of the great leaders of his own time ; or
whether, slighting this commandment, he writes of
matters concerning which he has no glimmer of an idea.
To settle this question, we carefully studied all that the
Riddle of the Universe contains concerning physics.


Material there is in plenty, for questions of physics
play a large part in the book ; and one of these is for
the author the ‘ lodestar’ guiding his philosophy through
the mighty labyrinth of the world-problems. The
result of our examination was startling, not to say
astounding. Everything—yes, everything—touching-
physical questions which Haeckel says, expounds or
affirms, is wrong ; is grounded on misunderstanding,
or exhibits an almost incredible ignorance of the most
elementary points. Even of the law [of Substance]
which he declares to be the ‘lodestar ’ of his philosophy,
he has not the most elementary schoolboy knowledge ;
and on the strength of such entire ignorance he is pre-
pared to demonstrate that the very foundation of
modern physics must be renounced as unsound.”—
(. Month , Oct. 1910.)
(14) Dr. Julius Wiesner, Professor of Plant-physio-
logy at the University of Vienna, and a botanist of in-
ternational repute, speaks of Haeckel as “ one who in
his most recent writings exhibits himself as a fanatical
misleader of the people; one who, with delusive assurance,
puts forth what have long been recognised as errors and
mistakes as if they were verities ; and who treats his
opponents with unexampled insolence.” {Month, Oct.
1910).
(15) Professor Branca, when reviewing Haeckel’s
Riddle of the Universe, wrote : “ This, therefore, is the
* freedom of science ’ as the fanatics of Monism under-
stand it. The Riddle of the Universe is like a rod
raised in warning, and making it clear to everybody
that his credibility and honesty will be questioned, if
he dares to differ in opinion from Haeckel.”
(16) J. Reinke, Professor of Botany at the Uni-
versity of Kiel, one of the first living authorities on
plant-biology, receives quite a special share of abuse from
Haeckel and his followers (notably the Monist Alliance)


because in a speech delivered in the Prussian House of
Lords on May 10th, 1907, he warned the authorities
and the general public against Haeckel’s pseudo-science.
After briefly showing Haeckel’s deficiencies in physics,
philosophy and theology, he turns to his special branch,
and says : “ Although Haeckel is a professor of zoology
in a German university, I must not withhold my opi-
nion that the biological portions of the Riddle of the
Universe are just as wanting in true science as the por-
tions which deal with physics, etc. The reason is be-
cause, wherever biology comes in, Haeckel uncritically
jumbles together proved and unproved matter, and thus
creates a chaos in the mind of his readers. It is the
opinion of not a few that, on account of his lack of
critical disposition, Haeckel forfeits all place in the
ranks of serious naturalists. When this much has been
said, nothing of Haeckel remains except the fanatic,
who, in union with the Monist Alliance, tries by force
to assert his mastery over the minds of the people.”
The same author, in his HaeekeVs Monism and its Vot-
aries (Leipzig 1907, p. 20) writes as follows:—“Just as
the Riddle of the Universe , so also The Wonders of Life is,
in my opinion, a special-pleading work ( Tendenzsehrijt)
without scientific value, because it does not advance our
scientific knowledge in the least. As regards the in-
struction of the people, it is not only useless but harmful;
for it gives an uncritical, even a distorted idea of our
biological knowledge. It contains, moreover, a great
number of positively wrong statements. In short,
though not intended as such, it ought to be called
a huge parody of modern biology, rather than a biolo-
gical handbook. Haeckel is so blinded by his preju-
dices, so spell-bound by his illusions, that he is incapable
of distinguishing them from scientific facts—though
he propounds them as facts, with all the appearance of
professional wisdom, nay of infallibility. The work seems


to furnish a symptom of scientific degeneracy. It is a
regular ‘ Commercial-traveller’s-sample-case ’ of super-
ficialities and shallownesses, and therefore absolutely
unreliable. To show in detail how recklessly Haeckel
handles truth, I must content myself with two instances,
—though I could give many others.” The chief instance
he quotes is taken from botany, the other from anthro-
pology ; and after giving them he asks his readers :
“Is this conscientious ? Is this truth-loving? Is this
scientific ? ”
To this pamphlet Haeckel made a rejoinder in his
Problem of Man (1907), which brought Reinke again
into the arena. In a pamphlet entitled “ The Latest
about Haeekelism ” (Heilbronn. 1908) Reinke fills seven
pages with parallel columns ; the one containing “ what
Haeckel says,” the other “what the truth is ” He
gives twenty-four instances of misrepresentation per-
petrated by Haeckel, and adds : “ These are samples
taken at random. It would be possible to multiply their
number many times.” The instances themselves we
reserve for a future article, giving only Reinke’s con-
cluding remark (p. 14) : —“ From this parallel between
Haeckel’s statements and the corresponding facts, the
reader may draw his own conclusion. All will undoubt-
edly agree with me that though Haeckel’s utterances
have no claim whatever to acceptance, there is at least
method in them.”
(17) Among English scientists Sir Oliver Lodge,
after passing a stricture on Haeckel’s contentions about
the nature of life, writes in his Life and Matter : —“lt is
just these superficial and hypothetical, and, as they seem
to me, rather rash excursions into side-issues, which
have attracted the attention of the average man and
have succeeded in misleading the ignorant.”
(18) Balfour, the leading English embryologist, in
an article on The Development of Elasmobranch fishes


(Journal o£ Anat. and Physol. Yol. X. 1876) complains
of Haeckel’s besetting fault of making a wrong use of
other people’s illustrations. He says that Haeckel has
taken one of Balfour’s plates of the germ-disc of a
Mustelus, and given the impression that Balfour’s obser-
vations confirm his view ; whereas in fact the exact con-
trary is the case.
(19) Dr. Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Botanist
and well known philosophical writer (now living in
Vienna ) in his work on Emmanuel Kant; Ms Per-
sonality as an Introduction to Ms Work ( 1905 p. 512 )
says: —“ If the layman wants to know how Haeckel in
his genealogical pedigrees suppresses and alters facts,
let him read Chapter 111 of Louis Agassiz’s De Vespece
et de la classification en Zoologie ; also Milne Edward’s
little classic: Introduction en Zoologie Generate, Chapter
VI. Here he will find a summary of all the relevant
embryological facts, and will also see the mischievous
distortions of truth—due to mind-crippling suggestion
—on which the whole Haeckelian system is based.”
CONCLUSION.
The German professor, from whom we derive these
notes, informs us that “this long list of quotations,
condemning Haeckel and his methods of popularising
natural history and philosophy, could be continued
almost indefinitely. Those witnesses only have been
chosen who are well known as leaders in the field of
science, most of them professors in universities; and
whose right to speak with authority cannot fairly be
questioned. They are all recognised authorities in their
own branches of learning, and famous through the im-
portant works which nearly everyone of them has
published; and they have all declared themselves against
Haeckel’s popularising methods in unmistakable terms.
Much more might be quoted. But only those state


ments have been selected which bear more or less directly
on our point, namely, the question of frauds and for-
geries. ”
FOK THE DEFENCE.
A perusal of these testimonies makes it an undeniable
fact that numbers of first-rate scientific authorities have
declared against Haeckel’s popularising methods. On
the other hand it will be asked: Where are his de-
fenders ?
Among them comes forward most prominently H,
Schmidt, private secretary to Haeckel himself; whose
work, Haeckels Emhryonenhilder (Frankfurt a. M. 1909)
was written under his master’s own supervision, and
therefore may be taken as quasi-official. It contains
amongst other things (p. 27—37) a selection of com-
ments on the Brass-Haeckel controversy drawn from
various current newspapers. We may be sure that
Schmidt and other supporters of Haeckel would have
been keen in collecting anything which appeared in
their favour. All the passages quoted contain some
attempt to exonerate Haeckel ; and yet not one of
them goes so far as to give him what is called a “clean
bill.” Every writer seems bound to acknowledge that
there was something wrong in Haeckel’s procedure.
We quote only a few short extracts :
(1) Dr. A. Reitz (p. 29) says : —“ Haeckel in try-
ing to jump over the barrier of his falsifications has
clumsily tripped himself up. He says that ‘ other pro-
fessors do just the same with their illustrations.’
Professor Haeckel! we sincerely hope not. Haeckel
wishes to make us believe that this kind of falsification
is a correct scientific practice. Thank God, it is not so,
and never will be so, as long as the service of truth
prevails in the sense in which it prevailed among our
old venerable savants. . . . What should we come to


i£ each investigator were to create proofs—and pictures
are proofs—for his hypotheses by constructing the
necessary missing forms out of actually observed forms,
without marking them as constructed?” The article
goes on to accuse Haeckel of “ blinkering ” the public,
of wilfully omitting to call his figures schematic, etc.
(2) Prof. Dr. 0. Zacharias (p. 30) writes:—“ Excel-
lent scientists have long ago pointed out what was ob-
jectionable in Haeckel’s figures of embryos, which are
frequently doctored, and therefore divergent from
nature. In spite of this, Haeckel has never shewn him-
self inclined to make any change in his popularising
methods.” Further on he speaks of “the fairy tales of
the so-called genealogical trees,” and records the opinion
of “those who regard Haeckel’s Riddle of the Universe
as a genuine calamity in the department of popular
scientific literature.”
(3) Dr. A. Koelsch (p. 33-34) comments thus on
Haeckel’s confession : —“lt has turned out a poor thing,
this defence—very poor. I make this statement with
the deepest regret. Haeckel tries to extenuate his fault
by denouncing, without any plausible reason, the whole
biological body, as being universally guilty of the same
laxity. For he m lintains that the illustrations of the
best text-books are worked up in the same way as his
own incriminated figures are worked up. When I read
these lines I blushed with shame for Haeckel. Surely
he ought to know, first, that no one clears himself from
blame by saying that others have done the same.
Secondly, he ought at least to have known that a sci-
entist, modifying other authors’ original figures, is in
duty bound to quote the source from which he has
borrowed, and to mark schematised figures unequivo-
cally as such. Thirdly, Haeckel ought to have known
that this is the actual practice of all self-respecting
scientists. Hence it is altogether intolerable to throw


on them the same suspicion which Haeckel has brought
upon himself. What other scientists have done is
precisely what Haeckel did not do; and herein lies the
blame which will alwaj r s remain attached to him.”
(4) Dr. E. Teichmann (p. 39) gives his judgment
as follows : —“Can Haeckel’s reply to his accusation
suffice ? I fear that nobody, after an unbiassed exam-
ination of the circumstances, will have the courage
to say ‘Yes.’ The author of popularising scientific
works has undoubtedly the right to adapt his text, as
well as his illustrations, to the intelligence of his
lay readers. He may leave out unessential parts and
emphasise essential parts ; he may likewise schematise
and construct. But—and this is a law never to be
evaded —he must not keep the reader in the dark as
to what has been done. Had Haeckel, in the explana-
tions of his plates, pointed out the originals they were
taken from, and stated that he had schematised them
and considerably altered them, he would have escaped
the charge now laid against him. Even so, lam bound
to confess that, in my opinion, changes of such import-
ance as he has made in his figures of embryos would
far exceed the justifiable limit of modification, even
if the fact of modification had been openly declared.”
Of the four authors quoted, one, namely Dr. Zacha-
rias, says openly that he is not an admirer of Haeckel,
and that he cannot exonerate him from the charge of
forgery. The other three are certainly among Haec-
kel’s friends, and might be expected to do the best they
could for him. We have selected them out of several
writers who, while otherwise trying to exonerate Haec-
kel, cannot do so without an accompanying censure ;
and it is important to note that not one single unquali-
fied defender of Haeckel appeared on the scene.
It is obvious that a number of quotations from what
one might call “ ordinary journalism ” could be got


together speaking o£ Haeckel’s popular works in terms
of praise. No one denies that Haeckel has a following of
enthusiastic disciples even in scientific circles —though
few of them occupy any high rank or reputation.
Among these H. Schmidt, in the work already quoted,
has gathered together seventy-two reviews favourable
to The Riddle of the Universe. Most of these are of an
entirely unspecialist character. Only two were taken
from biological journals—both signed by men of small
note. None of the leading biological journals, and to
the best of our knowledge none of the leading scientists
—not even those who share monistic views—have said
a word in favour of Haeckel’s popularising methods.
SCIENTIST VS. POPULAEISER.
It is true that a number of leading scientists have
bestowed high praise on Haeckel ; and such men as
Huxley, Lang, Hertwig are often quoted in this con-
nection. But when these eulogies are examined, it
will always be found that they apply to Haeckel the
zoologist. It is acknowledged on all hands that
Haeckel has done eminent work in those branches of
zoology which he cultivated as a specialist, e. g. the
Radiolaria, Siphonophora, Medusae, Calvispongiae, and
some of the closely allied fields of natural history. It
may, however, be mentioned that even here he has not
enjoyed the full and implicit confidence of his collea-
gues. Thus Prof. Hensen says, with regard to a deep-
sea Medusa taken during the Plankton expedition ;
“We had it figured by Mr. Eschke, because Haeckel’s
fancy pictures of these animals have given too much
offence” —thus showing that even in his exact inductive
studies Haeckel’s artistic fancy was a danger to him.
This danger became the greater as soon as he passed
from inductive work to the construction of theories,
even of a strictly scientific kind. Haeckel himself


acknowledges how little impression his theoretical works
on biological subjects made among his scientific collea-
gues ; and that it was the failure of his General
Morphology which made him seek a more popular
audience, beginning with his Natural History of
Creation (Riddle, p. 66) and passing on to the still
more popular Riddle of the Universe. Here we lose
sight of Haeckel the zoologist, and find ourselves
confronted with Haeckel the populariser—the apostle
of monism ; the propounder of the “ theoretical inter-
pretation of empirical knowledge; ” the guide on
“ the path of empirical investigation and the monistic
philosophy which is based on it.” (See Author’s pre-
face to The Riddle of the Universe).
Between Haeckel the zoologist and Haeckel the
populariser the difference is most remarkable. Writing
for scientists Haeckel seemed to feel the restraints of a
critical environment, and assumed a modesty and tenta-
tiveness of manner which is quite edifying. In writing
for the general public this restraint disappeared. A
vivid imagination and enthusiasm for his own opinions
seemed to run away with him ; it led him to write
confidently on things he knew little about, to build up
far-reaching theories on scanty data ; and finally, by a
sort of “ Rake’s progress,” to begin doctoring his facts
because they did not give support to his theories.
Hence it is that the honours which Haeckel has received,
and the testimonies which can be quoted in his
favour, will, when looked into, be found to apply
only to his strictly technical and scientific works. As
soon as we pass to his popularising works, all praise and
honour comes to an end, and in its place Haeckel is
inundated with a deluge of condemnation.
The plain fact is, Haeckel has made his present fame—
by no means an enviable one—not as a leading scientist
of any kind, but as a theoriser of the most extreme and


reckless type ; a free wanderer over a wide range of
subjects, scientific, philosophical, historical afad the-
ological, of which he has made no adequate study.
It is among the non-specialist reading public that
Haeckel has secured a reputation as a vehement anti-
religious populariser; while among the majority of
strictly scientific men, whether believers in religion or
not, he has, by his crooked methods of popularising,
forfeited all the esteem he ever enjoyed, and has even
earned the invidious distinction of bringing discredit
on the name of science.
Such is the gem ral impression which, outside a
certain narrow circle of disciples, seems to prevail in
the scientific world of Germany about Haeckel. This
being the case, we feel justified in reiterating the verdict
to which the whole evidence points ; namely, that
Haeckel as a populariser is not only to be regarded as
utterly untrustworthy, but that he has in the course of
his popularising work been guilty of proceedings which
can only be described as “ shameless frauds and forge-
ries.”
PART IV
OUR CORRESPONDENT’S LETTER.
Having in the foregoing pages fulfilled the first part
of our task, namely, to show “ what is the accusation
against Haeckel, and how far it is substantiated,” we
here throw in a sort of interstitial article dealing
with the counter-statement of our correspondent, which
has proved so useful in stimulating us to a full treatment
of this interesting subject ; and which will further


enable us to clear up some minor points left alone
in the previous articles. In his letter o£ May 24th,
he opens by saying that he does not write to refute the
first part of The Examiner article, but is only concern-
ed with the “offensive statement with regard to the
R. P. A.”—with which we shall deal separately in the
sequel. As this statement was made to rest on the
instance of Haeckel, he proceeds to give what elsewhere
he calls the “correct version” of the Brass-Haeckel
controversy.
IGNORANCE OR DECEPTION ?
Our correspondent commences with the following
remark;—
“Permit me to tell you that you are either ignorant of
the facts of the Brass-llaeckel controversy; or if you are
not, you deliberately mislead your readers in trying to
make them believe all this nonsense about Prof. Haeckel.”
Comment. —As we do not know the contributor of the
article in The Examiner of May 23rd, we cannot
answer for him personally. We can only say that
among the Germans of our acquaintance the Haeckel
case enjoys a household familiarity which is quite
natural, seeing that they belong to the country in which
the controversy took place—several of them having been
on the spot at the time it occurred. The Examiner
itself certainly cannot plead ignorance. The issues of
our paper dated Feb. 20, April 10, May 8, and August
14th, 19C 9, taken together, contain everything which our
correspondent himself has contributed soundly on the
subject, and a good deal more besides. The Examiner,
therefore, cannot plead ignorance. Secondly, the state-
ment of the whole Haeckel case given in the foregoing
pages, which confirms everything previously printed
in The Examiner, shows that we cannot acknowledge
deception either. We can claim to have known the


case in all its essential points, and to have put it for-
ward honestly in the columns of The Examiner at the
time it occurred.
(2) On the other hand, our correspondent would be
mistaken if he fancied that his meagre account of the
Brass-Haeckel controversy is anything like an adequate
handling of the Haeckel case at all. The imputation
of frauds and forgeries against Haeckel, as we have
shown, is a long-standing affair comprising three ex-
posures —in 186 s, 1875 and 1908 respectively ; and the
scholars on whom these exposures rest are Riitimeyer,
His, Semper and Keibel. Dr. Brass, the Kepler-Bund,
and the whole of that noisy controversy might be obli-
terated, and yet the entire indictment against Haeckel
would stand good.
(3) Finally, our correspondent shows inadequate
knowledge in talking of the accusation against Haeckel
as “ nonsense.” No one who knew the number of
serious scientists who have worked over the subject,
and delivered their verdicts as a result of painstaking
study, could be so bold as to waive aside the whole
affair as nonsense.”
UNSCRUPULOUS THEOLOGIANS; LEADING BIOLOGIST.
Our correspondent goes on:—
“In stating that Haeckel on his own confession had
been convicted of frauds and forgeries in connection ' with
his biological icorks, you are only repeating the malignant
and dishonest statements which unscrupulous theologians
have thought fit to circulate about Prof. Haeckel, the
acknowledged leading biologist of the world. Of course it
is not a matter of surprise to us rationalists that religious
obscurantists of scientific truths should resort to all
sorts of unscrupulous means to belittle their oppo-
nents. It has ever been their tactics, and doubtless they
depend on the amazing credulity of their adherents to


tell them all sorts of absurdities and falsehoods about
those who differ from them; things, as we know, that will
not stand investigation for a moment .”
Comment. —This paragraph is so highly characteris-
tic of the controversial style of Haeckel and his
followers that we reproduce it gladly just to show our
readers what that style is. The clerical bogey is ever
on their brain and on their lips; and everything, more
or less, is clerical which stands against their theory.
Every tinge of belief in free-will, in spirit, in a vital
principle above chemical and mechanical force, is first
dubbed “ dualism,” Then dualism is identified with
“supernaturalism,” and supernaturalism with theology.
No one who entertains such anti-monistic “myths” and
“ absurdities ” can be a sound, still less an independent
thinker. If he is not a professing theologian he is an
occult one ; and the clerical incubus lies upon him. If
he is not a wilful obscurantist himself, he is at least the
victim of other obscurantists. If any believer in
God and religion figures high in science, this is in
spite of his belief, and not in accordance with it. For
between religious belief and true science there is a great
gulf fixed—a total polarity; the one cannot consistently
subsist side-by-side with the other. This is what we
mean by the clerical bogey.
(2) But enough of this. As we shall later on make
a study of Haeckel’s own controversial methods, as
distinguished from his scientific methods, we shall here
content ourselves with the remark that the whole of
our indictment of Haeckel is the work of professors of
biology or zoology, men of independent position and
ways of thinking, who would be greatly amused to
find themselves classed with “unscrupulous theologians”
or “ religious obscurantists.” They would be equally
amused at finding themselves all relegated to a back


seat in the world of science, and Prof. Haeckel put
over their heads as “the acknowledged leading biologist
of the world.”
(8) The German Doctor of Biology who is our
authority in this matter, and who was at the Berlin
University while the Brass-Haeckel controversy was
raging, and was in touch with the scientific feeling on
the subject, assures ns that “the leading biologist of
the world” is a designation grotesquely false. Haeckel
is acknowledged to have done very good practical work
in a certain narrow field of systematic zoology [See
Part III]; but this is the limit of his original research.
Nearly all his other writings—notably the Biddle , the
Wonders of Life , etc., are compilations, in which he
puts together the facts observed and recorded by others,
mixed up with fictions of his own, and then draws from
them the philosophical conclusions of Monism. Haeckel
is no doubt a most prolific writer on the theory of
evolution ; but in spite of his many treatises, he has
never imposed himself on the scientific world as a
“leading” authority, even on this his pet subject.
Take for instance Oscar Hertwig, Director of the
Anatomico-biological Institute of the University of Ber-
lin ; an old pupil of Haeckel’s, whom Haeckel himself
holds in high esteem (See Riddle p. 23). Now when
Hertwig, in his book on The Fight about the Funda-
mental Questions of the Evolutionary and Hereditary
Doctrine 0909) drew up a list of authors to be con-
sulted, he named twenty-five eminent biologists who
have notably promoted scientific knowledge on this
subject; and yet among the twenty-five he did not in-
clude Haeckel 1 If Haeckel stands only as one among
the rank and file of ordinary biologists, the omission is
intelligible. But how could his name be simply passed
over —omitted even from “ the first twenty-five ” —if he
were in reality “ the leading biologist of the world ? ”


Or take again Kohlbrugge, author of The Morpho-
logical Descent of Man (Stuttgart 1908) the finest
summary of that subject on which Haeckel writes
comprehensively in his Anthropogeny . At the end of
his book Kohlbrugge, in 123 “ annotations,” mentions
every publication of importance on the subject—and yet
he omits HaeckePs Anthropogeny altogether. Haeckel’s
name appears indeed in the text, but only as one of “the
fanatics of the Darwinian camp ” —as opposed to the
“ more critical investigators” (p. 6). Lastly, Stratz, in
his great work the Natural history of Alan (Stuttgart,
1904) speaks only of HaeckePs “ too forward conclu-
sions” (p. 19); rejects repeatedly his genealogical pedig-
rees (pp. 14, 47) ; and nowhere treats the author of
Anthropogeny even as a writer of importance. Any-
one who calls Haeckel “ the leading biologist of the
world ” opens himself to the inference that he knows
no other biologist greater than Haeckel. But if so, one
can only say: Heaven help him ! It would be interest-
ing to know what authors of the least weight have
ever described Haeckel as “the acknowledged leading
biologist of the world.” “The leading monistic prophet
of the world ” would perhaps be more to the point.
THE CLERICAL VERSION.
Our correspondent proceeds:—
“Since you have been so good as to tell the well-known
clencal version about the Brass-Haeckel afair, and as you
are so eager for truth , I venture to think that you will
publish this in order that your readers may know the
exact facts about this absurd accusation on Haeckel .”
Comment. —Since the account in The Examiner of
May 23rd is the “clerical” version—certainly it was
written by a cleric, at any rate—we have tried to
satisfy our correspondent by producing another version,
which unhappily is also written by a cleric, but which


is in itself about as “unclerical” a production as one
could possibly make it. In this account we have hardly
drawn upon any witness who is a cleric. We have
carefully called into court professors of biology and
zoology in non-Catholic Universities, most of them
unbelievers in religion of any kind ; only two
out of more than twenty witnesses quoted are
known to us to profess membership in any church.
We are quite prepared to be told that in spite of
appearances all these witnesses are really tools of
the Jesuits—perhaps even Jesuits in disguise. Thus
Haeckel in the Problem of Man calls his scientific
opponent Prof. Reinke a “ Protestant Jesuit” (See The
Latest about Haeckelism, p. 6.); in his answer to Brass
(Berliner Volkszeitung, December 1908) he speaks of
his antagonist’s “Jesuitical misrepresentations;” and
in dozens of other passages in his writings the Jesuiti-
cal scare makes its appearance, now in one form, now
in another. If not Jesuits, his opponents must at least
be some kind of crypto-“unscrupulous theologians” and
“ religious obscurantists” ; otherwise they would never
dream of saying a word against Haeckel, “the acknowl-
edged leading biologist of the world.” In any case
we can claim to have done our best to secure the truth
about the Haeckel case from the most objective sources
we know of—and what more can a poor man do ?
THE KEPLER BUND AND BRASS’S ATTACK.
At this point our correspondent proceeds to give us
his version of the Brass-Haeckel controversy :
“ Dr. A, Brass, who is nothing else than a lecturer
of the Kepler-Bund—a sort of Christian Evidence
Society masquerading as a scientific society—in a lecture
in 1908 stated that Haeckel had so far tampered with
his figures as to put a human head on an ape-embnjo
and vice versa ; and this in spite of the fact that he


had personally shown Haeckel the correct illustrations.
Haeckel disdainfully replied that this was ‘an auda-
cious lie'; and later showed that he never had any
such communication with Dr. Brass; that the illustra-
tions complained of were accurate copies by well-known
embryologists, and that he had not drawn them himself
at all. Dr. Brass then amended his charge. He then
stated that Haeckel had cut off the embryo of a macacus
(tailed monkey) and turned it into a tailless ape
(Gibbon), Haeckel hereupon, while denying expressly the
truth of the charge, published his famous confession-
that six or eight per cent of his drawings were falsified.
A thrill of horror then ran through the religious world,
‘ Naturally the shudderers (as Mr. J. McCabe says)
were not told that Haeckel spoke in the most patent
irony, and admitted having done only ivhat embryologist
illustrators were in the habit of doing, including Dr. Brass
himself.’ ”
Comment. —We have already covered the ground of
this statement, with the exception of the following
points:—
(1) Our correspondent opens by repeating the
slanderous attack of the monistic press on the Kepler-
Bund. The Kepler-Bund is one of the largest, if not
perhaps the largest of the Natural History Societies
in Germany. The writer in America, already quoted,
declares that “ it is in some respects analogous to our
[American] A. A. A. S.; it has no religious affilia-
tion, and pursues purely scientific purposes. Among
its members are men like Valentiner, Berberich, Reinke,
Branca, whose reputation is international.” What
the aims of the Kepler-Bund are will best be gather-
ed from its own rules and regulations, not from
monistic imputations. These rules and regulations
make it quite clear that the “ Bund ” has for its


main object “the furtherance of the knowledge of
nature;” that it insists on “freedom of science” (Freiheit
der Wissenschaft) etc.—things which the Monistic
Alliance seems to claim as its own exclusive monopoly.
The Kepler-Bund grew out of a strong reaction against
the tyranny exercised by Haeckel and his Monistic
Alliance. According to Haeckel, Natural History has
proved that the “ central dogmas ” of religion, viz.
God, the soul, and free-will, are false (See Riddle,
cheap ed., p. 135); he therefore who understands nature
rightly must be an atheist; he who is not an atheist
cannot really understand anything of nature. Against
this harsh dogmatism the Kepler-Bund endeavours to
show, by positive work, that between nature-study and
belief in God and religion there is no such opposition.
Natural History in itself does not declare either for or
against religion ; the religious convictions of mankind
are not touched, but are left absolutely free by the
results of modern science. (See Die Welt, Yol. I,
1909, passim ; In the Interests of Science, p. 56 sq. etc.)
(2) Brass denied having made the statement that
he had shown the correct figures to Haeckel. In the
newspaper report on Brass’s first lecture (which in-
augurated the Brass-Haeckel controversy) a remark to
this effect was added, that “Brass himself had at that
time made the correct drawings for Haeckel.” Brass
immediately declared that his speech had not contained
these or similar words. They were due to a gloss of
the newspaper reporter, whose account had not been
checked by himself. But in order to discredit Brass,
the incorrect report was made unfair capital of by
Haeckel and his supporters (e. g. H. Schmidt). Brass
himself complained later on that “in spite of my
correction published long ago, [they] rake up obstina-
tely this misunderstanding of a newspaper reporter”
(Jn the Interests of Science, p. 33).


(3) We have shown that the illustrations complain-
ed o£ were not accurate copies, and that Haeckel must
have known it.
(4) Brass did not amend his accusation about the
change o£ heads ; he reasserted it more definitely, and
produced plates to prove it. The charge is moreover
fully confirmed by the independent witness of Keibel
[See Part I], What Brass did was to prove his accu-
sation to the hilt, and add others to it.
(5) Brass is not a lecturer of the Kepler-Bund in
any sense which deprives him of his independence
as a zoologist of credit, though not of eminent fame.
(6) We have to pass a stricture on the last sentence
quoted from Mr. McCabe. The horror, we are reliably
informed, was not only in the “religion- world,” but in
the scientific world as well. Secondly, there was
no concealment, as far as we know, of what Haeckel
said or meant. It is not true to say that Haeckel spoke
in irony. Irony means saying one thing while you
mean the contrary. It is strange that Mr. McCabe,
who otherwise—to judge from the translation of several
of Haeckel’s works published under his name—seems
to have mastered the German language fairlv well,
could so completely misread HaeckeFs declaration.
There is certainly no trace of irony to be found in
HaeckeFs words {Berliner Volkszeitung, quoted before).
Haeckel simply says that he has done what Brass
charges him with ; but he maintains that this is not an
objectionable way of acting—in proof of which he
alludes to all other embryologists, etc., as doing the
same. If there is irony here, it is the irony of fate :
—that the dogmatist in his conclusions should be proved
the forger in his premises ; that the denouncer of reli-
gious obscurantism should be convicted of anti-religious
obscurantism—caught red-handed in the very act.


Nor was the fact concealed from the religious world
that he only admitted having done what embryologist
illustrators were in the habit of doing. As proof that
there was no concealment, we turn back to an account
of the case which was published in the “ religious ”
paper America, and to another published in the “ reli-
gious’ 5 paper Rome , at the time, and reproduced in The
Examinee of April 10th and August 14th, 1909. There
we find the whole story given complete, including the
very text of the chief documents on both sides. As
far as we know, the whole case was the public property
of the papers except in England, where a regular policy
of suppression seems to have prevailed among the non-
Catholic press. At least those who watched the papers
failed to come across anything like a divulgation of the
affair. We have purposely made use of quotations from
the old files of The Examinee in order to show that
Mr, J. McCabe’s insinuation of suppression in the
“religious world,” though highly characteristic of him,
is gratuitous and false.
haeckel’s confession.
Our correspondent proceeds :
“ Now the usual clerical version of the story is that
Haeckel was forced to confess under pressure from forty-
seven leading scientists of Germany. This is quite the
boldest of inaccuracies. Haeckel’s statement appeared in
the Berliner Volkszeitung of Dec. 29th, 1908.”
Comment. — We suppose by the last sentence he
means to prove that Haeckel’s confession was printed
spontaneously, before the circular of disapproval of
“ the forty-six ” was published. This is undoubtedly
a fact. We have never come across any attempt, to
attribute Haeckel’s confession to the pressure of a
document which came after it, and was in fact a
pronouncement on it. If we did, we should feel


bound to call it a “ clerical error,” at least, if not
a “ clerical version.” In the accounts we have read,
the confession and the verdict of “ the forty-six ”
have always held their right chronological place.
THEOLOGIANS ?
Here by way of parenthesis our correspondent
remarks :
“ You say that Dr. Paulsen, a Protestant Professor
of the Berlin University, and other professors, among
others Wundt, Chwolson, Loofs, Adicices, Branca, speak
in contemptible terms about the methods of Haeckel. I
should like to remind your readers that in the list just
quoted there is not one biologist or zoologist, with perhaps
the exception of Branca, an obscure zoologist who is as
illustrious as he is unknown. The rest are theologians.
Prof. Loofs, for instance, is in Germany as hitter an
opponent of Haeckel as is the Rev. Dr. Ballard in
England .”
Comment. —How can our correspondent say this ?
The one and only theologian among the six professors
named is Loofs, professor of Protestant theology at
the University of Halle. Paulsen, though personally
a believing Protestant (?), is well known as professor
of philosophy in Berlin ; Wundt, professor of psycho-
logy in Leipzig ; Chwolson, professor of physics in
St. Petersburg ; Adickes, professor of philosophy in
Kiel ; Branca, professor of geology and palaeontology
in Berlin.
(2) “There is not one biologist or zoologist among
them except Branca.” True ; but Haeckel has written
on many other subjects besides biology and zoology.
In his popular writings Haeckel treats of a number of
heterogeneous subjects quite outside his special branch;
subjects in which he is as much a layman as many of
his readers. The abovenamed savants did not imitate


Haeckel by discussing subjects of which they had no
intimate knowledge. They confined themselves to
Haeckel’s methods and pronouncements in branches
where they were acknowledged specialists. Paulsen
and Adickes criticised his philosophical, Loots his theo-
logical, Wundt his psychological, Chwolson his physi-
cal, Branca his biological methods, especially those
connected with his own peculiar branch of learning.
(3) “Branca, an obscure zoologist who is as illus-
trious as he is unknown,” says our correspondent.
This statement is simply outrageous. Every German
tyro in palseozoology knows him. He is quoted as an
authority by English writers, for example, frequently
by Geikie. Even if we knew nothing else about him,
the very fact that he is Director of the Geologico-
palseontological Institute of the University of Berlin
would be sufficient to mark him off as one of the
leading members of his profession. But we have also
his standard zoological works on fossil Cephalopoda,
Fishes, and Mammals.
Our correspondent ought really to confine his state-
ments within the limits of his knowledge !
THE FORTY-SIX.
Our correspondent now returns to the main point:
“ Let us see what part these forty-seven scientists
took in the matter. The Kepler-Bund issued a
circular to the leading scientists of Germany, calling
on them to give their opinion in the matter. Nearly all
the embryologists and anatomists signed the statement—
among others Weismann, Wiedersheim, Bonnet, Boveri,
Kallmann, Hatschek, Flechsig, Waldeyer, Korschelt,
Hertwig, Lang, Plate, Pfeffer, Rail, Rilckert, Rhumb-
ler, Ruge, Schwalbe, Goette, Chun, etc. But what
they said was that though they did not like [according
to the German original, they did not approve of— Ed.


Ex.] the kind of schematising which Haeckel practised
in some cases , they , in the interests of science and the
freedom of teaching, condemned in the sharpest manner
the attack of Brass and the Kepler-Bund on Haeckel .”
Comment. —Except for substituting for the weak and
incorrect expression “did not like, 5 ’ the stronger and cor-
rect expression “ did not approve of,” we have em-
bodied this statement complete in our previous history
of the case. We have explained the meaning both
of the condemnation of Haeckel’s methods and of the
condemnation of the Kepler-Bund’s methods. This
item does not tell for hut against Haeckel. Nay, in
spite of its weak form, it is all the more valuable be-
cause it was so reluctantly given. [The number of the
signatures is 46, not 47].
(2) It is not true that “ nearly all the embryologists
and anatomists signed the statement.” The total of
“ ordinary professors ” of anatomy and zoology* in the
German universities is forty-eight, of whom only
twenty-four signed—exactly one half; although all of
them, we believe, were asked to sign. Among those
who held aloof were some first-class authorities e. g., 0.
Hertwig of Berlin, Ludwig of Bonn, Spengel of Gies-
sen ; —names well known all over the world. Beside
the “ordinary professors,” there are a good many—al-
together 99—“ extraordinary professors” and “lec-
turers” (Privatdozenten) of anatomy and zoology
at the Universities. Not a few of them are acknowl-
edged to be first-class authorities in their subject, and
all of them certainly belong to the group of “embryo-
logists” or “anatomists” in the German Universities.
We do not know whether they were invited to sign the
* “ Professor of embryology ” is a term not in vogue in the German
Universities, the subject being a subdivision of Zoology. Itotany or
Medicine. ‘‘Ordinary professors” mean men who hold the highest
official position in their own department of teaching.


declaration ; but the fact that none of them did sign
it, makes the remark of our correspondent appear all
the more grotesque. It is overdone if we consider
only the number of ordinary professors; but it becomes
an enormous exaggeration if we take into account the
whole number of the professional zoologists and anato-
mists.
HAECKEL DEAD !
Our correspondent continues :
“ Yet in the face of such a document “ religious
journals ” —writes Me Cahe in the Literary Guide —the
journals which are always wondering how man can
possibly be truthfd without their assistance —are assuring
their readers all over the world that Haeckel is morally
and scientifically dead, and has been condemned by
German science.”
Comment. —We must plead guilty of having said
the same—that is, morally and scientifically dead as
regards his personal character, and in the eyes of his
learned contemporaries ; though, it would seem, still
very much alive in the eyes of his worshipping followers
among the general reading public, and among the
popularisers of his works. Having made this confession
I might perhaps feel myself annihilated, icere it not
that there stand at my side in the prisoner s dock large
numbers of others not only editors of religious jour-
nals, but also many non-religious scientists, wbo have
just been giving their testimony in the witness-box.
The evidence for the scientific and moral deadness
of Haeckel is strong enough to convince any average
coroner’s jury that the object before them is a corpse.
The document of “ the forty-six,” far from pro-
viding any counter-evidence that he is alive, forms
one of the items of evidence against it. For as we
pointed out before: —However mild and weak its


condemnation, it is still a condemnation, and therefore
counts not for but against Haeckel’s reputation.
THE THIRTY-SEVEN.
Oar correspondent next proceeds with the Brass-
Haeckel story :
“ Not content with the failure of Brass, the
Kepler-Bund again attempted to draw up another
document against Baechel. Thirty-six men signed it,
some of them of great distinction in the world of science ;
hut the men of real distinction who signed it were astro-
nomers, geologists, botanists, lawyers, etc., hut never em-
bryologists. Their judgment on the point was absolutely
worthless ; and indeed they did not pretend to he able to
judge it.”
Comment. —We find on examination that the number
of those who signed was 37, not 36. Twenty-six are
well known representatives of the different branches of
science; for instance, zoologists (Hamann, Knauer),
botanists (Reinke, Kny), geologists (Branca, Berendt), to
mention only a few names. The other eleven were
not specialists in science.
(2) But even so, the question arises : What quali-
fications are required to form a sound judgment on such
a matter ? If it were some complicated question, only
intelligible by close microscopic observation and high
technical knowledge, the situation would be different.
Here in Haeckel’s case the matter is much more obvious.
It is a simple question whether Haeckel has invented
pictures, and put them forth and argued from them as
if they were not invented ; whether in copying other
people’s pictures he has copied them faithfully, or
altered them considerably to suit his theory. It does
not require a shoemaker to see whether two shoes are
the same size or a different size. It does not require
a carver to see whether one carved stone is a true


copy of another. When once the question is proposed
and the objects placed before him, any man with the
ordinary use of his senses can form a judgment on
such simple issues. But it is a favourite dodge
of Haeckel and his followers to discredit in this
way anyone who happens to come in conflict
with their contentions : “ This affair belongs to em-
bryology, and therefore you, who are not embryo-
logists, are incompetent to form a judgment in the
matter.” Even if their opponent happened to be an
embryologist, they would still discredit him if he
retained the slightest vestige of belief in Grod, free-
will or the human soul. He would immediately be
dubbed a theologian, a clerical obscurantist, whose
dualistic superstitions deprive him of the free use of
his reason. Haeckel’s pages are peppered over with
this sort of “ ruling out of court,” and our correspond-
ent shows himself an apt pupil in this regard.
(3) If our powers of judgment were decided by the
principle that:
“ Who drives fat oxen must himself be fat”
—or in other words, that one must be a specialist in
embryology before judging of a fraud connected with
embryology—the result would be an awkward dilemma.
We cannot speak positively of our correspondent’s
qualifications ; but the chances are, he is not an embry-
ological specialist. Similarly with Mr. McCabe, on
whose authority in the Haeckel case he seems to rely.
Mr. McCabe, we know, was during his youth and early
manhood a Franciscan friar ; a member of the class
described by our correspondent as 14 unscrupulous
theologians” and “religious obscurantists.” And in
his own autobiography he shows how far removed from
the modern “scientific” his education was. Surely
his sudden change from a “clerical” into a “rationalist”
would not magically constitute him an embryologist.


We learn from the pages of Who’s Who that he uses the
microscope as a “’recreation.” Still that would hardly
qualify him as an expert. Nevertheless he has had the
boldness to write a book on Evolution claiming to be
scientific ; to stand up and answer Haeckel’s eminent
scientific critics ; and to sit in judgment on the ques-
tion of Haeckel’s “ frauds and forgeries.” According
to our correspondent’s rule, we should have to decide
that, not being an embryologist, Mr. McCabe’s judg-
ment on that case was “ absolutely worthless ” like
that of the thirty-seven—-although we could hardly add
that he “ did not pretend to be able to judge it.”
(4) If these thirty-seven, or at least “some of them”
as our correspondent generously concedes, are “of great
distinction in the world of science,” how could they be
so utterly foolish as to sign a document giving a judg-
ment on a point on which they did not pretend to be
able to judge ? This would be the acme of stupidity.
They did indeed pretend—and with excellent reason
too—to be able to judge of the Haeckel case; and their
judgment is no more “ absolutely worthless ” than that
of their 46 colleagues, who signed the first document.
COUNTEE-CHAEGE AGAINST BEASS.
Our correspondent adds :
“Prof. Rabl in the Frankfurter Zeitung of March
sth, 1909, also Prof. Forel and Hertwig emphasised the
great services of Haeckel to science , and showed that
Hr. Brass had committed precisely the same fault he
brought against Haeckel.” “ Brass,” says Prof. Babl,
“is a mere layman in embryology; and university
students were warned not to trust to his illustrations.”
Comment. —W’e have dealt already (in Part III)
with the question of Haeckel’s services to science, by
showing that they were limited to the field of systema


tic zoology, and do not support him in the matter now
under discussion.
(2) Brass in his defence ( In the Interests of Science,
p. 80 sq.; see also Ape-Problem, 2nd edition) complete-
ly refutes the charge of falsifying illustrations. The
special instances Rabl mentions are printing-mistakes
expressly mentioned at the end of the book among the
“ errata.” The misrepresentation of one or two of the
copied illustrations was—as distinctly stated by Brass
—due to the impossibility of correcting the proofs, on
account of the unavoidable absence of the author.
Where is the parallel with Haeckel’s premeditated
falsifications ?
(3) As regards Babl’s (also Hertwig’s) condemna-
tion of Brass, there stand against it first-class testi-
monials in favour of Brass’s scientific qualifications
from other professors of science of high standing viz., of
Leuckart, Waldeyer, etc. Moreover, if the case against
Brass were so bad, Haeckel himself or some of his
followers would certainly have retaliated by issuing a
counter-pamphlet on “Brass’s frauds and forgeries,” so
as to show that “people who live in glass houses should
not throw stones.” But nothing of the sort appeared.
This being the case, merely general accusations, coming
from a party who are noted for their tactics of crushing
unpleasant adversaries by personal abuse, hardly count
for much.
(4) Finally, it matters little whether Brass is a
first rate, or only a second or even third rate authority
in his special branch of learning. The point at issue
is whether his charges against Haeckel are true or
false. We have already shown that he has substanti-
ated his accusations with irrefutable proofs.
THE LITERATURE.
Our correspondent then tells us that:—
“In the Brass-llaeckel controversy all documents on


both sides are given by Dr. Schmidt’s Haeckels Embry-
onenbilder, and Prof. Haeckel’s Sandalion. Both are
published hy the Neuer Frankfurter Verlaq, Frankfurt
a. M.”
Comment. —Schmidt, former general secretary of
the Monistic Alliance, is an altogether uncritical
eulogist of his master Haeckel. His writings are not
of the least weight outside the circle of Haeckel’s fol-
lowers ; they are of use only to one who wishes to
make a special study of bad logic, strong language and
vile abuse. In his own fatherland his reputation is
gone, even with his dearly beloved Monistic Alliance.
For when Prof. Chwolson, in his famous Two Questions
addressed to the Members of the German Monistic
Alliance (Braunschweig, 1908; had conclusively proved
Schmidt’s highly objectionable way of treating him
(Chwolson) in some literary affair, Schmidt had to
resign, or else was dismissed in disgrace from his post.
As to our correspondent’s assertion that Schmidt
gives all documents on both sides, it will suffice to make
a distinction as follows:—All documents on Haeckel’s
side, yes; all documents on the other side, no. Among
the documents on the side opposed to Haeckel, Brass’s
writings certainly occupy the first rank, because he
took the lead the last campaign against Haeckel.
After the declaration of the “Forty-six” Brass brought
out a counter-declaration, criticising in a very able
manner the standpoint of the “Forty-six.” We look in
vain for this important document of Brass in Schmidt’s
Embry onenbilder ; but in the place it ought to occupy
we find the following remark (p. 54): —“What Brass
himself had to say with regard to the declaration [of
the “Forty-six”], may be read by anyone who likes to
do so, in the supplement to the Norddeutsche Allgemeine
Zeitung No. 49. Here I refuse to give space to his
babble.” This passage is more than sufficient to dis


credit the impartiality of the man who is declared to
give “all documents on both sides.’ 1
SCHEMATISING.
As a final remark our correspondent adds :
“ I must explain briefly that schematising in scientific
illustrations is a procedure adopted by most workers ;
and if there is any dispute about it, it is only a question
of opinion, generally of an academic interest. But no
charge of fraud can. be brought against any scientist for
doing so. It is only the eery malicious or ignorant icho
can believe such things.”
Comment. —We have explained several times, and
here explain again, that schematising means the making
of conjectural figures, to show by deduction what would
exist if the writer’s theory were true. No one objects
to this, so long as the figures are clearly put forth as
schematisations, and labelled and spoken of and used in
the text as merely conjectural. Haeckel’s crime con-
sists essentially in having put forth schematised figures
without label or acknowledgment, thus giving the
unavoidable impression that they profess to represent
real objects—an impression confirmed by the fact that
they are treated as real objects and used as the basis
of inductive proofs in the text. It is this which turns
Haeckel’s doctorings into “frauds and forgeries.”
Secondly, our correspondent cannot be so simple as
to imagine that the obvious principles which determine
whether an illustration is honest or dishonest, should
not be familiar to those numerous professors who have
attacked and condemned Haeckel—not in a cursory or
indiscriminating manner, but by a careful examination
of Haeckel’s plates as compared with the originals, or
with known observations. The witnesses we have cited
cannot certainly be called ignorant; and since they


depend on tangible facts on paper before them, their
verdicts stand objectively, and need not be attributed to
malice. They might have felt what is called “ a
malicious pleasure ” in bringing a very old offender
to book. But if so, this would be a personal feeling
only, and would not interfere with the validity of
their conclusions.
CONCLUSION.
Except for the opening paragraph which we have sum-
marised, and the final paragraph which simply contains
a challenge of our charge against the Rationalist Press
Association for its circulation of Haeckel’s books, we
have now given the whole of our correspond* nt’s letter
of May 24th, embodying his complete statement in
defence of Haeckel.
From what has been said it is evident that our cor-
respondent’s letter contributes nothing to a sound
knowledge of the Haeckel case. It would, if accepted
as “ the true version,” only involve the matter “ in the
double obscurity of erroneous information.” The
arguments it contains have, moreover, done nothing to
redeem Haeckel’s reputation or palliate his offence ;
nothing to debilitate, still less to dispose of, our
original charge of “ shameless frauds and forgeries.”


PART V.
THE RATIONALIST PRESS REPRINTS.
In the foregoing pages we have seen what the
accusation against Haeckel is, and how far it is sub-
stantiated. Our conclusion is that Haeckel has been
convicted of falsifying plates and supporting arguments
by them in a way which justifies the indictment of
“shameless frauds and forgeries.” We have still in
contemplation a larger study of Haeckel’s writings,
which will show that not only these frauds and for-
geries, but also a large amount of other kinds of falsity
is made use of in such a way as to give to the position
of unbelief a plausibility which, when stated fairly, it
would not possess ; and therefore his works are calcu-
lated to “cheat people out of their religion.” But for the
present purpose we content ourselves with the foregoing
proofs ; and in the light of them we proceed to our
second question, namely; Given that the charge
against Haeckel is fully substantiated, bow far is the
Rationalist Press Association implicated through their
patronage of Haeckel and the circulation of his books?
PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
Before examining the indictment it will be well to
•define our terms. A simple statement of untruth in
words is called a lie. If a lie is perpetrated not merely
by words but by methodic action it is a fraud. If the
action consists in creating a false object and putting
it forward as a true object, we call it a forgery [a forged
signature, a forged letter, a forged inscription, a forged
picture, and so on]. A lie, a fraud, a forgery always
imply conscious and deliberate action with the pur-
pose to deceive. Where the deception is perpetrated
out of ignorance with no intention to deceive, the fault
is called a blunder or a mistake. Now Haeckel has


been convicted objectively of frauds and forgeries. No
one could accuse him of that degree of ignorance which
would reduce his falsities to mere blunders or mistakes.
He has acknowledged deliberateness, and tried to justi-
fy it by-saying that all embryological illustrators do
the same —which is merely a misrepresentation vainly
put forward to cover the fraud. About the Haeckel case
there seems no room for clash of opinion. In the light of
the foregoing evidence, we regard it as a closed question.
By way of further explanation we may add that
Haeckel’s forgeries are strictly confined to his plates,
which he has falsely invented and put forward as if
they were genuine. But the fraud extends also to the
written text —whether in the form of notes attached to
the pictures, or of statements and arguments based on
them or deriving a bogus support from them. The
making of the plates and the writing of the text go
together as part of the same scheme of fraud.
This being premised, we know what we have to
look for in the volumes circulated by the Rationalist
Press Association. It is not our business at present
to collect together all the many other objectionable
features of Haeckel’s books. Onr object is merely to
find out how far and in what way Haeckel’s proved
falsities intrude themselves into the reprints of the
R. P. A. : First, how far the forgeries are reproduced
in the form of plates; and secondly, how far the frauds
connected with the plates find place in the text—no
matter whether the plates themselves are reproduced
or not. For unfortunately the mischief does not stop
at the pictures ; in fact, the real mischief lies in the
false arguments which are based on them, or which
derive an appearance of truth from them.
We have already observed that our treatment of the
whole subject would become far clearer by aid of the
plates themselves, especially when placed side-by-side


with the originals of which many of them are falsifica-
tions. In reprinting these articles we have provided a
small selection of the most conspicuous instances, in
which the fraud or forgery becomes manifest at a glance.
For the rest, we must enter into a certain amount of
description in order to make each point clear.
THE REPRINTS.
Let us now see what the Rationalist Press Associa-
tion has been doing for the circulation of Haeckel’s
books since the date (1908) at which the whole Haeckel
exposure was in full possession of the public as a closed
question.
The list of books published by the Association, as
given on the covers of some of its most, recent prints,
includes the following works by Haeckel ;
(1) The Wonders of Life,
(2) J he Riddle of the Universe.
(3) The Evolution of Man { Anthropogeny).
(4) Last Words on Evolution.
All these works continue to be issued and advertised
by the R. P. A. and offered for sale, and are scattered
broadcast among the booksellers’ shops, and are bought
and read by thousands. With a copy of each of them
lying before us we can now set to work.
A. THE WONDERS OF LIFE.
Can be at once dismissed. It contains no pictures,
and treats of matters which mostly lie outside our
present scope. The points which we might have to
criticise all recur in the other reprints, and need not
be bandied here.
B. THE RIDDLE OF THE UNIVERSE.
0] the Riddle of the Universe we possess two editions;
one dated 1907 (before the Brass-Haeckel controversy


brought the exposure of Haeckel to a climax), and one
dated 1913, long after the exposure had become the
public property of the whole world. Our references are
to the latter. Neither edition contains any pictures ;
but in several cases the substantial effects of fraud and
forgery appear in the text.
Haeckel’s chief object in the first few chapters of
The Riddle is to get rid of all dividing-lines between
man and beast. It is a recognised fact that man by
structure belongs to the vertebrate type ; and the
general similarity of his organic parts to those of the
vertebrate animals, and particularly the anthropoid apes,
is an obvious truism. Haeckel, however, wants to push
this similarity so far as to draw the conclusion that man
must have descended, by gradual evolution, from the
vertebrate animals, and ranks merely as one amongst
them [a primate]. In doing this he has, in certain
points, supported his argument by references to plates
which, if true, would greatly countenance his conten-
tion ; but which on examination are found to be false—•
sometimes pure inventions, sometimes copies exaggerat-
ing the likenesses and suppressing or minimising the
differences.
I. THE LIKENESS OF EMBRYOS.
On page 53 (cheap edition, p. 23) Haeckel writes as
follows :
“ The substantial similarity in outer form and inner
structure which characterises the embryo of man and
the other vertebrates in this early state of development
is an embryological fact of the first importance. There
is but one explanation of it—heredity from a common
parent-form. When we see that at a certain stage
the embryos of man and the ape, the dog and the
rabbit, the pig and the sheep, although recognisable as
vertebrates, cannot be distinguished from each other,


the fact can only be elucidated by assuming a common
parentage. And this explanation is strengthened when
we follow the subsequent divergence of these embryonic
forms. The nearer two animals are in their bodily
structure, and therefore in the scheme of nature, so
much the longer do we find their embryos retain this
resemblance ; and so much the nearer do they approach
each other in the ancestral tree of their respective
group, so much the closer is their genetic relationship.
Hence it is that the embryos of man and the anthro-
poid apes retain the resemblance much later at an
advanced stage of development, when their distinction
from the embryos of other mammals can be seen at a
glance. I have illustrated this significant fact by a
juxtaposition of corresponding stages in the development
of different vertebrates in my Natural History of Creation
and in my Anthropogeny .” [So far HaeckelJ.
The plates in other works, thus referred to, are pre-
cisely those which fell under the condemnation of
Riitimeyer in the first, and more specially of His
and Semper in the second exposure [See Part I],
Under pressure of these exposures, the plates seem to
have been at least partially suppressed in the later edi-
tions of Anthropogeny. Bur, some of them still remain
in the complete edition of the English Evolution of
Man, and are referred to in the R, P. A. abbreviated
reprint of The Evolution of Man (VoL I, p. 155) especi-
ally in the foot-note.
These references to illustrations occurring in other
works pretend to provide support from nature for the
alleged identical appearance of the different embryos ;
and anyone looking up the plates would be convinced
that the argument contained in the text was proved to
demonstration. When once the false plates are discre-
dited, the argument falls to the ground. That Haeckel’s
contention, both in plates and in text, is false to fact


haa been conclusively shown by those who exposed the
pictures, and also by the following specialist authors :
(1) Lieberkiihn, Professor of Anatomy at the
University of Marburg [See Dennert, The Truth about
Ernst Haeckel, p. 33], says: “Professor Haeckel main-
tains in his popular writings that the embryos of man
and animals in their earlier stages cannot be distinguish-
ed from each other. Haeckel himself may be unable
to see the difference; but it does not follow that others
are equally incapable. You may, if you like, mix up
all sorts of embryos in one pot; and I am ready to tell
you the parentage of each and every one of them.”
(2) Fleischmann, Professor of Zoology and Com-
parative Anatomy at the University of Erlangen,
in his Theory of Descent (Leipzig 1909) on p. 245,
says : “Everyone who reads this passage in Haeckel
will imagine that an undistinguishable likeness obtains
among the embryos of vertebrates—all the more because
Haeckel has been repeating the statement for thirty
years. Scientific men, however, were sharply opposed
to it from the very first moment of its publication ;
and W. His (See Our Bodily Frame) demonstrated its
incorrectness, by word and picture, as early as 1874.
The progress made in evolutional investigation has now
positively proved Haeckel’s assertion to be wrong. I
do not believe that any scientist, who has devoted his
life to the study of animal development, will subscribe
to the sentence of Haeckel just quoted. Through the
exact observation of the embryonic development of
numerous vertebrates, it has been securely established
that the specific marks of different animals are ap-
parent, even in the youngest embryos, with the same
clearness with which the eggs of different birds can be
distinguished by an expert.”
On p. 246 Fleischmann adds : “I am convinced that
Haeckel would feel it an insult to be told that he


could not distinguish a young human embryo from
that of a dog, a pig or a bird—a point which can
easily be settled by any fairly experienced embryolo-
gist. The differences were already, even twenty years
ago, so universally known that the anatomist, W.
Krause of Gottingen, badly compromised himself, be-
cause in 1875 he labelled a chick embryo, sent to him
by one of his former students, as if it were the embryo
of a man in an early stage.”
(3) J. Ranke, Professor of Anthropology at Munich,
in his standard work on Man (Leipzig 1894), Vol. I, p.
154, says : —“As in the first germs —the ova and sper-
matazoa —so also in every later stage of development we
can recognise the specific properties which distinguish
the different developing bodies from their cognate
forms.”
(4) W. von Bischoff, one among the greatest Anato-
mists of the world, and Professor at the University of
Munich, in a meeting of the Bavarian Academy on
January Bth, 1876, showed careful drawings of human
and various mammalian embryos belonging, as far as
possible, to that early stage of development in which
the gill- or visceral arches of the head are still visible.
In the Proceedings of the Academy (1876) No. 1, p, 1,
we are informed that “they show important character-
istic differences in their entire configuration ; and are
consequently very unlike the corresponding illustrations
of Haeckel in his Anthropoyeny (Plate Y, Second
Series). They decidedly conflict with Haeckel’s state-
ment on p. 255 of the same book—namely, that the
embryo of man, even at this stage of development, can-
not be distinguished from that of the higher mammals.”
Prof. Bischoff further states that, even as regards
the earlier stages of development, he had never observ-
ed such an identity of form among different mamma-
lian embryos as was given by Haeckel in the first series


o£ the above-named plate ; and the same holds good of
the facial developments of the embryos of man, bat, cat
and sheep given in Plate I [=Plate XXIV in the
6th German edition].
Here, by way of parenthesis, it will not be out of place
to add Bischoff’s views regarding the ora of man and the
higher vertebrates. Haeckel has not given any false
plates or figures of them, the objects being too small to
allow of any glaring misrepresentation. But in the
Riddle (cheap edition, p. 22) he says: —“The human
ovum...has just the same characteristic appearances as
that of all other viviparous organisms.” Against this as-
sertion the abovementioned report declares that Bischoff
presented “ drawings, made as carefully and exactly
as possible, of the ova of man, cow, dog, pig, rabbit,
cat, rat, mouse and mole, all of the same magnification
of 400 diameters, which exhibited important differences,
as well in the size of each ovum as in the thickness of
the vitelline membrane, and especially in the composi-
tion of the yelk.”
(5) 0. Schultze, Professor of anatomy at the Uni-
versity of Wurzburg, in his Epitome of the Dereloji-
ment of Man and Mammals, edited at the instigation of
Kolliker as a revised edition of the latter’s classical
History of Development , stales on p. 122, that “as
regards the development of man in the first week of
gestation we are absolutely in the dark ; of the second
week some embryos have been described which go to
prove that the human development in these earliest
stages shows several distinctive features.”
(6) Plate V. (the one first mentioned by Bischoff)
was also censured by His and Semper as full of falsi-
ties [See our first part]. The reference is to the first
edition of Anthropoyeny. In the sixth German edition,
a collection of embryos —most of them “schematised” in
Haeckel’s usual fashion—is given in plates Vlll—


XIII. But none of these large plates are reproduced in
the E. P. A. cheap reprint of The Evolution of Man.
Our conclusion is that the statement cited above from
the Riddle of the Universe , which would certainly seem
demonstrated to the reader so long as he relied on
Haeckel’s illustrations, proves to be utterly false
as soon as the falsity of the illustrations has been
exposed. The statement, in short, stands solely on the
foundation of the false plates, which are supposed to
represent facts of nature, but really misrepresent them.
11. THE ALLANTOIS.
The second passage occurs on pages 54-56 (cheap
edition, pp. 24-25) of the Riddle, where the allantois of
a human embryo is described as a vesicle (or small
bladder), “a vesicular bag “a vesicular structure.”
On page 54 Haeckel writes : “ This vesicular bag, filled
with water, grows out of the hind gut of the embryo of
the jimniotes, and is nothing else than an enlargement
of the bladder of their amphibious ancestors. . . . The
formation of . . . the allantois is just the same, and is
affected by the same complicated growth in man as in
all the other amniotes; man is a true amniote."
Finally, he refers to a description and illustration of
this point in Anthropoijeraj Chapter XXIII (p 56).
The illustration which, if true, would bear out this
statement, occurred in the first edition of the Anthropo-
and was censured by His in the second exposure
(See Part I).
In the R. P. A. edition of the Anthropoyenp (Vol. I,
p. 164) we find a picture corresponding to this descrip-
tion. On examining it the reader will see, extending
from the abdomen of the figure, a long cord with a
large bulb at the end. This is the yelk-sac. Paral-
lel with this he will find another and shorter cord
with a small bulb at the end. This is meant for the


allantois. As a matter of fact the bulb has no real
existence. The allantois ought to be a simple tube closed
at the end without any expansion into a bulb.
To an ordinary observer this might seem a trifling
matter. Yet on that small and fictitious bulb Haeckel
builds his argument that “ man is a true amniote”—
merely one among those higher vertebrates which deve-
lop an “ amnion ” ; whereas in truth it is just the
absence of that small bulb which puts man in a place
apart. Thus when the bulb is shown to be non-exist-
ent, Haeckel’s argument on this point falls to the
ground.
There seems to have been some tinkering with this
illustration in various editions. Under the R. P. A.
copy it is cautiously stated that “the allantois forms a
large vesicle in most of the mammals.” Nevertheless
the picture itself is clearly that of a human embryo,
and is so labelled—which makes the deception com-
plete. Moreover, the statement that the human embryo
has the bulb or vesicle is retained and emphasised in
the text.
The following scientists v/itness to the falsity both
of the picture and of the argument built on it :
(1) His [See Part I] declares that in man “ the
allantois is never visible in the form of a vesicle.”
(2) Stratz, in his Natural History oj Man (Stuttgart
1901, p. 98) says: “From the ectodermal layer of the
yelk-sac a small tube, ending blind, grows out into the
pedicle. This formation is the allantois ” [Observe: a
tube, not a vesicle],
(3) Selenka, recognised by Haeckel as an authority
of the first rank, in his Studies of the A nthropoids as
regards the development and build of the skull, Part 111,
p. 207 (Wiesbaden 1900), says: “In man and the
anthropoid apes the development of the allantois into


a vessel-carrying vesicle does not take place. Only a
poor tube-shaped endodermal rudiment is formed.”
The conclusion is that Haeckel here maintains an
argument which would appear convincingly true if the
illustration were true ; but which is seen to be false
as soon as the illustration is corrected.
111. THE GENEALOGICAL TREES.
In the Riddle page 68 (See cheap ed. p. 30 seq.) Haec-
kel describes the genealogical pedigree of man’s descent
from the lower animals which he considers to be
“substantially correct” (p. 68). “ For the purpose of
our monistic philosophy (he observes) it is a matter of
comparative indifference how the succession of our
animal predecessors may be confirmed in detail. Suffi-
cient for us, as an incontestable historical fact, is the
important thesis that man descends immediately from
the apes, and secondarily from a long series of lower
vertebrates” (p. 69). He then gives an account of the
lines of descent from which “ their common origin
from a single ancestral group follows incontestably”
(p. 70). As regards the lines nearest to man, he says
that “ during the last twenty years a fair number of
well-preserved fossilised skeletons of prosimiae and
simiae have been discovered. In them we find all the
chief intermediate members which complete the con-
necting chain of ancestors from the oldest prosimiae to
man” (p. 71). He refers to the Java discovery of 1894
as “ the much-sought missing link, supposed to be
wanting in the chain of primates, which stretches un-
broken from the lowest catarrhinae to the highest
developed man” (p. 71). He concludes : “ Thus by
the discovery of the fossil man-monkey of Java, the
descent of man from the ape has become just as clear
and certain from the palaeontological side as it was pre-
viously from the evidence of comparative anatomy and


ontogeny. We have now all the principal documents
which tell the history of our race” (p. 71).
This emphatic and confident assertion is refutable in
all its parts : —(1) First, the Java find is no longer
viewed in scientific circles as the “missing link” which
Haeckel so enthusiastically calls it. Among hosts of
opponents to Haeckel’s assertion we need mention only
a few: Virchow, Ranke, Selenka, Keith, Lydekker,
von Zittel, Branca and Klaatsch—all anthropologists
of international fame. (2) The immediate descent of
man from the ape is a theory now altogether discredited
in scientific circles. Even by most staunch evolu-
tionists man is viewed only as a branch-type collateral
with the apes. (3) The alleged possession of “ all the
principal documents” and “all the chief intermediate
links,” is a grotesque exaggeration. (4) The genealogi-
cal tree which illustrates Haeckel’s theory, and which
gives the impression of a most convincing complete-
ness, is made up largely of fictitious names filling up the
gaps ; standing for forms of life which have never been
discovered, and whose existence is entirely unproved.
Although Haeckel, in certain places, expressly ac-
knowledges that his construction of the tree of descent
is in some parts hypothetical, here he leaves this con-
cession out of sight, and speaks of the line of descent
as “an incontestable historical fact.” As the genea-
logical tree is not produced in the R. P. A. edition of
the Riddle we cannot discuss it here, but shall do so
later on in the Last Words on Evolution. We can
however safely anticipate the result, and put Haeckel’s
treatment, as just quoted, among the “frauds” of the
Riddle. There is no doubt that any ordinary reader
would inevitably be misled thereby, without the least
chance given him to detect the imposition.
These three instances might by closer search be add-
ed to ; but they will suffice for our purpose because


they touch on the most important issues of this part of
the Riddle : that is to say (1) the ontogenetic, and (2)
the phylogenetic relations between man and the lower
animals. The rest of the book carries us out of the
region of zoology and physiology, and therefore falls
outside our present scope.
PART VI.
FURTHER EXAMINATION OF REPRINTS.
In this section we continue our examination o£ the
R. P. A. reprints of Haeckel’s works.
C. THE EVOLUTION OF MAN.
The Anthropogeny has been published by the R.
P. A. in two volumes, under the title o£ The Evolution
of Man. Of their reprint we possess the edition dated
1912. The work is considerably abbreviated; a number
of pictures are inserted in the text, but the full-page
plates of the original are omitted. We notice that
Messrs. Watts and Co. announce a library edition which
contains the full text and all the plates; but this work,
although advertised on the covers of the reprints, is
apparently not published in the name of the Rationa-
list Press Association. As the figures censured by
Keibel are mostly found in the plates, they fall outside
our present indictment, except so far as the arguments
in the text are dependent upon them.
We may, however, mention in passing that some of
the censured plates appear in other R. P. A, reprints:—
(1) Plate VII (Of. 6th Germ. ed. pi. XII & XIII)
showing the embryos of the hog, calf, rabbit and man,


is reproduced in Hird’s Easy Outline of Evolution, p.
27.
(2) Embryos o£ the fish, dog, and man, appear
on p. 92, and those of dog, tortoise and man on p.
106 of Clodd’s Story of Creation. (Cf. 6th Germ. ed.
pi. IX & XIII.)
In this way selected portions of the condemned
plates fall under the patronage and circulation of the
R. P. A, But we have quite enough to do in confining
ourselves to the actual reprints of Haeckel.
FIVE POINTS.
While handling the Riddle (See above) we have
already dealt with two points in the Anthropogeny :
(1) The assertion on Yol. J, p. 155, that: “In the
first stage of development . . . the embryos of all the
vertebrates from the fish to man are only incidentally
or not at all different from each other ” ; and that :
“In the second stage . . . the human embryo is still
hardly distinguishable from that of the higher mammals”
—also the foot-note referring the reader to six of the
omitted plates. The falsity found in the Riddle is thus
repeated, though more cautiously, in the Evolution of
Man.
(2) The illustration in Yol. I, p. 164, of a human
embryo exhibits an allantois ending in a bulb, which is
not found in nature, and on which Haeckel builds an
important but bogus conclusion in the Riddle.
Three other points can now be added :
(3) In Volume I, p. 129, we read: “ The human
sandal-shaped embryo cannot at this stage be distin-
guished from those of other mammals ; and it particu-
larly resembles that of the rabbit. On the other hand,
the outer form of these flat sandal-shaped embryos is
very different from the corresponding form of the lower


animals.” This statement about the human embryo
is entirely incorrect; and the plate which accompanies
it in the full German edition is one of those which was
exposed by Keibel [See Part 11. Keibel describes
the figures as “products of the imagination, for which
the embryos of [certain monkeys] have been made use
of to a fairly large extent. The embryos of man at
this stage (he concludes) have a totally different
appearance.”
(4) In Volume I, p. 177, and 11, p. 305, there appear
two pictures of apes in an erect posture, copied from other
authors. These are misleading to the general reader,
because he is not told that this posture is not a reality
in nature. Careful writers act quite otherwise. Thus
J. Ranke in Der Mensch (2nd edition, Vol. II) some-
times gives such erect figures in order to bring out
clearly this or that part; but he always adds a note say-
ing that the figure is “unnaturally stretched” thus
warning the reader that apes are not upright animals
(See pp. 4, 19, 79, 81). Haeckel serves his purpose
better by abstaining from this remark.
THE MONERA,
(5) One of the most serious of Haeckel’s false state-
ments is that connected with what he calls the “ monera .”
In order to establish the monistic philosophy, it is
necessary to show the uninterrupted oneness of the
whole universe under one universal law of evolution.
Not only must all life, including man, have sprung
from some first simple form of life, but this first simple
form of life must have evolved by itself from non-
living matter by “abiogenesis” or “spontaneous gene-
ration” (See Riddle, p. 27 and 131). Now it is
evident, thinks Haeckel, that a real “ cell ” could not
have been the first organism, because it is not simple
enough. Real cells—in the now prevalent sense of the


word—have “at least two different organs or organel-
latheir matter (plasm) is “ never homogeneous ”
( Wonders of Life, p. 59). Hence there must have been
some earlier and “ more elementary organisms ” (An-
thropogeny, Yol. I, p. 40). Haeckel claims that “these
first living things” are still actually represented by the
botanical order o£ Cyanophycece —which he prefers to
call CJiromacece —especially the genus Chroococcus.
For the purposes of the monistic philosophy he calls
them monera —“the simplest things we can conceive.”
These monera, he declares, contain nothing but “homo-
geneous plasson”—“ soft structureless plasson.” Even
with “our finest chemical reagents and most power-
ful microscopes we can find no definite parts, no
anatomic structure in it” ( Anthropogeny , 11-209 ; also
1-49, and Wonders, 22,59). “The whole life of these
homogeneous globules of plasm consists of simple
growth and reproduction by cleavage” ( Anthrop., 11-210).
210). When they have attained a certain stage of
growth, “the homogeneous globule splits into two
halves —like a drop of quicksilver when it falls” ( Won-
ders, p. 22). These monera, he concludes, are “of the
utmost importance for the purposes of Evolution ”
( Anthrop., 11-209). They have “ a special significance”
( Wonders, p. 22) and are of “extreme importance”
{Wonders, p. 61).
The biological professor on whom we rely has sup-
plied us with an overwhelming refutation of this
teaching, the details of which we reserve for our ful-
ler treatment later on. He cites a standard Textbook
of Botany by Strasburger, Jost, Sehenck and Karsten
(London 1912), besides the testimony of Kerner and
Oliver, Strasburger and Hillhouse, Fischer, Zacharias,
Heyler, Kohl and other specialists of the highest or-
der, in express contradiction of every point. Finally,
Reinke, who speaks of the “ flippancy ” of Haeckel in


discussing the Chromacece : “Itis a dodge on the
part of Haeckel to maintain that the cellular membrane
of Chromacece and Bacteria is nothing but a physical
surface-tension membrane. With this assertion he can
throw dust into the eyes only of the inexperienced.
It is a similar dodge when he speaks of chains of plas-
tids or of catena! coenobia. These are nothing but
words by which he tries to produce in unskilled readers
the impression that the majority of the Chromacea> are
of a different structure from the Algae—which is by
no means the case. Now when Haeckel, in spite of all
this, tries to turn the Chromacece into monera —in his
own sense of the term —I ask you :Is this conscientious ?
Is this truth-loving? Is this scientific ?” \_HaecheT s
Monism, p. 24,25].
The pictures illustrating this point in the Evolution
of Man (Yol. 11, p. 209, 210) are utterly misleading to
the general reader, because they convey the impression
that the objects are perfectly homogeneous. We do
not call the pictures “forgeries” because the fine fea-
tures of such delicate objects simply cannot be shown
on so small a scale. But they give a misleading
support to the highly erroneous contentions in the text.
As a matter of fact the monera are not simple globules
of homogeneous plasm, but have a very complicated
structure, and even a central body corresponding to a
nucleus—all of which can be distinctly seen by the use
of good microscopes and of good staining reagents.
Even supposing Haeckel failed to discover this by his
own earlier researches, he ought at least to have
withdrawn his erroneous monistic argument when the
truth had been made clear by others; and his persis-
tence in putting forward the monera, as providing the
“ missing-link ” between life and non-life which is
simply essential for his monistic philosophy, amounts
practically to a fraud.


D. LAST WORDS ON EVOLUTION.
This series of popular lectures, delivered in 1905,
professes to be a summary presentment of the teaching
of the earlier works—“ the chief evolutionary conclu-
sions advocated for forty years ” ( Preface ). The R.
P. A. reprint, translated from the second edition, bears
the date 1910, or two years after the final exposure of
Haeckel had become common property. It contains
four items which fall within our present scope—two
genealogical trees and two plates.
I. TREE OE VERTEBRATES.
Facing page 32 we find a “ genealogical tree of the
vertebrates” professing to trace the descent ( or ascent)
of man by gradual evolution through different stages
of the vertebrates from the lowest forms of vertebrate
animals. Of this tree the explanation given on p. 16 is
as follows : —“Thegenetic relationship of all vertebrates
from the earliest acrania and fishes up to man is proved
in its main lines by the concordant testimony of paleon-
tology, comparative anatomy and embryology. All
competent and impartial zoologists now agree that the
vertebrates are all descended from a single stem.” On
examining the tree we find running up the middle, as a
main trunk, a column of 12 names in ascending order of
structural development, and ending with man.
This certainly looks convincing. But when these
names are examined it is found that the majority of
them are pure inventions of Haeckel—conjectural fill-
ings-in without any known animal, either fossil or
existent, corresponding to them. On the next page
we reproduce the main line of the pedigree as given by
Haeckel, and side-by-side with it the same main line
after the fictitious names havo been eliminated. The
reader is asked to compare the impressions given by


The Vertebrates.
haeckel’s tree the real members.
Man
( Homo)
Man
( Homo)
Ape Man
(Pithecanthropus)
Pro-Gibbon
(. Prothflohated)
'Lemur
(Prodmiae)
Lemur
(Prodmiae)
Proplacentals
(. Mallotheria )
Promarsupials
( Prodidelphia )
Promarsupials
(Prodidelphia)
Promamnials
(Promam media )
Proreptiles
(Prorept'dia)
Protamphibians
(Proyonamjdiihia)
Paladipneusta
Primitive fishes
(SelaeJdi)
Primitive fishes
( Selacliii )
Arcluchrania
Provertebrates
(Prospondylia)
the two columns—how full the one, how emptj' the
other :


It is true that Haeckel in his Riddle , and occasionally
elsewhere, states frankly that his genealogical trees are
theoretical and schematic—as indeed it is obvious, in
the present state of our knowledge, that they must be.
I think he even, in some of his charts, indicates by a
mark those forms which are hypothetical—he does so,
for instance, in the “ classification of the primates ” in
Appendix 3of the Last Words. If Haeckel preserved
this attitude throughout, all would be well. Butin this
matter he habitually plays a double part. For in his
descriptive text, he argues as if all or nearly all his
“ hypothetical link forms ” which fill up the tree were
realities. He talks of the line of descent as “an in-
contestable fact”—even “an incontestable historical
fact,” and claims that “ we possess all the chief docu-
ments,” and all the “ links of an unbroken chain ” etc.
(See Last Words p. 67, 77, etc.; also Riddle, passim).
Such statements are absolutely false. They smother
completely the hypothetical aspect of the subject under
a weight of confident assertion, and thus inveigle the
reader into supposing that it is all as true as Gospel.
Such a method of writing is utterly deceptive.
Thus the impression given to the reader by the
foregoing “genealogical tree” (p. 32 ) and its ex-
planation (p. 16 ) is entirely misleading, just because
he is not told what he ought to be told—namely, that
out of the twelve direct ancestors only three have been
discovered to exist even as fossils. On page 69 Haeckel
further misleads his readers when he speaks of
the “ inseparable links of a long ancestral chain of
■which the most perfect link is man.” They may be
inseparable links in the imagination of Haeckel; but
in nature the great part of them have no known exist-
ence. Branca, a recognised authority on palaeontology,
says (quoted by Obermayer, op. cit. p. 370) that we
know nothing about any tertiary animal ancestors of


man ; and this must be emphasized “against the asser-
tions which Haeckel still continues to print, that we have
already all the important fossil intermediary links which
represent a coherent chain of ancestors from the oldest
prosimians [lemurs] up to man. This is sheer imagina-
tion ( Phantasie ).”
Again on pages 67 —6B Haeckel mentions five or
six fossil forms which have really been discovered,
and which he enumerates as among the ancestors of
man. Yet it we look up these forms in the genealogi-
cal tree, we find that they all occur in the side branches,
and therefore do not lead up to man. On this point
Haeckel’s own tree contradicts his text.
This genealogical tree has not figured in any of the
“three exposures,” because it has always been recog-
nised by scientists to be purely hypothetical. Haeckel
himself in his latest scientific work The Series of
our Ancestors { Jena 1908, p. 6) openly confesses that
“ All ideas we can possibly form about the stem-history
of any organism, even after the most critical investi-
gation, are and must remain hypotheses.” Likewise
in his Systematic Phytogeny (Berlin 1894-96), a book
written exclusively for his professional colleagues,
Haeckel in Yol. I, preface p. VI. says :—“lt is self-
evident that our genealogical history is and ever will
be a fabric of hypotheses .... Only a small portion
of the material resulting from these phylogenetic trans-
formations, lies tangibly before us ; by far the greater
part remains for ever hidden from our sight.” These
acknowledgments make Haeckel’s popularising dogma-
tism the more manifestly insincere ; and his use of
the hypothetical trees in the Last Words amounts
practically to a fraud.
11. TREE OF THE PRIMATES.
In Appendix No. 4 we find a genealogical tree of
the primates —an enlargement, so to speak, of a part of


The Primates.
haeckel’s tree
THE REAL MEMBERS.
Homo
Homo
sapiens
sapiens
Homo
stupidus
Pithecanthropus
alalus
Prothylobates
atavus
Archipithecus
Simiae
Necrolemures
Necrolemures
Lemuravida
Pachylemures
Lemuravida
Pachylemures
Archiprimas
Prochoriata
the general tree. It contains in its direct line a column
of seven names. Haeckel himself on page 71 talks of
the archiprimas as “ the single hypothetical root-form of
the primates.” Thus on his own acknowledgment it is
not known to exist. But on page 77 he says that
“the morphological chain is now uninterrupted and
clear.” Of this uninterrupted chain we regret to say
that only two links out of seven are realities—five being
fictions, including the very root-link of the whole chain.
We give here a copy of the main line in two columns
as before, for sake of comparison :
Yet on page 72 Haeckel says there is “no longer any
doubt that man is really a descendant of the ape...the
proofs of it are exceptionally clear and simple.” This


is the method of arguing described and censured by
Roux [ See Part 111 No. s]; namely, of first filling in
missing-links conjecturally by deduction, and then argu-
ing about them as if they furnished proofs for induction.
Not only is the tree, as presented without explanation,
misleading to the ordinary reader; but the use of it in
the text is so fallacious as to amount to a fraud.
We may remark in conclusion that, even viewed as
hypothetical constructions, Haeckel’s trees have not found
favour among scientists. Thus for instance Strata
observes ( Natural History of Man, p. 47): —“If we tried
to construct a hypothetical pedigree on a palaeontolo-
gical basis, it could not turn out either so detailed or
so indubitable as the one built up by Haeckel.”
Haeckel himself tells us pathetically how “ the do-
minant school of anthropology, especially in Germany,
. . described our carefully prepared ancestral trees as
mere figments” ( Last Words, p. 56).
PART VII.
REPRINTS CONCLUDED ; FINAL VERDICT.
In this final section we complete The examination
0 £ Haeckel’s Last Words on Evolution, and then pro-
ceed to onr final verdict on the whole case.
111. MAMMAL EMBRYOS.
Opposite page 96 o£ the Last Words we come across
some familiar friends: the plate showing nine embryos
of the bat, the gibbon and of man which met with so
condemnatory a handling from Keibel [See Part I].
Some of the figures are mere products of fancy; others
have been mutilated by the omissions of essential parts.


All this has the effect of producing an apparent identity
between objects which in nature are obviously different;
—thus giving fictitious support to the theory of their
genetic relationship.
In this connection we must mention that H.Schmidt,
Haeckel’s chief champion, is obliged to confess that
Haeckel had really taken Keibel’s Macaque-emhvjos,
changed them so as to suit his purpose, and labelled
them GriMon-erabryos instead. Schmidt makes a lame
attempt to represent this as a harmless manipulation ;
but goes on to acknowledge that “ Haeckel has been
guilty of a fault in not expressly and in every case
marking the figures as schematised or reconstructed ”
(Haeckels Embry onenhilder , p. 89). The booklet
containing this admission was published in April 1909.
Being the work of Haeckel’s own private secretary, it
counts as a more or less “ official ” statement of the
monist side of the dispute, and could hardly be unknown
to those concerned with the publication of Haeckel’s
works. [lt is expressly referred to in our correspon-
dent’s letter (See Part IV)]. The R. P. A. reprint of the
Last Words , containing the false plate, appeared a year
later than Schmidt’s acknowledgment of its faultiness.
And yet not a single word is given, either on the plate
or in its explanation, to caution the reader against its
defects. The inscription “Embryos of three mammals
(bat, gibbon and man) at three corresponding stages
of development” conveys the inevitable impression that
the objects represented have actually been observed
as they stand—instead of telling ns, in plain, honest
terms, that some of the most important and telling
figures among them are deliberate and openly acknowl-
edged fakes (See Schmidt’s words quoted above).
IV. ANTHBOPOID APES.
On page 65 of the Last Words we find a picture of five
skeletons in a row—gibbon, orang, chimpanzee, gorilla


and man. And yet the whole plate is headed “Skele-
tons of five Anthropoid Apes" —thereby embodying
Haeckel’s favourite contention that man is a true ape.
This is dead against the systematic usage in zoology.
None of the great systemisers, e. g., Kennel, Claus,
Carus, Ludwig or others, place man as one of the apes,
although he is classed with the apes under the riame of
“primates.” [On this point see Appendix].
On page 72 Haeckel writes: “When Huxley pub-
lished his powerful essay on Man's Place in Nature in
1863, he gave it a frontispiece showing the skeletons
of man and the four living anthropoid apes—the Asia-
tic orang and gibbon, and the African chimpanzee
and gorilla. Plate II in the present work differs from
this in giving two young specimens of the orang and
chimpanzee, and raising their size to correspond with
the other three skeletons.” . , . “Candid comparison of
these live skeletons shows that they are not only very
like each other generally, but are identical in the struc-
ture and arrangement and connection of all the parts.
...If we make a superficial comparison of our skeletons
of the anthropomorpha, we shall certainly notice a few
salient differences in the size of the different parts ; but
these are purely quantitative . . . There are, as is
well known, similar differences between human beings;
their arms are sometimes long, sometimes short; the
forehead may be high or low, the hair thick or thin, and
so on.” ( Last Words, p. 73-74.)
It is to be noticed that in Anthropogeny, a scientific
work, Haeckel produces Huxley’s plate bodily. [See
Evolution of Man, Vol. 11, p. 260]. Here in thepopular
work, Last Words on Evolution, he acknowledges the
substitution of two new figures, but leaves the reader
under the impression that the other three are those of
Huxley. In point of fact, they are enormously changed.
Any reader who likes to compare the two drawings will


be struck with the differences both in general appear-
ance and in many details. To facilitate this comparison
we have reproduced them both on the same scale in
Plate 11.
Thus, Huxley’s figures are of different heights, while
Haeckel’s are all the same height. He has drawn them
to widely different scales, in. order to make them look
more alike. Huxley’s row gives the impression of a
rather heterogeneous set of beings ; while Haeckel’s row
gives the impression of a progressive sequence. See the
regular decrease in the length of the arms, and the
regular advance from a bent to an upright posture.
Huxley’s apes are shown more or less correctly walking
on the outer edges of their hind extremities, while man
alone walks with flat feet; Haeckel’s apes all walk on the
flat sole as man does. Notice particularly the gorilla next
toman. Huxley’s specimen is bent deeply forwards,
with his head down ; and the long neural spines at the
back of the neck make an upright posture impossible.
Haeckel’s specimen, on the contrary, stands almost as
upright as man ; and the bones in the neck have been
rounded off so as to make an upright posture possible.
The effect of these changes is to give manifest
support to Haeckel’s assertion in the text; viz., that the
salient differences are merely “ differences of size”
.. . “ purely quantitative ” [ Quoted above]. This
statement is altogether contrary to the fact. Any
zoological textbook comparing the skeletons of man
and ape will give clear evidence that there are import-
ant differences of structure also : e. g., the build of the
hind extremities, certain peculiar differences connected
with the upright posture and gait of man, etc.
Thus H. Obermaier in his great work already men-
tioned (See Part III) says, on p. 369 : —“ If we coeat
to comparing man, morphologically, with the animal
world, the temptation arises to associate modern man


■with the now living apes, and especially the anthro-
poids. The gulf between the two groups is however so
great that now-a-days no serious investigator thinks
of asserting any very close connection between them.”
(2) J. Ranke in Der Mensch devotes nearly a hun-
dred pages to the detailed discussion of the numerous
structural differences between man and the higher
apes, beginning with the more obvious outward ones
which are “ visible at first sight,” and concluding with
the inner skeletal dissimilarities such as occur in the
cranium, the extremities, etc. (See Vol. I. p. 437 sq.;
Yol. 11. p. 3 sq., and p. 203 sq.)
(3) 0. Walkhoff in Studies on the Evolutionary
Mechanics of the Primatial Skeleton (Bioloyisches Central-
hlatt 1905, No. 6, p. 182 sq.) makes the following state-
ment : —“ The fundamental difference goes so far that
one can analytically ascertain from any X-ray photo-
graph of a frontal section, or even of an entire portion
of bone, whether it comes from man or from a monkey.”
Surely these are differences which it is impossible
to call merely “ differences of size,” or, “purely quan-
titative.” There is no doubt a general similarity in
the build of the bodily frame of man and monkey ; but
despite this it remains true what Brehm wrote fifty
years ago in his standard work Animal Life (Hildbur-
ghausen 1864, Yol. I. p. 2): —“One single look at the
skeletons of man and monkey reveals the differences
existing even in their general construction.” These
differences are clearly shown in Huxley’s original plate,
but wilfully obliterated in that of Haeckel.
It seems clear that Haeckel has studiously worked
out this plate to give a better support to his theory than
that given by Huxley’s plate. To the confiding reader
the impression would be irresistible. Brass in his ex-
posure of Haeckel (See Ape-prohlem , p. 8) calls it “boldly


garbled, and a wilful falsification of Huxley’s plate.”
It is, in short, as bad a bit of trifling with the facts
of nature as one could well imagine. It pronounces
Haeckel an incorrigible sinner in his old age ; a man
in whom the scientific instinct has been entirely buried
under the incubus of a preconceived theory. The
plate is not only a disgrace to Haeckel, but a disgrace
to any person who makes himself responsible for
reproducing it, without appending a caution against its
misleading character.
Hence the latest work published by Haeckel, and
reproduced most recently by the Rationalist Press
Association, is by far the worst of the whole lot. Even
putting aside everything else, the charge of “shameless
frauds and forgeries” against Haeckel, and the
patronage and circulation of the same by the R. P. A.
would stand proved to the hilt by an examination of
this volume alone ; and that in so obvious a manner as
to be palpable even to the much-despised “man of the
street,” when once the facts are pointed out to him.
(4) In conclusion we may briefly refer to a short
para on p. 93-1)4 in which the “Monera” are mentioned,
and the chief false statement regarding them repeated
•—in particular, that “the whole living body” of them
“is merely a homogeneous particle of plasm.” We
have already discussed the monera question when
dealing with the Evolution of Man.
SUMMARY OF RESULTS.
Collecting briefly the results of our examination, we
get the following :
Riddle of the Universe :—
(1) Likeness of embryos falsely asserted, and sup-
ported by reference to falsified plates in other works,
especially in the Anthropogeny.


(2) Vesicular character of allantois falsely asserted,
and supported by reference to falsified picture in the
Anthropogeny .
(3) Continuity of genealogical trees falsely asserted
as historical and scientific fact, while many of the
members are pure inventions.
The Evolution of Man :
(1) Likeness of embryos falsely asserted, and sup-
ported by reference to falsified plates in the full
editions of the same work.
(2) Picture of human embryo falsely containing a
vesicular allantois, and argument based on the same.
(3) Likeness of sandal-shaped embryo falsely assert-
ed—resting on a falsified plate in the complete work.
(4) Pictures of apes standing erect, omitting the
caution that they are “ unnaturally stretched,”
(5) The whole treatment of the “monera” shown
to be false to fact, and highly misleading in the con-
clusions drawn from them.
In other R. P. A. Reprints by Clodd and Hird :—
(1) One of the plates falsely showing likeness of
embryos, borrowed from the Anthropogeny.
(2) Six other embryo-figures borrowed from the
same work.
East Words on Evolution :
(1) Two false statements about the completeness of
man’s line of descent, supported by genealogical trees
which are full of inventions.
(2) One of the falsified plates of embryos, taken
from the Problem of Alan, and occurring even in the
latest German edition of Anthropogeny (Plates XI and
XIII).
(3) An utterly falsified presentment of four apes
as compared with man.


(4) Repetition of false statements regarding the
“Monera.”
COMING TO A CONCLUSION.
Such is our present indictment of the R. P. A. re-
prints of Haeckel. Possibly a closer search might add
further instances ; but these will suffice for our purpose.
We have confined ourselves simply to the forged plates,
and those passages in the text which spring out of them
or derive support from them—taking only clear and
indisputable cases. We have said nothing of Haeckel’s
other faults scattered throughout his books—his many
misstatements of fact; Ids many theories built illegit-
imately even on sound facts ; his many gratuitous as-
sumptions ; his many fallacious jumps between premise
and conclusion ; his frequent suppressiones veri, by the
omission of points which make all the difference and
which, as Newman once remarked, “make half-truths the
worst of lies ” : his frequent suggestion.es falsi , which,
by insinuations short of definite assertion, create a wrong
impression on the mind of the reader ; his attempts to
claim the support of authorities who really afford no
support; his attempts to rule out of court, by ridicule
or other foul means, those who are frankly against him;
the dogmatic emphasis with which he asserts that
science has exploded all religious belief; and finally,
the grotesque light in which he has represented
religious beliefs in order to refute them more easily,
or even to render refutation needless.
This programme it is our intention to work out at
leisure on the earliest possible occasion. The result,
we can foresee, will be an indictment against Haeckel
far more damaging than anything we have hitherto
written against him; and in consequence, afar stronger
condemnation of the Rationalist Press Association for
circulating Haeckel’s books than anything which we
have now to say against that body.


CUE FINAL VERDICT.
As the whole of the present discussion arose from The
Examinee article of May 23rd, we must work out our
conclusions with that bone of contention before us, as
well as the challenge from the Honorary Secretary of
a branch of the Rationalist Press Association to which
it gave rise. Turning to the letters sent to us by that
gentleman, we quote from that of May 24th the fol-
lowing remark :
“As regards your statement that the Rationalist Press
Association propose to spread the truth among all men hy
the most shameless frauds and forgeries, I write to tell you
that the R. P. A. have so far published about si.vty works,
or rather reprints of well-known writers. I challenge you
to prove and to show that among any of these icorks there
is a single instance of fraud and forgery, Ho cheat people
out of their religion’ as you put it.”
Confining ourselves closely to Haeckel’s works alone)
W'e have fairly and squarely faced this challenge, and
can now pronounce our final verdict on the result:—
According to the foregoing evidence the R. P. A.
reprints, published since 1908, contain a number of
Haeckel’s plates which have been proved to be “shame-
less frauds and forgeries,” together with the fictitious
proofs which are built on them, or are made to appear
cogent by aid of them. Therefore in answer to our
correspondent’s challenge, we claim to have proved and
shown that among the various works published by the
R. P. A. there occur, not only a single instance but
several instances of fraud and forgery ; which, since
they are used for the purpose of destroying belief, may
fairly 7 be said “to cheat people out of their religion.”
The only question which must remain unsettled is
this: Whether the Rationalist Press Association, indivi-
dually or as a body, has continued its patronage of


Haeckel’s works in good faith or in bad faith ; whether
its responsible authorities were fully cognisant of the
Haeckel exposures, or ignorant of their clinching im-
port. If the latter, certainly such ignorance is alto-
gether inexcusable —considering the notoriousness of
the case, and considering, also, the responsibility at-
tached to the circulation of such literature. The
Haeckel affair in all its details was so fully divulgated
in the German press that no one in that country could
be ignorant of it. We know that people in England
are as a rule profoundly out of touch with German
current literature. But those who undertake an Eng-
lish apostolate for Haeckel ought not to be ignorant of
a matter which makes all the difference to the position
which Haeckel ought to hold as a teacher and guide
of the people.
The question whether they have acted in good faith
or bad faith we must leave to their own consciousness.
But if in good faith, they cannot escape the imputation
of guilt without falling under the opposite imputation
of ignorance; an ignorance inexcusable already on
general grounds, but which will be all the more inex-
cusable after our present exposition of the whole case.
Since therefore it has been shown that the Rationa-
list Press Association has continued to print and sell
Haeckel’s books containing some of the chief frauds
and forgeries of which he has been convicted, after the
exposure had become public property , we feel bound to
uphold against them the grave censure of patronising
and circulating shameless frauds and forgeries.


APPENDIX.
AN ATTEMPT AT A REPLY.
While the last pages of this reprint were just
going to press, we received a pamphlet purporting to
be a reply to our articles in The Examinee.
In point of form this “reply” affects to work over our
articles piece, by piece. But the most essential and
pointed contentions of our attack are not squarely
faced ; and where the author of the pamphlet has man-
aged to say something , that something is generally
irrelevant because it does not refute what needs to be
refuted. What the author ought to have done is
this :—He ought to have proved that it is lawful and
honest for a scientific man to use the same identical
block three times with three different labels to prove
the equality of three different objects—no matter how
nearly alike those objects may be ; to alter illustrations
of other scientists in important points, in order to make
altogether different objects look very much alike,
without stating that they have been so altered ;to
invent pictures in proof of his assertions, and present
them as if they were drawn from real objects. No proof
of this sort is found in the pamphlet. In place of
this we find it emphasised (See pp. 19 and 22) that
the first and second exposures of Haeckel’s methods
refer to publications brought out 46, 39 and 37 years
ago —as if this made any difference to the heinous
crime perpetrated therein. If Haeckel had in his
later years mended his ways ; if he had repented
of the errors of his youth, and withdrawn them,
and made a resolution never to sin again in the same
way, and had kept that resolution ; the antiquity of his
misdemeanours might then be pleaded as an extenu-
ating circumstance, and might have allowed us to bury


them in silence. But seeing that he has continued
to carry on the same reprehensible methods of
falsification, even down to his old age, and failed
to profit by the various exposures to which he has
been subjected ; we can only regard him as an incor-
rigible old sinner, whose present faults take deeper
colour precisely because they are parts of a long bad
record. The further back this record dates, the more
manifest does his incorrigibility appear.
The author of the pamphlet lays stress on the fact
that Haeckel holds four doctorates for original research,
and more than seventy diplomas (p. 43). As to the
doctorates for original research, we ask in what Haec-
kel’s original research consisted. It consisted of some
work in systematic zoology contained in his strictly
scientific books, the value of which was fully acknowl-
edged in The Examine!!. Suppose we add his work
as a theoriser in evolution —also contained in his strictly
scientific books ; this gives the full limit to Haeckel’s
original research. But our indictment was not against
his scientific work. It was against that new form of
activity which he inaugurated at a later date, when he
found that his Darwinian speculations did not meet
with the high appreciation he hoped for ; when, instead
of confining himself to his special branch, he wandered
over the whole field of science and philosophy and
theology and even history, and fed the masses of
humanity with such pabulum as the Riddle of the
Universe and the Last Words on Evolution.
The question before us was about those works only,
in which the various frauds and forgeries were prac-
tically contained ; and we venture to assert that if
Haeckel still continued to receive diplomas and other
honours after the publication of these popular and mis-
leading writings, it was still Haeckel the scientist and
not Haeckel the populariser that was honoured. If the


author o£ the pamphlet wants to prove anything against
our contention, he must not merely produce evidence
that Haeckel has secured a reputation for original
scientific research; for this everybody knows. He
must produce evidence to show that the popular works,
against which our indictment is framed, have ever
met with approbation or eulogy from scientific men—
which certainly is not the case. So far from this, those
scientific men who have undertaken to handle them
have done so only to condemn them as unscientific,
in the strong terms which we have quoted from so
many independent critics in the course of our
articles.
The practical question with which we are concerned
is this: —Haeckel’s Riddle of the Universe, Last Words
on Evolution, etc., are being widely circulated among
the general public. What are the thousands of readers
to think of them ? Are they to take them implicitly as
sound guides to knowledge, or are they to regard them
as pernicious and misleading ? The answer to this
question must be drawn from an examination of the
works themselves, and the view which competent
scientists have taken of them. The fact that Haeckel
in his scientific closet has done good research work in
one or other detailed branch of science, and has been
honoured for that, is nothing to the point at issue.
Having remarked this much, the only further de-
tails in the pamphlet which seem to call for notice are
the following ;
(1) On page 20 we read that “ Professor Blosche,
in his Life of Haeckel, explains the misunderstanding”
etc. We never heard of any Professor Blosche. Per-
haps it is a misprint for Bolsche, who did write a Life
of Haeckel. But no ! the spelling “ Blosche ” occurs
again three times over on the same page and is repeated
wherever else the name is mentioned in the pamphlet.


However, supposing that the author does really mean
Bolsche, it may be of interest to mention that Professor
Bolsche, who is evidently regarded by him as a scienti-
fic writer of weight, is not a university-professor of
science at all. His title is only honorary, such as is
held by many high school teachers in Germany. He
has never done any scientific research in biology, and
consequently his name is not mentioned in the Zoologi-
cal Address-Book (Berlin 1911), which in its 1,110
pages gives the names of every scientific worker in the
Zoologico-biological field, even of the smallest note,
all over the world. He is an amateur populariser of
second-hand knowledge, who devotes himself to the
spread of Haeckel’s ideas. Yet even so, how can
Bolsche say that “ certain things had been so fully
established by Haeckel scientifically in other works that
he was at liberty to take them as facts ” in his popular
writings. If those scientific works are examined it will
be found that the things referred to are put forward
by Haeckel in a tentative and speculative manner
suitable to his role of scientist (see Parts V and VI
of the foregoing articles) ; and it is only when he
comes to write for the people that he holsters up his
gratuitous assertions by references to other works, on
the strength of which he now makes bold to regard
them as facts.
(2) On page 20 we find the three plates in the
Natural History of Creation described as “ some crude
woodcuts.” As we have shown (see Part I), it was not
a matter of “ some crude woodcuts,” but of one and
the same block being used three times over and labelled
to stand for three different objects. The author sees in
this “ nothing wrong or dishonest.” If so, our ideas of
what is wrong and dishonest seem to differ radically.
(3) On page 33 the author draws a distinction
between ‘‘inductive” and “descriptive” embryol


ogists, and implies that Haeckel’s work, being
inductive, needed illustrations which descriptive
embryologists did not need. This apparently means
that Haeckel wanted his pictures in order to draw
inductions from them. But this does not justify him
in falsifying the drawings of others, or inventing
others of his own, as a starting-point for induction.
It is of the very essence of induction to start from
observed facts, and not from fakes or inventions. In
Haeckel’s case the wish was father to the thought. True
drawings did not furnish what he wanted, and so he had
to make false ones.
(4) The author of the pamphlet lays great stress
on the so-called “biogenetic law” (p. 22). As this law
is a theoretical proposition merely, we had no deal-
ings with it in our articles ; but must give it some
attention in this appendix. The “biogenetic law”
asserts that “ the development of the individual is a
brief recapitulation of the development of the race.”
To explain concretely, this means that as man, accord-
ing to the evolutionists, has gradually developed from a
lower ancestry through the worm stage, the fish stage,
the monkey stage, etc.; so the embryo of each man
goes through these different stages, resembling in one
early stage a worm-embryo, and in another early stage
a fish-embryo, and then in a later stage a monkey-
embryo ; and the development of the individual embryo
through these stages is taken as a proof that the worm,
the fish, and the monkey were really ancestors of man.
In our articles we dealt with the alleged resemblances
between the different embryos (see Parts VI and YI1).
We showed that they did not exist, and that Haeckel
had given an appearance of reality to them by the
faking and inventing of various pictures. But here wo
are concerned with the law itself.


In the first place, the full credit of discovering this
law is, by the author of the “Reply” (p. 22), given to
Haeckel. As a matter of fact the real originator of the
law is not Haeckel but Fritz Muller (See specially his
Fur Darwin ; Leipzig 1864) who however does not
lay it down so dogmatically as some who have followed
him. All that Haeckel did was to give to this law
the short epigrammatic form by which it is known
to-day, and to proclaim it as if it were an ascertained
and universal truth. Consequently the author of the
pamphlet makes bold to say that “ it is admitted by all
scientists to-day.”
This is entirely wrong. About thirty to forty years
ago it was in high favour among many; but such men
as K. E. von Baer, Rathke, Joh. Muller, and others
rejected it from the very beginning. Further research
has gone largely against this law. The more the
individual development of different animals and plants
was investigated, the more instances were there found
in which the “biogenetic law” failed to show the faintest
sign of its existence. Among the many recent opponents
of the law are Oppel in the Yearly Bulletin on the Pro-
gress of Anatomy and Physiology, 1893; Keibel on the
Development of the Pig, 1893 ; Steinmann in his Pro-
rectorial Speech, 1899 ; also Haeckel’s great pupil, 0.
Hertwig, who in The Cell and the Tissues, Vol. 11, p. 278
(Jena 1898) says: —“When comparing ontogenetic
evolutionary stages with former phylogenetic ones,
we must always bear in mind that a later
stage can, in reality, never again correspond to a
preceding one. Ontogenetic stages give, therefore,
only considerably altered representations of phyloge-
netic stages, such as may have once existed in former
ages ; but these ontogenetic stages are nob identical
with the phylogenetic stages as regards their true
substance.” Then again, Tad. Garbowski, in his Mor


phogenetic Studies (Jena 1903) says with unmistakable
clearness : —“Most of what is generally ascribed to the
action of the so-called biogenetic law is erroneously
ascribed to it; because everything that is undeveloped
and incomplete must [naturally] be more or less alike.”
Other well-known scientists such as Beard, Driesch,
.Emery, Fleischtnann, Hensen, Reinke, Karl Vogt, and
many more, have also expressed their disbelief in the
“biogenetic law.” Those who entertain the law at all
do so with many reservations and restrictions. Hardly
any scientist of note will be found to-day who accepts
the law as it stands. The convincing reason is because
recent research has clearly proved that the exceptions
to this law are far more frequent than the realisations
of it. The majority of the stages through which the
individual embryos of different animals pass, do not for
the most part correspond to the gradations which,
according to the evolution theory, make up the history
of the development of life.
Haeckel himself seems to have been aware of this
discrepancy ; for in order to get rid of the difficulty he
tried to distinguish two lines of embryonic develop-
ment ; namely, palingenesis , which runs in agreement
with the evolutional progress of the race, and cceno-
genesis, which consists of deviations from that line of
progress (Of. Evolution of Man, Vol. I, Chap. 1). Ac-
cording to Haeckel’s original text, csonogenesis is a
“ disturbed or falsified development,” tolerated by na-
ture under the compulsion of adapting the embryonic
development to different circumstances. This jug-
gling explanation does not, however, blind us to the
fact that with regard to the alleged “ biogenetic law ”
the exceptions do not prove the rule ; for they are so
numerous as rather to disprove it. A law which does
not realise itself in the majority of cases cannot be
called a law at all.


After those remarks it becomes clearly false for the
author of the pamphlet to say that the biogenetic law
is “admitted by all scientists to-day.”
(5) On page 36 we are assured (against the state-
ment of The Examinee article) that “ the Kepler Bund
is not a Natural History Society ; few of its members
are interested in Natural History.” As a matter of fact,
a list of the members reveals a considerable number
of names well-known in the department of natural
history. Moreover the paper published by the Bund
is called Die Welt (The World) precisely because it has
natural history for its scope ; and the bulk of articles
it contains deal with purely natural history—thus show-
ing where the interest of the members lies.
(6) On page 41, referring to Haeckel’s plate of
skeletons, we are told that the heading “ Skeletons of
five anthropoid apes ” (Of. our Part YII No. IY.) is
not the work of Haeckel. “ The mistake was in-
advertently made by Mr. McCabe, the translator, who
acknowledged it in the Literary Guide of March 1,
1911.” We have not Haeckel’s original plate to refer
to, but take the statement as correct. We would only
remark that, considering that the namer “Gibbon,
Orang, Chimpanzee, Gorilla and Man ” appei.- in Eng-
lish print under the five figures, ir seems a strange
mistake to be made inadvertently, especially by “ a
most learned and scientific man” like Mr, MiCabe.
How is it possible that he “ inadvertently ” repeats the
very same mistake twice on p. 50 of Last Words on
Evolution, where we read ; —“ Explanation of Plate II ;
Skeletons of Jive Anthropoid Apes. These skeletons
of the five living genera of anthroporaorpha ”
And all this done “inadvertently ” by one who claims
to be a zoologist! However, to err is human ;to for-
give divine.


(7) On page 27 we read that “the Kepler Bund and
the Jesuit Thomas League began to sharpen their pen and
their tongue.” The Kepler Bund we know ; and the
Jesuit order we know; but, Jesuit Thomas League I who
art thou ? Here we recognise the old familiar clerical
bogey cropping up again.
(8) We are in cordial agreement with the writer in
one important point. He says on page 19:—“One
would suppose that a clever and shrewd scientist like
Prof. Haeckel knew what he was about.” Decidedly
so. It is just this “knowing what he was about” which
deprives Haeckel of all plea of ignorance or good faith,
and justifies our charge against his honesty.
These are the only points which it occurs to us to
make any comment on. If any one takes the matter
seriously enough to think it worth while weighing the
value of the “reply ” we suggest that, after reading its
various paragraphs dealing with The Examiner articles,
he should merely read over again what we have there
put down and have reproduced in the foregoing
pages. Throughout he will find a perfectly clear issue,
submitted to a perfectly clear and fully documented
treatment which, if squarely faced, leaves no escape
from the conclusion that Haeckel has been guilty of
perpetrating, and the R. P. A. of circulating, shameless
frauds and forgeries.
[The End.]


EXAMINER REPRINTS.
Theosophy and Christianity —dealing with Ethical
Ideas, the Personality of God, the Problem of Evil,
Karma and Reincarnation. Fourth Edition, 6 Annas
=6d.
Fortifying the Layman —deals with the problem,
how to fortify the Layman against the anti-religious
influences of his surroundings and to maintain his
faith by creating interest in religion. Fourth Edition,
6 Annas. English C. T. S. Edition, 6 Pence.
Studies in Idolatry —discussing the meaning of
Idolatry from various points of view, Christian and
non-Christian, and especially in relation to Hinduism.
Third Edition, 6 Annas.
Devotion to the Sacred Heart —dealing with the
principles of the Devotion ; The Revelations to B. M.
Mary ; The Promises ; The Twelfth Promise, etc.
Third Edition, Two Annas.
What the Catholic Church is, and what she
teaches ; a short guide for inquiring Protestants. One
Anna. ("English C. T. S. Edition, One Penny.]
Walled=up Nuns, and other curiosities contained in
Scott’s “ Marmion.” Third Edition, One Anna.
The Early Life of Our Lady, studied in relation to
the Apocryphal Gospels, etc. Second Edition. Price
3 Annas.
What to Me and to Thee, Woman ? A study of
John 11. 4. Second Edition. Price 2 Annas.
What about the Qood Templars ?—Showing the
reasons why Catholics should not join that order.
One Anna.


Studies In Hinduism (Part I). A’sequel to Studies
in Idolatry. It contains general outlines of the Hindu
religious system, and a discussion on the Hindu view
of God and his relations to man. 6 Annas.
Ten Papers on Evolution —From Darwin’s first
theory to its later developments and modifications.
Second Edition, 6 Annas.
Priests and People in Ireland ; a critique of M. J.
T. McCarthy's book, with some personal reminiscences
of Ireland. One Anna. [Australian or Scottish C.T.S.
Edition, One Penny.]
The Formation of Character ; a sequel to Fortifying
the Layman ; discusses what sort of men we wish our
children to turn out, what materials are given us, and
what are the means by which to attain the desired
result. Examiner Press Edition, 6 Annas. [Edition
by Sands and Co. for England at sixpence and by
B. Herder for America at 15 cts.]
Why should I be Moral? —An imaginary con-
ference on the ultimate basis of ethics, and its bearing
on the question of “ moral education in schools.”
Second Edition, Six annas. [Edition by Sands & Co.
and Herder as above].
An Essay on Love —A study of love in general as
regards its object, subject and process ; also of sex-
love in particular, its origin, process and management.
Price 10 Annas.
Maria Monk, Chiniquy and Jovinian :—A diatribe
against the circulation of such indecent literature, and
an exposure of certain fallacies and falsities concerning
celibacy and the confessional. Price One Anna.
Archaic Religions, being the first part of “ The
Dynamics of History , Human and Divine.” Price
Annas.


Galileo and his Condemnation ; the historical, theo-
logical and controversial aspects o£ the case considered.
Price Six Annas. [English C. T. S. Edition 6d. and
One Shilling.]
God, Man and Religion ; or the truths of natural
religion explained and demonstrated ; being Part I o£
a short Apologetical Series. Price 8 Annas.
Thirteen Articles on Freemasonry ; containing
some important additions to the former reprint. Price
Six Annas.
Haeckel’s Frauds and Forgeries ; A complete
exposure, based on first-hand sources. By Assmuth
and Hull. With two illustrations. Price 6 Annas.
Civilisation and Culture; A study o£ root-princi-
ples, testing the false and the true. Price 8 Annas.
To be obtained wholesale or retail from The Exami-
nee Peess, Bombay ; or retail from our Agents. One
anna = one penny. The prices are net, postage extra.
In order to cover cost of carriage from India, etc., our
Agents in England, America and Australia are autho-
rized to charge more, according to discretion.
Our retail Agents are : —B. X. Furtado and Sons
Bombay ; B. Herder, London, and St. Louis, U. S. A.;
W. P. Linehan, Melbourne ; E. J. Dwyer, Sydney ; L.
Gille&Co., Sydney; P. J. Kenedy & Sons, New York.
Cottineau’s History of Goa, originally published in
1831 and now reproduced with the author’s map of the
ruins. Eight annas. [B. X. Furtado and Sons have
exclusive right of selling this reprint].
Prospectus of “The Examiner.”— The Examinee
(formerly called The Bombay Catholic Examinee) is


a weekly Catholic organ published in Bombay. It
began its existence in the year 1850, and is at present
working through its sixty-sixth volume. It specially
aims at “fortifying the layman ” by furnishing him with
intelligible, clear and up-to-date information on theologi-
cal, historical, and other questions whether of current or
of permanent interest —thus gradually supplying that
mental furniture and creating that interest in religious
matters which is best calculated to antidote the ignor-
ance and indifferentism of the time. Every number
contains Editorial Notes and a Leading Article, often
in serial form ; while answers to controversial or other
difficulties sent in by correspondents, and careful and
critical Reviews of current books, form a special feature.
The Examinee is read all over India, and is gradually
securing circulation in England, America and other
English-speaking countries.
The terms of subscription are Rs. 8 = 10s. Bd. =
$ 2'66 per year. Subscribers can be enrolled through
foreign booksellers, but it is more convenien t to deal dire ct.
Payment, strictly in advance, can be made by cheque
or Foreign money order, to The Manager, Examiner
Press, Bombay. In all cases the paper will be des-
patched direct from Bombay. Copies lost in the post
are supplied gratis on application. We have now no
Agents for the Examiner, but only for the Reprints.
Publishing Office : —Examiner Press, Medows
Street, Fort, Bombay.
Imprimi potest:
H. Boese, S. J.,
Sup. Beg.
Bombay , Jan. 31st , 1915.
Imprimatur:
►p Herman Jurgens, S. J.,
Archbishop of Bombay.
