

A




'J' O THE j'VEADEJ^
||||j|OME people have found delight in wounding my national
pB feelings during these last ten years, and now, driven at
bay by the slanderous attacks of a vespernal metro-
politan paper, upon my countrymen generally, I feel bound to
show to Australia on the propitious day of her “ coming of
age,” what Italy is among the sisterhood of nations, and that
her despised sons living under the bright Australian sky, are
as ready as ever to vindicate her fair name, even when the
assailants may belong to the privileged race which now claims
an exclusive right to the possession of this my adopted
country.
It may be expected here that I should, at least, apologise
for something or other. Well, I do apologise for my bad
English, as far as its wording and spelling are concerned, but
for nothing else.




A "S 55
Morituri te Salutant!
Salve Australia ! I join with thy natural-born children
in greeting the centenary of thy nuptials with European civil-
ization : of thy admission among the great family of Cau-
casian Nations.
Hail to thee and thy spouse, the Italian-bred Londoner !*
Hail to thee and thy favoured race, whose ancestors, in form
divine, I found in the Athenian Acropolis and the Roman
Capitol.
Salvete !
Sincere is my joy, sincere my good wishes, but an un-
speakable sadness mars the gladness of my heart, and restrains
me from stepping forward and, foremost amongst thy sons,
kissing this beauteous forehead of thine, brilliant with sun-
shine, refulgent with the gems of the Southern Cross.
Why ? Ah, thy children look at me, only a waif, so
coldly, so scornfully that they seem to say, You illegitimate
* Some critics will, perhaps, be surprised to hear me call “ Italian
bred,” the modern Englishman, in whom I typify the present civili-
zation. Yet my epithet is strictly correct, and recognised by high
English authority. In the Australian school books we find the usual
alphabet called Roman , and a more graceful u al)c" called italic. In
the opening lines of English History, the same books tell us (I quote
from memory), “ the aborigines of Britain were a race of brave yet
savage men. Julius Caesar and his legions conquered and civilised
them.” The very name “ Britannia,” of which Englishmen are justly
proud, is a word picked up by the conquerors, and latinised by them,
for the use of modern descendants of the conquered. Elsewhere it is
recorded that the “ Bishop of Rome ” sent Augustine and other mis-
sionaries to “ Britain, in order to impart the light of the gospel to its
idolatrous inhabitants.” One-third of the words of the English lan-
guage are said to have been borrowed from Italy, and the masters of
English art and literature have derived their inspirations from the


brat, bow dare you claim this matron’s love ? ’Tis our mother ;
begone !”
Ah, I know thou hast for me the same kind smile as for
any other of thy children ; there is no preference nor partiality
in thee. But, alas, that is just why they are bitter against
me, the foster-child. They think I have no right in thy in-
inheritance, because I am not born of thee, or of thy mother
Britannia. For them lam but Hagar’s child, perhaps no-
body’s—a foundling.
Flay, I am not a foundling, nor a mean nation’s son, 0
my adopted mother ! lam but the son of too stern a mother,
stern, though loving. Noble she is, magnificent aud wealthy ;
so beauteous and so rich, alas, as to excite the covetousness of
the other nations of the earth, who leagued themselves to pour
upon her fecund breast all the ills of Pandora’s urn.
Her children are many and devoted to her ; but, alas,
some of them claim the greatest share of her bounty, regard-
less of their brothers’ rights. One wears a croYvn studded
with precious gems—the old iron crown of the Lombards —and
says, “ God gave it to me, woe to him who touches it !” but
others wear crowns of thorns ; one has a golden tiara to shelter
his head from the wrath of justice, others have the bare scalp
exposed to the blows of injustice ; a few have ortolans for their
fare ; many have but a handful of acorns ; the few have the
land, and everything that is on it and in it ; many have
scarcely the cold marble steps of the sumptuous temples and
palaces whereon to lay their weary limbs.
The view of such injustice upset my heart. One day I
stood up, saying, “ Hearken, 0 mother ! are we not all flesh
of thy flesh, and blood of thy blood ? Why are we not all
same country. It is, perhaps, less generally known that Italy has
been England’s teacher as well in commerce, finance, and navigation,
(vide Bent’s “ Genoa.”) Thus lam entitled to say that the modern
Englishman, who, in my opinion, typifies our nineteenth century civ-
ilisation, is “ Italian reared and I cannot resist quoting lines
from Sam. Butler’s recent work “Alps and Sanctuaries : Who
does not turn to Italy, who has the chance of doing so l YV hat,
indeed, do we not owe to that most lovely and loveable country ?
Take up a Bank of England note and the Italian language will be
found still lingering upon it. It is signed for Bank of Bug land ( \
Covin, a (Compagnia), not “ Company.” Our laws are Roman in their
origin. Our music and painting come from Italy. Our veiy leligion,
till a few hundred years ago, found its headquarters not m ondon,
not in Canterbury, but in Rome. What, in fact, is there which has
not filtered through Italy, even though it arose elsewheie


treated alike, according to our deserts ? Why are those
monster guns obtained from the fruits of our peaceful labour ?
Why set up those barriers between us and our transalpine
fellow mortals, who are also our brothers ?” “ Son,” began
my mother tenderly, “ Son, you are all brothers, but . .
And suddenly her voice was covered by a great clamour, and
she veiled her face, as one of her sons, a flaming sword in his
hand, exclaimed, “ Begone, thou rebel ! thou art cursed ;
go and seek a roof and thy bread from thy transalpine
brothers !
I had broken the Law—a law written by Privilege for
the benefit of all-powerful Privilege—the loving, but. stern
mother wept, but let the dread sentence pass, as Junius Brutus,
in the bygone days of republican virtue, had covered his head
and wept, after he had passed sentence of death upon his son.
Fatus, political fatality, not Famis, tore me from my mother’s
breast ; fate, not hunger, brought me to seek adoption at thy
hands, 0 Australia !
lam no beggar, no foundling. I am the son of a stern,
too stern a matron, whose children are terrible in their resent-
ment, as the wrath of her burning mountains : she is loving,
though, loving and lovely !
Let me tell thee who is my natural mother.
Her name is Italia. Others call her the “ Mother of
Nations,” the “ Nation of God,” the “ Niobe of Nations,”
the “ Mother of Learning, Art, and Song.” They say she
was a grown-up maiden when her sister, Greece, was in the
cradle ; and to judge by the unearthed relics, which have been
buried for ages in her bosom, she was living when the “ first”
man was moulded somewhere near the Land of Nod. There
are Gods and Goddesses amongst her ancestors—the merry
Gods of Homer and Virgil. Her youth, as the youth of aunt
Greece, is described as a pepetual Spring and Bliss. Astrtea,
then, ruled supreme ; long since she is gone—and so is the
peace of mother’s home !—shall she come back again ?
Wonderfully magnificent was, and is Italia. World-
famed are her estates : — Sybaris, the proverbial city of fastid-
ious luxury ; Crotona, the home of Pythagoras, enclosed by
a fifteen mile wall ; Syracuse, the rival of Athens, tenanted
by one million of souls ; Agrigentum, the Phaenicien Em-
porium, dear to Jupiter ; Neapolis, where charming Parthenope
lays thoughtlessly and invitingly along the slopes of the
thundering mountain ; Rome, the City of the Ctesars, the


maker and lawgiver of modem nations, now, once more, the
capital of the United Italy, and still as of yore the metropolis
of a world—a spiritual world embracing every civilized portion
of the earth. Also, Genoa , the Proud, the “ Ruler of the
Waves” in the middle ages ; Venice, the “ Bride of the Sea,”
“ lady of one fourth and a half of the Eastern Empire ” ;
Florence, the home of the Muses, the divine land of endemial
genius ! . . .
Her sons have brought her laws and her wealth to every
clime ; Gallia, Britannia, Iberia, Germania, Pannonia 4 Syria,
Lybia, .... were their colonies ; their works were and are
the wonders of the world, theatres sheltering eighty thousand
spectators, temples holding sixty thousand worshippers,
public baths for five thousand swimmers ; their roads were
such as the everlasting Appian way ; their acqueducts carry
ever-flowing rivers of ever limpid waters !
Wonderful is my mother: her rivals are gone—almost
fomotton —but she is there still, full of life and beauty. They
call her 4 * Eternalthey say that as long as the Coliseum
shall stand, so will she (Rome) and the world ! Phoenix like,
she has risen up to new life from the most terrible cataclysms,
not once, but thrice already. Tradition represents her first in
the virginal attire of Saturnian Astnea. Then history shows
her as Bellona, then as Minerva, then as Venus, and her
Graces. I see her now, wearing the buskins of Prometheus,
the apparently deformed demigod, still audacious. Prometheus,
defying the Furies of Hell, snatching the sacred thunderbolts
from the hand of infallible Jupitor, and proclaiming to the
world : “ Breathe freely, 0 Mankind, I have disarmed the
bi-headed monster, that miscarriage of Gallic genius, imposed
on me and you by ultramontane anointed bullies !”
Such is my mother ! lam such, a matron’s child : —I am
worthy of thy love !
Thou didst not ask me who I were, or whence I came,
when looking upon the whole world as my country, I was
brought to thee upon the friendly wings of fate-inspired
iEolus. —No, with true “ Christian ” spirit, thou were holding
thy hand out to me, and by thee, Australia, I was admitted
amongst thy adopted children. These are many, and perhaps
some have abused thy bounty. Ah! but those were not
Italy’s children. If some of the wandering gypsies who have
found their way to thy shores, first saw the light under an
Italian sky, they have prostituted their nations’ name as well


as the sublime melodies of her song : they are not the children of
that glorious mother : hear what she is, what she will be yet,
and knowing her, learn to know her true offspring.
Thou seem’st surprised that I should raise my voice to
thee in sadness ; but, see’st thou yonder sneering crowd,
abusing me, begrudging the morsel of bread I eat at thy board ?
Hard is the lot of him who abandons his Penates. His very
name becomes a reproach to him. “A Foreigner !”—that is
all he can be once here, no matter what he might have been.
“ Foreigner, we do not understand you ! your talk is so
funny ! why, our cockatoos speak better than you. Foreigner,
go to school !” It is but right, I thought, and to school I
returned at twenty-five, just as I was beginning to think that
I was qualified to be a teacher, —and to what a school ! There
my inexperienced companions, disciples of Owen, Carl Marx,
Bakounine, see to what pitiful straits are brought our inter-
national theories of “ Broad Home” and “ Universal Brother-
hood,” when they are put to a practical test, at the present day
at least; perhaps human nature may yet improve.
“ Foreigner, see, your shirt-collar is rather loose* ; we
like to see people stiff-collared.” And I bought military front
shirts and collars, and also stiffened my neck.
I was basking in the sunshine of a beautiful spring morn-
ing, stretched upon a velvety sward by the sea-shore, singing
the praise of thy placid waters and thy blue sky, happier than
Diogenes himself, or his modern Neapolitan descendants,
when, 10, the voice of one of thy censors startled me :
“ Foreigner, hold your tongue ! This is the day of rest ; go to
the house of the Lord ; there you will be allowed to sing !”
“ The house of the Lord why is it not Nature, limited only
by the canopy of Heaven itself ? Not here, perhaps, thought
I, and off I went to the nearest Temple, to rest and sing.
Behold ! a dimly-liglited house with a congregation of mortals
pale and melancholy, as if they were tired of life, whose
plaintive accents seemed to invoke their Maker to take them
away from the sight of the sun ! There was no room for me.
* An evening paper of Sydney lately found fault with the habit
of Italian boys who leave undone the collar button of their Crimean
shirts ; on several occasions the press has reproached to Conti-
nentals, to the Italians and French especially, their abstemious habits
and their propensity to make the Sunday a day of pleasure as well as
rest.


Italy is a stern mother ; ah, but her songs are lovely !
she worships her Maker in joyful notes of gratitude : not in
the mournful accents of fear and despondency. On the sun’s
day she crowns herself with flowers, and dances and sings as
a young nymph ! Then, wonder not if “ foreigners” feel the
absence of their Mother, and long for her merry rejoicings on
such a day.
Mind, Australia, she has had her day of ashes and sack-
cloth too ; she listened to a tonsured fanatic preaching the
“ Vanity of Vanities” of harem-tired Solomon, and she
plunged herself frantic into the fire. It was only a moment of
frenzy, of tremendous frenzy ; but it has inspired a great
woman’s mind, and the world has “ Romola”—it has inspired
a great artist, and the world has the “ Burning of the Vani-
ties.” Where is the master —except Mr. Punch —who will
attempt to commemorate the antics of the Salvationists or the
hysterical sobs of the quakers ?
“ They do not sing out here, on the days of rest,” thought
I ; “surely they do on working days and I tried to sing,
and I tried to sing while working, as the toiler of the fields
sacred to Ceres does, praising his toil. But I hear only sneers
around me, and the Censor says : “ Foreigner, we don’t sing
here : wait till the eighth hour is past.” Working hours
seem long here, labour seems a curse, then, that it shuts out
song. At last the eighth hour was over : “ Come, now,
come, foreigner,” I was told, “ come, let us drink of the spirit
of the Juniper, and the fire-water of corn, and be merry !”
“ I drink the juice of the grape ; the beverage of laugh-
ing mirthful Bacchus,” said I, and a storm burst over my
devoted head.
“ Body of Bacchus! but he talks Latin,” says one.
“ Yes, he’s a Papist ! them Popes drink juice,” says
another.
“ No, begorra, and it’s a pagan he is, a chinkee entirely,”
says a third, “ them heathens have the Bacchuses.”
“ He’s a Greek—a fishmonger—Bacchus is his country-
man.”
“Yes, he lives at Forest Lodge—He is one of those
beggars —bookworms.”
“ Off with your Grecian nonsense !”
“ Down with your juicy humbug !”
“ Get out of here, Foreigner, get out !”


And the echo repeated “ Foreigner ! Foreigner !
Foreigner !”
Foreigner ! How harsh it sounds to my ear. Do they
then really mean foreigner when they use that word here, in
this All-men’s Land ?* We, who work in thy fields, Aus-
tralia, we who toil in thy cities, who obey thy laws, and cherish
thy name under thy sky, are we not all thy children then ?
And here, in this virgin continent, meant by nature as a
home for the waifs of overcrowded, oppressed Europe, do these
selfish first-comers look at me as a foreigner, and use the
epithet as a reproach ? Do they here, in this so-called land
of freedom, dream of creating race distinctions, prejudices and
hatreds, while in the old land of despotisms and international
jealousies, rival nations pierce tunnels through the Alps to
remove nature’s own barriers, and even learn a universal
language ?—Who are those usurpers of ten square miles each
of thy soil ? Are they the Australians ? Do they dream of an
“ Australia for the Australians ?”—But then who are the
Australians ? Are they not the despoiled, despised black
skinned natives, the Australians ? Are not the other “natives”
imported ones, and have these as yet created in these hundred
years anything characteristic of the Australians of Australia :
an idiom, a poem, a statue, and a “ dish”—the sine qua non
distinctives of a nation ?
Or do these “ natives,” the descendants of the wanderers,
who have come here during these hundred years, claim to have
created thee ? Fair Australia of this day, do they think that
* Perhaps the expression “ All-men’s Land” requires explanation.
I quote accordingly a few lines of a previous publication of mine :
. . . . And in coming here they have availed themselves of the
same, or a letter right, with which thousands of Englishmen go to
Italy to speculate on the resources of that country. I say a “ better”
right, because the newly discovered lands have not sprung up from
the bosom of the ocean for the exclusive right and benefit of a single
race. The right of possession, based on the claim of the first occupier,
consequent on discovery, is but accidental. Only but for a few' hours
and Australia w'ould have been French ; a little more zeal, or rapa-
cious propensity, in Tasman or Van Dieman, and Australia wmuld
have been Dutch, and a New' Holland forever ; a little less discord
amongst the maritime republics of mediaeval Italy, and this continent
would now be a colony of the “ Chinese of Europe.” Moreover
Captain Cook would not have sighted Botany Bay, and taken posses-
sion of it, if preceding mariners had not doubled Cape of Good Hope,
and opened new tracks to navigation. And Cook’s predecessors
would not have ventured so far into the unknown ocean, had not


thou art the product of their exclusive genius, inventiveness or
energy, and that, therefore, Crusoe like, they may claim thee
and thy poor Man Friday as their own exclusive possession ?
It was not a naked, uncultured savage whom Defoe wrecked
upon the desert island : his hero landed there with a book, an
axe a rifle, with powder and shot, seeds and implements, and
th e knowledge, the result of the toil of a thousand generations
of men of all races, working through ages all over the globe,
and who have all contributed their share to improve alike
Robinson’s Island and Australia s Continent.
And on this continent they call me a foreigner !
I was beginning to believe, after years of toil among thy
children, that I was also a son of thine, when fate, in the
shape of a foreigner-hating bully murmured into my ear :
*• Memento homo, you are an Italian !” Vet I am blamed if I
answer, “to Italy I mean to return ! f
Foreigner ! How harsh the word sounds like the Spanish
etranjero! They use the word forestiere instead on the banks
of the gentle Arno, so as not to wound the feelings of the
pilgrim or the exile. “ Foreigner,” straniero , is used by Italy
only in apostrophizing and cursing Radetzky and his Croatian
hordes of women-floggers. Marvel not then if Trollope fell in
love with her, if Byron gave her his soul!
Foreigner they have been calling me for ten long years,
and with that name they have bestowed the usual epithets of
Columbus and Amerigus Vespucci torn its mysterious veil; and opened
a new field of glory, the first by discovering, and the second by
naming a great continent. Nor would these navigators have gone m
search of new lands or new roads to India, had not the riches and
wonders of this India and neighbouring Cathay been brought to light
bv Marco Polo and other early Italian travellers. Navigation would
not have been possible much further from the Pillars of Hercules, noi
would it have been attractive and remunerative, had not the Genoese
and Venetians made an art and a science of ship building and ship
sailing, and had not Amalfi provided their ships with the magnetic
needle Ido not mean to say that, in ultimate analysis, all credit
of discovery, and, consequently, all rights of possession rest with Italy ;
but I do say, and mean it, that all modern acquisitions are the result
of an uninterrupted series of international efforts, and therefore, are the
common inheritance of the civilised world. And, emboldened by an
enunciat recognised by modern Democracy, I Bay more x—lhe land,i
of the Earth belong collectively to the peoples of the Earth,* without
distinction of race or nationality.
f The vespernal paper already alluded to, an ominous Comet
asserts that all I talians in this colony are only sojourners.


reproach and contempt—reproaching me with the very faults
they encourage, support, patronise. They have made me taste
all the bitterness of Dante’s :
Oh, '•ome sa di sal lo pane altrui.
Many times they have brought me almost to the point of fly-
ing—insalutato hospite —back to my mother, and there throw
myself into her arms and say, “ Forgive my youthful presump-
tion, thou art my only, my true friend, after all ; there is no
world for me without thee, no home without thine !”
Hear my experiences among thy children, 0 Australia,
and judge between us.
One rainy day I presented myself to a disciple of Dasdalus,
and asked for work. “ I am sorry I cannot give you any,
answered the professional gentleman, but, pray, why don't
you try and do what other foreigners do for a living ?”
What do foreigners do for a living ? Loafing around the
“ statue ?” No ! Boarding at the soup-kitchen ? No ! Knock-
ing at their friend’s door ? No, they have got no friends.
What do they do, then ? May be they go in the streets to sell
fruit, or play fiddles or grind organs.
I replied next to a “wanted.” The wanting man was a
speculator in other men’s talents ; the wanted man was an
artist. “ Foreigner,” I was told, “your petition is not written
in correct English ; you cannot be much good in sketching.
But, wait, here is a note for an organ-hirer, go to him in my
name, and you shall have a billet.”
The suggestion was atrocious, and in my legitimate anger
I retaliated upon the first organ grinder I met, and smashed
his music-wandering machine. But, 10, the übiquitous myrmi-
don of thy majestic law, 0 Australia, caught me by the collar-
bone, and dragging 'me before the dispensers of thy justice,
placed me between the horns of dilemma. “ Either buy a new
organ, pay the bone setters and the scribe’s little bills, or else
for every half-crown you fail to pay, spend a day in Domus
Petri.”* I remonstrated with “ his Honor,” but he cut my
address short. “ Foreigner, we are not in Italy here ; the
laws of this free country recognise organ grinding as a lawful
trade. Begone !” As I went, I met at the very gate of
Themis’s Temple one of those little scamps whom thy censors
of morals reproach so bitterly to Italy,—a young fiddler asking
* To tell the truth. I am not the particular organ-smasher, but
there was such a smashing case tried, and such a seritense passed at
the Sydney Central Police Court, some seven years ago.


alms of the passers-by. “Do not encourage the growth of
this child into “ a vagabond,” I suggested to these. Ah, fly,
fly, fly for your bones, you poor slandered, never-understood
foreigner. Fly, five censors of morals, and manners are at
your throat, shouting menacingly : “ What harm does this lad
do ? Leave him alone or we will show you . . . You cursed
foreigner ! Bother take you and your country.”
A crowd of parrots cursed me and my mother ! They
curse and insult us still in their prints as well as in their
streets.
Insult and curse me, if you must insult and curse inoffen-
sive men ; but insult not, curse not the noble nation whose
name is Italia , though she be now in “ rags,” still she is my
mother, she has been your mother’s mother, nurse and
teacher.
Her true children will fight for her to-day as of yore, for
her honor as for her freedom. When I hear those slanderers
of the Italian name, I feel the desperate earnestness of the man
who has nothing left but an honoured name, and has sworn to
defend it; then I feel the fiery blood “ coursing in me ”of that
people who performed the tremendous drama of the Sicilian
Vespers, and . . .
But, which is the most horrible sight that human nature
can stand ? The sight of the son of Clymene fastened to a
rock, with an hungry vulture tearing his breast open, and
devouring his heart ? Yes, yes, I could stand the sight of a
vulture tearing, and rending, and gnawing the ever growing
villainous hearts of the slanderers of my mother Italy! Yes, I
feel that I could, I feel as if I . . .
Thou frown’st at my words, 0 Australia ! thou think’st
lam threatening, ungrateful for thy bounty. Ho, far from
it. I were unworthy to be one of thy children, were the sacred
name of my other motherland less dear to me. What
would’st thou think of me, thou, 0 noble matron, if I would
take no notice of the insults launched against my absent
mother? Thou wouldst say to me: You unnatural coward,
if you allow strangers to insult your natural mother, how can
I expect, I, an adopted parent, any filial affection, or regard,
or helping word and hand from you, forgetful, ungrateful
worm !
A mother!
To us, Italians, it is more than a mother. We have a
name for her that implies far more than the idea of home, of


parents, of friends. We call the holy land of our birth Patria ,
of which your word fatherland is but a cold translation, which
stands for the original word as “house” may stand for
“home.” And think what recollections the name of our
fatherland brings to our mind ! Take the spot where my
cradle was rocked—Drepanum—the least known and the
southernmost spot of Italy. Virgil has sung of it. It is a
thousand years older than Rome, standing still opposite to
Carthage’s ruins. Drepanum, the Trafalgar of the Roman
maritime supremacy, where the inevitable Trafalgar of the
present Franco-Italian contest will be, fought; where I hope
yet to see engulphed the Gallic insolence which threatens Italy
from Hamilcar’s resting-place. Rise up, spirit of Duilius, and
help my mother !
Englishmen cannot understand the full import of that
sublime word Patria. They never had need for it ; their
motherland’s existence has never yet been in danger. Patria !
how magical it sounds, when Italy’s call to her children is re-
echoed from Etna to Alps ; then husbands leave their wives,
invalids their crutches, the very “ dead their tombs,” and rush
to shield her with their bare breasts or die. May Australians
never hear such a call from their country. May they never
fully realise what Patria means !
But perhaps thou ask’st me : “ Who are those offenders ?
Surely they cannot be the sons of Australia ?” True, they
are not truly thy sons. They could not wantonly insult the
mother nation of the civilised world. They have had no old
feuds to settle with her, no cause to hate her, no provocation
to insult and slander her.
No, the slanderers are not truly Australian ; they
are a motley crowd of Anglophobists, who hate Italy,
because she is the only friend and support left to
England. A crowd of priest-begotten and priest-ridden
fanatics, and adventurers, who had only heels to show to the
Italian liberators at “ Castelfidardo ” and at “ Porta Pia,” and
whose mercenary careers have been hopelessly ruined by the
secularization of the Eternal City ; of envious bigots, who
cannot forgive Italy for what they call “ the privilege of
housing the Holy See of descendants of that race which
Julius Csesar declined to civilize, who blindly adopt the priestly
hatred of their leaders against the alleged jailers of the infal-
lible Pecci ; of a few of those self-appointed, self-denying
Protectors of the Australian workingman’s best friends, the


m
w ■ .
manufacturing monopolists, calling themselves Protectionists,
who have perhaps heard that Italy was the birth-place of Free-
trade, as it has been of nearly all the questions which have
revolutionised modern society ;* and, of course, of a few of
the ever-thirsty spongy “ dypsomaniacs,” who despise us
for our sobriety, and occasionally try to wound our feelings
with the remark that we “ are not good enough to get drunk
lastly, come the crowd of indiscriminate demagogues—self-
styled “ democrats ” —who look upon Italy as the evil creative
genius of all aristocracies, despotisms, and tyrannies, and seem
to ignore that it is the classical land of true Republican virtue
and true Democratic principles, alas, almost unknown to-day
to the contemporary cross-selling, foreigner-stabbing, demo-
crat-lynching Republics of the XIX century ! Demagogues,
whose sole idea of progress is the levelling down of everything
above the low level of their own abilities or understandings,
including amongst them upstart parvenus , and kid-gloved
“ Knights of Labour,” larrikins of the work shop as well as
larrikins of the Press, who hate Classicism, romanticism,
idealism, anything above brutal materialism ; who attack the
holders of anything beyond their own reach, whether intellect-
ual or material ; whose only delights are centered in “ roast
beef and whiskey who call themselves positivists, but are
really “ Animalists who profess to love music, but disdain
“La Sonnambula,” in order to see “ La Fille de Madame
Angot,” supplementing by a liberal exhibition of the legs, the
insufficiency of the French musical composition ; who are
fond of pictures, and pass by the chaste figure of the Penitent
of Magdala, to stop before the portrait of some modern brazen
Phryne, who, attired in her scanty costume, contemptuously
derides the last and highest hopes of frail, fallen humanity :
Repentance, redemption ! These “ animalists,” whose sense
of humour makes them ask with uncouth Mark Twain, “ Why
the Italian masters painted so many square miles of Madonnas
tending their eternal babes, and of monks looking towards the
heavens ; whose sense of grandeur make them think little of
the Arno, because it is not so wide a river as the Mississippi;
. * was in Tuscany that Bandini dreamt those wretched theories
which,, a century later, were developed by Adam Smith, in his “ Wealth
of Nations.” Cobden called that country the “ Classic land of Com-
mercial Freedom,” and this is, perhaps, enough to justify the hatred
expressed by hand-to-mouth protectionists against Italy and Italians
who dwell here.


whose notions of riches make them call “p oor the land where
the olive and the pomegranate luxuriate ; whose realism re-
quires the descriptions of Zola’s “ Hana, a fearful example
of what a fertile Italian brain may produce, when removed
from the land of Manzoni to the headquarters of literary
anarchy.
What a host of revilers and scoffers there are arrayed
against the I'oor son of Italy, who has wandered so far, to eat
the bitter bread of exile, in a land he thought was open to
“ all men of good will,” but where he is bid to divest himself
of every habit, thought, and feeling, which went to make his
individuality, How ridiculous such command sounds to him
in the mouths of his tormentors. How and then, one of these
may revel in stylish, perfumed, kid-gloved kind of luxuries, of
dainties imported (mark, animalists are, as a rule, protection-
ists) from the land of red-capped dandies, and delights in
having a chance of remarking, “ I prefer a glass of Roedeier.
By the way, champagne wine, now-a-days, is made from
Italian grapes, that is, when there is any grape juice at all in
it. But let him talk not of Roederer. Does he really drink
champagne ?
The larrikin, whether of high or low degree,_ is a thorough
going animalist, and respects no kind of superiority, but that of
brute force. Even his own brothers, should they attempt to
achieve fame in another way, are ignored, neglected dis-
couraged. Animalism alone is valued ; genius to be appreciated,
must be perverted to purely animalistic purposes. The
animalist worships only the large muscles of the athlete, the
rounded bust and prominent hips of the ballet dancer ;. he
revels in kicking balls and blackening eyes ; in witnessing
prize fights and “ free and easy dancing, and now and then,
by way of a diversion, chases some wretched creature in the
lanes of Woolloomooloo, or on the slopes of Mount Rennie.
And such are the slanderers of the Italian name here !
Such are they who say that the Italians are a race of degener-
ated, enervated, corrupted, lazy beggars.
The ominous comet, which is just beginning to appear in
the Australian sky, to guide young Australia in the paths of
democracy (?•) and protection, teaches the simpletons who
follow its trail that Italy is a cloaca among nations, and her
people the “ Chinese of Europe!” It teaches that their
15 **
.-i n - / 5 ? j 1 1 'I


presence here is becoming a public and social danger,* that
they come here to make fortunes by fruit-selling and music
killing in the streets, and return home to enjoy their gains
after having left here the seeds and germs of the corruption of
their community !
How foolish such words and how laughable, were they
not so unjust, so cruel, so mischievous !
Yes, foolish, for if the Italian Race is degenerated and
corrupted, what must those races be, who, after having for
centuries trodden upon her, thanks to the divisions amongst
her sons, fomented by priestcraft, have yet been shaken off
with one effort, once the nation had removed from her chest
that incubus, the legacy of ages, imposed upon her by United
Europe—the papacy ?
Yes we are corrupted ! But what about the corrupters ?
Another leader of Australian “ thought,” whose cog-
nisance is a volatile Mercury—the God of money grubbers and
the broker of mercenary love, the robber of Apollo’s cattle, of
Mars’ sword and of Venus’s Cestus—also descants on the
“ decline of the Italian race.” Pray, complaisant Mercury,
what do you mean by decline of a race ? There have been a
decline of the Roman Empire, a decline of Italian commerce,
a decline of Italian art—granted, but a decline of the race,
never ! It has had periods of rest, of transition, of evolution ;
but, never of decline. That race—that is my race—is yet the
same Etruscan race, of which the buried cities furnished the
British Museum with its most wonderful antiquities ; the race
which, from Rome, gave its language, its laws, its civilization,
and, from Rome again, from Florence, Genoa, Venice, &c.,its
religion, its arts, its songs, its very superstitions to modern
Europe—a more wonderful mark of its superiority than the
mere warlike conquest of the ancient world. That race is the
same which produced Julius Cfesar as well as Augustus, Cato
and Marius, as well as Spartacus and the Gracchi, Virgil and
Dante, Rienzi and Savonarola, Petrarch, Tasso, and Machia-
* I quote from a recent publication of mine :—About the state-
ment that the Italian element, as it is, constitutes a menace to the
wellbeing of the colony, any one can see its absurdity, if he only
looks at the statistics of population. So few are the Italians here,
that they are not mentioned separately, as the Germans, French, &c.,
are, but are included with other foreigners in a common heading :
Other nationalities. They may reach the thousand, at the most, the
four-fifths of which are agriculturists, laborers, and miners, and live
far in the interior.


velli, as well as Galileo and Columbus, Bruno, Vanini, and
Campanella, Mazzini, and Garibaldi, as well as Cavour, and
Victor Emanuel ; that is to say, a race in every page of whose
history for three thousand years, there appear names of great
men, any one of whom would suffice to illustrate a nation by
the extent of their services to mankind, and of their devotion
to their country, and many of whom died the death of martyrs
in the cause of humanity. And that the race is still the same
race, it is enough to see its navvies piercing the Alps, with-
out the reinvigorating help of whisky ; its naval engineers
launching ships once reputed sinkable utopias by the all-
knowing British admiralty ; and its thinkers upsetting the
papistical superstitions and reckoning, and its soldiers stand-
ing the Massowah climate and—a mere handful of them—the
onslaught of ten thousand Abyssinians led by Russian
officers ! . . . But, look there, at that picture, ye all-seeing
Mercury and ominous comet! —
“ Who is that red-shirted old man, followed by a band of
barefooted boys armed with pitchforks, and old-fashioned guns ?
Where is he going to ?” “He is an enervated member of a
declined race going to the conquest of a kingdom of eight
millions of souls.” “ And what becomes of this madman ?”
“ He conquers ; resigns the conquered crown and laurels into
the hands ef another, for this country’s sake; goes back penni-
less to his poor field, and, Cincinnatus like, dies !” “And yet
you call him a.. . ?” “An enervated and degenerated old
man.” “ His name ?” “ Garibaldi!”
Enervating ! indeed. Enervated then must be the
thousands who for ages have gone to Italy to seek the higher
inspirations of art and literature !
It was sitting on the ruins of Imperial Rome that Gibbon
conceived his great work on the fall of the Empire ; there—in
the most anti-papal city—Luther determined to start the
Reformation. From Italy Shakespeare and Handel, as well
as the stars of contemporary English literature, have drawn
their most sublime inspirations.*
* i; Shakespeare and Handel both lived mainly in London, but
both turned mainly to Italy when realising their dreams. Handel’s
music is the embodiment of all the best Italian music of his time, and
before him ; assimilated and reproduced with the enlargements and
additions suggested by his own genius. He studied in Italy, his
subjects for many years were almost exclusively from Italian sources ;
the very language of his thoughts was Italian, and to the end of his
life he would have composed nothing but Italian operas, if the


Enervated ! See Verdi feeling love, jealousy, hatred, at
seventy years of age, and writing “ Othello” with an alphabet
of only seven notes ! See Mazzini living in poverty and exile
for forty years, to carry out his self-imposed duty of uniting
his country, without hope of profit or reward. See Garibaldi !
See the hundreds of noble, wealthy, educated men who were
scattered over the world during the 50 years of the Italian
Revolution, living in exile in the most menial and humble
walks of life, not helplessly awaiting the restoration of a King
—like the French Emigres, —but silently working at the great
work, devoting to it their scanty earnings, and returning home
at the first call of duty to die on a Neapolitan scaffold, in a
Papal dungeon, or under the Austrian lash ! See Crispi, the
Italian Premier, backed by the voice of twenty-nine out of
thirty millions of enervated people, thundering to the Catholic
and Protestant nations alike, whose representatives are humbly
kneeling at the feet of a Pope, kissing his toe :—“ No Con-
ciliation ! Dictate me not! whether you be infallible demi-
gods, or simply arrogant mortals, interfere not with me ; I
am the State, and Italy is my name !”
Ah, it is something for a Nation that can say, in her
most critical moments : “My name is Italia !” It is some-
thing for me that I can rise my head, look defiantly at my
tormentors, and say : “ Hands off ! I am an Italian citizen—
Civis Romanus sum !”
But there are perhaps some debased, corrupted represen-
tatives of the Italian race here—there are really organ-grinders
and fruit hawkers who hail from Italy : the organ-grinders
and costermongers of Sydney do not all come from Cork and
Whitechapel. But, pray, who brings them here ? Who
encourages them here to continue in their wretched avocations
instead of shouldering an axe or a spade ? In Italy, organ-
grinders are not tolerated any more than are Jesuits ; here
both species seem to flourish well. In Italy, lazy sturdy
beggars are not fed now ; they are here, and here they swarm.
Thy children, 0 Australia, contribute the Peter’s Pence
which go to feed those Roman beggars who are still within the
Papal jurisdiction, and beyond the pale of Italian laws. Two
English public would have supported him. His spirit flew to Italy,
but his home was London. So, also, Shakespeare turned to Italy
more than to any other country for his subjects. Roughly, he wrote
19 Italian, or what to him were virtually Italian,"plays, to 12 English,
2 early British, 1 Scotch, and 3 foreign.”— Samuel Sutler's “ Alps
and Sanctuaries," 1


and a quarter millions sterling were presented to the Pope the
other day,—of these, £BOO,OOO, the wires say, go to the Papal
Charity, to feed —not the disbanded fat Franciscan mendicants
disposed of by the Italian Government—but real, common,
sturdy beggars, who lounge about the public squares and
streets of the principal cities, and are regularly paid by the
Papal Elemosinary Office, for giving trouble and embarass-
ment to the Civil authorities in the enforcement of the Vagrant
Act.
How little consistency there is in this sublunary world.
Here are people who send their money away expressly to help
a man to keep up mendicancy, and they object to mendicants.
Why mendicants are in especial honour in that spot of Rome
which is kept outside of Italy—the Vatican ; the church has a
special care of them, even after their deaths ! Look at this
picture of the “Blessed Joseph Labre, the beggar of the
Coliseum.”’ He was, according to his Vatican biographer, a
Frenchman who lived tor twenty years begging, under the
arches of the .great Mausoleum, and so pietoso —pious—so in-
different was he to worldly matters, that he kept the same
shirt on for six years. When dead, the friars who washed his
corpse found it a “ mass of vermin and . . . . ” I must not
quote further. “ What a martyr !” exclaims with due rever-
ence the biographer ; so he was “ beatified” by Leo. XIII six
years ago ; beatified because of his piety and resignation to a
voluntary existence of laziness and filth ! And Australians,
who object to dirty, lazy beggars here, send their money to
Pope Leo to keep up the breed, and they complain if some of
it finds its way to Australia. How consistent !
A demoralised race, too, our critics call us. Well, if
slavery demoralizes, we ought to have been corrupted to the
very marrow of our bones. Where is there another nation
which has been, like Italy, sold “ twenty-two times” by the
Popes ; which has been overrun by such a series of barbarians
and barbarous scourges as that beginning with an Attila,
“ Flagellum Dei,” and ending with a Bourbon, “ Xegatio
Dei 7” Where is the other country which has been taught so
incessantly from the highest places the examples of simony,
incest, sensuality, murder, brigandage,* and nepotism, incul-
* It is now proved that brigandage was used by the Papal See
as a weapon of offence in Southern Italy, after the union of Naples
and Bomagna with the Northern provinces. To a deputation of the
inhabitants of Sermoneta, complaining of the ravages of brigands,
Monseigneur de Merode, an Archbishop, Minister of War to Pius IX,


cated by a long succession of all-powerful, infallible popes
ruling over it for centuries by the support of foreign nations :
a country ravaged by Charlemagne, Charles of Anjou, and
Charles VIII of France, Henry IV and Barharossa of Ger-
many, the Houses of Austria, Spain, and Bourbon, Napoleon
Buonaparte and Marshal Badetzky, to say nothing of Car-
dinal Ruffo and the English Lord Nelson, the paramour of a
London street walker became somehow Lady Hamilton, and,
for whose sake, the gallant Admiral, turned into a Neapolitan
Sbirro, gave up to the hangman the noble Carraccioio, his late
brother in arms, who had surrendered upon the faith of a
regular capitulation, f And Nelson’s countrymen and wor-
shippers speak of the immortality of the Neapolitan beggars !
How insensate, how ungrateful, this outcry against a
whole nation, the nation who preserved the sacred deposit of
human knowledge and civilization during the darkness of the
Middle Ages, when the other peoples of Europe were cutting
each other’s throats ; and who received in return the legacy of
the struggle with the Moslem storm, senselessly provoked by
the useless and bloody crusades ; for Italy alone continued the
struggle and checked for two centuries after the fall of Con-
stantinople, the onward march of the Crescent, and you call us
an enervated race !
We have but yesterday accomplished with our own blood
the greatest modern revolution—the destruction of the tem-
poral power of the Papacy, and you call us “ cowards.”
The bankers of mediaeval Europe, the great merchant
princes of Genoa, Florence, Venice, lent England the means
of carrying on her great war against France, under the
Edwards and the Henries, who never repaid the loans, and
you speak of morality.J
and a known murderer and adulterer, replied : “ What ! do you call
brigands those soldiers of the Cross, fighting for the cause of their
king and religion ?”
f Prince Caracciolo, the patriotic republican Admiral, was de-
livered up by Nelson to be judicially murdered by the executors of
the personal vengeances of the notorious Queen Caroline and her
bosom friend Emma Hamilton, and was hanged at the yardarm of
his own flag-ship.
X The Italian bankers were frequently allowed to farm the Cus-
toms in England, as a security, perhaps, for loans which were not
very punctually repaid. In 1345, the Bardi at Florence, the greatest
company in Italy, became bankrupt, Edward 111. owing them in
principal and interest, 900,000 gold florins. Another, the Peruzzi
failed at the same time, being creditors to Edward for 600,000 florins


Twice we have breathed into your nostrils the breath of
intellectual life, with the Roman conquest, and again at the
Renaissance, and you call us the “ Nation of the dead.”
We have, first of all nations, proclaimed and advocated
the great principles of freedom, the injustice of private owner-
ship in land, the partitioning of large landed estates, the
abolition of capital punishment (Beccaria), the separation of
Church and State (Cavour), the introduction of Freetrade
(Bandini), of trade unions (known in Florence since the XIII
century), of cremation (Yenini), and of all those great social
reforms which modern thinkers and writers are now giving to
the world, dressed in fanciful styles, as their own creations,
and still some people here call us the “ Chinese of Europe.”
Where is your sense of justice ? We, the richest of
civilised lands, have struggled for ages against your invasions
and depredations, and you call us “ blood-thirsty ” because we
waged “ war to the knife ” against those who had deprived us
of the sword.
At present you send us thousands of third class passen-
gers to the “ shrine of the Apostles,” pilgrims who are no better
than their Mohammedan brethren rushing to the “ Tomb of
the Prophet,” and yet you complain that “ there is vermin in
Italy.”
Italy is one vast forest of marble structures ; marble
grows dirty with age, and “ whitewashing ” is out of the ques-
tion with it. If we scrub it you call us “ vandals,”* if we
don’t, you call us “dirty!” You seem to be acting the
part of the rustics in the fable of “ the old man, the son,
and the ass,” but you are wasting your breath now. We
mean to have “ our own way ” by all the gods of Olympus !
Listen to yonder Scottish Yankee, speaking disrespect-
fully in his “ Triumphant Democracy,” of the mother nations.
Does the democracy of Brooklyn Bridge and railway jobbers,
and Chicago lynchers forget that it owes its very home to
—Europe during the Middle Ages, by Henry Hallam, London.
These two seems together to represent £37,500,000 —thirty-seven and
a half millions of modern English money.
* Some time ago a section of the English and continental press
censured the innovations carried on by the civic authorities in Rome ;
the Italian Sanitary Commission has been accused of vandalism be-
cause it has condemned that nest of fever, the Ghetto, the quarter of
the Eternal City inhabited by the Jews. The foreign critics, living
at a safe distance, think that the Ghetto has many historical associa-
tions, and ought to be preserved.


Italy ? It is of no use to say that if the citizen of Genoa had
not gone in search of its continent some one else—some Yankee
no doubt —would have discovered it : it was discolored by
Columbus—and named by Amerigus !
Listen to that other, an Australian legislator and alum-
nus ! “ What is Greece ? What has Rome and Italy done in
comparison with our empire ?” asks this B.A. and M.L.A.
Our empire, forsooth. Read Byron and see what Greece is.
Read Gibbon and Sysmonds’ works, and learn about Rome and
Italy. But boast not of your empire, my sapient critic ; surely
you do not mean by it the British Empire, you who have in-
creased the Customs duties on “ foreign ” goods made in
England, and ridiculed the sending of an Australian contingent
to Suakim.
Yet Australians—especially those who send tribute to
Rome—have heard from the lips of Cardinal Moran what Italy
is, and what she has done for the world. Her trinity of
genius, Dante, Michael Angelo and Galileo, is more than
sufficient to immortalize the wide world ; either a Dante* or a
Galileo is enough to immortalise a nation. And yet the
Cardinal was silent upon what the Pisan philosopher might
have achieved had he not been gagged by Guzman’s holy
inquisition.
What has Italy done for the world ? Nothing, except
the founding of Europe and her colonies. Yet hear that
ominous Star which sheds its doubtful light- on our evening
hours calling this “Mother of Nations” the land of the
Chinese of Europe. Marvellous combination of wit and
civility ; of erudition and good taste. Whan an improvement
upon the Johnstons and Chesterfields of another century ; the
ancestors used attic salt, the descendant knows of no other
* Thus does Carlyle speak of Dante : —“ Yes, truly, it is a great
thing for a nation that it gets an articulate voice ; that it produces a
man who will speak forth melodiously what the heart of it means.
Italy, for example, poor Italy lies dismembered, scattered asunder,
not appearing in any protocol or treaty as a unity at all [prior to
1860] ; yet the noble Italy is actually one. Italy produced its Dante.
Italy can speak. The Czar of all the Russians, he is strong with so
many bayonets, Cossacks and cannons ; and does a great feat in
keeping such a tract of the earth politically together, but he cannot
yet speak. Something great in him, but it is a dumb greatness. He
has had no voice of genius to be heard of all men and times. He must
learn to speak. He is a dumb monster. His cannons and Cossacks
will all have rusted into nonentity, while that Dante’s voice is still
audible. The nation that has a Dante is bound together as no dumb
Russia can be.” —Heroes and Hero Worship.


but the Liverpool article to season both his corned beef and
his “ editorials” with.
Again listen to that fastidious young lady at the circu-
lating library : “ Dear me, no, T don’t read them Italian
things, I reads French novels, I loves the French !” So you
dislike Italian things, my promising young damsel, do you ?
And please, where have the Lyons silks and velvets which
adorn your naughty, pretty little body been weaved ? Read
your Braddons and ‘‘ Ouida’s” works ! Chacun a son gout.
Thy children, 0 Australia, profess to worship freedom of
speech and thought—though perhaps they care little enough
for freethought. Well, my anti-foreigner natives, do you know
to whom you owe that vaunted Christianity, which was im-
ported here with your own fathers and mothers ? It was born
in Bethleem, true ; but thanks to the Roman rulers of Judea
it was in Rome that the great battle between Golgotha and
Olympus was fought. It was in Rome that the Gospel of
Love took its root and grew, watered with the blood of
thousands of Martyrs. It was Rome, —nay it was Italy,—
that tended early Christianity in the Catacombs and shielded
it from the barbarians. It was the Italian pencil, chisel and
compasses which .symbolised and gave palpable forms to the
great principles and heroes of Christianity ; it was in Italy
Christianity found it most powerful champions ! In Italy
the . . .
What ? The Papacy? No, No, by the wrath of Heaven !
Papacy as it is, as it has long been, is not the work of
Italian hands. It was such in its modest apostolic simplicity ;
yes, but one clay the usurper of Gaul tempted with a worldly
kingdom the priest who claimed to be the vicar of the meek
Galilean, who had said “my kingdom is not of this world.”
A bargain was struck : the Pope crowned Charlemagne and
saluted him as Roman Emperor, and Charles made the Bishop
of Rome its king. Thence followed all the corruptions which
have rendered the very name of the Papacy an abomination to
the sons of Italy, whose anger drove it, time after time, from
the eternal city, there to be brought back again by foreign
soldiery—even the last time by the bayonets of republican
France, when the Christian world saw Pius IX reascending the
throne— not of Saint Peter, but of Hildebrand, of Alexander
VI, and of Sixtus V, “ having for his footstool the bodies of
his butchered countrymen.”
Australia, whenever thy children shalt visit Italy, let
them go to the Capitoline galleries —they shall see the master-


pieces of ancient end modern art multilated by the bombs of
republican France —of republican France, the slaughterer of
the Roman republic (1849) ! But this France, “ eldest
daughter of the Papacy ” was doomed at Sedan, and Rome
freed from her imposed ruler by my mother’s children. Papacy
as a temporal power, was doomed at last—it will live only at my
mother’s conditions : that it returns to its apostolic simplicity ;
that it be satisfied with a spiritual mission, and leave matters
political entirely to the State —Italy.
Such is my mother ! She has done much for the world :
she has undone things badly done by it ; I am one of her
children ! I am not “ foreign ” to the civilization of thy sons,
0 Australia. I am worthy of their respect, and I claim it.
I claim it, and I shall have it !
I hear in yonder forest the Laughing Jackass shrieking :
“ Be it so, be it so ! Your father and grandfathers were
great good men, but what are you now ?” I am not so great
as my forefathers were, but I am greater than my father —I
am rising again—Wait yet a day, and see what my sons shall
be! What am I? If nothing else, I am an illustrious
invalid who has worked hard through a lifetime, and now
wants rest, a temporary rest, to regain his exhausted strength.
Cease shrieking, ungentle Kookooburra, pray disturb
not my rest!
“ Ah, ah ! he is a foreigner, aforeigner, a cursed foreigner!”
A Foreigner?
There are foreigners in China, and they are stoned; there
are foreigners in France, and they are stabbed. But the first
is not the land of freedom, the other is the land of license.
Darest thou, the fairest of England’s daughters—thou whose
name and wealth have been published in all languages and
proclaimed all over Europe—thou who hast assisted foreign
immigration until a few months ago—darest thou allow a
rabble of dishonorers of thy virgin name, to insult foreigners
and slander their fatherlands ?
Hail, Australia !
Sincere is my greeting; thou perhaps may’st see in it that
ghastly sarcasm embodied in the greeting of the Roman
Gladiator entering the arena of death. But then, as lam
entirely in thy queenly hands, thou can’st dispose of my fate
by turning thy thumb downwards, pollice verso , and
finish what my mother has began ! A.
Queen of the South, Morituri te Salutant!




I
