

“ HALEK.“
What is it all About?
THIS PAMPHLET WILL TELL YOU
FOR IT CONTAINS —
AN INTRODUCTION TO * HALEK ’
THE REV. G. D. BUCHANAN, B.A. ;
LETTERS RELATING TO ‘HALEK’
SIR S. W. GRIFFITH, G.C.M.G., Chief Justice of
Queensland ;
DENIS O’DONOVAN, Esq., C.M.G.,
Parliamentary Librarian ;
A.ND OTHER WELL-KNOWN MEN ;
TOGETHER WITH
A REVIEW OF ‘HALEK’
MR. THEODORE WOOD.
BRISBANE :
A. J, ROSS 6fc CO,, Printers, 36 Queen Street..
1896.


HENRY L. DAVIS,
a(!latc|fnralicr,|ctoclfcr,6cmi|tfrcb;Tnt
anir ||lmmdogist,
M 3 QUEEN STREET,
« BRISBANE. »
Gold and Silver Jewellery of every description
made to order •
PEAELS, OPALS, SAPPHIRES, AND OTHER GEMS VALUED
AND PURCHASED IN ANY QUANTITY.
OLD GOLD & SILVER JEWELLERY PURCHASED
OR EXCHANGED.
OPALS, SAPPHIRES, ETC., CUT & POLISHED
Antique China, Bronzes, and Original Paint-
ings Bought or Sold on Commission.
Spectacl 3S and Optical Goods of Every Description
Note- Only one place of business-
143 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE
NO CONNECTION WITH ANY OTHER HOUSE


‘ %a h>h *
(■ROM THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE W. E. GLADSTONE
TO THE
AUTHOR OF “HALEK.”
favour.
Yours, very faithfully,
Hawarden, October Bth, 1896.
. , TV*" Fi " BUieB ‘ xne sea *as charms of its own but
ParadiSe - In HaLEK little
„ij . Uen ’** 18 in the ocean of immensity, with
tht aIV o d“ Y' 6 ° f th ' bleMed -«“‘™rt: “ Kashep,' 1
„, “ ar^nesg westward. In Bennben ” there is no
test for the earnest soul; influences from « Adaroni ” on the „
“ '7 “ ‘ he *■». « ever operative. Z
6 SMI 18 bomld in “Benuben.- Here is the secret of the
M / F (3357
I. (2,12.
Dear Sir, — I thank you for your courtesy in
sending me your interesting work ; and it affords
me sincere gratification to know that we have in
the Colonies an Author inclined to frame an
allegory on a basis so elevated, and a public
inclined to welcome his design with such marked
W. E. GLADSTONE.




By JOHN H. NICHOLSON
fHIS, the first Australian edition of Haler, is
reprinted from the London edition of 1882.
It has the Introduction by the Rev. Gr. D.
Buchanan, of Brisbane, the Review by Mr.
Theodore Wood (Editor of The Seen and The
Unseen), and various letters from well-known
men, together with a Dedication, Preface and Key, by
the author.
WHAT IS HALEK?
By The Rev. G. D. BUCHANAN.
Ir “ a good book is the life blood ” of a Master Spirit, then we
have in Halek the best of books. Here we have truth sublime,
veiled in allegory; here we have the aspiration of the soul, set
forth in life-like pictures. The sea has charms of its own, but the
islands in the sea make the poet’s paradise. In Halek our little
world is “ Benuben ”; it is in the ocean of immensity, with
“ Adaroni,” the place of the blessed—eastward ; and “ Kashep,’’
the abode of darkness —westward. In “ Benuben ” there is no
rest for the earnest soul; influences from “ Adaroni ” on the one
hand, and from “ Kashep ” on the other, are ever operative, even
while the soul is bound in “Benuben.” Here is the secret of the


world’s unrest, the eause of all its trials, perplexities and wars.
These planes of world life are before us, and the journey from one
to the other gives us the “ Adventures of Haler.” This is a
book every young man should read as he sets out on the Journey
of life. It will help him to know himself, and to understand life’s
meaning. It is a book oi reyelation to the desponding, and a
book of encouragement to all. It uncovers the shams of
“ Benuben ” and discovers the way of everlasting life.
It is a Christian book, not in a sectarian sense, but in the higher,
fraternal, and spiritual sense, and therefore acceptable to men of
all nationalities and religions—a forerunner of “ the Christ that is
to be ” —whose spirit is destined to unite the human race in the
unity of diversity.
It proclaims the way by which the seeker after truth can rise
from the bondage of the flesh (Pagam), through the enlargement
of the intellect (Karom), to the illumination of the Spirit (Sahitam).
Halek, struggling in the first, finds faith ; journeying to the second,
he finds hope, and in the third, love. Faith, Hope, Love, these
three, hut the greatest of these is Love.
Halek is a romance of the highest order, and when all the
little books, written for little minds, shall be forgotten, Halek will
stand, as the dream of a seer, whose vision of life came to him in
the wilds of the Australian bush.
The style of the book is excellent, and the story carries the
reader on from stage to stage until the climax of aspiration is
reached.
Halek will never grow old, as humanity is the same always
and everywhere. Multitudes yet unborn will be thankful that
John H. Nicholson lived, dreamed and wrote.
Cl. D. BUCHANAN,
Minister of Wickham Terrace Presbyterian Church.
Brisbane, March 6th, 1896.
From the Bev. G. A. M. Pringle.
All Saints Rectory, Brisbane,
I have read your book, Halek, with great interest. It is
written upon an unusual topic, but I have yet to learn that the


taste for a dignified and sustained allegory has altogether died out
—at any rate, I still preserve it; and your book has therefore
caused me great pleasure.
The story is interesting in itself; the allegory is just, and
worked out with skill, while the great thoughts represented in clas-
sical English, with a wealth of poetical imagery, make me desire
to keep such a book always by me after it has been read. I wish,
therefore, that when you bring out your new edition you would
send me a copy.
From the Chief Justice of Queensland, Sir Samuel Griffith, G.G.M.G.
I am very glad to hear that you are going to bring out a new
edition of Halek, and hope it will have a large sale. I enclose
an order for four copies.
From the Rev. W. Osborne Lilley, F.R.H.S. author of “ The
New Theology.”
Who would not read Halek ? Its graphic delineations of the
soul’s struggles, its unveiling of the heart’s tragedies, its subtle
touches of satire, its proverbial wisdom and quaint parables, its
melodies of hope amid the dirges of loss and pain, its revealing of
the everlasting foundations underlying the debris of time, make it
a book for the weary masses, the enjoyment of the cultured, and
one that will be more highly appreciated as the world advances
into the light of Christ.
From Denis O’ Donovan, Esq., C.M.G., Parliamentary ] Librarian,
Hearing that you are soon to bring out an Australian edition
of Halek, with Introduction, Key, etc., I beg that, as a small
tribute to the literary merit of the work, my name may be placed
on the list of subscribers for two copies. Yours, etc.,
D. O’DONOYAN.
From Mr. John Gordon Stewart, Private Tutor, Brisbane.
I am much pleased to learn that you are bringing out a new
edition of Halek— the Pilgrim’s Progress of the 19th Century. 1
have long admired it as a contribution to ihe solution of the


problem of existence, as a book containing a protest against the
cold pessimism and the aggressive cynicism of an age of intellec-
tual corruption, and as the vehicle for a pure and elevating philo-
sophy, none the less convincing, that it is conveyed through a
charming and artistically-woven story.
You may put me down for three copies.
From Mr. H. L. Davis, Queen-street, Brisbane.
If Halek affords the general public half the pleasure it has
afforded me, your name will become a household word in Queens-
land.
Your admirable exposition of the most beautiful and most
highly prized Christian ethics is so presented as to win the
reader’s sympathy. Every page sparkles with a light that should
commend your book to those desirous of learning from the Great
Master.
Did circumstances permit, I could wish to subscribe for as
many copies of Halek as would enable me to give one to every
young man of my acquaintance, but I must content myself with
two copies, for which kindly add my name to your list of
subscribers.
From Mr. R.H. Roe, Mead Master of the Boys' Grammar School,
Brisbane.
I shall be glad to take two copies of the new edition of Halek.
It is in my judgment, as a literary work, a “ well of English unde-
filed,” and no one can read it without gaining spiritual elevation
from the nobility of its moral tone.
From Mr. Granville G. Miller, a Judge of the District Court.
I am very much delighted to hear you propose to bring out
another edition of Halek. I think that, irrespective of the
natural charm of the book, the purity of the English, and the
classical beauty of its style make it a very valuable addition to
our libraries.


following letters, received since the first issue of
this pamphlet, testify to the wide interest; taken in
the forthcoming revised edition of Halek. I have great
pleasure in giving them publicity.
John H. Nicholson.
From the Rev. Hugh Jones, M.A., Minister of Wharf Street
Congregational Church, Brisbane.
Your Halek is no ordinary book ; it could have been written
only by a man of spiritual genius and of deep Christian
ence. When it is re-published, will you please send me two
copies of the book, as I should like to help to lift up on high a
torch that lights up the Spiritual Way ?
From the Rev. William Whale, Baptist Minister, of City
Tabernacle, Brisbane,
I find you are about to issue a new edition of Halek, and am
almost offended that you have not informed me earlier of the date
of issue, for lam anxious to have a copy for my own use. Please
put me down for two copies, and use my name with anybody who
cares for such influence as a commendation. You should have a
large response, and I hope you will be well repaid for your venture.
and ol tire justice ol Jtlis laws, uur world is repre-
sented as an island, “Benuben, ” lying between the
unknown shores of “ Adaroni” (the abode of the
blessed ones) on the Eastern side, from which direction


problem of existence, as a book containing a protest against the
cold pess * ~«»aaiye cynicism of an age of intellec-
tual con
sophy, r
eharmix
affordi
land.
high!;
reade
comr
Mast
you:
two
sub
It
fi
f
another edi
natural charm of the book, the purity of the rungi.
classical beauty of its style make it a very valuable addition to
our libraries.


“ H A L € K.”
By John H. Nicholson.
Reviewed bv
THEODORE WOOD,
Editor of The Seen and The Unseen, Brisbane.
THIS great work is not so much the product of a
master mind as the outpouring of an inspired
pen. The pilgrimage of Halek from Pagam via
Karom to Sahitam is allegorical of the earth life of one
who, strong in his faith, and sure in his hope of
future bliss, is yet destined to learn hard lessons, to lie
prone under heavy blows, to be thrown into the very
depths of despair, to be tried and re-tried, to be
tempted and tortured in body and mind times out of
number before he has sufficiently purified his nature,
and conquered Self to a degree that will enable him
only to experience delight in making others happy, and
in subordinating all desires of the flesh to the will of
God.
The first chapter is explanatory and descriptive, and
shows throughout in a marked degree the author’s
intense earnestness of purpose and keen comprehension
of the all pervading love and wisdom of the Creator,
and of the justice of His laws. Our world is repre-
sented as an island, “Benuben, ” lying between the
unknown shores of “ Adaroni” (the abode of the
blessed ones) on the Eastern side, from which direction


spring the love and light that illumine the world, and
“ Kashep,” the unknown land of loveless darkness,
which lies across a frozen sea to the West, where
dwell those who, through their own misdoings, are no
longer fitted to mingle with their kind, and who “ have
no wish to progress ” towards the realms of light.
Benuben is divided into three countries, Pagam,.
Karom, and Sahitam, representing the bad, medium,
and best phases of human nature.
Halek’s father is a wealthy merchant, of the world
worldly, and necessarily a Pagama. Halek is apprenticed
to a jeweller in a distant city of Pagam, and when
the story opens he is entering upon his pilgrimage of
life. His father has given Halek what he considered to
be a good opening towards future commercial success,
and, moreover, has promised to find him a considerable
sum of money to enable him to set up in business for
himself as a goldsmith when he shall have learned his
trade. Halek, however, is a dreamer, and feels he
possesses that within him which urges him to adopt a
higher profession than that of a tradesman ; and
therefore he works reluctantly and against the grain.
Always aiming for higher things than those amongst
which his lot is cast, his life is one long struggle after
the ideal shown him by his Soul in his early youth.
To closely follow the work in this review would be
impossible in the space which we can allot to it. The
whole book is so illumined throughout with finn
thoughts, lofty sentiments, divine ethics, and grand
passages of pure sonorous English that but meagre
justice can be done to it by a reviewer. It is in our
opinion an immortal work, and one which will rank
high as a standard book long after its gifted author
shall have gone to that home of bliss which he pictures
so brightly and so admirably in his pages. It was, un-
doubtedly, written in advance of its time, but now at
the close of the present century, when the dawn of a


light new to our thinking world is rapidly spreading
its radiance over the darkness of materialism, the new
edition of Halek, which is promised shortly, should
find thousands of readers to welcome its appearance.
Those who study Halek will find it a work invaluable
as a compa non, soothing in its effects upon irritated
nerves, strengthening to the weak, a gentle curb upon
the proud, and at all times a noble incentive to the
leading of a life which shall reflect credit upon the
individual, and assist every one to guide his earthly
course upon the great principles of Man’s Loving
Duty to his Creator and to himself. The author must be
held perfectly free from any attempt to coerce anyone’s
belief in any given direction. Halek is a work that
stands alone in our literature. Without bias of any
kind, it incites only to the conception of noble thoughts
and no less noble actions; nor once, in following the
hero’s pilgrimage, does the reader come across any
passage which would lead him to suppose that
the author of such a book was aught but a high-souled
being standing upon an independent plane, who lived
only for the good of his fellow man. Halek is a
beautiful allegory, and must be read “ between the
lines” throughout.
The 2nd chapter may be tersely summed up as
refined sarcasm upon our manners and customs, more
especially upon the hollow and Pharisaical religious
professions of the time. “The men of Siroth are
easily known by their dress ; for when they are in the
deep sadness of mourning, or in the extreme joyful-
ness of festivity, they must be dressed from head to
foot in the blackest cloth that can be procured.”
Again, amongst the Pagamas, or spiritually lowest
and most worldly class, the principal faith is that of the
“ Black-Whites,” who possess a black stone in their
temple which the faithful must believe to be white ,
because it is an article of their faith to believe that


the stone is white, although the evidence of their reason
and eyesight is directly opposed to the doctrine taught.
The effect of this endeavour to supplant reason by
dogma is expressed with great subtlety in the following
words: “ Their form of worship is extremely simple.
The elders stand in a circle round about the stone, and
when they have joined hands, they rush thereon head
first, and continue this exercise until they are stunned
by the repeated shocks (the italics are our own). When
the elders have performed their duties, it is the turn of
the young men ; then come the women; and lastly the
children walk up to the stone, and touch it with their
foreheads, but so as not to hurt themselves.” Poor
Halek had a hard time with his master Kobesh,
because, to use his own words, “ as you walk up to the
stone, you must repeat the words White is the stone ;
and I could not bring myself to say that it was white
before I could see that it was white.”
The 3rd chapter runs on very much the same lines
as the preceding one, caustic reference being made to
our outward observances of the Sabbath, and to
Mayoral elections. In regard to the * inevitable col-
lection at all places of worship, Halek wonders
why so few people subscribe their names to the
“ petition ” to the Great King which is handed round
for them to sign, and he adds, “In all these contri-
butions, it is the duty of the Uzza ” (chief minister)
*• to be the first; yet, strange to say, there are Uzzas
who are not the first, nor even the last; and who,
every tenth day, read aloud a petition for the progress
of useful works, towards whicn they themselves not
only refuse to contribute, but which, in a variety of
ways, they both discourage and obstruct.” And again,
“ It is to be observed that the Pagamas think there is
great merit in going to the Temple, in asking for
things they do not want, in singing hymns of thanks-
giving for what they have not received, and in hearing


the explanation of laws which they do not intend to
keep.”
It was at one of the Temple services that Halek
first saw his ideal of perfection —her whom he called
Turoni. This beauteous being—all love and purity—
plays an important part in Halek’s life and adventures.
At this time she has just reached that stage of spiritual
progression which causes her to leave Pagam and take
up her residence in Karom, far advanced from
that Soul-state which would allow Halek to bear her
company. Halek never forgot his ideal, and the very
thought of her inspired him with a longing after purity
and progress to a higher state, but before he could
move onward and set his foot firmly upon the soil o
Karom, many a trial was before him, and many a
victory over Self had to be grandly won.
With regard to the Mayoral elections, Halek typifies
our system by describing the Pagam ceremony of
“ Choosing the Richest ” with dry humour and
delightful irony, and tells, in language all his own,
how he, who is indeed the richest, who can eat
and drink most, throw most money about, and during
election times bear meekly the most abuse, is pretty
sure to be elected for the current year.
In the 4th chapter Halek is sorely tried, but his
faith in a bright Beyond brings him through, and the
wondrous feeling of calm that comes over him after a
great trial assures him that a constant struggle against
evil brings victory over Self. “ For some moments
my soul was tossed in a tumult of rage when I dis-
covered that Kobesh had slandered me to Rayamin,
and now desired me to know it. But after a while the
tempest ceased, and there was a wondrous calm, in
which I beheld Kobesh from a remote region of thought
where his arrows could not reach me.”
Modern self-styled scientists are mildly ridiculed
under the head of “ The sect of the ‘ Reasoners.’ ” For


refined satire commend us to the following passage ;
“ The Reasoners say that all things are governed by
laws, and that the laws themselves are governed by
one great law, beyond which is nothing, and which
provides that all laws work harmoniously together.
This Law of Laws is what the Reasoners worship ;
and, as a law can have neither form nor parts, and, as
they desire to worship something visible, they adore a
arge painting which represents a point, a line, a
triangle, a square, and a circle ; for these, they say, are
emblems of unchangeable laws.”
In the next chapter the great lesson is taught that
one victory over Self should not make any person too
confident that the struggle is over. Halek had been so
long and continuously galled by the petty malice of his
master that he grew to hate him. On this subject Halek
reflects, “ When a young man achieves a victory over
some sudden passion, or over a besetting vice, he
thinks that he may rest secure, and forever
enjoy the fruits of conquest. But as he becomes older,
he learns that the lengthened enjoyment of victory
prepares the way, not only for another conflict, but for
an ignominious defeat.” Halek adds to his reflection
the following great truth. Speaking of Kobesh, he
says: “ While I pitied him he could not injure me;
but when I hated him, I caused myself a thousandfold
more pain than he had ever inflicted upon me. Of all
loads hatred is the heaviest .” Then came the inevit-
able re-action to a spirit such as Halek’s. He chanced
to take up an old copy of the book of Adaroni, which
was used as a lamp stand—so neglected is the Bible in
Pagam. He read it between the lines, and he under-
stood it ; and this was the first turning point of his
life. What he gathered from reading the book of
Adarooi, and what everyone can learn from our Bible,
is so admirably expressed that we cannot do better
than reproduee Halek’s words; “ I found that the


Great King speaks of himself, not only as the father
and friend of his people collectively, but of each
person individually; and I saw that, whereas a man
might all his life truly serve his prince, and yet remain
unknown and unrecompensed, he who faithfully served
the Great King would certainly receive an abundant
reward.”
“ I saw that as a man finally is what he has become
through repeated exercise of his free will in choosing
between good and evil, he requires some place where
this perfect man may be thus built up till he is fit to
enter upon his highest duties in Adaroni —even as a
ship is built in a dockyard, and not upon the ocean.”
“ It became clear to me that, if the Great King pur-
posed to make Adaroni the very kingdom of kingdoms,
in which each person, from the highest down to the
lowest, shall discharge those duties for which he is
most fit, and that if his subjects were naturally slothful
and vicious, there must be a place set apart, out of
Adaroni, where men may be made fit for Adaroni; and I
could understand that Benuben was well suited
to be such a place.”
“ I could also conceive that if there were persons
who had so far destroyed within themselves the love of
good, as heartily to believe that evil is good, there
should be a place whither such persons might be re-
moved, so that they should not pervert and corrupt
others; I could understand that Kashep was well
suited to be such a place.”
These beautiful passages give the keystone of
the whole structure of the book, and summarise the
author’s conception of the perfect justice and love of
the Creator as shown in his scheme for regulating the
spiritual progress of mankind. One more passage in
this chapter we must quote from Halek’s reflections: —
“ The law of progress may be thus stated: Learn what
is true ; desire what is good; though prone to


evil, do not commit evil ; good deeds will surely follow ;
and the good deeds which you at first performed with
difficulty, because it was chiefly your judgment which
approved of them, will afterwards be performed with
full delight when you have learnt to love them.”
The 7th chapter is evidently designed to show that a
brain clogged by the use of alcohol and drugs cannot
appreciate the higher joys pertaining to a really spiritual
nature, and that the pure perceptions of the very soul
itself are deadened if the senses are dulled by the use of
drugs. To exemplify this, Pasakh, an alchemist, is
introduced who presents Halek with some confectionery
which upsets his brain’s equilibrium and forces him to
turn every subject, however serious, into unseemly
jest. This Pasakh does not appear again in the book
till near its close, when he plays a most important part
in Halek’s life.
In the Bth and 9th chapters the good wrought in
Halek’s nature by his study of the book of Adaroni is
clearly shown by his determination to follow a pro-
fession by which he may exalt and do good to the
hearts and minds of others, rather than to stick to a
mere earthly trade the sole object and aim of which is
to amass riches for selfish ends. To fulfil his high
purpose Halek leaves Pagam and commences his pil-
grimage by starting for Karom.
He has with him 100 gold pieces which his father
had sent him, and he feels rich and secure in his
possessions; but many trials await him, and bitter are
his last experiences of Pagam. He loses the gold that is
so valued in Pagam, but finds instead of it a more than
adequate return in the brightness of hope and in the
consolation of faith. By the misfortunes that happen to
him on his journey, and the adventures that he
meets with, and which are graphically described, Halek
learns that there must be no lagging on the path from
Benuben to Adaroni, so, taking to heart the lessons he


kas learnt, he falters not by day or night until he arrives
at Karom, and enrols his name on the list of its
inhabitants.
So far, the author has described Halek as one who
has been forced by circumstances to live amongst
worldlings pure and simple, but who, directly the
opportunity offered, seized it, and cast his life amongst
a better class, hoping thereby to improve himself, and
eventually become fit company for the noblest men
and women that the earth posses-es and ultimately
for the angels.
Halek’s life has been divided practically into three
parts. We have now done with the first; and the
more we study the hero in the second part, the more
we admire the very fine intuition possessed by the
author into the various sides of human nature. In
Pagam, Halek possessed a higher soul that the majority
of those around him. Upon his arrival in Karom he
finds himself of a lower order, for he has not yet
thrown off the taint of Pagam, nor can he see at first
with the eyes of a Karoma, and appreciate their gentle-
ness ; for instance, he cannot understand that reproofs
can be given in loving earnest by a Karoma for the
good of others and not incited by uncharitable feelings.
The kindly nature of the Karomas is also strange to
him, and he has gradually to pass through the experi-
ences of a mental terra incognita, and to endure many
trials before he fits himself to rank on a level with the
best Karomas, and to really understand the happiness
of a complete effacement of self for the benefit of
humanity. As he rises to more lofty heights, so
does Halek in the second part of his narrative use
still more noble and majestic language than before.
The whole tone of the author’s work becomes richer
and more expansive as his ideas grow with Halek’s
advancement, and at times we run across passages than
which no finer are to be found in the English language


both for purity of diction and for the music of their
expression, but such will be noted at the proper time.
At present we proceed with our epitome of the work.
The 10th chapter is mostly taken up with the story
of Milroth and Zarma, conveying one of the most
beautiful lessons, expressed in the purest language, of
the action of faith, and the triumphant reward of sub-
lime courage under adversity and oppression. Milroth,
a young lapidary, was enamoured of a poor but
beautiful maiden named Zarma, but the girl’s father
favoured a rich suitor and forbade the match between
Milroth and Zarma. In grief Milroth wandered about,
and at length he slept Then a voice seemed to say to
him, “ Denounce thy Love, and love shall raise thee
up.”
And with these words a wondrous light shone within
him, and he exclaimed; “ I yield thee up, 0 Zarma,
to the power that is stronger than I.”
Milroth saw his Love once more, and set out for the
Diamond Mountains to seek the means of supporting
Zarma as her father would wish. Here we have an
allegory in an allegory—of thoughtful conception, a
veritable adytum in adyto. What do the Diamond
Mountains signify but that in solitude the intellect
may seek, but not necessarily find the jewel of
hidden truth, which lies far from the beaten track
of the ordinary traveller ? Zarma was Milroth’s ideal,
and he went forth in search of the means of supporting
and proving his faith in his ideal ; he journeyed in
hope and trust; his spirit was cheered by the voice
of sympathising nature. “He lived in solitude
and silence. More than once his courage failed him,
and a fierce hunger for human companionship gnawed
at his heart; but he communed with the skies, and the
wild flowers whispered to him-, he made friends of the
birds, and the insects taught him; and he laboured
zealously from day to day.” The italics are our own,


In the next chapter, the eleventh, we have in the
“ Vision of Lormuz,” one of gems of this noble work.
It must be read aloud before the sympathetic harmony
of words and ideas can be followed in all their musical
richness. This chapter also contains “ The Song of
Halek,” deeply expressive of the pilgrim’s soul longing
to reach its ideal of purity and love. In the “ Vision
of Lormuz,” the following musical description of sound
and colour is not anywhere that we know of, surpassed
in English prose :
“ Behold a tree standing alone upon a bare mount
tain.
The sun rises and the tree is transfigured, while
his leaves, waving in the breeze, glitter like jewels.
Sometimes the wind brings him from afar the per-
fume of trees of his own kind, which he has never seen.
Then do his bright leaves quiver and droop.”
The depth and pathos of Halek’s song may be
gathered from a recital of it:—
THE SONG OF HALEK.
I call to the maid whom I named long ago Turoni.
She sat in the Temple, her white-haired father beside
her. I gazed on her face, and my soul filled with love.
I am singing to thee—Turoni.
Unknown to me was her dwelling ; what was her
name I knew not; only her beauty I knew, and the
gentle grace of her movements. Only one look did she
grant me before she departed.
I am seeking for thee—Turoni.
Many around me love and are loved in return ; many
a song is sung in the light of a beautiful eye. But
I sing alone, and the tone dies out in the darkness.
I am waiting for thee—Turoni.


Only in dreams do I see thee; my love has lived
only on hope. Show me a token to tell me I hope not
in vain. My heart is weary with looking and longing
for thee.
I love thee alone—Turoni.
The 12th chapter deals with Karom, and shows that
although there are many religious sects, they are less
positive and more trusting than in Pagam. They are,
briefly, too refined for Pagam, but not sufficiently pure
for Sahitam, the third and final stage of man’s spiritual
progression.
In the next chapter Halek, determined by the splendid
language of Erimoth the harper—“ Music is the voice
which cries aloud in the wilderness, and murmurs in
the perfumed groves of the lovers. Music slides her
tremulous tones into the heart of the humble, and
thunders forth her call before the fortress of the
proud”—resolves to be a musician, and listens to a
most instructive lesson on patience, from Erimoth,
which concludes with the words, “ Ardour without
patience and a wise ordering of our steps, is but as the
glare of the meteor which rushes earthwards ere we
have rightly beheld it. The fiery sun and the grave
moon know their seasons.” In this chapter the strange
woman Zenah, is introduced, representing disorderly
affection and discontent. Halek, acting on his good
impulse, leaves this woman though she excites his sym-
pathy, to seek his ideal from whom he has received an
unexpected summons—the Beautiful Maiden whom he
calls Turoni. Having found her spending her life and
energies, as might be expected, in the service of others,
Halek thinks his bliss is now permanent, but he soon
finds out that there is truth in the fable of “ The
King’s Horse,” which shows “ the difference that may
be between what we conceive, and what we produce, the
imperceptible degrees by which good becomes turned


into evil, and the ease with which we flatter ourselves
and accept the flattery of others.”
The fifteenth chapter is an analytic epitome of the
various moral states of man, and shows the author’s
intimate acquaintance with the higher truths of
spiritual life as well as with the ordinary weaknesses of
humanity. It is a caution for the present, and a guide
for the future.
“ The Story of Rimnag,” which follows, shows how
surely a man may conquer himself by faith in God,
and a determination to keep His laws ; and how, at the
end of his trial he may become a valued member of
society. Amongst the many beautiful ideas in this
story, the Lily holds first place. Rimnag is so engrossed
by self, and merely carnal pleasures, that he cannot
bear to see a white lily—the emblem of purity; so,
when a great physician sends Rimnag on a pilgrimage,
he gives him a pot of earth in which is hidden the
living bud of a lily, as yet unseen above the surface.
Rimnag has to tend this bud until it blossoms with his
own moral improvement into a lovely flower which he
refuses to part with at any price to those who tempt
him to do so, but which he eventually gives to a
pure woman whom he finds worthy of the gift. It is
a lovely story worthy of the author and his work.
In the 17th chapter Halek yields to insidious tempt-
ation while yet, he knows it not, and loses his situation
with the good man Alsor. He accepts another, how-
ever, which he thinks will suit him better. In reality
he neglects the stern business of life for indulgence in
the romantic side of existence.
In the 20th chapter we meet one of the grandest
passages that occu sin the whole work. The scene is
laid in the hall of the Harpers, and the author thus
describes Halek’s thoughts as he listens to the music of
Meshran: —“ Then did the music rise and fall, and
rise again, pulsing in solemn rhythm, till I saw the


island no more, but alone on some serene height, I
took into my heart the fierce pangs, the pining
sorrows, the loneliness, and the grand endurance of
those bright spirits who hope and have not, who toil
without sympathy, who fight without victory, but who
still strive upwards, urged and sustained by the
glorious instinct that at last, somewhere, it shall be
well with them.”
In the 2Brd chapter B alek, in a conversation with
Turoni, places love before duty, but is gently and
lovingly corrected by her. He is made to see the
weaknesses of his nature ; but the confirmation of
Turoni’s words by Erimoth and Zukku reduces him to
a state of bitterness and despair.
In the next chapter Halek rejects self-indulgence at
the expense of independence, and his conduct begins
to receive its own reward.
Halek sounds the keynote to his whole character
when he writes to his brother that he “ would dather
be an unnoticed and struggling aspirant towards some
noble end, than the indolent inheritor of untold
wealth.” The 25th chapter concludes with the dream
of Kabri, wherein is given in splendid language an
interview between God and Man.
Next, Halek’s employer, Kabri, is called to Adaroni,
and the “ Grief Sisters ” are introduced “ whose choice
work is the art of making others happy.”
The 27th is an important chapter. Halek, ever too
anxious to succeed quickly, fails again in his musical
exhibition—in his dream of art; and, falling under the
spell of the temptress Zenah, flings his good influences
behind him in despair. The spell of the Evil One
continued to enslave him for 70 days till the climax
came. Halek awakened and wrote in his Kecord r
“ Whatever else I may aspire to, I resolve first to
aspire toivards becoming a good man.”


Halek now makes another attempt to secure an easy
life without much effort, and again he fails. Then his
final resolve is taken to win the object of his ambition
by hard work, and he leaves for the Diamond Mountains
to undergo a probation of several years. Previous to start-
ing he makes the almost superhuman sacrifice of Self in
offering to the woman he loved with such a love her
freedom, and liberty to follow the dictates of her own
heart in his absence without reference to him. Halek’s
farewell letter to Turoni contains high resolves and
noble sentiments. He describes the principal aids
that man requires during his pilgrimage on earth, and
adds “ But to crown all this he must love, as a part of
himself, some woman who can join with him in his
aspirations, and share in all his joys and sorrows.”
The 29th chapter sees Halek through his six years’
probation at the Diamond Mountains. How altered
are his motives as he leaves Karom from those which
directed him when he left Pagam ! He left Pagam to
cultivate one of the fine arts in Karom ; he leaves Ka-
rom for the Mountains with the hearty intention of
keeping the laws of Adaroni. In the wild solitudes he
keeps them, makes a fortune, and returns thinking
to enjoy the rest of his life in ease and comfort with
Turoni. But Self has not yet been sufficiently
purified. Adaroni is now the home of the loved Tu-
roni ; and Halek, yielding to despair, and with his
dearest hopes shattered, hardens his heart and rebels
against the all-wise laws of the great King. But soon
his good angel prevails, and Halek thenceforward com-
mences to live for others, and to study their happiness
before his own.
But not yet is the final victory won. Halek, al-
though doing much good work and making the happi-
ness of others round him, still seeks earth’s joys and
now would wed SShashuna, who had been Turoni’s
adopted sister. But she and Zakku are lovers. A noble


impulse seizes Halek, he resigns Shashuna to Zakku,
and provides for them both. Halek is rewarded by a
bright vision of Turoni, who cheers him with the
words, “ Rejoice, and fear not ; thou art mine, and I
am thine, and we shall surely meet in sweet love, for
love is lord of all, and there is naught stronger than
love, and no power of evil can prevail against it. Re-
joice, therefore, and fear not.”
But the inevitable reaction sets in upon
Halek with awful sternness, until in black despair he
thus describes his wretched plight :—“ I called to the
Great King but I received no answer ; I wandered
throughout the night-watches by the shore of the sea ;
I called upon the Adaronas to come to me and show
themselves that I might be comforted ; but I only saw
the awful sky, the sullen sea, and the barren rocks. I
was conscious of nothing outside of myself, and in my-
self was no power of helping myself.”
The 33rd chapter gives us the meeting of Halek and
Pasakh after many years, and the two exchange con-
fidences. This chapter is very powerfully written, and
ably expresses the thoughts that have ever tortured or
consoled most thinking men and women.
In the 34th chapter Halek undergoes his last and
most terrible trial —the trial of his faith in the
immortality of his soul. In this chapter are thoroughly
analysed the inmost feelings of human nature. In
Halek’s case the original germ of good has never been
lost, hence he can eventually come out of his ordeal
purified, and say, “ There is the peace which arises
from the fulfilment of our desires; there is the peace
which arises from our renunciation of them. Each
has its proper time and use. But when a man has
ceased from thinking of his own immediate happiness
as the first thing to be attained at any cost; when he
recognises that his first duty is to consider the welfare
of others, at any cost; when he has done with mean-


ness, and coldness, greed of gain, and greed of plea-
sure that brings pain ; when he has lost the lust of
power, and the lust of fame; when he utters no more
sullen complaints, and bravely holds to his highest
hopes, then, whether he has enjoyed all, or surrendered
all, he will know that peace, which had hitherto passed
his understanding, and which, now that he dwells
therein, passes his utterance.”
In the last chapter of the book Halek arri es at
Sahitam from Karom, and tells how on the journey he
was tempted in the wilderness and how he repelled the
Evil One. He describes the loving purity of Sahitam
life, and eventually resolves to go as a Messenger to
Pagam, closing his stated resolution in the following
noble words : “ I have now found the choice-work for
which the whole of my life has been a preparation,
and which alone will satisfy the eager desires of my
heart.”
“ And I am an artist still; for the fine arts do but
represent what is beautiful; but the art of arts teaches
men to make their lives beautiful. I will go to the
Pagamas and tell them what I have learnt. I will
open to them my hand as well as my heart; for they
are as little children, to whom doctrine is nothing, if
it be not interpreted by kindly deeds. I will teach
them the meaning of renunciation —to which they can
never be stirred, save by one who of his love and pity
for them daily renounces before their eyes.”
Upon Halek’s departure the Prince gave him “ the
Diamond Sandals and the Ruby Signets, which mark
a messenger from Sahitam to Pagam. The sandals
mean that the wearer takes no step without the light
of the law on his path ; and the signets, one for each
hand, mean that he who wears them does no act which
is not animated by the purest love.”
In conclusion, we may be allowed to express the
earnest hope that before long Mr. Nicholson may see


his way to bring out a second volume continuing
Halek’s history until his final reception into Adaroni.
Before taking leave of Halek it may be well to
inform those who have never heard of the book that it
is a purely Australian work, and that it was written
in the solitude and silence of the Australian bush.


MEMO.
[MEMO
Jfk’ice “ is i^e^ei)
etjrel Sixpcrjoc, postage
added.
k
©7l eld pess e
o©]©r)ie.s [©I s <§s- ; ©r)d 1© p©i?i ©j[
itje pld ©ufside ©Tlusfpalasia jW
•Ss. 6d.


Mtf
muo
f(23^7
MBCCOXCVI.
—s®s —» *
BKISBANE :
A. J. ROSS & CO., PRINTERS, 26 QUEEN STREET




