

■* -
k. *
- k jk‘
» ■




haimers and seagulls
Hammers and sea.galls were ringing in my eaxs
There in the shiP3 7 'ard hy the winder sea?
Pirst day at work to learn to us,su9i iron,
Hammer the si eel into a living sh^P*
jpr>. miners we re clanging at the keel and ribs?
Until it stirred and Leaved wLtL sudden Lreatng
Seagulls were crying through the leafless framework,
Rising and swirling with the dreams and plans
Of a hoy v/ho knows he will become a man,
Of a hoy who works with men to build-’.a ship.
Hy hammer is ringing
On rivet and combing i
In the song it is singing
Every blow is a word-
The hammer is master
For the steel is bendings
The ship it is shaping
Has wings like a bird.
Oh, fly from the shipyard,
Take food to the hungry,
Take a cargo of wheat
Prom the Swan to the Rhine •
Hy hammer will drive you,
It will beat in your engines;
Oh, it woiy*-t stop singing
This hammer of mine.
Hy hammer is minting
The coin of my freedom!
The" 71 11 pay me tomorrow.
And" I T H spend like a man




My hammer is hreaMng
The shell of my childhood,
And ny dreams gather courage.
Take flight in a plan.
I mil "build the great liners
To trample the ocean
And split a white furrow
As straight as a pine.
And "before them, "before them
fly thegulls of my daring?
Oh, it won't stop singing,
This hammer of mine.
Hammers and hammers were throbbing in ny ears,
Throbbing year-long to wake her sleeping hull;;
Bach day the white hot rivets in her beams
Welded their heat and strength into her own i
Staunchon and deck, engine and driving shaft
Reined back their power for when she'd tread thetl
And still the ringing hammers drove her onward
Eager to leap into the greyhound stride.
Each day trie little streams of skill and strength
Gathered a river into ny hardening hands.
The long hours rolled upon my aching arms,
The gaunt machines snapped at my guiding hands?
But I was a hammer bending the stubborn hours,
for pressure and heat had changed me Into steel.
And as the ship grew, so my muscles grew.
As she became a ship, still sheathed in framework
Sue shouted out her hunger for* the sea:
So in thearras and eyes of my sixteen years.
Within the swift veins where my boyhood ran.
Glamoured the hunger and the claims of manhood,
Stiffened the bones and sinew’s of a man.




We who work steel are bruised
On the bones of the machine ;
Our calloused, hands are tom
By teeth we have not seen.
Our ears are plugged with pain
As the plates writhe and jerk;
The white steel, in the press
Spits at us as we work.
We who work steel grow hard
For pain we do not feel-
We do not flinch but strike,
We who would master steel.
We who work steel learn timing;
We watch where the fires are bright;
See that no iron is burning.
Strike where the steel is white.
Seagulls on seagulls whirled around the ship.
Calling her ride the brimming waves Mththem:
Telling of harbours just across the line
Wa lied by green mountains with their feet washed white
In blue far deeper than her keel could reach;
Telling of strange wharves deep with dates and wine.
Cargoes from valleys rich between bare Mils,
To load and load within her hungry holds;
Telling of keen waves on a starry night.
Of great waves mounting broader-backed than whales.
Challenge to every inch of men and steel.
Then the last clamour of our thousand hammers
Told to the waves that we would meet their challenge.
Take blow for blow with the launching of our ship.
And the nest morning gulls took up the challenge
When we came down for the last sight of her keel
•boolc "blie v.’i/ber -




Ropes barred us off, but what are ropes?
"G-et back, get bad-:, you can't come here 5
This is the place for visitors I” they said,
! 'v7liite rice and passengers V : we said.
And we went slowly on rebellious feet*
There our ship, our sweat and skill,
Smothered beneath their ribbons v their talk, the
shew.
A young bride yielding to an old rich husband.
And we who built the ship w r ere pushed away*
As they swung back the bottle to stein her side.
To launch her on a scum, of talk,
I sv/ung the hammer behind my back.
flung it so that it ripped their ribbons,
Crumpled their ceremony.
And our ship rang to the familiar hammer.
Rode out to the grasi c of the hammer and the galls•
Hammers and hammers were pounding through my head,
Jarring the bleeding lingers of my dreams.
Beside the water crouched the torpedo boats,
Hungry" as shags for our hammers, our sweat, our tin
Bay after day their same red rivet glowed,
Boat after boat, till the pattern seared ny eyes.
Hours clanged on hours, and time and overtime
In a bankless torrent swallowed my sun, 113?* sleep.
Black birds of prey, stealing our youth and vigour*,
Black birds of prey, ’the grim torpedo boats,
Kissing their hunger for the stomas of war,
Bang like the thunder above the ship we built,
Above the ships built by a million hands.
Seagulls on seagulls swept above the docks.
Keen as the questions darting in our brains.
Here living ships launched but to be destroyed
By the same hands that raised their mighty frame?
Xs there a hammer and anvil with the power




To test my hands till they are hooks of war?
Seagulls 'were crying all that dinnertime
When old Jock told me of a monstrous crime.
hr vias the bailiff in our house
Vhen only young men 1 s lives were cheap;
As hunger cane my wife went dry,
' y baby cried himself to sleep.
The whip of hunger cut this face.
hy back was twisted from his blows.
Then vie stopped work in seventeen,
In Glasgow/ docks, in Scottish snows,
We struck against their robber war
‘That gripped our throats, a tightening wire
hut hunger whipped us back to work.
hack to the anvil and Hie fire.
What wrenched apart the highland dans.
And lashed our forebears fromthe hills?
What blizzard drove them to the nones,
And herded them in snarling mills?
Landlord and chieftain fed their mines
With man and child till glens w/ere bare 5
Hammers of hunger 0 eat them down.
Anvils of prison clamped them there.
And now today our w/ages shake,
Vast crags of prices scar our reet.
Black wings of war swirl at the sun.
Shadows of hunger glide our street.
Ashes of famine scorch our land.
Jailers will trap our liberty.
Unless our earthquake seals their mouths.
no as of monopoly




■Hie hammer of united men
I fast shape the steel of history."
Ha mmers vie re striking at our days and mights?
Striking from grey rooms of the marbled banks,
Swung from the black pits of the Broken Hill»
Their hammers clipped the edges of our road,
Harrowed our mages? beat our margins thin
Upon the anvil of bleak? towering prices
Till thin dawns wote to hunger sharp as stones.
Their hammers drove the fascist wedges deep
Into the homes built by our people’s rights;
Grim laws were loaded for the Courts and police
To nail the handcuffs on the union doors.
Rivet the prison doors before our eyes,
Founder our land in fire and tide of war.
Hammers were shouting above our anhing' heads :
Ordering us chain the sun and seal the night
And lock our lives In endless cells ox work.
Air hammers galloped on the blackening steel,
Shredding our shoulders? shrivelling our hands wmth r
Snarling their orders through the foremen*3 mouth
Loud-speaker for a. voice ten thousand rn—as away.
Faster they beat upon our backsend legs,
Swaying on tip—toes for the final
Before the whistle threw us twisted scraps of day.
Seagulls, oh seagulls in the dyingsun
Show methe reffs before I drown with work,
Show me the passage through the fangs of war!
And their white wings went lifting through the night,
Guiding me back through pathless waves of time.
Steering my eyes to islands far ahead.
Laid bare the pattern of these hammering days.
Uhite wings of books, arrows of spoken words
Sung; ms the rhythm of these hammering da3 r s«
X watched the hammers in a hundred hands?




hid yll the morning Dread and clothes ana homes
Flowed from the hammers till there was hare enough
For a hundred homes until the newt day came •
I saw the hammers in the workers hands
hinting their sweat into the drops of money,
“ages enough to bu s the morning’s goods.
Surely they’ll rest, surely they’ll swim and play I
But the sharp Miistle harked them hack to work.
I saw the hammers of a hundred workers
Pour wine and silk across the afternoon
Into his hands, the omaier of the mill,
But not one thread or sip to
X saw the hammers make the owners profit,
Blood on the anvlll "beaten into gold.
Then all the silk end -wins he could not squander
Grew into mountains for he could now s ell on mu,
Though hunger and cold were snapping am . our heels.
And then he shipped them overseas to mame cs
For gold to fill his Bottomless greed for wealth.
Yes, and ten thousand times in a hundred countries
Fhis mad race spiralled and the profits grew
For hammers clanged deeper into the Prattle nlghu.
Beeper the hammers ate into our nighus,
Faster the frantic shuttle or the snips _
T/ovo tangled threads around a staggering world?
Higher the silk and wine piled up unsold.
For all the money that could may them ha hi
Was gold and profit hoarded by greedy men.
sale, no profit,” they said. **She sack for you.*
And hollow men crept past the Dhoated scores.
But scattered wolves that we had thought were men
Swept into packs howling with lust for wan.
War for the profits stolen by other wolves
Or lost in worlds they could net understand.
Depressions and wars I But in these furnaces
TTetal and dross grow separate and apart?




hetal of men who worked and made 'the world,
Dross of the wolves who owned and squandered it.
The dross clings when the metal runs,
But the steel shoulders it aside.
The pinnacles and thrones of slag
Grumple "before the molten tide.
Our jsd-.ghty voice knochoc, prisons down*
The wolves howl their fear and hate,
Bor the steel E s moulded into one
Great hammer thundering at their gate.
The Court has stripped our wage End margins hare,
Thrown usthe hones and passea ‘lie "boss the meat,
AdA hunger stalks us through the hollow street.
Strike I They have starved us to our knees "bef ore i
Twice have our youth "been sacrifioed for them.
On waves of famine they would launch, "their war!
hammer hy hammer all ‘lie shipyard stopped,
Seagulls swan SQ—t- of it through the listening sir.
Then hammers and seagulls sang within our Blood
Then we marched out upon the path wo planned j
Our feet were hammers ringing through the streets,
Our songs were seagulls arrowing through the land*
Seagulls and hammers were molten In my "blood,
Bor as we marched a thousand workers strong
A white ship swung towards a singing wharf.
“There is the pea.ce ships Our youth "back from Berlini
"Jot "bruised with, wounds and deeply scarred with death,
Is youth, returned twice to our sorrowing country,
But round and golden with the joy of peace 1“
he mingled with the "banners and the songs,
?rila the white wings that circled round the world
Swept the blue sky with, fiery flags of song,
Touched to the earth to swell our throats with hope *




"het;us carry the banner -together/' I arid to a girl.
;, 3ut where are wo going? 7Jhere do we go from. hero?”
.kad her brown eyes rare wsaaer then the sun.
And her voice rose from the wells of certain
rom the wells of cartointv
55 Our feet are on the road to peace
hundreds or mi 110203 trod in Tain:
Sandals and clogs and nahod fret
Have worn its stones with blood and pain*
lorcb.es have searched the range of tine
lo guard the young from beak and claw,
.Qnly to see the path to pesos
Blocked the avalanche of war.
But bruised hands and bleeding feet
Brought bade the hope of common men,
dor sinty million dead have made
A read for peace to walk again.
Higher our feet cllrib to the pans.
Star c:f a thousand darkened years.
Six hundred rlllion seeds of light
Conquer a. night or doubts and fears e
He cannot turn our gathering tide,
Hie black hors arm, sword In hand
the scent of fruit flows on -the dawn,
He are sc near 'die promised land.
Houll you make meeds with vninese Ix 3;
With Chi3n.an £lrls and men from Greece?
Make the Pacific truly aened,
ihe sea of friends, the sea of pec--^^-
wnth the youujo., ox m.txc? arm •i*
to the C-aiTiivol at Sydney -snde S
Come, we will scale diecrags on waxg
Pjae world is ours, the road Is wider*
"be* 11 build a ship and sail it through Sydney heads I 3




10.
And they laughed at the idea soaring like the gulls,
Ail they asked me who would build it, and where was
the steel.
”1 thousand strikers,' 1 I said,”duel sorap from a wreck,
Aid. haired of war to hammer the rivets home,
As the new poets hammer their nighty songs
Out of the sweat and nateship of vrorkiiig menu’
if iZi ’"'-r-* r". C 3 5 C? •&"? W* o AlV;'* Ch'’ "!
*i i. ~- r o Ca-o. o <- .> f r -~ - go *pj>aL.j a .»—■-» J*.
hare forty feet of steel and dream of, peace*
Asthousaad strikers bring her rivets and fittings.
Skill of a hundred workers hammer and bend ?
And flags are sewn and songs are sung for her.
Our hammers are ringing
On recking and rivet.
from the sea to the mountain
■fhis song if. be heard *
n*v% *i V n ’“.n w' i • r> a
idudi J— m -iO'jv
for the steel is bunding,
the ship we are shaping
bill have wings like a bird.
Chj fly from the shipyard,
And sail the Pad bio.
Spread a cargo ox friendship
from Shanghai to ’ lee.
•Our* hammers win. drive you,
Shew will boat in your engines,
o v
Shy it wonlt stop xlnging
Our hammer of peace.
Cur hammers are . "Tee.ilng
fne guns that surround us
Into- homes fox* the homeless
And the ribs of a> hull.
Our hammers or ealin^
The walls of our prisons.
And. our songs and our dreaming
Idly free as & gull*




We are 'building a peace ship
Hir/t '‘.ill scatter the clouds,
Carry 30 eds oi a xri eno.ship
Shat*v.ill over increase,
ind "before it, before it
Ply the gulls of cur daring•
Oh, it 77021* t stop ringing.
Cur homer ox peac^.
Hammers anil seagulls are music in mp cloo ■.
Hammers of strips ring out from port fo^port,
Strike upon strike has curred Uie rios or ‘femae
And clenched fists hulls -She of lioerty.
3e- -alls horn, out of fire ana f “““•">
P'X cl - *-•-f-ulls cr" on the rind or peace,
OTIF I7p* - <- ..
inf Pide its passage through the fangs or ear.
XU-AXrt _ rtl. -T —. -*> --. 0r 0,0
Hamnars end seagulls sing in .he chip - P




BIG- Jill ABB PEEER LALGIi
•'l*ll speak my mind, n said Lalor.
Mbey can jail me If ’they ZLike.
Ily voice will raise the rifles
And every word a pile ►
That if they jail my Body I
IZy words, a, cross of stars
Bill swing ahovo the diggers
Is Hey smash the prison Bars.”
5, 1*11 speak my mind," said Belly,
s, Tith limd caffs on ray wrists*
TZv voice rill ring An sir alia
for all my words are fists.
■fhey cannot jail my anger I
It spreads, like wind-oorae seeds
HU streets rill flow muh marchers
And every day with needs* ■*
Big Jim and Peter Lalor
Joined hands across the years.
And Laker diggers
Have or mad away my fears. 3
Said Jim, :, I know of natesbip
Zih.cn twice a million say.
Tie'll Bake the yarn of fifty-two
A new Eureka day. 10




THE SITCRD OF EIROHITO
Can I say I love my country
If my -roaming voice is still?
v/hen the Yanlees free SushicLa
Arms end turns him loose to Id.ll?
Let us count our dead at Darwin
Lhere the "bombs of To jo roared?
Now he cleans his rusted rifle,
How he mends his brolen sword.
Smash the sword of Hirohito,
Set his hungry people free;
Let them know, instead of
Cherry "blooms of liberty.
Let us know, instead of warships
Peace will sail the Corel Sea.
Dare I claim to love my people
If my hands are idle things?
Hhile the Yanis re-stole lltsui
hod the Zero spreads its wings?
Count thorn, count them, mure.ored. oners,
ITurses dead on Banla beach.
Chain those hands before the Yanlees
Put the sword within his reach.
Smp.ah the sword of Hirohito,
Set his hungry people free;
Let them know, instead of gun-smoke
Cherry blooms of liberty.
Let us know, instead of warships
Pea.ce will sail the Coral Sea.




?AT-TR IS THE SPUR (Ell m criticism.)
Thy should the crlngeing traitor
Have film and voice and stage?
Thy mist his quavering story
Hide the great deeds of our age?
Ton Harm, Tom Ilann, our comrade
Called out the London docks,
And gave us strength for victory
With mates and 'bread, not reals•
In sixteen, hitter sixteen
You hegged for coal for y, Tar.
But did you plead, for freed on
With the press-gang at our door?
James Connolly our comrade
Called on the Lublin men
To give their lives for liberoty
And gave his otn rath them.
You vrote ”The Scourge of Poverty- 11
ind stood for Parliament.
Soft floors, soft 30b, soft living.
Then told us n Pe content.'*
McLean, McLean our comrade
Out in the Clasgm: street,
He hullt a scourge for tyranny
To guide our marching f^et.
Tell us, oh tell us vriter.
Ox the new ve have seen;
Staunch. IjEzm, defiant Connolly
£nd the Party of llcLean.




IT :UST NOT PASS I
(IXother, reading letter end crying* Son cones in.)
Son Phy do you cry nether? Par is no more.
Mother It is the old war end the old sorrow son.
Burnt leaves from wartime fluttering round my head
Pam me how close their prowling dragon came.
Hy smouldering arms are seared and a::;
ITine years have furrowed deep where smiles p&guld
for nine long years this lew or told to me, 0 '"
11 Your sons are dead. The fascist least was near’l
Son But that is old, mother. Today is a new danger,
cA new fascism -
bother Listen again my son, to an old letter
Prit hy my eldest the day before he died.
” I have terrible news mother, but I must toll you
We saved a man got cut of trapped Halaul.
He Imew our Jim, escaped with nim to Tol.
He told us how the Japs hah caught him there.
They held them prisoner a few mocking days.
They hound his young hands hard with twasted wire,
Palled him as hashfires fell the sapling trees.
Death without trial, without cause,
How can such mad heasts he?
And how could X have ever oeen deceived.
By him who made Pori Heribia send them steel?
How I who *d never raised my voice in anger
Could smash my fist through every fascist face.
Tomorrow we are going into battle,^
And if 1 write with pencil or with rifle
Idv hands vail say the fascists must not pass.
Their hot hands will not touch the slj^-£ss?ras?aV:
Son Thr.t’s vdiat we say today. It nast not tread
Ilother Ola, son, ny life lass flowered in gentleness,
I did not laatts enough to msh that death
Would Enodr and luioolc on any hnmahdoor,
± ::x cradling fury roof and wadi *




Bather Tae, that is true. _ &rsn
XiC-sped south and lichee rcurt j
**+ T 16 .
But I drank deep of fitter "black rejoicing
/hen Hitler burned acid the Berlin ruins
And To jo hanged in jail.
Son But they, are dead and gone, that’s s-t old story.
He had a nesting at the factory gate.
Hie:/ told us that the Constitution was in danger,
That henries plans to bring in fascism,
That democratic rights are in the gun,
And we most organise and vote for HO.
Ilother How can ah old story be so vivid?
You did not fight sold you do not remember.
Even now T the green vails of the jungle
Sway In upon me, on the sons I bore,
Jim would bo thirty, anc Harry would bo marrlm.*
Yet where they died the rolling fl.ro v.as ...0, -■<->
Quenched by their blood shed at mustralaa's -nr
Son Thev were betrayed by friends ox xascisos hco.-e»
They were the victims of the Brisbane line 3
Half of Austrelis. naked to the Japs,
The rest stripped ba e with scarce a 5... u... .
One of our hands was chained before^ ho srrii.cn
One of our hands closed up his panning niv i
We"tamed -fee find the 'creek of freedom dij
ind many missing vho should ftgrfe «» xi;.e;
Australia fluttering v,dth a Broken rang.
Son Yes, it was fire ahead and spares oalm-nc. .
But now the danger gU.des Deoeatb our >S ee^ t
Porfsscist friends themselves to j.ascis «s
As the creeping smoke claws out in hungry .—am.
ilother Son is it true? Are fascists at the door?
Sven more close thal 1942?




Son Bren more close. But not In 'black shirts,
Not in tlie uniform of Jungle fighters,
But in the frock coat of monopoly.
Their fat hands clutch for fascist powers today,
Hand hack the sword to then who murdered Jin.
Death without trial, death on suspicion,
Bren as Jin was .slain, hut here in Perth#
And yet the maker of the Brisbane line
Asks for those powers in name of our defence.
defence? With both amis hound, > our eyes put out?
This must ho our defence.
Stamp cut the seeds of fascism while we can,
Before the streets are red with our own blood.
Before it sv/eeps our lend with tongues of war.
mi my tears quench them?
My hands and voice will build it,
Manorial to my sons, who died to keep her,
A Southern homestead for the oriel Q of pea.ee.
Mother.




THRES QOhW GIMTS.
Here to my river I come to make decision,
Vgbether to sell to the might/ dollar.
To work in far lands among foreign people,
Squander Australian skill in alien soil,
Or to stay here and sleep on empty dreams.
Oh, will they ev*z # bloom in steel and concrete,
The dreams, the plans of an -Australian engineer?
Here pas t my hands the floods waste out to sea 5
Red with my coir.try's life, her wounded soil,
Past my cupped hands that cannot hold her blood.
Itost the gift of rain spill from her feverish lip
Her life flood out in brown waves to the sea?
How shall we .save hei? Tell us, history.
Three golden giants have transformed the hist
11 And one was gold my hearty,
The first was go Id my son.
And co uld pave a city
With the sold that we have won. IJ
w
I turned, and at tny elbow
My father*s father stood.
His face and hands were creased and brown
As they were carved from wood.
‘•When we were young and eager
The gold rm in our veinsT
Our picks rang in the ranges,
Our tracks cut through the plains.
•7e traced him to his prison
By his gold blood in the sands,
And when vr split the reefs apart
He lifted up his hands.
Then Bailey broke the padlock
And Hannan saw him smile,
Till he stood aloft a giant
Hben wr freed the Golden Mile.




ifl r' e a ro-id-j a rii-i lV; ciy J
,vn; nvi:«-- a port for m.' .
- 0'- ''f CiF-'r ~h Bh-°C Ilka spears ox sualxgs u
unite rails from the sea.
T 3»'*lriP' oi e thif waters
That”l can drink a/ fill. *
heard his voice rola round tn~ worj-Q
proa Mar.itana Hill-
And giant shaped tree West anew
From Haritana bill.
p: S flowed into narrow streams,
Left the wide slope of pecpie pc or 5
iid the few rich who prisoned him
prcve biro to yield then core and sore =
His mighty hancE tore forests down?
Tore uo the soil in rocks and dust-
Sis -jiartz teeth bit the miners 1 lungs.
His salt breath clogged cur veins mth rust.
The steel trsf.n followed where hs signed?
But deserts burned where he had trcdj
And LX ccughed out my _ungs? my son.
Laid nr/" bl'-ok bones oeiore this god***
4Ud when I turned It vf-s a gum-tree there?
9oots soread Hk r feet, das steed
the man?
Md til® sold sunlight flowed through lirrhs Mid
& “ leaves?
And th? uind murmured in its towering lio^d*
ysi-r cio~ £ he crush men at th c rich men 1 s bicierziaf?
V&y? do th'* follow at his heels?
4- wounds stay open he tsushed the earth
Tie cannot hr el the tre-s end a* traapl=a s
Hr cannot put a ara minq ua-|po--i=j
Hr cannot sale ay irr-ans turn >a ac th c j- loea.
•*,, th' other siasts? I will eaU theffij
Vfnat they have changed esn they *_»




The drover rode between the trees.
He spoke to .me and sat at ease,
tfx crossed this river first with sheep,
-rV r»i r\ ■>-i t -f* -f r + ■*r ire . v»C* T—.CTfS
ci ■; lilC t v--i x Xi. Oj j vj .
1 5 vs v/at ehc the fe- ding f locks increase s
Trie West, put on its gold? n fleece j
From Kendenup tc
I*ve watched the golden giant grow.
«As I rode out v/ith Gregory
Behind us lay the saliens* sea.
Before the panel- ss range.
Behind us were the hungry flocks.
Before us piled the prisoning rocks.
Sven the trees were strange.
And as we rode the grass grew thin,
For summer shaved the mountain* s chin
And singed his head of hair.
E*f=i) the valleys hung their le~v~s,
And pods had slunk away like thieves;
goats could net pasture there .
But remembered children 1 s eves
Brimming' mth tears v;hen cold vinos rise
■loo little clothes tc \rar.
The humsing of the loots ucall cea.se,
Unless they wove the golden fleece
For all the- world to share .
And so we climbed frcm ridge to ridge.
From range to range 3 the sky our bridge,
Clasped bet even rocks and sun.
But sudd"n pools would kiss cur fret.
And green grass whisper, 11 Don : t retreat t :;
And game fall tc the gun.
One afternoon th~ skyline broke
And miles of grass rolled soft as smoke
Tc where the rivers run.
a toil Hon flocks came like the rains,
The golden giant reaped the plains;
His glory had be-gun.




V i
The gre«n hills purred to the caressing sun,
Fat sheep and horses drowsed on timbered slopes
And ports swelled out with bales on bales of o- o ld.
Oh, was there such a fertile giant
as rco r with US; rode out with Gregory'?
on 7 was there ever such a mighty giant*
whose roads like veins flowed through the sle-iping
\ f Jhosf finders dug for her a thousand wells',*
Ihose golden fleece warmed the shoulders of the world?
"Why is your shirt so bare and worn? »»
I asked him in surprise.
"Vihy is dust thick upon your horse
And sorrow in your eyes?"
:! Too many mouths cut dom the sheltering grass,
Too many hoofs cut through the red dry soil,
And the desert licked in dust towards the sea.
Yet to the squatters, moving hills of money
Hide frcu their eyes thin sheep and hungry sen,
And they are happy as the crows with drought.
But if I rode from to the Leeivin,
And if I bathed ay eyes in greenest spring,
I still would the sheep pile up in thousands
In the dead river bed, as If* to dam the water.
Dam back the mockery of the best mirage.
.Viter that's wasted, water that is "to come
Cannot hold back the desert wind of death,
Unless it's dammed to spread the green past through
tomorrow."
But when I turned to answer he was gone.
V/as it dust in my eyes or tears
That the dust shone above me Irlice a volden dant?
For the dust set tied like a g-olden Fleece
And the evening trembled like'" a lost hungry lamb.
Will my dreans thirst and die,
’.Vi 11 the wounded veins of the 'Jest spill out to sea?
No, dreams are stubom seeds when bern in thirst,
Jhen miner aid drover trace them in the dust,
And a thousand campfires light them from year to year.




op
di (~d «
Hit the great giant of the golden fleece,
Harried by squatters fanged with greed and wealth,
KU ddi e s cu r dr r - am s be neath hi s rayri ad feet.
Can the third giant make our land a garden?
Build the green walls of ray people's destern hcrae?
There on the leaves falling from gusts of wind
I read his stozy,
And in the ripples urging the lazy sand
I heard his voice 2
Voice of my father rising through rock and flood.
sr His promise stirred us like the scent of wattle
7e drank with dew on a September morn.
And where my axe rang in the virgin timber
The first voice of th~ golden grain was born.
And then he strode from creek-bed to the skyline.
He thrust the grey hood of the bush aside;
The earth smiled beneath his eager fingers,
The wind combed new, her golden pride.
And we were proud, guarding the ripening harves
Proud to grow hungry lands to eat;
I paused a moment on iqy n c 'n verandah
To taste first of the golden age of wheat.
Spring rains and summer suns have swelled th - harvest,
A million stems bend where the giant goes,*
The thrusting comb lifts up the heads and' holds Tit-
The golden stream gathers and breaks and flows.
Flows through our roads, flows in our limbs our
dream in g,
Monies trees to homes beneath his giant's might,
ills nands have ribbed th c sleeping bush with railways,
rsis thousand towns have made the darkness brisrht.
thousand farmers lead their horses homeward
To vfi iere his ey<=s are windows brimmed with light.




( -.r the Chicago wheat kings crashedthe market
kittle they' cared as the ruins round them lay;
But a poison spread in the arteries of* the cities
tfner 2 hollow ships rusted along the hay;
And young eyes darkened with the smut of hunger
Watching through fire less night to hr endless day.
They starved because a single monstrous spider
Spun v/ehs of money at each granary door;
And the same web fell on our hands, our farmlands,
Poisoned our lives with the misery of the poor.
Slow and corrosive as the salt from creekbeds
Xt seared the gre n blades of my life’s desire;
And drought trod down my heart; the shrunken grant
Dragged his burnt limbs out of the desert's fire.
&fo and earlier hopes have flowed in_vnn;_
Their course is clogged with salt and hou with pain.
\Vi;en I lie down, all heavy eared with sleep.
I still can hear the murmur of the wheat.
Vjhe»n I am dead, bury me on the slope
That the roots of the golden giant may fold me close.
Welcome the last of the great gif
Gentle and strong as new-born babies nands.* 1
t’e buried him where he could watch the farm.
Vibe re the rich soil could mend his broken body,
The rolling wheat still lift his heart with joy.
But now the sand, the hot eroded sand
Blows over him, dries up my throat with pain;
And where our homestead smiled above the wheatfields
The broken door sways in the wind and rain.
Oh, my Australia, oh, my forgotten people,
I cannot sleep for the crying of my heart,
For all the dead are speaking through the earth,
Burdening my ears with dreams they could not live,
Calling me fill their hunger with the deed.




24.
I cannot sleep for the silence in your he~rt;
V/e are living, lonely with frosty eyes,
Groping 1 for words to thaw in touching n~nos,
Hungering- a molten scng to warm our blood.
I cannot sleep for Vue hunger in my hec.rt;
Why have the golden giants lost their power?
Must empty faces stare through brimming windows?
Must cold" and hunger walk withuthe children of
the world?
i
I
t*ov/ night is cone and I must decision.
The Southern Cross looks down to wc.it my word.
I cannot leave you, no, I cannot leave you.
Come well or ill, come drought cr come the flood,
Gr coc r tar deserts loosed oy greedy men,
The brown hands of my fathers hold me here.
It was their hands that freed the- golden giants;
Now in our hands their dreams are joined vdthdeeds.
It is our hands must make them whole again.
ih ii’ v %


"" P. -i/C , r A s J
