

Handbook
ON
VITICULTURE
FOR
VICTORIA
By Authority:
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE
1091.




Handbooks already published by the Royal Commission, which can be
obtained gratis on application to the Secretary of the Commission,
Public Offices, Melbourne:—
No. 1. “ Ensilage.” „
No. 2. “ Perfume Plants and Essential Oils.”
No. 3. “ Viticulture in Victoria. ”
No. 4. “ Wine Making and Cellar Management” (in hand).
Applications from vine-growers for the services of the Experts attached
to the Board of Viticulture should be made to the Secretary of the Board,
Public Offices, Melbourne.
Corrections in the Lists of Vine-growers and the acreage planted are
specially requested.


HANDBOOK ON VITICULTURE
FOR
VICTORIA.
Iflogal Commission on Ttcgetabk fkoimds.
:
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
1891.




CONTENTS.
Page
Ninth Progress Report of the Vegetable Products Commission . . v
Members of the Board of Viticulture ix
Introduction.
Preliminary—Reasons for issuing Handbook —Necessity for co-operation
in order to insure greater uniformity in wines of each district—
Example of older wine-producing districts of Europe ... ... xi
Chap. I. —History and Description of the Vine. *
Root—Stem —Leaf—Flower ... ... ... ... ... 1
Chap. II. — Physiology.
Rise of sap —Transpiration —Assimilation —Respiration —Flowering—
Fecundation of the ovule—Setting of the fruit—Ripening of the
fruit—lmportance of leaves
Chap. lll.— Factors influencing the Growth and Products of the Vine.
Necessity of serious consideration on account of our past experience being
» very limited —Influence of climate —Irrigation of vineyards —Influence
of aspect —Division of the colony into three climatic regions—lnfluence
of soil—lnfluence of variety ... ... ... ... ••• 15
Chap. IV.— Ampelography.
European vines—American vines—lndigenous Australian vines ... 29
Chap. V.— Selection of Site, and Choice of Suitable Varieties.
Importance of considering the character of wine which it is desired to
make before selecting site —General requirements which should be
fulfilled by a site—Advantages or otherwise of each climatic region ... 66
Chap. Vl.— Preparation of Soil.
Necessity of deep preliminary cultivation —Methods of preparing the
soil; subsoiling or trenching—Drainage ... ... ... •••
Chap. Vll.— Laying-out of Vineyard.
Distance apart of vines—Arrangement of vines—Marking out the vine-
yard —Extent and disposition of blocks ... ... ... ... 80
Chap. Vlll.— Propagation of the Vine.
Propagation by seed —Propagation by cuttings—Selection of cuttings —
Different sorts of cuttings—Length of cuttings—Preservation of
cuttings—Stratification—Propagation by layers—Ordinary layering—
Complete burying of the vine—Reversed layering —Multiple layering 88
A 2


Chap. IX.—Planting. Page
Are cuttings or rooted vines to be preferred ?—Planting of cuttings in the
vineyard—Depth for planting—Proper time for planting—lnclination
of cuttings—Method of planting—Plantation of cuttings in a nursery
Plantation of rooted vines in the vineyard ... ... 9g
Chap. X. —Forming the Young Vine.
Proper height of vines—Forming the stem in the first region—Forming
the stem in the second and third regions ... ... ... ... 105
Chap. Xl.— Pruning.
Position of fruit-bearing wood on the vine—Long or short pruning—Laws
which govern the operation of pruning—Short spur pruning—Rod
pruning—Necessity of providing for wood as well as fruit—Mixed
system of pruning—System giving great extension—Other systems
of pruning—Time for pruning—Pruning instruments ... ... 110
Chap. Xll. —Summer Pruning.
Disbudding—Topping— Gooseberry style—Tying up—Nipping off the
terminal bud of a shoot—Annular incision—Stripping the leaves off ... 122
Chap. Xlll.— Cultivation.
Necessity of keeping soil in a loose state—Winter cultivation—Summer
cultivation ... ... ... 23q
Chap. XlV.— Crafting.
easons for grafting—Ordinary cleft graft—English cleft graft—Time
for grafting—Value of different stocks ... ... (ii _ 134
APPENDICES.
A. Abstract of Evidence taken by the Royal Commission on Vegetable
Products ... ... ... ... ... i4Q
B. List of Members of Central Vine-growers’ Association ... ... 145
C. List of the Vine-growers of Victoria ... ... ... ... 149
D. List of Applications from Vine-growers under the Bonus Regulations ... 170
E. List of Vine-growers’ Associations and Office-bearers ... ... 179
Index m , i## t 180


NINTH PEOGEESS REPOET OF THE EOYAL
COMMISSION ON VEGETABLE PRODUCTS.
To His Excellency the Right Honorable John Adrian
Louis, Earl of Hopetoun , Viscount Aithrie , and
Baron Hope , in the Peerage of Scotland; Baron
Hopetoun of Hopetoun , and Baron Niddry of
Niddry Castle , in the Peerage of the United
• Kingdom; Knight Grand Cross of the Most
Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George; Governor and Commander-in-
Chief in and over the Colony of Victoria and
its Dependencies , fyc., tyc., fyc.
May it please Your Excellency:
We have the honour to acquaint Your Excellency
that, since the date of our last Report, we have confined
our inquiries to the collection of practical evidence
regarding the cultivation of Perfume Plants and Essential
Oils, the cultivation of the Sugar Beet and the manu-
facture of Sugar therefrom, and the various branches of
Agricultural Education as taught in Great Britain and


Europe, with a view to the development of Agricultural
Education in this colony. The Minutes of Evidence on
these several subjects ar submitted herewith.
In our last Report to Your Excellency we stated that
we were fully convinced of the value attached by the
public to the Handbooks we have already issued, founded
on the evidence given before us, on the subjects of Silos
and Ensilage (No. 1), aud (No. 2) on the cultivation of
Perfume Plants and the production of Essential Oils and
Medicinal Drugs. The published returns of the Govern-
ment Statist show that in the first instance very great
advantage to agriculture in Victoria has resulted from
the dissemination of the information regarding Ensilage,
and in the latter a flourishing Government Perfume
Farm is now existing at Dunolly, where eight months
ago there was nothing to be seen but the primitive bush.
This official example is, to our knowledge, already bearing-
fruit, and we have every reason to believe that a new
industry has been added to the colony.
Accompanying the present Report, we beg to hand to
Your Excellency a third Handbook, which is entirely
devoted to the important industry of Vine-growing.
This work has been prepared by Mr. Frangois
de Castella, one of the experts attached by the
Government to the Board of Viticulture, who from
training and education is specially qualified to compile
from the evidence given by the witnesses, and from
his own experience in this colony, a Manual which
shall be of practical service to the vine-growers of
Victoria.


This Handbook will be followed by a second, dealing
with Cellar work and the making of Wine, and subse-
quently other publications on the cultivation of the Fig,
the Olive, &c., will be issued by the Commission.
■
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient servants,
WALTER MADDEN, Vice-President, (1.5.)
FREDK. T. DERHAM, Member, (1.5.)
JOHN L. DOW, „ (1.5.)
JAMES BUCHANAN, - „ (1.5.)
CHARLES YEO, „ (1.5.)
james Mclntosh, „ (1.5.)
JOSEPH KNIGHT, „ (1.5.)
ANDREW PLUMMER, M.D., „ (1.5.)
T. K. DOW, „ (1.5.)
JOHN WEST, „ (1.5.)
D. MARTIN, „ (1.5.)
JOHN J. SHILLINGLAW,
Secretary.
Public Offices, Melbourne,
sth May, 1891.
Note. —The Honorable J. F. Levien, President of the Commission,
absent in Europe. The Honorable George Graham, Minister of Agri-
culture, has not signed this report, owing to the fact that he is a
member of the present Ministry, and as such among His Excellency’s
Advisers.




MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF VITICULTURE.
The Honorable Geo. Graham, Minister of Agriculture, President.
John M. Highett, Esq., M.P., Chairman.
Emile Blampied, Esq., Great Western.
Thos. Blayney, Esq., Nagambie.
Eredk. Busse, Esq., Barnawartha.
Paul de Castella, Yering.
Alexander Caughey, Esq., Gooramadda.
Charles Craike, Esq., Geelong.
John Johns, Esq., Katandra.
Michael Kavanagh, Esq., Mooroopna.
Francis Mellon, Esq., Dunolly.
John C. Van Staveren, Esq., Nathalia.
James Williams, Esq., Eumurkah.
Sir Archibald Michie, K.C.M.G., Q.C., Treasurer.
Romeo Bragato, Esq., and Franjois de Castella, Esq., Experts,
John J. Shillinglaw, Esq., Secretary, Public Offices, Melbourne.




INTRODUCTION.
Although the vine has been successfully cultivated in Victoria for
fiiany years, a fresh impetus seems to have been given to the wine-
growing industry during the last few years, which fact is undoubtedly
due to the inquiries of the Royal Commission on Vegetable Products
and to the work of the Board of Viticulture.
A considerable number of persons, more especially young men
with small capital, are leaving the cities and turning their attention
to the country districts ; many of our farmers, finding that the
cultivation of cereals scarcely pays, are looking out for some product
which will enable them to make more money out of their holdings.
Amongst other cultures, that of the vine presents itself as being one
of the most remunerative.
Many excellent works have been written on Viticulture, but they
are mostly in French or some other foreign tongue, the few English
ones which exist being either out of print or only treating of the
culture of vines under glass, as practised in England.
The constant demand for some elementary work, in which
beginners may learn something of practical Viticulture, has led to
the elaboration of this little handbook, which it is hoped may be of
service to those requiring information on the subject.


The compilation of such a work is not so easy a task as might at
first sight be supposed. The colony of Victoria embraces every
description of climate, from Alpine to semi-tropical, or, in other
words, every climate in which the vine can be profitably cultivated.
To write a book which it is intended should teach people in
different circumstances—and who must therefore necessarily adopt
different cultural methods—is on this account, in order to avoid
confusion, a task requiring great care. In the following pages every
endeavour has been made to point out what influence the surrounding
circumstances have on the vine, and in what way the different
vineyard operations should be altered in consequence. This is the
reason why the three first chapters constitute a sort of introduction,
a thorough comprehension of which will render the remainder of the
work far more intelligible. These first chapters consist chiefly of
theoretical considerations, which may be but of small interest to many
practical , farmers. As such, they have been made as independent
as possible of the rest of the work, in order that practical men
may, if they so choose, pass them over and proceed at once to
the practical part, in which scientific terms and formulae have been
avoided as much as possible, in order to render it readily intelligible
to all.
It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the advantages to be derived
from the cultivation of the vine. They are evident to any one who
considers the subject, and this work is intended rather to give
information to those who have already decided to plant than to
persuade those who have not.
The cultivation of the vine differs essentially from that of most
other plants. Wine does not, like many agricultural products,
command a more or less fixed price, varying only with the condition
of the market. It varies enormously in value. Without taking
into consideration badly-made wine, which may be considered as
worthless, we shall often find sound wines of the same age one of


which, will be worth four times as much as another. This
'
difference in price depends chiefly upon the quality of the wine,
and often on the relative rather than on the absolute quality—or,
in other words, its suitability for the market which it is intended
to command.
At the present moment the market for Victorian —and we may say
for Australian—wine is very indefinite. Every one admits that the
London market is the one upon which we chiefly rely, and which
we must use our best endeavours to satisfy. The production of wine
in Victoria is so insignificant that up to this time we have not been
looked upon as a wine source by the large London merchants. This,
however, is correcting itself. The amount of wine which we shall
in a few years produce will be very considerable, and it is absurd to
suppose that every grower will then be his own wine merchant,
maturing and retailing his wine, as he often has to do at present.
Instead of this unsatisfactory state of things, there will be purchasers
as soon as the fermentation is properly terminated and the wine is in
a fit state to travel. Competition will bring about differences in price
in favour of the most suitable wines, and the grower will naturally
find that these are the most advantageous for his business. At
present any well-made wine of moderate alcoholic strength is of
pretty much the same value, but it is scarcely reasonable to suppose
that this state of things will continue.
In each district there will be one class of wine which will surpass
all others in point of excellence, and it is this type which the grower
should endeavour to produce. Different districts will doubtless
produce different wines, but all the vine-growers of one district should
endeavour to make their wines of that type. Instead of interfering
with each other by doing so, they will materially assist one another,
as they will render it possible for merchants to obtain a sufficient
quantity of the same wine to supply their customers with an article
of unvarying character.


This is not possible at present, on account of the great number
of different wines made by each vineyard, and the hopeless confusion
of names.
Instead of having in each district a host of different names, such
as Hermitage, Shiraz, Carbinet, Burgundy, Chasselas, Riesling,
Tokay, &c., let each district produce a definite type of wine.
Names derived from the sort of grape really mean nothing. Two
Rieslings—for instance, one grown on the Yarra and the other on
the Murray—differ as much as Hock and Sherry.
Each district now has its Vine-growers* Association. Let all the
vine-growers join it, and agree amongst themselves to produce one
class of wine, or two at most —say one white and one red—and
instead of the host of names mentioned above, the wine will then
come to be known by the name of the district in which it is produced.
We should have, for example, Rutlierglen, Great Western, Bendigo,
Mooroopna, and so forth.
Such a change will inevitably come, and the sooner it comes the
better for the wine industry. A man will then have some idea of the
contents of a bottle from the label.
In all old wine-growing countries this is the course which has
been adopted. Fortunately for them, difficulty of communication
and the experience of centuries, which showed them what sort of
wine could be best produced in the district, brought this about. It
is thus that such districts as Bordeaux, Burgundy, Chablis, Sauternes,
Champagne, all produce distinct types of wine, and the names of
these districts have become famous throughout the civilized world.
At the Cape the depreciation of wine was so great that they had to
adopt this system, which has so far been attended with most beneficial
results.
Very often the growers do not know what sort of wine it is best
for their own interests to produce; a few of them do not even know
bad wine from good. By belonging to a Vinegrowers’ Association,


and meeting occasionally to discuss affairs in a friendly spirit,
comparing their wines without jealousy, and obtaining the opinion of
qualified judges upon the suitability or otherwise of such-and-such
a description of wine, they will do more good to themselves, their
neighbours, and the viticultural industry in general, than can be easily
estimated.
The above remarks apply to the local as' well as to the home
market. It is very satisfactory to note that year by year the local
consumption of our wine is increasing, and although at present far
from being as considerable as one might wish, the prejudice of our
population in favour of beer and spirit, to which they and their
ancestors before them have been accustomed, jnust be taken into
consideration.
It is very gratifying to observe the way in which wine is gradually
beginning to supersede other drinks with a great many Victorians.
It is needless to remark that the effects of this change of opinion are
as beneficial to the consumers as to the producers of the wine, for
nobody now attempts to deny that sound natural wine is more whole-
some than any other beverage man is in the habit of consuming.
We are entitled to hope that from the amelioration in quality, and
greater uniformity in character to which we are looking forward, the
result will be a largely increased local consumption.
In conclusion, my thanks are due to those authors whose works
have furnished much of the matter contained in this Handbook.
Although I have availed myself largely of the reports of the Vegetable
Products Commission, there are several other works which I have
extensively consulted whilst writing the following pages, and to their
authors I now tender my grateful thanks.
Among these I would specially mention Baron Sir F. von Mueller,
Select Extra Tropical Plants; G. Foex (Director of the Agricultural
College of Montpellier), Cours Complet de Viticulture; L. Fortes and


F. Ruyssen, Traite de la Vigne et de ses Produits ; Dr. Jules Guyot,
Culture- de la Vigne et Vinification; Etude des Vignobles de France;
George Husmann, Culture of the Vine in California; Francisque
Chaverondier, La Vigne et le Vin ; and the works of Dr. A. C. Kelly
upon Vine Culture in South Australia.
Board of Viticulture,
Melbourne, 12th May, 1891.


CHAPTER I
HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF THE VINE.
The culture of the vine has always accompanied the progress of
civilization from the earliest ages up to the present time. Although
generally said to have been introduced into Europe from Asia Minor
modern research tends to prove that it was indigenous throughout
Southern Europe. Of late years many fossil vines have been dis-
covered, some of which so closely resemble the varieties of the present
day that it is most probable that the vine has existed in Europe since
the geological ages.
• Wine was made and drunk by the Hebrews, Egyptians, Greeks,
and Romans in the very earliest times. The first mention of it in the
Bible is in Genesis ix., 20, 21, 24, where we are told how Noah made
wine, and drinking some of it, without knowing its strength, was over-
powered by it. Even before this, however, it appears that wine was
made in Egypt. At the tomb of Apophis a bas-relief was found
representing a wine-press which dates from B.c. 3852, or 1,500 years
before Noah.
The antiquity of viticulture, although interesting, is of no
practical importance to us, and it will suffice to say that as times
became more peaceable, the growth of the vine spread over the
greater part of the continent of Europe, even penetrating into the
south of England, where, however, it is no longer cultivated for wine-
making purposes, and at the present day this precious plant is
cultivated in every civilized country where climatic conditions render
it possible to do so with profit.
The vine belongs to the family of the Ampelidea3, genus Vitis,
All the vines of European origin belong to one species, i.e., Vinifera;
B


they, therefore, all come under the botanical name of Vitis Vinifera, of
which the different sorts, or “ cepages” as they are called in French, are
only varieties. In a future chapter it is intended to describe a few
species of Yitis other than the Vinifera, amongst which will be the
various American vines, as they differ only in some minor respects
from the Viiis Vinifera, which is by far the most important. In this
chapter we shall confine ourselves to it as the type to which all vines
may be compared.
There is a considerable difference between the wild and the cultivated
state of the vine—in the former it is one of the most vigorous, fastest
growing, and longest-lived of plants, capable of covering hundreds of
square yards or climbing to the tops of the highest trees, but bearing
little fruit. In the latter, on the other hand, instead of being a
creeper as it is intended to be by nature, it is turned into a more or
less stunted shrub, its vitality is much diminished, and its life is
shortened to a great extent; these apparent drawbacks being amply
compensated by the great increase in the yield which is thus brought
about.
With the vine as with many other plants a diminution in the vigour
of the plant is marked by an increase in the production of fruit.
This is one of the wise provisions of nature for the perpetuation of
the species. As long as the plant is in full vigour, it centres all
its activity on itself, growing in a remarkable manner, but bearing
little or no fruit. When, however, it begins to get weakened by
any cause, natural or artificial, it seems to feel that its end is
approaching, and turns all its activity to reproduction or the produc-
tion of fruit.
Many vignerons, knowing this, carry things to extremes and weaken
the vine, through excessive pruning, to such an extent that its very
existence is made difficult to it. Thus, by overdoing things, do they
obtain wretched results, for which they blame the soil, the season, or
any cause but the right one. The vine resents such barbarous
treatment. Growers must adopt a more rational course, and not
kill the goose which lays the golden eggs. This is contrary to the
opinion held by many vignerons, but is nevertheless true. It is what
Dr. Guyot, the eminent French authority on viticulture, tried to
impress on the vine-growers of France during his whole life. We
shall see more of this when we come to pruning.


Tlie vine is a deciduous flowering creeper or shrub with long slender
sarmentaceous shoots. The different parts may be described as
follows: —
Roots.
The roots of the vine are of' two sorts, tap-roots and laterals, which
between them make up the complete root system of the plant, each
having its special functions to perform. These two sorts of roots are
very similar in structure, they are both long, slender, and branching,
moderately succulent and similar to those of most fruit trees, and
differ principally in their direction. The tap-roots of the vine are
ramified, and not so distinct as in most other plants; they are more
marked in seedlings than in vines grown from cuttings.
When a young vine is grown from seed the roet grows much faster
than the stem —it is at first entirely cellular, but it soon becomes
covered with a thin epidermis (outer skin), which gets thinner towards
the extremities; it is only the parts which are covered with this epi-
dermis which are capable of absorbing food from the soil ; on them
are found the minute absorbent hairs covered with a very thin mem-
brane, through which the nourishing elements of the soil enter the
vine in a state of solution. Later on, this thin skin gives place to a
regular bark ; woody fibres appear in the centre, and the root reaches
its adult stage in which it can no longer absorb liquids directly, but
serves to transmit those absorbed near the extremities to the other
parts of the plant.
The adult root is composed of a pithy centre, surrounded by bundles
of fibres (fibro-vascular bundles), separated by medullary rays. Out-
side is the bark, formed of vascular bundles, surrounded on the
exterior by a layer of cork, which serves to protect the root from
injuries. This cork layer varies in thickness, it predominates in the
roots of some of the American species, rendering them able to resist
the attacks of the phylloxera, to which the European varieties
succumb. The roots of the American varieties are also tougher and more
woody. Between the bark and the interior of the root is to be found
the cambium layer, which generates the different tissues.
Stem.
The stem of the vine in its wild state is not divided as it is when
cultivated into trunk, crown, and shoots, but is long, slender and
B 2


ramified, like the stems of most creepers, and is of pretty much the
same diameter at different parts of the vine. This is due to the fact
that the more rapid the development of the upper part of the vine
the more slender will the stem be. This is often noticeable in
trellises, and even vines in a vineyard where the main trunk has
been formed too quickly. It is better to form it gradually, as a
much stronger and better trunk, requiring less support than that of a
too-rapidly formed vine, will be obtained.
The shoots of the year are long and more or less slender. They
are knotted at regular intervals. At each knot a leaf is to be found,
the leaves growing alternately on either side of the shoot. Tendrils
grow opposite to the leaves, which help the plant to fix itself to
adjacent objects. In most vines every third leaf will be without a
tendril opposite to it, the other two having one. The tendrils are
then discontinuous, one species of vine (Yitis Labrusca) has con-
tinuous tendrils, a tendril (or bunch) being opposite to every leaf.
At each knot there is a woody partition right through the shoot
separating the pith above and below it, thus making a vine shoot in
this respect comparable to that of a bamboo.
At the base of each leaf there are several buds. The main one
will only develop itself in the ensuing year ; but, in addition to this,
there is one which may give rise to a lateral shoot during the current
year, i.e., may grow during the same year as the main shoot, and
there are two or more secondary buds which, like the principal one,
are reserved for the ensuing year, but only develop themselves in
case of injury to the main one.
The laterals grow principally if the extremity of the main shoot be
broken off, as we shall see when we come to the chapter on summer
pruning.
It is on the lateral shoots of the year that the second crop of grapes
appears. It lias been recommended to break off the extremities of
the young shoot when they are about 4 inches long, it being said that
the lateral shoots thus brought into existence will between them bear
more fruit than the original shoot off which they grow. This has not
been proved as yet, but still deserves mention, as it presents an
opportunity for some interesting experiments.
Unless the vine be short pruned a great many of the buds will not
develop themselves, the ones at the greatest distance from the old wood,


or situated near the end of the previous year’s shoots, alone developing
themselves; this tendency of the vine to continually elongate itself
must be carefully considered when vines are pruned long.
The structure of the stem is very similar to that of the root. It
also commences, like the root, by being purely cellular, but soon
differentiates itself, becoming gradually more and more complicated.
In the centre we have a cylinder of pith, very considerable in the
young shoots, but which gradually diminishes as the shoot gets older.
Outside this several concentric layers of fibro-vascular bundles are
situated, the number varying with the age of the vine; they constitute
the wood, which is extremely hard and dense in old vines, although
soft when the shoots are young. Then comes the cambium, or
generating layer, which forms the rings of new wood every year.
The cambium layer is composed of mucilaginous cells, and is situated
immediately between the young wood and the bark, which is itself
composed of several layers, which it is unnecessary to enumerate
here. The bark is thin and adherent; it is drier and tougher than
that of most other plants, and for this reason the vine is very hardy,
and capable of resisting intense cold ; it will survive a winter during
wjiich the fig, for example, would perish. The outer layer of bark is
gradually pushed off and replaced by new layers underneath it. The
old ones do not fall off entirely, but remain more or less attached to
the under parts, thus giving the old wood of the vine a characteristic
but untidy appearance. This peculiar bark is a certain protection to
the plant, but is at the same time a great drawback, as it forms a
harbour for insects, spores of parasitic fungi, &c., &c.
Leaves.
The leaves of the vine are large, and more or less deeply indented,
being usually divided into five lobes, by as many sinus, as the indenta-
tions are called. The margin is serrated or divided into teeth, which
vary greatly in size and character ; they are large or small, blunt or
sharp, regular or irregular ; sometimes there are two distinct series
of them.
The leaf is supported by a rather long stalk or petiole, which in
structure resembles the young stem of the vine. There are five fibro-
vascular bundles in it, each of which separates at the junction with the
broad part of the leaf or limb to form one of the main veins, and
occupy one of the lobes, the centre one, or mid-rib, being the


largest. Each of these primary veins again gives rise to numerous
secondary and tertiary veins distributed in such a way as to form a
perfect network of fibre. The veins are raised on the under-surface
of the leaf, but rather sunk-in if observed on the upper side.
The two surfaces vary also in many other respects. The under-
surface is usually downy, whilst the upper is seldom so. The under
side is always of a paler colour than the upper.
In structure the leaves of the vine consist of an epidermis or outer
skin, which covers both sides of the leaf, and encloses the paren-
chyma or cellular tissue, the cells of which contain the chlorophyl
or green colouring matter.
On the under side of the leaf are to be found the stomata or breath-
ing pores, to the number of 13,600 per square inch. These may be
termed the lungs of the plant, as it is through them that the air is
brought in contact with the inner tissues, which are thus enabled to
absorb necessary gases from the air, and to get rid of those
eliminated during the process of nutrition, as well as a large amount
of water. On the upper surface there are no stomata.
On the epidermis are hairs, which are either stiff or long and silky,
the former on the under side of most vine leaves, especially on the
veins, whilst the latter constitute the cottony down occasionally
present on the under or on both sides of the leaf.
Flower.
The flowers of the vine are grouped in bunches, which are too
familiar to require description. The bunch is botanically termed a
raceme, and is an example of indefinite inflorescence. The flower
itself is small and insignificant looking, and of a pale green colour.
It may be described as follows :
Calyx small, almost entire, formed of five sepals united at their
base. Corolla, usually composed of five petals, alternate with the
sepals and cohering above; when the bud opens they are set free at
the base, but remain united at the summit, so that the whole corolla
falls off in a single piece. Stamens, usually five in number, opposite
to the petals, the anthers being ovate and versatile. Alternate with
the stamens are five nectariferous glands, which give rise to the
fragrant perfume of the flower. Pistil —style short. It is divided
into two cells, each with two ovules. This is the complete or


hermaphrodite flower of the vine (Figs. 1 and 2) containing both
stamens and pistil. In the wild state all the flowers are not complete,
FIG. 1.
FIG. 2.
some plants bear complete flowers, whilst others bear flowers which
are only male, the pistil not being formed (Fig. 3). Other plants
FIG. 3.
again bear both male and complete flowers. Amongst cultivated
vines only the plants with hermaphrodite flowers are to be found; the
others, which are always sterile, not having been reproduced by
cuttings. Among seedling vines, however, they are of frequent
occurrence, and if found in a vineyard, the vines bearing them should
be destroyed or grafted with kinds bearing only complete or hei -
maphrodite flowers.
In addition to these, some badly-formed flowers may be found either
with the petals opening at the top and remaining attached to the flower
FIG. 4.
in the shape of a star, instead of detaching at their base and falling


off in a single cap as they ought to do (Fig. 4). Some again may
have the stamens and pistils turned into leaves, either partially
(Fig. 5) or totally, as in of a double geranium. The first
FIG. 5.
are capable of being fecundated by pollen from another flower and
giving fruit; they are unable to give rise to fruit otherwise, as the
stamens are short and weak, and the pollen often sterile. The
second are and must always be sterile.
Tendrils may be looked upon as bunches which have aborted or
which bear no fruit. They occur in the same position as the bunches,
i.e., opposite to the leaves, the complete bunches being opposed to lower
leaves, whilst the tendrils are situated more towards the extremities
of the shoots —they serve to attach the vine to the different objects
upon which it climbs. The fruit resulting from the fecundation of
the above-described flower is a round or slightly oblong succulent
berry, which, when ripe, consists of a rather thin skin enclosing a
very fluid pulp containing various substances, the most important
being glucose or grape sugar and some vegetable acids. In the centre
are situated the seeds, varying in number from one to four ; in some
varieties they are totally absent. The tannin and colouring matter
are contained in the skin. The percentage of glucose in the juice,
and consequently the strength of the wine, depends upon the amount
of fruit on the vine. Vines bearing a light crop will give a stronger
wine than those heavily laden with fruit ; by regulating the number
of bunches on the vines, it is possible to increase or diminish the
strength of the wine.


CHAPTER II.
PHYSIOLOGY.
Having described the different parts of the vine, let us see in what
manner and to what extent each of them contributes to the develop-
ment of the plant,and production of fruit.
The vine being a deciduous plant, the cycle of its yearly develop-
ment only extends from the time when the buds burst in the spring
till the leaves fall off in the autumn, which, in a temperate climate,
embraces a period of something under six months; the other six
months of the year are passed in a dormant state.
In this annual cycle of activity it seems to have for primary object
the production and proper maturation of its fruit; all the functions
of the different organs tending towards this end, as if they had been
brought into existence solely for this purpose.
The activity culminates in the ripening of the fruit; after this
has taken place, the leaves turn red or yellow, fall off, and the plant
hastens to assume its wintry appearance. Not only is this the case
in the cultivated vine, where it might be expected since every device of
art and an artificial selection during many centuries have been at work
striving to increase the yield, but even in the wild state is this so,
although to a lesser degree.
In the spring the activity of the vine begins to manifest itself by a
rise in the sap; this is followed by the emission of shoots bearing
leaves and flower buds, which grow with great rapidity for the first
few months.
The rise of the sap is due to the increase in the surrounding tem-
perature; this acts by dilating the bubbles of air which exist in the
liquid column contained in the vessels of the stem; by stimulating the
leaf buds it causes the emission of organs which provide for a con-
tinuation of the rise. The vessels of the vine are large, and the sap
flows very freely through them. When a shoot is cut in the spring
it bleeds copiously. Hales measured this ascensional force of the


sap, and found that it was equal to a pressure of about 10 lbs. per
square inch. When the plant is in full activity, the rise of sap is
still greater, as there are more factors to promote it.
The leaves exert a very considerable influence. The leaves of all
plants transpire or exhale through their stomata or breathing pores
large quantities of water. Those of the vine are no exception to this
rule. Hales found that a vine with a leaf surface of 1,820 square inches,
or 120 medium-sized leaves, exhaled from 5 oz. to 6oz. of water daily
under ordinary circumstances. This amount, however, is not con-
stant—it varies with the amount of light the plant is exposed to and
the moisture of the air. Plants do not transpire ip the dark nor in a
very faint light. This function is more acted upon by light than
heat. It makes room for the fresh sap which is being continually sent
up by the roots. This sap becomes concentrated by the loss of
water, and by osmosis favours the rise of a fresh quantity. Osmosis
is the name given to a physical phenomenon which takes place when
two liquids of different density are separated by a thin membrane ;
both liquids traverse the membrane, but the less dense does so to a
far greater extent than the denser one. This process of osmosis
takes place throughout the whole of the plant through the cell
membranes from the root where the liquids enter the absorbent hairs,
in the form of a thin watery solution, to the highest parts of the
plant. It is the principal cause of the rise of the sap, which is also
promoted by capillary attraction in the long vessels of the plant.
It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the cause of this rise of the sap;
it is sufficient for us to know that it does rise, and not only does it
rise but it circulates.
After entering the roots through the microscopic absorbent hairs
in the form of a thin watery solution, it rises through the vessels of
the young wood and finally reaches the leaves, to all the tissues of
which it is distributed by the veins. In the leaves it is not only
concentrated by loss of water, as we have already seen, but it
becomes enriched with many new substances derived from its contact
with the atmosphere.
Under the influence of the light of day the chlorophyl or green
colouring matter is capable of decomposing the carbonic acid of
the air and taking the carbon with which it forms immediate
products, which will in turn undergo transformations in order
to form the different tissues, &c., of the plants, the oxygen being set


free. One of the most important of these immediate products is
starch, but there are many others such as oils, acids, &c. The leaves
therefore, perform the double functions of transpiration and assimila-
tion—in addition to these, a true respiration similar to that of animals
takes place in them, the plant absorbing oxygen and exhaling carbonic
acid, and effecting transformations in some of the substances assimi-
lated during the day. This respiration is noticeable at night, but
is not so considerable as the absorption of carbonic acid during the
day.
Having undergone these different processes in the leaf, the sap
descends through the vessels of the bark, and is distributed to the
different parts of the plant as required, a part of it finding its way to
the roots, where it provides for the elongation pf these organs; and at
the same time a small quantity which escapes, helps to dissolve
certain mineral substances of the soil which are not soluble in water,
such as carbonate of lime and phosphates, and thus allows them to
enter the vine.
It is evident from all this, that carbon, which is the most abundant
solid element in all plants, and which remains in the form of charcoal
.when almost any vegetable substance is strongly heated without a
sufficient supply of air to burn it, is derived solely from the atmosphere,
and assimilated by the leaves, none of it being absorbed through the
roots. The only substances absorbed by the roots are water, ash, and
compounds containing nitrogen (ammonia and nitrates). These do not
form a large percentage, and if we except water, which is of course
necessary to dissolve the other substances, we shall find that not 8 per
cent, of the total weight of the plant comes from the soil, the remaining
92 per cent, being absorbed from the air. Strange as this may seem
it is not less true, no scientific fact being more clearly proved.
The different organs perform their functions in this manner through-
out the summer, the roots requiring moisture without the help of
which they would be unable to absorb the necessary mineral sub-
stances of the soil, or to replace the water lost by the plant through
transpiration. The leaves on their side require heat, light, and air.
Although it is necessary that moisture should be present in the soil,
it must not he so in too great a proportion as the vine requires air at
its roots as well. If the soil be swampy or sour, the vigour of the
plant will he greatly impaired, and it will fall an easy prey to any
disease to which it may he subject.


About tlie month of November, in Victoria, the all-important
function of flowering takes place ; the vine has then increased con-
siderably in size both above and below ground. The flower bud
gradually swells till the moment of bursting, when the corolla is
forced off in a single piece or capsule, and the different parts of the
flower are set at liberty. The pollen of the anthers is deposited on
the pistil, and finds its way to the ovules, which, being fecundated,
will ultimately become the seeds ; the ovary in which they are
contained swelling up to form the fruit. The exact moment when
this fecundation takes place is not clearly known. Some authors
consider that it is just before the capsule is thrown off, and while
the anthers are in contact with the pistil, whilst the majority admit
that it takes place immediately after the fall of the capsule. It is quite
possible that under different circumstances both views may be correct.
If the ovules are not fecundated, the flower withers and falls off,
giving rise to no fruit, or in plain words the fruit does not set.
The seedless Sultana grape seems at first sight to be an exception
to this rule ; but the experiment of Mr. Knight, of Sandhurst, in his
evidence before the Royal Commission on Vegetable Products, proves
that this is not so—the ovules are perfectly fecundated, but the seeds
are subsequently absorbed into the pulp of the fruit. The non-setting
of the grapes, or “ coulure ” as it is termed in French, is due to several
causes. The washing off of the pollen by rain at the time when
fecundation should take place is one of them, but in far the greater
number of cases it is due to a malformation of the flower.
We have already seen several cases in which it is, so to speak, in-
herited from parent vines, in which case the faulty vines should
be destroyed; but it often happens that it is not the fault of the plant
but of the season. Under the influence of prolonged wet weather, even
a considerable time before the blossoming, there may be am excessive
amount of sap in the plant, rendering it weak and flabby, although
in appearance perfectly normal. The stamens then become short
and watery, and are incapable of fecundating the pistil, which itself
may be sterile. This is amply proved to be the case by the fact that
anything which tends to diminish the quantity of sap in the vine also
diminishes the non-setting of such varieties as may be subject to this
defect. The excessive moisture may also promote this by facilitating
the growth of fungus parasites on the delicate reproductive organs,
with fatal results to the crop of fruit.


In addition to this non-setting or complete abortion in certain years,
it may be observed that although at first the fruit appears to have
set properly, after a short time differences
will be noticeable between different berries
of the bunch, all of which do not take an
even development, so that at vintage time
the hunches are loose and made up of uneven-
sized berries, some of which, containing no
seeds (which have been re-absorbed), are
scarcely larger than shot, and do not ripen
properly, while at the same time there are
some normal ones (Fig. 6).
In French this is termed “ millerandage.'' >
It may result from several causes. Some-
times it will be observed on diseased vines,
in which case it would appear to be due to
faulty nutrition of the plant ; but it occurs
far more often in Australia, especially when
cold wet weather prevails immediately after
FIG. 6.
the setting of the flower, the young fruit receiving a check to their
development, from which they are not able to completely recover.
According to M. L. de Malafosse, these small berries are due to the
development of some late flowers present in most bunches, which
usually abort, but are enabled to develop on account of the non-setting
of some of the principal flowers ; they are not, however, capable of
giving normal-sized fruit. Whatever be the manner in which this
“ millerandage ” be brought about, it may be said to result in the great
majority of cases from the prevalence of unfavorable weather imme-
diately after the blossoming. Once fecundated, the fruit develops
itself steadily during the whole of the summer, the rest of the plant
also increases in size to some extent, although it does not grow
rapidly after the blossoming. The leaves increase in size and number,
and in them the various substances found in the mature fruit are
elaborated. They are thus of the greatest importance; the fruit
cannot be formed without them. In the words of Macagno, another
eminent French authority, “the leaves are the laboratory of pro-
duction of glucose, the green branches the conductors of this precious
constitutive element of the must.”


We, therefore, see that the leaves do not simply act beneficially by
sheltering the grapes from the direct rays of the sun, but are indis-
pensable for the elaboration of the necessary constituents of the mature
fruit. The unripe berries contain several free acids, amongst the
number tartaric, citric, and malic are the most important. By the
action of these acids on such substances as starch, gum, dextrine,
lignine, cellulose, &c., grape-sugar or glucose is formed. The fruit
during this time becomes richer in sugar and poorer in acid ; part of
the acid is also neutralized by mineral salts absorbed by the roots,
and at the same time the juice becomes denser through loss of water
by evaporation. The different processes which take place in the
plant, of which the ultimate result is the production of glucose, are
exceedingly complex and cannot be gone into here ; the above out-
line sketch will suffice to give an idea of the character of the
transformations.
A short time before the maturation takes place—the time being
marked for red grapes by their commencing to change colour —a
characteristic change seems to come over the vine; it looks sick.
This is caused by the sap partly leaving the leaves and transporting
itself to the berries. During this time the plant looks more unhealthy
than at any other period of its yearly development. This is termed in
French the “ veraison,” and continues, although in a less marked
manner, until the time when the fruit is ready to be picked.
Once the maturity is complete, whether the grapes be picked or not,
the duty of the year being accomplished, the vine hastens to assume
its winter appearance. The nutritive materials which have not been
required for the fruit are concentrated in or about the buds as a store
for next year, to enable the plant to start its growth again.
The leaves turn red or yellow and fall off; the ascensional power
of the sap becomes less and less and finally ceases, and the vine
assumes its winter or dormant state and is to all intents and purposes
dead. It continues in this state until the rise of temperature in the
spring determines a rise of sap and commencement of vegetation, when
the same cycle is gone through once more.


CHAPTER III.
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE GROWTH AND
PRODUCTS OF THE VINE.
Any one who studies the numerous works on viticulture, or strives
to obtain information on the subject from practical men coming from
different parts of Europe, will be struck by the great confusion which
exists, and the startling way in which the systems recommended by
each differ from one another, even on what would appear to be the
fundamental principles, or such operations as planting, pruning,
&c.
It may be imagined that this is so, because each district in the old
country has its particular method, handed down from generation to
generation, and the prejudice common to uneducated country people
makes them unwilling to change it; but the application of more
scientific methods would change all this, and bring about a reform,
having for result the adoption of one standard system. This, how-
ever, is not the case. It is not alone by scientific research that our
modern knowledge of viticulture has been obtained. Our ancestors
were not scientific men, yet no one can deny that they brought it
to a high state of perfection. Their guide was practical experience,
extending over many centuries ; it taught them slowly but surely,
with comparatively few exceptions, the best method to adopt ; this
is amply proved by the fact that since the results of modern research
have been applied to practical viticulture, few alterations have been
made in the methods used.
We are thus led to admit that nearly every district in the wine-
producing countries of Europe has a distinct viticultural method of its
own, and at the same time that all these methods are correct, pro-
vided they are adopted in the locality where experience has proved
their suitability. In Europe things are thus greatly simplified ;in nine
cases out of ten a man may, with perfect safety, copy the method
adopted by the majority of his neighbours. In Australia we are very
differently situated; we have no experience of past generations to guide


us, but are confronted at the start by a host of conflicting opinions
held by vignerons coming from different countries and climates. The
simplest and quickest way out of the difficulty is to try to discover,
by more scientific means than our ancestors had at their disposal, what
are the rules we are to be guided by, and how they may be varied by
circumstances. It is impossible to lay down hard-and-fast rules for
viticulture —to say, as many people do, that any particular soil,
distance apart, kind of vine, &c., is the best for wine making.
We shall see that the same method of culture in two different localities
will give different results, different modes of culture in the same locality
will also give different results, and lastly, that in certain cases different
modes of culture in different localities may give the same result.
The surrounding circumstances have more influence on the vine
than on most plants usually cultivated. Their effect is plainly
visible in the outward appearance of the plant, but manifests itself to
a far greater extent in the wine which is, on this account, a most vari-
able product.
These surrounding circumstances are made up of several factors ;
it is of the greatest importance that the vigneron should know what
they are, in what manner they act, and in what way it is possible to
modify their effect by adopting a different system of culture, with
the object of obtaining a wine well suited to the requirements of
commerce, and at the same time of as high a degree of perfection as
possible; as between making a pretty good wine and a very good wine
lies all the difference between paying working expenses and making
handsome profits.
In this chapter we shall examine what these different factors are
and in what way they act; in the following ones we shall see in what
way it is possible to modify their effect. These factors are climate,
soil, and variety.
Climate.
Although the three factors enumerated above are all of great
importance, the climate is, without doubt, the most important one.
Its influence in rendering a certain mode of culture more suitable
than another is very considerable —in fact, it is of such importance as
to be capable of rendering the profitable cultivation of the vine
impossible. There is, in other words, a climatic zone, outside of
which vine-growing 'will not pay. lortunately, this zone is very


extensive, and we may say that it embraces all climates which are
neither tropical nor very cold. Very few parts of this colony of
Victoria are unsuitable for the cultivation of the vine as far as this
factor is concerned.
The three elements, heat, light, and moisture, in varying pro-
portions, make up the climate. Two vines so situated as to receive
more or less of either of them may be said to be in different climates,
as would also be the case if they received the maxima or minima of
either of them at different times.
Heat and light may be considered together, as they both being
derived from a common source —viz., the sun —on a clear day the
plant receives more, and on a cloudy day less of each.
The immediate effect of an increase in the amount of heat and
light a vine receives, or, in other words, of transporting it from a
colder into a warmer climate, is an increase in the vigour of the
plant; but its most important effect is to augment the percentage of
glucose contained in the must, and, consequently, the strength of the
resulting wine.
It is for this reason that the wines of northern France are lighter
than those of the south, which are in turn lighter than those of
Spain ; or, in taking Victoria, that the wines of the northern districts
are stronger than those of the southern ones.
That the effect of the climate should be very considerable is
evident when we consider that not only does the plant receive more
intense heat and light during the same time, but it receives it during
a longer time—the yearly cycle of active growth, increasing in
length in the warm climate, since the vines begin to bud much
sooner in the spring, although the time of complete maturity of the
fruit is not sensibly hastened.
We saw in Chapter 11. that during the ripening of the fruit the
percentage of acid diminishes as that of glucose increases. Part of
this acid is employed in the elaboration of the glucose, and part is
neutralized by mineral salts derived from the soil just before complete
maturity ; in a cold climate the acids are not completely neutralized,
and the grapes (and wine) often have a sour crude taste.
To sum up the effect of climate in a few words, we may say the
colder it is the more acid, the warmer it is the more alcohol the
resulting wine will contain.
c


The cold climate errs by the resulting wine being too rich in acid,
and the warm by it being too rich in alcohol. A perfect wine can
therefore be more easily produced in a temperate climate.
The influence of moisture is to some extent contrary to what we have
just seen, inasmuch as in a moist climate the percentage of acid and
glucose in the must are both diminished. In some cases this is an
advantage, but in excess is very injurious, the vine being subject to
various fungus diseases (especially if the air be damp), and the wine
becoming a watery compound without flavour, bouquet, or keeping
qualities. Although it is impossible to alter the climate in the matter
of light and heat, we can modify it, as far as moisture is concerned, by
having recourse to irrigation, which thus becomes of the greatest
importance to vine-growers in very dry countries, where the rainfall is
so scanty as to render viticulture unprofitable without its aid.
Irrigation, as applied to vineyards, has given rise to much discus-
sion, most persons, especially in this country, holding different opinions
as to the results to be expected from it. In the evidence taken by
the Royal Commission on Vegetable Products, whilst most witnesses
agree that it largely increases the yield, they express very different
opinions as to whether its adoption is advisable or not. Some recom-
mend it, others denounce it in emphatic terms, saying that it facilitates
the development of fungus diseases of the vine and ruins the character
of the wine* There is much to be said on both sides; moderation
must be observed in this as in most other things. The use of too
much water is no doubt injurious, especially in land where the drainage
is imperfect, as a vine is most unfavorably placed if growing in swampy
or very damp soil. In the cooler parts of the colony vineyards should
be very sparingly, if ever irrigated; in fact, in most cases, it is
better to dispense with it altogether. It will, however, be readily
understood by unprejudiced persons that this is not so in the dry
northern districts. In the case of a deficient rainfall the application
of a few inches of water in an artificial manner can only be attended
with beneficial results if the water be applied judiciously and at a
proper time. An excessive amount of sap in the plant at flowering
time, or a chill immediately after the setting of the fruit, being usually
attended with disastrous results (page 12), care should be taken not
to apply water until this dangerous period has safely passed and the
berries are of the size of small shot. ___
* In the Appendix will be found an abstract of these opinions.


The application of water too late in the season (just before vintage)
is also injurious, and, according to some, liable to promote the growth
of a second crop of grapes.
On the whole, we may say that irrigation of vineyards is in many
cases beneficial, and sometimes even necessary ; it enables the culti-
vation of the vine to be carried out in localities where it would be
impossible under the prevailing climatic conditions, it largely increases
the yield, and at the same time enables a lighter wine to be produced in
the warmer parts of the colony. In the central parts it may often prove
beneficial, although by no means necessary, whilst in the cooler southern
parts it cannot be recommended except under exceptional circumstances.
The water of rivers contains far more fertilizing matter than rain
water, it therefore follows that irrigation acts bemeficially in, to some
extent, enriching the land, and by thus delaying its ultimate exhaustion,
postponing the time when manuring must be resorted to, or at least by
compensating for the increase in production it brings about.
The opponents of irrigation urge that it is not used in France.
This, however, is not the case. Foex, the director of the Agricultural
College of Montpellier (France), mentions several parts of the south
of- France where vineyards have been irrigated for many years,
and recommends the extension of this pracfice, especially for the pro-
duction of cheaper wines. Pulliat also mentions how the vineyards
of the Canton du Valais, in Switzerland, are irrigated, the climate,
although cold in winter, being dry in summer.
Much harm has been done to the cause of irrigated vineyards by
inexperienced persons who have water placed at their disposal.
Thinking that its fertilizing powers are unlimited, and that the more
the vines get the better will the result be, they over-do it, and swamp
them to such an extent as to either prevent the setting of the grapes
or promote the growth of fungus diseases, which destroy the crop;
they soon find their error, then rush to the other extreme, denounce
irrigation, and resolve never to have recourse to it again. Although
the water may not have been applied in sufficient quantity to do this,
yet it may have done considerable injury by unduly decreasing the
percentage of natural acid in the fruit, and thus rendering the wine
less liable to keep well as well as making it more dangerous during
fermentation. Although too much natural acid (which would be present
were unripe grapes employed)is objectionable, too little is almost as bad.
C 2


The failure of irrigated vineyards is frequently caused by neglect
of cultivation. Irrigation, to be successful, must be supplemented by
thorough and frequent cultivation, for which it is by no means a sub-
stitute, as many people seem to think.
A vineyard owes its particular climate to several causes, of which
the most important are latitude, altitude, and aspect; it is also greatly
influenced by the distance from the coast, proximity to mountain
ranges, direction of prevailing winds, &c.
It is unnecessary to discuss the influence of altitude and latitude
l iere —every one knows that the further one goes from the equator,
or the higher one rises above sea-level, the colder it will be.
The aspect or exposition o a vineyard, however, although of vary-
ing and, as a rule, lesser importance, deserves mention, as one con-
tinually hears such very different opinions as to its importance. In
reality this varies with the coldness of the climate ; in a warm one
it is not considerable, the amount of light and heat being so great
that a little more or less does not make much difference.
On almost level land the influence of aspect is insignificant. On
hilly land it may be very considerable, the side of a hill facing the north
evidently being far hotter than that facing the south. In some parts
of Europe the eastern aspect is considered far superior to any otlier
for the reason we have already given, that light has more influence
on many vegetable functions than heat—the eastern side of a hill being
exposed to the morning light, always more intense than that of the
afternoon.
Is this aspect always an advantage ? In a cold climate it is cer-
tainly so, but in a warm climate it is often preferable to choose a site
with a cooler aspect, S.S.E. or even S.W. One often hears it said that
the vine must be grown on hills and not on flat land. In a cold district
this is true, because the hillsides with favorable aspect and shelter
will be warmer, the drainage better, and the soil also poorer—some-
times an advantage in a cool climate as we shall see later on.
In a temperate climate the aspect is of small importance, and
flat land is often as suitable as hilly, whilst in a warm district the
best aspect will often be the southern or south-western slope, or
the one which would be worst in a cool district.
The distance from the sea renders the climate more extreme,
that is, hotter in summer and colder in winter. Localities situated


far inland are, as a rule, more liable to suffer from spring frosts,
although producing a stronger wine than places near the coast,
where the variations in temperature are not so great.
The proximity to high mountain ranges renders the climate cooler
and moister than it would otherwise be. The effect of prevailing
winds varies according as to whether they have passed over the
sea or over a heated continent, or, in other words, whether they
are dry or moist.
From all this it will be seen that it is impossible to lay down
any simple rules which would enable a man to say, for example,
“ the climate of my vineyard is identical with that of Bordeaux.” Only
complete meteorological observations can enable, such a thing to be
said with any approach to certainty.
For the purposes of this work, it will be very convenient for us
to roughly divide the colony into three climatic regions or divisions
as far as viticulture is concerned. These regions would be as
follows :
First , or cool region. —This would embrace the greater part of
the colony situated on the coast side of the Dividing Range, and
would be very similar to the best wine-growing districts of France,
such as Bordeaux, Burgundy, Champagne, &c., and from similarity
of climate would be solely but eminently suited for the production
of light wines of similar character to those made in the above
districts.
Second, or intermediate region , comprising the greater part of the
central districts of Victoria, the climate of which is similar to that
of the south of France or north of Italy. Sandhurst, Great Western,
and similar wine-producing districts would come within this region,
which would be admirably suited for the production of good com-
mercial wines, and capable of producing either strong or light wines,
according to the sorts grown and methods of cultivation.
Third, or warm region', where the climate is similar to that of Spain,
Portugal, or Sicily, and therefore best suited for the production of
strong wines, although by careful culture -and selection of soil and
varieties moderately light wines may be produced. Rutherglen,
Mildura, and most places situated in the northern and north-western
parts of the colony would be comprised in this region which is the
one where the best results would be obtained from the employment of
irrigation.


Soil.
The nature of the soil has a most important influence on the
growth of the vine and on the quality and quantity of wine which it
will produce. Two vineyards, differing from each other only in the
soil, may give very different results both as regards the crop per acre
and the value of the wine.
The vine is one of the hardiest of plants, and will grow in any
soil that is not swampy, too highly mineralized, or otherwise unfit for
vegetation. There is scarcely any variety of soil fulfilling these
requirements in which profitable vineyards have not, at one time or
another, been established ; but, as might reasonably be expected,
certain classes are more or less suitable than others, more especially,
as we shall see, in a certain climate or for a certain variety of vine.
The characters of a soil are physical and chemical. The physical
characters are looseness or stiffness, depth, and colour.
Ihe looseness or friability of a soil is of great importance. The
advantages of a friable soil over a compact one are manifest—the
drainage is better, the absorption of water greatly facilitated, and, as
it can be cultivated with far greater ease, it enables one to check the
evaporation of moisture during the dry season, as nothing favours the
retention of moisture so much as keeping the surface in a thoroughly
loose state. The difference between a stiff clay soil, which dries up
and cracks in summer, and a sandy or otherwise friable soil, which
remains loose and is always moist a few inches below the surface, is
too well known to need enlarging upon. A loose soil is therefore an
advantage in a very wet as well as in a very dry district.
The depth of the soil is of variable importance, and depends chiefly
upon the climate. Although a deep soil is usually considered to be
the best for vine-growing purposes, if we examine the different
districts in the old country we find that this is far more the case in
the southern than in the northern parts. In a warm climate the vine,
taking a greater development, requires more room for its roots, which,
extending vertically as well as laterally, demand a deeper soil.
Under such conditions there is also less danger of a scarcity of
moisture during the summer. In a cold district the moisture of the
soil is always ample, and the vine, growing with less vigour, can


satisfy itself with a much shallower soil, in which it is also better
able to mature its fruit, an operation which is not always satisfactorily
performed in northern France, where it is not uncommon to see vine-
yards growing where there is only a thin layer of soil covering an
impenetrable rocky subsoil. Such vineyards are in many cases
celebrated for the excellence of their product (but, again we say it,
only in a cold district).
The colour of a soil is of more importance than might be imagined.
Every one knows the difference between the temperature of a house,
the outside of which is painted black or painted white. With the
soil the influence is more marked, as it acts both upon the roots and
the part above ground. A dark-coloured soil absorbs heat, and its
own temperature rises, but it reflects very little on to the upper part
of the vine, whilst a white or light-coloured soil has the reverse effect;
it reflects the rays on to the fruit and leaves, whilst its own tempera-
ture increases but slightly. It follows that a dark soil is an advan-
tage in a cold climate where the moisture of the soil is excessive,
while in a warm climate a light-coloured soil is preferable, as it
insures to a greater extent the retention of moisture. The disease
known as Chlorosis, which is characterized by the leaves of the vine
turning yellow and the whole plaut losing its vigour, and which often
results from too much moisture in the soil, is less prevalent in dark
than in light coloured soils, in which many vines, more especially
among those of American origin, suffer very considerably from it.
Soils containing pebbles or gravel are always, and in all countries,
highly esteemed for viticultural purposes. This is borne out by the
fact that almost all the most celebrated vineyards are planted in soils
containing a more or less considerable proportion of pebbles of various
kinds. In the best Burgundy vineyards they are calcareous, at
Bordeaux quartz, on the Rhine granitic, and in Champagne chalky.
In some of the most celebrated vineyards the soil is so stony that it
would be unfit for any other culture than that of the vine. At
Chateau Lafitte the proportion of water-worn quartz pebbles in the
soil is 71 per cent.
The chemical properties of the soil are of great importance, and in
order that they should be understood, it will be necessary to revert
to what we saw with reference to the composition of the vine. The
following table gives a fair idea of the importance of the different


elements of which the plant is composed, as well as the sources from
which they are derived :
Carbon ... ... 'j
Hydrogen ... ... /
Oxygen ... ... /
Amounting to about 90 per cent., and
derived by the vine from the air and
rain.
Sodium ... ... A
Magnesium ...
Sulphur
Chlorine ... ... )
Iron ...
Silicon
Manganese ... ... ,
Amounting to about 4 per cent.
These elements are always far
more abundantly provided in the
soil than is necessary to the plant.
Nitrogen ... ... v
Phosphorus ... ...
Potassium ... ... /
Calcium (lime) ... J
Amounting to something over 4 per
cent. Derived like the last from
. the soil in which they are only
present to a limited extent.
Of these fourteen elements, combined together in varying numbers
and proportion, the almost infinite number of substances found in the
vine and wine are made up. We see from the above table that the
last four, viz.:—Potassium, phosphorus, nitrogen, and calcium (or
lime) are the only ones we need consider, as all others are either
derived from the air and rain or are so abundantly present in all soils
as to be practically inexhaustible. The presence of more or less of
these four important elements renders a soil valuable or worthless,
and the predomination of any one of them will render such a soil
especially suitable for one class of plants. A soil rich in nitrogen is
most suitable for wheat, colza, tobacco, &c.; one rich in phosphorus is
better suited for turnips, maize, sugar cane, &c.; whilst for vines
potash is the most important element, at least as far as the
production of fruit is concerned —the presence of phosphorus and
nitrogen has more influence on the production of wood. Now, although
vines are cultivated with the object of obtaining fruit, there must
be wood for the fruit to grow upon. We must have sufficient of all
the necessary elements, but as potash is the one of which the greatest
portion is taken away by the fruit, it is the one which should be
present in considerable proportion in all soils intended for vines.
In many cases poor soils give wines of superior quality, especially
in a cold climate, where a heavy crop would give too weak a wine.


The number of varieties of soil are very great, and it would be
out of place to here give complicated analyses, yet it will be of use
to those who intend planting, to briefly review what are the chief
types of soil, what are the principal constituents of each, and in what
way it acts upon the vine.
All soils more or less resemble one of the following types :
Clayey, sandy, calcareous, plutonic, and peaty soils.
Clay soils give excellent wines, as a rule, in temperate climates,
especially if they are not too compact, their principal drawback being
their liability to crack and dry up. Wines made in clay soils usually
possess all the requisite characteristics of a good wine in moderation
and are very pleasant. Their chief constituent, pure clay or silicate
of alumina, is not necessary to the vine, so its influence must be
more mechanical than otherwise.
Schistose soils are usually metamorpliic clays, and therefore give
similar results. A loose surface resting on a mellow clay subsoil
will give excellent results in a cool district. A clayey soil will in
most cases greatly benefit by being irrigated..
Sandy soils contain a greater or lesser proportion of pure silica.
The wine they produce is generally light and delicate, more so than
that produced by any other. In them the vine grows very freely
and begins to bear early, probably on account of the facility with
which the roots can spread.
Calcareous or limestone soils. —The presence of lime has a marked
influence on the strength of the wine—that made on a limestone
soil containing as much as 5 or 6 per cent, more alcohol than wine
grown on sandy soil. They are therefore more desirable in a cold
than in a warm climate. The vine does not grow very vigorously
on such soils, although lime is to be found more extensively in the
wood than in the fruit.
Plutonic soils. —Under this category may be classed granitic,
porphyritic, basaltic, and the so-called volcanic soils ; they are, as
a rule, rich in potash, and therefore admirably suited for viti-
culture. The Hermitage vineyard in France is situated on granitic
soil ; the Tokay of Hungary on basalt. The wines made on such
soils are therefore excellent, and these soils will grow vines for
many years without becoming exhausted.


Peaty soils are those rich in organic matter, and, consequently, in
nitrogen. Although very rich and forming good agricultural soils, they
must be said to be less suitable than the others for viticulture. The
nitrogen stimulates the woody development, but the fruit is watery
and the resulting wine—poor in sugar, acids, and tannin—does not
keep well.
The presence of iron in a soil has a great effect in increasing the
colour of the wine. It is probably for this reason that our Australian
wines are, as a rule, so rich in colour. Some soils in France con-
taining magnesia produce white wines of very high quality.
The richest soil does not produce the best wine. In many
instances it is rather the reverse. Some of the best wines in the
world are grown on soil so poor as to be almost unfit for any other
culture but that of the vine. Rich soils more frequently produce
common wines, but in great abundance.
Such are, in a general way, the chief kinds of soils and the manner
in which they influence the resulting wine. It must be borne in mind
that under each head there will be some which will give better results
than others, although the difference's between them may be so slight as
to be only noticeable in the wine itself, and not apparent to an
ordinary observer. Chemical analysis enables us to find out all the
elements in a soil as well as the proportions in which they exist; by
adding certain elements to one soil, however, so as to make it identical
with another, we cannot be sure of obtaining the same results from
it, even if the other conditions of climate, &c., be identical.
In many European wine-growing districts, it is common to find two
vineyards, only separated by a wall, planted with the same varieties
and cultivated in the same manner, producing wines of very different
commercial values. No addition of substances to the soil will enable
the proprietor of the inferior vineyard to produce wine equal to that
of his more fortunate neighbour.
There is a subtle something in the soil that gives this superiority,
and which it is impossible to impart by artificial means. Most beneficial
results may be obtained by the addition of certain substances with a
view of increasing the yield, but the quality of the wine cannot be
similarly controlled.
These remarks must not prejudice one against the analysis of soils,
which is of great help, as we shall see later.


Variety.
It is our intention to devote a special chapter to the description of
the different varieties of vine usually cultivated, but we shall here say
a few words about the influence of the variety on the character of the
wine, and mention some of the points on which varieties differ from
one another.
The variety, or “cepage,” as it is concisely termed in French, is
considered by many to be the most important factor of the wine. We
prefer to give it third place, the climate and soil being what may be
termed fixed factors, whilst the selection of sorts is entirely at the
discretion of the vine-grower.
It is necessary to distinguish between choice and common varieties.
The former are those from which high-class wines are made. The
latter are devoted to the production of ordinary wines of commerce—
they make up for the inferior quality of their product by being
much heavier bearers, and hardier than the more delicate choice
varieties.
It is to be regretted that many persons, tempted by the prospect of
heavy yields, plant common to the exclusion of choice varieties, and
thus sacrifice quality to quantity—an injudicious course of action, the
evil effects of which will inevitably be felt as soon as competition
begins to be active. The higher class wine, commanding a higher
price, amply compensates for the lesser yield.
The distinction between choice and common varieties is not
absolute, but relative. It depends to some extent upon the condition
of soil and climate.
A vine which is a heavy bearer, but which gives too weak a wine
in a cold district, may give excellent results in a warmer one ; or a
sort may be a choice one in one soil and a common one in another.
As an example, we may mention the Gamay of Beaujolais and the
Pinot of Burgundy. The soil of the Beaujolais district is granitic and
schistose, whereas that of Burgundy is calcareous. In the former the
Gamay gives a superior wine to the Pinot ; in the Burgundy district,
on the other hand, it is the Pinot alone which gives the celebrated
wines which make the name of Burgundy a household word through-
out the world, whilst the Gamay is looked upon as an inferior sort.
It is thus of the greatest importance that the variety should be
suited to the other conditions; we have in the judicious choice of it


a means of producing a wine of, to some extent, what character we
wish. In a very warm climate we want to make a wine as light
as possible, in a cold one it is a strong wine we must try to
make. The strength of wines made from different varieties in the
same vineyard will greatly differ. For example, one may give a wine
containing 14 per cent, of alcohol whilst another would produce one
containing over 20 per cent.
It follows that the variety which gives the best results in the first
or cool region would be utterly unsuited for the third region, at least
for the production of light wine. Although it might yield a strong
sweet wine of high quality as such, the demand for this class of wine
is only limited.
All varieties are not influenced alike by an increase in the warmth
of the climate —its effect in increasing the alcoholic strength of the
wine is more considerable on some than on others. For example, a
certain sort might give a wine containing 18 per cent, of alcohol if
grown at Lillydale, whilst it might contain 26 per cent, if grown at
Rutherglen. The relative strength for a second variety might be—
Lillydale 20 per cent, and Rutherglen 23 per cent. The increase in
strength would be 8 per cent, for the first sort, and only 3 per cent,
for the second, which, in other words, gives more constant results
under varied climatic conditions than the first sort.
The time of coming into leaf in the spring and of the ripening of the
grapes varies greatly. It is very advisable that the vine-grower should
keep a permanent record of the date of the first appearance of the leaves
and flowers on his vines. Late budding varities are to be recommended
in localities subject to spring frosts, whilst early ripening sorts should
be cultivated if the weather about vintage time be usually unfavor-
able. Some varieties have greater or less power of resisting frost,
once they are in leaf, whilst others are capable of bearing fruit on the
secondary buds if the main ones have been destroyed. The suitability
or otherwise of a variety also depends on its capacity for resisting
fungus or insect diseases, or being more suited to a special style of.
pruning. These peculiarities will be given in the next chapter where
each vine will be described in detail.


CHAPTER IV.
AMPELOGRAPHY.
The word “ Ampelography ” denotes the description of different
kinds of vines.
The family of the Ampelideas is divided into several genera; the
only one which interests us here is the genus yitis, which is in turn
divided into several species.
The ordinary grape vine,Yitis Yinifera, being the most important,
is the species we shall devote most attention to. There are several
others which we must also describe, amongst which are the American
vines, which have assumed great importance of late years, on account
of the remarkable resistance they oppose to the attacks of the
phylloxera.
Each species comprises many more or less distinct sorts, or
“cepages,” as they are termed in French ; the term being very con-
venient, as these different sorts are not all sufficiently distinct to
justify their being classed as different varieties from a strictly
botanical point of view, although the term may be used in a general
way.
As vines are always propagated by cuttings, and any issue derived
from seed may vary considerably from the parent plant, it is more
correct to look upon all the vines of a “cepagc” collectively, as an
individual, of which each vine is a part. In other words, the
differences between “ cepages” are individual differences, the many
millions of each which exist together only making up or being, so
to speak, part of the original vine from which they were multiplied
in the shape of cuttings.
The differences between these sorts are of the first importance as
far as the resulting wine is concerned; they, therefore, are of far
greater interest to the practical vigneron than to the botanist.
In this chapter the most important “ cepages ” are described in
alphabetical order under the different species to which they belong.


EUROPEAN VINES.
These are very numerous, and embrace over a thousand sorts,
all of which belong to the species Vitis Vinifera, many of which,
fortunately, need not be mentioned here.
We shall confine ourselves to those which are usually cultivated
in Australia, as well as a few which might be adopted with excellent
results, according to circumstances, for wine-making purposes,
without mentioning the numerous table grapes, as they come more
strictly under the domain of horticulture.
The most usual synonyms of each are given, but it must be
borne in mind that the classification of the different sorts is by no
means easy. Authorities on the subject often hold very different
opinions as to the identity or otherwise of sorts called by different
or even by the same name in different districts in Europe.
With regard to the time of ripening of the fruit, we have adopted
Pulliat's system of dividing the time of ripening of all grapes
into three periods. The different sorts ripen during one or other of
these.
Sorts marked * are those already extensively cultivated in Victoria;
those marked f have with certainty been introduced into the colony,
but are not extensively cultivated.
f Aramon. Synonyms : Buchardt's Prince , Ugni Noir, Re-
valaire, Okors zem Kek, &c.
Although only a common red variety it was very extensively
cultivated in the south of France before the invasion of the phyl-
loxera, on account of its great prolificacy. Foex estimates its
average crop at about gallons per acre, and states that it has
been known to produce 3,500 gallons per acre. It makes up for its
great bearing capabilities by only yielding an ordinary wine, especially
if the soil be rich and the crop heavy.
In the third or warm region of Victoria it would prove a valuable
sort ; its wine, being light, would be very suitable for blending with
other sorts, with the object of producing a good commercial wine.
It comes into leaf early, and is, therefore, liable to suffer from late
frosts. It ripens in the third period, and its thin skin makes the
berries liable to rot in a moist climate.


It resists the mildew pretty well, but is somewhat sensitive to
the attacks of the oidium. As the Aramon is always cultivated for
quantity rather than quality it must be planted in a rich soil which
is at the same time deep and free.
In the south of France it is always pruned short.
Foex gives the following description of it :
Stem strong and very vigorous in rich soil; spreading grower;
shoots of a fine light-red colour in summer, greyish in winter; knots
prominent and close together, with a dirty white, much-developed
bud ; leaves large, not deeply indented, upper side glossy, under side
covered with loose down, petiolar sinus open ; bunch voluminous,
long, almost cylindrical, or slightly shouldered'with a tender, herba-
ceous stalk ; berries large, round, very juicy; not very good for
table use, though sufficiently sweet; of a light black (not intense)
colour where the ground is moist, and the yield very considerable.
It is not as yet cultivated to any extent in Victoria.
f Aspiran. Synonyms : Spiran , Verdal, Epiran , Riveyran,
Piran, Verdai.
A choice red grape, not cultivated in Victoria as yet, although it
would prove a valuable sort in the warm region of the colony. The
wine made from it is light in colour—light, delicate, and keeps well.
It is one of the choice varieties of the south of France. It is a good
bearer, and gives from 250 to 400 gallons per acre.
It comes into leaf medium early, but does not suffer from frost.
The grapes ripen early in the third period.
The Aspiran suffers but little from most fungus diseases.
The most suitable soil for it is a deep, free soil, preferably gravelly,
and of a reddish colour.
It is usually pruned short. Its grapes are excellent for table
purposes.
Foex describes it as follows: —“Rather vigorous grower; shoots
semi-erect, slender, of light-red colour, with buds a medium distance
apart. Leaves of medium size, five-lobed, deeply indented, teeth deep
uneven, rather broad, giving the leaf a very elegant appearance,
upper surface of a yellowish-green and smooth, under surface with
a slight woolly down near the veins; bunch medium size, close,
somewhat shouldered ; berries medium size, slightly oval; skin rather


thick, of a purplish-black, covered with bloom ; juicy, of a refresh-
ing taste, very agreeable to eat.
* Aucarot.
This seems to be variety of white Pinot, so we shall refer to it
later on.
* Baxter’s Sherry.
An ordinary white grape, somewhat extensively cultivated in
Victoria, which gives a wine of an exaggerated sherry character. It
is a heavy bearer, and gives from 600 to 800 gallons per acre. It
comes into leaf and ripens in the second period. It may be described
as follows:—Vigorous, rather spreading grower, shoots of a reddish
yellow colour, long and slender; leaves large of a peculiar tender, rather
flabby texture, divided into five lobes, or sometimes seven lobes, the
two extra ones being around the first pair of secondary veins on the
midrib, petiolar sinus rather open; upper surface bright green and
smooth, under surface covered with fine silky down; a few hairs
on the veins. Bunch large, rather loose, with oval berries.
* Black Hambro’. Synonyms: Black Hamburg , Frankenthal ,
' Schwartz or Blauer Trollinger, &c., &c.
A very fine black table grape, which can also be used for wine-
making purposes; in the third region it will give very good results,
as the wine made from it is light and delicate, and it is a heavy
bearer, ripens during the second period; it is a vigorous grower with
thick shoots, leaves large, not deeply indented, teeth rather rounded
off, upper surface smooth, under surface very slightly downy. The
secondary veins of the mid-rib are almost white and very distinct,
giving the whole leaf a characteristic appearance. Bunch large and
rather loose. Berries large, almost round, and thick-skinned. The
celebrated vine at Hampton Court is a Black Hambro’.
* Black Prince and *Black St. Peter.
Two more table varieties, which give good results for wine-making
purposes in the warmer districts of the colony. They are both very
vigorous varieties, and maybe pruned long.
Bouschet Hybrids.
The Bouschet Hybrids are a group of sorts, being the outcome of
the experiments of Louis Bouschet in 1828. He endeavoured to


produce by hybridization between the Tinto or Teinturier and the
ordinary cepages of the South of France a new variety with the red
juice of the former and the many advantages of the latter sorts. His
experiments were successful, and he and his sons have since given us
many varieties, the best known of which are the Petit Bouschet
(Aramon x Tinto), Alicante Bouschet (Grenache x Tinto), Terret
Bouschet , and Aspiran Bouschet. These sorts are of value for the
production of intensely deep-coloured wines.
* Burgundy. See Pinots.
* Cabernet Sauvignon. Synonyms : Petit Cabernet, Vidure,
Navarre , Vinidure, Sauvignonne, and in Australia it is fre-
quently, but erroneously, called Carbinet.
This is one of the choicest red varieties of France. It forms the
basis of all the best vineyards of Bordeaux, and is largely cultivated
in the cool region of Victoria. The wine made from it cannot be
surpassed. As wine made from it is a little rough when young, it is
better to mix it with some other sorts at vintage time ; the wine is
then ready for market sooner than would otherwise be the case.
It is unfortunately a shy bearer, and is very subject to set badly at
flowering time. It is also very liable to fungoid diseases, especially
oidium and anthracnosis (black spot). Under very favorable conditions
it may give as much as 500 gals, per acre, but the average in good soils
cannot be said to be more than 200 gals.
It is only in the cool region of Victoria that the cultivation of
the Cabernet is to be recommended. In the warm parts the advantages
gained from it are not sufficient to make up for the small yield.
It comes into leaf late, and escapes late frosts. It ripens at the end
of the second period.
The soil which suits it best is a pebbly soil resting on a clay sub-
soil, also gravelly, so as to insure thorough drainage, the Cabernet
suffering, perhaps, more than any other sort from an excess of
moisture around its roots.
It is at all times, unfortunately, very subject to fungoid diseases,
especially oidium and antliracnose, but is exceedingly so if badly
drained.
The fruit-bearing buds of the Cabernet are situated at some distance
from the old wood. It follows that it must be pruned long ; if short-
pruned, it will often prove perfectly sterile.
D


In addition to its many other advantages, it gives excellent results
when grafted on other varieties.
The following are the characteristics by which it may be recognised:—
Vigorous, somewhat spreading grower; wood of a reddish rather
dark-fawn colour, of medium thickness, with buds of a medium size;
the leaves are very characteristic (five-lobed), the indentations or sinus
being deep and the lobes overlapping each other towards the outside
in such a way as to make it appear that the leaves were pierced with
five holes ; upper-surface of a fine dark-green colour, free from down
and glossy, but uneven ; under-surface covered with close short
down ; teeth large and very uneven. The leaf has a peculiar crisp
appearance. Bunch of medium size, conical, slightly shouldered and
rather loose. Berries small, round, thick dark skin, covered with a
beautiful bluish-grey bloom ; they are rather apt to fall off when
very ripe.
* Oarmenet. Synonyms: Gros Cabernet, Cabernet Franc,
Grosse Vindure, Petit fer, Breton, Veronais, Arrouya.
This variety differs but slightly from the preceding one, the wine
made from it being almost identical, although perhaps less perfumed.
It is not superior to the Cabernet in any respect, and will not do in a
limestone soil.
It differs from the Cabernet in the following points : —Wood of a
paler colour ; leaves coarser and less glossy, but of the same shape ;
bunches rather smaller ; berries larger, with thinner skin. It is to
be found mixed with the Cabernet in most of the Victorian vineyards
where the latter is cultivated.
* Carignane. Synonyms : Carignan, Bois dur (signifies hard
wood), Crignane, Catalan, and improperly Mataro in some parts
of the south of France.
This is a rather common red variety. It is extensively cultivated
in the south of France, where it gives very good results. Foex says
that it is perhaps the one which combines in the highest degree both
quality and quantity. It frequently gives crops of 1,500 gallons
per acre in France.
It comes into leaf late and is thus able to escape spring frosts.
It ripens during the third period. Unfortunately its greatest fault is
its susceptibility to the attacks of fungoid diseases, especially oidium
and anthracnosis, and its liability to set badly at flowering time.


It should only be cultivated in the dryer parts of the colony
where these diseases are not very prevalent.
It requires a well-drained, free, clayey soil.
The Carignane is very well adapted for the gooseberry mode of train-
ing, being an erect grower and requiring short pruning. It may be
described as follows : —Vigorous erect grower, wood strong and
thick, of light-red colour, hard and brittle, short-jointed at the
base ; buds dark in colour and rather large ; leaves large, wrinkly
and uneven, five-lobed, the sinus being deep ; upper surface dark-
green and smooth, under surface slightly downy ; the leaves
assume a fine red colour at vintage time ; bunch large ; berries rather
long, slightly oblong, juicy, not very good to eat. It is cultivated
in Victoria.
* Chasselas, Golden. Synonyms: Chasselas de Fontainebleau,
Fendant, Valais Blanc , Sussling, Frauentraube, Gutedel,
Marzemina Bianca, Chrupka , &c., &c.
A white grape, respecting the value of which for wine-making
purposes the most varied opinions prevail. It is recognised by all
to be an excellent table grape.
Although many authorities condemn it as a wine grape, we are
not of their opinion, and can confidently recommend it for the
production of a clean light wine. It presents the peculiarity of
giving a similar wine in countries subject to very different climates.
In Switzerland it gives a good wine where most other varieties
would only produce a crude sour wine, whilst in warm countries
it never gives a very strong wine.
The cuttings of this variety should be selected with the greatest
care, as one often finds certain vines in a block of Chasselas almost
sterile. This is due to faulty selection of cuttings in the first place.
Although one of the first sorts to come into leaf, it does not suffer
considerably from frost. It is one of the earliest sorts to ripen (first
period).
It is rather liable to fungus diseases, but not excessively so.
Although thriving in any soil, it seems to give the best results in a
free well-drained loam, with clay subsoil.
It is well adapted to either long or short pruning, but does not
thrive if trained on the gooseberry-bush system.
D 2


Th© Chasselas may bo described as follows :—Rather vigorous
grower, wood of a reddish brown colour, often short-jointed near the
old wood; leaves about as broad as long, five-lobed, but not deeply
indented ; teeth broad, obtuse, and almost even; upper surface
smooth, but not glossy, of a yellowish-green colour ; under surface
without down and similar to the upper, only paler. The young
leaves are conspicuous by their deep yellowish bronze tint. Bunch
above the average size, conical, shouldered, more or less compact.
Berries rather large, thick-skinned, with small seeds, and of delicious
flavour. When grown in the shade they are of pale-green semi-
transparent colour, but if exposed to the sun of a golden bronze. It
is rather largely grown in Victoria.
The Chasselas Violet, Chasselas Rose, and Chasselas de Falloux
are only of value as table grapes, the latter is somewhat similar to the
Chasselas Rose; they differ from the golden chiefly in the colour of
the fruit.
Chasselas Musque is another sort, differing chiefly in the Muscat
flavour of its fruit.
Cinsaut. Synonyms: Boiirdales, Boudales, Espagnin , Salerne,
and sometimes, but erroneously, Picardan Noir and Ulliade
JVoir.
A good red variety, largely cultivated in the south of France, on
drier soils. It yields as much as 400 gallons per acre of a good,
light, red wine. It comes into leaf late, and ripens early in the
second period. It is similar in many respects to the Oeillade, but is
a more spreading grower, wdth more slender shoots. Leaves smaller,
more deeply indented, and more downy underneath than those of the
Oeillade. Berries also larger. It is a good variety for table purposes.
Clairette. Synonyms : Blanquette, Cotticour.
A white variety from which some excellent French wines are made.
It is very long-lived, but suffers from a peculiar form of anthracnosis,
termed punctuated anthracnosis.
The average crop it gives is about 250 gallons per acre. It is very
well suited for table purposes.
Corinth (Currant).
A small berried seedless variety of Muscat, of value for the pro-
duction of currants with a fine flavour. It is very similar to the
Muscats, and, as a rule, less hardy than the Zante.


* Dolcetto Nero. Synonyms: Nebbiolo, Bignona, Uva d'Acqui.
A good red grape, largely cultivated in the north of Italy. It is
better suited for the second region of the colony than either of the
others, and fears drought more than moisture. It is cultivated to some
extent in the Bendigo district is a good bearer, ripens very early; the
wine made from it is light, clean, pleasant, and of good colour. It
will thrive in almost any soil suitable for vine culture, and should be
pruned long.
This sort is in many respects very similar to the Malbec.
The Dolcetto is rather a vigorous grower, with filbert-coloured
short-jointed shoots, buds large and whitish befo're bursting. Leaves
of medium size, smooth and almost glossy above, downy underneath,
three or five lobed, sinus round and rather deep, pointed teeth ; the
young leaves are of a reddish colour, covered with down, and
become red before falling off. Bunch of medium size, pyramidal,
long, rather close, with a brown stalk. Berries medium, round,
bluish-black, covered with bloom, with thin skin and juicy pulp.
They fall off pretty easily when ripe.
f Doradillo. Synonyms : Jaen Blanc, Plateado or Plateadillo,
White Syrian (?).
A very prolific, white Spanish grape, capable of yielding very
heavy crops of light wine. It is admirably suited for the third or
warm region of the colony. The fruit is suitable for table as well as
wine purposes.
* Espart. See Mataro.
fFollG. Synonyms: Enrageat, Plant Madame, Grosse Chcilossc ,
Picpouille Blanc, Plant de Grece, &c.
La Folle is the white grape from which all the celebrated brandies
of the Cognac district were made before the invasion of the phylloxeia.
In some parts it is used for blending with red grapes, as it greatly
improves the wine made from them, rendering it lighter and more
agreeable. Wine made from it alone is usually of little value.
The average crop it gives is about 250 gallons per acre. As it
comes into leaf rather early it fears late frosts; it ripens during the
second period.
It is not very liable to fungoid diseases, and will thrive in most
soils. In France it is pruned short.


; La Folle is not a vei 7 vigorous grower. Shoots thick and short-
jointed, of a light-reddish tint. Leaves five-lobed sinus, of limited
depth, especially the upper lateral ones ; upper surface of a peculiar
dull green colour, rather flabby, reminding somewhat of the Isabella
( Vitis Labrusca ), free from down, with veins of a reddish tint, under
surface rather downy; bunch medium size, close; berries rather large,
round. With one exception it is not cultivated in Victoria.
* Gamay, Petit (Small). Synonyms : Gamay JVoir, Plant
d' Arcenant, Gamay Nicholas.
A good red variety extensively cultivated in the Beaujolais district
of France.
It is admirably adapted for the first or cool region of the colony,
although rather liable to frosts, as it comes into leaf early; it ripens
during the second period, and is a heavy bearer. It is rather sus-
ceptible to the attacks of the oidium. The wine made from it varies
more than that of most of the preceding sorts with the character of
the soil.. In a granite or porphyry soil it produces the excellent wines
of Beaujolais, whilst in the Burgundy district, where the soil is rich
in lime, it yields a very inferior wine, although the climate of both
places is practically the same.
It ought to be pruned short, and is a moderately vigorous upright
grower, with shoots of medium size ; leaves medium, five lobed,
teeth short and irregular, upper-surface light-green, under-surface
almost free from down; bunch medium, close ; berries medium,
slightly oval, black, covered with bloom.
The Gras Gamay, also called Gamay Rond or Gamay d } Orleans,
differs little from it, but is, if anything, a heavier bearer, although
the wine made from it is of inferior quality; it differs chiefly from the
preceding one by the berries being round instead of oval. It is only
to be found in a few Victorian vineyards.
* G ° Uais - Synonyms : Burger Blanc (white), Sibling, &c., &c.
The Gouais has been confounded with La Folle, from which,
however, it is totally distinct.
It deserves mention, as it is cultivated to some extent in Victoria,
but is, at the best, an inferior sort, the wine made from it being
weak, flat, poor in tannin, and not keeping well. It is a very heavy
bearer and yields, under favorable circumstances, 800 gallons per


acre. It may be planted to a limited extent in a vineyard if blended
with other sorts at vintage time, and would prove of value for brandy
making. It is rather subject to oidium, and the fruit does not
always set well. It is suited to long and short pruning. The Gouais
is a vigorous erect grower, which can be recognised by the purple
colour of its shoots during the summer. Leaves large, dark-green,
almost entire; bunch of medium size, rather close; berries rather large,
round, thin-skinned, liable to rot at vintage time.
* Grenache. Synonyms : Roussilon , Alicante , Arragonais,
Granaxa, Rivesaltes, Bois Jaune (yellow-wood), Redondal.
A choice red variety, largely cultivated in the' south of France and
Spain, where some celebrated wines are made from it. It will give the
best results in the second and third regions of the colony, where it has
already been planted to some extent. It is especially suited for the
production of wines of a Port character; the wine made from it has a
good bouquet and considerable character, but its colour is not perma-
nent; after a few years it assumes a tawny brown, or sometimes almost
a yellowish tint similar to old Port. As a rule it is better to mix it
with some other sorts, such as Carignane, Aramon, or Mataro at vintage
time; it will improve the resulting wine by giving it more character
and causing the wine to mature sooner. It should only be made into
wine by itself for the production of a Port or liqueur wine, and
should then be grown on pebbly soil, preferably on a granite
formation. For blending purposes it should be cultivated on a richer
soil.
It is fairly prolific, and gives crops of 350 gallons per acre. Not
very subject to oidium, it suffers considerably from anthracnosis
and mildew or peronospora, and should be pruned short.
The Grenache is a very vigorous semi-ereet grower, with thick
shoots of a yellowish colour, short-jointed with swoollen buds, the
extremities often remain green in the winter ; leaves medium size,
smooth on both sides, very glossy on the upper ; bunch large, close;
berries medium, slightly oval, not very dark, covered with bloom,
and thin-skinned. There is also a White Grenache similar in most
respects to the red, and an excellent variety for the third region,
especially for the production of a full-bodied wine.
* Hermitage (Red). See Shiraz.
* Hermitage (White). See Roussanne.


Maccabeo. Synonyms: Ugni Rlane (white), Queue de Renard
Gredelin.
A white variety not cultivated in Victoria, but of value for the pro
duction of fruity wines in the third region. A good bearer, which
will adapt itself to almost any soil. It comes into leaf late, and
ripens very late (at the end of the third period).
* Malaga.
An oval grape of a purple colour, well adapted for raisin-makino-
and, on account of its thick skin and good carrying qualities, of great
value as a table grape. It ripens in the second period.
* Malbeck. Synonyms : Cot, Baloutzat Gourdoux, Estranqev,
Noir (black) de Pressac, and many others, in Australia some-
times erroneously termed Red Chasselas.
A choice red variety, much cultivated in the Bordeaux district,
where it helps to a considerable extent to make the best clarets. The
wine made from it resembles in many respects that made from the
Cabernet Sauvignon, but is lighter than it, and matures more rapidly.
This sort is admirably suited fot the second region of the colony
where it is already cultivated to some extent, and parts of the first!
f ™. gl 14 “ hable t 0 set its fruit very badly in cool moist
localities. The wine made from it in the third region, being rather
strong, would benefit by being blended with that of such kinds as
Mataro Aramon, &c. It is a pretty good bearer, and in well drained
soi wdi give good crops. It comes into leaf rather early, and is
liable to suffer from frost, but has the peculiarity of bearing fruit on
shoots growing off the old wood if the normal fruit-bearing shoots are
destroyed. It ripens towards the end of the first period.
It suffers but slightly from oidium, but is, on the other hand, very
liable to anthracnosis. J
It gives best results on soils rich in lime.
Although capable of bearing fruit when pruned short, longprunW
smts it very much better. It is the sort grown in the part of France
w lere the vines are grown on what is termed the “ Chaintres” system,
av ic i gives the plant an enormous extension, as we shall see further
on. Ihe Malbeck is a vigorous grower, with wood of a brownish-
fawn colour, rather short-jointed, with large buds; leaves above medium
ze, t istinctly three-lobed, of a pinkish-white when they first come out •
upper surface smooth, but wrinkly and uneven, often of a reddish colour


in parts, the remainder being of a pale-green colour ; under-surface
covered with flaky down ; bunch large, branched, not very close ;
berries rather large, round, dark violet, covered with bloom ; stems
red, especially the extremities, to which the berries are fixed.
Malvoisie.
There are several sorts of Malvoisie , differing chiefly from each
other in the colour of the fruit. They are suited for the production of
sweet or liqueur wines in the third region and the warmer parts of the
second. The grapes have a characteristic flavour comparable to that
of the Muscats. They are, as a rule, very subject to oidium.
*Mataro. Synonyms :Espar,Esparte, Spar, Mourvedre, Balzac,
Catalan , Charnet, Flouron, &c.
A valuable red sort, largely cultivated in the south of France and
in Spain, and admirably suited for the production of commercial
wines in the second and third regions of the colony—it is not suitable
for the first. The wine made from it, although somewhat rough, is
light and of good colour and keeping qualities, and is admirably
Suited for blending with other sorts such as the Aspiran or Shiraz,
and many others. It yields, under favorable circumstances, as much
as 1,000 gallons per acre.
It comes into leaf late and ripens during the third period.
It is very hardy, and will grow in almost any soil, but gives the
best results in a limestone formation. It is not subject to fungus
diseases of any kind. It should be pruned short, and is well adapted
for the gooseberry method of training on account of its upright
growth.
The Mataro is a vigorous erect grower, with short-jointed wood of a
reddish-brown colour and large buds. Leaves medium size, five-lobed,
but not deeply indented, petiolar sinus open, two series of rather sharp
teeth, upper-surface dark-green, rather rough, under-surface downy
and whitish —leaf-stalk and veins dark reddish-brown; bunch
medium, close, with small shoulders and woody stalk; berries of
medium size, round, black, covered with bloom, not agreeable to eat.
f Merlot. Synonyms: Vitraille, Bigney, Crabutet, Plant Medoc. .
A choice red variety, cultivated to some extent in the best Bor-
deaux vineyards. The wine made from it is lighter, and has less
bouquet than that of the Cabernet Sauvignon , but it matures faster.
It is an excellent sort for the first or cool region.


It is a prolific sort, comes into leaf rather late, and ripens during
the second period. The soil which suits it best is the same as
for the Cabernet Sauvignon. It may be pruned.short, but gives
better results with long pruning.
The Merlot is a vigorous semi-erect grower, with wood of a greyish-
fawn colour, short-jointed, ribbed ; leaves broader than long, of medium
size, five-lobed, with petiolar sinus open as well as the others ; teeth
sharp and uneven ; upper-surface smooth, uneven ; under-surface
downy ; bunch long, conical, ramified ; berries small, round, uneven,
of a blue-black colour, covered with much bloom.
Mission Grape.
A variety extensively cultivated m California, where it was prob-
ably imported from Morocco. It is considered by the American
authors as a common sort, giving large crops of strong coarse wine,
of little value.
Mondeuse. Synonyms : Mouteuse, Molette, Persaigne, Savo-
yanne, Maldoux.
A good variety for the first region of Victoria, being a heavy bearer,
giving as much as 800 gallons per acre in Savoy and the adjoining
departments of France, where it is extensively cultivated. The wine
made from it becomes of high quality with age, and keeps well.
It is a very hardy variety, will do well in almost any soil, and
gives good results with either long or short pruning, the former being
preferable. It comes into leaf late, and ripens at the end of the
second period.
The Mondeuse is a vigorous spreading grower, with long-jointed
shoots of a greyish-yellow colour ; leaves rather large, longer than
broad, three-lobed, smooth above, downy beneath; bunch large and
loose; berries of medium size, slightly oval, of a somewhat acid
and astringent flavour.
f Morrastel. Synonyms : Mourrastel, Perpignan , and some-
times, but erroneously, Mataro.
A valuable variety, in many respects similar to the Mataro, from
which it may be distinguished by its wood being of a darker and
redder colour ; its leaves are paler, and with rounder lobes. The
young leaves are reddish, whilst those of the Mataro are whitish.
It bears as much as the Mataro, of a somewhat higher class wine.


f Morrillon. Synonyms : Gros Plant Dore, Maitre Noir.
Seems to be a variety of Pinot, with large bunches and large
berries. It is better suited for the table than for wine-making. It
must not be confounded with the Morillon Blanc or ordinary white
Pinot.
* Muscats.
There are many different Muscats, which it is useless for
us to enumerate here. We shall endeavour to describe one or two
of the principal ones, to which the others all bear considerable
resemblance. ,
The character common to them all is the strongly perfumed flavour
of their fruit, which renders them only suitable for the production of
liqueur wines, raisins, or table grapes. The strong Muscat flavour
renders them unsuitable for blending with other sorts to make a light
wine. We shall give a description of some of the leading sorts.
* Muscat de Frontignan.
* This is the best Muscat variety for wine-making purposes. It is
admirably suited for the production of high class liqueur wines in the
third region of the colony, and is a fairly good bearer. It comes into
leaf early, and ripens at the end of the second period. It is very
subject to oidium, anthracnosis, and all fungoid diseases.
Either long or short pruning suits it. The flavour of the fruit is
superior with the former. It is a vigorous rather spreading grower,
with thick, short-jointed shoots of a reddish-brown colour ; leaves
medium size, five-lobed, but not very deeply indented as a rule, two
series of long sharp teeth, upper-surface smooth and even, under-
surface almost devoid of down ; bunch cylindrical, close, not much
shouldered ; berries round, medium size, of a beautiful amber colour
on the White Frontignan, but of a reddish-brown on the Brown
Frontignan. These two only differ in the colour of their fruit.
* Muscat Gordo Blanco.
This is the best raisin grape we have, and is extensively cultivated
in the third region of Victoria. In its general characters it pretty
closely resembles the former, but is more vigorous and a better
bearer, whilst its berries are oval. Considerable difference of opinion
exists as to its identity with the White Muscat of Alexandria;
although many authorities say that they are the same sort, it is not


probable that this is the case. This Muscat is an excellent table
grape, but for wine-making purposes is inferior to the Frontignan.
t Oeillade. Synonyms : Ulliade , Ouillade.
One of the choice red varieties of the south of France which,
although not cultivated to any extent in Victoria, would prove of
value in the third region. Its wine is very clean, delicate, and light
in colour, and would be very suitable for blending with that of such
kinds as the Mataro, as it would reduce the roughness of the resulting
wine. It is a good bearer, and thrives best in deep, well-drained
soils. In schistose formations it gives very good results. It is
subject to oidium and anthracnosis in moist places. It comes into
leaf early, ripens during the second period, and requires short pruning.
It is a semi-erect moderately vigorous grower, with thick short-
jointed reddish wood and large buds. Leaves medium, rather longer
than broad, five-lobed, teeth large and sharp, upper-surface dark-
green and rather rough, under-surface rather downy; bunch large,
loose; shouldered; berries large,, oval, black, covered with bloom,
juicy. There is also a White Oeillade very similar to the red in its
general characters and producing a very good wine.
* Pinots.
The Pinots are a group of sorts, all of which are of great value
and admirably suited for the cool region of this colony. They are the
sorts cultivated in the Burgundy, Chablis, and Champagne districts,
and only give very high-class wines on a limestone formation (p. 27).
As the type of the group, we will first consider the
* Pinot Noir (Black). Synonyms : Smooth-leaved Burgundy ,
Burgundy , Black Cluster, JVoirien, Franc Pinot, Morillon Noir,
Auvergnat Noir, Salvagnin Noir, Blauer Klavuer , &c., &c.
This choice red variety is cultivated, to the exclusion of other
kinds, in the best vineyards of Burgundy, such as Chambertin, Clos
Vougeot, &c. In the cool region of Victoria, on limestone soils, it
would give an excellent wine. Unfortunately, it is a poor bearer;
its average yield in the Burgundy district is only about 200 gallons
per acre. It is very free from fungus diseases, but does not always
set its fruit well. It is usually pruned short, but gives far better
results if pruned long.


It is one of the first to come into leaf, and als® one of the first sorts
to ripen (early in the first period). *
It is a spreading grower of less than medium vigour, with slender
long-jointed shoots of a slightly purple-grey colour. Leaves medium,
five-lobed, not unlike those of the Cabernet, hut not so deeply indented,
petiolar sinus open, teeth short, blunt, and even, upper-surface
almost glossy, under-surface slightly downy; bunch small, cylindrical,
very close ; berries small, rather thick-skinned, not perfectly round,
often deformed from being very close in the bunch, very black,
covered with bloom, and very juicy.
* Pinot Meunier. Synonyms: Miller's, Bur gundy, Meunier,
Blanche Feuille, Morillon Taconne, &c.
Similar to the Pinot Noir in almost every respect, but diffeiing
from it by the leaves being covered both above and below with a
considerable amount of flaky down, giving it the appearance of having
been dusted with flour, whence its name. The red wine made from it
resembles that of the Pinot Noir, but it is lighter, and does not keep so
jvell. In the Champagne district it is the most extensively cultivated
sort, and is one of the few cases in which white wine is made from
red grapes on a large scale.
| Pinot Gris. Synonyms : Beurot, Fromentot, Auxoit, Au-
vergnat Gris, Gris Cordelier, Malvoisie (improperly) Levraut,
Edel Clavner.
A choice pink variety, yielding an excellent white wine. It is
from this grape that the highest class Champagne is made. It is
very similar to the Miller's Burgundy, although leaves are not so
downy, and the fruit, instead of being black, is of a beautiful greyish-
pink colour.*
* Pinot Blanc (White). Synonym : White Burgundy.
Very similar to the others, only with white fruit. There are
several white Pinots, differing slightly from each other. The Aucarot
is probably one of them. They are valuable sorts, and give good
results in all the three regions ; in the warmer parts they produce
excellent liqueur wines.
f Pinot Blanc Chardonay. Synonyms : Morillon Blanc,
Epineth, Beaunois, Plant Dore, Auvergnat, &c.
This is the best of the white Pinots, and is the one fiom which the
best Cliablis wines of France are made. It is somewhat different


from the other Pinots, especially in its leaves, tvhich are less deeply
indented, and of a more yellowish colour. It also does best in a lime-
stone soil.
* Pedro Ximenes. Synonyms : Pero Ximen, Pedro Jimenez
Boutelon.
One of the choice Spanish white varieties which enters to a great
extent into the composition of the best sherries, and is somewhat
extensively cultivated in the warmer parts of Victoria, where it is
well suited for the production of full-bodied wines. It is a good
bearer, but is rather subject to oidium. It comes into leaf rather late
and ripens during the third period. It gives the best results in a
sandy or pebbly schistose soil. It is a spreading grower of medium
vigour, with shoots of a reddish-grey colour and a considerable number
of laterals. Leaves rather large, distinctly five-lobed, dark-green and
smooth above, very cottony underneath; bunch medium size, with tender
stem; berries medium size, slightly oblong, soft, and thin-skinned.
fPulsart. Synonyms: Poulsart, Blussart, Plant d'Arbois
Mescle.
A choice red sort, not cultivated to any extent in Victoria, but
which could with advantage be planted in the first and the cooler
part of the second region. It gives an excellent wine, especially in
limestone soils, and is a good bearer on condition that it be pruned
long. r
It ripens during the second period.
The Puls art is a vigorous grower, with short-jointed wood of
medium thickness. Leaves small, five-lobed, with (J shaped petiolar
sinus very open; they are free from down on both sides, and of a light
green. Lunch medium size, long, loose, and shouldered; berries
of medium size, oval, thin-skinned, and juicy.
* Riesl ing\ Synonyms : Ross ling, Gentil Aromatique, & c .
A choice white variety, already extensively cultivated in Victoria.
This is one of the best white varieties for cultivation in the first
and the cooler part of the second region, and gives good results
even in the third. It is the grape cultivated on the Rhine, and
from which the celebrated Hocks are made.
It is a good bearer, and can give crops of 500 gallons per acre,
but does not always set well at flowering, and is subject to
oidium.


It gives best results in a granitic or schistose formation, but will
thrive in almost any well-drained soil.
It comes into leaf somewhat late and ripens during the second
period.
Long pruning is indispensable for it. If pruned short it gives
very poor crops.
The Riesling is a spreading grower, of medium vigour, with rather
long-jointed wood of a glossy grey colour. Leaves medium, thick,
round, five lobes (sometimes three-lobed), rather deeply indented sinus,
rounded, tSeth almost even, upper-surface dark green, very
wrinkly, free from down, under-surface covered with short down,
veins very thick and covered with stiff short hairs; bunch small
and close; berries small, round, of a greenish colour, covered with
bloom, with several hard black specks adhering to the skin. They
may be recognised by the peculiar aromatic taste they leave on the
palate. What is commonly termed Shepherd's Riesling is a variety
of the above. It is a better bearer and has larger berries, but the
wine is not of such high quality as that of the little Riesling.
* Roussanne. Synonyms: White Hermitage, Bergeron, Fro-
monteau, Plant de Seyssel.
A choice white sort, from which are made the best White
Hermitage wines of France. There is some difference of opinion as
to whether our White Hermitage is the Marsanne or the Roussanne.
The following properties of the Roussanne enable it to be said with
almost certainty that it is our White Hermitage: —
It is very subject to oidium, whilst the Marsanne is only slightly
so; its berries are smaller, the skin thicker, and the seeds larger than
those of the 'Marsanne ; its berries become browner when exposed to
the sun than those of the Marsanne.
If pruned long it will yield crops of 300 gallons per acre. The
wine made from it is of excellent quality. It is rather alcoholic,
sound, and has a beautiful bouquet, keeps well, and improves for a
long time. The Roussanne is best suited for the first region, but will
also give good results in the second. It gives the best results in a
granitic soil, but will thrive in most other sorts.
It is more subject to oidium than most other fungoid pests. Comes
into leaf late, and ripens towards the end of the second period. It
is a vigorous somewhat spreading grower. Shoots rather thick,


long-jointed, of a yellowish-grey colour, with rather small buds. Leaves
rather large, five-lobed, teeth blunt and irregular, upper-surface of dark
green, glossy and bulgy, under-surface downy ; bunch medium, and
close ; berries small, round, thick-skinned, of a golden colour when
ripe, brownish where exposed to the sun.
* Sauvignon (Red). See Cabernet.
| Sauvignon (White). Synonyms: Surin Fie, Blanc Fume ,
Feigentraube.
One of the choicest of all the white varieties. It, together with the
Semilion, yields the celebrated Chateau Yquem wine, and most of the
other renowned vineyards of Sauternes. In the first region it would
give excellent results. It thrives in most soils, but gives the best
results in a well-drained friable pebbly clay soil.
The Sauvignon is hardy, little subject to fungus diseases, but is a
poor bearer.
It is a vigorous spreading grower, with medium-size yellowish-brown
wood. Leaves small, thick, three-lobed, broader than long, teeth
short, blunt, and uneven, upper-stir face smooth, under-surface downy;
bunch small and close; berries medium size, slightly oval, trans-
parent, thin-skinned when ripe, of a delicious flavour.
Semilion. Synonyms: Colombier, Goulu Blanc, Chevrier ,
and sometimes, erroneously, Malaga.
This is another “ Sauternes ” variety, the wine made from it is
similar to that of the Sauvignon in most respects, although not quite
so perfumed. It is a better bearer than the Sauvignon, which it re-
sembles to some extent, differing from it by the colour of the wood,
which is dark-brown (mahogany). Leaves large, three or five-lobed;
bunch large, rather close; berries large, almost round, of a golden colour,
with thin skin.
* Shiraz. Synonyms : Red Hermitage, Schiras, Sirac, Syra,
Sirrah, Serine, Candive.
An excellent red variety, perhaps more extensively cultivated than
any other in Victoria.
It forms the base of the celebrated Hermitage vineyards of France,
where it was first planted by a monk, who, returning from Shiraz, in
Persia, brought the cuttings with him. So goes the story, and it
explains the two most common names by which it is known.


It does best in a granitic soil, but will grow in almost any that is fit
for viticulture. It is a good bearer and yields crops of as much as
700 gallons if pruned long. It gives good results if pruned short.
The wine made from it possesses many excellent qualities, it is
perhaps rather strong when grown it the third region, and is better
when grown in either the first or second.
Although liable to oidium, it resists mildew (peronospora), and does
not suffer much from anthracnosis.
It comes into leaf early, and ripens during the second period.
The Shiraz is a vigorous spreading grower. Shoots thick, long-
jointed, of a characteristic grey colour; leaves, rather large, five-lobed,
but not deeply divided, teeth blunt and even, upper-surface of a fine,
bright, but dark-green, not glossy, with a few traces of flaky down ;
the colour is so characteristic that a block of this kind may easily be
recognised at a distance ; under-surface, cottony ; bunch rather
large, long, conical, sometimes rather loose ; berries below the
average size, oblong, black, covered with bloom, thin-skinned, and
juicy.
* Sultana. Synonyms : Kechmish, Sultanieh, Conforogo.
This is the seedless grape from which the well-known Sultana
raisins are made. It is also a good table grape, and produces a good
light white wine. It should be pruned long.
* Sweet Water. Synonyms : Listan, (?) White Nice. (?)
Like the Chasselas, this sort is considered to be only of use as a
table variety, but this is not the case in the second and third regions.
Some excellent white wines are made from this grape, which is
superior to Gouais in these conditions. It may be easily dis-
tinguished by its thick, dark-green, five-lobed leaves; the lower
indentations of which are the deepest. The leaves are smooth and
glossy above and downy beneath. Bunches large, and berries medium
size, round. Very agreeable to eat.
f Tinto, Synonyms : Teinturier, Gros Noir Oporto, Tinto
Francisca, Rome Noir, Bec.
The Tinto is one of the few grapes which have red juice. In
most other red grapes the colouring matter is contained in the skin,
but the juice of the Tinto is of a deep red colour as well. The wine
made from it is of a remarkable colour. This is, in fact, its only
E


quality ; in other respects it is flat, and does not keep well. It is
neither a vigorous grower nor a good bearer, but may, however, be
useful in a bad year, and in a cold district, to increase the colour of
other wines, and for this reason a few acres of it may be added to
vineyards in cooler parts of the first region if the soil is not colour-
promoting.
It may be described as follows : —Plant not vigorous, resembling
the Pinots; leaves, five-lobed, and deeply indented, the two lower
indentations being the deepest, they are slightly cottony on both
sides, but more so on the under one; at vintage-time they can easily
be recognised by their magnificent red colour; bunch small, close ;
berries, small, round, and with crimson juice.
* Tokay.
It is difficult to say what grape our Tokay really is ; it does not
seem to be identical with the Furmint> which is the chief grape grown
in the celebrated Tokay vineyards of Hungary ; nor does it answer
to the description of the Balafant, another Hungarian sort. It is, how-
ever, a very good grape and gives abundant crops of excellent wine. It
generally sets well at blossoming, and although very subject to oidium,
is not attacked by the anthracnosis. The fruit ripens pretty early,
and is very liable to rot if the vintage be a wet one. The wine does
not ferment regularly as a rule, and requires careful treatment when
young, still it may be recommended as a very good variety for the
first and second regions, for which, perhaps, it is too strong by itself.
It cannot be recommended for the third. The Tokay is a rather
vigorous erect grower, with short-jointed shoots of a pale reddish-
yellow. Leaves large, three-lobed, longer than broad, with deep,
sharp, and uneven teeth, upper-surface uneven, of a yellowish-green,
without down, under-surface rather downy ; bunches above medium
size, shouldered ; berries medium, round, thin-skinned. The Tokay
will give good crops when pruned short, but will do better with long
pruning.
t Verdot.
This is another of the red varieties largely cultivated in the
Bordeaux district for the production of clarets. The wine made
from it is very good, although rather hard at first. In this
respect it resembles the Cabernet , although it is inferior to it in
bouquet. It is also a better bearer than it. It is, as a rule, cultivated


in Bordeaux in the rich soils, termed palus, along the river. If
injured by frost, new shoots often come out at the base of those
destroyed.
The leaves are medium sized, longer than broad, when young
covered with a characteristic silvery white down, when full-grown
three or five-lobed, teeth uneven, indentations rather open and not
very deep—upper surface smooth, uneven, of a paler green
than Cabernet, under side downy ; bunch somewhat similar to
Cabernet hut more shouldered and smaller; berries rather small,
round, with thick skin, and large seeds; it ripens in the third period.
* Verdeilho. Synonym : Gouveio.
The Verdeilho is the principal white variety grown in Madeira,
where an excellent wine is made from it. It is best suited for
making a wine of Madeira type in the second and third regions of
the colony. It also gives good results in the cool regions in
situations where it ripens properly, but it is better suited for the
others.
. May be described as follows : —Plant moderately vigorous, shoots
slender, rather closely knotted, and of a reddish tint. Leaves not very
large, almost entire, upper side dark-green, smooth and rather
shiny, under surface slightly downy, teeth even, short, and blunt;
bunch medium size, rather close ; berries medium size, oval, eveD.
regular, thick skin.
This variety is very subject to oidium ; should be pruned long.
*Zante (Currant). Synonym: Passolina.
Is the grape from which the currant of commerce is made. It is said
by some to be identical with the Corinth, but this does not appear to be
the case. It is a vigroous grower and must be pruned very long. It gives
the best crops on high, overhead trellises, and does not come into full
hearing for seven or eight years under ordinary circumstances. Its leaves
are easily recognised, they are large, five-lobed, and with large (very),
even, rather sharp teeth on the margin, different to most vines many
of the leaves on a plant have seven instead of five principal veins, which
separate from the juncture with the petiole; the upper-surface is dark-
green with a few flakes of cotton, especially on the veins, whilst the
under-surface is downy and of a whitish colour; bunches large; berries
very small and seedless. There are three sorts, the fruit of each are
respectively white, red, and black.
E 2


Zinfandel. Synonym : Zierfahnder Rother.
An Austrian red variety much cultivated in the United* States.
The wine made from it is light and agreeable.
It is a heavy bearer and requires short pruning. It is not, as yet,
cultivated in Victoria.
AMERICAN VINES.
We saw that the European vines all belong to one species
( Vitis Vinifera). The American ones may be resolved into several
distinct species, each of which in turn comprises a greater or lesser
number of varieties. Many of these, being of no practical interest,
need not be described. We shall confine ourselves to such as have
been proved to be worth propagating, or which, being frequently met
with, deserve mention.
The chief character of the American vines, and the one which has
caused them to come into so much favour in Europe of late years, is
the remarkable resistance they oppose to the attacks of the phyl-
loxera. With a few exceptions, they can all thrive with this terrible
insect living on them. Their roots are, as we have seen, tougher
than those of the European vines. The injuries caused by them heal
quickly, and are insignificant compared with the destruction of the
more succulent roots of European sorts brought about by the bite of
the insect —destruction which invariably results in the death of the
plant after a more or less considerable period of time, usually about
three years.
Not only are the American sorts able to resist, but they are less
exposed to the ravages of the phylloxera, which lives chiefly on
their leaves, whilst, with European sorts, the roots are the usual
habitat of the insect. Even in infested vineyards (planted with
European sorts) it is exceedingly uncommon to find insects on the
leaves.
The American vines are not phylloxera-proof, in the sense that the
phylloxera is never to be found on them. They are phylloxera-
resistant, as the insect can and does live on them without causing
any considerable injury. These vines having existed for many
centuries with the phylloxera living on them, have, by natural selec-
tion, become able to resist their ravages. The phylloxera and the
American vines have, so to speak, been brought up together in


nature’s nursery. The Vitis Vinifera never having had to cope with
this natural enemy, and being unprepared by nature to resist it, falls
an easy prey to its ravages.
It must not be though t that the phylloxera and the American vines are
indissolubly linked together. Once free from the insect and transported
to a clean district they will remain so. Under such circumstances it
would be just as impossible for the phylloxera to suddenly appear on
them without having been brought from elsewhere as it would for it to
suddenly come into existence on a European vine ( Vitis Vinifera ).
Although it has been conclusively proved are to blame for
the presence of the pest in Europe (where they were imported in the
shape of rooted vines, no precautions having been taken, since the
very existence of the pest was then unknown), the American sorts
may with perfect safety be introduced into any clean district, provided
they are absolutely free from all traces of the insect, 100 much
caution cannot be observed in their introduction into this colony;
only seeds or cuttings from vines which have been growing in a clean
district side by side with European vines for some years, without
detrimental effect upon the latter, should be tolerated for this purpose.
It must be remembered that a single insect might suffice to start an
invasion, which it would be most difficult, if not impossible, to check.
Many American varieties have been introduced into Victoria; they
are at the present moment growing perfectly free from this dreaded
insect, and could be reproduced with perfect confidence.
With few exceptions, this immunity from phylloxera is the only
thing to recommend their cultivation, although in some cases, if
employed as stocks, they improve the yield of some European sorts
grafted on them. They have many faults and are inferior in almost
every respect to the European sorts. With the exception of the
varieties of Vitis JEstivalis, their fruit possesses a peculiar taste,
reminding of black currants, termed in America “Foxy taste,” or
they are acrid or otherwise unfit for wine-making purposes. Many
of them are but poor bearers, and in addition to this they suffer more
than the others from unsuitable descriptions of soil, being liable to
chlorosis, and are often very difficult to propagate by cuttings.
Although we shall describe such American sorts as are of interest
in detail, it may be of service to vine-growers to have some simple
rule by which they may distinguish between an American sort and a
Vitis Vinifera.


The following rule is given by L. Portes and F. Ruyssen, and will
be found to hold good in the majority of cases, although some
American sorts are very similar to a Yitis Yinifera, and vice versd.
Fig. 7 represents a typical leaf of Vitis Yinifera, and Fig. 8 one of
Vitis Labrusca (an American species), which may to some extent
serve as a type for them all.*
FIG. 7.
FIG. 8.
The most characteristic difference between the two and the only
one presenting any degree of fixity is in the petiolar sinus or main
indentation, where the petiole or leaf stalk joins the limb or flat part
of the leaf. In the Vitis Vinifera the edges, after separating at
first, tend to join again higher up, giving the opening the form of a
U which has been closed in at the top; in the Vitis Labrusca, on
the other hand, it is more similar to a V which has been widened
above so that the extremities point outward. The portion of the
leaf above the insertion of the petiole is far more considerable in the
Vitis Vinifera than in the Vitis Labrusca , or the insertion of the
petiole is much nearer the centre of the leaf in the former
variety. The texture of the leaves presents a somewhat charac-
teristic difference. Those of the American sorts appear to be more
or less flabby, whilst the leaves of Vitis Vinifera have a more crisp
appearance.
* It must be borne in mind that the general form of the leaf is not always
as in the cuts; for example, V. Vinifera frequently has three-lobed and V.
Labrusca five-lobed leaves. The two examples given are the most common forms
of each species.


The only American species of interest are the following : — V.
JEstivalis, V. Arizonica, V. Berlandieri, V. Californica, V. Candi-
cans, V. Cinerea, V. Cordifolia, V. Labrusca, V. Riparia, V.
Rotundifolia, and Vitis Rupestris; in addition to these there are
many others of purely botanical interest.
VITIS .ESTIVALIS.
The summer grape of North America. This is the only species
from which are derived direct producers, that is varieties yielding
grapes capable of being made into wine, similar to that of V.
Vinifera. Almost all the sorts belonging to the other species are only
used as grafting stocks.
The grapes of the V. rfstivalis, however, are more similar to those
of V. Vinifera , being free from foxy or other foreign taste. Un-
fortunately most of the varieties derived from it are poor bearers.
The species, as a whole, may he described as follows :
Plant of medium vigour, with long thick climbing shoots, usually
dark and covered with bloom ; tendrils large, discontinuous ; buds
and young leaves of a brilliant carmine ; leaves at first covered on
both sides with down, but when full grown without down on the
upper side ; ordinarily lobed, but sometimes almost entire ; bunch
variable ; berries small, thin-skinned, covered with bloom. This
species is divided into a northern and southern group. The former
have leaves almost entire and rusty-coloured down on the veins. All
the varieties belonging to this species resist the phylloxera.
The chief “ cepages ” are as follows :
Cunningham. Synonym : Long.
A pink variety, somewhat extensively cultivated in France,
although a poor bearer. It ripens very late and is to be preferred
for making white wine on account of tlie very light colour of that
fermented with the skins.
It is difficult to propagate by cuttings, and is not a good stock to
graft on.
The leaves are large, three-lobed, or almost entire, smooth and
dark-green above, downy beneath.


Cynthiana. Synonyms : Norton's Virginia, lied River,
Norton.
A good red variety, producing a very good wine, but being a rather
poor bearer, and requiring a rich soil.
It requires long pruning, resists fungus diseases very well, but
does not strike well from cuttings.
t Devereux. Synonyms: Black July, Lincoln, Thurmond,
Hart, Tuley, McLean, sometimes erroneously termed T^enoir.
A good red-wine grape. It is hardy, vigorous, and will grow in
most soils, but is only a poor bearer.
Some authors consider it to be a hybrid between V. HZstivalis and
V. Vinifera. The leaves are of medium size, three-lobed, with
obtuse lobes not deeply separated ; upper-surface dark-green, glossy,
very uneven, with a few silky hairs ; under-surface pale-green, with
numerous hairs on the veins,
t Elsinburgh, Synonyms : Missouri Birdseye, Smarts.
A red grape belonging to the northern group, producing a good
wine, but not extensively cultivated on account of its very small
yield.
Herbemont. Synonyms : Warren, Warrenton , Neil's Grape,
Herbemont's Madeira.
A good red grape, belonging to the southern group, perhaps one
of the best American direct producers. It is a fair bearer; its wine
is of good quality, although light in colour. It does not come into full
bearing till rather late, and is liable to chlorosis unless planted in
well-drained soils of a dark colour. It is a vigorous spreading
grower, with wood of a pale-pink colour; leaves large, three, five,
and rarely seven lobed, lightish-green above, pale-green below ; two
series of blunt teeth; bunch rather small, close; berries small, round,
thin-skinned, dark-red or black, covered with bloom.
f Jacquez. Synonyms: Jack, Cigar, Box Grape,
McCandless, Black Spanish, Longworth's Ohio.
A red grape, belonging to the southern group, perhaps the best of
all the American direct producers; also suitable as a resistant stock
to graft on, although inferior in this respect to certain varieties of V.
Riparia and V. Rupesiris.


It is a good bearer, and yields a wine of magnificent colour, similar
to that made from Mataro , Carignane, &c., although slightly inferior
to them, and of a bluish tint if the grapes are over ripe.
It is a hardy variety, and thrives in most soils, although it is,
unfortunately, very liable to fungus diseases, especially anthracnosis
and mildew.
It is a vigorous semi-erect grower, with brownish-purple wood,
even when green; leaves longer than broad, large, usually five-lobed,
bright green, and smooth above, paler beneath, and with some silky
down; bunch large, long, loose; berries rather small, round, purplish-
black, covered with bloom, hard, with tough skin and red juice.
Pauline. Synonyms : Burgundy of Georgia , Red Lenoir.
A pink variety of little value, being a poor bearer and very subject
to a peculiar form of anthracnosis, termed in French “ Anthracnose
deformante.”
* VITIS ARIZONICA.
A hardy vine, thoroughly phylloxera-resistant, which, although
not used as yet, would give very good results as a stock to graft
European varieties on. It does not grow readily from cuttings.
It is a medium vigorous spreading grower, with smooth adherent
bark. Leaves small, usually heart shaped, upper-surface dark-
green and shiny, under-surface paler and with stiff hairs on the
veins; berries small, of agreeable taste; seeds small.
It is similar to the V. Californica and V. Cordifolia. No cultivated
varieties of it are known as yet.
VITIS BERLANDIERI.
Synonyms: Surret Mountain, Little Sweet Mountain.
This species deserves mention as it is the one recommended by
Pierre Viala as a stock to graft Vinifera on in the chalky soils of the
Department des Cliarentes, where the other American sorts will not
grow. Its chief drawback is the difficulty with which it is propa-
gated by cuttings.
It is a vigorous spreading grower, with long slender shoots of
polygonal section towards th 6 extremities. Leaves small, usually
heart shaped, glossy above, under-surface either smooth or covered


with grey down; bunches small and close; hemes small, round,
black, without foreign taste.
It is not used as a direct producer.
VITIS CALIFORNICA.
Deserves mention as it is held in some esteem in America. It is
a vigorous grower, with slender, ramified, slightly downy shoots.
Leaves small, usually entire, with blunt teeth, upper-surface glossy,
under-surface paler, with tufts of hairs on the veins; small black
berries. This species is not esteemed in France, where it is said to
be subject to chlorosis, and fungus diseases. It resists phylloxera,
but its very small yield unfits it for a direct producer. It is a
good stock to graft on, but is difficult to propagate by cuttings.
VITIS CANDICANS.
Commonly termed the Mustang grape in America.
Like many others, it would form an excellent stock for grafting, as
it is very vigorous and phylloxera-resistant, but can only be propa-
gated with difficulty from cuttings. The fruit is so acid as to render
it unfit for a direct producer. It is a heavy bearer.
It is a most vigorous grower, with medium, long-jointed shoots;
leaves rather small, either heart-shaped or lobate, upper-surface
bright green and smooth, under-surface covered with a very close
white down; bunches small, but very numerous; berries large, black,
and of an acrid taste; seeds large.
VITIS CINEREA.
This species seems to be allied to Vitis JEstivalis and V. Ber
landieri. Like the latter, it thrives in chalky soils, but is also
difficult to propagate.
It is a vigorous spreading grower, with small leaves, either entire
or subdivided, of a whitish-green above and below, the veins on the
under side are hairy; bunch small; berries very small, black, without
bloom, acid, but without foxy taste.
VITIS CORDIFOLIA.
Called in America Winter Grape , Frost Grape , or Chicken
It is similar to the last in most respects, such as its adaptability to
chalky soils and the difficulty with which it can be propagated.


Its leaves are somewhat similar to those of V. Riparia , although
they differ from it by opening out flat. The leaves of V. Riparia
remain folded for some time after first coming out. The acid taste
of its grapes renders it unfit for a direct producer.
VITIS LABRUSCA.
This species, usually termed in America Fox Grape, or Northern
Fox Grape, is perhaps the one which has been submitted to cultural
methods with the object of improving the fruit for the greatest
number of years, and for this reason there are many varieties derived
from it, few of which, however, are considered to be of practical use
from a European stand-point. In the first place they are not all,
strictly speaking, phylloxera proof. Although they resist it far
better than the V. Vinifera varieties, many of them suffer from the
attacks of the insect, some even succumbing to it after a few years.
In addition to this the fruit has a strong foxy taste, rendering these
vines unsuitable for cultivation as direct producers, and many of
them are subject to chlorosis if the soil be light in colour and not
properly drained. We must describe a few varieties on account of
the frequency with which one meets with them in gardens, &c.
One or two of them possess the above-named defects in so small a
degree that they may be considered as being of value.
The general characteristics of the species are as follows :■ —
Spreading growers of medium vigour, with long thick shoots,
sometimes hairy near the knots in the green state. The tendrils are
continuous, that is, there is a tendril (or bunch) opposite to every
ieaf. This is the principal characteristic of the species, and dis-
tinguishes it from all others, which have discontinuous tendrils.
Leaves rather three than five lobed, upper-surface of a dull dark-
green colour, under-surface covered with thick close down, usually
white, brownish on the veins ; bunch rather large ; berries large,
either round or oval, with pulpy flesh and foxy taste; skin thick ;
seeds large. Asa rule varieties belonging to this species ripen early.
The following are some of the varieties derived from this species :
f Adironda.
An early black grape of little value.
t Anna:
A hardy white sort, probably a seedling of Catawba, not of much
value.


t Canby’s August. Synonyms : York's Madeira, Black Ger-
man, Hyde's Eliza, Monteith.
Canby’s August is usually considered to be a hybrid, but it is more
closely connected with V. Labrusca than any other species.
It resists the phylloxera, and, as it is very hardy and capable of
doing well in almost any soil, it forms an excellent stock to graft on,
although, perhaps, inferior to V. Rupestris and some varieties of V.
Riparia. It cannot be employed as a direct producer on account of
the very foxy taste of its fruit and its being a poor bearer.
f Catawba. Synonyms : Red Muncy, Catawba, Tokay,
Singleton.
A purple variety, considered to be very good for wine-making
purposes in America, as it is freer from foxy taste than most V.
Labrusca varieties. A kind of champagne, known as Sparkling
Catawba is made from it in America. It is almost adapted for
cultivation as a direct producer, although a rather poor bearer. It
is of no value as a stock, as it cannot be said with certainty to be
phylloxera-resistant.
Concord.
This variety is much esteemed in the eastern states of America,
where the foxy taste is not so much disliked as in France or the
western states. It is a good bearer, and is phylloxera-resistant, but
the fruit has a foxy taste. It will not thrive in very warm dry
districts, nor in any but dark well-drained soils, being very subject
to chlorosis.
t Diana.
A rather good white variety.
t Isabella, Synonyms : Woodward, Payne's Early, Samboton.
This is, perhaps, the best known American sort in Australia. It
is a hardy black grape, and a rather good bearer, but is not
phylloxera-resistant, and its fruit has a marked foxy taste, so it is not
to be recommended.
f Israella.
Very similar to Isabella, of which it is probably a seedling.
f Ives’ Seedling. Synonyms ; Ives, Ives' Madeira, Kittredge.
A vigorous prolific black variety, easily recognised by its very
handsome leaves, dark-green above, white beneath. It is of little


value as a grafting stock, and cannot be used as a direct producer on
account of the taste of its fruit.
f Logan.
A prolific black variety.
t Maxatawney.
A white sort, rather suited for table purposes.
f Martha.
A white sort, with less foxy taste than many of the others.
f Miles:
An early black grape, somewhat free from foxy taste.
t Perkins.
A pale lilac early grape, with very pronounced foxy taste.
t Rebecca.
A beautiful white grape, but of little value.
f Tokaylon. Synonyms : Wyman, Spofford Seedling.
A robust, vigorous, rather late, black variety, almost free from
foxy taste.
VITIS RIPARIA.
The Sand or River grape of the Americans.
The varieties derived from V. Riparia are of great value as stocks
to graft on, being thoroughly phylloxera-proof, and thriving in most
sorts of soils. They cannot be employed as direct producers on
account of the flavour of their fruit, which is rather acrid than foxy.
Some of them only bear male flowers, and are necessarily sterile.
The following are the main characteristics of the species : —Very
spreading slender grower, but capable of covering large surfaces;
long-jointed wood; leaves at first folded along the midrib, but after
opening out flat, they are usually heart-shaped or three-lobed, with
sharp teeth, upper surface smooth, and often very glossy, under-
surface duller in colour, smooth, or with a few hairs on the veins
(when the leaves first come out they are sometimes very downy);
bunch usually small; berries small, with a less pronounced foxy taste
than those of V. Labrusca\ seeds small. The sorts derived from V.
Riparia come into leaf, blossom, and ripen very early.
f Clinton. Synonym : Worthington.
This red variety is extensively grown in America as a direct pro-
ducer, as it is a fair bearer, and its wine is of good colour and body.


It cannot, however, be recommended as such, as its fruit has the
foxy taste. It is an excellent stock in good, free soils, and grows
easily from cuttings. The leaves have some hairs on the under side
of the veins.
Solonis. Synonyms : Cordi/olia Solonis, Long's Arkansas,
La Souys.
Some authors consider this sort to be rather a V. Cordifolia than a
V. Riparia. It is a very constant type, so much so that it can be
reproduced by seed without much variation.
It resists phylloxera in a remarkable manner, and does well in
almost any soil, for which reasons it is probably the best stock for
grafting purposes, although it is of no value as a direct producer.
The young leaves are downy, but when full-grown smooth on both
sides, with the exception of a few hairs on the under side of the
veins.
f Taylor. Synonyms : Bullet, Taylor's Bullit.
A white grape, in other respects similar to the Clinton. It is a
good stock for grafting on, although inferior to the Solonis and Wild
Riparias. It is a thick stock, and therefore most suitable for
vigorous growing varieties. It is without value as a direct pro-
ducer on account of its small yield, although the fruit is almost free
from foxy taste.
f Wild Riparia.
There are several Wild Riparias cultivated somewhat extensively
in France as stocks. They are excellent for this purpose, being very
hardy and absolutely phylloxera-resistant. They ought to be grafted
very young, as the graft takes better under these conditions.
VITIS ROTUNDIFOLIA.
Synonym : Vitis Yulpina. Known in America by the names of
Muscadine , Bullace, and Bullet Grape.
This species deserves mention, as it differs greatly from all the
foregoing kinds.
It can be readily distinguished by its bark, which, instead of being
like that of the vines we are accustomed to see, is smooth, and
covered with small lenticels, and, in a general way, similar to that of
a mulberry.


The leaves are small, entire, heart-shaped, and glossy on both
sides. Bunches very small, made up of a very few large berries, with
very large seeds. The fruit do not ripen simultaneously, as is the
case with other vines, but successively, and fall off as soon as ripe.
They are very poor in sugar, and can only produce a drinkable
wine in a hot climate, where this species might be cultivated with
advantage, as it is an exceedingly vigorous grower, one vine being
capable of covering over an acre of ground. Although phylloxera-
resistant, they do not make good stocks, on account of the difficulty
with which European sorts can be grafted on them.
The following are the best known varieties -
t Flowers. Synonym : Black Muscadine.
A late variety, esteemed in Georgia, Alabama, and South Carolina,
where it is said to yield a good red wine.
f Scuppernong 1 . Synonyms : Yellow Muscadine. White
Muscadine. Bullace. Roanoke.
A very hardy white sort, from which wine is made in the Southern
States of North America,
f Thomas.
A reddish grape similar to the others in most respects.
tVITIS RUPESTRIS.
This species is also termed Rock drape and Sugar Grapein America.
No cultivated varieties have, as yet, been derived from it. It is a
a very poor bearer, most of the flowers being sterile, and is therefore
unsuitable as a direct producer. It is, on the other hand, an excellent
stock for grafting European sorts on, as it is thoroughly phylloxera-
resistant, and very hardy, doing well in almost any but chalky soils.
HYBRIDS.
There are, as might be expected, many hybrids between the
different species, some of which deserve mention ; these are —
t Allen’s Hybrid.
Chasselas x Isabella. A good early white table grape, but not
phylloxera-resistant.
f Alvey. Synonym : Hagar.
This is aV. Vinifera X V. JEstivalis hybrid. A good red variety,
producing a good wine. It is phylloxera-resistant, but the fruit sets


very badly, and it is subject to what is termed in French “ anthracnose
deformante .”
f Delaware.
Is a V. Vinifera x V. Labrusca.. A white grape of little value
although it seems to resist the phylloxera.
Elvira.
A hybrid of Taylor X Sphinx. A white or pink phylloxera-
resistant variety. It is a good bearer, and although its fruit has a
foxy taste, it seems to yield upon distillation an excellent brandy.
f Goethe.
Is a hybrid between V. Vinifera and V. Labrusca. It is a good
white grape, but a poor bearer, and does not seem to be phylloxera-
resistant.
f Lindley.
A brick-red table grape derived from V. Vinifera x V. Labrusca x
V. Rip aria.
f Salem.
A V. Labrusca x V. Vinifera (81. Hamburg). A variety of little
value.
Vialla. Synonym : Clinton- Vialla.
One of the most valuable hybrids as a stock to graft on, but useless
as a direct producer, on account of the foxy taste of its fruit and the
small number of flowers which set. It is a V. Riparia x V. Labrusca.
f Wilder.
A V. Vinifera x V. Labrusca x V. Riparia f said to be a good
purple table grape.
AUSTRALIAN VINES.
This chapter would not be complete without a brief mention of
some of our indigenous Australian varieties. Although at present
they are considered as being without value, and have never been
cultivated with a view of improving the fruit, it is quite possible
that something might be done in this direction.
They differ from vines one is accustomed to see in being
evergreen, with bark similar to that of V. Rotundifolia, and oblong
serrated leaves, comparable to those of the laurel or camellia. The
flowers are more similar to those of the Ampelopsis or Virginia


creeper than a vitis. The petals open above, and in appearance are
similar to Fig. 4.
The following species are described as follows by Baron von
Mueller in his work “ Select Extra Tropical Plants” :
Vitis Acetosa.
“Carpentaria and Arnheim’s land. —Stems rather herbaceous than
shrubby ; erect. The whole plant is pervaded with acidity, thus
the foliage proved valuable in cases of scurvy. The berries are edible,
and very white, purple, and black. This species, if planted in countries
with a mild temperate clime, would probably spring afresh from the
roots annually. Mr. Alfred Giles made from this grape some wine
of fair quality, reminding of claret.”
Vitis Baudiniana (F. v. Mueller). Synonyms : Cissus
Antarctica , Vitis Antarctica.
“ East Australia.—With V. Hypoglauca, the most southern of all
species of grapes, none extending to New Zealand. It is evergreen,
and a vigorous plant for bowers, but suffers even from slight frosts.
The berries are freely produced and edible, though not large.”
Vitis Hypoglauca (F. v. Mueller).
“ East Australia, as far south as Gippsland.—An evergreen climber
of enormous length, forming a very stout stem in age. The black
berries attain the size of small cherries. This species, also, may
perhaps bo vastly changed in its fruit by continued culture; bears slight
frosf, but it is best in cool climes to keep seedlings for two or three
years under shelter, so that sufficient increment and induration of the
woody stem takes place for its resisting subsequently some frost.”
Vitis Opaca (F. v. Mueller). Synonym : Cissus Opaca or
Burdekin Vine.
A Queensland species, which is, like the others, a hardy evergreen
climber.
* * * * *
In addition to these there are several Asiatic and African species,
which, however, need not be described here.


CHAPTER V.
SELECTION OF SITE AND CHOICE OF SUITABLE
VARIETIES.
The selection of a suitable site for a vineyard is of the greatest
importance, and cannot receive too serious consideration at the
hands of the intending planter.
When it is remembered that the important factors—climate,
aspect, soil, &c.—depend upon the site chosen, the importance of
a judicious choice becomes manifest.
When selecting a site the main thing the future vinegrower must
keep in view is the kind of wine he wishes to make. Choice or
abundant, light or strong, dry or sweet, red or white, all depends
upon these points, and they should receive the fullest consideration,
more especially from any one who has not as yet purchased his land,
hut wishes to know which will be the most profitable district for
him to settle in. It is a delicate matter to say that any district is
best situated for this purpose, such a course would expose one to much
unfavorable criticism from residents of all the other districts, who
might consider that they were slighted and their land depreciated.
We shall briefly enumerate the different advantages of such and
such a climate and soil, and leave it to the intending planter to
choose between them.
Most wine-growing districts of Victoria, and a good many districts
where no vines have as yet been planted, have some distinct advantage
to recommend them, such as freedom from excessive moisture, and
consequent immunity from fungus pests; prolificacy of the vine in
them; excellent quality of the wine; freedom from frosts ; suitability
to such and such a variety.
It would be well to here warn the intending planter against
devoting himself to the production of abundant crops of small value
instead of smaller yield of superior wine. It pays a man better to
obtain 100 gallons per acre of wine for which he can obtain 4s per
gallon than 400 gallons per acre of wine only worth Is. per gallon.


The absolute return per acre will be the same in both cases, but the
smaller yield, entailing less expense in gathering, vintaging, and
casks, leaves a larger margin for profit.
At present the production of Victorian wine is so limited that it
has not come to be looked upon as a regular article of commerce in
the markets of Europe. The demand for it is small, and, consequently,
in the absence of competition, wines in reality of very dissimilar
values often sell for the same price. With the largely-increased
production, which is sure to result from the extensive planting of the
last year or two, a re-arrangement of prices is bound to come, tending
to raise the price of superior wines and lower that of wines of
ordinary quality.
The successful wine-grower of the future will be the one who
devotes himself to the production of high-class wines. At present it
may be more remunerative to produce larger quantities of an inferior
article, but a time will come when the producer who sacrifices quality
to quantity will find difficulty in getting rid of his wine, whilst for a
superior article there will always be a demand.
The strength of the wine to be produced is the next point requiring
consideration. In Europe strong wines are going out of fashion
every day and giving place to lighter ones ; people preferring a claret
of which they can drink a bottle without inconvenience to a strong
wine of a port or sherry type, which does not quench the thirst, and
of which only a couple of glasses may be taken with impunity. In
Australia the taste for strong wines still continues, although lighter
ones are coming more into favour every day.
A light wine is the one for which there is, and always will be, the
greatest demand. It is destined to be the universal drink for all
classes, being more beneficial, cheering, and invigorating than any
other. The great bulk of strong wines now produced will be devoted
chiefly to blending purposes, and will not probably command a high
price in the near future, with the exception of a limited number of
high-class strong wines, which will always command good prices as
liqueur wines or ports.
Sweet wines may be included in the same category as strong wines.
A wine cannot remain sweet unless it is sufficiently rich in alcohol to
prevent the fermentation of the unchanged sugar. Such wines, often
termed ladies’ wines, liqueur, or fruity wines, are perhaps more sought
F 2


after in the colonial market than dry, strong wines. They are often
of excellent quality when made in certain privileged situations, but
their production ought not to be encouraged.
Red wines are in greater demand than white, although wines of
the type of Chablis or Hock meet with a ready sale. In short the
wine the future grower will find the most profitable to make is a dry
red wine—the lighter the better. As for producing what is commonly
called a claret, it will not do to imitate what one is in the habit of
tasting as such. It must be remembered that only a small proportion
of what comes out here as French wine was ever grown in France at
all. Wines of a delicate character, liable to be mistaken by true
connoisseurs for the celebrated wines of France and Germany, such as
Bordeaux, Burgundies, Hocks, &c., can only be produced in the first
or cool region of the colony. The second region is capable of pro-
ducing excellent wines of a somewhat stronger description, but which
are still light wines, provided proper care be observed in the selec-
tion of sorts. Whilst the third is'best adapted for the production of
good commercial or blending wines, but in greater abundance, as well
as some high-class strong wines. In France it is only the central
portions which produce Clarets, Burgundies, and other light wines ;
no wines in the south of France or any part of Spain, Portugal,
or Italy are similar to a first-class Bordeaux. It is a surprising thing
that the first region of Victoria, which is so very favorably situated
for the production of light wines, and in which it is not impossible
that some privileged spots may be found capable of producing wines
equal to the celebrated Chateau Latour, Margaux, and Lafitte of
Bordeaux, has been so greatly neglected by persons devoting them-
selves to viticulture. The greater part of north-eastern Gippsland
comes within this region, yet there are not twenty acres of this vast
district planted with vines.
This is a word of advice en passant to any one who has not as yet
decided in which district to plant. The greater number of persons
have already purchased the land, and wish to know if it be suitable
for viticulture or not. It is unnecessary to say that the most reliable
information in thia direction will be given by the vine itself, and
intending planters cannot do better than study the established vine-
yards in the district, and ascertain from the owners the advantages or
disadvantages they labour under.


The principal points respecting which information should be
sought in either of the three regions are :
Ist. Suitability of the soil, both from a physical and a chemical
point of view, as already set forth (page 23).
2nd. Suitable rainfall. In an approximate manner it may be said
that localities with an annual rainfall of under 10, or over 40 inches,
are unfavorable for vine-growing purposes. If recourse can be had to
irrigation, of course vines can be profitably cultivated in districts
where the rainfall is even less than 10 inches. A good deal depends
upon the distribution of this water. If it be spread evenly over all
the months of the year a lesser rainfall will be necessary than would
otherwise be the case. The following table, giving the annual rain-
fall of some of the best known wine districts of France, may be of
interest to intending planters :
Champagne ... ... ... 18*71
Burgundy ... ... ... 29*35
„ Beaujolais ... ... ... 37*27
Bordeaux ... ... ... 23*09
Bas Languedoc ... ... ... 25*65
Avignon ... ... ... 23*42
Arles ... ... ... ... 16*67
Marseille ... ... ... 20*17
Champagne is situated in the north of France ; Burgundy, Beaujolais,
and Bordeaux in the central portion ; whilst the Bas Languedoc,
Avignon, Arles, and Marseille are in the south. It will be seen that
Victoria and France are very similarly situated as regards rainfall.
3rd. Liability to late spring frosts occurring after the vines have
come into leaf.
4th. Liability to violent winds occurring in the very early summer,
at which time the shoots, being neither long enough to be tied up
nor strong enough to resist the action of the wind, sustain considerable
damage.
sth. Frequency of injurious hailstorms. These are of very local
occurrence, and concern the site of the vineyard itself rather than a
whole district, especially in hilly country ; they are often confined to
certain ranges and valleys. It is common to observe two places only
a mile or so apart, one of which is devastated by hail nearly every
year, whilst the other enjoys comparative immunity from it. The


injury done to vines by this scourge is very great. A single storm is
capable of annihilating in a few minutes an entire crop.
6th. Several other points ought to be considered, such as the
visitation of locusts. In order to be as little exposed as possible, the
shelter of some natural obstacle, such as a creek, river, belts of timber,
or a high range of hills should be taken advantage of where
practicable.
Other considerations, such as distance from market, facility of
obtaining labour, &c., &c., should receive due consideration, but need
not be mentioned here.
The above conditions must be fulfilled in any vineyard, no matter
how or where situated. There are others which vary with the
climatic region in which the vineyard may be situated, so must be
considered separately for each.
First Region.
The great advantages of this region have been mentioned ; it is
not, however, without its drawbacks. The vine, growing with less
vigour than in the warmer districts, necessitates closer planting,
which, without increasing the crops, renders cultivation more expen-
sive, there being more vines per acre to prune, disbud, tie up,
sulphur, &c., &c., whilst the work of ploughing and scarifying is also
rendered more difficult.
In addition to this, the frequent summer rains promote the growth
of weeds, or cause the flowers to set badly and facilitate the develop-
ments of fungus diseases; whilst in the colder parts unfavorable
weather towards vintage time may interefere with the proper ripening
of the grapes. On account of these many drawbacks a site requires to
be chosen with great care in this region. Contrarily to what we will
find to be the case for the other two regions, the vineyard should be so
situated as to promote the production of alcohol, otherwise the wine
would be too weak. Hill sides with aN. or N.E. aspect should alone
be selected, unless the ground be almost level, as on the summit of a
rise, when the direction of the slope is of no consequence. Low-
lying flats are most unsuitable, and should never be selected. A
slope steeper than 1 in 7 is not to be recommended, as considerable
quantities of soil would be carried away by the rush of the water
during the winter. The soil must be friable, easily cultivated,


preferably pebbly, and of such a nature as to insure thorough drain-
age. If these conditions are fulfilled a pale-coloured surface will
promote the ripening of the fruit. If the drainage be not thorough
a darker soil is to be preferred. Rich soils, especially black or peaty
ones containing much organic matter, should never be planted with
vines.
The “ cepages ” which give the best results vary according to the
chemical character of the soil and the temperature of the spring and
autumn.
In a limestone soil with fine spring but early autumn, the best red
wine will be produced by the Pinots, either the ordinary Pinot Noir
or the Millers Burgundy (Pinot Meunier); under similar conditions
this sort yields the celebrated Burgundies of France. The Pulsart
another sort which would do well under these cireumstances. It is
also a better bearer, and does not suffer from frost to any considerable
extent. If the autumn be fine, the Mondeuse would prove a valuable
red sort, as it gives large yields of good wine, it ripens later than
either Pinots or Pulsart. The Malbeck is also to be recommended,
although it frequently sets badly at flowering time.
For white wine the different white Pinots, the Pinot Gris, and
Aucarot will give the best results. The Chasselas may be added to
these.
In granitic and schistose soils the most suitable red sorts are
Shiraz or Red Hermitage, and Gamay, whilst for white, Roussanne
or White Hermitage, Riesling, and Tokay.
On a clayey subsoil, covered with a more or less sandy or loamy
surface soil, most of the above-mentioned sorts thrive. Those, how-
ever, which give the best results are the Bordeaux varieties, Cabernet,
Carmenet, Verdot, Merlot, and Malbeck, more especially if the soil be
sandy, or rich in quartz pebbles. The Shiraz (Red Hermitage) also
gives very good results in it, whilst it is a better bearer than most of
the above.
For white wine, the Semilion and Sauvignon (white) will give
excellent results, as also will Riesling, White Hermitage, and Chas-
selas. The latter will serve to blend with either of the former
varieties, although they must not be blended with each other. The
Tokay and Pinot Gris also give good results in such a soil.


Second Region.
This is, perhaps, the region in which the greatest facilities are
offered to the grower, he having few of the drawbacks which are to
be met with in the cool region to contend with. The vine growing in
a more luxurious manner enables larger crops to be obtained from
vines planted farther apart. The wine, however, although in many
cases excellent, is of a rather different character, and not so delicate
as that of the last region. It is, if anything, too strong; so, in selecting,
a site, unless with a view of making liqueur wines, raisins, or currants,
the chief preoccupation of the intending planter must be to aim at
diminishing the percentage of alcohol. The most favorable aspect for
this purpose will be S.E., or W. Level ground, with sufficient
slope to allow surplus water to drain off, will give very good results.
A sandy soil should also be sought for ; wines in such soils being
considerably lighter than those grown in stiffer ones. Limestone soils
should be reserved for the production of strong wines, and should
be avoided for the production of those of lighter character. In
this region several of the sorts mentioned above will give excellent
results in the same descriptions of soil as suits them in the
first region. These are Aucarot, Pulsart, Shiraz (Red Hermitage),
Gamay, Roussanne, Riesling, Merlot, Verdot, and Malbeck. The
latter gives excellent results, being far less liable to set badly
than in the cooler part. These sorts should not be planted
exclusively in a vineyard, as the wine made from them would
be too strong; they should be used to give bouquet and
other qualities to the wine, whilst other sorts producing lighter
wine form thej basis of the vineyard, of these several will thrive
in any soil. They are the Dolcetto, Black Hambro, Black 1 rince,
Black St. Peter, Mataro, Morrastel, and Carignane, whilst a
certain'percentage of juice of La Folle grapes would greatly improve
the quality. The Oeillade and Grenache may be added to this
number; they give the best results in schistose and granitic soils.
For dry white wines the sorts to be recommended are—Riesling,
Chasselas, Doradillo, and Tokay, although the latter does not give
such satisfactory results as in the first region. To these may be
added the Sweet Water, which produces large crops of good light
wine welL adapted for reducing the strength of the other wines.


The Gouais is a sort which should not be too extensively planted.
Good wines of a strong character may be made on stony hill sides,
with N. or N.E. aspect from the following sorts : —For red,
Cabernet Sauvignon, Carmenet, Grenache, and Pinots. For white,
Pedro Ximenes, in granitic or schistose formations, where also the
Roussanne will give a strong wine. Yerdeilho, which, perhaps,
is superior to any other for the production of a wine of a Madeira
type; and, lastly, the Muscats, which yield excellent liqueur wines
of well-known character.
Third Region.
This region cannot produce wines as light as those of the two former
ones. The object of the grower in this region being to make a wine con-
taining as little alcohol as possible, the same precautions should be
observed as mentioned for the last region, such as S.or S.W. aspect, and
sandy soils. Under these conditions excellent dry wines, containing
less than 25 per cent, of alcohol, maybe grown in abundance, well suited
for commercial purposes, and which should successfully compete with
wines of similar character imported largely into France from Spain and
other warm countries. For this purpose only a limited number of
sorts mentioned as suitable for the first region should be tolerated;
in fact they are Shiraz and Malbeck, and they should be only
sparingly planted. Such sorts as Aramon, Carignane, Cincaut,
Grenache, Mataro, Aspiran, Morrastel, and Oeillade are, without doubt,
the most suitable ones. The three last-named would produce a
lighter wine of very good quality without any other admixture. The
Grenache is better suited for the production of liqueur wines, as also
are Muscats, Malvoisies, Roussanne, Yerdeilho, Pedro Ximenes,
Aucarot, Maccabeo, &c., whilst for the production of a light white
wine, Chasselas, Riesling, Doradillo, La Folle, and perhaps also Sweet
Water and Gouais may be named.
It is needless to mention that this region is better suited than the
others for the cultivation of raisin and currant varieties.


CHAPTER VI.
PREPARATION OF SOIL.
Having selected the site for the vineyard, the next thing to do is
to prepare the soil for planting.
The vine being a deep-rooted plant, the greater the ease with
which its roots can penetrate to a considerable depth the more
vigorous and healthy will it be, the longer will it live, and the
better will it be able to stand severe drought during the summer
months. No means facilitates the penetration of the ground by the
roots more than deep preliminary cultivation, which is, therefore, not
only beneficial but necessary. Many persons are in the habit of
saying the* deep cultivation is unnecessary, and that they have
observed viaes doing better on land which was simply ploughed to a
depth of a few inches than on that which w T as subsoiled. This may
be the case for the first few years, but once the vines have attained
their full development, the difference between the yield of the two
soon becomes manifest, the advantage, of course, being on the side of
the properly cultivated vines, which will continue to thrive for many
years without becoming exhausted. Although good results are often
obtained on land which has received only a simple ploughing, far
better results would have been obtained had it been more deeply
worked. The longevity of vineyards in the old country, where vines
have frequently been cultivated for centuries on the same land, is, in
a great measure, to be attributed to proper preparation of the soil.
Although a stiff soil naturally benefits more by deep cultivation than
a free one, it has been found in France, at Aigue Mortes, where vines
are planted in almost pure sand in order to enable them to resist the
attacks of the phylloxera, that, contrary to expectation, trenching to
a considerable depth (2 or 3 feet) had a most beneficial effect on the
growth of the vine, and increased the yield to a considerable extent.
The stirring of the soil does not only act mechanically, in rendering
it penetrable for the roots, but by aerating it renders certain sub-
stances more readily assimilable. In addition to this it improves the
drainage and enables rain to be absorbed more readily, as well as a
proper amount of moisture to be retained.


Gaillardon is of opinion that deep cultivation diminishes the aromatic
taste to be met with in some Algerian wines, which he considers to
be due to the presence of debris of aromatic plants in the surface soil.
It is quite possible that the same rule might apply in Australia, where
the debris of Eucalyptus leaves which have been collecting on the
ground for thousands of years may be responsible for the “Australian
taste ” with which many of our wines are sometimes reproached by
European connoisseurs. The freedom from peculiar taste of wines
grown on sandhills where no Eucalypti exist tends to confirm this
theory. The depth of the preliminary cultivation depends upon the
climate. The warmer and drier this is the deeper ought it to be.
Vines growing in a warm climate attaining a far greater development
than is the case in a cold one, the roots, which spread more or less
equally in every direction, require a deep soil. In addition to this, it
may be mentioned that the deeper the soil is worked the lighter will
the resulting wine be.
If we examine what is usually done in France we will find that in
the northern parts the preliminary cultivation is extremely shallow,
whilst in the warmer and drier south it is very deep, except in certain
parts where a thin layer of soil rests on broken limestone, easily pene-
trable by the roots of the vine. Such soils, called “ Garrigues ,” prevail
in Languedoc and part of the Herault and Pyrenees Orientales, and
this accounts for the small depth to which they break up the soil in
these places. The following are the ordinary depths to which the
soil is broken in some of the leading wine countries of Europe :
Provence (southern France) ... ... 30in. to 39in.
Hermitage „ ... ... oOin.
Douro (Portugal) ... ... ... 39in. to 59in.
Cyprus (island of) ... ... ... 28in. to 32in.
Bordeaux (medium climate of France) ... 24in.
Beaujolais „ ... 24in.
Burgundy (cooler part of France) ... Min.
Champagne „ ... 12in. to 24in.
Canton de Vaud (Switzerland) ... 36in. to 39in.
In Australia it would never pay to subsoil land to such depths, on
account of the high price of labour, and the following will be found
quite sufficient for each region.
First or cool region from 12 to 18 inches ; second region, 18 to 24
inches; and third region, 24 to 30 inches.


There are three ways of breaking up the ground—l. Subsoiling or
breaking up the soil to the required depth, but leaving the different
layers in theirnatural position; 2. Trenching or breaking up the soil in
such a way as to bring the subsoil to the surface and bury the surface
soil at the bottom of the trench; 3. Mixing the surface and subsoil ta
the required depth. This last method necessitates the employment
of hand labour, and being, therefore, too expensive for application in
Australia, need not be considered here. We have thus to decide
between subsoiling and trenching.
This is one of the vexed questions of viticulture, many persons
holding different opinions about it. In the evidence given before the
Hoyal Commission on Vegetable Products, the majority of witnesses
are in favour of subsoiling (see Appendix A), and, in fact, this method
is the one which will give the best results in the great majority of cases.
In Australia, the most common description of soil is a more or less free
surface, resting on a rather stiff subsoil; in such a case trenching
would prove injurious, as by bringing the subsoil to the top the surface
would be rendered stiff and difficult to cultivate. It would hinder
the absorbtion of water during rain, and by the facility with which it
would cake and crack, would promote in an undue manner the
evaporation of the necessary moisture during the summer, besides
rendering the proper aeration of the soil very difficult.
Trenching is only to be recommended in the somewhat exceptional
case when the subsoil, or at least the soil situated at the depth of a
foot or so be looser than the surface soil, or capable of becoming so
by exposure to the action of the air. In places where the soil con-
tinues identical or practically so to the depth of 3 or 4 feet, it is
indifferent which method be employed, although perhaps trenching
is to be preferred, as the well-aerated surface soil, being buried whilst
fresh layers were exposed to the action of the air, would have a most
beneficial effect upon its fertility.
Partial subsoiling, or only subsoiling a foot or so on each side of
the row in which the vines are planted, is not a judicious operation,
as it places the roots in a sort of drain, where they are liable to suffer
from too much moisture. The advantages to be gained from such a
course would in any case be small, as it must be remembered that the
roots of the vine spread in every direction, and not only immediately
under the plant itself.


The best time to subsoil land for viticultural purposes is at the end
of the autumn, when the first rains have sufficiently softened the
soil to render the operation possible. This presents the great advan-
tage of exposing the newly-broken land to the action of air, rain,
frost, &c., during the whole of the winter preceding the planting, thus
rendering it loose and sweetening it in a considerable degree.
Before proceeding to subsoil, the land should be thoroughly cleared,
all trees and hushes being removed, and roots run to the depth of at
least 18 inches or 2 feet. Any live trees should be ring-barked
during the early summer; they will be dead by the time subsoiling is
to be commenced, and will send up no suckers. They may he pulled
out with a Forest Devil, or one of the numerous appliances used for
this purpose, after the soil round the roots has been loosened. All
rubbish should be burned on the ground itself, the ashes, containing a
considerable amount of potash, forming a valuable manure.
The best way to subsoil land is with a double-furrow plough
specially made for the purpose, the second or front mouldboard of
which has been removed and replaced by the subsoiler which
consists of a curved bar of iron so arranged as to be capable
of being raised or lowered by a lever, and carrying an ordinary
plough-share at its lower extremity or terminating in a
broad point like the chisel tooth of a scarifier. An ordinary plough
opens up a furrow to the depth of 8 inches or so, then the subsoil
plough can be started, the subsoiler engaging in the furrow already
opened, and stirring the soil to the required depth, whilst the shear
and mouldboard open up a fresh one in which the subsoiler will work
on the second round, and so on.
In moderately stiff soils five horses ought to be able to subsoil an
acre per day to a depth of 18 inches.
If the ground has not been thoroughly freed from roots, or there
are stones which interfere with the progress of the plough, it will be
better to substitute for the above two single ones, which follow each
other in the same furrow, the second one being without a mould-
board. Any stoppage of one of them will not interfere with the
working of the other.
In order to trench the soil, the best way is to employ an ordinary
plough to go first and open the furrow to as great a depth as possible,
and follow up in the same furrow with a trench plough with a high
mouldboard capable of raising the soil to the surface.


If the trench plough be sufficiently strong, and a good team of
bullocks be available, it will be possible to turn the soil to a depth
of 15 inches in a single operation. The ground, after having
been subsoiled or trenched, as the case may be, and left exposed
during the winter, will have settled down considerably and be almost
level. It should then receive a light ploughing and harrowing, when
it will be in a fit state for planting.
Any parts which are sour and swampy (especially in the first
region) should be drained. Places of this character should be care-
fully marked when observed, and properly drained before being
planted with vines.
The most suitable system of drainage consists of a series of small
drains running into larger ones, which in turn empty themselves into
main drains situated in suitable positions..
FIG. 9.
A glance at Fig. 9 will show the disposition of these drains.
The small arrows indicate the direction of the greatest fall, a a , the
main drain, which may be situated along a gully, in which case it
can be left open, bb b are the secondary and cc c the small drains.
All the drains should be so placed as to make as great an angle as
possible with the line of greatest slope. This presents the double
advantage of not giving too much fall, in which case the scour might
be too great, and rendering the drainage more effective. A drain


often acts as beneficially by intercepting the water from above and
preventing it from entering the parts requiring drainage as another
one would by carrying off the water which is already there.
The main drains should, if closed, be made of stone, slabs, or
earthenware pipes, and. should be of sufficient size to enable them
to carry off all the water brought to them by the others. The
secondary drains may be made of slabs or stones, but more economical
and quite as effective ones may be made of vine-cuttings or scrub,
the former being preferable.
These drains should be dug to a depth of 2 to 3 feet, or until the
good clay subsoil be reached; they may be from 9 inches to 1 foot in
width at the top, tapering down to 6 inches at the bottom. They
are then filled in with vine cuttings, which must be put in carefully
in order that no vacant places are left where the water lodging would
cause the whole drain to collapse and become useless. They should
not be put in bundles, but by small quantities at a time, starting from
th,e top of the slope and working down, so that the layers are
arranged the reverse order to that which slates are fixed on the
roof of a house. They should be rammed tight, and filled in with
earth. A layer of straw or weeds will prevent any loose earth from
falling through, and will thus keep them more open than would
otherwise be possible. Drains of this class may be made of a
maximum length of 200 to 300 yards, they last for upwards of
twelve years, and even when quite decomposed leave sufficient spaces
to insure an escape for surplus water, whilst the decomposed cuttings
make an excellent manure for the vines growing in proximity to
them. The small drains need not be so deep as the secondary ones
in Fig. 10. The secondary drains are 300 yards in length, and the
small ones being 80 yards long and 40 yards apart; in this case we
have a gradual slope, for which reason the angle between the small
and secondary drains is acute, in order to insure a sufficient fall for
the water; on a steeper slope the angle might be made obtuse, an
advantage, as it would enable less drains to be made per acre. It is
not always on ground without much slope that drains are wanted; it
frequently occurs that on steep hillsides there are sour wet spots
which must be drained; in such cases the whole block would not
require to be systematically treated, and the vigneron must use his
judgment and only drain what is necessary, as the process is
expensive, and should not be applied unless where required.


CHAPTER VII.
LAYING-OUT OF VINEYAED.
A vineyard should be methodically laid out and planted in such a
manner as to enable a maximum of yield to be obtained with the
employment of a minimum of labour, the high price of which in
Australia renders many methods often applied in Europe imprac-
ticable with us.
As in the case with most other vineyard operations, no fixed rule
can be given, the laying-out depending essentially on the climate,
soil, and sorts grown; so much is this so that a perfectly laid out
vineyard on the Murray would be most unsuitably so in one of the
cooler districts of the colony.
In laying out the vineyard we have to consider—
1. Distance apart of the vines.
2. Arrangement of the vines.
3. Extent and form of the blocks.
The distance apart of the vines, having considerable influence upon
the disposition and form of the blocks, must be considered first.
Perhaps no question concerning viticulture has given rise to more
discussion than this, the most conflicting opinions being held by
practical vignerons.
It is impossible to lay down any hard-and-fast rule for the distance
which vines ought to occupy relatively to each other. The vigneron
must be guided by practical experience and by climatic and
economical considerations.
It was mentioned (p. 10) that plants exhale a considerable amount
of water through their leaves. If the ground contains too much
moisture, close planting, by giving more leaves per acre, enables more
water to be got rid of than would be the case if the vines were
planted far apart. In the warmer districts the reverse is the case,
the amount of moisture is insufficient, and, if recourse cannot be had
to irrigation, the vines will suffer if not planted at such a distance
that each vine has a sufficient store of water at its disposal. This
necessity for planting vines far apart in a warm climate is much


intensified by the great augmentation in the vigour of the plant under
the influence of the increase of light and heat to which it is there sub-
jected. We saw (p. 9) that the less grapes there are on a vine the richer
the must will be in glucose, and consequently the stronger will the wine
be —the vigour of very closely-planted vines being small, the crop on
each vine is lessened, and the resulting wine is stronger than
would otherwise be the case, an advantage in a cool district where
grapes sometimes ripen with difficulty, but a drawback in a hot
climate where under normal conditions the wine is too strong, and the
object of the vigneron is to reduce it as much as possible by natural
means.
In France the number of vines per acre varies very greatly; the
following figures give some idea of the ordinary distances in some of
the leading districts: —
Champagne ... Ift. 3in. x Ift. 3in.
Burgundy ... lft. lOinxlft. lOin.
Beaujolais ... 2ft. 4in. x 2ft. 4in.
Hermitage ... 3ft. 3in. x 3ft. 3in.
Cognac ••• 3ft. 3in. x 4ft. lOin.
Bordeaux ... 3ft. 3in. x 3ft. 6in.
Sauternes • • • 2ft. Bin. x 4ft. 4in. to 2ft. Bin. x 6ft. 6in.
Herault ... 4ft. 6in. x 4ft. Gin. to sft. 3in. x sft. 3in.
It will be seen from this table that the distance between the vines
gradually increases as one goes from the north to the south of
France.
In Australia, where the high price of manual labour makes it
imperative that the vineyard should be so arranged as to substitute
by horse labour wherever possible, the majority of the above distances
would be totally unsuitable. At 3ft. x 3ft. the ground must be worked
by hand, and at 4ft. X 4ft. it can only be worked with difficulty by
horse labour during the summer months, unless the vines be tied
closely to stakes or wires.
It does not do to rush to extremes, and, except in exceptional
cases, such distances a$ 12ft. x 12ft. are not to be recommended, as
the diminution of the yield per acre would not be compensated by
the greater facility with which the soil can be worked. As proof of
this, let us suppose two plots of ground of one acre each, one planted
oft. x oft., which we shall call A, and one planted 10ft. x 10ft,,
which we shall call B. A will contain 1,742 vines per acre, whereas
G


B will only contain 435; if the individual vines bear the same crop
in each block, A will give 400 gallons to B’s 100 gallons ; therefore,
for each block to pay equally well, the cost of cultivation must be
£2 for B if it be £8 for A.
If the individual vines of B bear twice as much as those of A, the
yield would be as follows : —•A 400 gallons and B 200 gallons ; in such
a case B would be the most remunerative block, although a third
one planted at, say, 7ft. X 7ft. would probably give the best
results.
There is for each locality, with the same conditions of soil and
climate, a certain distance, which we may call the optimum, at which
vines will give the best results; if this distance be increased they
will not improve, and if it be diminished they will deteriorate.
Unless this be a distance which cannot conveniently be worked by
horse labour it would evidently be a waste of land to plant wider,
and would entail the cultivation of unnecessary soil. It would be
just as foolish to plant closer than this distance, as it would necessitate
unnecessary pruning, disbudding, tying-up, &c.; that is, if the climate
be such that grapes will ripen satisfactorily in it.
In the first or cool region, the optimum distance is 4£ft. x 4ift. or
sft. x sft., but vines may be planted as far apart as 6ft. x 6ft., on
account of the greater facilities afforded for cultivation. In other
words, the number of vines per acre should be from 1,200 to 2,000.
In the second region it will be found more advantageous to plant
vines farther apart, say 7ft. x 7ft., Bft. x Bft., or Bft. x sft., or from
680 to 1,100 vines per acre.
In the third or warm region they should be planted still farther
apart, 10ft. x 10ft., or about 400 vines per acre, being a very suitable
distance. These distances may be varied to some extent by circum-
stances. Vigorous varieties should be planted farther apart than
weak ones. Vines in rich soils, growing more vigorously than in
poorer ones, must also be planted farther apart.
Arrangement of the Vines.
There are three methods of arranging vines. These are the square,
the quincunx or equilateral triangle, and the rectangular rows.
The square system is so simple as to require no description. The
following table gives the number of ; vines per acre for different '
distances apart:—


Distance apart. Vines per acre.
1 ft. x 1 ft. ... 43,500
ft. x ft. ... 19,360
2 ft. x 2 ft. ... 10,890
2ift. x2£ ft. ... 6,970
3 ft. x 3 ft. ... 4,840
ft. x ft. ... 3,556
4 ft. x 4 ft. ... 2,722
4|ft. x ft. ... 2,151
5 ft. x 5 ft. ... 1,742
ft. x ft. ... 1,440
6 ft. x 6 ft. ... 1,210
6ift. x 6ift. ... 1,031
Distance apart. Vines per acre.
7 ft. x 7 ft. ... 889
ft. x 7ift. ... 774
8 ft. x 8 ft. ... 680
ft. x ft. ... 603
9 ft. x 9 ft. ... 537
ft. x ft. ... 482
10 ft. x 10 ft. ... 435
11 ft. x 11 ft. ... 360
12 ft. x 12 ft. ... 302
13 ft. x 13 ft. ... 257
14 ft. x 14 ft. ... 222
15 ft. x 15 ft. ... 193
In the cool region, with vines planted sft. x sft., there is ample
room to work implements in two perpendicular directions. At 6ft.
x 6ft. they may be worked in four different directions. At distances
stated for the other regions implements may at any time be worked in
four directions.
The quincunx system will be readily understood by reference to
Fig. 10. It presents the advantage of enabling the ground to be
worked in three directions, but is somewhat inconvenient, as the
oblique rows towards the outside of the blocks are all of different
lengths.
FIG. 10.
Each vine is opposite to a space, thus offering facilities for work-
ing, it being possible to move the scarifier to avoid projecting
branches. The vines are so situated that one is always equidistant
G 2


from six others, for which reason it is sometimes termed the septuple
system. The following table gives the number of vines per acre
and distance between the rows for different distances of the vines
trom each other :
Distance Distance Number of
between vines. between rows. vines per acre.
4ft. ... 3ft. sin. ... 3,205
sft. ... 4ft. 4in. .. 2,025
6ft. ... sft. 2in. ... 1,392
7ft. ... 6ft. lin. ... 1,038
Bft. ... 6ft. ll£in. ... 785
9ft. ... 7ft. ... 619
10ft. ... Bft. Bin. ... 505
lift. ... 9ft. 6|in. ... 420
12ft. ... 10ft. 4fin. ... 330
Planting in rectangular rows is to be recommended where vines
are trained on wires; in any other case either of the two former
systems is to be preferred. If the vines be placed at less than
4 feet from each other in the rows it prevents cross cultivation by
horse labour, thus presenting all the drawbacks of the trellis
system without any of its advantages.
In the third region, where vines must not be planted close, it
may be advantageous to plant wider in one direction than another,
even if the vines are to be staked or trained gooseberry-bush
style. For example, 10ft. x 6ft. is more convenient than Bft. x
Bft., as it enables a dray to be driven to any part of the block,
whilst it does not entail any considerable augmentation in the
number of vines per acre. The number of vines per acre for
different distances apart are as follows: —
Vines per
Distances apart. acre.
4ft. x 3ft. ... 3,632
sft. x 3ft. ... 2,904
6ft. x 3ft. ... 2,420
6ft. x 4ft. ... 1,816
6ft. x sft. ... 1,452
7ft. x 4ft. ... 1,556
Bft. x 4ft. ... 1,360
Bft. x sft. ... 1,090
Vines per
Distances apart. acre.
Bft. x 6ft. ... 908
Bft. x 7ft. ... 778
10ft. x 6ft. ... 726
10ft. x 7ft. ... 622
10ft. x Bft. ... 545
10ft. x 9ft. ... 465
10ft. x lift. ... 395
10ft. x 12ft. ... 363


If the vines are to be trellised the wires should run in the direction
in which the vines are closest. This will leave more room for
cultivating, and entail less manual labour per acre than would be
the case if the rows were placed close together.
There are several ways of marking out a vineyard before
planting. If it be intended to plant in squares or rectangular rows
this is a very simple matter. The sides of the blocks should be
marked off at the required intervals with pegs or vine-stakes, and
lines drawn across the block joining these ✓ marks. A chain,
specially made for the purpose, with links of specified length, will
be found very convenient. The chain being stretched across the
block where a row is to be situated, the junction of each link
indicates the position for a vine. If such a chain cannot be
obtained, an ordinary piece of fencing-wire, or a gardener’s line,
may be substituted for it. This should be tightly stretched along
the row. With a piece of wood of the required length for
measure, the position of each vine will be easily ascertained.
Persons having a really first-class ploughman in their employ will
find it more economical to run furrows across the field at the required
distance apart, two vine-stakes, or other easily-distinguished marks,
one considerably behind and in a line with the other, being placed at
the opposite side of the field to the one the plough is started from,
to enable the implement to be guided with precision. The plough-
man must be careful to always keep these in a line. If the ground
be in very good condition the plough may be replaced by a wheel-
barrow, the same precautions being taken in order to obtain straight
lines.
Marking-out land for plantation according to the quincunx system
is slightly more complicated, as the lines cut each other at an angle of
60 degrees. If a theodolite or suitable instrument cannot be ob-
tained, a convenient method is to only mark out every second line.
Referring to Fig. 10, for example, rows 1,3, and 5 would be marked
out and rows 2,4, and 6 inserted afterwards, each vine being inserted
in the rectangle formed by four vines first marked. For example, if
the vines are to be planted 6 feet apart, mark out the block as if for
the rectangular system, the rows being 10ft. 4in. apart and the vines
in these rows 6 feet from each other. By joining them diagonally the
position of each vine in the intermediate rows will easily be obtained.


The direction in which the lines are planted is not of very great
importance if the vines are planted on the square or quincunx sys-
tems. If planted on wires, it deserves consideration.
It is often recommended to direct the rows north and south, one side
receiving the morning and the other the evejiing sun; the fruit is
more likely to ripen evenly. Other considerations, however, may be
be of greater importance than this. If spring frosts are of frequent
occurrence plant east and west, as the vines sheltering one another
from the first rays of the sun will be less liable to sustain injury. If
very strong winds or hail storms are to be feared their direction
should be noted, and the rows directed accordingly.
In steep ground care must be taken not to let the rows follow the
line of greatest slope, especially if the vines are to be trained on
wires, as the rush of water down the furrows in winter would be liable
to carry off considerable quantities of soil.
Provision should also be made for irrigation in localities where
this may prove beneficial.
Extent and disposition of blocks. —A vineyard should be laid out
in blocks separated by roads, which serve as a means of communi-
cation with the pickers at vintage time, for the removal of cuttings,
for the cartage of sulphur, manures, &c., as may be required, and to give
turning room to ploughs, scarifiers, and other implements. The num-
ber and extent of roads must be varied according to circumstances.
The distance apart greatly modifies their distribution. If the vines be
planted 10 feet apart, few of them will be required, there being room for
a dray to pass freely between the rows. In such a case all that is
necessary is a head-land at certain intervals on which implements
may be turned.
Care must be taken to lay the vineyard out in such a way as to
enable the different cultural operations to be executed with as little
turning as possible ; every time a plough or scarifier is turned it entails
a much greater waste of time than might be expected. The blocks
should, therefore, be laid out in such a way that the rows of one
correspond with those of the next one, so that the implements can
work for a clear distance of, say, half-a-mile or so, without stopping
at roads ; if this can be done in two directions, so much the better.
If it be proposed to train part of the vines on wires, let the rows in
this part be so directed as not to interfere with the above conditions.
In more closely-planted vineyards, say anything less than Bft. x Bft.,
the distribution of roads is of far greater importance, and some


definite system should be adopted. Dr. Guyot recommends to divide
the vineyard into blocks, 50 yards wide by 200 yards long ;
the roads, 200 yards apart, being 10 feet wide, whilst the others are
16ft. 3in. in width. Under these conditions 11*5 per cent, of the
whole vineyard would be taken up by roads.
In Victoria it will be preferable to have the main roads wider, say,
25 feet, and the smaller ones not less than 12 feet. If the vines be
staked or trained gooseberry style, they should be divided into 5-acre
blocks, say 5 x 10 chains; if trained on wires, these blocks might,
with advantage, be divided into two by a narrow road running length-
ways. This greatly facilitates work at vintage time, and enables
lighter straining posts to be used for the wire, the expansion and
contraction of which is also less on a short length.
The division of a vineyard into blocks of the same size is to be
recommended ; it greatly facilitates observation and comparisons,
and is a great advantage if part of the vineyard is to be worked by
contract.
The roads should be made deeper than the rest of the vineyard, in
order that they may, to a certain extent, act as drains. If properly
formed, with a water-table on each side, they will be just as firm and
maintain themselves in as good order as if raised above the surface of
the rest of the vineyard, whilst, at the same time, they greatly benefit
it by carrying off the surplus water.
The practice frequently adopted in Europe of cultivating other
plants, such as wheat, asparagus, fruit trees, &c.„ between rows of
vines is strongly to be condemned, especially in a dry climate, where
the vine requires all the moisture there is in the soil, especially when
it is young and not deep-rooted and cannot obtain moisture from the
lower layers of the soil. For similar reasons different sorts ought
not to be mixed together in the same block, but kept separate. Iheir
grapes can easily be blended at vintage time, and the grower will
have the advantage of knowing in what proportion they are blended,
as well as all particulars of yield per acre, &c., of such and such a
sort, details of which he would otherwise be totally ignorant.
The above are the principal points which require attention, and
should be fulfilled by any one going in for viticulture in a thorough
manner. Such conditions as shape of land to be planted or excessive
steepness of portions of it may render it impossible to observe them
in every detail, but nevertheless they should receive attention
wherever practicable.


CHAPTER VIII.
PROPAGATION OF THE VINE.
The vine may be propagated in three ways—
• By seed,
By cuttings,
By layers.
Propagation by Seed
is only resorted to for the production of new varieties, as the vines
grown in this way often differ considerably from the parent stock,
even if the seeds were not the result of hybridisation.
Certain American sorts may be raised in this way if they are intended
to form stocks to graft on. Such are the V. Solonis, some of the wild
varieties of Y. Biparia and V. Bupestris, and some of the other species
which cannot easily be grown from cuttings, although these give more
constant results. The seeds should be only taken from perfectly ripe
grapes, and preferably from the finest berries of the bunch. They
should be steeped in water for a few days, sown in October, and
covered with about an inch or two of rich, loose soil. It takes about
a month for them to appear above ground, and they will not com-
mence to produce fruit till the fourth or fifth year.
Although seeds are the means provided by nature for the repro-
duction of the vine, and plants grown in this way are remarkably
well constituted, it cannot be recommended to the practical vigneron.
Propagation by Cuttings
is the usual, and one may almost say the only, method employed on
a large scale. It is our intention to here consider cuttings and rooted
vines together In the following chapter we shall discuss the relative
advantages of each.
Any fragment of a vine shoot less than twelve months* old, and
comprising one or more buds, may be looked upon as a cutting, and is
capable of producing a new vine.
* It may be of interest to mention that of late years vines have been largely
propagated in France from what are termed herbaceous cuttings; that is, the
green fragments such as are broken off the vine when disbudding. They require
great care on account of the facility with which they dry up, but otherwise
strike easily. According to Fox, the softer the tissue the greater are the facilities
for the emission of roots.


Selection of cuttings. —As a rule, when purchasing cuttings one is
obliged to take what one can get, and hope for the best, but whenever
it can be done they should be selected with the greatest care.
The vine the cuttings are taken from has in many cases a marked
influence on the character of the young vine. In a block planted
exclusively with one variety there will often be differences between
some of the individual vines. These differences bear upon such
qualities as the size of the fruit or prolificacy of the vine, the latter
being the more important. Some vines identical to the others in
every other respect are almost completely sterile, whilst others are
remarkably heavy bearers, and this may be observed on the same vines
year after year. Cuttings taken from such vines would perpetuate
the characteristic of the parent, and be either almost sterile or remark-
ably prolific, as the case may be. During the summer or autumn,
before the cuttings are taken, all vines in the vineyard which are
remarkable for the quantity or quality of their fruit should be care-
fully marked, and cuttings only taken from them. The sorts which
require most care in this direction are the Chasselas, red and white
Hermitage, and Pulsart.
The portion of the vine the cuttings are taken from must also
receive attention. Only such shoots as have borne or have been
capable of bearing fruit should be selected for this purpose. The
wood which fulfils this condition is that which, instead of growing
directly off the old stem, grows off the wood of the previous year.
Shoots growing off the old stem are termed in French “gourmands;”
they, as well as suckers, should never be employed for cuttings; in
certain cases the vines they give rise to are sterile.
The age of the vine the cuttings are taken from is not of any
consequence provided it be older than three years.
There are two sorts of cuttings, viz., ordinary cuttings, which consist
of any part of the shoot; and those which formed the lower end of the
shoot, and have a small piece of two-year-old wood at their base.
These, known in French as “ crossettes,” present the advantage of
enabling the purchaser to see that they fulfil the condition of having
been capable of bearing fruit, and are principally to be recommended
on this account. They also strike more easily, as at the junction with
the older wood there is a ring of buds, which facilitate the emission
of roots. A cutting off any other part of the same shoot would


ultimately produce as good a vine, although, perhaps, less liable to
strike at first.
The piece of old wood at the base of these cuttings should be
removed before planting, as it is incapable of giving rise to roots.
Care should be taken not to injure the above-mentioned ring of buds
when doing so.
Fig. 12.
Fig. 12a represents an ordinary cutting; Fig. 12 b one with a piece
of old wood at its base; and Fig. 12c the same, with the old wood
removed, all but the strip of bark which is in contact with the above-
mentioned buds.
Medium-sized, short-jointed cuttings give far better results than
either very thick ones or thin, slender, and long-jointed ones. The
wood must be well ripened, that is, it should have its regular winter
appearance, and no trace of green at the extremities of the shoots.
It must also be free from diseases of any kind, more especially
anthracnosis or black spot. Cuttings which have been attacked by
oidium, and which have brown or black marks on them in conse-
quence, are not to be recommended as a rule, although if the injuries
are only on the surface of the bark, and do not extend into the green
part or cambium layer, no ill effects may result from their employment.
The length of cuttings has given rise to much discussion. It
may be said, in a general way, that the shorter it is the better will the
resulting vine be, as the more similar will the conditions be to those
of a vine grown in the natural way, which is from seed. In the wild
state the seed would doubtless germinate very near the ground, and
send down roots penetrating the soil in all directions. The portion of
stem of such a vine below ground would be exceedingly short. The
more the cultivated vine resembles the wild one the more favorable


will the circumstances be in which it is growing. As we have
already seen, the complete root-system of the vine consists of tap-
roots and laterals. If either of these develop themselves exclusively
at the expense of the others the vine will not thrive. A long cutting
produces a crown of lateral roots at each knot, and no tap-roots; it
is thus very differently situated from that produced by a short cutting,
which is much more similar to a seedling vine.
Fig. 13 represents the vine resulting from a short cutting, Fig. 14
that resulting from a very long one.
FIG. 13.
FIG. 14.
Although vine roots must penetrate deeply into the soil, their
junction with the stem should be as near the surface as possible.
So great is the advantage of short cuttings over
long ones that it has been recommended by many
authorities to plant what are termed single-eye
cuttings (Fig. 15).
These are sown in drills like seeds, and covered with
an inch or so of soil. They give excellent results, and
FIG. 15.
are of great value for reproducing rare sorts, as every eye will,
under favorable circumstances, give rise to a plant. Some of the
American sorts, which do not as a rule strike easily, are propagated


in this way, being forced under glass. The resulting vines are
excellent, and are, of course, as nearly as possible in the same
conditions as if grown from seed. In spite of these advantages,
the system cannot be recommended in practice, on account of the
great care which must at all times be bestowed on the young plants
in the. way of watering, &c., in order to bring them to a successful
issue.
It is evident from all this that a short cutting gives the best vine,
but in practice it must be of sufficient length to permit it to reach
layers of soil sufficiently moist to enable it to stand through the warm
summer months until its own roots are capable of doing so.
In dry climates, especially if the soil be porous, one will have to go
to a more considerable depth in order to fulfil these conditions than in
a cool district. This may be expressed in the following words—the
drier the climate the longer the cutting must be, and the shorter the
cutting the better will the resulting vine be.
The vigneron must carefully consider these points, and, using his
judgment, fix upon a suitable length of cutting. As a general rule the
following lengths will be found to suit the different regions:—
First region ... ... ... Bin. to lOin.
Second region ... ... ... 12in. to 15in.
Third region ... ... ... 15in. to 18in.
If recourse can be had to irrigation, it is needless to say that the
length of the cutting in the third region may be considerably reduced.
In soils which retain moisture for a considerable time, the length
may also be sensibly reduced.
Preservation of cuttings. —Although the vitality of the vine is very
great, and fragments of shoots which have been exposed to atmos-
pheric influences for a considerable time may grow when planted,
this is by no means to be relied on, and the greatest care should be
taken of cuttings after they have been removed from the vine in order
to protect them from the drying influence of the air. Want of care
in this respect is frequently the cause of failures in young plantations.
The careless way in which cuttings are often sent by rail is strongly
to be condemned. One frequently sees bundles of them lying for days
at a time in an exposed state on railway platforms or in goods sheds,
with the result, often blamed to other causes, that only 20 to 30 per
cent, of them strike when planted. Had they been wrapped in damp
straw before being sent to the railway station, although perhaps


entailing a little more expense, the far greater percentage of strikes
would amply repay the extra cost.
Cuttings must therefore be carefully protected from the desiccating
action of the air and sun from the time of their removal from the vine
until the planting season; the longer this interval is the greater is
the necessity for proper preservation.
Cuttings are preserved in different ways, but none is more efficacious
than burial in soil. They may be buried in a vertical or horizontal
manner. Some persons advise to place them in heaps, with the lower
extremities turned uppermost, and cover them, over with soil; but
this does not seem to give better results than if they were buried in
an upright position. If cuttings have only to be preserved for a few
weeks before planting out the bundles may be partially buried, that is,
the lower extremities stuck in the ground to a depth of 9 inches or so.
Before planting it is well to soak them in water for a day or two.
Stratification of cuttings is the French term for their burial in a
horizontal manner, as indicated (Fig. 16). This is more to be recom-
FIG. 16.
mended than the vertical position, and will in the great majority of
cases give the best results.
The soil in which cuttings are stratified should he loose and, pre-
ferably, sandy. It should be sufficiently moist to prevent loss of
moisture, but not wet, as this would render them liable to become
mouldy or even to rot.
A trench, about 18 inches deep and as wide as the cuttings are
long, should be dug in such a position as to ensure thorough drainage.
The cuttings should then be placed in bundles of 50 each, the earth
replaced over them and well trampled.
The advantages of this system are obvious; it gives the vigneron a
much longer time to plant his cuttings in, and at the same time
causes them to strike far more readily, as the process serves as a


preparation for the emission of roots, which takes place immediately
after they are planted out. Cuttings may with perfect safety be left
for several months in this way, provided the soil contain neither a
deficiency nor an excess of moisture.
Several means of facilitating the emission of roots have been sug-
gested, such as removing narrow strips of the outer bark before
planting; poundin them with a mallet, the bruises and splits thus
caused, although promoting the formation of roots, often act injuri-
ously by facilitating the penetration of too much water, which often
causes the young vine to partially rot. Twisting the lower extremity
has the same effect, and is less injurious. Soaking the cuttings in
running water promotes their striking, but it should not be continued
for too long a time, as it presents serious drawbacks if too prolonged.
Several other methods have been also suggested, but they may be
said to be quite unnecessary for the V. Vinifera or European sorts,
which all strike with ease; they may give good results with some of
the American sorts.
Propagation by Layers.
Layering, although not a general operation for the production of
young vines, may be extremely useful for the propagation of such
sorts as do not strike easily from cuttings. Its principal utility,
however, is for the replacement of one vine by another or the filling
up of a vacant place with as little loss of time as possible.
FIG. 17.
Ordinary layering , as represented! in Fig. 17, is so simple as to
require little description. A trench, varying in depth from Ito 2 feet,
according to the climate,* is opened from the foot of the old vine to
t e place which the new one is to occupy. A shoot of not more
The warmer the climate the deeper should the trench be.


than one year old is brought down and buried in this, the extremity
being turned up so as to leave two buds free above ground.
The underground part emits roots, and is at the same time nourished
by the parent vine until severed from it, usually two years after the
operation was performed ; by this time the roots of the young plant are
sufficiently developed to enable it to dispense with the parent stock.
Although fruit is often obtained the first year, thus saving consider-
able loss of time, vines produced in this way are not well constituted;
the laterals are greatly developed at the expense of the tap-roots,
which are usually absent. We have, in fact,'a vine such as is
illustrated in Fig. 14, only still less desirably constituted, as the main
underground stem, instead of penetrating deeply into the soil, runs
along at a small distance from the surface. In a warm, dry climate
such a vine would be unable to procure the requisite moisture from
the deeper layers of the soil, and might suffer considerably.
In a cold climate, where there is seldom or never any deficiency of
moisture, and where grapes ripen with difficulty, this may be an
advantage, as the weakening of the vine increases the strength of the
wine.
For this reason the practice is common in colder parts of Europe,
such as Burgundy, where vines are “ provigne” as this operation is
termed, every six or seven years, a certain number of vines being
treated each year.
Ordinary layering is also employed to obtain young rooted vines
in some parts of France, but is not to be recommended.
Complete burying of a vine is adopted when it is wished to replace
an old vine by one or more young vines. This process will be readily
FIG . 18.
understood by reference to Fig. 18. It presents the same disadvan-
tages as the previous method, and is only to be recommended in a cool


climate. In Champagne this has becorpe a regular cultural operation;
the totality of the vines of a vineyard are thus buried every year, one
shoot, cut back to three eyes above ground, replacing the vine of the
previous year.
FIG . 19.
Reversed, layering (Fig. 19) gives more vigorous vines than either
of the other methods, the root-system being well constituted and
identical to that of a vine raised from a cutting. Strange though it
may seem, no ill effects result from the turning upside down of the
stem of the young vine which this process entails.
The buds on the long rod should be brushed off when they com-
mence to grow, with the exception of the three or four nearest the
ground. The young vine may be severed from its parent dui’ing the
winter following the operation.
It is unnecessary to insist that the part of the shoot buried in the
ground should be much longer in a warm than in a cold climate,
where 6or 7 inches would suffice. Varieties which only strike with
difficulty may be propagated in this way. The only disadvantage
of reversed layering is to prevent cross cultivation during the summer
months.
Multiple layering is made use of for the propagation of such sorts
as do not grow readily from cuttings. It is doubtful whether it
would pay to have recourse to it on a large scale under ordinary cir-
cumstances, although the plants obtained in this way are excellent in
every respect. Small vine-growers having only an acre or so per year
to plant would derive great benefit by adopting it.


Fig. 20.
A glance at Fig. 20 will enable the process to be readily under-
stood. A small gutter is excavated at the foot of the vine which it
is desired to propagate, and a rod from the vine is pegged down in it.
The layer is covered with about 1 inch of soil, and the gutter is
otherwise left open until the young shoots have attained a length of
8 or 10 inches, when it is carefully filled. In the following
winter it will be found that each shoot has formed a nice bunch of
roots at its base, so that when separated from each other with the
secateur each of the shoots a , b, c, d, e, f, and g constitutes an
excellent young rooted vine, ready to be planted out. In a warm
climate the layer should receive several waterings during the summer.
*****
From what we have seen, it is evident that the most practical and
economical means of propagating the vine is by cuttings, although in
certain cases some of the other methods may deserve consideration.
II


CHAPTER IX.
PLANTING.
The subject of planting brings us face to face with the serious
question: Are cuttings or rooted vines to be preferred ?
This is another of the questions upon which authorities differ —in
point of fact there is much to be said on both sides.
The opinions of the witnesses examined by the Royal Commission
on Vegetable Products, as will be seen in the Abstract appended
hereto, are divided, although the majority admit that cuttings ulti-
mately produce a better vine. This opinion is also shared by some of
the best European authorities; others again consider that the difference
between the vigour of plants grown in either way is insignificant.
Other considerations than the vigour of the resulting vine are of
greater importance in deciding which ought to be used.
In very dry climates or poor soils rooted vines strike more readily
than even very long cuttings, and, as they can for this reason be
made considerably shorter, they ensure the resulting vines having
a better root-system (p. 91). At the same time they present the
disadvantage of being more expensive, whether if purchased as such
or if raised by the vigneron himself in a nursery, as the extra handling
would be rather considerable.
Unless it be possible to irrigate, or the season be exceedingly
favorable for transplanting, the time gained by the employment of
rooted vines is so small as not to constitute a strong argument in their
favour.
As a general rule, we may say that the employment of cuttings will
prove most economical in all cases where they strike with ease (not
less than 70 per cent.). If the number of misses reach 50 per cent,
it will pay better to employ rooted vines.
In this chapter we have to consider —Ist, planting of cuttings in
the vineyard ; 2nd, planting of cuttings in the nursery; 3rd, planting
of rooted vines in the vineyard.


Planting of Cuttings in the Vineyard.
The depth at which cuttings should be planted is determined by
their length. This has already been discussed in the previous chapter
(p. 90). They should be planted at such a depth that two eyes
alone are left above ground ; one only is necessary, but it is
better to have “ two strings to one’s bow,” and if two shoots develop
themselves they will each grow less vigorously than if either existed
alone, and consequently be less liable to be broken by strong winds.
The lower of these eyes should be level with, or half an inch or so
below, the surface of the ground.
The time for planting depends to some extent upon the climate;
the warmer this is the earlier ought vines to be planted.
In the great majority of cases our Victorian vignerons plant their
vines far earlier than is necessary or even beneficial. Cuttings properly
stratified, as directed in the previous chapter, need not be planted o
until the buds are on the point of bursting, as at this moment they
will find the soil in the best condition for the continuation of their
growth. In a warm climate this will, of course, take place sooner
than in a cold one; and if drought is to be feared they should be
planted out as soon as the terminal buds show a tendency to swell.
The commencement of September is the most favorable time for
planting in the third region, whilst the beginning of October would
not be too late in the first. In many parts of France stratified cuttings
are not planted out until the parent vines have already come into
leaf ; it has been observed that the percentage of strikes is increased
by such a course.
Inclination of cuttings . —ln many parts of France it is cus-
tomary to bend portion of the base of the cutting at right angles with
the remainder in the hole in which it is planted, or to plant it
slanting, sometimes so much so that it only makes a very small angle
with the surface.
Except in a very cold climate, where it is desired to weaken the
vine in order to facilitate the ripening of the grapes or where the
roots must be kept near the surface to ensure their receiving sufficient
heat, no advantage is to be derived from such a practice. As we
have already seen, the shorter the cutting the better the resulting
vine. Cuttings are only increased in length in order that the base
may be situated in deep, moist soil. It is evident that the same
h z


cutting placed perpendicularly will reach deeper than one planted
slanting.
For this reason perpendicular planting is to be recommended in
Victoria —at least in all the districts where the vine is cultivated as
yet.
Method of planting. —Cuttings may be planted in several ways, but
the principal ones are with the spade and with the bar.
In loose, friable soils, which are not liable to cake, the bar or dibble
will give very good results.
FIG. 21.
Such a one as represented in Fig. 21 is to be preferred, as the pro-
jecting piece of iron (a) insures all the holes made being of a uniform
depth, and at the same time greatly facilitates the work, the vigneron
being able to use his foot as well as his hands to force it into the soil.
The bar, after being inserted into the ground to the required depth, is
moved to and fro to enlarge the hole. The cutting, which will benefit
by being dipped in a mixture of cowdung, clay, and water, is placed in
the hole into which some soil (mixed with a little manure if it be very
poor) is tightly rammed, the hole should be gradually filled, only small
quantities of soil being introduced at a time, the soil near the surface
should be left in a loose state to a depth of a couple of inches. It is
essential that the contact between the cutting and the soil be as inti-
mate as possible, especially at the base, care should therefore be taken
not to put too much soil into the hole before ramming, but to fill
gradually. A very good method to insure a perfect contact with the


soil at the base of the cutting is to pour into the hole before its in-
sertion about half a pannikinful or so of a mixture of soil, water, and
manure of about the consistency of treacle, the remainder of the soil
is then put in and well rammed.
In stiff soils planting with the bar often gives unsatisfactory results,
as the soil becomes compressed on the sides of the hole and hardens
it to such an extent that the young roots can only spread with diffi-
culty. In such a case the hole should be made with a spade, and the
soil, which will greatly benefit by the addition ,of a little manure,
rammed in tightly with a rammer or with the foot. Should the soil be
very stiff, better results will be obtained by filling the hole around the
young plant with loose soil brought from elsewhere than with the soil
taken out of the hole. If the soil be very sandy, the addition of a
spadeful of good manure to the soil taken out of the hole will greatly
facilitate the strike. When planting, it will be found advantageous to
employ several men, each of whom has his special work to do. The
best vigneron should ram the soil around the cuttings, this being the
operation requiring most attention in order to insure a good strike.
Sometimes two cuttings are planted in each hole in case one does
not strike. If both strike, one should be removed before it has
attained considerable development so as not to allow its removal to
interfere with the roots of the one which is to remain.
In very dry districts only one bud should be left above ground,
which should be covered with a small heap of sand or very loose soil
to protect it from atmospheric influences until the commencement of
vegetation.
Plantation in a Nursery.
If it be intended to plant rooted vines a nursery should be formed.
The site for which must be selected with care ; a loose but not too
sandy a soil is to be preferred for this purpose. If irrigation be
possible so much the better. Above all, the land must be thoroughly
drained. The cuttings to be planted in a nursery may be 2or 3 inches
shorter than would be necessary for those to be planted in the vine-
yard ;in other respects the same rules hold good. The cuttings
should be planted perpendicularly, and rammed as tightly as possible,
especially at their base.
The proper distance apart for cuttings in a nursery is 2ft. Gin. by
6in. or 3ft. by 6in., as it leaves room to cultivate ; they can, however,


be planted as closely as Ift. 6in. by 6in. without prejudice to the
resulting plants.
It is often stated that to make a nursery all that is necessary is
to open a plough furrow, place the cuttings upright in it, and turn the
soil against them with a second furrow. This is by no means to be
recommended, as the second furrow cannot establish a sufficient
contact between the cutting and the soil. In a cool district a certain
proportion may strike, but in the warm region the great majority, if
not the totality, would miss.
To form a nursery properly a trench proportionate in depth to the
length of the cutting should be opened up, preferably with the spade,
although the plough may be employed for this purpose. In this the
cuttings are placed as nearly vertical as possible (Fig. 22), the soil
FIG. 22.
taken out of the trench is then carefully put back in small quantities
at a time, and tightly rammed with the foot, with the exception of
the surface, which should be kept nice and loose, and preferably
heaped up against the cutting, as in Fig. 23.
FIG. 23.
The proper time, &c., for planting cuttings in a nursery is the same
as if they were to be planted in the vineyard.


The length of time vines should remain in the nursery depends
upon the growth they make, as a rule two-year-old vines are the best
in the colder districts, whilst one-year-old ones give excellent results
in the warmer parts on account of the greater development they have
acquired during the time—they are even to be preferred to two-year-
old ones, which might have acquired so considerable a development
that they could not be transplanted without injury to their roots.
Whilst in the nursery the young plants should receive every care;
the soil should be continually kept in a loose,state and free from
weeds. If remaining more than a year in it they should be pruned,
one or two of the best shoots only being left, which are cut back to
one eye each.
Planting Rooted Vines in the Vineyard.
The rooted vines should be extracted from the nursery with care in
order to break as few roots as possible; the broken extremities of
these should be carefully trimmed with a sharp knife, and the shoots
pruned before proceeding fro plant them, which should be done as
soon as possible after their removal from the nursery.
It is of the greatest importance that they should be planted out at
exactly the same depth as they were in the nursery, the underground
part being unsuited for exposure to the air.
A hole should be dug with the spade, into the bottom of which a
little loose surface soil, and if possible a little quantity of manure, is
thrown, the young vine is placed in it, the roots being carefully sepa-
rated from each other, if entangled, and spread out in all directions;
the remainder of the earth is put back by small portions at a time
and pressed with the foot but not rammed tight, as should be done
with the cuttings. Care should be taken to loosen the surface soil
thoroughly before leaving the vine.
Young plants obtained by ordinary layering require the same
treatment as those raised in the nursery. If the result of multiple
layering (p. 96) they require rather more care, as their feeble depth
at which they should be planted renders them very liable to suffer
from drought. In fact this process can only be employed in the first
and second regions (p. 21), or on a limited scale where it is possible
to water them.
A hole is dug into which the greater part of the earth is put back,
after having been thoroughly loosened in such a manner that it will


form a sort of cone, the summit of which is almost level with the
surface of the surrounding soil. On this cone the young plant is
placed, the roots being carefully spread around. The soil, after being
beaten with the spade, is then put back, and heaped up around the
stem of the young plant in such a way as to afford it as much
protection as possible.
Young vines should be staked, whether they be planted as cuttings
or otherwise. This is a great advantage, as it enables them to be tied
up, and thus escape the action of high winds and other causes of
destruction, and insures the stem of the resulting vine being straighter
than would otherwise be the case. The stakes used for this purpose
may be small temporary ones, but it is far better to at once establish
the permanent ones, which must be employed sooner or later.


CHAPTER X.
FORMING THE YOUNG VINE.
The form of the vine, depending, as it does, upon the mode of
pruning adopted, ought perhaps, strictly speaking, to be treated in
the chapter devoted to that subject. The importance of proper
training from the first, however, and the fact that a good many
owners of young vineyards may find it useful to have a few plain
hints as to how to prune their vines for the first two or three years,
or before they have mastered the different methods of pruning adult
vines, has led us to devote this chapter to the purpose. Moreover,
as with the exception of a few methods not to be recommended in
Victoria, all the different forms of vines may be said to require the
same preliminary training in a given climate.
If a vine be not properly formed from the first it is very difficult
to get it into shape afterwards, and it must be borne in mind that the
form exercises no inconsiderable influence upon the facility of culti-
vation as well as on the quality and quantity of the wine.
Vines trained according to any of the systems mentioned in this
work consist of an upright stem or trunk, and an upper part or
crown which may be of very variable form.
Height of vines. —The height of the vine above the ground, or, in
other words, the length of the trunk, is not purely arbitrary, but
should vary according to certain fixed laws.
Vines with low crowns are liable to spring frosts, but, receiving
more reflected light and heat in the summer, the fruit contains more
glucose and yields a stronger wine. The facility with which the
grapes become covered with mud or dust is, however, a disadvantage,
as the soil, which is always alkaline, neutralizing part of the natural
acid of the fruit, causes the fermentation to proceed irregularly and
favours the production of lactic acid, the great enemy of the wine-
maker in the warmer districts, where the grapes are often deficient in
natural acid even under favorable circumstances. It has lately been
suggested that the gout de terroir, or earthy taste, so common in


our wines is caused by a certain amount of soil being present in the
grapes during fermentation.
If the grapes are situated at some distance from the soil they are
no longer exposed to these drawbacks, which are more serious in a
warm than in a cold district, in which one is obliged to keep the
fruit near the ground in order that the wine may not be too weak.
As a general rule the crowns of all the vines in the second, and
especially in the third, regions of the colony are far too low. Were
these higher, heavier crops of wines—lighter, more delicate, and
better in every respect than those made at present —could be produced.
The extra length of stakes or wires this would entail would be amply
compensated by the increased facilities for working given by the
men not having to stoop so much when pruning, disbudding, or
gathering the grapes.
For raisin-growing, the crowns require to be lower than for wine
grapes, as the object of the grower is to increase the proportion of
glucose and lessen that of water as much as possible.
For wine grapes the following heights will give good results :
First region ... ... lft.
Second region ... ... lft. 6in.
Third region ... ... 2ft.
For the production of liqueur wines these heights should be lessened
in the second and third regions.
Forming the stem. —Having decided its length, the next thing is to
form the stem. It is important that this should be thick and strong, so
as to be able to support the vine, especially if it be grown gooseberry-
style, and to allow the sap to circulate freely. It is evident that this
is all the more necessary in the third region, where the vine attains a
larger size than in the first, where its development is not considerable.
We have already seen (p. 4) that the more gradually the stem is
formed the thicker will it be. In the third region, therefore, it must
be brought up to its final height gradually, a small portion being
added year by year until the desired height is reached.
In the first region we have already seen that more eyes may be left
out of the ground than in the second or third ; in fact, it is better to
leave two than one, and even three will not be too many provided
they be close together. When pruning time arrives the vigneron
must use his judgment, and leave a spur, pruned to two or three eyes,
according to the strength of the plant, upon whichever shoot is the


strongest (Fig. 24). The following year, if it be the upper shoot
which was left, the shoots resulting from the development of the
FIG. 24.
two lower buds should be removed, and the upper one cut back to one
or two eyes, according to the vigour of the plant.
Fig. 25 shows the young vine now in its second year. The dotted
lines indicate the mode of pruning. If the plant be very vigorous it
FIG. 25.
FIG. 26.
may be cut in «, otherwise it should be pruned to one eye in b. This
rather close pruning will probably cause some of the buds at the base


of the spur to develop, so that the third year the vigneron will be able
to start forming the crown. The pruning in this case will be readily
understood by reference to Fig. 26. The buds on a are capable of
producing fruit during the ensuing season. The crown is now
formed, and the vigneron will find the rules for subsequent pruning in
another chapter.
In the second and third regions the stem requires to be thicker
than in the first, for which reason no part of the original cutting
should be employed to form it, as this, having lost part of its vigour
through transplanting, is not capable of producing so stout a stem as a
new shoot. If the two eyes left have developed themselves, the upper
one should be entirely removed, as well as the portion of old cutting
between it and the lower one, which is cut back to three eyes. At
the second pruning (Fig. 27) the top shoot A is cut back to three eyes
and the lower two, B and C, removed, as is also the case again at the
third pruning, as will be seen by reference to Figs. 28 and 29, which
FIG. 27.
FIG. 28.
FIG. 29.
represent respectively the third and fourth prunings. At the third
pruning (Fig. 28), the shoots B and C should be removed, and the
shoot A cut back to three eyes in a. At the fourth pruning also
(Fig. 29), the shqots C and B should be removed, and A cut back
to three eyes in D. By this time the vine will produce some grapes;
and at the fifth pruning two spurs, pruned to two eyes each, may be


left, or, in other words, the crown may be formed in the same manner
as was done for the first region. In this manner a good, straight
stem will be obtained, and no more time lost than if the spurs were
formed the second year, besides not presenting the danger of over-
charging the young vine before it is fit to stand it. If by the fourth
pruning the stem has not attained within 4 or 5 inches of what
is to be its total length, it will be well to defer forming the crown till
the fifth pruning, very little time being lost, since the vine is capable
of bearing some six or seven bunches by this time on the shoots
resulting from the development of the three eyes left.
These are the general indications which, as a rule, ought to be
followed with vines of ordinary vigour; but the intelligent vine-
grower must use his judgment, and make the best use of the vigour
of the vine, if this be above the average, or make allowance for it if
below it.


CHAPTER XI.
PRUNING.
The objects of pruning are to increase the yield, to improve the
quality of the wine, to ensure a uniform product by giving the same
development to each vine, and also, by giving them a definite sym-
metrical shape, to facilitate cultivation, and the instruction of the men
who are to work in the vineyard.
r I he fruit of the vine, unlike that of most fruit trees, does not grow
off the old wood, but upon the green shoots of the current year, and
only on those resulting from the development of buds situated on
a shoot of the previous year, which in turn grows off the two-year-
old wood of the vine. Any green shoots which do not fulfil these
conditions will in nearly every case bear no fruit. The wood con-
stituting the spurs or rods left when pruning must be chosen with
care ; that growing off the wood of the previous year, which in turn
grows off the two-year-old wood, is alone of use for this purpose.
FIG. 30.
In Fig. 30 the shoots f g, h, and k fulfil these conditions ; i,
which grows directly off the two-year-old wood, and j, growing


directly off the old stock of the vine, are incapable of giving rise
to fruit-producing shoots for at least two years ; it is therefore
useless to leave them when pruning, unless one or two eyes at their
base be left in order to obtain wood for pruning on in a future
season.
All the buds on a shoot will not give rise to equally prolific shoots ;
wiiilst some would give three bunches each, others might only give
one, and others again might prove absolutely sterile. It is important
to know what is the position of these prolific buds, as it is evidently
useless to leave those which will not produce fruit.
This position of the prolific buds varies with the kind of vine.
With some they are at the base of the shoot, with others at a certain
distance from the base, and with others again all the buds of a shoot
capable of bearing fruit are equally prolific.
Fig. 31 represents a vine of the second type. It will be seen that
the shoots a and b have no fruit, whilst c, d, and e have two bunches
each.
On a vine of the first type the reverse would be the case, a and b
having fruit on them, whilst c, d, and e are sterile or almost so.
FIG. 31.
This leads us to the question of long or short pruning, these being
the two great classes into which all the different methods are divided.
A vine is pruned short when the shoots of the year which are left
to bear fruit or wood are cut back to two or three eyes each.


A vine is pruned long if one or more of these shoots are left, each
of which has on it more than five buds.
It would be most foolish to short prune a vine having its prolific
buds situated as represented in Fig. 31, as little or no fruit would be
obtained. It would be just as foolish to long prune, or leave a long
rod on a sort where the buds at the base were alone prolific. The
others bearing no fruit would only develop themselves at the expense
of the prolific ones, and thus be worse than useless.
With a vine of the third description (one on which all the buds are
prolific) it is a matter of indifference which method of pruning be
adopted, provided a sufficient number of buds is left on each vine.
This is in turn regulated to a great extent by the climate.
Many erroneous ideas are held with reference to long pruning.
From what has been said above, it will be seen that its adoption is
chiefly regulated by the sorts of vine grown. In addition to this there
are other considerations—such as the strength of the wine—which
ought to influence the selection of the style to be adopted when one
has to deal with sorts suited to either long or short pruning.
Before describing the different methods of pruning, it will be well
to briefly recapitulate the laws which govern this most important
operation, some of which we are already familiar with.
First. Within certain limits, the production of fruit is increased if
the vigour of the plant be diminished (page 2).
Second. The activity of vegetation on any branch is always greatest
on the part of that branch farthest from the parent stem (page 4).
Third. The activity of vegetation is greatest in a vertical shoot;
the production of fruit greatest in a horizontal one.
Fourth. The greater the number of shoots the lesser will the
individual development of each be, and the greater the number of
shoots the lesser the production of fruit on each, and vice versa (up to
a certain limit).
Fifth. The greater the quantity of fruit on a vine the smaller the
percentage of sugar will it contain.
Before pruning, a point must be mentioned which does not
receive sufficient attention at the hands of our vignerons : this is


to always cut. a shoot through the bud above the highest one
which it is intended to grow, as in Fig. 32, where the dotted line
indicates where it should be cut. The
FIG. 32.
natural partition is here taken advan-
tage of to prevent the accumulation of
water, &c., which might rot and split the
shoot, and injure the bud below. As it
may be rather difficult to cut exactly
through this division, it is better to make
the cut slightly above'it and obliquely,
so as to destroy the bud which it is not
intended to keep.
The vigneron having mastered these
preliminary principles, we will proceed to
describe the different methods of pruning.
Short Spur Pruning.
This system, being the simplest, is the one which must be considered
first.
Vines pruned according to this method consist of a stem or trunk,
and a crown composed of a variable number of short spurs radiating
from the centre. These spurs consist of shoots of the year cut back
to two or three eyes each. Care must be taken to leave the new
spur in such a manner as to guard as much as possible against the
excessive elongation of the arm which bears it.
FIG. 33.
Fig. o 3 represents in detail, before and after pruning, an arm and
spur of a vine pruned according to this style. If either of the other
shoots were made use of to form the new spur, it would entail the
leaving of a fragment of two-year-old wood of appreciable length, and
i


if this was continued year after year the arm would become so long
as to seriously interfere with cultivation. Pruned as in Fig. 33, the
length of two-year-old wood left is reduced to a minimum.
Several arms, each pruned in this way, are left every year, so that
a complete vine will be as in Fig. 34. The same vine after pruning
is represented in Fig. 35. The shoot b, growing off the old wood, has
FIG. 34.
FIG. 35.
not been entirely removed, but cut back \o one eye. Although
incapable of giving rise to fruit-bearing shoots, it will give a shoot
which can be employed to form a new spur at the ensuing pruning,
when the old arm (extending beyond it) which has become too long


may be removed. In other words, the eye at bis left to provide for
the replacement of an arm, which, through old age or faulty pruning,
had become unduly elongated.
A properly pruned vine (pruned according to this system) should
present spurs which radiate upwards and outwards, so that the young
shoots springing from them do not get tangled and twisted together”.
The number of these spurs to be left upon a vine depends upon the
climate; if the climate be cold, three or four will be ample, whilst
if it be warm it will be better to leave a considerable number—say,
eight or nine.
.This is as much on account of the extra size of the vine under the
influence of the increase in light and heat as to regulate to some
extent the strength of the wine. The greater the development and
number of bunches on each vine the lighter will this be, as we have
several times had occasion to see.
This method applies equally well to vines trained to stakes or
gooseberry style ; but should never be adopted for vines trained on
wires, as no advantage is to be gained, whilst all the disadvantages
of the wire will present themselves.
All vines which were said to require short pruning in Chapter IV.
should be pruned according to this system. Those which will give
good results with short or long pruning may also be pruned in this
Avay in the cool parts of the first region. Those which were said to
require long pruning should never be pruned in this way, although
giving good results with either method.
The Muscats should be short pruned, and if grown for the production
of raisins should, in addition to this, have their crowns near the
ground, so as to enable large berries, with as high a percentage of
glucose as possible, to be obtained.
Rod-Pruning,
Or, in other and general terms, long pruning, consists in leaving on
the vine at pruning time one or more rods or leaders of wood of the
current year having more than six buds or eyes on it. The shoot
that has served during the previous year is removed and a new one
brought down in its place, so that each leader only lasts a season.
Great care should be exercised in the choice of the leader. It is
unnecessary to say that it should fulfil the conditions illustrated in
Fig. 30 (page 110), as unless capable of bearing fruit it would be
absolutely useless.
i 2


Care must also be taken to make provision for a new leader for the
ensuing pruning. Except great care be exercised in the green
pruning, as we shall see hereafter, none of the shoots growing off the
rod or leader of the previous year are eligible for the ensuing one.
FIG. 36.
Fig. 36 illustrates this clearly. The leader left here had eight
buds on it. Of these the first two, a and b, have not developed
themselves; c and d have only grown slightly, the shoots result-
ing being too small to constitute a new leader. It would be
necessary to go as far as / before obtaining a shoot of sufficient
length and strength to form a new leader. If this were done, it is
obvious that in a very few years the elongation of the arm of
the vine bearing the leader would become so considerable as to
seriously interfere with other operations. In order to obviate this
difficulty a short spur is left at the base, which, by the development
of the two eyes left on it, gives rise to the two shoots, c and d ;
the one resulting from the development of the lower one ( D , Fig. 36)
is cut back to two eyes, in B, and forms a new spur termed the wood
spur, although also capable of bearing fruit. The shoot resulting from
the upper bud (C, Fig. 36) forms the new rod, commonly termed the
fruit rod. The old rod and fragment of two-year-old wood are re-
moved by the cut marked A (Fig. 36), the two shoots resulting from
the development of the buds on D (Fig. 36) will in turn provide for a
new wood spur and fruit rod for the year succeeding their develop-
ment, the rod formed by C being removed.
This is the main point to master in the rod system of pruning. If pro-
perly carried into effect, the elongation of the arm bearing the leader
will not be more rapid than with the ordinary short spur system.


When choosing the rod a shoot of medium vigour should be pre-
ferred to a very thick long-jointed one, as it is likely to bear more
fruit.
The simplest form of rod-pruning is that recommended by Guyot ,
which consists in leaving only one wood spur and fruit-rod on
each vine. Figs. 37 and 38 represent a vine pruned according to
this method respectively before and after pruning.
FIG. 37.
FIG. 38.
It will be observed that the crown of such a vine is rather near the
surface of the soil; Dr. Guyot, living, as he did, in a cool district,
was led to recommend such a course.
In Australia it will be found preferable to effect some slight modifi-
cations in this method, such as substituting wires for the large and
small stake attached to each vine, and considerably raising the crown
FIG. 39
of the vine. In the second region of the colony it will be best to
leave two leaders on each vine, as is represented in Figs. 39 and 40,


which respectively show the vine before and after pruning. It is as
well to leave a spare short spur or two on a vine pruned in this way.
FIG. 40.
Should any accident happen to the arm bearing the leader, it may then
be replaced without loss of time.
If the vines be staked, it is still possible to prune them long; the
leader is then brought round the crown of the vine, and tied either to
one of the other arms or to the main stem of the vine. (Fig. 41.)
FIG. 41.
This presents the advantage of enabling cultivation to be carried out
in several directions, each vine not occupying a much greater space
than would be necessary for an ordinary short pruned vine. It is not
necessary to explain that the leader should be selected in the same
way as for the former system.
This method, consisting of spurs and rod, may be termed the
mixed system of pruning—it gives excellent results with such
sorts as the Shiraz ( Tied Hermitage ), Tokay , Pinot , and several


others, which are suited for either long or short pruning, as stated in
Chapter IV.
In warm climates with rich soils, where very large yields are to be
expected, a more considerable development may be advantageously
given to each vine, as is represented in Figs. 42 and 43, representing
respectively the vine before and after pruning. It will be readily
FIG . 42.
FIG . 43.
seen that this system consists of two permanent branches, from
which protrude a variable number of arms, each constituted accord-
ing to Guyot's method. The temporary leaders may be inclined


upwards at an angle of about 45 , and tied to a second wire (the top
one being reserved for the young shoots as they come out), or bent
round and tied to the main branch of the vine. In forming such a
vine care must be taken not to establish it too rapidly, but to only
add, say, one arm bearing fruit-rod and spur each year until it
has attained its full size ; in this way a vigorous long-lived vine may
be obtained with a stout stem, which will be capable of yielding
enormous crops for a considerable number of years.
These are the principal systems of training vines. There are many
others—chiefly variations of these—which, although interesting, are
not of sufficient practical importance to deserve a detailed description
in an elementary work.
Once the above methods are thoroughly mastered, all other methods
will be easily learned. Amongst the most important are the
Chaintres System, consisting of a rather ramified stem bearing
spurs and fruit-rods, which are propped on small forks driven
into the ground. When it is desired to cultivate, the whole vine
is thrown bodily over into the next row, the forks withdrawn,
and the ground tilled; the forks are then replaced, and the vine
thrown back upon them. The same thing is done to the next row,
and so on till the block is cultivated. Although this system gives
very heavy crops of light wine, and the shelter of the leaves, which
entirely cover the ground, keeps the latter cool in a dry district, it is
very doubtful if the system would give good results in Australia, on
account of the extra labour rendered necessary.
Another system is training the vines on overhead trellises —this is
very suitable for such sorts as the Zante Currant and others requiring
great extension. It is established on the same lines as the other
systems, and only requires notice “en passant .” The overhead part
should be sufficiently high to enable a horse to pass underneath with
the plough. Other systems, such as training vines on living or dead
trees, are not practical, and therefore not to be recommended, especially
the former.
Time for Pruning. —Vines must never be pruned before the wood
of the year is ripe—that is when it has lost its green herbaceous
appearance, and assumed its ordinary brown or grey winter state;
once this has occurred, it is safe to prune. This change is marked by
the cessation of bleeding or flowing of sap when a shoot is cut. It


varies with the season and the sort of vine, and should be fixed
accordingly. In a general way the middle of May is not too early to
commence pruning, especially for early sorts, such as Pinots, Chas-
selas, &c.
In certain cases it may be an advantage to prune very late. If
spring frosts are to be feared, by pruning the early sorts only when
the buds are beginning to swell, their coming into leaf will be delayed
for as much as a fortnight, a sufficient time in most cases to enable
them to escape injury from this cause.
Again, late pruning is an excellent preventative of the non-setting
of the grapes, to which some sorts are liable. The copious bleeding
thus produced counteracts in a great measure the excess of sap in the
vine, which we saw (p. 12) was in the majority of cases the cause of
the abortion of a large number of flowers. It is well on this account to
prune such sorts as are liable to set their fruit badly very late; these
are chiefly the Cabernet, Malbeck, Riesling, as well as some others.
Instruments for Pruning. —ln olden days the vine was pruned with
a sort of hooked knife, termed a “ serpette such an instrument was
slow as well as dangerous, and has been replaced by the secateur, or
pruning scissors, which is too well known to require description. A
small garden-saw will also be found convenient for removing any old
arms, &c., which cannot conveniently be cut with the secateur.


CHAPTER XII.
SUMMER PRUNING.
Under this heading we will consider all the different operations
which have to be executed on the vine itself, from the time it begins
to bud in the spring till vintage time. These comprise ordinary
operations, such as disbudding, topping, and tying up, which are
practised in most, if not all, of our Victorian vineyards, and some others
which might with advantage be executed in special cases, if the
augmentation in the crop due to them were sufficient to justify the
employment of the extra labour necessary for their execution. Such
operations as nipping off the tops of the young shoots, or making an
annular incision round them, with the view of preventing the non-
setting of the flowers, or stripping off the leaves to afford greater
facilities for the ripening of the fruit, come under the latter heading.
Disbudding , as the name implies, consists in removing all unneces-
sary buds as soon as they have burst out into leaf. All shoots having
no fruit on them, and which are not necessary to provide wood for the
ensuing pruning, should be removed when they are from four to six
inches long, or as soon as it can be ascertained with certainty that
they bear no fruit, as at this time they can be removed with ease. If
they have attained a considerable size before removal, this would
entail a waste of energy to the plant, which ought to be avoided. It
is also difficult to break them off without wounding to some extent
the wood of the vine on which they grow. Sometimes two shoots
grow out of the same bud. If this be a bud which was intended to
produce a shoot to be utilized at the next dry pruning the weaker
one of the two should be removed, otherwise they may both be left,
that is, if both show fruit.
When disbudding, it is important to make provision for replacing
arms which, by continual or faulty pruning, have become too long.
With this object a few shoots (one or two) ought to be left at the
base of such an arm, which may be cut back to one eye at pruning
time, as has already been explained (p. 114).


The importance of disbudding varies with the climate and the kind
of vine grown. As a rule, the colder the climate the greater the
necessity for this operation. If we examine what is done in Europe
we will find that, in the cold districts of Canton de Yaud (Switzerland),
Burgundy, and Champagne, it is always carefully executed, whilst in
many of the warm parts of Southern France (corresponding to our
third and the warmer parts of our second region), it is entirely
neglected even in well-managed vineyards. The question of the
proper ripening of the fruit governs this operation. In a cold climate
the extra shade is a drawback; in a warm one it is an advantage.
Certain sorts require disbudding far more than others. Those
which send out shoots from all parts of the vine should be submitted
to this treatment under any circumstances, whilst such sorts as only
send out a limited number of shoots where no buds were left need
only be disbudded in a cool climate. The Pinots (Burgundy), Gamay,
Gopais, and many others, belong to the first type, and ought always
to be disbudded, whilst such sorts as Shiraz (Red Hermitage),
Chasselas, Tokay, &c., do not require so much care in this direction.
Certain conditions may modify the above directions. If strong
winds are to be feared early in the season, it will be better not to
disbud until the dangerous time has passed. If the winds occur later,
it is better to leave the disbudding till the vines are fit to be tied up.
As disbudding weakens the vine it is a good preventative of the
non-setting of the flowers, and ought to be rigorously carried out in
districts where this is to be feared.
Topping consists in cutting or breaking off* the shoots of the vine
from time to time, in order to enable air to circulate freely among the
vines, and to render summer cultivation possible. Although applied
to vines trained in all manner of ways, those trained gooseberry-buslx
style are topped more than the others, as, having no support, they are
more liable to spread in all directions, so as to hinder summer
cultivation.
The operation is very simple, and consists in trimming the vine to
the required size with a sickle or large knife. A broken scythe-blade,
about twelve or fifteen inches in length, fitted to a handle, is very
suitable for this purpose.
As is the case for disbudding, only in a far greater degree, topping
is of more importance in a cold than in a warm climate. In the


former all that is possible should be done to promote the ripening of
the grapes, whilst in the latter they easily get over-ripe.
In the warmer parts of Victoria vines are extensively trained goose-
berry style, and topped in an excessive manner, the idea of the vine-
growers being that, by removing the extremities of the shoots, they
strengthen the vine. No more fatal error could be made. As we saw
(p. 11), the greater part of the solid substance of the vine is derived
from the air by the green leaves; it stands to reason that by continually
removing the fresh leaves the plant must eventually suffer consider-
able injury. Although vines topped even to a considerable extent
may for the first year give excellent results, both as regards quantity
and quality, they will gradually lose their vigour, and after a few
years appear to be completely exhausted. The following passage
from Dr. Guyot’s work, “ Culture de la Vigne et Vinification,” amply
proves this. He says :—“ If one tops all the shoots of a vine evenly,
without allowing any to extend as a long shoot, all the bunches
succeed well, and the crop is abundant the first year, if the number
of branches does not exceed that which the vine ought to bear; the
second year the bunches are scarcer, looser, and smaller ; the third
year the vine has lost some of its vigour, and its buds are almost
sterile. It remains in this state the following years, and only
resumes its fertility when, by ceasing to top, it is allowed to renovate
itself. The more vigourous the vine which is topped the more
rapidly will it become sterile. It has occurred to me to see under
these conditions the second buds develop with energy, and carry
away the bunches in an exaggerated vegetation, in spite of a second
topping executed on them ; this topping which, when practised
partially and only on one or two special branches of the vine, opposes
itself to all non-setting of the fruit, becomes sometimes a cause
of non-setting if applied to the entire vine, but in every case absolute
and repeated topping becomes a cause of sterilization and final
decline.”
Dr. Guyot recommends topping to be only executed on the fruit
branch left according to his system of pruning (Fig. 38 p. 117), the two
shoots growing off the wood spur being tied to a stake, and allowed
to fully develop themselves.
This would be impossible on vines trained gooseberry-bush style,
for which reason the system is not to be recommended in the warm


districts of the colony. The poor yield of our vineyards, compared to
that obtained in Southern France, is probably due to the excessive
topping practised, especially in the warmer parts.
I have observed many cases in which blocks of vines trained
gooseberry style, which had almost ceased to be productive, and only
produced miserable shoots scarcely worth leaving at pruning time,
resumed their vigour and bore good crops when staked and the
shoots allowed to grow.
In the south of France many vineyards are simply pruned in winter,
and neither disbudded, topped, nor tied up to stakes or wires, but
allowed to grow wild, so to speak, with the result that enormous
crops of good wine are obtained from them. The shoots and leaves
spreading in all directions protect the fruit from the burning rays of
the sun, and at the same time shelter the soil and keep it cool, thereby
hindering the excessive evaporation of moisture. In addition to
these advantages, by forming a sort of network, the vines protect
each other from the effects of high winds. The evidence given by
witnesses before the Royal Commission on Vegetable Products also
tends to prove this.
If the excessive growth of weeds is to be feared, it will be better to
train the vines on' stakes or wires, as this will render cultivation
possible at any time.
In spite of these manifest disadvantages, the gooseberry system has
something to recommend it, as it renders economy, both of labour and
stakes, possible, so that in poorer soils, where the vines grow with
medium vigour, it may be tolerated. Not more than one topping in a
season should be given, and the shoots should be cut at least four
leaves above the last bunch. Unless this is done there will not be
enough leaves left upon the plant to provide for the necessary accumu-
lation of reserve materials in the buds for the ensuing year after the
elaboration of the crop of grapes. If care be observed in these points,
the diminution in crop may be so small as to be compensated for by
the greater facilities of cultivation, &c. It would be well to allow a
portion of the vineyard to grow wild every year —say one-fifth —so
that in five years the whole vineyard will have had time to completely
regenerate itself. This reminds one of the precept in the Bible,
Exodus xxiii. 10, 11, wherein it is ordained to cultivate the vineyard
and olive ground for six years, and leave it alone the seventh.


Tying up must be had recourse to in all cases where the vines are
not trained gooseberry style or let to grow wild; it necessitates the
employment of some support to tie the vine to, which may consist of
either wire or stakes. The suitability of either of these is decided,
as we saw in the preceding chapter, by the mode of pruning
adopted ; the only method admitting of either sort of support being
employed is that illustrated in Fig. 41, where it will be readily under-
stood that, if the vines are staked, the rod or leader must be brought
round and tied down to the crown, whilst if trained on Avire it may be
tied along it.
With this mode of pruning, it becomes a question of expense which
method of training be adopted. The absolute cost of either depends
upon a variety of circumstances, such as proximity to good timber,
facilities for carting, wire, &c., &c. The relative cost, however, is
more easily stated, and depends chiefly upon the distance apart at
which the vines are planted. Under ordinary circumstances, with
vines planted at 5 feet x 5 feet, stakes will cost almost twice as much
as wire; at 7 feet x 7 feet, the expense will be almost the same in
each case ; whilst at 10 feet x 10 feet, wire will cost considerably more
than stakes. The cost of cultivation with stakes is naturally less than
would be the case with the wire. With the former this can be
executed entirely by horse labour in two perpendicular directions,
whilst with the latter there will always be a narrow band of soil
between the toavs, which must be cultivated by hand labour.
Whether tied to stakes or wire, the tying should be done as early
as possible, so as to give the leaves time to grow in all directions and
completely protect the berries from the sun. In Avarm climates great
damage is done by postponing the tying until the fruit is of the size
of large shot; the sudden exposure to the sun’s rays causes them to be
scorched, and thus injures both the quality and quantity of the crop.
Vines should be tied up, especially in a warm climate, as soon as the
flowering is over and the fruit properly set.
The material used for tying vines is not of great importance, the
cheapest being the best. In districts where rushes are to be found
growing on river flats they will be very useful, and may be cut, dried,
and stacked away during the slack time after the vintage. The men
may be employed to cut and trim them on wet days during the winter
when no other work can be done. Before employing rushes to tie up


vines they should be soaked in water for a day or two, in order to
render them soft and pliable, as in the dry state they are very brittle,
and snap off easily. If no rushes can be obtained, a good substitute
will be found in rye-straw; an acre or so of rye, according to the size
of the vineyard, may be sown for the purpose. New Zealand flax
(Phormium Tenax) will also be found useful. A knife, with four
or five blades about one-third of an inch apart, will enable a leaf to be
cut into a large number of strips with ease.
After the vines are tied, the shoots will probably continue to grow
—the extremities above the stakes may be cut off, although this should
not be done too often. Good strong stakes should be employed, pre-
ferably made of split timber, not less than 2 inches square, and of
sufficient height to allow a considerable amount of growth above the
crown of the vine ; if this be 2 feet above the surface, the stakes
should not be less than 4ft. Gin. above the ground, which will
necessitate their being oft. 6in. to 6 feet in length. Yine-stakes
of Stringybark, messmate, or box timber of the above dimensions,
tarred or charred at the lower extremity before being driven into the
soil, ought to last in good condition for fourteen or sixteen years.
In France it is customary to draw and stack the stakes during the
winter, but of course expense of labour renders such a course
impracticable in Australia. Tying to wire is practically the same as
tying to stakes, and needs no detailed description; the shoots are tied
together in two or more small bundles, and not tied separately.
Nipping off the terminal bud of a shoot—or Pincement, as it is
termed in French —resembles ordinary topping in many respects, but
differs from it chiefly in being executed before the flowering ; it is
executed in many parts of France upon the fruit-bearing shoots as a
preventative of the non-setting of the blossom. It is also had recourse
FIG. 44.
to as a supplement to the system of pruning employed in the Bordeaux
district, which will be readily understood by reference to Fig. 44.


This is similar to the mode of pruning illustrated in Figs. 39, 40,
but differs from it in there being no short or wood spur left at the
base of the long or fruit rod ; the shoots resulting from the develop-
ment of a and/ 1 will provide fresh fruit rods for the ensuing year. As
we saw (p. 116), under ordinary circumstances these buds would not
develop themselves ; only those in c, d, e, h, and i would produce
shoots fit to form leaders. By carefully nipping these before flowering
time their growth is slightly checked, and the buds a and f which
would otherwise have remained latent, are caused to give rise to two
shoots which will constitute leaders for the next year. This system
gives good results in France, but the difficulty of executing this
nipping at a proper time and manner on a large scale in a country
where skilled vignerons are scarce renders it unsuitable for Australia.
The nipping of fruit shoots on vines trained on wire in the ordinary
way might with advantage be practised on sorts which are liable to
set badly at flowering time, a week or so before this important function
takes place, should the benefit derived from it justify the extra
expense it would entail.
I.
Annular Incision. —Although this cannot be recommended as one
of the ordinary vineyard operations, it deserves mention, and might in
certain cases be employed with advantage. Its object is to prevent
the non-setting of the flowers, and it consists in removing a ring of
bark, as narrow as possible, from the base of a fruit-bearing shoot, just
before flowering ; or in removing a similar ring of bark before the end
of - the winter from near the base of the leader which is to bear the
fruit-grow r ing shoots. It seems to act, like most other operations
which tend to diminish the non-setting, by weakening the vine, and
should not be too extensively practised. It presents the disadvantage
of rendering shoots thus treated very liable to break off under the
influence of wind.
Although the operation may be performed with a small pruning-
knife, special instruments are manufactured for the purpose, with
which it is possible to treat many vines in a short time. On the
whole, although good results have resulted from this operation, it is
not employed anywhere on a large scale.
Stripping the leaves of the vine before vintage time, so as to
facilitate the ripening of the grapes, is never necessary in either the
second or third regions of the colony ; in the cooler parts of the first


it may, in exceptional cases, be employed with advantage. The leaves
should only be removed a few days before the complete maturity of
the fruit, otherwise it will be very liable to be hardened and burnt by
the sun. Foex recommends to only tear off the limb or flat part of
the leaf, leaving the petiole or leaf stalk in its place, in order to allow
the fruit to profit by the materials contained in it, as well as to pre-
vent wounding the shoot bearing the fruit, which may be required for
pruning. In no case in Australia would it be beneficial to remove
more than one-half or two-thirds of the leaves on a vjne.


CHAPTER XIII.
CULTIVATION.
The surface of a vineyard must be kept in a thoroughly loose
condition ; we have already seen that the ground must be properly
loosened to a considerable depth before planting ; it must also be
kept in a loose state as much as possible, and no agent is more
powerful in this direction than thorough cultivation of the surface.
If the surface be kept loose, the lower layers will not settle down to
the same extent as would otherwise be the case. In addition to this,
cultivation is necessary in order to destroy the weeds, which grow
with great ease in most vineyards* with detrimental influence to the
vines near them.
The different cultural operations which should be performed in
a vineyard may be grouped as summer and winter cultivations.
The winter cultivation is the most important, and has for its primary
object the proper aeration of the soil. This acts beneficially in
a variety of ways, but chiefly in rendering many mineral substances
more soluble, and therefore more readily assimilable than would
otherwise be the case; this cultivation should preferably be executed
with the plough, as by turning the soil upside down greater facilities
are afforded for its thorough aeration.
The depth of this ploughing should not be too considerable, as it
would be liable to injure the tender absorbent rootlets of the vine;
as these do not, and should not, come so near the surface in a dry as
in a moist climate, it follows that the winter cultivation should be
deeper in the former than in the latter case. In a general way
it should vary between 4 and 6 inches —4 inches in a cold, and 6 inches
in a warm dry district. The best means of executing this ploughing
varies according to circumstances. If excessive moisture during the
winter is to be feared, the ground should be gathered up to the vines
on each side, so as to leave a furrow down the centre of the row by
which the surface water may run off. If too much moisture is not to
be feared, this will not be necessary, and the soil may be ploughed in


whatever way is most convenient. In many parts of France it
is customary to gather the soil in the centre of the rows towards the
latter part of the winter, the band of soil left along the row betwee
the vines being drawn into the centre with hoes or other hand imple
ments. This baring of the stems of the vines exposes larvse o
insects to the action of frost, &c.,and enables all suckers or weeds
be remoyed with ease. As it must be done by hand labour, it is no
to be recommended in Australia, more especially as the advantages t
be derived from it would not be likely to repay the extra cost.
is to enlarge upon the different rules to be observe
m ploughing, such as only moving the soil when in a fit condition
and not when wet and liable to form into lumps. These points ar
well known to practical farmers, and as for those who are as ye
inexperienced, they will obtain better, information from a practica
ploughman on the subject than could be expressed in many pages o:
a books
As far as implements are concerned, much the same thing may be
said. In stiff soils ploughs with a long mould-board, capable of com-
pletely turning the sod, will be found to give the best results, whilst
in loose or sandy soils short mould-boards may be used with advantage
It is unnecessary to say that wherever possible two or preferably
three furrow ploughs should be employed.
Summer Cultivation . —The object of summer cultivation is two-
fold. First, to keep the vines clear of weeds; and second, by keeping
the surface in a thoroughly loose condition, to insure the retention of
a sufficient amount of moisture in the soil during the dry weather.
The effect of a loose surface in checking evaporation is enormous.
If the surface becomes compact and hard, it in reality consists of an
innumerable number of small interstices, communicating with each
other so as to form fine channels, which acting by capillary attrac-
tion, like the wick of a lamp, draw the moisture up from the lower
layers of soil, and allow it to freely evaporate into the air. Surface
cultivation breaks up these fine continuous channels, and checks the
loss of moisture. Mulching or covering with sand or gravel acts in a
similar manner. It is a well-known fact that soil under a small heap
of straw is always cool and moist. Mulching with straw has many
disadvantages ; amongst others it presents a harbour for a host of
noxious insects and interferes with ploughing, which, as we have
K 2


seen, is necessary for the aeration of the soil. It is, therefore, best to
mulch with soil, or in other words, to thoroughly cultivate the surface,
unless in the case mentioned in the previous chapter, where the vines
are allowed to grow wild during the summer, and where the large
number of leaves protecting the surface of the soil and keeping it
cool prevent excessive evaporation.
In all other cases thorough cultivation must be resorted to. Moie
especially is this the case if vines be irrigated. As with other plants,
a thorough surface cultivation must follow every application of water,
without which no good results can follow from it.
The summer cultivations should always be executed with scarifiers,
grubbers, or cultivators, of which there are an immense variety of
types, some more suitable than others for certain descriptions of soils.
It is unnecessary for us here to describe any of these implements;
those which break the ground most thoroughly and leave it in the
finest state of division are the best. As the summer cultivations
only require to be superficial —not exceeding 3 inches or so in depth
the implements should be chosen accordingly.
The first of these cultivations should take place early in the spring,
before the buds begin to burst, and should level all the ridges caused
by the Avinter ploughing. If the vines are not trellised, but planted
either on the square or quincunx system more than 5 feet apart, a
very simple way of levelling will be to run a light single-furrow
plough without a wheel at right angles (or at 60° if it be the quincunx
system) to the direction of the winter ploughing; this furroAV, in the
centre of the row, will allow the wheel and front tooth of the scarifier
to pass evenly along, whilst the other teeth tear and level the soil
completely in all directions.
If the vines are trained on wires, it will be advisable to level the soil
to some extent with a couple of furrows in each row, run in whichever
direction may be required before proceeding to employ the scarifiei.
Of course the band of soil along the wires must be broken up by hand
labour, either with spade or hoe, the latter being preferable. The
number of summer cultivations necessary is very variable, and, as a
rule, is regulated to a great extent by the growth of weeds; the
amount of cultivation required to keep these down is usually more
than would be absolutely necessary for the maintenance of the sur-
face in a proper state. Persons who are so fortunate as not to be


troubled with weeds will find it greatly to their advantage to give
two or three good scarifyings during the course of the summer.
Cultivation may he proceeded with at any time when the soil is in
a fit state, except when late frosts are to be feared, or at flowering
time. The stirring of the soil reducing the temperature of the air, is
liable to be attended with unfavorable results at these times.


CHAPTER XIV.
GRAFTING.
Although grafting is an operation which, it might seem, ought not
to be required on a properly laid-out young vineyard, yet this hand-
book would be incomplete without a brief chapter devoted to the
subject, more especially as it may often be found very useful to graft
a few vines of a vineyard.
It is naturally better that the most suitable sorts should be planted
in the first place, so that it will subsequently prove unnecessary to
change them, but this is not always an easy matter, especially in a
new district where the vine has not been cultivated before, and where,
under the peculiar circumstances of the locality, one sort may prove
so far superior to the others as to render it advantageous to replace
them either completely or partially by it. Grafting enables this to
be done without the loss of three or four years’ crop, which rooting
out and replanting would necessarily entail.
Another case in which grafting is employed must also be mentioned,
but it is to be hoped that we may never be obliged to have recourse
to it on this account. This is the rafting of European sorts on
phylloxera-resistant American stocks. The American vines, although
phylloxera resistant, with very few exceptions produce wine of totally
different character to the different “cepctges” of the V. Vimfera
(European sorts). By grafting the latter upon the former we have a
solution to the difficulty, which has already enabled European vine-
growers to reconstitute to a great extent the millions of acres which
were destroyed by the pest.
In addition to these cases,, grafting often has a truly beneficial
effect in making a vine bear more regularly and in diminishing the
non-setting of the fruit, chiefly because the joint, presenting a certain
opposition to the flow of the sap, Aveakens the vine to some extent in
the same manner as late pruning, the annular incision, &c., which, as


we have already seen, are means of combating the non-setting of the
fruit.
I, myself, have had practical experience of some vines of Cabernet-
Sauvignon grafted on Miller’s Burgundy (Pinot Meunier ) stocks,
which set their fruit far better than similar vines growing on their own
roots. Some authors go so far as to say that Cabernet grafted on
Cabernet, or any sort on a stock of the same sort as itself, will bear
better than growing on its own roots.
It has been found that the Malbec, which, as we Have already seen,
is very liable to set its fruit badly, gives far better crops when
grafted on some American sorts, especially the Solonis (a variety of
V. Riparia).
The above are examples in which grafting is attended with bene-
ficial results, but this is not always the case. If the stock and scion
do not suit each other the results may be disastrous. As an example,
a case may be mentioned which came under my notice of some Shiraz
(Red Hermitage) grafted, through a mistake of the vigneron, upon
some vines of Pinot Blanc. Although the grafts took perfectly, the
resulting vines were absolutely sterile, and never had a single bunch
upon them, even ten years after the execution of the operation, besides
which they did not ripen their wood till two months later than the
other vines of the vineyard, the extremities of the shoots sometimes
remaining herbaceous throughout the whole winter. Some Chasselas
grafted on similar stocks in the same block were very successful, bore
large crops of grapes, and ripened their wood thoroughly every year.
A general rule often given by practical vignerons is to graft red sorts
upon red, and white upon white. It will be observed that the case
mentioned above was a departure from this rule.
The enumeration of the different American stocks suitable for
grafting with such-and-such a European sort would lead us too far.
It will suffice to say that the scion and stock should as much as
possible be growers of similar vigour, a weak grafted on an extremely
vigorous one, or vice versa, being most liable to give unsatisfactory
results.
The different methods of grafting vines are extremely numerous
and varied. Want of space renders it impossible for us to describe
tl em all; we shall limit ourselves to two methods which are applicable
in different cases. Whatever be the method of grafting adopted, it is


absolutely indispensable that the cambium, or generative, layer, situated
between the bark and the wood of both scion and stock, should
coincide in at least one point; the greater the length through which
this contact takes place the better. If this condition be not properly
fulfilled the graft will not take.
First. Ordinary cleft graft, applicable when the diameters of stock
and scion are different.
Second. English cleft graft, which can only be employed when the
stock and scion are of the same diameter, as would be the case when
grafting young-rooted American vines with European scions.
Ordinary cleft graft. —This is the most common and simplest
method of grafting, and is so well known as to descrip-
tion. Reference to Fig. 45 will enable the process to be readily
FIG. 45.
understood. Tlie stock is cut off horizontally, and in as clean a
manner as possible, 4 inches* or so below the surface, with a small
saw. A clean cleft is made with a chisel or pruning knife, which
should preferably not extend right across the diameter of the stem.
The sides are cut clean with a sharp knife, and a small slip of wood
may be removed in order to allow the scion to be properly placed
with ease, and the cleft is kept open with a wedge made for the
purpose. The scion, consisting of a well-ripened shoot of the year,
* If a y. Vinifera is to be grafted on an American stock in a phylloxera-
infested district the stock should be cut off as near the surface as possible, so as
to prevent the scion forming roots of its own later on, which would expose it to
suffer from the attacks of the insect.


cut to three eyes, should be cut at its base, as illustrated in Fig. 46;
that is, wedge-shaped, with the inner side narrower than the outer
FIG. 46.
one. It is inserted into the cleft, care being taken that the
cambium layers coincide, and the wedge carefully withdrawn;
the stock will then hold the scion tightly, and all that will be
necessary will be to surround it with grafting wax or clay.
Should the cleft have been made too deep, or the stock be
rather weak, this will have to be tied, so as to insure the
scion being held firmly in its place. The" operation properly
accomplished, the soil which was removed should be replaced
and preferably heaped up round the scion, as represented in
Fig. 45.
In order to insure contact between the cambium layers
of the stock and scion it is recommended to slightly incline
the latter, so that there may be a certainty of their cutting
each other, and thus being in contact in two points, one on
each side of the cleft.
It is evident that this system of grafting may also be made use
of if stock and scion are both of the same size. In such a case the
cleft should be made right across the stock, and the scion cut to a
wedge of the same thickness on each side, but, as a rule, the
English cleft or splice graft will give more satisfactory results in
such a case.
Ihis method of grafting will be understood by reference to Fig. 47.
FIG. 47.
Both stock and scion are cut obliquely at the same angle, and a
longitudinal slit is made very slightly above the centre of the
first section, so that with a slight pressure one can be made
to slide into the other, as represented in Fig. 47. The stock
and scion should be carefully fitted together, so as to render
the binding of the joint with string or other substance
unnecessary. In order that this should be the case both
stock and scion must be cut in exactly similar manner, so
that when put together no spaces where there is not contact
between the two may be found.
This is the mode of grafting most extensively employed
for grafting European sorts on phylloxera-proof American
stocks. It gives excellent results. The cambium layers of
stock and scion meeting in several places, a thorough joint


is made, which only weakens the resulting vine to an insignificant
extent.
In France whole nurseries of cuttings are sometimes planted out
already grafted, the cuttings striking and the graft taking simul-
taneously. Although a convenient process —as it may be executed
during wet weather in a shed or other sheltered place—on an average
only about 25 per cent, of these grafted cuttings strike; and, even
to obtain these, great care must be taken, frequent waterings and
weeding being necessary.
The best time for grafting is in early spring, just when the sap has
started to rise with vigour and the first leaves have come out. This
time varies according to the climate, but, as a rule, may be said to be
about the month of October. In the drier parts of the colony it will
be well to graft somewhat earlier, to avoid the desiccation of the scion,
which might otherwise ensue. In the cooler parts it will be better to
postpone the operation for a couple of weeks, to avoid the risk of
decay through excessive moisture.
As a rule, it is best to graft a late on an early variety, as the rise
of sap of the former causes the union between the two to effect itself
before any leaves have made their appearance. The vessels of the
stem are given time to prepare themselves for the supply of the sap
rendered necessary by the transpiration of the leaves.
As this is not always possible, and it may even be necessary to
graft an early on a late sort, it is advisable to stratify the cuttings
intended to be used as scions in the same way as ordinary cuttings
until the time for grafting has arrived.
It will be superfluous to insist that scions should always be chosen
with as much, if not more, care than ordinary cuttings. The same
rules are to be observed in the selection of each.
During the summer following the operation care should be taken
to remove any suckers growing from the stock, or, if grafting on
phylloxera-resistant stocks, any roots growing from the base of the
scion.
The value oj different stocks is a subject upon which much has
been said, and opinions vary greatly. The following extract from
the “ Cour Complet de Viticulture,” the valuable work of Foex, the
director of the Agricultural College of Montpellier (France), will
throw some light upon the question. He says:—“ All the American


‘ cepages are not of the same value as regards the chances of their
successful grafting. The one of which the greatest number of
grafts take is the Yialla ; next to it come York Madeira, Jacquez,
and Taylor ; then Yitis Rupestris, and the wild Y. Riparias. The
latter, after being planted out for two years, are refractory to graft.
Lastly, the Solonis, which is the most difficult of those usually
employed. The question of the accommodation of different stocks
to different ‘ cepages ’ used to graft on them is as yet very imperfectly
known, and only seems to be of slight interest from a practical
point of view. The majority of stocks employed so far seem to
unite equally well with the different types grafted upon them, and to
nourish them equally well. Some people believe to have observed
that the Aramon succeeds particularly well on the Clinton, and the
Bouschet Hybrids upon the Jacquez.”


APPENDIX A.
Abstract of Evidence taken by the Royal Commission on Vegetable
Products, giving the opinions of the witnesses upon some debatable
points relating to Viticulture.
IRRIGATION OF VINEYARDS.
In Favour of Irrigation.
The Hon. Peter Laurence Van der Byl, Cape Colony.
279. Irrigation does not interfere with the quality of the wine,
whilst crops of 2,000 gallons per acre are obtained with its aid.
Adolf W. Fox, Emu Creek.
2958. Irrigation would double the yield in the Bendigo district,
and improve the quality. Would gladly give £2 per acre for irriga-
tion.
Wm. Graham, Rutherglen.
6928. Would gladly irrigate if water was available. It would
improve the quality, as natural rainfall is sometimes deficient.
Henry Petersen, Emu Creek.
2939. Irrigation would enable much land to be devoted to viti-
culture which is now lying idle.
G. S. Smith, Waligunyah.
7447. Intends to try irrigation on his vineyard.
Not in Favour of Irrigation.
Angelo G. D. Bernacchi, Maria Island.
10097. Irrigation is practised in some Italian vineyards, but is not
to be recommended. The yield is largely increased, but the quality
deteriorated, even if the water is only applied in winter.
Jas. Bladier.
3020. Emphatically condemns irrigation of vineyards. Says no
vines are irrigated in France. Mentions case of Irenchman at
Waligunyah who irrigated vines, but lost most of the crop through
o'idium and black spot.


Alfred Busse, Barnawatha.
6473. Does not believe in irrigation for vines.
Robert Turner, Rutherglen.
7109. Does not irrigate his vines, but irrigates other crops.
SUBSOILING OR TRENCHING.
In Favour of Subsoiling.
Hubert de Castella, St. Huberts, Lillydale.
4276. The land ought to be subsoiled before being planted. If
it be very loose, a simple ploughing may give good results, but it is
better to subsoil. The subsoil must not be brought to the surface.
G. B. Federli.
10418. Considers that soil should be deeply worked, but subsoil
left where it is.
Hugh, Fraser, Brown's Plains.
6811. Subsoiled his land before planting.
Wrn. Graham, Rutherglen.
6853. Subsoils the land with two ploughs, the second one only
loosening the subsoil without turning it over. If the subsoil be
brought to the surface the vines do not come to maturity so soon.
The soil is made cold, and cuttings are more liable to miss.
C. H. Morris, Brown’s Plains.
6750. Brought the subsoil to the surface when planting Ins
vineyard, but is of opinion that it is better to simply stir it, leaving
it where it is.
Thos. A. Rattray , Talibilk.
7538. Subsoils the land with two ploughs following each other,
but does not bring the subsoil to the surface.
In Favour of Trenching.
Alfred Biisse, Barnawatha.
6452. Trenches the land from 18 to 20 inches with a trench
Hon. Peter Laurence Van der Byl, Cape Colony.
329. Trenches the ground by hand to a depth of 2 feet if the soil
be poor; if it be rich, simply ploughs it.
Robert Caughey, Gooramadda.
7300. Believes in bringing the subsoil to the surface ; it keeps
the vineyard cleaner for the time, and vines do better.


F. G. Docker, Bontlierambo.
8617. Hand-trenched one portion of the vineyard and plough-
trenched the other.
J. P. H. Gherig, Barnawatha.
6539. Prefers hand-trenching, but it does not pay. Two ploughs
do very well ; bringing the subsoil to the top is the best, although in
some sorts of soil it might make the ground sour.
Hans Larsen, Gannawarra.
5260. Necessity for trenching through clay till sandy subsoil is
reached.
J. H. Smith, North Barnawatha.
6654. Trenches to depth of 15 to 18 inches, bringing subsoil to
the top with a specially made double-furrow plough.
Robert Turner, Rutherglen.
7084. Plough-trenches the ground intended for vines.
The following witnesses consider both subsoiling and trenching
unnecessary :
D. G. Hamilton, Rutherglen.
7411. Is of opinion that a simple ploughing 7 or 8 inches deep is
sufficient preparation. His soil is a clayey loam with ironstone
pebbles.
Thos. Hardy, South Australia.
17. Of late has abandoned trenching, finding it to be unnecessary;
simply ploughs to depth of 6 inches. The soil is of a loose character.
G. S. Smith, Wahgunyah.
7482. Simply ploughed the ground to a depth of 10 inches. The
soil is sandy.
DISTANCE APART OF VINES.
The following distances apart were recommended :
Alfred Biesse, Barnawatha.
6455. 7 x 7.
Hon. P. L. Van der Byl, Cape Colony.
340. 4 x 4, 5 x 5, or 6 x 6.
Hubert de Castella, St. Huberts, Lillydale.
4336. On the Yarra, 5 x 5; on the Murray, BxB.
Alex. Caughey, Gooramadda.
7296. On wires, 10 x 4; where staked, BxB.


F. G. Docker, Bontherambo.
8614. Has vines at 6 x 6, but prefers BxB.
Rickard Dods, Marong.
2689. 9 x 9.
G. B. Federli.
10421. 8 x 8 or 10 x 10.
Hugh Fraser, Brown’s Plains.
6820. 7 x 7, but 8 x 8 is preferable.
J. P. H. Gherig, Barnawatha. '
6550. Not less than 8 x 8, 10 x 10 is preferable.
Wm. Graham, Rutherglen.
6857. Planted formerly at 8 x 8, but prefers 10 x 10.
Thos Hardy , South Australia.
66. 12 x 20 for currants, 8 x 10 for wine grapes.
L. Levin, Rutherglen.
7182. BxB.
C. H. Morris, Brown’s Plains.
6759. Prefers 8 x 8 to 10 x 10.
T. A. Rattray, Tahbilk.
7538. 4x 4 too close. The proper distance is 10 xBor 10 x 10.
Camille Beau, Wahgunyali.
7235. Planted at 5 x 5, but prefers 8 x 8 or 10 x 10.
J. H. Smith, North Barnawatha.
6652. Plants 10 x 5, and roots out every other one later on, so
as to make it 10 x 10.
Robert Turner, Rutherglen.
7155. 10 x 10.
G. S. Smith, Wahgunyali.
7494. 8 x 8.
CUTTINGS OR ROOTED VINES.
In Favour of Cuttings.
Alfred Biisse, Barnawatha.
6459. Prefers cuttings, as once they strike they grow quicker
than the rooted vine, which has to form new roots after transplanting.
Hon. P. L. Van der Byl, Cape Colony.
336. Plant cuttings in preference to rooted vines.


R. Caughey, Gooramadda.
7341. In a favorable season prefers cuttings, but rooted vines
are less liable to miss.
J. P. H. Gherig, Barnawatha.
6562. Prefers cuttings to rooted vines if circumstances are
favorable, as they overtake the rooted vines the second year.
Wm. Graham , Rutherglen.
6869. Prefers cuttings, as in a fair season they are just as good
as rooted vines.
D. G. Hamilton, Rutherglen.
7412. Decidedly approves of cuttings in planting a large vineyard,
Camille Reau, Wahgunyah.
7235. Plant 5 x 10 with cuttings; root out every second vine
later on, which can be employed to fill up misses.
In Favour of Rooted Vines.
Hubert de Castella, St. Huberts, Lilly dale.
4282. Thinks one-year-old rooted vines are the best, as they are
more certain to grow. Has seen three-year-old rooted vines produce
as good vines as those planted as cuttings.
Thos. Hardy , South Australia.
20. Always plants rooted vines.
G. W. Knight, Bendigo.
9380. Rooted vines are to be preferred to cuttings, as they are
far more certain to grow, especially in the northern districts.
C. H. Morris, Brown’s Plains.
6765. Thinks cuttings better than rooted vines, but recommends
the latter and employs them himself.
Thos. A. Rattray, Tahbilk.
7538. Certainly prefers rooted vines to cuttings, as they save a
year.
G. S. Smith., Wahgunyah.
; 7488. Has employed both systems ; the rooted vines are a cer-
tainty.
J. 11. Smith, Barnawatha.
6659. Prefers rooted vines ; not that there is any advantage after
the plant has grown, but they are safer to take in the first go off.


APPENDIX B.
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE CENTRAL VINE-
GROWERS’ ASSOCIATION, MELBOURNE.
[May, 1891.]
ame - Address.
Adams, Henry Deep Lead, Wimmera.
AUan, B. ... Yates’ Seed Farm, Otahuhu, Auckland.
Anderson, E. W. N. ... ... Trymple, Mildura.
Angas, J. H. ... ... ... Currie-street, Adelaide, S.A.
Angus and Robertson ... ... 110 Market-street, Sydney, NSW
Arapiles Shire Council ... ... President.
Barlow, John B. ... ... Retreat Vineyard, Barnawartha.
Barlow, W. A Vigneron, 109 Pitt-street, Sydney.
Battallani, Jos. ... ... ... Carmanual Creek, Dunolly.
Battersby, D. ... ... ... Dargalong.
Bavay, A. de ... ... ... Victoria Brewery, E. Melbourne.
Bennett, J. ... ... ... Dookie.
Bernacchi, A. G. D. ... ... Maria Island, Tasmania.
Blayney, Thos. ... ... ... Nagambie.
Borelli, J. B. ... ... ... Panton Hill.
Borwick, G E. ... ... ... Mount Carannya Vineyard, Dookie.
Borwick, W. H.... ... ... Dookie.
Bowness, E. 217 Heidelberg-road, Clifton Hill.
Boys, Wallace R. ... ... Swan Hill.
Bradbury, S. ... ... ... London, care of McLean Bros, and Rigg.
Bradshaw, Ihos. ... ... Bamawm, Rochester.
Bragato, Romeo ... ... Board of Viticulture.
Brenzing, Ernest ... ... Nagambie.
Bristow, G. B. N. ... ... Vineyard Co., Stawell.
Bruhn, Albert ... ... ... Emu Vineyard, Emu Creek,
Brunning, William ... ... Somerville, Hastings.
Buchanan, Hon. J. ... ... Berwick.
Buckland, Henry ... ... Moe.
Buckley, Allan R. ... ... Rutherglen.
Burrough, G. C. ... ... Mildura.
Biisse, F., and Sons ... ... Burrabunnia, Barnawartha.
Busst, C. J. ... ... ... Huntly.
Campbell, John ... ... Rutherglen.
Carotin, J. P. ... ... ... Sandhurst.
Castella, Frangois de ... ... Board of Viticulture.
Cassuben Bros. ... ... ... Deep Lead, Wimmera
Caughey, A. Mount Prior Vineyard, Gooramadda.
Christians, Wm. ... ... Lake Rowan.
Clarke, Hen. ... ... ... Lunatic Asylum, Ararat.
Clennett, W. P. ... ... Port Esperance, Tasmania.
Clifford, M. 11. ... ... ... 45 Queen-street.
Cook, G. J. ... ... ... Savings Bank. Melbourne
Cook, W. F. ... ... ... The Grange, Narre Warren.
Cook, James ... ... ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Cook, Sami. ... ... ... Axe Creek, Axedale.
Cooper, James ... ... ... Upper Black Dog Creek, Chiltern.
L


Name. Address.
Cormack, A. ... ... ... Gannawarra.
Cottnan, H. ... ... ... Collingwood.
Craike, Thos. ... ... ... Bowmont, Sandhurst.
Crellin Bros. ... ... ... Hallam’s-road Station.
Cruikshank, Geo. ... ... Witchipool, Donald.
Curtain, John ... ... ... Dookie.
Daccommun, Emile ... ... Nagambie.
Dali, Jas. ... ... ... P. 0., Sydney.
Darveniza, T. ... ... ... Excelsior Vineyard, Mooroopna.
Davenport, Sir Samuel ... ... Beaumont, Adelaide.
Davidson, Wm. ... ... ... Moorondah, Hawthorn.
Delmenico, Giovanni ... ... Terrappee, Boort.
Dick, Dr. ... ... ... Wodonga.
Docker, F. G. ... ... ... Bontherambo, Wangaratta.
Doig, J. G. ... ... ... Bobinawarrah.
Duerkop, Henry ... ... Care of Mr. T. Wilson, Chiltern.
Dugay, Theodore ... ... Rutherglen.
Duncan, Thos. ... ... ... Tubbo, Narandera, N.S.W.
Dunn, F. ... ... ... 306 Flinders-lane.
Eglie, Fred ... ... ... Tabilk, Nagambie.
Elms, Wm. ... ... ... Moyarra, South Gippsland.
Elston, W. ... ... ... Kangaroo Flat, Sandhurst.
Evans, J. ... ... ... Buckley-street, Essendon.
Everist, J. ... ... ... Yarrawonga.
Fitzgerald, R. ... ... ... 3 Catherine-street, Richmond.
Fegely, C. de ... ... ... 472 Little Collins-street west.
Fenton, J. P. ... ... ... Elcho Estate, Lara.
Formby, R. ... ... ... Surveyor, Mildura.
Fraser, Hugh ... ... ... Olive Hills, Brown’s Plains.
Frey, H. J. ... ... ... Tintaldra.
Frowd, Isaac ... ... ... Tongala, Echuca, Kyabram.
Fyfe, Wm. ... ... ... Bald Hill, St. Arnaud.
Gardiner, G. ... ... ... Cashel.
Giovanoni, D. ... ... ... Spring Creek, Hepburn.
Graham Bros. ... ... ... Netherby Vineyard, Rutherglen.
Grant, James ... ... ... Craig Elachie, Elmhurst.
Grant, A. N Hillston, N.S.W.
Grant, T. H. ... ... ... Pakenham.
Grenville, H. K. ' ... ... Mirboo, Gippsland.
Grosse, Frederick ... ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye, and 6 Collins-
street west.
Guppy, Walter ... ... ... Benalla.
Gues-Willer ... ... ... Care of Mr. Dugay, Rutherglen.
Haehnell, C. W. ... ... Krambruk, Apollo Bay.
Hague, J. T. ... ... ... Angastown, S.A.
Haig, Thos. ... ... ... Beechworth.
Hamilton, D. G. ... ... Rutherglen.
Hardy, Thos. ... ... ... Bankside, Adelaide.
Harrold Bros. ... ... ... Adelaide.
Heape, S. E. ... ... ... Koimburra, Cosgrove.
Henderson, T. S. ... ... Ry. 1 >ept., Wellington, N.Z.
Howell and Green ... ■ ... Bathhurst, N.S.W.
Hutton, M. C. G. ... ... Cooring Yering, Lilydale.
Irvine, Hans W. H. ... ... Great Western
Jeavons, Joseph ... ... Wycbeproof, Teddy waddy.
Johns, John ... ... ... Katandra, via Rockville P. 0.,
Johnson, H ... ... Stony Creek, Rockhampton, Queensland.
Johnson, Thos. ... ... ... Naringal, Allansford.
Jones, W. ... ... ... Mooroopna.


T - ii , , Name> Address.
King-street, Sandhurst.
Ke v’ r P n Kedan street, St. Kilda.
King,' Hy l" "* ~ Mont P ellier -
Lamerock, Jas. ... ... ... Cosgrove.
Lang, W. H. ... ... ... Netherby.
Lawrence, A, & Co 527 Collins-street.
Echuca.
Levin, L. ... ... Rutherglen.
::: ::: sas-"**-™**
Long, W. J. ... ... ... Victoria Hotel, Elmore '
••
Magennis, W. J. P. 0., Yabba.
Maginms, Jas. ... Dookie.
Mann F, T A p Arcade, Sandhurst.
£r’ E A v ~ -• pssssssss^' W - A -
Matthew^ av." ::: ::: 41
MellisTi I: Primrose Garden, Korongyale.
M«ney’ St*" ~ “ BaliaratW Guildford,
MnrHs a'f * Mooney’s Gap, Ararat.
®°“ Z. -
Mueller, John “* Tabilk ' h ‘
M^ e t a o n sh, S ias 0n ... ::: ;;; Ws Plains, Rutherglen.
McNaughton,’ John ”! BiiwooT^™’ 8^6 *’ S ' Melbourne -
Nolan, James ... ... ... R u thp r «rlpn
Nunn a A L*' H ‘ H Rockville:House, 50 N. Terrace, Adelaide,
O Dea Mmhae! Rutherglen.
v, *** *” ••• Rutherglen.
niSn D ’A HU / h - Surveyor, Mildura.
Usborn, A. F. ... ... ... Cowra n« w
Osmand, Hon. W. H. S Doctor’s Creek, Stawell West.
Parker' Josenh Imandra-street, East St. Kilda.
raraer, Joseph ... ... ... Castlemaine West.
PedriniV. ’ ‘ " Yandnd Male ' street » Middle Brighton.
Penfold, Dr. O. ... ."i Sandhurst.
Petersen, H. ... ... ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Pooley, Humphrey Barnawartha.
Power, R. D. ... ... ... Qrbost.
Poxon' Levi W j Mill-street Hanover-square, London.
.roxon, nevi ... ... ... Lake Marmal, via Barakee
Prentice Jas Emu Vineyard. Rutherglen
Pritchard, J. A. ... ... Gwar-y-Castel, Alma-road, St. Kilda.
RatclifEe, David... ... ... Kyabram, Rodney.
Reade, C. ... ... ... High-street, Sandhurst.
S eeV A e ’„ lb ? mas ••• Rutherglen.
Rendell, W. ... ... ... Longfield, Yielima.
Reveree, Alex. ... ... ... Dark Forest, Waterfall Illawarra NR w
Ridout, J. E Goorambat East. Wa rra, N.S.W,
L 2


Name. Address.
Ridout, Robert, jun. ... ... Goorambat Vineyard, Benalla.
Rigby W. C. ... ... ... 74 King William-street, Adelaide.
Ritchie, P. B*. Alphington.
Roberts, John ... ... ... Fairburn Grange, Cashel.
Ross G. H. D. ... ... ... Wethersdane Park, Hallam’s-road.
Rough. J. C. ... ... ••• Elive, Gourlay-street, Balaclava.
Rubie, Jacob ... ... ... View Point Vineyard, Michelston, Tabilk.
Ruedin, A. ... ... ••• Huntly Vineyard, Huntly.
Ryley, F. ... ... ... Wangaratta.
Schuhkraft, G. F Doncaster.
Seal P ... ••• ... ... Mildura.
Shaw, F. K Goornong.
Shields, W. ... ... ... Ethandune, Yielima.
Shillinglaw, John J. ... ... Panton Hill.
Shillinglaw, Esmond B. ... ... Panton Hill.
Shillinglaw, J. Crawford ... Panton Hill.
Shillinglaw, F. Flinders ... ... Panton Hill.
Sim J. ... ••• - Cosgrove.
Simon, A. C. ... ... ... Green Bank, Bacchus Marsh.
Smith,Daniel ” Eversley.
Smith, G. S., & Sons All Saints’, Wahgunyah.
Smith, Edwin Rutherglen.
Smith, Elderson... ... ... 410 Brunswick-street, Fitzroy.
Smith’S., & Son ... ... Yalumba Vineyard, Angaston, 5.A. %
Snart, Robt Gooramadda.
Stevens, John ... ... ... Mutual Store, Melbourne.
Streckfuss, H. ... ... ... Goornong.
Stuckey, S. J Millicent S.A.
Stuttard, W. ... ... ... 4 Prmce’s-park Terrace, Royal-park.
Sutherland, John Tyrrel-park, Wycheproof.
Swindale, Henry Runnymede, Elmore.
Tarrant, S. ... ... ... Rosedale Orchard, Clunes.
Tenner, James ... ... ... Wodonga.
Tenner P. A. ... ... ... Wodonga.
Thompson, H. E Cent Arpent, Hay, N.S.W.
Thompson, J. L. ... ... Dookie.
Thompson, G. W. ... ... 16 North-street, Richmond.
Tomlinson, H. J. ... ... 60 Simpson-street, E. Melbourne.
Traill, J. C. ... ... ••• Enfleld-street, St. Kilda.
Treloar, W. G. ... ••• Watervale, S.A.
Tribolet, Abraham ... ... Excelsior Vineyard, Corop.
Tully S. S. ... ... ••• Wickliffe-road.
Tyler, E. E. ... ... Tubbo, Narandera, N.S.W.
Van Staveren, J. C. ... ... Nathalia.
Veitch, Christopher ... ... Casterton.
Walker, Francis ... ... St. Ives, Karabeal.
Walker, Thos. ... ... ... Seaton, Gippsland.
Warnecke, C. H. Bromley.
Watkin J. F. ... ... ... Beaufort-road, Beaulort.
Wattie, Wm. ... ... ... State School 2565, Leeor.
Webber J., & Son ... ... Mercer-street, Geelong.
Webster, Graham Greensborough
Welham John ... ... ••• 28 Duke-street, Ballarat W.
Wplls h’ G ... ... Cheltenham.
Wendell* C H !!. ... ••• Colbinabbin, Elmore.
Whitehead, J. R Barnawartha
Wickham Bros. .. ... ... Bullington Vineyard, Wodonga.
Willis, James ... ... ... South Wangaratta.
Wills Thos. ... ... ... Whiteway, Moonambel.
Wilson Dr. C. M. ... ... Moyarra, South Gippsland.
Wyndham E. ... ... ... Bukkulla, Inverell, N.S.W.


APPENDIX C.
LIST OF THE VINE-GROWERS OF VICTORIA.
[May, 1891.]
(Corrections are specially requested, addressed to the Secretary of the Board.)
Name. Acres. Address.
Abbott, David ... \ ... Sandringham.
Abbott, J. ... ... 4 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Abel, Wm. ... ... 3 ... Painswick, Goldsborough.
Abell, W. ... ... 2 ... Inkerman, Dunolly.
Ackerman, Walter ... 4 ... Lockwood.
Adami,'Peter ... 4 ... Jamieson-street, Daylesford.
Adams, Henry ... 4 ... Deep Lead, Wimmera.
Adams, John ... 10 ... Mooroopna.
Adams, J. S. ... 6 ... Alphington.
Adams, P. ... ... 7 ... Wodonga.
Adams, Robt. H. ... 3 ... Dromana.
Adams, W. A. ... 30 ... Mountain Creek, Moonambel.
Ah Chung ... ... \ ... Day’s Creek, Omeo.
Ah Dan ... ... 4 ... Dimboola.
Ah Fee ... ... 4 ... Dimboola.
Ah Huey, Joney ... 15 ... Benalla.
Ah Loy ... ... 7 .... Moliagul.
Ah Shea ... ... 4 ... Moliagul.
Ah Wong ... ... 2 ... Myers’ Flat, Eaglehawk.
Alderson, Thos. ... 7 ... Bet Bet.
Alexander, J. ... 5 ... Toolamba, Tatura.
Allin, Edwin.,. ... 4 ... Bray-street, Long Gully.
Amor, J. ... ... 5 ... McCoy’s Bridge, Mooroopna.
Anders, Herman ... 3 ... Roseberry, Warracknabeal.
Anderson, John ... \ ... Point Nepean-road.
Anker, W. ... ... I ... Wandin Yallock, Lilydale.
Ansaldo, Emanuel ... 3 ... Newtown, Beechworth.
Ansell, Edwin ... 2 ... Havelock-road, Beechworth.
Anson, Wm.... •... 3 ... Coleraine.
Archer, W. S. ... i ... Mooroopna.
Armstrong, Alfred ... 24 ... Marna Vale, Eltham.
Arnold, Jas. ... ... ... Mercer-street, Geelong.
Arnot, E. ... ... 4 ... Bluff-road, South Brighton.
Ashley, William ... 10 ... Mandurang.
Audley, H. ... ... 10 ... Rutherglen.
Augustina, A. ... 1 ... Bet Bet.
Aumall, Capal ... 1 ... Doncaster.
Aumann, August ... 34 ... Doncaster.
Babbage, J. P. ... 4 ... Sailor’s Gully, Eaglehawk.
Baccala, Antonio ... 3 ... Bealiba.
Backons, ... ... 2 ... Yackandandah.
Bacon, Jas. ... ... 12 ... Great Western.
Bailey, Edgar ». 13 ... Rutherglen.


Name. Acres. Address,
Baker, Daniel ... 10 ... Woosang, Wedderburn.
Baker, George ... 8 ... Woosang, Wedderburn.
Banna, Jas. ... ... 4 ... Newtown, Beechworth.
Barassie, Guiseppe ... 2£ ... Shicer Gully, Guildford.
Barldaz, Leon ... 4 ... Armitage, Christmas Hill.
Barlow, John B. ... 30 ... Retreat Vineyard, Barnawartba.
Barnes, Jos. ... ... £ ... Whim Holes, Napoleon Lead.
Bartels, Henry ... 3£ ... Newtown, Beechworth.
Batcheler, Richd. ... 1 ... Thomastown.
Battiland, Joseph ... 7 ... Dunolly.
Baume, August ... 13 ... Rutherglen.
Baumgarten, G. ... 140 ... Barnawartha.
Baumgarten, W. ... 16 ... Barnawartha.
Bavay, A. de... ... ... Beenak.
Bawden, Wm. ... 2 ... El Dorado.
Bawm, J. J. ... ... 2 ... Perry River, Stratford.
Baxter, James ... 3 ... Barnawartha.
Baxter, John ... 13 ... Barnawartha.
Bear, J. P ... (See Tahbilk).
Bear, T. H. ... ... 40 ... Castle Hill, Yan Yean.
Beard, David ... If ... Three-mile, Beechworth.
Beck, August ... 10 ... Brown’s Plains, Rutherglen.
Beck, Fredk. ... 29 ... Brown’s Plains, Rutherglen.
Becks, Gustave ... 10 .... Sunburjr.
Bedgood, Charles ... £ ... Perry River, Stratford.
Bedolla, Michael ... 2 ... Spring Creek, Hepburn.
Bell, J. ... ... £ ... Longwood.
Benson, A. ... ... 4 ... Wodonga West.
Bensaschi, Giovanni ... 2 ... Talbot-road, Talbot.
Bent, Thomas ... £ ... Union-street, Brighton.
Beper, Alex. ... £ ... Ironbark, Long Gully.
Berger, Godfred ... £ ... Doncaster.
Berryman, William H. £ ... Bray-street, Long Gully.
Bersica, S. .. ... 15£ ... Mooroopna.
Bertran, Francis ... 4 ... Newtown, Beechworth.
Best, Henry... ... 40 ... Concongella Vineyard, Great Western,
Bieske,Wilhelm ... 1 ... Boram Boram, Penshurst.
Biles, Thos. ... ... 1£ ... Maryville, Morwell.
Billieh, Ignatio ... l£ ... Wedderburn.
Black, Robt.... ... 1 ... Dunolly.
Blackburn, Thomas ... 1£ . ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Blaikie, Alex. ... 20 ... North Wangaratta.
Blake, Arthur P. ... £ ... Bambra-road, Caulfield.
Blanckbourne, Wm. ... £ ... Eddington.
Blayney, Thos. ... 40 ... Nagambie.
Bloon, Christian ... 3 ... Doncaster East.
Bloxham, William ... 3£ ... Ivanhoe, Heidelberg.
Blumner, F. F. ... 6 ... Bright.
Blumner, Hartman ... 5 ... Lockwood.
Bodkin, W. ... ... 7 ••• Picola.
Bofil, Martin ... 3 ... Waanyarra.
Boland, A. ... ... 6 ... Loddon.
Bolla, Pietro £ ... Hepburn.
Bon, Mrs. A. F. ... 2 ... Wappan Station, Doon, Mansfield.
Bond, William ... 3 ... Eddington.
Bonning, Wm. ... £ ... Greendale-road, Ballan.
Boreelan’d, Alex. ... 6 • ... Laanecoorie, Eddington.
Borelli, J. B. ... ... Panton Hill.
Borwick, G. E. ... ... Mount Caranya Vineyard, Dookie.
Bossidge, Jasper ... l£ ... Whroo, Rushworth.
Botton, Edward ... 6 ... Eddington.
Bourke, John ... 11 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.


Name. Acres. Address.
Bowen, Albert ... 4 ... Amphitheatre, Elmhurst.
Bowit, William ... 25 ... Jackson’s Creek, Sunbury.
Bowtell Bros. ... 4 ... Sugar Loaf, Great Western.
Boyes, J. ... ... 2 ... Leneva, Wodonga.
Boyes, J. and H. A. ... £ ... Stanhope, Rushworth.
Boyes, T. ... ... 7 ... Middle Creek, Yackandandah.
Brachd, C. ... ... ... 112 Collins-street west.
Brache, C. ... ... 100 ... Wahgunyah.
Bradshaw, J. ... 32 ... Bamawm, Rochester.
Bramston, George ... 1 ... Chiltern.
Bray, And. ... ... 5 ... Lilliput, Rutherglen.
Bray, Wm. ... ... £ ... Napoleon Lead. ,
Brennan, C. ... ... 10 ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Brennan, M.... ... 4 ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Brenzing, Ernest ... 10 ... Nagambie.
Brewer, A. ... ... 2 ... Epsom, Sandhurst.
Brewer, A. ... ... 5 ... Huntly.
Briggs, Robt. ... 21 ... Narong, Rutherglen.
Bristow, G. B. N. ... 90 ... Stawell Vineyard Co.
Broadway, James ... 1 ... Lockwood.
Brown, Alfred ... £ ... Lower Tarwin.
Brown, George ... 2 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Brown, George ... 10 ... Millewa.
Brown, James John ... 3 ... Malakoff-road, Beechworth.
Browne, A. H. L. ... ... 135 Collins-st. W., agent Chateau Tahbilk.
Broughton, E. ... 1 ... Booroopki.
Bruce, Andrew ... 1 ... Perry River, Stratford.
Bruhn, Albert ... 36 ... Emu Vineyard, Emu Creek.
Bruhn, Otto ... ... i ... Majorca.
Brunning, William ... 2 ... Somerville, Hastings.
Bryant, Charles ... 1£ ... Muckleford.
Brydie, Alex. ... 3£ ... Wahgunyah.
Bubeek, Felix ... 25 ... Bald Hill, Sunbury.
Buchanan, Chas. ... 8 ... Vine Bank, Beeao.
Buckley, A. R. ... 71 ••• Rutherglen.
Buckley, John ... 1 ... Huntly.
Buckly, John ... 2 ... Charlton-road, Wedderburn.
Bull, John E. N. ... 3£ ... Castlemaine.
Burgdotf Bros. ... 4 ... Barker’s Creek, Castlemaine.
Burge, John... ... 6£ ... Toolamba.
Burger, Johan ... 6 ... Yulanga, Boram Boram, Penshurst.
Burne, John ... ... • 3 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Burne, J. ... ... 15 ... Axe Creek, Sandhurst.
Burnes, Jos. G. ... 16 ... Rutherglen.
Burns, Joseph ... 20 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Burns J. G. .. ... 15 ... Rutherglen.
Burns’ Wm. ... ... 3 ... Upper Black Dog Creek, Chiltern.
Burrowes, Wm. ... 40 ... Rutherglen.
Burrows, W. and R. J. 45 ... Rutherglen.
Biisse, F, and Sons ... 80 ... Burrabunnia, Barnawartha.
Busst, C.J 15 ... Huntly.
Calanchini, G. ... £ ••• Hepburn.
Calder, William ... 5 ... Natimuk.
Callender, R. ... 2 ... Katunga.
Cameron, Alex. ... 3£ ... Bailieston, Nagambie.
Cameron, Charles ... 7 ... Almond Grove, Bet Bet.
Cameron, Chas. ... 8 ... Timor.
Campbell, Alex. ... i ••• Gordon.
Campbell, J. ... 75 ... Rutherglen.
Cannings, W. ... £ ••• Campbellfield.
Carnfortb, ... 2 ... Great Western.


Name. Acres. Address.
Carnie and Munday ... 4 ... Katamatite.
Carroll, S. ... ... 3 ... Wodonga.
Carson Bros. ... 60 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Carson, J. ... ... £ ... North Mooroopna.
Carson, T. K. ... 62 ... Rutherglen.
Cary, Thos. ... ... 18 ... Rutherglen.
Cassubean Bros. ... 10 ... Deep Lead, Wimmera.
Castella, Paul De ... 100 ... Yering.
Castles, J. J. .... 6 ... Narioka.
Cathro, Alex. ... 1£ ... Black Spring-road, Beechworth.
Caughey, Alex. ... 260 ... Mount Prior Vineyard, Gooramadda
Cayley, Catherine ... £ ... Craigie, Majorca.
Cazer, Chas. ... ... £ ... Talbot.
Celerich, Steven ... 1£ ... St. Arnaud-road, Wedderburn.
Chambers, Geo. ... 42 ... Barnawartha.
Chambers, Phil. ... 20 ... Rutherglen.
Champion, Adolph ... 4 ... Great Western.
Chandler, Geo. ... 3 ... Benalla.
Chandler, Geo. ... 10 ... Rutherglen.
Chandler, James ... 45 ... Rutherglen.
Chandler, William ... 13 ... Rutherglen.
Chapman, T. H. ... 12 ... Nagambie.
Chappie, Henry ... £ ... Mount Korong-road, Long Gully.
Charlsworth, Joseph... 1 ... Mandurang.
Child, ... ... ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell.
Christians, Wm. ... 3£ ... Lake Rowan.
Clarke and Parry ... 5 ... Landsbor»ugh.
Clarke, Ge 0.... ... 1 ... Somerville.
Clarke, Hen. ... 3£ ... Lunatic Asylum, Ararat.
Clements, John ... 1 ... Lockwood.
Cleough, ... ... £ ... Grassy Flat, Sandhurst.
Clift, W. ... ... 1 ... Huntly.
Clifford, Lewin H. ... £ ... Bacchus Marsh.
Climus, Mrs. ... 5 ... Yackandandah.
Cochran, Michl. ... 1£ ... Burnside, Tooborac, Heathcote.
Code, B. ... ... 3 ... Axe Creek, Sandhurst.
Coe, William ... £ ... Coleraine.
Cole, Arthur ... 2 ... Nicholson-street, Coburg.
Cole, Mrs. Ward ... £ ... Bay-street, Brighton.
Coleman, S. ... ... 12 ... Shepparton.
Collard, G. ... ... ... Bonegilla.
Collen, John... ... 30 ... Wahgunyah.
Collie, John ... ... 12 ... Dobie’s Bridge, Ararat.
Cone, John ... ... 2 ... Main Lead, Beaufort.
Congdon, William ... 5£ ... Wattle Flat, Castlemaine.
Conno, John ... 9 ... Gooramadda.
Conroy, Pat.... ... 9 ... Chiltern West, Rutherglen.
Conroy, Wm. ... 15 ... Great Western.
Cook, James ... 15 ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Cook, J. ... ... 7 ... Middle Creek, Yackandandah.
Cook, Sami. ... ... 2 ... Axe Creek, Axedale.
Coombes, Wm. ... f ... Railway Reserve, Echuca East.
Cooper, Geo. ... £ ... Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Cooper, James ... 8 ... Upper Black Dog Creek, Chiltern.
Copsey, Alfred ... ]£ ... Bet Bet.
Corcoran, Pat. ... 3' ... Research Vineyard, Eltham.
Cornelius, J.... .. 17 ... Rutherglen.
Cornforth, ... 3£ ... Dunbulbalane.
Costello, P. H. ... 25 ... Mount Hooghly, Dunolly.
Coupar, Joseph ... £ ... Mirboo.
Cousens, Benjamin ... 1 ... Wedderburn.
Cox, Thos, ... ... £ ... Lillimur.


Name. Acres. Address.
Coyle, Bernard ... 17 ... Christmastown, Chiltern.
Craig, W. ... ... 2 ... Wodonga West.
Craike, Thos. ... 10 ... Bowmont, Sandhurst.
Cranny, Fredk. ... £ ... Cockran-street, Elsternwick.
Croft, Robert ... 1 ... Waverly-road, Oakleigh.
Crolle, D. ... ... 4 ... Epsom.
Crooke, James E. ... £ ... Bacchus Marsh.
Crouch, Harry ... £ ... Yanipy, Kaniva.
Crozier, A. ... ... 2 ... Kulnine, Yelta.
Crozier, Elliott ... 2 ... Yelta.
Cue, Geo. ... ... £ ... Casterton.
Cuff, Abraham ... 5 ... Taripta, Echuca. ,
Cummins, J. ... 2 ... Bonegilla.
Curnick, E. ... £ ... Mirboo.
Curnow, Jas. ... 2 ... Woodstock West, Eddington.
Currie, Capt. ... £ ... Beach, Brighton.
Curry, Mrs. ... 3 ... Bet Bet.
Curtain, John ... 700 ... Chateau Dookie, Dookie.
Curtis, C. E. ... £ ... Casterton.
Cussen, M. ... 1 ... Mooroopna.
Dalberti, Dominich ... 10 ... Great Western.
Daley, J. J. ... £ ... Gibson-road, Sandringham.
Daly, 5- O’B. ... 30 ... Dunolly.
Daly, Jas. ... £ ... Dunolly.
Daly, N. ... 26 ... Great Western.
Daravin, J. T. ... 14 ... Mandurang.
D’Arcey, Peter ... £ ... Parkin’s lieef-road, Maldon.
Darragb, James ... £ ... Ballan.
Darveniza, T. ... 58 ... Excelsior Vineyard, Mooroopna.
Davey, H. T. ... £ ... Kerang.
Davey, T. ... ... 2 ... Youanmite.
Davidson, John ... £ ... Serpentine.
Davidson, Wm ... £ ... Faraday, Castlemaine.
Deane, John ... 2 ... Lockwood.
Dear, Fredk. ... 1 ... Dunolly.
Deas, Geo. ... ... 19 ... Rutherglen.
Deason, John ... £ ... Moliagul.
Deganhardt, G. ... £ ... Murtoa.
Deherert, Reinhold ... 10 ... Doncaster East.
Delmenico, Giovanni 17 ... 'J’errappee, Boort.
Deller, Thos.... ... 2 ... Constantia, Myers’ Flat, Eaglehawk.
Delves, Henry ... 7 ... Back Creek, Marong.
Dennis, John ... £ ... Phil pot-street, Long Gully.
Denscher, R. ... 4 ... Great Western.
Derritt, J. ... ... 4 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Deritt, M., sen. ... 15 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Deschamp, August ... 4 ... Lilydale'
Deschamp, Mrs. C. 18 ... Lilydale.
Deschamp, Mrs. L. ... 14 ... Lilydale.
Devers, C .... ... 15 ... Rutherglen.
Dewar, Hugh ... 4 ... Great Western.
Dewer, Catherine ... 14 ... Rhymney.
De Pury, E. ... 55 ... Lilydale.
Dick, Dr. ... ... 30 ... Wodonga.
Dickson, Robt. ... 40 ... Upper Indigo, Barnawartha.
Dickson] Thos. ... 5 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Dickson’and Sons ... 40 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Dimboola Ahor. Mis. S. £ ... Dimboola.
Dixon, John ... £ ... Glen Eira-road, Elsternwick.
Docker F. G. ... 33 ... Bontherambo, Wangaratta.
Dod, R.’ ’ 2 ... Marong.


Name. Acres. Address.
Doig, J. G. ... ... 20 ... Bobinawarrah.
Dominiquez, A. ... 1 ... Porepunkah.
Donald, Alex. ... i ... Woodford, Dartmoor.
Donaldson, John ... J ... Chinaman’s Creek, Castlemaine.
Donnelly, James ... 5 ... Christmas Town-road, Chiltern.
Dookie Agric. Coll. ... 15 ... Dookie.
Dorg, Wm. ... ... 3 ... Elengarden, Myers’ Flat, Eaglehawk.
Dorsa, P. D. ... ... \ ... Maldon.
D’Orsy, Laurence ... 5 ... Doma-Munjie, Chiltern.
Douglas, Thomas ... 23 ... Rutherglen.
Drew, William ... ... Sparrowhawk, Long Gully.
Drummond, G. M. ... 20 ... Carlyle, ltutherglen.
Drummond, Mrs. Margt. 20 ... Rutherglen.
Du Boulay, Francis ... ... Holmes Creek, Beechworth.
Ducommaw, Emil ... 12 ... Nagambie.
Duerkop, Henry ... 4 ... Chiltern.
Duff, John ... ... 1 ... Baringhup West.
Dunn, A. ... ... 35 ... Wahgunyah.
Dunn, John ... ... 7 ... Gooramadda.
Dunn, Mrs. ... ... 9 ... Wahgunyah,
Dunn, Sami.... ... ... Dunlavin, Talbot.
Duscher, Jacob ... 5 ... Great Western.
Duscher, Rudolph ... 4 ... Great Western.
Duvall, J. ... ... 2J ... Wodonga West.
Dyer, John ... ... 1 ... - Kiewa, Yackandandah.
Eaddy, Alfred ... $ ... Chari ton-road, Wedderburn.
Eagle, Wm. ... ... J ... Harcourt.
Eaking, George ... ... Duncan-street, Long Gully.
Eaton, Jas. ... ... 10 ... Rutherglen.
Edmonds, J. H. ... 4 ... Clear Lake, Natimuk.
Edwards, J. F. ... 9 ... Rutherglen.
Edwards, Mrs. ... 1£ ... Fell Timber Creek, Wodonga.
Edwards, R.... ... 12 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Eglie, Fred. ... ... 12 ... Tahbilk, Nagambie.
Eisele, Richd. ... 15 ... Kanyapella, via Echuca.
Eligate, Mrs. ... 5 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Elliott, E. ... ... 6 ... Bet Bet.
Ely, Rob. ... ... \ ... Newman, Baringhup.
Emmerson, James ... 5 ... Great Western.
Esperson, Gustave ... 2 ... Craigie, Majorca.
Estapling Bros. ... 9 ... Freestone Creek, Briagolong.
Ettershank, John, and Co. 30 ... East Loddon Estate, Serpentine.
Ewins, George ... 3 ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell West.
Facey, James ... £ ... Spring Mount Farm, Cranbourne.
Falder, John ... 2 ... Murphy’s Flat, Tarnagulla.
Falk, F. ... ... 1 ... Wodonga West.
Fankhauser, Geo. ... 1£ ... Belmore-road, Balwyn.
Farkins, August ... I ... Mount Lonach, Amphitheatre, Lexton.
Farrasi, Joseph ... l| ... Elevated Plains, Hepburn.
Farrell, Andw. ... 2 ... Summer Head, Baringhup
Farrioli, Andrew ... 7 ... Snake Hill, Glenlyon.
Faulkiner, John ... 7 ... Woosang, Wedderburn.
Felgenhaur, Fredk. ... 3 ... Stewart’s Bridge, Echuca.
Ferguson, Alex. ... 4 ... Mandurang.
Ferguson, Donald ... 3 ... Azarby, Yea.
Ferhemann, Auguste 1 ... Doncaster East.
Fernando, Joseph ... 1 ... Frenchman’s, Landsborough.
Field, J. R. A. ... ... Kialla West.
Figgins, Jas. ... 4£ ... Mollison’s Creek, Pyalong, Glenaroua,
Pyalong.
Finger, H. ... 5 ... Doncaster East.


Name. Acres. Address.
Finger, H., jun. ... 1£ ... Doncaster East.
Fisher, Mrs. Sarah ... 24 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Fitzgerald, Edward ... 12 ... Castlemaine.
Fitzjohn, Jas. ... J ... Broadford.
Fizelle, George ... 1 ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Fizelle, Theodore ... 2 ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Fizelle, Thos. ... £ ... Botanical Gardens, White Hills, Sand-
hurst.
Flack, Geo. ... ... £ ... Ballan.
Fleming, Thos. ... 2 ... Benalla.
Fletcher, Wm. ... 5 ... Warrior Hills, Beeac.
Florentine, Charles ... 24 ... Mitchelston, Nagambie.
Flowers, David ... | ... Talbot.
Foggo, James ... 4 ... Landsborough.
Forster, John ... £ ... Yallock, Edenhope.
Fortune, M. ... ... 18 ... Rutherglen.
Foux, Peter ... ... 5 ... Dunolly.
Fowles, Wm. F. ... ... Ballan.
Fox, A. ... ... 37 ... Emu Creek, Strathfleldsaye.
Fox, Henry ... ... \ ... McCallum’s Creek, Majorca.
Francome, E. ... | ... Darlimurla, Mirboo.
Franzi, Guiseppe ... 1 ... Newstead-road, Guildford.
Fraser, Hugh ... 20 ... Olive Hills, Brown’s Plains.
Frater, Peter ... 6 ... Beechworth.
Frey, H. J. ... ... \ ... Tintaldra.
Frowd, Isaac ... 18 .. Tongala, Echuca.
Fuge, R. ... ... 20 ... Rutherglen.
Fulton, Andrew ... 9 ... Mount Fulton, Lilydale.
Fulton and Co. ... 42 ... Wyuna, vid Echuca.
Funcke, Valentine ... 8 ... Rhymney.
Furguson, John ... 2£ ... Hazeldean, Millewa.
Furness, Geo. ... 8 ... Rutherglen.
Gaach, John... ... 1 ... Moonlight Flat, Castlemaine.
Gaffy, M. ... ... ... Mooroopna.
Gaggioni, Pietro ... 1 ... Hepburn.
Gale, Danl. ... ... 1 ... Kaniva South.
Gambetta, W. ... 18 ... Deep Lead, Wimmera.
Gambetti, Peter ... 25 ... Elizabeth Creek, Stawell West.
Gammell, Alexander £ ... Elizabeth-street, Malvern.
Garbeline, Peter ... 7 ... Melbourne-road, Beechworth.
Gardiner, Geo. ... ... Cashel.
Gardner, James G. ... 20 ... Millewa.
Gasparo, Giovanni ... 1 ... Ringwood, Mornington.
Gee Wah ... ... i ... Dimboola.
Gehan, Francis ... 3 ... Mokepilly, Stawell West.
Gehrig, G. P. ... 106 ... Barnawartha.
Gemmell, John ... 6 ... Wooragee, Beechworth,
Gemmil, William ... 9 ... Golden Valley, Bet Bet.
Gemmill, James ... 6 ... Tongala.
Gemmill, J. J. ... 6 ... Mooroopna.
Gentle, Thomas ... 1 ... Tangambalanga, Kiewa.
Gervasoni, Antonio ... 3 ... Yandoit Creek, Yandoit.
Gervasoni, Carlo ... 5 ... Yandoit Creek, Yandoit.
Gervasoni, Lugi . ... 5 ... Yandoit Creek, Yandoit.
Gianetti, Baptist ... 5 ... Bealiba.
Gibbs, Alex. ... ... Campbellfield.
Gieppy, Walter ... 4 ... Goomalibee, Benalla.
Gifford, Wm. ... h ... Korong Vale.
Giles, Henry ... $ ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Gillam, James ... 1 ... East Murchison.
Gillet, Paul ... ... 8 ... Great Western.


Name. Acres. Address.
Gilliland,Wm. ... 9 ... Rutherglen.
Gilmore, G. ... ... \ ... Woodlands, Napoleon Lead.
Giovanoni D. ... 2 ... Spring Creek, Hepburn.
Glasgow, D 8 ... Rutherglen.
Gleddin, Bernard ... 5 ... Mandurang.
™ •" ••• ... Strathfieldsaye.
Gliddell Mrs. ... 2 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Glisson, S. ... ... 4£ ... Great Western.
Gloss, J. ... ... i ... Allen’s Flat, Yackandandah
Gloty, J. ... ... i. ... Walhalla.
Glover, Mrs. ... 2 ... Bullock Creek, Marong.
Goddard, H. S. ... 5 ... Taripta, Rodney.
Godley.P F ... io ... Great Western.
Golding, Alfred ... 6} ... Kaniva South.
Goldsworthy, Mrs. Mary 4 ... Rutherglen.
Golhngs, S. ... ... 15 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Goode and Sons ... 4 ... Huon’s Creek, Wodonga.
Goodyer, E. ... ... 5 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Goodyer, Mrs. ... 30 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Gordon, C 14 ... Wodonga.
Gordon, Miss ... J ... Apsley.
Gorse, Thos. ... 2 ... Wedderburn.
Gould, Daniel ... 1£ ... Doncaster East.
Grace, Mrs Bridget ... 5 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Graham and Cameron 3 ... Stawell
Graham Bros. ... 190 ... Netherby Vineyard, Rutherglen.
Graham, George ... 24 ... Wunghnu.
Grant, David ... J ... Mount Korong-road, Long Gully.
Grant, James ... 9 ... Craig Elachie, Elmhurst
Grant, James ... 1 ... Somerville, Hastings.
Grant, Robfc. ... 2 ... Lowan, Natimuk.
Grant, William ... £ ... Millbank, Bacchus Marsh.
Gray, Wm 20 ... Millewa.
Green, James ... 1 ... Mandurang.
Green, John ... ... 2 ... Granite Hill, Talbot.
Green, 1 . ... ... 1 ... Kitty’s Lead, Napoleon Lead.
Greenaway, Joseph ... J ... Craigie, Majorca.
Greenham, G. ... J ... Dartmoor.
Greenman J. ... 4 ... Huntly.
Gregge, W 2 ... Huntly.
Grey, I redk. ... 4 ... Ranter’s Gully, Campbell’s Creek
Grice, James ... l£ ... Mornington.
W. ... 36 ... Strathfieldsaye.
o-S 11 ’ " e , rem i a h ••• 6 Maidenham, Coghill's Creek.
Griffin, John ... 6 ... Strathfieldsaye.
X r ?S n > Rj - 3 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Griffin, W. and Osmond 3 ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Grimmond, John ... 15 ... Wahgunyah.
Grosse, I rederick ... 32 ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye, and 6 Collins-
Groutsch, Mrs. Barbara 2 ... Runnymede, Elmore.
Uussettie, iredk. ... s Newbridge.
Hackford, Ed. ... 16 ... Lilliput, Rutherglen. .
Hadley, Geo. ... 7 ... Kiewa, Yackandandah.
Haig, 'lhos. ... ... 18 ... Beechworth.
Hall, Francis ... 4 ... Wattle Flat, Castlemaine.
:£ ain , J | ... Carlsruhe.
Hamrnil, Pat. ... 11 ... Summer Hill, Christmas Town, Chiltern.
Hami ton, D., jun. ... 30 ... Clydeside, Rutherglen.
Hamilton, D. G. ... 78 ... Rutherglen.
Hamilton. M. ... J ... Longwood.


Name. Acres. Address.
Hamilton, T. ... 4 ... Landon, Yandoit.
Handing, Thos. ... l ... Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Hampton, Josiah ... £ ... Ravenswood, Castlemaine.
Hancock, Ghas, ... 12 ... Olive Vineyard, Stewart’s Bridge, vid
Echuca.
Hanlon, L. ... ... 25 ... Kotupna.
Hannan, Mrs. ... 46 ... Rutherglen.
Hannon, John ... 15 ... Rutherglen.
Hannon, Mrs. ... 9 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Hanton, E. ... ... 20 ... McCoy’s Bridge, Mooroopna.
Harbery, Alfred ... 3 ... Sheepwash, Strathfieldsaye.
Hardy, Joseph ... 8 ... Mooroopna.
Hardy, J. ... ... 5 ... Mooroopna.
Harditch, Geo. ... 5 ... Moliagul.
Harris, G. J.... ... 6 ... Clear Lake, Natimuk.
Harris, Mrs 3 ... Axe Creek, Axedale.
Hart, Pat. ... ... 16 ... Marong, Rutherglen.
Harrison, John ... 40 ... Brown’s Plains, Rutherglen.
Harrison, John ... 40 ... Brown’s Plains.
Harrison, John ... £ ... Kaniva.
Hartigan Bros. ... 7 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Hartigan, D. ... 15 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Hartweek, Carl ... 3 ... Hamilton North.
Hasty, Ralph ... £ • ... Bungeeltap-road, Ballan.
Headdey, E.... ... 33 ... St. Ethel’s Vineyard, Great Western.
Hedge, Geo. ... ... 1£ ... Everton.
Heedenwag, A. ... 3 ... Middle Creek, Wodonga.
Heily, G. D. ... ... 1£ ... Moora, Rushworth.
Helier, John... ... 4 ... Goulburn Park, Wunghnu.
Helliar, John ... £ ... Stuartmill.
Hempestall, G. ... £ ... Tintaldra.
Henay, Thos. ... £ ... Lillimur North.
Henderson, A. ... 15 ... Burnside, Rutherglen.
Henderson, A. ... 5 ... Barnawartha.
Henley, James ... 40 ... Millewa.
Hennessy, J.... ... 9 ... Toolleen.
Hennicker, Henric ... 2 ... Lower Three-mile, Beechworth.
Henning, John ... £ ... Lockwood, Kangaroo Flat.
Heyfrom, Stephen ... 20 ... Upper Black Dog Creek, Chiltern.
Hicks, Joseph ... 1£ ... Bromley, Dunolly.
Hicks, ... ... 1£ ... Burnt Creek, Dunolly.
Hill, James ... ... £ ... Britannia Reef, Majorca.
Hill, Mrs. Emily ... 2 ... Epsom.
Hillier, H. L. ... 6 ... Mandurang.
Hindson, John ... £ ... Canterbury-road, Balwyn.
Hiskins, John ... 3 ... Rutherglen.
Hintze, G. ... ... 15 ... Rutherglen.
Hives, John ... ... £ ... Black Lead, Napoleon Lead.
Hobbs, ... ... 6 ... Yackandandah.
Hodgkinson, J. ... 6 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Hodgson, H.... ... 1 ... Allen’s Flat, Yackandandah.
Hole, Mrs. ... ... 3 ... Bet Bet.
Holland, Alfred ... 2 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Holibone, Walt 12 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Holloway, G. ... 15 ... Barnawartha.
Holmes, John ... 6 ... Barrow Vineyard, Strathfieldsaye.
Holmes, Thos. ... 2 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Hood, John ... ... 2 ... Huntly.
Horbury, ... ... 2 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Horseman, Henry ... 1 ... Blanket Flat-road, Campbell’s Creek.
Horewood, Joel ... £ ... Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Hoskin, Richd. ... 3 ... Royal Farm, Benalla.


Name. Acres. Address.
Hossack, Jas. ... 7 ... Rutherglen.
Howard, John ... 22 ... Wahgunyah.
Howell, Mrs. M. ... 12 ... Lilliput, Rutherglen.
Howenstein, And. ... 2 ... Three-mile Creek, Ararat.
Howie, Robt. ... 13 ... Westfield, Moreland-road, Brunswick.
Howlett, Fredk. ... l£ ... Spring Grove, Merrivale, Morwell.
Houston, Wm. R. ... 7 ... Rutherglen.
Hughes, Mark ... £ ... Hamilton North.
Hughes, Wm. ... 63 ... Rutherglen.
Hughes, W. ... ... 60 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Hunt, Frank... ... 1 ... Walwa Creek.
Hunter, John ... f ... Wedderburn,
Huntly, John ... J ... Thomas-street, Brighton. . .
Humphreys, Jas. ... 7 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Hurnell, Mrs. ... 6 ... Great Western.
Hutchins, Geo. ... f ... Coleraine.
Hutton, Harry ... 2 ... Specimen Gully, Campbell’s Creek.
Hutton, M. C. G. ... 20 ... Cooring Yering, Lilydale.
Hutton, ... ... ... ... Great Western.
Hyland and Wain ... \ ... Chiltern.
Ingram, A. ... ... 3 ... Bagshot, Huntly.
Invernezzi, Ambrozio 3 ... Yandoit Creek, Yandoit.
Ireland, De Courcv ... \ ... .Horsham.
Irvine, Hans W. H. ... 83 ... Great Western.
Jacobs, Joseph ... 20 ... Kialla West, Shepparton.
Jack, Rob. ... ... 40 ... Rutherglen.
Jackson, J. ... ... 1 ... Epsom.
Jackson, Mrs. ... 1 ... Runnymede, Elmore.
Jackson, Mrs. Sarah... 12 ... Rutherglen.
Jacobson, Charles ... 12 ... Rutherglen.
Jamieson, ... 1 ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell.
Jamieson, R. ... 4 ... Tangambalanga, Kiewa.
Jeavons, Joseph ... 8 ... Wycheproof, Teddywaddy.
Jenkins,— ... 3 ... Epsom.
Jenkin, John ... \ ... Cambrian Hill, Napoleon Lead.
Jennings,— ... 4 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Jennings, Geo. ... i ... Woodside, Casterton.
Jochen, John ... § ... Templestowe, Doncaster.
Johns, John ... 15 ... Katandra, Cashel.
Johns, Thos. M. ... £ ... Britannia Reef, Majorca.
Johnson, — ... £ ... Tubut Station.
Johnston, David ... 5 ... Dookie, Cashel.
Johnston, J. C. ... 16 ... Springvale, Jackson’s Creek, Sunbury.
Johnston, J. S. ... 16 ... Sunbury.
Johnston, Robt. ... 2 ... Marmal, Boort,
Johnston, William ... £ ... Caralulup, Talbot-road, Lexton.
Jolly, William ... | ... Bunguluke, Wycheproof.
Jolly, Wm. ... 10 ... Great Western.
Jones, Alfred ... 2 ... Somerville, Hastings.
Jones, H. ... ... 20 ... Rutherglen.
Jones, Henry Geo. ... 2 ... Yarra Yarra Vineyard, Eltham.
Jones, Humphrey ... 4 ... Carlyle.
Jones, James ... ... Garden Flat, Majorca.
Jones, William ... 20 ... Wedderburn.
Jones, W. ... ... 30 ... Mooroopna.
Kahland, J. ... ... ... King-street, Sandhurst.
Kam, G. ... ... £ ... Amphitheatre-road, Avoca.
Kane, G. ... ... | ... Avoca.
Kapper, Henry ... 2 ... Bonegilla, Bellianga.


Name. Acres. Address.
Kavanagh, M. ... 36 ... Lake Erie Vineyard, Mooroopna.
Kay, Fong ... ... 3 ... Indigo, Chiltern.
Kegan, Patk. ... 3 ... Mokepilly, Stawell West.
Kelly, E. ... ... 3 ... Wodonga.
Kelly, J. ... ... 13 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Kelly, Joseph ... 26 ... Rutherglen.
Kelly, M. ... ... 8 ... Wodonga.
Kewly, Thos. ... ... Waterloo.
Keys, ... ... 2 ... Narioka.
Kilson, Thos. ... 5 ... Bealiba.
Kimber, John J. ... J ... Harcourt, Castlemaine.
King, Daniel ... 35 ... Lilliput, Rutherglen.
King, Dan. ... ... 65 ... Rutherglen.
King, E. and Edward 7 ... Rutherglen.
Kinge, W. ... ... ... Wodonga West.
Kitchen, A. ... ... 1 ... Donald.
Kitchen, Henry H. ... £ ... Mansfield.
Kitchen, William ... f ... Waterloo.
Klein, Chas. E. ... 14 ... Wyuna, vid Echuca.
Klein, Otto ... ... 7 ... Kanyapella, vid Echuca.
Knight, G. W., sen. ... £ ... Sandhurst.
Knight, Joseph ... 10 ... Mooroopna.
Knott, Joseph ... ... Lockwood, Kangaroo Elat.
Koch, F. ... ... 4 ... Christmas Town.
Koenstel, Otto ... 10 ... Huntly.
Kreoger, Theodore ... § ... Hepburn.
Krutze, Rob. ... \ ... Hamilton South.
Kurle, Rob. ... ... 40 ... Rosenthal, Sunbury.
Laidlaw, John ... 14 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Laidlaw, W. ... £ ... Banayeo, Apsley.
Lamond, R. G. ... 2 ... Great Western.
Lampard, ... £ ... Kadnook, Edenhope.
Lang, Jas. ... ... | ... Harcourt.
Lang, John ... ... 2 ... Huntly.
Lang, W. ... ... 4 ... Middle Creek, Wodonga.
Lange, W. ... ... 2 ... Baranduda, Wodonga.
Lapsley, Robt. ... 3 ... Lockwood, Kangaroo Flat.
Laub, Louis ... 1£ ... Honeysuckle, Lauriston.
Laurence, John ... \ ... Union-street, Brighton.
Laurence, Joseph ... i ... Mill-street, Brighton.
Lauson, Robert ... 4 ... Kiewa, Yackandandah.
Laver, Alfred ... 7J ... Chinaman’s Creek, Castlemaine.
Lawe, Joseph ... 3 ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye.
Lawson, John ... 3 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Leech, Robert ... 6 ... Grange Vineyard, Tooborac, Heathcote.
Leikman, William ... i ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Leitch, J. ... ... ± ... Wodonga West.
Lennye, Carl ... 4 ... Echuca.
Leonard, P. ... ... £ ... Napoleon Lead.
Lettow, Jas. ... ... .. 4 Dunolly.
Levin, L. ... ... 40 ... Rutherglen.
Leviston, Hy. . #l £ ... Enfield, Napoleon Lead.
Lewis, Samuel ... 4 ... Mandurang, Strathfieldsaye.
Lloyd, Michael ... 3 ... Concongella, Great Western.
Lloyd, Patrick ... 12£ ... Concongella, Great Western.
Lloyd, Wm. ... ... 5 ... Alston, Waranga, Rushworth.
Lindlaw, Mrs. • ... 11 ... Rutherglen.
Lindsey, R. ... ... 1£ ... Sherbourne East, Marong.
Ling, James ... , ... 1 ... Dereel, Rokewood.
Little, ... ... ... Campbellfield.
Lockett, James ... 7 ... Waanyarra.


Name. Acres. Address.
Longerenong Ag. Col. ... Dooen.
Longstaff, J. ... 15 ... Allen’s Flat, Yackandandah.
Looney, Ihos. ... 50 ... Rutherglen.
Lorimer, John ... 21 ... Rhymney
Lounds, Ambrose ... 20 ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye.
Love J D 1* ... Tatura.
Loveland, Geo. ... l ... Eddington.
Lowden, Charles ... £ ... Mitta Mitta.
Luflow, Wm. ... li ... Upper Black Dog Creek, Wooragee.
Ly nn > 7 ... Great Western.
Lyon, Mrs. ... ... £ ... Stanmore House, Balmoral.
Macey, James 36 ... Estcourt, Boorhaman, Wangaratta.
Mackereth, Edwin H. f ... A voca.
Magee, ... ... 3 ... Avoca.
Maguire, J. E. ... 10 ... Excelsior Vineyard, Mandurang.
Maguire ihos. ... 16 ... Spring Vale, Rutherglen.
Maher, A. ... ... 1 ... Arcade, Sandhurst.
Maher, J. ... ... 6 ... Boiregilla, Wodonga.
Maher, Laurence ... 7 ... Rhymney.
Ma.ling, , ••• i ••• Whitehorse-road, Balwyn.
Malone, Daniel ... 1 ... Laanecoorie, Eddington.
Manager, John ... 12 ... Great Western.
Maniel, l)e H. ... ... Barnawartha North.
Mann, John ... ... 2 ... Castlemaine.
Manns, G. ... ... 10 ... Leneva, Wodonga.
Mannes, A. ... 30 ... Axe Creek, Sandhurst.
Manness, Anthony ... 20 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Manson, Jas. ... £ ... Wattle Flat, Castlemaine.
Margery G. 55 ... Barnawartha.
Manott, Louis ... 2 ... Landsborough.
Marriott, John ... 2 ... Main-road, Campbell’s Creek.
Marshall, Joseph ... £ ... Muckleford, Castlemaine.
ar *! n » i ... El Dorado Park, Chiltern.
Martin, F. ... ... 50 ... Rutherglen.
Martin, Geo. ... J ... ICaniva.
Martin, James ... 15 ... Mooroopna.
Martin, John ... 5 ... Kangaroo Creek, Sandhurst.
Martin, John ... 3 ... Hawthorne Vineyard, Birregurra.
Martin, J. F ... 60 ... Rutherglen.
Martinoga, Philip ... 1 ... Shicer Gully, Guildford.
Maskell, Geo. ... i ... Durrant-street, Brighton.
Mason, A. B. and A. C. 12 ... Shepparton.
Mason, John ... £ ... Mitchel 1-street, Echuca East.
Massamch, Antonio ... 2 .. Ringwood
Massey, George ... 8 ... Wahgunyah.
Mathews, Leonatheous 4 ... Alma-road, Beechworth.
Matthews, W. H. ... 3 ... Epsom.
Matthews, W. ... 100 ... Barnawartha North.
Matthewson, John ... £ ... Dendy-street, Brighton.
Manlein, Peter ... 6 ... Primrose Garden, Korongvale.
Maunder, Geo. ... 15 ... Barnawartha North
Maxwell, W. H. ... £ ... Coleraine.
May, Peter D. ... 8 ... Jallukar, Stawell West.
Mayerhoff, Carl ... 2 ... Spring Creek, Beechworth.
Mehener, Paul ... l ... Chinaman’s Creek, Castlemaine.
Meiklim, William ... 8 ... Mooroopna.
Mellis, A. ... ... 4 ... Kyabram. •
Mellon, F ... ... 18 ... St. Francis’ Vineyard, Dunolly.
Melville, Donald ... 3J ... Alhion-street, Brunswick.
Merlo, E. ... | ... South Parkins, Maldon.
Merry, David ... 4 ... Wooragee, Beechworth.


Name. Acres. Address.
Mertitmeyer, A. E. 4 _ Chiltern.
Metzger, Jules ... 2 ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell.
Metzger, Louis ... 28 _ Doctor’s Creek, Stawell.
Meyer, Francis ... 9 .„ Lockwood, Kangaroo Flat.
Meyer, F. ... ... 9 ... Lockwood.
Meyer, H. H. ... 14 ... Sheepwash, Mandurang.
Michael, H. ... ... 4 ... Goornong.
Mildura (Chaffey Bros.) ... Swanston-street, Melbourne.
Milesi, Angelo 1 Smeaton-road, Yandoit.
Millard, Henry ... £ ... Union-street, Brighton.
Millard, John ... £ ... Union-street, Brighton.
Miller, Emma ... 2£ ... Honeysuckle, Lauriston.
Miller, James ... f Noorilim East, Arcadia, Murchison.
Miller, Wm. and Geo. If .... South Brighton.
Millington, F. ... £ ... Enfield, Napoleon Lead.
Mills, Chs. ... ... | ... Hamilton.
Mills, Samuel ... 8 ... Mooroopna.
Minogue, Michael ... 2 ... South Bundalong, Yarrawonga.
Minotti, Antonio ... If ... Hepburn, Mount Franklin.
Minotti, Battista ... 2 ... Mill Spring, Franklinford, Yandoit
Minotti, Gustave ... 3 ... Ballarat-road, Guildford.
Mirrigan, Pat. ... 8 ... Barnawartha North.
Mitchell, Alf. ... 23 ... Narong, Rutherglen.
Mitchell, Dav. ... 40 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Mitchell, M. A. ... 35 ... Rutherglen.
Mitchell, Mrs. B. ... 15 ... Rutherglen.
Mitchell, Wm. ... f ... McCallum’s Creek, Talbot.
Mole, Geo ... ... 2 ... Terrappee.
Mongan, D. ... ... 10 ... Allen’s Flat, Yackandandah.
Monte, ... ... 2 ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Montfort, W. ... If ... Benalla,
Montgomery, Thos. ... 13 ... Rutherglen.
Mooney, J. and L. ... 90 ... Mooney’s Gap, Ararat.
Moor, T. S. ... ... 11 ... Bellevue, Benalla.
Moore, B. ... ... 2 ... Dunolly.
Moore, John... ... 2£ ... Dunolly.
Moran, Marcellus ... £ ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Moran, Martin ... 2£ ... Benalla.
Morgan, Mrs. ... 1 ... Cherry tree, Kangaroo Flat.
Morganti, Maurizio ... 8 ... Eastern Hill, Eganstown.
Moresi, Francesco ... 21 ... Terrappee.
Morley, Fredk. ... 2£ ... Spring Creek, Beechworth.
Morley, James ... 24 ... Rutherglen.
Morris, G. F., & Sons 500 ... Fairfield, Rutherglen.
Mowatt, Alex. G. ... 2 ... Langi-Ghiran, Ararat.
Mueller, Dr. A. ... 25 ... Yackandandah.
Mulcare, Joseph ... 2 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Mull, Christian ... 2 ... El Dorado.
Muller, Mrs. F. ... 14 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Muller, D. J. ... £ ... Chiltern.
Muller, Jacob H. ... £ ... Wharparilla, vid Echuca.
Murphy, B. ... ... 2£ ... Landsborough.
Murphy, Timothy ... 2 ... Tongala, Kyabram.
Murray, E. J. ... 3 ... Somerville, Frankston.
Murry, C. ... ... 1 ... Somerville.
Murry, Mrs. Ann ... 10 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Murry, William ... £ ... Alma-road, Caulfield.
Mutzig, Charles ... 6 ... Deep Lead, Wimmera.
Myer, Christie ... 2 ... Spring Creek, Beechworth.
Myers, Albert ... 5 ... Mount Fairview, Box Hill.
Myers, H. ... ... 16 ... Mandurang.
Myers, Wm. ... ~. 6 ... Epsom.
If


Kamo. Acres. Address.
Myles, Edward ... * ... Waanyarra, Tarnagulla.
Mcßean, Simon ... 30 ... Brown’s Plains, Rutherglen.
Mcßride, Alex. ... 12 ... Gooramadda.
McCabe, James ... 3 ... Lockwood.
McCormack, John ... $ ... Tallarook
McCrum, R. ... ... l ... Toolamba.
McDonald, John ... * ... St. Kilda-street, Brighton.
McDonald, William ... 17 ... Eclat, Docker’s Plains, Wangaratta.
McDugall Jas. ... 4 ... Bambra-road, Caulfield.
McEwin, Peter .... } ... Dunrobin, Casterton.
McFarlane, C. ••• 2 ... Fell Timber Creek, Wodonga.
McFarlane, C. ... 2 ... Wodonga West.
McFarlane, W. ... 2 ... Wodonga West.
McGarrigle, Jas. ... 10 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen
McGuan John ... 20 ... Concongella, Great Western.
McGill, A 2 ... Toolamba.
McGill, J. ... ... 5 ... Toolamba.
McGuines, John ... 2 ... Mangalore.
McGuire, Thos. ... 10 ... Narong, Rutherglen.
McGuire, ... ... 12 ... Sheepwash, Mandurang.
Mclnerny, Mrs. Eliza 8 ... Rutherglen
Mclnnis, J 2 ... Mangalore.
Mclntyre, Hugh ... 10 ... Green Hill, Chiltern.
Mclntyre, John ... 22 v . Wattle Hill, Melbourne-road, Chiltern.
McKay, Wm. ... $ ... Echuca.
McKenzie, Alex. ... 7 ... Booraman, Wangaratta,
McKenzie, James ... 5 ... Bet Bet.
McKinley, Chs. ... 20 ... Timor West.
McKinnon, Mrs. Anne £ Avoca
McKirdy, Alex. ... 4 ... Somerville, Hastings.
McKmty, Hugh ... 16 ... Narong, Rutherglen.
McLennan, J. ... £ ... Dartmoor.
McLeod WiHiam ... 3 ... Little River Vineyard, Little River.
McNaughton, John ... 4 ... Burwood.
McNeill, W. H. ... 10 ... Barnawartha.
vj C D? ee ’ ••• 4 ... Avoca-road, Lamplough.
McPherson, Donald ... J ... Dartmoor
McPherson, Jas. ... f ... Nangala, Casterton.
McPherson, Rob. ... 27 ... Lilliput, Rutherglen.
McPherson, ... 8* ... Tahbilk, Nagambie.
Nation, Philip ... 13 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Neil son, George ... 4 ... Horticultural Soct.’s Gardens, Richmond.
Neilson, John • ... 25 ... Rutherglen.
••• Ranter’s Gully,Campbell’s Creek.
Niblett, Chas. ... J ... Lockwood
Nicholls, Samuel ... 2 ... Murphy’s Flat, Tarnagulla.
Nicholson, J. C. .. 3 ... McCallum’s Creek, Talbot.
Nickenson, J. M. ... 11 ... Shepparton.
Nicol, John ... ... 4 ... Mirboo.
Nolan, James ... 14 ... Rutherglen.
Norcam, Richard ... 2 ... Jallukar, Stawell West.
Norton, Mrs. Margaret 2 ... Growtley, Wansraratta
Nott, Harry ... ... 7 ~.. Rutherglen. h
Nutske, Henry ... J ... Warracknabeal
Nuttall, Thomas ... £ ... Craigie, Majorca.
Oates, Wm .... ... 2 ... El Dorado.
Odgers, R. ... ... 4 ••• Kitty’s Lead, Napoleon Lead.
Oliver, Mrs. Marg ... 25 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Olney, Jams. ... 2 ... Thomastown.
Olsson, Charles ... 3 ... Mia Mia, Redesdale.


Name. Acres. Address.
Oman, Mrs. Charlotte £ ... Doncaster.
Onsley, Ohas. ... I ... Glen Eira-road, Caulfield.
Osborne, W. T. ... if ... Cemetery-road, Campbell’s Creek.
Osbourne Henry ... 13 ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye.
Osmand, Hon. W. H. S. J ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell West
Ostler and Son, W. H. f ... Mitchelldale,Dayo.
O’Brien, Garrett ... 14 ... Rhymney,
O’Connor, John ... 9 ... Barnawartha.
O’Dea, Michael ... 22 ... Rutherglen.
O’Grady, ... ... ... Rutherglen.
O’Neill, — ... ... f ... North-road, Brighton.
O Shea, John ... f ... Green dale, Ballan.
O’Sullivan, F. ... 2 ... Huntly.
Pagan, George ... 29 ... Burnside, Mooroopna.
Pallenger, Henry ... 25 ... Wunghnu.
Panton’s Freehold M. Co. 5 ... Epsom Vineyard, Sandhurst.
Parker, Joseph ... 2 ... Castlemaine West.
Parker, Mrs. M. ... 4 ... Wodonga West.
Parker, Richard ... f ... Ballan.
Parnaby, M.... ... 10 ... Huon’s Creek, Wodonga.
Parry and Clark ... 4 ... Cambrian, Landsborough
Parry, Edward ... f ... Garden Flat, Majorca.
Parry, William ... | ... Garden Flat, Majorca.
Passalaqua, Prospero 2f ... Shicer Gully, Guildford.
Patterson, J. ... 2 ... Leneva, Wodonga.
Payne, Henry ... l ... Wedderburn.
Payne, HW. G. ... f ... Budgeree, Boolara, South Gippsland.
Payne, Mrs. ... £ ... Kambrook-road, Caulfield
Payne, Mugleston ... 3 ... Kialla West, Mooroopna.
Pearce, Jos. ... 27 ... Crumple Horn, Rutherglen
Peatling, Henry ... l ... Bagshot, Huntly.
Pedrineini, Pietro ... 14 ... Yandoit.
Pedrini, Vincenzo ... 2f ... Yandoit.
Peerless, H. ... ... 3 ... Marong.
Pegganette, Peter ... 2 ... Dunolly.
Pegler, A. H. ... 2 . ... Ned’s Corner, Yelta.
Pellow, Thos. ... l ... Baulkamaugh.
Pennington, Harold ... & ... Glen Eira-road, Caulfield.
Peoples, Robt. ... 39 ... Wodonga.
Perini, Vincent ... 5 ... Spring Creek, Hepburn.
Perry, Mrs. Bridget ... 5 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Petchell, Wm. ... If ... Hamilton South.
Petersen, H. ... ... 15 ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Phelps, Robt. ... 2 ... Dunolly North.
Philip, Adam ... £ ... Bow Flat, Wedderburn.
Phillips, Henry ... 3 ... Warracknabeal.
Plum, Albert ... 2 ... Docker’s Plains, Wangaratta.
Pohl, C. ... ... 20 ... Emu Creek, Sandhurst.
Pola, Mrs. Ann ... 5 ... Rhymney.
Polo, John ... ... 23 * ... Rhymney.
Polo, Peter ... ... 31 ... Rhymney.
Pollard, G. ... ... § ... Bonegilla, Wodonga.
Pollinelli, Antonio ... 4 ... Dunolly.
Pooley, Humphrey ... 24 ... Barnawartha.
Porter, Zadok ... 20 ... Rutherglen.
Posiner, Philip ... l ... Dunolly.
Pottenger, H. F. ... 13 ... Drumanure, Karpool.
Potter, Robt. ... 14 ... Chiltern West, Rutherglen.
Powell, J. ... ... 2 ... Grassy Flat, Sandhurst.
Power, Thos. ... f ... Warracknabeal.
Poxon, Levi ... ... 12 ... Lake Marmal, via Barakee.
M 2


Name. Acres. * Address.
Poynton, Wm. ... 6 ... Pyrenees, Amphitheatre, Eversley.
Pratt, James... ... 35 ... Boorhaman, Wangaratta.
Prentice, Jas. ... 36 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Prentice, M. J. ... 35 ... Emu Plains, Rutherglen.
Prescott, Thos. „. ... Thomastown.
Price, William ... 2 ... Bealiba.
Pritchard, Alexander... 9 ... Havelock-road, Beechworth.
Pump, John ... ... 3i ... Doncaster East.
Purcell, William H. ... £ ... Bannerman-street, Bong Gully.
Pyle, Robert... ... 5 ... Three-mile, Beechworth.
Quin, Charles ... 3 ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Quinn, A. ... ... 10 ... Indigo, Chiltern.
Quirk, Thomas ... 4 ... Mooroopna North.
Quirt Bros. ... ... 7 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Rainess, H. ... ... 2 ... Castlemaine.
Ralston, Dav. ... 34 ... Rutherglen.
Ralston, Thos. ... 10 ... Rutherglen.
Ramsey, H. T. ... 7 ... St. Andrew, Kangaroo Ground.
Rankin, C. ... ... i ... Waterloo.
Ranseyer, F. A. ... 5 ... Telford, Yarrawonga.
Ratcliffe, David ... 12 ... Kyabram, Rodney.
Ratbjen, H. ... ... 5 ~. Colbinabbin.
Ray, E. ... ... 37 ... Rutherglen.
Reade, C. ... ... 4 ... High-street, Sandhurst.
Reaux, Camille ... 6 ... Wahgunyah.
Reddington, W. R. ... 20 ... Yackandandah.
Redwood, Richard ... 2 ... Barton Farm, Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Reed, Charles H. ... 3 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Reeve, Thomas ... 35 ... Rutherglen.
Regan, Mrs. A. ... 3 ... Lake Lonsdale, Stawell.
Remsyen, Fredk. ... 7 ... Kangaroo Ground, Eltham.
Renwick, Mrs. ... £ „. Caulfield.
Rettich, David ... 3 ... Doncaster.
Rey, E. ... ... 13 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Richards, F.... ... 2 ... Bailieston, Nagambie.
Richards, J. ... ... 3 ... Wodonga.
Richards, ... ... % ... Fawkner.
Richardson, H. ... 5 ... Allen’s Flat, Yackandandah.
Richardson, J. ... 7 ... Barnawartha.
Richardson, William ... 7 ... Docker’s Plains, Wangaratta.
Ridout, J. E.... ... 2 ... Goorambat East.
Ridout, Robert ... 10 ... Goorambat Vineyard, Benalla.
Righetti, Battista ... 1J ... Yandoit.
Righetti, Joseph ... 3£ ... Hepburn.
Riley, E. ... ... 1 ... Wangaratta.
Ring, E. ... ... 13 ... Rutherglen.
Roberts, John ... 17 ... Fairburn Grange, Cashel.
Roberts, J. ... ... 2 ... Lockwood.
Roberts, Mrs. ... 2 ... Shelbourne.
Robertson, Geo. ... £ ... Warrock, Casterton.
Robb, John ... ... 18 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Robbins, Joseph ... 7 ... Barnedown.
Robbins, J. M. ... 4 ... Kangaroo Flat.
Robbins, W. ... ... 3 ... Muskerry.
Robinson, G. W. ... 2 ... Berwick.
Robinson, James ... 10 ... Concongella South.
Robinson, Mrs. ... 30 ... Indigo, Yackandandah,
Robinson, William ... 1£ ... Malakoff-road, Beechworth.
Robinson, Wm. ... 2| ... Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Boeder C. ... ... I ... Victoria-street, Long Gully.


Name. Acres. Address.
Roffins, Martin ... 1 ... Longwood.
Rogers, Thos. ... if ... Ballarat-road, Daylesford.
Rolleri, Guiseppe ... 6 ... Spring Creek, Hepburn.
Ronchi, Polo ... 15 ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell West.
Roset, John ... ... 2 ... Doncaster.
Rosetti, Barnard ... l£ ... Parkin’s Reef-road, Maldon.
Ross, Chas. M. ... 1 ... Broadford.
Ross, John G. ... 1 ... Serpentine.
Ross, William ... 4 ... Big Waterhole, Talbot.
Ross, William ... \ ... Alabama, Coghill’s Creek.
Rossia, Thomas ... 1 ... Porcupine Ridge, G^enlyon.
Rouse, William ... 1 ... Inkerman-road, Beechworth.
Roustan, E. ... ... J ... Gordon.
Rowan, Andrew ... 260 ... St. Hubert’s, Lillydale.
Rowan, John ... ... Bailieston, Nagambie.
Rowan, John ... 5 ... Mitchelstown.
Rowe, Edward ... 4 ... Fryerstown.
Rowe, Hannibal 0. ... if ... Castlemaine.
Rowe, William ... 10 ... Chiltern West, Rutherglen.
Rubli, Abraham ... lj ... Bailieston, Nagambie.
Rubli, Fredk. ... 20 ... Bailieston, Nagambie.
Rubie, Jacob ... 13 ... View Point Vineyard, Michelston, Tabilk.
Ruske, H. ... ... 2 ... Derrijar, Warracknabeal.
Ruedin, A. ... ... 30 ... Huntly Vineyard, Huntly.
Ruehe, Antony ... 15 ... Rutherglen.
Ruhe, Fritz ... ... 19 ... Rutherglen.
Rumbler. A.... ... $ .. Napoleon Lead.
Rundel, Mrs. J. ... 3 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Rundel, J. T. ... 2 ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye.
Rundel, M. ... ... 6 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Rusconie, Charles ... 2 ... Tarilta, Vaughan.
Rutland, William ... 14 ... Rokewood Junction.
Rutter, J. ... ... 2 ... Fell Timber Creek, Wodonga.
Ryan, John ... ... ... Dookie.
Ryan, M. ... ... 2 ... Bet Bet, Dunolly.
Ryan, Thos. ... ... £ ... Nuggetty Gully, Fryerstown.
Ryan, W. ... ... 7 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Ryan, ... ... 6 ... Almond Grove, Bet Bet.
Ryley, F. ... ... ... Wangaratta.
Saines, John... ... 6 ... Rutherglen.
Saines, Rob. ... ... 10 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Salinger, H. ... ... 12 ... Hochhiem Vineyard, Great Western.
Salvia, Peter... ... l£ ... Chewton.
Sanders, Theodore ... £ ... Benevolent Asylum, Ballarat South.
Samblebe, Franz ... 2f ... Lower Three-mile, Beechworth.
Sargentson, John ... 10 ... Big Hill, Stawell West.
Sartori, Lazarus ... l£ ... Yandoit.
Sartori, Peter ... 5 ... Yandoit.
Saulter, C. A. ... £ ... Gibson-road, Sandringham.
Scarffe, John ... f ... Garden Flat, Majorca.
Scarlett, Wm. ... | ... Mirboo.
Sceilly, Thos. ... li ... Katunga.
Schache, E. ... ... * i ... Murtoa.
Schelisky, Henry ... if ... Reid’s Creek, Beechworth.
Scheuflle, L. F. ... 4 ... Epsom, Huntly.
ScheufHe, W. ... 4 ... Epsom, Huntly.
Schlemme, Wilhelm ... ... California Gully.
Schlink, A. ... ... 12 ... Huon’s Creek, Wodonga.
Schlue, H. ... ... 30 ... Rutherglen.
Schluter, Henry ... 40 ... Rutherglen.
Schmede, Chas. F. ... 2 ... Muckleford.
Schmitt, Franz ... 2 ... Berwick.


Name. Acres. Address.
Schnider, Jacob ... 4 ... Surrey Hills, Box Hill.
Schramm, M. ... 2 ... Doncaster.
Schroder, Ernest ... 13 ... Chinaman’s Creek, Castlemaine.
Schuhkraft, G. F. ... 7 ... Doncaster.
Schutt, Hans ... \ ... Kangaroo Flat.
Schutt, Henry ... 1 ... Kangaroo Flat.
Schwab, Golfred ... 4 ... Mitchellston, Nagambie.
Schwarer, Jos. ... 8 ... Chiltern West, Rutherglen.
Schweitzer, J. ... 9 ... Barnawartha North.
Schwind, J. ... ... 2i ... Wodonga West.
Scorer, Mrs. M. ... | ... Woodlands, Napoleon Lead.
Scott, Alex. ... ... 2” ... Somerville, Hastings.
Scott, J. ... ... 30 ... Wahgunyah.
Scott, R. F. ... ... 10 ... Kanyapella, via Echuca.
Seeber, Christian ... li ... Epping.
Segar, Ferdinand ... 1 ... Mount Beckworth, Clunes.
Selletti, ... ... 7 ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell.
Severino, John ... 2 ... Caralulup, Talbot, Lexton.
Severino, John ... 4 ... EvanSford, Talbot.
Sewell, Martin ... 15 ... Bet Bet.
Shaw, E. ... • ... i ... Korong Yale.
Shaw, F. K. ... ... 9 ... Goornong.
Shaw, Mrs. Sarah ... 6 ... Rutherglen.
Shaw, Rinz. ... ... 9 ..« Goornong.
Shaw. Samuel ... 40 ... Redesdale, North Wangaratta.
Shaw, Sami. ... ... 30 ... Tarrawingee.
Shelly, Wm. ... ... 2 ... Indigo-road, Chiltern.
Shillinglaw, J. J., & Sons 10 ... Dumbiedykes,Panton Hill.
Shoebridge, Edwd. ... 3 ... Havelock-road, Beechworth.
Shoebud, Thos. ... 6 ... Holmes Creek, Beechworth.
Shoecraft, Godfrey ... 4 ... Doncaster.
Siebel, John ... ... i ... Thomastown.
Silvester, Eugene ... * ... Coleraine.
Simon, A. C. ... £ ... Green Bank, Bacchus Marsh.
Simon, R. ... ... 4 ... Middle Creek, Yackandandah.
Simons, George ... I ... Waterloo.
Simpson, Mrs. ... S ... Cabanandra.
Simpson, Thos. ... f ... Gibson-road, South Brighton.
Sims, ... ... 7 ... Moliagul.
Sinclair Bros. ... £ ... Rupanyup.
Skene, A. B. ... l£ ... Mildura.
Skinner, John ... £ ... Coleraine. . .
Skyrme, Geo. ... 40 ... St. George Vineyard, Great Western.
Slade, George ... 40 ... Fairview, Rhymney.
Small, William ... £ ... North-road, Brighton.
Smart, Rob. ... ... 40 ... Rutherglen.
Smith, A. ... ... £ ... Napoleon Lead.
Smith, Daniel ... 15 ... Eversley.
Smith, G. S. and Sons 250 ... All Saint’s, Wahgunyah.
Smith, H. P. ... 1 ... Suffolk Hall Vineyard, Strathfieldsaye.
Smith, James Henry ... l£ ... Hind’s Diggings, Redbank.
Smith, John ... ... 2 ... Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Smith, John Thos. ... 23 ... Rose Hill, Howlong-road, Chiltern.
Smith, J. H. ... 170 ... Mundadda Vineyard, Barnawartha.
Smith, J. ... ... 200 ... Brown’s Plains, Rutherglen.
Smith, Luke ... i ••• Waterloo.
Smith, Mrs. Christina £ ...' Daylesford-road, Ballan.
Smith, Thos. ... 9 ... Beechworth.
Snowden, E. G. ... 6 ... Monomeath, Canterbury-road, Box Hill.
Somerville, Thomas ... 7 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Somerville, William, jun. 4 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Somerville, William, sen. 3 ... Strathfieldsaye.
Speakman,— ... 1 ... Dunolly.


Name. Acres. Address.
Stade, H 37 ... Rhymney.
Stafford, Thos. ... 1 ... Dunolly.
Stafford, Wm. ... 2 ... Deep Lead, Wimmera.
Stanger T. ... ... 8 ... Fell Timber Creek, Wodonga.
Starr ... ... 1 ••• Baranduda, Yackandandah.
Stawell Vineyard Co.’" 110 ... Watta Wella, Stawell.
Stead, John jas. ... 1 ... Black Dog Creek Chiltern.
Steen, John ... ... 1 ... Emu Creek, Strathfieldsaye.
Stehn’ W. ' ... li ... Lowan, Natimuk.
Stephens, Joseph ... f ... Three-mile Beechworth.
Stevenson, Robert ... 10 ... Nillumbik, Kangaroo Grd., Queenstown.
Stewart, James ... 1 ... Teddywaddy, Wycheproof.
Stewart, J. G. ... £ ••• Craigie, Majorca.
Stiggants, Henry ... 1 ... Warrandyte.
Stoaker, Heinrich ... 32 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen. ,
Stone Edward ... 2 ... The Delta, Laanecoone, Eddington.
Strachen, Thos. ... 3 ... Axe Creek, Axedale.
Stranch, F. G. ... 3 ... Huntly.
Streckfuss, H. ... • 20 ... Goornong.
Strickfiss, Edward ... 18 ... Eddington, Goornong
Stuckensmidth, F. ... £ ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Sullivan, David ... 23 ... Rutherglen.
Sullivan, John ... 20 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Summers, Albert ... 10 ... Newbridge.
Summers G. ... 3 ... Baranduda, Wodonga.
Summers, H. ... 3 ... Baranduda, Wodonga.
Summons, P., sen. ... 5 ... Baranduda, Yackandandah.
Summons, P, H» ••• 4 ... B&rEmduclji, YB»CK3.nQ3»nQ.B»ii.
Sutherland, D. ... 10 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
Sutherland, J. ... 5 ... Indigo, Yackandandah
Sutton, G. ... ... 2 ... Fell Timber Creek, Wodonga.
Sutton, Stephen ... l£ ... Tallarook.
Swan, Andrew ... 23 ... St. Leonard, Wangaratta.
Swanton, William ... £ ... Stuartmill.
Sweeney. Terence ... 12 ... Rhymney.
Swindale, Henry ... £ ... Runnymede, Elmore.
Synnott, Mrs. E. M. 40 ... Goonawarra, Sunbury.
Tahbilk (Chateau) Co. 360 ... Nagambie.
Tait, Samuel... ... 1 ... Dunolly South.
Tait, William ... 5 ... View Bank Farm, Boweya, Lake Rowan.
Tanner W. ... ... 9 ... Barnawartha.
Telford, Ja’s. ... 34 ... Rutherglen.
Templeman, William £ ... Dunolly.
Tennant, George ... i ... Kangaroo Flat.
Tenner, A. ... ... 5 ... Wodonga.
Tenner, James ... 8 ... Wodonga.
Tenner, P. A. ... 10 ... Wodonga.
Tetlow, J 2 ... Dunolly.
Thiele, Gottlieb ... 7 ... Doncaster.
Thomas, Alfred ... £ ... Thomastown.
Thomas, Francis ... 3£ ... Fern Hill, A scot Val e.
Thomas T 5 ... Allen’s Flat, Yackandandah.
Thompson, j"is. i’.’. £ ... Baynton, Kyneton
Thompson, Mary ... 7£ ... Spring Creek, Beechworth.
Thomson, Patrick ... £ ... Dayiesford-road Banan.
Thomson, W. K. ... £ ... North-road, Brighton.
Thorne. Robert ... 4 ... Newbndß®.
Thornell, George ... 1 ... Somerville, Hastings.
Thornell, Henry ... 1£ ••• Somerville, Hastings.
Thornell John ... 3 ... Somervi e, Hastings.
Thornell J., jun. ... 1 ... Somervi e, Irankston.
Thornell, Thomas ... 1 - Somerville, Hastings.


Name. Acres. Address.
Toogood, Jane ... £ ... Oampbellfield.
Trararsi, Philip ... 1 ... Elevated Plains, Hepburn.
Treheir, Nicholas ... £ ... White Hills, Sandhurst.
Trevise, Benjamin ... 4 ... Lockwood South, Kangaroo Flat.
Trewella, John ... J ... Union-street, Brighton.
Tribolet, Abraham ... 12 ... Excelsior Vineyard, Corop.
Trimble, Robt. „. 25 ... Rutherglen.
Trinkhaus, Albert ... 1 ... Muckleford, Castlemaine.
Trombold, Henry ... 2 ... Doncaster.
Trotman, John ... 10 ... Federal, Kurraca South, Wedderburn.
Trouette and Blampied 87 ... St. Peter’s Vineyard, Great Western.
Trudewind, A. ... 4 ... Nure Creek, Wodonga.
Tuckett, J. R. ... 15 .. Rosenberg, Riddell’s Creek.
Turner, Robt. ... 17 ... Lake View, Rutherglen.
Turnow, William ... £ ... Dane-street, Long Gully.
Turpia, James ... 1 ... Lower Tarwin.
Twiddy, Robert ... 2 ... Wedderburn.
Tyrell, H. ... ... 10 ... Boggy Creek, Moyhu, Hedi.
Übergang, Chas. ... 1 ... Doncaster East.
Upton, Christop. ... 20 ... Lilliput, Rutherglen.
Upton, W. ... ... 24 ... Gladstone, Rutherglen.
Urquhart, James ... 13 ... Doctor’s Creek, Stawell West.
Vahland, W. C. ..„ 30 ... Charter Vineyard, Runnymede, Elmore.
Valh, Antoni ... 3* ... Goornong South.
Vanina, Charles ... l| ... Hepburn.
Vanna, James ... 3 ... Rock View, Newtown, Beechworth.
Van Staveren, J. C. ... ... Nathalia.
Vantravers, Paul ... 23 ... Langi-Ghiran, Ararat.
Veitch, Christopher ... 2 ... Casterton.
Vickers, Edward ... 2 ... Nagambie.
Vince, Daniel ... 3 ... Essex Farm, Bridgewater.
Virgoe, Mrs. ... ... North-road, Brighton.
Vosti, Antonio ... 1J ... Ballarat-road, Guildford.
Waldron, Chs. ... 16 ... Carlyle, Rutherglen.
Waldron, John ... 12 Rutherglen.
Walker, Thomas ... \ ... McCallum’s Creek, Majorca.
Wallace, John ... 44 ... Bullock Creek, Marong.
Walsh, Alex. ... | ... Union-street, Brighton.
Walsh, Thos. ... 12 ... Rutherglen.
Ward, J. .., ... Bagshot, Huntly.
Warnackie, H. ... 10 ... Burnt Creek, Dunolly.
Warne, Fras. ... | ... Kangaroo Flat.
Warnecke, C. H. ... 3 ... Wunghnu.
Warnicke, C. H. ... 12 ... Bromley,
Warren, Henry ... io ... Rutherglen.
Wass, John ... ... 3 ... Vale Hotel, Moonambel-road, Avoca.
Waterson James ... i ... Croft Hill Farm, Baringhup East, Maldon.
Watkin, J F. ... 5* ... Beaufort-road, Beaufort.
Watson, Hector J ... Dartmoor.
Watson, J. G. ... J ... Walwa, Tintaldra.
Watson, W. ... ... £ ... Napoleon Lead.
Watt, Hugh ... ... 8 ... Cashel.
Watts, Wm. ... ... 2 ... Doncaster.
Webb, George ... 2 ... Newtown, Beechworth.
Webb, Wm ... * ... Darling-street, Echuca East.
Webb, W. J. ... 8 ... Rochester.
Webster, A. ... ... 5 ... Mooroopna.
Webster, Joseph ... 10 ... Moodemere, Rutherglen.
Webster, R., jun. ... 30 ... Wahgunyah.
Webster, Rob., sen. ... 10 ... Wahgunyah.
Wehsack, Francis ... £ ... Ormond-road, Elwood.


Name. Aores. Address.
Weigard, Wm. ... 2 ... Lockwood.
Wendell, C. H. ... 3 ... Colbinabbin, Elmore.
Wendell, H. E. ... l* ... Colbinabbin.
West, John ... ... 20 ... Mooroopna.
Dayid - i ... Glen Eira-road, Elsternwick.
••• ... Malakoff-road, Beechworth.
Whitehead, J. R. ... £ ... Barnawartha.
Whitehead, O. ... 2 ... Indigo, Yackandandah.
ea T'« "• ••• Upper Indigo, Barnawartha.
Whittingham, Geo. ... * ... Caulfield.
Wickam Bros. ... 6 ... Ballington Vineyard, Wodonga.
Wilcot, John ... £ ... Casley-street, Long Gully.
Wilkins, Jas.... ... 20 ... Gooramadda, Rutherglen.
Williams, A. J. ... 3 ... Dunbulbalane.
Williams Bros. ... 16 ... Leneva, Wodonga.
Williams, Daniel ... $ ... Middle Creek, Moonambel.
Williams, D 18 ... Middle Creek, Wodonga.
Williams, Enoch ... 2 ... Holmes Creek, Beechworth.
Williams, E.... 2 ... Leneva, Wodonga.
Williams, E 10 ... Middle Creek, Yackandandah.
Williams, G.... ... ± ... Gordon.
Williams, H. ... 3 ... Tarnagulla.
Williams, Jas. ... 14 ... Numurkah.
Williams, Joseph H.... 3 ... Stony Creek, Tarnagulla.
Williamson, D. Walter 15 ... Beau Sejour, Eversley.
Willis, James ... 2 ... South Wangaratta.
Wills, John J. B. ... 4 ... Bolerch, Moonambel.
Wilson, Dickenson ... 8 ... Warrakgeep, Eversley.
Wilson, Hector ... 6 ... Vectis Bridge, Natimuk.
Wilson, John ... 2 ... Crowlands.
Wilson, M. ... ... 4 ... Upstonville, Mooroopna.
Wilson, M. ... ... 4 ... North Mooroopna.
Wilson, Thomas ... 10 ... North Mooroopna.
Wilson, W. ... ... 3 ... Eversley
Wilson, W. ... ... 3 ... Barnawartha.
Wingfield, Wm. ... 2£ ... Bridgewater-on-Loddon.
Wingor, William ... 4 ... Bullock Creek, Marong.
Winks, H. ... ... 3 ... Winter’s Flat, Castlemaine.
Winter, Frederick ... 3 ... Doncaster.
Winzar, ... ... 4 ... Axe Creek, Axedale.
Wise, J. ... ... 16 ... Rutherglen.
Wittig, Ennis ... i ... Doncaster.
Wood, Thomas ... j ... Ballarat South.
Work, William ... 10 ... Landsborough.
Wornes, William ... 3 ... Mooroopna.
Worthy, Mrs. ... 2 ... Coleraine.
Wuillemin, Louis ... 8 - ... Delta Vineyard, Briagolong.
Yackovitey, A. ... 1 ... Wandiligong.
Yander, Andrew ... 5£ ... Doncaster East.
Yander, Chas. ... 4 ... Doncaster East.
York, Edward ... 3 ... Three-mile, Beechworth.
Young, Charles ... 10 ... Nursery Vineyard, Newbridge.
Young, John ... ... Rutherglen,
Young, J. F„... ... 32 ... Mooroopna.
Young, J. ... ... 2 ... Jackass Flat, Eaglehawk.
Young, J. ... ... l£ ... Parkin’s Reef-road, Maldon.
Young, Wm. ... 2 ... Baulkamaugh.
Zander, Andrew ... 3 ... Doncaster East.
Zander, Charles ... 5 ... Doncaster East.
Zerbe, Auguste ... 3J ... Doncaster East.
Zwar, Michael ... 1£ ... Broadford.


APPENDIX D.
LIST OF APPLICATIONS FROM VINE-GROWERS IN
VICTORIA UNDER THE BONUS REGULATIONS
[ACT No. 1043].
[May, 1891.]
WITH AREAS PROPOSED TO BE CULTIVATED.
Name. Pftrißh - A - R
Amies, S. J. P Horsham ® ®
Aitken, Elizth Mildura 4 u
Alexander, Jas.... ... Toolamba ... ... ••• ••• *0
Anderson, J.C Borung ® ”
Aston, A. W Youanmite ... *0 ”
Alexander, Josiah ... Terrappee "
Alexander, Jas.... ... Mildura ... ... ... •••
Appleby, A Mildura ® "
Atkinson, H Mildura * u
Allen, Chas Byawatha ... * "
Anderson, Chas. ... Kanyapella and Wharparilla 10 0
Bernassochi, J. ... ... Woosang ... ... ••• ••• * %
Braillard, J. ... ... Tabilk 10 0
Buckley, A. K Norong »
Brensing, E. ... ... Tabilk ... ... ••• •••
Browne, J. H Horsham 6 *
Bennett, R. P Horsham ... * ”
Baker, Geo Berrimal J
Burrowes, W. ... ... Carlyle... ... ... ••• ••• _ n
Briggs, Mrs. M. J. ... Lilliput ® ”
Briggs, R. R Norong - 0
Baldwin, W Girgarre East 0
Burke, J Lilliput “ ”
Burge, J. T Toolamba * ”
Bailey, V Glenrowen J® "
Barlow, J. B Barnawartha *
Baumgarten, G. L. ... Barnawartha North ... 40 u
Barnes, G. Jallukar ... 10 0
Brache and Co Strathfieldsaye... 0
Blaikie, A Carraragarmungee 18 0
Brien, W. R. H.... ... Wangaratta South o u
Batson, G Tarrangmme 5 0
■Rppir ff ... Gooramadda ... ... ... ... u
Boon’ John !!! ... Mooroopna J J
Bell, R Mooroopna o o
Brown, D Norong 4 0
Bridgefoot, J Carraragarmungee 0
Brierley, T. W Chiltern West J® J
Bacon, W. H Glenalbyn 1 u


Name. Parish. a. b.
Buckland, J. S. ... ... Goornong ... ... ... ... 7 0
Baum, A. ... ... Boorhaman ... ... ... ... 4 0
Baumgarten, W. G. ... Barnawartha ... ... ... ... 3 0
Browu, John ... ... Mudgegonga ... ... ... ... 5 0
Bandy, T. ... ... Corack East ... ... ... ... 2 0
Baker, Geo. ... ... Bungalally ... ... ... ... 1 2
Bott, C. ... ••• Boomahnoomoonah ... ... ... 11 0
Brehant, Geo. ... ... Concongella ... ... ... ... 2 0
Burgess, D. ... ... Tallygaroopna ... ... ... ... 3 0
Bowman, W. ... ... Bet Bet ... ... ... ... 4 0
Bradley, P. ... ... Ca,rraragarmungee ... „ ... ... 10 0
Blackburrow, T. ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 10 0
Briggs, B. R. ... ... Waaia ... ... ... ... ... 17 0
Byrne and Barry ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 4 0
Ballintine, E. ... ... Dookie... ... ... ... ... 12 0
Baxter, Jno. ... ... Barnawartha North ... ... ... 6 2
Bailey, E. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 7 2
Bourke, J. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 6 0
Bromley, C. H. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 8 0
Cox, Elizh. F. ... Elmore ... ... ... ... 4 0
Chalmers, D. ... ... Wychitella ... ... ... ... 10 0
Chomley, A. W.... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 8 0
Clayton, W. ... ... Barnawartha ... ... ... ... 12 0
Campbell, Jno. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 8 0
Clear, Jno. ... ... Barnawatha North ... ... ... 6 3
Colvin, H. ... ... Boorhaman ... ... ... ... 0 0
Critchfield, J. ... ... Borung 1 1
Crisp, T. E. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 7 2
Crosthwaite, A. ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 11 2
Costello, J. H. ... ... Bet Bet ... ... ... ... 20 0
Colvin, J. ... ... Norong 10 0
Coster, C. E. P Mildura 8 0
Cau, F. D. B. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 10 0
Conna, J. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ... ••• 6 0
Chappell, A Pelluebla 2 0
Cameron, W. ... ... Boort ... ... ... ... 2 0
Clementson, J. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ••• 12 0
Cameron, C. ... ... Bet Bet ... ... ••• ••• 13 0
Cordner, G. ... ... Miram Piram ... ... ... 2 0
Carson, T Huntly 4 2
Clay, W. Bagshot 5 0
Cocks, J. S. ... ... Woodstock 1 0
Carolin, M. ... ... Waggarandall 6 0
Cooper, J Wooragee North 12 0
Culham, M. ... ... Chiltern West ... ... ••• 20 0
Chandler, W. ... ... Carlyle 13 2
Charlesworth, J. ... Mandurang ... ••• ••• ••• o 0
Caelli, B Huntly ... 1 2
Cheesley, R. H. ... ... Barnawartha South ... ... ... 6 0
Chandler, Geo., jun. ... Carlyle... ... ••• ••• ••• 16 0
Conroy, B. ... ... Concongella ... ••• ••• ••• 5 0
Cox, T. J. ... ... Barnawartha North and South ... ... 4 2
Cuneen, M. ... ... Runnymede ... ... 5 2
Corcoran, J. ... ... Glenlogie ... ••• ••• ••• • 0
Crozier, E. ... ... Mildura ... ••• 4 0
Carver, W. A. ... ... Mildura ... ... 3 0
Chaffey, Annie A. ... Mildura ... 10 0
Campbell, T. L. ... Mildura ... 0
Chandler, W, J. ... Carraragarmungee 25 0
Curtain, John ... ... Dookie ... ••• ... ••• 50 0
Clurey, P. ... ... Youannnte ... ... ... ... 1 0


Name - Parish. A . B .
Dudley, F. J. ... ... Maryborough ... ... i 0
Delves, H. ... ... Marong ... ... q 0
Derry, J. D. ... ... Horsham ... " " i<> n
Darveniza, T Mooroopna .. 99 X
Delbridge, T. ... ... Huntly ... T j 5
Davis, J. A. T. ... ... Yarrawonga ... ... 51
Day, J.... ... ... Pine Lodge ... ... in 0
Dunn, J. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... *” g n
Dale, A. A. ... ... Wangaratta North ... . ’’ 4 n
Dunne, M. ... ... Youanmite ... ... *'* 14 n
Donaldson, J, B. ... Woosang ... it «
Daly, H. O’B. ... ... Dunolly ... ... g n
Downie, 8., jun. ... Shepparton ... ... ... 4 9
DevittjP. ... ... Wooragee North ... 3 n
Davis, J. B Shadforth 5 X
Delmmico, G. ... ... Terrappee ... ... ... 20 0
Danaher, W. ... ... Barnawartha South ... 12 0
Deßavay, A Woori Yallock ... • ... 94 X
Dunstan W. ... ... Tarrawingee ... ... 9 n
Dalton, T. C. ... ... Horsham ... ... 1 ft
Dunstan, W. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... 5 0
Dormer, J. M. ... ... Norong ... 10 ft
Doig, J. G Oxley S . I .X g° 0
Debney, F. W. ... ... Horsham ... 1 0
Dagon, P. S Wandin Yallock ... 2 0
Eldridge, G. ... ... Norong ... ... 14 0
••• ... Kyabram East .. ... 30 0
®}}} 8 ® r o s - ... ... Lockwood ... ... ... 4 q
Elliott, John ... ... Norong ... .. 15 0
Edleston, J. S. ... ... Carapooee ... . 10
Eurns, K J Stawell ~' m 5 0
Elliott, R. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... .. 8 0
Edmonds, J. H. ... ... Carchap 6 0
p d r > J T - Tongala 15 0
juscer, j. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... #>< g 0
eraser, A. ... ... Timmering ... ... ” 5 0
Field, J. R. A Kialla “* g X
Fisher, T. ... ... Gooramadda
Fealey, G. A. ... ... Byawatha ... ... ... 25 0
Fraser, Hugh ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ... 40 0
Faulkner, J. ... ... Woosang ... ... ... ... 10 2
Fairless, W. ... ... Baulkamaugh ... ... ... ... 4 0
Fmmster, J. ... ... Upotipotpon ... ... ... ... 4 n
Fisher, R. ~. ... Chiltern ... ... ... ... 4 n
Filtoe, R. H. ... .:. Mildura ... ... ... ... 5 g
Foster, J. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... 3 0
Falvey, E. ... ... Chiltern West ...
Ferguson, G. ... ... Mysia o n
Field, J. ... ... Quantong ... ... ... 2 0
Fitzpatrick, M. .;. ... Mildura 4 0
Forster, T. ... ... Horsham ... ... ... .X 4 2
Fortesque, C. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... g q
Gordon, D. .... ... Mildura ... .... g 2
Grattan, W ... Gowangardi* ... ... ... 45 q
Governa, B .... Moormbool East ... *" 40 n
Gordon, G. ... .... Mildura ... ... .X 3 0
Gibbons, R. Taminick ... .... 4 n
Geake, J. E. .... ... Mildura ... ... ... 7 0
Grossman, W. ... Wangaratta North ... ... 14 n
Gilliland, W. ... ... Goormadda ... ... ... 10 0


Name. Parish. a. r.
Graham, H. P. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 8 0
Graham, Anne ... ... Carlyle ... ... „. ... 22 0
Gibbs, J. ... ... Gowangardie South ... ... ... 2 2
Gillham, J. W. ... ... Branjee ... ... ... ... 2 0
Griffin, A. ... ... Barnawatha ... ... ... ... 4 0
Gassies, J. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 30 0
Gray; W. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 7 0
Garrett, M., jun. ... Miepoll ... ... ... ... 3 0
Griffiths, M. ... ... Tallygaroopna ... ... ... ... 2 0
Greatorex, T. ... ... Yabba Yabba ... ... ... ... 10 0
Groom, H. ... ... Berrimal ... ... „.. ... 3 0
Green, J. ... ... Mandurang ... ... ... ... 6 0
Goulden, M. ... ... Neereman ... ... ... ... 3 0
Gardiner, G. ... ... Dookie... ... ... ... ... 5 0
Gill, J. ... ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 5 0
Graham, Geo. ... ... Drumanure ... ... ... ... 6 0
Gray, W. M. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 4 0
Gianetti, B. ... ... Bealiba ... ... ... ... 1 0
Graham, A. ... ... Kialla ... ... ... ... ... 10 2
Gorman, J. M. ... ;.. Yarrawonga ... ... ... ... 10 0
Garrard, A. F. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 3 0
Griggs, J. A. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 7 0
Gamble, E. N. ... ... Watchegatcheca ... ... ... 3 0
Giles, J. ... ... Kewell West ... ... ... ... 14 0
Hallahan, J. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 16 0
Henderson, A. i.. ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 11 0
Halleen, M. ... ... Norong ... ... ... ... 18 0
Henshilwood, J. ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 12 0
Hamilton, D. G. ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 10 0
Hossack, J. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 10 0
Humphreys, J. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 10 0
Hintze, G. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... .. 3 0
Hughes, W. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 30 0
Hoare, C. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 5 0
Howard, K. G. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 6 2
Harper, J. ... ... Toolamba ... ... ... ... 5 2
Hicks, W. C. ... ... Bundalong ... ... ... ... 3 0
Headdey, E. ... ... Concongella ... ... ... ••• 10 0
Harris, T. H. .., ... Kunat Ivunat ... ... ••• ... 30 0
Holmes, J. T. ... ... Chariton East ... ... ... ••• 4 0
Hamilton, Mrs. E. ... Concongella South ... ... ... 2 0
Howard, J. ... ... Betley ... ... ... ••• ... 1 2
Howell, Margt. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ••• ... 7 0
Hurnall, C. ... ... Concongella South ... ... ... 11 0
Hicks, J. ... ... Chiltern West ... ... ... 6 2
Hannan, H. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ••• 19 0
Heape Bros. ... ... Currawa ... ... ... 5 0
Henrickson, G. ... ... Moliagul ... ... ••• ••• 2 0
Hare, W. T. ... ... Murchison North ... ... ... 2 2
Hansen, H. ... ... Lurg ... ... ••• ... ••• 3 0
Hill, W. Karrabumet 30 0
Hinton, E. ... ... Huntly... ... «... ... 12 0
Hardie, C. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 6 0
Hazell Bros. ... ... Oxley ... ... ••• ••• ••• 7 0
Hughes, M. ... ... Barnawartha South ... ... ... 6 0
Hanlon, L. ... ... Kotupna ... ... ... 10 0
Hurley, D. ... ... Lexington ... ... ... ... 1 2
Hayes, T. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 3 2
Hughes, S. ... ... Dooen ... ... ... ... ... 1 0
Harriman, T. ... ... Girgarre East ... ... ..... ... 9 2
Hughes, T. ... ... Barnawartha South ... .... ... 4 0


Name. Parish. A R
Inchbold, J. ... ... Yarrawonga ... ... ... 04 n
Ireland, DeC Horsham ... . 3 f $
Idiens, A. C Mildura .* ,
Irving, F Mildura o n
Inghs, M Mildura ... Jj q
Jones, W. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ok n
Jeffrey, A. D. ... ... Echuca North ... ... " k o
Jackson, C. R Drouin West ... ’ ‘"no
Jack, R. Lilliput ... ... 4 n i
Johns, G. H. ... ... Katandra ... ... in n
Judd, E. W Mildura J n
Johns, R., jun. ... ... Carchap ... ..1 ’* 9
Jackson, 8. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ’ ' ik a
Jones, W. ... ... Tamlnick ... an
Jacob, J. Kialla West ... ... or, n
Johns, Jno. ... ... Waggarandall ... s n
Johnston, J. S. ... ... ... ... ’ *** ? ”
Jackson, H. H. ... ... Norong ” *’* * 5 i
Johns, H., sen. ... ... Carchap ... ;.. ’’’ *” i 9
Jones, Geo. ... ... Boorhaman ... .. « n
Jones, F. A. ... ... Bungalally ... c
Jenner, T. B. ... ... Mildura ... “ o n
Jeffers, Wm Byawatha • ... a n
Jackson, A. ... ... Ararat... ... ... 10 q
Kelly, J. ... ... Carlyle... ... on n
Konig, H. E. Y. ... Mooroopna ... ' 10
Kay, E.... ... ... Carlyle ... "* 14 0
Kidston, W. McF. ... Mildura ... 7 J
King, D. ... ... Lilliput ... ” " cn n
Kannenberg, J. H. ... Woorak ... « n
Kelly, Jno Carlyle n n
Kelly, Martin Wodonga ... n
Kemp, R. ... ... Yarrowalla ... ’ 5 0
Keagle Isabella Pine Lodge ... “ *" „
Kfech, H. ... ... Sandhurst ... ... 0
Kearney, T. D. ... ... Gooramgooramgoncr c n
Kilburn, J. E. ... ... Mildura ... 4 n
Keogh, Ed. ... ... Tarrawingee ... iil 4 n
Keyte, Ann ... ... Natimuk . . ’ k n
Knight, G. W. ... ... Huntly... ... *" *** c n
Kelly, Mich. Carlyle Z 2 l 2
Looney, T Carlyle q n
Lewis, W. E. ... ... Knowsley East... ... " 14 n
Lawford, W Mokoan ... ... “* l n
Long, W. J. ... ... Elmore... ... ... " q n
Lyons, Mary Carlyle... ... *** «
Lennon, J., sen Barrakee ... o n
Lancaster, S Kyabram East *" 6 n
Lane W ... ... Shadforth ... ... ” -.on
fynch E. ... ... Yarrawonga ... ... ”* n
Lilford, E Tongala ** ... ... J
Lilford, J. ... ... Kyabram East ... ... a n
Lancaster, J. ... ... Taripta ... ... *" ”* 7 n
Lenne, C. ... ... Wharparilla ... "* “* 9fi n
Leech, W. H. and T. ... Woosang . i * 2 ° J
Longstaff, J. ... ... Yackandandah "* » n
Lobb, A. ... ... Wahring ... "* *“ 4 n
Lamperd, W. ... ... Toolleen ... *** *** 9 Jj
Laupmann, G. C. ... Mildura ... 4 n
Lawson, P Bundalong ... ,0 o
Lyan, J. Concongella ... 4 n


Name. Parish. a. h.
Moon, R. J. ... ... Bungalally ... ... ... ... 20 0
Mason, A. C. ... ... Shepparton ... ... ... ... 50 0
Martin, J. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 15 0
Maddock, J. F. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 2 0
Meehan, W. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 16 0
Murray, A. S. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 30 0
Morris, G. F. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ... ... 50 0
Mitchell, Mrs. B. ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 25 0
Maye, J. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... .*’ 6 0
Miller, C. ... ... Karrabumet ... ... ... ... 50 0
Moylan, M. ... ... Currawa ... ... ... 18 0
Morrison, J. W. ... Wangaratta North ... ... ... 1 2
Madder, J. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 3 0
Morrison, Elsie... ... Wangaratta North ... ... ... 2 2
Magennis, W. J. ... Yabba Yabba ... ... ... ... 8 0
Mayer, K. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 4 2
Millman, S. ... ... Huntly ... ... ... ... 2 0
Maidling, T. P. ... ... Barambogie ... ... ... ... 10 0
Maidling, F. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 10 0
Morris, J. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 5 0
Minogue, J. ... ... Estcourt ... ... ... ... 8 0
Manning, G. H. M. ... Horsham ... ... ... ... 4 0
Mellis, J. J. ... ... Kyabram ... ... ... ... 5 0
Mandeville, L. ... ... Wedderburn ... ... ... ... 5 2
Mess, Jas. ... ... Nillumbik ... ... ... ... 3 0
Manus, G. S. ... ... Wodonga ... ... ... 8 0
Marfleet, J. ... ... Yarrowalla ... ... ... ..’ 5 0
Mellis, A. ... ... Kyabram East ... ... ... ... 2 0
Morin, S. ... ... Wombat ... ... ... ’’’ 4 0
Manlieu, P. ... ... Borung ... ... ..’ j" 2 0
Mannes, A. ... ... Strathfieldsaye ... ..." 5 0
Mayer, J. C. ... ... Shadforth ... .” "" 5 2
Munro, R. ... ... Undera ... 10 0
Moss, F. ... ... Maldon ... .." " 10
Miller, C. M. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 5 0
Morley, M. E. ... ... Carlyle... ... ... ... ... 31 0
Mellords, Jno. ... ... Horsham ... ... 1 0
McKay, J. ... ... Chiltern West ... ... ... ..! 10 0
Mclntosh, J. ... ... Tabilk ... ... ... ... ... 20 0
Macdonald, W. ... ... Lilliput... ... ... ... ... 12 0
McDonald, H. ... ... Dunmunkle ... ... ... ... 6 0
McLennan, A. ... ... Lilliput... ... ... ... 50 0
McQuade, J. ... ... Norong... ... ... ... ... 15 0
McKinty, T. ... ... Boorhaman ... ... ... ... 20 0
Macguire, T. ... ... Norong... ... ... ... ... 19 0
McPherson, R. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 25 0
McDonald, C. ... ... Wingalook ... ... ... ... 7 2
McLennan, K. ... ... Mooroopna West ... ... ... 15 0
McPadyen, W. L. ... Arapiles ... ... ... ... 17 0
McEvoy, J. ... ... Lilliput... ... ... ... ... 15 0
McCartie, J. ... ... Lilliput... ... ... ... ... 7 0
Mcßean, S. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ... ... 20 0
Mac Kay, F. C. ... ... Warragul ... ... ... ... 1 0
McNeil, J. C. ... ... Undera... ... ... ... ... 6 0
McPherson, J. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 6 0
Mcßae, M. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ... ... 9 0
McMahon, T. ... ... Strathfieldsaye... ... ... ... 2 2
McDonald, A. H. ... Wangaratta ... ... ... ... 10 0
McKinnon, C. ... ... Carapooee West... ... ... ... 5 0
McGuan, J. ... ... Concongella South ... .... ... 6 0
Mackereth, E. H. ... Avoca ... ... ... ... ... 14 0
McDonald, J., sen. ... Glenloth ... ... ... ... 3 0


Name. Parish
MeOuinnesg, A ... Mount Cole ... ' , *
McMillan, Mrs. M. ... Lexington ... Z ® ®
|ST J - ::: :: Is™ir h * SOTU * • -»•
& J k ::: ::: Si" 0 * = "• = S
N°tt,W Norong ... - f ®
Nugent C Echuca... ~ ? ®
Nolan, J ... ... Norong .
Nelson, J. A Horsham ... “ ®
Nickinson J. N. ... Shepparton ... ." ~ ? 2
Nason, G. S. ... ... Ararat *" •** 1 0
Nicholls, T. A. and H. E. Waaia ’. - * ®
North, Geo Katunga" Z 2 r n
Newton, S. Mildura ... ® ®
Newcomen, W., jun. ... Taminick ... ®
Nonmus, W Crowlands ... Z Z Z 10 0
O’Donoghue, F. ... Brimin „
O’Reilly, P Marmal ® ®
J- Boort ™ 2 2
O Dwyer, J. J. ... ... Tabilk ... . 5 i
Oliver, J. L ... ... Norong • ® ®
O Connor, J. ... ... Barnawartha ... ” X 9
Q^ s > ?' t "* •” Wooragee North **" o
O Loughlin, J, Axedale ... •“ ®
Pearce, John ... ... Bontherambo ... ... q n
£ orter >Z Boorhaman ,2 2
- - Toolamba *2 ®
Putland G Duchembegarra ’ " J 2
Pearce, J. Carlyle... ... * J ®
Pearce, W. R. ... ... Tallygaroopna ... ... 0
Pressley, C Peechelba .. ®
Power, J. Woosang ... ® ®
J Estcourt ; ;;; - f ®
::: ::: ~ - ‘
|h'\w. ::: = ~ 5 = - £
T W H.::: ::: Site ••• = =
Pj cr ?ft, H. C Mildura ... *" J ®
Pleming, T. H. C. ... Bontherambo ... Z. ”* 22 0
Quarrel!, J. ... ... Corindhap ... ... , n
Quincy, A. S Mildura | | ®
Ratford, J. ... ... Boorhaman ... ... 10 n
Ridout, J. E. ... ... Goorambat ... on
Ruche, F Carlyle J* ®
Robinson, G. W. ... Heathcote .. X
Reap, C. Carlyle *** * I* ®
Raeburn, J. Wingalook . a X
Ramseyer, F. A. ... Pelluebla ... ,2 ®
Rankin, 0. H. ... ... Bontherambo ... ’ *”
Reynolds, T Youanmite , ... ”* r " J


Name. Parish. a. k.
Ruedin, A. L. ... ... Huntly ... ... ... ... ... 10 0
Roach, C. ... ... Currawa ... ... ... ... 10 0
Ryan, M. ... ... Bet Bet... ... ... ... ... 12 0
Ribbons, S. ... ... Horsham ... ... ... ... 1 q
Robinson, J. ... ... Concongella South ... ... ... 3 0
Rough, J. C. ... ... Horsham ... ... ... ... 2 2
Robinson, A. ... ... Boorhaman ... ... ... ... 2 0
Roberts, E. J. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 4 0
Ritchie, J. B. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 10 0
Rawlings, T. E— ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 10 0
Rundell, M. ... ... Strathfleldsaye ... ... ...* ... l 0
Skinner and Anderson ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 15 2
Staniland, E. W. ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 12 1
Spawn, A. F. ... ... Dooen ... ... ... ... ... 3 0
Scott, J. B. ... ... Concongella ... ... ... ... 2 0
Shillinglaw, John J. ... Panton Hill ... ... ... ... 5 0
Shillinglaw, E. B. ... Panton Hill ... ... ... ... 5 0
Shillinglaw, J. C. ... Panton Hill ... ... ... ... 5 0
Shillinglaw, F. F. ... Panton Hill ... ... ... ... 5 0
Spencer, T. W. B. ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 3 0
Scott, T. ... ... Mundoona ... ... ... ... 10 0
Stanton,* J. L. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 21 0
Schluter, H. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 11 0
Sewell, W. ... ... Bet Bet ... ... ... ... 9 0
Smith, G. S. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 50 0
Shields, W. ... ... Yielima ... ... ... ... 10 0
Smith, D. ... ... Bundalong ... ... ... ...' 5 0
Schlue, H., and Sons ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 34 0
Southon, G. ... ... Katunga ... ... ... ... 7 2
Stevenson, A. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... ... 15 0
Simms, A. J. ... ... Bontherambo ... ... ... ... 6 0
Stocker, H. ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 10 0
Smith, P. ... ... Burramine ... ... ... ... 6 0
Shaw, Sarah ... ... Carlyle ... ... ... ... 10 0
Scandelera, G. ... ... Teddywaddy ... ... ... ... 13 0
Sim, J. ... ... ... Pine Lodge ... ... ... ... 10 0
Somerville, J. ... ... Strathfleldsaye... ... ... ... 4 0
Simpson, P. N. ... ... Euroa ... ... ... ... ... 2 0
Strachan, West, and Co. Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 42 0
Shea, T. ... ... Ararat... ... ... ... ... 25 0
Stones, M. ... ... Chiltern West ... ... ... ... 9 0
Swan, A., and Sons ... Carraragarmungee ... ... ... 2 0
Shaw, J. ... ... Boohaman ... ... ... ... 12 0
Schwab, G. ... ... Mitchell ... ... ... ... 1 2
Stuart, W. C. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 10 0
Small, J. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 5 0
Skipper, F. J. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 3 0
Stevenson, H. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 7 0
Somerville, T. ... ... Strathfleldsaye ... ... ... ... 1 2
Simpson, D. ... ... Marmal ... ... ... ... 1 0
Skyrme, Geo. ... ... Concongella ... ... ... ... 4 0
Sallinger, E. J. ... ... Concongella South ... ... ... 9 0
Tobin, M. ... ... Chiltern West ... ... ... ... 13 0
Tomlinson, H. G. ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 10 0
Tafft, G. ... ... Lilliput 22 0
Thompson, W. ... ... Strathmerton ... ... ... ... 20 0
Taylor, A. ... ... Gunbower ... ... ... ... 3 0
Telford, J. R. ... ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... 5 0
Tye, Wm. ... ... Whroo ... ... ... ... ... 5 0
Threlfall, R. ... ... Woosang ... ... ... ... 1 0
N


Name. Parish. A . R
Taylor, R. S. ... ... Borung ... ... ... 12 0
Tanner, D. ... ... Barnawartha North ... ... 15 o
Thompson, J. L. ... Dookie ... ... 19 0
Thompson, R. ... ... Norong ... ... "* k n
Tickner, H. ... ... Ledcdurt ... ... ..’ 9 a
Tiokner, F. D. ... ... Ledcourt ... ... ... " g 0
Tanner, J. ... ... Barnawartha ... ... ... g a
Tanner, W. ... ... Barnawartha ... ... ’" ' 4 a
Thompson, A. I). ... Mildura ... ... n
Tolley, G. H. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... g o
Taggart, W. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ”* 4 0
Trouette and Blampied ... Concongella, ... ... xg q
Upton, C. „. ... Lilliput ... ... 40 0
Uhthoff, W. T. ... ... Currawa ... ... ... 2 0
Vaughan, J. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... g 0
Wilson, J. R. ... ... Mildura ..; ... ... 20 0
Whiting, E. ... ... Barp ... ... ... iq q
Wickham 8r05.... ... Baranduda ... ... i” “* 5 0
Wilkinson, H. J. ... Mildura ... ... ... in 0
Wilson, W. M. ... ... Mildura ... ... .. 5 0
Wilson, C. D. ... ... Mildura • ... ... ... 5 0
Walsh, D. ... ... Norong ... ... ... ” 50
Withers, T. ... ... Lilliput ... ... ... 7 0
Williams, J. ... ... Katunga ... ... ... 14 q
Wilson, A. ... ... Wedderburn ... ... ... ... n 0
Wilson, M. .. ... Mooroopna ... ... ... ... iq 2
Williams, H. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ’’’ 20 0
Woollett, G. J. ... ... Norong ... ... ... ..*. 25 0
Waite, J. T. ... ... Norong ... ... ... ... 20 0
Wise, G. ... ... Carraragarmungee ... ... 5 0
Wales, C Tallarook ... 7 q
Wall, F. ... ... Burramine ... ... ... ... g 0
Worland, C. ... ... Branjee ... ... ... ... 1 q
Whelan, F. ... ... Gooramadda ... ... ... 9 0
Walther, J. R. ... ... Ni-Ni ... ... ... ... 2 0
Wicks, A. J. ... ... Horsham ... ... ... ... 1 n
White, J. ... ... Dunolly ... ... ... ... \ o
White, E. S. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... ig q
Webb, A. W. ... ... Mildura ... ... 1 ... 5 q
Waddington, J.... ... Mildura ... ... 4 q
Wallis, W. ... ... Horsham ... ... ... ... 2 2
Walker, Y. ... ... Arcadia ... ... ... ... 15 0
Wenke, M. ... ... Chiltern ... ... ... ... 8 0
Walsh, J. D. ... ... Chiltern West ... ... ... ... 7 0
Wallace, C. ... ... Chiltern ... ... ... ... 12 0
Worm well, E. ... ... Mildura ... ... ... ... 4 0
Wuillemin, L. ... ... Briagolong ... ... ... ... 2 0
Young, T. ... ... Horsham ... ... ... ... 26 0
Young, Wm, ... ... Boola Boloke ... ... ... ... 8 0
Young, J. ... ... Tarrawingce ... ... ... ’’’ 7 2
Young, W. J. ... ... Mildura ... ... 5 2


APPENDIX E.
LIST OF VINE-GROWERS’ ASSOCIATIONS IN VICTORIA, LOCALITIES, AND OFFICE BEARERS, TO DATE.
Name.
Locality.
President.
Vice-President.
Treasurer.
Secretary.
Central Vine-growers’ Association
Melbourne (Board
J. J. Shillinglaw
Barnawatha Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association
of Viticulture)
Barnawatha
C. H. Morris
J. Baxter, W.
Tanner
Thos. Craike, A.
J. R. Whitehead
Bendigo Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association
Sandhurst
Wm. Grieffenhagen
J. Kahland
Dookie District Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association
Cashel ..
J. Johns
Ruedin
C. S. Heape
Dunolly Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association
Dunolly
H. O’B. Daly
Baccala, P.
P. Faux
R. Clay
Euroa Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association
Euroa ..
E. Chandler
Pegganetti
A. Fraser
G. Barrett
J. W. Gillham
Geelong Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association
Geelong
C. Craike
J. Deppler, C.
Tetaz
W. Gibbs, G.
H. King
J. H. Dardel, jun.
Goulbum Valley Vine and Fruit-growers’ and Special Pro-
Mooroopna
F. J. Young
W. Gibbs
W. Jones
ducts Association
Great Western and District Vine and Special Products
Great Western ..
H. W. H. Irvine ..
Pagan
J. Lorimer
H. Best..
Ed. Headdey
Fruit-growers’ Association
Nagambie and Goulburn River Vine and Fruit-growers’
Nagambie
T. Blayney
E. Vickers, J.
E. Wild
Special Products Association
Nathalia and Lower Moira Viticulture Society
Nathalia
J. C. Van Staveran
McIntosh
H. Bryant
R. T. Briggs
Numurkah Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association ..
Numurkah
J. Williams
J. C. Rockliff, S.
W. G McKinney,
Rutherglen and Murray District Vine-growers’ Association
Rutherglen
G. S. Smith
G. Thompson
R. J. Caughey, R.
x
jun.
H. Audley
Swan Hill Vine and Fruit-growers’ Association ..
Swan Hill
A. F. Ramsay
Burrowes and
J. O’Grady
C. Perm an
Wodonga Wine and Fruit-growers’ Association
Wodonga
W. C. McFarlane..
A. Schlink, P.
A Schlink
G. S. Manns
Yarra Valley Wine-growers’ Association ,,
Lillydale ..
Paul de Castella ..
Adams
M. Hutton
M. C. G. Hutton
Board of Viticulture, 12th May, 1891.
JOHN J. SHILLINGLAW, Secretary.


INDEX.
Adironda, 59
Alicante, 39
Alicante Bouschet, 33
Allens, Hybrid, 63
Altitude, effect on climate, 20
Alvey, 63
American vines as stocks to graft on, 134
„ distinctive characters of
leaves, 54
~ foxy taste of fruit, 53
~ resistance opposed to phyl-
loxera, 53
Ampelideae, 1
Ampelography, 29
Anna, 5j7
Antiquity of viticulture, 1
Annular incision, 128
Aramon, 30
Aromatic taste of objectionable character
diminished by subsoiling, 75
Arragonais (see Grenache), 39
Arrangement of vines, 82
Arrouya (see Carmenet), 34
Aspect, 20
Aspiran, 31
Aspiran Bouschet, 33
Assimilation, 10
Aucarot, 32
Auvergnat (see Pinot Blanc Chardonay), 45
Auvergnat Gris (see Pinot Gris), 45
Auvergnat Noir (see Pinot Noir), 45
Australian vines, 64
Auxoit (see Pinot Gris), 45
Balafant (see Tokay), 50
Baloutzat (see Malbeck), 40
Balzac (see Mataro), 41
Bar, 100
Bark, 5
Baxter’s Sherry, 32
Beaunois (see Pinot Blanc Chardonay), 45
Bergeron (see Roussanne), 47
Beurot (see Pinot Gris), 45
Bigney (see Merlot), 41
Bignona (see Dolcetto), 37
Black Cluster (see Pinot Noir), 44
Black German (see Canby’s August), 60
~ Hamburg, 32
~ July (see Devereux), 56
~ Muscadine (see Flowers), 63
„ Prince, 32
~ St Peter, 32
~ Spanish (see Jacquez), 56
Blanc Fumb (see Sauvignon), 48
Blanche Feuille (see Meunier), 45
Blanquette (see Clairette), 36
Blauer Klavner (see Pinot Noir), 44
~ Trollinger (see Black Hamburg), 32
Blocks, extent and disposition of, 86
Blussart (see Pulsart), 46
Bois dur (see Carignane), 34
Bois Jaune (see Grenache), 39
Botanical description of vines, 1
Boudalfes (see Cinsaut), 36
BourdalCs (see Cinsaut), 36
Bouchet Hybrids, 32
Boutelon (see Pedro Ximenes), 46
Breton (see Carmenet), 34
Buchardt’s Prince (see Aramon), 30
Bullace (see Souppernong), 63
~ (see Vitis Rotundifolia), 62
Bullet (see Taylor), 62
Bullet Grape (see Vitis Rotundifolia), 62
Burdekin vine (see Vitis Opaca), 65
Burger Blanc (see Gouais), 38
Burgundy (see Pinot), 44
~ of Georgia (see Pauline), 57
„ Miller’s (see Pinot Meunier), 45
~ Smooth-leaved (see Pinot Noir), 44
„ White (see Pinot Blanc), 45
Cabernet Franc (see Carmenet), 34
~ Sauvignon, 33
Calcareous soils, 25
Cambium, importance of ingrafting, 136
Canby’s August, 60
Candive (see Shiraz), 48
Carbinet (see Cabernet Sauvignon), 33
Carignane, 34
Carignan (see Carignane), 34
Carmenet, 34
Catalan (see Carignane), 34
„ ' (see Mataro), 41
Catawba, 60
“ Cepage,” 29
“Chaintres” system of pruning, 120
Charnet (see Mataro), 41
Chasselas, 35
„ de Falloux, 35
~ de Fontainebleau, 35
~ Golden, 35
~ Musqu6, 36
~ Red (see Malbeck), 40
„ Rose, 36
„ Violet, 36
Chemical composition of the vine, 24
Chevrier (see Semilion), 48
Chicken Grape (see Vitis Cordifolia), 58
Chlorophyll, its importance in assimilation, 10
Chlorosis, 23
Choice varieties must be preferred to com-
mon, 27
Chrupka (see Chasselas), 35
Cigar-box Grape (see Jacquez), 56
Cinsaut, 36
Cissus Antarctica (see Vitis Baudiniana), 65
„ Opaca (see Vitis Opaca), 65
Clairette, 36
Clay soils, 25
Clearing, 77
Climate, 16
Climatic regions of Victoria, 21
Clinton, 61
„ Vialla (see Vialla), 64
Cognac grape (see Folle), 37
Colombier (see Semillon), 48
Commercial considerations, 67
Concord, 60
Conforogo (see Sultana), 49
Cordifolia Solonis (see Solonis), 62


Corinth Currant, 36
Cot (see Malbeck), 40
Cotticour (see Clairette), 36
“ Coulure,” 12
Crabutet (see Merlot), 41
Crignane (see Carignane), 34
“ Crossettes,” 89
Crowns, height of, 105
Cunningham, 55
Cultivation, 130
„ effect on vitality of vine, 2 .
~ preliminary, must be deep, 74
~ must follow irrigation, 20
Currant, Corinth, 36
~ Zante, 51
Cuttings, 88
„ selection of, 8
~ length of, 90
„ single eye, 91
„ preservation of, 92
~ stratification of, 93
„ means of facilitating emission of
roots, 94
Cuttings or rooted vines, 98
~ planting in vineyard, 99
~ inclination of, 99
Cynthiana, 56
Delaware, 64
Devereux, 56
Diana, 60
Dibble, 100
Disbudding, 122
Dolcetto Nero, 37
Doradillo, 37
Edel Clavner (see Pinot Gris), 45
Elbling (see Gouais), 38
Elsinburgh, 56
Elvira, 64
English cleft graft, 137
Enrageat (see Folle), 37
Epinette (see Pinot Blanc Chardonay), 45
Epiran (see Aspiran), 31
Espagnin (see Cinsaut), 36
Espar (see Mataro), 41
Espart (see Mataro), 41
Esparte (see Mataro), 41
Estrangey (see Malbeck), 40
European vines, 30
~ grafting on American stocks, 137
Extent’and disposition of blocks, 85
Factors influencing growth and products of
vine, 15
Fall of leaves, 14
Fecundation of the ovule, 12
Feigentraube (see Sauvignon), 48
Fendant (see Chasselas), 35
First region, 70
Flouron (see Mataro), 41
Flower, botanical description, 6
„ anormal forms of, 7
Flowering, 12
Flowers, 63
Foex, recommends irrigation of vineyards, 19
~ opinion on value of different grafting
stocks, 138
Folle, 37
Forest devil, 77 •
Forming young vine, 105
Fox Grape (see Vitis Labrusca), 59
“ Foxy taste,” of American grapes, 43
Franc Pinot (see Pinot Noir), 44
Frankenthal ( see Black Hamburg), 32
Frauentraube (see Chasselas), 35
Friability necessary in soil, 22
Fromenteau (see Roussanne), 47
Fromentot (see Pinot Gris), 45
Frontignac (see Muscat de Frontignan), 43
Frontignan (see Muscat de Frontignan), 43
Frost, advantage of late budding varities, 28
„ pruning retarded in consequence, 121
„ grape (see Vitis Cordifolia), 58
Furmint (see Tokay), 50
Gamay, 38
„ Noir, 38
~ Nicholas, 38
~ d’Orleans, 38
~ in Beaujolais, 27
Gentil Aromatique (see Riesling), 46
Goethe, 64
Golden Chasselas (see Chasselas), 35
Gooseberry system, 124
Gordo Blanco ( see Musca Gordo Blanco), 43
Gouais, 38
Goulu Blanc (see Semilion), 4
Gourdoux (see Malbeck), 40
“ GoOt de terroir,” 105
Gouveio (see Verdeilho), 51
Graft, ordinary cleft, 136
„ English cleft, 137
„ splice, 137
Grafting, 134 .
~ diminishes non setting of fruit, 134
~ time for, 138
Granaxa (see Grenache), 39
Granitic soils, 25
Grbdelin (see Maccabeo), 40
Grenache, 39
Gris Cordelier (see Pinot Gris), 45
Gros Cabernet (see Carmenet), 34
~ Gamay (see Gamay), 38
~ Noir (see Tinto), 49
„ Plant Dorc (see Morrillon), 43
Grosse Chalosse (see Folle), 37
„ Vindurc (see Carmenet), 34
Gutedel (see Chasselas), 35
Guyot system of pruning, 117
~ opinion on topping, 124
Hailstorms, 69
Hart (see Devereux), 56
Height of vines, 105
Heat, influence of, 17
Hermitage, red (see Shiraz), 48
white (see Roussanne), 47
Herbemont, 56
Herbemont’s Madeira (see Herbemont), 56
Hoeing, 132
Hybrids, 63
Hybridization of vine, 32
Hyde’s Eliza, 60
Iron, its influence on colour of wine, 26
Irrigation of vineyards, 18
„ practised in France and Switzer-
land, 19
Isabella, 60
Israella, 60
Ives’ Seedling, 00
Ives, 60
~ Madeira, 60
Ivanhoe, white (see Shepherd’s Riesling), 47
Jaen Blanc (see Doradillo), 37
Jacquez, 56
Jack (see Jacquez), 56


Kittredge (see Ives’ Seedling), 60
Kechmish (see Sultana), 49
Labrusca (see Vitis Labrusca), 59
La Souys (see Solonis), 61
Lateral shoots, 4
Latitude, influence of, 20
Layering, 94
~ reversed, 96
~ multiple, 96
Laying out of vineyard, 80
Leader, selection of, 116
Leaves, 5
„ importance of, in ripening of fruit, 13
~ stripping, 128
Length of cuttings, 90
Lenoir (see Devereux), 56
„ (see Jacquez), 56
Levraut (see Pinot Gris), 45
Light, importance of, 20
Limestone soils, 25
Lincoln (see Devereux), 56
Lindley, 64
Listan (see Sweet Water), 49
Little Sweet Mountain (see Vitis Berlandieri),s7
Locust, 70
Logan, 61
Long pruning, 115
Long (see Cunningham), 55
Long’s Arkansas (see Solonis), 61
Maccabeo, 40
Maitre Noir (see Morrillon), 43
Malaga, 40
Malaga (see Semilion), 48
Malbeck, 40
Malbeck bears better grafted on Solonis, 135
Maldoux (see Mondeuse), 42
Malvoisie, 41
„ (see Pinot Gris), 45
Marking out before planting, 85
Marsanne, 47
Martha, 61
Marzemina Bianca (see Chasselas), 35
Mataro, 41
„ (see Carignane), 34
„ (see Morrastel), 42
Maxatawney, 61
McCandless (see Jacquez), 56
McLean (see Devereux), 56
Merlot, 41
Mescle (see Pulsart), 46
Meunier (see Pinot Meunier), 45
Miles, 61
“ Millerandage,” 13
Miller’s Burgundy (see Pinot Meunier), 45
Mission Grape, 42
Missouri Bird’s Eye (see Elsinburgh), 56
Mixed pruning, 118
Moisture, 17
„ cultivation retains, 131
Molette (see Mondeuse), 42
Mondeuse, 42
Monteith (see Canby’s August), 60
Morrillon, 43
~ Blanc (see Pinot Blanc Chardonay), 45
~ Noir (see Pinot Noir), 44
~ Taeonnd (see Pinot Meunier), 45
Morrastel, 42
Mountains, their influence on climate, 21
Mourrastel (see Morrastel), 42
Mourvedre (see Mataro), 41
Mouteuse (see Mondeuse), 42
Mueller, Sir F. von, description of Australian
vines, 65
Mulching, 131
Multiple layering, 96
Muscadine, ( see Vitis Rotundifolia), 62
Muscats, 43
Muscat de Frontignan, 43
» °f Alexandria (see Muscat Gordo
Blanco), 43
Muscat Gordo Blanco, 43
Mustang {see Vitis Candicans), 58
Navarre {see Cabernet Sauvignon), 33
Nebbiolo {see Dolcetto Nero), 37
Neil’s Grape {see Herbemont), 56
New Zealand Flax for tying vines, 127
Nipping off terminal bud, 127
Noir de Pressac {see Malbeck), 40
Noirien {see Pinot Noir), 44
Non-setting of fruit, 12
. ». . » » diminished by annula
incision, 128
Non-setting of fruit diminished by disbudding,
of fruit diminished by grafting,
Non-setting of fruit diminished by late prun-
ing, 121
Norton {see Cynthiana), 56
Norton’s Virginia {see Cynthiana), 56
Northern Fox Grape {see Vitis Labrusca), 59
Number of vines per acre, 82
» , ». ,» with square system, 83
Number of vines per acre, rectangular system,
Number of vines per acre, quincunx, 84
Oeillade, 44
korszem Kek {see Aramon), 30
Oporto {see Tinto), 49
Ouillade {see Oeillade), 44
Passolina {see Zante Currant), 51
Pauline, 67
Payne’s Early {see Isabella), 60
Peaty soils, 26
Pedro Jimenez {see Pedro Ximenes), 46
Pedro Ximenes, 46
Perkins, 61
Pero Ximen {see Pedro Ximenes), 46
Perpignan {see Morrastel), 42
Persaigne {see Mondeuse), 42
Petiole, structure of, 5
Petit Bouschet, 33
Petit Cabernet {see Cabernet Sauvignon), 33
Petit fer {see Carmenet), 34
Phormium Tenax for tying vines, 127
Phylloxera resistance of American vines, 52
Physiology of the vine, 9
Picardan {see Cinsaut), 36
Picpouille Blanc {see Folle), 37
“ Pincement,” 127
Pinot, 44
„ Blanc, 45
„ ~ Chardonay, 45
„ in Burgundy district, 27
„ Gris, 45
„ Meunier, 45
~ Noir, 44
Piran (see Aspiran), 31
Plant d’Arbois (see Pulsart), 46
~ Dor6 (see Pinot Blanc Chardonay) 45
» d’Arcenant (see Gamay), 38
„ de Grbce (see Folle), 37
„ Madame (see Folle), 37
» Medoc (see Merlot), 41


Plant de Seyssel (see Roussanne), 47
Planting, 98
~ cuttings in vineyard, 99
~ „ nursery, 101
~ rooted vines in vineyard, 103
~ time for, 99
Plateado (see Doradillo), 37
Plateadillo (see Doradillo), 37
Plough, subsoil, 77
Ploughing, 130
Plutonic soils, 25
Potash, necessity for, 24
Poulsart (see Pulsart), 46
Preliminary cultivation, 74
„ ~ depth of in France, 75
Preparation of soil, 74
Prolific buds on vine, 111
Propagation of the vine, 88
Prun ng, 110
~ for young vines, 107
~ long or short, 112
„ short spur, 113
~ mixed, 118
~ rod, 115
~ system giving great extension, 119
~ time for, 120
~ instruments for, 121
~ summer, 122
Pulliat’s periods of ripening, 30
Pulsart, 46
Queue de Renard (see Maccabeo), 40
Quincunx, 83
Rainfall of Europe compared with ours, 69
Rebecca, 61
Rectangular rows, 84
Red Chasselas (see Malbeck), 40
~ Hermitage (see Schiraz), 48
~ Lenoir (see Pauline), 57
~ Muncy (see Catawba), 60
~ Wines, demand for, 68
~ River (see Cynthiana), 56
Redondal (see Grenache), 39
Regions, division of colony into, 21
Respiration, 11
Revala'ire (see Aramon), 30
Reversed layering, 96
Riesling, 46
~ Shepherd’s, 47
Riparia (see Vitis Riparia), 61
Ripening of Grapes, 14
Rise of sap, 10
River Grape (see Vitis Riparia), 61
Rivesaltes (see Grenache), 39
Riveyran (see Aspiran), 31
Roads in vineyard, 86
Roanoake (see Scuppernong), 63
Rock Grape (see Vitis Rupestris), 63
Rod pruning, 115
Romii Noir (see Tinto), 49
Roots of vine, 3
Rossling (see Riesling), 46
Roussanne, 47
Roussilon (see Grenache), 39
Rupestris (see Vitis Rupestris), 63
Rushes for tying vines, 126
Salem, 64
Salerne (see Cinsaut), 36
Salvagnin Noir (see Pinot Noir), 44
Samboton (see Isabella), 60
Sand grape (see Vitis Riparia), 61
Sandy soils, 25
Sauvignon, Red (see Cabernet Sauvignon), 33
Sauvignon, White, 48
Savoyanne (see Mondeuse), 42
Scarifiers, 132
Schiraz (see Shiraz), 48
Schistose soils, 25 •
Schwartzer Trollinger (see Black Hamburg), 32
Scientific considerations must guide vine*
grower in a new country, 16
Scion, 136
~ choice of, 138
Scuppernong, 63
Second region, 72
Seedlings, raising of, 88
~ variability of<29
Selection of cuttings, 89
Semilion, 48
Serine (see Shiraz), 48
Shepherd’s Riesling, 47
Shiraz, 58
Shoots, 4
Short spur pruning, 113
Singleton (see Catawba), 60
Sirac (see Shiraz), 48
Sirrah (see Shiraz), 48
Site, selection of, 66
Smarts (see Elsinburgh), 56
Soil, physical and chemical properties of, 22
~ preparation of, 74
Solonis, 62
Spar (see Mataro), 41
Spiran (see Aspiran), 31
Splice graft, 137
Spofford Seedling (see Tokaylon), 61
Square system, 83
Stakes, 126
Stem, 3
~ structure of, 5
~ forming of, 106
Stomata, 6
Stratification of cuttings, 93
Stripping off leaves, 128
Subsoiling, 76
Subsoil plough, 77
Sugar grape (see Vitis Rupestris), 63
Sultana, 49
Sultanieh (see Sultana), 49
Summer cultivation, 130
Summer grape (see Vitis Aestivalis), 55
Summer pruning, 122
Surin Fi6 (see Sauvignon), 48
Surret Mountain (see Vitis Berlandieri), 57
Surrounding circumstances, importance of, 16
Sussling (see Chasselas), 35
Sweet water, 49
Sweet wines, 67
Syra, (see Shiraz), 48
Taylor, 62
Taylor’s Bullit (see Taylor), 62
Teinturier (see Tinto), 49
Tendrils, 8 .
Terret Bouschet, 33
Third region, 73
Thomas, 63
Thurmond (see Devereux), 56
Tinta Francisca (see Tinto), 49
Tinto, 49
Tokay, 50
Tokaylon, 61
Topping, 123
„ injurious effects of, 125
Transpiration, 10
Trellised vines, 85
„ overhead, 120
~ relative cost of, 126


Trenching, 76
Tuley (see Devereux), 56
Tying up vines, 126
Ugni Blanc (see Maccabeo), 40
~ Noir (see Aramon), 30
Ulliade (see Oeillade), 44
„ Noir (see Cinsaut)
Uva d’Acqui (see Dolcetto), 37
Valais Blanc (see Chasselas), 35
Variety, its influence on wine, 27
~ must be adapted to other conditions, 28
~ choice of, 66
Veins, 6
Veraison, 14
Verdai (see Aspiran), 31
Verdal ~ ~ 31
Verdeilho, 51
Verdot, 50
Veronais (see Carmenet), 34
Vialla, 64
Viticulture, antiquity of,
„ soils suitable or, 25
Vitis Acetosa, 65
~ Aestivalis, 55
~ Antarctica (see Vitis Baudiniana), 65
~ Arizonica, 65
~ Baudiniana, 65
„ Berlandieri, 58
~ Californica, 58
~ Candicans, 58
~ Cinerea, 58
„ Cordifolia, 58
~ Hypoglauca, 65
~ Labrusca, 59
Vitis Opaca, 65
„ Riparia, 61
„ Rotundifolia, 62
„ Rupestris, 63
~ Vinifera, 30
„ Vulpina ( see Vitis Rotundifolia), 65
Vitraille (see Merlot), 41 n, r
Vuidure Sauvignonne {see Cabernet Sauvisr-
non), 33
Warren {see Herbemont), 56
Warrenton {see Herbemont), 56
White Burgundy {see Pinot Blanc), 45
„ Hermitage {see Roussanne), 47
„ Ivanhoe {see Shepherd’s Riesling), 47
~ Muscadine {see Scuppernong), 63
~ Nice {see Sweetwater), 49
„ Pinot {see Pinot Blanc), 45
„ Syrian (?) {see Doradillo), 37
Wilder, 64
Wild Riparia, 62
Winter cultivation, 130
Winds, 69
Winter grape {see Vitis Cordifolia), 58
Wire, training vine on, 120
Wood upon which fruit grows, 110
Woodward {see Isabella), 60
Worthington {see- Clinton), 61
Wyman (see Tokaylon), 61
York’s Madeira (see Canby’s August), 60
Yellow Muscadine (see Scuppernong), 63
Zante Currant, 51
Zinfandel, 52
Zierfhandler Rother (see Zinfandel), 52
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.




