

tf«sS£ , faski , .lias's < 9il|ps lj£
ftttMß
PBS§§iPll
i -, m
-v*
:,:£d
'
ISilis^P
*: i; $5
|l|p:^
-• ' ,
HP
«H^g
||p|sgcp|s ;.:‘v :
■g '
iMMSPS&S&
jMBBMBsssSgr: >•>>
«BlteißB&%fi3ft>3i£ , 3 i ■: > ■ss--
feßjßWKKfe : ,^>sgyg;gg»v. , y
■




HANDBOOK
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES




HANDBOOK
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES
NEW SOUTH WALES
BEING
A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR JUSTICES OF THE PEACE IN HOLDING
INQUIRIES IN LIEU OF INQUESTS
WITH AN APPENDIX
CONTAINING ACTS RELATING TO INQUIRIES, DIRECTIONS FOR
TAKING DEPOSITIONS OF PERSONS DANGEROUSLY ILL, &c.
R. H. MATHEWS
CORONER AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
AND JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FOR QUEENSLAND
sgonee an£> Melbourne
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
1888




of §oufß
THIS WORK
ON THE
PRACTICE OF INQUIRIES IN LIEU OF INQUESTS
IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
THE AUTHOR


*■


PREFACE.
The compilation of this work was suggested to me during
my experience as a Justice of the Peace in different parts of the
Colony, by the necessity which appeared to exist for Magistrates
to possess a work, simple and practical in its form, and easy of
reference, to enable them, when required by the Police to hold
inquiries respecting sudden deaths, to have a ready guide to the
formal proceedings at such inquiries. These remarks apply more
especially to Magistrates residing in country towns, and the
interior of the Colony, who have little leisure or opportunity to
acquire experience in the examination of witnesses, or in taking
down their depositions.
It is hoped that this Handbook, forming a complete practical
guide to the holding of Magisterial Inquiries, from their first
initiation, through all their stages, to the final transmission of the
proceedings to the Department of Justice, will supply the means
of learning at a glance the whole form of procedure, and enable
Justices of the Peace, when called upon to act, to conduct these
inquiries in a correct and satisfactory manner.
The comprehensive instructions given in the articles on the
Mode of Taking the Depositions, the Examination of Witnesses,
and the Instructions for Taking Depositions of Material Witnesses
respecting Indictable Offences, will be found of great service to
Justices of the Peace when officiating on the Bench at Police
Courts, to Coroners, to Clerks of Petty Sessions, and others, whose
duty it is to examine witnesses, or to take down the evidence
given by them in any Court.


To members of the Police Force, who are always required to get
up the case for Magistrates when holding inquiries, and to
make reports and affidavits respecting persons dying intestate,
this little book will, I trust, be found a simple and compenpious
guide to the duties they have to perform, and the formalities to
be observed, on such occasions.
The work is divided into four chapters : —The first chapter
treats of the appointment of Justices of the Peace; the mode of
taking the necessary oaths of office; the form of Commission,
Writ of Dedimus Potestate m, and Writ of Supersedeas.
The second chapter contains general instructions respecting
Magisterial Inquiries, and is divided into five sections, showing
the authority conferred on Justices of the Peace for holding these
inquiries ; the duty of Magistrates when a death is reported to
them ; the mode of taking down the depositions; the different
forms of oaths and declai’ations to be administered to witnesses
and interpreters; the admissibility of evidence, and the compe-
tency of witnesses.
The third chapter is devoted to the procedure at the holding
of Magisterial Inquiries, and is divided into five sections, giving
full directions as to the opening of the inquiry; the examination
of the witnesses; the duties of the police at these inquiries;
specimens of Magisterial Findings ; and a recapitulation of all the
practical instructions given in the preceding pages of the work.
The fourth chapter treats of the procedure after the conclusion
of the inquiry, namely, giving a certificate for the burial of
the body; furnishing the requisite information to the District
Registrar and Curator; the preparation and rendering of accounts
in connection with the inquiry; the manner of transmitting the
whole of the proceedings to the Department of Justice; and all
the Forms required at these inquiries.
An Appendix has been added, giving the Medical Witnesses
Act; extracts from Acts defining who are to be deemed legally
qualified medical practitioners ; an extract from the Licensing Act
of 1882, as to holding inquiries in public houses, and an extract


from the Registration Act respecting the particulars to be
furnished by Magistrates to District Registrars.
An article has also been added on the taking of depositions
respecting any indictable offence, of a material witness who may be
dangerously ill, and whose evidence, if not forthwith taken, would
probably be lost, with practical directions as to the course to be
pursued in such cases.
Much labour and thought have been spent in the endeavour to
produce a useful and trustworthy guide; many authorities have
been consulted, and whatever has been thought suitable has been
carefully adapted or adopted.
In offering this Handbook to the public as a first attempt to
supply an urgent and long-complained-of want, the author ventures
to hope that it will prove to be of practical utility to those for
whose guidance and assistance it is specially designed.
Errors are necessarily incident to the first edition of a work of
this nature, but it is hoped that, if any exist, they will be found
to be unimportant.
R. H. MATHEWS.
Coroner’s Office, Singleton,
4 th July , 1888.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Appointment of Justices of the Peace.
PAGE
Creation of the office of Justice of the Peace
1
How Justices of the Peace are appointed ...
... 1
Form of commission
... 2
Letter announcing appointment ...
... 3
Writ of Dedimus Potestatem
... 3
Form of writ ...
... 4
Oath of allegiance
... 4
Judicial oath
... 4
Certificate of Judge or Magistrate that oaths have been taken
... 5
Oaths must be taken within six months
... 5
Mode of taking oaths, and fees payable in connection therewith
... 5
Justices are not punishable for errors in judgment ...
... 6
Removal from Commission of the Peace by a Writ of Supersedeas
... 6
Form of Writ of Supersedeas
... 7
General Instructions respecting Magisterial Inquiries.
CHAPTER 11.
AUTHORITY FOR MAGISTRATES HOLDING INQUIRIES.
Inquiries may be held by Justices of the Peace
Inquiries should not be held where any suspicion of foul play
Magistrates have no power to commit for trial
In what cases the inquiry should be terminated
Information laid against suspected person
No power to impannel a jury ... ...
No power to compel attendance of witnesses
Usual mode of obtaining attendance of witnesses ...
Inquiry should not be held on Sunday
Inquiries should not be held unnecessarily. .
Discretion of Magistrate in such cases
In what cases inquiries should be held
Violent or sudden deaths should be reported to police
One inquiry may be held on several bodies
Expenses of inquiries
Medical witness may be summoned


Post-mortem examination may be ordered
Penalty for medical witness disobeying summons
Any medical witness may be examined
Analysis or assay
Magistrates cannot hold inquiries respecting fires
DUTY OF MAGISTRATES WHEN A DEATH IS REPORTED TO
THEM
When an inquiry should be held
Police report death to the nearest Magistrate
Arrangements for holding the inquiry
Notice sent to Examiner of Collieries or his representative
Notice sent to Railway officials ...
Medical witness summoned if required
Preference given to Government Medical Officer ...
Interpreter procured if necessary
Where inquiry to be held
Police to get up the case at inquiry
Inquiry may be dispensed with ...
Publicans bound to receive dead bodies ...
Procedure in cases of accidents in collieries
Procedure in cases of accidents on Government railways
Interested persons may be present at inquiries
Interested persons may examine or cross-examine witnesses...
Deaths in gaols and lunatic asylums
MODE OF TAKING THE DEPOSITIONS.
Form of caption for depositions ...
Each witness’ deposition should commence on fresh sheet
Depositions should be written legibly
Corrections, &c., should be initialed
How the evidence should be taken down ...
Documents produced in evidence—how marked
Cross-examination—how taken down
Re-examination—how taken down
Form of jurat in ordinary cases ...
Recalling witnesses—how taken down
Caption where interpreter employed
Jurat where interpreter employed
Constable’s deposition of service of summons on medical witness
Adjournment of inquiry—how noted
Resumption of inquiry after adjournment—how noted
Conclusion of inquiry—how noted
OATHS OF WITNESSES AND INTERPRETERS.
Power to administer oath to witnesses
Witness to be sworn before examination
Mode of Administering the Oath...
1. Christians, how sworn ...
2. Jews, how sworn
3. Scotch witnesses, how sworn
4. Scotch Covenanters, how sworn
5. Mohammedans, how sworn
6. Parsees, how sworn


7. Roman Catholics
8. Quakers or Moravians
9. Gentoos
10. Chinese
11. Interpreter’s oath where witness does not speak English
Another form of interpreter’s oath
12. Interpreter’s oath where witness deaf and dumb
13. Affirmation instead of oath
14. Declaration instead of oath
15. Promise in lieu of oath ...
Admissibility of evidence
General rules of evidence to apply
Evidence should be relevant
In cases of doubt evidence should be taken down
Competency of witnesses
What witnesses competent to be sworn
Any witness may make a declaration
Idiots and young children not competent ..
Lunatic competent during lucid interval ..
CHAPTER 111.
Procedure in Holding Magisterial Inquiries.
OPENING THE INQUIRY.
Magistrate proceeds to place appointed for inquiry
Constable has the witnesses, &c., in attendance
Writing materials, &c., should be in readiness
Not necessary that body should be viewed
Interested persons allowed to be present ...
Place of holding inquiry not an open court
Publicity desirable in most cases
Press reporters allowed to be present
EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES.
Witnesses examined in relative order
Examination in chief
Magistrate or Constable conducts examination
Evidence written down as it is given
When cross-examination allowed
Purpose of re-examination
Depositions read to and signed by witness
Purpose of recalling witnesses
How evidence of recalled witness taken .
Foreign witnesses examined through interpreter ...
Deaf and dumb witnesses examined through interpreter
Medical witness examined if necessary
Preference given to Government Medical Officers ...
Medical witness generally examined last ...
ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE AND COMPETENCY OF WITNESSES.


Magistrate should take down evidence himself
Procedure if medical witness disobeys summons
Whether death caused by intemperance or not
Particulars required for death register
Describe deceased if unknown
Persons dying intestate ...
Deceased paupers
Information for District Registrar
Inquiry may be adjourned if necessary
Resumption of inquiry after adjournment...
Inquiry may be further adjourned if necessary
Magistrate records his finding
Copy of finding should be kept ...
Conclusion of inquiry
DUTIES OF POLICE AT INQUIRIES.
Bodies should be removed to nearest public house
Death should be reported to Magistrate or Coroner
Bodies should be searched and appearance noted
Should remain in charge of body...
Should get witnesses together
Should produce articles found on body
Dimensions of wounds should be ascertained
Instrument causing death should be produced
Body should not be buried without inquiry held
Police should get up case for Magistrate ...
Report to Inspector-General of Police
Report to Agent of Curator of Intestate Estates
Finding of new-born child or dead body ...
FORMS OF MAGISTRATES’ FINDINGS.
1. Congestion of the lungs, accelerated by intemperance
2. Death from excessive drinking
3. Death from apoplexy
4. Death by hanging ...
5. Death by cutting throat
6. Death by gun-shot wound
7. Death resulting from a fall ...
8. Death from burns
Death from scalds
9. Death from poisoning
10. Found drowned, cause unknown
11. Drowned whilst bathing
12. Suicide by drowning
13. Death from disease of the heart
Death from starvation
14. Found dead, cause unknown ...
15. Where part of body found
16. Directing police to lay a criminal information
17. Where only a few bones of skeleton found
18. Prisoner dying in gaol
19. Death by accident on the railway or tramway
20. Death by accident in a colliery


RECAPITULATION OF PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS.
General synopsis
Memorandum of questions to ask witnesses
CHAPTER IV.
Procedure after Conclusion of Inquiry.
MISCELLANEOUS DIRECTIONS.
Burial of body in ordinary cases ...
... 40
Burial of deceased paupers
... 40
Excessive charges sometimes made
... 40
Information to be sent to District Registrar
, . .
... 41
Report by Police to Inspector-General
... 41
Death of intestates reported to Curator ...
... 41
Agent of Curator may pay funeral expenses
... 41
Agent of Curator may sell deceased’s effects
... 41
Deaths of foreigners reported to Consul ...
... 41
PREPARATION AND RENDERING OF ACCOUNTS.
Accounts should be rendered in proper form ... ... ... 42
Fees to Magistrates for holding inquiries ... ... ... ... 42
Mileage for attending inquiry or adjournment ... ... ... 42
Fees to medical witnesses—
For giving evidence ... ... ... ... ... 42
For holding post-mortem examination ... ... ... 42
Mileage for attending inquest or adjournment... ... ... 42
No fees to salaried medical officers ... ... ... ... 43
Fees to interpreters, with specimen of account ... ... ... 43
Fees to publicans where body received on premises, with specimen of
account ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Rewards for taking up bodies found drowned, with specimen ... 43
Postage and stationery account, with specimen ... ... ... 44
Fees for the burial of paupers, with specimens ... ... ... 44
General remarks respecting preparation of accounts ... ... 45
Magistrate may fill up all the accounts ... ... '... ... 45
To whom medical witnesses’ accounts forwarded ... ... ... 45
To whom accounts for burial of paupers forwarded where no inquiry
held ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
To whom all other accounts are forwarded ... ... ... 45
Mode of rendering account when the Magistrate pays the parties
* himself ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
TRANSMISSION OF PROCEEDINGS.
Proceedings should be forwarded at once ...
Letter to accompany proceedings...
Remarks concerning intemperance
Where death dire to “ natural causes ”
Proceedings to be fastened together
Directions for numbering the pages, &c. ...
Death register and accounts fastened together


Accounts for burial of paupers
Accounts for medical witnesses
FORMS USED AT MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES.
Preliminary remarks
Form 1. —Magistrate’s Letter to Accompany Proceedings ...
2. —Caption for Proceedings at Magisterial Inquiries ...
3. —Certificate of Magistrate’s Finding
4. —Cover for Proceedings at Magisterial Inquiries
5. —Magistrate’s Certificate for the Burial of the Body
6. —Magistrate’s Certificate Dispensing with Inquiry ...
7. —Summons for Attendance of Medical Witness
8. —Death Register (G 245)
9. —Justice’s Information to District Registrar
10. —Magistrate’s Letter to District Agent for the Curator of
Intestate Estates
11. —Notice in Cases of Deaths by Accidents in Colliery or on
Railway
12. —Account for Magistrate’s Fee ...
13. —Account for Medical Witness’Fee
14. —Account for Interpreter’s Fee
14.—Account for Publican’s Fee
14.—Account for Taking up Dead Body Found Drowned
14.—Account for Stationery and Postage
14. —Account for Burial of Paupers ...
15. Showing how to render any Account in cases where the
Magistrate pays the fees out of his own pocket in the
first instance
16. —Report by Police to the Inspector-General
17. —Affidavit of Death and Intestacy
APPENDIX.
The Medical Witnesses Act, 1 Victoria No. 3
Extracts from Acts Defining who are Legally Qualified Medical
Practitioners ...
Extract from Registration Act, 19 Victoria No. 34
Extract from Licensing Act of 1882, 45 Victoria No. 14
Instructions for Taking Depositions of Persons Dangerously 111,
respecting Indictable Offences—
When such depositions should be taken ...
Examination of person reporting illness of witness...
Magistrate repairs to place where witness lies
Directions for taking his deposition
Procedure if accused person present
Procedure if accused is a foreigner
Conversations in presence of accused admissable ...
When witness’opinion or belief may be taken
Better that too much rather than too little evidence be taken
down
In cases of doubt, evidence should be taken down ..


PRACTICAL GUIDE
MAGISTERIAL INQUIRIES
CHAPTER I.
APPOINTMENT OE JUSTICES OF THE PEACE.
The office of Justice of the Peace was originally created by
Edward the Third, a.d. 1327, the first statute on the subject
being 1 Edward 3, c. 16. The learned antiquary, Sir Henry
Spelman, says that Justices of the Peace were appointed by that
prince for the suppression of commotions which were anticipated
in consequence of the dethronement of his predecessor.
At the present day, however, the powers and duties of this
honourable office have been most extensively enlarged. As they
have become more arduous and responsible, and required greater
talent and more matured habits of business for their proper and
efficient discharge, high-minded and well-informed country gentle-
men have not been found wanting to perform them, and, at the
same time, to sustain the dignity of their station, and command
respect for the laws, by their honest and impartial administration.
—(Stone’s “ Petty Sessions.”)
Justices of the Peace, in this Colony, are either appointed by
Commission, under the hand of the Governor and Great Seal of
the Colony, with the advice of the Executive Council, or derive
their authority as such from certain Acts of Parliament. Renewed
Commissions of the Peace, under the Great Seal, are from time
to time issued as new appointments are made; and the Under-
secretary, Colonial Secretary’s Department, notifies the several
new names inserted in the Government Gazette to the parties
concerned.
The following is the form of Commission issued by the Governor
of this Colony, with the advice of the Executive Council. After


the issue of the Commission, it is duly lodged for record in the
office of the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court: —
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, and so
foi’th.
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting :
To John Jones, Wilcannia, and James Smith, Big River,
Esquires.
Know ye, That, with the advice of the Executive Council of our
Colony of New South Wales, We have assigned you, and each and
every of you, to be Our Justices of the Peace in Our said Colony,
either alone or with any one or more of Our Justices as are now
or shall hereafter be commissioned by Us in that behalf, to keep
and cause to be kept all Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes in force
within Our said Colony, and all Acts of the Legislature of Our
said Colony, for the punishing of offenders, the preservation
of the Peace, and for the quiet rule, welfare, and good govern-
ment of Our People in Our said Colony ; and to have, exercise,
and discharge all the powers, authorities, and duties belonging
or pertaining to the office of a Justice of the Peace in our said
Colony : And therefore We command you, and each and every
of you, that to keep the Peace, and all Laws, Ordinances, and
Statutes, and all and singular other the Premises you diligently
apply yourselves, and that at certain days and places duly
appointed, or to be appointed for these purposes, into the Premises
to make inquiry, and all and singular the Premises hear and
determine and perform and fulfil them, doing therein what to
justice appertains, according to the Law and Custom of England
and of Our said Colony : And We command all Our Sheriffs and
Deputy Sheriffs of Our said Colony, at certain days and places
appointed or to be appointed, to be aiding by all lawful means
in the performance and due execution of the Premises : In
Testimony Whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent, and the Great Seal of our said Colony to be
hereunto affixed.
Witness Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Councillor The
Right Honourable Charles Robert, Baron Carrington,
Knight Grand Cross of Our Most Distinguished Order
of Saint Michael and Saint George, Our Governor and
Conimander-in-Chief of Our Colony of New South
Wales and its Dependencies, at Government House,
Sydney, in Our said Colony, this day of
,in the fifty* Year of Our Reign; and


in the Year of Our Lord One thousand eight hundred
and eighty-
By His Excellency’s Command,
Colonial Secretary.
Entered on Record by me, in Register of Patents, No. , page
, this day of One thousand eight hundred and
eighty-
Por the Colonial Secretary and Registrar of Records,
Principal Under-Secretary.
The following letter is sent to every Magistrate upon his being
appointed to the Commission of the Peace :
“ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, ,18 .
“ Sir, —I am directed by the Colonial Secretary to trans-
“ mit to you a copy of notice, dated , published in
“ the Government Gazette of the , by which you will
“ observe that you have been appointed a Magistrate for
“ the Colony of New South Wales.
“ I am further directed to inform you that it will be
“ requisite for you to take the oaths prescribed for Justices
“ of the Peace, before one of the Judges of the Supreme
“ Court, or before a Court of Quarter Sessions, or a Justice
“ of the Peace authorized by Writ of Dedimus Potestatem
“ for the purpose, within six months from the date of the
“ commission ; and to suggest that you should do this with
“ the least possible delay, as any Magistrate who acts as
“ such before taking the oaths of office, incurs a penalty of
“ one hundred pounds.
“ The Commission, which bears date , has been
“ deposited with the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court.
“ I have the honour to be, &c.,
“ Principal Under-Secretary.”
The Writ of Dedimus Potestatem above referred to may be
directed to any Magistrate, empowering him to administer to the
newly-appointed Magistrate the Oath of Allegiance, and the
Judicial Oath, the forms of which are annexed to the Writ.
When the oaths have been duly taken, the Writ is endorsed and
returned to the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court. The


following is the form of the Writ, with the annexed oaths and
certificate :
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, &c., &c., &c.
To Edward Brown, Esquire, J.P., of Menindie, greeting :
Whereas His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council, has appointed John Jones , of Wilcannia,
Esquire, to be a Justice of the Peace in and for the Colony of
New South Wales and its Dependencies : Know you, that we
have given unto you full power and authority to administer the
prescribed oaths to him, the said John Jones.
And therefore, we command you, that on such a day and place
as you shall think fit, you go to the said John Jones , if he cannot
conveniently come to you, and, on his oath on the Holy
Evangelists, duly administer the annexed Oaths, and certify the
same unto Our Supreme Court of the Colony aforesaid, together
w r ith this Writ.
Witness the Honourable Sir Frederick Darley, Knight, Our
Chief Justice, at Sydney, this day of
in the fifty- year of Our reign, a.d. 188 .
Prothonotary.
The oaths and certificate annexed to the Writ of Dedimus
Potestatem (which are exactly the same as those prescribed for
use by Judges when swearing in Magistrates) are as follow :
Oath of Allegiance.
I, do swear that I will be faithful and
bear true Allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Victoria, Her Heirs
and Successors according to law. So help me God.
[ Signature of Magistrate taking the oathd\
Judicial Oath.
I, do swear that I will well and truly
serve our Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria, in the office of Justice
of the Peace for the Colony of New South Wales, and I will do
right to all manner of people after the laws and usages of this
Colony, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. So help me
God.
[Signature of Magistrate taking the oath.~\


Certificate.
1, the undersigned, do hereby certify that the above oaths
were this day duly administered by me to the above-named
Given under my hand, at this day of ,
in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
eighty-
[Signature of Judge or Magistrate administering oaths. ]
Before entering upon the duties appertaining to the office of a
Justice of the Peace, it is necessary that the prescribed oaths be
taken before the Supreme Court or one of the Judges thereof—
or before a Circuit Court—or before a Court of Quarter Sessions
—or before a Justice of the Peace authorized by a Writ of
Dedimus Potestatem for the purpose. (20 Vic. No. 9, s. 2.)
The oaths to be taken are the Oath of Allegiance and the
Judicial Oath (33 Vic. No. 14, ss. 2,4, 7), and if not taken
within six months from the date of the Commission the appoint-
ment lapses. If the party to be sworn in objects to take an
oath, he may for the word “ swear,” in both the prescribed forms
of oaths, substitute the words “ solemnly, sincerely, and truly
declare and affirm ; ” and may omit the words “ so help me God.”
(33 Vic. No. 14, s. 11.)
If the oaths be administered by a Judge of the Supreme Court,
either at the Supreme Court in Sydney, or at any Circuit Court,
the following fees are payable, viz.—los. 6d. for the Oath of
Allegiance, 10s. 6d. for the Judicial Oath, and ss. for the
Certificate, making £1 6s. in all. These oaths and the Certificate
are in the same form as those annexed to the Writ of Dedimus
Potestatem —the only difference being that in the one case the
Certificate is signed by a Judge, and in the other by a Magistrate.
If the oaths be taken before a Court of Quarter Sessions no
fees whatever are payable, as such Courts have no authority to
demand fees for swearing in Magistrates.
If the newly-appointed Magistrate finds it more convenient to
be sworn in under a Writ of Dedimus Potestatem , he must write
to the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court, applying for the issue
of such Writ, and enclosing the proper fee, which he may do by
money order or bank draft, giving the name and address of the
Magistrate he wishes to have empowered to administer the oaths
to him. The fee referred to is £1 11s., made up as follows:
Ten shillings for the Writ, and ten shillings and sixpence each for
the Oath of Allegiance and the Judicial Oath. On receipt by the
Prothonotary of this application—which may be in any form—
and the above fee, he will, without delay, forward the Writ to


the newly-appointed Magistrate, accompanied by the following-
letter :
“ Supreme Court, Sydney, 188
f “ Sir, —I have the honour to forward herewith a Writ of
pi s “ Dedimus Potestatem, addressed to the gentleman named in
s -.| “ the margin, empowering him to administer the necesssary
§ 11 “oaths to you as a Justice of the Peace for the Colony'of
| “ JSTew South Wales.
“ You will please return the Writ to this office, when duly
§ r“ executed, with the least possible delay.
“I have the honour to be, &c.,
“ Prothonotary.
“ John Jones, Esq.,
“ Wilcannia.”
The newly-appointed Magistrate will then go to the gentleman
named in the Writ, before whom he will take and subscribe the
necessary oaths. (See form of oaths.) The Magistrate authorized
to administer the oaths will then sign the Certificate at the foot of
the form. When this is done, the newly-appointed Magistrate
will, as soon as possible, return the writ to the Prothonotary of
the Supreme Court, Sydney.
Taking the prescribed oaths, whether before a Judge or a
Magistrate, constitutes a person de facto a Justice of the Peace,
and he may thenceforth act as such.
Removal from the Commission of the Peace hy a Writ of Super-
sedeas.—When Justices of the Peace are guilty of any gross act of
oppression committed by them in the exercise or alleged exercise
of their magisterial duties, or are actuated by any vindictive or
corrupt motive, they are liable to be punished by indictment or
criminal information. As, however, from the arduous and often
intricate nature of their duties, they are frequently surrounded
with difficulties and dangers, the Legislature and the Supreme
Courts have, from time to time, anxiously thrown around them
very strong protection in the just and impartial execution of their
office. Thus, the Judges have uniformly refused to punish or
interfere with Justices for mere errors in judgment • and Lord
Mansfeld, C.J., declared that the Court would never interpose
its authority to punish a Magistrate unless it was clearly shown
that he had acted partially, maliciously, or corruptly, and had
consequently abused the trust reposed in him.
A milder, though, perhaps, more effectual mode of proceeding
against a Justice is by endeavouring to have him removed from
his office. This may be done upon a complaint to the Minister of
Justice, preferring the charges of misconduct, and if the same be


substantiated before the Executive Council, a Writ of Supersedeas
under the Great Seal, on the recommendation of the Council, is
issued by His Excellency the Governor, removing the offender
from the Commission of the Peace.
Writs of Supersedeas are also issued in all cases where
Magistrates have become bankrupt by passing through the
Insolvent Court, or have tendered their resignation.
Such Writs, when issued, are forwarded by the Colonial
Secretary to the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court, with a
request that he will strike the name of the party mentioned
therein out of the Commission of the Peace deposited in his
office. A letter is also written from the Colonial Secretary’s
Office to the party concerned, telling him that the Governor has
been pleased to accept his resignation, or to remove him from the
Commission of the Peace (as the case may be), and that a Writ
of Supersedeas has been duly issued.
The following is the form of the Writ of Supersedeas issued
by the Governor : —•
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, and so
forth.
To , greeting :
Whereas, by Our Commission of Letters Patent under the Great
Seal of Our Colony of New South Wales, and under the hand
of Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Councillor, Charles
Robert, Baron Carrington, Our Governor and Commander-in-
Chief of Our Colony of New South Wales, bearing date at
Government House, Sydney, the day of
One thousand eight hundred and We did assign you
one of Our Justices of the Peace in Our Colony of New South
Wales and its Dependencies, either alone or with any one or
more of Our Justices as were then or should thereafter be com-
missioned by Us in that behalf, to keep and cause to be kept all
Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes in force within Our said
Colony, and all Acts of the Legislature of Our said Colony
for the punishing of offenders, the preservation of the Peace,
and for the quiet rule, welfare, and good government of
Our People in Our said Colony, and to have, exercise, and
discharge all the powers, authorities, and duties belonging
or pertaining to the Office of a Justice of the Peace in Our
said Colony: And therefore We commanded you, that to
keep the Peace and all Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes, and all
and singular other the Premises, you diligently applied yourself,
doing therein what to justice appertained, according to the Law
and Custom of England and of Our said Colony : And whereas


[by your letter dated the day of you did
resign such office of a Justice of the Peace] or [it is deemed
expedient to remove you from such office of a Justice of the
Peace], Our Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Our said
Colony has been pleased [with the advice of the Executive
Council] to relieve you from the discharge of such your duty as
one of our Justices of the Peace in Our Colony aforesaid : Now
forasmuch as, for the reason before stated, it is expedient that the
said Commission or Letters Patent, so far as the same relates to
you the said which authorizes and empowers you co
act as one of Our said Justices of the Peace of Our said Colony,
may be superseded : For that end, We do therefore, by these
Presents, will and command you, the said , that you
stay and surcease all further proceedings by you taken or done
upon or under Our said Commission or Letters Patent, and We
do permit you to surcease therefrom, and We do declare the
same, so far as relates to you, to be and the same is superseded
accordingly : In testimony whereof We have caused this Our
Letter or Writ of Supersedeas to be made Patent, and the Great
Seal of Our said Colony to be hereunto affixed.
Witness Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Councillor
Charles Robert, Baron Carrington, Knight Grand Cross
of Our Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George, Our Governor and Commander-in-Chief
of Our Colony of New South Wales and its Dependen-
cies, at Government House, Sydney, in Our said Colony,
this day of in the year of Our
reign • and in the Year of Our Lord One thousand
eight hundred and eighty-
By His Excellency’s Command,
Colonial Secretary.
Entered on Record by me, in Register of Patents, No.
P a g e j this day of , One thousand eight
hundred and eighty-
For the Colonial Secretary and Registrar of Records,
Principal Under-Secretary.


CHAPTER 11.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS RESPECTING MAGIS-
TERIAL INQUIRIES.
Authority for Justices of the Peace Holding Magisterial
Inquiries as to Causes of Death.
Inquiries may he held by Justices of the Peace. —ln this
Colony no special Statute has been passed authorizing the hold-
ing of Magisterial Inquiries into the cause of death of any person,
or regulating the procedure thereat, but an implied authority is
given by the Medical Witnesses Act, 1 Yic. No. 3, to which
practical effect is given by a notice which appeared in the Govern-
ment Gazette , No. 22, page 300, of 18th March, 1845. This
notice is dated 15th March, 1845, and after defining the limits
within which Coroners should exercise their jurisdiction, states as
follows : —“ln police districts in which there maybe no Coroners,
the inquiries into the causes of any sudden deaths which may
happen within the same are to be conducted by the Police
Magistrate, if there be one, or if not, by any Justice of the Peace
of the district, under the powers granted by the Act of the
Governor and Council, 1 Victoria No. 3.”
Inquiry should not he held where there is any suspicion of foul
play. —Magisterial Inquiries should only be instituted where there
is no Coroner, or during a vacancy of that office ; or where the
local Coroner is absent, or is unable from any cause to hold an
inquest—as in cases where the body is so much decomposed that
no information could be gained by an inspection of it, or has lain
so long that there is nothing but the whole or part of the
skeleton : and should be confined to those cases in which the
facts and circumstances plainly indicate that the death was acci-
dental, or due to natural causes, and that no suspicion of crimin-
ality or blame attaches to anyone.
Whenever, in the opinion of a Magistrate, it is expedient to
institute an inquiry into the cause of any sudden death, he
should cautiously consider whether the circumstances of the case
do not rather render the laying of an information for “ murder”
or “ manslaughter ” the more desirable course to pursue, so that
the guilty party may be at once arrested, and the proceedings
assume their proper judicial shape in the only effectual form
which would render them available for ultimate usefulness.


Cannot Commit for Trial. —lt must be borne in mind that,
owing to these inquiries being instituted without formal in-
formations, and being held before the arrest of any suspected
person, or in his absence, there is no power vested in the
Magistrate to commit any such person for trial, although the
evidence may disclose a strong case of suspicion against him.
In what cases the Inquiry should be terminated.—'When-
ever, at any stage of the inquiry, the evidence discloses facts
which point to the conclusion that any person is guilty of
wrongfully causing the death under consideration, the Magistrate
should terminate the inquiry immediately, and record as his
“finding ” that an information be laid by the Police against the
suspected person, charging him with murder, or manslaughter
(see Forms of Magistrates' Findings ), in order that such
person may be brought up on summons, or warrant, at the Police
Court, in the usual way. The whole case is then commenced
afresh before the Justices, at the Police Court, according to the
usual rules of procedure in charges of indictable offences, and all
the witnesses are examined de novo , in the presence of the
accused, who has the opportunity afforded him of cross-examining
them, if he wishes to do so, or of calling any witnesses he may
think desirable for his defence. If, after full investigation, the
Justices think a prima facie case is made out against the accused,
they will commit him for trial; otherwise, he will be dis-
charged.
It is important to bear in mind that no depositions taken at
Magisterial Inquiries of witnesses who may subsequently die can
be read as evidence at the trial, either on behalf of the Crown
or of the prisoner.
Cannot impannel a Jury. —A Magistrate has no authority to
summon or impannel a jury for the purpose of holding an inquiry
—that power being conferred only upon Coroners—but must
conduct the proceedings himself; at the conclusion of which he
formally records his opinion—usually called the Magistrate’s
“ Finding”—as to the cause of death.
No power to compel attendance oj Witnesses. With the
exception of a medical witness, who may be summoned under the
Act 1 Vie. No. 3, the Magistrate has no authority to summon
any witnesses to attend at these inquiries, and therefore there are
no means of compelling unwilling witnesses to be present thereat.
The usual way of obtaining evidence is for the Constable who has
charge of the case to request all persons who know anything
connected with the death to attend at the time and place appointed
for holding the inquiry.


Sunday . —A Magisterial Inquiry should not be held on a
Sunday.
Inquiries should not he held unnecessarily. —lt is important
to keep down the expenses of Magisterial Inquiries to the limit
provided by Parliament, and to confine such inquiries, as far as
may be practicable, to cases of suspicious death, or of deaths so
sudden as to create a reasonable ground for investigating the
cause ; and, with this object in view, it is desirable in all cases for
the Magistrate to consult with the Police, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether any clear ground exists for suspecting that
death might have been caused by some foul means, before the
Government is put to the expenses incidental to such inquiries.
It would be very harassing to families, as well as costly to the
Government, if Magisterial Inquiries were held in cases where no
reasonable doubt existed that death was the result of natural
causes, even though it may have been unexpected and somewhat
sudden. Dying suddenly is not to be understood as applying to
persons who may die of fevers, or other epidemics; and the
absence of a doctor in attendance before death is not of itself a
sufficient reason for holding an inquiry, unless there are some
suspicious circumstances of neglect or maltreatment in the case.
If inquiries were considered necessary in all such cases, the cost
would be very much in excess of the Parliamentary provision for
the purpose.
Whilst urging the necessity for restricting the number of in-
quiries, the Minister of Justice does not desire to be understood
as controlling the exercise of the Magistrate’s discretion in respect
to cases in which an inquiry may appear to him to be essential to
the ends of justice.
In what cases Inquiries should he held. —The object of holding
a Magisterial Inquiry is to ascertain the cause of death, free
from doubt'or suspicion, so that the public may be satisfied that
such deaths occurred in the common course of nature, and not by
some unlawful violence, foul play, or culpable neglect. It is,
therefore, the custom to hold inquiries in all cases of persons
meeting their death by violence or accident—persons found dead
—dying suddenly or in prison—or committing suicide—for the
purpose of ascertaining whether deceased came to his death by
the wrongful action of any other person, or not.
Magistrates ought not in any case to obtrude themselves into
private families for the purpose of instituting inquiries, but
should wait until the case is reported to them by the Police, to
whom it is the duty of those in whose houses violent or sudden
deaths occur to make immediate communication, whilst the body
is fresh, and, if possible, whilst it remains in the same situation
as when the person died.


But under whatever circumstances an inquiry may be considered
necessary, the authority vested in the Magistrate in this behalf
ought to be exercised within the limits of a sound discretion.
One Inquiry held on several bodies. —One Magisterial Inquiry
may be held touching the cause of death of several persons, who
have been injured by the same cause, and died at the same time;
but only one fee is payable to the Magistrate for the whole
inquiry, no matter how many persons may have' met their death.
Expenses of Inquiry. —A Justice of the Peace holding a Magis-
terial Inquiry has authority to sanction the payment of certain
necessary fees to medical witnesses—interpreters—publicans—
rewards for taking up bodies of persons found drowned—and for
the burial of paupers. For full details respecting these fees, see
Preparation and Rendering of Accounts.
Witnesses are not entitled to any remuneration in respect of
their attendance at these inquiries, either for giving evidence or
for travelling expenses.
In very exceptional cases, however, an allowance to cover the
actual expenses incurred by a material witness may be submitted
to the Minister for Justice ; such claims are dealt with on their
merits, and if recommended by the Magistrate holding the inquiry,
payment may be approved of; but as there is no special appro-
priation of money by Parliament to meet expenses of this nature,
it is only under very special circumstances that they should be
entertained.
Any legally qualified Medical Practitioner may be summoned. —
The Justice of the Peace holding the inquiry is authorized by the
Statute 1 Vic. No. 3 (see Appendix), to issue his summons
for the attendance as a witness of some legally qualified medical
practitioner, in actual practice, who may reside in or near the
locality, if the deceased was not attended by one at or imme-
diately before his death; and in cases where the deceased was so
attended by one or more such practitioners, the Magistrate may
at his discretion summon any one, or all, of them to give evidence
as to the cause of death ( Form 7). By a circular issued by the
Government it is directed that the expense of medical testimony
should not be incurred except in cases in which the Magistrate
shall have been satisfied that a skilled and scientific examination
of the body is absolutely necessary, or that it is important to
ascertain the history of deceased’s case and treatment.
Post-mortem examination may be ordered. —Should the Justice
he of opinion that an external examination of the body is not
sufficient, owing to the suspicious or unusual circumstances of the
case, he may, at any time before the termination of the inquiry,


direct any legally qualified medical practitioner to perform a post-
mortem examination of the body of the deceased, either with or
without an analysis of the contents of the stomach or intestines.
Whenever the cause of death has not been satisfactorily ex-
plained by the practitioner examined in the first instance, the
Justice may summon any other legally qualified medical practi-
tioner, and direct him to perform a post-mortem examination with
or without an analysis, whether such an examination shall have
been previously performed or not; and may if necessary adjourn
the inquiry for the purpose.
Penalty for Medical Witness disobeying Summons.— The Act
referred to, 1 Vic. No. 3, does not empower the Justice to compel
the attendance of a legally qualified medical practitioner, but
section 5 provides that if such witness be duly summoned to give
evidence, or if ordered in writing to perform a post-mortem
examination, and he does not obey such summons or order, with-
out a reasonable excuse, he shall be liable to a fine of not less
than £3, nor more than £2O, to be recovered in a summary way
before any two Justices of the Peace.
Extracts from several Acts of Parliament, defining who are to
be deemed legally qualified medical practitioners in this Colony
will be found in the Appendix.
Any Medical Witness may be examined. —The Magistrate has
power to examine as a medical witness any person he thinks fit
other than a legally qualified medical practitioner; the only
privilege the latter has is that he is entitled to demand payment
of the Statutory fees, whereas no other practitioner has a right to
such fees.
Analysis or Assay. —Whenever there may be reasonable ground
for suspecting death to have been caused by poison, or by im-
proper medical treatment, and in the opinion of the Magistrate
an analysis of the stomach or other parts of the deceased person
may be necessary, the Magistrate must communicate in the first
instance, either by telegraph or by letter (according to the urgency
of the case), with the Under-Secretary of Justice, giving an
outline of the circumstances in each case, and of the symptoms
and duration of illness, &c., before incurring the expense of send-
ing' constables to Sydney with the matter for analysis or assay,
so that the necessary steps may be at once taken, and the Govern-
ment Analytical Chemist duly instructed for the purpose of
obtaining the requisite information thereon. The Constable en-
trusted with the matter should take care to be able to swear that
he delivered it in the same condition in which he received it.
No authority to hold Inquiries respecting fires. —A Justice
of the Peace has no authority to hold a Magisterial Inquiry


respecting the cause of any fire, that power being conferred only
upon Coroners. The proper course to be pursued in cases where
any property has been wilfully destroyed or damaged by fire, and
there is no Coroner to hold the usual inquest, is for the Police to
proceed against the suspected person on a charge of arson, by
laying an information and taking out a summons or warrant—
according to the urgency of the case—and bringing him before
the Police Court; and then, after public examination of the
witnesses against and for the accused, and in his presence, a com-
mittal or discharge may take place, in precisely the same way as
in any other charge of felony.
Duty of Magistrates when a Death is Reported to Them.
When Inquiry should be held. —When the body of any de-
ceased person is found by the Police, or they are informed of any
such body having been found, or any death under unusual cir-
cumstances is notified to them, a report stating, if possible, the
name of the deceased, and the manner of the death, should be
made immediately to the Coroner, if there be one, or, if not, to the
nearest Magistrate, in all cases of—
1. Violent death.
2. Casualties by which death ensues.
3. Sadden deaths.
4. Persons found dead, whether the whole body or only part
of the skeleton be found.
5. Persons committing suicide.
6. Persons dying in gaols, lock-ups, or hospitals.
7. Prisoners executed in gaols.
8. And in all cases where death is suspected to have occurred
from foul play.
Arrangements for holding the Inquiry. —On receipt of the
report referred to—whether in the form of a letter or a telegram—
from a Police Officer, the Magistrate, if he is satisfied that there
are no suspicious circumstances connected with the case, and that
a Magisterial Inquiry would be sufficient to elicit the cause of
death, he thereupon arranges with the Police as to the place where,
and time when, such inquiry will be held, having due regard to
the convenience of the witnesses, and all persons concerned.
If the death happened in a colliery, or on a railway line, the
Magistrate will then send notice to the Officer of the Mines De-
partment, or of the Railway Department, as the case may be, in
accordance with the directions given under the respective sub-


headings of Accidents in Collieries and Accidents on Government
Railways.
If it be thought necessai'y that a medical man should be called
in to view the body, or make a post-mortem examination, the
Magistrate should issue his summons (Form 7) for such medical
man if there are reasons for supposing that he will not attend
without a summons, in order that the Constable may have him in
attendance, with the other witnesses, when the inquiry commences,
] (reference being given to the Government Medical Officer of the
district.
The Constable then communicates these arrangements to all
persons who will be required to give evidence in the case,
and requests them to be present; and if he learns that any
material witness cannot speak English, he should endeavour to
find some competent person to act as interpreter, and have him in
attendance, with the witnesses, at the place appointed for holding
the inquiry.
It is not imperative that the inquiry should be held at the place
where the body was found, or the death occurred ; the body may
be removed by the Police, in a cart or otherwise, to the nearest
convenient place for holding an inquiry; or if the Magistrate
does not consider a view of the body necessary, it need not be
removed, and the inquiry can be held at any place which will be
convenient for the attendance of the witnesses and others.
The Police Officer who reports the death to the Magistrate
must consider himself as the person whose special duty it is to
get up the case at the inquiry, by having the witnesses, exhibits,
interpreter, &c., ready at the time and place appointed.
Inquiry may be dispensed with. —lf, however, the Magistrate
is satisfied, from the information given to him by the Police when
reporting the death, that there is no necessity for holding a
Magisterial Inquiry, he may dispense with it, and grant a certifi-
cate for the burial of the body, to the effect of Form 0.
Publicans bound to receive dead bodies. The bodies of
persons found dead, are usually removed by the Police to the
nearest public-house, or to the house of some of the deceased’s
friends, if any. By section 86 of the Licensing Act of 1882
(see Appendix ), power is given to hold inquests in public-houses,
where the house is not situated within one mile from any dead-
house or police-station ; and the publican is bound, under a
penalty not exceeding £5, to receive a dead body into some secure
place upon his premises if it be brought there for the purpose of
an inquest being held upon it; but he is not bound to receive a
dead body in an offensive state of decomposition, or the body of a


person reputed to have died of an infectious disease. For every
body so received the publican is entitled to receive the sum of
thirty shillings. In the section just quoted, the word “ Inquest,”
and not “ Coroner’s Inquest,” is used, and it is thought the
Government would be willing to pay the prescribed fee to the
publican in cases of Magisterial Inquiries, and that the publican
would be bound to receive the dead body upon his premises ;
because, when the Police bring the body there, they do not know
whether an Inquest, or a Magisterial Inquiry, will be held thereon.
In the case of a person dying suddenly in a public-house, the
publican will not be entitled to receive the sum mentioned, or any
other gratuity.
Accidents in Collieries. —By the 28th and 29th sections of the
Coal Mines Regulation Act of 1876, 39 Vic. No. 31, it is
enacted that unless the examiner, or inspector, or some other
person on behalf of the Minister, be present at an inquest (or
inquiry') respecting the loss of life of any person employed in or
about any coal mine, whose death may have been caused by any
explosion or other accident whatever within such mine, or pit, or
shaft thereof, or any works or machinery connected therewith, the
Coroner (or Magistrate) shall adjourn the same, and by written
notice delivered or sent four days at the least before holding the
adjourned inquest (or inquiry ), give notice of the time and place
of holding the same; but before such adjournment, the Coroner
(or Magistrate) may take evidence to identify the body, and order
the interment thereof. And the examiner, inspector, or other
person authorized in that behalf, shall be at liberty to examine or
cross-examine any witness at any such inquest (or inquiry).
Provided that if the accident has not occasioned more than one
death, and notice of the inquest (or inquiry) has been given by
the Coroner (or Magistrate) not less than forty-eight hours before
the time of holding the same, it shall not be imperative on the
Coroner (or Magistrate) to adjourn such inquest (or inquiry) if the
majority of the jury think it unnecessary.
In districts where there may be no Coroner, or that officer is
absent, or cannot from any cause hold the inquest referred to
or during a vacancy in the office of Coroner—any Justice of the
Peace may hold a Magisterial Inquiry, and should follow the
directions given in the last paragraph, except that the discretion
therein conferred on the majority of the jury will then be vested
in the Magistrate. The notice referred to may be to the effect of
Form 11.
Accidents on Government Railways. —Whenever loss of life
occurs by reason of any accident on a line of Government Rail-


way, or on the premises of any railway station, the Magistrate
conducting the inquiry should send notice to the nearest Traffic
Manager, Station Master, or other railway official, of the time and
place of holding such inquiry, in order that the Traffic Manager,
or his representative, may have an opportunity of being present
thereat, and of examining and cross-examining any witnesses he
may think proper. And for the purpose of allowing sufficient
time for the attendance of such official, the Magistrate may, if he
consider it necessary, adjourn the inquiry to a time and place to
be stated in the notice referred to, after having taken sufficient
evidence to identify the body, and issuing his certificate for its
interment. The notice referred to may be to the effect of Form 11,
Interested persons may he allowed to examine Witnesses. —ln
cases where fatal accidents occur in saw or other mills, in house-
building, in the erection of bridges, or in any large establish-
ments where a number of men are employed, and in reference to
which the public or employes may think there is, perhaps, some
blame or negligence on the part of the employer, it is usual to
allow such employer, or any person interested in the resitlt of the
proceedings , to be present at the inquiry to cross-examine the
witnesses, in order that he may have an opportunity of correcting
any wrong impression which may have arisen respecting the cause
of the accident, and of setting himself right with the public ; or
he may himself give evidence if he so desires, but in such case
it would be the Magistrate’s duty to caution him that he is not
compellable to answer any questions, or to make any disclosures,
tending to criminate himself; or, further, he may call and
examine any witnesses he wishes as to the cause of the accident,
such witnesses being subject to examination afterwards by the
Magistrate if he thinks proper.
Deaths in Gaols and Asylums. —When holding Magisterial
Inquiries respecting deaths in Gaols or Lunatic Asylums, and the
circumstances of the case raise any question as to negligence or
impropriety in the treatment of the prisoner, or inmate, the
independent evidence of some medical man wholly unconnected
with such Gaol or Asylum should be taken, in addition to that of
the regular medical officer, as a guarantee and a safeguard against
the testimony of interested parties, however respectable, connected
with such institutions.
In cases of deaths in Gaols and Lunatic Asylums, the local
Coroner generally holds an inquest; but as cases may arise where
Justices of the Peace may be called upon to hold inquiries, it has
been thought desirable to refer to the matter in this work.


Mode of Taking the Depositions.
Form and caption of depositions. —The depositions should be
preceded with a heading, or caption , as it is called, to the effect
of Form 2, on half a sheet of foolscap paper. The first witness’s
deposition should then commence on a fresh half-sheet of paper,
giving his name in full, occupation, and place of residence.
When a witness’s evidence extends over more than one page, the
last word on each page should be repeated at the commencement
of the following one.
The continuation of the depositions should be written on half-
sheets of foolscap paper, with the pages numbered in regular
order; the examination of each witness commencing on a fresh
half-sheet, preceded by the words “ J. 8., having been sworn,
states : lam a sawyer, and reside at Tulloona.” [Here follows
his evidence.]
The depositions, and all the proceedings connected with the
inquiry, should be written in a distinct and legible hand, on one
side only of the paper, leaving about a quarter of the width of
the sheet as a margin. All corrections, erasures, and inter-
lineations should be initialed by the Magistrate on the margin
opposite to where they occur.
How the evidence should he taken down. —The statement of
every witness should invariably be taken down in the first person,
and as nearly as possible in his exact natural language, even to
slang expressions—rejecting all that is irrelevant, supposition,
or hearsay, and avoiding ambiguous phraseology. If it is neces-
sary to alter the witness’ words, in order to make his statement
intelligible, he should be asked if the alteration expresses his
meaning. The substance of a conversation should never be
accepted when the witness can state the words themselves;
neither should the witness be allowed to state his own conclusions
from facts, instead of the facts from which the conclusions may
be drawn.
All depositions should be as concise as the nature of the
case will permit, and needless prolixity is not desired ; but the
facts should be stated with reasonable minuteness, in words
most commonly used and generally understood, and in such
sequence as to give a connected account of what took place.
Every relevant circumstance detailed by the witness should be
taken down with care and accuracy, particularly as regards time,
place, and persons ' } and whenever these or any other matters
appear to be loosely or ambiguously spoken of, the attention of
the witness should be called to these points, not by leading


questions, but by such as may tend to elicit the desired informa-
tion from the witness in his own words.
In taking the evidence of ignorant witnesses great care is
necessary, in order to avoid writing down a variety of matters
altogether irrelevant; and it is difficult to make such witnesses
state only what they saw or did, and to suppress that which they
only heard or surmised. A witness of this description will go on
for a considerable time in telling a story as if he had been present
and saw it all; but presently it turns out that it was only
communicated to him by someone else. Depositions are some
times taken very carelessly in this respect, mixing up facts with
hearsay and surmise, and also containing ambiguous and irrelevant
sentences.
Documents produced in evidence. —When documents are pro-
duced in evidence they should either be introduced in extenso
into the depositions, or their purport stated, as their importance
may seem to require, and should then be initialed by the
Magistrate, and lettered in consecutive order, thus: —“ Exhibit
A,” “ Exhibit B,” &c., followed by the Magistrate’s initials. A
note should also be made on the margin of that part of the
deposition where such document is quoted, or referred to, thus :
“See Exhibit A.” All exhibits should be attached to the deposi-
tions wfith which they are connected.
Cross-examination. —When any person is allowed to cross-
examine a witness at the end of the examination-in-chief, any
relevant evidence so elicited should be written down immediately
following, as a part of the deposition already taken, and such
evidence must be distinguished from the examination-in-chief,
which may be done in this way:—“ By Mr. John Smith : ”
[Here give the evidence.]
Re-examination. —lf the witness be re-examined such additional
evidence should be distinguished from the cross-examination in
the following manner : —“ By the Magistrate : ” [Here give the
re-examination. ]
Form of Jurat in ordinary cases. —When the witness’ deposi-
tion is finally completed, read to him, and corrected if necessary,
it must be signed by him with his name or mark, and the
following jurat added and signed by the Magistrate :—“ Sworn
[affirmed, or declared ] on the Bth May, 1887, at Singleton, before
me. A. 8., J.P.” [This jurat must be added to each witness’
deposition after he signs it.]
Recalling witnesses. —lf a witness be recalled, it should be
noted on the proceedings in the same order as if he were a new
witness, except that he need not be again sworn. The additional


evidence will be taken down on a fresh half-sheet of paper, and
the heading will be as follows :—“ A. 8., recalled, states [Here
give his additional evidence.] The witness will then sign it as
before, and the Magistrate will add and sign a jurat in the usual
way.
Caption and Jurat inhere interpreter employed. —ln cases in
which interpreters have been employed in interpreting the
evidence given by the witnesses, it should be shown on the face
of the depositions, not only that the witnesses were examined
through such interpreters, but also that the interpreters were
sworn as such, and their names should be given. The interpreter
should be sworn to interpret, as well the oath as the questions
put to the witness, and the answers given thereto. In such cases
the following heading may precede the witness’ deposition :
“ Eugene Grandjean, a Frenchman, was called as a witness ; but,
not being able to speak the English language, Jacques De Baun,
painter, of Sturt-street, Silverton, was sworn as interpreter,
through whom the necessary oath Affirmation, or declaration ]
was administered to, and the following deposition made by, the
said Eugene Grandjean.”
[Here follows the witness’ statement.]
To which, after being signed by him, the following jurat may be
added :
“ Sworn \affirmed, or declared ] on Bth May, 1887, at Singleton,
the contents of the deposition having been translated to the
deponent by the abovenamed interpreter, before me.
“A. 8., J.P.”
Constable's deposition of service of Summons on Medical Witness.
—The deposition of the constable who serves a summons on a
medical witness, who disobeys it, may be in the following form :
“John Dunn, on oath, states :—I am a Constable in the New
South Wales Police Force, stationed at Menindie. On the 18th
day of June, instant, I served a duplicate of the summons
produced on 0.P., by delivering it to him personally [or, by
leaving it with Q.R., to whom I i*ead and explained it, at the
usual place of abode of the said O.P.] It is under the hand
and seal of a Magistrate of the colony, and is returnable to-day.
He has been called three times, and does not appear.”
This deposition will be signed, and a jurat added in the usual
manner. The copy of the summons referred to should be
attached to the deposition by a tape and sealing wax, and the
Magistrate should endorse on such copy these words :—“ This is
the copy of the summons referred to in the deposition of John
Dunn hereto annexed,” and adding his signature.


Adjournment. —The date and place to which an inquiry may
be adjourned, with the causes rendering such adjournment neces-
sary, should be entered in the depositions—at the end of the
evidence already taken—in the following manner : —“ Inquiry
adjourned [to the Plough Inn, Branxton], for the purpose of
obtaining further evidence [or as the case may be\, until Monday,
the 9th May, 1887, at 10 a.m. Singleton, 7th May, 1887.”
Resumption. —When the inquiry is resumed, the following
caption, on a fresh half-sheet of paper, should precede the
examination of the witnesses:—“ Branxton, 9th May, 1887.
The Magisterial Inquiry respecting the cause of death of J.S.
[or, a man unknown] was resumed, pursuant to adjournment.
“ Thomas Bull having been sworn [or, having made an affirma-
tion, or, having made a declaration], states : —”
Conclusion. —When the inquiry is concluded, the certificate of
the Magistrate’s finding ( Form 3) should be written on a fresh
half-sheet of foolscap paper, and the following entry made at the
end of it: —“ Inquiry closed. Branxton, 9th May, 1887.”
(See also Instructions for taking Depositions of Material Wit-
nesses respecting Indictable Offences, in the Appendix.)
Oaths of Witnesses and Interpreters.
Power to administer Oath to Witnesses. —lt may be laid down,
as a general rule, that wherever Justices of the Peace are
authorized by act of Parliament to hear and determine, or to
examine witnesses, they have, incidentally, a power to take
the examinations on oath. By the 12th section of the Acts
Shortening Act, 16 Yic. No. 1, “Whenever any Court, Judge,
Justice, Officer, Commissioner, Arbitrator, or other person shall
be authorized by law, or by consent of parties, to hear and deter-
mine any matter or thing, such Court, Judge, Justice, &c.,
shall have authority to receive and examine evidence, and are
empowered to administer an oath to, or take an affirmation from,
all such witnesses as are legally called before them respectively.
Witnesses to be sworn before examination. —Before the examin-
ation of a witness is taken he should be duly sworn to speak the
truth. And as the mode of administering the oath varies, ac-
cording to the peculiar religious belief professed by the witness,
the Magistrate should always satisfy himself upon this point,
either by questions put to the witness or other persons. It need
scarcely be observed that the object in view in putting the
witness under the solemn obligation of an oath is not only to
impress him with the moral and religious duty of speaking the
truth, but to render him liable, in case he should give false
testimony, to the punishment awarded by law to a person who


commits perjury. If, therefore, a Magistrate should be wilfully
deceived by a witness as to his religious belief, and the witness
should thus be improperly sworn, and so as not to bind his con-
science, it will not the less prevent his being convicted of perjury,
in case he should be proved to have given false testimony.
Mode of administering the Oath. —The particular form of
ceremony of administering an oath is quite distinct from the
substance of the oath itself. The form of oaths under which
God is invoked as a witness, or as an avenger of perjury, is to
be accommodated to the religious persuasion which the swearer
entertains of God, it being vain to compel a man to swear by a
God in whom he does not believe, and whom he, therefore does
not reverence (Puffend, b. 4, c. 2, s. 4). According to several
decisions and enactments, the mode of swearing witnesses of
different religious persuasions may be as follows :
1. Christians, how sworn. —A Christian is sworn upon the
four Gospels or Books of the Holy Evangelists, and the following
form of oath is usually adopted, being repeated to the witness
after he has taken the Testament in his right hand :
“ A. 8., the evidence that you shall give to this inquiry
touching the death of C.D. shall be the truth, the ivhole truth,
and nothing but the truth. So help you God.”
The witness then kisses the Testament, and the oath is com-
plete. It is not necessary, in imposing the oath, to use the exact
form of words here given ; any other words of similar import
will be sufficient for the purpose.
2. Jews. —A Jew is sworn upon the Pentateuch, with his head
covered, the language of the oath being changed from “ So help
you God” to “So help you Jehovah” (2 Hale, P.C., 279 ;
Omichund v. Barker, Willes, 543).
3. Scotch Witnesses. —The Scotch oath is thus administered :
Holding up his right hand, uncovered, the witness repeats after
the Magistrate or Constable :
“/ swear by Almighty God, and as I shall ansiver to God
at the great day of judgment, that 1 will tell the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, in so far as I know
and shall be asked in this case.”
4. Scotch Covenanters. —The following is also given as the form
of a Scotch Covenanter’s oath :
“ I, A. 8., do swear by God himself, as I shall answer to
Him at the great day of judgment, that the evidence I
shall give to the court, touching the matter in question, is the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. So help me
GodS (1 Leach, 412, n. ; Walker’s case, Q. 8., 1788.)


5. Mohammedans. —A Mohammedan is sworn on the Koran.
The form in Morgan's case (1 Leach, 54), was as follows : —The
witness first placed his right hand flat upon the book, put the other
hand to his forehead, and brought the top of his forehead down to
the book and touched it with his head. He then looked for some
time upon it, and being asked what effect that ceremony was to
produce, he answered that he was bound by it to speak the truth
(Roscoe’s Cr. Ev.) In a recent case, a different course was fol-
lowed. The officer of the Court asked the witness what form of
oath was binding on his conscience, who replied, the oath in the
usual words, provided he were sworn on the Koran, and he was
sworn accordingly (Best’s Ev,, 6th ed., 233).
6. Parsees. —A Parsee swears in a similar mode to the Mo-
hammedans, except that, instead of the Koran, he swears on the
Prayer Book used by the Parsees.
7. Roman Catholics. —Roman Catholics sometimes express a
wish to be sworn on the Douay version of the Bible, which should
always be acceded to, but this formality is unnecessary unless
desired by the witness conscientiously.
8. Quakers or Moravians. —Quakers, Moravians, and Separatists
are to make a solemn declaration or affirmation instead of taking
an oath. (See 3& 4 Will. 4, c. 49, adopted in this Colony by 8
Will. 4, No. 2.) The following is the form of declaration :
A. 8., being one of the people called Quakers [or one of
the persuasion of the people called Separatists, or of the United
Brethren called Moravians , as the case may be], do solemnly,
sincerely, and truly declare and affirm that the evidence ,” <L~c.
9. Gentoos. —The deposition of a Gentoo has been received who
touched with his hand the foot of a Brahmin ( Omichund v.
Barker, 1 Atk., 21). But if the party swearing be himself a
priest, then he touches the Brahmin’s hand. In some parts of
India, the natives are sworn on a portion of the water of the
Ganges (Best’s Ev., 6th ed., 233).
10. Chinese. —The following is given in a recent case as the
form of swearing a Chinese witness (Roscoe’s Or. Ev.) :—On
entering the box, the witness immediately knelt down, and a china
saucer having been placed in his hand, he struck it against the
brass rail in front of the box and broke it. The Crier of the
Court then, by direction of the interpreter, administered the oath
in these words, which were translated by the interpreter into the
Chinese language (Entrehman’s case, 1 Car. & M., 248) :
“ You shall tell the truth, and the vjhole truth; the saucer
is cracked, and if you do not tell the truth , your soul will be
cracked like the saucer.”


Other forms—as the extinguishing a lighted lucifer, or the
cutting off the head of a cock—are also used in this colony,
because binding on the consciences of particular tribes of Chinese.
11. Interpreter's Oath where ivitness does not speak English. —
Foreigners, as well as other witnesses who do not speak the
English language, should be sworn through the medium of another
person duly qualified to interpret them, the interpreter being first
sworn faithfully to interpret the witness. The interpreter’s oath
may be in the following form :
“ You shall truly and ffaithfully interpret the evidence about
to be given , and all other matters and things touching the
present inquiry , and the [French, or as the case may be]
language into the English language , and the English language
into the [French, &c.J language , according to the best of your
skill and ability. So help you God."
The following is another form of interpreter’s oath :
“ You swear that you are well acquainted with the English
and [French, or as the case may be] languages , and that you
will faithfully interpret between the Court and the witness.
So help you God." (Vice-Admiralty Court Rules, Form 31.)
12. Interpreter's Oath where witness deaf and dumb. —Deaf and
dumb persons, if they can be communicated with either by signs
or by writing, and it appears that they are possessed of intelli-
gence, and understand the difference between truth and falsehood,
may be examined as witnesses. The examination may be carried
on either by signs or in writing, or partly in both. (Best’s Ev.,
6th ed., 210). The interpreter should be sworn faithfully to
interpret the signs, and the usual oath should also be put to the
witness through the interpreter. The following form of inter-
preter’s oath may be used :
“ You swear that you are well acquainted with the signs
used by deaf and dumb persons in communicating their ideas ,
and that you will faithfully interpret between the Court and
the witness.”
Witness may be sworn in any mode he may declare to be
binding on him. —lt may, indeed, be taken as a general rule that
a witness may be sworn in such mode, and with such ceremonies,
as he, at the time, declares to be binding upon his conscience;
and a witness so sworn will be liable to the pains and penalties
applicable to the offence of perjury if he should wilfully pervert
or suppress the truth.
13. Affirmation instead of Oath in certain cases where persons are
unwilling to be sworn. —By the 10th section of the Common Law
Procedure Act, 20 Vic. No. 31, it is enacted “ that if any person


called as a witness, or required or desired to make an affidavit or
deposition, shall refuse or be unwilling, from alleged conscien-
tious motives, to be sworn, it shall be lawful for the Court or
Judge, or other presiding officer, or person qualified to take
affidavits or depositions, upon being satisfied of the sincerity of
such objection, to permit such person, instead of being sworn, to
make his or her solemn affirmation in the words following:, viz. :
O'
“I, A. 8., do solemnly, sincerely, and truly affirm and
declare that the taking of any oath is, according to my reli-
gious belief, unlawful ; and I do also solemnly, sincerely, and
truly affirm and declare that the evidence” &c.
Which solemn affirmation shall be of the same force and effect as
if such person had taken an oath in the usual form, and the like
provisions shall apply also to every person required to be sworn
as a Juror.
14. Declaration instead of Oath. —Whenever any person called
as a Avitness, or having to make a statement in an information,
complaint, or proceeding in any Court, or before any Justice,
objects to take an oath, or is reasonably objected to as incompetent
to take an oath—or appears to the Court or Justice to be incom-
petent to take an oath—he may make the following declaration
instead of being sworn :
“ I solemnly declare that the evidence now about to be given
by me shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth.”
And whosoever, having made such declaration, wilfully makes any
false statement before such Court or Justice, knowing the same
to be false, shall be deemed guilty of perjury, if the statement,
had it been on oath, would by law have been perjury ; or, where
such false statement does not in law amount to perjury, the
offender shall be liable to penal servitude for five years (46 Vic.
17, ss. 343, 292).
15. Promise in lieu of Oath. —Whenever any person called to
give evidence in any Court, or before any Justice, or other person
authorized to administer an oath, whether in a civil or criminal
proceeding, shall object to take an oath, or be reasonably objected
to as incompetent to take an oath, such person shall make the
following promise in lieu of such oath :
“ In the case in which I am now called as a witness, 1
promise to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth
and any person who, having made such promise, shall wilfully
and corruptly give any false evidence, shall be deemed guilty of
perjury (40 Vic. No. 8, s. 3).


Admissibility of Evidence and Competency of Witnesses.
Admissibility of evidence. —Justices, when holding Magisterial
Inquiries, ought, as far as they can, apply and be governed by the
general rules of law regulating the admissibility or exclusion of
evidence; but they may with propriety listen to statements not
strictly admissible in evidence, for the purpose of arriving at
what is admissible to establish the facts of the case.
The chief test of the admissibility of evidence at these inquiries,
is its relevancy ; and if care be taken to prevent leading questions,
except in cross-examination, and to repudiate answers founded on
hearsay and surmise, the Magistrate will have no difficulty in this
respect; but if he is in doubt as to whether any evidence is
admissible or not, the better and safer course is to take it down.
(See also the remarks on evidence in the last four paragraphs
of Instructions for taking Depositions of Material Witnesses
respecting Indictable Offences, in the Appendix.)
Competency of witnesses. —No person is competent to give
evidence on oath unless he believes in a Supreme Being who will
punish him, either in the present or future life, for perjury ; but
by the 343rd section of 46 Yic. No. 17, and the 3rd section of
40 Vic. No. 8, if a witness objects to take an oath, or is reason-
ably objected to as incompetent to take an oath, he can make a
declaration or promise : so that, practically, all persons, univer-
sally, are competent as witnesses, with the exception of persons
who have not the use of reason, as idiots, lunatics, and very young
children; but the evidence of witnesses at any age is admissible,
if it appear that they have sufficient discretion, and understand
the moral obligation of an oath; so, likewise, a lunatic is com-
petent during a lucid interval.
No witness is compellable to answer any questions, or make
any disclosures, tending to criminate himself.


CHAPTER 111.
PROCEDURE IN HOLDING MAGISTERIAL
INQUIRIES.
Opening the Inquiry,
When the time arrives at which the inquiry is to be held,
the Magistrate proceeds to the place appointed, where he
meets the Constable, who attends with all the witnesses, an
interpreter if necessary, and any exhibits, such as the instru-
ment by which death is supposed to have been caused—as a
razor, pistol, poison, &c., the rope with which deceased hanged
himself, papers or other property found on searching the body,
or anything else which may tend to explain the cause of death,
or to facilitate identification, if the deceased be an unknown
person.
The Magistrate should have with him a sufficient supply of
foolscap paper for taking the depositions, pen, ink, blotting-paper,
a Bible, and all the necessary printed forms—together with this
Handbook .
It is not essential to the validity of an inquiry that the
Magistrate should view the body, but it is thought desirable that
he should do so when practicable, as material evidence as to the
cause of death may thereby be gained. If the body has lain so
long, or is so decomposed that an inspection of it would be of no
service, such view may be dispensed with.
It is usual to allow any person interested in the result of the
proceedings to be present and cross-examine the witnesses, but
the room or place in which a Magisterial Inquiry is held is not
an open Court, and no person has a right to be present, or to
examine witnesses, except the officers of the Mines or Railway
Departments (see Duties of Magistrates when a Death is Reported
to them), and can only do either by permission of the Magis-
trate ; but as publicity generally assists the investigation of truth,
and the detection of guilt, the power of exclusion ought not to be
enforced, unless the ends of justice appear to require it.
Representatives of the Press are generally allowed to be present
on the understanding that they will not publish the particulars
until the conclusion of the inquiry.
The next step in the proceedings is to examine the witnesses,
whose evidence is either taken secretly or in public, as the
Magistrate may consider expedient.


Examination of Witnesses.
Witnesses examined in relative order. —The witnesses should be
called in separately to give their evidence, and should be examined
in such relative order as may best serve to give a connected
account of everything relating to the case, and form a regular chain
of evidence. The evidence of each witness should be taken
formally in every case, for until the inquiry is terminated it is
impossible to say what may be the result.
Examination in chief. —As each witness appears, and before
his name or testimony is taken down, he should be sworn accord-
ing to some of the forms given under the heading of Oaths of
Witnesses and Interpreters. After the witness has been sworn,
or has made an affirmation or declaration in the prescribed
manner, his name , occupation , and place of abode should be
written down by the Magistrate, who will then proceed to
examine the witness and elicit from him, in regular order and
in detail, an account of all the facts and circumstances within his
own personal knowledge respecting the cause of death of the
deceased, but omitting all hearsay and exti'aneous statements.
Instead of the Magistrate himself conducting the examination
of the witnesses, this duty is frequently performed by the Con-
stable in attendance, who, from his previous knowledge of the facts
of the case, knows what information each witness will be able to
give, and he questions them accordingly.
As each witness gives his evidence, it should be carefully taken
down by the Magistrate, adopting, as far as possible, the precise
words and expressions spoken by the witness. If any papers or
other exhibits are produced by the witness, they will be received
by the Magistrate, and lettered in consecutive order. (See
Mode of Taking the Depositions.)
Cross-examination. —ln cases where any officer of the Mines or
Railway Departments, or any other person interested in the
result of the proceedings, has attended for the purpose of cross-
examining the witnesses, such cross-examination should take
place immediatiately after the examination in chief.
Re-examination. —When the cross-examination is finished, the
witness may be re-examined by the Magistrate, for the purpose of
explaining anything he may have said in his cross-examination.
Depositions read to and signed by the Witnesses. —When the
evidence of each witness is complete, containing both his
examination and cross-examination, it should be read over to
him, when any corrections or additions may be made at the
witness’ request, but all erasures and interlineations should be


initialed on the margin by the Magistrate. The witness then
signs his deposition, but if he cannot write, the Magistrate, or
the Constable in attendance, may write his name for him, and
get him to make his mark between his Christian and surname,
the Constable signing as a witness to the mark. The Magistrate
then writes and signs the usual jurat, which should be added to
each separate witness’ deposition.
Witnesses may be re-called. —A witness who has already given
his evidence may be recalled at any stage of the inquiry, in order
that he may be asked any further questions which may be
thought necessary, or to explain anything he has previously
stated, and as he was sworn in the first instance it will not be
necessary to swear him again. When a witness is recalled, he
may be cross-examined and re-examined in the same manner as if
he were a new witness. He must also sign his additional
evidence, and the Magistrate adds a jurat as before.
Foreign witnesses examined through Interpreter. —lf any of
the witnesses are foreigners, and do not speak the English
language, the oath, affirmation, or declaration, should be adminis-
tered to them through an interpreter, who should first be sworn
to truly and faithfully interpret between the Court and the
witness. (See Oaths of Witnesses and Interpreters.} The caption
given in the article on the Mode of Taking the Depositions ,
under the sub-head of Caption and Jurat where interpreter
employed, should precede the witness’ evidence, and when his
examination is finished, it should be translated to him by the
interpreter, and corrected if necessary, after which he signs it,
and the jurat just referred to is added.
Deaf and Dumb Witnesses. —When deaf and dumb witnesses
are examined, the interpreter will be sworn and administer the
oath to the witness in a similar manner to that adopted in
the case of foreigners, and the heading and jurat to such
depositions may be in the same form, mutatis mutandis. (See
last paragraph.)
Medical Witnesses. —Although the Magistrate ought not, with-
out sufficient reason, to call upon medical men to attend at these
inquiries, or impose upon the public the expense of paying them,
yet in cases where the cause of death is obscure, or where medical
evidence is indispensably necessary to ascertain whether deceased
met his death by foul play or through culpable maltreatment by
his attendants, a medical witness may be summoned and ex-
amined ; and, in such cases, it is the wish of the Government that
the preference should, in all cases, be given to the Government
Medical Officer, or gratuitous Medical Attendants of Hospitals


and Benevolent Asylums, if at hand and willing to attend, pro-
vided no special grounds exist for calling in some other practi-
tioner. This must not be construed as interfering with the
right of the Magistrate to call in any medical man he may think
proper, but it is assumed that the wish of the Government will
be complied with in ordinary cases.
The medical witness, if one be thought necessary, is allowed to
be present during the examination of all the other witnesses,
to enable him more fully to arrive at his conclusions as to the
cause of death, especially where no post-mortem examination has
been made; and his testimony is usually the last taken, but it
may, of course, be taken at any stage of the inquiry.
Some Coroners and Magistrates having, in order to save time,
allowed medical witnesses to write their own depositions, the
Attorney-General called attention to the practice as being illegal,
and that it should be discontinued. The depositions of medical
witnesses should be written down by the Magistrate himself in
the same manner as those of other witnesses.
Where Medical Witness disobeys Summons. —Should a medical
witness not appear in answer to the summons ( Form 7), the
deposition of the Constable, on oath, must be taken of the service
of the summons ; to render which effectual the Magistrate should,
in issuing the summons, make out a copy of it, to be compared
with the original by the Constable who is to serve it; for it is
necessary that the service of the summons should be both made
and deposed to by the Constable to whom it is delivered. (See
Mode of Taking the Depositions .) The Magistrate holding
the inquiry has no power to fine a medical witness for non-
attendance ; but, on proof of service of the summons and the
disobedience of the witness, he is liable to the penalty provided
by section 5 of 1 Vie. No. 3 (see Appendix), which may be
sued for and recovered as therein provided. The Constable’s
deposition of the service of the summons should be attached to,
and forwarded with, the other depositions in the case.
In practice, however, it is seldom necessary to summon a
medical witness; the Constable, by direction of the Magistrate,
verbally requests him to attend with the other witnesses.
Other Witnesses. —lf any person interested in the result of the
inquiry wishes to call any witnesses, or to give evidence himself,
he may do so at the conclusion of the examination of the wit-
nesses called by the Constable. (See p. 17.)
Deaths caused by Intemperance. —As information tending to
show the number of deaths arising directly or indirectly from
intemperance, where inquests or Magisterial Inquiries shall have


been held, is considered valuable for statistical purposes, it is
requested that in all cases the Magistrate will append to the
proceedings of each inquiry a memorandum, stating whether
intemperance has, or has not, in his opinion, been the immediate
or more or less remote cause of the death in question.
The information asked for should, therefore, be elicited from
some of the witnesses during their examination, and may be
inserted in the letter accompanying the proceedings, something
to the effect indicated in the second paragraph of Form 1,
Particulars required for Death Register. —Magistrates are also
required in every case to furnish the following information on
the Form G- 245, called the “ Death Register,” supplied for the
purpose by the Government Printer (see Form 8), namely :
1. Name of deceased.
2. His (or her) age.
3. Where born.
4. Locality where death occurred.
5. Cause of death.
6. Value of property possessed by deceased.
7. Other remarks.
The information required in the first, fourth, and fifth columns
will transpire during the ordinary progress of the inquiry ; and
the remainder should be obtained from any of the witnesses able
to supply it whilst giving their evidence. In the column headed
“ Other remarks,” may be given the disposal of the effects of
deceased, &c.
A tabulated statement consisting of the particulars required
under the respective headings indicated on Form 8 is prepared
every year from the information thus furnished by Coroners and
Magistrates throughout the colony, respecting all inquests and
inquiries held by them in cases of deaths from the Ist of January
to the 31st of December in each year; and such statement is
published in the Government Gazette during the first quarter of
the ensuing year.
Describe Deceased , if unknown. —Where the deceased is
unknown, the Magistrate should endeavour to obtain the
following particulars from the witnesses, in order to facilitate
identification of the body, namely :—Height—colour of hair—
colour of eyes—apparent age—complexion—whether bald, wore
whiskers or moustache—dress—stout or light build—distinctive
or natural marks on body. Any papers, trinkets, &c,, found on
the body should be described.
Deceased Intestates. —ln cases where the subject of the inquiry
died intestate, leaving no next of kin in the colony entitled to


his real and personal estate, it is desirable for the Magistrate to
report the fact to the District Agent of the Curator of Intestate
Estates, to the effect of Form 10 ; and to enable him to do so, he
should ask the witnesses, when giving evidence, if they know
whether the deceased died without making a will, and if so, the
nature and probable value of his property, and where situated,
together with the names and addresses of some of his relatives, if
any known. It is the duty of the Police to make these reports
to the Agent of the Curator by affidavit in the prescribed form.
(See Form 17, and also Duties of Police at Inquiries.) But
lest the matter should be overlooked by them, it has been thought
advisable to invite the attention of Magistrates to it in these
pages.
Deceased Paupers. —During the examination of the witnesses,
it should be elicited from them whether deceased has any relatives
or friends able or willing to defray the cost of burial expenses,
in order that the Magistrate may know whether or not he will
have to arrange for the interment of deceased at the public
expense.
Information for District Registrar. —By the 28th section of
19 Vic. No. 34, the Magistrate is required to notify to the
District Registrar all particulars required to be registered con-
cerning the death, together with the opinion of such Magistrate
as to the cause thereof ( Form 9). The particulars referred to
should, if possible, be elicited from some of the witnesses during
the examination.
Inquiry may be adjourned. —lf, during the inquiry, it appears
that there are absent persons who can give material evidence, or
that it will be necessary to direct a surgeon to perform a post-
mortem examination, or for the attendance of an interpreter, or
for any other reason that the Magistrate may deem sufficient, he
may adjourn the inquiry to a later hour of the same day, or to
another day, at the same or any other place, and the following
form of words may be used by the Magistrate or Constable, in
the hearing of those present :
“ This inquiry is now adjourned [to the Commercial
Hotel, Wilcannia], until Thursday next , the 26 th instant, at
10 o'clock.”
In most cases, the witnesses who have already given their
evidence will not be required again, and should be thanked for
their attendance.
Resumption of Inquiry after adjournment. —At the time and
place mentioned in the adjournment, the Constable again meets
the Magistrate, with such additional witnesses as may be thought


necessary, and the inquiry is resumed. The evidence of the
further witnesses is then taken in the same way and with the like
formalities as observed on the first examination, preceded with a
fresh caption. (See Mode of Taking the Depositions, under the
sub-head of Resumption.)
Re-adjournment. —The inquiry may be adjourned from time to
time, as often as may be requisite, to obtain all necessary infor-
mation respecting the cause of death under investigation, and an
entry of every adjournment and resumption should be made upon
the depositions as directed in the article on the Mode of Taking
the Depositions.
Magistrate's Finding. —At the conclusion of the examination of
all the witnesses the Magistrate formally draws up his opinion
respecting the cause of death (called the Magistrate’s finding),
which he openly declares to those present, and attaches it to the
depositions.
The Certificate of the Magistrate's Finding ( Form 3) consists of
three parts —the caption , the finding , and the attestation. The
caption is the commencing part of the certificate, the finding
follows the caption, and the attestation is the date, and signature
of the Magistrate.
The Finding should state the name of the deceased, and the
time, place, and manner of the death ; and, in all cases of persons
found dead, or of supposed drowning, it should state whether
there are any external marks of violence on the body. If the
name of the deceased be unknown, he may be described as “ a
certain person unknown.”
In cases where no direct evidence can be obtained respecting
the death of any deceased person found upon the sea-coast, or in
any river or other water, the body should be carefully examined
externally, and should there be no appearance of violence, or
suspicion of foul play, the Finding should state that the person
was “ found dead,” as it is not always practicable in these cases
to determine, even by a post-mortem examination, whether death
has been occasioned by drowning or not.
A copy of the finding should in all cases be kept, together with
the date and place of the inquiry, and the Magistrate should
allow any member of the police force to take a copy thereof.
Conclusion. —This brings the inquiry to a termination, and the
Magistrate then thanks the witnesses for having willingly given
their time and assistance at the investigation, and relieves them
from further attendance.


Duties of Police at Magisterial Inquiries.
(Extract from “Rules for the Police Force, 1884.”)
When the body of any deceased person is found by the Police,
or reported to them as having been found, it should be removed
to the nearest public-house in the neighbourhood ; but where
there are two or more public-houses near to each other, they
should be used alternately.
A report stating, if possible, the names of the deceased, and the
manner of the death, should be made immediately to the Coroner,
if there be one, or, if not, to the nearest Magistrate, in all cases
of violent death, casualties by which death ensues, sudden deaths,
persons found dead, persons committing suicide, prisoners dying
in any of Her Majesty’s gaols or other places of confinement,
prisoners executed in gaols, and in all cases where death is
suspected to have occurred from foul play ; and such a report,
together with the result of the Coroner’s Inquest or Magisterial
Inquiry, should be made to the Inspector-General (Form 16).
The appearance of such body, the position in which it was
found, and the probable length of time dead, should be noted ; and
it should then be carefully searched, and anything found thereon
should be kept in the custody of the Police, and produced at the
inquest or inquiry.
If the Police are unable to secure the attendance of a Coroner,
they should forthwith report the matter to the nearest Magistrate,
or take other necessary steps so that an inquiry may be held as
soon as possible.
A Constable should remain in charge of the body until an
inquest or inquiry has been held thereon.
Summonses should be personally served upon the witnesses or
persons who may have found the body, or know any circumstances
connected with the death of the deceased, and also upon the
medical man who first saw the body, and any other medical man
who can give evidence touching the death. If no medical man
can be procured to examine the body, the Constable must make
the best examination he can himself.
The Constable should produce at the inquest or inquiry any
papers or other property found on searching the body of the
deceased, and any weapon or instrument found that might be
supposed to have been the means of death—such as a knife,
razor, pistol, or any bottle or paper, &c., containing poison.
If the wound consists of a cut, the length, breadth, and depth
should be ascertained as far as possible, together with its ex,act
appearances. If firearms appear to have been the cause of the
death, it is desirable to find the bullet or any other matter which


may have entered the body ; but a medical man should generally
make any examination of the body that may be necessary for the
purpose, and in all cases, before the body or any weapon or other
article which could in any way be connected with the case is
moved, or the position of the body altered, care should be taken
that every particular is noted in writing.
Should there be wounds or other marks of violence on the body,
it is of importance to ascertain and get possession of the instrument
(if any) with which such wounds or marks have been inflicted.
The Police should not take upon themselves to bury the body
without an order from the Coroner or a Magistrate, unless it is
impracticable to obtain one.
Upon inquiries into deaths caused by violence, the Police
Officer in charge of the station at the time must consider himself
as the person whose special duty it is to get up the case for the
Coroner or Magistrate.
Reports in the proper form are to be made respecting all
inquests or inquiries. (See Form 10.) If the deceased died
intestate and possessed of property, full particulars respecting the
same must be promptly transmitted to the District Agent for the
Curator of Intestate Estates, together with affidavit of death and
intestacy in the prescribed form (Form 17). The cost of funeral
expenses will form the first charge upon the deceased’s property.
In case any new-born child or any dead body shall be found
exposed, the Constable in case of a new-born child, and the
Coroner, or if none such, the nearest Justice, in the case of a dead
body, shall forthwith inform the District Registrar thereof, and
of the place where such child or dead body was found ; and where
an inquest or Magisterial Inquiry shall be held on any dead body,
the Coroner or Magistrate (as the case may be) shall notify to the
District Registrar the verdict of the jury or the opinion of such
Magistrate, with all other particulars required to be registered
concerning the death.
Forms of Magistrates’ Findings.
For the purpose of assisting the Magistrate in formally writing
out his finding, the following specimens are given, and are num-
bered in such a manner that a finding, which may be altered
to suit any particular case, can be easily picked out by referring
to the Contents of this book. Form 3 will be copied to the words
“ I find as follows,” and then add the particulars, modified from
some of the cases given below :
1. That J.S., at the Nine-mile Gap, in the Tenterfield District,


in the Colony aforesaid, on the 14th of April, 1887 [died
of congestion of the lungs, accelerated by intemperance].
2. Or, died of nervous exhaustion, resulting from excessive
drinking.
3. Or, died from cardiacal apoplexy.
4. Or, died from asphyxia caused by strangulation, which was
the result of his own act.
5. Or, died from haemorrhage from a wound in his throat
inflicted by himself the same day.
6. Or, died from a gunshot wound in his chest [accidentally]
inflicted by himself the same day.
7. That J.S., at the Singleton Hospital, in the town of Sin-
gleton, in the District of Patrick’s Plains, in the Colony
aforesaid, on the 23rd of April, 1887 [died from the
effects of injuries accidentally received by falling from
his horse (or a building, &c.) at Boggy Flat, on the 22nd
of the same month].
8. Or, died from the effects of burns (or scalds) accidentally
received on the 19th of the said month.
9. Or, died from the effects of a cei'tain poison, known as con-
centrated acetic acid (accidentally) taken by himself on
the same day.
10. That J.S., in the waters of the Darling River, at Menindie,
in the District of Mitchell, in the Colony aforesaid, on
the 20th of May, 1887 [was found dead without any
marks of violence appearing on his body, but whether
his death was caused by drowning, or not, there is not
sufficient evidence to show.]
11. Or, died from asphyxia caused by drowning, and that such
drowning was the result of accident whilst bathing on the
same day.
12. Or, died from asphyxia caused by drowning, and that such
drowning was the result of his own act.
13. That J.S. (or a man unknown), on the Goorangoola road,
near Bridgeman, in the District of Patrick’s Plains, in the
Colony aforesaid, on the Bth of May, 1887, was found
dead, without any marks of violence appearing on his
body, and that the cause of death was disease of the heart
(or starvation).
14. Or, and that there is not sufficient evidence to show the
cause of death.
15. That part of the body—namely, the skull—of an adult
person, name and sex unknown, on the bank of the Hunter
River, near Bowman’s Crossing-place, in the District of
Patrick’s Plains, in the Colony aforesaid, on the 10th of
April, 1887, was found, without any marks of violence


appearing thereon, but where, when, or how such person
came by his or her death the evidence adduced is not
sufficient to show.
16. That J S. died in the Hospital at Hay, on the 4th day of
May, 1887, from alcoholic poisoning, caused by one D.T.
having administered to him, the said J.S., at sundry
times between the 15th April and 2nd May, 1887, and in
such quantities, divers spirituous liquors, of which the said
J.S. did die. I therefore direct that an information be
laid, charging the said D.T. with manslaughter.
17. That certain bones were found at Claremont, near Lud-
denham, in the District of Penrith, in the Colony aforesaid,
on the 12th of August, 1887, but whether such bones are
those of a human being or not, the evidence adduced is
not sufficient to show.
18. That J.S., a prisoner in the gaol at Tamworth, in the
District of Tamworth, in the Colony aforesaid, on the
24th of January, 1888, in the gaol aforesaid, died from
natural causes—to wit, of cerebral apoplexy.
19. That J.S., on the Great Northern Railway line, near Rix’s
Creek platform, in the District of Patrick’s Plains, in the
Colony aforesaid, on the 21st of July, 1887, died from
injuries accidentally received by a passing train.
20. That J.S., at the Day Dream Colliery, at Wallsend, in the
District of Newcastle, in the Colony of New South Wales,
on the 13th of December, 1887, died from injuries acci-
dentally received by a fall of coal in the said colliery.
Recapitulation of Practical Instructions for Holding
Inquiries.
When a Magistrate is apprised by the Police of a death
respecting the cause of which he considers an inquiry necessary,
he fixes a time and place for holding it, to suit as far as possible
the convenience of all persons concerned.
If a doctor’s evidence is thought necessary, a summons is
issued to, or the Constable is requested to communicate verbally
with, the Medical Officer for the district, or other available
medical man.
If the death occurred in a colliery, or on the railway, notices
should be sent to the proper officers.
Should an Interpreter be required, the Constable must endeavour
to find a competent person for this duty, and have him in attend-
ance.
When the time arrives at which the inquiry is to be held, the


Magistrate proceeds to the place appointed, taking with him the
requisite materials for taking down the depositions, a Bible, and
this Handbook. He there meets the Constable with the exhibits,
witnesses, <fcc.
The Magistrate may view the body, if thought desirable, or he
may dispense with such view.
On assembling in the room where the proceedings are to be
conducted, the Constable announces that the Magisterial Inquiry
is now open.
The examination of the witnesses is then proceeded with, and
their depositions taken down in accordance with the directions
given under those heads.
Persons interested in the result of the proceedings may be
present to cross-examine witnesses, or tender evidence.
For any reason the Magistrate may deem sufficient he may
adjourn the inquiry to a future day, or to a later hour of the
same day, to the same or another place. The inquiry may
be adjourned as often as found necessary. If the witnesses
already examined will not be again required, they should be so
informed.
On resumption after adjournment, if any, the Constable again
declares the inquiry open, as he did in the first instance.
If the body be that of an unknown person, it ought to be
carefully described, to assist in identification.
During the examination of the witnesses, the Magistrate should
endeavour to elicit from them the particulars required for filling
up the Death Register—whether intemperance was the direct or
indirect cause of death—whether deceased died intestate, leaving
no next of kin in the colony ; and the necessary particulars for
filling up the form for the District Registrar.
By referring to the subjoined Memoranda , the Magistrate will
be enabled to see at a glance the questions he should ask in order
to obtain the information mentioned in the last two paragraphs.
When all the evidence has been taken, the Magistrate draws
up his formal Finding , and delivers it in open court.
After the inquiry is terminated—or before if it be adjourned,
or if thought necessary to prevent infection—the Magistrate
writes out the burial certificate, and delivers it to the party
having charge of the funeral. If the deceased be a pauper,
arrangements must be made for his interment at the public
expense.
As soon after the conclusion of the inquiry as possible, the
Magistrate should make out the accounts, and prepare the whole
of the proceedings for transmission, as directed in the articles on
Preparation and Rendering of Accounts and Transmission of
Proceedings.


Memoranda of Information to be Obtained from the
Witnesses.
As some of the information referred to in these memoranda
need not appear in the depositions, it is convenient in practice to
have Form 9 lying at hand, in which the particulars elicited
from the witnesses can be at once inserted.
For Death Register.—Form 8*
Name of deceased, or description of body (if not identified).*
Age, and where born.
Date and place of death.
Cause of death.
Value of property found on deceased, and how disposed of.
For the District Registrar.—Form 0.
Calling or occupation, and sex.
How long in the Colony 1
Christian name and surname of father.
Christian name and maiden name ot mother.
To whom was deceased married 1
Date and place of marriage.
Any children (alive or dead) 1
Undertaker’s name.
For the Curator's Agent.—Form 10.
Did deceased die intestate, leaving no next of kin in the
colony 1
If so, did he leave any property —what does it consist of—
where is it situated—and what is its approximate value 1
Where did deceased reside —and what are the names and
addresses of some of his relatives (if any known) 1
For General Purposes.
Was intemperance the direct or indirect cause of death 1
If a foreigner, to what State did deceased belong ?
Was the deceased a pauper 1
* Where the deceased is unknown, the following particulars should be
elicited from the witnesses :—Height—colour of hair—colour of eyes —
apparent age —complexion—whether bald, or wore whiskers or moustache
stout or light build—natural or other marks on body—peculiar clothing
—trinkets, papers, &c., found on the body—and any other means of
identity.


CHAPTER IY.
PROCEDURE AFTER CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY.
Miscellaneous Directions.
Burial of the body, in ordinary cases. —lf the Magistrate views
the body, or if he considers such view unnecessary, and is
satisfied that it will not be required for a post-mortem examina-
tion, or if he deems speedy interment desirable, in order to pre-
vent infection, he will, before the commencement of the inquiry,
issue his certificate for the burial of the body. (See Form 5.) If
the body has not been ordered to be buried in the first instance,
then, in the event of an adjournment of the inquiry, the Magis-
trate should make out the burial certificate and hand it to the
friends of the deceased, unless the body be required for a post-
mortem examination. But in any case, at the conclusion of the
inquiry, if the body has not previously been buried, an order, in
accordance with Form 5, will be given for its interment.
Burial of deceased paupers. —lf the Magistrate has ascertained
that the deceased was a pauper, and that thei-e are no relatives or
friends able or willing to defray the cost of his burial, instruc-
tions should be given to the Police to make arrangements
with some person in the locality for his interment at the public
expense ; but, before forwarding the accounts for these services
to the Department, the Magistrate should satisfy himself, by
careful inquiry, that the charge made in each case is strictly
moderate, and the lowest price for which the work could reason-
ably be performed ; and, also, that the requisite particulars are
stated on the voucher in every instance—that is to say, the cost
of the coffin, the distance and expense of conveying the body to
the place of interment, and the amount of burial fees (if any).
For form of certificate to be endorsed on these vouchers, and
the explanation to be given when the amount charged exceeds
<£2, see Preparation and Rendering of Accounts.
Circulars have at different times been issued to Magistrates by
the Department of Justice, calling attention to the excessive
charges frequently made for the burial of paupers, and pointing
out that the remains may be interred in a shell or coffin of the
plainest description, for which service 30s. or £2 would, in most
cases, seem to be sufficient remuneration.


Information to District Registrar. —The Magistrate is required
to fill up a form giving the particulars under the several printed
headings, as fully as he can ascertain them, and forward the same
to the District Registrar of Births, Deaths, and Marriages. (See
Appendix.) This form is furnished by the Registrar-General on
application, and is headed “Form of Justice’s Information.”
(See Form 9.)
Report by Police to Inspector-General. —The Police are instructed
to furnish reports respecting all inquests and inquiries to the
Inspector-General, and in order to help them to do so, the Magis-
trate should allow the Police Officer who has had charge of the
case to take a copy of the Finding or any other information he
may require. These reports by the Police are made on printed
forms supplied them for the purpose, with columns specifying
the particulars required, and although the Magistrate has nothing
to do with filling up such reports, and is in no way responsible
for them, yet a copy of the form used by the Police (Form U)
is given in this work, in order that the Magistrate may see what
information the Police Officer requires.
Persons dying intestate. —The Police are required to promptly
transmit to the District Agent for the Curator of Intestate
Estates full particulars respecting any person who has died
intestate and possessed of property, leaving no next of kin in the
Colony entitled to his real or personal estate. The form of
affidavit to accompany such particulars is given in Form 17. A
Magistrate holding an inquiry should, if he thinks it desirable,
communicate the like information to that officer, which may be
done something to the effect of Form 10.
The cost of burial will be the first charge on the property of
deceased, and the Curator’s Agent is the only person who can
pay such expenses, by the sale of deceased’s effects ; the Magis-
trate has no authority to do so, even if sufficient ready money
for that purpose be found on the body. On receiving the neces-
sary information and affidavit from the Police of the death of any
person intestate, leaving any real or personal estate liable to be
collected by him, the District Agent of the Curator of Intestate
Estates is required to take possession of the property of the
deceased, and as soon as a sale thereof is effected, he may pay out
of the proceeds the claims for funeral expenses, if verified by
affidavits, when not exceeding £5 ; but when exceeding that
sum, the balance will be paid by the Curator, if certified to as
reasonable by the District Agent. In estates where the amount
of assets is small, the funeral expenses must not exceed £5.
Charges for refreshments at the burials will not be allowed.
Deceased Foreigners. —When the deceased person, on whom the


inquiry has been held, is a foreigner, having no relatives in the
district, the Magistrate should forthwith give information to the
Consul of the State to which such person belonged, furnishing
particulars of property (if any) possessed by deceased.
Preparation and Kendering of Accounts.
Inconvenience and delay having occasionally arisen in the pay-
ment of accounts, through Magistrates not being aware of, or not
complying with, the regulations and formalities to be observed
in rendering accounts, it has been thought desirable under this
head to give full directions as to the filling up and transmission
of every account which can occur in practice, with a specimen in
each case. By carefully reading these instructions a Magistrate
will have no difficulty in preparing all the accounts in connection
with the inquiry. (See Forms 12, IS, 14, and 15.)
Magistrates’ Fees for holding Inquiries. —The fee for holding
each Magisterial Inquiry is £l, and travelling expenses at the
rate of 9d. for every mile from the Magistrate’s usual place of
residence to the place where the inquiry is held. Only one fee
of £1 is allowed for the same inquiry, no matter how often it is
adjourned, but the Magistrate will be allowed 9d. per mile for
every journey he has to make for the purpose of continuing the
inquiry. No mileage is allowed for the return journey in any
case. The account for these fees should be rendered on the
Government Contingency Form No. 7, Series B, supplied on
application by the Government Printer ( Form 12.)
If two or more inquiries are held in the same place, on the
same day, the Magistrate will, of course, only be entitled to one
allowance of mileage.
And where one inquiry is held on the bodies of several persons
who died from the same cause, and at the same time, it will be
treated as one inquiry, and only one fee of £1 will be payable.
Fees to Medical Witnesses. —A medical witness is allowed for
each inquiry one guinea for attending and giving evidence, and,.
in addition thereto , two guineas for each post-mortem examina-
tion, and one shilling per mile one way for every mile beyond
ten from his residence to the place where the inquiry is held.
He will be allowed only one fee for attending and giving
evidence at the same inquiry, no matter how often it may be
adjourned, but will be allowed travelling expenses, the same as
in the first instance, for every journey he takes to attend such
inquiry. The account should be rendered on the Government
Contingency Form No. 8, Series B, supplied by the Government


Printer (Form 13). The medical witness should sign his name
in the receipt column, and also write and sign the following
authority on the face of the form :
“ I hereby authorize the amount of the above account to
be paid on my behalf to (name of person or bank)!
The form, when filled up and signed by the medical witness, should
be left with the Magistrate, who will forward it, for payment, to
the Medical Adviser to the Government.
Where the death shall have happened in any hospital, gaol, or
public institution, no medical officer appointed with salary to
attend thereat shall be entitled to such fees. These fees are,
however, sometimes allowed where deceased is received into an
institution in a dying state, and expires within a few hours after
admission.
Fees to Interpreters. —When it is found necessary to employ an
interpreter, the Magistrate should make the best terms he can
with any competent person. The scale of fees fixed by the
Government for Chinese interpreters is 10s. per day, or ss. if
occupied for less than two hours, and it is thought that this is a
fair fee for any other class of interpreters ; but as much depends
on the scarcity of interpreters, or the class of person employed,
the maximum daily fee fixed by the superior courts is 30s. In-
terpreters, if residing within ten miles of the place of holding
the inquiry, are allowed travelling expenses of 4s. per day, and if
residing more than ten miles, of Bs. per day, in addition to the
above fees.
The account for interpreters’ fees should be rendered on Con-
tingency Form No. 1, Series B, and may be stated as follows :
“ Acting as interpreter at a Magisterial Inquiry, held by A. 8.,
J.P., respecting the death of C.D., at , on
188 , occupied less than two hours, ss. [or, occupied more than
two hours, 10s.] — (Forms 14 and 15).
Fees to Publicans. —Every licensed publican who shall receive
a dead body upon his premises for the purpose of an inquest or
inquiry is entitled to a fee of 305., the account for which should
be submitted, in the name of the publican, on Contingency Form
No. 1, Series B, to the following effect :
“Receiving upon my licensed premises, at Dubbo, known as
the ‘ Travellers’ Rest Inn,’ the dead body of J.S., for the
purpose of a Magisterial Inquiry, which was subsequently
held thereon by A. 8., J.P., on 18 ,£1 10s.’’
(Forms 14 and 15.)
Rewards for taking up the bodies of persons found drowned. —
A fee of five shillings is allowed for each body so taken up, and


claims for these services should be rendered, in the name of the
claimant, on Contingency Form No. 1, Series B, and may be to
the following effect :
“ Taking up out of the Lachlan River, at Oxley, the dead
body of J.S., found drowned therein, on which a Magisterial
Inquiry was subsequently held by A.B, J.P., on the
188 , 55.” ( Forms 14 and 15.)
Postage. —lf the postage and stationery used by the Magistrate
in connection with the inquiry be thought worth charging for, the
account shotild be submitted on Contingency Form No. 1, Series
B, as follows :
“ Stationery and postage used in connection with Magis-
terial Inquiry respecting death of J.S., held at on
, 188 , Is.” ( Forms 14 and 15.)
Fees for the Burial of deceased Paupers. —There is no regular
scale of charges for the burial of paupers, but the Magistrate
conducting the inquiry should take care that the Government is
not imposed upon. (See Miscellaneous Directions .) The account
for these services should be rendered on Contingency Form No.
1, Series B, and the particulars may be stated as follows :
“June Ist, 1887. To burial of J.S.—Providing coffin,
20s. ; conveying body three miles to place of interment, ss. ;
digging grave, ss. ; and burial fees (if any).” The voucher
should be rendered in the name of the undertaker or person
by whom the body was buried. {Forms 14 and 15.)
In cases where an inquiry has been held, the following certifi-
cate should be written on the voucher, and signed by the
Magistrate, without which the claim will not be passed for
payment :
“ I hereby certify that a Magisterial Inquiry was held by
me in this case, and that the proceedings were forwarded to
the Department of Justice on [date\ ; that deceased was a
pauper at the time of his [or her] death, and left no relatives
or friends able or willing to defray the cost of burial
expenses; and that the charge is strictly moderate, and the
lowest price for which the services could reasonably be per-
formed.”
In cases where the Magistrate has thought an inquiry respecting
the death of a pauper unnecessary, and has given a certificate to
that effect as per Form (», merely authorizing the burial of the
body, the endorsement on the voucher will be varied as follows :
“ I hereby certify that no Magisterial Inquiry has been
held by me in this case, as I considered the same unneces-


sary ; that deceased was a pauper ” (and so on, as in the last
case).
In addition to the above certificate on the face of the voucher,
it will be necessary to furnish with the accounts for the burial of
paupers—in all cases where the amount charged exceeds the
maximum rate of £2 —a special explanation of the circumstances
of the case, and the reasons for incurring the additional expendi-
ture. This explanation may be given in a paragraph in the
letter (Form 1) transmitting the proceedings.
General remarks respecting accounts. —ln order to avoid repeti-
tion, it has been thought desirable to give under this head a few
general directions respecting the filling up of all the foregoing
forms of account, or vouchers , as they are commonly called.
The Magistrate conducting the inquiry is responsible for the
rendering of all accounts in connection with it, and as he has to
countersign every voucher, without which they will not be paid, and
as he will have with him all the necessary Forms, it is recommended
that he should fill up all the vouchers for fees and allowances in
connection with the inquiry, in order that all the information
required in the different columns may be given in a complete and
accurate manner ; and that, when so filled up, he should get the
persons entitled to the fees to sign the Forms in the proper places.
A separate account must be rendered by each claimant; but if
one claimant performs several services he may charge for them
all in one account.
The vouchers for fees to medical witnesses, filled up as previously
directed, should be forwarded direct to the Medical Adviser to
the Government at the termination of each quarter—that is,
at the end of the months of March, June, September, and
December respectively, and all necessary information should
at the same time be furnished to that officer to enable him to
deal with such claims.
Accounts for the burial of deceased paupers, respecting whose
death no Magisterial Inquiry has been held, when filled up as
directed and the necessary certificate endorsed thereon, should
be forwarded direct to the Principal Under-Secretary, Colonial
Secretary’s Department, and are chargeable against an amount
provided for the burial of destitute persons in cases where no
written evidence has been taken.
All the accounts in connection with the inquiry, excepting the
two last mentioned, should be forwarded direct to the Under-
secretary, Department of Justice. All accounts should be rendered
as early as possible after the conclusion of the inquiry, and if
amounting to £2, or upwards, should have a duty stamp affixed
and duly cancelled.


Sometimes the parties performing the service are persons
having no fixed place of abode may, in fact, at the time be
travelling about the country ; this applies more particularly to
the class of men who recover bodies of persons found drowned,
interpreters, and those who effect the burial of paupers in the
interior of the Colony. To such persons it would obviously be
very inconvenient to render the accounts in their own names,
and wait till they were paid by the Department. In such cases
it is recommended that the Magistrate should pay the parties out
of his own pocket, first getting them to sign the printed authority
on the voucher, filled up with his (the Magistrate’s) name. He
then writes on the face of the voucher of each claimant whom he
has so paid the following authority, requesting the money to be
paid to his own credit in any bank lie may desire :
“I hereby authorize the amount of the above account to
be paid on my behalf to the Bank of New South Wales,
Bourke. A. 8., J.P.” . (See Form 15.)
The Magistrate should obtain a voucher, filled up and signed in
a similar manner, from every person whom he pays. He then
forwards these accounts to the Under-Secretary, Department of
Justice; the Principal Under-Secretary, Colonial Secretary’s De-
partment; or the Medical Adviser to the Government, as the case
may be, and is paid precisely as if he had himself performed the
different services.
Transmission of Proceedings.
As soon as convenient after the termination of the inquiry, the
Magistrate should forward the whole of the proceedings to the
Under-Secretary, Department of Justice, accompanied by a letter
something to the effect of that given in Form 1,
The second paragraph of such letter should contain the opinion
of the Magistrate as to whether intemperance has or has not
accelerated the death in question.
In cases of “ deaths from natural causes,” the Magistrate is
requested to insert in such letter a paragraph explanatory of any
special features of the case, other than those appearing on the
depositions, which may have induced him to incur the expense of
an inquiry.
The Police report referred to at pages 14 and 34, upon receipt
of which a Magisterial Inquiry is held, should be attached to the
proceedings in every case.
The proceedings should be fastened together with a metal
fastener, or with tape, and the pages regularly numbered. The
letter above referred to (Form 1) will be the first page, the


caption ( Form 2) the second page, then will follow the deposi-
tions in the same order as they were written down, at the end of
which shall come the “Exhibits,” if any, in the order in which
they were produced in evidence. After the depositions (or after
the Exhibits, if any), will follow the “ Magistrate’s Finding ”
(Form 3); and at the end of all these should be added the
“ Cover for Proceedings ” ( Form 4), containing the date of the
inquiry, the name of the deceased, and the “ Finding ” briefly
stated, so that when the papers are folded up, a glance at the
outside will show on whom the inquiry has been held, the date of
holding it, and the result.
These proceedings, so folded up, after they are dealt with by
the Department of Justice, are put away—or filed, as it is called
—for future reference, as records of the Department.
To those who are unaccustomed to fastening documents of this
kind together, it may be as well to state that the pages should
read from the top downwards as they lie open on the table—not
from the bottom upwards—that is to say, when the proceedings
are fastened together, the letter ( Form 1) should be on top, and
the cover {Form 4) underneath.
In the same envelope with the proceedings already mentioned,
but not fastened to them, may be forwarded the Death Register
(Form 8), filled up with the particulars mentioned at the head of
the columns, together with all the accounts in connection with the
case, excepting those mentioned in the next paragraph.
Accounts for the burial of paupers, where no inquiry has been
held, should be forwarded to the Principal Under-Secretary,
Colonial Secretary’s Department. Medical witnesses’ accounts
should be transmitted to the Medical Adviser to the Government.
(See Preparation and Rendering of Accounts.)
Forms used at Inquiries.
The following Forms, Nos. 1 to 17 inclusive, used by Magis-
trates in conducting inquiries, comprise all those which can be
required in practice. (See Contents.)
It will be convenient for Magistrates to keep a few printed
Forms on hand, for use if called upon to hold inquiries. The
only Forms which are printed are the following:-—Nos. 4,5, 7,8,
9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. Of these Nos. 5 and 9 may be
obtained on application to the Registrar-General, Sydney; the
others may be obtained in like manner from the Government
Printer. The remaining Forms, Nos. 1,2, 3,6, 10, and 11, are
never printed, but must be written out by the Magistrate.
If no printed forms are on hand, any or all of those required


may be copied in writing out of this book, in case of emergency;
or, when transmitting the depositions, the Magistrate may attach
a memorandum thereto, stating what Forms he requires to enable
him to render the accounts for fees connected with the inquiry, and
they will be forwarded to him, when he can fill them up as directed
in the article on the Preparation and Rendering of Accounts.
FORMS.
Form 1.
Magistrate's Letter to accompany Proceedings.
Sir, —I have the honour to forward herewith the depositions
taken at a Magisterial Inquiry held by me on the
of 18 , respecting the death of one J. S. [or, a man
unknown, as the case may be], with my finding thereon; to which
is appended the Police report in consequence of which I held the
Inquiry.
From the evidence adduced in this case I am of opinion that
death was [not] accelerated by intemperance [or, In this case there
is no evidence to show whether death was accelerated by intem-
perance or not].
[Here may be stated any special features of the case, if any,
other than those appearing in the depositions, which the Magis-
trate may consider necessary to bring under the notice of the
Department.]
The deceased was a pauper, and I found it necessary to instruct
the Police to make arrangements for his burial at the public
expense; [and if the charge for such burial exceeds <£2, the cause
of the higher rate should here be explained]. [This paragraph
will only be added if necessary.)
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
The Under Secretary for Justice,
Sydney.
Form 2.
Caption for Proceedings at Magisterial Inquiries.
Magisterial Inquiry held at the house of , known as the
sign of the at , in the Colony of New South Wales,
this day of 18 [or, Magisterial Inquiry commenced


at the dwelling-house of , known as the sign of the ,
at , in the Colony of New South Wales, on the day of
18 , and concluded at the dwelling-house of
known as the sign of the , at , in the said Colony,
on the day of 18 ] before me, one of Her Majesty’s
Justices of the Peace for the said Colony, respecting the cause of
the death of
Before commencing the inquiry the body was viewed by me
[or, The body was not viewed by me, as I did not consider such
view necessary].
The following witnesses were examined on oath, viz
[Here insert names of witnesses]
and their depositions are hereto appended.
My finding is recorded at page
Form 3.
Certificate of Magistrate's Finding.
I, being one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace
for the Colony of New South Wales, having held a Magisterial
Inquiry at ,on the day of ,18 [or, having
commenced a Magisterial Inquiry at , on the day of
,18 , and concluded the same at ,on the
day of 18 ] respecting the cause of death of one
J.S. [or, a man unknown, or, a male child ] do hereby certify that
I find as follows :
That [i here state finding. ]
Witness my hand at
, this day of


Form 4.
Cover for
Proceedings
Magisterial
Inquiries ,
H
o
o'
CD
B
ctT 1
ft.
tzi
a
M
Si
©
x
‘5
a
&
3
Cfc
-r
I S
c? S-
a
i—i
£
o
§ 3
I—l
w
*1
b
a
Os
s'
►5
g
'l*
5
s
ft.
s'
Co
©
Form 5.
Certificate of Coroner or Justice of the Peace.
SCHEDULE G.
Coroner for the District of [or, Justice of the
Peace of] do hereby order the burial of the body
now shown to the Inquest Jury [or, to me] as the body of
Witness my hand this day of 18 .
Coroner
Justice of the Peace.
Form 6.
Magistrate's Certificate Dispensing with Inquiry.
I, the undersigned, being one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the
Peace for the Colony of New South Wales, having made inquiries
respecting the death of A. 8., who died on the 18 ,
do hereby order the burial of the body, after registration as by
law required, as I consider a Magisterial Inquiry unnecessary \
and I certify that the cause of death was stated to be [ fracture ,
contusion , burn, or as the case may be].
Witness my Land at this day of
18 • J.P.


Form 7.
Summons for the Attendance of a Medical Witness.
New South Wales, to wit.
Magisterial Inquiry at , upon the body of
By virtue of this my order, as a Justice of the Peace for the
District of , you are required to appear before me at ,
on the day of one thousand eight hundred and eighty-
at of the clock in the noon, to give evidence
touching the death of
J.P.
To
Form 8.
Death Register.
Form 9.
Form of Justice's Information.
To the Registrar of the District in which the undermentioned
Death took place.
Pursuant to the 28th section of the Act of the Legislative
Council, 19th Victoria No. 34, intituled “An Act for Registering
Births , Deaths, and Marriages in the Colony of New South
Wales,” I hereby inform you that an inquiry was held by me, on
the day of 18 ,at in the District
of on the body of then and there lying


dead; and I certify to the following particulars elicited on the
inquiry, viz. :
When and where Died. Sex and Age. Cause of Death.
Witness my hand, this
day of
J.P. conducting the Inquiry.
Further Particulars if obtainable.
How long was deceased in the Colony ?
Christian name and surname of father.
Christian name and maiden surname of mother.
If deceased was married. To whom ? Date.
Where born.
Undertaker’s name.
Any other matter of detail that may be valuable to Registrar.
Form 10.
* Letter to District Agent of Curator of Intestate Estates.
Sir, —I have the honour to inform you that on the day of
,18 , I held a Magisterial Inquiry respecting the
cause of death of one J.S., aged about years.
As far as I could ascertain, he died intestate, leaving no next
of kin in the Colony, and possessed of property consisting of
\hore give particulars shortly, and where situated\ worth about
£
He was a resident of , and left the following relatives: —
[Give affinity, names, and addresses , if known. ]
I have the honour to be,
The Agent of the Curator
of Intestate Estates,
Your obedient servant,
*The Magistrate need not furnish this information to the Curator’s
Agent if he be satisfied that the Police, whose duty it is to supply it,
will attend to the matter.


Form 11.
Notice in Cases where the Death happens in a Colliery ,
or on the Government Railways.
I beg to give you notice that one J.S. was accidentaly killed
at the Mine [or, on the Railway line near
on the day of 18 , fand that I intend holding a
Magisterial Inquiry respecting the cause of his [or her] death on
the day of 18 , [or, fand that I have adjourned
the Magisterial Inquiry respecting the cause of his [or her] death
till the day of 18 ] at o’clock in the
noon, at
N.B.—The above Notice should be addressed to the “The Examiner
of Mines,” “ Railway Traffic Manager,” or as the case may be, at his
usual place of abode.
Form 12.
Account for Fees to Magistrates.
Series B.—Contingency Form No. 7.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Pay Voucher No. Item No.
Contingent Expenses.— Payable from Vote of £
of Appropriation Act of 188 .
Department of Coroners,
Dr. to Claimant.
(Place or District)
For the undermentioned Inquests or Magisterial Inquiries.
Total £
at 20s. each, and of
Travelling Expenses
at 9d. per mile.
I certify that the amount charged in this Voucher as to com-
putations, castings, and rates is correct, and that the Expenditui’e


is duly authorized in terms of the Audit Act. I further certify
that each of the inquests or inquiries was actually held super
visum corporis, as stated in the above Return, and that the above
specification of distances is true and correct.
Signature of Coroner )
or Magistrate — )
I certify that I have received the proceedings of the
in the cases specified in the foregoing Return, and that the
holding of the same was necessary, with the exception of those
on the parties hereinafter named, viz. :
Attorney-General.
I hereby authorize the amount of the above Account to be
paid on my behalf to*
(, Signature)
* Here insert Bank or Party.
Received on the day of 188 , the sum
of pounds shillings and pence,
in full payment of the Account for my Fees and , Travelling
Expenses.
(, Signature)
( Witness)
Note.— Forms 5, 12, 13, and 14 are the same as those used
by Coroners.


Form 13.
Accounts for Fees to Medical Witnesses.
Series B. — Contingency Form No. 8. NEW SOUTH WALES.
Payable from Vote of £ : : . Item No. of Appropriation Act of 188 . Pay Voucher No.
Abstract and Acquittances of Fees paid to Surgeons or Medical Officers attending by Summons on
Coroners’ Inquests or Inquiries held by Justices of the Peace, touching sudden Deaths, held before
for the District of from the to the 188 , inclusively, pursuant
to Act of Council No. 3, of 13th June, 1838.
Date of
Payment.
Name of Surgeon
or
Medical Officer.
Date of
Inquest or
Inquiry.
On whom held
and where.
By whom required
to be made.
Number of miles
beyond ten miles
from residence,
for which Is. a
mile is allowed.
Attendance to
give evidence,
at 21s. each
Inquest.
Number of post-
mortem examina-
tions, at 42s.
each.
Total Amount of
Fees and
Travelling
Expenses.
We, the undersigned, do £
acknowledge to have q
received the sums oppo- g
site our several names, h
being in full of our fees H
and travelling expenses 2
respectively, as herein
specified. d
Witness.
eO
d
2
5
TOTAL £
I certify that the amount charged in this Voucher as to computations, castings, and rates is correct, and that the
expenditure is duly authorized in terms of the Audit Act. I further certify that the surgeons abovenamed were necessarily
called upon, and attended to give their professional evidence ; that they were required to make, as above specified, and did
actually perform, the number of post-mortem examinations stated ; and that the distances for which travelling expenses are
charged exceeded ten miles from the usual residence of each surgeon respectively. I further certify that none of the surgeons
or medical officers named in the above return is a salaried officer to any hospital, gaol, or other public building, wherein any
of the deaths occurred.
I hereby authorize the amount of the above account to be paid on my behalf to the Bank of New South
Wales, Tamwortli — (p. 43).
(Signature of Doctor) *3T (Signature of Coroner or Magistrate) SST


Form 14.
Account for General Purposes.
Senes B.—Contingency Form No. 1.
• ' NEW SOUTH WALES.
Head of Service Pay Voucher No.
[As specified in the Appropriation
Act of 188 .]
Payable from Vote of : : Item No.
Appropriation Act of 188 .
Contingent Expenses.— Department of
[■Departmental No. Sub-Head of Estimate
Date or Period
of Supply or
Service.
Claimant
(Place or District)
For the Supply of the undermentioned
Articles or Services :
[Signature of Claimant)B3T
Total
I certify that the amount charged in this Voucher as to com
putations, castings, and rates is correct; that the service has
been faithfully and that the Expenditure is duly
authorized in terms of the Audit Act.
[Signature of Magistrate)
Officer incurring the expense.
Head of the Department.
I hereby authorize the amount of the above Certificate in my
favour to be paid on my behalf tof
Signature of Interpreter, Publican, dec., as the case may be.
t Here insert name of Party or Bank.
Received on the day of 188 , the sum
°f . pounds shilling and pence,
sterling.
(Signature of Interpreter, Publican, dec., as the case may be.)
[Witness)
[Note. This is. the Form used in rendering Accounts for Fees for
Interpreters, Publicans,, taking up drowned persons, stationery and
postage, and for the burial of paupers, and should be filled up as directed
at pages 43 to 45.]


Form 15.
Showing how to fill up Voucher in cases where the Magistrate pays
the party out of his own pocket in the first instance. (See p. 46.)
Series B.—Contingency Form No. 1.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Head of Service
Pay Voucher No.
[As specified in the Appropriation
Act of 188 .]
Payable from Vote of £
Appropriation Act of 188
Item No.
Contingent Expenses.— Department of Justice.
[Departmental No. Sub-Head of Estimate
Date or Period
of Supply or
Service.
Claimant— Heinrich Bauer.
Place or District — Singleton.
1887.
June
For the Supply of the undermentioned
Articles or Services :
Acting as Interpreter at a Magisterial
Inquiry held by Adam Clark, Esq.,
J.P., respecting death of Philip
Duggan, at Greta, on . 31st May, 1887.
One day ... ... ...
(Signature of Claimant)
I —Heinrich Bauer. Total
[Note. — If the fee were for a Publican, or recovering body found
drowned, this Form would be filled up similarly. If for burial of a pauper
the certificate given at p. 44 would be written on it in addition .]
I certify that the amount charged in this Voucher as to com-
putations, castings, and rates, is correct ; that the service has
been faithfully performed, and that the expenditure is duly
authorized in terms of the Audit Act.
Adam Clark, J.P.,
Officer incurring the expense.
Head of the Department.
I hereby authorize the amount of the above certificate in my
favour to be paid on my behalf to Mr. Adam Clark, J.P.
Heinrich Bauer.
Received on the
day of
shillings and
pounds
( Witness)
188 , the sum
pence, sterling.
Adam Clark.
I hereby authorize the amount of the above Account to be paid
on my behalf to the Commercial Bank, Singleton —(p. 46).
Adam Clark.


rd «M
• fog-si**®
S toss’s
•rt
cS £ § a S .2
-a> a^
m
I |I
o g-d .
O -P
85
© J 3 o
I **
5
-M
© <8
c 5 O E
« 2
HH
O ~
<W43 L
<D U d
+3 0 0
d Cu £
°«3
g
£ H ©
<? § 2*l
S ° „
» P-> o
.P a
Si, oo _Jg
» i g .1 £
«
a 5
« a-2 & .
O « jxj OH3 °fe
» H i -g .2 §
f$ § nl^o
-® £ j
•gw
o «
*W
* i
ce
S
-40
c 3 d
2 « 1
.3 I s !
■s °
o>
P
o' 1 ,2
P •“ •
Mc3 ©
,Q bo
o a
"o p<
•4^3
S_ i «M
O £ M °-g^
O , ® c 3 o'd
jf
§§■§■&§
!§ in
'O


Form 17
Affidavit of Death and Intestacy .
In the Supreme Court of New South Wales. 1
(Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.) j
In the matter of the estate of late of
deceased.
On this day of in the year one thousand
eight hundred and eighty- , of ,
in the Colony of New South Wales, being duly
sworn, maketh oath, and saith as follows: The abovenamed
departed this life on or about the day of one
thousand eight hundred and and as I have heard,
and verily believe, intestate, having no person of kin to him in the
said Colony, but leaving property exposed and liable to waste
therein.
Sworn by the deponent, on the day first above mentioned,
at , before me,
A Commissioner for Affidavits.
* This Affidavit, together with full particulars of deceased’s property,
should be promptly transmitted by the Police to the District Agent for
the Curator of Intestate Estates.


APPENDIX.
The Medical Witnesses Act.
1 Victoria No. 3.—An Act to provide for the attendance of
Medical Witnesses at Coroners’ Inquests and Inquiries held
by Justices of the Peace. (13th June, 1838.)
Preamble. 6& 7 Wm. IV., c. 89, passed 1836. —Attendance of medical
witnesses.—Coroner or Justice may summon any qualified medical
witness in case where deceased was unattended before or at the time of
death. —Deceased having been attended before or at the time of death,
Coronor or Justice to summon the party who gave such attendance
only.
Whereas an Act was passed in England in the sixth and seventh
years of His late Majesty’s reign intituled 11 An Act to provide for
the attendance and remuneration of Medical Witnesses at Coroners’
Inquests ” and it is expedient to extend the several provisions of
the said Act to this Colony in the manner hereinafter mentioned
Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor of New
South Wales with the advice of the Legislative Council thereof
That after the passing of this Act whenever upon the summoning
or holding of any Coroners’ Inquest or upon the holding of any
inquiry by a Justice or Justices of the Peace touching- the death
of any person it shall appear to the Coroner Justice or Justices
(as the case may be) that the deceased person was not at or
immediately before his death attended by any legally qualified
medical practitioner it shall be lawful for such Coroner Justice or
Justices to issue a summons for the attendance as a witness at
such inquest or inquiry of some legally qualified medical practi-
tioner in actual practice who shall reside near to the place where
such inquest or inquiry is holden but that where the deceased
person was attended by any such practitioner the Coroner Justice
or J ustices shall issue a summons for his attendance only or if the
deceased was attended by more than one such practitioner the
Coroner J ustice or J ustices may cause all or any of them to be
summoned at his or their discretion.
Coroner or Justices may order a 'post-mortem examination either with or
without an analysis of the contents of stomach or intestines.—Death
partly or entirely caused by improper or negligent treatment of medical
practitioner, he shall not be allowed to perform or assist at any
such examination.
2. And be it enacted That it shall be lawful for the Coroner
Justice or Justices either in such summons as aforesaid or by an


order in writing at any time before the termination of the inquest
or inquiry to direct any legally qualified medical practitioner to
perform a post-mortem examination of the body of the deceased
either with or without an analysis of the contents of the stomach
or intestines. Provided that if in any case it appear to the
Coroner Justice or Justices (as the case may be) that the death of
such deceased person was probably caused partly or entirely by
the improper or negligent treatment of any medical practitioner
or other person then such practitioner or other person shall not
be allowed to perform or assist at any such examination or
analysis although he shall in every such case be allowed to be
present thereat.
Additional medical evidence in cases where the cause of death is not satis-
factorily explained by first examination.—Majority of Jury desiring
such additional evidence, and naming any particular party, that
party only shall be summoned.
3. And be it enacted That whenever it shall appear to the
Coroner or to a majority of the Jury at any such inquiry or to
the Justice or Justices or a majority of them at any such inquiry
that the cause of death has not been satisfactorily explained by
the practitioner or practitioners examined in the first instance at
such inquest or inquiry the Coroner Justice or Justices shall
forthwith cause any other legally qualified practitioner or practi-
tioners to be summoned as a witness or witnesses at such inquest
or inquiry and shall direct him or them to perform a post-mortem
examination with or without such analysis as aforesaid whether
such an examination shall have been previously performed or not.
Pi ovided that where such additional evidence is at the instance of
a majority of the Jury it shall be lawful for such majority to
name to the Coroner any particular practitioner or practitioners
whom they wish to attend and in that case such practitioner or
practitioners shall be summoned and no other.
Remuneration to Medical Witnesses. —For evidence one guinea, post-
mortem examination two guineas.—One shilling for every mile beyond
ten. —No remuneration for unauthorized examination. —Death hap-
pening in public buildings, Medical Officer attending not entitled
to remuneration.
4. And be it enacted That when any legally qualified
medical practitioner has attended at an inquest or inquiry in
obedience to any such summons as aforesaid he shall for such
attendance and for giving evidence at such inquest or inquiry be
entitled to receive the remuneration of one guinea and (in addition
thereto) for the making of any such post-mortem examination the
remuneration of two guineas and if the place of his residence shall
be more than ten miles distant from the place where the inquest or


inquiry is holden then such practitioner shall be entitled to a sum
of one shilling for every mile of such extra distance in addition.
Provided that no remuneration shall be paid for the performance
of any post-mortem examination instituted without the previous
direction of the Coroner Justice or Justices (as the case may be).
Provided also that where the death shall have happened in any
public hospital gaol or other public building no Medical Officer
appointed with salary to attend such hospital gaol or building shall
be entitled to any such remuneration.
Medical Witnesses neglecting to attend to forfeit and pay not less than
three nor more than twenty pounds. — Proceedings, &c., under this
section to he in manner provided by 5 Gul. 4 No. 22.
5. And be it enacted That where any such summons or order
of any Coroner Justice or Justices as aforesaid shall have been
served upon any medical practitioner to whom the same was
directed or shall have been left at his usual residence in sufficient
time for him to obey the same and he shall nevertheless not obey
such summons or order he shall for such neglect forfeit and pay a
penalty or sum of not less than three pounds nor more than twenty
to be recovered in a summary way befoi-e any two Justices of the
Peace unless he shall at the hearing of the case shew a good and
sufficient excuse for such neglect to the satisfaction of such
J ustices. And every proceeding under this section shall be
had before such Justices and every such penalty be awarded
levied and distributed and the part}; - convicted be entitled to
appeal in the manner respectively provided by an Act of the
Governor and Council passed in the fifth year of the reign of His
late Majesty King William the Fourth intituled “An Act to
regulate summary proceedings before Justices of the Peace."
Extracts from
Acts defining who are legally qualified Medical Practitioners for
the purposes of Ist Victoria No. 3 :
No person shall be deemed a legally qualified medical practi
tioner unless he shall prove to the satisfaction of the New South
Wales Medical Board that he is a Doctor or Bachelor of Medicine
of some University —or a Physician or Surgeon licensed or
admitted by some College of Physicians or Surgeons in Great
Britain or Ireland—or a Member of the Company of Apothecaries
of London—or who is, or has been, a Medical Officer, duly
appointed and confirmed, of Her Majesty’s sea or land service.—
2 Victoria No. 22, s. 1.


Any person who shall prove to the satisfaction of the New
South Wales Medical Board that he is a Member or Licentiate
of the Apothecaries’ Hall of Dublin shall be a legally qualified
medical practitioner.—9 Victoria No. 12, s. 1.
Any person who shall prove to the satisfaction of the New
South Wales Medical Board that he has received from the
University of Sydney, or from some university, college, or other
body duly recognized for that purpose in the country to which
such university, college, or other body may belong, a diploma,
degree, or license entitling him to practise medicine in that
country, shall be deemed to be a legally qualified medical practi-
tioner.—l 9 Victoria No. 17, s. 1.
Any person desirous of being declared a legally qualified medical
practitioner shall submit his degree, diploma, or other certificate
or proof of his being so duly qualified, for the examination and
approval of the New South Wales Medical Board, and shall
obtain from the said Board a certificate of his being so qualified.
—2 Victoria No. 22, s. 2.
The New South Wales Medical Board shall cause the names of
all “ legally qualified medical practitioners ” to be registered in
a book to be kept by the Board for that purpose and shall also
cause all the names so registered to be published in the Gazette ,
on or about the Ist of January, annually—for the information of
Coroners, Magistrates, and the public.—2 Victoria No. 22, s. 3.
Registration Act.
19th Victoria No. 34.—An Act for Registering Births Deaths
and Marriages. (3rd December, 1855.)
Sections 28 and 29, with Schedules.
Finding of child or body.—Notice of Inquest.
Sec. 28. In case any new-born child or any dead body shall be
found exposed the Constable in case of a new-born child and the
Coroner or if none such the nearest Justice of the Peace in the
case of a dead body shall forthwith inform the District Registrar
thereof and of the place where such child or dead body was found
and where an inquest or magisterial inquiry shall be held on any
dead body the Coroner or Magistrate (as the case may be) shall
notify to the District Registrar the verdict of the Jury or the
opinion of such Magistrate with all other particulars required to
be registered concerning the death and such Registrar shall make
the entry accordingly.


Certificates of deaths and burials.
Sec. 29. Every District Registrar immediately upon registering
any death or as soon thereafter as he shall be required so to do
shall without fee or reward deliver to the undertaker or other
person having charge of the funeral a certificate under his hand
according to the form in the Schedule hereto marked F that such
death has been duly registered and such certificate shall be
delivered by such undertaker or other person to the Minister or
officiating person who shall be required to bury or perform any
religious service for the burial and if any dead body shall be
buried for which no certificate shall have been so delivered the
person who shall bury the same or perform any funeral or reli-
gious service for the burial or who shall in any other way dispose
of the body shall forthwith give notice of the facts to the District
Registrar. Provided always that the Coroner or Magistrate
holding any inquest or inquiry upon any dead body for which no
certificate shall have been delivered as aforesaid may order the
body to be buried if he shall think fit before registration and shall
in such case give a certificate of his order in writing under his
hand according to the form in the Schedule hereto marked G to such
undertaker or other person having charge of the funeral—and
every undertaker or other person who shall bury or otherwise
dispose of any dead body shall forthwith cause to be transmitted
to the District Registrar a certificate thereof in the form or to the
effect set forth in the Schedule hereto marked H countersigned by
two respectable householders.
Schedule F.
I, A. 8., Registrar of Births and Deaths in the District of
do hereby certify that the death of Robert Taylor was
duly registered by me on the day of 18
Witness my hand this day of 18
[Signed] A. 8., District Registrar.
Schedule G.
(See “ Form 5.”)


Schedule H.
I, A.B , of undertaker, do hereby certify that the
body of [C.D.] was on the day of 18 duly
buried at and in presence of the undersigned.
Witness our hands this day of 18
[Signed] A. 8., Undertaker.
[Countersigned]
| Householders.
Extract
From the Licensing Act of 1882. (45 Victoria No. 14, s. 86.)
Inquests in Public Houses.
Sec. 86. Every holder of a publican’s license shall at the request
of any officer or constable of police receive into the house men-
tioned in such license or at his option into some secure place upon
the premises occupied therewith or any portion of the appurten-
ances thereof (not being a house or premises situated within a
distance of one mile from any dead-house or police station) any
dead body that may be brought to such house for the purpose of
an inquest being held thereon and for every dead body so received
he shall be paid the sum of thirty shillings out of any money which
may be available for such purpose. And if he shall refuse to receive
such dead body for the purpose aforesaid he shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding five pounds. Provided that nothing herein
contained shall make it compulsory upon any publican to receive
a dead body in an offensive state of decomposition or of a person
reputed to have died of an infectious disease.
Instructions for taking Depositions of Material Witnesses
respecting Indictable Offences.
The Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1883, 46 Victoria
No. 17 (Sections 344 and 345), authorizes Justices of the Peace,
at any time, and in any place, to take the depositions of persons
dangerously ill and likely to die—respecting any description of
indictable offence. This provision is very useful, and every Magis-
trate should be prepared to take such a deposition if called upon.
It is not only in cases where a person has received mortal injuries
from another, as in murder and manslaughter, that these deposi-


tions may be taken; they may also be taken where a material
witness in any charge of felony or misdemeanor, as in cases of
robbery, cattle-stealing, assault, &c., is so ill that his evidence
would otherwise probably be lost.
When any credible person reports to the Magistrate that any
such witness is dangerously ill, he (the Magistrate) should take a
short deposition on oath from the informant. The oath in such
case may be as follows:—“You shall true answer make to such
questions as shall be asked of you. So help you God;” —and
the deposition may be in the following form:—“G.H., having
been sworn, states : I am a quarryman, and reside at Biamble. A
person named O.D. has received mortal injuries from one E.F.,
and wishes to make a deposition before he dies ” [or, L.M., a
person who is a material witness in a charge of robbery for which
no person has been committed for trial, has to-day received very
serious injuries by accidentally falling from his horse, and is so
dangerously ill that, if his deposition is not taken at once, his
evidence will probably be lost,” or as the case may be]. The
informant signs this, and the usual jurat is added. If the case
is urgent, and will not admit of delay, this deposition may be
dispensed with.
The Magistrate then repairs to the place where the sick person
lies, taking with him the requisite writing materials, and a Bible,
and proceeds to take his deposition, in the manner directed under
the head of Mode of Taking the Depositions. A suitable form for
caption and jurat are given in the fourth Schedule to the Act, and
as the Sections and Schedule referred to are very clear, and
explain themselves, they will now be given in extenso :—
Depositions by persons dangerously ill.
Sec. 344. Whenever by the representation of any credible person
on oath—or in case of urgency without oath—it is made to appear
to any Justice that a person, able to give material informa-
tion respecting an indictable offence, is dangerously ill, whereby
his evidence will probably be lost if not forthwith taken, such
Justice may take the deposition of the person so in danger, touch-
ing the offence —in like manner as if a prosecution for the same
were then pending before the Justice—and to transmit such depo-
sition to the Attorney-General. And if afterwards, on the trial of
any person for the offence to which the deposition relates (or for
the murder of the deponent in case of his death or alleged death
by reason of such offence), it be proved to the satisfaction of the
Judge that the witness is dead, or unable from illness to attend
the trial, his deposition may be read in evidence for or against the
accused, although not taken in the presence or hearing either of
the party prosecuting or of such accused person.


Proviso as to cross-examination, &c.
Sec. 345. Provided always that every such deposition shall be
in the form, or substantially in the form, contained in the Fourth
Schedule hereto—and shall be subscribed by the Justice taking the
same—of which fact, and that such deposition was duly taken by
him under the last section, the deposition itself, if purporting to
be signed by such Justice, shall be sufficient proof. Provided also
that a copy of such deposition shall be delivered, to every person
whom the same may affect criminally, as soon after the taking
thereof as shall be practicable—and that, if practicable, every such
person shall have full opportunity afforded him, if he thinks fit, of
cross-examination, before being placed on his trial, or committed.
And, for the purpose of such cross-examination, it shall be lawful
for any Judge, or Police Magistrate, by any order or orders in
writing, to cause any person in custody to be conveyed to any
place mentioned in any such order, and afterwards to be returned
to that custody.
Fourth Schedule.
(Form of Deposition. )
The deposition of A. 8., a person now dangerously ill, taken
before the undersigned Justice, at S., in the County [or Police
District] of which said A. 8., being duly sworn,
aaith as follows :
[The witness’s statement is to be in the first person, and it
ought to be reasonably full as to all material facts. The witness’s
signature, or mark if from any cause unable to write, should be
added. Then will follow this jurat and certificate .]
Sworn before me this day of 18
And I hereby certify that I have taken this deposition under the
provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1883,
because it has been made to appear to me that the deponent is
dangerously ill, and that his evidence, if not forthwith taken,
would probably be lost.
[Signature of Justice f\
[lf the deposition be by Solemn Affirmation or Declaration the
form will be varied accordingly.]
Procedure if accused present.
If the accused person be present, he should be invited, at the
end of the examination-in-chief, to put any questions by way of


cross-examination, in order to elucidate anything favourable to
himself touching the matter ; and the answers to such questions
should be carefully taken down as a portion of the depositions.
(See Mode of Taking the Depositions.)
Should the accused voluntarily interpose an observation material
to the case, at any period of the examination, it ought to be taken
down, in that part of the deposition where the interruption
occurs, as nearly as possible in his own words, thus : —“ Here the
accused voluntarily says,” &c. (putting his very words).
When the accused person is a foreigner, and does not under-
stand the English language, the charge against him—and also the
deposition of the witness—should be clearly explained to him
through the medium of a sworn interpreter; and if he desires
to cross-examine the witness, his questions—and the witness’
answers thereto—should be translated by the interpreter. In
such case an entry should be made on the proceedings to the
following effect:—“The accused, E.F., not understanding the
English language, 0.P., of , was sworn as interpreter, by
whom the charge against the said accused, the deposition of the
witness, and all the proceedings, were translated and explained to
him.”
General remarks on talcing down the evidence.
The rules for the examination of witnesses, taking down their
depositions, and admissibility of evidence, given in previous pages
of this work, will apply to these cases; but in addition thereto,
particular care will be necessary to avoid taking down any con-
versation deposed to by the witness, unless it occurred in the
presence and hearing of the party accused, as it will not otherwise
be admissible as evidence at the trial. The rule against hearsay
evidence does not apply to cases of statements of conversations
in the presence of the party against whom they are offered, which
latter are always admissible as evidence against such party.
But though, as a general rule, witnesses can give evidence only
of facts within their own knowledge, there are exceptional cases
in which, being unable to speak with certainty, they may then
express their opinion or belief, as, for instance, with respect to
the identity of persons or things; but unless they give grounds
for such belief, their unsupported averment of it is of no value.
It is far better that too much rather than too little evidence
should be elicited when taking these statements; and it is much
more desirable that a considerable amount of matter should be in-
cluded in such depositions, which may be excluded at the trial of
the person for the offence to which they relate, than that anything
should be excluded from the depositions which might be admitted at
the trial, or might lead to further inquiry, and to the procuring


of further admissible evidence, between the time of taking the
statement and the trial.
In any case of doubt as to whether any particular evidence is
admissible or not, it should be taken down, leaving it to the
Court at which the accused is tried to decide whether it shall be
used or not. Where the deposition of a deceased witness, which
contained hearsay evidence, was received upon the trial, and read
in its entirety, but the Judge told the jury to exclude the hearsay
evidence from their consideration, the Supreme Court held that
the proper course had been pursued. R. v. Launt, 3 S.C.R., 84.
George Robertson and Company, Sydney and Melbourne.






iiss*a*Wii«aiiWi»*|i
- -< gHiigiinNihsHHlK• unilHMl
lift
U'.
.444*Wv/
■Bl
ii!iiiiiiiiii«»liiiii
lift
■:': s#t : B?:i: : hf‘->^?^^rf? ; r^ } >“i-' ; §g&
it-'iji'-:
»MfeMpitNßM«
aggg:-r^^^^BßBBBSfe->s§feßs^g{^
■. .' :-j.->-£4- ■&&*&£■&&• '.-■. ;if■«§l§g£c?&g£g
mmommom
| | ■ i;.; • *#t't f 7 Mil
mmmmm
MMhPhhm
PS®
