

HAND-BOOK
st. Ijwtajefo'a Cafjr^ra:!
S IT 3D IsT IE "5T
luibjMfs of t Mhulows
&c. &c.
Price One Shilling.
JOSEPH COOK & CO. 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOOTH WAKES.
\2 b £
fl i'3 v 7


DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of Australia
The Right Reverend Frederic Barker, D.D.
Dean of Sydney
The Very Reverend William Macquarie Cowper, M. A.
Canons of the Cathedral
The Reverend Robert Allwood, B. A.
and
The Reverend William 11. Walsh, M.A.
Architect of the Building
(Appointed in 1846.)
Edmund Thomas Blacket.


ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
The building, now (1868) nearly completed, is—for a Cathedral, the
principal Metropolitan Church in our Communion,—of very small
dimensions ; but, in appropriate decoration and internal arrangement,
iit will when finished bear comparison with many Churches, even in
England, of better proportions and far greater size. This paper is
Intended merely to convey to visitors, and others interested in its
some account of the interior of the edifice.
St. Andrew’s is (within the walls) rather less than 160 feet long,
’ by 62 ft. in breadth ; the Transept being 110 ft. by 14 ft. only : whereas
York Cathedral is 486 ft. by 105 ft.—the Choir alone being in length
212 feet. The Cathedral of Salisbury is nearly as long as that of York ;
while Canterbury and Winchester Cathedrals, although narrower, have
•each a length of 500 ft. and upwards. The Great Hall of our Sydney
University is 135 ft. by 45 ft.
The Foundation Stone was laid by Sir Richard Bourke, then Governor
of New South Wales, on the 16tli May 1837, during the Episcopacy
of the late Bishop ; whose name and then designation (before tbe
creation of the Metropolitan Bishopric) are inscribed on the North
Pillar next to the Communion Railing. Owing, however, to the
depressed state of the Colony in some of the following years, no sub-
stantial progress was made in the work until the year 1846 ; ,when the
present Building Committee was formed. On the corresponding
Southern Pillar, are the name and designation of our present
Metropolitan.
NAVE PILLARS.
The six Pillars in the Nave bear the name end designation,
respectively, of the then Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops, in
commemoration of their meeting in this Diocese, in conference,
in the year 1850. They are in order as follows :—William Grant
Broughton, Bishop ot Sydney and Metropolitan; George Augus-
tus Selwyn, Bishop of New Zealand ; Francis Russell Nixon, Bishop of
Tasmania ; Augustus Short, Bishop of Adelaide ; Charles Perry, Bishop
, of Melbourne ; and William Tyrrell, Bishop of Newcastle.


STAINED-CLASS WINDOWS,
All of these, (twenty-four in number below the Clerestory,)
are with three exceptions the gifts of individuals, and for the most
part executed in the highest style of modern art. The Southern
windows, numbered 7,8, 9, and 10, on the annexed engraved plan,
represent the Miracles of our Saviour. The Northern, Nos. 15,
16, 17, and 18, are illustrative of our Lord’s Parables. The Western,
Nos. 11, 13, and 14, represent His Transfiguration, Baptism, and
Temptation. The subjects of the two East Windows, marked 1 and 3,
are the Last Supper, and the Resurrection. Those of the North
windows in the Choir are events in our Saviour’s life before His
ministry; while the windows opposite these are devoted to events
after the Crucifixion. Thus, a connected series of illustrations is given—
in designs, moreover, which harmonise in character with each other.
Labgeb Windows. Of the three large Windows, the Western re-
presents the Apostles and Apostolic men. Simon, James the Less,
Andrew, Barnabas, Matthias, and Jude, in the upper row. Thomas,
James, John the Baptist, Stephen, Philip, and Bartholomew, in the
middle row. Peter, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and Paul, in the
loiver. This beautiful window is the gift of Thomas S. Mort, Esq., of
Creenoakes; and its cost was £576.
The Northern Window (end of the Transept) was presented by the
late Charles Kemp, Esq. ; and it has the following subjects. Upper
row, Behold the Lamb of Cod, Call of St. Andrew, Call of St. Peter.
Middle row, Receive ye the Holy Chost, Day of Pentecost, St. Andrew
preaching. Lower row, Crucifixion of St. Andrew, Crucifixion of our
Lord, Crucifixion of St. Peter. The cost of this window was £329.
The great Eastern Window represents the following subjects, in 21
compartments; there being three rows of 7 lights each. Two Disciples
following Jesus ; They came and saw where He dwelt; The Ascension ;
Andrew finding Simon; He brought him to Jesus ; Calling of Andrew
and Simon ; Feeding of the Five Thousand ; Ordination of the Twelve
Disciples; Andrew and Philip with the Creek Worshippers; the Cood
Shepherd; Jesus foretelling the Destruction of Jerusalem; The Day
of Pentecost; Andrew crossing theEuxine; Christ’s injunction Feed
my Sheep. The 3 central lights, in the uppermost row, are supposed
to represent the Ascension ; the 3 corresponding lights in the middle
row, the Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes ; and the 3 central lights
in the lowest row, the Descent of the Holy Chost. This Window was
erected partly by Cathedral funds, and partly by special subscriptions,
in memory of Bishop Broughton. The total cost was £Bl2.


Transept Windows. —No. 21 is erected by members of the Legal
Profession, in memory of the late Mr. Justice S. If- Milford and Mr.
Justice Edward Wise ; both of whom died in 1865. It contains illus-
trations from the Life of Samuel; each having the text referred to,
(from the Ist book,) in the following order. The 12th chapter, 24th
verse ; the 7th chapter, 16th verse ; and the 3rd chapter, 9th verse.*
The shield on the Northern light is that of Mr. Justice Milford;
having the date of his death, 26th May 1865, encircling it. That on
the Southern, the shield of Mr. Justice Wise; with the date of his
death, 28th September 1865. This window is by C. Clutterbuck,
Maryland Point, Stratford ; and the total cost of erection was £lO2.
The Window opposite (Western side of the Transept) is by Lavers and
Barraud, Enders-street, Bloomsbury; and it has been erected to the
memory of Captain John Pike, formerly of the 73rd Regiment, but
afterwards a settler near Merton, on the Hunter, by his Widow.
Captain Pike died at Tours, in France, about five years ago ; bequeath-
ing large sums in charity, to various Colonial institutions. The subject
of this Window is, The Supper at Bethany: Mary anointing the
feet of Jesus ; taken from St. John’s Grospel, 12th chapter, 7th and
Bth verses—which are inscribed beneath the picture.
Clerestory Windows. The smaller Window (over “a” in the en-
graved plan) in the North Transept, Western side, is to the memory of
the late William Macpherson, Esquire, of Blairgowrie in Scotland ;
for many years the holder of various Public Offices in this Colony.
He died at the residence of his son, Allan Macpherson Esquire, by
whom the Window is erected, on the 11th March 1866, aged 81.
The subjects are, Moses lifting up the Serpent, John the Baptist
preaching in the Wilderness, and Abraham offering up Isaac. The
manufacturer is C. Clutterbuck, and the cost of erection was £64.
The Window over “ b ” in the South Transept, (West of the Organ,)
will shortly be erected by the Legal Profession, of which he was so
long a member, in memory of James Norton Esquire ; for above thirty
years Registrar of the Diocese. He was born at Ore Place, in Sussex,
England ; and died at Elswick, in this Colony, on the 31st August
1862, aged 67. —The Window opposite (Eastern side of the same
Transept) is to be erected by members of the Legal Profession, and
other Friends, in memory of Robert Johnson Esquire, a Member of
the Legislative Council; who was born in London, on the 17th
December 1812, and died at Brooksby, Double Bay, on the 6th
November 1866.
* The appositeness of the second illustration is greater, perhaps, than was in-
tended. “And he went from year to year, in circuit, to Bethel, and Gilgal, and
Mizpah; and judged Israel in those places.” The circuits in New South Wales, in
1865, were to Bathurst, and Goulburn, and Maitland; at which last mentioned
to>yn Judge Milford died.


Nate and Choir Windows. —A Table of these, stating the
Subjects in detail, with the names of the Donors respectively, will be
found at the end of this publication, facing an engraved Ground
Plan of the Cathedral. All of these Windows are from the same
Manufactory ; that of Messrs. John Hardman and Co. of Birmingham.
The cost of the three Great Windows has been already mentioned.
That of the others varies from £206, the Choir Windows, North and
South, —to £lBO, the price of each Window in the Nave,—and £136,
the Windows under the Towers.
Memorial Brasses. —Most, if not all, of these windows are in-
tended as Memorials; and it is understood, that the name to, be-
commemorated will, in each instance, be engraved on a brass- plate'
inserted in the wall beneath. But until this point has been decided*
and the name in each case mentioned, it is thought better (lest mistakes,
should occur) to specify none.
Bishop’s Tomb. —The late Bishop’s Effigy, and a fac simile of
his Tomb in Canterbury Cathedral, (he having died while on a visit
to England,) are in the North Choir Aisle. The inscription on the
Tomb is, Cu lie emits Ghaut Broughton, Primus Fp is cop us
Sgdniensis, Australasia Metropolitanus ; Obiit xx. Feb : m.d.cccliii ;
JEtat. EXT.
ORGAN.
This, the gift of the Ladies of the Diocese, is placed in a gallery in
the South Transept. It was built in 1886 by Messrs. Hill and Sons, of
London, under the direction of Dr. Monk, the Organist of York
Minster; and it certainly may be pronounced a magnificent instrument.
The instrument contains 37 stops, and 2374 pipes ; and has 6 couplers,
and 7 composition pedals. The entire cost, including freight, (towards
which Mr. R. A. Hunt and his Family contributed £100,) insurance,
duty, and charges for erection, has exceeded £2,000. # It was put
together in the colony by Mr. C. J. Jackson, of Sydney, with the
assistance as architect of Mr. W. H. Nash.
The following is a more detailed description of the instrument;
which is of the most delicate finish throughout. The pipe metal is of
the superior kind, called “spotted” metal. The compass of the
manuals is from CC to A in Alt, fifty-eight notes ; and the compass of
pedals CCC to F, thirty notes; the instrument having three manual
organs and one pedal organ. Each of these is independent of, but may
be connected with the others, for producing such qualities of tone as
could not otherwise be obtained. The Great Organ, which contains
* The amount, in detail, (rejecting tractions under twenty shillings,) is thus
distributed. Manufacturer’s bill, Dr. Monk’s commission, and petty charges, £1694.
Insurance, freight, and duty, £255. Expenses in the Colony, £164. Total £2,113.


928 pipes, has the following stops: bourdon, 16 feet; open
diapason, (No. 1,) 8 feet; open diapason, (No. 2,) 8 feet; stopped
diapason, 8 feet; spitz flute, 8 feet; octave, 4 feet; harmonic
flute, 4 feet; twelfth, 3 feet; fifteenth, 2 feet; mixture, 5 ranks ;
trumpet, 8 feet; clarion, 4 feet. The stops of the Pedal Organ,
which has 240 pipes, are, open bass, 16 feet; violone, 16 feet;
sub-bass, 16 feet; quint, 12 feet; violoncello, 8 feet; bass-flute,
8 feet; fifteenth, 4 feet; and trombone, 16 feet. There are 812
pipes in the Swell Organ, which has the following stops:
bourdon, 16 feet; open diapason, 8 feet; stopped diapason, 8 feet;
cone gamba, 8 feet; octave, 4 feet; fifteenth, 2 feet; echo cornet,
5 ranks ; oboe, 8 feet; horn, 8 feet; and clarion, 4 feet. In the Choir
Organ, there are 394 pipes and seven stops : lieblich gedacht, 8 feet;
dulciana, 8 feet; pierced gamba, 8 feet; gemshorn, 4 feet; lieblich
flute, 4 feet; flautina, 2 feet, and clarionet, 8 feet.
The instrument has six couplers :—great organ to pedal organ, swell
to pedal, choir to pedal, swell to great, choir to great, and swell to
great, (sub-octave.) There are four composition pedals, for changing the
stops of the great and pedal organs combined, and three composition
pedals for the swell organ. Wind is supplied by two large bellows,
one of which is used for the pedal organ, the other for the three
manuals. The quality of tone of all the stops is very fine. The har-
monic flute, the oboe, and the clarionet, with the trumpet and clarion
of the great organ, are exquisite. Each of the stops runs through
the entire compass of the manual, or pedal organ, to which it belongs.
THE PULPIT.
This was the gift of Robert Towns Esquire, presented in the joint
names of himself and Mrs. Towns; and their initials appear,
accordingly, on the panels in front. The carving of the ornaments on
these, and of the acorns and oak leaves bordering the top, deserves
special mention. It was executed, as was also that on the lintel under
the Organ, by Mr. John Ferris, of Little Norton Street. The cost of
the Pulpit, including the Stairs and Stone Platform, was £270.
the font.
This, placed under the North Western Tower, was erected-by the
contributions (for the most part in very small sums) of Children ; the
subscriptions being from such, exclusively, as had not yet been con-
firmed. Around the rim of the Font are inscribed, cut in the stone,
the following words ; taken partly from xxxv Ezekiel 25th verse, and
partly from 2 Corinthians, 6th chapter and 18th verse. “ I will
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean ; and I will be
a Father unto you, and ye shall be My sons and daughters. And at


the base, on the front step, is the following. “ The Offering of The
Children of the Diocese.” The stone of the basin and capitals,
(resembling closely Caen stone,) is from Otago ; and the pillars are of
granite, from Gabo Island. The total cost was £250. Water is
supplied to the basin, and removed from it, by concealed pipes.
TILES AND MARBLE FLOORING.
The elaborate Marble and Encaustic-Tile work, covering the Choir
and space within the Communion railing, and the steps to it, are by the
Messrs. Field of London—executed under the direction of Mr. Gilbert
Scott, E.A. The cost there, excluding incidental charges, was £867.
The Tiles, to be laid in the Aisles and Nave, are by Minton and Co.
of Stoke-upon-Trent; and their cost, at the manufactory, was £770.
Towards this beautiful ornamentation, the Metropolitan has con-
tributed, from funds at his disposal, the sum of £lOOO.
WORKMEN EMPLOYED.
Foreman of Joiners &c., Mr. W. H. Hudson. In addition to Mr.
Ferris, the following Carvers have been employed in the Building.
Messrs. Hodgkin, Sanderson, Morris, Cunningham, Quill, Ward and
Son, Tinkler, Bland, and Bernasconi. And the following Joiners:
Messrs. Moss, Bretnall, Sanbrook, Thackeray, Thursby, Thomas, and
Robinson. The Mason executing the work on the Font, the pillar
shafts excepted, was Mr. Benjamin Brain; and the carving of the stone
bosses, and names on the Nave and Choir Pillars, was by Mr. Isaac
Brown. The Eagle (placed in the Choir) was carved by Mr. William
Hodgkinson, and was the gift of Mr. Edward Oram.
Joseph Cook and Co., “ Churchman ” Office, 370, George-Street, Sydney.


THEIR
DONORS AND SUBJECTS.


W£BT.
. .. Sce&Ze of fe&t.
.f '? *? r ? y 70 m ?o r


— - ' “
Jtisle (Uilimlotus; Sonora,
and Jsubjcrte.
( The names of the Donors are in italics ; and the prefixed Numeral has reference to the engraved Plan.)
I
Hon. 'John Campbell
ii
Family of the late
p
and Charles Campbell,
The Last Supper.
Deputy Commissary
The Transfiguration.
a
H
Esquires
P
m
13
General Laidley.
3
SeverinK. Salting, Esq.
The Resurrection.
p
>
Family of the late Sir
James Dowling, C.J.
Baptism of our Lord.
H
Thomas Whistler
4
Executors of Thomas
Moore, Esquire.
Woman at the Sepulchre; Noli me
tangere ; Mary tells the Apostles ; Peter
and John at Sepulchre.
Smith, Esquire.
The Temptation.
u
•H
15
John Croft, Esquire.
The Sower ; Pharisee and Publican ;
A
o
5
Public Subscription.
(Memorial to Charles
Three Marys at the Sepulchre; They
The good Samaritan ; The Prodigal Son.
xi
■p
F*
Kemp and George K.
Ingelaw, Esquires. )
heldHim by the feet; Journey to Emmaus;
Supper at Emmaus.
•
o
B 1
in.
•HI
16
Major General Sir
Edward Macarthur.
The Unjust Judge; The King’s Supper;
The Unjust Steward; The Wedding
o
C/1
6
Family of the late A rch-
deacon Ccnvper.
Thomas’s Unbelief; His Adoration ;
Sea of Galilee ; Charge to Peter.
<4
A
p
17
The same.
Garment.
The barren Fig Tree ; The Ten Tal-
O
ents; The Lost Money; Dives and
Lazarus.
Y>
1 7
Mrs. Edward A spin all.
Walking on the Sea ; Healing on the
18
The Hon. William
Rescuing the Lamb ; Good Shepherd
Sabbath Day ; Cure of the Leper ; Cure
Charles Wentworth,
rejoicing ; Go into my Vineyard ; This
of the Infirm Woman.
Esquire.
is the Heir.
o
r— f
in
8
Edye Manning, Esq.
and Sir William A/.
Casting out a Devil ; Draught of
Fishes ; Blind Man Restored ; Healing
22
George Macleay, Esq.
The Annunciation ; Meeting of Mary
and Elizabeth ; Birth of our Saviour ;
<
Planning.
of I en Lepers.
•H
Angel appears to Shepherds.
&
p
F*
o
D)
9
GeorgeCox & Edward
Cox, Esquires.
Centurion’s Servant cured ; Cure of
Peter’s wife’s Mother ; Cure of Dumb
man ; Canaanitish Woman’s daughter.
Js
o
E
23
Sir Daniel Cooper,
Bart.
Magi seeing the Star ; Journey of Magi ;
Appearance before Herod ; Their
Adoration.
IO
Robert Tooth, Esquire.
Man sick of the Palsy : Calming the j
&
24
Henry Osborne, Esq.
Presentation in the Temple ; Flight
Sea ; Loaves and Fishes ; Miracle in |
into Egypt ; Visit to Jerusalem ; Jesus
Cana of Galilee.
in the Temple.
«


