

HANDBOOK
FOR THE
USE OF THE MEMBERS OF
THE AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION
FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
HOBART MEETING-, 1892
EDITED BY
ALEXANDER MORT O N, F. L. S.,
GENERAL SECRETARY FOR TASMANIA.
WILLIAM THOMAS STRUTT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART,
1891. %
AOCr'-cA 11




HANDBOOK
FOR THE
USE OP THE MEMBERS OP
THE AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION
FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
HOBABT MEETING,
EDITED BY
ALEXANDER MORTON, F. L.S., v
GENERAL SECRETARY FOB TASMANIA.
(Tasmania:
WILLIAM THOMAS STRUTT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART.
1891.




PREFACE.
The Compiler has consulted the following books in preparing
this Handbook, and has to acknowledge indebtedness to the
various Authors : “ History of Tasmania,” by James Fenton;
Official Handbook of Tasmania, 1889-91,” by R. M. John-
ston, F.L.S. ; “ Australasian Newspaper Directory,” by
Gordon & Gotch; “ Systematic Geology of Tasmania,” by
R. M. Johnston, F.L.S.; “ Sketch of the Physical Structure
of Australia,” by J. Beete Jukes; “ Zoology of Australia,” by
Sir William Macleay, F.L.S.; “ Handbook of the Plants of
Tasmania,” by Rev. W. W. Spicer ; “ The Wild Flowers of
Tasmania,” by S. Hannaford ; “ List of Books relating to
Tasmania,” by J. B. Walker, F.R.G.S.; and numerous Papers
contributed to the Tasmanian and Royal Societies at different
times.




EPITOME OF TASMANIAN HISTORY.
BY CARRIE E. MORTON.
Tasmania, named first after Van Diemen, the Governor
of the Dutch Settlements in the Indian Archipelago,
afterwards more euphoniously called by the name of the
discoverer, Abel Tasman, owed to Bass and Flinders the
first authentic recognition of her insular position.
The discoverers of Bass Straits in 1798, more than 150
years after Tasman’s voyage, first conclusively proved
that Van Diemen’s Land was not a part of Australia, but
an island separated from the Continent by the Straits
named in honour of George Bass.
The first settlement was made in 1803, when a party
of convicts and military men, under Lieutenant Bowen,
came from New South Wales, and made an encampment
at Risdon on the eastern bank of the Derwent, and about
four miles higher up the river than the present City of
Hobart,
In 1804 the party under Lieutenant Collins, who had
made so unsuccessful an attempt to colonise Port Phillip,
started for the Derwent, and reached the settlement at
Risdon to find that it had been deserted by Bowen, and
that the rest of the party were almost in a state of
starvation.
Colonel Collins decided against Risdon as a permanent
settlement, and laid out a site at the head of Sullivan’s
Cove, naming it after Lord Hobart, then Secretary of
State for the Colonies. The settlement at Risdon was
not at once abandoned, though it might have been better
if Colonel Collins had, immediately upon his arrival,
removed the entire encampment to the western side of
the Derwent ; for at Risdon the first hostilities between
blacks and whites occurred, and the war of extermination,
which has left so black a stain on colonial history,
commenced. A party of three hundred natives, who


were out driving kangaroos, appeared on the hills behind
the little Risdon settlement. Actuated by sudden and
unreasonable panic, the officer in charge gave orders to
fire at them ; and a number of men, women, and children
were killed. Governor Collins tried all in his power to
protect the blacks from inhumanity, and to restore the
confidence which had been thus rudely shaken; but the
mischief was done, and thenceforward treachery and
violence were carried to a pitch in which nothing short
of extermination of the weaker party would satisfy the
stronger.
Very early in the history of the settlement an attempt
was made to cater for the literary appetites of the young
Colony, and, in 1810, the Derwent Star was launched
as a newspaper venture. Want of type, want of news,
and want of money were fatal to the longevity of the
concern, and a few months witnessed its interment.
Four years after the Van Diemen’s Land Gazette
struggled into life, and, after a precarious existence of four
and a half months, gradually disappeared. The Hobart
Town Gazette , a few years later, managed to weather
nine years of storm, but was then submerged in a sea of
troubles that hid it out of sight. At the present time
seventeen newspapers, daily, weekly, and monthly,
minister to the social, moral, and religious needs of
Tasmania.
In 1804 the first settlement was made in the north
of the Island, at the west arm of the Tamar, which is
now known as York Town. After a short stay, the
opposite side of the river was selected in preference, and
an encampment made at George Town, near Tamar
Heads ; but this was soon broken up, and the site of the
present City of Launceston was permanently fixed upon.
In 1812 the two military settlements of the Derwent
and Tamar were united under one administration, and
Colonel Davey was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of
the whole Island.


In 1817, fourteen years after the first batch of colonists
landed, the first Church in Tasmania was built on the
site where the Cathedral now stands, and was named
St. David’s, but, perhaps owing to want of funds, was
not opened for service until 1821.
In 1823 the Van Diemen’s Land Bank was estab-
lished ; and, about the same time, the educational wants
of the young in the rising Colony, which had been
attended to in a desultory fashion for some years, were
taken to heart by the Government, a Superintendent of
Schools appointed, and the way for a better and more
perfect educational system was made plain. During the
years of Governor Arthur’s administration, from 1824
to 1836, a large number of public and private schools
were founded ; but, for more than ten years after his
recall, the educational condition of the country, in the
unsettled state of the population, declined year by year.
In 1847, however, the Hutchins School, named after
Archdeacon Hutchins, was built ; a year before that
Christ’s College was opened, near Longford ; and the
Launceston Church Grammar School was started in the
Northern City. Two of these institutions have continued
in unabated usefulness up to the present. Christ’s
College, after some vicissitudes, was removed to Hobart,
and has been conducted as a scholastic institution with
varying success, but is now closed for a time. The
High School, an unsectarian educational establishment,
was opened in 1850, on a beautiful site at the entrance to
the Queen’s Domain, and for many years efficiently
supplied the educational wants of the many who desired
unsectarian instruction. On the retirement, a few years
ago, of Rev. R. D. Poulett-Harris, who had carried on
the school since 1857, the Committee of the High School
made an arrangement with the Council of Christ’s College
by which the building was taken over for a boys’ school in
connection with the College The experiment has not been
successful pecuniarily, and the fine building is now closed.


In 1858 a Council of Education was formed, which had
at its disposal several Exhibitions as well as two Tasmanian
Scholarships, the holders of which received ,£2OO a year
for four years while pursuing their studies at an English
University. The question of founding a Tasmanian
University was discussed by Parliament, on the recom-
mendation of Rev. R. D. Poulett-Harris, the Rector of
the High School; but it was not considered to be the
right time for so extensive an undertaking. A measure,
which under the circumstances was perhaps more useful,
was advocated by the same liberal-minded teacher, and
put into practical operation in 1860. An annual
examination was conducted by the Council of Education
for the Degree of Associate of Arts. Up to this time
345 persons have successfully passed the examinations
and obtained this degree ; 43 have taken the Tasmanian
Scholarships; and 86 have gained the Minor Exhibitions
in the gift of the Council of Education.
Tasmania has now the Constitution, the Senate, and
the beginnings of a University ; and although as yet it
is the day of small things, there is no reason why the
island Colony may not do as useful educational work
as her larger and more ambitious sisters on the Continent.
Scientifically, Tasmania has progressed in an encourag-
ing manner. Sir John Franklin, who became Governor
in 1837, brought with him an amount of enthusiasm in
scientific and educational pursuits which stimulated
very considerably the intellectual life of the settlers. It
was during his tenure of office that the French warships
Zele and Astrolabe called at Hobart with news of their
discoveries in the Antarctic region? ; and the English
Expedition to the same regions, under Captains Ross
and Crozier, started from and returned to the Derwent
in the ships Erebus and Terror. Dr. Joseph Hooker,
who accompanied the expedition as botanist, used the
opportunity to collect specimens of Tasmanian botany ;
and a large part of his descriptive account of the botany


of the expedition is devoted to the flora of Tasmania.
Mr. John Gould, collecting materials for his “Birds
of Australia,” also visited Tasmania, and included
descriptions of Tasmanian species in his valuable work.
Before the Erebus and Terror left Hobart, the Com-
mander, Sir James Ross, fitted up an Observatory with
the latest and most useful instruments for ipeteorological
and other observations, which materially assisted the
scientific work of the Colony. A scientific society, called
at first the Philosophical, afterwards the Tasmanian
Society, owed its birth to Sir John Franklin and a few
scientific and literary members of the community, two
of whom, Hon. Dr. Agnew and Mr. James Barnard,
have ever since been identified with the scientific progress
of Tasmania, and who, as Honorary Secretary and Vice-
President, respectively, of the Royal Society, have done
much to foster all the objects for which such a society
exists. The meetings of the Tasmanian Society were
held at Government House once a fortnight, under the
presidency of Sir John Franklin ; and Papers on
Geology, Natural History, Meteorology, Ethnology,
and Botany, contributed by various members, were pub-
lished in a volume called* “The Tasmanian Journal.”
Lady Franklin, who took a keen interest in Natural
History, and took many journeys through wild parts of
Tasmania for the purpose, among others, of collecting
specimens of the fauna and flora of the Island, built a
Museum on the Ancanthe estate, about five miles from
Hobart, where it may still be seen, though its exterior is
rather obscured by the cowsheds that reposefully lean
against the walls.
During the Governorship of Sir Eardley Wilmot the
Royal Society grew out of the Tasmanian, and continued
to do the same useful work during the time of Sir W. T.
Denison, who, in 1847, succeeded Sir Eardley Wilmot
as Governor of Tasmania. As the Royal Society
included Horticulture in its objects, the Government


made it a grant of the Botanical Gardens, which
remained its property until 1884. The Society also
started a Museum and Library, which at first were open
on Monday and Wednesday afternoons after 4 p.m., and
on Saturdays from 2to 5. So great was the interest
taken in the collection of Natural History specimens all
over the Island that in 1849, two years after its inception,
the Trustees reported that it was impossible to classify
or even keep strict account of the numerous specimens
that were sent from every quarter. In 1848 Dr. Milligan
was appointed Secretary to the Royal Society, which
immediately took a front rank in the scientific societies of
Australasia, and has ever since retained a position of some
importance.
The Museum and Botanical Gardens were carried on
by the Royal Society, aided by a Government grant,
until 1884, when they were handed over to the Govern-
ment, and placed under Trustees, leaving the Royal
Society free to devote its attention to strictly scientific
pursuits.
Not the least useful work undertaken during past years
has been the introduction of the Salmonidce. By whatever
name the species may be called, certain it is that a
delicious edible fish has been added to the number of
Tasmanian fish already in our waters. It is worthy of
remark that one of the oldest members of the Royal
Society, Hon. Dr. Agnew, bore the entire cost of the
last shipment of Salmon Ova, amounting to about
£BOO.
The Society also steadily fought for the adoption of
the name “Tasmania” for the Island. In 1853 the
transportation of prisoners to the Island ceased entirely ;
and, two years afterwards, the new name of Tasmania
was legalised in official despatches, and a more hopeful
era dawned for the Colony.
In 1852, just about a year after the gold rush began
in New South Wales and Victoria, the precious metal


was found near Fingal, and was worked for a considerable
time by a large number of miners, who gradually, how-
ever, were attracted elsewhere by reports of fabulous
finds of gold in Victoria.
In 1855 Tasmania was granted a new Constitution,
with power to elect two Houses of Parliament. Sir
Henry Fox Young was at this time the Governor; and
the people of Tasmania, with whom he and Lady Young
were very popular, had the gratification of seeing them,
in 1858, take up their residence in the new and beautiful
Government House which had just been erected.
Morally, socially, and intellectually, the Colony made
rapid strides during the time that the Vice-regal
power was in the hands of Sir Henry and Lady Fox
Young.
In 1857 the City of Hobart was first lighted with
gas.
The first Railway in Tasmania was opened in the
North in 1871; but it was not until five years after that
the Main Line from Hobart to Launceston was opened for
traffic. From the first the Government and the Main
Line Railway Company had disagreements; and it was
a matter for congratulation when the Government, who
had taken possession of the Launceston and North-
western Railway soon after its completion, finally
purchased the Main Line in October, 1890. With
the exception of the V. D. L. Railway from Waratah
to Emu Bay, on the North-west Coast, all lines that are
now completed are Government properly; and the
Colony possesses about 470 miles of metal roads, of
which only about 50 are yet to be opened for traffic, and
the remainder are in full working order.
The population of Tasmania is 151,480. The climate
is mild, and exceptionally healthy, and the scenery richly
varied, grand, and beautiful. The country, notwith-
standing some vicissitudes, is in the main prosperous,
and suffers less from the “unemployed” difficulty than


its larger neighbours. As a rule, a provident sober man
can always obtain work at a remunerative rate ; and the
wealth of the country is, on the whole, evenly distributed.
Intellectually, Tasmania has no reason to feel ashamed
of her record. In painters she boasts of a name
honoured throughout Australasia as one of the truest
exponents of Art—Mr. W. C. Piguenit. In poets,
Rowland Davies makes one of a quartette of Australian
song writers. In singers, Miss Amy Sherwin takes a
front rank ; and, among writers, “ Tasma ” is known
throughout the English-speaking world. About 160
books relating to Tasmania have been written, —many by
authors whose long residence had naturalised them in
their adopted country. One might specially mention
Mrs. Charles Meredith, whose first Tasmanian book was
published in 1852, and who has at intervals ever since
sent forth her charming descriptions of life in Tasmania,
with accounts of the animals, birds, and flowers which
abound in the Island. Mrs. Meredith has recently
published a new and beautiful work, entitled “ More of
my Bush Friends in Tasmania.”
To the Rev. John West Tasmania is indebted for a
valuable work, entitled “ The History of Tasmania,”
published in the year 1852.
Mr. John Gould lived in Tasmania for some time,
collecting materials for his books on Australian and
Tasmanian Birds, Mr. R. M. Johnston, F.L.S., is the
author of several important books relating to Tasmania,
chief among them being his “ Systematic Geology of
Tasmania.” Mr, James Bonwick has written volumin-
ously on different phases of Tasmanian life and customs ;
and Mr. James Fenton, aided materially by Mr. J. B.
Walker, has given to the world a fair and concise
History of Tasmania. The list might be prolonged
indefinitely of Tasmanians by birth and adoption who,
in history, in science, in art, in literature, and in song,
have been an honour to the Island which lies beneath


the Southern Cross. The number of scientific and
other papers contributed to the Tasmanian and Royal
Societies since 1842 would be sufficient confirmation,
were any needed, of the mental activity and love of
individual research to be found among the inhabitants of
Tasmania.


GEOLOGY AND PHYSICAL FEATURES.
Tasmania contains an area of 16,778,000 acres, including
islands and lakes. All the islands in Bass Straits belong
to the Tasmanian Government. The Colony possesses
altogether 146 islands with an area of 1,131,000 acres,
and an area of freshwater lakes estimated at 75,500 acres.
Tasmania is heart-shaped, with a coast-line indented
with bays, though only a few of them form naturally
good harbours. The two finest are the Derwent and
Macquarie Harbours, in the south of the Island. In
every direction are to be seen mountains, crags, and
peaks ; and the continuity of hill-top or plain is per-
petually broken by spurs, gullies, or solitary eminences.
Unlike the Continent of Australia, it is abundantly
watered by fine rivers, some of which, like the Derwent
and Tamar, are open to navigation ; others, like the
Gordon, on the West Coast, await the settler’s axe and
fire to clear away the barriers which obstruct free entrance
to their spacious and lengthy navigable course. In the
Midland Districts and in the north there are extensive
and fertile plains ; but a great part, especially towards
the west of the Island, is of comparatively little value
for agriculture.
The annual rainfall varies as much as from 17*11 inches
at Falmouth, on the east, to 80*47 at Corinna, on the west.
The geological formation of the south-eastern part of
Tasmania consists of a very massive greenstone, and
sandstone of the Palaeozoic formation. The igneous rocks
vary from a crystalline dark greenstone, through fine-
grained basalts, to a coarse cellular trap, or scoriaceous
lava-like pumice. The aqueous formation consists of a
great mass of sandstone, with beds of clay, shale, limestone,
and coal. Grass Tree Hill, near Risdon, shows a mass
of sandstone, with an occasional bed of shale, upwards of
1000 feet thick, lying nearly horizontally.


North-eastern and Western Tasmania contain rocks
principally of the Archaean period ; and towards the
coast on the west the Upper and Lower Silurian rocks
predominate. Granites and porphyries are associated
with them in various localities ; and the precious metals
are frequently found in these formations at almost any
part of the Island where they predominate.
The rock formations, on the whole, in Tasmania differ
little from those in Australia, —those belonging to the
Mesozoic period being rich in plant remains. Quite
recently specimens of a fossil fish of the Ganoid family
were found at Knocklofty, near Hobart, and named
Acrolepis JELamiltoni, in honour of His Excellency the
Governor. The geology of the country round Hobart
will probably yet be modified by the discoveries that
will be possible when the bush round Mount Wellington
becomes better known, and the dense scrub becomes
cleared.
FAUNA.
The Tasmanian Fauna is somewhat similar to that of the
adjoining Continent, and almost altogether distinct from
European. Perhaps the two most remarkable mammals
peculiar to the Island are the Native Tiger (Thylacinus
cynocephalus), and the Tasmanian Devil (Sarcophilus
ursinus).
The curious duck-billed Platypus (Ornithorhynchus
anatinus) is to be found here as in Australia, and one
species of Porcupine, or Ant-eater (Echidna setosa) is
peculiar to this Colony.
There are 46 species of Mammals, besides the marine
animals, which are well represented in the seas, especially
to the south.
The Class Aves is represented by 187 species, of
which nearly half are sea-birds or waders. There are
no fewer than 28 species of Procellar idee (Order
Games ), and 21 of the Order Grades.


Reptilia. —This Class is represented by one Turtle
(Sphargis coriacea), three species of Ophydia (Hoplo-
cephalus c.urtus , Hoplocephalus superhus, and Hoploce-
phalus coronoides), and 17 species of the Sauria , or Lizard
family.
In the Pisces, of 10,000 species to be found in the
globe Australia claims about 1400, and Tasmania has
206 indigenous and seven introduced. Of Crusta-
ceans, Crayfish and Prawns abound; but of Molluscs
there is only one important species, the Common Mud
Ovster ; and, from *some cause not quite clearly under-
stood, they have become extremely scarce of late years.
The costly experiments undertaken by the Government,
under the direction of the Inspector of Fisheries, a few
years ago, have been fruitless in restocking the foreshores
with this valuable food product.
The Insecta are numerous and varied, but there is
room for a more systematic collection and description of
this interesting family in Tasmania, as the species, even
round Hobart and Launceston, have not been nearly all
collected and described.
abound, but have not been so much
studied as one might expect, perhaps owing to the want
of good dredging appliances; and the same remark
applies to the Coelenterata. The smaller forms of the fifth
and sixth sub-kingdoms of the Animalia will well repay
a closer investigation than they have yet received at the
hands of scientific students in Tasmania.
FLORA.
The Tasmanian Flora early received the attention of
botanists, and has become well known to the scientific
world through the researches of Hooker, Bentham, and
Baron von Mueller, while many minor treatises have been
published in Tasmania on some part or other of this


beautiful study. Tasmania contains 100 orders and 1100
species, exclusive of mosses, lichens, sea-weeds, &c.
In Class I. Exogens, Order I. Ranunculece , Tasmania
has 10 species. Dillenece , 9. Magnoles , 1 ( the Pepper
Tree of Tasmania). Crucifers, 14, of which several are
found near Hobart. Violes, 5. Pittospores, 6. Poly-
gales, 5. Tremandres , 3. Frankeniaces, 4 (in the
North of the Island). Caryophylles, 5. Illecebes, 1.
Portulaces,3. Flatines ,l. Hyperices, 1. Malvaces,4;
several species about Hobart. Sterculiaces, 3. Tiliacesft,
(one found on Mount Wellington). Linece, 1. Gerani-
acece, 4: one (G. parviflorum) was dug up by the
Aborigines and the roots roasted for food : often called
“ Native Carrot.” Rutaces , 18. One of these species,
Correa alba, was formerly used by the sealers as a
substitute for tea, and is known as Cape Barren Tea.
Stackhouses, 4. Rhamnece, 15: several about Hobart.
Sapindes, 2. Leguminoece, 60. The seeds of one
species (Acacia Boobyalla) were eaten, after being
roasted, by the natives. Rosacece, 5. Several species
bear edible fruit, the best being Rubus Gunnianus or Wild
Raspberry. Sanguisorbece , 3. Of these, the leaves of
the common burr, Accena sanguisorbce , are said to be a
good substitute for tea. Saxifrages, 5, Native Laurel,
very common. Crassules, 4. Droseracece , 7 (one on
Mount Wellington). Haloragece, 13. Myrtacece, 27.
Several varieties, commonly called Tea-tree, but the
leaves are too aromatic to be pleasant. Lythracece, 2.
Onagrece, 2. Cucurbitece, 1. Mesembryacece, 4. One
species, the Canajong of the Aborigines, was much
esteemed for the pulpy edible seed-vessel. Umbelli-
fers, 21. Araliacece, 2. Caprifoliacece, I—the Tas-
manian Elder Bean, a white fruit, is abundant in
some situations, especially in the north. Ruhiacece, 14.
Several species bear edible fruit, and are called generally
Native Currants. Cempositce, 106. The various thistles
and, the common dandelion are in this order. Stylidece ,


6. Lobelece, 6. Campanulece, 2. One found on the
summit of Mount Wellington. Goodeniacece, 12.
j ßrunoniacece, 1. Ericece, 4. Some of the native
cranberries and snowberries belong to this order :
one, Gaulfheria hispida, is found on Mount Wel-
lington. Epacridece , 60. All the fruits of the berry-
bearing section of this extensive natural order are
esculent, but the seeds are 100 large, and the pulpy
covering too thin, to render them very valuable for
food. Primulece, 1. Oleacece , 1. Apocynece, 2. Lo-
ganece, 6. Gentianece , 7. Convolvulece, 7. The Dodder,
Cuscuta Tasmanica, is found about Hobart. Barra-
givece, 5. Solanece , 1. The Solatium laciniatum, or
Kangaroo Apple, bears a large fruit, like a potato, and
when it is fully ripe, which may be known by the skin
bursting, is good to eat,-either raw or cooked. Scraphu-
lariacecc, 19. A few species common about Hobart.
Lentibulaceoe, 5. Myoporacece, 2. Lahiatce, 12. Plan-
taginece, 4. Plentiful about Hobart. Phytolaccece, 1.
Polygonece, 9. One species has an edible fruit. Amar-
antece, 3. Chenopodece , 9; many of these plants have
been used as pot-herbs: one, found near Hobart, is
occasionally pickled. Scleranthece, 2. Lauracece, 3.
Monimiacece , 1. The bark of the Sassafras was formerly
used by the settlers to make a substitute for tea. It has
a pleasant taste, but slightly aperient effect, Thymelece,
18. ; the native cherry belongs to this order. Protea-
cece, 22. The magnificent Waratah (Telopea truncata)
is in this order. Urticece, 3. Casuarinece, 4, Euphor-
hiacecc, 10. Ceratophyllece , 1. Corylacew, 2. San-
tak(B, 6, Coniferece, 11. In Class 11., Endogens,
Tasmania has 1 out of 20 species out of Bydrocharidece ;
of Orchidece, 66. A number of plants of the Orchidece
have bulbous edible roots, which were eaten by the
natives. Iridecc, 5. Amaryllidece, 1. j Hypoxidece, 2.
BLcemodorece , 1. Liliacea ?, 24, Xyridece , 2. Juncecc , 16.
Potamece , 8. Nagadece, 7, Typhacea ?, 2. Lemnacece, 2.


Very common. Restiacece, 12. Centrolepidece , 10.
Cyperacece, 55 ; several species about Hobart and Mount
Wellington. Graminecp, 43. Of Sub-kingdom 11.,
Cryptogams, Tasmania has 77. Of these 59 belong
to the Orders Ophioglossece, Schizacece, Osmundece,
Hymenophyllea , Cyathece, and Polypodece, 12 to Lyco-
podece, and 6to the Order Marsilece. Many of the most
beautiful ferns are to be found on the sides and in the
gullies round Mount Wellington, while mosses abound
there and in many parts of the forest lands to the west.
INDUSTRIES AND MANUFACTURES.
When Tasman discovered Tasmania, almost the first
land which caught his eye was a portion of the West
Coast, behind which towered two mountain peaks, which
were afterwards named by Flinders after the two vessels
commanded by Abel and Gerritt Tasman. The name of
one of these is rapidly becoming known in all the
English-speaking world for a wealth of which Tasman
little dreamed, and of which the officers and men con-
demned to the dreary Settlement of Macquarie Harbour
could have had no idea. Of Heemskirk, much that
could be said would partake largely of the nature of
forecast ; but at Zeehan enough has been proved to
justify its being placed among the silver-mining areas
of the world. Several large silver fields have been
discovered during the last few years,—Mounts Zeehan
and Dundas on the West Coast, and at Heazlewood and
Whyte Rivers, about 15 miles from Mount JBischoff. A
new discovery, west of Mount Bischoff, also gives
excellent promise. Over 130 miles of ground have been
taken up in these argentiferous fields. A railway is in
course of construction from Strahan (Macquarie Harbour)
to Zeehan and Dundas, and a tramway from Whyte
River to Waratah.
In gold not so much is being done, though several
promising finds, notably at Savage River and at Mount


Horror, have lately been made, and there are very
promising indications of the future importance of the
goldfields of the Colony. At Mathinna and Lefroy
there are rich reefs which have already begun to increase
the wealth of the mine-holders, and stimulate a systematic
method of development. The Tasmania Mine at Beacons-
field is also a very rich one, and for years paid large
dividends, which have been temporarily suspended
during the erection of new and costly machinery.
Among tin mines Mount Bischoff holds a high place,
and is exceptionally rich ; but in almost all the granitic
rocks throughout the Island tin is found in large or small
quantities. Altogether there are between 80 and 90
mines being worked, —the output for 1889 being 5550
tons of tin.
Coal is mined with varying success in different parts
of Tasmania, notably at Fingal where the greatest
amount is produced. In the early days of the Colony
coal mines were worked at Port Arthur and Schouten
Island, besides other places, and, until recently, at New
Town, a few miles from Hobart. About ten mines are
in operation, and the output is yearly increasing.
Iron is plentiful, but the working of the mines has
been abandoned owing to the obstinate nature of the
ore and the expense of shipment. As flux for silver
smelting there will probably be a demand that will
cause the industry to take another start.
Marble is found at Maria Island on the East Coast, at
Gordon River on the West, and at Ida Bay, near
Hastings, at the South. Beautiful marble caves are also
found at Ida Bay, but they have not been sufficiently
opened up to be easily accessible.
A splendid Portland cement hag been made in small
quantities from the limestone at Maria Island, and
highly commended by building and engineering experts
in Victoria, but the work of manufacture on a large
scale has not yet been attempted.


Of manufactures Tasmania has a considerable number,
but it might easily be increased to the manifest advantage
of the inhabitants.
Sixty-four saw-mills deal with the enormous timber
resources. Eight bark-mills make marketable the wattle
bark. Of brickworks and potteries there are forty-eight.
Engineering establishments number fifteen. Tanneries
and fellmongeries, 24. Soap and candle works, 5.
Woollen-mills, 3. Gasworks, 3. Flour-mills, 44. Jam
factories, 7—(all in the south of the Island). Breweries,
14. The value of the agricultural and pastoral produce
for 1889-90 was estimated to reach a total of .£2,397,709,
or more than £l5 per head of the entire population.
PLACES OF INTEREST IN TASMANIA.
One-day excursions from Hobart:—
The Fern Tree Bower and Mount Wellington. The
Fern Tree Bower is reached by vehicle or on foot, and is
five miles from the City, along the Huon Road. From
the Bower a track leads up to the summit of Mount
Wellington, and another track to the Springs and
Pinnacle branches off from the Finger Post, about a mile
nearer the Hobart side of the Huon Road. Magnificent
views of the surrounding country may be obtained from
the Springs (half-way) or the Pinnacle (the top) of
Mount Wellington, and the track or roadway is in
excellent order.
Mount Nelson.—Conveyance to Sandy Bay, thence by
bush track to the Signal Station at the summit of Mount
Nelson, where there is a fine telescope, with which a
splendid view of Bruni Island, D’Entrecasteaux Channel,
Storm and other Bays, Tasman’s Peninsula, and of the
City of Hobart, may be obtained.
Kingston, Brown’s River.—A delightful drive of about
ten miles along the western shore of the Dewent to a
pretty village in a hollow u shut out by hills from the


rude world,” but opening towards the sea, with a fine
beach, and a stream in which there is often good fishing.
A mile beyond the beach is a blowhole, which however
is only grand in rough weather.
Mount Rumney.—Reached by steamer to Bellerive,
thence by coach to the “ Red Gate,” where a track,
leading easily up the mountain, brings one to the summit,
from which can be seen Rokeby and Fredrik Hendrik
Bay to the south ; Tasman’s Peninsula, Norfolk Bay,
Pittwater, the Causeway and Sorell to the east and north
east, while Cambridge and Hobart are north and west.
Mount Rumney was at one time a Signal Station between
Eaglehawk Neck and Hobart, and has, probably, the
most extensive view to be seen anywhere in the south of
Tasmania.
The Causeway and Sorell.—A coach leaves Bellerive
daily for Sorell, a drive of about ten miles along a
country road with some variety, crossing near Sorell
the Causeway over Pittwater, a fine sheet of water
indenting the line of coast, and narrowing gradually
into a small bay near Richmond.
Richmond. —An old, quaint, interesting little township,
containing almost a reflex of life half a century old,
reposeful, suggestive, rather pretty ; reached from Belle-
rive or Hobart by coach.
Salmon Ponds and New Norfolk.—These inland
resorts may both be visited in one day by taking the
8 a.m. train from Hobart, going on to the Plenty Station,
from whence a pleasant walk along the river bank brings
one to the Ponds, and stopping at New Norfolk for an
hour or two on the return journey. The Ponds in
which the salmon are reared are beautifully situated on
the Plenty River, in the midst of a fine estate planted
with English trees. The hop gardens here and at New
Norfolk are worth a visit. At New Norfolk is the
Asylum for the Insane. Russell s Falls are reached
from Glenora by special arrangement.


Other places of interest in the Island require more
extended time for their visiting, but brief mention may-
be made of them here.
Launceston, the capital of the North, reached from
Hobart by Express 8 a.m., or Mail train 1030 a.m. and
9 - 30 p.m. Has many places of interest, including the
Cataract Gorge, the City Park (where the Tasmanian
Exhibition is now being held), the Victoria Museum
and Art Gallery in the Depot Grounds, and numerous
squares and public buildings ; is prettily situated at the
confluence of the North and South Esk, and has many
elevations from which lovely views of plain and
mountain scenery may be obtained.
Franklin and Huonville, Huon River.—Steamer leaves
Hobart on Mondays and Thursdays, calling at Bruni
Island, Peppermint Bay, Oyster Cove, Gordon, Port
Cygnet, and a number of other places in the Channel
and on the Huon. Return may be made by coach the
next day, passing through grand scenery all the way.
Tasman’s Peninsula.—Steamer twice a week, calling
at principal ports. Coach runs from Norfolk Bay side
to Carnarvon at the south, where the most beautiful
scenery is to be found.
North-west Coast and Mount Bischoff. Train from
Hobart to Ulverstone, thence by coach to Emu Bay,
and on by the V. D. L. Company’s Railway to Waratah.
The scenery by this route is very fine and varied, and
the great tin mine repays a visit.
Macquarie Harbour and West Coast.—By steamer
from Hobart, or overland from Mount Bischoff, passing
the silver mines of Whyte River and Heazlewood en
route.
Port Esperance.—Steamer goes occasionally to this
place, where there is a beautiful bay containing three
islands. There is a painting of these, by Piguenit, in the
Hobart Art Gallery.
The places round about the City which will be worth


taking an hour or two to see are : —The Botanical
Gardens, which are beautifully situated on a slope over-
looking the Derwent just above Government House;
the Public Library, located in the Municipal Buildings
in Macquarie-street; the Museum and Art Gallery, in
Argyle-street, where the skull of the last Aboriginal
and a number of other purely Tasmanian relics are to
be seen; Lady Franklin’s Museum, about two miles
along the Augusta Road, —a pretty drive ; Franklin and
Barrack Squares.


CONCISE HISTORY
OF THE
ACCLIMATISATION OF THE
IN TASMANIA.
By P. S. S eager,
Member of Fisheries Commission of Tasmania.
The idea of acclimatising the English salmon (Salmo
salar) in Tasmanian waters was entertained by some of
the colonists at a very early period in our history. In
the year 1841, as recorded in Vol. 1., p. 281, of the
« Proceedings of the Royal Society of Tasmania,” the
late Captain Frederick Chalmers, of Brighton, in Tas-
mania, applied to Dr. Mackenzie, of Kinillan-by-Ding-
wall, Ross-shire, Scotland, for salmon fry to bring to
Tasmania. The fry were not supplied, but the cor-
respondence is interesting, and shows how little was then
known of the subject when Dr. Mackenzie suggested that
artificially impregnated ova deposited in a basket of fine
gravel and plunged in a lank would require no more
attention until it was landed in Tasmania, where it could
be put into a pail and carried to any stream and there
deposited. Dr. Mackenzie’s last letter to Captain Chal-
mers, of 12th July, 1841, says “ Next year you can
have some fry sent south to you in better time if you
like, or if you will give me the address of some careful
confidential friend, I will send him south two baskets
containing impregnated roe, say in September, one
basket to be sunk in water in England to produce live
fish for your next year’s trip, and the other to be shipped
to your address in Australia, where it is probable you
will receive it long before the fry begins to chip the shell.


All that will be necessary is to direct your friend to keep
the basket under water in some fresh stream till the ship
is ready to sail, when one can be transferred to the ship’s
tank. Dr. Mackenzie had evidently a very limited
knowledge of the difficulties which had afterwards to be
overcome in the transport of salmon ova before success
was secured. There is no record that Captain Chalmers
proceeded further with his experiment.
In the year 1848 Mr. James L. Burnett, of the Tas-
manian Survey Department, when on leave of absence,
visited the Duke of Sutherland’s salmon fisheries, in
Inverness-shire, and consulted the manager, Mr. Young,
on the practicability of introducing salmon and trout
into Tasmania. Mr. Young suggested two methods—one
to bring out the spawn, and the other to bring out young
fish, giving the preference to the latter. In a letter to
Mr. Burnett, of 23rd Octoder, 1848, he says: —“It would
be a grand undertaking, and perfectly practicable if it
could be accomplised during the time between extracting
the eggs and their hatching; but unless that could be
done, I fear the delicate state of the new-hatched fish
could not endure the fatigues of a long voyage.” Mr.
Young’s plan was to erect boxes or tanks about 18 ft.
long by 4 ft. deep and broad, in which salmon smolts
were to be placed, and regularly and slowly supplied
with water from the sea, and fed with salted liver, boiled,
and coarse flour bread, broken up small. A paper on
Mr. Burnett’s visit to Mr, Young, written by Captain
C. E. Stanley, R.E., with the correspondence, was read
before the Royal Society of Tasmania on 12th September,
1849, and is recorded in its proceedings, Vol. 1, p. 135.
With reference to Mr. Young, Mr. Morton Allport, in
his “ Brief History of the Introduction of Salmon to
Tasmania,” says “ Mr. Young gave tbe preference to
the latter method (young fish), which is the more
remarkable, as from the account of one of his experi-
ments it is clear that he had accidentally been upon the


verge of discovering the very method which, after many
years, led to success. In the experiment alluded to, Mr.
Young caused the fecundated ova packed in baskets of
gravel to be hung in a running stream at different dis-
tances from the shore. During a severe frost one or two
of the baskets nearest the bank, and those which were in
•omparatively still water were frozen hard on the surface,
and Mr. Young supposed that the vitality of the eggs
was destroved ; but he let them remain, and discovered
that the only effect of the reduced temperature was to
delay the hatching of the ova for several days.”
The result of Mr. Burnett’s enquiries was, that the
then Lieut.-Governor of Tasmania, Sir William Denison,
whose name is associated with so many important under-
takings in the colony during the terra of his governor-
ship, and who had already evinced the greatest interest
in the salmon question, wrote to the Secretary of State
to allow of tanks constructed for the purpose, and
supplied with salmon fry or smolts taken at the right
season, being placed on board some of the convict
vessels, and brought out under the immediate care and
supervision of the surgeon-superintendent.
Some such efforts must already have been made, for
on 13th August, 1849, Sir William Denison, writing to
Earl Grey on the subject of the introduction of salmon,
says ; —« Several attempts have been made to bring out
the spawn, but they have all failed but there is no
record of such experiments. A long correspondence
between Sir W. Denison, the Home authorities, and
Mr. A. Young, appears in the “ Proceedings of the
Royal Society of Tasmania,” Vol. 2, p. 40, wherein the
employment of a welled fishing smack to convey adult
salmon and smolts to the colony was advocated, and it is
closed by a despatch from Earl Grey, in which he states
that it was impracticable to carry the fish in tanks on
the deck of the prison ships, “ while, on the other hand,
the alternative of using a welled smack for their convey-


ance has, for the present at least, been abandoned as
being attended with too much expense.”
In the year 1852, through the efforts of those interested
in the subject, and at the instance of the Governor, Sir
William Denison, an attempt was made to introduce both
salmon and trout by means of ova. This effort is the
first of which any detailed record exists. A paper read
before the Royal Society of Tasmania (see its Proceedings,
Yol. 2, p. 288) by Mr. J. L. Burnett describes the
arrangements made, and gives details of the voyage of
the vessel selected—the Columbus. The ova were shipped
on the 31st January, 1852, and the plan adopted is thus
described by Mr. Burnett : —“ About 50,000 ova of
salmon and trout were placed in a large oval tub or
vessel with a false bottom, 4ft. Gin. by 3ft. 4in., Ift. Bin.
deep, double-sided, made of wood, cased in lead, and
capable of containing 60 gallons of water, besides the
requisite quantity of gravel. . . . The tub was slung
just under and on one side of the fore hatchway, with
directions that every six hours a fresh supply of six
gallons of water should be added by means of a funnel
inserted in a tube entering below the false bottom, the old
or original quantity (or the greater portion of it) being
drawn off by a stop-cock placed for that purpose in the
upper part of the tub, and that the six gallons of water
were to be supplied six times a day as the vessel approached
the Equator, making 36 gallons in the 24 hours, and to
be again reduced in the cooler latitudes to the original
quantity of 24 gallons per diem.”
Mr. Gotlieb Boccius, who was employed by the
Home Government, through the Land and Emigration
Commissioners, to procure the ova, fixed the 15th and
20th April as the dates upon which the trout and salmon
respectively would hatch, but the hatching commenced
on Ist March, in latitude 14° 30' north, longitude 26°
west, and the fry were seen in the tub until the water
became thick and putrid. On arrival of the vessel at


Hobart the tub was examined by Dr. Milligan, the then
Secretary of the Royal Society of Tasmania, and Mr.
J. L. Burnett, and, it is not surprising to read, “ without
finding any traces of either spawn or fish.”
Mr. Burnett in his paper gives his opinion as to the
causes of failure, and his suggestions as to future efforts,
one of which was that the temperature of the water
should be regulated by means of ice. This is the first
recorded suggestion for the regulation of temperature,
the importance of which appears previously to have been
entirely overlooked.
The cost of this experiment is stated to have been
about ,£3OO, and it appears from a despatch from the
Duke of Newcastle to Sir W. Denison, dated 2nd June,
1853, which covered a detailed account of the Columbia
experiment by Mr. Boccius (see Proceedings Royal
Society, Vol. ii., p. 437), that instructions were given to
renew the experiment under the same supervision.
Arrangements for this further experiment were made
with Mr. Boccius, who provided the necessary appliances,
which were placed on board the J Duke of Roxburgh.
The sailing of the vessel was delayed, but owing to a
severe frost having set in when the ova was required
artificial spawning could not be successfully completed.
The attempt was therefore abandoned, and the spawn-tub
landed from the vessel.
The interest of the Royal Society of Tasmania in the
subject still continued, and the matter was frequently
referred to at its meetings, at one of which, held on 11th
August, 1852, the Secretary read a letter from Mr. J. C.
Bidwell, Commissioner of Crown Lands in New South
Wales, to Sir William Denison, covering “ Notes on the
Establishment of the Salmon and other Fish in the
Rivers of Tasmania and New Zealand” (see Proceedings
Jloyal Society Tasmania, Vol. ii., p. 326), in which he
thus writes upon the introduction of salmon :
“ Now, to do this it would be necessary to bring and


hatch the spawn, and 1 think that by packing spawn in
ice there would be no difficulty in preserving its vitality
for a much longer time than would be required. It is not
probable that the vitality of fish spawn would be destroyed
even by freezing, but by merely packing it in ice there
would be no danger of actual freezing, as the ice would
always be in a melting state.”
Mr. Bidwell, in writing, explains that he would have
written long before, but that he had suffered a long and
severe illness, and it is more than probable that his
health failing prevented his practical views being more
prominently considered and carried into effect. However
much we may be indebted to those who afterwards
adopted, to a large extent, the same method which Mr.
Bidwell suggested, it is due to the latter gentleman that
the credit of first suggesting the packing of spawn in ice
should be prominently mentioned in any history of the
subject.
On 9th February, 1858, the then Colonial Secretary
of Tasmania submitted certain questions to the Royal
Society “ relative to the introduction of salmon into
Tasmania,” and the payment of a Parliamentary reward
of <£soo for such introduction; and a committee, con-
sisting of the Hon. E. S. P. Bedford, M.L.C., J. W.
Agnew, Esq., M.D., Morton Allport, Esq., and Joseph
Milligan, Esq., F.L.S., was appointed, whose report
appears in the Proceedings of the Society, Vol. iii.,
p. 283.
The idea of the introduction of living salmon was still
prominent, as the committee state in the first paragraph
of their report “that the mere introduction of spawn,
even though properly fecundated and in a state of vitality,
ought not of itself to entitle the person introducing it to
any portion of the reward.” Members of this committee
lived to learn that the most successful means of conveying
salmon to distant parts is by means of spawn, and that
the introduction of living fish as then strongly advocated


at the time proved to be a failure. This committee also
advocated the use of ice to regulate temperature during
the voyage, and they recommended the construction of
breeding ponds, which recommendation was afterwards
carried out.
Sir Thomas Brady has, however, recently demonstrated
the possibility of carrying live salmon to the colonies by
successfully conveying some fish, twelve months old, to
the south of the line, where their deaths were caused by
improper food.
The next experiment was made in 1860 through the
efforts of a body of colonists then in England, known as
the Australian Association —amongst whom was Mr.
Edward Wilson, President of the Victorian Acclimatisa-
tion Society,—working under the guidance of Mr. James
Arndel Youl, who from this date was closely associated
with every succeeding shipment of ova from England to
Australia and New Zealand, with, I believe, one exception
only, and who has displayed the most praiseworthy zeal
and self-denial in his efforts. It is said that Mr. Youl’s
attention was drawn to this work by the experiment of
Mr. Boccius, and that in the year 1854 he commenced
to study the artificial propagation of salmon and transport
of their ova. The association raised by subscription a
sum of £6OO, and the experiment made under their
management cost nearly that amount. The vessel selected
for the experiment was the S. Curling, which sailed from
Liverpool for Melbourne on 25th February, 1860, with
30,000 salmon ova, collected by Mr. R. Ramsbottom,
from the River Dovey, in Wales. The shipment was
under the care of Mr. Alexander Black. The apparatus
consisted of a supply tank on deck of 200 gallons water,
the water being conveyed from this tank by means of a
|in. pure block-tin pipe, which passed through the deck
into an ice-house containing, when the vessel sailed, 15
tons Wenham Lake ice; the pipe was taken twice round
this house, a length of pipe of from 80 to 100 ft., when it


found its exit into the vessels for the ova, which comprised
a stout framework 4 ft. square, surrounded on all sides
by a continuous wooden trough, 1 ft. wide, 6-in. deep,
lined with pure block tin, with stops at intervals to divide
and regulate the depth of water, the stops acting as falls
for the purpose of aeration, and a further fall of 1 ft. from
the upper series of troughs to the lower was made to aid
in the same direction. The bottom of this trough was
covered with fine gravel, in which the ova was placed.
The ova apparatus was swung with chains and pulleys
to keep it steady and counteract the pitching and rolling
of the vessel. The water, after passing through the ice
tank, flowed over the ova, fell into a tank below,
from which it was pumped up again to the lank above,
thus maintaining a regular stream: 1800 gallons of
spring water was shipped, with a supply of charcoal for
purification. The experiment failed, as on the 24th
April, and the 59th day out, the last of the ice melted,
and the last ovum died.
In anticipation of the arrival of this shipment the
Tasmanian Government caused ponds to be constructed
at North-West Bay for the reception of the ova ; but
these ponds were never used, and the site was afterwards
abandoned in favour of the present position at the River
Plenty, where hatching-boxes and ponds, after the model
of those at Stormontfield, in England, were constructed,
the sketches of Stormontfield ponds having been supplied
by Mr. Cruzon Allport, then in England, to his brother,
Mr. Morton Allport. Although this experiment failed,
Tasmanians should always acknowledge their gratitude
to the subscribers to the fund and the Committee of the
Australian Association, who bore the whole expense of
the shipment, and consigned it to the Royal Society of
Tasmania as a gift to the colony.
This effort is also memorable from the fact that Mr.
Black’s journal was submitted to Mr. (now Sir Thomas)
Brady, of the Irish Fisheries, for his opinion as to the


causes of the failure. From this time up to the present
date Mr. Brady has been closely connected with each
shipment to Tasmania. In the year 1860 a joint com-
mittee of both Houses of the Tasmanian Parliament,
consisting of Mr. William Archer (chairman), Messrs.
Maclanachan, Henty, Chapman, Dr. Butler, Dr. Officer,
and the Colonial Treasurer, was appointed “to take into
consideration the report of Mr. Black on the introduction
of salmon into the rivers of Tasmania.” In their report,
dated 31st August, 1860, they stated that “ they deem
themselves justified in coming to the conclusion that our
rivers and the adjacent seas are adapted in point of
temperature and in all other respects to the habits and
constitution of the salmon,” and that they “ have good
reasons for believing that it is quite possible to introduce
the salmon by means of their ova.” Their estimated
expense of the introduction was .£2400, and they recom-
mended that its conduct and the appointment of a manager
&c. should be confided to the Australian Association
which had managed the previous experiment. The report
appears in Tasmanian Parliamentary Journals, 1860,
No. 87.
Up to this date the more active portion of the work in
Tasmania had been carried out by the Royal Society, but
now a wider interest was being felt in the subject, with
stronger hopes of success. The Government, on 21st
October, 1861, appointed a body of gentlemen as
Honorary Commissioners in Tasmania, and entrusted to
them the management of the whole subject.
The Commissioners at once entered heartily into their
work. Prior to their appointment, however, the Govern-
ment of Tasmania, acting in accordance with the recom-
mendation of the Parliamentary Committee last referred
to, had authorised another experiment under the direction
of the Committee of the Australian Association in
London, and the Commissioners found upon enquiry
that all such arrangements were completed. The


Association in England derived great assistance from
Mr. Edward Wilson, of Melbourne, but the chief worker
was Mr. James A. Youl, who really directed all matters
in connection with the experiment. Mr. Youl’s great
desire was that the shipment should be directed to
Hobart, and possibly to some extent the giving effect to
this desire contributed to the failure which followed, as at
the time he had under offer a larger vessel bound to
Melbourne, in which the apparatus required would
probably have worked more satisfactorily. After much
difficulty he secured a small iron steamer of 120 tons
(the Beautiful Star), at a cost of .£SOO, which was, how-
ever, to sail to the colony under a jury rig, and not to
use her steam power. The apparatus used consisted of
trays, one set hung on gimbals, and another large swing-
ing tray, in each of which the ova was laid on gravel,
over which iced water flowed at the rate of 500 gallons
per day, Mr. William Ramsbottom, a son of Mr. R.
Ramsbottom, of Clitheroe, had been brought to England
from Melbourne and appointed to conduct the experi-
ment. He sailed in the Beautiful Star from London on
4th March, 1862, with about 50,000 salmon ova. Full
particulars of the voyage and its disasters appear in the
report by Mr. Ramsbottom, which discloses that the
gimbal apparatus proved a complete failure from the
outset, the ova dying in great numbers on the first day
at sea, caused by the violent rolling of the apparatus
keeping them continually in motion. The swinging
apparatus worked successfully, so far as the limited space
in the vessel would permit it to do so. Ova hatched, and
the fry survived for a limited period only, owing prin-
cipally to a succession of severe gales, and finally to the
failure of the ice supply, which was exhausted at 12-30
on 17th May, on which date the whole of the remaining
ova died at 1 p.m., with the exception of a few taken
from a small box in the ice-house, which lived for eight
hours beyond this time, 74 days after the date of sailing,


and 88 days from the time of the ova being taken from
the parent fish.
Notwithstanding this failure, the experience gained
was such that in reporting to the Chief Secretary the
Commissioners wrote “ they were justified in expressing
a confident opinion that that experiment, though un-
successful, had demonstrated the perfect practicability of
the project, and the certainty of success under proper
conditions easily attainable.” This shipment was the
last failure and the cause of future successes. The little
box already mentioned containing ova packed in layers
in moss and charcoal, which had been placed in the ice-
house by Mr. Youl, and forgotten by Mr. Ramsbottom
until he stumbled against it 69 days after the Beautiful
Star had left England, led to further experiments and
the institution of a similar system of packing ova adopted
afterwards in most of the future shipments. It is only
natural to suppose that there would be many claimants
for the credit of this discovery. The suggestion to
retard the development of ova by the use of ice was
made long before by Mr. Bidwell, as already mentioned,
and there exist many records of somewhat similar
suggestions by other individuals at various times in this
colony and elsewhere prior to the experiment in the
Beautiful Star. The credit of the first practical attempt
to test what had previously been many times suggested
lies, therefore, with Mr. Youl, who has stated that the
idea was first mentioned to him in Paris by M. Girley,
who showed him how fish ova packed in wet moss in
earthenware jars were sent long journeys. But prior to
the shipment of ova per Beautiful Star our present
guest, Sir Thomas Brady, then secretary to the Fisheries
Board of Ireland, had by his practical views on pisci-
culture attracted the attention of Mr. Youl, and the latter
gentleman several times visited Dublin to consult with
him. Mr. Brady was much impressed with the packing
of ova in moss, and, writing to Mr. Youl on 24th


December, 1861, he says;—“ It strikes me that you
ought to try the ova in moss also. I got it up the other
day in beautiful order in moss, and it kept very good for
several days in the damp moss, and might keep so a very
long time, I think. I send you a sketch of what I
would propose.” [I have this sketch, which shows a box
of ova packed in layers in moss, with a tank for iced
water at top and a false bottom, with tap to draw off the
water after it passed through the moss.] “If by means
of the iced water you can retard the hatching of the ova,
I think it will be the easiest way of preventing them
being tossed about by the rolling of the ship, as the moss
will keep the ova steady. I never saw any ova in such
good condition as that I lately received in the moss,
and I am trying an experiment with it, and also pur-
pose sending some ova to Italy in this way ; at any rate,
a small trial in this way would do no harm, and it
can easily be watched to ascertain if they are coming to
life. If they don't hatch before the arrival, it mill be a
decidedly safe may of transporting them." Mr. Youl
sent the letter to Tasmania with an endorsement:
“ Requested Mr. B. to have made for me an apparatus
such as he describes to hold from 100 to 200 ova. I
will feed them with ice-water from the melted ice drawn
from ice-house.”
This letter was written on 24th December, 1861, and
the Beautiful Star sailed on sth March, 1862, with a
box packed almost exactly as per Mr. Brady’s sketch,
but without the water tank. Mr. Youl, writing some
years afterwards, 26th March, 1867, thus refers to Mr.
Brady’s value to him at the time :—“ So important did
I think Mr. Brady’s instructions that I paid three visits
to Dublin to learn all I could on the subject, and it was
there I consolidated all I had read and previously seen
on the subject.” It affords me the greatest pleasure in
stating my belief that Sir Thomas Brady’s advice had
much to do with the experimental box placed in the


Beautiful Star, and also to place on record the fact
that, from the date of his letter thenceforward to the
present time, Sir T. Brady has worked zealously,
heartily, and gratuitously with Mr. Youl and others in
relation to all or nearly all the shipments of ova to this
colony, and that his interest in the acclimatisation of
salmon in these Southern waters has never flagged, but
has now culminated in the most successful shipment of
salmon ova ever made. In recording this tribute to Sir
Thomas Brady, let it be well understood that I do not
in any way ignore the self-denying work of our good
friend, Mr. J. A. Youl, C.M.G., whose value in this
cause I so well know, and whose work can never be
forgotten by those acquainted with the history of salmon
acclimatisation in the Australian colonies and New
Zealand. I feel sure that, should Mr. Youl read this
paper, he will be pleased to think that the services of
his coadjutor. Sir Thomas Brady, are appreciated so
well by the colonists of Mr. Youl’s former home, who
have so many times admitted their indebtedness to him-
self in the same direction.
The experience gained in the Beautiful Star experi-
ment was a matter of much consideration by the
Commissioners and Mr. Ramsbottom, who were equally
anxious that the method of packing ova in moss and
ice should be practically and thoroughly tested. The
Commissioners forwarded a report to His Excellency
the Governor, T. Gore Brown, on Ist September, 1862,
(Parliamentary Paper, No. 82, 1862), in which they
recommended the immediate return to England of Mr.
Ramsbottom to arrange another experiment, and “ during
the approaching winter Mr. R. would be able—first to
put to the test of further experiment the preservation of
the ova in moss, of which his late experience in the
Beautiful Star has led him to think so favourable ; and,
secondly, to ascertain whether and for what period the
ova can be preserved alive in a state of congealation.”


At the date of this report it was considered that the
latter method would be supplementary to the main plan.
At the same time Mr. Youl was also working in a
similar direction, as shown by a letter addressed by him
to a member of the Salmon Commission, dated 27th
October, 1862, in which he writes: “So impressed am
I with the little experiment in the box with moss that I
mean to try an experiment at my own expense this year,
to test it by placing some 20 small boxes, with from 300
to 500 ova in an ice-house, containing 25 tons of
Wenham Lake ice j” the experiment was to be made, if
possible, in a ship direct to Hobart, Mr. Youl was
afterwards in treaty for space in the s.s. Great Britain ,
but the expense involved being greater than he antici-
pated, and being afraid of the effect of the vibration of
the screw on the vitality of the ova, this shipment did
not take place, but he afterwards secured necessary
space in the Bunrobin Castle, sailing for Hobart direct,
had everything arranged, and orders given for the con-
struction of the ice-house, when the owners, fearing
injury to the cargo from the melting ice, withdrew their
promise, and the shipment was abandoned.
In the meantime, with the use of the Wenham Lake
Ice Company’s vaults in London, and the assistance of
Messrs. R. Ramsbottom, W. Ramsbottom, Thos. John-
ston, and others, a series of experiments were being
carried out under the direction of Mr. Youl with ova
packed in moss in boxes similar to the box placed in the
ice-house of the Beautiful Star. The boxes were
covered with ice, and examined at different periods of
45, 57, 90, 120, and 144 days, with perfect success, the
vitality of the ova having been in no way impaired, and
ova of each Jot being successfully hatched. Thus, at
last, the long-cherished hope of the successful acclima-
tisation of the salmon species in distant lands was in a
fair way of accomplishment, the expensive and somewhat
cumbersome mode hitherto adopted by means of trays


with gravel, &c., was at once abandoned, and Mr. Youl,
writing on 25th May, 1863, says :—“ It does, therefore,
appear that the best way of making another attempt
next year would be with ova in an ice-house, and not to
attempt it again by placing them in a running stream,
which not only entails a much greater outlay, but is
attended with so much risk.”
The Salmon Commissioners again entrusted the
management of a further experiment to the Australian
Association in England, who delegated to Mr. Youl
“the sole superintendence of the necessary preparation
of the renewed experiment about to be tried.” Mr.
Youl found great difficulty in procuring a suitable vessel,
the desire of the Commissioners being that the experi-
ment should be made in a ship sailing direct to Hobart.
Although arrangements were nearly completed with the
owners of a barque named the Alfred Hawley , circum-
stances arose which rendered this impossible, and Mr.
Youl, fearing the loss of another year, sought the aid
and assistance of Messrs, Money Wigram and Sons, who
generously allotted to him 50 tons of space in their well-
known clipper ship, the Norfolk, advertised to sail for
Melburne on the 20th of January following. Messrs.
Wigram first intimated that the space was without charge,
but Mr. Youl offered them 100 guineas from his private
purse, which were subsequently declined, Messrs.
Wigram being desirous that the service should be entirely
gratuitous. Mr. Youl, having overcome one great
obstacle, was almost immediately met by another. He
had engaged Mr. Robert Ramsbottom, the well-known
pisciculturist, of Clitheroe, to forward a supply of salmon
ova from the Ribble, for shipment per the Norfolk, but
every fish captured in the Ribble was found to have shed
its spawn. In this dilemma Mr. Youl published in The
Times an appeal for assistance, and despatched Mr.
Ramsbottom with his son to the Dovey, in Wales, and
Mr. Johnston, another experienced pisciculturist, to the


Tyne, and their efforts were successful, about 100,000
salmon ova reaching London on 18th January. The ova
was at once packed and shipped in the Norfolk: the
mode of packing at that time adopted has been repeated
with little alteration in each succeeding shipment, and is
thus described by Mr. Youl; —“ A couple of handfuls of
charcoal are spread over the bottom of the box, then a
layer of broken ice; after this, a bed or nest of wet moss
is carefully made and well drenched with water. The
ova are then very gently poured from a bottle, which is
kept filled with water. The box is now filled up with
moss, and pure water poured upon it until it streams out
from all the holes. Another layer of finely pulverised
ice is spread all over the top of the moss; the lid is then
firmly screwed down. The boxes used measured 11| in.
long, '6f in. wide, and in. deep, perforated top and
bottom.
In addition to the salmon ova, a small consignment of
trout ova (Salmo fario) was placed in the ice-house,
contributed by Admiral Keppel through Frank Buckland
and by Francis Francis. All the boxes were placed in
the ice-house; the remaining space was filled with blocks
of Wenham Lake ice, and the house securely closed.
The Norfolk sailed from the London Docks on 21st
January, 1864, arriving at Melbourne on 19th April
following. Before stating the procedure on the vessel’s
arrival at her destination it may be well to here enter
into rather full details in relation to this shipment of ova,
as the produce formed the first stock of salmon and trout
liberated in Australian waters. Many theories are now
advanced as to the various species to be found in these
waters, and doubts have frequently been raised as to
whether true salmon ova were ever received; various
opinions have also been expressed upon different speci-
mens of trout ($. fario), which have been called fario
eriox, etc. Under these circumstances I have thought it
well to record all available information in my possession,


which may help to set at rest unfounded theories and
incorrect assumptions upon so important a matter. The
salmon ova were obtained from the following rivers in
England and Wales :
River Dovey, 17,000, obtained by R. Ramsbottom.
Rivers Ribble and Hodder, 35,000 to 45,000,
obtained by Westell Ramsbottom. -
River Severn, 30,000 to 40,000, obtained by W.
Ramsbottom and allies.
River Tweed, 20,000, obtained by Johnston.
With regard to the salmon the names of those who
collected the ova are well known as men of experience who
were not likely to err in the choice of fish for stripping;
that the greatest caution and care were exercised does
not admit of a doubt. Mr. Youl has always indignantly
repudiated the suggestion that any mistake could pos-
sibly have been made by sending for salmon ova that of
another species.
A newspaper clipping thus refers to Mr. Ramsbottom’s
proceedings at the River Dovey:—
“ The Dovey Fisheries at Machynlleth. Mr.
Ramsbottom, who has been so successful in the artificial
propagation of salmon, has lately visited the Dovey for
the purpose of obtaining salmon ova to send to Tasmania.
He commenced netting in Mr. Bulkeley’s water on the
upper part of the Dovey, but here only succeeded in
getting two fish suited to his purpose. These he put in
a small piece of water near the river at Mallwyd, secured
by a cord to their tails ; but, although he had paid the
men very liberally, and explained throughout the neigh-
bourhood the great object the fish were to be used for
and the enormous expense already incurred, and that the
ship that was to convey the ova was on the eve of sailing,
some scoundrels actually cut the cords and stole the fish
during the time of service on Sunday. He subsequently,
with the permission of the Preservation Society, succeeded


in getting from the lower part of the Dovey at Derwenlas
two splendid female salmon of 28lb. and 141 b. weight,
laden with spawn, from which he obtained all that he
required. He captured numbers of very large salmon,
both in the upper part of the Dovey and at Derwenlas,
but all had spawned.”
The Times of 18th January, 1864, states with reference
to the ova obtained from the Severn :
“ Salmon Spawn for Tasmania. —Mr. Youl, who has
been deputed by the Tasmanian Government to procure
from the English rivers a supply of salmon spawn for the
purpose of introducing that fish into his own country, has,
after many difficulties, at last succeeded in obtaining a
supply from the Severn, which the Inspectors of Fisheries
pronounce one of the best salmon rivers in England.
Last week he went down to Worcester, and on Friday a
number of fishermen were employed, under the direction
of the officers of the United Association for the Pro-
tection of the Severn Fisheries, in netting the river near
Worcester. The result was that 18 salmon were taken,
from which 5 were selected as being fit for the purpose
required. These were fish of from 151 b. to 181 b. each,
three spawners and two milters, just ready to shed their
spawn and milt. The fish were kept until Saturday,
when the spawn was pressed from them and the milt of
the male fish also shed over the spawn, which was
deposited in a vessel prepared for the purpose. When
this was done —and it was accomplished very success-
fully—the fish were returned to the river apparently
none the worse for the operation. The spawn thus im-
pregnated was to be conveyed to London to-day, and
will be at once despatched to its destination, a vessel
having been detained on its voyage for the purpose. It
is hoped that the experiment will be crowned with success.
Some interesting facts in connection w r ith the salmon
came out in the conduct of this experiment. In a tribu-
tarv of the Severn —the river Terne, which falls into the


Severn near Worcester—all the fish taken were found to
be spent fish. We believe that neither a new river fish
nor an unspent fish was taken. In the Severn, out of
18 fish taken several were spent, some were not suffici-
ently advanced in spawn for the purpose of the experi-
ment, and only two were fresh river fish. The last-
named fact at once affords ample proof of the good
policy of making January a close month,'as it was done
under the last Salmon Fisheries Act. In order that the
fishermen might perfectly understand the object of the
netting on Friday last they were assembled and a local
magistrate explained to them that it was only legal to
capture salmon for the purpose of artificial breeding, and
that even if fresh water fish should be taken they must be
returned to the water. The fishing was witnessed by
many.”
Can it be seriously suggested in the face of these
extracts that the ova obtained on these occasions was
other than that of S. solar. The trout ova were obtained
from the river Itchin, from the Wey and High Wycombe,
Bucks. The former are thus described by Frank Buck-
land : “ I have obtained about 1000 eggs, regular
beauties, of ‘ Itchin Trout; ’ ” and the two latter are
referred to by Francis Francis in a letter to Mr. Youl:
“ The ova sent is the finest trout ova I ever saw, and
was taken from 81b. and 101 b. fish which had all but
finished spawning.” These trout ova were the first and
only lot which reached Tasmania alive, a second consign-
ment in the Lincolnshire being all dead on arrival in
Melbourne. From the produce of the Norfolk trout ova
the rivers of Tasmania and the adjacent colonies have
been stocked, and it will be at once seen that, beyond the
changes produced by food and water, it is a popular error
to suppose that many varieties of brown trout are to be
found in our rivers.
The Norfolk arrived in Hobson’s Bay on 15th April,
after a voyage of 84 days. She was immediately boarded


Mr. Edward Wilson, the President, and other members
of the Acclimatisation Society of Victoria, in whose
presence the ice-house was opened and an ova box
examined, a considerable portion of the ova being found
alive. Steps were at once taken to tranship the ova boxes
and ice to the Victorian sloop Victoria, which was placed
at the disposal of the Tasmanian Government for the
purpose of conveying the ova to Hobart; 170 boxes
were distributed in 11 strong wooden cases, each being
covered with a quantity of ice and enveloped in blankets;
11 boxes of ova were retained by the Victorian Accli-
matisation Society for the purpose of being hatched in
Melbourne. Of these the first egg hatched on May,
and ultimately from 200 to 300 fry appeared, the tem-
perature of the water having been kept at from 50° to
54° by means of ice, and the fry were afterwards trans-
ferred to a tank, 120 being ultimately liberated in Badger
Creek and never heard of afterwards.
The Victoria sailed for Hobart on 18th April, arriving
at her destination on the 20th April. The cases as packed
in Melbourne were at once transferred to a barge which
was towed by steamer to New Norfolk. Intense excite-
ment existed in the locality, and the greatest desire was
evinced by the residents to render assistance in trans-
porting the boxes to the ponds on the Plenty. The
larger cases, containing the ova boxes, were slung on
bamboos and placed on the shoulders of men, who thus
carried them to the hatchery, where Mr. Ramsbottom,
with the assistance of Mr. Morton Allport, at once pro-
ceeded to unpack the ova and place them in the hatching
boxes, where they were deposited on the 91st day after
embarkation in the Norfolk. The temperature of the water
was reduced by means of the remaining ice to 42°, and
averaged about 47° up to 12th May, from which date to
sth July the average was about 41°. It was estimated
that there were about 35,000 living ova, including trout
ova. On the 4th May the first trout ova hatched, and


on the following day the first salmon; the hatching of
the trout continued until the 25th May, and of the
salmon until Bth June; the salmon fry were kept in the
hatching boxes until early in August, when they were
permitted to pass into the rill attached to a large salmon
pond. The trout were kept in the boxes until the end of
August, when, owing to several deaths and the appear-
ance of disease amongst them, they were ~ removed to a
specially prepared rill, when their number was found to
be nearly 300. The mortality amongst the fry was very
trifling, and the fish continued to feed and thrive well in
their new home. The prospect so long hoped for of
establishing the salmon in these southern seas seemed
about to be realized. So much has been said and written
of late years in relation to this experiment, and so many
misrepresentations and misstatements made in reference
thereto—frequently by those who should have hesitated
to make assertions without due enquiry, and assertions
which could not be supported —that it seems desirable
to give in rather full detail the number of fish liberated
from the ponds, and the date of liberation.
A statement has been made that all the fish resulting
from the Norfolk shipment died before reaching the
Derwent, but this statement has arisen from the circum-
stance that on 4th October following the hatching, when
the fry were about five months old, a leak was dis-
covered from the salmon pond communicating with the
River Plenty, through which it was found that the fry
were escaping, as one was captured in a box placed at
the outlet of the leak. A trench was at once cut, and
the leak repaired, which occupied 19 days, and during
that period 240 fry passed from the pond into the leak,
and were captured and returned to the pond. A very
large number must have already reached the Plenty, the
number escaping being estimated at 1500. This estimate
was arrived at from the fact that upwards of 3000 fry
were admitted to the pond from the breeding boxes, that


the mortality to the date of the discovery of the leak was
trifling, and that owing to the careful watch kept night and
day by Mr. Ramsbottom and his assistants, the natural
enemies in the shape of water-rats and platypi were
destroyed. Mr. Ramsbottom, in his diary, referring to
the water bursting upon them when repairing the leak,
which necessitated the immediate filling up of the trench,
writes : —“ As to how many of our young fish passed
away with this terrible flow of water I cannot give the
shadow of an idea, only that a vast number must have
found their way into the Plenty.” Owing to a rather
heavy mortality amongst the salmon parr in the pond, it
was determined to liberate in the River Plenty those
remaining. The mortality could not be accounted for
by Mr. Ramsbottom, who said the fish affected, “ when
dead, look as bright and as healthy as any I ever caught
with the fly and gentle in the Ribble; fine plump fish
they are, and I may say I never saw any so large for
their age.” The water in the Salmon Pond was lowered,
and from the 19th to 22nd March, 1865, 419 young
salmon, 10 months old, measuring from sto 6 inches
long, were liberated in the Plenty ; 14 parr were retained,
being immature, and it was afterwards discovered that
others were unintentionally kept back, as, on 30th Janu-
ary, 1866, 33 smolts were taken from the pond and
liberated in the Plenty, and on 6th August, 1866, 76
smolts were also liberated.
The result of the Norfolk shipment of salmon ova
was 528 salmon counted into the Plenty and an estimated
number of at least 1500 by the rush of water when the
leak in the pond was being repaired. In January, 1866,
38 trout were liberated in the Plenty, and 133 were
retained in the pond 5 these fish formed the stock from
which and their progeny, the rivers of this colony,
Australia, and of JVew Zealand, have been supplied. It
is well to bear in mind, as already stated, that these trout
were the first and only importation of S. fario into Tas-


Mr. Ramsbottom, sen
41,000
„ Westell, sen
16,000
„ Allies
500
„ Johnston
45,000
mania, and that the very common opinion that there are
several species of brown trout in the colony is thus
manifestly inaccurate. Any variability existing must arise
from local causes connected with the water and food of
the rivers in which the fish are found.
The Salmon Commissioners having strongly urged the
necessity for a further supply of salmon ova, the Govern-
ment provided the necessary funds, and the task of
management again fell to Mr. J. A. Youl, who, through
the aid of Messrs. Ramsbottom, sen., Westell Rams-
bottom, F. Allies, and Thos. Johnston, procured the
following lots of ova from the rivers Ribble, Hodder,
near Clitheroe, the Itchin, and its tributaries, near South-
ampton, the Severn, and Teme, near Worcester, and the
Tyne, and Tweed :
102,500
There were also obtained 15,000 ova of sea trout (S.
trutta), and a box of trout ova, S.fario. The ova were
packed in 161 boxes, in the same manner as in the
previous shipment per Norfolk, and were shipped in an
ice-hpuse on board the ship Lincolnshire, which sailed
from England on Bth February, 1866, arriving in Hob-
son’s Bay, 30th April, 1866, where the boxes were tran-
shipped to the Government steamer Victoria, with the
ice remaining, and sent to Hobart, which was reached on
4th May, and on the following day the ova were all
placed in the hatching-boxes at the Plenty, it being esti-
mated that 50 per cent were alive. The hatching was
complete on 30th June, the first salmon ova having
hatched on Bth May, 1866, and the first sea trout on 12th
May, 1866. In October, 1867, it was determined to


liberate the young salmon and sea trout, as they had
assumed the smolt form, and they were permitted to pass
into the Plenty. In the Commissioners’ report, dated
2nd September, 1869, the numbers liberated are stated to
have been nearly 6000 salmon and 900 salmon trout.
A few pairs of sea trout were detained as a breeding
stock.
For many years subsequently to this date the work of
acclimatising trout and salmon trout was carried on at
the breeding ponds with great success as to trout, but
with only modified success as to salmon trout, which
spawned for the first time in Tasmania in fresh water,
without having been to the sea, in June, 1869, as after a
few years it was found that although the few salmon
trout detained, and their increase, continued to deposit
ova, their fertility ceased, and at last the fish were
liberated.
But in 1882, a Royal Commission having been
appointed to enquire into and report upon the fisheries of
the colony, it was recommended by that body that further
importations of salmon ova should be procured. Parlia-
ment, acting upon their recommendation, provided the
necessary funds, and the Hon. J. W. Agnew, a member
of the Salmon Commission, visiting Europe in 1882,
was entrusted by his brother Commissioners with the un-
controlled direction of a further shipment of salmon ova.
Dr. Agnew, from various causes, was unable to carry this
object to completion, but he was able to correspond with
and to visit Mr. J. A, You! and Mr. T. F. Brady, who»e
co-operation he secured, and those gentlemen, with the
assistance of Mr. Richard Philpott, Merchant, of 3,
Abchurch Lane, London, were afterwards appointed a
Committee of Management to conduct the next ship-
ment, the latter gentleman acting in finance, and the
two former in packing and collecting the ova. Through
the co-operation of R. L. Moore, Esq., Molennan,
Londonderry, R. J. Mahony, Esq., Dromore Castle,


County Kerry, and Samuel L. Alexander, Esq., Roe
Park, Limavady County, Londonderry, Mr. Brady was
enabled, with the assistance of his son, Mr. Herbert
Brady, and Mr. Nevin, head-keeper to Mr. Moore,
to secure upwards of 80,000 ova, presented by these
gentlemen through Mr. Brady to the colony, which were
conveyed to London and there packed by Mr. Youl in
the usual manner in moss, and shipped in an ice-tank in
the s.s. Ahinyton, sailing for Hobart on 19th February,
1884. She arrived in the Derwent Ist May, after a
passage of 71 days; the ova being deposited in the
hatching-boxes at the Plenty on the following day. The
following tables, extracted from the Salmon Com-
missioners’ Report, dated 15th July, 1884, (Parlia-
mentary paper, No. 68, Session 1884), furnish full par-
ticulars relating to this shipment :
The hatching continued up to the Ist July, and on
that date there were in the boxes 1825 fry.
The following return shows the mortality of ova and
fry from the date of the first count, sth May, to the end
of the hatching, Ist July.
Ova died,
Fry died.
75 s«
-4-> 53
C«'sK OJ
■fi«S o 5
_ Ctl rH _ **>
«C ► o c* c-
S©2
H H
3 482 1095
) 410 518
3 1176 1274
i 339 1331
I 11 26
mt to Launcc
Markings on
Boxes.
rH m
r a 'P
e|
■ SOS ss ®
.fcpHfS -g
Eh
IP
So*
O
ekS
o.
£
T
Kerry.
613 20,000
108 27,000*
98 10,000
992 20,000
14 Unkaown
Erne and Erne )
Top j
Limavady
284 1138
Eyed ova
* Not including 3000 sent to Launceston.


o'.
Markings on dumber Living s || Date of
Roxps of Ova on cog taking Ova dt» “
±ioxe • shipped. May 5. p c 'c from Parent. 22 5
» +J '” 51
Ch G pL, 5 2
Kerry 20,000 1,095 5'47 17 &22 Dec., 1883 6 May 142 days
X aD . d .. Erae 30,000 I IC5* J 2-27 15 Jan.. 1884 5 May 112 days
Limavady 10,000 1,274 12-74 16 Jan., 1884 5 May 112 days
X 20,000 1,331 6-65 28 Jan., 1884 29 May 123 days
Eyed ova Unknown 25 .. 1 Dec., 1883 3 May 155 days
* At Launceston.
The cause of comparative failure on this occasion was a
defect in the drainage of the ice-house, which became
choked with debris, thus preventing the exit of the melted
ice, and causing the ova boxes to float and knock about
with the rolling of the ship, and also saturating the moss
and decomposing it, and killing the ova. From this ship-
ment 229 sraolts were liberated in the River Plenty
during 1885, and 730 in October, 1886.
Thirty fish of the Ahington shipment were retained in
a special pond at the Plenty hatchery, and although
their growth has not been very great they w r ere artifi-
cially spawned during last season, producing 3140 ova,
from which 300 fry were liberated, the majority being
forwarded to the Northern side of the colony under the
care of the Hon. Janies Smith, IVJ.L.C., whose attention
to his charge was so great that he succeeded in liberating
300 in the rivers selected, and 50 were also placed in
the Plenty, It is hoped that for a time, at least, ova
will be obtained from the stock detained, which, however,
through deaths is now reduced to 9 fish.
Parliament having supplied a vote for another ship-
ment, Messrs. Youl and Rrady again offered their valu-
able services, and Mr. Brady gave his personal attention
to the fertilising of the ova’from carefully selected fish


from the rivers Erne and Blackwater, Messrs. Mahony,
Moore, and Alexander having a second time generously
granted the use of their waters for the purpose and
presented the ova to the colony. The Salmon Commis-
sioners had also made suggestions to Mr. Youl as to
improvements in the ice-house, profiting by the experi-
ence of the defects on the previous occasion in the
Abington. Mr. Brady succeeded in securing about
160,000 ova, which were packed by himself and Mr.
Youl in 101 boxes, and shipped in an improved ice-house
in the s.s. Yeoman , which sailed from London on 27th
February, 1885, arriving at Hobart on 4th May, On
arrival the ice-house was opened, and the result found to
be highly satisfactory. The ova were at once removed
to the ponds at the Plenty, and the hatching was com-
pleted in June with greater success than had hitherto
been obtained, and much of this success may fairly be
attributed to the improvements in the ice-house. Ten
thousand ova of this shipment were “ eyed ova,” i.e .,
ova arrived at such a state of development as to have
the eyes visible in the ovum, and the unpacking of this
lot revealed so few dead eggs that in their report to
Parliament upon the shipment, the Commissioners
wrote : —“ This circumstance would seem to indicate that
in future experiments ova alone which have arrived at
the ‘ eyed ’ stage should be packed.”
Prior to the shipment per Yeoman, a small lot of
about 10,000 ova had been shipped to Hobart per
s.s. Tainui , in an insulated case placed in a small room
adjoining the refrigerating machinery. The case had a
series of six trays for ova, with an ice tray above each,
the ice being supplied from the refrigerator during the
voyage. The care of the room was entrusted to a gentle-
man passenger travelling to Hobart, who was fully
instructed in his duties, and faithfully performed them.
Although on arrival a large percentage of the ova were
alive the result after hatching was very indifferent.


It is, however, impossible to assign accurately any satis-
factory reason for this result, which may have arisen
from one of several causes. When writing of this experi-
ment to Sir Thomas Brady, while advocating the old
system of shipment in an ice tank, lie admitted that the
refrigerator boxes, in the hands of a skilled attendant
would be a great success, and the recent great success of
Sir T. Brady’s shipment, per Kaihoura , conducted upon
a somewhat similar principle to that adopted in the Tainui,
but upon a larger scale and improved arrangements, bears
out what I then wrote. I am still, however, inclined to
support the old method of the ice tank, as providing an
even temperature, and requiring no supervision or atten-
tion during the voyage, in preference to the insulated
cases, which really need the attention of a skilled
attendant, thereby adding considerably to the outlay.
The fry from the Yeoman and Tainui being so large in
number, could not be conveniently detained in the ponds,
and it was determined to liberate them when the umbilical
vesicle was absorbed, and 27,000 salmon fry were placed
in various rivers of the colony between 18th August and
2nd December following. For the first time in the
history of salmon acclimatisation in Tasmania S. salar
were liberated in other rivers than the Derwent, the
allotment being as follows :
Biver Derwent and tributaries 10,950
South Esk (71 died) 6,000
North Esk 250
River Huon (10 died) 4,000
River Mersey (40 died) 4,000
River Pieman (all died') 500
River Leven (25 died) 2,000
River Inglis (86 put in Inglis, about 25 put in
South Esk) 200
27,900
735 therefore died in transit.


This shipment was the last carried out under the direc-
tion of the Salmon Commissioners, but before closing the
record of their work it should be stated that in addition to
S. salar, S. trutta, S. fario, they have successfully intro-
duced to the waters of the colony the American brook
trout, S. fontinalis, ova of which were obtained from
New Zealand in 1883, the increase from which has been
distributed amongst many streams and lakes in Tasmania.
The fish is a great acquisition, being a handsome, plump
fish, very game and taking the Hy readily ; it is in great
demand, and justifies all that had been reported of the
species prior to its introduction at the instance of Mr.
W. Tarleton, a member of the Commission, whose atten-
tion was drawn to the fish in New Zealand when visiting
that colony.
The Commissioners tendered their resignation on 20th
June, 1887, and closed a history of 26 years’ useful and
valuable work performed amidst many difficulties and
discouragements. They have often been assailed as
incompetent, but when the names of the more prominent
are considered such charges entirely fail. Who would
have dared to have challenged the scientific knowledge
and attainments of the late Morton Allport, who was so
closely associated with the experiments until success was
attained, and whose memory still lives in the records of
his work amongst the papers of this Society. Self-
denying, an ardent lover of nature in every form, his
death created a blank which has not yet been supplied.
I speak thus feelingly of him, having had the privilege
of his friendship and a personal knowledge of the zeal
he threw into the work of salmon acclimatisation. He
was also the means of introducing other fishes to the
Colony. Sir Robert Officer, for many years Chairman
of the Commission, was also well known as a man of
science and a zealous worker. Mr. R. M. Johnston,
F.L.S., &c., another member, needs no eulogy from me.
He is the author of the only complete catalogue of Tas-
manian fishes, and his general scientific attainments are


universally acknowledged. Mr. Matthew Seal’s practical
knowledge in fishery matters are also admitted by all.
The Hon. J. W. Agnew, the last Chairman of the Com-
mission, and Hon. Secretary of this Society, and a
member of the committee which reported on the subject
in 1858, is a worker of no mean order, and the other
members of the Commission at different times—the Hon.
Captain Langdon, Thos. Giblin, the Hon. W. Archer,
W. A. B. Jamieson, the Hon. Dr. Butler, R. C. Read,
John Swan, A. G. Webster, A. Riddoch, W, Tarleton,
H. Weedon, R, F. Irvine, Bernard Shaw, J, H. Wedge,
J. Buckland, C. E. Beddome, the Hon. W. A. B.
Gellibrand, and Ebenezer Shoobridge—make up a roll
to whom Tasmanians should be glad to acknowledge their
indebtedness for years of self-imposed labour. If all tbe
success desired has not been attained, it is from no lack
of zeal or labour on their part.
The writer may be pardoned for having thus referred to
the members of the late Commission, having worked with
them as their Secretary for many years, and I submit
with confidence that an impartial study of what they
performed during their tenure of office well entitled them
to the commendation they received from His Excellency
the Governor on their retirement, which was conveyed
to them by the Chief Secretary as follows :—“ His
Excellency accepts with regret the resignation of these
gentlemen, and the members of the Government desire
to join with him in expressing the high sense entertained
of the valuable services rendered by the Commissioners
in their efforts to introduce the salmon into the waters of
Tasmania. The services thus voluntarily rendered to
the Colony for so lengthened a period, during which the
Commissioners had to combat with difficulties and dis-
couragement of no ordinary character will, it is hoped,
result in the acclimatisation of the true salmon, as it has
already in the propagation and distribution of the salmon
trout,”
Thus ended the labours of the Salmon Commission,


but the work was not to stop there, as by a singular
coincidence its further prosecution has again fallen into
the hands of this Society, whose Ist volumes of records
of 1841 contains correspondence on the subject of salmon
acclimatisation. Dr, Agnew, Hon. Secretary to the
Society, the only surviving member of the Committee
who reported on the subject in 1858, was so much im-
pressed by the success of the last shipment of “ eyed
ova ” that he generously proposed to the Jloyal Society
of Tasmania that if they would appoint a Committee to
undertake the conduct of another shipment, to consist of
“ eyed ova” only he would personally meet all the expense
of the undertaking. The Society willingly accepted so
noble an offer, and appointed a Committee of Manage-
ment, consisting of Messrs. A. G. Webster, Matthew
Seal, R, M. Johnston, C. T. Belstead, R. C. Read, and
A. Morton, to which committee he had the privilege and
honour of being elected a member. It was Dr. Agnew’s
express wish that the whole management in relation to
the collection of ova was to be entrusted to Sir Thomas
F. Brady, who was invited to accompany the shipment
to the Colony. His Excellency the Governor also lent
his willing aid to further the object. It is unnecessary
for me to do more than allude to the shipment per
Kaikoura, as our guest Sir Thomas Brady has, so recently
at the opening meeting of the session, given the fullest
details of his work. Those who, like myself, have been
many years connected with the Salmon Commission
know well how to appreciate the work Sir Thomas
Brady has done for the colony on this occasion. Those
unacquainted with the subject know little of the privations
to be undergone in the collection of salmon ova during
the most inclement season of the year —the many miles
of travelling to be endured, and the anxiety in relation to
the numerous minute details necessary to ensure success ;
were such difficulties more widely known the great value
of such work would be more highly appreciated. Sir


Thomas has received a hearty welcome, and I trust he
will carry away with him from our colony the most
pleasing recollections of his visit, and live long to learn
of the success attending his recent labours and the
establishment of a valuable salmon industry in the colony.
Before closing this history I must draw attention to
the important fact that although large sums of money
have been expended by this colony in the work of salmon
acclimatisation, great assistance was rendered at various
times by other members of the Australasian group. The
following sums of money having been contributed, —,£995
by the Government of Victoria, £2OO by the Acclimatisa-
tion Society of Victoria, £3OO by the Provincial Govern-
ment of Canterbury, New Zealand, £2OO by the Pro-
vincial Government of Southland, New Zealand, and
£l5O by the Provincial Government of Otago, New
Zealand. The Victorian Government also on two occa-
sions generously gave the use of their sloop Victoria to
convey ova from Hobson’s Bay to the Derwent.
The writer regrets that he does not feel himself com-
petent to enter scientifically into the result in relation to the
efforts made to acclimatise salmonidae in Tasmanian waters,
but in this respect he is somewhat relieved by his friend,
Mr. R. M. Johnston, who has prepared an exhaustive
paper dealing with the matter from several standpoints.
He can, however, claim that success has been secured in
the thorough and unquestioned establishment of salmon
trout and brown trout, both of which species are now
abundant. The establishment of the true salmon, how-
ever, is still to some extent a matter of uncertainty. It
must, however, be borne in mind that more than one
specimen submitted for scientific examination to Dr.
Gunther and others have been pronounced S. salar , and
that Sir Thomas Brady has publicly stated his belief that
specimens shown to him are of the same species. In
speaking of them commercially, Sir Thomas states that
such specimens in a salmon producing country would be


accepted as salmon without a doubt. This being so, I
may almost claim that the establishment of S. salar is
an accomplished fact, and express my earnest hope that
the grand result attending Sir Thomas Brady’s shipment
per Kaikoura will be the means of so establishing the
species as to admit of no doubt in the future. The
question of a change of character to some extent in
S. salar by a new environment is so ably dealt with by
Mr. R. M. Johnston in his “ General and Critical
Observations on the Fishes of Tasmania,” that I may be
pardoned for concluding my short history of the subject
by quoting the following extract from that work :
“ With respect to the exact nature of the Derwent
migratory Salmonoids, there has been much dicussion as
to whether the S. salar has really established itself or
not. The handsome fish which is now so numerous in
the estuary of the Derwent is, within certain limits, a
most variable form—some individuals being almost
identical in all specific characters with the grilse form of
S. salary while others partake more of the character of
the equally valuable S. trutta, and its still more closely
allied congener, S. cambricus. It is clear to me, how-
ever, that the prevailing form found in salt water is a
mean between these, and it is this overlapping of the
closely agreeing characteristics of these so-called species
which renders it so puzzling to determine to which of
them any one individual belongs. The question, which
has excited much interest in Tasmania, is confused by
the notions of imperfectly informed persons, who, by the
use of such a misleading common name as ‘bull trout,’
have led many to think that we have only succeeded in
acclimatising the common brown trout and its varieties in
our waters, and they often, in ignorance, speak of our
fine migratory fish as if it were a coarse, destructive fish
of no value. It is to be regretted, where legislation may
be concerned, that erroneous notions should be circulated
in this way. By such people the fanciful views of


amateur pisciculturists or sportsmen are deemed to be of
equal value to the utterances of learned ichthyologists
such as Dr. Gunther, whose profound knowledge causes
them to speak with extreme caution.
“We only know as yet that we have a fine non-
migratory trout (the brown trout), and a splendid sea-
going migratory salmonoid. The question is, not S.fario
versus S. trutta, or S.fario versus S. salar, but the
more difficult one of determining whether the variable,
handsome, migratory fish, which is frequently captured
far out at sea, is (1) S. trutta, (2) S. camhricus, (3) S.
brachypoma, (4 ) salar, (5) all of these in variable
numbers, (6) a hybrid partaking in varying degrees of
the characters of the four named species, or (7) one or
other of those named but modified by transfer to a ne\y
environment. If the individuals which prevail agreed
with or fell within the classified limits of any one species
we would not have the slightest difficulty in determining
their specific value ; but when no one individual comes
exactly within the limits of the written characters, it is
necessary that the seven propositions advanced by me
should be answered satisfactorily before any one can
pronounce with confidence on the subject.
“ Mr, Allport, who knew very well the niceties of
distinction between S. salar and S. trutta, inclined
strongly to the opinion that our Derwent salmonoids are
grilse of the former, and not S. trutta. Dr. Gunther and
Professor M‘Coy have had the disadvantage of deter-
mining the nature of the species from single individuals
sent to them at odd times. They consequently, from
such disconnected points, could have no means of deter-
mining the curve of variability, and I am not surprised
therefore that, respectively, at different times, they have
pronounced certain individuals to be S. Salar, S. trutta,
S. cambricus, and a hybrid between S. salar and S. trutta.
Old specimens cannot determine the curve of variability,
nor can they determine whether the four fish, so differently


named, were not after all the progeny of the same
parents.”
Mr, Johnston’s observations are also supported by the
Chief Inspector of Fisheries of England, Mr. A. D.
Berrington, who in his report to the Board of Trade,
dated 31st March, 1887, thus writes: —
“ The artificial propagation and acclimatisation of fish
is one of the hobbies of the day; and the results which
it is producing are of great value. It has much to
our knowledge of the life history of fish, and conse-
quently of the lines on which their increase may be
promoted. It has served to show us more clearly how
small are the differences which separate the varieties
of our salmonidae, and has furnished proofs that in
many instances these varieties are not of a permanent
character, but depend upon food and other circum-
stances of position. These are facts which must be
borne in mind if we would hope to avoid disappointment
when introducing fresh strains into our rivers. According
to all analogy it must be advantageous to cross the
existing breed, and in so doing to bring in the best form
of the race we desire to improve and multiply ; but it
must not be expected that the special characteristics of
the fish we turn out will necessarily be perpetuated in
the offspring, as under changed conditions these pecu-
liarities are apt to disappear.”
I trust, therefore, that with these opinions, strengthened
by the views of Sir Thomas Brady, we will in the future
hear of fewer doubts upon the subject, and accept the one
broad fact, which is beyond dispute, that a fish has been
acclimatised in Tasmania which is of considerable com-
mercial value, that it is the means of attracting visitors
to our shores, and that with proper care and attention, it
will in the future afford profitable employment to our
fishermen, and add wealth to our Island home.


LIST OF BOOKS RELATING TO TASMANIA.
COMPILED BY
JAMES B. WALKER, F.R.G.S.
Callander, (John). —Terra Australis Cognita:
or, Voyages to the Terra Australis, or
Southern Hemisphere, during the Sixteenth,
Seventeenth, and Eighteenth Centuries.
3 vols. Bvo. Edinburgh, 1766-68
[The second volume contains portions of Tasman’s Journal
of the Discovery of Van Diemen’s Land, New Zealand,
&c. See also the Collections of Harris, De Brosses,
Dalrymple, Burney, and others.]
Cook (Captain James). —Voyage toward the
South Pole and Round the World, performed
in H.M.S. Resolution and Adventure , 1772-
75, &c. 2 vols. 4to. London, 1777
[Marion du Fresne]. — Nouveau Voyage a la
Mer du Sud. Bvo. Paris, 1783
Cook (Captain James). — Voyage to the Pacific
Ocean, &c., under the Direction of Captains
Cook, Clerk, and Gore, in H.M.Ss. Resolution
and Discovery, 1776-80. 3 vols. 4to. and
folio atlas. London, 1784
Mortimer (Lieut. G.) —Observations, &c., made
during a Voyage in the Brig Mercury,
commanded by J. H. Cox. 4to. London, 1791
Bligh (Lieut. Wm.) — A Voyage to the South
Sea, with a Narrative of the Mutiny of the
Bounty. 4to. London, 1792
Collins (Lieut.-Col. David). —An Account of
the English Colony in New South Wales,
&c., &c., with an Account of the Discovery
of Bass Strait by Flinders and Bass. 2 vols.
4to. London, 1798-1802


Labillardiere (Jacques Jules). —Relation du
Voyage a la Recherche de la Perouse. 2
vols. 4to. and folio atlas. Paris, 1800
Labillardisre (J.J.) —Voyage in search of La
Perouse, 1791-94. 2 vols. Bvo. London, 1800
Grant (Lieut, James). —Narrative of a Voyage
of Discovery in the Lady Nelson in 1802.
4to. London, 1803
Labillardiere (Jacques Jules). —Novae Hol-
landiae Plantarum Specimen. 2 vols. 4to.
Paris, 1804-6
Tuckey (Lieut. J. H.) —Account of a Voyage
to establish a Colony at Port Phillip, in Bass
Strait, in H.M.S. Calcutta , in the years
1802-4. Bvo. London, 1805
Rossel. —Voyage de D’Entrecasteaux, redige par
M. de Rossel. 2 vols. 4to and folio atlas.
Paris, 1808
Peron et Freycinet. —Voyage de Decouvertes
aux Terres Australos. 2 vols. and 2 atlases,
4to. ' Paris, 1809-16
Brown (Robert). —Prodromus Florae Novae Hol-
landiae et Insulae Van Diemen, Bvo. London, 1810
Mann (D. D.) —The Present Picture of New
South Wales. 4to. London, 1811
Flinders (Matthew), —Voyage to Terra Aus-
tralis, &c., prosecuted in the years 1801-3, in
the Investigator, the Porpoise, and the
Cumberland. 2 vols. 4to. and folio atlas.
London, 1814
[O’Hara, —]. —History of New South Wales.
London, 1817
Bent (Andrew). —Michael Howe, the last and
worst of the Bushrangers of Van Diemen’s
Land. Bvo. Hobart Town, 1818
Wentworth (W. C.) —Statistical, Historical,
and Political Description of the Colony of


New South Wales, and its Dependent
Settlements in Van Diemen’s Land. Bvo.
London, 1819
Jeffreys (Lieut. Charles), —Van Diemen’s
Land; Geographical and Descriptive Delinea-
tions of the Island. Bvo. London, 1820
Wallis (Captain). —Historical Account of the
Colony of New South Wales and its Depen-
dent Settlements. Folio. London, 1821
Dixon (James). —Narrative of a Voyage to New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land in the
ship Skelton during the year 1820. 12mo.
Edinburgh, 1822
Evans (George Wm.) —Geographical, Historical,
and Topographical Description of Van
Diemen’s Land. Bvo. London, 1822
Reid (Thomas). —Two Voyages to New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land. Bvo.
London, 1822
Bigge (John Thomas). —Reports of the Com-
mission of Inquiry on the State of the
Colony of New South Wales, &c. (Parlia-
mentary Papers.) Folio.
London, 1822-23
Godwin’s Emigrant’s Guide to Van Diemen’s
Land, more properly called Tasmania. Bvo.
London, 1823
Curr (Edward). —An Account of the Colony of
Van Diemen’s Land. 12mo. London, 1824
Field (Barron). —Geographical Memoirs on New
South Wales, &c. Bvo. London, 1825
Widowson (HENRY).-r-Present State of Van
Diemen’s Land. Bvo. London, 1829
Hermit (The) in Van Diemen’s Land, from the
Colonial Times. Hobart Town, 1829
Betts (Captain T.). —Account of the Colony of
Van Diemen’s Land. Bvo. Calcutta, 1830


Goodridge (Charles Medyett). —Narrative of
a Voyage to the South Seas, &c., and Eight
Years’ Residence in Van Diemen’s Land.
12mo. Exeter, 1832
[Goodridge, C. M.] — Statistical View of Van
Diemen’s Land. Bvo. Exeter, 1832
Quintus Servinton: A Tale. 3 vols. 12rao.
Hobart Town, 1832
Bischoff (James). —Sketch of the History of Van
» Diemen’s Land, and an Account of the Van
Diemen’s Land Company. Bvo. London, 1832
Henderson (John). — Observations on the Colo-
nies of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land. Bvo. Calcutta, 1832
Breton (Lieut. Wm. Hy.) —Excursions in New
South Wales, Western Australia, and Van
Diemen’s Land, during 1830-33. Bvo.
London, 1833
Pri nsep (Mrs. A.) —Journal of a Voyage from
Calcutta to Van Diemen’s Land, comprising
a Description of that Country, 12mo.
London, 1833
Ross (Jas., LL.D.) —Essay on Prison Discipline,
in which is detailed the system pursued in
Van Diemen’s Land. Bvo. Hobart Town, 1833
Parker (Henry W.) —Rise, Progess, and Pre-
sent State of Van Diemen’s Land. Bvo.
London, 1833
Arthur (Colonel George).— Observations upon
Secondary Punishments. Bvo. HobartTown,lB33
Melville (Henry). —Van Diemen’s Land, com-
prising a variety of Statistical and. other
s Information. 12mo. Hobart Town, 1833
Holman (James). —Voyage Round the World,
including Travels in Africa, Asia, Austral-
asia, &c., from 1827 to 1832. 4 vols, Bvo.
London, 1834-35


Arthur (Coloner George). —Defence of Trans-
portation. Bvo. London, 1835
Melville (Henry).— History of the Island of
Van Diemen’s Land, from the year 1824 to
1835 inclusive. 12mo.
Hobart Town, 1835
Martin (Robert Montgomery),— History of
Australasia, comprising New South Wales,
Van Diemen’s Land, &c., &c. 12mo.
London, 1836
Gould (John). —Synopsis of the Birds of Aus-
tralia. Imp. Bvo. London, 1837-38
Holt (Joseph). —Memoirs of Joseph Holt, Gene-
ral of the Irish Rebels in 1798. Edited by
T. Crofton Croker. 2 vols. Bvo. London, 1838
(Holt visited Hobart Town in 180 b.)
Maconochie (Captain A.) —Thoughts on Con-
vict Management, and other subjects con-
nected with the Australian Penal Colonies.
Bvo. Hobart Town, 1838
Wheeler (Daniel). —Letters and Journals of
Daniel Wheeler, while engaged on a Reli-
gious Visit to some of the Islands of the
Pacific Ocean, Van Diemen’s Land, &c.
Bvo. London, 1839
Mann (William). —Six Years’ Residence in the
Australian Colonies. 12mo. London, 1839
Dixon (John). —The Condition and Capabilities
of Van Diemen’s Land as a place of Emigra-
tion. 12rao. London, 1839
Rocher (Charles), —Analysis of the Criminal
Law of England as applicable to this Colony
[V.D. Land]. 12mo. Hobart Town, 1839
Southey (Thomas). —Treatise on Sheep, addressed
to the Flockmasters of Australia, Tasmania,
&c. Bvo. London, 1840
Burn (David). —Van Diemen’s Land: Moral,


Physical, and Political. [The Colonial
Magazine.'] London, 1840-1
Gould (John). —Monograph of the Macropodidae,
or Family of Kangaroos. Folio.
London, 1841-2
Browning (Dr. Colin Arrot). —England’s
Exiles. Post Bvo. London, 1842
Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science,
culture, Statistics, &c. 3 yols. Bvo.
Hobart Town, 1842-49
Backhouse (James). —Narrative of a Visit to the
Australian Colonies. Bvo. London, 1843
*■ Pridden (Rev. W.) —Australia, its History and
Present Condition, 12mo. London, 1843
Martin (Robert Montgomery). —History of
the Colonies of Great Britain. Bvo.
London, 1843
Strzelecki (Count Paul E. de). —Physical
Description of New South Wales and Van
Diemen’s Land. Bto. London, 1845
Franklin (Sir John). —Narrative of some Pas-
sages in the History of Tasmania. Bvo.
London, 1845
Gould (John). —Mammals of Australia. 3 vols.
folio. London, 1845-60
Rowcroft (Charles). —Tales of the Colonies ; or.
The Adventures of an Emigrant. 3 vols.
post Bvo. London, 1846
(New edition. 12mo. 1858.)
Rowcroft (Charles). —The Bushranger of Van
Diemen’s Land. 3 vols. post Bvo. London, 1846
Rowcroft (Charles). —Adventures of an Emi-
grant in Search of a Colony. 3 vols. post
8 vo, London, 1846
Harvey (William Henry). —Nereis Australis ;
or, Algae of the Southern Ocean, Bvo.
London, 1847


Gould (John). —Introduction to the Birds of
Australia. Bvo. London, 1848
Gould (John). —Birds of Australia. With Sup-
plement. 8 vols. folio. London, 1848-70
Rocher, (Chas. A. W.) —Analysis of the Criminal
Law of Van Diemen’s Land ; with an Appen-
dix, containing the Charter of Justice, &c.
Bvo. Launceston, 1848
Syme (J.) —Nine Years in Van Diemen’s Land.
Byo. Dundee, 1848
Royal Society of Tasmania.— Papers and Pro-
ceedings. Bvo. From 1849 to present time.
Hobart Town, 1849-91
Jukes (J. Beete). —Sketch of the Physical
Structure of Australia. Bvo. London, 1850
Fry (Rev. Henry Phibbs). — Penal Discipline,
&c., in Van Diemen’s Land. Bvo. London, 1850
Browning(Colin Arrott). —The Convict Ship ;
a Narrative, &c., on board the Earl Grey ,
during a voyage to Tasmania. 12mo. (sth
edition.) London, 1851
Mundy (Lt.-Col. Godfrey Chas.) —Our Anti-
podes ; or, Residence and Rambles in the
Australasian Colonies. 3 vols. Bvo, (Second
edition.) London, 1852
West (Rev, John). —History of Tasmania. 2
vols. Bvo. Launceston, 1852
Morgan (John). —Life and Adventures of William
Buckley. Bvo. Hobart Town, 1852
[Contain*! part of Rev. R. Knopwood’s Diary.]
Meredith (Mrs. Charles). —My Home in Tas-
mania during a Residence of Nine Years.
2 vols. post Bvo. London, 1852
Stoney (Major H. Butler). —A Year in Tas-
mania. Bvo. Hobart Town, 1854
Stoney (Major H. Butler). —A Residence in
Tasmania. Bvo. London, 1854


' Mitchel (John). —Jail Journal; or, Five Years
in British Prisons. 12rao. New York, 1854
Bonwick (James). —The Bushrangers; illustrating
the Early Days of Van Diemen’s Land.
12mo. Melbourne, 1856
' Melville (Henry).— Australasia and Emigra-
tion. Prison Discipline, with a Description
of the Penal Settlement of Van Diemen’s
Land. Land Regulations and Aborigines.
Bvo. London, 1857
Bunge (Daniel), —Australasiatic Reminiscences
of Twenty-three Years’ Wanderings in Tas-
mania and Australia. 12mo. Melbourne, 1857
Nixon (Right Rev. Francis Russell, Bishop
of Tasmania). —The Cruise of the Beacon.
A Narrative of a Visit to the Islands in Bass
Strait. 12mo. London, 1857
Puseley (David), —The Rise and Progress of
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. By
an Englishman. 12mo. London,* 1857
Hull (Hugh Munro).— Guide to Tasmania.
12mo. Hobart Town, 1858
Howttt (William), —Land, Labour, and Gold;
or, Two Years in Victoria, with Visits to
Sydney and Van Diemen’s Land. 2 vols.
post Bvo. (Second edition.) London, 1858
Hull (Hugh Munro). —Experience of Forty
Years in Tasmania. 12mo. London,* 1859
Harvey (William Henry).— Phycologia Aus-
tralia ; or, A History of Australian Sea-
weeds. 5 vols. Bvo. London, 1859
Meredith (Mrs. Charles). —Some of my Bush
Friends in Tasmania. 4to.
London, 1859
[Leakey (Caroline).] —The Broad Arrow. By
Oline Keese [Caroline Leakey], 2 vols. Bvo.
London, 1859


[Miller (Maxwell).] —The Tasmanian House of
Assembly. A Metrical Catalogue, Bvo.
Hobart Town, 1860
Tasman (Abel Janszoon). —Journal van de Reis
naar het Onbekende Zuidland in den Jare
1642. Edited by Jacob Swaart. Bvo.
Amsterdam, 1860
[First complete edition of Tasman’s Journal of the Dis-
covery of Van Diemen’s Land, &c.]
Hooker (Sir Joseph Dalton). —Flora Tas-
mania ; the Botany of the Antarctic Voyage
of H.M.S. Erebus and Terror in 1839-43.
2 vols. 4to. London, 1860
Walker (George Washington). —Life and
Labours of George Washington Walker.
Edited by James Backhouse and Charles
Tylor. Bvo. London, 1862
Jobson (Rev. F. J.) —Australia; with Notes by
the Way. Post Bvo. London, 1862
O’Flanagan (Roderick). —History of New South
Wales ; with an Account of Van Diemen’s
Land, &c., &c. 2 vols. Bvo.
London, 1862
Lloyd (George Thomas). —Thirty-three Years
in Tasmania and Victoria. Post Bvo.
London, 1862
Bentham (Georqe)&Mueller (Baron Ferdi-
nand). —Flora Australiensis, a Description
of the Plants of the Australian Territory.
7 vols. Bvo. London, 1863
Gould (John). —Introduction to the Mammals of
Australia. Bvo. London, 1863
Rocher (C. A. W.) —Tasmanian Criminal Law
Consolidation and Amendment Acts, with
Notes. Bvo, Hobart Town, 1864
Gould (John). —Handbook to the Birds of Aus-
tralia. 2 vols. Bvo. London, 1865


Woods (Rev. Julian E. Tenison). —History of
the Discovery and Exploration of Australia.
2 vols. Bvo. London, 1865
Howitt (William). —History of Discovery in
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand.
2 vols. Bvo. London, 1865
[Mortlock (John Frederick).] —Experiences
of a Convict, transported for twenty-one
years. An Autobiographical Memoir. By
an Ex-Military Officer. 12mo. London, 1865
Hannaford (Samuel). —The Wild Flowers of
Tasmania. 12 mo. Melbourne, 1866
McPhail (Myles). —Tasmanian Directorv.
Hobart Town, 1867
Dilke (Sir Charles). —Greater Britain: A
Record of Travel in 1866-67. 2 vols. Bvo,
London, 1868
Bonwick (James). —John Batman, the Founder
of Victoria. 12mo. Melbourne, 1868
Milner (Rev. John) & Brierley (Oswald
W.) —Cruise of H.M.S. Galatea; Capt.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh. Bvo.
London, 1869
Calder (James Erskine). —Tasmanian Indus-
tries. Bvo. Hobart Town, 1869
Martineau (John). —Letters from Australia.
Post Bvo. London, 1869
Denison (Sir William). —Varieties of Vice-
Regal Life. 2 vols. Bvo, London, 1870
Cash (Martin). —Adventures of Martin Cash
while a Bushranger underarms in Tasmania.
Edited by James Lester Burke. Bvo.
Hobart Town, 1870
Buck (Frederick). —Die Britisch-Australische
Colonie Tasmanien. Bvo. Hamburg, 1870
Beauvoir (Le Comte de). —Australia. Voyage
autour du Monde. 12mo. Paris, 1870


Bonwick (James). —The Last of the Tasmanians ;
and the Black War of Van Diemen’s Land.
Bvo. London, 1870
Bonwick (James). —Curious Facts of Old Colonial
Days. Bvo, London, 1870
Bonwick (James). —The Daily Life and Origin
of the Tasmanians. Bvo. London, 1870
Legrand (William). —Collections for a Mono-
graph of Tasmanian Land Shells. Bvo.
Hobart Town, 1871
Walch’s Tasmanian Guide Book. [Edited by
Mrs. Charles Meredith.] Hobart Town, 1871
Brownrioo (Rev. M. B.) —Cruise of the Freak :
A Narrative pf a Visit to the Islands in Bass
and Banks Straits. Bvo. Launces'on, 1872
Trollope (Anthony). —Australia and New Zea-
land. 2 vols. Bvo, London, 1873
Johnston, (Robt. Mackenzie). —Field Memo-
randa for Tasmanian Botanists. Oblong 4to.
Launceston, 1874
Clarke (Marcus). —His Natural Life. 12mo.
Melbourne, 1874
Bonwick, (James).— Mike Howe, the Bushranger
of Van Diemen’s Land. 12mo. London, 1874
Tasmania ; a Popular Account of the Features,
Inhabitants, Natural History, and Produc-
tions, with the History of its Colonisation.
12mo. London, 1874
Davis (Dr. Jos. Barnard). —Osteology and
Peculiarities of the Tasmanians, a Race of
Man recently become extinct, 4to. Haarlem, 1874
Booth (Edwin Carton). —Australia. Illustrated
by Prout, Chevalier, &c. 2 vols. 4to.
London, 1874-76
Calder (James Erskine). —Some Account of
the Wars and Extirpation of the Native
Tribes of Tasmania. 12mo. Hobart Town, 1875


Bailliere’s Tasmanian Gazetteer and Road Guide.
Hobart Town, 1877
Etheridge (Robert). —Catalogue of Australian
Fossils, including Tasmania, &c. Bvo.
Cambridge, 1878
Spicer (Rev. William W.) —Handbook of the
Plants of .Tasmania. 12mo,
Hobart Town, 1878
Smyth (R. Brough). —The Aborigines of Vic-
toria ; with Notes relating to the Habits of
the Natives of other parts of Australia and
Tasmania. 2 vols, 4to. Melbourne, 1878
Constitutional Act. —Acts, Reports, Petitions,
and Proceedings of Legislative Council in
connection with the Introduction and Subse-
quent Amendments of the Constitutional
Act of Tasmania. Hobart Town, 1879
Petterd (William F.) — Monograph of the Land
Shells of Tasmania. Bvo. Launceston, 1879
Shillinglaw (John J.) —Historical Records of
Port Phillip. Bvo. Melbourne, 1879
[Contains the Rev. Robert Knopwood’s Diary from 24th
April, 1803, to 31st December, 1804.]
Just (Thomas C.) —Tasmaniana : A Description
of the Island of Tasmania and its Resources.
Bvo. Launceston, 1879
Meredith (Mrs. Charles). —Our Island Home:
A Tasmanian Sketch Book. Folio.
London, 1879
Wallace (Alfred Russell). — Australasia: A
Compendium of Geography and Travel. Bvo.
London, 1879
Heaton (J. Henniker). —Australian Dictionary
of Dates and Men of the Time. Bvo.
Sydney, 1879
Todd (Alpheus). —Parliamentary Government in
the British Colonies. Bvo. London, 1880


Senior, (William —“ Redspinner ”). —Travel
and Trout at the Antipodes ; An Angler’s
Sketches in Tasmania and New Zealand.
12mo. London, 1880
Meredith (Mrs. Charles). —Tasmanian Friends
and Foes; Feathered, Furred, and Finned.
Bvo. London, 1880
Etheridge (Robt., Jun.) & Jack (Robt.
Logan). —Catalogue of Works, &c. on
Geology, Palaeontology, Mineralogy, Mining,
and Metallury, &c., of the Australian Conti-
nent and Tasmania, Bvo. London, 1881
Clarke (Marcus). —The Mystery of Major
Molineux, &c. Bvo. Melbourne, 1881
Macleay (William). —Descriptive Catalogue of
Australian Fishes. 2 vols. and Supplement.
8 vo, Sydney, 1881
Thomas (H.) —Guide to Excursionists between
Australia and Tasmania. 12mo. Melbourne, 1882
Johnston (Robert Mackenzie). —General and
Critical Observations on the Fishes of Tas-
mania, with a Classified Catalogue of all the
known Species. Bvo. Hobart, 1882
Willson (Right Rev. Robert William). —
Personal Recollections of the Right Rev.
Robert Wm, Willson, First Bishop of Ho-
bart. Compiled by Rev. Thos. Kelsh.
Hobart, 1882
Just (Thomas C.) —Official Handbook of Tas-
mania. Bvo. Hobart, 1883
Ettingshausen (Baron Costantin von). —
Beitrage zur Kenntniss de Tertiaflora Aus-
tralians. 4to. Vienna, 1883
Davies (Rowland L. A.) —Poems and other
Literary Remains. Edited, with a Bio-
graphical Sketch, by Chas Tomlinson.
London, 1884


Wood (John Dennistoun). —Laws of the Austral-
asian Colonies as to the Administration and
Distribution of the Estate of Deceased Per-
sons. With a Preliminary Part on the
Foundation and Boundaries of those Colonies
and the Law in force in them. Bvo. London, 1884
Walch’s Handbook of Garden and Greenhouse
Culture for Tasmania. 12mo, Hobart, 1884
Fenton (James). —History of Tasmania, from its
Discovery in 1642 to the Present Time.
8 vo. Hobart, 1884
Haywood (Howard). —Through Tasmania: Hay-
wood’s Visitors’ and Colonists’ Guide. Bvo.
Hobart, 1885
Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company’s Guide
for Visitors to Tasmania. Hobart, 1886
Ullathorne (Bishop). —Memoir of Bishop
Willson, First Bishop of Hobart, Tasmania.
Bvo. London, 1887
Walch (Garnet). —Huddart, Parker & Co.’s
Guide to Tasmania. Melbourne, 1889
Etheridge (R. Jun.) —Contributions to a Cata-
logue of Works, &c. on the Australian and
Tasmanian Aborigines, 4to. Sydney, 1890
Roth (H. Ling). —The Aborigines of Tasmania.
Preface by E. B. Tylor. Bvo. London, 1890
Roth (H. Ling). —Crozet’s Voyage to Tasmania,
New Zealand, &c., in the years 1771-72.
Bvo. London, 1891
Dean (W. B.) —Notorious Bushrangers of Tas-
mania. Launceston, 1891
Fenton (James). —Bush Life in Tasmania Fifty
Years Ago. Bvo. London, 1891
Meredith (Mrs. Charles). —Bush Friends in
Tasmania. Last series. 4to. London, 1891
Nowell (Edwin Cradook). —History of the
Relations between the two Houses of Parlia-


merit in Tasmania and South Australia in
regard to Amendments to Bills containing
Provisions relating to the Public Revenue
or Expenditure. Hobart, 1890
Parliamentary and Government Publications :
Votes and Proceedings of Legislative Council
of Van Diemen’s Land. 1837-55.
Hobart Town, 1844-55
Votes and Proceedings of Legislative Council
of Van Diemen’s Land, with Papers. 1851
to 1855 inclusive.
Hobart Town, 1851-5
Votes and Proceedings of Legislative Council
of Tasmania, with Papers. Annually from
1856. Hobart, 1856-91
Votes and Proceedings of House of Assembly
of Tasmania, with Papers. Annually from
1856. Hobart, 1856-91
Acts of the Governor and Council of Tasmania,
with Chronological List and Index. 7 George
IV. to 19 Viet. Hobart Town, 1873
Acts of the Parliament of Tasmania, with
Chronological List and Index. 20 to 55
Viet. Hobart, 1873-91
Stops (Frederick). —Index to the Legisla-
tive Law of the Colony of Tasmania. Bvo.
Hobart Town, 1865
H ULL (H ugh Munro). Statute Index
(The). Folio. Hobart Town, 1880
Stops (Frederick). —Statutes of Tasmania,
from 7 Geo. IV. (1826) to 52 Victoria (1888).
Alphabetically arranged, with Notes. 5 vols.
8 vo. Hobart, 1826-88
Stops (Frederick). —Statutes of Tasmania,
alphabetically arranged : from 47 Viet.
(1883) to 52 Viet. (1888). Vol. V. Bvo.
Hobart, 1890


Parliamentary, &c. Publications — continued.
Statistics of Tasmania. Annually from
1857. Folio.
[Prior to this datw the Statistics were published at
irregular intervals.]
Johnston (Robert Mackenzie). — Tas-
manian Official Record.- Annually from-
-1890. Bvo. Hobart, 1890-91
Crown Lands Guide. —Annually from 1884.
8 vo. Hobart, 1884-91
Nowell (Edwin Cradock). —Parliamentary
Handbook. 12rno. Hobart, 1887
Johnston (Robert Mackenzie). Sys-
tematic Account of the Geology of Tas-
mania. 4to. Hobart, 1888
Johnston (R. M.) —Rocks and Minerals of
Tasmania. 4to. Hobart, 1888
Walker (James Backhouse). —The French
in Van Diemen’s Land ; and the First Settle-
ment on the Derwent, Bvo. Hobart, 1889
- The Settlement of Tasmania. Bvo.
Hobart, 1890
The Discovery and Occupation of
Port Dairymple. Bvo. Hobart, 1890
The Discovery of Van Diemen’s Land
in 1642. Bvo, Hobart, 1891
Johnston (Robert Mackenzie), —Hand-
book of Tasmania for the year 1891.
ALMANACS, &c.
Bent (Andrew). —Van Diemen’s Land Pocket
Almanack for 1824. 12mo. Hobart Town, 1824
Bent (Andrew). —Tasmanian Almanack. An-
nually from 1825 to 1829. 12mo.
Hobart Town, 1825-29


Ross (J as.) —Hobart Town Almanack. Annually
from 1829 to 1836. 16mo and 12mo.
Hobart Town, 1829 36
Melville (H.) —Van Diemen’s Land Almanack.
Annually from 1831 to 1835. 12mo.
Hobart Town, 1831-35
Melville (Henry). —Van Diemen’s Land
Annual, 1836 and 1837. 12mo.
Hobart Town, 1836-37
Wood (Jas.) —Van Diemen’s Land Legal and
Commercial Calendar, 1837 and 1838,
12mo. Hobart Town, 1837-38
Elliston (Wm. Gore). — Hobart Town Almanack,
1837, 1838, and 1839. T2mo.
Hobart Town, 1837-39
Wood (James). —Van Diemen’s Land Royal
Kalendar, Colonial Register, and Almanack.
Annually from 1846 to 1857. 12mo, •
Hobart Town, 1846-57
H ull (H. M.) —Royal Calendar and General
Tasmanian Almanac, 1859 and 1860. 12mo.
Hobart Town, 1859-60
Walch’s Tasmanian Almanac. Annually from
1863. 12mo. Hobart, 1863-92
Gordon & Gotch.—The Australian Handbook.
Annually from 1870. Bvo. London, 1870-92
Greville (E.) —Official Directory and Almanac
of Australia. Annually from 1882. Bvo.
Sydney, 1882-92
*
WILLIAM THOMAS STRUTT,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART.






PAVILION POIMT .. •' -f i'.-
r *
D t R
.-MACQUARIE POINT
i uKr? *■ -t . ; <i 'JiSMti
Jlbfe • : / mSeZr \V
rwmi.,'. \ r"« TKs. YMt— • •• • ■.■■W\* s h %*
'V*%|. --; ■ ■vtjfcl, ]
s *. iX llrA 1C •• ,*■ #• Mr lit **•■ t » « y * » «f ■"*? < \*.jJ //fy' crv .Nv
’ifeWl SULLIVANS
■ ■Jr/p* *• . t .'v nV ~i
'-M? -• * ,•• •••
' ■JfeWv- r K\V>X- / - - / / Vm&Osar %%w
life ¥%
Photo-Utlaympked at the Siirvey Department. Hobart. February I8.‘)0






