

' 4!
1 v_c.lv
HANDBOOK
VICT OEIA
(AUSTRALIA).
% Sljorf gcscriptiou of fbe Colonii,
ITS PRODUCTIONS, MANUFACTURES AND CAPABILITIES,
ESPECIALLY WITH REGARD TO ITS NEW
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES AND
SETTLEMENT ON THE LAND.
MELBOURNE:
|)rintcb for tbc Uidonrm Commissioners for tl)j |1 arts Cvbibition,
,M ‘CARBON, BIRD & CO., 37 FLINDERS LANE WEST.




HANDBOOK
VICTORIA
(AUSTRALIA),
A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE COLONY,
ITS PRODUCTIONS, MANUFACTURES, & CAPABILITIES,
ESPECIALLY WITH REGARD TO ITS NEW
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES AND
SETTLEMENT ON THE LAND.
MELBOURNE:
|)rintrir for tlu Pi dorian Commissioners for % |laris Crbibition.
BY M‘CARBON, BIRD & CO., 37 FLINDERS LANE WEST,




INDEX
Chapter. Subject. Page.
I, Physical Geography or Victoria 5
11. Climate and Seasons 8
111. Soil and Agriculture, Taking-up Land, New Indus-
1,
TRIES °
IV. Pastoral Interest, Wool, Hides, Tallow, &c. ... 43
V. Mining and Minerals, Gold, Other Minerals ... 49
VI. Manufactures, Trades, and Industp.ies ... ... .60
VII. Trade, Commerce, and Shipping 66
VIII. Railways, Roads, Coaches, Postal, Telegraphic, &c. 71
XI. Employment, Wages, Rents, Prices of Provisions, &o. 77
X. Moral and Mental Condition of the Population,
Education, &c. 8^
XI. Political and Social Condition of the People ... 92
XII. Divisions of the Colony, Principal Towns ... 99
XIII. Government, Land Forces, Navy, Police 108
XIV. Growth of the Colony, The Rising Race, Natura-
lisation, Conclusion ...
XV. The Passage Out 118




VICTORIA.
CHAPTER I.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY.
The Colony of Victoria, formerly known as Port Phillip, is the
smallest but most populous and important of the colonial divisions
of the Continent of Australia, occupies its south-east corner, and
lies between the 34th and 39th parallels of south latitude, and the
141st and 150th meridian of east longitude. The shores of Port
Phillip Bay, which is the chief harbour of the colony, were first
explored by Lieutenant John Murray, who entered its Heads, and
named the hill known as Arthur’s Seat, ten weeks before Flinders
visited it in 1802. Later in the same year Charles Grimes, sur-
veyor of the parent colony (New South Wales), visited the shores
of Port Phillip, and finding a river running into the Bay, which
the natives called “ Yarra-Yarra ” (meaning “flowing-flowing”),
sailed up it a little beyond the place on which the metropolis
(Melbourne) now stands; but it was not until January, 1877, that
his original map was found in the survey office at Sydney, and that
the credit of being the “father of the colony” was accorded to him
over the claims of Batman and Fawkner to that honour.
Victoria is bounded on the north and north-east by New South
Wales, on the west by South Australia, and on the south by the
Southern Ocean and Bass’s Straits, the latter of which separate it
from the insular colony of Tasmania. Its extreme length from east
to west is about 420 geographical miles, and its average width
from north to south about 240 miles, the coast line extending about
600 miles. Its area is 88,198 square miles, or 56,446,720 acres, or


about a thirty-fourth part of that of the entire continent, and is
less by 1466 square miles than that of Great Britain.
Notwithstanding the fact of its being far smaller than any of
the sister colonies on the mainland, its population, which was esti-
mated in June, 1877, at 460,907 males, 388,114 females, total 849,021,
is equal to about three-fourths of all the others put together. The
southernmost point of land in Victoria is a rocky headland known as
Wilson’s Promontory, which is also the southernmost point of Aus-
tralia, and it is on this account that the colony is by English and other
writers not acquainted with Australian nomenclature, sometimes
erroneously called South Australia, the fact being that South
Australia lies very much further north than does Victoria.
Physically the colony is divided into two parts, north and south,
by a range of mountains known as the main or dividing range, which
runs from east to west nearly its whole length, and at an average
distance of about sixty or seventy miles from the sea. The eastern
part of this range is known as the Australian Alps, and the western
part as the Pyrenees. This forms the main watershed of the
country, the rivers rising in it flowing generally north or south
as the case may be, the former into the Murray River, which runs
along the northern boundary, the latter into the sea. From the
main range run numerous spurs, the loftiest being the Bogong
Range in the eastern part, whose summit reaches an altitude of
6508 feet above the level of the sea, being the highest point of land
in the colony. With the exception of the Murray, which is the largest
in Australia, the Yarra, the Goulburn, and one or two of the south-
eastern or Gippslaud streams, the rivers are unnavigable, except
by boats. There are numerous lakes in the colony, some salt, some
fresh. Of these Korangamite (salt), has an area of seventy-six
square miles, and lakes Hindmarsh, fifty-six square miles, Colac,
ten square miles, and Burrumbeet, eight and a half square miles,
all fresh, are the largest. 'There are also large lakes in Gippsland,
but they are more in the nature of lagoons, being separated from
the sea only by a narrow strip of sand. Port Phillip is the largest
inlet from the sea into Victoria, being a sheet of water thirty miles
long, and thirty-five miles wide. It is entered by a rather narrow


passage, and has numerous shallows and sandbanks, the channel
between which is, however, well buoyed.
The head of Port Phillip is known as Hobson’s Bay, and it is there
that most of the large foreign shipping for'the port of Melbourne
anchors. A considerable portion of the intercolonial shipping,
however, steam and sailing, proceeds up the Yarra River, which falls
into Port Phillip, and berths alongside the wharves in the city of
Melbourne itself. Further down Port Phillip, on the western side
and nearer the entrance from the'sea, isCorio Bay, on which is situated
the town of Geelong.
The geological formation of Victoria has been thoroughly and
carefully investigated, the prevailing rocks being found to be granite,
■syenite, quartz, mica, schists, sandstone, clay, slate, and ironstone.


CHAPTER 11.
CLIMATE.
The geographical position of Victoria, which is between the 34th and
39th parallel of south latitude, and the 141st and 150th meridian of
east longitude, gives it the mildest and most equable climate of any
of the Australian colonies. It is warmer in summer than Tasmania,
and colder in winter than New South Wales, Queensland, or South
Australia, but does not suffer from the cold, foggy winter weather of
the first, nor the intense summer heat and scorching winds of the
other three.
It is true that there are occasional hot winds which blow from the
north, and which, bringing with them clouds of dust, parch up
vegetation, shrivel the fruit on the trees, and create a feeling of
extreme lassitude in both human beings and animals. But much as
these hot winds are dreaded by new-comers, they are by no
means so frequent and certainly by no means so severe as is
generally supposed. The average of hot wind days for the
colony amounts, according to Professor Neumayer, to about B'4
in the year, but of these it must be remembered the major portion
are rather warm, than hot, wind days. Even at their worst, they
rarely last longer than a day (three days is the maximum duration),
when in the evening a strong south wind, with thunder, lightning and
rain sets in, and rapidly clears the oppressive atmosphere.
These hot winds produce temporary inconvenience to young
children and invalids, yet they are not dangerous. They destroy
organic germs, whether of animal or vegetable origin, which are
generally admitted to be the sources of epidemic diseases. They are
therefore healthy in character.
A popular error with regard to the climate of Victoria is that it is
a land of long and severe droughts, during which the soil is burnt up


for months, vegetation ceases, and the country is decimated of cattle
and sheep for want of water. Nothing was ever further from the
truth. It is not denied that there have been and are occasional
seasons of drought, but these, like the hot winds, are greatly over-
rated, and are not nearly so frequent, so severe, or so disastrous as
has been stated. The truth is that Victoria, while not having so great
a rainfall as that portion of New South Wales which lies between
the coast range and the sea, has a greater one than South
Australia, as is shown by the valuable work of Sir G. S. Kingston, in
which the number of inches of rain for the year in Sydney, Melbourne,
and Adelaide are stated at 49.95 in., 27.58 in., and 21.36 in. respec-
tively. The mean of the rainfall in Melbourne for fourteen years
during the various seasons is set down as follows : —Spring 40'3 days,
summer 24‘4 days, autumn 28'9 days, winter 41 - 9 days, a total
average of 135'5 days. In Sandhurst, as representing the northern
part of the colony, the number of wet days averaged 164'82, and in
Portland, as representing the south-western portion, 108'08 days.
The year of greatest rainfall was 1849, when 44’25 in. of rain fell, and
that of least 1845, when it was only 15 - 94 in.—both these years
may, however, be looked on as exceptional ones. The balance of the
year, omitting occasional unpleasantly hot days, may be characterised
as consisting of fine, clear, genial weather. The mean temperature
of the air at Melbourne is shown, as based on observations extending
over fourteen years, as in spring 57°'0, summer 65°‘3, autumn 58° - 7,
winter 49° '2. In summer 80° in the shade may be looked upon as
extreme heat, and yet such is the purity and elasticity of the air,
that even with this exceptional temperature, little or no inconvenience is
felt. The hottest day on record during the last eighteen years, was the
14th January, 1872, when the thermometer in the shade showed
111° '2; it has risen to or above 100° sixty-one times during the same
period. During the same eighteen years the thermometer has fallen
to or below the freezing point fifty-two times, the extreme cold being
in 1865, when 30° were registered. All this goes a long way to prove
the assertion that has been made over and over again, both by
colonists and visitors who have travelled much, that the climate of
Victoria is one of the finest in the world.


As compared with other places, Melbourne, the capital of the
colony, has a climate corresponding with that of Maffra, a small
township eighteen miles N.W. of Lisbon, situated in 38° 55' N. lat.
and 700 feet above sea level. The chart shows the isothermal line
on which Melbourne is situated to correspond to that on which, in
the northern hemisphere, are placed Marseilles, Bordeaux, Bologna,
Nice, Verona, and Madrid, the climate of Melbourne, however,
having the advantage of being more equable than that of any of
those places.
The Victorian spring commences on the 23rd of September, the
weather throughout being generally mild, pleasant, moderately warm
and having about the average rainfall. Summer commences on the
22nd of December, the longest day, and usually opens with change-
aide weather, occasional high winds, and heavy rain. December is
the wettest, and January the hottest summer month, although hot
winds are frequently experienced in February. Autumn begins on the
20th of March, when, alternating with refreshing showers, occurs the
pleasantest time of the year. The summer heats have passed, and
the soft airs from the north and north-west temper the atmosphere
to a delicious mildness. Winter commences on the 21st of June, the
shortest day, and brings with it stormy and boisterous, but not very
wet weather, although there are occasional heavy falls of rain.
With regard to the climate, in reference to the growth of vege-
table products, it may be said that Victoria, within its comparatively
limited area, will grow and bring to perfection the products of three
of the seven vegetable zones into which each hemisphere is divided.
Speaking generally, it assimilates to Southern Europe, and especially
to that part of it bordering on the western part of the Mediterranean
Sea, for although the latitude of Victoria is several degrees higher
than that of the countries indicated, still, the fact that a lower mean
temperature, varying from 4° to 7°, and even to 10°, prevails in the
southern over the northern hemisphere in corresponding latitudes
outside the equator, fully accounts for the difference. This difference
is caused mainly by the greater area of ocean surface.
But it is necessary to seek further for a reason why within an
extent of barely 240 miles, or something over 3° of latitude, there


should be as great a range of climate as exists within a range of from
10° to 11° in the most favoured parts of Europe. This reason is to be
found in the fact that there are certain local causes constantly at
work, which on the one hand correct the true southern hemisphere
tendency to lowered temperature in one part of the colony, and on
the other retain it in its normal state in another.
These causes are due to the influence of the low coast mountain
range which divides the country into two nearly equal parts, north
and south. In his treatise on the subject published in the “ Official
Record of the Melbourne Exhibition, 1872,” Mr. O’Hea, M.L.A.,
thus accurately traces the operation of these causes:—“The rise of
the land upwards from the sea is so gradual as to be scarcely per-
ceptible, yet it is sufficiently marked to cause the entire coast region
to present a decided slope facing the great Southern Ocean, and
directly exposed to the cooling influence of the winds that blow from
the water upon the land. This gives, for the latitude, a compara-
tively cool summer climate to the coast region, though the value of
the mean temperature reading of the season is generally made to
appear high by reason of the periodically recurring hot winds of
December, January, and February, from the north. The coast
district is thus, on the -whole, exceedingly mild in its climate. On
the other hand the country inland, from the summit level of the
Dividing Range to the Murray, descends with an equally gradual but
decisive slope facing the north—an aspect which secures to it an
enhanced degree of solar heat, which heightens the mean tempera-
ture in the north of the colony to the same extent as the opposite
conditions lower it in the south. The periodical hot winds have
also their distinctive effect in this direction, and the greater or less
prevalence of very decided drought throughout the year lends its aid
to give to the northern division of Victoria a mean summer tempera-
ture of comparatively high value. ”
Thus the coast range, shutting in that corner of Victoria known as
Gippsland, and producing there a moist climate, turns off to the
westward, and practically divides the colony into a northern and
a southern half. In the southern is the wheat-growing, and, owflng
to its mildness, the grape-producing region. It is in the northern


half of the colony that is found the temperature representing the
zone of the olive, fig, and orange.
Will these products, with all these advantages of climate, grow in
Victoria, can they be brought to perfection, and if so, can they
be practically utilised? Unquestionably; and it needs only energy,
enterprise, patience, and knowledge of the subject to grow all
the vegetable products of the temperate parts of Southern Europe
in profusion. Already there is the corn and the wine, soon, let
it be hoped, there will be the oil. Cereals and root crops, fruits,
from the hardy apple to the luscious peach, grow in abundance.
The wines of Victoria are known and appreciated even in the wine
countries of Europe, and that too “in mouths of wisest censure.”
Much has been done, more “remains behind.” It has been shown,
proved to demonstration, that the colony will produce the olive, the
orange, the fig, the mulberry, the almond, the raisin and currant grape,
&c., &c., and skill and capital are now only waiting to produce in
Victoria the crops of the most favoured countries of Southern Europe.


CHAPTER 111.
SOIL AND AGRICULTURE, LAND-LAWS, ETC.
Up to quite recently an idea prevailed, even amongst the better
informed in England, and on the Continent of Europe, that the interior
of Australia was a vast wilderness, an arid waterless desert of sand
and stones, where nothing grew or could grow, and where it was
impossible for human or animal life to exist; notwithstanding that
so many works have been written on Australia stating the total
falsity of such an idea, yet it cannot be denied that in the minds
of nine-tenths of those who ever think about the colony at all, that
impression still remains. This erroneous idea is now so widely spread
as to deter many of those who might and would become good an
successful colonists from trusting their future in a land concerning
which they are so lamentably misinformed.
Much of this misconception as to the character of the interior
has been caused by the reports of ignorant writers, many of whom
having probably never left Melbourne, have come to a conclusion
on mere hearsay evidence.
But few persons take the trouble to wade through the voluminous
mass of statistical information issued yearly by the Government,
although those who do not would probably be surprised at the extent
of land under cultivation, and the amount and value of the crops
produced. Nor is the land so under cultivation restricted to any
one district. On the contrary, blocks of land are opened up, and
are continually, being opened up for agricultural settlement in all
parts of the colony, and the great work of placing an industrious
population on the soil is rapidly and steadily going on.
It is not contended, of course, that all the land in the colony pos-
sesses soil of equal richness, or of similar quality, and there are large
areas of country unsuitable, either from position, or from the nature


of the ground, for the cultivation of wheat or potatoes, or even for
dairy purposes, but admirably for other valuable industries common in
Southern Europe. And it must be remembered that the present race
of colonists in Victoria devote almost all their energies to growing the
cereals or root-crops of Great Britain, or to the production of milk,
butter, cheese, and other dairy produce. For these purposes special
qualities of soil and situation are required, and hitherto, all country
unsuited to them has been practically ignored, or if utilised, only so
in a perfunctory and experimental manner. An Englishman must
have land that will carry grass. He is accustomed to green fields
and deep meadow land, and ignores the dry volcanic soil that pro-
duces the semi-tropical fruits of Southern Europe, the home of the
vine, the mulberry, and the olive.
So it is that there are millions of acres of land, the finest and
ttest in the world for the growth of those valuable products, lying
nntenanted in the immediate neighbourhood, or within easy distance
of large centres of population. As has been shown in a previous
chapter, the climate is suitable for these products, and experiments
have satisfactorily proved that the soil is of the proper character and
quality. It now remains only for intelligence and energy to carry
out the enterprise to its full fruition, and to cover the sunny slopes,
spreading plains, and sheltered valleys of northern Victoria, with a
race of hardy vignerons, olive dressers, and sericulturists.
In dealing with the question of agriculture, it is proposed, first of
all, to treat on the extraordinary facilities offered by the Government
of Victoria for taking up land in freehold. These facilities are not
the growth of a day. In former years the colony was, except
in a few cases, a territory composed of vast holdings, utilised
mainly for sheepwalks, and so held by the squatters, as these large
stockowners are called, as to preclude ownership, or even occupa-
tion, by small farmers. As time progressed, and the desire of
colonists to settle on the land increased, it became the policy of the
Government to throw open the land for general occupation.
After a considerable amount of tentative legislation the first success-
ful measure was the Land Act of 1869. Previous to its passage the Hon.
J. M. Grant had by his administration of the Land Act of 1865, and


especially by his interpretation of the powers entrusted to him
under the 42nd clause, done much to settle the people upon the lands,
but the area which they could occupy was too small, the terms too
high, and the tenure insecure. The Land Act of 1869, introduced
by Mr. Grant and the Hon. J. J. Casey, President of the Paris
Commission, and subsequently administered by the latter, intro-
duced free selection before survey, continued the fixed price at £1
per acre, to be paid by ten instalments of 2s. each, reduced the area
capable of being selected to 320 acres, insisted upon personal
residence after the first six months for two years and a half, culti-
vation of one tenth during the first three years, enclosing with a
fence, and effecting improvements to the value of £1 per acre. The
choice of selection was thrown on the Department of Lands, as also
the power to determine whether the conditions had or had not been
complied with. This act is now in force, and it is to it that the
rise and extension of agriculture in Victoria may be fairly said to be
due, as under its liberal provisions vast tracts of territory com-
paratively waste until then have been taken up, notably in the
districts of the Goulburn Valley, the Wimmera, Avoca, Campaspe,
Terricks, Thunder, Loddon, and Ovens Plains, Gippsland, and the
Upper Yarra.
Any man can hold land, and can become the proprietor thereof
by paying for it at the rate of 2s. per acre for ten years; nor
does a foreigner need to become naturalised in order to enjoy the
privilege. Shortly, the provisions are as follows :
1. Any person has the right of free selection of any land in
the colony which may not have been sold or disposed of, under
certain conditions.
2. He may apply personally to the land officer for the district
in which he wishes to select for a licence to occupy an area of
Crown lands not exceeding 320 acres in extent.
3. The term for which the application must be made must be
three years, the occupation fee or rent being at the rate of 2s.
per acre, paid half-yearly in advance.
4. The license is not transferable, nor has the licensee power
to sublet.


5. The licensee must fence the land within two years, must reside
upon it, and during the three years’ term of his license must cultivate
at least one out of every ten acres, and must make a total of improve-
ments to the value of £1 per acre of the allotment, the value of
the fencing being included in the improvements.
6. Within thirty days of the termination of his three years’
license, and having fulfilled the conditions of occupancy, the
licensee may, on payment of 14s. per acre, obtain a Crown grant
in fee simple of his land, or should he not be in a position to
pay the 14s. per acre, he may obtain a lease of his allotment for
seven years, at a rental of 2s. per acre per annum.
7. At the expiration of the seven years’ lease (ten years in all),
and having fulfilled the conditions, he will have paid £1 per acre
for his land, namely, 2s. per annum for ten years—seven years
of lease and three of previous license—and will then be entitled
to a Crown grant in fee simple of his allotment without any
further payment.
8. The lessee may at any time during the currency of his lease
purchase the freehold by paying in advance the balance between
what he has already paid, and the total sum of £1 per acre.
This easy method of becoming proprietors of the land they
settled on has been productive of a wonderful change in the
materiel of the colonists of Victoria. Thus, in 1861, there were
17,343 farmers, farmers’ wives, market gardeners, &c., and 23,875
farm labourers, farm servants, and garden labourers, a total of
41,218 persons; while in March, 1876, there were no fewer than
88,719 persons employed on the 40,872 farms and agricultural
holdings of the colony, being 61,273 males and 27,446 females.
The facilities offered to the middle classes and agricultural
labourers for the acquisition of homesteads have produced this
remarkable change, since the opportunities of becoming their own
masters have induced thousands of industrious men, who could save
enough of their wages to build a hut, fence in a piece of land, and
provide food for their families until they could get in their first
crops, to settle on the land. There has thus arisen a large body of
small farmers, who, while improving their own positions, have also


materially added to the wealth and substantial good and advance-
ment of the colony. Many other industrious men too, not having
more money than was necessary to pay the first half-year’s rent, and
to build a hut for their families, have boldly ventured on settlement
on their own account, trusting to the work they could obtain during
the three or four busy months of shearing and harvest time for funds
to supply their needs, and to fence and crop their own holdings.
The modus operandi for obtaining an allotment under the Amending
Land Act of 1869 is at once simple and expeditious. The applicant
selects a suitable piece of ground, and having pegged it out, that is
to say, placed a wooden peg not less than three feet above the ground
at each of the four corners of his selection, on one of which pegs he
has placed a notice of his intention to apply to the Crown Lands
Office for the land so marked out, gives notice to the Government
Surveyor for the district, and advertises in the local paper the fact
of his application. The land is thereupon surveyed and reported on,
opportunities being afforded to other parties to object to the land
applied for being granted. Such objections are very rarely raised,
and only for cogent reasons will be entertained. The application
being recommended by the district land officer, and approved by the
Board of Land and Works, the license for occupation is issued forth-
with.
Thus then, by an easy process, any man in Victoria, alien or
otherwise, can by the payment of two shillings per acre per annum
for ten years, and by complying with the simple conditions of fenc-
ing, cultivating, and improving his land, become the possessor of a
farm of from 40 to 320 acres in extent, at the nominal price of £1
per acre, the greater portion of such price having already been paid
by way of rent.
Nor is pastoral occupation allowed to impede agricultural settle-
ment, for except on portions of Crown Lands reserved for public
purposes, the selector may choose out his allotment wherever he
thinks fit, and may have it surveyed at once. The regulations are
so simple that they are easily complied with, much of the difficulty
with the squatters has been overcome, and the bona fide settler may
now obtain his land almost immediately after having marked it out.


With regard to the land itself, the entire area of Victoria is
56,446,720 acres, of which about 13,855,003 acres have been
already alienated, either sold or taken up by selectors, leaving about
42,591,717 acres still the property of the Crown. Of this, however,
over 20,000,000 are not immediately available, as they consist of moun-
tainranges, swamps, and mallee and tea-tree scrub, &c., and require re-
clamation and improvement. Even of this, however, very much, by
the judicious outlay of capital, may, and no doubt will, in future
years, be rendered valuable, lx>th for agricultural and for special
purposes. Of the remaining land, twenty-two and a half million
acres, or thereabouts, which is now ready and open for settlement,
it may be said that it is generally suitable for agricultural purposes.
The very fertile, rich, black, and chocolate soils of volcanic origin
cover an area of nearly 8,000,000 acres, and there are about
23,000,000 acres of rich light loam, alluvium, and good clay. Much
of the forest land, although of excellent quality, is yet unoccupied,
some being covered with heavy timber, some with scrub, but the
labour of clearing this, especially the latter, is not nearly so great as
has been generally supposed. The character of the soil in any
ocality depends, of course, on the geological formation of the
district. According to the latest information the various descrip-
tions of soil may be thus classified. Of rich, light, loamy soil, to be
found on terraced flats along river valleys, and in narrow belts along
the sea coast, also in extensive level plains with stunted timber and
thinly-grassed undulating country, there are about 23,000,000 acres.
The flats referred to are open or lightly-timbered with redgum,
blackwood, &c., and their geological features are clay, sand, lime,
gravel, tertiary, and superficial deposits, including alluvial soil. Of
cold sandy clays and poor light sandy loams found in hilly and
undulating country, timbered with iron and stringy bark, and
having a geological formation of clay, slates, schists, and sandstone,
about 18,000,000 acres. Of rich black and chocolate soil, noted for
its fertility, and met with in open slightly undulating plains,
with isolated wooded, sometimes stony hills, belonging to the
tertiary period, and volcanic in origin, about 8,000,000 acres. Of
light and sandy soils in undulating and hilly country, with open


timber and good grass, about 5,000,000 acres. These soils are also
found on mountain ranges, densely timbered, extending to 6000 feet
above seadevel, and belonging to the granite formation. Of rich
sandy loams, in open well-grassed downs and hilly country, with
dense forests, and showing geologically shales and soft sandstones,
about 2,000,000 acres. Of all these descriptions of soil, for agricul-
tural purposes the alluvial and black vegetable moulds rank first.
They yield very large returns to The farmers, and are situated in
Gippsland, Western Port, round Colac, and all over the Warrnam-
bool district. Next to these are the volcanic soils, black or choco-
late. Some very rich farms are found on these, and they are
admirably suited to the growth of the vine, the olive, the fig, the
mulberry, and other fruits. The poorer loams follow these in order
of value, being fertile, and yielding good crops. The granite soils,
fair, but light and sandy, come next; and lastly, clays and adhesive
loams, and soils in which sand is a large constituent, although some
of the latter are valuable for special products.
Wheat, oats, barley, potatoes, and hay, are, and always have
been, the standard crops of Victoria, and beyond these no great
extent of any one thing has yet been grown. Maize is largely used
for horse feed, but it is principally imported from New South Wales,
where it grows freely. But the small variety, or ninety-days maize,
will ripen anywhere, and it needs only to be better known to cause
it to be cultivated in Victoria. It yields abundantly, with little
trouble, and is good at all stages of its growth for one or other kind
of stock.
With regard to the standard crops, the latest statistics show that
for the year ending 31st March, 1876, there were under wheat, 321,401
acres; oats, 124,100 acres; barley, 31,568 acres; potatoes, 36,901 acres;
hay, 155,274 acres; and green forage, including cereal grasses (barley,
wheat, oats, &c.), maize, rye grass, lucerne, clover, vetches, &c.,
sorghum, and permanent artificial grasses, 308,405 acres; the
returns being wheat, 4,978,914 bushels; oats, 2,719,795 bushels;
barley, 700,665 bushels; potatoes, 124,377 tons; and hay, 206,613
tons. For the year ending 31st March, 1877, the returns were—
wheat, 401,417 acres; oats, 115,209 acres; barley, 25,034 acres;


potatoes, 40,450 acres; hay, 147,408 acres; and green forage, 362,554
acres; yielding wheat, 5,279,730 bushels; oats, 2,294,225 bushels;
barley, 530,323 bushels; potatoes, 134,082 tons; hay, 180,560 tons.
From these figures it will be seen that there has been an increase in
both the average and produce of wheat and potatoes, and a decrease
in oats, barley, and hay. The average produce, however, is lower
per acre than that of the previous year, being in 1876, wheat, 15‘49
bushels; oats, 21'92 bushels; barley, 22'20 bushels; potatoes, 3'37
tons; hay, 1 ’33 tons; and in 1877, wheat, 13T5 bushels; oats, 19 91
bushels; barley, 21T8 bushels; potatoes, 3"31 tons; hay, l - 22 tons.
With the quantity of wheat produced may be taken into account
the quantities imported and exported, and with these must also
be taken into account the manufactures of wheat, namely, flour,
bread, and biscuit, the whole being known to the trade as bread-
stuffs. The statistics of the colony taken from 1836 (assuming that
one bushel of wheat produces forty-five pounds of flour, bread, or
biscuit), show that in almost all the years Victoria has had to
import breadstuffs largely in order to supply the requirements of
her population, and in three years only has there been a residue,
and in those but a small one, remaining for export. The three
years referred to are 1870, 1873, and 1874. In the first of these the
exports of breadstuffs exceeded the imports by 95,654 bushels, in
the second by 138,088 bushels, and in the third by 40,714 bushels.
In 1875, although in an official report laid before Parliament it
was anticipated that there would again be a surplus of breadstuffs
to the amount of about 20,000 bushels, it turned out that the
demand exceeded the supply, and that it was found necessary to
import no less a quantity than 200,369 bushels of breadstuffs over
and above the quantity exported.
The following are the proportions per cent, which the land under
each of the principal crops has borne to the total land under cultiva-
tion in the last two years:—For 1875-6, wheat, 28'52; oats, 11 *01;
barley, 2’80; potatoes, 3’27; hay, 13*78; green forage, 27 ‘37; other
tillage, 1325; total, IOO'OO. For 1876-7, wheat, 32-61; oats, 9*36;
barley, 2 03; potatoes, 3'29; hay, 1T97; green forage, 29-45; other
tillage, 11-29; total, IOO'OO. It will thus be observed that in pro-


portion wheat and green forage covered a larger area, and the other
crops a smaller area in proportion to the total cultivation, in the
latter year than in the former.
Other crops, less important than those already named, are grown
to a certain extent in Victoria. Some of these are raised in gardens
and on smaller lots than those which the collectors are called on to
visit, and therefore the full extent to which they are cultivated does
not appear. For the year 1876-7 these crops are shown as follows:
Beet, carrots, parsnips, and cabbage, 571 acres, .3430 tons; canary,
30 acres, 183 bushels; chicory, 225 acres, 980 bushels; cocksfoot, for
seed, 13 acres, 230 bushels; flax, 3 acres; fibre, 2\ cwt.; linseed,
52 bushels; hops, 225 acres, 129,136 lbs.; maize, 1609 acres, 25,900
bushels; mangel-wurzel, 1285 acres, 15,386 tons; mustard (white),
74 acres, 185 cwt.; onions, 720 acres, 71,580 cwt.; opium poppies,
4 acres, 60 lbs.; osiers, 5 acres; peas and beans, millet and sorghum,
21,235 acres, 373,857 bushels; prairie grass, for seed, 75 acres, 12
bushels; grown on 3 acres only, 72 acres having failed; pumpkins,
19 acres, 77 tons; rape, for seed, 10 acres, 20 bushels; raspberries,
10 acres, 51 cwt.; rye and bere, 1153 acres, 15,277 bushels; rye grass,
for seed, 1851 acres, 28,209 bushels; strawberries, 21 acres, 1509
cwt.; teazles, 3 acres, 19,000 number; tobacco, 1479 acres, 14,413
cwt.; turnips, 224 acres, 1769 tons; vetches and tares, for seed,
8 acres, 47 bushels; vines, 4765 acres; wine, 481,588 gallons; brandy,
3725 gallons.
In addition to the area under these crops, the following land was
returned as being comprised in gardens and orchards in the same
year; —18,641 acres, being an increase of 880 acres on the previous year.
Ten acres under olives, and eleven acres under mulberry trees, are
also returned for the year. The mulberry trees numbered 11,010,
and are grown for the purpose of feeding and rearing silkworms, this
being an industry, which, so far as it has gone, has been attended
with great success in Victoria. The previous year there were 23
acres under mulberries, with 30,650 trees. Of these, no fewer than
25,000 trees, brought from China, France, and Italy, were planted by
a company established near Castlemaine. This company exported
in 1875, over 100 ounces of silkworm grain to the north of Italy,


where it is said to have created quite a sensation amongst the pur-
chasers on account of its healthy appearance. Some cocoons were
also sent, and were highly approved of by competent Judges. No
particulars as to the olive crop have been given.
Mulberry and olive trees are frequently grown in gardens, and
there is no doubt that both are far more extensively cultivated than
the agricultural statistics indicate. With regard to the former, how-
ever, it is to be deplored that although the colony presents special
advantages for their cultivation, a large plantation of them
is reported to have been abandoned since last year, owing to
there being no demand for their produce, which will account
for the discrepancy which appears in the statistics of the two years.
Raspberries, and strawberries too, are cultivated to a considerable
extent in private gardens, so that far more are produced than appear
in the statistics. This is also the case with oziers for basket making,
which are often grown in small patches, in swamps and on the banks
of streams, and do not come under the notice of collectors of
statistics.
Land in fallow is included in land in tillage. The quantity of
fallow land in 1876-7 is returned at 84,159 acres, as against 97,133
acres in the previous year.
The number of hands employed on farms during the year ending
31st March, 1877, was 63,394 males; 28,747 females; total,
92,141; being an increase of 3422 persons over the previous year.
These figures include the owners of holdings, and only refer to
alienated land of which no portion is subject to a squatting license.
The rates of wages for agricultural labour on farmsfor the year 1876--7,
average as follows, board and lodgings being given in every case in addi.
tion to wages, and there still being, as there has always been, a great
scarcity of labour, especially in the busy season; —Ploughmen, per
week, 21s. 3d.; farm labourers, 17s. 4d.; married couples, 265. 3d.;
females, 10s. Bd.; mowers, 31s. Id.; mowers, per acre, ss. 9d.;
reapers, per week, 335. 4d.; reapers, per acre, 12s. lid.; Threshers,,
per bushel, Bd.
The number of holdings of various sizes, and the extent of occupied
and cultivated land embraced in them, are shown as follows. It must


be noticed, however, that these statistics, in common with all others
concerning agriculture, contain no account of holdings which are not
over one acre in extent, or of land which does not appear to be in the
bond fide occupation of some one living on or near the ground, or of
any which is occupied for other purposes than agriculture or the
keeping of live-stock, or of any Crown lands held under pastoral
licenses:—Holdings of from 1 to 4 acres, 1673; land in occupation;
4874 acres; land under tillage, 2836 acres. Froms to 14 acres, 3536,
land in occupation, 31,138 acres; under tillage, 13.981 acres. From
15 to 29 acres, 3897; land in occupation, 80,309 acres; under tillage,
25,333 acres. From 30 to 49 acres, 3284; land in occupation, 125,895
acres; under tillage, 34,023 acres. From 50 t 099 acres, 5998; land in
occupation, 432,307 acres; under tillage, 93,693 acres. From 100 to
199 acres, 8103; land in occupation, 1,144,521 acres; under tillage,
204,474 acres. From 200 to 320 acres, 11,664; land in occupation,
3,315,835 acres; under tillage, 415,368acre5. From 321 to 400 acres,
1132; land in occupation, 407,982 acres; under tillage, 62,586 acres.
From 401 to 500 acres, 920; land in occupation, 414,704 acres; under
tillage, 60,201 acres. From 500 acres upwards, 2915; land in occupa-
tion, 7,929,938 acres; under tillage, 322,736 acres. Being a total of
43,057 holdings; land in occupation, 13,855,003 acres; and land
under tillage, 1,231,105 acres; the average size of holdings being 322
acres; the average per centage of occupied land, enclosed, being
91 - 7; the average percentage of occupied land cultivated, 8 'B9; and
the average area cultivated by each holder being 28 - 6 acres.
The average prices of the agricultural produce in 1877 are: —
Wheat, ss. lOd. per bushel; oats, 3s. 7d.; barley, 3s. lOd.; maize
4s. 4d.; hay, £4 13s. per ton; potatoes, £2 145.; mangel wurzel,
£1 11s. 6d.; showing a considerable increase in prices over the
previous year in all those products, except barley and maize, the for-
mer being at the same price as, and the latter at a slight reduction
from, that of 1876.
The standard weight of crops in Victoria is reckoned at 60 lbs. per
bushel for wheat and maize; 40 lbs. for oats; and 50 lbs. for barley.
The actual weight, however, varies in different districts, wheat vary-
ing from 58 to 64 lbs.; average, 61 lbs.; oats, from 35 to 44 lbs.


average, 40 lbs.; barley, 45 to 56 lbs.; average, 51 lbs.; maize, 50 to
601b5.; average, 55lbs. These averages have been the weights of
produce since 1863, except in the case of barley last year, when that
article averaged 1 lb. lighter.
The statistics of live-stock on farms and lands unconnected with
squatting stations show that there were horses, 177,483; cattle,
959,146, of which 264,648 were milch cows; sheep, 6,444,786; pigs,
171,729.
In order to afford an idea of the extent to which farming is carried
on in the colony, it may be here recorded that the approximate value
of agricultural implements and machinery on farms, was valued,
on the 31st March, 1877, at £1,734,976; and of improvements, at
£13,754,526; a total of £15,492,502.
In proceeding to the consideration of what may fairly be called
new agricultural industries in Victoria (inasmuch as although they,
or some of them, have been in existence for years, still it has been
merely experimental cultivation, and, with the exception, perhaps,
of the culture of the grape vine, and the manufacture of wine, never
have been gone into with the object of producing a staple com-
modity), it may not be out of place to mention that they have long
commanded the attention of the most eminent scientists of the
colony, and that numerous and exhaustive reports and treatises have
from time to time appeared in the public press with the object of
attracting attention to the subject.
More especially has attention been drawn to the cultivation of the
Vine, from the factthatthe vine would thrive and bear fruit luxuriantly
in the Victorian climate and soil. Although both these are generally
more suitable on the north than on the south side of the Great Dividing
Range, yet so long back as 1846 vineyards were established in the
district of Geelong, and in the face of many obstacles, such as the
difficulty of procuring vine-cuttings suitable for the soil, the
ignorance of the proper management of the vine on the part of new
cultivators, the indiscriminate mixing of various kinds of grapes for
pressing, the want of proper cellarage, and the remunerative rate of
wages for other pursuits, vine-growing slowly but surely made
progress, the more that of late years a few vignerons from the


continent of Europe have planted vineyards, and so far introduced
the systems in use in their respective countries, while a knowledge
of the varieties of the grape and the best methods of cultivation
have been imparted through the medium of the press. The requisite
knowledge and experience for the cultivation of the vine are by no
means difficult. Climate and soil have done so much that a little
observation, inquiry, and natural tact, with advice or assistance
from properly trained vignerons, will enable a man to master a
sufficient knowledge of the subject to warrant him in commencing
operations for himself.
A large amount of capital is now invested in the culture of the
vine. In 1856, there were 279 acres of vineyards, yielding 11,000
gallons of wine, and 340 gallons of brandy. In 1869 there were
4950 acres, on which were grown 9,230,531 vines, yielding 577,287
gallons of wine, 878 gallons of brandy, and 24,980 cwt. of grapes
for sale, and in 1877 there were 4765 acres, on which were grown
7,938,512 vines, yielding 481,588 gallons of wine, and 3725 gallons of
brandy, a falling-off from the previous year, in extent of vineyards,
number of vines, and produce of wine, but a very large increase in
the quantity of brandy made.
Generally speaking, the Victorian wines are good in their several
kinds, but it must be noted that whether light or full bodied; they
are the produce of French or German vines. Except the Verdeilhq
(Madeira), scarcely any other is to be found as a standard sort,
although in the valley of the Murray all the Spanish vines would
have a fine chance, for there a deep gravelly soil, heat and shelter,
and no hot winds, indicate their natural home. The wines from the
north of the Dividing Range still maintain the high standard for which
they have been known for many years. Owing to the great variety
of climate, and the abundance of fine aspects for vineyards in the
general contour of the country, Victoria is fortunately capable of
producing, and does produce, wines which can he advantageously
classified with many of the European kinds. In the Melbourne
Exhibition of 1875, she took in all 99 prizes, being 35 first-
class, 24 second, 29 third, and 11 fourth class, the samples being
as follows:— White, Mixed, Riesling, Chasselas, Verdeilho, Nice,


Sherry, Pedro Ximenes, Ugni Blanc, and Roussette; Red, Hermi-
tage, Carbinet, Gamais, Mourvedre or Esparte, Mataro, Mixed
Burgundy, Shiraz, Black Cluster, Malvoise, Grenache, Leverdun or
Glory of Australia, Pineau, Malbec and Muscatel. Of the white
wines the Riesling, of which there were 26 samples, took 17 prizes,
and of the red, the Hermitage, out of 35 samples, took 29 prizes.
The Ararat district showed 15 samples, Beech worth 6, Castlemaine
14, Echuca 12, Geelong 8, Goulburn 12, Melbourne 28, Murray 4,
and Sandhurst 41, making in all 140 exhibits, which took 99 prizes;
Hew South Wales, with 45 exhibits, taking 39, and South Australia
with 66 exhibits, 55 prizes. At the Philadelphia Exhibition, 1876,
prizes were awarded to Victorian wines.
In connection with Victorian wines, Mr. Lesley A. Moody, Chief
Inspector of Distilleries, Melbourne, reports:—“The result (of
analysis) corroborates an opinion which I had entertained for some
time, that the natural wines of the northern portions of Victoria
develop more alcohol than natural wines have been generally con-
sidered to be capable of doing, and range much higher in this respect
than the British customs standard of 26 per cent, of proof.” Again,
“The quality of the wines tested was in general very good, and in
many cases might be called excellent. The speciality of most of the
produce of the vineyards situated in the northern portion of the
colonies is that it is full-bodied, rich, and fruity, caused, doubtless,
by the greater warmth and dryness of climate there, which ripen the
grape thoroughly, and give a high gravity of must. The character,
istics of these wines are similar to those of Spain and Portugal, while
those made in the southern districts resemble the wines made in
Germany and the Rhine, and the northern and midland districts of
France. The produce of the same description of grape grown in the
districts of the north of the Dividing Range, and that grown to the
southward or seaward side, makes wine of a distinctive character.
My experience of some years in the vineyards of the colony leads me
to the conclusion that the character of the wine made is improving
year by year; and as Victoria possesses soils and climates of such
variety, and so suitable for the growth of wines of so many descrip-
tions, and of a superior class, I am sanguine of a great future for


this produce when greater experience, knowledge, and capital, are
brought to hear on it, and vignerons can be induced to see the policy
of limiting their vines grown to those only which experience shows
to be suitable to the soil and climate of their vineyards. A few good
wines will find a readier market, be easier and more cheaply manu-
factured, and therefore more profitable, than a large variety of
medium quality,”
From this undeniable testimony as to the high character of Victorian
wines, and from the facts that they command a ready market, and
that there are millions of acres of land having soil available and
suitable for their growth, and a climate which will bring them to
perfection, it cannot be, but that with the influx of vignerons from
France, the Rhine, and the Mediterranean coast, will come the time
when Victoria shall vie with the older countries of Europe, in being
looked upon as one of the finest wine-producing countries in the
world.
But not only in the direction of the cultivation of the vine is there
an opening for the overcrowded peasantry and small capitalists of
southern Europe. The soil and climate of the colony are equally
suitable to the growth of other southern products. And first the
Olive, As yet, but little has been done towards the production of
this valuable fruit tree, but even that little has proved unmistakably
that it will flourish and that its fruit will ripen in Victoria as well as
in its native soil, if properly planted and tended during the earlier
stages of its growth.
In the year 1871 a Royal Commission was appointed to investigate
and report on the establishment of rural industries in Victoria, and
the acclimatisation of the olive was one of the subjects which first
engaged their attention. It is due, however, to the energy dis-
played by the Rev. Dr. Bleasdale, that an impetus was given to the
industry, and that the enterprise assumed a tangible shape. That
gentleman, having been entrusted by the Commissioners with the
duty of procuring plants of the olive tree, and of superintending the
planting of them, procured one hundred truncheons of 5 feet in length
and from two to three inches in diameter, from olive trees which had
already borne fruit in South Australia. These he divided into two


lots of fifty each, one lot being sent to Sunbury, about a dozen to be
planted in the vineyard of the Hon. J. Cf. Francis, and the remainder
in the grounds of the Industrial School, this having been done mainly
with a view of testing the different aspects and soils. These were
planted under the direction of Mr. Baldini, a gentleman thoroughly
acquainted with olive growing as carried on in some of the cooler
climates of Italy, who showed the work-master at Sunbury the
method usually adopted in the northern parts of that country,
when truncheons are planted. It may, therefore, be taken for
granted that the Italian method of planting had a fair trial. The
lemaining fifty, except a dozen planted at Essendon, were planted
in the gardens of the Acclimatisation Society at the Royal Park,
Melbourne, by a native of Oporto, carefully in accordance with the
mode of planting employed in Portugal. Besides these, several
hundred cuttings were planted in various parts of the colony, and
in various ways, and the result, up to now, has been satisfactory,
having done all that was desired, namely, proved that the olive will
thrive in Victoria. The foundation of the olive groves has been
established, and it only needs knowledge and enterprise to carry out
the profitable industry, the fabrication of olive oil, for even now,
from the olives grown on the few trees that have arrived at full
bearing, has been expressed oil which has been pronounced by com-
petent judges equal in quality to the best French or Italian olive
oil.
The I ig, that is to say the green and red fig, is already acclimatised
in Victoria, and has been not only brought to perfection so far as
the growth is concerned, but has been dried, and in the form of
dried figs, has been exhibited and offered in the market. But it is a
fact that the true Turkey white fig, the valuable % of commerce,
has not been introduced into the colony. Why this is so it is
difficult to determine, for wherever the olive will ripen the fig will
flourish, and the Victorian climate appears to be especially favour-
able to the production of this fruit; nor is its cultivation attended
with much difficulty. The figs introduced into Victoria, and pro-
pagated by means of seeds, suckers, or cuttings, have been very
prolific, are great fruit bearers, and exist to a considerable extent.


principally, if not wholly in gardens. They are generally of the
green or red sort, and assume the form of shrubs or spreading
bushes, rather than of trees. The Rev. Dr. Bleasdale, who has
studied the subject in Portugal, where figs are largely grown,
says that although it might appear ungracious and dogmatic to say
that there was not a true or white fig in the colony, still he believed
that such was the case—at all events, in all his experience he had
never seen one. All he had met had a taint of red in their fruit,
and did not shape for forming trees, but only bushes. The true fig
tree has no business to bear other than true white or yellow fruit, as
its true and proper autumn crop, for there are two crops annually.
It remains then for those who understand the subject to cultivate,
not only that, but the black or dark purple fig in the colony, and
thus to bring to a practical issue the production and drying, which
latter presents no special difficulties, of this valuable and profitable
fruit.
Amongst the new industries introduced of late years into Victoria,
none perhaps, have attracted more of public attention than the
production of Silk. A lady, Mrs. Bladen Neill, who certainly
deserves well of the colony for her exertions in this direction, has
already done very much towards affording a knowledge of the pro-
cess of production of this valuable article, and in Victoria, with her
suitable geographical position and meteorological peculiarities, and
her large consumption of imported silks, much more remains, and
ought to be done in this direction. The white mulberry (morus
alba) the best and richest aliment known for the silk-worm, grows
luxuriantly, and the true silk-worm (Bombyx Morus) thrives
well in Victoria. Mulberry trees are grown in nearly all gardens of
any pretensions, and in the Botanical Gardens and Royal Park,
Melbourne, and at Sunbury, and the breeding of the silk-worm has
long been a favourite amusement with the ladies and youth of the
colony.
The samples of silk shown at the various Exhibitions in Mel-
bourne and elsewhere, cannot be surpassed in fineness and strength
of texture by silk produced in any part of the world. As yet, how-
ever, few attempts have been made at the manufacture of colonially


produced silk, beyond reeling it off the cocoons, and making it into
hanks.
Although, as has been stated, mulberry trees are grown far and
wide, still the number of full-grown trees in any one locality is
limited, and there is not therefore a large and readily available
supply of fresh leaves for the sustenance of any very large collection
of silk-worms. Before, then, anything can be done in the way of
extensive production of new silk, the foundation must be laid by
the formation of numerous large plantations of the mulberry tree in
the neighbourhood of the centres of population. Nor is there either
difficulty in, nor lack of available land for its cultivation. It is a
hardy tree within the limits of the vine climate, and grows rapidly
and vigorously everywhere throughout the colony. The soil most
suitable is a dry sandy loam, or other moderately fertile, well
drained site, if possible on a gently sloping surface, a heavy alluvial
soil, swampy or difficult to drain, being avoided, for although the
tree will flourish there the leaves will supply a coarse unwhole-
some food for the worms, which will bring on disease, and will
give an inferior quality of silk.
Besides the true mulberry tree [Morns alba), the soil and climate
of Victoria is well adapted to growing the Manilla Mulberry Shrub
(Morns muUicaulis), which is valuable for supplying a copious supply
of tender leaves for the worms in the first stage of their growth.
Nor are the mulberry and the silkworm proper the only sources of
silk supply. There are numerous silkworms of different species
which feed on the leaves of other plants, but which are far inferior
in value to the true silkworm, as, although they produce a strong
lustrous silk of dark-yellow colour, it is open to the great objection
that it is almost impossible to unwind the cocoon, and notwithstand-
ing the fact that the French have succeeded after repeated efforts
in the filature or reeling off the thread of the cocoon of these, the
Eria or Arrindy worms, the trouble, delay, and expense of the
process puts a practical bar to it, and the arrindy cocoons are
now converted into Bourre de Sole, that is, the cocoons are carded
into a kind of wadding, which is then spun into thread like cotton
or wool. The Eria, Arrindi, or Palma Christ! (Bomhyx Ricini),


feeds on the Rkinus or castor-oil plant, and this worm ought to
be largely produced in Victoria, for the castor-oil plant grows with
the ease and rapidity of a weed, and is in leaf throughout the year.
The castor-oil plant has the additional recommendation of its seeds
furnishing, by a simple process of pressing, the well-known
medicinal drug, castor oil.
Other descriptions of silkworms are known to the Chinese and
Japanese, and feed on the Japan varnish tree and the oak, and
the Island of Madagascar is remarkable for the variety of silk-
producing worms found there. These latter, however, belong to
the curiosities of silk production, and would not, perhaps, thrive
in Victoria. Enough has been said, however, to show that a vast
field of enterprise is open to skilful and energetic sericulturists
from France and Italy, in order to develop an industry which
is second to none in the world for the demand for its product,
and the pecuniary value of its results, if carried out in an extensive
and spirited manner.
Although the Orange and Lemon have for a considerable time
past been cultivated with some show of success in Victoria, and
especially in the neighbourhood of Melbourne, still it is the opinion
of many experienced persons that the climate is unsuitable.
Certain it is that the oranges produced, although hardly sweet
enough, and somewhat thick-skinned, have been good, but have
mostly been grown in well sheltered gardens and choice spots.
What is wanted, however, from a commercial point of view, is
not that this superb fruit should be cultivated with the skill and
care of an accomplished horticulturist, and the superior tilth and
fertility of a sedulously tended garden or nursery, but its growth
on a large scale, say in numerous orangeries of from ten to fifteen
acres each, with simply the ordinary care and attention devoted
to orchards of less important fruit, and for this purpose it is
questionable whether the neighbourhood of Melbourne, or indeed
any of the districts lying south of the Dividing Range, are well
adapted. True it is that the orange flourishes to perfection in
the same climatic belt as that which suits the olive and the fig,
or even the somewhat cooler vine climate. But, at the same


time, the tribe or genus Citrus, of which the orange (Aurantium)
is the noblest species, advances, with respect to some of its species,
such as the lime and the shaddock, into the tropics, where the
olive will not bear fruit.
The fact is, that the mildness of the Melbourne winter and
spring are all that could be desired, but that the summer and
autumn have not the duration of a high temperature sufficiently
prolonged to furnish that exquisite mingling of the saccharine
and acid juices of the fruit in the full perfection that the orange
is capable of exhibiting, and that it does exhibit in the fruit grown
in warmer climates. The true habitat of the orange in Victoria,
therefore, grown for profit, is on the sunny slopes north of the'
Dividing Range, in the direction of the Wimmera, the Murray,
Echuca, Sandhurst, Maryborough, Moliagul, and other correspond-
ing districts wherever there is rich soil, and means of copious
irrigation. And of spots favourable there is no lack, so that there
is little fear that, when the matter is taken up in earnest, and
by persons who know practically the requirements of the tree,
and the proper method of its cultivation, the growth of this
valuable fruit will become an important industry.
The five divisions of the Citrus tribe are the orange, the citron,
the lemon, the lime, and the shaddock, with their numerous
varieties. The orange and lemon, and perhaps the citron, are,
however, those only which concern Victoria, and experience has
proved that no part of the world has a more suitable climate and
soil for the production of these valuable fruits than the south-
eastern districts of the Australian continent, including New South
Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. In these colonies, especially
on the Hunter River, and the Parramatta River, in New South
Wales, trees of from twelve to fifteen years old will produce
from thirty to forty dozen oranges each tree, and in some cases
a hundred dozen have been gathered from trees forty years old.
The favourite varieties, all flourishing well in New South Wales,
are as follows The Bahia, or Navel orange; the Sabina, the
China, the Maltese, or Blood; the Siletta, the St. Michael’s, the
Genoa, the Sorento, the Poor Man’s, the Seville, the Tangierine,


the Canton Mandarin, the Emperor of China Mandarin, the Emperor
Mandarin, the Thorny Mandarin, and the Cumquat. Of these
the St. Michael’s, Navel, Poor Man’s, Seville, Cumquat, and the
various Mandarin oranges, and several kinds of lemons have been
and are satisfactorily brought to maturity in Victoria, and there
can he no reason why, with suitable soil and proper culture, the
colony should not compete in the production of this noble fruit
with her elder sister colony of New South Wales.
The Lisbon lemon and the Sweet lemon have already been accli-
matised and grow to perfection, the trees being hardy, easy of culti-
vation, free growers, and very productive.
It is somewhat unaccountable that with the advantages of climate
and soil, so well adapted to the growth of the vine, there should
have been so much indifference displayed by Victorian vignerons
with regard to the cultivation of grapes for drying, or converting into
Raisins and Currants. They have been and are, it is admitted,
produced in the colony, but only on a very small scale, but even
small as it is, the fact has been proved by actual experience that
with a moderate amount of attention they will flourish here, and
may be rendered an important and prosperous undertaking by any
one capable of carrying it out. The grapes mostly used for drying
into raisins are the fleshy sort of the Muscat, the Sultana, and the
Black Calabrian, which latter kind is unknown in Victoria, and the
Sultana is not very well known. But raisins from the Muscat of
Alexandria grape have been successfully made, and excellent raisin
grapes, Lexia and Muscatel, will both come to perfection in the colony,
as has been proved beyond doubt.
Currants, dried from the small Zante and Corinth grape, have also
been produced in small quantities, the fruit growing well in the
warmer parts of the colony.
Almonds have been grown for years in the neighbouring colony of
South Australia, and their production offers a fair field for enterprise
in Victoria, where some few varieties are already established. This
fruit is cultivated largely in Erance, Spain, Italy, Portugal, Algeria,
and other Mediterranean countries, whence it forms a very valuable
article of export. Persons from France and Spain experienced in


their culture would find an opening here, for, as has been stated, both
the climate and soil of Victoria have been proved to be favourable to
its growth.
The establishment of plantations of the Sweet Chestnut (Fagus
castanea, Castanea vesca), on a large scale, has long been a
desideratum recognised among men of science in Victoria. The
timber of the chesnut tree is exceedingly valuable for the manufac-
ture of wine casks, as it contains no matter which can give the wine
an objectionable taste or colour. Besides this the tree is highly
ornamental, and as it ages, becomes very large and umbrageous. Its
fruit too, which in Spain, Portugal, and Italy contributes very largely
to the luxury and sometimes the necessity of life, is a commodity
which at present, in South Australia and everywhere it is grown,
commands a very high price in consequence of the scanty supply.
The tree is one that is hardy, grows freely, and is easily transplanted
when young, but which requires a good soil, requiring sufficient depth
of soil or open rock to admit of its forming a tap root. In Portugal it
is found to flourish best in gravelly districts, and on the slopes of
rotten rocky hills. As any place, however, having moderate drainage,
and capable of growing beech or ash, would be suitable, there seems
no difficulty in fixing on abundance of suitable sites in Victoria.
The varied resources of soil and climate in Victoria are proved in
nothing so much perhaps as in the fact of the production of Opium of
a superior kind, the choicest yielding ten per centum of morphia,
being the produce of the mountain valleys in North Gipps Land.
There is, however, at present a grave obstacle to its being cultivated
as an article of commerce, and that is the scarcity of juvenile labour,
the fittest and cheapest for the purpose. The crop of opium, which
is gathered in December or January, must be got in within six weeks
at the utmost, and as in a plantation of five or six acres in extent, it
would require a dozen hardworking youths to go over the vast
number of poppy heads in due time at the period of gathering the
milky sap from the carefully wounded capsule which forms the opium
without waste, and with cleanliness, the vast amount of work neces-
sary to gather a large harvest is easily to be seen. Where, however,
the grower, either by means of his own numerous family, or with the


assistance of the children of neighbours, has been able to over-
come the obstacle, the production of opium in Victoria has been very
profitable. The value of opium depends on the quantity of morphia
it contains. Ten per cent, of morphia is considered a high rate, and
Victorian opium is found to contain from 7 to 10 per cent. A fair ave-
rage yield is 401bs. to the acre, the price varying, according to quality,
from 20s. to 30s. per lb. The profitable nature of the production of
this plant may be estimated from the fact that about 48,0001b5..
are imported into Victoria annually, to say nothing of the
importation into the other Australian colonies. Besides a large quan-
tity for colonial consumption, there would, in all probability, be
a large export demand, especially to America, where enormous quan-
tities of this drug are used mainly in the composition of American
patent medicines.
One of the most important of the new industries of the colony,,
and one to which the special attention of farmers seems to have
quite recently been attracted, is the culture of the Tobacco plant.
The unprecedently rapid increase in the area of land under tobacco
this year (1876-7) as compared with previous years, shows that
agriculturists have at last opened their eyes to the great advantage
accruing from the production of this crop. In 1874-5 there were
733 acres under tobacco ; in 1875-6 there were 782 acres ; while this
year there are no fewer than 1479 acres. The crop for 1875-6 was
for some reason not very clearly understood a failure in most
districts, the quantity raised being only 501 cwt., so that it would be
unfair to compare this year’s crop with last year’s, but the year pre-
vious (1874-5) there were raised from 733 acres 6839 cwt. of tobacco,
while this year (1876-7) from 1479 acres has been produced 14,413
cwt. The principal portion of this crop has, as hitherto, been grown
in the northern and north-eastern part of the colony, notably in the
Beechworth district, where the cultivation of the tobacco plant has
long been viewed with favour. Although it is many years since the
attention of farmers was first directed to this plant, and since,
in fact, a commencement was made in its culture, and considerable
quantities of the leaf produced, still it was found for a long time
that, owing to the want of experience and skill on the part of


growers, more particularly with regard to the process of curing
the leaf, it was impossible to produce a good quality of tobacco, and
that the most of that produced was only ht for “sheepwash.” The
consequence of this was that the prices offered for it were not remu-
nerative, and tobacco growing fell, as a consequence, into disfavour.
Still, in the face of these discouraging circumstances, there were
found persons sufficiently confident of future success to persevere,
and the consequence was that with enlarged experience and practical
instruction on the subject, they have succeeded in producing a very
fair marketable article in the form of cured tobacco leaf, which,
mixed with American leaf, is now worked up by Melbourne manu-
facturers. As compared with the demand the supply of Colonial leaf
is very small, and there is ample room for extending the operations of
the growth of this article to an almost unlimited extent, inasmuch
as by still further improving the quality of the tobacco an export
trade will spring up, and thus a very large demand arise. That
there is a tendency to operate in this direction is clearly proved
by the rapid strides lately made in its culture, as shown by the
figures quoted. Samples shown in the leaf as well as manufactured
from Oxley and other places in the Beechworth district, near
the Murray river, which forms the division line between Victoria
and New South Wales, show the decided fitness of the soil and
climate of (at least this part of) Victoria, for the production of
superior tobacco. The varieties of the tobacco plant grown in the
colony are Virginian, Maryland, Kentucky, and Connecticut —all
American sorts —and although the climate seems favourable to the
much-esteemed Syrian and Persian kinds, no attempts have as yet
been made to experiment with their seed.
The cultivation of the Flax plant is an industry which, started
some years since in Victoria, seems almost to have died out in
the colony, the reason of its decadence being the want of the proper
machinery for dressing the fibre, and the difficulty, therefore, of
marketing the crops, and, with the exception of a very few settlers
from Scotland and Ireland, the general want of practical acquaint-
ance with the cultivation and management of the plant on the
part of those who grew it. In 1868 there were thirty-one, and in


1869 thirty-four acres of land under flax in the neighbourhoods
of Melbourne and Geelong, and in the former year 1060 cwt. of
fibre, and in the latter 271 J cwt. of fibre and 150 bushels of linseed
were produced, but since then there has been a gradual diminution;
until this year there were only three acres under flax, producing
two and a-quarter cwt. of fibre and fifty-two bushels of linseed.
And yet the importance of the cultivation of this plant is fully
recognised both by the Government and the mercantile community
of the colony, the import of linseed oil being over 100,000 gallons
per annum, and there being an immense demand for the dressed
fibre both of flax and hemp for rope manufacture. At present
the colonial portion of the supply is chiefly furnished from South
Australia, where the industry is pretty extensively carried on.
In order to encourage the growth of flax in Victoria the Government
some time since offered to furnish seed and information regarding
its growth and preparation to persons desirous of engaging in its
cultivation, and to grant bonuses to those growers or cultivators
who produced the most marketable samples of fibre, but this offer
does not appear to have been availed of to any extent. And yet,
when it is known that the produce of a fair crop, cultivated with
care on an average soil, will be per acre at the rate of five cwt.
of dressed fibre, worth from £3 to £4 per cwt., with a yield of linseed
of from ten to twelve bushels, worth 10s. per bushel, while the
local demand for linseed oil and linseed cake alone is very large,
there ought to be no hesitation on the part of farmers engaging
in flax culture.
The cultivation of Beetroot in Victoria is no new thing; years
ago it was grown, and with such success that a distillery was
established for the purpose of obtaining spirit from the root, an
article by no means objectionable, considering the lack of both ap-
pliance and experience on the part of the promoters, being produced.
This enterprise was, however, given up after a time, and a joint
stock company established instead, for the purpose of extracting
sugar from the beet. Machinery was imported, and a considerable
outlay gone into for the purchase of appliances with the latest
and most approved improvements, and operations commenced at


Staughton Yale, near Geelong. The result was success. Sugar of
superior quality, and such as was sold side by side in the Melbourne
market, in competition with cane sugar from the Mauritius, brought
good prices. The first sale of the Victorian Beetroot Sugar Com-
pany’s sugar was on Monday, Ist December, 1872, the market
reports of sales in the next day’s newspapers stating that Mauritius
cane sugar realised 255. 9d., 275. 6d., 305., 335. 6d., 365. 9d., and
375. 6d. per cwt. according to quality, after which “there was a
considerable attendance of the trade, and much interest excited,
on the occasion of the disposal of the first production of the
Victorian-grown Beet Sugar Company (Limited), under whose
instructions were next sold 800 bags, representing about twenty-
five tons of Victorian-grown beet sugar, of qualities ranging from
low to good counters, which realised from 30s. 6d. to 335. per cwt.
After the auction sale, a small parcel of very superior quality of
the company’s sugar (J. W.), was sold at £37 10s. per ton,” a
price equal to that of the best Mauritius cane sugar, as given in
the quotations just cited. From this it may be seen that the
manufacture of sugar from beetroot is not only possible, but that
it is actually an accomplished fact in the colony. Both soil and
climate are suitable for the growth, and although in the statistics no
record has been furnished of beet grown specifically for sugar manu-
facturing purposes since 1872, when 4131 tons were grown on 239
acres of land; still, under the head beet, carrots, parsnips, and cab-
bages, 543 acres are returned, producing 3251 tons of those articles,
of which beet, doubtless, furnishes a fair share.
Hops and Arrowroot are grown with much success in some parts
of Victoria, more particularly in North Gipps Land, and have
become staple commodities. Various other plants, such as Cotton,
the Cork Oak, the Chinese Tea tree, &c., have been tried with
varying success throughout the colony. They are all acclimatised
in the Botanical Gardens, Melbourne.
Victoria has well been described as a country of vast forests and
of treeless plains, for so strongly marked is the arboreal difference
between various districts, that the definition is almost warranted by
fact. The forest regions extend in an almost unbroken tract over


the greater part of the southern and eastern mountain districts.
Here it is that the eucalyptus flourishes in all its grandeur, attaining
enormous dimensions, and forming inexhaustible supplies of valuable
timber for this and succeeding generations. Of indigenous timbers,
the most valuable is, undoubtedly, the Ked Gum (Eucalyptus
rostrata), a dense, hard wood, with a handsome curly grain,
almost entirely free from the tendency to casting and longitudinal
shrinkage which is the characteristic of other varieties of the
eucalyptus, and as it is almost indestructible in damp ground or in
salt or fresh water, it makes the best of all piles, being impervious
to attack by the teredo navalis, for engineering works, nor can it
be surpassed for any purpose, either engineering or building, where a
resistance to sheer downward pressure is wanted. It is also
unequalled as planking for bridges, wharves, or buildings. As
sleepers it is considered first-class; red gum posts, although
rough, will last nearly twice as long as any other, and is the
favourite wood with wheelwrights for spokes and felloes of
heavy wheels. The failings of red gum are that it has a short
grain, which renders it unsuitable for horizontal bearing tim-
bers in any but very short lengths, it cannot easily be obtained
in long lengths and of reasonable diameter, and it does not split
freely. Cut in the proper season, and properly protected from
its tendency to sun-crack, it would, after proper and thorough
seasoning, be eminently suitable to the requirements of the cabinet
maker for the heavier portions of furniture, as it takes a fine polish,
and cuts into good veneers. It has been used with great advantage
for knees and the rigid portion of ships’ framing, and for the fixed
bearings, and even in some cases for the running bearings of
machinery. As firewood it is exceedingly valuable and is looked
upon as amongst the best sold for that purpose, as it generates a
fine free flame with considerable heat.
The Blue Gum (Eucalyptus globulus) is restricted to southern
and eastern Victoria, and to the colony of Tasmania; it grows to an
enormous size in almost any kind of soil, and is well-known, not
only for the value of its timber, but also for its vigorous growth
and hygienic properties. It is true that all eucalypts partake


of this latter property, but from the exceeding vigour and pleasing
symmetry of the trees of this particular species, it has been denomi-
nated the representative type of the many kinds of the Australian
gum trees. The wood of the blue gum is of a yellowish-grey tint,
with a free, straight grain, of great strength and tenacity, and
to be obtained in almost any lengths with moderate equality of
section. Hence it is useful for piles, although, unlike the red gum, it
is pervious to the teredo navalis. It is especially useful, from its
flexible qualities, for heavy longitudinal beams, and makes excellent
sawn and split material. A resin is obtained from this tree of a
kino character, and a volatile oil from the leaves, together with
a bitter principle in an amorphous condition, and an acid termed
“eucalyptic acid.” The oil and the bitter are well spoken of by
the missionaries of the New Hebrides and South Sea Islands for
ague and dengue fever. The tree, when in full growth, gives
off an aroma under a genial atmosphere, which is acknowledged
to destroy malaria and*miasmatic poison.
Stringybark (E. obliqua) although much inferior, is a wood similar
in appearance to E. fissilis, but having a browner tint. It supplies
a good deal of the second-class sawn timber in the market, and being
a free-splitting wood is useful for palings, shingles, posts, and rails.
Messmate (E. fissilis), is another timber, being, as its name
implies, “free splitting,” used for posts, rails, palings, and shingles,
and not unfrequently for sawn stuff and wheelwright’s work. It is
also superior to white gum, being straighter in the grain, and
splitting more readily. White Gum (E. goniocalyx), is found growing
in swampy localities, and is liable to decay early, and is scarcely
lit even for firewood, from its tendency to burn black without
producing flame.
The Ironbark (E. sideroxylon) is a very hard and heavy wood,
tenacious and strong, extensively employed by coachbuilders,
cabinetmakers, and especially by wheelwrights for shafts and
spokes. There are several other kinds of gum trees found growing
intermixed with the species already described, but are not employed
to any extent for mechanical purposes, chiefly for firewood; in some
instances special varieties are peculiar to certain districts, as for


instance, the Peppermint Gum tree (E. Amygdalina odorata) is
met with on mountain sides or hilly slopes, occupying generally
dry and poor soil; it is from this species that the well-known
eucalyptus oil is obtained. The wood is but of little value; the tree
bearing willow-like branches, with a leaf similar in appearance to an
almond tree leaf, gives a pretty effect, and when grown in open
ground grows evenly and with much foliage. A fine kino gum
exudes from the trunk of the tree, and the leaves yield the oil. The
nomenclature of many of our forest trees adopted by bushmen of
the early days still holds its own, as for instance, appletree, a
species of eucalyptus, honeysuckle, cherrytree, sheoak (sheick), and
others.
The Blackwood and the Lightwood’are usually regarded under the
general name lightwood. It flourishes in the rich sedimentary soil,
and the shelter and humidity of the ranges, where it attains large
proportions. The timber of this tree is exceedingly valuable, being
largely used for all kinds of cabinet work, as it has a rich colour, a
beautifully marked grain, and takes a fine polish, not surpassed even
by walnut, to which it bears some similarity. It has a close grain,
and combines strength and flexibility with lightness.
The Murray Pine, a handsomely marked, useful wood, used in the
northern parts of the colony for all kinds of purposes, is not much
employed in Melbourne. It yields abundantly a resin, like sandarac,
and is employed for the same purposes. During the hot summer
months this resin- drops from the tree and can be gathered
up freely. The Myall, a smaller variety of the same wood,
is highly scented with a pleasant aroma, and is used principally
for stock-whip handles, wooden pipes, and other articles of turnery.
The ironbark, the hardest and heaviest of Australian timbers,
is very tenacious and strong, however, and is used by coachbuilders
and wheelwrights for shafts and spokes. Sheoak and Honeysuckle
wood is mostly used for firing, although it is occasionally used by
cabinetmakers for the sake of variety.
The Wattle, being several species of the Acacia, the timber of which
is used for making staves for casks, is much esteemed for the value
■of its bark for tanning purposes, and their numerous flower branches


for their grateful aroma. Ferntree and Pencil wood, although not
much used, are sometimes, the former especially, cut into veneers.
These may be said to constitute the list of timber woods indigenous
to Victoria, although from the great variety of climate and soil
she possesses, there seems to be no reason why numerous other kinds
of timber should not be grown within her borders. Thus, the coast-
line would, in all probability, produce forests of Mediterranean
firs, and pines from other countries, and might also grow the plane,
the cork-oak, the sycamore and others; the forest and alpine
regions would grow the oak, the beach, the birch, and forests
of Baltic deal fir, silver fir and Norway spruce, particularly
along mountain ridges, while in the northern parts of the colony
might be raised many of the valuable woods of Italy, Spain,
and Southern France. In fact, there might easily be acclimatised
timber trees from all climes, excepting perhaps those of the warmer
zones of tropical countries.


CHAPTER IY.
PASTORAL PURSUITS, WOOL, TALLOW, &C.
The pioneer of improvement in Australia is the squatter, and
especially in Victoria, where in the old old time came the venture-
some sheepfarmers from Tasmania and the then-known territory
of New South Wales, of which this colony formed a part, with their
flocks and herds; who, striking boldly into the unknown interior,
sought “fresh woods and pastures new” for their ever-increasing
stock.
At the outset Victoria, or Port Phillip, was only looked upon as
one of the natural outlets for the ever-growing demand for country
for pastoral purposes; and it is probable that for many years no future
beyond its settlement into sheep or cattle runs was ever dreamt of even
by the most sanguine of those who populated it. Squatters’ stations,
a few small townships where the nmholders could, from time to
time, obtain their supplies; and a port here and there,' whence the
wool and tallow could be shipped, and stores received in return,
and thus from year to year the colony went on progressively,
it is true, but only though as a territory to be formed into vast,
and so far as population was concerned, uninhabited estates,
something like the ranches of the plains of Mexico and South
America. No attempt was made toward the improvement of the
soil, beyond the little cultivation for home use round the head
stations of the “tenants of the Crown,” as the large landholders
were called. Without society, save that of his few shepherds and
station-hands, the squatter dwelt in the wilderness, a king in the
midst of his own holdings, living much as he listed, in accordance
with his own rule and law, and building up in many instances a
magnificent fortune.
But after a time there came a change. The discovery of gold
in Victoria, and the consequent rush of adventurers from all parts
of the world in search of the precious metal, first roused tke


squatter from his dream of unquestioned dominancy of the land.
Far and wide into the heart of many a fair domain flocked tribes
of hardy diggers, little regarding the squatters’ right of first
possession in their eager search for gold. Nor, after all, could the
squatter object, for with the opening up of the goldfields in the
interior came the settlement of hundreds or, it might be, thousands
of men. These men must be fed, and there at once was established
a ready cash market at a high price for his superfluous stock, and
thus, although he was, no doubt, deprived for a time of the
enjoyment of a portion of the land which he looked upon as his
own by right, he received an advantage which far more than
compensated him.
Legislation, too, from time to time, interfered with what was
practically his monopoly of the lands of the colony, and restricted
the privileges which had originally been granted him. As the thousands
which the fame of the Victorian goldfields had caused to cluster
here and there, gradually began to regard the country to which
they had come as the land of their adoption, and as the future home
of themselves and their families, instead of a mere abiding place for
a season, in which to make money for the mere purpose of leaving
it, so arose the necessity for provision being made by which they
could settle on the lands—the more, as, in course of time, it was
discovered that the soil was eminently suited to agricultural pur-
poses, and the interior country just what was required for a
portion of the teeming population which overstocked Great Britain,
and which had no outlet except the United States of America and
Canada. For many years it must be admitted that the principal
cause which impelled emigration from Europe to Australia was
the auriferous nature of the country; but since gold-digging, as
a calling, has, compared with the number of the population, de-
clined, the people have to a very large extent turned their attention
to the occupancy of land in freehold for farm purposes, and it is
through this fact that the privileges of the squatting community
have been greatly restricted.
And this is only as it should be, and as in the very nature of
things it must be in all new countries which enjoy freedom and


liberal laws. First comes the adventurous flockmaster, taking up
vasts tracts of country for the sustenance of his stock, territory
which at the time is practically useless to the world. Then as
population increases, so his holdings must gradually become more
circumscribed, in order to make room for the new comers. As
is only natural to be imagined, this invasion of what they considered
their rights, was, and even now is, resolutely contested by the
squatters who had so long held the tenure of the vast pastoral
estates, and loud and bitter were their denunciations of a policy
which deprived them of the lands which they had hoped to have
held in perpetuity, regardless of the cry on every hand for the
opening up of the country to the agricultural population.
Various schemes of land legislation were from time to time
devised, but with little effect, until, in 1865, the Hon. James
Macpherson Grant, then Commissioner of Crown Lands, succeeded
in passing his comprehensive Land Act, which was further amended
in 1869 by the Casey Act, the object of which was the settlement of
the people on the lands of the colony—an Act which has cut boldly at
the root of the difficulty, by selecting the best portions of the soil of
the colony, whether held under squatting lease or not, and placing
thereon, on farms of from 40 to 320 acres in extent, an industrious
agricultural population. At first this was felt to be a sad blow
by the squatters, who complained bitterly that they who had first
opened up the lands should thus be ruthlessly despoiled of them.
After all, and although it must be conceded that to the original
squatters a very large measure of credit is due, still it is clear
that the good of the many is, and must be, paramount to that of
the few, and that locking up the public estate in the hands of a
few large runholders was conducive neither to the benefit of the
people nor of the State.
But the depriving the squatters of their lands opens the way
for other considerations, the first being that as the area of land
held under pastoral license becomes more and more circumscribed,
so will increased attention be devoted to the improvement of the
grazing capacities of the smaller areas, and more especially to the
improvement of grasses, and the introduction of systems of artificial
irrigation. In fact, it may be said that already has the public mind,


and especially that portion of it interested in pastoral pursuits,
turned its attention to these important matters, with the object
of multiplying the depasturing capabilities of the sheep-runs. In
the olden days, when land was to be had for the finding, it mattered
little to the squatter whether the land would carry one or .five
sheep to the acre—if his run were overstocked, he had merely to take
up more country; but now the case is different, and improvement of
his grass only will enable him to hold his own against competition.
With this there must also be improvement in the breeds of
sheep, for which there is ample room, for although, to the credit
of some of the stockowners, they have spared no trouble or expense
in the importation and breeding of the best kinds of both sheep
and cattle, still no little advancement may yet be made in depas-
turing, in the prevention of disease, and in producing better qualities
of wool.
As the lands of Victoria gradually become absorbed into agricultu-
ral homesteads for the people, and the squatting areas more and
more restricted, so the squatters must, as did their predecessors before
them, look across the boundary of the colony to the widely-spreading
plains yet to be opened up and occupied in the Northern districts, and
stretching away north and west to the very verge of the continent.
But even in Victoria, and within the circumscribed areas now
available for pastoral pursuits, the squatters of the present day enjoy
advantages which go a long way towards compensating them for the
loss of their lands, and many of these advantages owe their existence
to the very fact of the country having been opened np for settlement.
The means of communication are rapidly and steadily extending and
improving in all parts of the colony. With the increase of popula-
tion and production, railways are being constructed, roads are being
improved, and new ones made in all directions, and river steamers
ply from one end of the navigable Murray to the other. The wool
clips, that in the older days of bullock teams and bad roads, or no
roads, used to take up many weeks in transmission from the station
to Melbourne, or other port of shipment, can now be brought down,
in many cases, in a few hours.
Another advantage is that the demand for wool is a steadily
growing one. The increase of the wool trade from Victoria may


easily be seen by the following figuresln 1857 there were
15,940,827 lbs. exported, valued at £1,239,166. This had, in 1865,
increased to 40,423,494 lbs., valued at £3,088,343, and in 1875
to 85,064,952 lbs., valued at £6,096,958. All these figures, however,
are inclusive of wool imported from other places, and exported
from Victoria; still an export trade that in twenty years has grown
from one to six millions, or in forty years, from eleven thousand
pounds to that amount, is surely one which ought to command
attention, especially as the maximum in production here, or in
consumption at home, is by no means reached.
As shown by the statistics, the squatting runs, and the area of
land held under them, have steadily decreased since 1865, in conse-
quence, of course, of the settlement of the country into agricultural
holdings under the Grant Land Act. Thus, in 1866, there were 1129
runs in the colony, having an approximate aggregate area of'
29,003,998 acres, while in 1876, there were only 822 runs, with an
approximate aggregate area of 21,906,540 acres. And this decrease has
been as gradual as it has been steady, and pretty much at about the
same rate. Thus, in 1875, there were 865 runs, with 22,967,639 acres;
in 1874, 864 runs, with 24,230,128 acres; and so on. The average area
of the runs of the colony was 26,552 acres in 1875, and 26,772 acres
in 1876. The rent in 1875 amounted to £139,304, and in 1876 to
£152,664. The number of hands employed on stations for the year
ending 31st March, 1877, was 4270 males; 1332 females; total, 5608.
The rates of wages for station hands for the same year, were lor
stockmen, £49 Bs. per annum; boundary-riders, £43 Is.; shepherds,
£3B Is.; hutkeepers, £32 135.; married couples, £59 135.; females,
£2B 165.; station labourers, 17s. lid. per week; sheepwashers,
225. 7d.; shearers, 14s. 9d. per 100 sheep shorn. All these rates of
wages are inclusive of rations.
The following is an estimate of the live stock on the squatting
stations for the last two years. It must be mentioned, however,
that the returns have been compiled, as far as possible, from esti-
mates supplied by the squatters in reply to inquiries made by
the Government statist. In many instances these inquiries were
not responded to, and in such cases it was necessary to supply
the particulars from the returns of former years. It will be observed


that there has been a decrease in 1877 from the previous year in
horses and sheep, and an increase in cattle and pigs. In 1876,
there were 196,184 horses, 1,054,598 cattle, of which 255,137 were
milch cows, 11,740,532 sheep, and 140,765 pigs. In 1877, there were
194,768 horses, 1,128,265 cattle, of which 277,072 were milch cows,
and 175,578 pigs. The live stock slaughtered in the year ending
31st March, 1877, were as follows; —For the butcher and private
use, sheep and lambs, 1,704,929; cattle and calves, 166,638; pigs,
53,855; for preserving or salting, sheep and lambs, 287,315; cattle
and calves, 10,525; pigs, 13,818; for boiling down for tallow,
sheep and lambs, 185,965; cattle and calves, 24,400; pigs, 2700.
Total—sheep and lambs, 2,178,209; cattle and calves, 201,163;
pigs, 70,373; a general total of 2,449,745, against 2,073,302 in the
previous year. The figures quoted above will give an idea of
'the extent and importance of the pastoral interest in Victoria, and
will show to what a magnitude the colony has grown during the
few years of its existence. They will also show that notwithstanding
the large quantity of land withdrawn from the squatting stations,
and devoted to agricultural purposes, the quantity of stock de-
pastured on the pastoral lands remaining intact has not diminished
in a corresponding degree, owing, no doubt, to the improvement in
the grasses and in the grazing of stock.
The sea-board and the rivers of Victoria abound with excellent
fish, many varieties of which are quite new to naturalists, but have
been studied, classified, and described by the French Consul-General,
the eminent naturalist, Count F. de Oastelnau. Native game,
hares, and rabbits abound; and many European song birds, and
a few from other parts of the world have already made their home
in the colony.
Although squatting, pure and simple, in Victoria, may not present
the same advantages to the new comer as it did of yore, still, with
a fair acquaintance with the treatment of sheep, a little capital,
spirit and energy, and the faculty of adapting himself to circum-
stances, of learning new modes of life, and working hard and
roughing it in the interior, there are still prizes to be won, fortunes
to be made by the immigrant, who, with sobriety, prudence, and
economy turns his attention in that direction.


CHAPTER Y.
MINING AND MINERALS.
The history of Victoria is intimately and inseparably connected
with gold mining. In fact, had there been no such thing as gold
mining, the probabilities are that Victoria, as Victoria is, would
never have existed. The discovery of gold in 1851 sent a thrill
throughout the whole world, and Victoria was made.
The fame of the Californian mines had gone before, and .to that
terra incognita there was a rush; the fame of the wonderful gold-
finds in Victoria followed, and thither, from all parts of the world,
there was a stampede. Australia, before that event almost unheard
of, except in the large centres of population, became at once invested
with a strange weird romantic interest, and Melbourne, Ballarat,
and Bendigo, names hitherto unknown, became as household words
in every village and hamlet in Great Britain, and, to some extent, on
the Continent.
In Australia itself the effect of the discovery of gold was mar-
vellous. It changed, as in an instant, the whole fabric of com-
mercial, industrial, and social life. In the course of a few months
half the male population of the colony had left their legitimate occu-
pations, and had gone hot-footed on the popular adventure in search
of the dazzling metal. Workshops stood idle, business places were
closed, ships lay empty at the wharves, trade was at a standstill,
business was allowed to drift where it would; there was but one
thing thought of, and that thing—Gold!
Speedily came the flood from the other colonies, and following
that in hot haste, the vast influx from all parts of the world, crowd
following crowd as fast as ships could bring them. And what
wonder, when the reports of wonderful finds of fabulous amounts of
gold, carefully propagated by the store and shanty keepers, and


multiplied a hundredfold in the telling, came sharp and fast; one
report “did tread upon another’s heels, so fast they followed.”
For a time, as might only be expected under such an exceptional
state of things, society was disorganised. Dissipation and reckless
waste was the rule, and robbery and even murder were not uncommon.
But even in the worst times of the Victorian gold-fields, absolute
lawlessness never prevailed. Those were times when each man’s
hand had to keep his head, but yet the good sense of the majority
prevented the scenes of bloodshed and disregard of the laws of
property and of human life which disgraced the earlier days of the
Californian diggings.
Gold was known to exist in Victoria long prior to 1851, but owing
to the jealousy of the Government of those days, who absolutely
forbade its discovery being made known, and also to the little
attention paid to it, no particular notice was taken, although men
employed on some of the stations had casually picked it up and
even sold it, and although a report went abroad in 1849 about a
shepherd having found a large deposit in the neighbourhood of the
Pyrenees mountains. The fact is, that in those early days, the
attention of settlers was so concentrated on discovering new tracts of
country for their ever increasing stock, that they cared little for
aught else, even though it were picking up gold.
Although gold had been found at Clunes in March, 1850, a
nugget of which was shown in a shop in Collins-street, it was
not until August, 1851, that Mr. Hargreaves discovered it at
Ballarat, and those diggings were first opened. Later in the year
it was discovered at Mount Alexander (Castlemaine), Buninyong,
and Fryer’s-Creek, and then gold mining became an industry, or
rather the industry of Victoria.
It is now estimated that at least one-third of the entire area of the
colony is auriferous, and yet, even now, only a small portion of that
area has been explored, and a still smaller portion, “ exploitered
and even with regard to the latter, science is still in doubt as to the
depth to which the gold-bearing rocks extend, and as to the possi-
bility or otherwise of discovering auriferous alluvions deposits at a
lower level than the deepest of the deep leads already worked.


Gold has been found in veins traversing granite, and diorite, in
the granite itself, and detected in the planes of bedding of soft
yellowish and reddish brown Silurian claystone, and in sand-
stone. It occurs in bluish-white plastic silicates, in the veins
with carbonate of lime, oxide of manganese, and carbonate of
manganese, and, rarely, with sulphate of barytes. It has been got
from the siluiian, the mesozoic, and the miocene rocks, as well as
from the pliocene deposits, and the soils derived from the breaking
up of slates and sandstones. And since the pick and shovel of the
miner have thus demolished so many of the ingenious hypotheses of
closet philosophers, it is difficult to lay down any authoritative data
as to where gold will not be found, hereafter, in a country so full
of anomalies, and so splendidly endowed with mineral wealth as
Victoria.
Gold-mining, as an industry, is divided into two well-known
branches, called respectively alluvial, and quartz mining, the mean-
ing of the two methods of obtaining gold being explained by the
names. Alluvial mining, which, in the earlier days of the gold-
fields, constituted all the workings, consists of shovelling up from
the surface, or from a depth below the surface, the earth supposed to
contain particles of gold, and washing or puddling it. The process
was simple, and is easily explained. The digger having put a suffi-
cient quantity of gold-impregnated earth into his tub, added water,
and stirred up the mass until it became of a mud-like consistency,
when it was ready for cradling, which meant that it was emptied
into a long box, having a sheet of iron full of small perforations at
one end. Through this machine the earthy matter was passed,
leaving the heavier particles of the gold mixed with “dirt” at the
bottom. Ihe “dirt’ was then washed in a tin dish, an operation
requiring skill and experience, until little or nothing was left in the
dish except the pure gold. This process, which was called “shallow
sinking, was followed by “sluicing,” or washing the auriferous
clays and gravels lying in low grounds, in artificially constructed
channels of water. Not content with the gold found on or near the
surface, the miners soon began to search still lower levels for gold
impregnated earths, and here the precious metal was found in still


greater abundance, and “deep-sinking” soon became a recognised
and distinct form of mining. This process was carried on by
sinking shafts from the surface to what was technically termed a
“bottom,” usually of pipeclay, or by tunnelling, running galleries
obliquely from the sides of hills or sloping ground, in search of auri-
ferous soils.
But deep-sinking was expensive, and hence arose the formation of
companies with large capital, and gold-mining, instead of being a
kind of desultory employment, to be put aside or resumed, at the will
of the individual digger, became an institution, and a recognised and
permanent branch of employment, involving capital and paid labour.
Quartz-mining soon followed. It was discovered that quartz was
the matrix of gold, and that the gold which had been found lying
loose in the earth, under the roots of trees, in the beds of creeks, and
so on, was merely that which had been disintegrated from its parent
rock and washed away by storms, &c. Quartz-mining consisted of
boring into and blasting the solid quartz itself, taking out that
portion which promised to be auriferous, and crushing it by means of
machinery. The machinery necessary for the successful prosecution
of this branch of gold-mining is of a simple yet ponderous and
expensive character. The quartz brought up from the bowels of the
earth is subjected in many cases to a process of roasting or burning,
and then broken up into small pieces a little larger than ordinary
road metal, is conveyed to the crushing-machine, which machine
consists of a battery of four, six, eight, or more stampers, driven by
steam-power. The stampers consist of upright iron rods, shod with
heavy shoes, and rising and falling with regular motion, pounding
the hardest quartz rock into powder. The stamp-heads or shoes
work in an iron box, into which the quartz is shot, and which is kept
supplied with a stream of water, so that the slush or quartz mud is
carried off through a grating in front, while the gold, being heavier,
sinks to the bottom. But gold in atomic particles is carried off in the
muddy water, and to prevent the loss of this the water is caused to
flow over a sloping board or platform, covered with a “blanket” of
green baize or some other coarse material, which holds much of the
gold, while its escape is further prevented by small grooves or ledges


across the platform, charged with mercury, which lays hold of the
particles of gold as they are washed down. The whole of the debris
from the bottom of the box, from the blanket, which is rinsed in hot
water, and from the gutters, is then placed in a vessel containing a
quantity of mercury, and by a rotary or shaking motion, an
amalgam of gold and mercury is formed. The amalgam is then
placed in a chamois leather, which is squeezed until a considerable
portion of the mercury oozes through it, and the remaining amalgam
is put in a retort, when powerful heat causes the mercury to fly off
through a pipe provided, while the pure gold remains in a cake at
the bottom.
Other kinds of machinery have from time to time been invented
for crushing the quartz, but the battery seems to have kept the field
against all comers.
Bendigo, or Sandhurst, and Ballarat, were long known and
celebrated as the head centres of the quartz reefs, but of late years
they have had a formidable rival in Pleasant Creek, or Stawell, the
head-quarters of deep sinking. For a long time the workings were
comparatively shallow, that is to say they did not greatly exceed
300 or 400 feet in depth, and it is only about fourteen years since
that attention was first called by Mr. 11. B. Smyth, then
Secretary for Mines for Victoria, to the fact that the yield of
gold from parcels of quartz got from depths as great as 400
feet, was, on the average, 12 dwts. 8 grs. per ton, and not
less than the average yield from depths ranging from 50 to
300 feet. Although he made this statement and bore it out by
statistics, it was for a long time regarded with doubt and incre-
dulity, and it was broadly stated more than once that the samples
from the greater depths had been picked, and that deep sinking
must result in loss.
As in the case when they declared that gold could only exist
under such and such conditions, so the theorists were at fault with
regard to the depths to which auriferous quartz extended. Their
prognostications were, however, disregarded, and miners were not
deterred from difficult and costly explorations, and the consequence
has been that shafts have been sunk, and are still being sunk,


and rich stone found at depths which, in the earlier days of gold-
mining, were never contemplated, nor is there any diminution in
the yield of gold in the deeper levels. There is one prospecting shaft
at Stawell, at the Magdala mine, over 1700 feet in depth, but this
has not yet struck gold-bearing quartz. In other claims which are
being profitably worked in the same district, there are shafts
one 1420 feet, one 1260 feet, and two others more than 1000 feet.
From the deep levels in some mines the quartz has yielded
as much as 3 ozs. per ton. At Clunes, the New North Climes
pumping shaft is over 1200 feet deep, with a level in the working
shaft at 1012 feet, which has produced excellent golden quartz equal
to the average obtained from the mine generally. At Sandhurst,
one shaft is 900 feet deep, and there are four exceeding 800 feet,
and one exceeding 700 feet. The yield from some of these deep
mines, at the deepest levels, varies from 12 dwts. to 1 oz. per ton.
The fact that rich quartz is raised every day from depths considerably
below the level of the sea, is of great importance as regards our
material interests, and of high scientific interest.
The colony is divided into seven mining districts, namely, Ballarat,
Beechworth, Sandhurst, Maryborough, Castlemaine, Ararat, and
Gipps Land. The number of distinct quartz reefs proved to be
auriferous in 1876, was 3307, from which were raised 587,291 ozs. of
gold, an average yield of 10 dwts. 13'48 grs. to the ton of quartz.
The extent of auriferous alluvial and quartz ground worked on was
1134 square miles, and the estimated value of gold-mining claims
and lands held under gold, mining leases, £5,745,590. The estimated
quantity of gold taken from alluvial workings was 346,933 ozs.; the
total yield, alluvial and quartz, being 934,224 ozs.—the smallest
return for the last eleven years, that of 1865 being 1,095,787 ozs.
The largest return for anyone year was for 1868, when 1,657,4980z5.
were raised. The mining population showed a total of 41,#10 miners,
being a falling-off' of 707 from the previous year. The largest num-
ber of miners employed was in 1860, when there were 70,794 on the
various gold-fields of the colony. Of the 41,010 miners employed in
1876, 29,843 were Europeans, 11,167 Chinese; 14,446 being engaged
in quartz, and 26,558 in alluvial mining. The machinery employed


on the gold-fields in 1876, was as follows : —Alluvial —steam engines,
289, having an aggregate horse-power of 7858; puddling machines,
1143; buddies, 7; whims, 210; whips or pulleys, 245; sluices, toms,
and sluice-boxes, 15,321; hydraulic hoses, 36; pumps, 591; water-
wheels, 216; quicksilver and compound cradles, 166; stamp-heads
(crushing cement), 448; boring machines, 16. Quartz mining—
steam engines, 792, of an aggregate of 16,089 horse-power; crushing
machines, driven by other power than steam, 66; stamp-heads
{crushing quartz or other vein-stuff), 6356; buddies, 54; winding,
washing, pumping, and other machines, moved by water power, 8;
whims, 560; whips or pulleys, 489; boring machines, used in
blasting, 5. The approximate value of all mining plant (alluvial and
quartz), for the year was £1,989,500, as against £2,033,629 of the
previous year.
In fact, the statistics for the last few years show conclusively that
both with regard to the number of claims worked on, the area of
mining country, the gold obtained, the miners employed, and the
machinery used, there has been a gradual diminution, in consequence,
perhaps, of the large number of men formerly engaged on the gold-
fields who have taken up homesteads under the Land Act of 1869.
Still, it is estimated that a considerable increase has taken place in
the quantity of gold raised in proportion to the number of hands
employed in getting it, for while in 1873 the average per man was
£93 16s. 2d., and 1874, £99 Bs. 3d., it Avas in 1875, £lO4 4s. 4d.;
and, in 1876, as is estimated, a little less than that. The
quantity of Victorian gold received at the Royal Mint, Melbourne,
for 1876, was 427,879 ozs. being 1,312,732 ozs. since the opening of
the mint.
Although, as a rule, gold is found in small particles, still there
have been numerous examples of large pieces (nuggets) being
picked up by lucky miners. Of these, the “Welcome,” found at
Bakery Hill, Ballarat, r was the largest. It weighed 21950z5., and was
sold in Melbourne for £9325. The “Welcome Stranger ’ was found
near Dunolly, and, when melted, yielded gold to the value of
£9534; the “Blanche Barkly,” found at Kingower, was of the value
of £6905 12s. 9d. A nugget, unnamed, found in Canadian Gully,


was of the value of £5532 7s. 4d. The “Heron,” found near Mount
Alexander, was sold in England for £4OBO. The “Lady Hotham,”
found near Canadian Gully, was valued at £3000; the “Victoria”
and the “Dascombe,” found at Bendigo, were respectively valued at
£1650 and £1500; the “Nil Desperandum,” found at Ballarat, was
sold for £1050; the “Precious,” found at Berlin, weighed 1621 oz.;
the “Viscount Canterbury” and the “Viscountess Canterbury,”
also found at Berlin, weighed respectively 1105 ozs. and 884 ozs., and
many others; nearly 200 nuggets of the value of from £6O to £2OOO
each having been known to have been found in the district of
Dunolly, and about 350 of the value of from £4 to £l5OO each at the
Berlin diggings near Kingower.
What are the prospects of miners in Victoria? Notwithstanding
the undoubted falling-off in the industry of late years, they are as
bright as ever they were. Gold-mining is no longer the wild un-
settled pursuit it was in the olden days, when it might more aptly
have been called gold-hunting. It has become a defined calling,
and men now embark in it as they would in any other settled
business. There is now little of the fevered excitement of the
early time, large and lucky finds are not so common, and men look
forward, not to those brilliant coups by which fortunes were made at
once, but to a permanent and steady income to be derived from their
labour. It may be worth while for those who have an inclination to
try Victoria as a field for their future exertions, and who think of
gold-mining as a calling, to consider that, in a country of such wide
extent, it is hardly possible that the principal beds of gold should
have been all discovered within a few years from the date of gold-
mining. It is an admitted fact that the presence of gold is traceable
in small quantities throughout a large portion of the colony. Predic-
tions of the failure of the goldfields seem as far from verification as
when they were made with regard to the giving out of the superficial
alluvial deposits twenty-five years since. It was prophesied, at the
time that the working in quartz veins commenced, that they could
never be payable at a greater depth than sixty or seventy feet, and
yet the deep sinkings at Stawell, Climes, Bendigo, Ballarat, and
other places, have abundantly proved the fallacy of such statements.


In short, capital, labour, and perseverance will make many a mine
yield gold which has hitherto been profitless, and will open many
and many a wide area of country that has never yet been fairly
tested—country that, for aught we know, may contain as rich or
richer ore, waiting for the enterprising digger, as any that ever
yielded treasure in the halcyon days of gold-mining
The rates of wages paid for different descriptions of mining labour
are as follows;—General manager, £3 to £l2 per week, without
rations; legal manager, £1 to £6; mining manager, £2 10s. to £5;
engineer, £2 ss. to £5; engine-driver, £2 2s. to £3 10s.; pitman, £2
to £2 155.; blacksmith, £2 2s. to £3 10s.; carpenter, £2 2s. to £3 125.;
foreman of shaft, £2 2s. to £3 10s.; miner, £2 to £3; surface man
(labourers), £1 10s. to £3; boy, 10s. to £2; Chinese, 12s. 6d. to £2.
But Victoria contains other minerals as well as gold. On the 31st
December, 1876, the following leases, and the areas of land occupied
by them, were in force: —For antimony, 18 leases, 351 a. Ir. 27p.;
argentiferous galena, 1 lease, 154 a. Ir. 32p.; coal, 10 leases, 4956 a.
3r. 7p.; coal, shale, or lignite, 1 lease, 640 a.; copper and ores of
copper, 2 leases, 872 a. 3r. 13p.; flagging, 1 lease, 9a. 2r. 30p.;
lignite, 1 lease, 475 a. 2r. I Op.; silver, 2 leases, 370 a. Ir. 16p.; silver,
lead, and copper, 1 lease, 561 a. 2r. 21p.; slate, 1 lease, 49a. 3r. 39p.;
slate and flagging, 2 leases, 19a. 2r. 25p.; ironstone, 1 lease, 320 a.
Ir. 35p.; red ochre clay, 1 lease, 2a. Or. 14p.; tin and iron, 1 lease,
51a. Ir. 39p.; tin and the ores of tin, 8 leases, 1076 a. Or. 6p.; total,
51 leases, covering an area of 9912 a. Ir. 34p. According to the
estimate of the Mining Department, the values of the minerals, other
than gold, raised in Victoria from 1851 to the end of 1875 were —
Silver, £14,617; tin, £333,870; copper, £8331; antimony, £104,865;
lead, £4700; iron, £2101; coal, £8233; lignite, £2172; kaolin, £7444;
flagging, £37,961; slates, £940; magnesite, £l2; diamonds, £107;
sapphires, £575; total, £525,928, of which £35,452 was the value of
those raised in 1875. Thus, it seems that there are other mineral
industries in the colony waiting only for development, for the truth
is, that none of those named have been much more than experiments,
and certainly have not been carried on with that amount of enter-
prise which the magnitude of the interests deserved.


In 1860, the casual discovery of a crystal of sapphire, in the gizzard
of a wild duck, turned the attention of the Rev. Dr. Bleasdale, a
well-known mineralogist, to the subject of precious stones; and since
then he has successfuly prosecuted his investigations in this branch
of mineralogy; and his discoveries have amply rewarded his studies.
At first it was thought rare to find a crystal of corundum, hut, after
a while, it became quite common. In at least five different localities,
a long way asunder, fuje specimens of this class of gems have been
unearthed. In three of these the original matrix of the precious
corundum (sapphires), has been discovered—the old red basalt at its
overlap on the granite—at Gembrook, 45 miles east from Melbourne;
Comaidai, 40 west, and near Glen Lyon, in the Jim Crow ranges,
about 75 miles.
In each of these localities the crystals were perfect, and utterly
free from abrasion, or water-wearing, and in that at Gembrook, a
very considerable quantity were found as free from abrasion as if
crystals had been broken into splinters by the hand. The collection
from Gembrook comprises the following, all being gems of fine quality
and many of fair size which have been wrought for ring and pin
stones, viz: —sapphires, asterias, blue, dark-red, and greenish,
oriental aquamarine, oriental amethyst, oriental topaz and beautiful
small crystals of ruby. In addition to the above, two of the mines,
Donnelly’s Creek (Gippsland) and Glen Lyon, have yielded specimens
of green corundum (the oriental emerald) of good size, and great
beauty. Two have been wrought, one now being of 6 carats, and
the other SJ, both faultless gems. Diamonds of more than 4 carats
weight and good colour have been found near Beechworth, associated
with stream tin and the pale blue topaz, in streams running through
granite gullies, notably the Woolshed Creek. Spinels of good colour
but small; topazes, blue, white, and of a pinkish colour, are
common on gold workings near granite and old-basalt-hills; as also
are zircons, and hyacinths. Of each of these kinds many superb
specimens have been wrought. Opals, both the noble and the fire-
opal, occur at Beechworth. Garnets of the almondine tint alone have
been reported in Victoria, and are plentiful, though generally small
in the granite regions. Beryls, whether emerald or aquamarine,


have not yet occurred, hut some good chrysoberyls came from near
Donnelly’s Creek, Gippsland. Sard, and sardonyx, chalcedony,
chrysoprase, and agates in great variety, have been discovered on
most of the alluvial diggings. Rock-crystal, cairngorms, amethysts,
and all descriptions of jaspers of the finest quality, being in the
estimation of seal-cutters quite equal to Egyptian, with quartzites
and plum-pudding stones, are common about Beechworth, Mount
Blackwood and the Blue Mountain diggings.


CHAPTER YI.
MANUFACTURES, TRADES, AND INDUSTRIES.
Until the last few years little was known or thought of the
manufactures of Victoria, and in the face of the importations of
manufactured goods of all kinds from England, America, and other
countries, where the manufactories of those goods were established,
and where the goods could be produced at the minimum rate, much
cheaper, as it was thought, than they could possibly be in the colony,
in consequence of the difference in the price of labour, it was accepted
as a conclusion that, although certain trades, such as carpentry,
painting, smith’s work, masonry, building, &c., which were absolutely
necessary to be carried on in the colony, as well as those providing
the necessaries of life, such as baking, butchering, &c., might and
would flourish so long as the colony were prosperous, still, that
manufactories, strictly such, of goods which could be exported from
other countries, could not possibly pay. Time has, however, shown
that not only can goods be manufactured here to compete with those
from home, but that actually, in many cases, the colonially made
goods have to a large extent driven the imported ones from the
market. It does not come within the scope or purpose of a work like
this to follow the question out in its political aspect, which would
involve entering into the vexed question of protection versus free
trade, further than to say that the system under which the Govern-
ment is now carried on is a moderate protectionist one, customs
duties being levied on such goods as can be produced in the colonies,
and on articles of luxury, while other goods and the necessaries of
life are practically free. The highest duty levied in any case, except
upon wines, spirits, and tobacco, is 20 per cent, on the declared
value at the place from which it is exported.


The numerous industries which now exist in Victoria, and which
are firmly established in almost all her large towns, had very small
beginnings, and had many difficulties to contend with at starting,
not the least being the prejudice against them in the public mind; in
fact, for a long time it was looked upon as a kind of reproach to
say that any article was of colonial make, even as now, amongst a
certain class, it is deemed unfashionable to admire, or even to
acknowledge the merit of anything that does not bear, as they say,
the London Hall mark. Yet, with the drawback of having to
contend with these difficulties, nay, in spite of them, they have made
such head way that the colony is now no longer dependent on foreign
markets for any of her articles of everyday use. Capital is exten-
sively invested at satisfactorily remunerative interest, and artizans
who are willing to work can find abundance of employment at good
wages; in fact, a great hindrance to the further development of these
industries is the difficulty of getting a sufficiency of competent hands.
The principal industries which afford employment for large
numbers of workpeople, are as follows; —
Boot and Shoe Factories.—These establishments have rapidly
sprung into a most important position, and are carried on in most
of the large towns of the colony. They employ large numbers of
hands, men, women, and boys, and machinery of the latest designs
is used extensively in the various operations of cutting, rivetting,
pegging, and sewing. The employment is healthy, as by the use of
machinery the consequent stooping and consequent compression
of the chest attendant on the making of hand-made goods is
avoided. Against forty-six of these establishments at work on the
31st March, 1876, there were on the same date in 1877 no fewor
than sixty-seven, employing 1831 males and 433 females, and using
eight steam-engines of an aggregate of fifty-one horse-power, and fifty-
nine hand machines, the value of the plant and machinery being
£22,727; of the lands, £33,810; and of the buildings, £36,835.
Wages are—Wellingtons, 10s.; elastics, 7s. 6d.; closing, Bs.
Clothing factories employ a still greater number of hands, princi-
pally females, the numbers being 788 males and 3029 females. Of
these factories there are fifty-three in the colony, using one steam-


engine of eight-horse power, and fifty-two hand machines—not
including sewing-machines; the machinery and plant is valued at
£13,977, the lands at £58,925, and the buildings at £67,385. In
these establishments the various articles of male and female clothing
are made up, and as there is a continual demand for labour the
wages of the employes are good. (For rates of wages of tradesmen,
&c., see article on “Employment, Wages, &c.,” Chapter IX.)
The rapidity with which these establishments are springing up of late
warrants the assumption that ere long the inferior class of shoddy
goods from the home factories will be entirely driven from the market.
Saddlery and harness making is an industry of comparatively
recent formation in the colony, inasmuch as until lately nearly all
the goods of this class were imported. There are now, however,
twenty-nine saddlery and harness manufactories in the colony,
employing 323 males and 14 females, besides two saddle-tree, three
saddlers’ ironmongery and coach-spring, and five whip manufactories,
which employ seventy-six males and five females. All kinds of
goods appertaining to this line of business are now made in the
colony, and while quite equal to the imported can be purchased at a
lower price, so that it is not unlikely that ere long importation,
except of certain special articles, will practically cease.
Of hat and cap manufactories there are twenty-two as against
fifteen of last year, emploing 145 males and 97 females.
Coach, waggon, &c., manufactories are also on the increase,
there being 116 against 105 of last year. These employ nine steam-
engines and 105 hand-engines, of an aggregate of 105 horse-power,
and 1358 males and 14 female hands, the value of the machinery
and plant being £52,896, of the land £68,605, and of the buildings
£58,415. All classes of work, from the most elaborately finished
and handsomely decorated carriages to the strongest drays and
lorries, are turned out. Besides the factories themselves, there
are separate establishments for the making of carriage materials,
such as springs, patent axles and hubs, spokes, felloes, and shafts.
Many of the vehicles manufactured in Victoria, shown at the various
Exhibitions, have been greatly admired, and could not be excelled
for workmanship and finish by anything ever imported.


Cabinet works number twenty-six, employing 438 males and
twelve females; and bedding and upholstery manufactories, of which
there are eleven more, employing 177 males and thirty-two females,
are divided into various branches, all of which are prospering.
Of saw-mills, including moulding, framing, and turning mills,
there are 159, with 152 steam-engines of an aggregate of 840 horse-
power. These are kept in constant work; and carpentry, which
has extended to making doors, sashes, weatherboards, and the
like, formerly imported from England and America, has made rapid
strides.
Iron and tin works number 53, employing 677 males and 7 females,
and iron, brass, and copper foundries, of which there are 77, employ
1556 males. The value of plant and machinery used in these indus-
tries amounts to £166,141, and of the lands and buildings is very large.
Rolling mills are doing well, and boiler making has rapidly extended,
and has altogether stopped importation.
Agricultural implement manufactories number 46, employing 838
males, and 3 females. This industry is rapidly increasing, as the
machines made in Victoria are far better adapted to the require-
ments of the local farmers than anything which can be obtained
from abroad.
Of fellmongeries and woolwashing establishments there are 52,
employing 900 males and 13 females.
Other manufactories are numerous, and may be thus classified: —
Account-book manufactories, and manufacturing stationers, 16;
hands employed, 607. Printing establishments, 33; males, 1424;
females, 42; hands employed, 1468. Organ building establishments,
2; hands, 16. Pianoforte manufacturers, 7; hands, 21. Picture-
frame makers, 6; hands, 25. Carving and gilding establishments, 5;
hands, 28. India-rubber stamp manufactories, 3; hands, 8. Model-
ling works, 3; hands, 9. Statuary works, 1; hands, 3. Wood
carving works, 1. Wooden pipe manufactories, 2; hands, 6. Die-
sinkers, engravers, medallists, trade-mark makers, 5; hands, 25.
Philosophical instrument makers, 2; hands, 6. Surgical instrument
and truss manufactories, 5; hands, 12. Blasting-powder, dynamite,
&c., manufactories, 3; hands, 51. Fuze manufactories, 1; hands, 16.


Gunmakers, 4; hands, 13. Cutlery, machine tool manufactories, 7;
hands, 21. Engine, machine manufactories, 53; employing 1064
males. Graving docks, 3; hands, 94. Patent slips, 4; hands, 90.
Lime works, 24; hands, 152. Looking-glass manufactories, 5;
hands, 42. Chemical works, 5; hands, 52. Die works, 14; hands,
80. Essential oil manufactories, 5; hands, 26. Ink, blacking, &c.,
manufactories, 8; hands, 103. Paint, varnish manufactories, 2;
hands, 16. Saltworks, 5; hands, 27. Tar distilling, asphalte works,
3; hands, 24. Fur manufactories, 3; hands, 11. Waterproof manu-
factories, 2; hands, 20. Umbrella and parasol manufactories, 7;
hands, 25. Jute factories, 1; hands, 166. Rope, twine works, 13;
hands, 336. Cheese factories, 25; hands, 117. Meat curing estab-
lishments, 15; hands, 402. Biscuit manufactories, 7; hands, 286.
Confectionary works, 8; hands, 170. Jam manufactories, 8; hands,
167. Maizena, starch, &c., manufactories, 3; hands, 16. iErated
waters, &c., works, 114; employing 579 males and 30 females. Coffee,
chocolate, spice, &c., works, 10; hands, 108. Distilleries, 6; hands,
49. Malthouses, 13; hands, 50. Sauce, pickle, &c., manufactories, 3;
hands, 30. Sugar refineries, 2; hands, 190. Tobacco, cigar, snuff
manufactories, 13; hands, 653. Vinegar works, 5; hands, 34.
Boiling-down establishments, 19; hands, 89. Bone-cutting mills,
and bone manure manufactories, 16; hands, 91. Brush manufac-
tories, 6; hands, 138. Curled hair manufactories, 3; hands, 16.
Flock manufactories, 3; hands, 17. Glue, oil manufactories, 8;
hands, 36. Morocco, fancy leather manufactories, 2; hands, 6.
Portmanteau, trunk manufactories, 7; hands, 38. Soap, candle,
tallow works, 42; employing 440 males and 11 females. Bark mills,
4; hands, 21. Basket making works, 9; hands, 40. Window-blind
manufactories, 10; hands, 86. Broom manufactories, 2; hands, 25.
Chaff-cutting, corn-crushing works, 187 ; employing 582 males and
16 females. Cooperages, 19; hands, 102. Fancy box manufactories,
2; hands, 27. Hat-box manufactories, 2; hands, 8. Paper manu-
factories, 1; hands, 131. Paper-bag manufactories, 6; hands, 142.
Gasworks, 15; hands, 377. Glass manufactories, 4; hands, 55. Glass
works, 4; hands, 21. Filter manufactories, 2; hands, 6. Marble
works, 19; hands, 164. Stone-breaking works, 5; hands, 76. Stone-


sawing, polishing works, 4; hands, 90. Ice manufactories, 3; hands,
19. Electro-plating and gilding works, 4; hands, 35. Goldsmiths
and Jewellers (manufacturing), 19; hands, 370. Lapidaries, 1;
hands, 2. Antimony smelting works, 5; hands, 95. Lead w'orks, 1;
hands, 12. Tin smelting works, 1; hands, 3. Wire-working estab-
lishments, 6; hands, 35. Ship and boat-builders, 19; hands, 88.
Besides these there are numerous other industries too small in'
their number to call for special notice, all those mentioned being
works of an extensive character, and places being merely shops, or
being on a limited scale, not being included. The totals are—Manu-
factories, 2302, including flour mills, breweries, tanneries, brick
yards, and potteries, against 2241 of the previous year. Of these
latter there are flour mills and mills for dressing grain, 152, with
138 steam and 13 water engines of an aggregate of 2811 horsepower,
which operated on 5,159,850 bushels of wheat and 309,839 bushels
of other grain during the year; hands employed, 707. Breweries,
102, employing 902 hands and 633 horses; beer made during the
year, 14,236,529 gallons. Woollen mills, 8, employing 428 males and
145 females, and making 719,887 yards of tweed, cloth and flannel,
2816 pairs blankets, and 2941 shawls during the year. Tanneries,
96, employing 1140 hands, and tanning 1,310,229 skins and 323,693
hides during the year. Brick yards and potteries, 241, employing
1194 hands, and making 75,081,000 bricks during the year; and
stone quarries, 155, employing 808 hands. Total employed in
manufactories, works, &c., 22,033 males and 4792 females.
From these statistics it will be seen that Victoria, as a manufac-
turing colony, is in a flourishing condition, and it is also to be
noticed that there is ample room for an extension of the existing
and an opening up of new industries. No artisan need fear that he
will not obtain employment at remunerative wages, and as an out-
let for the overcrowded cities of Europe, where men are suffering
from the keen competition which ensues on too little work for the
many workers, she opens a vast and comparatively untrodden field
of enterprise as a land where there is indeed ‘ ‘ bread and work for
all.”


CHAPTER VII.
TRADE AND COMMERCE, SHIPPING, ETC,
From a very small beginning the trade and commerce of Victoria lias,
during the comparatively short existence of the colony, grown into
gigantic proportions, and the importance of the interchange, inter-
colonial and international, may be easily understood by the elaborate
and exhaustive statistics and customs returns regularly pub-
lished for the information of the public. The port of Melbourne is
continually crowded with shipping of every class and tonnage,
steamers and sailing vessels, from the small coaster to the huge
cargo, passenger, and mail-carrying ocean-going steamers of 3000
to 4000 tons burthen. Besides the port named there are also the
smaller sea ports of Geelong, Portland, Port Fairy, Port Albert,
and Warrnambool, and the Murray river ports of Echuca, Swan Hill,
Tocumwal, Wahgunyah, Wodonga, and Howlong, all of which are
regularly visited by vessels of larger and smaller size.
At first, and for many years after the settlement of the colony,
the entire commerce of Victoria was transacted by way of Great
Britain, but as the imports and exports grew in magnitude and
importance, so the merchants and shipowners laid on their vessels
direct to the foreign ports with which they were transacting business.
Thus, in addition to the enormous English trade, there are vessels
continually sailing between the Victorian ports and India, China,
Mauritius, America, France, Germany, Sweden, and other places,
wherever the requirements or exigencies of traffic demand.
The principal port of \ ictoria is the metropolis, Melbourne, or
rather Melbourne, Sandridge, and Williamstown, which may be
generally classified under the one term. At this port the imports for
1875 amounted to £13,015,552, or 78 per cent, of the total imports for
the year, and the exports to £13,126,292, or 88’89 per cent.


The port at which, after Melbourne, the value of the goods
imported is greatest, is Echuca, the principal port on the Murray,
and customs port for the overland trade with New South Wales.
At this place the value of the imports was £2,189,562, or 13-12 per
cent., and here and at the other ports on the Murray, nearly one-
fifth of the total imports for the year were delivered. Except
Melbourne, the only very important sea port for foreign trade is
Geelong, which imported during 1875 goods to the value of £211,029,
exporting to the value of £1,192,750 in the same year. Besides the
foreign trade, however, there exists a coastwise traffic, by means of
which the outports receive goods of which the duty has been paid in
Melbourne, and send away goods to Melbourne for ultimate shipping
there. The principal items of these coastwise exports is wool, of
which Warrnambool sent away 1,390,330 lbs., valued at £140,884;
Port Fairy and Belfast, 2,289,207 lbs., valued at £229,258; and Port-
land, 2,440,661 lbs., valued at £196,325—a total value of £566,467
for wool exported. The other articles shipped in these ports are
principally grain, cheese, leather, live stock, potatoes, bark and skins,
of which the total value for the year was £189,615, bringing up the
total export value from the south-west coast to £756.082.
The total value of the imports and exports for the year 1875 was
as follows Imports, £16,685,874; exports, £14,766,974; the excess
of imports over exports being £1,918,900; and the total value
of the external trade thus being £31,452,848; being £268,111 less
imports, and £674,135 less exports than the previous year.
Of the imports, the quantity of breadstuff's (wheat, flour, bread,
and biscuits), was 284,605 bushels, valued at £71,137; and of
the exports—wool, 85,064,952 lbs., valued at £6,096,958; tallow,
13,910,736 lbs., valued at £203,243; hides and skins, valued at
£50,454 ; and breadstuff's, 84,236 bushels, valued at £36,076.
The value of the imports and exports per head of the population
(815,034), was—imports, £2O 9s. 6d.; exports, £lB 2s. 4d.; or both,
£3B 11s. 10d.
The value of the imports of articles, entered as being the produce or
manufacture of the United Kingdom, of other British dominions, and
of Foreign states, and the value of the exports of articles entered as


being the produce or manufacture of the same countries and of Vic-
toria, will be found as under :—Articles, the produce or manufacture
of Victoria—exports, £10,571,806 ; the United Kingdom—imports,
£7,528,092; exports, £1,349,032; other British possessions—imports,
£6,324,571; exports, £2,108,328; Foreign states —imports, £2,833,211;
exports, £737,808. The exports of the articles of produce or manu-
facture of Victoria are set down at about 71 per cent, of the whole.
The country from which, next to Great Britain, Victoria imports
most largely, is the neighbouring colony of New South Wales, the prin-
cipal articles being, in 1875 —wool, £2,264,676; horned cattle,
£573,224; sheep, £473,044; coal, £258,645; and maize, £113,675.
The imports from “ other Foreign states,” consisted principally of tea
from China, £630,922, and sugar from Java, £258,553.
The external trade of Victoria, as shown by the imports and
exports, is larger than New South Wales and Queensland combined,
or is larger than Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia,
Tasmania, and New Zealand combined. It must, however, not
be forgotten that in the Victorian imports from the other colonies
wool is represented by a value of £2,310,477, and gold by a value of
£869,416, and there is no doubt that most of this is afterwards
included in the Victorian exports.
The Customs revenue for 1875, as compared with 1874, shows a
falling-off of £84,003, the receipts being £1,764,209 in 1875 and
£1,848,212 in 1874. Pilotage rates, not included in the customs
revenue, amounted to £21,463 in 1875.
The shipping interest of Victoria is represented by a fleet of vessels
of all tonnages, from the small lime and firewood ketches trading
between Melbourne, Geelong, Western Port, and other short
distances, to sailing vessels of considerable tonnage—brig, barque,
and even ship rigged, and the numerous fleet of fine coasting and
intercolonial steamers. The latter vessels especially are of a high
class, and those trading with New South Wales and New Zealand
especially are mostly splendid specimens of naval architecture—well
manned, kept in excellent order, well found, roomy, and comfortable,
swift, and fit for any weather. Those trading to the other colonies
are generally smaller vessels, but are equally comfortable, while the


coasting steamers are eminently suited to the requirements of the
trade. In brief, the mercantile navy of Victoria is such an one as
might reflect credit on any of the older states of Europe, no expense
having been spared to obtain vessels of the best class that science
could design and skill create.
The tonnage of vessels entering and leaving Victorian ports, and
the number of men employed to navigate such vessels, were greater
in the year 1875 than in three previous years. The number of
vessels inwards, however, was slightly exceeded in one, and the
number outwards in two, of those years.
The vessels inward in 1875 numbered 2171; the tonnage, 840,386,
and the number of men was 38,681. The vessels outward, 2223;
tonnage, 833,499; and number of men, 38,454. Of these inward
vessels, 1781, with a tonnage of 483,880 and 25,679 men, were
colonial; 296, with a tonnage of 297,127 and 11,708 men, British;
and 94, tonnage 59,379 and 1294 men, foreign. Of the outward, 1869
vessels, tonnage 505,691, men 26,442, were colonial; 268, tonnage
274,245, men 10,856, British; and 86, tonnage 53,563 and 1153 men,
foreign. The foreign vessels were of the following nationalities, in
the order of their number, visiting the ports;—Aifterican, French,
German, Norwegian, Dutch, Swedish, Hawaiian, Russian, Danish,
Spanish, and Nicaraguan.
The colonial vessels had 1 man to 19 tons, the British 1 to 21 tons,
and the foreign 1 to 46 tons. By this it is seen that the colonial
vessels are, numerically, the best manned, and foreign vessels the
worst. It must be remembered, however, that most of the colonial
vessels, and many of the British vessels, are steamers, whilst nearly
all the foreign vessels are sailing vessels; and as steamers must have
one crew to attend to the engines and another to the sails and cargo,
they necessarily carry more hands in the aggregate than sailing
vessels.
In 1875 the vessels arriving in ballast numbered 64, with an
aggregate tonnage of 6379 tons. Those outward numbered 728, with
an aggregate of 234,172 tons.
Owing to the large amount of shipping engaged in the coal trade of
New South Wales, the number and tonnage of vessels entered and


cleared in that colony are in excess of the number and tonnage of
those entered and cleared in Victoria. With this exception, how-
ever, the shipping coming in and departing from Victorian ports is
much greater, both in regard to numbers and tonnage, than that of
any other colony in the group.
The only vessels built in Victoria have, as yet, been small craft.
In the year 1875, of such were launched 24, comprising 9 steamers
and 15 sailing vessels, viz., 1 barge, 8 cutters, and 6 schooners.
The aggregate tonnage of the steamers was 1406, or an average of 156
to each vessel. The vessels on the register at the end of 1875
numbered 458, viz., 61 steamers and 397 sailing vessels. The former,
in the aggregate, measured 12,656 tons, and carried 865 men; the
latter measured 61,228 tons, and carried 2564 men. The number of
lighters licensed to carry goods was 133. The number of licensed
boats was 323, of which 2 were to be employed in whaling, 9 in
oyster fishing, and 312 in the conveyance of passengers, &c.


CHAPTER VIII.
RAILWAYS, ROADS, COACHES, POSTAL,
TELEGRAPHIC, etc.
Not many years ago the means of communication between one part
of the colony and another, were of the most primitive description.
The roads were, for the most part, little more than bush tracks, cut
through the timber, and made to the extent that they were made
by rocks and fallen trees being shot into the bad places, and the rest
left to take its chance. Deep beds of thick choking dust in summer,
and horrible quagmires of thick mud and slush in winter, travelling
over them was an undertaking not lightly to be entered upon, and
only performed at risk of life and limb. That they were traversed it
is true, either by the lumbering bullock drays of the period, when
main strength was the only means of overcoming the difficulties, or
by the world-renowned “Cobb’s coaches,” whose drivers, reckless of
danger, and regardless of horseflesh, forced their way, sometimes on
the road, sometimes off it, from one point to another. No sooner
did a new diggings break out, no sooner did a new township spring
up, than the übiquitous Cobb was there with his teams of half-broken
horses, and his leathern-hung waggon-coaches. And so for years
the country was opened up for traffic, and traversed from end to
end, while cabs and omnibuses became general in the city and towns
of the interior.
But the change soon came. Ihe advantages of railway communi-
cation were too well known, and too much appreciated by the
enterprising colonists for them to be long satisfied without them, and
railways soon wound their way over hill and plain from the metropolis,
north, east, and west. The number of miles of railway now open in the
colony is about 950—namely, the Melbourne, Sandhurst, and Echuca
line, which taps the Murray River at the latter place, 156 miles;


Melbourne and Williamstown, 9| miles; Melbourne, Geelong, and
Ballarat, 100£ miles; Ballarat and Ararat, 57 miles; Ararat and
Stawell, 18f miles; Ararat and Hamilton, 66J miles; Hamilton and
Portland, 55 miles; North-Eastern line, from Melbourne to the
Murray at Wodonga (Albury), 187 miles; Ballarat and Maryborough,
42J miles; Castlemaine and Dunolly, 47 i miles; Wangaratta and
Beechworth, 26 2 miles; Sandhurst and Inglewood, 30| miles; Mary-
borough and Avoca, 15 miles; and Geelong and Colac, 51 miles.
These are Government railways, and besides them the Government
has also in progress the Melbourne and Gipps Land line (120
miles), and some others under consideration. There are also
the following private lines belonging to a company known as
the Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay Railway Company:—Melbourne
and St Kilda, 3| miles; Melbourne and Sandridge, 2h miles;
Melbourne and Windsor, 3£ miles; Windsor and Brighton, 5| miles;
and Richmond and Hawthorn, 2 miles. It will thus be seen that
the colony is partially covered with a network of railway which,
with the improvements which have been made in the roads, render
modern travelling not only easy, but pleasant to any part of the
country. The total cost of the Government lines, as stated at the
end of 1876, for 1875 was £12,228,100, or an average of £21,540 per
mile, the average distance travelled during the year 1875 being
2,051,910 miles. The total coast of the private lines was £865,412,
or £50,907 per mile, the distance travelled being 451,128 miles.
The whole of the lines are constructed on a gauge of 5 feet 3 inches,
which is also the national guage of South Australia, but not of any
of the other colonies, where a narrower gauge has been adopted.
The permanent way on the whole of the railways is of the best
description, the ballast consisting principally of blue-metal (basalt)
spalls, bound together with sand, loam and gravel, and making a
roadway practically devoid of shrinkage and sinking. Unlike the
railways of other colonies, those of Victoria have had no very great
engineering difficulties to overcome, they run for the most part over
tolerably level country, and with a few exceptions there are no
marked ascents or descents. The gradients too are easy and gradual,
and the curves have a long radius, so that with common care and


attention, travelling by rail is unattended with the slightest danger.
In fact, accidents from running on the lines are so uncommon as to
be almost unknown, and the baton system having been introduced
on the Government railways, is an additional safeguard. The rails
are of the best quality, and are firmly fixed to red-gum sleepers, the
very best timber that can be obtained for the purpose.
The rolling stock on the Government lines consists of 121 locomo-
tives, 96 first-class and composite carriages, 87 second-class car-
riages, 175 sheep and cattle trucks, 1678 goods trucks, wagons, &c.,
and 149 guards’ vans and other vehicles, the total cost being
£948,206. On the private lines the rolling stock consists of 16
locomotives, 77 first-class and composite carriages, 15 second-class
carriages, 202 goods trucks, wagons, &c., and 12 guards’ vans and
other vehicles, the total cost being £137,830, a grand total for the
two classes of railway of £1,086,036 for rolling stock. It may be
added that the carriages are roomy and comfortable, and that on the
Government lines a number of saloon carriages have been intro-
duced, and appear to have given much satisfaction to travellers.
The main terminus of the Government line is in Spencer-street, at
the west end of Melbourne, and is an extensive range of wooden
buildings, containing all conveniences for passengers and for the
large goods traffic carried on. The other termini and the interme-
diate stations are also roomy, and fitted with all requirements. The
same may also be said of the termini and stations on the private
lines.
Passenger rates for travelling on the Government lines are—First-
class, 2d. per mile; second-class, l|d.; and on the private lines —
First-class, IJd.; second-class, Igd.; there being a slight reduction
on the latter lines for return tickets, the rates being still further re-
duced on them to regular travellers by means of monthly tickets.
The number of passengers carried on the Government lines for 1875
was 2,699,519, and on the private lines 3,465, a total of
6,165,076 5, and an increase of 790,235 over the previous year. The
goods carried amounted, on the Government lines, to 732,772 tons,
and on the private lines to 206,674 tons—a total of 939,446 tons,
being an increase on the Government lines of 51,062 tons, and a de-


crease on the private lines of 16,286 tons, as compared with the pre-
vious year.
The receipts for the year were—on the Government lines,
£920,008, and the working expenses £481,717; on the private lines
the receipts were £171,930, and the working expenses £89,761.
The main roads and bridges of the colony are constructed by the
general Government out of a fund voted by Parliament for the pro-
secution of public works. The construction and repair of the
streets and roads in the towns and municipalities devolve on the
corporations of those places, and on what are called road boards,
who have the power of levying local taxation for those purposes.
The amount expended during the year on roads and bridges was
£99,451; a total of £6,773,817 since the year 1851. As a rule, the
principal roads are well made and kept in good order, although
many of the cross roads are rugged and uneven, and difficult and
dangerous, if not altogether impassable, in bad weather. This
arises, in many cases, from the character of the country through
which they pass; and although very much has been and is being
done to them, much more remains to be done. Still, such as they are,
they are largely used for traffic, though some of the main lines of
road have been to a great extent deserted from the fact of railways
touching the principal towns and villages they connect. Communi-
cation by rail or coach is, however, easy between every part of the
colony, for at each of the principal centres of population coaches
running daily or twice or thrice a week branch off in every direction,
and there is no difficulty in reaching the most remote part of
Victoria by coach or mail car, or even the smallest and most unfre-
quented hamlet, station, or settlement by means of the coach and a
short drive by hired conveyance or ride on horseback.
The postal arrangements in the colony are very complete, and the
facilities for communication by letter are as perfect as they can be
made, neither trouble nor expense being spared for the safe and
prompt conveyance of letters, not only to all parts of the colony, but.
to all parts of the world. The rates of postage are low, the charge
for a single letter (half-ounce) to any part of the colony, or any part
of the other Australian colonies, being 2d. prepaid by stamp and not


otherwise. Letters are forwarded by the earliest and quickest
means, rail as far as possible, and coach or horse otherwise, as fre-
quently as is necessary or convenient, and even the most remote
corners of the colony are rarely outside of two days’ communication.
Post-offices, of which there are no fewer than 900, are established in
every township, village, diggings, and agricultural settlement, and
in the large towns post-pillars for the reception of letters and news-
papers are established in convenient places, and cleared several times
each day. In Melbourne, Ballarat, and other important towns,
there are three or four deliveries per day, with occasional additional
deliveries when rendered necessary by the arrival of the English
mail. An additional facility is offered to the public by the adoption
of the postal card system, by which short messages, not intended to
be private, can be forwarded by the usual post delivery in all parts of
the colony for Id. These must, however, be written only on one
side of a card, sold ready stamped for the purpose, the address being
written on the other side.
During the year 1875, no fewer than 17,134,101 letters, 7,552,912
newspapers, on which the postage is v>d. , and 1,528,493 packets
(postage within the colony Id. for each two ounces), a total of
26,215,506, were passed through the various post-offices of the colony,
but of these 129,824 were irregularly posted, having no addresses,
or being imperfectly addressed, and of these 117,599 were returned or
delivered, the owners being eventually found, and 12,225 destroyed, or
kept on hand. 1136 of these were registered letters, containing valu-
ables to the amount of £13,462, but 94 per cent, of them were delivered.
The number of letters, &c., posted shows a total increase of 2,339,878
over the previous year. There was also an increase of 8698 in the
number of registered letters. About a fourth of the post-offices are
also money order offices, and through these the following money
orders were passed during the year: —Orders issued, 121,094;
amount, £373,436; orders paid, 121,924; amount, £393,383. The
money order offices transmit or pay orders to or from any part of the
colonies or Great Britain, and are very largely used for the trans-
mission of small sums. The rate of postage to Great Britain is 6d. for
single letters, Id. per oz. for packets, and Id. for newspapers.


Allied to the postal department of the colony is the electric tele-
graph, whose wires stretch far and wide in every direction, and flash
instantaneous messages over land or under sea to the remotest parts
of the earth. Like the postal, the telegraph arrangements are very
extensive, and amply sufficient for the requirements of the colony,
extending, as they do, in every direction, and having stations in every
important township and centre of population. The telegraph lines in
Victoria extend over 2629 miles, the wires measuring 4510 miles.
They are connected with the lines of New South Wales, and by
means of them, with those of Queensland and New Zealand. They
are also connected with the lines of South Australia, and through
them, with those of the Eastern Archipelago, Asia, and Europe, and
will be shortly connected with those of West Australia. They are
likewise connected with those of Tasmania, by means of a submarine
cable, reaching from Port Phillip Heads to Low Head, at the mouth
of the Tamar River. The number of telegraph stations in Victoria is
over 164; the number of telegrams for the year 1875 being, paid,
623,514; unpaid, 109,355; total, 732,899. The rate for telegraph
messages within the colony is an uniform one of Is. for ten words,
exclusive of the address, and Id. per word additional. The rates for
the other colonies are somewhat higher, and a special charge is made
for cablegrams.
The accounts of the post and telegraph offices are kept together,
and show for the year 1875, an income of £206,388, with an expen-
diture of £291,945.


CHAPTER IX.
EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, RENTS, PRICE OF
PROVISIONS, etc.
Employment is plentiful in Victoria. There is no lack of work for
the man, or the woman either, who will and can work. The colony
is undoubtedly the home for the industrious working man, who
may, with common steadiness, application, and prudence, not only
live in comfort, or in fact, as compared with the condition of
many working men in the overcrowded cities of Europe, in affluence,
but who may easily save enough to enable him soon to become a
freeholder and his own landlord, and it may be, to start in business
on his own account. Hundreds who have landed on these shores in
poverty have done so, and there is ample room and verge enough for
hundreds, aye, thousands more to do the same thing. The country
is not half populated, and it is by workers, not dreamers, that it
must be populated.
But there is the right sort of population, even of working
population, and the wrong sort. There is scarcely a handicraftsman
of any kind who cannot at once, and for good wages, secure
permanent employment, and most are sought after with avidity by
employers whose jobs are being delayed for sheer want of skilled
labour. The carpenter, the builder, the plasterer, the stonemason,
the painter, the worker in wood, or in iron, the makers of articles of
clothing, of use, of luxury, the purveyor of what we eat, drink,
wear, use, with all their concurrent and connected artizans, are
needed, are absolutely wanted, not only in Melbourne, the capital,
but all over the country. The farmer, the ploughman, the farm
labourer, all whose interests are connected with agricultural pursuits,
have millions of acres waiting to their hand, and nothing but
patience, pluck, and perseverance, are wanted to enable them to go


forward upon it, and px’osper. These, men of energy and courage to
face and overcome the first difficulty, are those who will and must
succeed in any new country, most of all in this.
But the lazy, the improvident, those who are too poor to be
independent, too proud or unable to put their hands forth to manual
labour, had better stay away, for they must inevitably go to the
wall. The race here is to the swift, the battle to the strong.
Clerks, men wanting light genteel employment, et hoc genus omne,
there is little or no room for.
For the honest, industrious, prudent man, whether artizan or
agriculturalist, whether earning his bread in the smoke and turmoil of
cities, or tilling the grateful virgin earth in the fresh free air, there is a
certain hope of ultimate success, and a steady improvement in his
worldly good. This all may hope for, this all, who try con-
scientiously, may attain. Therefore is it that, as was said at the
beginning of this chapter, the colony is undoubtedly the home for
the industrious working man.
Wages are good. Let its see what wages are here, as compared
with those in Europe. From the current rates of wages actually
paid for various kinds of labour, and published monthly in the
Melbourne newspapers, we cull the following statement made in the
Melbourne Age of 3rd September, 1877 :
Bakers; Foremen and first-class workmen, £2 ss. to £3 10s. per
week ; second hands, 355. to 40s. In small shops lower rates pre-
vail. Building trades: Stonemasons, 10s. to 11s. per day; brick-
layers, plasterers, slaters, 10s.; carpenters, I Os.; labourers, 75.; pick
and shovel men, 6s. Butchers; Shopmen, 355. to 40s. per week;,
boys, 15s. to 205.; slaughtermen, 40s. to 505.; small-goodsmen, 30s.
to 40s. with rations. Cabinetmakers : Wages vary greatly with the
class of shop and ability of the men. In the superior shops in the
city the amounts earned are from £3 to £4 per week, and in
others from £2 10s. to £3 10s. In country towns lower rates prevail.
Coachbuilders; Smiths, £2 10s. to £3 15s. per week, a few very
superior men receiving £4. Bodymakers are mostly paid by the
piece, and good hands can earn from £2 10s. to £3 10s. Wheelers also
work by the piece, and earn from £2 10s. to £3 10s. Painters, 9s. to


10s. per clay. Trimmers, £2 10s. to £3 per week. Vycemen, from
30s. to 40s. Coopers ; Mostly paid by piece-work, but day-work is
9s. for the day of ten hours. The rates for tallow casks are ss. for
thirds, and 4s. 6d. for fourths. Drapers ; In first-class shops drapers’
assistants and carpet salesmen have from £3 to £4 per week; first-
class milliners, £3 to £3 10s.; second-class, 355. to 50s. Farriers
Firemen, 555. per week ; doormen, 455.; inferior hands, 30s. to 40s.
Gardeners : Best men near town, 30s. to 425. per week. In the
country, 20s. to 255. with rations. Inferior hands, 15s. with rations.
Hattei’s : Bodymakers—Low crown, 12s. and 14s. per doz.; regulars,
18s. and 20s. do. Finishers—Low crown, 12s. and 14s. per doz.; silk
hats, 225. and 245. do.; pullovers, 20s. do. Shapers —Regulars
plain shape, 6s. per doz.; over fths, 9s. do.; Anglesea. 12s. do. Low
crowns—under fths, 4s. per doz.; over fths, 6s. do.; Anglesea, Bs.
do. Crown sewers, average 3s. 6d. to 55.; trimmers, 6s. Jewellers:
Manufacturing jewellers, average workmen, 555. to 655. per week;
finer workmen, £5 to £6 per week. Seal engravers and enamellers
are wanted, and can obtain from £6 to £8 per week. Miners ; For
surface work, 40s. per week; underground, 455.; specially deep wet
mines, 50s. Painters and glaziers: Average rate 9s. per day.
Plumbers and gasfitters: Average £3 per week. Printers, &c.;
Compositors, Is. per 1000; lithographers, £2 10s. to £3 15s. per week;
binders, £2 to £3; paper-rulers, £3 to £3 10s. Sailors: In sailing
ships, £5 per month; steam vessels, £6 per month. Ship carpenters;
employment very irregular, average rate, 13s. per day. Stevedores::
Lumpers get 12s. per day. Drivers of donkey engines, £lB per month.
Tailors; The rate by the log is Is. per hour, but in second-class shops
the men earn from £2 10s. to £3 per week. Tanners and curriers:
Beamsmen, 40s. to 50s. per week; shedsmen, 425. to 455.; tanners,
38s. to 455.; curriers (piecework), from 50s. to 70s. Tinsmiths, from
£2 to £3 per week (piecework), Watchmakers: Average rate, £4 per
week; superior workmen as high as £6. Grooms in livery stables,
30s. to 40s. per week; coachmen, 40s. to 505.; navvies, on railways,
9d. per hour.
The following are the wages ruling for domestic servants, &c.: —
For town; Housemaids, £25 to £3O per annum ; female cooks, first-


class, £4O to £75 ; others from £26 to £36 per annum; male do. 30s.
to 80s. per week; nursemaids, £25 to £35 per annum; nursegirls, Bs.
to 10s. per week ; laundresses, £35 to £45. For hotels: Cooks (male
and female), £SO to £l5O per annum ; housemaids, £35 to £4O. For
stations: First-class married couples, for home stations, £7O to £9O
per annum ; second-class do., with children, £4O to £SO; cooks, £45
to £55; housemaids, £35 to £4O. For farms: Men cooks, £SO per
annum; married couples, £6O to £7O; women servants, £3O to £35 ;
farming men, 15s. to 20s. per week ; milkmen, 15s. to 255.; plough-
men, 18s. to 225. 6d. ; waiters for hotels, 20s. to 355. per week ;
grocers’ assistants, 15s. to 305.; general store do., 20s. to 405.;
nursery governesses, £3O to £4O per annum ; finishing do., £6O
to £BO.
Station hands’ wages are as follows:—Stockmen, £6O to £75
per annum ; shepherds, 15s. to 20s. per week; ordinary working
men, 15s. to 205.; drovers, 255. to 405.; gardeners, 15s. to 20s.
So much for tradesmen and handicraftsmen. Can they, could they
ever hope, working such hours, generally eight hours per diem,
to earn such wages at home? We trow not.
But, it may be said, and often has been said by those who wished
to throw cold water on emigration, and to keep the working man for
ever with his nose to the grindstone:—“Although we grant you that
labour is plentiful and that wages are high, still the cost of living is
so great that you are better off where you are earning less than half
the money, than in the colonies, earning the high wages, but having
to pay four times the price for everything you eat, drink, and wear.”
An excellent argument, certainly, if it were true.
The following may be quoted as the average prices in Melbourne, in
March, 1877, of the chief articles of consumption for the year 1876—7-
The cost of groceries, wines, spirits, &c., is generally somewhat
higher, and of agricultural and grazing produce somewhat lower, in
country districts ; —Agricultural Produce— Wheat, per bushel, ss. to
6s. 6d.; oats, 3s. to 45.; barley, 3s. to 55.; Maize, 3s. 6d. to 65.;
bran, Is. 3d. to Is. Bd.; hay, per ton, £3 10s. to £6; potatoes, £3 to
£8; flour, £l4 ss. to £l4 10s.; bread, per 4-lb. loaf, 6d. to 7d.
Grazing produce —Horses, draught, £lO to £4O; saddle, £5 to £SO;


fat cattle, £6 10s. to £l6 25.; milch cows, £4 to £l2 10s.; fat calves,
£1 10s. to £3; fat sheep, 7s. to 225.; fat lambs, 6s. to 10s. 6d.
Butcher's meat —Beef, retail, per lb., 4cl. to 8cl.; mutton, 21,d. to 4d.;
veal, 6d. to Bd.; pork, 7d. to 9d.; lamb, per quarter, Is. 6d. to 3s. 6d.
Dairy produce —Fresh butter, per lb., Is. to Is. 6d.; salt butter, Bd.
to Is.; colonial cheese, lOd. to Is. 2d.; imported, Is. 6d. to Is. lOd.;
milk, per quart, 4d. Farm yard produce— Geese, per couple, Bs. to
125.; ducks, ss. to Bs.; fowls, ss, to 75.; rabbits, Is. to 25.; pigeons,
Is. 3d. to 55.; turkeys, each, 6s. to 125.; sucking pigs, Bs. to 145.;
bacon, per lb., lOd. to Is. 2d.; ham, Is. to Is. 3d.; eggs, perdoz., Is.
to 2s. 6d. Garden produce —Potatoes, wholesale, per ton, £3 to £6;
retail, per lb., |d. to Id.; onions, per cwt., 6s. to 125.; carrots, per
dozen bunches, 6d. to Is.; turnips, 6d. to Is.; radishes, 6d. to Is.;
cabbages, per dozen, 6d. to 25.; cauliflowers, Is. to 45.; lettuces, 4d.
to Is.; green peas, per lb., Id. to 3d. Miscellaneous articles —Tea,
per lb., Is. to 3s. 6d.; coffee, Is. to Is. 6d.; sugar, 3d. to 6d.; lump,
7d.; rice, 2d. to 4d.; tobacco. Is. to 65.; soap, 3d. to 4d.; sperm
candles, 9d. to Is.; tallow candles, 4d. to 6d.; salt, Id.; coal, per
ton, 20s. to 355.; firewood, 12s. to 18s. Wines, Spirits, dc. —Ale,
per hhd., £4 to £9 55.; per doz., 6s. to 11s.; porter, per hhd., £5 to
£7; per doz., 7s. 6d. to 11s.; brandy, per gal., 4s. lOd. to 315.; rum,
3s. to 3s. 6d.; whisky, 4s. to 10s.; hollands, 2s. 9d. to 45.; port
wine, per doz., 255. to 555.; sherry, 255. to 855.; claret, 10s. 9d. to
80s.; champagne, 265. 9d. to 100 s.; colonial wine, per gallon, Is. up-
wards.
These prices, which may be relied on as being the correct prices
ruling, subject, of course, to variations n some of the articles, as
they are in or out of season, constitute all the necessaries, and some
of the luxuries of life, and are, as will be seen, very little different
to home rates, some a little higher, perhaps, others lower. Fruit,
comprising grapes, peaches, nectarines, apricots, oranges, bananas,
passion fruit, apples, pears, cherries, plums, damsons, red, white and
black currants, Cape gooseberries, loquats, strawberries, raspberries,
mulberries, gooseberries, pine-apples, and other fruits, are plentiful
in their respective seasons, and may be had quite as cheaply, and in
most cases far more cheaply than in Great Britain.


Wearing apparel, slops, soft goods, boots, &c., are reasonable,
the imported articles being subject to a duty, in no case higher than
20 per cent, ad valorem , but the colonial-made goods, consisting of
boots, hats, tweeds, shawls, blankets, and male and female clothing
of all kinds, can be purchased of excellent quality and at low prices.
From these prices it is clearly shown that the ignorant or wilfully-
erroneous statements made in the old country regarding the high
price of living in Victoria are totally devoid of foundation, and that,
taking into consideration the higher rate of wages, living is far-and-
away less costly than it is in the cheapest parts of Europe. Certainly
house rents are higher, but it must be remembered that the working
men of Australia are not content to dwell in the close narrow streets
and crowded alleys of older Britain. Every working man, with any
pretension to decency, must have his neat cottage in a wide, open
thoroughfare, with probably his little patch of flower garden railed
in before the door. His rent will thus range from ss. to 10s., or,
perhaps 12s. per week, according to the neighbourhood, the distance
from town, and the class of house, but for the latter sum he may
easily obtain, within easy distance of the centre of the city, a
verandah-cottage, with a small garden and a roomy yard behind, con-
taining four, or perhaps five rooms; a bathroom, with plunge and
shower bath (an unspeakable luxury in the summer season); gas and
water laid on; and the cottage handsomely finished, and furnished
with grates, ovens, gasfittings, chiffonniere cupboards, shelving, and
all other appliances for use and comfort he can wish for himself and
family.
But he does not need, if he be moderately careful and steady, to
pay even that rent long, for, with or without the aid of one or other
of the numerous excellent and liberal building societies, he can easily
acquire a small allotment of ground, and build thereon his own brick,
stone, or weatherboard house, and so, after a time, live—with the ex-
ception of the local taxation, which is light—rent free, a man having
a stake in the country, a citizen, and a freeholder.
Although much of this article may seem to commend itself more
especially to artisans whose interests are connected with the large
towns, still it bears with equal truth on those whose avocations


lead them into the country, for although outside the towns they may
not be able to rent houses of such pretensions as in them, still there
is no difficulty in obtaining comfortable residences, and as the rents
are lower, and the facilities for becoming possessed of land greater,
so the inducement to become freeholders is stronger, and the means
of doing so still easier.
The small capitalist farmer, however, and the agricultural labourer
who reads this chapter, and in conjunction therewith, chapter 111.,
which deals with the agricultural interest, will see embodied therein
a simple, ready, and cheap means of settling on the land, a purpose
not altogether connected with the subject on which this chapter
purports to deal.


CHAPTER X.
MORAL AND MENTAL CONDITION OF THE
POPULATION, EDUCATION, etc.
One of the proudest boasts of Victoria, as a free country, is that
there is no such thing as religious intolerance within her borders.
Every man is perfectly at liberty to enjoy his own religious opinions
and to follow the tenets and practices of his own creed, so long as
he does not break the law, outrage propriety, or interfere with his
neighbour. There is no State Church, nor does any one religious
denomination enjoy privileges denied to any other. Whether a man
professes religion or no religion there is no interference with his civil
rights, nor is the line of demarcation between one creed and another so
marked as in other countries, where one particular religion is looked
upon as, par excellence, that of the people. Religions are, to some
extent, blended, and even the clergy, generally the most conservative
body in existence, frequently meet on a common platform when
questions of public good are to be considered.
It might be thought that such a free and easy system might lead
to irreligion, or to neglect of public worship on the part of the
people, and yet so far from such being the case, there is perhaps no
part of the world where religious ordinances are more conscientiously
attended to, or are held in greater respect by non-professors, than in
Victoria. More, it would be hard to find a place where more
opportunities are afforded to the public to meet in religious com-
munion, or where larger, more orderly, and more respectable
congregations gather together, sabbath after sabbath, to “the sound
of the church-going bell.” The clergy of all denominations throughout
Victoria, registered for the celebration of marriages, numbered 669
at the end of the year 1875. The total number of buildings used
for public worship was 2519. The approximate number of services


during the year was 206,883; the number of persons for whom
accommodation was provided was 421,377, and the numbers usually
attending at the principal service on the sabbath averaged 296,262.
The religions professed by the people of Victoria at the date of the
last census were as follows Episcopalian Protestants, 257,835;
Presbyterians, 112,983; Methodists, 94,220; Independents, 18,191;
Baptists, 16,311; Lutherans, 10,559; Church of Christ, 3540; Mo-
ravians, 93; Calvinists, 1432; Friends, 333; Unitarians, 1016;
other Protestants, 1028; Roman Catholics, 170,620; Apostolic
Church, 278; Greek Church, 332; Christian Israelites, 285; Mor-
mons, 97; Jews, 3571; other sects, including Pagans, mostly Chinese,
18,392; no denomination, 2737; no religion, 2150; unspecified,
5560; objecting to state their religion, 9965.
In connection with the churches are 1430 sabbath schools, with
12,055 teachers, and 108,388 scholars. Of these schools, 270 are
Church of England, 208 Roman Catholic, 315 Presbyterians, and
478 Wesleyan. It may be stated here that 1875 was the last year
of the reservation of £50,000 annually from the revenue for the
purposes of public worship, therefore since December, 1875, State
aid to religion has been abolished.
The state of education in Victoria, taking all things into account,
may be said to have reached a high standard, and for the future there
can be no reason why that standard should not be still higher. Of
one thing there can be no doubt, namely, that while the existing
system lasts, and it seems to have become the recognised law of the
land, education in the colony will be virtually universal. That
system, which was not passed through the Legislature without
strenuous opposition on the part of the clergy, is one of free,
compulsory, and secular education, the religious element, or the
slightest approach to teaching the tenets of any creed or sdct, being
strictly forbidden in the public schools. At first this measure was
viewed with distrust by many worthy but short-sighted persons,
such distrust being incited by the hostility of the clergy, who
viewed with alarm the prospect of so much power passing from their
hands, and who denounced the system as godless and atheistic.
With the exception of a few ill-advised pastors of one or two


denominations, they, the clergy, have however now accepted the
position, finding it better to direct their energies towards giving
religious instruction to the children out of school hours, than to
waste their time in fruitless efforts to overturn a system which has
received the cordial approval of the public voice, and which promises
to conduce so much to the public weal.
Prior to 1862 two systems of education, named respectively the
Denominational and the National, were supported by the State in
Victoria; but in September of that year they were blended into one
system under the Common School Act (25 Viet., No. 140). That
Act, however, was repealed by the present Education Act (36 Viet.,
No. 447), which came into force on the Ist January, 1873.
The present Act provides that the Department of Education shall
be presided over by a responsible Minister of the Crown, styled the
Minister of Public Instruction, and also provides for what are called
boards of advice, elected in the various school districts. The subjects
taught free are reading, writing, spelling, writing from dictation,
arithmetic as far as vulgar and decimal fractions, grammar, geography,
and disciplinary exercises, also needlework for girls. Drill and
gymnastics are taught when practicable. Extra subjects, such as
Latin, French, or any other language, Euclid, trigonometry, algebra,
the elements of natural science, mensuration, bookkeeping, sing-
ing and drawing, are also allowed to be taught at certain pre-
scribed low rates, to be charged for to the parents. The com-
pulsory clause of the Act applies to children between six and fifteen
years of age, each of whom is required to attend at a State-school for
a period of sixty days in each half-year, unless the child has been
educated up to a certain standard, is educated elsewhere, or is
prevented from attending by sickness, distance, or other unavoidable
cause, and parents are liable to penalties for non-fulfilment of the
requirements of the Act.
During 1875 the number of public schools, including State day and
night schools, and capitation schools, was 1320, the number of
instructors 3826, the number on the rolls 220,533, and the number
in average attendance 101,495. The average attendance in 1874 was
104,375, but the diminished attendance is accounted for by the fact


that during 1875, some of the schools were closed at various periods
on account of the prevalence of the epidemics of scarlatina and
measles.
Of private schools there were 565, having 1511 teachers, and 27,481
scholars, but five of these schools are colleges or grammar schools,
which at a former period received sums of money and grants of land
from the Government for the erection of school buildings, although
no State assistance is now given them. They are all connected with
some religious denomination, and in connection with some of them
there are exhibitions, chiefly with the view of assisting the ablest
pupils to complete their education at the university. These colleges
are known as the Melbourne Grammar School (Church of England),
which in former years received £13,784 towards building, 7 masters,
149 scholars; Geelong Grammar School (Church of England), £7OOO,
8 masters, 124 scholars; Scotch College (Presbyterian) £6445, 14
masters, 340 scholars; Wesley College (Wesleyan) £2769, 12 masters,
230 scholars; St. Patrick’s College (Roman Catholic) £2500, 9 masters,
166 scholars. Total grant in aid of building, £32,498, 50 masters,
1009 scholars.
The Melbourne University for the higher branches of education
was established under a special Act in January, 1853, and was opened
in October, 1855. The Act provides for a council of twenty members,
of whom sixteen must be laymen, and who shall elect from their
body a Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor, also for the constitution of a
senate, to be presided over by a warden, and for the endowment of
the university by the payment of not less than £9OOO per annum out
of the general revenue. It further provides that no religious test
shall be administered to any one to enable him to be admitted to the
privileges and advantages of the university. By Royal letters patent,
issued in March, 1859, it was declared that all degrees granted, or to
be granted by the Melbourne University, should be recognised as
academic distinctions and rewards of merit as fully as if they had
been granted by any university in the United Kingdom.
The students who matriculated in 1875, numbered 93 as against
118 in the previous year. From the opening of the University in
1855, to the end of the year, the students who matriculated amounted


to 923. The undergraduates who attended lectures during the year
were as follow: —Arts 56, laws 60, engineering 27, medicine 52—total
195. The number of graduates was 34, of whom 29 took direct, and
5 ad eundem degrees. Of the former 10 graduated 8.A., 6 M.A.,
3M. 8., .1 M.D., and 9 LL.B.; of the ad eundem degrees, 3 were
8.A., 1 M.A., and 1 LL.B.
The total graduates since 1855 have been 430. The total receipts
of the University during 1875 amounted to £15,179, of which £9OOO
was obtained from Government, £5947 from college fees, and £232
from other sources.
It will thus be seen that with regard to the two important matters,
the religious and mental culture of the population, Victoria may
compare favourably with any part of the world. With regard to the
former, eminent and talented preachers are warmly welcomed and
liberally paid by their congregations, and the prizes to be won by
men who have made or can make their mark in the clerical world,
are neither few nor, in a pecuniary point of view, lightly to be
despised. Regarding the latter, it may be fairly said that the
Government has set an example which might be profitably followed
anywhere, inasmuch as while providing liberally for the higher
branches of education, they have devoted most of their energies
to the compulsory training of the young in the more rudimentary
branches, and, education being free, there is not the slightest excuse
even for the poorest parents, in not giving to their offspring that
boon, more priceless than all others, a good education.
Notwithstanding the fact that in the earlier days of the colony,
and especially during the first of the gold rush, it was visited by so
many new comers, many of whom were desperadoes and scoundrels—
the riff-raff and off-scouring of society from all parts of the world,—
and, notwithstanding that, to some degree, the taint of that ruffian
element remains still in our midst, —yet Victoria can compare favour-
ably in point of morality and immunity from crime with most parts
of the world. Of the children born during 1876, which numbered
26,769, there were 975 registered as illegitimate, being one in every
27 5. Supposing all the children born out of wedlock to have been
registered as such, illegitimacy is much more common in England and


Wales than in Victoria—the illegitimate births there during the
eleven years ending with 1873 having been 1 in every 17 registered.
The gradual diminution of crime generally is marked by the circum-
stance that, notwithstanding the increase in the population of the
colony, fewer and fewer arrests have been made during the past ten
years, and the diminution in the number of serious offences is
indicated by the fact that the number of persons committed for trial
follows the same rule. Diminished numbers are observed in respect
to all the more serious crimes, especially murder, wounding or
poisoning, rape, unnatural offences, robbery with violence, and
horse, sheep, and cattle stealing. The numbers arrested for drunken-
ness show a steady decrease during the period named.
The charities of Victoria are noble and large. Hospitals for the
sick, asylums for the afflicted and bereaved, shelters for the poor,
and refuges for penitents, are numerous and liberally supported,
partially by Government subsidy, partially by voluntary con-
tributions. Of hospitals there are 32, having 232 wards or rooms,
with beds for 1987 patients, and having afforded assistance to 14,477
inmates during the past year; 1 lying-in hospital, with 65 beds, 799
inmates; 1 blind asylum, 102 inmates; 1 deaf and dumb asylum, 84
inmates; 1 eye and ear hospital, 171 inmates; 1 children’s hospital,
88 inmates; 5 benevolent asylums for the aged poor, 1683 inmates; 1
immigrants’ home, for the relief of the homeless poor, 10,229 relieved ;
7 orphan asylums, 1262 inmates; 9 industrial and reformatory schools,
2682 inmates; 4 hospitals for the insane, 3089 inmates; 4 female
refuges, 338 inmates: total, 69 institutions, having afforded aid in a
year to 34,984 persons, or 8’507 on an average at one time,—a goodly
show for charity, and one which speaks volumes for the general
prosperity of the colony and the generosity of the colonists.
The mental condition of the population of Victoria, too, may
compare favourably with that of other places, as evidenced by the
numbers of public libraries, mechanics’ institutes, and other similar
institutions, which are broadcast throughout the length and breadth
of the land. The principal of these, and the one which is the pride
of Victoria, is the unequalled Public Library in Melbourne. This
building was opened in February, 1856, and, although important


additions have been made to it since then, it is yet unfinished. The
buildings have cost £110,190, the funds being pi’ovided by Govern-
ment, and the total number of volumes in the library at the end of
last year was nearly 90,000, the private contributions of books,
pamphlets, maps, &c., having amounted in all to about 67,000, of
which about 44,000 were presented to the institution, and the
remainder deposited under the copyright statute. The Library is open
to the public free on week days (an energetic movement has
lately been made to have it opened on Sundays as well), between
the hours of 10 a.m. and 10 p.m., and was visited during the year by
about 240,000 persons.
The National Gallery, which is attached to the Library, contained,
at the end of 1875, 5919 works of art, viz., 73 oil paintings, 159
objects of statuary, and 5687 drawings, engravings, and photographs —
and all these have been largely added to—partly by purchase, partly
by loan, during last year. It is opened at noon daily (Sundays and
certain holidays excepted), and is closed at 4 p.m. in winter and
5 p.m. in summer. The school of painting was attended in 1875 by
7 male and 34 female students, and the school of design by 45 males
and 107 female students. The Industrial and Technological Museum,
also attached to the Library, contained 17,982 objects, principally
specimens of art, industry, and natural products. Class lectures are
given at this institution on chemistry, mining, mineralogy, telegraphy,
&c., and are fairly attended. This institution receives students
in all branches of chemical science, both theoretical and applied :
in mineralogy, assaying, and geology applied to mining. The fee
payable for this course of education and practical training is but four
guineas per term (£4 45.), of which there are four in the year, but
pupils may enter at any time. There are two exhibitions of £5O a
year, to be holden for one or two years by the two most advanced
pupils. All requisite appliances and apparatus, &c., are supplied,
and the pupil is charged only for such as are lost or seriously injured.
The two latter institutions were visited last year by about 200,000
persons.
Attached to the Melbourne University is the National Museum,
an institution containing valuable specimens of minerals, stuffed


animals, insects, and other specimens of natural history. It is open
free to the public, on week days, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., and was
visited last year by about 100,000 persons.
Besides these places of public resort and instruction in the
metropolis, nearly every township in Victoria has its free library,
athenaeum, or scientific, literary, or mechanics’ institute—the number
in 18/o being 138; and it is estimated that during that year they
were visited by nearly two and a-half millions of persons. The total
number of volumes in these institutions was 184,428.
Besides the public institutions named, eVery place of importance
has its place or places of public resort and entertainment—theatres,
concert-rooms, and the like. Of th.ese, Melbourne has four fine
theatres, three public concert-halls, a town-hall for concerts, balls,
&c., having a magnificent organ, an athenaeum-hall (to which is
attached, or, rather, which is attached to) a reading-room and cir-
culating library, and other places of amusement or recreation of
greater or less importance. Ballarat has two theatres and a music-
hall; Sandhurst the same; Geelong, one hall, fitted as a theatre;
and in nearly every township of any pretension is a room fitted
with the appliances for musical or dramatic representations.
In connection with the mental condition of the population, it may
be mentioned, too, that schools of art and design exist in Melbourne,
Ballarat West (where is also a school of mines), Ballarat East,
Brunswick, Clunes, Creswick, East Collingwood, Fitzroy, Geelong,
Northcote, Prahran, Preston, Eichmond, Sandhurst (where is also
a school of mines), Sebastopol, South Melbourne, South Eichmond,
and St. Kilda, —so that, whether for educational or merely recreative
purposes, V ictoria may fairly vie, not only with her neighbours of
something like her own age, but with those of the older countries of
Europe who have enjoyed for ages past the advantages she has only
just commenced to enjoy, but which she has, in the exuberance of
her youth and energy, grasped at and paid for with so liberal a hand.


CHAPTER XI.
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL CONDITION OF THE
PEOPLE.
Closely allied to the moral and mental status of a people, is their
political and social condition. Where the moral and mental condition
is low, the people will be found politically and socially abject
and debased; where, on the contrary, the moral and mental status is
of a high standard, so too will they occupy, socially and politically, a
high position in the State.
Victoria is, in a word, essentially politically free. The very nature
of her political institutions is such that she must be free, for with
certain necessary restrictions, the law places no bar to any man rising
to the very highest office under the Crown.
The affairs of the colony are under the control of a Governor
appointed by the British Government, whose term of office is usually
six years, the present one being Sir George Ferguson Bowen, K.M.G.,
and of an Executive Council, consisting of the Governor and the
Ministry for the time being, and of two Houses of Legislature. The
Legislative Council consists of 30 members, representing the six
provinces into which the colony is divided, namely, the Central, North-
western, North-eastern, Southern, Eastern and Western, which contain
29,110 electors. The qualification for a vote is a leasehold of £SO a
year, or a freehold property of the same value. The candidate’s
qualification is £2500 freehold, or property of the value of £250 an-
nually, the tenure of office being ten years, one of the five members
of Council for each province retiring in rotation at the expiration of
every two years. The Legislative Assembly consists of 86 members,
representing 55 electoral districts, and is triennial in its duration.
The members of the Assembly need no special qualification, and
members of both Houses are paid £3OO per annum for re-imbursing


their expenses. The number of electors for the Assembly on the
roll on the 21st March, 1877, was 181,228, and the qualifications of
a voter are so small that the system may be practically considered
as one of universal suffrage. The voter must he a male person
of twenty-one years of age (not subject to any legal incapacity), a
naturalised or denizen subject of the Queen, and have resided
in Victoria one year previous to the Ist day of January or July in
any year, or have been naturalised at least three years. All voting
is done by ballot.
The aspect of Victoria socially is one on which she may with
reason pride herself. Out of the chaos of disorder and misrule of
the old digging days, the sterling good sense of her people has
evolved a social system which is second to none in the world.
Victorians are a law-loving, a law-abiding, and an orderly race, and
although unquestionably, amongst a certain class, rowdyism exists,
still there is no defined body anything like the roughs of London or
the hoodlums of San Francisco. Life and property are comparatively
safe, and robbery with violence is of rare occurrence. Certainly
nothing like “garotting,” the crime that rendered London streets
so dangerous after nightfall, is practised, and even “bushranging,”
once a reign of terror in New South Wales, never obtained a footing
in Victoria, and when tried was speedily stamped out. The great
social failing in the colony is indulgence in strong drink —drunken-
ness, in fact; but even this, which at one time was looked upon
as a venial fault if not a manly attribute, is now regarded rather as
a disgrace and a disability, and publicly, at all events, has wonder-
fully decreased of late, the more as the wines native to the soil
are growing in favour with the masses, and dram-drinking, or, as
it is colonially termed, “nobblerising,” is gradually giving way to
the partaking of sound and pure juice of the grape.
The character of a nation has been said by an original thinker
to be determined by its songs. Equally well may it be said that
the character of a nation is shown by its amusements. Victorians
are pre-eminently a people of amusements. Nor do they, as
Continental nations say the English do, take their pleasures sadly.
Holidays are frequent, and are largely availed of by all classes of


people. And really a Victorian holiday is something to see, for in
no part of the world perhaps can so orderly, so well dressed, and
so evidently well-to-do a body of people be found as may be seen,
hurrying by road, rail or steamer to pic-nic, review, racecourse,
cricket ground, or what not, at holiday time. The outdoor amuse-
ments most affected are horse-racing and cricket, and after them foot-
ball, bowls, rifle-shooting, boating, hunting, and the newly imported
games of Polo and La Crosse. Poller skating is also a fashionable
amusement, there being numerous rinks in the colony, and Mel-
bourne has a fine hand-ball court, which is extensively patronised.
Every town of any pretension has its racecourse, the metropolitan
one at Flemington being the best in Australia, and hardly to be
matched in any part of the world. The principal event of the
year is the Cup race, which is run for at Flemington in the summer
season. The Cup day is the fashionable day of the year, and on that
occasion the Flemington Grand Stand (an excellent and commodious
building), and “the hill” are crowded with a vast assemblage of
visitors from all parts of this and other colonies, and show such a
spectacle of well-dressed people as cannot be seen elsewhere, Goodwood
in England, and Chantilly and Longchamps in France perhaps
excepted. On that day every one turns out to do honour to the
occasion, which is looked on as a kind of festival. High and low,
rich and poor, alike congregate on the racecourse in tens of thou-
sands, and for the time busy and crowded Melbourne appears
deserted. Among the wealthier classes, the ladies especially, it is
looked upon as a point of honour to appear arrayed in the gayest
and richest apparel that can be obtained, and as a gathering of
female beauty and dazzling toilettes, the Melbourne course on a
Cup day has long been generally celebrated all over the colonies.
The racing is excellent, much attention having been paid to, and
large sums of money expended in, the breeding of racehorses.
Every township has, too, its cricket ground, Melbourne having
a large number, of which the principal are the Melbourne, East
Melbourne, and South Melbourne grounds, on the first-named of
which the intercolonial and All-England matches are played. Foot-
ball is the favourite game in winter, and numerous matches are


played on the grounds of the various clubs during the season. There
are also two or three regattas during the year, but aquatics are not
so extensively patronised as in the sister colony of New South Wales.
The other sports named, too, have their numerous votaries, and it is
but few of the young men of the colony who are not attached to one
or more clubs for the prosecution of games of some kind, or who do
not belong to one of the numerous volunteer corps, amongst which
rifle-shooting is a favourite recreation (butts being provided by
Government in suitable places), and which mass together once a year
for an encampment in the country, which lasts several days, and
comprises a review and a sham fight.
As has been said, Victorians are a people of amusements, but it
may also be said that Victorians are a people of work. They do not
allow one thing to interfere with the other. There are no half
measures. When they work, they mean work, and when they play
they go at it with a will. Indeed, it would be hard to find a place
where the distinction between labour and recreation is so distinctly
understood and carried out, and it would be equally hard to find one
where, in proportion to the population, a public holiday can turn out
such well-dressed, well-conducted, respectable, and evidently well-
to-do crowds of people as are to be seen in Victoria.
In connection with the social condition of the population, it may
be mentioned that a laudable desire exists amongst all ranks in
Victoria, and especially amongst the labouring population, to possess
dwellings of their own. This subject has been touched upon in
chapter 111., but there the occupancy and purchase of agricultural
freeholds is more particularly referred to. The same feeling exists
with regard to the purchase of dwelling-houses by the artisans and
others employed in the towns of the colony, and to aid in this object’
building societies have been established in most parts, and have met
with a large amount of success. At present there are in Victoria no
fewer than fifty-eight of such societies, having 21,750 members,
holding borrowing and 140,695 J investing shares. The
amount advanced in the year IS7G was £870,203, the income being
£1,011,397, the working expenses £28,571, the assets £2,750,660*
the liabilities £2,352,282, and the moneys on deposit £611,598.


The friendly societies of Victoria numbered twenty-eight in 1875,
These had 754 branches in various parts of the colony, and an average
number of members of 45,924. The number of cases of sickness
relieved during the year was 10,359, aliment being allowed for 53,453
weeks. There were 426 deaths, the average number of wives regis-
tered under the Friendly Societies Act being 27,021, and the deaths
of the same being 169.
There are also numerous insurance offices all over the colony, which
do a very extensive business in life and fire insurance, the necessity
for making a provision for their families in case of death being a duty
strongly impressed on the public mind, and being very largely carried
out.
In addition to these, which are established by private enterprise,
the Government, in order to foster habits of frugality and thrift
amongst the people, has established what are known as savings
banks and post-office savings banks all over Victoria. The savings
banks are under the control of five commissioners, in whom are
vested all deposits and securities. These savings banks are eleven
in number, and are established at Melbourne, Geelong, Portland,
Belfast, Castlemaine, Sandhurst, Ballarat, Maryborough, Warrnam-
bool, Kyneton, and Hamilton. The rate of interest on deposits is
fixed by the commissioners, but by the Savings Banks Statute
(28 Vic., No. 263), it must not exceed 4 per cent, per annum. On
the 30th June, 1876, the end of the savings banks financial year, the
number of depositors was 27,506, of whom 15,834 were males, and
11,672 females. The total amount of depositors’ balances was
£889,958, an average amount of £32 7s. Id. for each depositor. It
was found, however, that of the depositors 16,686 had accounts less
than £2O to their credit; 4653, less than £5O; 3160, less than £100;
1723, less than £150; 1024, less than £200; and 260 had more than
£2OO.
By the Post-office Statute of 1865 (29 Vic., No. 277), post-office
savings banks were established, and interest allowed on deposits not
-exceeding 4 per cent. (The rate of interest has since been reduced
to 3 per cent.) On the 11th September, 1865, post-office savings
banks were opened at Melbourne, Williamstown, Geelong, Ballarat,


Sandhurst, Castlemaine, Maryborough, and Beechworth, and between
that date and the 30th June, 1876, at 159 towns in all. The number
of depositors was 41,521, the amount of depositors’ balances £617,277,
and the average amount of each depositor £l4 17s. 4d.
Besides these banks there are several deposit banks founded by
private enterprise, and largely patronised by persons who prefer the
higher rate of interest given at them than at the savings banks to the
perfect security offered by Government institutions. The principal of
these are the Melbourne Banking Corporation, the Land Mortgage
Bank, and the Victoria Savings Institute. All these have influential
proprietaries, and appear to be in a prosperous condition. Many of
the building societies also receive deposits for fixed periods, and the
security offered by them is probably equal to that held out by the
deposit banks.
Connected to a certain extent with the social condition of the
people, although more nearly perhaps with the commercial interest,
are the banks of issue in Victoria. Of these there are twelve, viz.:—
The Australian and European Bank, Bank of Australasia, Bank of New
South Wales, Bank of Victoria, City of Melbourne Bank, Colonial
Bank of Australasia, Commercial Bank of Australia; English, Scottish,,
and Australian Chartered Bank, London Chartered Bank of Australia,
National Bank of Australasia, Oriental Bank, and Union Bank of
Australia. Of these five are local institutions, and the remaining
seven have proprietaries outside the colony. These banks are
regulated under the Banks and Currency Statute (27 Vic., No. 194).
By this Act each bank is compelled, under heavy penalties, to
compile and publish quarterly in the Government Gazette a general
statement of its business, so that the public is made aquainted with
the exact financial position of the bank, four times a year.
The number of branches or agencies, &c., in Victoria, is 293.
Their total liabilities are—Notes in circulation, £1,335,478; bills in
circulation, £54,472; balances due to other banks, £287,179; de-
posits not bearing interest, £4,722,549; deposits bearing interest,
£10,127,599. Total, £16,527,277. The assets are—Coined gold,
silver, and other metals, £3,162,188; gold and silver in bullion and
bars, £357,189; landed property, £790,129; notes and bills of other


banks, £129,000; balances due from other banks, £341,156; all
debts due to tbe banks except notes, bills and balances due from
other banks, £19,138,461. Total, £23,918,123. The capital and
profits accounts show—Capital stock paid up, £8,630,745; average
per annum of last dividend declared, 10 J per cent.; average per
annum of interest paid to shareholders, 11 *757 per cent.; total
amount of last dividend, £507,340; amount of reserve profits,
£2,650,096.
These large figures, which, while they show the firm basis on which
the banks are established, also denote the extent to which commercial
transactions are carried on, go far to prove the substantial and
satisfactory state of the colony in a financial point of view, and, as
the greater includes the lesser, so it may be argued that what is true
of the colony as a State, is also true of its population with regard to
their material wealth, and through that, to their social condition.


CHAPTER XII.
DIVISION OF THE COLONY, PRINCIPAL
TOWNS, &C.
Victoria is divided into seven mining, six Council (electoral), and
fifty-five Assembly (electoral) districts, thirty-seven counties, fifty-
nine municipalities, and 110 shires; also into parishes, and police
and other districts for special purposes. The five original divisions
are the districts of Gipps Land, the Murray, Wimmera, Loddon, and
the settled districts.
Gipps Land, so called after Governor Gipps, one of the early
Governors of New South Wales, occupies the south-eastern part of
the colony, and is shut in on the north and north-east by ranges of
lofty mountains, and on the west by a heavily timbered, swampy,
and broken tract of country. It occupies about one-fifth of the
entire territory, and owing to the rugged character of its northern
and eastern parts, much of that portion is unavailable for agri-
cultural purposes. Still, it contains large tracts of fertile country
suitable either for agricultural or pastoral pursuits, there being,
especially in the south and south-west (where considerable areas
have lately been taken up under Grant’s Land Act see
chapter III.), —rich deposits of alluvial soil. The heavy but
valuable timber with which a large portion of it is covered, causes
clearing to be attended with considerable expense, although large
returns amply repay the trouble and cost of cultivation, and a
large proportion of the fat cattle for the Melbourne market are
received from it during the winter months. Gipps Land is very
rich in minerals, yielding gold, silver, copper, iron, tin, lead, coal,
marble, and limestone. Auriferous quartz reefs are worked with
considerable success in the hilly north-west portion of the district.
The climate and soil of the lower country is suited to the growth of


oranges, lemons, hops, tobacco, and opium, and the south-west
for almost all kinds of agricultural produce. In fact, when properly-
developed, this district promises to become what the late Henry
Kingsley prophesied it would one day be, “the brightest jewel
in the British Crown.” It is splendidly watered by large rivers
and lakes, the former being the Avon, Thompson, Tambo, Snowy,
La Trobe, and many others; and the latter, lakes Victoria, Wel-
lington, and King, with numerous lagoons. The fishing and
shooting are unsurpassed in the colony, and form a great attraction
to sportsmen. The principal towns are Sale, Stratford, Bruthen,
Alberton, Bosedale, Tarraville, Palmerston, Bairnsdale, and Jericho.
The population of the district is about 20,000, but the opening of
the railway now in progress from Melbourne to Sale, will probably
soon quadruple that number. The geological formation is chiefly
volcanic, with outcropping beds of granite and trap to the north-
east. In the south it is carbonaceous, and auriferous country has
been found over almost all the explored parts of the district.
The Murray district, comprising the Omeo, Ovens, and Goulburn
subdivision, is a vast tract of country forming the north-eastern
part of the colony, and is separated from Gipps Land by the
Dividing Range. It is generally a mountainous country, and is
very rich in auriferous wealth. It contains several fine rivers, the
Kiewa, Ovens, Mitta Mitta, Broken, Goulburn, and others, and is
bounded on the north by the Murray river. In the north-east
are extensive grassy plains, and there are tracts of rich agricultural
land eminently suited to the culture of the vine, olive, tobacco, and
wheat. In fact, some of the best wine and tobacco produced in the
colony come from this district. The principal towns are Avenel,
Euroa, Benalla, Wangaratta, Chiltem, Beechworth, Belvoir (Wo-
donga), Yackandandah, Tarrawingee (all on the North-Eastern
Railway), Wahgunyah, Rutherglen, Buckland, Bright, Mansfield,
Jamieson, and Woods Point. The general geological formation is
lower silurian, with recent surface drift of slate and shale, and
occasional outcropping beds of granite and basaltic plains.
The Wimmera district occupies the north-west part of the colony,
and is also bounded on the north by the Murray river. Up to


a late period it was thought that the whole of this vast district
consisted of sandy and sparsely grassed plains, intersected with
belts of myall scrub, and forests of she-oak and stringy bark, and
therefore fit for nothing save the depasturing of sheep. Later
research, has however, discovered large patches of good agricultural
land which have been taken up bj- settlers. The principal rivers
are the Wimmera, Avon, Richardson, and Yarriambiack creek,
which are, however, all more or less liable to dry up, or become
mere chains of waterholes. In fact, the great drawback to the
vast plains in this district is the scarcity of water in summer,
although wells, sunk to a depth of from SO to 140 feet, almost
invariably give good fresh water. The geological formation is
pleiocene tertiary, with granite and porphyry dykes. Gypsum
has been found in a few places throughout the district.
The Loddon district comprises a tract of pastoral country, in
which good agricultural land has recently been found and taken
up, lying on the Murray, Loddon, Avoca, and Campaspe rivers,
between the districts of Wimmera and Murray. The south part
of the district is very rich in auriferous deposit, and has long been
worked for gold with great success. The principal towns are Sand-
hurst (formerly Bendigo), Echuca, Ravenswood, Dunolly, Inglewood,
and Wedderburn. The geological formation is lower silurian, with
recent surface drift.
The Settled district comprises the whole of the south and south-west
part of the colony, including the districts of Melbourne, Castlemaine,
Geelong, Ballarat, Warrnambool, Hamilton, Stawell, Ararat, and all
the towns and country lying south of the main Dividing Range,
except Gipps Land, and it is in this part of the country that, as
yet, the principal portion of settlement has been going on. The
soil and climate is various, and at different places will grow almost
any crop that may be sown in it. (See diaper III.)
The colony is also divided into seven mining districts, each of
which is under the control of a mining warden, viz. Ballarat,
Beechworth, Sandhurst, Maryborough, Castlemaine, Ararat, and
Gipps Land. (For electoral districts see chapter XL)


Victoria is also divided into thirty-seven counties, viz.: —Anglesey,
Benambra, Bendigo, Bogong, Borung, Bourke, Buln-Buln, Croajingo-
long, Dalhousie, Cargo, Delatite, Dundas, Evelyn, Follett, Gladstone,
Grant, Grenville, Gunbower, Hampden, Heytesbury, Kara-Kara,
Karkarook, Lowan, Millewar, Moira, Mornington, Normanby, Pol-
warth, Eipon, Eodney, Talbot, Tambo, Tanjil, Tatchera, Yilliers,
Weeah, and Wonnangatta. The most densely populated of these
counties according to the last census was the metropolitan county
Bourke, with 236,778 persons, or over 136 persons to the square
mile; the next was Talbot, containing Clunes, Castlemaine, Creswick,
Daylesford, Maryborough, Amherst, Maldon, and other important
goldfields, with 84,762 persons, or 52 to the square mile; then
Grenville, containing the City of Ballarat, and the chief part of
the Ballarat and other goldfields, with 60,917 persons, or 41 to
the square mile; then Grant, with 40; Bendigo, with 23; Dalhousie,
an agricultural county, with 20; then Yilliers, also an agricultural
county, with 13; and so on down to Weeah, a county in the
Wimmera district, close to the South Australian frontier, believed
to be totally uninhabited, inasmuch as no person was found in it on
the census night.
In 1861 there were in Victoria about six persons to the square mile.
In 1871, when the last census was taken, there were more than eight
to the square mile. In England and Wales there were 389 persons to
the square mile. This allows one and three-fifth acres for each
inhabitant of England and Wales, whilst in Victoria there are 77
acres for each individual.
There are 59 municipalities or cities, towns, and boroughs in the
colony, having a total area of 230,683 acres, with a population of
398 117, and 88,516 dwellings, a total value of ratable property of
£29,638,515, and an annual value of £2,971,823. The revenue for
1876 was £446,256, and the expenditure £423,885. Under the Local
Government Act, boroughs must not be of greater area than nine
square miles, and must have a population of at least 300. They are
governed by a mayor and council, of not less than six nor more than
nine who are empowered to levy rates, make by-laws, compulsorily


take land for permanent public works, &c. If, in a borough, the
annual revenue reaches £IO,OOO, it can be proclaimed a town. If the
revenue reaches £20,000, it can be proclaimed a city, and under this
provision the metropolitan suburbs of Fitzroy, Prahran, Emerald
Hill, and Richmond have become towns, and the suburb of Colling-
wood and the towns of Ballarat and Sandhurst have become cities.
There are also 110 shires in Victoria, having an area of 48,087,227
acres, an estimated population of 411,735 persons, and 89,373
dwellings. The estimated value of ratable property is £43,415,832,
and the annual value £3,649,874, the revenue being £595,146, and
the expenditure £582,481. Any portion of the country not included
in a city, town, or borough, containing an area of not less than 100
square miles, may be proclaimed a shire, provided their revenue
raised from rates not exceeding Is. in the pound on the net annual
value of property amounts to not less than £IOOO, and road districts
must embrace 40 square miles, and have an annual ratable value of
£SOOO. These districts are under the control of boards of six
members, of whom one is elected chairman of a road district or
president of a shire.
The metropolitan and largest city of Victoria is Melbourne, on the
Yarra Yarra River, near Hobson’s Bay, and in the county of Bourke.
It is by far the most important city in the Southern hemisphere, and
has, with its suburbs, a population of 265,000. The city proper
has an area of 4480 acres, a population of 61,000 persons,
and 12,844 dwellings. The estimated total value of ratable
property in Melbourne is £8,568,100, and the net annual value
£856,810, the revenue for 1876 being £112,653 2s. lid. and the
expenditure £101,246 16s. sd. Melbourne is a city which, although
only of a few years’ growth, would do no discredit, whether for the
width of its streets, the number and elegance of its public buildings,
the business transacted in it, the magnificence of its shops, the
beauty of the numerous parks and gardens by which it is environed,
or the thousand comforts and conveniences afforded to its residents,
to any country on the face of the earth. Indeed, it has been
spoken of as the ninth city in the British world for popu-
lation, wealth, and magnificence. The city proper is built on two


hills, and an intervening valley, the streets running at right angles,
each main street being ninety-nine feet wide, and each minor street
half that width. These main and minor streets run alternately
from east to west, but there are no narrow streets from north
to south. Thus the city is cut up into handsome blocks from
east to west, and half blocks from north to south. The principal
streets are Collins, Bourke, Swanston, and Elizabeth streets, the
first-named being the fashionable business street of the city, and
a system has lately been inaugurated of planting trees in the main
thoroughfares, which was commenced in this street, and cannot but
be productive of highly valuable results, in a town where the heat is
so intense and the dust is so troublesome in summer. The future
adornment of the streets in this direction is left in the hands of the
citizens. The most noteworthy edifices are the Treasury, Houses
of Parliament, Public Offices (just built), Public Library, Post
Office, Government Printing Office, Customs’ House, Mint, Univer-
sity, Town Hall, banks, insurance offices, and many large and
well built hotels, of which the leading ones are Scott’s, the Port
Phillip, White Hart, Albion, Menzie’s, Phair’s, and Tankard’s, the
last-mentioned being a Temperance hotel. The port of Melbourne is
at Sandridge, two and a-half miles from the city, and connected by
railway. The Yarra Eiver is, however, navigable for large vessels up
to the heart of the city, the fairway being there impeded by a dyke
of basaltic rocks known as the Falls. Immediately below these falls
are the Queen’s, Cole’s and Australian wharves, extending for
about a mile along the north bank of the river, and almost solely
used by intercolonial sailing vessels and steamers, especially the
colliers. On the opposite bank are ship repairing yards, foundries,
and many other manufactories, there being also a large steam crane
capable of lifting fifty tons from vessels berthed alongside. There
are two railway stations in Melbourne, the Government station in
Spencer-street, which is the starting place and terminus of all the
up-country lines, and the Hobson’s Bay Company’s station, whence the
suburban trains run. There are four fine theatres in Melbourne, the
Royal, the Prince of Wales Opera House, the Academy of Music, and
the Princess, the latter only opened occasionally. The Hospital is


a commodious brick building in the centre of the town. There is
also a Children’s Hospital in the town, and another, the Alfred
Hospital, at a little distance on the St. Kilda road, where are also
the Blind, and Deaf and Dumb Asylums, all fine buildings. The
Yarra Bend and the Kew Lunatic Asylums are on the outskirts of the
city in the opposite direction. There are two markets, the Eastern
and the Western, in the city, and in and about it lie several large
recreation reserves and public gardens, of which the Botanical
Gardens, about a mile distant, is the most extensive. Next to this is
the Fitzroy Gardens, then the Royal Park, containing the Zoological
and Acclimatisation Society’s collection of animals, &c., the Flagstaff
Hill Gardens, Carlton Gardens, and numerous other small reserves
planted with trees. The Picture Gallery, at the rear of the Public
Library, is a large building containing many fine paintings, water-
colour drawings, and statues, and adjoining this is the Exhibition
Building, first used with the original building for the Intercolonial
Exhibition of 1865. Melbourne was erected into an Episcopal See
in 1848, the present Bishop being the Right Rev. Bishop Moorhouse,
and the Roman Catholic Archbishop being the Most Rev. J. A.
Goold. Melbourne is amply supplied with newspapers, there being
three daily morning papers, the Argus, the Age, and the Telegraph,
with their weeklies, the Australasian, the Leader, and the Weekly
Times. There is an evening journal, the Herald, and several other
weeklies and monthlies, comprising, in addition to those named,
the Illustrated. Australian News, Sketcher, Punch, Australian Medical
Journal, Advocate, Australasian Insurance and Banking Record, Aus-
tralian Journal, Christian Review, Church of England Messenger, Vic-
torian Independent, Temperance News, Australian Jurist, Spectator,
Melbourne Review, Australian Review, Southern Cross, Australian
Trade Revieiv, A.B.C. Travellers’ Guide, Bradshaw’s Guide, and others.
The suburbs of Melbourne, which are extensively and largely popu-
lated, are Emerald Hill, South Yarra, St. Kilda, Sandridge, Prahran,
Windsor, Balaclava, Elsternwick, Richmond, Fitzroy, Collingwood,
Carlton, Hotham, and North, East, and West Melbourne. Many of
which have local newspapers, and most of which are connected with
Melbourne by rail, or by lines of omnibuses, or cars and waggonettes


with which Melbourne is plentifully supplied, and which are clean
and commodious, and run at cheap rates. Taken as a whole, the
city of Melbourne is a good place to live in whether for business or
pleasure; it is still in the prime vigour of its youth, and for a city
little more than forty years old may fairly be called one of the
wonders of the world.
The second most populous town in Victoria is Ballarat, the centre
of the western goldfields, and a most important and beautiful city,
with fine wide streets and noble buildings. It is ninety-six miles
from Melbourne, and is connected by rail. Ballarat (East and
West) has an area of 7200 acres, and a population of 32,586, with
8046 dwellings. The estimated total value of ratable property is
£1,097,481; the revenue, £35,204 ss. Bd.; and the expenditure,
£29,961 Bs.
Sandhurst, the capital of the northern goldfields, comes next,
with an area of 7500 acres, a population of 26,927, and 7190
dwellings. The estimated total value of ratable property is
£1,881,850, the revenue £25,505 Is. 5d., and the expenditure
£21,495 2s. 4d.
Next in order of population, &c., comes the City of Collingwood—
a suburb of Melbourne, with an area of 1241 acres, a population of
21,800, and 4889 dwellings. The estimated total value of ratable
property is £1,095,080, the revenue £20,238 Bs. 6d., and the expen-
diture £19,266 11s. Id.
Geelong, the second seaport, has an area of 3100 acres, a popula-
tion of 11,000, and 2200 dwellings, with an estimated value of
ratable property of £703,920, a revenue of £14,198 11s., and an
expenditure of £14,625 15s. 2d. It stands next in importance to
Sandhurst, although in point of population, &c., it is below the
metropolitan suburbs of Emerald Hill (24,500), Fitzroy (17,000),
Hotham (14,600), Prahran (16,520), and Richmond (18,612),
although including Geelong West, a separate borough, it would be
above some of them.
Following these places may be ranked in importance Castlemaine
(7500), Stawell (8000), Eaglehawk (7757), Clunes (5639), Daylesford
(4351), and Ararat (3000), all mining townships; Williamstown


(7800), Warrnambool (4600), Portland (2400), and Belfast (2200), sea
ports; and Echuca (3695), the port of the Murray River trade, and
next in order the other suburbs of Melbourne, and the numerous
country towns, villages, and agricultural settlements.
The total number of cities, towns, boroughs, and townships, large
and small, in the colony is at present about 600, but others are con-
tinually springing up in various parts, as agricultural settlement
goes on, and new townships are surveyed and proclaimed. It is not
necessary to give a list of all these places, and the pursuits with
which they are connected; sufficient to say that nearly half of them
are wholly agricultural, about one-fourth of them wholly mining, and
the remaining fourth grazing, agricultural and grazing, or agricul-
tural and mining, and commercial.


CHAPTER XIII.
GOVERNMENT, LAND FORCES, NAVY,
POLICE, etc.
The form of Government by which Victoria is ruled is practically
the same as that of Great Britain, the only difference being that the
Loyal power is here delegated to a viceroy. Bound by the same
regulations, and conforming to the same authority, Victoria has her
Upper and her Lower Houses of Parliament, corresponding in almost
every particular, except, perhaps, that of the privileges of Peers,
with the Houses of Lords and Commons in England. Both Houses
in Victoria, the Upper being called the Legislative Council, and the
Lower the Legislative Assembly, are electoral, the former being
presided over by a President of its own election, and the latter by a
Speaker, also of its own election. The officers of Parliament assimi-
late to those of the Houses of Lords and Commons, each electing its
own Chairman of Committees, the Council having its clerk, assistant
clerk, usher, and four messengers; and the Assembly its clerk,
assistant clerk, serjeant-at-arms, and seven messengers. The Council
is composed of thirty members, representing six provinces; and the
Assembly of eighty-six members, representing fifty-five constituencies.
(For qualifications of members and voters, see chapter XI.) The
Executive Council is composed of the Governor and the Ministry for
the time being, who are the heads of the various Government depart-
ments, and who control those departments, being responsible only to
Parliament.
The functions of the Assembly are to inaugurate bills, and pass
them in the regular form, of first and second readings, committee,'
and third reading, and then transmit them to the Council, who deal
with them in the same manner, having the power of initiating, accept-
ing, refusing, or altering all bills, except money bills, with which it is.


within the province of the Assembly solely to deal. The Council
has, however, the power to refuse those hills in r/lobo, hut not
otherwise, and the Governor has, after all, the power of veto, and
also of granting a dissolution of Parliament. Before becoming law,
all hills must he signed hy the Governor on behalf of Her Majesty
the Queen. The practice of Parliament is regulated hy the rules laid
down hy May, as in the English Parliament, the certain standing
orders being capable of suspension hy the vote of the House. The
privileges of Parliament are jealously guarded, the President and
Speaker having power to call to the bar and commit to prison any
person infringing them.
The practical working of the Government of the country devolves
on the various departments, each of which is controlled by a Minister,
and which are as follows:
The Chief Secretary’s department, comprising the audit of Govern-
ment accounts, police, gaols, the mint, patents office, chief medical
officer, school of anatomy, medical board of Victoria, lunatic asylums,
friendly societies, national museum, botanic gardens, observatory,
public library, museum, and technological commission.
The department of Education, or Public Instruction, including the
statistical department.
The Treasurer’s department, comprising public finance, Govern-
ment stores and transports, payment and receiving of accounts,
intestate estates, and the Government printing-office.
The department of Mines, comprehending all matters appertaining
to mines, mining laws and regulations, and mining surveys.
Department of Land and Works, comprising the board of land
and works, lands and survey, public works, sewerage and water,
roads and bridges, and water supply.
Railway department, comprehending all matters connected with
the Government railways and railway traffic.
Trade and Customs department, comprising roads and customs,
ports and harbours, pilot board, steam navigation board, powder
magazine, distilleries, and immigration.
Postmaster-General’s department, including the postal and tele-
graph service of the colony.


Law department, comprising the Attorney-General’s and Minister
of Justice’s departments, law offices of the Crown, supreme court,
insolvent court, vice-admiralty court, county courts, district
courts, circuit courts, criminal sessions, police courts, coroners,
notaries public, jury lists, and auctioneer’s, publican’s, and haw-
ker’s licences.
One of the fundamental questions with which the Government has
to deal is, of course, that of revenue. Now the amounts of which
the revenue may be said to be made up, are of two kinds, viz.,
those raised by taxation, and those raised otherwise. Of the former
class are the receipts from customs and excise duties, from wharfage
rates, port and harbour dues, tolls, business licences, and duties
on estates of deceased persons. Of the latter class are the amounts
derived from the sale or occupation of Crown lands, from railways,
water supply, and other public works, from post and telegraph
■offices, fees, fines, and forfeitures, labour of prisoners, interest
on the public account, &c. The revenue for the financial year
1876 was £4,325,156 9s. Id., of which £1,780,391 17s. 3d. was
raised by general Government taxation, and the balance by the
public lands, works, &c., specified. The expenditure was £4,572,843
10s. 9d. To this may be added the revenue and expenditure of
municipal government; the grand totals being,—revenue, £5,009,847
45.; expenditure, £5,222,499 Is. 7d.; leaving a deficiency by expen-
diture in excess of revenue of £247,687 Is. Bd. From this, how-
ever, must be deducted £88,794 45., surplus balance brought forward
from 1875, leaving a net deficiency to be carried to the finance
account of 1877 of £158,892 17s. Bd.
The public debt of Victoria, charged on the revenue of the
colony, amounts to £13,996,823, and consists of two items, viz.,
£12,119,193 borrowed for railway construction, and £1,877,630 for
water supply, defences, graving dock, and other public works.
The average rate chargeable on these loans is about 4.8 per cent.
Pensions chargeable on the Government, not including police
pensions, nor retiring allowances voted annually by Government,
amounted at the end of 1875 to £26,276 17s. Id., although only
£24,795 4s. Bd. was actually paid. The pensions under the Civil


Service Act are of three kinds, viz.:—retiring allowances, equal to
half their salary to officers of not less than ten years’ service,
being sixty years of age; retiring allowances, equal to a sixtieth part
of their salary for every year of service up to forty to officers of not
less than ten years’ service and sixty years of age; and retiring
allowances equal to a sixtieth part of their salary for every year of
service up to forty to officers not having attained the age of sixty,
who should be compelled to retire in consequence of infirmity of
mind or body.
The Land Forces of Victoria consist of a paid artillery corps and
naval brigade, which was formed under the Discipline Act 1870 (34
Viet., No. 389), on the withdrawal of the detachment of the Imperial
troop, formerly stationed in the colony; also of a volunteer force
of various arms, established under the Volunteer Act 1865. The
men of the paid artillery, or local defence force, if of good character,
are drafted off into the ranks of the police and of the warders of
gaols as vacancies occur. In the period between the Ist July, 1870,
and the 30th June, 1875, there were 190 men so drafted, and the
cost of the corps to the colony during the same period was £44,545.
The following is the strength of the local defence force : —Officers, 2;
sergeants, 5; rank and file, 130; total, 137.
The Volunteer Force of Victoria is a fine body of men, and its
members have shown much zeal in rendering themselves effective.
The total establishment authorised is 4015, consisting of 6 troops of
cavalry, 10 corps of artillery, 1 corps of engineers, 1 torpedo and
signal corps, and 13 corps of rifles. The strength of the volun-
teer forces at the end of 1875 was— Cavalry. —Officers, 31; sergeants,
24; troopers, 196; total, 251. Artillery. —Officers, 60; sergeants,
68; gunners, 1299; total, 1447. Engineers.- —Officers, 5; sergeants,
7; rank and file, 102; total, 114. Torpedo Corps. —Officers, 4;
rank and file, 21; total, 25. Rifles. —Officers, 65; sergeants, 97;
rank and file, 1552; total, 1714. Grand total. —Officers, 165;
sergeants, 116; rank and file, 3170; to which must be added 109
supernumeraries.
In addition to these there were 64 staff and unattached officers,
and 38 unattached sergeants, with 100 bandsmen, bringing the grand


total of volunteers to 3551, so that the aggregate strength of all the
volunteer corps was 464 short of the establishment, or 355 short if
the supernumeraries be added to the number of the regular corps.
The following arms were in possession of the land forces ;—Gar-
rison guns, 6 muzzle-loading rifled 9-in., 25 muzzle-loading rifled 8-
pounders, 30 smooth-bore 68-pounders, 38 smooth-bore 32-pounders.
Guns of positions, 6 breech-loading Armstrong’s rifled 40-pounders.
Field guns, 6 breech-loading Armstrong’s rifled 12-pounders; 6
breech-loading Armstrong’s rifled 6-pounders; 6 muzzle-loading rifled
Whitworth’s 3-pounders ; 1 smooth-bore howitzer 24-pounder; 9
smooth-bore howitzers, 12-pounder; 2 guns, 6-pounder ; total, 135.
Some of these guns are, however, of obsolete patterns, and some
otherwise unserviceable for defence. The rifles in possession of the
land forces were : —Breech-loaders, 131; long Enfield, 573; Lancaster
large bore, 1234; Lancaster reduced bore, 1800; General Hay, 322;
pattern unstated, 147; total, 4147.
The Naval Forces consist of the ironclad turret-ship Cerberus, of 235
feet long and 2107 tons register, and the wooden line-of-battle ship
Nelson, of 220 feet long and 2736 tons register; also, of a Naval
Reserve, the men of which receive a small fee as a retainer. The
Cerberus has 6 officers, and a crew of 36 petty officers and seamen,
and 40 boys—total, 82; and the Nelson 5 officers and 32 petty officers
and seamen—total, 37. The Naval Reserve consists of 9 officers and
216 petty officers and seamen—total, 225. The Cerberus carries 4
Woolwich 10-inch 400-pounder guns; and the Nelson 2 Woolwich
7-inch 116-pounders, 20 shunt guns (45 cwt., 64-pounders), 20
smooth-bore (32-pounders), and 6 howitzers (12-pounders)—total, 52
guns. The small-arms in possession of the naval forces are—so
Martini-Henri rifles, 226 Sea Service rifles, 43 Enfields, 18 General
Hay’s, 24 Deane and Adams’s revolvers, and 119 undescribed
revolvers—total, 480.
The military expenditure during 1875 amounted to £36,372 165.,
and the naval expenditure to £17,104 12s. 2d., a total of £53,477
Bs. 2d., —the amount expended on defences generally, including
buildings and works of defence, during the last twenty-one years
being £2,073,874.


During the present year, Sir William Jervois and Colonel
Scratchley—two eminent military engineering authorities—have
made a rigid examination of the defences of Port Phillip, with a
view of so altering the old or - constructing new fortifications as to
render them capable of repelling an invading fleet, and immediate
steps will be taken to act on their valuable recommendations and
suggestions.
The Police Force of Victoria is a body of men of whom, whether
for appearance, physique, or knowledge of their difficult and often
delicate duties, it is impossible to speak too highly. The force (which
numbers about 1050), is divided into two sections—the foot and the
mounted police, or troopers. The former are engaged principally in the
large towns, and the latter in the country districts, except a few who are
stationed in Melbourne, and who are told off for occasional special
duty in the suburbs. The costto the colony for policewas£l99,737l3s.
Id. in 1876, during which year the cost for gaols and penal establishments
was £61,051 4s. 7d., a total of £260,788 17s. Bd. for the detection,
repression, and punishment of crime in the colony. Under a recent
system, the police and gaol warders are drafted from the strength of
the local defence force, who enter on their duties therefore with
some knowledge of them, and without having to undergo the necessary
drill, &c., before being ready for active service.


CHAPTER XIV.
GROWTH OF THE COLONY—THE RISING
RACE, NATURALISATION—CONCLUSION.
“What great events from trifling causes spring!” A generation
has passed away since the small craft, so aptly named the Enterprise,
was moored to a tree at the foot of a grassy hill on the banks of
the Yarra Yarra River, and since the little association of
seventeen souls landed in August, 1835, on the site where was so
soon to spring up the now magnificent city of Melbourne. The hill,
first called Pleasant Hill, and then Batman’s Hill, has disappeared;
one by one the members of that little band of hardy pioneers has
gone from the scene of his labours to join the “great majority,”
hut that handful of people has widened out into a nation.
The wilds, untrodden by human foot, save that of the dusky
savage, who roamed unmolested through the bush in search of food,
have given way before the axe of the woodman, and the spade of
the 'settler. The country has been reclaimed, and what was once a
dismal solitude, a desolate wilderness, now echoes to the unceasing
sound of busy life.
The newly found country did not lack long of people. Already
the Hentys had settled with their flocks and herds at Portland
Bay, but it was not until the public mind was awakened to the
advantages of the Port Phillip district as a new field of enterprise
and settlement by the adventurous zeal of Batman and Fawkner
in 1835, and of Major Mitchell in 1836, that many ventured to
the unknown country. In May, 1836, the seventeen had already
swollen to 177 (including the settlement at Portland Bay), 142
males and 35 females; by November of the same year the number
was 186 males and 38 females—224 in all; but in September, 1838,
there were 3080 males and 431 females, a total population of 3511


persons. Settlement went on slowly until the gold fever set in,
w'hen in April, 1854, there were no fewer than 236,798 persons in
the colony, and thenceforward the increase has gone on rapidly
until at the end of 1876 there were no fewer than 830,679 persons,
comprising 451,134 males, and 379,545 females, the result partly of
natural increase, and partly of immigration.
Many of the present inhabitants of Victoria, as is well known,
have found their way hither from other parts of the world, and the
relative proportion of different nationalities has naturally changed
from time to time with the varying streams of immigration. The
English-born were, however, foremost in the list of nationalities at
every census-taking until that of 1871, when they were found to
be more than doubled by Young Australia. In 1846 there were
9126 Irish-born, and 4225 Scotch-born, to 10,100 English-born. In
1851 the numbers had changed to 14,618 Irish-born against 28,908
English-born, or scarcely a half, and in 1861 the same proportion
was found to exist. In the latter year the Scotch-born were little
more than a third of the English-born, and in 1871, the date of
the last census, the Irish-born were found to have gained on the
English-born, and stood in the proportion of three to five, and the
Scotch-born were rather more than a third of the English-born, while
the Welsh formed a very small proportion of the whole population,
less than 1 per cent. only.
Foreigners, on the other hand, were in the proportion of 5 per
cent, of the total population, but out of the 37,315, which was
the sum total of foreigners, 17,826 were Chinese, or one in every
forty-one of the population. The next most numerous race were
the Germans, who numbered 9264, or one in seventy-four. The
Americans numbered 2423, and the French 1170.
In that year, Victorians born numbered 329,597; natives of other
Australian colonies and New Zealand, 28,669; English, 164,287;
Welsh, 6614; Scotch, 56,210; Irish. 100,468; other British pos-
sessions, 3870; French, 1170; Germans, 8995; Austrians, 269; Belgic,
128; Danish, 1014; Dutch, 341; Italian, 772; Norwegian, 395; Polish,
214; Portuguese, 197; Russian, 334; Greek, 146; Spanish, 135;
Swedish, 845; Swiss, 1240; Turkish, 10; American (United States),


2423; Chinese, 17,857; other countries, 315; born at sea, 2064;
unspecified, 2999. Total on the 2nd April, 1871, 731,528; since when
no record of nationalities has been kept.
An important change of type is continually going on by process of
marriage. There are, as every one knows, distinctive characteristics
in the general appearance, physique, and character of English, Irish,
and Scotch people, the result of difference of origin, of temperament,
climate, soil, occupation, social institutions, laws, religion, and of
being kept apart. But the old barriers have been broken down by
the alliances which are every day powerfully cementing the three
great peoples named, so will another national type be developed in
the shape of an Australian people whose destiny it may be to show
that, as they are the latest, so they will prove the wisest, best, and
happiest among the nations.
There has always been a disproportion in the number of the two
sexes in Victoria, although it is, of course, not so great now as it was
in the earlier days of the colony; for example, in 1838, there were
only 431 females to 3080 males, while in 1876 it is estimated that
there are 383,837 females to 456,463 males. The greatest equality
naturally exists among the Australian born. In 1871, there were
178,385 females to 179,881 males. Among foreigners, the French
showed 37 females to 100 males; Germans, 35 females to 100 males;
and Chinese, only 1 female to 575 males. Statistics show that the
nationalities are rapidly being forced, and that ere long the distinc-
tions of race, as they exist with regard to the present generation,
will be to a great extent disregarded, if not unknown.
There is a home for all races, all creeds, all tongues, in her midst,
who will be content to be, not English, or Irish, or Scotch, French,
Italian, German, or what not—but Australians, as certainly their
children will be after them. And to become Australian is easy.
There is no prejudice here, no jealousy of foreigners, no obstacle in
the way of their success. They enjoy equal rights, privileges, and
immunities with the British or the native born. They can, by
becoming naturalised, have the same voice in matters of State,
occupy the same position in the councils of the nation. Foreigners
residing in Victoria may obtain letters of naturalisation on taking an


oath of allegiance to the Crown before any judge or police magistrate,
as prescribed by an Act of the Legislature (26 Vic,, No. 166). But
without becoming naturalised, alien friends resident in the colony
may acquire real and personal property, and may hold, convey,
devise, and bequeath it in the same manner as if they had been
natural-born subjects of Her Majesty. Alien women being married
to British subjects thereby become naturalised. The number of
foreigners naturalised during the last eleven years, that is to say
from 1866 to 1876 inclusive, is 1034, of whom 116 were naturalised
during the latter year. Of these 1 was Austrian, 1 Belgic, 2 French,
3 Dutch, 4 Italian, 16 Prussian, 49 from other German states, 32
from other European countries, 3 American (U.S.), and 5 Chinese.
Victoria, a country of no nationality save her own, which is made
up by a fusion of them all, invites all nationalities to her shores. Not
as visitors for a season, but to come in as her adopted sons and
daughters, and share in the riches which her grateful soil affords to
those who will but till it. Thousands have already found peace and
plenty in her bounteous lap, but there is yet room, not only for thou-
sands, but for hundreds of thousands. And not only room to live,
but the means to live in comfort, to thrive and become prosperous
citizens and denizens of this “new earth under a new heaven.”
To the crowded marts and hives of industry in Europe, where men,
and women too, crowd, and toil, and sometimes starve in the struggle
to get bread, hopeless of rising, despairing of anything beyond; to
the broad acres where weary farm labourers vegetate through life,
without a thought of mending their condition, unceasing labour from
youth to manhood, and in old age, the workhouse; to the sunny
slopes and wide champagnes of France and Germany, and the vine
and olive-clad hills of Italy, where the peasant lives and dies content
if for his toil he can earn his black bread and soup; to the artisan,
the farmer, the small capitalist, the vigneron, the sericulturist, the
labourer, she cries: “Come, here is plenty and to spare, come, bring
with you your strong arms, your stout hearts, your skill, and your
knowledge, bring with you your wives and little ones, for I have need
of you all.”


CHAPTER XV.
THE PASSAGE OUT.
In these days of rapid travelling the voyage to Australia may be
looked upon as little more than a pleasure trip, for the passage is
frequently made in little over forty days, and, except a little knocking
about off the Bay of Biscay and the Cape of Good Hope, is generally
a fine one, it being no unfrequent thing for passengers to declare
that the sea for the greater part of the run has been ‘‘ as smooth as a
millpond”—a slight exaggeration, perhaps, but, in the comparative
sense in which it is used, quite true.
The means of transit are numerous, and such as will suit all classes
of the community. From the stately floating palaces—the mail
ships—which ply from Southampton, via the Mediterranean and Bed
Seas and the Indian Ocean, to the fast-sailing clipper ship, there are
all classes, all sizes of vessels engaged in the Australian trade, but on
all the accommodation is ample, the provisioning good, and the health
and comfort of the passengers strictly and carefully considered.
The best-known lines of regular traders from England to Victoria
are, first of all, the Peninsular and Oriental line of mail steamers, the
passage rates in which are rather high, and only suited to the means
of wealthy persons or those whose business compels them to travel in
a hurry; the fares are from £4O to £BB. Next come the steamers of
the Pacific Mail Steam Navigation Company; the Lusitania, the
Chimborazo, and Cuzco (which make the outward passage in from
36 to 40 days); the Whampoa and the St, Osyth. Money Wigramand
Sons’ line of steam and sailing ships comprises a number of well-
known vessels—the Durham, Northumberland, Kent and Somersetshire
steamers, and the Yorkshire, True Briton, Hampshire, Essex, and
Lincolnshire sailing packets. The rates of passage money are; —By
steamers, saloon, 55 to 70 guineas; second-class, from 25 to 30


guineas; third-class, 18 to 22 guineas; steerage (for single men only),
15 guineas. By sailing vessels, saloon, £47 10s. to £52 10s.; second
cabin, £22 to £25; third cabin, £lB to £2O; steerage, £l4; a reduction
of about 10 per cent, being made for families, &c. Besides this there
is the old-established Green’s Blackwall line of fine sailing ships, and
best known of all, perhaps, the celebrated Black Ball line, of which
the Great Britain, a vessel that has made more runs and brought
more passengers to Melbourne than any other ship afloat, is one. The
Aberdeen line of clippers, the Orient line of steamers (just started),
all of which run regularly with passengers, and the Colonial, White
Star, Victoria, London, Thames, and Mersey lines, which although
not composed strictly of passenger ships, still afford excellent accom-
modation to all classes of passengers. The fares in each of these lines
of vessels are about the same, namely, from £l4 to about £SO,
according to accommodation, and, in fact, Money Wigram’s prices
may be taken to fairly represent the whole. The dietary arrange-
ments for all classes of passengers are on a liberal scale, and amply
sufficient in quantity, and good in quality, for the requirements of
persons of all grades.
Besides the Peninsular and Oriental line of mail steamers, there are
also two other mail lines, one via America, New Zealand, and New
South Wales, known as the Californian service; and one via the Medi-
terranean Sea, Suez Canal, Singapore, Batavia, Torres Straits, and
Queensland, known as the Eastern and Australian Company’s Service.
These are, however, little used by ordinary passengers, the routes
being more expensive than the others.


MELBOURNE :
M’CARBON, BIRD AND CO., PRINTERS,
37 FLINDERS LANE WEST.




