

Hand-Book
of the
Melanesian Mission
PRICE THREEPENCE.
MELANESIAN MISSION,
CHANCERY CHAMBERS, AUCKLAND. N. Z.
1926.


The Missions Anniversary
11th June, St. Barnabas’ Day.
The Pra per for the Mission.
A LMIGHTY GOD, for Whom the Isles do wait. Send
down Thy Blessing on the Melanesian Mission: the
Bishops: the Missionary Clergy: the Native Clergy and
Teachers: the Nurses and all Workers: the Officers and Crew
of the “Southern Cross,” and all who are or have been
taught in the Schools.. Comfort them, O Lord, in every
sorrow: protect them in every danger: strengthen them in
every temptation: give them such sure trust and confidence
in Thee that they may serve Thee without fear.. O Lord
of the Harvest, send forth labourers into Thine Harvest.
Guide by Thy Holy Spirit those who are fitted for the work,
that they may willingly offer themselves to serve Thee, and
by Thee be enabled to set forth Thy glory: through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.


THE STAFF, 1926.
BISHOP : The Right Reverend JOHN MANWARING STEWARD, M.A.
(Consecrated September 21st, 1919.)
ADDRESSES : Postal-Siota, British Solomon Islands. Cable-Bishop,
Melanesia, Tulagi.
Asst. BISHOP : The Right Reverend FREDERICK MERIVALE
MOLYNEUX, M.A., M.B.E.
(Consecrated August 9th. 1925.)
Bishop’s Commissaries for the Islands :
Solomons —Rev. A. I. Hopkins,
Siota. (Retiring March 1926)
ST. LUKE’S COLLEGE, SIOTA :
R. P. Wilson (1895)
R. E. Tempest (’18), Frank
Browning (’2l), Messrs. N.
Forsgate (’24), Cameron Buf-
fett (’24), and W. W. Engall
(Retiring 1926) A. G. Bradley (’25)
C. L. Mountfort (’25) Misses
Wilson (’O4) Simson (’2O) Bayly
(’22) and Broadbent (’22).
ST. MICHAEL’S COLLEGE,
PAMUA : Revs. H. J. Nind
ST. MARY’S INDUSTRIAL and
BOY’S SCHOOL, MARAVOVO :
Revs. G. Warren (’l3), A. C.
Dancaster (’23), *S. P. Oda-
kake (’24), A. C. Elliott, Mr.
Seaton (’22), Mrs. Elliott
(’24), Mrs. Warren (’22).
District Missionaries :
SOLOMON ISLANDS.
Bugotu —Revs. *Hugo Hembala
(’O6), *Benjamin Hageria
(’2l), *Wilson Bana (’24),
*Wilson Doedoke (’24), *Am-
brose Iputu (’2l), and Mrs.
Sprott (T 6).
Florida (Gela) Revs. D. E.
Graves (’l4), Tome
(’18), Tumu (’O9),
*Peter Sukoku (’2O), *John
Pegone (’O6).
Guadalcanal-- Rev. -Hugo Toke
(’l7), and *James Toganiade
(’2l).
Malaita North —Revs. A. Mason
(’l4), *J. Talofuila (’18), and
Mrs. Mason (’l3).
Malaita South —Revs. A. A.
Thomson (’l4), and *James
Uqe (’2l).
San Cvisional— Revs. *P. Marita
(’2l) and *G. Giladi (’24),
(Santa Anna.)
New Hebrides —Rev. H. L. Hart,
(’22) Wilfred Steel (’22).
Vureas.
PRINTING HEADQUARTERS,
MARAVOVO : Mr. F. R. Isom
(’l3).
ALL HALLOWS’ SCHOOL, UGI :
Revs. Dr. Fox (’O2), A. But-
chart (’24).
ST. PATRICK’S COLLEGE and
SCHOOL, VUREAS : Rev. H.
L. Hart (’10).
GIRLS’ SCHOOLS.
(1) Bunana Misses Wench
(’O9), Wilson (’22), and
Safstrom (’23).
(2) Torgil Misses Hurse
(1901), and Bray (’24).
Ulawa Revs. *M. Marau (’l9),
and *C. Marau (T 7).
SANTA CRUZ AND REEF IS-
LAND Reefs— Rev. G. West
(’l3) and *B. Teiilo (’l3).
TORRES : Vacant.
BANKS ISLANDS—
Motolava Revs. *J. Gilvelte
(’l7), *Ben Qorig (’O6), and
*M. Sisis (’O6).
Merclava Rev *Harry Vanva (24)
NEW HEBRIDES :
Raga
Maewo Revs. R. Godfrey (T 8),
*M. Tarileo (’l7), *E. Tari-
malena (’24). *Judah Butu
(’24), and *S. Lanlanmele
(’24), Misses Hardacre (’O4),
(on leave) B -ought m (’22) and
Mrs. Godfrey C 22) Miss Williams
Opa —Revs. A. E. Teall (’2l) and
C. Rawson (’24).
*Native Clergy.
643 MELANESIAN TEACHERS (Stipendary).


THE BUSINESS
MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
NEW ZEALAND.
Commissary for New Zealand:
YEN. ARCHDEACON H. A. HAWKINS.
The Melanesian Mission Finance Board.
The Yen. Archdeacon H. W. Williams (Chairman) The Yen.
Archdeacon H. A. Hawkins, Rev. G. G. Bell, Messrs. J. C.
Dove, Geo. Kissling, W. Coath and J. A. Gentles,
General Secretary: Major h. s. n. Robinson
Offices: 418 CHANCERY CHAMBERS, AUCKLAND.
Cable Address: “ Melanesia,” Auckland.
Telephone 41-731.
All Correspondence should be addressed to
“The Secretary,” Melanesian Mission, Auckland.
Melanesian Mission Trust Board:
The Most Reverend The Archbishop (Chairman)
Mr. A. B. Roberton Mr. L. T. Symes
Mr. W. S. Fisher Mr. C. Hay
Mr. H. Gilfillan Mr. P. Upton
The Yen. Archdeacon H. A. Hawkins (Bishop’s Commissary)
INTRODUCTION.
By way of introduction we cannot do better than
offer to the earnest consideration of our readers the
following stirring extracts from a speech by the
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, delivered at
the Church House, on June 15th, 1921 :
“The first great feature of the whole work of the
Melanesian Mission is that it throws us back on
first principles and brings us to the time of
St. Paul and St. Barnabas going out among the
people in the mountains of Asia Minor or other
countries in the earliest days. Those characteristics
still obtain, and take us, as soon as we} look
at these details, to thoughts of the principles


THE ENGLISH COMMITTEE
President of the English Committee:
THE RIGHT HON. and MOST REVEREND THE LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
Chairman of English Executive Committee:
THE RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF ROCHESTER.
Bishop’s Commissaries’—Rev. Canon C. W. Browning, 104, Foster
Hill Road, Bedford, and Rev. A. E. Corner, Eversley, Milner
Road, Bournemouth.
Office—Melanesian Mission, Church House, Westminster S.W.I.
Hon. Treasurei —The Rev. C. Hamerton Gould.
General Secretary—Rev. A. E. Corner,
Travelling Secretary—Rev. F. Lyle Uppleby, 11, Frederica Road,
Winton, Bournemouth.
Office Secretary—Mr. B. Lanham.
Deputation Secretary—Rev. Ernest Mort, Broomfields, Frensham,
Surrey.
Hon. Sec. for Scholars and Island Stations —Miss F. E. Coombe,
Villa Marina, Worthing.
Hon. Secretary for Women’s Work —Mrs. J. R. Selwyn,
Marrington, Branksome Park, Bournemouth.
that should guide us all and which were in the
minds of those of whom the Bible and the earliest
Church history tell.
“Another great feature which, T think, is out-
standing in the Melanesian Mission, is that it is a
most splendid object lesson of the existence in our
own time and among our own contemporaries of
great men standing for Christ, men to whom a great
trust has been given and who have proved them-
selves not unworthy to discharge it. The self-offer-
ing, devotion and capacity of the first leaders who
took this matter in hand is something that bids us
all be of good courage. We remember that there
are great men for Christ alive in the world in our
own contemporaries. The work of Bishops Selwyn
and Patteson brings us straight back in thought to
the kind of work performed by St. Columba, or of
Ansgar, or of St. Francis Xavier, and all kinds of
people whose names are familiar as great mission-
aries of the world. Nobody who tries to look at
the matter fully will place your men in an inferior
position to the great missionaries of former days.
Bishop Selwyn combined the characteristics "of
more than one of those great pioneers in Northern
Europe of thirteen centuries ago, St. Augustine,


afterwards. The new difficulties that Bishop Sel-
wyn’s prescience foresaw are with us now as well
as the work that those two great men took in hand,
and we have had the splendid service since of
another Selwyn and of Bishop Cecil Wilson, whose
names will live as the names of Selwyn and Patte-
son themselves. Now a man whose name is not a
new one to the episcopate has taken up the work
which Bishop Wood through ill-health was com-
pelled to lay down, and we want to hearten him
with the thought that we know and care about the
great traditions he inherits, and that we believe he
will carry that work on, and that we will take care
that the thing shall not languish for lack of funds
at a time when it would be discreditable to us all.
The devotion these great men have shown is worth
dwelling upon at a time like this. It throws us back
on first principles and cheers us with the thought
of the greatness of our own time and the oppor-
tunities of the leaders, the great men of to-day, to
overcome for Christ and to bring light in where
darkness was before. We resolve not to let that
work languish, but to strengthen in every possible
way the hands of those who, on a larger scale than
ever before, will undertake the bringing of those
islands of the sea to the allegiance of Jesus Christ,
the Son of God.”
Where and What is Melanesia?
Melanesia, “the islands of the black people,” is a
name given to a succession of groups of islands
beginning with the New Hebrides in the south and
extending to the neighbourhood of New Guinea,
from about 14 degrees to 7 degrees S. latitude, fol-
lowing the trend of the north-eastern coast of the
Australian Continent at a distance of about one
thousand miles from it. The missionary diocese of
Melanesia in its present development comprises
three islands of the New Hebrides, the Banks,
Torres, Santa Cruz, and Reef Island Groups, and
the Solomon Islands as far to the north-west as
Choiseul, but a further development to include
Bougainville and New Britain is under considera-
tion. The possibility of such advance into unoccu-
pied territories depends almost entirely upon the
support vouchsafed by the Home Churches of Eng-
land, Australia and New Zealand.


The Right Rev, the Bishop of Melanesia
J. M. STEWARD M. A.


What are Melanesians like?
The Melanesian islands are mostly volcanic, girt
by coral reefs, except the Reef Islands, which are
coral reefs pure and simple, on which vegetation
and soil have accumulated. They vary in size from
one hundred and twenty miles in length to the
smallest dimensions. Groves of cocoanut grow near
the beach; the interior is generally a tangle of
luxuriant tropical vegetation. Between the shore
and the higher ground are often dark swamps over-
grown with mangroves, in which the poisonous
malarial mosquito is generated. There are scarcely
any indigenous wild animals, but parrots —green,
blue, red, and yellow —abound, and in the Solomon
Islands vast flocks of white cockatoos are noisily
in evidence. In the Solomon Islands also the
swamps and mouths of streams are infested by
crocodiles.
The Melanesians are not black, but bronze, their
complexions varying much: many of them being
of a very light tint. Their features also vary very
much, and there is no doubt that they are a very
mixed race. They have a very strong belief in an
unseen world. The existence of legions of spirits,
in earth, air and water, is to them very real. Some
of these spirits are those of departed human beings,
others have always been spirits. The chief feeling
towards the spiritual world is one of fear. Every
sickness or accident is attributed to magic; and a
man who is supposed to have power with the spirits
can obtain wealth and influence. There is a word,
mana, found in almost every Melanesian language,
signifying “spiritual power.” It is supposed to
reside not only in certain men, but in various inani-
mate objects, such as stones of unusual size or
shape, and it is regarded as the most valuable of
possessions.
Revenge is a very strong passion among the
heathen natives, and it takes the place of a moral
duty. Any wrong done to a member of a family,
village, or tribe, must be revenged. Thus it was,
not many years ago, a common thing to find neigh-
bouring villages engaged in continual warfare with
rare intervals of truce, to satisfy the demand of “a
life for a life” according to the native idea of justice.
Such villages sometimes do not even understand


for instance. His visit to England reads curiously
like —if you take Bede’s account of his visit to
Kent —the letters of Bishop Selwyn recounting his
landing in New Zealand and the beginning of what
he did from there, or the account of what he first
thought and said when he was in touch with the
Melanesian Islands. You will see how curiously
alike are the characteristics of the two far distant
territories and the characteristics of the two men.
Bishop Selwyn combined other characteristics which
belonged to great pioneers and missionaries in our
own earliest days which perhaps St. Augustine did
not possess. I have always compared him in my
own mind, with regard to his New Zealand work,
with the great Archbishop Theodore in the way
he planned as a statesman and admitted new ideas
of how in years to come changed conditions would
arise, and saw that preparations must be made for
complete change in surroundings and circumstances.
He set himself to do that as Archbishop Theodore
did in the early days of his pioneer work in our
own land.
“In 1871 came the tragedy of Bishop Patteson
laying down his life, and we know what grew out
of that. I doubt if any incident in the last hundred
years of work, whether at home or abroad, in any
part of the Church of Christ, has so stirred the
consciences of Christians as to what missionary
work meant, as the murder of Bishop Patteson. It
made people think what it was all for, whether it
was worth while, what were the sacrifices which
had been made, what had led up to them; and then
came his own messages and thoughts about it,
translated into words as to how it was not to be
by punishment, but by bringing them to Christ that
a real revenge (if you may call it so) was to be
made for his death—revenge of the finest and
noblest kind, bringing good into the place where
evil had arisen. That question stands out in the
history of the last hundred years of the story of
mission life as something that matters to the whole
Church. It made people think. It forced them
back to fundamental principles and started a new
notion of the grandeur of the work and the pos-
sibilities involved, and brought about a new resolve
that those possibilities should be made into realities
of accomplishment. It is with us to-day, fifty years


one another's language, from never having had any
friendly intercourse within any time remembered.
Most of the outrages committed on white men (in-
cluding the murder of Bishop Patteson and his
companions) have been acts of revenge for previous
misdeeds of white men, though the blow has seldom
fallen on the original offender.
Another very unlovely feature of heathen life is
infanticide. The practice has not been equally
prevalent everywhere; but in many parts a large
proportion of the children are made away with soon
after birth, mainly from superstitious motives acting
upon the minds of mothers who, amid the hard con-
ditions of their lives, are but too willing to be spared
the added trouble of nursing a child. One of the
most noticeable features of a Christian village is
the abundance of children.
Cannibalism hardly now exists in any part of
Melanesia among the heathen. Speaking generally,
it was practised in the south and in the north, the
New Hebrides, and the Solomon Islands, and has
never been practised in the middle regions, the
Banks, Torres, and Santa Cruz Groups. It is
impossible to say why some Melanesian races are
cannibal and others not. The island of Mala,
notorious for cannibalism, produces some of the
staunchest Christians under the influence of the
Gospel.
The cessation of feuds and bloodshed which has
taken place wherever a Christian school has been
planted impresses even the heathen, who often speak
of Christianity as “ The Law of Peace.”
How the Melanesian Mission began.
The beginning of the Melanesian Mission dates
from 1849, when George Augustus Selwyn, first
Bishop of New Zealand, visited the islands in his
little schooner the Undine, of 22 tons, and had five
native boys entrusted to him, whom he brought
back to train in his school at Auckland. Bishop
Selwyn star'ted on the principle of making the
natives, after they had been trained by him in
Christian truths and baptised and confirmed, mis-
sionaries to their own people, with the help and


supervision of English missionary clergymen. “The
white corks were to float the black net,” according
to the Bishop’s saying. This principle has been
followed ever since, with the result that Christianity
has been an indigenous growth, entwining itself
with the life of the people. It has never been the
aim of the Melanesian Mission to make natives copy
European civilisation in dress and mode of life,
which are) unsuited to them; but to give them with
Christianity the power of true progress, while allow-
ing them to retain everything in the native life that
is not inconsistent with their Christian profession.
The Martyr Bishop.
Bishop Selwyn, after a visit to England, brought
out with him in 1855 John Coleridge Patteson, a
young clergyman, son of Sir John Patteson, a Judge,
and an old friend of the Bishop. At the same time
the first Southern Cross, a schooner of 70 tons, was
built and sent out to New Zealand. John Coleridge
Patteson was consecrated first Bishop of Melanesia
in 1861. His sympathy with the natives and power
of acquiring their language were never equalled by
any other white man. In 1867 he transferred the
headquarters of the Mission from New Zealand to
Norfolk Island, which was nearer by six hundred
miles to the Melanesian Islands, and which com-
bined the advantages of a climate warm enough to
suit the children of the Tropics, and healthy enough
for the families of English Missionaries. Here the
training school of native clergy and teachers has
flourished until, in 1920, a further step forward was
taken and the centre of the Mission and the Bishop’s
home were successfully transplanted to the Solomon
Islands, in the very heart of the Diocese.
Bishop Patteson, as is well known, was killed by
a blow from a club, on the little island of Nukapu,
Santa Cruz Group, on September 20th, 1871. This
was an act of revenge, esteemed justice by the
natives, for the kidnapping of five native boys by
labour-traders, who in those days were practically
slave-traders. At the same time a white missionary
the Rev. Joseph Atkin, and a native boy, Stephen
laroaniara, were mortally wounded with arrows,
and died afterwards of tetanus.


Bishop John Selwyn.
Into the breach made by Bishop Patteson’s
murder, stepped John Richardson Selwyn, the heroic
son of a noble father, who went forth at the bidding
of Bishop Selwyn, then Bishop of Lichfield, and
after a few years’ service was consecrated second
Bishop of Melanesia in 1877. Space does not allow
us here to tell of the labours of his fifteen years’
episcopate, during which the Mission ever advanced,
until, worn out by the effects of climate, toil, and
hardships, Bishop John Selwyn, after a terrible
illness, was compelled to resign his post, and spend
the last five years of his life a cripple in England.
Bishop Cecil Wilson
Succeeded Bishop John Selwyn in 1894, and after
seventeen years’ episcopate, marked by a very great
extension of the Mission influence, and a great
advance towards the firm establishment of a
Melanesian Church, resigned in 1911, and was suc-
ceeded in 1912. It was during Bishop Wilson’s
episcopate that a beginning was made of white
women’s work in the Islands. One of the pioneers
of that movement, which has helped to increase the
effectiveness of the Mission, is Miss Hardacre. who
is still an active member of the Staff.
Bishop Cecil John Wood
Whose episcopate, lasting till 1919, was marked
by the establishment of a Training College for
Native Clergy in the Solomon Islands and the
decision to remove the headquarters from Norfolk
Island to the Solomons, where, under his successor,
a strong centre has been founded at Siota, in the
Island of Florida.
Two Pressing Needs.
Of all the urgent needs of the Mission, none is
more pressing than that of more Clergy and perhaps
particularly A MEDICAL MISSIONARY. Nurses
are on the Staff, but are handicapped. In Melanesia
there is a great opening for original research into
the cause and cure of obscure tropical diseases. In
a letter received recently from Bishop Molyneux
he stated that large numbers were dying simply for
want of medical attention. Apart from the medical
adventure which is offered —there is a wonderful
opportunity for service to mankind.


The Mission at the Present Day.
The work left by Cecil John Wood has been
carried forward by his successor, the present
Bishop, John Manwaring Steward, consecrated in
1919. Its progress is testified to by the fact that
the Report shows 324 schools. 643 native teachers
(male and female), and 27 native clergymen.
Starting from the little Undine, each successive ship
owned by the Mission has been larger than the one
before, to cope with increased needs, the present
Southern Cross, the fifth of her name, being a full-
powered steamer of 400 tons. The growth of the
work has at the same time greatly increased both
the need of workers and the expense of working.
In the early days of the Melanesian Mission,
during the Episcopates of Bishops Patteson and J.
R. Selwyn, the administration of the internal afifairs
of Melanesia may best be described as “ paternal.”
The Staff was numerically small, and met annually
at Norfolk Island during the Island hurricane sea-
son ; but. as the members of the Mission Staff
increased, and men and women began more and
more to reside in the Islands, these “Staff Meet-
ings” at Norfolk Island became gradually restricted
to those of the Staff who were stationed at Norfolk
Island, with the addition of one or two of the Island
Staff who happened to be recuperating at Norfolk
Island during the time that the Bishop was in
residence there.
Then there arose among the members of the Staff
who lived in the Islands a feeling that they were
becoming less and less represented in the councils
of the Mission, and more and more did the Bishop,
unconsciously and unwillingly, find himself grow-
ing into an absolutely autocratic position. Com-
pelled to make important decisions without unneces-
sary delay, unable to consult his Staff collectively,
bit by bit every question, great or small, became a
matter for the Bishop to decide alone.—This position
was not only quite foreign to the early ideals of
Bishops Patteson and Selwyn, but also brought
such a burden of detailed business upon the
shoulders of the Bishop that no man could bear it.


Native Houses
Street Scene
Another
Street Scene
Scenes from Maravovo Solomon Islands.


Bishop Wilson recognised this fact, and first of
all succeeded in relieving himself of the administra-
tion of the external affairs of the Mission by appoint-
ing committees in Auckland and Sydney. Finally,
in 1911, he summoned the first official Conference
of Missionaries at Bungana. A most pleasant and
profitable time was spent there by all who were
able to attend, but the Staff were unaccustomed to
such a conference, with the result that too much
was attempted and a very large number of resolu-
tions were passed, which, alas, were—as time went
on —“more honoured in the breach than in the
observance.”
One feature calls for special mention, and that is:
that from the very first the opinions of the Native
Clergy were sought. For many reasons it was
impossible to include them in those summoned to
Bungana, but as soon as possible after the close of
the Conference a meeting of Native Clergy and
Catechists was held under the presidency of Arch-
deacon Uthwatt, to discuss the matters brought
before the Conference, and other things especially
concerning the natives.
Bishop Wood followed in his predecessor’s foot-
steps ; and very soon after his arrival called the
Second Conference, which was held at Maravovo.
As time passed there arose among the priests of
the Staff a desire for a more formal association in
the work of the Diocese, and at the Third Confer-
ence, also held at Maravovo, it was decided to ask
that a Synod might be constituted. The resignation
of Bishop Wood prevented more than the passing
of a resolution expressing this desire. It was left
for the present Bishop to have the honour of con-
stituting, at Siota, in November, 1921, the Sacred
Synod of the Missionary Diocese of Melanesia.
To those who only know the Mission’s history
during the past few years, this may seem like an
innovation. We had gr°\vn so used to the idea of
an autocratic Episcopacy, an unaided monarchy,
that the admission of the priests of the Diocese into
the formal councils of the Diocese seemed to some
as an adbication, a yielding to the “modern demo-
cratic ideas, ’ but those few of the Staff who clung
to ancient Tory ways of thinking, rejoiced in the
feeling that this step was not only a nearer approxi-
mation to the ideas of Patteson and “Bishop John,”




but also brought the Diocese into line with the
Church of the Persecution when St. Ignatius wrote:
“Do not ye anything without the Bishops and the
Presbyters.”
The Islands.
We will briefly review the position of the Mission
in the successive groups of islands.
Beginning from the south, a great advance of
Christianity has taken place recently in most parts
of the three islands of the New Hebrides where the
Mission is at work —Raga, Maewo, and Opa.
On October 16, 1906, the Rev. C. C. Godden
was murdered by a heathen who had been a labourer
in Queensland. This sad event indicates no oppo-
sition on the part of the people to Christianity.
The man conceived that he had a grievance to
avenge on white men as a body, and was perhaps
insane. The heathen were almost as sorry for the
outrage as the Christians. Indeed, the strength of
the heathen indignation at the murder is shewn by
their request that the murderer might be handed
over to them to be burnt alive! The ladies’ work
started on Raga is most hopeful.
In the Banks Group generally, Christianity has
become —outwardly, at least —dominant, though it
cannot be said that heathenism is wholly extinct.
These islands, especially Motalava and Meralava,
have furnished some of the best native missionaries
for pioneer work in other groups. The danger is
now not an open enemy, but the falling away from
the first love, which is almost inevitable when the
actual evils of heathenism have been forgotten.
The small Torres Group still suffers from the
absence of a white missionary, owing to the dearth
of men. It is to be feared that there has been con-
siderable falling back, and that some time will be
necessary to recover lost ground.
In the Santa Cruz Group the Mission has had
peculiar difficulties to contend with, and we wait
yet to see the blood of the martyrs bring forth a
plenteous harvest on the ground watered by it.
There are, however, more hopeful signs now than
at any past time; and the fact that a missionary
can now go about anywhere among these turbulent
islands in safety is in itself a great advance.


Map Showing Melanesian Mission Field of Work including
New Ireland, New Britain ex German portion of New Guinea.
This Map is Drawn to Scale.




Port at Vanikolo.
The recent opening of Vanikolo, where a large
timber-cutting industry is now established, has
made this part of Melanesia far more accessible.
There is a regular steamer from Sydney via the
New Hebrides, about one in ten weeks, and a
smaller boat from Tulagi links up the group with
the Solomon Islands.
Coming to the Solomon Islands, it may be said
that, generally speaking, the smaller islands have
now been Christianised, but that the larger ones
present much greater difficulties. One cause of
this is that the coast populations and those of the
interior were till very recently in a state of chronic
hostility. Ulawa and much of the southern part of
Mala have been evangelised by the noble labours
of such men as Clement Marau and Joseph Wate.
Great advances have been made in the northern
part of Mala, an island with a most sinister reputa-
tion for cannibalism and bloodshed. But here we
are confronted with a new difficulty, unknown in
the earlier days of the Mission, and arising out of
our unhappy divisions. Other religious bodies pro-
pose to occupy the ground for which our Church
has been so tardy in providing sufficient men; and
if the native mind is confused by the spectacle of
a divided Christianity, the blame for this belongs
mainly to our own lack of evangelising zeal.
In San Cristoval excellent pioneering work has
been done during recent years, both by English and
native workers; schools have increased, and the
altered habits of the people witness to the power
of the Gospel. To-day very few villages in San
Cristoval are still heathen; practically all are either
Melanesian, Roman, or S.S.I. Evangelical schools.
Guadalcanal until lately quite heathen, is now
being evangelised, and a network of schools is
being formed there by the labours of native
teachers, many of them volunteers from other
islands. Guadalcanar owes the beginning of its
Christianity, under Providence, to two of its sons
who were carried off in a head-hunting raid as
children to the neighbouring island of Ysabel, and
afterwards educated at Norfolk Island.


Bishop Patteson Memorial Cross. Nukapu Is.


By their own wish, they returned as evangelists
to their native island. There, amid hardships and
persecutions, they sowed the seed which has since
grown. A white missionary and a devoted band of
native teachers succeeded to their labours. Through
manifold perils and dangers they fostered the
growth of the faith which the two first pioneers,
Hugo Gorovaka and George Basilei, had planted.
Nearly 100 miles of the western coast-line are now
studded by Christian Schools, and two Native
Priests are in charge of the district.
Maravovo, in the Island of Guadalcanal for some
time the home of the Training College and the
Welchman Memorial Hospital, is now the Head-
quarters of our Industrial work, with the Mission
Press and a plantation, and a small Industrial
School for Natives, part of a large boys’ school.
Florida is now entirely Christian with Native
Clergy and Teachers, and the centre of the Mission
work is at Siota, on the site of the boys’ school
once flourishing under Archdeacon Comins, Dr.
Welchman, and Rev. R. P. Wilson. Here is estab-
lished the Training College for Ordinaiids and
Teachers.
The evangelisation of Ysabel and the building
up of the Church there would form a story of the
deepest interest, associated especially with two
names: Soga, the chief of Bugotu, and Henry
Welchman. Soga was a famous warrior and head-
hunter in his earlier days. He was converted to
Christianity; the timely administration of a dose
cf medicine by Bishop John Seiwyn, which cured
him of an illness that defied the magicians, having
much to do with his conversion. Baptised and Con-
firmed, he became a very thorough Christian,
governing his people well, and being a bulwark of
the Church in his native island. He died in 1899.
Henry Welchman was a medical man, who gave
up his practice at Lichfield to join the Mission,
where he at first worked as a layman, and after-
wards was ordained deacon and priest. He was
the first white Missionarv who took a wife to the


islands; but Mrs. Welchman died at Siota, Florida,
within a few months of her arrival there, in 1897.
Dr. Welchman carried on the Central School at
Siota for some time, and also Missionary work in
Ysabel, which he saw transformed from a wild
head-hunting island into a country mainly Christian,
with a well-organised Church. He established his
headquarters at Mara-na-Tambu, or All Saints, and
used to gather his teachers there for instruction and
devotional meetings. At last, worn out by toil and
hardships, he died in “harness” at a bush village,
where he was taken ill on a journey, with his teach-
ers round him, on November 12, 1908. He rests
from his labours, and his works do follow him. No
head-hunting raid has now occurred in the north-
west Solomons for several years, and it is hoped
that the islands which have been the head-hunters’
strongholds will before long be won for Christ.
Also in harness at Mara-na-Tambu died two more
white Priests, who carried on the Welchman tradi-
tions —Andrews and Sprott. Lately there has been
a great development in Church building on native
lines throughout Bugotu. Mrs. Sprott, with the
help of a nurse, keeps open as a centre the station
at Mara-na-Tambu. Two native Priests are doing
line work in their respective spheres.
Central Schools.
The need for a larger supply of native teachers
is now being met by the establishment of Central
Schools in various groups, which can send their
most promising boys to Siota, and train others for
the work of teaching on the spot. A Central School
for the Solomon Islands has been opened at Pamua,
.San Cristoval, and another on the Island of Ugi,
and another at St. Patrick’s, Sanlang, in Vanua
Lava, Banks Islands, and at Maravovo.


The “Southern Cross.”
The first Mission ship of this name was a schooner
of 70 tons, built in England for Bishop Selwyn, and
sent out in 1855; part of the cost being defrayed by
the profits of Miss Yonge’s book “The Daisy Chain,”
which have ever since been devoted to the Melan-
esian Mission. The copyright of this work expired
in 1910, so that no further support from it will be
forthcoming. Five successive ships of the same
name, each larger than her predecessor, have linked
the islands to one another and to Norfolk Island
and New Zealand. The present ship, of 400 tons,
steaming eight knots, was built by Messrs. Arm-
strong, at Newcastle-on-Tyne, and launched in
1903. She cost £21,000. She is admirably adapted
for her work; but increased size and steam-power
have brought also increased expense in working.
The ship makes two voyages round the islands
each year. These voyages are necessary if the
work is to be done properly, but they involve a
great strain on the resources of the Mission. A
long-desired and valuable addition to her equipment
is the installation of electric light on board, now
successfully working. It is a very great boon and
costs little in working. The cost of this installation
was defrayed in part by the Sunday-school children
of New Zealand.
Women’s Work.
Two Girls’ Schools, one in the Solomons and one
in the Banks Islands, have been started, and promise
very well. The systematic work among the women
of Melanesia is most important. Women’s stations
are now established in Raga and the Solomon
Islands for medical, social, and teaching work
amongst the women and children. Villages are
ready and welcome the white women, but itinera-
tion is difficult except to places near the centres.


The Church at Nerinignam. Motolava. Banks Islands.


The Labour Traffic.
In the early days of the Mission natives were
taken away to labour in British colonies by methods
practically indistinguishable from those of the slave
trade. After Bishop Patteson’s death this traffic was
put under Government regulation and recruiting
became voluntary. It is to be regretted that more
was not done in the white man’s country to Chris-
tianise the Melanesian labourers. Here and there
noble work has been done, but a great number
seemed to have learnt little but vulgarity and vice
from their sojourn among white men. And such
religious teaching as has been given has usually
not been of the Church type. The Australian
authorities have returned the labourers to their
homes. Grave apprehensions were entertained of
the disturbances and bloodshed which would prob-
ably take place in some of the islands, owing to
the influx of such a large new population from
across the sea. Happily these apprehensions,
except in isolated cases here and there, have not
been justified. The returned labourers are for the
most part being absorbed into the rest of the
population, and slipping back into the ordinary
native mode of life. Some are giving valuable
assistance in the schools. Unfortunately, however,
the general result of a sojourn in Queensland has
been to lower considerably the native’s opinion of
the white man.
Political Arrangements.
A word may be said to explain the political and
administrative arrangements now existing in Melan-
esia. The Solomon Islands, Santa Cruz, and Reef
Island Groups are under British Protectorate. A
Commissioner resident in the Florida Group, and
responsible to the Governor of Fiji, governs this
large area as far as circumstances allow. Our native
teachers have often rendered valuable service to
the cause of good government; but it has always
been the practice of the Mission to respect the
authority of the chiefs and to aim at inspiring
Christian chiefs with a sense of responsibility
towards their people. In the New Hebrides, Banks,
and Torres Groups a dual system of con-
trol exists, under Britain and France. A


recent treaty was intended to make the co-
operation of the two Powers more harmoni-
ous, and more beneficial to the natives than for-
merly, but its results have been most disappointing
to all concerned.
Recent Developments.
The consecration of an Assistant-Bishop in
August, 1925, is the most recent landmark of
advance and an inspiring challenge to carry on and
progress. The work of Bishop Molyneux will at
first be mainly the Southern part of the Diocese,
with a centre at Lolowai. in Opa. Thus the most
needy part of the Diocese will come under his
charge, with the problems of deportation and gov-
ernment to face. Another great development is in
progress at the other end of Melanesia. In Novem-
ber, 1925, the two Bishops visited Rabaul, the
capital of the ex-German Solomons, and take back
first-hand information as to how best a new Bishop-
ric, for which the Australian Church is to be
responsible, should be founded. The Roman
Catholics and Wesleyans are occupying part of the
large islands concerned, but there remains much
heathenism in what is still geographically the north
part of the Diocese of Melanesia. The N.W. Solo-
mons are ready and waiting the challenge to the
Australian Church to occupy.
Another recent development is the growth of a
Native Ministry. The ordination at the Siota Con-
ference in 1921 was a landmark. A Native Ministry
is essential, lest non-Christian civilisation destroys
what has been built up; the Church must be native.
Twenty native Priests are at work. They need
white supervision and do not fill the place of white
men, but under their guidance do in their own way
invaluable work, which can only grow healthily
under the stimulus of sympathy and guidance. So
far we can indeed thank God and take courage for
what as a body they are doing.
A fourth development that is still in infancy is
that of industrial work. Here the problem is to
find skilled white men able and willing to act as
instructors and to break down the Melanesian
reluctance to learn native work which is mainly
confined to particular people and districts. Car


pentry is the most attractive work and most valu-
able, but a large region of native work is open if
interest could be aroused.
A fifth development is that of Native Offerings.
It is little realised how much the people themselves
give in cash and labour. In Gela and Bugotu and
Raga, for example, they are generous givers of both.
Directly and indirectly every year their contribu-
tions are considerable. But in the larger islands
especially there is room for growth. It is not
uncommon for one island to give between £IOO
and £2OO in cash, besides labour in building fine
churches. And to this must be added cash given
to the Mission amounting to several hundreds a
year.
Another recent development is at the home base.
A Finance Board in New Zealand, under General
Synod, is now established, and closer co-ordination
of work between England, Australia, and New Zea-
land should lead to economy and efficiency.
Conclusion.
The Melanesian Mission has been God’s instru-
ment for doing in a remote corner of the world a
work which, for its quality and the character of its
leaders, takes a high place among the Missions of
the Church. The system of reaching the natives
through the natives, secures, we believe, thorough-
ness and reality in the work done. The one hope
of preserving the Melanesian race to be a living
branch in the Church of the future is to be found
in arming them with a vigorous Christianity. A
serious responsibility lies upon English Church
people to see that in this comparatively small
heritage of our Church in the great Pacific Ocean,
the sum of good received through white men
exceeds the unavoidable harm. Others may do the
work if we fail; but we ought not to leave it to
others. We have good reason to be thankful for
the stirring of the missionary spirit which has been
aroused. But there is still plenty of room for more.
How many of our best workers have been removed
within the last few years by death or illness? Men
especially of the best kind are still sorely needed,
both for the island work and the training work at
Siota: clergymen to whom the missionary call has
come in the midst of parochial work, clergymen


specially trained for the mission-field, and educated
laymen; men skilled with their hands, and men who
can approach problems of native life and languages
with something of the scholarly mind of Bishop
Patteson and others well known in the past. It
is a mistake to think that only men of great lin-
guistic aptitude can do work in Melanesia; but it
is a worse mistake to think that anybody is good
enough to carry on the traditions of the Selwyns
and Patteson. Increased pecuniary support is
needed to enable the present ship, more powerful
but also more expensive than her predecessors, to
do the work required of her. It is needed for the
development of the Central Schools and the new
advance in the Solomon Islands; and for the pro-
vision of medical work among natives and whites.
Above all, prayer is needed to the Lord of the
Harvest that He will send forth labourers, and so
inspire with His Spirit all (both white and coloured)
who are working for Him in those regions, that the
kingdom of His Son may be extended and built
up in the best possible way.
This sketch of our History would be very incom-
plete were it not to include a reference, however
inadequate, to the wonderful work of the British
Navy in the Islands. In the past, the only true
civilising agents in these parts of the world were
the officers and men of the Navy. How much the
missionaries owe to them for numerous acts of per-
sonal kindness, from the days of Bishop Selwyn, of
New Zealand, to the present time, space forbids
even an attempt to estimate. But from the earlier
times of mission enterprise till now, the officers of
the Navy have been our best friends, and their
continued interest is one of our most valued pos-
sessions. The establishment of a Protectorate in
the Solomon Islands and the well meant Condo-
minium in the New Hebrides has much lessened
the activities of the Navy so far as participation in
the pacification of the Islands is concerned. In
the Solomons a body of officials, who have the real
well-being of the natives at heart, has taken the
place of the intermittent work of naval officers, and
in the New Hebrides we can at least say that the
officers of the Condominium do their best under
very real difficulties to promote the growth of a
recent civilising influence among the inhabitants.


MILESTONES.
1849 —The Mission was founded by the Bishop of
Zealand (G. A. Selwyn).
1855 —The Rev. John Coleridge Patteson joined
the Mission and was consecrated as its
First Bishop in 1861.
1864— Edwin Nobbs and Fisher Young, Lay
Workers, killed at Santa Cruz.
1867 — The Training College of the Mission, which
till then had been at Auckland, was re-
moved to Norfolk Island,
1871 —Bishop Patteson was killed at Nukapu,
Santa Cruz Group, with the Rev. J. Atkin
and Stephen Taroaniara, native teacher.
1873 The Rev. John Richardson Selwyn joined
the Mission and was consecrated Second
Bishop in 1867.
1874 Sarah Palmer died in the Mission Field.
1878— George Augustus Selwyn, Bishop, died.
1880—The Memorial Chapel to Bishop Patteson
was consecrated at Norfolk Island.
1892 —Bishop J. R. Selwyn resigned after a long
illness.
1894—The Rev. Cecil Wilson was consecrated
Third Bishop.
1897 —Helen Welchman, died, Soloman Islands.
1906—The Rev. C. C. Godden killed at Opa, New
Hebrides.
1908 — The Rev. Henry Welchman died at his post
in Bugotu in the Solomon Islands.


1909 Rev. Frank Bollen died suddenly at his
station at Maravovo, Guadalcanar.
1910— First Conference of the Mission Staff held
in the Islands.
1911 — Bishop Wilson resigned.
1911— Guy Bury, Priest, died, Santa Cruz.
1912 Bishop Cecil John Wood consecrated.
1912 George Andrews, Priest, died, Solomon
Islands.
1913 Training College for Ordination founded in
Solomon Islands.
1913— Charlie Grace Sage, Deacon, drowned,
Solomon Islands.
1915 —Frederick Harry Drew, Priest, died,
Solomon Islands. William Fortescue
Long, Priest, drowned.
1917 Sarah Jeffrey, died at the Solomon Islands.
1918— Bishop C. J. Wood resigned.
1919 Bishop Steward consecrated.
1920 The Headquarters of the Mission moved
into Islands.
1921 First Synod of Diocese constituted.
1921—Norman Dixon, Priest, died Solomon
Islands.
1924 Melanesian Mission Finance Board estab-
lished by General Synod.
1925 Bishop Molyneux consecrated Assistant
Bishop of Melanesia.
1925—Initial visit to the far North West New
Britain, with a view to extending the
Mission,


Bishop F. M. Molyneux
Asst. Bishop of Melanesia
WHAT ARE OUR RESOURCES?
1. An Endowment Fund, a large proportion of
which was bequeathed by Bishop Patteson, pro-
duces £ 1200 a year.
2. Subscriptions from England, amounting now to
about £9OOO a year. To put the Mission on a
sound footing, these must be raised to £15,000.
3. Subscriptions from Australia (£2,000) and
New Zealand (£8,000). In New Zealand the
Mission is adopted as a work of the Church, and
collections are made for it in every parish.
4. The Mission has lands at Kohimarama, Auck-
land, which are now being sold on a freehold basis.
When this is completed and the cost of reading,
drainage, etc., etc., paid off, the net result should
be a substantial increase in the Mission revenue.
But this cannot be looked for until some five years
or more.
The Mission is not assisted by the S.P.G. or C.M.S,


WHAT ARE OUR LIABILITIES?
1. The cost of maintenance of the new Mission
vessel. Southern Cross , without which nothing can
be done. This, with repairs, insurance, stores,
coal, etc., is now nearly £ 10,000 a year. It
is hoped that funds will increase sufficiently
to provide for a third voyage. which is
urgently needed. All moneys for the ship
are controlled by the Melanesian Mission Finance
Board, Auckland, N.Z., a body recently constituted
by General Synod, and subscribers may rest
assured that every economy is practised.
2. The payment of the clergy. More clergy are
sorely needed; also funds for their support.
3. The maintenance of the Schools, including-
-7 o
buildings, fences, provisions, etc.
4. The maintenance of the Island Stations, includ-
ing salaries to native clergy and teachers. Over
£2500 is required NOW for expenses of Island
Schools, and this is an increasing item. The salaries
in all cases are very small. It is always borne in
mind that the natives should help themselves in this
matter; and in most places offerings of money raised
from trading in copra (dried cocoanut), or of
curios, are made. They can and do build their own
churches and schools.
5. The total annual expenditure is upwards of
£20,000. But if all the Islands are to be fully
occupied, at least £25,000 will be required, and for
a further advance at least £5OOO more is essential.
6. The work to be undertaken in the north-west
of the Solomons will also make heavy inroads on
our already burdened revenue.


Ways of Helping
1. Prayer and Intercession.
2. Annual Subscriptions and Donations. —Payable to the Treasurer.
3. Scholars. —A boy or girl may be supported for £lO a year during
the period of training for the office of a teacher in the Islands ;
payable to the Treasurer.
4. Island Fund. —A school in the Islands may be supported for £lO
a year.
5. “The Southern Cross Log.” —The Mission’s quarterly Illustrated
Magazine, containing latest news from the Islands, articles by
Missionaries, etc. Price 2/6 per annum, including delivery. Sub-
scriptions to this should be sent to the Secretary, Melanesian Mission,
Chancery Chambers, Auckland.
6. Working Parties. — (a) To make cassocks and surplices for use
of native clergy and catechists. (5) To make articles for sales of
work. Such may be sent to the office.
7. Modern Books. —Theological, Biographical, Historical, Travel and
Fiction, are a great boon to the Missionaries.
8. Altar Linen, Church Ornaments and Sacred Vessels are much
needed to furnish the Churches in the Islands. These should be sent
to the Office Secretary.
9. Presents. —Strong, useful articles, such as the following, are
much prized by the Melanesians: Sacred pictures (backed with linen),
sheath-knives and pen-knives, fishing lines and hooks, large work-
men’s handkerchiefs, implements for cricket and football, sewing and
writing materials, shaving requisites, whet-stones and files, soap and
towels, leather belts and pouches, spoons, enamelled mugs, plates,
etc. Reliable drugs and ointments, bandages, lint, clinical ther-
mometers, etc., are always greatly valued by the Missionaries.
11. Garden or Drawing-room Meetings. —Apply to the General
Secretary.
12. Legacies.
13 Tuck Boxes and Medical Comforts. —Particulars re Tuck Boxes
may be had from Mrs Cruickshank, St. Mary’s Vicarage, Remuera,
Auckland, or from Miss Cameron, 106 Gloucester Street, Christchurch.
Lantern Lectures. —The Office Secretary can lend sets of slides to
any clergy who will kindly lecture for the Mission.
All Contributions should be sent to the Treasurer.
Addressed to—The Treasurer, Melanesian Mission, Chancery Chambers,
Auckland. Cheques to be crossed Union Bank of Australia, Auckland.
General Secretary and Treasurer —Major H. S. N.
Robinson, the Melanesian Mission, Chancery Chambers,
Auckland N.Z,


Native Mother and Child
“Those who bring Sunshine to the lives of others cannot
keep it from themselves.”
J. M. BARRIE


Melanesian Mission
Southern Cross Log
An interesting little Magazine containing
notes etc. from the various Island Stations
and items of interest about the Mission in
the Islands and at Home.
Published Quarterly
Subscription 2/6. per year. Postage Paid.
For fuller information apply to:-
The General Secretary
Melanesian Mission, Chancery
AUCKLAND.
Clancy & Herdman. Printers. Auckl
