

HAND-BOOK
OF
PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS
FOR
SUGAR-CANE PLANTING,
SUGAR MAKING,
AND THE
DISTILLATION OF RUM:
BY
FREDK. A. BELL;
Compiled from Notes containing his Experiences, and the Opinions of Practical
Hugar Planters,
I-'. PRINTKR. PITT STREET.
Sgtmcg:
J. J. MOOEE, GEORGE STREET;
opposite st. axdrew’s cathedral,
AND TO BJ; HAT) OF ALE BOOK.SKLLFHS.
ISGo.


PLAN OF MILL BOILING CURING & DISTILL HOUSES.


HAND BOOK
OF
PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS
FOR
SUGAR-CANE PLANTING,
SUGAR MAKING,
AND THE
DISTILLATION OF RUM:
BY
FREDK. A. BELL;
Compiled from Holes wiUaininj his Jbpei-ience*, (tail the Opi'nio/u of ProelM
Suyar I’lunlm
Sgtinrg :
J. MOORE, GEORGE STREET;
orrosms ST. ANDEW’m CATUUDHAI'i,
and hi m-: had of am, Uookshu.kus.
1 Klifi.




TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE SIR JOHN YOUNG, BART, K.C.B.,
GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEF OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
&c., &c., &c.
Sm,
It is with equal pleasure and satisfaction that I avail mysolf of your
Excellency's permission to dodicato this little manual of Sugar planting and
malting to your Excellency.
Ah Governor of Now South Wales, at a period whon almost despair has
pervaded tho whole Agricultural population, from bad Mamins, diHoaaod crops,
and floods, combined with a want of tho scientific and practical knowledge of
Agriculture, your Excellency has laboured most energetically and sincerely
to arouse tho drooping energies of the Colonists, for which you are most
justly entitled to the gratitude and thanks of tho community.
It is a matter of groat congratulation to all ranks, that Hot Majesty has
given thorn a Governor who is fully aware, that tho prosperity of tho
Government depends on that of tho Colony, that ovory vast and mighty
moans should ha employed to stimulate, encourage, and load tho pooplo to
ovory branch of miienUllo art and industry, of which Agriculture is tho groat
foundation.
As your Excellency has expressed your opinion that groat benefits and
wealth might ho derived from tho introduction of Sugar Cane planting and
Sugar making into this Colony, I do mysolf the honor to solicit your support
und iriAuonce in encouraging and promoting those branches of industry.
I have tlio honor to bo
Your Excellency's
Moat obedient hum bio servant,
FRED K . A. BELL.
Itumood, 'iSth May, 18(b).


PREFACE.
Eon the last two years I have heon making every .enquiry as to
the fitness of the Sugar Oane cultivation for this colony.
I had read many letters written hy Mr. Thomas Scott, of
Brisbane Water, as to its prolificacy in growth and saccharine
juices, also letters and lectures by my worthy friend the liev.
Mr. Edward Holland, of Port Macquarie; still unlike other
colonies, neither the Governor, the Colonial Executive Ministers,
the Agricultural Society, the Acclimatization Society, nor any
individual except the above named two gentlemen, gave the
slightest encouragement, or took any active measures to develope
this great source of wealth to the colony; hut the same mysterious
apathy has hung like a blighting mist over this great agricultural
industry—the propagation of which might, years and years ago,
have clothed the rich still waste banks of our rivers, with luxuriant
crops, studded our coasts with towns and villages of substantial
settlers, given wealth to planters and merchants, and a large and
increasing revenue to the colony.
At last, I had the presumption to suppose that I coidd set
sugar growing on foot in this colony, and personally went to the
expense of printing and circulating the comparative table which
will he found in the appendix. I hired the hall of the School of
Arts, and got up a public lecture ; then induced some members
of the legislature and other gentlemen to meet and discuss the
subject. AJtor several meetings, a gentleman of the name of
Mr. Thorny De Heating arrived in the colony, in April last,
from Melbourne, and said he came from the Mauritius; he called
on Mr. Starkey and others, who sent him to me —I found that he
wished to get employment in the proposed sugar company.
But after conversing with him, I felt strong doubts as to his
being a practical planter, and none of the Mauritius merchants
knew anything about him; so after asking the opinion of an old
Jamaica planter with whom he had conversed, I found that we
both considered that his information must have been derived from
other sources than practice, hut perhaps from observation in the
Mauritius, where nearly the whole cultivation of the island is
sugar cane ; however, wishing to keep “ sugar growing” before
tire public, I wrote a few letters for him to publish in the Herald,
and my son gave him clean copies; ho afterwards told my son


that Mr. Fairfax had offered him two guineas a letter to coutinno
thorn j hut as that journal had published a loader evidently with
the intention of stopping my exertions to introduce sugar 'plant-
ing, I declined writing more for him or tlio llorald. Since then,
ho reprinted those seven letters in tiro shape of a little pamphlot,
although consisting of only tho oommonoomont of tlio subject.
I mention all this, as tho Herald claimed tie puilio thank of tho
colony for this casual visitor to Sydney, instead of giving the
honor to Mr. Scott and tho Eov, Mr. Holland, who have advo-
cated sugar planting for many years past.
Therefore, seeing, that at tho present time there is a con-
siderable interest manifested as to sugar growing, and believing
that a desire existed among tho agriculturist of this colony, to
procure information in regard to tho cultivation of tlio sugar cauo
(which. I boar from many quarters they intend to substitute for
wheat, maizo, and other coroals), I thought it would bo bencllciai
if I drew- up a short manual or hand book, giving Hiiillciout
practical information as to tho planting of cauo, and tho manu-
facture of sugar from tho juice,
From this brochure, I derive no benefit whatever, I have done
it sololy with a sincere desire to promote sugar growing in this
colony; and tho merit of putting it before the public rests with
the publisher.
A gentleman of Sydney, and my sou, are now proceeding with a
sugar plantation, in tho success of which I have no doubt. They
will plant in August, and in six months after, they can increase
their plantation from tho now shoots, so that proceeding thus,
they can secure u succession of crops of cauo and sugar.
Although there is no greater difficulty in cultivating tho sugar
cauo than there is in maize, still there is, in disposing of it after
ripening, so as to convert its juice into sugar, and yield good
profits to the cultivator.
It is next to impossible that ovory small agriculturist can have
Ids own machinery for manufacturing sugar, us the cost would he
too great; therefore, I proposed, and do propose, that a joint
stock company should ho formed, for tho purpose of building
sugar works; with suitable machinery (which would cost con-
siderably under £2,500), capable of converting 1,200 gallons of
juioo per clay (of twelve hours) iiito sugar. That this company
should not he cultivators of tho cauo beyond 00 to 60 acres, but
use their laud principally as a nursery to supply cam tops to farmers
for planting. That tho works should ho supplied with canes
for crushing by various growers, from whom they would ho
bought at such a profitable price to tho farmer ns to ouooimigo
its cultivation.
From minute inquiries I am assured by the Eov. Mr. Holland,
Mr. Mearos, Mr. MoArthy, and several farmers on the' Hastings
IV


Biver, that in twelve months time, from thirty to forty growers
(averaging ten acres of cane each) could he depended upon at
that river alone, who would sell to such a company this supply;
therefore the canes from these 400 acres would give 1,200 tons of
sugar, _ realising £38,400, of which the growers might receive
one third as their payment for cultivating, £2 per ton being
deducted for maniifactnring.
On the rivers, where no works are established, the only plan
for small sugar growers to adopt (who wish to make merely a
supply for their family), will be to join in purchasing a set of
three portable rollers, which would cost from £IOO to £3OO,
and let them he taken from farm to farm; then let each grower
purchase a set of small machines, capable of making very good
sugar,'with care and according to the directions given.* I think
it will he found that after reckoning every expense the farmer,
on an average, will receive nearly double the profit on cultivating
sugar cane, than he ever got from maize or other cereals.
Sugar caue, is a crop that seldom or ever fails, therefore
farming profits even on moderately flooded lands, will be
rendered a certainty. The population and wealth of the Agri-
cultural community, in sugar districts, will be rapidly multiplied.
The Minister for Lands will rejoice in the vastly increased and
increasing sales of the public lands north of the Hunter Biver.
The steam and sailing coasting trade, will he prosperous.
The merchant importers and exporters, will participate largely
in the prosperity; in short, shipbuilders, manufacturers,
wharfingers, proprietors of (stores, coopers, draymen, artizana,
and labourers, will all he benefited by the introduction of such
a vast industrial lahom 1 and manufacture, as sugar and rum.
My object is mainly to encourage the introduction of sugar
planting and manufacture, as I am. convinced that it cannot be
too widely extended: let it be established as one of the legitimate
and standard productions, and a reliable source of wealth to the
colony. The profits on sugar growing will or must keep pace
with the demand, as every one knows that the increasing popu-
lation of the world is far beyond the prodiiotion of sugar, even
if hundreds of plantations were added to those now existing.
I cannot conclude, without drawing the readers attention to
the two boxes of strong grained Muscovado sugar, exhibited by
the Eev Mr. Edward Holland, of Port Macquarie, at the
exhibition of the Agricultural Society of New South Wales, at
Parramatta, on the 19th May last, when they awarded him the
small prize of £5.
I accompanied the Eev. Mr. Holland to some of the largest
* Such machines can ho got from Mr. Kohinsou, of No. 486, Goorgo-fltreot, at a cost of
from £7 to £2U, capacity.
V


sugar importing merchants of Sydney, to show them this sugar,
and finally to Mr. William Doan, the produce auctioneer;
the lowest value put on it was £34 per ton; this gentleman,
saying, that the market was now dull, hut at another time it
would bring a bettor price.
I have .kept a largo sample bottle full of this sugar, which I
will have much pleasure in showing to any one who desire it, or
it may bo seen at Mr. Mailer’s, and the Umpire Olhco.
Groat credit, and public thanks, arc duo to Mr. Holland, for
this production, as no doubt his example will bo followed by
others. Ho expects more than 30 tons from his next crop, as ho
will have 10 acres to cut, so that his profit will bo about £IO2O,
less the trifling expenditure for cultivation and manufacture.
It was very remarkable that neither His Excellency the Governor
Sir John Young, nor his Ministers, nor any of the members of
the Agricultural Society, took the least notice in their speeches
at the luncheon, of this important and meritorious production;
although some time ago I had a letter from His Excellency’s
private secretary, Mr. I'nrvillo, expressing the Governor’s earnest
wish, to see the cultivation and manufacture of sugar in New
South Wales, successfully and extensively carried out. I sent a
sample bottle full of Mr. Holland’s sugar to His Excellency, ns a
token of the colony’s progress; also I have forwarded sample
bottles to Mr. Fouhlauque, secretary of the hoard of trade, and
to Messrs. 8. Rucker & Co., the groat sugar brokers of London,
asking them its value, and their opinion of the produce —although
this is only his first proper attempt at sugar making, in a
common boiler, without proper rollers, machinery, evaporators,
&0., but which I believe he is now gutting.
FRED K . A. BELL.
Burwooil, 25ih May, 1805.
VI


INDEX.
t* I'*,.
Dodioutimi.
I’l'lTaiO.
On tlio vimotiwi ormifijur cimo .. .. .. .. .. 1
On anils snilablo for augur cano .. .. ■. ■’*
Tnflucnci.'H of clinmlo ami aonainm .. ~ ~ .. ~ <•
Modo nf onltnro .. .. .. .. .. I-
Manuring .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Iti
On llm nianufm'luvo (ifwiflar, Iho prw’ww nf i-maliing «mh* ~ 111
Cnnojuioo—its HnlwtuiionH .. .. .. .. .. uu
Dofoimliim of aim juioo .. ~ .. Ti
Nyaloin nf nmnnliuiluro mitnnmomluil .. ~ ','.l
Ominontnitimi ol'ayrup .. ~ *.'(>
Cryntiilliwithm nf llm syrup anil curing ~ V.'*
Packing for nmrkcl. ~ ~ ;il
limn—■pvncnHH (il'ilislilladon .. .. ~ HI
IHatillcry and (listillulum ~ .. .. in
Flavouring Iho spirit; ~ . . ,11
Appendix—lrrigation .. ~ ~ .. i->
Hi'. Campboll’a nicimirandum on tho sugar cmic .. .. is
Linui in clarifying ~ .. ~ ~ ~ ~ fl 1
(knnparalivo tnlilmt of cultivation of tho sugar mint ~ ~ ~ ft',l
Tallin of niamwa .. ~ .. ~ .. ~ j
Claim planting in tho MaurHina, ila oust; .. .. ,*i.,
Thrcn tallica of gravity anil (lonaity of augur solutions .. .. o;t
Tables of production mul mtmvkd,. ~ ~ ~ ..til


SUGAR-CANE PLANTING.
ON THE VARIETIES OF SUGAR-CANE.
The principal varieties of the Arundo SaooJmifera are :
1. The Khjooli or purple cane cultivated chiefly in Bengal and
Java, for I take these plants of Bengal and Java to he the same,
their slight differences arising from soil and cultivation. It grows
best in dry soils, and yields a dark colored juice, which is much
sweeter and richer in saccharine xrrinciplas, than the light colored
varieties of the east, but less in quantity. This cane is hard and
very difficult to press, owing to the resinous nature of the bark.
2. The Pooroo :—This is one of the light colored canes, though
when ripe the stem turns to a deep yellow. It thrives only on
good soil, yet the juice is less rich than that of the Kajooli.
3. The Ktdloor :—This is also a white cane, and grows natu-
rally on swampy land. It is more generally cultivated in India
than the other varieties, but the sugar which it yields is less rich
in crystallizahlo matter than they. There are other varieties in
the various provinces of India, but they are of less value than
those mentioned above.
4. The Creole or common Sugar Cano : —This is the longest
and best known to Europeans, and was in all likelihood origin-
ally one of the above white varieties before it was introduced into
Europe, where it has undergone such improvements by bettor
cultivation, more equable climate, and richer soils, as to impress
it with the character of a distinct variety. It passed from tho
east into Arabia, and from Arabia into Syria, Egypt, Oandia,
and Sicily; from thence it was carried into Madeira, and lastly
from Madeira into the "West Indies and Brazil. It loves a humid
soil, and grows vigorously in every region within the tropics,
even at considerable elevations above the sea level; tho quantity
and quality of its produce varying with the temperature of the
place whore it is cultivated.
5. The Tahitan: —This is one of the richest and most productive
of all the Sugar Canes; the stem is stronger, grows taller and
quicker, and produces more sugar, or to be precise, it yields one-
third more crystallizahlo matter than other cane. The leaves are
lighter colored than the Creole, it is also larger in diameter, with
longer internodds. It may owe its superiority to the climate
B


and the rich soil of Tahiti, hut it also grows well on poor exhausted
lands, where any of the other varieties would starve; and it
possesses the important property of resisting the influence of
temperatures which would obstruct the develop einont, or altogether
destroy the Creole Cano. Another most valuable endowment is
that it comes to maturity in ten months, Thus it will bo seen that
the purple Cano of Bengal and Java, and the rich native of Tahiti
ore superior to all tho other varieties, and on account of their
excellence, their productiveness in orystallizable matter, and early
maturity, they were introduced into tho "West Indies and America
about tho end of last century, and they have already almost
entirely superseded the original Sugar Canes convoyed thither
from Madeira. Reverting to tho Kajooli or purple cano, it
would'appear from its color and the distinct condition of its loaves
to bo rather a different species than a variety of the Sugar Cano.
But this is beside the present question,
The “Salangore Cane" is perhaps tho finest description of cano
rtr the whole would. It is largely cultivated in Province
■Wellesley, Singapore, and Malacca, and is called by tho Malays
“Tibboo capper” (the cholic cano), from its having sometimes
a considerable quantity of a white resinous substance in tho
stalk. It is, I believe, only known to tho planters in those
places as the China cano, from tho circumstance of tho Chinese
being tho cultivators of it before Europeans become planters in
those parts.
This cano will produce as many as five to seven of the larger
canes from one stool, each from ten to fifteen foot long, without
loaves, and seven and a-half inches in circumference (roxnid tho
lower joints); each cano weighed from 15 to 25 lbs.
“That of 26 lbs. weight I kept some weeks in my house, and
“numbers of people saw it; it was thirteen and a-half foot long,
“ and two and a-half inches in diameter; yet it was not by any
“ means so largo a cane as I have seen.
“ Tho place where I found it growing was a nowly-olaarod piece
“ of jungle land, whereon a Malay had 1 squatted, built a house,
“ planted rioo ; and some throe acres of sugar-cane around it.’ ”
Letter from Singapore.
I have heard that tho Salangore cano grows firm and strong,
stands upright much bettor than tho “Otaheita,” gives juice
most abundantly, which is sweet and easy of clarification, boils
well, and produces a very fine, fair sugar, of a bold and spark-
ling grain.
I consider that no plantation in this colony will be complete
without the possession of tho Salangoro cane as one of its species
for' cultivation; and tho Acclimatization Society, I have reason
to believe, will procure it as well as tho Tahiti, which they have
ordered already from the South Sea Islands,
2


ON SOILS SUITABLE FOB SUGAR-CANE.
Tli a composition of the soil is a consideration of the utmost
importance in establishing a sugar estate. Numerous plantations,
no doubt, -will spring up in various parts of Australia, and as ill-
grounded notions are often conceived in relation to soil formed by
mo debris of various rooks, it is desirable that attention be
directed to the subject.
Granite varies very much indeed in its appearance, and its
constituents; it is commonly, however, composed of felspar, mica,
and quartz, but hornblende sometimes assumes the place of mica,
and albite that of felspar, although at times they occur together.
We find that soils formed by the decomposition of granite,
comprise various constituents highly desirable in a_ sugar-cane
soil, -which may be placed as follows, viz., silica, alumina, potash,
soda, lime, magnesia, peroxide of iron, protoxide of manganese,
and fluoric acid. These with other mineral substances, and an
accumulation of vegetable matter in a state of decomposition,
serve to constitute a soil of considerable fertility. The dis-inte-
grated crystals are constantly, though gradually, decomposing;
but it often happens that planters have a prejudice against such
land, because they see a large number of these crystals in the
soil, and forthwith pronounce it sandy and unsuitable. Many a
fine tract of land will remain -uncultivated, from no other cause
than this unfounded prejudice. Some peculiar descriptions of
granite rook resist the action of tho elements in a remarkable
degree, as is shown in the case of two obelisks at Home, which
have been erected upwards of throe thousand years. Others,
again, especially when felspar predominates, quickly crumble
away, and are destroyed.
On the whole, then, we cannot view the granite formation as
other than favourable to the composition of a good soil, in which
argillaceous earth abounds, although its comparative value must,
in a great measure, depend on tho vegetable and other substances
with which it is mixed.
In Jamaica limestone rooks abound, especially in tho northern
parts, whore they are commonly called “honey combed rocks”
from their being worn into various fantastic shapes by the action
of the weather.
Throughout all India, I understand, they are found very
abundantly: whore they do not occur in one form, they do in
another.' Thus in many places the natives (fig into tho soil, or
in the beds of rivers, for a description of concretionary limestone,
which is constantly forming aud which is termed hmlcer. This
hunker is naturally very variable in its constituents, from tho
indiscriminate manner in which lime, from its strong affinity for
acids, enters into combination with the first it may chance to meet.
B 2
3


Limestone consists of limo in combination with carbonic acid
and small portions of foreign matter. As a_ formation I know
from ojqrerioncothat it exorcises a most beneficial influence on tlio
growth of tlio sugar-cano plant, and the saccharine character of
its juice.
I ■well remomher, at Jamaica, a small mountain estate in the
parish of Trelawuoy, which was so rooky that in many of tho Holds
planting could only bo accomplished by band (not hoe), na small
indications of soil could bo soon, yot tbo roots of tho aano
insinuated themselves hotwixt tho stones and rooks, and discovered
abundant sources of nutriment of tbo rarest quality, as tho sugar
produced by those oanos evidenced.
lean safely say, that the juice was tho cleanest and host I
have ever soon in any part of the world; and tho sugar (made in
common open pans) was superior in every respect to any
Musoovada I over saw—that mode by tlio vacuum pan not excepted.
Surely this extreme excellence must have boon occasioned by
this peculiar formation (limo-stono), and no doubt whatever can
exist, that tho roots extracted from it this supply of gonial
nourishment, which exhibited itself so strikingly in tho abundance
of saccharine matter deposited in tho colls of the plant.
Magnolia pyrites (aulplmrot of iron) and iron or eulio pyrites
(hi-sulphurot of iron) tho former, which, is of a colour intermediate
between bronze-yellow and coppor-rod, is composed of ono atom
sulphur and one atom iron -tlio latter is of a characteristic bronze-
yellow colour, streak brownish-black, and contains of sulphur
two atoms, iron ono atom.*
Those pyrites are very abundant on some lands, and act wry
prejudicially on vegetation when tho lands arc not drained properly,
as'by exposure to tbo air this substance becomes converted, l\y
tho prolonged action of oxygon, into sulphurate of iron and
sulphuric acid, which remain in solution in tho stagnant water
that covers tho land, rendering it very sour or acid. In seasons
of dry weather evaporation goes on rapidly, and this sour or acid
water, percolating through tho thick strata of decaying vegetable
matter often forming tho surface soil, yields to tho vegetable
matter its oxygen, and thus again resumes its character as iron
pyrites. With every lodgement of water and subsequent
absorption those transformations aro continually effected, so long
as the land remains undrained, hut a proper system of drainage
altogether arrests those notions, and rescues the crop from tlio
very serious injury sustained thereby.
I hoard a few days ago a discussion, whore a gentleman of
evident talent in scientific agriculture gave it as his opinion that
sugar-cane would flourish oven if flooded over with salt water,
* Sco Dr. Thowiisou’s work on Mineralogy, Geology, and Mineral Analysis.


Now I perfectly agree that the plant would flourish, hut it
would produce a very small quantity of sugar, for it is a well-
known fact that where saline matter exists in a great proportion
in the land, it will to a certainty he found in the juice, thereby
rendering it very difficult to manufacture; and the sugar, when
produced, will never appear as dry sugar, free from syrup, aud
will consequently he of less value.
When the cane has once imbibed salts they become incorporated
in its juice, and then all attempts, even from animal charcoal
filters, will not be sufficient to get rid of them, and will he almost
unavailing. It is generally known that land reclaimed from the
sea, or salt water fiver, as for instance the Parramatta Eiver,
would not grow sugar to a profit.
As regards the soil containing iron stone formation, I must in
addition remark that red hematato of a brownish red colour in
masses, in ball, powder red, composed of peroxide of iron, red
clay ironstone, and red silioions ironstone, are of the same class,
and consist of red oxide of iron, more or less mixed with foreign
matter.
I need not follow the chemist further, because this is enough I
believe for the planter to discern that such pyritaoeoua soils act
prejudicially on the cane, when the lands are not carefully
chained, as by exposure to the air this substance becomes con-
verted by prolonged action of oxygen into sulphate of iron and
sulphuric aoid, which remains in solution in the stagnant water,
rendering it sour and acid. All acids will enter into the cane, and
will render what a planter would call foul juice; however, those
acids can he destroyed to a certain extent by sulphite of lime in
the syrup. I will not say that such soil (if any one is obliged
to use it) cannot he made to yield good sugar. Should care
he taken in draining, ploughing, and burning it with, brush,
and manuring with green vegetables, adding lime, its chemical
properties wifi change, and that soil will no doubt then give a
profitably-filled barrel to the cane.
In a very swampy or marshy soil the cane will grow most lux-
uriantly, yield a very large quantity of juice, but not very rich with
saccharine matter, and will, with great difficulty, on account of
the mucilages it contains, be concentrated into sugar. On the
other hand, in a dry soil, the cane will grow slowly, yield a small
quantity of juice, but very rich with saccharine matter, easy to
be concentrated, and the sugar of the finest description.
We have, fortunately, in our hands the moons of obviating both
those inconveniences. As regards the swampy lands, by ploughing
and deeply draining them, you will thereon grow canes much less
juicy, but they will give you then good sugar’, and in sufficient
qrantity. As to the very dry lands, you can, if not too far from a
fresh water river, avail yourself of its waters by means of a channel


(which cannot cost much) for irrigating your plantations by
letting it run in a small volume, and very slowly, into the furrows
containing the plants, that irrigation to be done only during the
dry season. The organisation or structure of the sugar-cane
shows, ns it has been demonstrated by scientific men, that it con-
sumes much water in its vegetation and elaboration of its juico,
and of course requires, from time to time, in those very dry
localities, to bo watered either naturally by the rain, or artificially
by irrigation.
The Government of the rich island of St. Domingo, where it
appears that the drought is sometimes uncommonly severe, had
so well understood the permanent importance of irrigating the
sugar plantations there, that they undertook, at the Colonial
expanse, extensive and useful works in order to procure water
from one of the largest rivers, thus allowing a very large number
of planters to avail themselves of it for irrigating their canes.
That Government consented to advance the money, which was to
he afterwards reimbursed to the treasury by a yearly and pro-
protiauato tax levied on all the plantations using that water.
A soil suitable for the sugar-cane cultivation is that which is
called substantial alluvial and brick mould, rather damp at a
certain depth, and of a calcareous or limy nature. Such soils in
Now South. Wales seem frequently found on tho borders of rivers
and are well adapted for tho cultivation of sugar-cane.
INFLUENCES OP CLIMATE AND SEASONS.
I think it desirable to discuss tho important and interesting
subject of the botanical characteristics, circulation, and chemical
transformations of the sugar-cane, in order that the planters of
this colony may fully understand a subject in which' they aro
about to invest tlioir money, and to which they will dovoto thoir
time.
It must bo very apparent to ovory one that particular soils,
climates, and seasons exorcise a groat influence on tho growth
and development of so sensitive a plant as tho sugar-cane* and
it necessarily follows that the more perfect our knowledge of tho
nature of such influences, the greater assurance have we of tho
success of our operations.
Tho sugar-cane (sacoharium offloinamun), classed in botany as
being a genus of tho frimulria dii/ynm, is a gigantic member of
tho yraminea tribe, and in all its characters is indubitably one of
the moat important'plants afforded us by a bountiful providence.
One of its products, sugar, is so extensively used, and is in every
way such a blessing to mankind, that every exertion should ho
made to supply it to our poorer fellow-creatures at as cheap a rate
as possible. It is usod in many ways for sweetening and


rendering palatable numberless dishes and liquids, and in making
syrups ■which sweeten, thicken, and x>reaerve the vegetable j luces
that are made use of in medicine. Emits are boiled in syrup and
kept under the name of preserves, or sent on voyages to all parts
of the known world. It is a well-ascertained fact that man can
not only exist, but absolutely become fat and healthy, on sugar
and water alone. This was evidenced by the crew of a ship
bringing home a cargo of sugar; she encountered several disasters;
which, together with calms, delayed her so long on her voyage
that all her provisions were consumed, and the crew were obliged
to have recourse to the sugar on board; this not only sustained
the men, but actually quite cured them of the scurvy, which had
made sad havoc among the crew previous to their being reduced
to this, them last and most providential resource ; supxiorted by
this most agreeable aliment, they reached their xmrt in safety.—
See La Gazette do Santi, No. 44, 1785.
This is by no means a solitary instance of the anti-scorbutic
properties of sugar, whilst its nutritious and fattening qualities
are abundantly shown on every sugar estate in the world;
however, as this admits of no doubt, I need not dwell on so clear
a fact. Sugar is also an excellent antiseptic, much more powerful
than even sea-salt; whilst, again, it is recommended by Orfila as
an antidote to the poison of verdigris and oxide' of copx>er. Nor
.are its admirable qualities appreciated by mankind alone, for the
very beasts of the field, the birds of the air, and numerous reptiles
.and files delight in its, sweetness and fatten under its influence.
A most absurd and vulgar prejudice ouce prevailed against the
use of sugar in any quantity; it was said to bo unwholesome, to
breed worms in the stomach, to injure the teeth, to cause nausea,
&c., &e., whereas undoubted experience has demonstrated that
its effects are diametrically opposite to all this; as nothing can
bo more wholesome, more destructive to worms, loss imivrious to
the teeth (the Oreole ladies, and men, women, and children, who
chew the sugar-cane every morning, have beautiful teeth, and
the children are as fat as Raphael's angels) ; pure sugar never
produces nausea; it is the coloured abomination called “ lollies ”
that nauseate and poison the eaters.
The following wifi, show the antiaexfiic jnoxierty of the augar-eano
in the "West Indies: The fibrous residue of the sugar-cane, after
it has passed through the mill, is called trash; until now this resi-
due was not known to possess any remarkable properties, and the
only use that was made of it was to tie it up into faggots when dry,
or else to give it to the cattle. But accident, as is generally the
case in most scientific discoveries, has lately revealed a property
in this refuse of the sugar mill which it had never been sus-
pected to possess, and henceforth, should further experiments
confirm the fact, the cane, while it yields sugar to the community


at large, will afford medical men a valuable therapeutic agent.
A few mouths ago a physician of Georgetown was summoned by
the authorities to examine the body of a man that had been dis-
covered under a heap of cane trash. Ho was surprised to find
that the body omitted no smell, and that instead of being in a
state of putrefaction, it was dried up like a mummy. He did
not at the time proclaim his discovery, but immediately instituted
experiments on dead animals, which completely confirmed his
observation. Convinced thereby, that by tbo fermentation of
fresh cane trash, a disinfecting and antiseptic gas was evolved, he
immediately turned his attention to the moans of employing the
sugar-cane as a preventative against epidemics and contagious
diseases, and as a medicinal plant generally. There happened
to bo at the time a groat number of patients suffering from ulcers
in the hospital, and a contagions gangrene had declared itself;
the physician caused several tubs containing cane trash to bo
placed in the wards, and the supply to be renewed at intervals.
In a short time the atmosphere of the hospital was purified, the
contagion ceased, and none of the patients who had not caught
the gangrene before, were attacked with it. Thus it seems that
nature itself has provided an antidote for the pernicious effects
of heat in tropical countries; the contagious diseases caused by
the heat of the sun may bo neutralised by the sugar-cane which
is brought to maturity by its very rays.— From GaUgnani’s Mes-
senger.
To render this more clear, it is requisite that I should glance
at the vegetable economy of the plant, its structure or organ-
isation, and the mode in which it extracts substances forming sap
from the soil, by moans of its roots ; also at tbo manner in which
the sap circulates and is transformed by tbo action of the loaves
and other green parts into nourishment befitting the plant, and
the peculiar circumstances under which the saccharine or
crystallimblo matter is deposited in the cells in the greatest
abundance.
In elucidating these points, I wish it to be very distinctly
understood that X avail myself of the opinions of eminent writers
on organic chemistry, such as Liebig, Easpail, and others, with
whom I entirely agree, I shall, however, endeavour to simplify
and abbreviate, without making a constant repetition of their
names.
Every planter knows that the cane plant is propagated by
cuttings from the cane itself, which are usually tiro few upper
joints of the plant nearest the leaves, and commonly designated
the “ cam top.” But sometimes the whole cane is cut up in pieces,
and planted out, as from every part having a perfect “ eye ” or
“bud” will spring forth a plant.
The cane cutting which is used for planting may bo in one,


two, or more Joints of the cane itself or from tho top stalk, as
each Joint possesses one eye or bud.
On being planted, these eyes or buds shoot forth, and at tho
same time a number of roots are thrown out around tho whole
circle of each joint, which serve to supply the young plants with
sustenance until they are sufficiently advanced to throw out roots
of their own.
It happens that by depriving tho oane cutting' of these roots
-the young shoots will continue growing for some time, and then
die away before they have become strong enough to form roots of
their own: for although the pieces of cane which, aro planted
abound in sugar, gluten, &c., yet these alone cannot support the
young shoots, which also require the absolute presence of roots
to supply by their peculiar action that kind of sap which I shall
call ascending sap, being a watery solution of oartliy salts.
Now, in the cane this sap is supplied by tho roots emanating
from the piece of cane planted, until tho young sprouts or shoots
become furnished with perfect roots of their own, when tho parent
piece of cane dies away, and gradually decays.
The sprouting of the eye, therefore, is simultaneous with the
formation of roots; and both combined constitute the effort made
by the cane to reproduce itself. With tho formation .of a leaf or
leaves anew action commences (it may be termed a transformation
of organic substances), by which that watery solution of earthy
salts constituting the ascending sap is first transmitted from tho
roots to tho leaves, where it undergoes an elaboration which
changes its character.
The functions of leaves and other green parts of plants are to
absorb carbonic acid, and by tho aid of solar light and moisture,
to appropriate its carbon; bonce they aro called “organs of
assimilation
On the first formation of the leaves those functions begin; they
are at first more particularly employed in their own development,
afterwards in the formation of woody fibre, and other substances
necessary for the general purposes of tho plant.
Having) already mentioned tho sap which I have designated
tho ascending sap in contradistinction to tho descending sap, I shall
now discuss at once the important subject of its circulation and
chemical transformation.
It is of course obvious that tho roots aro immediately con-
nected with tho sap vessels which receive and transmit tho sap
throughout the whole plant. Those sap vessels aro of two
classes, viz., the ascending sap vessels and the descending sap vessels,
both communicating with tho various organs of assimilation.
The circulation is also of two characters; the first that which is
termed cellular, and tho second that denominated vascular.
The cellular circulation is that which occurs within tho cells,


and presents tlie appearance of two contiguous but unmixed
currents, running in opposite directions ; the vascular circulation,
on the other hand, is that which occurs in the vascular network,
and exhibits only one continuous current in every part of the
tubular vessels. The well-established fact of the power possessed
by vegetable membranes, of aspiring and expiring surrounding
liquids, explains the means whereby snob circulation is kept up.
The roots then supply a watery solution of earthy salts (or sap
not tending to organise) to sap vessels, through which it ascends
and is diffused to tho very extremity of tho loaves, whence it
returns (transformed into a sap tending to organise) through tho
descending sap vessels again to the roots.
In this progress through tho plant, tho sap is drawn into tho
different organa in succession; tho desirable parts are assimilated,
other parts arc rejected and pass on, until at length those which
remain unappropriated reach tho roots and aro voided as
excrement.
Wo here find the roots performing two distinct functions, viz.,
the collection and transmission of nutriment, and tho discharge
of excrement. To enable them to perform these important duties
they are found to possess powerful organs of aspiration, by which
they suck in those aqueous solutions which oonstituto tho ascending
sap, and also other organs by means of which they expire those
substances which, unsuitable or otherwise, have boon rejected by
tho various organs of assimilation through which, they have passed.
Moat people _ have remarked the extreme tenacity with which
some roots cling to rocks, stones, pieces of gravel, sand, bone,
wood, or other substances, and the roots of tho cane plant
amongst others will ho found adhering to minute fragments of
gravel, sand, wood, eto., (forming soil), in tho same manner; yet
I may venture to say that nineteen persons out of twenty do not
consider that such adhesion is caused by suction, or in other
words by tho powerful aspirations of tho roots, which alone
produce that auction; and the fact serves to shew ns in a forcible
manner the wonderful power exerted by these organs of aspiration.
Endued with this faculty, tho roots can only extract nutriment
from tho soil through tho medium of water, which renders
soluble the medium whereof tho soil is composed.
It is obvious how much may depend in cultivation, not only on
tho richness of the soil, hut on tho supply of water which is
afforded to tho plant, as, without an ample allowance of this
essential, that richness cannot become soluble in sufficient
abundance, and consequently the plant is more or loss pinched
for want of nutriment. It, however, often occurs that the supply
of water is too great; this has a tendency to do injury to tho
sugar-cane, at particular periods, inasmuch as the cane may be
required for sugar manufacture, when its juices aro from this


cause too aqueous. The nature of the soil also must greatly
affect the quality of the sap, and influence, both in quantity and
quality, the sugar produced by the plant. However, this con-
sideration more properly belongs to another branch of the
subject.
I have thus briefly described the functions of tho roots, and
explained that “the ascending sap,” or “sap not tending to
organise,” is transmitted to the leaves and other parts of the plant,
and undergoes an elaboration by which it is transformed into
“ sap tending to organise.” I will now, therefore, touch on the
manner in which this transformation is effected. Within the
tropics the twenty-four hours may be said to be equally divided
into twelve hours day, and twelve hours night; consequently the
leaves and other green parts of the cane inhale carbonic acid
and exhale oxygen during twelve hours of daylight, whilst during
twelve hours of night they inhale oxygen and exhale carbonic
acid. In onr warmer latitudes of course the same will apxily.
Whilst light is present, carbonic acid is absorbed and its carbon
appropriated, but in the absence of light the process of assimilation
is arrested, because the carbonic acid is no longer decomposed,
but is dissolved in tbe juices which pervade all parts of the plant,
and escapes every moment through the leaves, &o. But whilst
daylight is so necessary in this respect, it is equally necessary to
the assimilation of the hydrogen. Now hydrogen is received by
tbe plant in the form of water, which, by tbe aid of light, it
decomposes, emitting its oxygen and appropriating its hydrogen.
The deficiency of sunshine, or solar light and heat, is one great
reason why I doubt if sugar-cane grown south of the Manning
Eiver will yield a fully-developed cane as to quantity of saccha-
rine matter; largo canes and little sugar are unprofitable.
Again, oxygon is necessary to the plant, therefore we find
that whilst the plant is absorbing water by tbe roots and car-
bonic acid by the leaves, and, hj the aid of light, decomposing hath,
still the oxygen separated from each is not wholly exhaled;
appropriated as are the hydrogen and carbon, I advocate wide
planting to get abundance of solar light. We can imagine how
large an amount of oxygen is set free by plants when we consider
the quantity of water and carbonic acid absorbed by their
different parts; the roots, for instance, in a moist soil are con-
stantly transmitting an abundance of watery sap, which water
the carbonic acid has absorbed; the same evolution ensues on
its decomposition. The quantity of oxygen thus supplied to the
atmosphere is really much greater than the amount derived from
it, although the plant absorbs oxygen from the atmosphere at
night. Tho decomposition of carbonic acid is no sooner arrested
by want of light, than a true chemical process commences in
consequence of the action of the oxygen in the air upon the


ommio milmtnncoa composing tlio loaves, &c., of tlio plant. This
brief and simple explanation 1 think renders it clear, that it is
throngli tlio do composition of water and carbonic acid that hy-
drogen, carbon, and oxygon (Hum latter also by simplo ahsorbtion
during darkness) arc obtained by tlio plant; tin mo serving to
constitute the Amending sap—a sap tending to organist*. Attached
to oaoli joint of tlio cane plant, is one loaf whoso peculiar oJlluo
it is to supply elaborated sap (or sap comprised of earthy salts,
nitrogen, &0., blended with carbon, oxygon, and hydrogen), to tho
various cellular and vascular organs existing in that joint; it
therefore follows, as a mutter of course, if the Joint h
deprived of its leaf before this has completed its functions, considerable
loss and 'injur;/ mud accrue to it, inasmuch ns tho joint is thou
reduced to a dependence on tho nutriment Us organs can derive
from tho already exhausted sap descending from tho joint im-
mediately above it. lienee we hud that, by depriving a joint of
its leaf, that Joint is never fully developed, but becomes contracted
and imperfect. Here wo see the neemity of allowing the leaves to
remain on the plant until they have performed their office, when the
ohemioal influence of the oxyyen of the air produces a ehanye in their
colour, and shows that they may he removed with safety, Mantes
nro very much in (ho habit of setting mums too closely together,
which lends them on to “ trash ” those canes too heavily; id eet,
to strip oil hy hand tho leaves of tho plant, in order to allow air
and light to penetrate. Much intelligence surely is not repaired
to convince any one that such a practice is erroneous and indeed
pregnant with evil consnipumc.tm. Only fancy rich hind planted
ho close and tangled that a person cannot walk between the rows
without groat dillloulty, and so dense that no ray of light can
penetrate; then consider tho course pursued by tho planter: ho
Bonds in labourers once, twice, or thrice, with orders to "trash
heavily,” or in other words, to strip oil not only every dry leaf,
hut also every green leal) leaving the cams plant in a woM
plight —naked and wretched in appearance, and rendered tpiite
incapable of perfectly developing several joints in each barrel.
MOOT’ OF cni'.TUUK.
In tho first place the planter must consider tlio benefit which the
soil derives from being well ploughed up, harrowed, and perfectly
pulverised. As it is necessary to mix up tho various constituents,
moving and scattering about all esemuentitious matter, loosening
and rendering the ground porous, so that the air ami wafer can
penetrate to perform their important functions, ns, without this
is well attended to, tho soil will prove next to barren. It is
good to plough deep ; tho soil should he carefully ploughed, and
I would even say tronuh ploughed, thou moss‘ploughed, after
12


which pass oyer the roller and harrows, as the ground cannot he
too much teased.
The cane tops are hy many planted in lines six feet apart and
six feet from cane top to cane top in the stools or holes; then it
■wih take 1200 cane tops to an acre ; hut I am of opinion that
lines of eight feet and the stools at four feet is not a morsel too
much room for this colony, where the cane grows so luxuriantly;
also, Messrs. Board and Sons, near Brisbane, inform me that they
plant their cane at these distances; however, each planter must
use his own discretion according to the richness of the soil he
plants; only let every one remember that between the lines the
plough, horse hoe, and small cane cart have often to travel; also
Between the stools, weeds must be kept down either hy hand hoes
or a narrow horse hoe drawn hy a mule, or, what is better, hy
an ass, if they can he got, as their feet are small, they handle
them better, their weight is light, and they draw steadily.
When fho lines are made one man with a sharp broad hoe opens
holes every six feet, making them eight to ten inches deep, and
about nine inches broad; close behind him follows another man,
with a large bag of cane tops round his shoulders ; Ms duty is
to drop two or mor’e tops into each hole ; some planters put four
and even five in a hole, but I should recommend three cuttings.
Then at every sixth line they both stop and proceed to cover in
the earth, so as to make it three inches above the cane top, mi
not more , and so on to the end of each field; but if a third man
or a boy is employed to fill into the holes, much time is saved,
and the planting proceeds rapidly.
Brora week to week weeding must he attended to, and the soil
may he piled on the roots as the shoots come up, the same as
is done with potatoes, and often with maize, as those hanks at a
future time have to he doubled over the crushed cane coming
from the mill, which is used as manure.
I have omitted to mention that the preparation of the soil
should he gone about in New South Wales from May to August,
not during rainy weather, and left in fallow for a month. When
the canes for planting are to be cut, it should be done with a
moaheat or a 4-inches broad bladed knife, about 24 inches long in
the blade, made of good steel and sharp, as the cuttings must he
done clean and hy one cut; and in jointing for planting the last
cut should he at the last dry leaf from the top. In four months
the plants begin to grow to the surface, and in six months the
planter finding abundance of shoots, he then selects his sugar-
cane for crop, and outs off the others, with which lie proceeds to
plant other fields, or sells them for £1 per 100. When the
crop has grown twelve months, planters should give air and
light to the plants hy sending boys to strip oft part of the super-
fluous leaves; this is called “ trashing hut with lines and stools
13


oiglit foot by four, or ovon six foot by six, little or uo trashing
should bo allowed, ns the loaves and other green ports (as
before stated) inhale carbonic acid and exhale oxygen, during
daylight, whilst daring the nij|ht they do tho reverse; there-
fore without tho loaves tho joints cannot bo fully developed.
In fifteen months tho canes will begin to ripen by the leaves
changing colour; tho upper loaves tiro termed “long tops,”
and the other loaves “ trash,” and both are used when
perfectly fresh and moist for “ green soiling,” which is tho host
manure; indued I highly approve of a groon crop of any kind,
such as indigo, mam), or lentils, being sown between the rows, and
out down long before they ripen and used for tho express purpose
of manure. Without going into lung details ns to culture, I
think all tho purposes may lie gained if I cut tho story short by
inserting a brief review of what should ho done from my note
book. When the canes aro ripe, they will show it by shedding
the trash (loaves) and appearing clean in tho stem or bail'd up
to tho “lop after this they will sull'er (as planters term it), and
show it by the eyes at tho top shooting, and tho stem becoming
hollow and rod inside. When tho cano is ripe tho long top
should bo cut oil' first, and out by the root wall down below tho
surface of tho ground.
Fint.~~ A very light iron or wooden plough, drawn by four or
six cattle, gives tho'land a thorough turning up.
SemuL— A cultivator, or harrow, drawnhyibur cattle, succeeded
by a “ halughoring,” breaks up the clods, and pulverises and
smooths over tho soil completely.
Third. —.Trenches aro ploughed with a single plough, (by rod
and line), eight foot apart exactly; finished oil', if thought de-
sirable, with a double-banking plough, and cauo-tops planted by
hand along thorn.
hirst and second mouldings are given with a moulding
implement, which will ho fully described hereafter,
Fifth.— i'irst, second, and third (if necessary) cleanings aro
performed with a cultivator, or other appropriate instrument.
BMk—TSmt and second banking aro given with ploughs
adapted to that kind of work,
Seventh, —A furrow is made between tbo banks before each
trashing of tho cano (which may be twice), to receive the loaves
removed from tho plants, after which the earth is returned, cover-
ing over tho trash, and filling up tho furrow. A. common plough
performs this very well.
Nothing further is required until tho canes are cut; whm ih
fint erqp, as far as tho cultivation is ooncoruod, may be said to end,
and tiro second crop commences at once, in manner following
Mrel— 'The groon trash direct from tho mill, after being crushed,
is returned to the branches of tho field from whence tho'cones aro


just cut, by very light carts, and thrown carefully over the dry
leaves and long tops lying in the trenches between the banks.
Second. —The levelling machine, drawn by horse or cattle, is
introduced between the banks, which powerfully presses down the
mass of trash, &0., and at the same time slices off from either
bank some four, six, or more inches of earth, and arranges it
cleverly over the trash. This, repeated once or twice, as may be
determined on, quite covers over the trash, and leaves the smallest
possible amount of work for the labourers, which consists in their
cutting, with very sharp hoes, the cane roots down to the bottom,
and levelling the small portion of the bank remaining, so as to
have the whole field onoe again quite level. Lx a few days
after being so cut down, the stools begin to throw up numerous
vigorous shoots or sprouts, which are the first rattoon canes, and
which soon require a light moulding.
Third.' —The moulding implements mould the young sprouts
or rattoons, once, twice, or three times, as may be required, at
intervals; it does not require to go so deep into the ground
as to distinb the store of vegetable matter which lies buried in
the trenches, so that by the time the second banking is required,
the whole will have rotted away, provided the land be any way
porous, which it should be when green-manured.
Fourth. —The cultivator, or other instrument, will suffice to
clean the young rattoons, should they require it, and keep them
so; weeding should be continuous, and done by hand when re-
quired close to the roots.
Fifth. —The banking is performed, as in the former year, with
a plough, at intervals, as may be required; by which time, as I
before remarked, all the cane trash of the preceding crop will
have rotted, and become excellent manure.
Sixth. —The furrows between the banks (for the reception of
the leaves taken off in trashing) are again made and covered up,
as in the previous year, and the canes then remain until ripe for
crop, when they are cut, and here the second crop ends.
By the foregoing it wall be observed that I have recommended
all labour, as far as possible, to be performed by agricultural
implements (of which there are numbers suited to almost every
want of the agriculturist), in place of manual labour, because the
more I reflect upon the swarms of labourers used on the Jamaica
sugar plantations 40 years ago, when hoes, mattocks, and spades
were only used, and at present at the Mauritius, Bourbon, and
the Straits, where they are obliged, from the stony nature of the
volcanic soil, to use the hoe and spade, the more I see the
immense advantage possessed by this colony, not only in regard
to labour in the field, but in the manufactory, where, in place of
the mulish, lazy swarms of Ooolies or other Indians, she can
have strong, intelligent, and steady labour, performed by Euro


poans, foAv iu number, and therefore at a loss coat, and thoir
work superiorly executed.
MANUBINO.
Tho following observations on Manuring will ho chemically
considered. The object which avo have in view in manuring our
lands is to keep up a constant fertility, which will enable us to
reap from thorn every year the largest possible crops of sugar.
It is hut reasonable to suppose that constant cropping Avonld
speedily exhaust any soil, unless wo return to it, in Homo shape
or other, those substances of which avo deprive it; and that this
is in reality the fact, every day’s experience proves to us.
It has often boon demonstrated that, if plants grown on any
given space of land bo ploughed into the soil Avhilst they arc in
a green and succulent condition, the fertility of that land is much
increased.
This proceeds from the quantity of nutriment those plants
have abstracted from the atmosphere during thoir growth ; so
that, by thoir being ploughed into the soil Avhoroiu they wore
grown,' they afford to it a much greater amount of substances
than they received from it, and consequently whatever excess
they may furnish, so far enriches the soil.
Some plants arc much more remarkable in this respect than
others ; fir instance, Lucerne ploughed into the soil previous to
blossoming, enriches it exceedingly, and iu hlurope is very much
used for that purpose ; potato shaws, Avlion green, are capital
manure ; indigo, cut before blossoming, is also good.
This is Avhat is termed “ green soilingand by it, the plant
used is mode the means of convoying to the soil the carbon and
ammonia, which in its groAvihit extracts from tho atmosphere. It
also appropriates to its oavu use tho oxormuoutitiouH matter
deposited by other descriptions of plants growing in tho soil
previously, and deposits its own excrement, which servos as food
to others sucooediug it. In Europe and all cold climates this
exoromentitioAAS matter voided by plants is much, longer passing
into pntrifaction than in tropical countries ; tho necessity there-
fore of adopting a rotation of crops is much greater iu tho former
than in the latter.
All plants void excrement, Avhicb, Avhnn acted on by air and
moisture, purifies and becomes converted into “ humus.” or vege-
table matter in a state of decay.
This deposit of organic matter is common to all plants, and
exorcises a beneficial influence on tho hind, by furnishing it with
a substance capable of being converted into humus, Avhieh is so
desirable in a soil; but plants cannot long bo replanted in tho
same soil without being seriously affootcil by thoir oavu excrement,*
so much so, that at length they altogether fail; therefore lime
16


as ■an alterative should be used, as that or other artificial aids
induces a more speedy conversion of this matter into humus,
than -would otherwise take place ; this is effected by frequently
turning up the soil with the plough or hoe, so as to expose the
excrement to the influence of the atmosphere, and by irrigating
the land with river water; as the water of rivers and streams
contain oxygen in solution, which effects the most rapid and
complete putrefaction of the excrementitious matter contained
in the soil which it penetrates.—(Liobig).
I have commenced the subject of manuring, by that which I
consider to be, the leading features in the system required for the
culture of the sugar cane.
I would wish to show the simple fact, that the cane can by
the aid of frequent ploughing altogether manure itself; and where
irrigation is added increased benefit must result.
I premise then, that we take from the soil only, the juice of the
oane, all. the other portions being returned to it immediately; and
that, to compensate for even that portion, we return to it all the
wood (or coal) ashes, as well as the feculencies resulting from the
boiling and distil houses, and, if need be, some portion of our
cattle manure also, if they are froo from saline particles.
Now, before I proceed further, the account so settled between
the planter and his land demands investigation ; and I think I
shall have little difficulty in showing that the latter has not been
prejudiced thereby.
We wall first ascertain wliat we take from the land when a
crop of 5,600 lbs. of sugar, and its usual proportion of rum is
obtained.
Pure sugar is composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen ; or
say carbon 12 x water 11; but Muscovado sugar contains besides,
mineral substances and oganic matter, though in very small
quantities when well manufactured.
The foliage of canes growing on an acre of land, together with
thoir other green parts, is assuredly from three to four times the
superficial extent of the land; and it has been very clearly shown
that these parts of the plant have the power of attracting and
assimilating the carbon contained in the atmosphere.
This atmospheric supply is certainly limited; but that it is
sufficient to furnish the quantity comprised in 5,600 lbs. of sugar,
and much more, there can bo no reasonable doubt.
Liebig estimates “that the atmosphere contains 3,300 lbs.
avoirdupoise of carbon, a quantity wliich amounts to more
than the weight of all the plants, and of all the strata of mineral
and brown coal which exist on the earth. This carbon is, there-
fore, more than adequate to all the purposes for wliich it is
required.
a


Whilst the cane is growing it is constantly depositing in the
soil, through its roots, the exorementitioue matter, ■which I hayo
already noticed.
Were this allowed to remain undisturbed by the planter, it
would accumulate to such a degree, that canes would no longer
grow on the land; but being exposed by frequent ploughings to
the active influence of the air, it heoom.es transformed by putre-
faction into humus, which supplies to the roots of the plants a
constant store of nutriment, in the form of carbonic gas and
nitrogen.
Thus, the excrement which the plant deposits the soil, be-
comes by exposure to the air (and consequent oxidation) a fertile
source of genial nourishment to itself, and to the members of its
own class succeeding it,
, The greater portion of this organic matter is unquestionably
derived from tbe atmosphere (as numerous experiments have
fully proved) ; we therefore find that a constant store of manure
is being prepared by the plant itself during the whole period of
its growth, and that the aid of man is alone required to' effect
thoso changes which servo to render that stock of manure
available.
The ploughings, however, serve to effect other changes than
that relating to the conversion of oxcrementitious matter into
humus ; as the mineral constituents of the soil are also exposed
to the influence of the atmosphere, and undergo a disintegration
of a portion of their parts; which thereon becomes, through the
medium of water, befitting food for plants.
Every ploughing, therefore, that land receives may bo termed
an atmospheric manuring.
Oobbett says, “A bright ploughshare is the cheapest commo-
dity over used by a farmerand I not only agree with him, but
Xam also sure that the sugar planter who keeps it bright by
constant work, will speedily bo convinced that it is the cheapest
fertilizer he can apply to his land.


ON THE MANUFACTURE OF SUGAR.
THE PROCESS OF CRUSHING CANE.
The canos should never exceed four or five foot in length, ■when
they are placed on the feeding hoard of the mill; otherwise
they invariably cause inconvenience and very frequently (from
being crooked) “ overlapping,” in spite of all the feeders can do
to prevent it.
The prevention of these serious evils rests with tho oano-cuttors
in the field; who, as they cut the canes from tho stools,
should be careful in dividing them into desirable lengths.
—Arrived on tho feeding board, tho cano carriers remove tho
cane bands with which tho bundles are tied; and tho feeders
must take the greatest care to arrange the canes along tho whole
length of tho rollers, in a regular and even manner,—By so
doing, twenty-two canos of average size can be crushed at tho
same time; supposing the rollers to bo four feet in length.
A greater number can be placed at once in tho mill, but not
conveniently, nor do I think it advisable; the great point in feed-
ing being to supply, immediately and cleverly, the place of each
cane as it disappears through tho rollers, so that, reckoned at any
moment, the same number of canes (twenty-two) will be found
passing through tho mill.
This forms the groat difference between negligent mill feeding,
which at times would cram tho rollers with perhaps thirty-five
canes, whilst at others not more than two or three are presented
to it.
The feeding, then, best caloidated to produce a largo quantity
of juice, tho steady working of the engine, tho least liability to
breakage, or the least possible wear and tear of the machinery, is
that which is regular, uniform, and moderate in speed and
quantity.
The feeder who directs and assists the course of the saturated
cane stalks towards the second set of rollers, has little more to do
than to see that they enter the rollers in a straight and desirable
manner.
If these rollers are screwed up as tight as they should bo,
there can bo no necessity for his doubling the saturated stalks ;
as they will not be able, under any circumstances, to pass through
the rollers without being thorouglaly crushed.


It may bo doomed desirable to separate tho pure juice ex-
pressed, from that of the saturated canes, as ho much water is
mixed with it, hut if intended for immediate manufacture, I do
not consider that any good is to ho by such separation.
Indeed under any aircumstanooß, caw juice should ho clarified
immediately it is expressed.
An important duty appertaining to tho mill-houso, is to keep
the mill bod constantly free from hits of oauo trash (which aro
continually falling from tho rollers); othorvviHO, in tlio course of
a very short time, they become acid, and communicate a taint to
the juice.
The mill bed, therefore, should bo cleaned every live or ton
minutes; which can bo performed by a boy, whoso duty should
consist in cleaning tho mill bod, juicc-guhors and strainers.
As tho juice runs from tho mill bed, it falls into tho first,
second, and third strainers in succession; each lying on a stop
lower than the other, tho material of each strainer buing liner
than that of tho one above it.
Thus there is a fall of twonty-ono inches, obtained by moans
of throe stops of seven inches each; which stops allow of a small
receptacle being made, on oath of them, of about two foot square,
having raised edges of about two inches high, and a lip protu-
ding over tho space occupied by the next (lower) stop,
Into those spaces of two foot square, tho strainers (which are
only twenty-two inches square) lit, resting on their lower rims
of one inch; so that tho bottoms of tho strainers arc one inch
raised above tho bottoms or beds of the receptacles.
To prevent acidity, shoot lead is used in forming those hods or
receptacles; and they aro constantly cleared of all matter likely
to cause acidity.
A frame-work answers all tho purposes above described pro-
vided the strainers rest on bods of shoot lead.
The third or lowest strainer should bo of lino wiro-gamo;
passing through which tho juice is cleared of a largo quantity of
extraneous matter; and ft farther portion is retained in tho 'last
and finest strainer, which hangs over tho clarifier.
The juice having boon conveyed to tho boiling house, wo will,
previous to tracing it further, proceed to notice the substances it
contains.
OANffi JUICK
As it arrives in tho boiling house may bo hold to contain—
" Water, Green feeula,
Sugar, Groou wax, (ohlorophyllo)
Woody Mhro, Gum,
Gluton, and Saline matter,
Tlio several qualities vary very much, according to tho cir-
cumstances under which tho oauo plants aro grown, and tho


degree of maturity to which they have arrived at the period of
their being cut.
Water contained in cane juice varies from seventy to eighty-five
parts in 100, and may all be evaporated, except the portion
necessary to crystallization.
Sugar resident in expressed juice ranges from five degrees to
fourteen degrees of Baume’s sacoharometer, id est, from about
9 lbs. to 25 lbs. per cent.
Sugar exists in the cells of the cane plant, as I have before
remarked, both in the form of a limpid fluid, and also as a con-
crete formation; that is to say, that this limpid saccharine crystal-
lizable fluid, under favorable circumstances (as a congenial soil,
and dmiug hot, dry weather), becomes so rich, and so perfectly
elaborated, that it deposits minute but distinct crystals around
the cells which contain it; and these crystals are seen adhering
to the whole of the inner membrane of the cells.
For this reason a saturation of the cane stalks with hot water
is advised, previous to their undergoing the final presuro by tho
second set of mill rollers.
Woody fibre or lignin , are terms used to designate the solid
structure of the cane stalk, and, if proper precautions are not
taken, particles of it will become intermixed with tho cane juico,
from the breaking down and crushing which the stalk undergoes
whilst passing through the mill.
Gluten is a substance that presents itself under varied forms,
according to the manner in which it is acted on by the different
matters with which it comes in contact. This circumstance has
furnished a befitting opportunity for chemists to enrich their
nomenclature with many singular new names: thus wo have
gluten, zimome, gliadine, legumine, vegetable albumen, fibrine,
caseine, diastase, cum, multi* aliis J hut they are all gluten . All
cane juice contains a proportion of the free acids—at times so
great that, on leaving the mill, it produces a slightly acid reac-
tion on litmus paper; whereas, generally, they are not to bo
detected by that test, being combined with gluten, &c., bo as to
present no symptoms of their existence.
But, on the application of an alkali (temper lime), a union
immediately takes place between the alkali and the acid, and tho
gluten forthwith assumes the form of coagula, and becomes in-
soluble in water.
A further application of alkali would have tho effect of re-
dissolving the coagulated gluten, and holding it in a state of
solution, until an acid re-agent could be used to saturate the
alkali, which would cause the gluten once more to assume the
form of coagula. Thus we see that a very great deal of nicety
is required in what is termed tempering cane juice or cane liquor;
and we perceive at once one great reason why it is that an alka-
line menstruum (temper) in excess is so injurious; viz., as being


not only sufficient to saturate tlio acid which liolds the gluten
dissolved, but effecting tbo ro-solution of tbo ooagula about to
form.
It lias boon shown by Liobig, Enapail, and other colobratod
chemists, tliat gluten, or vogotablo albumon, contains nitrogen
in the form of an nuunonincal salt, which is decomposed by tbo
action of boat, or of an alkali (as lime).
Again, we find that by subjecting fresh cane juice to a mode-
rate beat (of from MO to 108 degrees Mir.), the volatile acids
bolding tbo gluten in solution are disengaged and evaporated,
leaving tbo gluten in tbo form of flaky coagula.
There has boon a very groat deal of argument amongst tbo
most eminent chemists, as to tbo fact of an acid being present in
cano jnioo ; as well as to tbo naturo of that acid.
Green fcoula, so called, in cano jnioo, consists of oval vesicles of
very variable form and size, full of green globules, whoso office
appears to bo to afford nourishment to tbo buds or “oyos” of
tbo plant during tbo progress of germination.
Heat has the effect of keeping all matters dispersed through
tbo liquor, but lime-water tends'to unite and harden thorn, so
that a largo portion of thorn is taken oil' with tbo scum.
Alumina combines with colouring matter, and forms a pre-
cipitate.
Gum, as existing in'expressed enno-juioo, is in tlio form of
mucilage, and results from tbo presence of tbo glutinous and
woody textures with which it is intermixed,
Salim matters present in cano-juieo, depend very much on tbo
soil on which tbo canes arc grown! Comprised of such substances
as those just enumerated, it may readily bo supposed that oano-
juioo is ouo of tbo most fermentable compounds possible; and
experience shows that in balf-an-liour after expression an inci-
pient vinous fermentation commences.
This is often apparent in tbo vessels used in tbo West Indies,
and called cold receivers, wboroin tbo fresh juice is received as
it runs from tbo mill, and retained, until there is room in tbo
clarifiers to allow of its being drawn down.
It often occurs that jnioo is so kept for a long time ; but if tbo
period extends beyond twenty or thirty minutes, tbo pan-man
(attendant on tbo defecators) always uses a little lime to prevent
fermentation, until it can bo received into tbo clarifiers,
I now wish to impress on the planter, in the strongest possible
manner, that the operations in the hiling-lmm should tend to the
accomplishment of two groat objects; viz., the complete separation of
all extraneous matter from the cane-juice , so as to bring it as nearly
as possible to the state of sugar and, water alone; and secondly, the
evaporation of the surplus water, so as to leave the sugar in the
condition of a fine white syrup, which will crystallise wholly and, well,
22


The first is to be accomplished by means of defecation; 'the second,
by means of evaporation and concentration. Therefore it only rests
with the planter whether or not he will pursue those methods with such
care as will enable him to carry out theso objects effectually and
successfully.
DEFECATION.
I mil now point out the means whereby defecation the most
complete can he effected at moderate cost and trouble :
In coming- from the mill the juice is made to pass through four
strainers, of increasing degrees of fineness—the last being very
fine—before it is transferred to the clarifier, which I will suppose
to contain 600 gallons (although it may be 100, or 30 gallons,
according to the planter’s produce). As the juice falls into the
clarifier, there should ho a small pipe slowly dropping into it a
solution of the sulphite (not sulphate) of lime, in order to rectify
all tendencies to acidity which must he regulated by litmus
paper. Directly the bottom of the pan is covered, heat is
applied under it, hy which the heating and filling go on
simultaneously, so that, by the time the pan is filled, the
jirice is pretty hot; hut increase tho heat until it boils briskly
for five minutes. Then take about ten ounces of fine sieved
quick-lime (for 600 gallons), and mix it with clean water, so as
to form a cream of Erne, which add to the juice in the clarifier,
taking care to stir it up well, so as to make tho alkali diffuse
itself evenly throughout tho whole body of the liquid, but if
the sulphite of lime has been used as before proposed, then this
lime need not be added.
The temperature, which by this time will be lowered, may now
bo raised to 180 degrees Pahr., at which keep it for some time
to see if the scum rises in a desirable manner; hut, if it does
not, then raise the temperature by degrees until it does; but on
no account allow it to rise above 200 degrees Pahr.
A thick scum having risen and formed a crust, symptoms will
speedily appear of a disposition to crack, on which the firo may
bo withdrawn entirely; the time from the pan being quite filled
until tho fire is withdrawn, being usually about fifteen or twenty
minutes. (Of course this time is according to quantity.)
Ten minutes is now allowed for the liquor to settle a little,
when it is to he drawn down through the cook and a very fine
wire gauze strainer into the precipitator, taking _ care that none
of tho sediment accompanies it; to prevent which the bottom
liquor, more or less mixed up with tho sediment, had better bo
drawn off and strained carefully by itself, and thrown into the
clarifier then filling.
23


SYSTEM OF MANUFACTURE RECOMMENDED.
Immediately tlie partially clarified liquor outers tlio precipi-
tator, a brisk fire is to bo made until the temperature of tlie
liquor rises to 210 degrees, at which keep it a few momenta,
whilst a man with a ecummer skims oil whatever Benin may
arise. All shimmings are to ho put into the clundor receiver.
When no more appears, raise the temperature to the boiling
point, slamming it carefully for about ton minutes; then add to
it the defecating menstruum, made in the following manner;
for 500 gallons. Throe (if the liquor bo very foul, live, or oven
six lbs. may bo used, the lime being in proportion) pounds of
sulphate of alumina are dissolved in throe gallons of water, to
which, solution twelve ounces of lime is applied, and tiro whole
well stirred until the decomposition is complete; then add four
ounces more of lime, mix all well together, and allow time for
precipitation.
■When this is complete, rim off the supernatant water, and tiro
precipitated matters will then be, alumina, sulphate of lime, and
free lime.
Add to these a little clean water, sufficient to bring the whole
into a creamy state, and it is then ready for use.
When this is added to the liquor in the precipitator, it must
be thoroughly mixed up by stirring, after which, the boiling must
bo kept up for about throe or four minutes; tho lire is then
withdrawn, and tho liquor is ready to ho drawn off, either into
tho filters or fining cisterns.
It would bo useless to keep it longer in tho precipitator, as
none but tho grosser particles will subside for a length of time;
therefore wo must trust either to filtration, or to subsidence in
the fining cisterns. If filtration bo preferred, two ram puncheons
well packed with moistened wood (I prefer animal) charcoal (tho
one loading by pipe to tho other,) may ho used with, economy
and advantage; but if ling filters are thought preferable, they
may he employed instead of tho former, whichever may ho
chosen, however, care must bo taken to keep them perfectly clean
and sweet; and this constant washing and thorough, cleansing,
appear to me to constitute tho only disadvantage of the system
of filtration, whereas, in using fining cisterns, nothing of that
kind enn be urged. But as 500 gallons of juice supplied by tho
mill can be clarified, defecated, and filtered in about two or two
and a-half hours, whereas tho same quantity would take five and
a-half hour’s if subsidence in the fining cisterns wore substituted for
filtration, I will promise, therefore, that Jlltm bo used, and that tho
first 600 gallons of filtered liquor enters the evaporators, within two
and a-half hours after tho mill commences work in the morning.
Liquor which has undergone tho clarification and filtration
24


above described, must be in a very pure condition when it reaches
the evaporators, and will consequently require little or no skim-
ming during evaporation; nor will it require any farther appli-
cation of hme ; although, for the entire satisfaction of the
planter, it may be tested (indeed it always should be tested) with
litmus paper, both when it first arrives in the evaporators, and
also when it reaches the tim’d evaporator.
It must altogether rest with the planter himself, as to what
description of evaporating vessels he will use ; hut to pursue the
course of manufacture I am describing, I will, as a medium,
take a “range” (such as those made by Messrs. Blyths, of
London) of throe open pans worked by a naked fire.
In evaporating the liquor, the greatest care must be taken to
keep the pans filled, much above the parts on which the fire
strikes, so as to prevent any burning. If this he neglected, as
it 100 often is, a caramelization takes place from the burning of
the sugar, and the colour is proportionally heightened.
It is from this liability that much preference is given to flat or
slightly convex bottom pans.
The filtered liquor of which we are now treating should ho
extremely clear, and with little or no colour ; so that, if care be
taken to keex> the pans properly filled, little or no accession of
colour will bo caused by the heat it receives in the evaporating
range up to a density of 28 Q by Baume’s saccharometer.
Arrived at this density (say fifty parts sugar and fifty parts
water), it should be drawn off (skip by skip), and will then pre-
sent itself in the form of an exceedingly fair syrup.
It is now to be decided as to whether this syrup is to he passed
through the animal charcoal filters or not; hut as I should sup-
pose that no manufacturer can ho so negligent of his own or his
employer’s interest, as to demur to that process, after the facts
stated, I will premise, as a matter of course, that the im-
portant action of animal charcoal is had recourse to.
The syrup, then, as it leaves the evaporating range, runs into
a receiver, to which a montejus (or copper pump) is attached,
and is thereby elevated to the charcoal filters.
Having passed through the animal charcoal, the syrup is found
to he greatly purified and much whitened.
It next is placed in the vacuum pan for concentration, after
which it is drawn off into the granulators; to which steam is
applied to keep up a temperature of about 180 degrees Fahr., in
order to promote the granulation of the concentrated syrup.
From the granulators the new sugar is taken into the curing-
house, where its perfect crystallization and ultimate curing takes
place. There can he no doubt that sugar so made would he
fully equal, to any imported sugar. The planter would have a fine
white strong-grained article, which would command a high price
25


anywhere. It would bo a sugar which would pay the planter
hotter than any other, and on which there could be no loss by
wastage, drainage, &0., &o.
However, to go back to the consideration of the evaporating
pans, I believe there can bo no question as to the complete supe-
riority of the steam-heated pans over those worked by a naked
lire. The only question is one of expense.
I have in the foregoing plan, preferred mentioning open pans
worked by naked fires, as they can he so generally used, and
I must hero observe, that wall defecated cane liquor, if carefully
attended to, runs no risk of burning or increasing its colour
during evaporation in open pans over a naked fire; for it is during
the concentration that tho injury is dono.
The experiments of Mon. Souhiorau and others, have com-
pletely established tho fact, that syrups may be evaporated in
common open pans, until they contain throe parts (lbs.) sugar to
one part (lbs.) of water, without receiving any injury from
burning, or any increase of colour; provided that the 'vessels be
properly filled, and the evaporation proceed quickly by KneUer’s
plan, I havo soon this tried and proved, not a month ago, in
Sydney.
But on evaporation beyond that point, produces a visible effect
on tho colour of tho syrup, from the decomposition taking place
in tho sugar; which is rendered unorystallizable, or what is
termed glunoso.
Hence we boo that we may evaporate our syrup until it con-
tains only one part water, to three parts sugar, in open pans;
hut to avoid all risk from burning, 1 would always choose flat,
or slightly convex (arched inward) bottom pans, with no brick-
work at tho sides, in order to prevent tho glowing bricks from
communicating too much heat in those parts.
CONCENTRATION.
Having brought the syrup to this density, our next care is to
concentrate it, (id cot, to evaporate as much of the remaining one
third water as possible), without entailing a greater loss than is
absolutely unavoidable.
Thus, when animal charcoal is not to he used, tho well-clari-
fied and finely-filtered cane liquor may be 1 evaporated up to, say
2110 degrees 3?nhr. at once ; thou discharged from tho tacho (the
boiler the most heated) in order to he concentrated.
I may mention three methods of accomplishing this object, two
of which are in common use.
The first is tho vacuum pan; the monel "Wetzal’s pan, or
Gadosden’s, and tho third a modification of Godfrey Knelkr’s
process.


The vacuum pan is considered the most complete method now
practised, and by far the most costly, as by it, syrup can be con-
centrated at as low a temperature as from 160 ° to 180 ° Tahr.,
which insures it from injury.
Wetzgal’s pan is a much cheaper method, whilst it admits of the
temperature being kept equally low, as syrup will concentrate in
such pans at from 160 ° to 165 ° ; but extremely simple and
useful as they are, yet the constant beating (if I may so term it)
the syrup receives from the revolving wheel, to a certain degree,
injures the formation of the grain:—although this observation
applies chiefly where the evaporation is carried very far.
Knellor’s plan (which I like and earnestly recommend) was to
force cold air through the body of the syrup; but by sundry im-
provements introduced by M. Brame Ohevallier, it has been
rendered much more perfect.
By the improved method, the vessel is provided with a steam
jacket, a coil of perforated piping inside, and a set of circular perfor-
ated tubes like the worm of a still; through which last, dry air is
forced to the bottom of the pan, and rising through the body of
the liquid carries off a large amount of vapour, at the same time
keeping the liquid (.at an extremely low temperature. Sugar
made in such pans has completely rivalled that of the vacuum
pan in every respect.
My reasons for entertaining this opinion are, that the cost of a
pan capable of containing 200 gallons of concentrated syrup,
together with its steam jacket, steam coil, and air tubes complete,
would not be more than £80 —the air pump would not cost more
than £25 ; and a powerful bellows would cost much less, the
extra power of the mill engine would be more than sufficient
to work it; and lastly, the facilities for obtaining dry air on a
sugar estate are very great:— as in very hot, dry weather, the
common atmospheric air would answer admirably; whereas, in
damp weather, it might be easily dried without incurring other
than the most paltry expense.
A double actioned air pump of 12 inches in diameter, and 18
inches stroke, will deliver about 100 cubic feet of air per minute ;
which, if properly dried, would evaporate heated syrup faster
than the vacuum pan, and at an equally low temperature.
A pump of this size would take four horse power from the
engine to work it, and would cost about £BO (thirty pounds).
I calculate that a pan of about the size I have named (200
gallons), is capable of turning out upwards of twelve (12) tons of
sugar a day, from syrup comprised of three parts sugar to one
part water.
I cannot recommend this pan too strongly.
I know that it is common with sugar boilers using either of the
low temperature apparatuses to concentrate their syrups far too
high;—such, for instance, as ninety parts sugar to ten parts water.
27


Tliis concentrated syrup contains, when cold, seventy parts of
crystallized sugar, and twenty parts sugar held in solution, hy
the ten parte water; forming, therefore, thirty parts of syrup;
which drains oil as molasses, and can ho rccoucoutratud in a suc-
ceeding operation. Hut the concentration of syrup carried so far
is detrimental to the formation of a largo and well developed
grain, and very much obstructs the drainage of the muss.
This fact was so dourly discovered hy Dutronc in the course of
his experiments, that ho laid it down us an established principle,
that sugar should h allowed to crystallize in a hirin' quantity of water;
and that ho is perfectly correct is beyond all doubt.
From a disregard of this excellent rule, great loss of produce,
time, and labour occurs.
Tbo temperature at which syrup is usually discharged from
the taoho (or what is termed “ skipped”), is about 340" to 2/50“
Fahr., or no loss than from 10° to i«“ h'alu\ beyond the point to
■which evaporation can bo carried without Injury' from burning,
or rather, of decomposition from the elfeeis of over heating.
Then, during the time taken in ladling out the skip, so much
more is injury accruing; which certainly is more limited where a
largo discharge valve allows of the contents of the laehe being
drawn off quickly.
If any planters are determined to continue (he enneenlmtion of
their syrup in open pans over a naked lire, let them at Uniat have
the concentrating tacho separate hum the evaporating range, and
hung over a furnace of its own, that the temperature may he
modified or increased without allccting (he operations hi the other
pans,
When syrup is being evaporated or concentrated, in open pans,
tho thermomotor will show, in a moment, tho density to which it
has arrived at any period of the operation: thus, when the syrup
is-fifty parts sugar and fifty parts water, its boiling point will ho
about 219° or 220° Fahr.; when sixty of sugar and forty of water,
it will bo 224° ; when three parts sugar and imo part; water, it
will ho about 229 u ; when live parts sugar and one of water, it
will bo about 238° or 21!!) u , and so on.
By this it will bo soon that tho thermometer is mi excellent
guide in showing tho several points at which the eeneeulmf ion lias
arrived; and when joined to the practical experience of an
intelligent and careful, beilorman, no mistake whatever need bo
made, nor any risk of injury bo incurred, but the good old proof
was by trying tho liquor between tho huger and thumb, which
must be taught,
ORYSTALLISiATION,
"Whon tbo syrup bus boon concentrated to the desired point,
the next object is to secure tho granulation or crystallization of
the sugar contained, in as general and perfect a manner as
28


possible, so that the whole of the crystallizahle sugar may assume
the form of fine bold crystals; and when that formation is complete,
the syrup or mother water {id est, the sugar held in solution by
the water which is in excess) may drain off freely and rapidly,
leaving the sugar devoid of that clammy stickiness so observable
iu sugar that is high boiled, and imperfectly drain ed, To attain
this end in as perfect a manner as is desirable in practice, the
planter must make up his mind to two things; viz., to discard the
old fashioned and highly objectionable coolers now commonly
used, and entirely to abolish the use of hogsheads, tierces, and
barrels, as curing vessels
Instead of the old system of casks, there should be one cooler
of copper, if it can be afforded (or rather receiving vessel), to
receive the concentrated syrup from the tache or the low tem-
perature apparatuses ; and from this receiver the syrup should
be immediately carried into the curing house, and deposited in
the curing cases.
If the syrup be concentrated in an open tache or boiler, I will
suppose the sldp to be struck when the temperature rises to
230 ° or 232 ° Fahr. (low boiling) ; and the curing eases require
then to bo made of wood, and of this form, viz., five feet long
and three feet wide, with aides fifteen inches deep, increasing to
26 inches in the centre, by means of two planes forming the
bottom, inclining six inches, some say 9 deep and 15 inches centre.
Across the middle of the bottom, where the two inclined
planes are joined, a channel is formed, along which twelve or
fifteen holes (of an inch in diameter) are made, for the syrup to
drain through when the crystallization is complete.
These cases are lined with very thin sheet lead, and the holes
may have small tubes of one and half or two inches long, neatly
soldered on to the lead lining.
The particular size and form of these cases were very correctly
ascertained by Dutrone, from numerous careful experiments, to
be the very best for the purpose required; and if made and
lined as above described, they offer every possible advantage for
crystallizing and draining, at a. considerably less cost.
In working with these cases, it is advisable to lay a piece of
course matting or who gauze, of about six inches wide, supported
by small cross pieces of wood, along the whole length of the case,
and immediately above the draining holes.
When the skip is struck, it runs into the cooler or receiver,
from which it is immediately removed and placed in the curing
cases; taking care only to half fill each case, in order that the
other half may be filled up from the succeeding skip.
When the soeond half is added, the whole must be well stirred
up, so as to amalgamate the two portions thoroughly, and secure
an equal temperature throughout the mass.
29


Whilst it is cooling 1 down, no drafts of cold air should he
suffered to enter the curing house ; for the process requires to be
gradual and unaccelerated.
After some hours (varying from twelve to twenty-four), a
crystallization will he apparent at the surface, sides, and bottom,
when it will be necessary to stir up (with a wooden knife) the
whole mass; gently and gradually disengaging the crystals at
the bottom and sides, and distributing them throughout the body
of the liquid.
The effect of this will soon he discernible in the accelerated
crystallization which thereon ensues ; but if circumstances seem
to render it advisable, a second very gentle movement may be
given to the mass, two or three hours after the first.
It must then he left perfectly uninterupted for three, or perhaps
four days; when the whole will have become quite cold, and
crystallization taken place throughout. The plugs, which stop
up the holes for drainage, are then withdrawn, and in the course
of three or fern 1 days the drainage will bo complete.
If the whole process has been carefully attended to, the space
of four days is very rarely exceeded, as the syrup drains off very
rapidly. Arrived at this stage, the sugar contained in the case
is ready for liquoring; and, should the planter decide on this
simple means of enhancing the value of his produce, a solution
of tine white sugar (taking care, first, to scrape the top nicely
and evenly) should be put on the top of the case.
This percolates through the mass, and cleanses the crystals;
but, if liquoring is not had recourse to, the sugar, immediately
the syrup has drained off, should be taken from the case, dried
in a stove or in the sun, and at once packed for shipment.
In no case can crystallization proceed under such favourable
circumstances as when the syrup is thin and limpid ; so that the
crystals, informing, may have freedom of motion; on the contrary,
a thick and tenacious syrup opposes insurmountable obstacles to
a perfect crystallization; and consequently the crystals are small,
irregular, weak, and clammy; thus being difficult of drainage.
Many hoilermen think, that because they can evaporate almost
the whole of the water contained in their syrups by the low
temperature principle, without fear of burning, &c., that it is in-
cumbent on them to concentrate very high; seemingly unconscious
or xmheedful that they are running counter to the first principles
of crystallization.
I must, therefore, once more repeat, that if the planter wishes
to secure a good description of sugar, which will drain readily
and throughly, he must toil low,
30


PACKING- FOE MAEKET.
The lieafc of the sun soon accomplishes the drying; tlio sugar is
then put into boxes and well beaten down, which is managed by
means of a thick piece of plank that fits nicely into the box. Thus a
quantity of sugar is put into the box, the piece of plank is in-
troduced and well beaten down by a heavy piece of wood ; _ thou
another quantity of sugar is added, and the plank is again in-
troduced and well beaten down ; and so on until! it is quite full,
when the box is headed up and braced strongly. These boxes
may contain from 400 to 500 lbs. or rather more, and accordingly
will go four or five to the ton as freight, sugar exported in boxes
never loose weight.
RUM.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCESS OF DISTILLATION AS USED
IN JAMAICA.
The spirit called Rum is made from the molasses and cano trash
shimmings resulting from the manufacture of Sugar,
It is never made from Sugar itself but from the molasses that
drains from the Sugar dining the process of curing; although in
Calcutta and many other places, there is a spirit made from
treacle, bad sugar, &c., which is sometimes called rum ; but it is
in no way like the pure spirit manufactured in Jamaica. Being
made from molasses and skimmings, it is advisable to notice
those two products; and, together with them, the exhausted
wash commonly named liundvr. Molasses, which contains an
azotised substance, such as glutinous or albuminous matter,
possesses in itself elements necessary to fermentation ; id ost , it
contains sugar, water, and gluten; which latter, acting as a
ferment, speedily disposes the whole mass to fermentation; thus
we very frequently see molasses fermenting in the receiver in the
curing house, before it can be used in setting np wash..
This tendency to fermentation is greatly increased by the ad-
dition of water, which reduces its density; hence we find, in
curing-houses, where clay, pond weed (sfiowah), or wetted gun-
nie-bags are placed on the sugar to whiten it, that the water in
these, mixing with the molasses, causes fermentation Tory quickly.
Shimmings comprise the matters separated from tho cano juice
during the processes of defecation and evaporation: thus wo
have the thick crust of scum thrown up in the clarifiers, tho scum
of the precipitators and evaporators, and the precipitates in both
clarifiers and precipitators; together with those, there is a pro-
portion of cane liquor mixed with the various scum and pro-
31


cipitatea, and a large quantity of -water which has been used in
washing down and cleansing the various vessels and gutters; and
further, every time the liquor is “is boiled off” in the evapora-
tors (which occurs, perhaps, every Saturday night), there is a
quantity of what is termed “ sweet liquor,” which results from
the washing the boiling pans, &c., receive. All those running
together into tho distil house, become united in the slamming
receiver, and are denominated feoulonoies; tho liquor of which
when clarified, is drawn down, as will be explained, under the
name of shimmings. It is therefore evident, that those feoulonoies
are comprised of the foreign matters existing in cone-juice; such
ns woody fibre, gluten, groon fooula, wax, gum, and earthy
matters, together with more or loss cane-liquor water, and are pro-
nounced by Avoquin to be composed of waxy matter, green matter,
albumen, woody fibre, triphosphate of lime, silica and water.
Shimmings then contains in itself tho elements essential to fer-
mentation ; and accordingly wo find that it very rapidly passes
into fermentation when loft to itself: but in consequence of tho
glutinous matter being in excess of tho sugar, this latter is
speedily decomposed, and tho second or acetous fermentation
commences very frequently before tho first is for advanced.
When the feculoncios arrive in tho distil house, they are not: con-
sidered lit lor use, until a separation has taken place between
tho liquid and tho solid parts ; when tho clour liquid is /brawn
off as shimmings, to ho employed in setting up wash. Dander or
(redundilr) is the fermented wash after it has undergone dis-
tillation by which it has boon deprived of tho alcohol it contained
Speaking of tho wash from winch brandy is obtained, and tho
wort for making beer, Liebig says, “ tho principal clilforonco in
the preparation of tho two liquids is, that in the fermentation
of wort an aromatic substance (hops) is added ; and it is certain
that its presence modifies the transformations which take place.
Now it is known that tho volatile oil of mustard and tho om-
pyreuinatiu oils arrest completely the action of the yeast 5 and
although the oil of hops does not possess this property, still it
diminishes in a groat degree the influence of decomposing azotisod
bodies upon the conversion of alcohol into acetic acid. There
is, therefore reason to believe that some aromatic substances,
when added to fermenting mixtures, are capable of producing
very various modifications in tho nature of the products
generated.”
The action of (hinder, in wash made of molasses, shimmings,
and water, has a similar effect to hops or oil of Imps in wort.
It is the _ aromatic substance which modifies tho changes or
transformations taking place during fermentation, it increases tho
density of the liquor, preventing that violent fermentation during
-which so much alcohol is lost, and keeps tho liquor comparatively
32


cool in temperature, and slow in its motion. Dundor, to bo good,
should be light, clear, and slightly bitter, it should bo quite free
from acidity, and is always best when fresh. Dunder as it is
discharged from the still, runs into receivers placed on a lower
lever than the still, from which it is pumped up when cool
into the upper receivers, where it clarifies, and is then drawn down
into the fermenting cisterns as required. Well clarified dundor
will keep for six months without any injury.
Many causes affect its quality; and remember, that very often
many rounds of the house are injured from the distiller using that
that is acid, or that which is heavy, thick, and viscid.
When wash is set up with too large a proportion of sweets, the
fermentation lasts until all the gluten or ferment has undergone
decomposition and become precipitated ; when it ceases for want
of more ferment, the sugar 'which still remains in the wash in-
decomposed is, therefore, incapable of being resolved into alcohol,
but instead passes into the still with the wash, and is discharged
in the dunder, still in the form of sugar. The consequence of
which is, that the dunder, on cooling, speedily commences to
ferment, and works away again, more like wash than dundor; to
the great alarm of many inexperienced distillers, who term it
“live dunder, ” and very frequently throw it away, fancying it
will injure their wash: whereas it should bo immediately used
to set up fresh wash, or Is at once redistilled; as the fermentation
only arises from the indecomposed sugar being acted on by the
renewed activity of the ferment.
Good dunder (which does not contain sugar Indecomposed, as
in the above ease) may be considered to be wash, deprived by
distillation, of its alcohol, and much concentrated by the boiling
it has been subject to, whereby the substances it contains, as<
gluten, gum, oils, &c., have become from repeated boilings so
concentrated as to render the liquid mass a highly aromatib'cein-
pound.
In this state it contains at least two of tho elements necessary
to fermentation, so that on the addition of a third, viz., sugar,
that process, speedily commences.
From these observations it is seen that molasses and shimmings
each contain sugar, gluten, and water; 00 that fermentation will
occur spontaneously in them, without the intervention of any
foreign substance, such as yeast; and that dunder contains gluten
and water, _ as well as an aromatic bitter principle.
With this view of their character and action, w 0 will next proceed
to the working detail, and the considerations connected with fer-
mentation.
A.s the feculenoies flow into tho distil-house, they are collected
in what are termed shimmings receivers, each of which generally
hold about 300 or 400 gallons.
D
33


. They are always lined with sheet lead, or very thin copper,
and are provided with a cock to draw off the contents.
A receiver being fall, it is allowed time to clarify, after which
the clear liquor, now termed shimmings, is drawn down into the
mixing cistern. (I am quite convinced that there is no necessity
for a missing cistern, it only entails additional labour without any
accompying benefit. I would never think of using it,) if there he
one, or otherwise into the fermenting cistern direct; all the scum
aud impurities remaining in the receiver should bo rim off into
the receiver which is immediately beneath it, and there mixed
wiih 100 or 200 gallons of water, (hot, if it be at hand) and well
stirred up for some considerable time, in order to separate en-
tirely all the sugar that may remain entangled in the interstices
of the gummy and glutinous textures. This stirring being con-
tinued until all the sugar is washed out, the mass is allowed to
rest for some time, that it may clarify again, but, if grounds
exist for apprehending fomentation or acidity, a little sulphurous
acid (horn burning one or two sulphur matches,) in the ono case,
and lime in the latter, may he added. When the liquid has
clarified, the clear liquor may he drawn off into the fermenting
cisterns, to aid in setting up the wash.
I am aware that this washing of tho feculent mass is seldom
praetised, but it most certainly .ought to he, for otherwise tho
sweets contained will ho -thrown away, consequently much loss
will accrue.
It must be borne in mind that alcohol, or the spirit which we
call rum, is obtainable from sugar alone, tho ferment being only
necessary to assist tho decomposition of the sugar.
“ The analysis of Oano Sugar proves that it contains tho
elements of carbonic acid, and alcohol, minus ono atom of water,
“ In the transformation of Sugar, which is called fermentation,
its elements are divided into two portions, the ono carbonic acid,
which contains two thirds of the oxygen of sugar; an'd tho other
alcohol, which contains all its hydrogen.
“Thiuard obtained from 100 grammes of cane sugar 0-5202 of
absolute alcohol (and 0-6127 of carbonic acid); 100 parts of
sugar from the cane yield therefore 108-89 parts of carbonic
acid and alcohol. The entire carbon in those’ products is equal
to 42 parts, which is exactly the quantity originally contained
in the sugar. The alcohol and carbonic acid, produced by the
fermentation of a certain quantity of .sugar, contain tog-other one
equivalent of oxygen, and one equivalent of hydrogen; tho
elements, therefore, of ono equivalent of water more than the
sugar contained. The excess of weight in tho products is thus
explained moat satisfactorily; it is owing, namely, to the elements
of water having taken part in tho metamorphosis of the sugar.
The carbon of sugar does not exist in it as carbonic acid, neither


does its hydrogen exist as alcohol: Sugar contains, therefore,
neither alcohol nor carbonic acid ; so that these bodies must be
produced by a different arrangement of its atoms, and by their
union with the elements of water.
“In this metamorphosis of the sugar, the elements oftheyeast
(ferment or glutinous matter), by contact with which its fermen-
tation was effected, take no appreciable part in the transposition
of the elements of the sugar; for in the products resulting from
the action, we find no component part of this substance.’’. —•
{lielig, p 249.)
Ifrom this we perceive that the ferment (which in cane-
wash is the gluten or albumen) produces by contact the fermen-
tation of the sugar; but that the alcohol is formed from the
elements of the sugar itself, minus one atom of water which
it derives from tho surrounding body of water. On the
quantity of sugar contained in a wash, therefore, is the quantity
of alcohol dependent; the ferment being merely the motive
power, if I may so term it. The planter having acquainted
himself with these facts, must next endeavour to ascertain the
conditions under which fermentation will proceed most advan-
tageously, and the wash yield its maximum amount of spirit.
I say spirit, because the sugar planter wants to make rum, not
alcohol; if, therefore, the chemist can obtain from 100 lbs of
sugar, 50 lbs of absolute alcohol, (of 791 specific gravity, at 68°
Fahr.) the question is, how much rum of 80 per cent, over proof
(that is, we will say, 130 gallons of spirit, or 30 over 100, taking
100 as the standard proof; then thirty over proof would be 130,
its specific gravity, with the temperature at 60 ? Tabr. is 8797),
should the same quantity of sugar yield in the colonial distdl-
honse ? The planter always reckons one gallon of proof rum for
every gallon of molasses that he uses. Now if we take common
average molasses as containing 65 parts sugar, 32 parts water,
and 3 parts organic matter and salts; and suppose that by
careful fermentation and distillation, 33 ports (out of 65) of ab-
solute alcohol be obtained, we may then reckon 331bs of spirit,
or about 4 gallons, which is a return of about gallons of rum,
30 per cent, over proof,, from 100 lbs of such molasses, (33 lbs
of absolute alcohol, specific gravity 794, at 60 9 3?abr.) will require
164 lbs. of water to reduce it to 30 per cent, over proof, specific
gravity 8797, at 60° Ifabr.—49J lbs. weight), this agrees well
with the planter’s calculation. Molasses however varies very
much in quality, and at the best can only be calculated for ac-
cording to the amount of sugar it contains. Moreover that
sugar having in part suffered change, cannot be so capable of
affording alcohol as pine sugar. The quantity of sugar con-
tained in the shimmings is also reckoned in the per centage of
sweets allowed to each cistern of wash; but nothing can be more
35


loose and 'unsatisfactory than the mode of calculating the sac-
charine value of shimmings on sugar estates; some planters
reckoning it at six gallons to one gallon of molasses, -whilst
others range from six to ten gallons. It is very evident that the
quality of the shimmings must ho dependent on the quantity
and quality of the cane juice mixed with it, and the relative pro-
portion of water used in'cleansing the various vessels and gutters.
I think, on the whole, that it may he taken at from eight to ten
gallons of skiramings to one gallon of good molasses. Were
proper instruments used, as they ought to be, there could he no
uncertainty on this point whatever; whilst the same instruments
would enable the planter to ascertain the density and condition
of his wash at any moment. In setting up wash, the planter
must first get his house in good working order; then try the
different per centages, to find which suits best the nature of the
locality : for it is an established fact that some distil-houses will
work best and furnish greater returns at a low per ccntage,
whilst others require a higher per centago. To show this a
brewer at Preston-pans near Edinburgh had such an increasing
sale for his ale that he determined to build premises close beside
his old ones, in order that ha might triple the quantity—ho did
so, but he never could get the same fermentation and was com-
pelled to go back to his small brewery to preserve the name of
his ale. Prom my own experience I believe twelve per cent, of
sweets to be the best and most economical per centago that can
bo adopted ; that is, ten per cent of molasses, and two per cent
of shimmings, which (allowing ten gallons of shimmings to be
equal in saccharine value to one gallon of molasses) is therefore
IQO gallons of molasses, and 200 gallons of skimmings, to a 1,000
gallon cistern. In my own practice I always need a large quantity
of dunder; and from very unmistokeable evidence, lam thoroughly
convinced that it exercises a most beneficial effect on the character of
the fermentation.
At Trelawney, in Jamaica, they used as much dunder as any
where in the island; if not a great deal more ; yet the rum made
was very great in quantity, and of the very highest quality.
When I had good, light, and well clarified dunder, X very
frequently employed very little water, in setting up my
cisterns, preferring the use of dunder almost entirely, and the
excellent returns obtained by that system, fully convince me
of the correctness of the practice. The great object thrft the
distiller has in view, in conducting his fermentation is to obtain
the whole, _or as large a portion as possible of the spirit, that
the quantity of sugar he employs is capable of producing: to
lose none, or as little as possible of it by evaporation or aoetifica-
tion; to accomplish this I hold it as essentially necessary first,
to keep the fermenting department at as low a temperature as is


possible in a warm climate, say about 75° to 80 n Bahr. if it can
be accomplised, and secondly to use a large quantity of duuder.
Tor instance, let us take a supposed case of distillation in a 1000
gallon cistern. Weprooeedto setitup; first, we draw down (direct)
200 gallons of well clarified sldmmings, 60 gallons of molasses,
and 100 gallons of clear dunder, mix them well together, and
allow fermentation to commence. This very speedily occurs, when
other 60 gallons of molasses are added, together with. 200 gallons
of water, and the wash is allowed an hour or two to attain a
general fermentation; on seeing which the other 400 gallons of
dunder are run into the cisterns, and the whole mass is throughly
mixed. As the fermentation goes on, a little dirt and scum will be
thrown np which is immediately skimmed off, and the temperature
of the wash will ho found to rise gradually, until it attains from
8° to 10“ Tahr. above that of the house itself. If the temperature
he found to rise too high, the nest cistern must he set up with
more dunder and less water, hut if the temperature keeps very
low, and the wash works too' sluggishly, less may he used next
time. The next criterion is the period it continues working, and
the quantity of rum it produces on distillation, the latter being,
.after all, the great object for which we are striving. Many young
distillers are always in a desperate hurry to see their fermenta-
tion cease, and think that their|wash cannot ferment fast enough.
I am constrained to say there are also some old distillers who
partake off this absurd anxiety; not reflecting on the nature of
the transformations which the elements of the sugar are under-
going, and the conditions which are necessary to ensure a success-
ful issue. There are those who labour very industriously to show
that the fermentation of wort and that of wash is identical; and
that, consequently yeast should he made use of in distilleries on
sugar estates, altogether overlooking the difference between wort
made from malt, and wash made from saccharine juice of the
cane together with molasses and dunder.
The employment of yeast on estates has formed the ground-
work of many a delusive promise, for which unfortunate
Colonists have had to pay. Amongst others, Jamaica planters
no doubt entertain a very vivid recollection of the scheming
adventurer, who many years ago played such havoc in some 200
or 300 of their distilleries, whilst he dipped so deeply into their
purses. It is necessary, then, again to observe that the fer-
menting principle (gluten) exists in large quantities in the
molasses, shimmings, and dunder; and consequently that no
foreign agent such as yeast is necessary. Nay, further, that such
is extremely undesirable, as it would change altogether the
character of the fermentation. The fermentation of wash on a
sugar estate is somewhat allied to that process which occurs in
the making of “ Bavarian beer;” with this great difference, that


by no moans can the temperature bo kept so low as in the ease
in the Bavarian brewery. The similitude chiefly consists in the
fermenting wash throwing up no frothy scum, but gradually
precipitating the ferment as it decays: or, in other words, instead
of the gluten reproducing itself (as is the ease with yeast in
worts) it is destroyed and precipitated. The fermentation of a
cistern of wash, when it Iras its proper proportion of dundor, and
the house is kept cool, is moderately slow, quite uniform, and
ultimately very complete; it throws up no froth or scum (other
than the mere extraneous dirt), but gradually .precipitates the
glutinous ferment as it decays. The temperature may bo 90° or
upwards; but the alcohol is, to a certain degree protected from
acetifioatian by the aromatic principle resident in the dundor; so
that, when distilled, the Avash is found to yield from ten to twenty
per cent, more spirit than if loss dundor had been usod, and a
higher temperature permitted. It has been fully substantiated
that beer made according to the Bavarian process, at a temper-
ature not exceeding 50 Ifrihr. (boo Liebig, page 298) contains fully
20 per cent, more alcohol than that made by the common process.
Liebig gives two reasons for this: viz. that by the wort being fer-
mented in very wide flat vessels, its gluten is decomposed entirely
by the action of tho oxygon of tho air, instead of abstracting
any portion of it from tho sugar contained, whilst at the same
time tho temperature is so low, that tho oxygen cannot decompose
tho alcohol which is formed. With such a fact before ns, wo
cannot do wrong to try (if it be only one “wido, flat vessel ”)
what effect such exposure would have on a body of fermenting
Wash, set up with plenty of dunder, and in a distil-houso kept as
cool as possible. In an experiment of this kind, tho shallow
fermenting vessel should contain a quantity equal to tho cisterns;
and the trial wash on each occasion, should bo first mixed all
together, then divided, half to tho former, and half to tho latter,
so that no difference could exist in the quality of tho wash.
Half-a-dozen trials would entirely decide whether any benefit
accrued from tho surface of tho fermenting wash being so much
greater and so much more exposed to tho influence of the oxygon
of tho air—-the water of rivers and streamlets, as containing
oxygon in solution, must bo bettor for sotting up wash than that
of wells, tanks or ponds, as, no doubt, tho major portion of tho
oxygon employed is abstracted from tho water. Wo could, of
course, never hope to keep tho temperature nearly so low as
that mentioned by Liebig; but it is found hi practice, that
perfectly open cisterns succeed quite as well as, if not much bettor
than covered ones, I am led to believe that a much more extended
surface would bo far from producing unpleasing results. I much
regret not having tried this hitherto, but I take tho opportunity
of suggesting the experiment. Eight days is considered a very
38


desirable time for cisterns to work off, and very frequently it
takes ten or even fourteen days ; but never grow impatient with
them, as you will always find your account in the excellent return
they give you. In fermenting wash, it often happens that the
fermentation, in a few days will subside entirely, although a
considerable quantity of sugar will remain in it indeeomposed.
This will arise from two causes: first, from the fermenting agent,
gluten, not being in sufficient proportion to tbe sugar, whereby
only a portion, equal to its power of stimulating decomposition,
is decomposed, whilst the sugar in excess remains unchanged:
secondly, from the action of the alcohol, which is sometimes
formed so rapidly and m such quantities, that it precipitates the
gluten before it can effect its transformation, and keeps it inert
for some length of time, thereby arresting the fermentation for a
period. I believe that in sugar-estate distilleries, in nineteen
cases out of twenty, where sugar remains in the wash indecom-
posed, it arises not from the want of ferment, hut from its being
thus precipitated by the alcohol: hence, |wheu distillation has
removed this spirit, the (hinder commences to ferment by the
renewed action of the gluten. I have very seldom had this (what
is termed) live dunder, from always making my distOlerman stir
up the cisterns of wash every day, by which means the precipitated
gluten was brought into renewed action daily.
It must not he forgotten that, hj the most scientific-methods possible,
wash can only yield an amount of alcohol equal to half the weight of
the sugar contained in the molasses and shimmings ' employed; the
planter s’ core being, by judicious admixture of the materials—by
keeping the fermenting house as cool as possible, and by a thorough
distillation , to secure the whole, or as much as he can of this amount o /
spirit—more he cannot by any possibility obtain.
I have already said that, hy pursuing the mode of manufacture
(of sugar) which I have recommended, extremely little molasses
will accrue, and the same also applies in regard to the skimmings,
consequently there will be no more of tbe latter than will suffice
to give a desirable tone to the former: hence, it is evident that
the operations in the distal-house will be reduced to a very small
scale. This, indeed, is as it should be : everything is converted
into sugar that can be, and it is only the remnant that ought to
find its way into the distil-house for conversion into rum.
CLEANLINESS
Is particularly required in every department from the mill-
house to the rum store; it is of as much importance in the
distil-houae as in the milling, boiling, and curing departments;
and the planter who aims at perfect success in manufacturing
and distillation, must be nice and clean even to a fault. Every
vessel should he constantly and carefully washed and scrubbed,
and also well limed down, to prevent acidity; and by these


means the distil-house, and everything that is in it, should always
be perfectly sweet and clean.
DISTILLERY.
The Distil-house should be divided into one large and one
smaller compartment.
In the first, put 16 fermenting cisterns sunk in the ground,
each to contain 1000 gallons.
Pour scumming receivers, two above and two below (close to
the fermenting cisterns), of 1000 gallons each.
Eight rum butts of 400 gallons each.
In the smaller compartments, there should be two dander
receivers of 1200 gallons each; the still capable of containing
1100 gallons, and the worm tank containing the worm.
■When the still is to bo charged with wash lot it bo done with
600 gallons of dunder
200 ~ washings and scummings
120 ~ molasses
180 „ warm water
1000 gallons.
Stills of smaller dimensions, of course, must be charged
according to the same proportions.
After the fire is called or lighted, either watch the process
until the sparkling ceases, or try it by the saccharomoter; the
whole of the operations should be done by a practical man, as it
is too important a matter to attempt it by written or verbal
directions. Distilling must be taught, by experience, however,
the following will give the necoessary information which it is
hoped will prove useful.
DIBTILLATKW.
The apparatus used in separating the alcohol from the wash is
generally called a still, but the descriptions of stills have so mxdti-
plied of late years, that some 300 or 400 patents might be men-
tioned, if it were of any utility doing so. I will, however, confine
myself to a notice of one. Of all the different arrangements, I
have never known one to surpass the common still and double
retorts. As a distilling apparatus peculiarly suited by its
simplicity, durability, economy, and efficiency to the wants of tho
planter, I consider that it stands unrivalled.
This sketch represents the apparatus as it is commonly used ;
but if provided with a wash-heater, the pipo from the [second
retort, instead of passing directly to the worm tank, would first
run through the chargor containing tho wash, impart to it
a large portion of its heat, and then enter tho worm-tank. A still
of 1000 gallons sc? provided should run off 600 gallons of rum,


NO. 1. Common Still.
" 2. Fast retort.
" 3. Secondretort.
" 4. Eitter of A Charcoal.
" 5. The raquru and
condensing worm.
" 6. Water Cistern.
" 7. Rum veceiver.


averaging SO to 40 per "cent, over proof, between five o’clock in
the morning, and eight o’clock at night. In working the appara-
tus, the still itself is loaded with wash, and the two retorts with
a few gallons of low-wines, or even water, sufficient to cover the
bottom of the vapour-pipe; say about 15 or 20 gallons of low-
wines in each. The fire is then applied under the still, and rum
of 40 to 45 over proof commences to flow into the can placed ready
to receive it. When the still begins to boil, the lend rumbling
of the retorts gives intimation of the fact, and warns the attendant
distillermen to prepare for the spirit in the oan-pit. The fire,
if burning strongly, is slightly checked, clean cans are placed in
readiness, and the suporuitendant stands by with his proof bubbles
or hydrometer, prepared to test the strength of the spirit. When,
it first begins to flow, a strong empyreumatio odour is perceptible,-
therefore the first gallon of spirit is thrown into the low-wine hut;
then comes the strong, well flavoured rum, varying from 40 to
50 over proof.
If an average strength of 30 per cent, over proof be required,
the rum must continue to be thrown into the rum-butt, until the
twenty-bubble rises in the proof phial when the remainder of
the running must be thrown into the low wino-butt ; but if proof
rum be wanted, the spirit may continue to be thrown into the
rum-but until the twenty-eight bubble rises, which will generally
bring the whole running to twenty-throe, this, therefore, allows
2 bubbles for colouring, &0., to bring it to the twenty-five bubble
or proof. In working with retorts it will ho found that these rules
apply pretty nearly; but, to he quite sure, all that is requisite is
to test the contents of the rum-butt as the running progresses, by
which no error can occur. Whatever may be the description of
distilling apparatus used, it is evident that the object of the
planter must be to obtain fi'om Ms fermented wash all the spirit
it contains, and to do so as economically and expeditiously as he
can •• to accomplish this, I can, from experience, strongly recom-
mend the still and retorts.
IrLAVOURma TJTE SPIRIT.
It is highly important that rum has that peculiar and delicate
flavour which was once so remarablo in “ Wodderburn’s Jamaica
Eum,” the prices obtained for it were always the highest. In
1841, I bought some of it 5 years old Kingston, in Jamaica, for
private use, and paid 2 guineas a gallon, it was difficult to get
it, oven at that price, because it realised that price in London to
the shipper. In this colony I have never tasted good rum,
indeed no one appears to know anything about what its flavour
should be. The spirit generally sold both wholesale and retail,
tastes and smells as if it had been imported in leather bag's,
whereas good rum is highly aromatic in both. Liebig says
“ volatile or essential oil contained in plants is changed into resin


by the absorption of oxygen; ” now tlio peculiar flavour of rum
is generally understood to proceed from the resinous aromatic
gum or essential oil contained in the rind of the cane; but apart
from this, an empyreunmtio oil appears to be genera ed during
tlio fermentation of the wash, which our greatest chemists ascribe
to an interchange of the elements of sugar and gluten, from
whatever source it be derived, however, all planters aro quite
aware how undesirable it is in rum, and at how much pains many
are to got rid of it, so as to improve its flavour.
Its character may be judged of from the fact that one drop is
sufficient to taint ten gallons of spirit. Many are the expedients
resorted to expel this disagreahle taint; but amongst them all,
I have found that charcoal and lime are the simplest and most
efficacious: the former absorbs aud the latter combines with
it, and precipitates it in the form of soap.
The method I have employed myself, and known others resort
to successfully, is to have a wooden box (of about two feet long
and one foot in diameter, with a division in the centre running
down to within an inch of the bottom) filled with coarsely
powdered charcoal, through which the spirit is made to pass as
it runs from the worm in the can-pit; the charcoal absorbs a
considerable portion of the oil, and the rum consequently flows
from the filter much purified. It is then conveyed to the rum butt
(of about 300 or 500 gallons,) which is situated at a good eleva-
tion, and at once treated with a little caustic lime (quick-lime),
being throughly stirred up to disseminate it.
After an interval of two days, the flavour may be tried, aud
if found satisfactory, the contents of the butt may be drawn off
through a charcoal filter, similar to the first, into the ooloin-ing
butt, to bo coloured. But if the lime used be not enough, a little
more must bo added, mixing the whole up again, and after two
days it may be run off as noticed. At this period the lime will
bo seen at the bottom of the butt, in combination with the oil,
together forming a kind of soapy precipitate. By carefully pur-
suing this plan, I have known rum of a month old, sell as three
year old rum; so great a difference had it occasioned, and so
much improved had the rum become in flavour.
It is, however, essential to remark, that both care and judg-
ment aro required in submitting the rum to this process, as too
much liim will serve to render it a neutral spirit, altogether free from
the well-known flavour of rim. But it is impossible to go wrong,
if the operator will only pay the most ordinary attention to what
ho is about. I cannot too strongly urge on planters the expediency
of using all moans in their power to improve their rum as well
as their sugar, as it is for their profit, and the character of the
colony.
42


aOLOvs.ma
Is the next point, and the art of making colour, I think, is one of
the most important parts of the distillerman’a business. It very
frequently occurs that really good rum is quite sjjoiled by being
badly coloured: this, therefore, should be strictly attended to.
The description of sugar that may be used for it, is a ■well
grained, fair-coloured muscovado; such is commonly chosen
in Jamaica. This is put into a large copper or iron boiling pan,
to which heat is applied; one man stands by with a wooden oar,
or staff, and stirs it about continually, from the moment it begins
to dissolve until the boiling is completed.
Another man makes the tire, which may be of dry brush-wood,
so as to ie instantly checked at will; as the boiling proceeds, bubbles
rise, large and heavy at first, then small and quickly; the colour
of the mass changes from brown to a deep black, the wooden
stirrer shows the colour increasing to the desired shade, and the
taste of the operator distinguishes the particular flavour required.
The nicety of his taste in a great measure decides the success,
not only of the boiling, but of the subsequent flavour his rum
will have. No sweetness whatever should be apparent, nor should
there be any bitterness, but just tbe exact and happy medium.
Arrived at this stage, the fire should be drawn, and some strong
proof rum be gradually added; the man stirring with might and
main, until sufficient has been given to ensure the colour from,
assuming a solid form on cooling; the whole mass may then be
emptied into "the colour cask” in the rum store. This cask is
generally a small hogshead placed end up, on a wooden horse
two feet high, and has a plug hole two or three niches from the
bottom to draw off its contents when wanted, without disturbing
any matter which may have precipitated. Good colour is as thick
as it can he, without forming a solid mass, and is as clear, and
bright as possible; mixed with rum, it should at once give it, a
clear, rich tint, devoid of any haziness or muddiness, but to
ensure this, it had better be mixed in a pail with a. quantity of
rum, anil then carefully strained , previous to being- thrown into
the rum butt. Yery good colour will not require more than three
pints to colour a whole puncheon of 100 gallons, whilst bad color
will not incorporate freely, hut precipitate, leaving- the rum only
slightly tinged.
37rom a most mistaken economy, some planters use molasses
for making colour, preferring to spoil a whole puncheon of rum,
rather than use a few shillings worth of good sugar in making
colour for it. I have seen colour made from molasses, and found
it such bad tasted stuff, that I cannot imagine any perfectly sane
person can persist in its use.
Colouring rum is the last stage through which it passes before
it leaves the estate, it is then put into hogsheads or puncheons for
43


sale, or shipment. There is another method of flavouring’, about
■which I need not write at present, as well as a mode to recover
bad rum.
In my opinion, really good rum is the most 'wholesome spirit
made, it does not burn the “ interials ” like brandy, gin, and
whiskey. In Jamaica, rum is taken in punch, but merely
enough to give the aromatic flavom’; a table spoonful is enough
fora pint of water, but drinking “strong rum and water,” is
justly abhorred.


APPENDIX.
IRRIGATION.
In 1847, His Excellency Sir Charles Grey, the energetic Governor
of Jamaica, in addressing the Royal Agricultural Society of that
island, made the following very sensible and correct remarks :
“ Upon the subject of Irrigation, as it has recently been so much
discussed, lam rather reluctant to enter; especially as it seems
to have been thought that extravagant and vain hopes have
been held out or entertained.
I am not myself at all of that opinion; for I never saw a
country in -which it appeared to me, that more of what is useful
remains to be done with the waters from above and the waters
from below. And yet I have seen other and - far distant
countries, in which there are the ruined and now neglected
remains of work accomplished in bygone times for the same
purposes (irrigation), so stupendous, that I hesitate to describe
them.”
Thus far His Excellency’s observations are strictly just, but in
the following, he indulges in speculations relative to the Pyramids
of Egypt, which certainly are not the least curious and amusing
amongst the many which have from time to time been enter-
tained. He says, “ There is reason to believe, indeed, that the
greatest structures that the power of man has ever raised, and
which belong to the earliest periods of which we have any
record, and perhaps to periods of which we have no record at all,
wore dedicated to agricultural irrigation ; and although I have
never yet visited the banks either of the Euphrates or the Nile,
I venture to say, upon grounds which I cannot attempt now to
disclose, that a more probable use of the Pyramids themselves
than any which has yet been assigned to them, is, that from
higher points of the Nile, the river waters were conducted, by
the subterraneous channels which still exist, into their vast
interior, and elevated chambers of the most perfect and curious
masonry, for a more regulated and more managable supply of
water to the plains of Memphis, and the periodical and purposely
excluded inundation could have supplied; and one which might
be more profitable to those who should have the command and
control of it.”


Whilst favouring 1 the Society with this altogether new light as
to the purposes for which those celebrated structures were
originally erected, His Excellency kept the attentions of its
members palpably fixed on the great subject of irrigation:
which indeed was the important point; and the ingenious theory
advanced by His Excellency, no doubt sent many home to dream
of irrigation, who otherwise would not have bestowed a thought
on it.
We must view the application of water to a oano-liold; first, in
respect to the manner in which it renders soluble the constituents
of the soil, and in that form present thorn to the plants growing
thereon; secondly, in regard to the oxygon that it contains in
solution, which acts on the organic and alkaline constituents of
the soil, and converts them into alimentary substances for plants;
and thirdly, in relation to the various other substances which it
holds in solution, and consequently supplies to the soil: as
potash, silica, &c., &o.
In those two latter respects, the waters used in irrigation must
be extremely variable, both from the sources from which they
are derived, and also from the groat difference which the water
of one river presents to that of another.
In estimating the value of river water, for instances, reference
must bo had to the country through which those rivers have
passed, as well as the particular formations of tho mountains in
which they rise. In India and many other parts, rivers run for
several hundreds of miles through countries charaotemod hy
many varieties of soil, and consequently their waters aro muon
affected at times.
Tho Nile is a celebrated instance of tho valuable substances
which river water at times holds in solution, and deposits over
tho country it inundates.
Tho rising of this riven* is owing to tho very heavy periodical
rains that fall in Abyssinia, from Juno to September.
Honeo, in Egypt, it begins to rise in tho former month, and
does not commence falling until tho end of tho latter; during
which tune a largo deposit is bestowed on tho lands which aro
inundated.
After tho waters have subsided, tho ground is found covered
with a rich mud, composed chiefly of argillaceous earth and
carbonate of lime ; which fortikos tho land to that degree, that
although it has been cropped continuously for the last 8000
yours, often yielding two crops in tho year, yet it retains its
ancient fertility, and requires the very smallest amount of
tillage.
But river water generally contains silica, potash, oxygen, and
other substances conducive to fertility, independent of tho extra-
ordinary matter contained during heavy rains. It is during dry


seasons that irrigation is so necessary, and therefore we could
only expect to find in the -water those substances ordinarily held
in solution.
Liebig tells ns “that the sugar cane and others of the same
tribe thrive luxuriantly; and delight in marshes, in argillaceous
soils, in streamlets, and other places, where the change of water
constantly renews the supply of dissolved silica.”
He likewise tells ns that the potash abstracted by grass plants,
is restored to the soil by an annual irrigation, in reference to
which he says, “In the vicinity of Liegen (in Nassau), from
three to five perfect crops are obtained from one meadow; and
this is effected by covering the fields with river water, which is
conducted over the meadow in spring, by numerous small canals.
This is found to ha of such advantage, that supposing a meadow
not so treated, to yield 1000 lbs. of hay, then from one thus
watered, from 4000 to 6000 lbs. are produced.”
Again, when alluding to the deposits by plants of excrementi-
tious matter in the soil, he shews how the irrigation of fields
affects lids matter by reason of the oxygen contained by the
water in solution, “In the soils in the neighbourhood of the
Bhino and Nile, which contain much potash, and where crops
can he obtained in close succession from the same field, the
fallowing of the land is superseded by the inundation; the
irrigation of meadows effects the same purpose.”
“It is because the waters of rivers and streams contain oxygen
in solution that it produces the most complete and rapid putrefac-
tion of the excrements contained in the soil which it penetrates,
and in which it is continually renewed.”
p “If it was the water alone which produced this result, marshy
meadows should be the most fertile.”
He here speaks of the effect it produces ou the exerementitious
matter alone; hut, as we have before seen, oxygen also effects a
disintegration of the alkaline constituents of the soil; hence,
lands that are irrigated with river water do not require to lie
fallow—but its being pursued in conjunction with the methods
of manuring I have recommended, renders a constant succession
of the same description of crops perfectly attainable. Let us
now glance at it in another light: viz., as affording the means
whereby the constituents of the soil are supplied to the roots of
plants in the only fonn that they can furnish nourishment; that
is in solution.
We find that roots can only receive food from the soil by the
aid of water, which, faffing on the land as rain, or being con-
ducted over it, as in irrigation, renders soluble the various
substances required by plants for then growth and devolopement.
Item this we perceive that although a soil may contain all
the other elements which conduce to the highest fertility, yet,
47


unless supplied with water, plants cannot grow on it, because
their roots cannot appropriate the rich stores which are present,
except through the medium of water ; and it follows that diu-ing
seasons of long continued dry weather, when the soil is parched
up, plants cannot extract from it the sustenance they require,
from the simple fact of water being absent; so that they
either become stinted in their growth, or are altogether killed.
In irrigating during hot dry weather, there is another feature
which most materially influences the plant; this is the vapour
which a hot sun causes to rise from irrigated lands.
This vapour, as it rises from the ground, of course passes up
through the foliage of _ the canes, in order to escape into the air;
but in its passage it is powerfully attracted by the leaves and
other green parts of the plants, and its moisture is made use of.
When the air is exceedingly dry from long continued drought
and hot weather, the creation of this moist atmosphere around and
amongst the growing canes must be highly beneficial; as the
external organs of assimilation are thereby supplied with the
means of exercising a more vigorous action, to the refreshment
and corresponding improvement of the whole plant.
Hence, it is apparent that irrigation benefits the plants both
by the food which it supplies to their roots, and the nourishment
that it affords to their loaves and other green parts.
MEMORANDA OF THE SUGAR OAN.E, BT DR. CAMPBELL.
1. Whatever may have boon the mode of reproduction in
several common vegetable forms, ordained, some of them for the
especial support of man, and some only to supply his minor
necessities, when they first sprang- from the earth at the flat
of the Creator, is a question which will be best left to the
mystery in which it has so long boon involved. The experience
of ages however has shown us manifestly that from our first
knowledge of thorn till now wo can only hope to perpetuate
thorn by natural offshoots from their roots, or from portions
cut from the living stem. One of them is the Sugar Oane. In
America frequent attempts have boon made to propagate this grass
by seed, but they have invariably failed. It comes into flower
indeed, and even produces seed; but these have always proved
sterile. Still all the beautiful organism remains, and notwith-
standing- the vanity of the effort, u unchecked it proceeds to the
riltimato object of all vital beings, the preservation of the species,
impotent only in the power of fecundation. Yet this power
left to luxuriate even in its barren attempts is adverse to the
productiveness of the plant; for it abstracts just so much from
its essential qualities as it contributes to the promotion and
maturation of the organs of reproduction. It is a wise maxim
therefore which directs the cultivator to prevent, by cutting- the


top of the Sugar Cane, the -weakening process of blossoming,
or technically, of arrowing, an expression derived from the
unique and splendid appearance of the plant when the organs
of fructification aro permitted to mature, and wave their silvery
glories in the breeze.
2. The vigor and conservative energies of all living things,
plants as well as animals, through ah their term of existence
have but one chief end and object, to which all their other at-
tributes are subservient, namely the preservation and propagation
of the species ; accordingly when they are allowed to ripen and
fructify all then’ vital strain, their vigor at this important time
are employed in carrying out these primary intentions ; and with
reference to the Sugar Oane it is concluded on good grounds
that the richness of- the juice is lessened and deteriorated by the
process. So that the principle of reproduction, secure in this
point of being unrestricted to a single mode, or a single
organ of regeneration, can afford to apply all its forces and. its
energies to bring tho plant, in every condition of its commercial
value, to the utmost stage of perfection attainable.
3. The size and productiveness of all varities of Sugar Oane
depend mainly on the nature of tho soil, but to a considerable
extent also on the temperature of the place. The Tahitan seems
to combine in itself all the best qualities, of the various kinds.
Although the soil of Tahiti is generally of the richest description,
yet this best of its productions will thrive in poor and effete lands
in which any other sort would degenerate and starve ; it also
resists tho effects of cold which would kill the young shoots of
other varities; and having by nature a strong robust and woody
stem it is fitted to withstand the force of those hurricanes which
formerly devastated and ruined the plantations of the West India
Islands. But its most inestimable quality consists in its pro-
ducing the best Sugar, which yields also the greatest amount of
crystallizable matter. Besides all, it is the quickest in growth,
the tallest in height, the largest in circumference, and it has the
longest internodes of all the known varities of Sugar Oane.
4. It was introduced into the West Indies and South America
in the year 1796 ; and it has now superseded all the old varieties,
especially in Jamaica, on account of its many superior qualities.
It comes to maturity in twelve months at farthest, and sometimes
in nine ; it weighs a third heavier, produces a sixth more juice,
and a fourth more Sugar than the Oreole. It is likewise an
important consideration in respect to the choice of Mud, that
there is less fecnlenoy and mucilage than in the others, from
which canfee its Sugar is more crystallizable.
6. Every node of the Sugar Cane in general has a single leaf
at the joint, and the ripeness of the particular internode may be
known by the withering and falling of its particular leaf, showing
E


that each internode of the same stem is in this rospeot inde-
pendent of the others above and below, and may become npo
before its neighbours. An acre may be expected to yield 30 tons
of Oanes.
6. The roots will continue to send up canes for twenty years if
the ground be properly treated and manured. In many plan-
tations the rows are kept full by merely filling with fresh cuttings
any vacancy that may have been caused by delay or accident.
It tillers like the other grasses to the extent of five or six stools,
which when they grow up are called ratoons (rejittous) ; and
grow nearly as large as the original, hut they have a tendency to
deteriorate in size annually. They may however he kept as good
as the original plant hy careful management, especially by good
manuring. Mr. Keating recommends manuring the Sugar Oano
with its own refuse. Tins was done before his great-grandfather
was born, as far back as the middle of the last century, Thorn is
no manure in fact like itself, because in it is returned all that it
takes from the ground; the sugar itself being chiefly carbon
and water which are derived from, the atmosphere.
7. When the oanes are out and the tops taken off, they are
conveyed without delay in carts or waggons to the mill, and im-
mediately subjected to the operation of pressing to prevent tho
juice from spoiling. The improved mill consists of throe
cylinders disposed in the form of a triangle whether it bo vortical
or horizontal. One roller in the latter ease, which is the most in
use, always stands over the other two. The uppermost is culled
the top roller, the first or front one next to the feeding board, is
called the feeder, and the hindermost one parallel with the feeder,
is called the delivering roller. The Oanes being cut short aro
placed upon the feeding board and spread out as evenly ns
possible and are seized by the feed rollers which give them tho
first pressing, and then the ingenious contrivance called tho dumh
returner, directs the megass back through the top and delivering
rollers, which give them the final squeeze, pressing out every
atom of saccharine moisture. Mr. Keating coo 1 y recommends
this old method of passing tho megass a second time through the
same rollers as an idea of his own; why, the practice is as old in
some form or other as the invention of Oane mills.
LIME IN CLARIFYING.
I quote the following from a English newspaper:—The use of
lime in the process of clarifying oane juice, has for its object tho
separation of most of the extraneous matters from tho sugar in
solution, which impurities combine with the lime in an insoluble
state. But the separation, to be complete, necessitates an
excess of lime, which excess remains in the clarified juice. True,
to make a good clarification, that is, to purify as much ns


possible by means of lime, so as to obtain a transparent liquor,
lime must be used to excess; the perlime, the azoted, the
protique matter, which in the cane juice form with the lime
combinations so much the more insoluble in the juice as they are
lade, i. e., combined with more lime. In a neutral or acid juice,
some of those matters remain in solution, hut they will diminish
in proportion to the quantity of lime left free after the clarifica-
tion. This excess of lime is without action on the crystallizahle
sugar, whilst on glucose or uncrystallizahle sugar, it is most
energetic. Under the double influence of lime, and the high
temperature at which the clarification is performed, the un-
crystallizahle sugar is destroyed, and is transformed into an
acid which combines itself with the lime, and produces a dark
red and even a dark blue, when this kind of sugar and the lime
are in sufficient quantities in the juice; it is for this reason that
the more lime used in the clarification, the more the defecated
jnice is discoloured; and it is on this account, also, that in
practice as little lime as possible is employed in the defecation.
But by putting an insufficient dose of lime at the defecation,
another inconvenience is met with —the liquor being foul, the
sugar becomes clammy, without grain, and cures badly, retaining
much molasses. Thus the sugar manufacturer finds himself
placed between two dangers, the one, in putting too little lime
at the defecation to avoid discolouring, and thereby obtain
sugars of a better colour, hut clammy, soft, and of a low
saccharimetrical grade ; the other, to put too much lime which
colours the juice, produces better crystals, hut of an inferior tint.
This strong colour produced by the excess of lime, increases
with the high temperature during the concentration, hut, ‘ 1 by
passing solutions of sugar through granulated animal charcoal, the
whole colour is discharged, and not only the colour, but the
whole of the mucilage and other impurities, aud the sugar is
made pure. Sugar as black as the darkest Port wine, can be
made as pure as water.
Granulated charcoal which is so successful in the European
sugar houses, has not been generally adopted in the sugar
colonies, as portable or pure water for washing;, and fuel for
rehmming the charcoal are very scarce in the tropics.
Messrs. Leplay and Ouisinier have sought to remedy this
defect by employing an agent requiring neither fuel nor water,
possessing the same properties as granulated animal charcoal,
but so energetic as to need very small doses, which makes it
inexpensive.
This new agent has not, like the acids, any decomposing action
on lime, otherwise it would liberate the organic matters combined
with the lime during the clarification. Prepared with pounded


animal charcoal tho new product has received the name of
“ sm-phosphated black.”
The action of tliis absorbent is described as being twenty-five
to thirty times more powerful than reburned charcoal. It must
bo imported from England or France. It is said that the rapid
notion which it exercises on the defecated juice, stops immediately
the destructive power of the lime, and produces a sugar well
purified with hold crystals, dry, hard, easily freed from tho
mother liquor, which drainage being reboiled, yields successively
a second and a third product, known in the sugar market as
syrup sugar.
The saccharimetrioal grade of the first product ranges between
94 and 95 degrees ; while pure, white stoved sugar, is rated 100.
Being no longer a raw but a semi-refined sugar, it does not
disolvo during its transit to Europe, which is a most important
consideration.
This improved sugar can he made with the old plant of a
West Indian sugar house, namely, the copperwall, a train of
kettles over a naked fire, only a few extra utensils occupying
five foot by ton, are required. The surpjwsphated black is used at
the rate of two pounds for every hundred imperial gallons of
cane juice.
Tho residue resulting from this treatment, mixed up with tho
solid part of tho scum, constitutes an excellent manure, which
contains a very large portion of phosphate of lime, and under a
form suitable for plants, particularly for the sugar cane. I
give this account because it is instructive, and the, process may
be gojie into by some manufacturers of sugar. I regret that I
cannot give tho cost, but it must be trifling compared with tho
benefits.
Comparative table by F. A. Bell, as to the Cultivation of the
Sugar Cano in New Orleans, United States, America, lat.
29 - 68 N., and in How South Wales, from 28 to 32-50 S. lat.
IN NEW OUEEANS, XT. 8. 29'68 N.
1. The average crops of sugar yield barely 2 tons to each acre.
2. —Tho average number of crops from the same roots are
barely two ; every 3 years fresh cane must be planted.
In 16 months tbo canes attain their full growth,, when, to save
them from destruction by frosts, they must be speedily cropped
and crushed and the juice panned, frequently working day and
night, and often on Sundays, to prevent fermentation.
3. The quality is well known as middling to inferior.
4. —Tho quantity of sugar produced from the juice is from 16
to 19 ozs. per gallon.
6.—The climate is semi-tropical, subject to severe frost and
great heat.
52


, 6.—The cost of labour ia from $240 to $250 (dollars) or, say,
from £4B to £5O per annum.
N.B.—The produce, 30 per cent, less than New South Wales.
7.—The coat of land suitable to grow sugar cane is from $lOO
to $l5O (dollars) or, say, from £2O to £3O per acre. When a
plantation is made, the planter reckons on 120 per cent., and in
Jamaica they look for more.
IN NEW SOUTH WAXES.
1. —At Brisbane Water, lat. 33°50 south, and at Port
Macquarie, lat. 31-50, the crops have exceeded 2J tons and'3
tons per acre, computed from an actual plantation of 25 acres of
sugar cane.
2. —The average number of crops horn the same roots are from
Bto 18! The cane does not attain its full growth under 18
months; and the cane can be cut at leisure at any time of the
year, as there are no frosts to injure the plants, and they should
be reared so as to ripen in rotation..
. 3.—The quality is strong grained sugar, and of good colour.
4. —The quantity of sugar produced is from 20 to 28 ozs. pe r
gallon of juice.
5. —The climate is semi-tropical, with .slight, and often no frost
in winter, and never such as to injure the cane, and the heat
generally moderate.
6. —The cost of labour is from £6O to £6B per annum.
N.B.—The advantages are 62 per cent, more than New Orleans.
7. —The first cost of land £1 per aero; clearing, reckon -£l3,
in all £l4 per acre; and on the Clarence or Richmond Rivers,
land can be got and cleared at a less cost, and the soil capable of
producing immense crops.
In Queensland the cane is inferior in produce, as it arrows or
flowers, and is weaker in juice.
The cultivation of sugar has invariably increased the wealth
of the countries capable of producing it, and New South Wales
possesses the following advantages :
1. —The produce from the non-flowering cane
exceed other countries by 30 per cent.
2. —The sugar cane plants will yield 12 to 15
crops, in place of 2, call this 8 ~
3. —The Custom House import duty is £5 per
ton, of course wordd not be payable by growers.. 14 ~
4. —The freight from sugar-growing countries
and landing expenses, call it as low as .......... 10 ~
Thus against, or to meet the expense of high
labour, a total of advantages is shewn of 62 per cent.
53


TABUS OF MANURES.
Ashes from tho engine boiler, evaporators, and rum still;
these divide into coal ashes and wood ashes.
Goulashes, variable; generally silica and alumina, with small
quantities of limo, sometimes magnesia, and also peroxide of
iron.
Wood ashes, variable; usually potash, lime, soda, magnesia,
silica, tho oxides of iron, and of manganese, chlorine, carbonic
acid, sulphuric acid, and phosphoric acid; sometimes alumina
occurs, and even oxide of copper, but both very rarely.
Cano trash and leases, in decay, become humus, and supply an
abundant store of carbonic acid and nitrogen to plants growing
in _ tho soil, in which they are embeded; thoir ashes contain
silicate of potash, carbonates of limo and potash, phosphates of
lime, soda, and magnesia, phosphoric acid, oxides of iron, &c., &o,
Feouleneios from manufactory, silicate of potash, phosphoric
acid, ammonia, and numerous other constituents.
Humus or vegetable matter in a state of decay, carbonic acid,
nitrogen, &c., &c.
Cow dung or sheep dung, phosphate of lime, silicates of potash,
or limo, common salt, &0., &c.
Cow wine, ammoniacal salts, uric acid, and salts of phosphoric
acid.
Horse dung and wine, generally silicates of potash and limo,
and different phosphates, ammoniacal salts, uric acid, salts of
phosphoric acid, &c.
Human foods, phosphates of limo and magnesia, nitrogen,
&0., &o.
Urine, urea, free laotio acid, and lactate of ammonia, &0., uric
acid, mucus of tho bladder, sulphate of potash, sulphate of soda,
phosphate of soda, phosphate of ammonia, chloride of sodium,
muriate of ammonia, phosphates of magnesia and limo, siliceous
earth and water. ( Berzelius 1 Analysis.)
Bonos, phosphates of limo, magnesia, &0., carbonate of lime,
&c, &e.
Guano, extremely variable, urate of ammonia, oxalate of
ammonia, oxalate of lime, phosphate of ammonia, phosphate of
ammonia and magnesia, sulphates of potash and soda, sal
ammoniac, phosphate of lime, clay and sand, water and organic
matters. (Analysis ly Fewer ay and Faugulin.)
Limo, common lime or quick lime.
Marl, carbonate of lime, clay and sand.
Clay,' alumina and silica, generally tinged with iron, lime,
magnesia, and other metallic oxides are occasionally present in
certain natural clays.
Band, silox or silica, carbonate of lime, &o.
54


Mud from rivers and ponds, argillaceous earth, corhonate of
lime, and vegetable matter.
Gypsum, sulphuric acid, lime, and water.
Salt, chloride of sodium, &c.
Salt-mater, chloride of sodium, sulphate of soda, sulphate of
lime, chloride of potassium, and oloride of magnesium.
Glmrcoal, carbon, is valuable as a manure by reason of the
quantities of carbonic acid, and ammonia, which if attracts from
the atmosphere, and supplies to the roots of plants.
Ohalh, variable, a friable carbonate of lime, sometimes con-
taining also small portions of alumina, oxide of iron and silica.
"When it is what is termed “soapstone” or “soapy chalk,” it
contains a predominant proportion of magnesia.
Soot, a pulverent charcoal condensed from smoke; pit coal
soot contains some sulphate and carbonate of ammonia, together
with bituminous matter. (According to Vre.')
The very valuable effects of human fosses, eow, horse, and sheep
dung and urine, in the production of wheat and other crops,
cannot he questioned, but their use as manures for sugar cane,
especially when they are fresh, is decidedly injurious, because it is
not a great growth which is required, but the growth which will
give you the greatest quantity of crystallizahle sugar, and little
molasses. To go into the argument here would take up too
much space, hut after careful reading, I am fully justified in
condemning such manures for sugar cane, by the opinions of
Liebig, Girovedin’s prize essay on manures, chap. 5, Boussin-
gault, aud Eichardson. In such dungs we find valuable
substances, hut their unavoidable admixture with mine, points
ithem out as unfit for sugar caue.
The following are taken from the “Herald,’" of Ith April, 1865.
SUGAR CANE PLANTING IN THE ISLAND OF
MAURITIUS AND NEW SOUTH WALES.
No. 1.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sib,, —I have just arrived in this country, and since have had the.
opportunity of reading with deep interest some very valuable
•writings in the Sydney Morning JteraU respecting various experi-
ments, quite successful (but unfortunately made on too small a
scale), of sugar growing in New South Wales, whose suitable
climate and richness of the soil render it so well adaptable for
that cultivation.
55


It is manifest that public attention here is now converging in a
very determined way towards that important question. All, in
fact, in this country seems to promise and ensure large and re-
munerative profits. You have at your disposal thousands of
acres of cheap, suitable, and prolific lands. You are so favourably
situated that you have not to fear the periodical visitation, as in
Mauritius, of destructive hurricanes or cyclones, such as the one
which happened there on the 12th of February last. You have
herds of cattle that you can buy at almost a nominal cost. You
have in this town large and powerful foundaries, such as the one
belonging to Messrs. P. N. Russell and 00,, which I have visited,
and where all machinery required for the manufacturing of
sugar can be cast and finished as well as in England, and at
prices as low and cheap as in the mother country; and you have
sure and remunerative markets for your own sugars, all over
Australia and the adjacent islands, besides the European markets,
which would also of course be opened to you.
With such advantages, how is it then that up to this moment
no sugar plantation with manufactories have yet been started,
and what may be the latent cause that has hindered the entering
into that lino of so lucrative a cultivation ? I have made in-
quiries, and was, to my great astonishment, answered; The want
of cheap labour.
I must, moreover, add, that I was not a little surprised to seo,
first in the Brisbane papers, and afterwards in the Australasian
of Melbourne, that the exclusive cause of the great introduction
of sugar in the Island of Mauritius was, in consequence of her
being able to procure Ooolie labourers.
Now, as a British subject and a native of “Mauritius,” I havo
the right to beg to correct that error, as I am certain that her
prosperity was never exclusively brought about by the provisions
of Indian labour, but rather by the prolificacy of tho sugar plant
itself, which could be cultivated almost all over the island, by the
introduction and use there of Peruvian guano which thus allowed
her lands to yield sugar at two tons and a half (2-J) to three (3)
tons per acre. That manure has undoubtedly contributed to sot
that island on the actual footing of the large yearly average pro-
duction of 270 millions (or 135,000 tons) of sugar; and also the
food prices obtained there for that useful and necessary article of
the consumption of which increases daily throughout tho
habitable globe, and by far outstrips its production, I shall go
further, and say, there cannot exist any feeling of jealousy, that
if hundreds of new plantations wore to bo established, the price
would not be materially reduced.
Respecting the Ooolie labour at “Mauritius,” I have now to
say that I wished to see tho difference of the outlay and expense
for starting a sugar estate in that island and in “New Mouth


'Wales.” ■ Therefore I have made that “statement” which I have
this day the honour to address to you, herein enclosed, begging
that you will he pleased to have it published in the Sydney Morn-
ing Serald, should you deem it of sufficient interest to the com-
munity, and especially to the parties who might he ready to begin
at once that most lucrative branch of cultivation.
There are many particulars bearing upon the practical and
working part of the business itself, which it would have been too
long for me to insert in that “statement,” —but which I would
be ready and most happy to give, before I leave this country, to
those who might wish to have them.
The topics to which I allude in this accompanying “ state-
ment” (as Icing connected together , I may say), are ;
1. Coolie labour at Mauritius and its cost.
2. The high price for land and draught animals to work on
the plantation.
3. The varieties of canes cultivated, and a few words in answer
to the erroneous opinion propagated (here in Sydney) by a few
gentlemen of the,highest respectability, who seem to believe that
it is necessary that the cane should carry arrow or flower to yield
sugar.
4. A comparative estimate hetAveen “Mauritius” and “New
South Wales,” as to the money required to start a sugar estab-
lishment in either of them, with the respective results.
I think I have been able to prove most clearly, as it Avill be
manifest to every one, in that estimate, that you will here lay out
less money, make larger profits by sugar growing, than in
“Mauritius,” and rid yourself of the anxiety, annoyances, and
risk of the lives of your labourers, and that you can get your
work done as ohoap and cheaper by your European labourers, all
healthy, strong, and intelligent, than at Mauritius, by her
Indians. In a word, I remain deeply conAunced that “New.
South Wales” is lying under far more favourable circumstances
than that island, for sugar growing.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Yours very obediently,
T. DE KEATING.
Jamison-street, College-buildings, No. 2. 4th April.
No, 2.
Coolie Laboub at “Matjbitius,” and its Cost.
That island draws all her labourers from India. On their
arrival there they have to fulfil a contract of five years’ engage-
ment, at the expiration of which they have right to a free return
passage to their native country. According to our immigration
regulations, Indian females are also introduced there in the pro-
portion of thirty-three per cent, of the males. However, every


emigrant can take Ms wife with Mm i£ he chooses; the passage
money for all those females being also paid by that island. They
have, too, right to a free return passage to India. Though intro-
duced at the colonial expense, still they are not bound to work
therefore the money paid for their introduction must consequently
increase the average cost of the male labourers.
Tlio passage money for a Coolio labourer from India is £l5
For Ms return to India 15
Por a fonmlo, in the proportion of ono-third 10 10
That labourer being only engaged for live years, it is noeosaary to bavo
an average of that sum for each year to divide those £4O by his time
of sorvioo, which will give for the first year £8
Por his wages whon still now, £6 per annum, and £lO when ho has be-
come an old immigrant—average 8
£ifi
Per his rations, per annum 6
Por extra pay and extra rations during tho six months of crop timo, given
as an encouragement. 3
Eations to hia wife 2
Average cost of a coolio’s labour £27
Many other expenses should also he added to that sum, such
as tho purchase of medicaments, doctor’s fees, and too often the
large expenses those emigrants cost whon sent to the quarantine
station.
I will further observe that those Indians, on their arrival at
Mauritius, are generally in a very weak condition, and many in a
complete state of emaciation, in spite of the good care taken of
them on hoard during their passage, and are for many months
unfit for hard work. Mortality is sometimes great among them
before they got accustomed to tho new climate; a circumstance
which is then a great loss to the planters, and must of comae con-
tribute to enhance tho average yearly cost of the remaining
doolies. The whole taken into consideration, will allow me to
repeat here tho opinion generally admitted by the planters, that
a doolie labourer costs at least, if not much more, than £3O per
annum.
The Government of “Mauritius” have very extensive estab-
lishments for immigration at Port Louis, dalcutta, Madras, and
Bombay. These various offices cost yearly a very largo sum of
money, and weigh very heavily on tho colony. It would he too long
for mo to outer hero into all tho particulars respecting that matter.
Another item, which also hears very heavily on the planters,
is the purchase of draught animals lor work on the pl antation.
The Preach Poitou mules are tho most esteemed, and cost £4O
each. An estate having 500 tuns of sugar to make, must buy
about 50 of these animals at tho above price; it will bo an outlay
of £2OOO. Tho want of extensive pasture lands does not alloy of
having bullocks in a sufficient number.
58


Choice land in Mauritius fetches such high prices that there is
no possible parallel between its value there and in Now South
"Wales. As a proof, I will only quote the following fact: a fine
sugar estate of 2000 acres of land, with a crop which was valued
to yield (in the year the sale took place) 3,000,000 of pounds, or
1500 tons of sugar, was sold for the sum of £120,000. I might,
if necessary, quote many other sales similar to that one.
Now, before alluding to the sugar-cane plantation at Mauritius,
I must give a short description of the varieties grown there.
The three varieties carrying arrow, or flower, are—the Penang,
Ghiinghan or Bamboa, and Salangore. They enter into efflor-
escence about fifteen months after they have been planted, and
in the proportion of one to ten. While in this state of arrowing,
they (those stalks that have arrowed) become almost hollow, lose
their saccharine richness, and will give very little juice. They
soon decay. The tops or cuttings of those arrowed stalks are not
at all fit for new plantations —their flowers bear no reproducible
seed.
The following canes belong to that variety which never flowers,
nor carries arrows. They are known under the name of the
“ Bourbon caneits rind is of a deep violet colour; and the
“Diard,” —of a yellowish colour. This-latter is imported from
Batavia.
These two varieties always yield a groat deal of juice and
sugar. They are (but especially the Bourbon, or violet one) now
almost exclusively planted throughout Mauritius. Nevertheless,
I think it wise to cultivate, as far as possible, several varieties,
known to he good, at the same time on an estate.
My personal opinion, based upon close observation and long
practice, allows me to assert and maintain that it is not at all
necessary that the cane should carry arrow or flower to yield
sugar.
No. 3.
Comparative Estimate of the amount of Money required at
Mauritius, to purchase 100 acres of Land, plant them with
Sugar Canes, ahd manufacture the juice, and the result,
leaving out the profits from the distillation of Eum—and of
the sum that would be required to start a similar establish-
ment in New South Woles —and the result.
I must at first say that a sugar estate should be at least 1000
acres of land —but at all events ought never to be less than 600
or 600, because that portion of land that may have grown canes
for a certain number of years must then be allowed to rest for a
certain time ; for if the cane is known to yield large crops, it is
also known to be very exhausting to the soil.


However, I will, only as an instance, speak of the purchase of 100
acres of laud already cleared and ready for cultivation, at tho
avoraga of £3O por aero—(sometimes £4O and moro is paid for
ohoioo land). But I will say £3O . £3,000
For weeding, holing, and planting, keeping them in a good state of
cleanliness, and manufacturing the same canos, it is necessary to
havo at least 100 Indian labourers, at £27 each por annum, for
24 months 5,400
Tho purchasing of various implements as pickaxes, hoes, handspikes,
&0., &c., &a 20
25 French Poitou mules, nt £4O each 1,000
For their food, and cure to he taken of thorn, at £2O eaoli por annum 500
For carts, waggons, and harness 200
100 tons of wood, at 12s. (This wood to begin the manufacturing of
the juice. Ooal costs, £2 10s. average a ton) 60
An engineer, at £3OO por annum, for six months only of tho crop time 126
'£10,305
MAOHINEIIY AND HUIEDING !
1 crushing mill of 24 horso-powor, with boiler £1,500
1 juice receiver 10
4 charcoal clarifiers, at £6O each, 200
4 juice filters, at £3O each .. 120
1 evaporating sot of pans 160
0 Gaddosdon’s revolving and orystalising pans, at £BO each 480
8 coolers, nt £l5 each, and various other copper basins. 130
4 centrifugal machines, at £BO oaoh 320
1 wooden shod, 200 foot by 40 wido 300
£3,220
Insurance on £3,220 of machinery and building, at 2i por cent .... 80
Total amount paid at Maiiritius for land, cultivation, manufacturing,
machinery, Mid building, at tho end of 24 months £13,005
lIBSUDT AT THE END OP 24 MONTHS,
100 aoros of sugar canos will yield at least (3) three tons of sugar
por acre—3oo tons at £25 por ton £7,500
The second crop will give (12 months after) 2 tons per acre. 200 tons
at £26 por ton 5,000
The third crop will give as much as the second, hut I will say ono
ton. 100 tons at £25 por ton 2,500
£16,000
To this should be added tho proceeds from distillation of molasses,
which would give at least 20,000 gals, of rum, at Is. 6d, por gal. 1,500
Total result at Mauritius £16,500
Leaving a net balance, say of £2,000. Besides, it must be ob-
served tlxat that estate now remains tbe property of the planter.
It must, moreover, be remarked that the above sugars, were they
made in New South 'Wales, and sold there, would bring in that
market at least £32 a ton, which would then give the total result
of £19,200 instead of £16,000. (This latter sum proceeding
from the Mauritius market).
With so powerful and complete machinery as the above, the
quantity of a thousand (1000) tons of sugar might be yearly very
easily manufactured, with some additional expenses for an in-
crease of cultivation.


The foregoing estimate, compared with one I have under my
eyes respecting the cost of labour in New South Wales, and
emanating from good authority—and also compared with private
and very valuable data I have obtained since my short residence
here concerning the cost for clearing, ploughing, and cultivating
land in this country—shows me very clearly and peremptorily
that if at Mauritius a hundred (100) Indian labourers are neces-
sary for a plantation of 100 acres of laud, one-fourth (J) of
European labourers would be more than sufficient to perform the
same work within the same time in New South Wales.
I have now to prove before concluding what would be required
in. New South Wales to purchase a hundred (100) acres of land,
with sugar cane, and manufacture the juice—taking the outlay
for machinery and building the same as in Mauritius, and the
result within the same time :
No. 4.
Tub pueohasinq 100 acres of land already cleared and ready for tiro
plough, in Now South Wales, at £i per aero £4OO
Hour men (European, labourers) with two teams, will plough and
plant them in two months, at £BO each per annum 3io
During the crop time (for 6 months), 60 young lads would ho
necessary, at £6O each per annum 1,600
Eor fencing these 100 acres of land at Bs. per rod, 50G 200
Oost of 100,000 sugar-cane tops (for the beginning only), at £1 per
cent 1,000
2 harrows, £6 ; 2 ploughs, £6; 1 clay breaker, £l5 ; 4 spades, £1;
6 rakes, £1; 6 hand-hoes, £1; making a total of about 30
60 bullocks at £4 each 200
Carts, waggons, and yokes 200
To meet unforeseen expenses which may hero have escaped my
attention., 1,000
£4.860
Eor machinery and building, as in Mauritius 3,220
Total amount required in New South Wales lor land, cultivation,
manufacturing, machinery, and building, at the end of 24
months £8,370
The sum say of £BOOO paid hero against that of £13,600 required at
Mauritius, leaving from the beginning about £3OOO in favour of New South
Wales estate.
Supposing now, from the well-known richness of your land here, that the
above 100 acres of oanos would yield the same quantity of sugar (if not
more) as in the island of Mauritius, six hundred (600) tons within the same
time, at a ton, you have tiro result of £19,200, and adding to it the £l5OO
from the proceeds of rum, you get the total amount of £20,700, from which
must of course be deducted the sum of £BOOO for the oost—leaving as a net
profit to your planter the sum of £ 12,000.
It is useful for me to add that the above estate being now quite free, will,
by its own intrinsic value, increase the amount of profits for all future years.
I hope and believe that, by the above comparative estimate, I have been
able to prove, mathematically, that Now South Wales can produce sugar
under much more favourable circumstances than the island of Mauritius.
Sydney, 4th. April.
T. DE K.


Tabw No. I.
TABLE REPRESENTING THE SPECIFIC!
OE SUGAR OF VARIOUS
GRAVITY OF SOLUTIONS
STRENGTHS.
SPECIFIC
GRAVITY.
ft t/J
•*} pj
!jO
ge-
ls
Ri d
w g
ft ™
« <
-J PM
O o
U05
(A rl
S(H
£} £J
o 5>
as
w o
“s
M H
U W
G R
ra yj
S S
3 *
ea
sg
II
aa
m t»j
si
«a
t>S
aooo
•00
1057
•14
1118
■28
1187
•42
1203
•66
1001
‘01
1002
‘IB
1123
•20
1103
•43
1208
•67
1008
•02
1000 ,
■18
1128
•30
1100
■44
1273
•58
1012
•03
1000
•17
1133
•31
1201
‘10
1279
■60
101(1
•01
1073
•IS
1137
•32
1200
‘40
1281
•GO
1020
•05
1077
•19
1142
•33
1210
•47
1289
•61
1021
•00
1081
■20
1117
•01
1220
‘18
1205
•02
1028
■07
1085
•31
1102
■35
1225
•40
1301
•83
1033
•08
1000
•22
1107
■38
1280
•00
1307
•04
1030
•09
1008
•23
1102
•37
1235
•51
1312
•06
1010
■10
1100
*21
1107
•38
1211
•52
1817
•00
1015
•11
1101
■25
1172
•31)
1248
•63
1321
■000
1040
•12
1100
■20
1177
•10
1262
I'Ol
1053
•13
$1113
•27
1182
•41
1267
•05
Table No. II.
TABLE OF TUB DENSITY OF SOLUTIONS|OF SUGAR ACCORDING
TO THE SCALE OF BBAUMB’S SAOOHAROMUTER.
'S
CO £
9g
w ft
ft
| a 1
6 o
fH
«ri
is
§ B
g ft M
m o
o
rH
5j
gg
IB
w ft
ft
t/5
ft 9
O
rH
Ih
$ H
w %
ft
9 J
“ s
rH
s,.
sg
□ ft
S s
w ft
ft
| 5 |
■ B g
H
1
;-ois
8
•144
IB
•270
22
■400
20
■041
2
•035
0
•103
10
•204
23
*424
30
•500
8
*052
10
•182
17
■310
24
•443
81
■680
4
■070
U
•200
18
■334
20
•402
32
.001
5
•087
12 ,
•218
10
•362
20
■481
83
■022
6
•104
13
•237
20
•370
27
•000
34
•044
7
•124
1-1
•258
21
*388
28
•C21
85
•600
62


Table No. III.
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN" SPECIFIC
GRAVITY
AND PER
CENTS. OVER PROOF AT
60 o.
PROPORTION, BY WEIGHT OF
ALCOHOL AND WATER.
SPECIFIC
PER CENT. •
OVER OR
ABSOLUTE
ALCOHOL BY
REMARKS.
GRAVITY AT GQo
WEIGHT
IN 100 PARTS.
SPIRIT.
UNDER PROOF.
WATER.
100
2-2
8208
60
87-0
G’9
8306
55
83*2
11-6
8484
50
79*5
0)
&
IT'l
8506
45
70*4
1
-s
21-8
8C4G
40
73*0
OT
27-5
8723
35
&
09-2
3
•§
33-4
8797
30£
66*7
•s
39-7
8809 -
25
63-5
8
p.
,46-7
8939
20
00-6
© -d
■ 53 -a
64*3
9008
16
57-7
AS
;62-7
9075
10
54*5
$ S
» 5
.....
n-3
9137
5
51*9
© bn
81*2
9200
Proof
49'0
d’S
+»o
91*9
9259
6
40-3
91*2
100
9318
10
43-4
a to
85*0
DD74
15
40*8
■si
g g
75-5
9426
20
38*3
9 g
g>S
67*0
9475
25
35-6
•i'g
■^1
69*9
9521
30
33-0
■15
52-0
9564
25 &
30-5
K o>
,2 W
*g
46*5
9602
40p
28*1
1
40*8
9638
45
25*8
A
35-6
9671
50
23-3
1
30*7
9702
55
31-0
1 •
20'3
9732
60
18'5
22*3
0700
65
191
A
&
18*5
9789
70
13*8
63


PRODUCE 01? ONE AGUE, IN JUIOE AND SUGAR, WHEN IT
YIELDS TWENTY-FIVE TONS OF DANES.
' t
«pS
AMOUNT
OP
LBS. OP RUOAll
CONTAINED.
LESS IN MOLASSES AND
3KIMM1NUS AT 42 PER CENT,
AMOUNT OP DRY
YIELDED BY ONE
I.BH.
HUUAU
ACRE.
e S g
gg
JUICE IN
MS.
18 PER
CENT,
20 PER
CENT.
22 PER
CENT.
38 PER
CENT.
20 PER
CENT.
22 PER
CENT.
18 PER
CENT.
20 PER
CENT.
22 PER
CENT.
70
30,200
7050
7840
8024
LBS.
588
LDfi.
053
LBS.
718
LBS.
0408
LBS.
7187
LIES.
7000
75
&2,000
7600
MOO
0240
030
700
770
0030
7700
8470
80
o
o
CO
r^T
-rH
8001
8000
0850
072
740
821
7303
82U
0035
PRODUCE
OP ONE ACRE., IN JUICE AND SUGAR
YIELDS THIRTV TONS OR DANES.
WHEN IT
1
LBS. OP SUGAR
LEHS IN M01AH8KB AND
AMOUNT OP DRY
SUGAR
Bt @ (3
OP
CONTAINED.
SKIMMINUS AT 12 PER CENT,
YIELDED DY ONE
ACRE.
Cj
”11
JUIOB IN
EDS.
18 PER
20 PER
22 PER
18 MB
20 PER
22 PER
18 MR
20 MR
23 PER
CENT.
CENT,
CENT.
0ETT.
CENT.
CENT.
CENT.
CENT.
CENT
70
47,040
8408
0,408
10,348
LBS.
70S
LBS.
702
LBS.
802
LBS.
7763
LBS,
8016
LBS,
0480
75
50,400
0002
10,080
11,088
767
840
924
8335
0240
10,104
80
63,760
0077
10,752
11,827
8(10
800
004
8871
0800
11,178
Largo quantities of woody fibre and water, are not desirable in
tbo sugar cane; but the sugar in abundance, and as pure as can
be induced.
An acre of plant-canes, in rich soils, generally produces from
twenty-five to thirty tons of canos, ready dressed for the mill; and,
if the superior description of mill —of 5 rollers—be used, and tho
saturation of tho partially expressed stalks, such as already
described, be followed, there is no doubt whatever but that
fully 80 per cent of tho juice may bo obtained; and that such
juice will declare a higher density than in any other caso, by
reason of tho whole crystalline deposit in tho cells being 1 obtained
by that peculiar method, which has never been done in Queens-
land or hero. In the following calculations, tho range is taken
of from 25 to SO tons; and a careful examination of tho products
will make apparent the enormous loss sustained by tho planting
interest, from tho present very negligent and wasteful modos of
cultivation and manufacture: especially tho latter, in tho
Mauritius and now in Queensland, -whore improper systems have
been introduced, at least so I am told.


Sh-om these statements, it appears that if we obtain from our
canes 70 per cent, only, of their weight in juice, and if that
juice is only of a density of 10° hy Baume’s Saccharometer
(about 18 per cent.) we may secure from them, in the former
case (25 tons of canes per acre), 6,468 lbs. (about 2 8-9 tons) of
dry sugar, and 588 lbs. of molasses; in the latter case (30 tons
per acre) we may obtain 7,763 lbs. (nearly 3-|- tons) of dry sugar,
and 705 lbs. of molasses, from one acre of land.
But if the density of the syrup should be 120 Baume, or 22 per
cent, at 26 tons of canes per acre, we might obtain 7,906 lbs.
(more than 3$ tons) of dry-sugar, and 718 Ihs. of molasses, from
one acre ; or if at 30 tons of canes per acre, then 9,486 lbs.
(nearly tons) of dry sugar, and 862 lbs. of molasses, from one
acre of land.
If we go up the scale to 80 per cent of juice, from 30 tons of
canes, at 12° Baume, we arrive at the startling amount of
3.1,173 Ihs. (or very nearly 5 tons) of dry sugar, and 994 lbs. of
molasses from one acre of land.
This is certainly double the quantity of sugar usually potted
from an acre of good plant canes in many sugar growing coun-
tries. I say potted, because a ton hogshead seldom weighs more
than 1,700 to 1,800 lbs. when it reaches Europe; but, in addition
to the sugar actually potted, we must allow for about 60 to 80
gallons of molasses per ton : say from tons, about 175 gallons
of molasses, or 175 gallons of nun.
N.B.—Baumo’s glass Saccharometer’s can bo bought from Mr.
Tornaghi, 312, Q-eorge-street, Sydney, at from seven to ton
shillings each.
65


iNOW PUBLISHED : Pi’ice 1 l"5s.; J»;v _pos4t, 48s.
A NEW, REVISED, AND GREATLY. ENLARGED EDITION
OF
PLUMKETT’S
AUSTRALIAN MAGISTRATE,
EDITED BV
W. 11. WILKINSON, Esq.,
BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
Sydney -J, J, STOOHE, Publisher, George Street,
OPPOSITE 3T. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
Parties requiring copies of the above work will please to sonu i.Ur orders without •Vbw, to the publisher,
us in eoii-cquenee of the great expense, only a limited number of copies are stru.se ofT.
Also, Price Is.; by post Is. 3d.
SI JC 3L» IBL CULTIVATION:
Plain and practical directions for Planting the Mulberry and treatment
of the Silk Worm,
BY
JOHN W. BATE.
Sydney; —J. J. MOORE, Publisher, George Street,
OPPOSITE ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
Price 2s. 6d.; by post 2s. 9d.
PRACTICAL TREATISE ON
SHEEP BREEDING AND WOOL GROWING,
BY
THOMAS SHAW,
A Practical Australian Sheep Farmer of nany years’ experience.
Sydney:—J. J. MOORE, Publisher, George-street,
OPPOSITE ST. ANDREW'S CATHEDRAL.
Price Is.; by post Is. 3d.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE CAUSE AND PREVENTION
OP
BUST H 2«r W JBE lE3 A. X,
BY
J, MONTAGUE SMITH, Settx.ee.
SydneyJ, J. MOORE, Publisher, George Street,
opposite st. Andrew’s cathedral.
