

D r I-tl* ‘ Tj
PRICE K\ L>LI 1(1
liHißiiaiHHge
l*ps| / ’ MtfSl
HAND BOOK |g
OF INFORMATION
FOR EMIGRANTS B
OF INFORMATION
FOB EMIGRANTS
NEW ZEALAND, AUSTEALIA,
CANADA, THE UNITED STATES,
BRITISH COLUMBIA,
AND THE
RED RIVER SETTLEMENTS.
ALEXANDER MIDDLETON.
ILLUSTRATED,
Gil GLASGOW:
WILLIAM LOVE & JAMES NIMMO, St Enoch Square.
P I LIVERPOOL: PHILIP, SON, & NEPHEW,
49 and 51 South Castle Street.
PJj
I—l O' 1870.
||3| Printed at the City Steam Printing Works, 32 &34 Ann St.
jjjiIBBBBBBBBIii


H
c a
w
s
55
o
5
2
<
55
-<
55
3
3
O
CQ
c 5
g
H
g


HAND BOOK
INFORMATION FOR EMIGRANTS
NEW ZEALAND, AUSTRALIA,
CANADA, THE UNITED STATES,
BRITISH COLUMBIA,
AND THE
RED RIVER SETTLEMENTS.
I LLU STRATE D,
GLASGOW:
PRINTED AT THE CITY STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
32 & 34 ANN STREET.




CONTENTS.
NEW ZEALAND.
Otago,, : *
Auckland,
Canterbury, .... .13
AUSTRALIA.
New South Wales, ...... 19
Queensland, .... , . 28
Victoria and South Australia, 37
Western Australia and Tasmania, . .44
CANADA.
Ontario, . . . . • • • .51
Red River, ...••••
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, . . .33
BRITISH COLUMBIA.
Hudson’s Bay Territory, ... . . 69
THE UNITED STATES.
New York and Pennsylvania, . • . . . 77
Virginia, 8b
The Western States, ...... 87
California and the Pacific States, ..... 93
Colorado and the Territories, . 190
Utah and the Mormons, ....•• 103
THE RIVER PLATE COUNTRY.
Buenos Ayres, . . . . • • .115
The Argentine Republic, . . . • • .123
Homes in Kansas, . . . « . .129
Conclusion, . . . . . . ,133


ILLUSTRATION’S.
Settlers Clearing an American Forest.—[ Frontispiece .]
Sydney Cove, Port Jackson, Australia, . . IS'
Post Office, Forest Creek, Gold Diggings, Australia, . . 28
Gold Point, Forest Creek, Australia, ... 30


FIELDS FOR EMIGRANTS.
NEW ZEALAND.
OTAGO.
New Zealand is one of the most favourite resorts of the Scot-
tish emigrant. The reasons for this preference are various, but
probably the chief is its resemblance to Scotland. Unlike America
and Australia, New Zealand is a mountainous country, and the
climate is more temperate than any of the Australian colonies.
New Zealand, as its name implies, was originally discovered by the
Dutch—the discoverer being Tasman, the same who first discovered
Tasmania, formerly known as Van Dieman’s Land. Although first
discovered by Tasman, New Zealand was first thoroughly explored
by Captain Cook on his first voyage, in 1769, who took formal
possession of the country in the name of his sovereign. From
Captain Cook’s time up to 1814, the islands were the resort of
whaling ships, but in that year a settlement was formed in the Bay
of Islands by some missionaries, which encountered various fortunes.
In 1840 New Zealand became a British colony; but scarcely had the
colony been formed when a native war broke out, which retarded its
progress. But from 1844 to 1860 the colony enjoyed peace, and its
progress was very rapid.
The great distance of New Zealand from Europe has acted and
will always act against emigration on an extensive scale; and had it
not been for free and assisted passages granted by the various
Provincial Governments, the peopling of the country by European
settlers would have been much slower than it has been. New
Zealand, it may be stated, consists of three islands, which, when
they were first colonised, were designated New Ulster, New Munster,
and New Leinster. This Irish nomenclature has, however, been set


aside, and the three islands are now known as North Island, Middle
Island, and South Island (or Stewart’s Island). The Islands lie
between 34 deg. 12 min. and 47 deg. 20 min. South latitude.
Extending over thirteen degrees of latitude, the climate is, of course,
varied ; but the difference is not so great as might be expected.
The most valuable of the three is the Middle Island—better known
by the name of Otago—which was originally a Scotch settlement,
and is still to some extent under the control of the Otago Association,
the head quarters of which are in Edinburgh. Emigration to Otago
is conducted almost exclusively from the Clyde by ships sailing
monthly under the auspices of the Association. Nothing could be
better than the arrangements of the Association, which not only
gives every necessary information to the intending emigrant, but
also grants free and assisted passages to suitable parties. In a
handbook, printed in Dunedin, the capital of Otago, last year,
information of the most reliable description, up to the latest date, is
to be found. In order to give the reader a correct view of Otago,
we cannot do better than give some extracts from the handbook
published under the authority of the Government of Otago :
* The systematic colonisation of Otago commenced in 1848. Previous
to that year, however, the bays indenting the sea-coast were fre-
quented by the crews of whaling-vessels, who resorted thither for the
purpose of “trying out” (i.e., melting down) the produce of their
expeditions. Mr John Jones was the first actual settler. The loca-
tion originally selected by that gentleman, at Waikouaiti Bay is now
the site of a thriving township. But attention had been attracted
to the district in other quarters. As early as 1844 the late Edward
Gibbon Wakefield conceived the idea of establishing a Scottish set-
tlement in the then unoccupied portion of the Middle Island; and at
the instance of the New Zealand Company the Colonial Office in-
structed Governor Fitzroy to set aside the present Province of Can-
terbury for the New Edinburgh settlement. A further investigation
and examination of the country, conducted by Mr Tuckett, caused a
deviation from the original design ; and, in accordance with that
gentleman’s recommendation, the site of the settlement was finally
located in Otago, where a block of 400,000 acres was purchased from
the native proprietors of the soil on behalf of the then recently
formed Otago Association. The first immigrants, ninety in number,
arrived in the John Wickliffe, on the 23rd March, 1848. Amongst
them was the leader of the expedition, Captain William Cargill, and


his family. The Philip Laing followed with the second detachment
of 236 immigrants, arriving on the 11th April in the same year. On
board the latter vessel was the Rev. Thomas Burns—now Dr Burns
—the first pastor and spiritual adviser of the infant settlement.
This venerable gentleman is happily still spared to witness the
prosperity of the land, and of the Church whose foundations he has
so materially assisted to lay, and whose growth he has so carefully
tended. It was originally designed to establish a settlement based
exclusively on Free Church principles, whence it occurred that the
name of Dr Chalmers was given to the principal port. But this
intention was subsequently abandoned, and questions of religion or
country have long since ceased to be insisted upon. Otago is there-
fore open to all who may desire to select it as their abiding place,
irrespective of creed or nationality. With one brief interval, Captain
Cargill was from the commencement the ruler of the settlement. In
the year 1852 the Imperial Parliament passed the New Zealand Con-
stitution Act, by which Otago was erected into a Province. Captain
Cargill was thereupon elected as the Superintendent, an office which
he continued to fill, with honour to himself and advantage to the
country, till 1860, when, worn down by age and infirmity, he retired
from public life. “ Seven months afterwards,” to quote from a con-
temporary record, “ on the 6th August, the gallant soldier, indefati-
gable colonist, and true Christian, departed this life,” A public
monument, decreed to his memory, has since been erected in the
Octagon ; but he has a more enduring monument in the grateful
remembrances of the people with and for whom he so long and so
arduously laboured. In December, 1860, the handful of hardy immi-
grants who first took possession of the soil had largely increased in
numbers. The population at that date was, by computation, 12,961.
The revenue of the financial year ending September 30th in the same
year, amounting to L. 85,000, furnishes other and material evidence of
the growing prosperity of the Province of that period. In the next
year, 1861, the district of Murihiku, or Southland, was severed from
Otago, and constituted a separate Province, whereby Otago lost a
portion of her territory, with about 3000 inhabitants. But imme-
diately thereafter occurred the gold discoveries, which more than
counterbalanced the loss of Southland, and lent renewed impetus to
progress. Many of those whom the gold-fields attracted to Otago
subsequently returned to their former haunts in Australia, or wan-
dered elsewhere; but a large proportion settled with their families in


the Province, and have been amalgamated with the original settlers.
By the census taken in December, 1867, the total population was
found to be close upon 49,000 souls. Deducting residents in South-
land, who were included in the computation of 1860, it will be
seen that in seven years the population has sustained nearly a five-
fold increase—a rate of progression which speaks well for the past,
and promises well for the future. The revenue has advanced in pro-
portion. From the balance-sheet for the financial year ending March
31st, 1868 (recently laid before the Council by the Provincial Trea-
surer, Mr Julius Vogel), it appears that the amount of revenue re-
ceived for that period was close upon L. 300,000. This is exclusive of
a large sum retained by the Colonial Government for general purposes/
The discovery of gold in Otago in 1861 led to important results in
the colony. The Otago gold-fields are very valuable, as well as of
great extent; one-half of the territory, it is believed, contains gold,
and the yield of gold is likely to increase for some time. The native
war has naturally retarded the progress of Otago as well as the other
settlements; but by this time it must be over, and it is not likely
that such an occurrence will take place again, as in a few years the
whole of the natives will have died out or become amalgamated with
the colonists. For the benefit of those who feel inclined to take ad-
vantage of the favourable terms offered by the Otago Association, we
quote the following useful hints supplied by Mr Colin Allan, immi-
gration agent at Dunedin :
* A few hints of a practical character to such as are inclined to
make Otago their future home may here be useful. The classes of
emigrants chiefly in demand for this Province are ploughmen and
farm servants, shepherds, and domestic servants, all of whom
command good wages for their labour. Ploughmen receive from
L. 52 to L. 55, and good hands as high as L. 60 per annum, with
board and lodging; shepherds L. 60, and female servants from L. 30
to L. 40, according to experience. The general scarcity of female
■ervants in this Province is attributable to two causes:—lst, mar-
riages, through which one-half are taken out of the labour market
before they are twelve months in the Province; and 2nd, those
who were themselves servants two years ago now employ servants
of their own. Country servants are better suited for the require-
ments of the Province than those who are brought up in large towns. I
The Provincial Government of Otago, through their home agent,
John Auld, Esq., W.S., Edinburgh, give assisted passages to the


classes above referred to, to the amount of one-half of the passage
money. Applications for assisted passages must be made to the Se-
cretary, George Andrew, Esq., Otago Emigration Office, 60 Princes
Street, Edinburgh, who will forward to the applicant a printed form
of application to be filled, containing among other particulars a de-
claration that he is of good character, in good health, and free from
bodily or mental defect ; also a certificate by his medical attendant
testifying to his health. In addition to these, the applicant must
produce a certificate from his late employer, one from his clergyman,
and, in the case of domestic servants, a certificate from a respectable
householder, certifying, of his own knowledge, that the applicant is
unmarried. These documents being returned to the office, the agent
decides thereupon whether the applicant is suitable for an assisted
passage, and communicates to him the result. Friends in the Pro-
vince have the privilege of sending for their friends and relations in
the home country on prepayment of L.lO per statute adult to the
immigration agent, Dunedin, Otago, who will forward passage war-
rants through the home agent to the parties applied for. The settlers
largely take advantage of this scheme to introduce into the colony
relations at home. All who are thus assisted, whether at home or
in the colony, make a declaration that it is their intention to settle
in Otago, and not to leave the Province, in consideration of the
assistance granted to them. Should they remove from the Province
before the expiry of three years from the landing, they will be called
upon to repay the whole amount of passage money advanced to them.
The ships carrying emigrants under contract to the Provincial Go-
vernment of Otago are those of Messrs P. Henderson & Co. from
Glasgow, and Messrs Shaw, Savill, & Co. from London. They must
all be first-class ships, commanded by experienced captains, and well
found in provisions of the very best quality. The Secretary from
Edinburgh visits the ships before their departure, in order to see
that the contract is properly carried out. The voyage to Hew
Zealand is the safest that can be taken to any part of the world.
The average passage of Messrs Henderson’s ships from Glasgow, for
the last four years, has not exceeded ninety - two days. It all
depends on the passengers themselves whether the voyage proves
pleasant or otherwise. With a view to their comfort and happiness,
certain rules are laid down for their guidance, which must be obeyed.
Of these the most important is cleanliness, both bodily and in their
berths, and regularity in airing their bed-clothes on deck in fine


weather. Great care should be taken in using lights on board, or
any article of a dangerous or combustible nature. They should pro-
vide themselves with sufficiently warm clothing and bedding for the
voyage, as the change from the heat of the tropics to the cold of the
Southern Ocean is both sudden and often severe. The provisions
are weighed out to each mess twice or three times a week, and pro-
perly cooked and served. Should a passenger have any cause of
complaint against another passenger, or any of the ship’s crew, he
should at once go to the, captain and state his complaint, and in the
majority of cases it will be rectified at once. On the arrival of the
ships in port, the immigration agent, in company with the emigra-
tion officer of the port, goes on board, and should there be any cause
of complaint on the voyage, it is inquired into. The agent takes
sole charge of the Government immigrants, conveys them and their
luggage to Dunedin, where the females and married men and women
are given over to the matron of the Immigration Depot, in which
they are lodged until suitable situations are procured for them.’
The Government of New Zealand is perhaps more Conservative
than any of our colonies, the franchise being a L. 10 rental in town
and country. It is difficult to account for this Conservatism in
New Zealand, except it is on the ground that the majority of the
colonists are more staid in their opinions on everything than in the
other colonies of the south. Mr C. W. Dilke, in a valuable work
on our southern colonies, thus contrasts the Australians and New
Zealanders :
* The Australians seem active and healthy, but wanting in power
and weight; the girls delicate, without being sickly. The New
Zealanders, on the contrary, sent out there young, and passing their
lives in the saddle, are “physically the perfection of the English
race, but wanting in refinement and grace of mind —ln Australia
there is promise of a more intellectual nation The
Australians boast that they possess the Grecian climate, and every
young face in the Sydney crowd showed me that their sky is not
more like that of the Peloponnesus than they are like the old
Athenians. The eager, burning democracy that is springing up in
the Australian great towns is as widely different from the Republi-
canism of the older States of the American Union as it is from the
good-natured Conservatism of New Zealand ; and their high capacity
for personal enjoyment would of itself suffice to distinguish the
Australians from both Americans and British.’


AUC KL AND.
Auckland occupies the same position in the North Island of New
Zealand that Otago does in the Middle Island. Although the colo-
nisation dates from 1840, Auckland was laid out a year earlier by
Colonel Wakefield, and had it not been for the energy and enter-
prise displayed by this gentleman, New Zealand would have been
lost to this country, the French having despatched a frigate with
emigrants aboard to take possession of the country, and the vessel
arrived only a few weeks after the whole of the islands had been
declared a possession of the British Crown. Auckland was pitched
on as the capital of New Zealand, but notwithstanding this and other
advantages, it has not progressed so much as might have been ex-
pected. Auckland possesses one of the finest harbours in the Pacific,
and the surrounding country is admirably suited for the cultivation
of grain, and also for stock-farming, sheep and cattle both thriving
well; better, in fact, than they do in Australia. New Zealand wool,
produced in the North Island, is equal, if not superior, to the finest
samples of Australian wool; and every year the production is in-
creasing, in spite of native wars and gold fevers, for Auckland, like
Otago, possesses the precious metal in abundance; and the Auckland
gold-fields, if not so rich and extensive as those of Otago, are never-
theless highly productive, and have been wrought with great success
since 1852. The emigrant from this country, in estimating his chances
of success in the northern island of New Zealand, will do well,
however, to lay more stress on the agricultural and pastoral resources
of the country than on making a fortune by gold-digging. For-
tunes have been realised at the Auckland gold-fields as well as else-
where ; but the chief attraction for the emigrant from this country
consists of fertile land, well watered, and so cheap that it is eligible
for all. Land can be obtained on lease at 5s per acre, and may be
purchased for L. 3.
In Auckland, and in the other settlements in the northern island,
including Wellington and New Plymouth, there is not such a large
demand for labour as in Otago, although agricultural labourers, plough-
men, shepherds, blacksmiths, and other mechanics can always find
ready employment at wages more than double what they receive at


home, while they have a good chance of becoming employers them-
selves, if they are industrious and saving in their habits.
In order to give the intending emigrant some idea of Auckland and
the other settlements in the North Island, it will be necessary to
give a brief topographical description of the principal districts. Auck-
land is situated on a narrow isthmus about two miles in extent, and
this possesses the advantage of marine communication both with the
east and west coasts —an advantage which was seen by the first set-
tlers, and determined the site of the future capital of New Zealand.
North of Auckland the country is not suited for cultivation, except
in the valleys; and the mountains, being volcanic, are not generally
adapted for pastoral purposes. It is to the south of Auckland that
the really valuable portions of the northern island lie.
Immediately adjoining the boundary of the borough, to the south-
east, is the Papakura district, extending along the eastern shores by
the Manukau harbour for a distance of ten or twelve miles. This
district is bounded on the west by the waters of the Manukau, which
deeply indent it in various directions, with its numerous creeks.
The centre of the district comprises a plain or flat valley, ranning
inland, in an easterly direction, from the Papakura Pah, for many
miles, until it reaches the Wairoa River. About one-half of this
plain is densely timbered the remaining portion being clear and
open, but agreeably diversified with clumps and belts, which give it
a park-like appearance. These belts and clumps consist of a rich
variety of wood; the graceful tree-fern, and the deep green, glittering-
leafed karaka, clustering in unusual profusion around the tall stems of
the statelier forest trees. Surrounded by these ornamental woods,
melodious with the song of birds, are here and there clear open spots
of ground of various size, sheltered from every wind—choice sites for
homestead, park, or garden. The soil of the plain is of various
character—a considerable portion consisting of alight dry vegetable
soil, well adapted for clover paddocks, or for the growth of barley
about an equal quantity is dark-coloured, good, strong, flax land,
suitable for wheat and potatoes, the remainder being rich swampy
land, for the most part capable of drainage. On the north and on
the south, the plain is bounded by rugged r'dges, densely covered
with kauri and other timber ; and it is watered by a small but never-
failing stream of excellent water. The plain of Papakura is best
seen from the highest point of the southern ridge, about four miles
to the south-east of the site of the old Pah. There may be seen, on


a bright sunny day, a panoramic view, than which, in the whole of
New Zealand, there are few more beautiful.
Wellington, the other principal attraction in the northern island,
lies at the northern extremity, and is in many respects even superior
to Auckland as an agricultural country, more especially the Valley
of the Wairarapa.
The valley of the Wairarapa, properly so called, as distinguishing
it from the plains about Ahuriri, with which it is connected, contains,
in round numbers, about half a million acres in plain and down, as
undulating land is called in England—the plain, however, predomi-
nating. This extensive plain is bounded by hills of almost equal
value for the purposes of pasturage. Of the plain, about 100,000
acres are covered with fine timber, chiefly totara, matai, hiora, kahi-
katea, manuka, &c., all highly valuable for the purposes of cabinet-
work and carpentery. About 200,000 acres consist of open land
covered with grass, anise, fern, flax, and tohitohi. This soil is in
general less rich than the timber land, but still possessing, in common
with similar land in other parts, great fertility.
At the southern end of the valley are two extensive lakes, cover-
ing an area of about 50,000 acres, but they are so shallow as to be
comparatively useless ; there is no entrance seaward, in consequence
of a complete bar of sand, and being surrounded by low, swampy
land. The bar, which is formed by the southerly winds, to the
full force of which Palliser Bay lies entirely exposed, closes the
lake during the summer months (generally from December to May),
until the accumulated waters burst the barriers that confine them,
and open a passage to the sea. The river Buamahunga runs
through the whole valley, and loses itself in the lakes; it is from
six to nine chains wide ; the channel of the river, until it leaves
the lakes, is deep enough for a vessel of fifty tons, and whale-boats
can ascend the river for twenty or thirty miles from the point where
it leaves the lake, after which it becomes a succession of shoals and
falls; so much so, that it is only in time of freshets that canoes
can reach further, and then they can be poled up to within a few
miles of the end of the valley. The floods rise suddenly and
considerably ; the greatest rise which has yet been experienced is
sixteen feet.
The district may be divided into three parts, each possessing
its distinct and peculiar characters ; the lowest part, or that nearest
the sea, and the western side of the lakes, is mostly swampy, and


is covered during the winter months with water; the eastern side,
on which the stations are formed, consists chiefly of grass land ; the
lower ground near the river consists of the woodland previously
described. Beyond these, in what may be termed the valley of the
Upper Wairarapa (by far the larger division of the district), there
are magnificent grassy plains, the soil of which is of the richest
description, intersected by belts of wood, and watered by numerous
streams. This district is easily connected with the plains of Ahuriri,
which, at a moderate estimate, comprise an area of five hundred
square miles of level grass land, from which there is an easy commu-
nication with the Manawatu district.
The grasses of the Wairarapa, and indeed of New Zealand gene-
rally, are very numerous, and if cultivated, would be fully equal
to English grasses ; cattle eat every kind, from the coarsest to the
finest. There is abundance of a native rye-grass, and the sheep
are very fond of a species of couch-grass, which is the first to make its
appearance in the spring; not that the grasses fail in the winter, but
they become sour at that season, and do not possess the same nu-
tritive qualities. These grasses improve by cultivation, and if brought
to England would no doubt become valuable adjuncts to the grazier.
Grass everywhere makes its appearance whenever the fern and
brushwood are burnt off. Cattle running in a district speedily destroy
the fern, and grass takes its place ; the more this is eaten, the more
turfy the land, as a matter of course, becomes. The Wairarapa
is, in consequence of cattle running in it, becoming a rich grazing
district; the fern has, in many parts, disappeared, and thousands
of acres of the native rye-grass, and other grass, are now to be
found. When the bush is destroyed, it is replaced by sowthistle,
growing to the height of five or six feet. This valuable plant
is found in great abundance in dry swamps. There is a great ad-
vantage in the sowthistle. It is most abundant in the hot summer
months, when the ordinary pasturage becomes parched, and cattle
then resort to the swamps in which it grows. The sowthistle, the
natives state to have been first sown by Captain Cook, which is not
unlikely to have been the case. It grows in New Zealand to an ex-
traordinary height in most districts of the Wellington settlement.
The wild tulip and wild cabbage are in many parts equally abun-
dant, and equally beneficial to the stock-farmer.
One great peculiarity of New Zealand is the abundance and nutri-
tious quality of many of the native shrubs, upon which cattle eagerly


browse. One of these, the karaka, which grows to be a large tree, is
invariably devoured as far as cattle can reach the leaves; conse-
quently, contrary to the experience of most other countries, the
shrubs of New Zealand, everywhere existing in the most lavish abun-
dance, become of equal value to the stockmen with the grasses
themselves, and this will account in a great measure for the com-
paratively small district required to pasture a considerable quantity
of stock.
Some of the grasses furnish food for man and beast. The porcupine
grass is one of these. When young, it is devoured by sheep with
avidity, and the root is a favourite and agreeable food both with
natives and stockmen. But when this grass is fully grown it is a
great annoyance to the pedestrian; the stems, as its name implies,
closely resemble the quills of the porcupine, and are pretty nearly as
formidable to the legs of the stockmen. Porcupine-grass is abundant
in the Wairarapa, and, since the introduction of cattle, is rapidly
on the increase.
In enumerating the special productions of New Zealand, it would
be a grave omission not to mention the flax plant, which is peculiar to
this country, and is one of the most useful of plants. In addition to
other uses to which this plant can be turned, the cup of its flower
contains a considerable quantity of honey, which surpasses, in deli-
ciousness of flavour, the finest honey collected by bees from a variety
of flowers. ' The honey is not to be found at all times, but abounds
from the month of August to December, which are spring and
summer months in that southern land. The flax plant is also used
by the natives as a substitute for paper, and it has been used in
the manufacture of the finest paper, for which it is admirably
adapted. Native berries of different kinds are also very plentiful
—one of the most remarkable being the fuchsia berry, an oblong
fruit that grows on the New Zealand fuchsia, which often attains the
height of 20 feet, and even more.
The cost of reaching Auckland is about the same as to Otago,
viz., L. 15 for a steerage passage; and emigrants from Scotland
will find it the best way to sail from the Clyde in the fine ships
that are despatched once a month by Patrick Henderson and Co.
The best time to leave is from April to October, although it
makes little difference what period of the year the emigrant arrives
in New Zealand, there being no cessation of employment during the
winter as there is in some of the States of the American Union


and in Canada. On arriving in the colony, the first thing the
emigrant will have to set about is the erection of a cottage, as house
rents are very high, both in Dunedin and Auckland.
The following observations are worthy of strict attention, be the
emigrant’s cottage formed of what material it may. His house
should be placed upon gravel, sand, or loam, as these soils are most
easily drained, and drainage is an object in a well-watered country
like New Zealand, where the rankness of the vegetation is such as
to cause dampness and putrefactive gases, if not guarded against.
Streams abound in New Zealand, and such a locality as will command
one may in almost all cases be chosen. But the emigrant should not
suffer himself to be so enamoured of the beauty of those streams as
to place his cottage immediately on the bank of one. By choosing a
convenient elevation, all the uses of the stream are retained, and
the air is better than in the bottom of the valley. Another im-
portant point, too, is gained—the sewage is more easily drained off.
The light, too, is better, and a more cheerful prospect is obtained.
These essentials have a greater influence on health and spirits than
may commonly be believed. A northern or north-eastern aspect
should also be chosen ; the warmth of such a position is greater,
and the light more abundant. The reader must recollect, that in
New Zealand the sun is to the north, and not to the southward as in
Europe. The garden and homestead of every cottage should be
perfectly cleared of timber, with the exception of ornamental shrubs,
which abound, and may either be left standing or transplanted to
such spots as good taste may point out. No English garden, how-
ever expensively kept up, can for a moment vie with the beauty of a
cottager’s garden in New Zealand in the beauty of its shrubs, to
say nothing of the vines, melons, Cape gooseberries, peaches, all
English and many tropical fruits, which will grow anywhere in
the greatest luxuriance. The ventilation of the house, the want of
which forms the great defect of English houses, should be strictly
attended to, as conducive, not only to health, but in a high degree to
comfort also.


CANTERBURY.
To the north of Otago, in the Middle Island, lies the Canterbury
•settlement, originally colonised by an association composed of ad-
herents of the Church of England. Like Otago, which was first
settled by an association in connection with the Free Church of
Scotland, Canterbury has outgrown its original design, and its
population is now a mixture of all creeds and races. The discovery
of gold in the adjoining settlement of Otago was the means of
drawing off a large proportion of the original settlers in Canterbury;
but since the gold fever has cooled down, Canterbury has attracted a
considerable number of emigrants, not only from the United King-
dom, but from Germany. The more Canterbury is known, the
greater will be the influx of emigrants, as both its soil and climate
are unsurpassed. Lying to the north of Otago, its winters are
milder, and its vicinity to the ocean tempers the heat of summer,
which otherwise would be as intense as it is in Southern Europe.
Canterbury and the adjoining town and settlement of Nelson, as
we have already stated, comprise some of the most valuable portions
of New Zealand; and for the emigrant who wishes to possess somo
of the advantages of home in regard to education and society, offers
the most inviting field of any of the southern colonies.
It is almost unnecessary to say anything of the climate of Nelson.
The extreme salubrity and excellence of that of the whole colony
is universally known and admitted. The test which King Charles
applied to the English climate, that there were more days in the
year when people could be in the open air than anywhere else,
applies with considerably more force here. With a very great
amount of sunshine, the heat is neither excessive, nor disagree-
able; while, with an abundance of rain, there is no continual wet
season. The only defect in any part of New Zealand is that there
is too much wind to be agreeable; not that it blows harder than it
blows on the English coast at times, but it blows hard oftener. In
this respect, however, Nelson is the most favoured place in the
country. The wind, though for about three months in the spring
and summer it blows fresh for days together, is seldom violent or
tempestuous, and in the winter it blows very little indeed; days


and even weeks almost perfectly calm, with brilliant sunshine by
day, and magnificent moonlight at night, occurring at that season.
In the other settlements of New Zealand it is not unusual, in
extraordinarily fine weather, to hear the observation— ‘ This is
Nelson weather,’ though their own is much above the average of
English weather. Of the general mildness of the climate, an idea
may be gathered from the fact that the flocks of sheep frequently
lamb in mid-winter in the open country ; and unless there happens
to be an unusually heavy rain or severe frost at the very time of
lambing, a very small per centage of losses—perhaps not above five
or ten per cent. —will occur. Geraniums, fuchsias, aenotheras, pico-
fcees, and other summer flowers of England, continue to blossom in
Nelson during the winter months. One peculiarity of the climate
may be noticed, which is, that there are in fact only two seasons—
the summer, and what we call winter. There are no transition
seasons of spring and autumn, or at all events hardly perceptible
as such; and their absence is the more observed from the fact, that
nearly all the indigenous trees are evergreen, so that there is no
periodical fall or renewal of the leaf—a circumstance to be regretted
by the admirer of the picturesque, were it not compensated by the
fact, that the forests maintain their usual verdure all the winter
long.
It is now twenty years since the first ship sailed for the Canter-
bury settlement, and every year has witnessed an addition to the
colony of emigrants from the mother-country; but notwithstanding
its superior capabilities, the progress has not been so rapid as in
either Otago or Auckland. The demand for labour is not so great
as in Otago, but those employed receive about the same rate of
wages, and land can be obtained on easier terms than in the neigh-
bouring settlements. When the settlement was first projected there
were restrictions in the way of purchasing land—L.3 being the fixed
price for land susceptible of cultivation; but this arrangement is
no longer in force, and land can be had on more favourable terms
than in any other part of New Zealand. Land grants, of a limited
number of acres, are given on certain conditions to suitable parties.
In a country like New Zealand, where the territory is limited—not
being very much larger than Scotland—there is of course not the same
diversity as in America or Australia; and, if the emigrant on landing
at any of the settlements does not feel content with the state of
matters, he can shift to the next settlement with little trouble or


expense. Those who contemplate making New Zealand their home
would, however, do well to fix upon the exact spot before leaving;
and, before leaving it to try another, he should give it a fair trial, as
many come to grief by acquiring a roving disposition, which ends
generally in the rover leaving the colony and blaming it for his failure
instead of his own wayward disposition and habits.
When the emigrant lands in New Zealand, he should accept the
first thing in the way of employment that turns up, even although
it is something he may not altogether like. A gentleman, possessing
an extensive knowledge of our southern colonies, advises agricultural
labourers, wherever it is possible, to follow the pursuits they have
been accustomed to.
An agricultural labourer engaging himself in town employment is
lost to the colony, and in many cases to himself also. His hand
becomes * out,’ to use a country term, and he afterwards turns with
difficulty to the employment to which he has been accustomed.
Town emigrants are best fitted for town employments: their consti-
tutions and habits are often unfitted for the successful pursuit of
agriculture ; but every man who can handle a spade or an axe should
at once take to the woods, and employ himself in clearing land.
Agricultural labourers may at first gain less wages by this, but
they will gain advantages which are out of the reach of a town
labourer. No country employer will refuse to sell or to lease to his
labourer a portion of his land, which the latter can cultivate at his
leisure, or after his ordinary occupation is ended. The desire of the
labourer to possess his own cottage and garden will be to his
employer an earnest of industry and perseverance which he will
encourage for his own sake; while the possession of a home of his
own will abundantly compensate the working man for a little less
wages than he might have gained in town, where his leisure hours,
instead of being made to add to his own comfort and that of his
family, may only be spent in dissipating that which he has earned ;
in which case he will be able to add little to the comfort of
either.
If he have an industrious wife and a family of children, he will
find his little homestead grow under his hands, without any great
additional labour on his part, and he will thus soon be in a state
of comparative independence. If the labourer be not a married man,
let him become so previous to his leaving home ; he need be in no fear
that he cannot afford to keep a wife in the colony, even though he


land without a shilling in his pocket. She will be a helpmate to him
in every sense of the word, and with frugality, temperance, and indus-
try, neither will have cause to regret their change of condition. It
will be his own fault if, within a couple of years from his landing
in the colony, he does not possess a home which is, in every sense of
the term, his own property.
One of the chief points for an agricultural emigrant is, whether he
will turn his attention to tillage, or to sheep and cattle farming.
The former is, perhaps, the best basis on which to work, and is liable
to no fluctuations ; the latter is becoming the more lucrative pursuit,
but is liable to fluctuations from the quantity of stock brought at
times into the market from the neighbouring Australian colonies. In
Australia, sheep-farming is a precarious pursuit, from the prevalence
of the disease called catarrh, which will sweep off whole flocks in an
incredibly short space of time, and against which there is no guard-
ing. In New Zealand the ordinary diseases of sheep are unknown,
and no new disease has been experienced. Sheep-farming is, therefore,
as certain a pursuit as tillage itself. Much will, however, depend
upon the previous habits and inclinations of the settler himself, as
to which occupation he may choose. If he decide upon grazing, let
him get his sheep, which will cost him about twelve shillings a head
under ordinary circumstances, and a few cattle, good breeds of which
will cost him about five pounds a head, and go away into the bush,
not so far that he will deprive himself of the advantage of vicinity
to a town where he can dispose of his produce, and procure neces-
saries at the same time ; nor so near to a town that he will intrude
upon others, or they upon him. He cannot do better than settle him-
self down in close vicinity to a tribe of natives: he need not be afraid
that they will either eat him or his cattle; but if he treat them with
kindness and firmness he will soon find out that they have become
valuable neighbours, and very useful adjuncts, at a small cost, to his
establishment.
If he decide upon becoming a grazier, let him purchase or lease
some distant section from a settler, or from the agent of some absentee
landholder, for the purpose of forming his cattle station, taking
care that it shall be as near to the outside of the settlement as pos-
sible, so that he may have the run of the unclaimed land beyond him;
or if it be within the settlement, let him take care that it abut upon
hilly land which has not been given out, when he will possess the
same advantage of an extensive sheep-walk. Th« hills of New


Zealand abound with the finest pasture, and will eventually form by
ao means the least valuable portion of the country.
If he do not choose to purchase or lease land, he may become a
tquatter: that is, he may set himself down beyond the boundaries of
che settlement altogether. This he may do without going far from any
of the settlements. New Zealand is not like Australia in this respect,
where a squatter must go many hundred miles, and altogether beyond
che reach or the influence of civilisation, before he finds unoccupied
pasturage. In the case of squatting, it is advisable to pay a small,
out accurately defined tribute to the resident natives for permission
co settle near them. The squatter will then be secure from molesta-
tion of any kind, and will find his tribute repaid tenfold in some shape
or other. Neither let him feel annoyed at what he may consider
their freedom, either of speech or of action. It is nothing more than
their ignorance of the customs aud habits of civilised life ; and no
sooner do they become aware that such freedoms are displeasing, than
they immediately cease from using them. Whatever may have been
said of the New Zealander, he is one of ‘ nature’s gentlemen,’ both in
feeling and deportment, and is, to the full, as sensible a man as the
settler, whatever may be his own estimation of himself. By none can
more valuable advice, in many colonial matters, be given than by
the native, and by none is it more freely accorded.
It is difficult to give any advice to mechanics on landing in the
colony. They will naturally get the highest wages they can, and
as soon as they can. Beyond this, all must be left to their own
sagacity: their services are always required. It is very common for
them speedily to save enough to get land of their own, when they
generally combine its tillage with their own trade. It is by no means
unfrequent that, having effected this, they turn farmers altogether.
A profitable caution to the emigrant on his first landing in the
colony will be, not to be too hasty in deciding on his future course of
proceeding, whether he have nothing but his labour to offer, or
whether he have a small capital to invest. In the first instance, his
steps are easily retraced if he go wrong; but in the latter case, money
hastily and therefore injudiciously invested will often be lost, or, at
least, from want of experience on the part of its owner, be in no
small danger of becoming so. The emigrant to New Zealand, of all
colonists, has the least occasion to be in a hurry on his arrival,
possessing, as he does, an advantage entirely unknown to the
occupant of other emigration fields, viz., the advantage of being


placed at once on the site of his future operations. He can, there*
fore, afford to spend a few days or weeks in looking about him,
before he finally decides on his future course. This advantage should
not be underrated; nor will it be so, if compared with the disadvan-
tages of emigrating to some other of our colonies; from which
comparison it will appear, that New Zealand, though the most distant
in space of all our colonial possessions, is among the nearest in the
time requisite for the location of the emigrant. Take Canada, for
example, the nearest of all our colonies. In case of emigration
thither, the emigrant, after a voyage of two or even three months, in
ships for the most part badly found and wretchedly provisioned, finds
himself under the necessity of travelling many hundred miles in a re-
gion in which frost and snow prevail for two-thirds of the year. Hence,
the expenditure of time, notwithstanding the vicinity of the colony,
makes the New Zealand voyage of four months short in comparison
with the time requisite for getting located in British North America
whilst the expenditure of money without return, which, in the case
of emigration to Canada, is unavoidable, amounts to a sum which,
in New Zealand, would have put him in possession of an excellent
cottage and garden, as almost as soon as he had landed from the ship.
Even after the toilsome journey through the back-settlements of
Canada has been performed, the emigrant has still to look for his
location ; and if he arrive at any other period than the commence-
ment of the short summer of the Canadian climate, he must wait
for many months, living all the time upon his capital, till the
advent of the following spring melts the snow, which lies many feet
deep upon the ground, before he can plant a single vegetable for the
use of his table. In New Zealand, on the contrary, he can sow or plant
during any month of the year, and such is the rapidity of vegetable
growth, and the fertility of the soil, that a comparatively short time
will suffice for a plentiful supply of vegetables at any season. A com-
parison in this and other respects has been made with Canada, simply
because it is the most familiar instance with emigrants; but the
same remarks, with regard to difficulty of location, will apply to
the interior of New South Wales and other colonies, even though tbev
present no drawbacks in point of climate.






AUSTRALIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The island continent of Australia was first discovered by the Dutch
in 1640. But little was known concerning it until the eastern coast
was explored by Capt. Cook, on his first voyage in 1770. Seventeen
years later a vessel was sent out from this country to found a convict
settlement at Botany Bay; but on the arrival of the vessel, Port
Jackson—now known as the queenly city of Sydney—was fixed on
as the site of the future settlement. For a long period New South
Wales, as the eastern part of Australia was called, was known in
connection with convict life, and it was not until more than a decade
of the present century had elapsed that anything was attempted in
the way of regular colonisation. The great length of the voyage, and
the presence of a large number of convicts, acted as deterrents against
emigration on a large scale to any part of Australia, and it is only
within the last thirty years that Australia has become a favourite
field for emigrants from the British Islands and the Continent of
Europe, and even from America.
New South Wales, previous to the erection of Queensland into
a separate colony, comprised all the eastern part of the Austra-
lian continent south of 26 degrees south latitude and east of
longitude 141 E. Since 1859 the territory of New South Wales
is more limited in extent, comprehending the country between
30 and 37 degrees south latitude, and extending westward from
150 degrees E. to the boundary of the colony of Southern Australia,
excluding, of course, the colony of Victoria. The settled portions
of New South Wales are about 60,000 square miles, and are finely
diversified by the Blue Mountains, which traverse the colony from


south to north with an average elevation of from 3000 to 4000 feet
above the level of the sea. The valleys of the Blue Mountains,
and the plains on both sides of them, are covered for the most part
—where not cleared by the settler—with large spreading trees,
affording a succession of leaves in all seasons, and a variety of
flowering shrubs of exquisite fragrance, unknown in northern lands,
abound on the grassy plains free from trees. The most remarkable
of the wild animals are the kangaroo, a species of the opossum
tribe, and a species of the wild dog. Of winged animals the most
singular are the black swan and the cassowary.
New South Wales possesses a fine climate, the temperature being
much more agreeable than might be supposed in so low a latitude.
The heat in summer is not so excessive as in the northern States of
America, while the winters are as mild as in the south of Europe.
In America the Anglo-Saxon race has a tendency to deteriorate;
and, certainly, the descendants of Scotch and English parents are
less productive than their ancestors. In Australia the very opposite
is the case, as is shown by various writers who are thoroughly
competent to form an opinion on the subject. One writer, in
describing the peculiar properties of the Australian climate, says—
* While the male sex generally acquire increased bodily and mental
vigour in the Australian climate, the female European undergoes
similar, if not more remarkable, constitutional invigoration. An
Englishwoman of five-and-twenty will retain her vigour undiminished
for eight or ten years, and sometimes a rejuvenescence takes place
in a healthy woman of thirty; while the lives of the aged with
impaired constitutions are prolonged. The most remarkable change
effected by the climate, according to medical authorities, is the
renewal of the fecundity at a comparatively advanced age, and, in
numerous well-authenticated cases, the bringing on of fertility after
many years of barrenness in the mother country. This is now
becoming so well known that some married couples without families
emigrate to Australia with the prospect of having children; and
where an heir to an estate is wanted, the longing mother takes her
departure for the wished-for land where her hopes may be realised.
And when so blessed, she looks with delight upon her offspring as
nothing inferior to any in her native land. Indeed, it may be said
that the native-born children of Anglo-Saxon parents are, if any-
thing, an improvement upon the original stock. Nowhere have we
seen such bright intelligent faces, with clear complexions and robust


frames, as we have seen among the youth of both sexes in Australia.
The beauty of the young women, especially those born in Yictoris
and Tasmania, where the climate is coolest, is the theme of all
travellers and newly arrived settlers, who consider them equal to
the fairest English beauties, because flaxen hair predominates. At
the same time it must be stated that the bloom of the Australian
women is not so permanent as that of their English sisters. The
roses that bud on their cheeks arrive sooner at full bloom and then
decay. So is it with the whole constitution. The child arrives
at maturity two or three years sooner, and the woman declines
several years earlier.
What may be the longevity of the native-born race as compared
with their progenitors, there is no sufficient time yet to determine.
We are of opinion that the lamp of life burns more quickly in that
clime than in this; so that the individual may not reach an extended
number of years. But if we take into consideration the long days
and fine salubrious weather that prevail, the term of existence is
increased beyond the most favourable conditions of long life in
Europe. Even when disease attacks the patient in Australia there
is rarely any lingering or chronic complaints. In that region the
cure of disease is generally more rapid than in Europe, and so also
is the progress towards decay or death. You are either becoming
rapidly convalescent from an illness, or hurrying into your grave;
there is no long lingering on its verge.
Before going into details respecting the suitability of Australia in
general, and New South Wales in particular, as a field for emigrants,
it may not be out of place to give a brief description of Australian
scenery by a Scottish gentleman who for a long series of years
occupied an important position in Australia :
‘The scenery of the Australian continent is diversified, and the
most enchanting landscapes alternate with prospects as dismal and
uninviting as can well be conceived. In order to form a correct
conception of the grandeur of the Australian bush, let the tourist
take his stand where a wide district lies around him, and if he love
nature in her wilder and more sublime aspects, he will be gratified.
The country differs widely from the ornate and highly cultivated
landscapes of England, where art has been so long used to improve
and adorn ; but it would command attention from the vastness of its
proportions, and the sublimity of its general features. I well re-
member the vivid impression made upon my mind when, on a fine


spring morning I ascended the hill of Tarrengomer. It was Sunday,
and I have ever observed that even the vast resources of the
wilderness appear more subdued and solitary on that day of the
week than any other. The day was marked by the peculiarities of
the climate; the air was elastic, and I felt my spirits become more
buoyant as I inhaled it; objects, even at a great distance, were
clearly visible. My eye ranged over a wide expanse—the green
“downs ” on the banks of the Loddon river, and the vast plains be
yond, were diversified by here and there clumps of trees, formed
into many fantastic shapes, and long lines of coppice, particularly
near the river and its tributaries. The hill on which I stood had
evidently been thrown up out of this vast plain in some convulsion
of nature. Far distant the high peaks of some ranges were barely
distinguished from the light azure clouds which hung about them in
graceful drapery, whilst, in the intervening expanse, the creeks and
rivers peeped out, their waters glistening in the bright sunshine like
millions of diamonds. Profound silence reigned around, and it
struck me as remarkable at the time that a negative quality should
have such force, as the great distinguishing feature of the whole.
JSTo living thing appeared to animate this vast solitude. I was
alone with God and nature. I sat and gazed on the prospect before
me, which the sun bathed in life and beauty, for many hours, and
it was not until night began to fall that I left my seat to reach a
shelter, which was so many miles off that I narrowly escaped being
“bushed.”
‘There is considerable sameness in the Australian bush. There
are, however, many beautiful and variegated landscapes, many
sylvan glades of remarkable loveliness, that might compare with
Sherwood in the days of Eobin Hood—thinly timbered dales, that
would vie with the most carefully decorated park in Europe, and
nooks of extreme fertility. But there is shade as well as sunshine ;
and it cannot be overlooked that vast marshes, and long tracts of
dense and almost impenetrable scrub, exist along with whole districts
of heath, dark and dreary to cross, and dismal to dwell in; extensive
forests of tall, gaunt, and naked trees, which convey no idea of
anything else than deformity and misery.
‘But the country—l mean that portion of it which is settled —of
the mighty interior, there is literally nothing known beyond what
was discovered by Dr Leichardt during his overland journey to Pore
Essington; that gallant but unfortunate explorer having unques-


tionably perished in his attempt to pass from New South Wales to
Swan River. Throughout that portion of the country with which
we are acquainted, the forests do not present those attractions which
strangers have expected. In the ranges the trees are deformed and
naked, affording neither shade in the summer heat, nor shelter from
the winter cold. The eucalyptus is the species most generally met
all over the continent. It has long leaves, of a dark green colour,
which remain the same, both in the intense drought of summer
and the severe frosts of winter. In the flats, these trees reach an
enormous size ; many of them exceed the oaks of England in mould,
and the wide-spread magnificence of their branches. In districts
more favoured, where the acacia loves the soil, no scenery could
be more inviting. It grows most luxuriantly on the slopes and
plateaux, but is seldom seen in forest ranges. It is a most brilliant
shrub, and when the earth glows with its golden flowers, contrasting
with the deep-green foliage, it is the nearest to a peep at paradise
that I have met with.’
Although originally a penal colony, New South Wales retains few
vestiges of its origin, and the descendants of the original settlers are
for the most part the aristocracy of the colony, and are every way as
respectable as the aristocracy of Europe, whose ancestors were robbers
and pirates. Had it not been for the discovery of gold in 1851, New
South Wales, like the neighbouring colony of Victoria, would never
have made the progress it has done. As proof of this, we may men-
tion that in 1850 the population was a little over a quarter of a
million, now it is more than half-a-million; and this is exclusive of
Queensland, which, in 1850, formed part of the colony.
Before the discovery of gold wool was the great staple production
of New South Wales, and it still forms an important article of pro-
duction. Agriculture is now, however, followed by a larger propor-
tion of the population than in the period antecedent to the gold
discoveries.
Before the discovery of gold-fields, agriculture was followed by but
few persons, and the demand for produce was extremely limited,
wheat often selling as low as 3s a bushel. The squatters were the real
producers and benefactors at this early stage, as their stock con-
sumed the herbage which otherwise was useless, and their wool and
tallow brought in considerable wealth, and in fact constituted the
Bole exports. From 1840 to 1850 the squatters constituted a most
important class, but after the gold had been discovered the products


of the squatters came to be but a small item, and as a class they
became infinitely less important. The land, in the early phases of
Australian colonisation, had been granted to respectable emigrants
free of charge. The assignment system was then in operation, and
such as obtained free grants of land were allowed a certain proportion
of convicts to bring it into cultivation. At the period there was no
free labour available, and without prisoners of the Crown to till the
soil, land would have been useless. It is the opinion of not a few
good judges that private assignment was preferable to the new-fangled
schemes which have been tried during the last twenty years. The
great capabilities of the Australian colonies began about 1830 to
attract respectable emigrants to their shores, and the Government
imposed a small price (5s an acre); but the emigration increasing,
the minimum rate was raised to 10s, and afterwards to L.l per acre,
which is the present upset price. Any land that is put up for sale
by the Government is at once passed over unless 20s per acre be
offered; but country sections, having once been offered, may be after-
wards selected by any person, and taken at the upset price.
The first free colonists quickly discovered that farming was far
from being a lucrative occupation; the population was limited, and
there was no market open for their surplus produce. The introduction
of merino sheep at an early period, and the grazing capabilities of the
colony, induced many to turn their attention to this branch of indus-
try. They soon found their own estates too limited for their in-
creasing flocks, and they led them into the wilderness and grazed
them on the waste lands. This was the origin of the squatting
system. No attention would probably have been paid to this in-
trusion had not another very different class just then also intruded
upon the public domains, composed of expired and runaway convicts.
This genus—half bushranger, half trader—spread over the country,
carrying on a nefarious trade in grog and tobacco with the convicts
upon the free settlers’ estates. They were always receivers of stolen
property, and in many instances sheep-stealers and bushrangers.
They set law and order at defiance, and soon became a terror to
the well-disposed portion of the community.
The Government were determined to prevent these nefarious intru-
ders from continuing to occupy the unsold land, and in order to
accomplish this, an act was passed to legalise the occupation of the
country, by approved persons, for depasturing purposes. Each person
who used the Crown land was now compelled to pay a licence of ten


pounds per annum, and commissioners, or bailiffs, were nominated
to maintain order. An assessment was, moreover, levied, and ap-
propriated to the maintaining of a body of mounted police, who were
placed under the command of the Crown. This system appeared
to answer the requirements of the case, and squatting extended not
only over the original colony, but also over the length and breadth of
the new settlements which were soon after opened. The fee demanded
by Government, in the shape of right or leave to depasture, was
small, and the fine wool brought a good price. The squatters had,
therefore, a course of great and uninterrupted prosperity. In a few
years many gentlemen of energy and capital were attracted to Aus-
tralia, and embarked in squatting pursuits; a talented and highly in-
fluential class arose, who, although literally nothing else than tenants
at will of the Crown, being merely permitted to use the ground by
sufferance, were yet able to assume a hostile position towards the
executive, to force important concessions, and all but obtain the
advantage of a patrician, or privileged order. Not only squatting,
but even convictism, however execrated by the people, have been of
use in the early stages of colonisation. Both, however, must eventu-
ally give way, after a certain stage has been reached, to permit the
farther development of the very colonisation they have effectually
advanced to a certain stage. The second has been for some time
discountenanced to any portion of Australia, with the exception of
Western Australia, and the first is daily being circumscribed by the
sale of the public lands. Many of the wealthy squatters have saved
money sufficient to purchase their runs, and have already secured tho
best portions of them. The system only will become obsolete; the
present squatters will become landowners, and combine agricultural
with pastoral pursuits. It is much to be regretted that the land
regulations should have impeded the civilisation and settlement of
the colony; that so many persons who accumulated fortunes in gold
digging should, instead of becoming permanent colonists, have been
compelled to settle in other countries. The local government ap-
peared to favour this suicidal policy for a length of time, and it is
only recently that the waste lands have been put up in anything like
sufficient quantities for the public necessities.
There are some of the Australian squatters well educated and
largely connected, but a great many of them have advanced them-
selves to fortune by persevering industry. Many of the class last
described commenced with very few sheep, but having secured excel-


lent runs tlieir stock increased with a wonderful rapidity, the pro-
ceeds of the wool clearing the expenses of the station; and when
the runs came to he well stocked, and they could dispose of the
surplus as well as the wool, the revenue derived from these sources
was very considerable. Cattle breeding has always been more or
less followed in Australia, but previous to the discovery of gold it
was circumscribed. The great increase of population consequent
upon the gold discoveries raised the value of meat so much that the
squatters found the carcase the more valuable part of the animal, and
cattle began to be more valuable than sheep, and less trouble to rear,
when labour rose fully 100 per cent. In traversing these portions of
the country, the tourist often steals upon the cattle grazing here and
there in groups amongst the forest ranges, or reposing on the sides
of the hills. They frequent the long silent plains and the sledgy
marshes, near the margins of the great rivers, such as the Murray
and the Murrimbidgee. They are seldom disturbed in their favourite
haunts, for few strangers intrude on their wild domains, and the
stockman under whose charge they nominally are, only looks occa-
sionally that they are upon their proper ground. The duties of such
a functionary are light, the cattle keeping in mobs, and seldom wan-
dering off the ground on which they have been reared. At particu-
lar seasons, however, the stock have to be mustered at the station,
and the young animals branded.
Stock farming in Australia, more especially in New South Wales,
is attended with a good deal of risk on account of the frequent
droughts that dry up the rivers and streams, and leave the flocks
and herds to perish with thirst. It is, however, an occupation that
has many fascinations ; and men who have been born and educated
in the crowded cities of the mother country have taken to it as
kindly as though they had had been natives of the wilds.
Most of the squatters who have lived long in the far bush, admit
that they like the life, and have little desire to change it. Nearly
all of them who have returned to Europe retain a lively and pleasant
recollection of the time spent there Indeed, there must be a fasci-
nation about it not easily described, when many abandon the
pleasures of friendly and congenial society, and the gratification of
high civil station in Europe, and return to make their permanent
abode amidst the deep recesses of the Australian bush. They have
imbibed a taste for an unconfined life, and here there is a ‘ bound-
lessness ’ not to be found in other countries. The most agreeable


stations are in soft and enchanting landscapes, which appear pecu-
liar to Australasia ; long, wide plains, thinly timbered, and glowing
with flowers of the brightest hues ; open slopes descending with
great regularity, one after another, towards some river or creek,
green, verdant, and beautiful, with the hoary charms of blue and
silent mountains in the distance.
The class of Australian squatters comprehends men of every shade
of character, and the style in which they live is regulated by their
means, their tastes, and their intelligence. In new districts, when
the land is being taken up for grazing purposes, there is little, if
any, distinction made between the employer and the employed; and
those at the station live in a tent, or bark hut, eating and sleeping
together. Those who go to new districts are generally adventurers
with limited pecuniary resources, or superintendents employed by
the large stockowners in the settled portions of the colony, who
require an outlet for surplus stock. After a certain period the new
tract of country is settled ; those who occupy the land as squatting
stations have accumulated money, and purchased some portion of
their runs in fee simple ; they erect houses, lay out gardens, plant
orchards and vineyards, buy houses, engage servants, and not seldom
marry fair wives to beguile the tedium of the bush. When their
runs are circumscribed by the influx of civilisation, they are then
induced to cultivate the best land, and combine agricultural with
pastoral pursuits. They are allowed to occupy the unsold portions
of their runs for their flocks, until population presses on them,
and they are all absorbed, as one wave after another sweeps forward.
At one time the Government of New South Wales devoted the
greater part of the money obtained from the sale of lands for
promoting immigration, but of late years free and assisted emigration
to New South Wales has been almost suspended. This arises not
so much from any slackness in the labour market as from a disin-
clination on the part of the Government to spend money in pro-
moting immigration. In Sydney and the other large towns skilled
artizans and mechanics are in demand at good wages. Stonemasons
and bricklayers get 10s per day; carpenters, 9s do.; builders
labourers, 7s do.; shepherds, L. 30 to L. 40 per annum with rations ;
female servants, country, L. 26 to L. 28 do.; married couples, without
encumbrance (first class), L. 55 to L. 65 per annum do.; (second
class) from L. 45 to L. 55 per annum. From these quotations it
will be seen that labour, both skilled and unskilled, is well paid in


New South Wales, and for those possessed of a little capital there is
abundance, of cheap land, either agricultural or pastoral, and if the
emigrant possesses energy and enterprise it is almost impossible to
fail of success; although it should be borne in mind that there are
many difficulties to surmount as well as hardships to endure in a
new country like New South Wales. Emigrants from Scotland going
to New South Wales will find it most convenient to sail from
Glasgow, from which first-class vessels are despatched at intervals
of a month, or two months, as required. These vessels sail under
the Government regulations, and the cost of a steerage passage from
the Clyde to Sydney varies from L. 14 to L.IG, being about the same
as to the other Australian colonies.
QUEENSLAND.
Queensland is not only the youngest but the most flourishing of all
the Australian colonies, and, with the exception of Victoria during
the gold fever, none has made so rapid progress. It is not ten years
since Queensland was disjoined from New South Wales, yet in that
brief decade the progress that has been made is something extraordi-
nary. In December, 1859, when Queensland was erected into a se-
parate colony, the population was but about 25,000; eight years
later, it was over 100,000, and the increase of wealth had kept pace
with the increase of population, as we find that in 1859 the value of
exports was a little over half-a-million sterling, while in 1867 there
was considerably more than two millions. With respect to the soil,
climate, and extent of Queensland, all of them point to a magnificent
future. The territory is four times as large as France, with a coast
line of 1000 miles, equal in extent to the whole Atlantic sea-board of
the United States, from Cape Hatteras to Cape Cod. The whole
of the coast is indented with splendid harbours, formed by the mouths
of the numerous rivers which run into the great Southern Ocean.
No portion of the Australian continent is so well watered as Queens-
land, and a large proportion of the rivers are navigable, such as the
Clarence River, the Richmond, the Tweed, and Brisbane rivers, all
of which are navigable for a considerable distance from their mouths.
T hen there is Moreton Bay, which formerly gave its name to the


ii :mmi *■". r- v %&&§s-.'■ IWteiL?. V.,
■- i %: 4 -li3pi^
■yg -is ■■'■ ■ m-3jgKBß^3^/
I^-,| ■ , >•&f^r I ’--:- .:;■' j. : ; |
r '■ '•VyßjgVj^
Ki;! usmisa i
I ;s&«£
a® 1 ,: tjwK
HBS
i i Mir life!
• r ,' |i | •A :# ’ffijp ■'■
. ■V . ,' es ■ •"» %&,
to; •! ismm 6i»
|j s 'fyi | -■• ; I 5#MpK
. :if ..HI ? rn^mk
flHiwaH;
,v\ ska •, ir 1 Jfessm ■ t? Si
i# ,iH
<liii;il«aK m*WM9 j
!J1 • TlS^-
ii '!»• ™R--r ■-
msmWm-
1 1 , U*. wlwuSStJju J v* v «tek
[j j i //fi], |
-ijllu.tr'ii'l .. _.




whole region. This bay was discovered ninty-nine years ago by
Captain Cook, but was not examined until nine years later by Captain
Flinders. It was not, however, until sixty years afterwards that
the Brisbane river was discovered, and soon after its discovery a
convict settlement was formed on its banks, which continued until
transportation to New South Wales ceased. During the time that
Brisbane was a penal settlement it made little or no progress. A
wharf was constructed, but it was found to be of no use on account of
a mud bank between it and deep water. A swamp was also drained
at considerable expense, and the experiment of growing rice tried on
it with little success. This want of success was, however, not owing
to the soil but to the ignorance of those who made the experiment.
Instead of sowing the grain in its natural state, they got a lot
of manufactured rice from Sydney and sowed that. As it was no
more disposed to yield a rice crop than pearl barley or hot water gruel
would yield barley or oats if sown in this country, the experiment
turned out a failure, and it was reported that the soil and climate
were not suitable for rice cultivation.
When Moreton Bay ceased to be a penal settlement it was thrown
open to free emigration. A great change for the better came over
its condition and prospects, and the change was still greater when
the territory was erected into a colony with a government of its own.
The Rev. Dr Lang, a Scotchman, and a member of the Parliament of
New South Wales, has the honour of being the parent of Queensland,
as it was mainly owing to his exertions that it was disjoined from
New South Wales; and the Queen was pleased to stand godmother to
the promising child of the sturdy Scotchman. Brisbane, the capital
of the colony, presents a very different appearance to-day to what it
did when it was the site of a penal settlement. In this region, in
which Anglo-Saxon life is making for itself a new centre of wealth and
industry, a view from a neighbouring hill-top suggests one of the
grand solitudes of Nature. Lofty mountain ranges close the distant
scene on every side, except that towards the sea. Within the
landscape are detached hills, and there is the winding river that
appears and disappears as it runs under the black forest that lies
large over the land, with the majestic Moreton Bay pine overtopping
all the other trees.
The climate of Queensland is the finest in Australia, and closely
resembles that of Madeira. The average temperature of Brisbane
is G 8 deg. 7 min., and that of Funchal, Madeira, 68 deg. 5 min. The


temperature is equalised by the sea breezes from the long range of
coast, and the hot winds that at times sweep the southern colonies,
withering vegetation, are unknown in Queensland. The day is pleas-
antly warm, and the evenings just cold enough to have a fire ; the
sky brilliantly blue, and the atmosphere singularly transparent.
The pastoral interest is the leading one in Queensland, and raises
the staple product and principal export, wool. Nearly every man of
position is connected with it, that is, he is more or less a squatter, as
sole or part proprietor of one or more of the extensive runs (many of
them larger than an English county) for depasturing sheep and
cattle. Queensland stands very high as a pastoral colony; her
flocks and herds already represent immense wealth. The Legislature
has been very liberal in dealing with the occupiers of Crown Lands,
generally called squatters, and very properly so. They are the pioneers
of settlement and civilisation; they push out into the untrodden
wilderness at great risk, and often incur great hardships in their
search for fresh pastures, and in establishing their stations. They
have only a temporary use of the land, for it is a part of the
conditions on which they hold their runs, and well understood, that
they must move off, if the land is required for occupation by the
agriculturist; but, on the other hand, whilst in possession, which may
be for a lifetime, they are unmolested—absolute * monarchs of what
they survey.’ They have no wild beasts to contend with, and if they
treat the blacks well they are as harmless to the colonist as are the
timid wallaby and kangaroo. Should their little principality be re-
quired for Government or public purposes, a twelvemonth’s warning
to quit, and compensation for all improvements, such as houses, huts,
wells, stock-yards, &c., are given by the Government. It is to squat-
ting that the greater proportion of immigrants who possess much
capital turn their attention. Numbers of half-pay officers, disap-
pointed merchants, lawyers, &c,, have taken to this pursuit, and have
succeeded in acquiring sufficient knowledge and skill in their new un-
dertakings to enable them to secure a competency for life, and in
numerous instances to retire with large fortunes.
Some stations are appropriated entirely to sheep, others to cattle,
according to the quality of the pasture or fancy of the proprietor;
but the greater number have both- sheep and cattle, and many
squatters have horses also. The high and dry grounds, where the pas-
ture is neither too rich nor too abundant, is best for sheep; the low
swampy ground, or the rich alluvial flats, being best adanted for


•cattle. The squatter, after having selected his country, purchases in
the southern market from the well-stocked runs there the flocks and
herds with which he intends to commence business on his maiden
station. Often he has to drive his stock over a thousand miles of
country or more before he reaches his destination. A large number
of men are employed on runs as overseers, stockmen, shepherds, hut-
keepers, &c. The overseer commands a good salary, and is generally
allowed pasturage for a certain number of cattle or sheep, so has a
good chance of making money sufiicient to take a run of his own.
A shepherd has charge of from 600 to 800 sheep. In some of the
plains as many as 2000 to 2500 sheep can be run with safety in a single
iflock. He has a particular pasture ground on which he lives in a
hut, or humpie, as it is called, another man acts as hut-keeper, cooks
the shepherd’s meals, and watches the sheep if required at night.
Although for some time to come the main wealth of Queensland
will consist in her flocks and herds, the agricultural interest will in
course of time vie with the pastoral in magnitude and importance.
Sugar and cotton are both cultivated with success in Queensland,
and in 1868 the cultivation of the former seems to have been highly
successful, the results being as encouraging as any that can be
shown in the West Indies or Louisiana.
A Brisbane paper, dated February 23, 1869, in a long account of
sugar cultivation in the colony, has the following : —ln every district
in the colony where agriculture is carried on, the breadth under sugar
is increasing, so fully satisfied are those interested that the success of
sugar cultivation is a certainty. The particulars received from Pim-
pama are circumstantial and complete, and are facts actually accom-
plished, We have not heard the ages of the various fields of cane,
but presume that they have not fared better in that respect than on
the generality of young plantations where the means are at hand
to crush with. The field called No, 1, and containing 3 acres 3
roods, 23 perches, yielded 21,080 gallons juice at a density of 10 de-
grees Baume, were cut in November and December, and yielded 14
tons sugar, being at the rate of 3 tons 11 cwt. 3 qrs. 18 lbs. per acre,
or 1 ton of sugar per 1506 gallons of juice. These were plant canes.
No, 2 field, containing 7 acres 3 roods 33 perches, plant cane
and ratoons in alternate rows, yielded 24,310 gallons juice at a
density of 104 degrees Baume, cut in December, and yielded 16 tons
3 cwt. 24 lbs., being at the rate of 2 tons 70 lbs. per acre, and
15044 gallons per ton of sugar. Nos. 6 and 7, plants and ratoons in


alternate rows, and containing 12 acres 2 roods 16 perches, yielded
52,586 gallons juice at a density of BJ> degrees, cut in August and Sep-
tember, and yielded 31 tons sugar, being at the rate of 2 tons 6 cwt.
3 qrs. lbs. of sugar per acre, and 1696 gallons of juice to the ton
of sugar. The last field, called No. 8, is a small piece of 2 acres 3£
perches, in plant canes, and yielded 12,580 gallons juice at 10
degrees density, were cut in November, and yielded 8 tons 18 cwt.
of sugar, being at the rate of 4 tons 8 cwt. 5£ lbs. to the acre,
and 1413 gallons of juice to the ton of sugar. There were in addition
3 hogsheads molasses from this patch. This is perhaps the largest
yield of sugar ever known, and ought to be great encouragement
to those who are struggling to overcome the difficulties of establishing
a new plantation. The manufacturing operations have been brought
to a close on most of the plantations ere this, and the fine rains
we have had are telling in a wonderful manner on the young ratoons,
as well as on the plants in the newly planted ground. The crop
at Pimpama this year will be considerably more than double that
of last year, just completed, and will necessarily increase as the
various fields, in the rotation of their planting, come to maturity.
Cotton, however, promises to be more extensively cultivated than
sugar —Queensland cotton being equal to the finest American; and if
labour were plentiful the colony of Queensland would be one of the
finest cotton fields in the world. An acre of cotton in Queensland is
worth about L. 40, so that even a few acres would yield a handsome
return to the cultivator. In order to facilitate the cultivation of
cotton the importation of coolie labour has been tried, and more
recently attempts have been made to obtain labourers from some of
the South Sea Islands; but this mode of supplying the labour market
. not likely to be tolerated, as it would soon degenerate into a traffic
j 3 obnoxious as the African slave trade, and would entail on the
jolony all the evils arising from the presence of a subject and in-
ferior race. Even were a system analogous to slavery to be estab-
lished in Queensland —which public opinion would never permit—
the example of the United States is likely to deter the colonists from
poisoning the young life of the colony with such an ingredient as
domestic slavery. Cotton, if it is ever cultivated to a great extent,
as it will without doubt be in the immediate future, will be so en-
tirely by free labour, and not only that, but the labourers will be
Europeans; for although European labour may be dearer, any other
kind will not be tolerated, as the people, in the broadest sense of the


term, are masters of the situation, and will take good care that the
rights and dignity of labour are thoroughly respected.
In addition to sugar and cotton, most of the fruits and productions
of both temperate and torrid zones thrive in Queensland. On the
banks of all the principal rivers are millions of acres suitable either
for grain or for growing sugar cane, cotton, tobacco, and rice. Among
the fruits raised are oranges, peaches, pine apples, grapes, and cocoa-
nuts, while every kind of vegetables known in Europe arrive at the
greatest perfection, it being no unusual thing to obtain three crops
from the same land within the year. In maize there has been got
from the same ground three crops, within a twelvemonth, of eighty
to a hundred bushels to the acre—a result which it is confidently
believed was never obtained in any other country. Not only is the
soil fruitful, but below it are mineral treasures of great value. Gold
has been found in considerable abundance in some localities, while
the more useful minerals of coal, iron, and copper are found in suffi-
cient quantities to repay the cost of working them; and when the
resources of the colony are better developed, the working of the
minerals will form an important branch of industry, and add greatly
to the wealth and prosperity of the country.
Beyond all question, Queensland is destined at no very distant day
to take a leading, if not the foremost, place among the Australian
colonies, and on that account offers peculiar inducements to emigrants
from this country. Every branch of industry is, of course, in its
infancy; but already railways are being constructed, and towns are
rising in the midst of solitudes which only a year or two back were
occupied as sheep or cattle runs by the squatters—a class that are
not popular in the colony, although they have been of great service
in acting as the pioneers of civilisation in the Australian wilds. The
Queensland squatters, it may be noticed, are men of wealth, which
has been acquired by pastoral pursuits, for which the colony is so
eminently adapted. In New South Wales three acres of pasture are
required for each sheep, whereas in Queensland the average is less
than one a-piece. As an illustration of the wealth of these squatters,
it may be mentioned that when it was proposed in the first Parlia-
ment of Queensland that the Governor’s salary, which the British
Secretary of State had fixed at L. 2500 a-year, should be raised to
L. 4000, the honourable member, who proposed the addition, said
that L. 2500 a-year was only equal to the income of a second-rate
squatter with twenty or twenty-five thousand sheep. There is, per-


haps, no colony that offers greater attractions for the investment of
capital in pastoral or agricultural pursuits, while the field for labour
of a certain kind is almost illimitable.
Stockmen, drivers of bullock teams, shepherds, and domestic ser-
vants, are in constant requisition, and such men need never be out
of work if they choose to take it. Hutkeepers, i.e., the persons who
keep the huts in which the shepherds or stockmen sleep, and who
cook for them, &c.,, receive lower rates of wages. In cases of married
couples, the husband is engaged as shepherd, and the wife as hut-
keeper. The wife can generally get employment on the station with
her husband, and the boys even (if they have any), as soon as they
are strong enough to work, become sources of income instead of en-
cumbrances. Unskilled labour will always find a ready market, and
there are the inducements of the gold-fields.
The following rates of wages and prices of provisions are from a-
paper published by the Queensland Government Emigration Office: —
AVERAGE RATES OE WAGES IN QUEENSLAND.
Stonemasons, 10s to 11s per day. Grooms, a-year, with rations, L. 40
Bricklayers, 10s to 11s. to L. 45.
Carpenters and Joiners, 9s to 10s. Farm Servants, do., L. 35 to L. 40.
Plasterers, 9s to 10s. Married Couple, with services of
Blacksmiths, 10s to 11s, wife, double rations, L. 45 to L. 55,
Shepherds, a - year, with rations. Servant maids, a-year, with board
L. 30 to L. 35. and lodging, L. 20 to L. 25.
Rations are generally 10 lbs. of flour, 10 lbs. of beef, 3 lbs. of sugar, | lb.
of tea weekly, or as may be agreed.
Persons who are disposed to hire as shepherds, or general servants
in the interior, especially in the Kennedy and other northern dis-
tricts, may obtain much higher wages than the above-mentioned.
PRICES OP PROVISIONS IN QUEENSLAND.
Fresh beef, 4d ; best fresh mutton,
4d per lb.
Salt beef, per lb., 3d.
Tea, per lb., 2s to 3s.
Bacon, per lb., Is 2d to 2s 6d.
Salt butter (best) per lb., Is 4d to 2s;
Fresh butter, 2s to 2s 6d.
Flour (best) cwt., 235.
Flour (2nd) cwt,, 19s.
Soap (Colonial) per lb., sd.
The price of clothing is about one-fourth more than in Great
Britain, but from the mildness of the climate a much less quantity
of clothing is needed in Queensland; the cost of clothing to the
working classes is therefore less than at home.


The immigrant, on arrival, is furnished by Government with
shelter in the Immigration Depot, and also with rations until he has
had a chance of engaging himself. A great mistake is often made by
immigrants refusing offers of employment because the wages are a
little under the regular rate. They frequently afterwards have to
repent their refusal. They forget, in making their first engagement,
that in many pursuits a man with some little experience in colonial
life is more valuable than one who has only just arrived in the
colony; they forget, also, that their employer knows nothing of their
capabilities. Let them accept the first fair and reasonable offer, and
having proved their usefulness to their employer, after a little expe-
rience, he will then, generally speaking, gladly give them higher wages
rather than part with them. Moreover, it is better, and more profit-
able in the end, to get into employment at once (even although it be
not that which they most affect), at a lower rate of wages, than to
remain idle from day to day for two or three months, in the mere
hope of getting some more eligible offer. Another obstacle to the
employment of some immigrants on arrival is that they refuse to take
any situation except it be in or near the town at which they have
been landed. They refuse to go into the interior, and dread the bush ;
they thus linger about the town, and decline good offers of employ-
ment in the bush, in the hopes that they may find work within the
prescribed radius. Now, it is evident that the demands of these
towns are very limited, as compared with the requirements for labour
in the interior, and that such persons might readily find good engage-
ments at higher wages if they would accept the offers made to them
to proceed up the country. The dread of the bush is a foolish
imagination, which experience would at once dispel. There is in the
bush, as in the towns, all the protection to the inhabitants which a
civilised state can afford. Life and property are as secure in the
bush as in the towns. Bushranging is almost unknown, the only
cases which have occurred since the foundation of the colony having
taken place recently on the road to the gold-fields, where there is
a large population; and in these cases the offenders were speedily
brought to justice. The blacks, as a rule, when they are visible, give
little or no trouble, and they are, moreover, kept from the commission
of depredations on life and property by fear of the retribution which
would await them.
The cost of a steerage passage from the Clyde to Queensland is
r. 15 but free and assisted passages are granted to eligible parties.


Free passages are granted to single domestic servants, and to married
couples without families, or with one child. The terms and full par-
ticulars with respect to free and assisted passages, may be obtained
of Mr J. Gow Rennie, 54 Broomielaw, Glasgow, the agent for the
Queensland Government in Scotland. From 1860 to 1866 large num-
bers left the Clyde for Queensland, but from May, 1866, to May,
1869, there was no vessel left the Clyde for Queensland; but a com-
mencement was, however, made in that month by the Star Queen
leaving the Clyde with 800 emigrants, in which free and assisted
passengers were taken, subject to the regulations of the Government
Commissioners, which, as we have stated, can be learned on applica-
tion to Mr Rennie, 54 Broomielaw, Glasgow. For the information
of those emigrants interested in the price of land, we give the follow-
ing brief summary of some of the clauses of the Crown Lands Aliena-
tion Act of 1868:
The land is divided into agricultural land, and first and second-
class pastoral lands. Purchases of these lands can now be made as
follows:—Of agricultural land, from 40 to 640 acres can be purchased
at 15s per acre, payable in ten annual instalments of Is 6d per acre;
within three years from the date of selection the lessee, on proof
that he has resided not less than two years on his land, and ex-
pended not less than 10s per acre on the land, or that he has fenced
the whole with a good and substantial fence, or if during the cur-
rency of the lease he can prove that he has cultivated one-tenth, on
payment of the balance of the ten years’ lease, is entitled to a deed
of grant in fee-simple.
Purchases of first and second-class pastoral lands can be made at
10s and 5s per acre, payable in ten annual instalments of Is per acre
and 6d per acre. Of first-class pastoral land, from SO to 2560 acres,
and of second-class pastoral land, from 80 to 7680 acres, can be pur-
chased ; within three years from the date of selection of any pastoral
land, the lessee, on proof that he or his bailiff has resided on the land
for two years, and that 10s per acre for first-class land, and 5s per
acre for second-class land, has been expended in substantial improve-
ments, or that he has fenced the whole with a good and substantial
fence, on payment of the balance of the ten years’ rent, is entitled to
a deed of grant in fee-simple.
Blocks of land for sugar and coffee plantations, of from 820 to 1280
acres, can be selected within ten miles of the coast or any navigable
river, and if within three years one-tenth part of the land selected is






under cultivation in either sugar or coffee, on payment of the balance
■of the ten years’ lease the lessee is entitled to a deed of grant.
Provision is also made in the Act whereby any person who is the
head of a family, or who has arrived at the age of 21 years, can make
selection of a homestead of 80 acres of agricultural land, subject to a
quit-rent of 9d per acre for five years, or of 160 acres of first or
second-class pastoral lands, subject to a quit-rent of 6d per acre; and
the lessee, on proof of five years’ residence and cultivation of one-
tenth of the land, or that he has fenced it in with a good and sub-
stantial fence, can obtain a deed of grant at the end of the five years;
or, if the lessee chooses to pay the upset price of his land after two
years, on proof of residence and cultivation, he can then obtain the
deed of grant.
VICTORIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The thriving colonies of Victoria and South Australia occupy the
southern portion of the Australian continent, and, from their posi-
tion, are the most temperate of the Australian colonies, Victoria,
formerly known as Port Philip and Australia Felix, formed, up to
a recent date, part of New South Wales, but the gold discoveries
increased its importance, and now Melbourne, its chief city, is a
formidable rival to Sydney, and if its progress in the future be any-
thing like what it has been in the past the capital of Victoria will
become the metropolis of the southern hemisphere. South Australia
has not made the same progress as its more stirring neighbour Vic-
toria; but, considering the opposition and prejudice it had to over-
come in its early days, its present position is very satisfactory. South
Australia was first settled in 1834, but for ten years it made very
little progress, in consequence of misrepresentation and other adverse
causes. It was represented as being little better than an arid desert
in which it was impossible to earn a living. By-and-bye, however,
when more correct accounts of its capabilities were made known,
South Australia attracted considerable numbers of settlers, the ma-
jority of whom were Germans and Scotch; and when its valuable
copper mines were discovered, its progress became more rapid; but
it received a check by the exodus caused by the discovery of gold ir


Victoria. When the gold excitement had partially died away, South
Australia recovered from its depression, and for the last fifteen years
has been steadily progressing.
The surface of South Australia is diversified by several mountain
ranges, but the highest of them do not exceed 3000 feet above the
level of the sea. It is in the mountains where the rich copper mines
are situated. These mines are the richest of their kind in the world,
and the working of them is one of the chief sources of wealth to the
colony, which is, moreover, rich in pastoral and agricultural produc-
tions. The vine thrives uncommonly well in South Australia, and
already its vintages have become famous in Europe, where the vine is
likely to die out. In the virgin soil of Australia the vine will flourish
for centuries after it has died out in the wine-producing countries of
Europe, and the wines of South Australia will yet be as famous as
those of France, Spain, and Hungary were in the earlier days of the
world’s history. The vine, however, is not the only valuable produc-
tion of South Australia, wheat and other grain arriving at great per-
fection. Already wheat and flour in considerable quantities are being
exported to this country, and every year the quantities will be larger,
and in a few years the colony will become one of the principal grain-
growing countries in the world, and become a formidable rival to the
Western States of America and Russia for supplying those countries
which do not raise sufficient breadstuff’s for their own consumption.
In South Australia the progress of agriculture causes a great demand
for agricultural labourers and the different trades of artisans required
to carry on farming. Miners are also in great demand at wages that
would astonish the same class in this country. Labour of all kinds
commands about the same rates as in Victoria, and as we shall state
them in treating of that colony it is unnecessary to report them here.
The cost of reaching Adelaide, the chief town in South Australia, is
about the same as to other Australian ports. Vessels from the Clyde
for Adelaide sail at intervals, in which steerage passengers are carried
at from L. 14 to L. 16 in the steerage, and the rates are much the same
from Liverpool or London, where first-class ships sail at regular in-
tervals.
Victoria is, in many respects, the most important of the southern
colonies. Its gold-fields are the richest in the world, and although
they have been wrought now for nearly twenty years the yield of gold
shows no falling off; on the contrary of late years there has been a
perceptible increase. Gold is, however, far from being the only


source of wealth in Victoria. Farming, both pastoral and agricul-
tural, are prosecuted with vigour and success, and the flocks and
herds of the Victorian stockmen are often more valuable than the
richest mine in Ballarat or Bendigo. The climate of Victoria is also
very favourable for the cultivation of the grape, and the vines of
Victoria rival those of South Australia in all the qualities essential to
good vines.
Melbourne, the capital of Victoria, although little more than thirty
years old, has a population of about 150,000, with buildings which,
in extent and magnificence, equal, if not surpass, some of those to be
seen in European capitals which have existed for centuries. From
the date of its foundation, in 1837, the city of Melbourne has been
distinguished for its enterprise. More than any other town or district
in Australia it has been true to the Australian motto— ‘ Advance !’
The following account of the first years of its history will be read with
interest:—
‘ The town of Melbourne was laid out on the northern bank of the
Yarra in the form of an oblong square, with the streets at right angles
to one another. The principal streets are of convenient breadth, and
promise for the larger population and more elegant structures of the
future city an open and agreeable effect, in accordance with the
climate of the country. But each of the considerable blocks which
they mark out is traversed by a lane or “little street,’’ affording a
traffic entrance to the houses and stores; and the cheaper sections of
land in these localities have been bought up by the poorer classes,
who are often too densely thronged in their narrow quarters.
‘ The site of the town, whose lands were subsequently the objects
of such extravagant speculation, had been mapped out in half-acre
portions called allotments, a term now associated with many sore
reminiscences of golden hopes and rusty realities in the hard but
wholesome experience of the colonists. The first land-sale, which
consisted of these town-allotments, occurred at Melbourne in June,
1837. The Government required payment in gold, and few were pro-
vided with the requisite description of value. The fortunate buyers
got such lots as were then sold at a rate varying from L. 30 to L. 100
per half-acre. After an interval of little more than two years, the
value of each of these small areas of the green sod had ascended to
thousands of pounds. At a sale by auction that occurred in 1839,
which is still referred to with a sigh by the early colonist as the time
of happy faces and general money-making, three half-acre sections


realised the enormous sum of L, 10,250; and the purchaser, it was
said, had found this extravagant investment to be also remunerative
by means of the magic process of carving out his sections in fragments
suitable to the wants and abilities of the crowd of buyers. Many
parties were induced thus to speculate in land; and it must be ad-
mitted that the continued advance in the estimated value of this kind
of property was a temptation difficult to be withstood, and a short
and easy road to fortune. Numbers of the purchasers sold out with
enormous profit, and again plunged, with their enlarged means, into
investments which had already proved so advantageous.
* The settlement had been founded, and for a short period at first
continued to be peopled chiefly by immigration from Van Diemen’s
Land. But attention was soon excited in a wider field; and Sydney
poured forth her adventurers and her capital to participate in the
profitable traffic going on at Port Philip. Two Anglo-Australian
banks, previously in operation in Sydney, promptly established
branches in a town of such increasing importance, and in the general
prosperity of the times found an ample investment for their large
paid-up capital, in discounting the numerous bills that were created
by the buying and selling propensities of the settlers.
‘As every occupation appeared to prosper—as every purchaser re-
sold at his own convenience with a profit, and the measure of a man’s
means appeared in a direct ratio with the extent of his speculations,
it was impossible to deny mutual credit and accommodation, which
accordingly prevailed to the most unbounded extent. Transactions
enlarged and multiplied; and a legion of lawyers was unremittingly
engaged in the equally lucrative employment of framing conveyances
and unravelling titles for the patches and fractions of land that were
incessantly pushed into the market, involved in confusion by the
tardy emanation of the Crown-grant, the operation of the law of dower,
or the haste and negligence of the speculators. The sale of town
allotments commenced on Ist June, 1837, that of “country and
suburban sections” on 12th September of the following year. From
these respective dates to the end of 1841 there had been sold by
Government, chiefly by public auction, in the space of between
four and five years, 205,748 acres of land, realising no less a sum
than L.394,353.’
It is almost needless to mention that when the gold discoveries
came in 1853, the hitherto rapid progress of Melbourne was increased
a hundredfold, and streets and buildings sprung up as from the touch


of a wizard’s wand, for the most potent of all enchanters, gold, was
king.
In order to convey some idea of the Australian gold-fields, we take
the following from a sketch written by the Hon. Thomas M ‘Combie,
a brother of the M.P. for West Aberdeenshire, and himself a member
of the Legislative Council of Victoria. Speaking of the uncertainties
connected with gold mining in Victoria, Mr M‘Combie says the un-
certainty of gold finding is increased in the deep workings at Ballarat,
Ararat, and elsewhere:—‘The leads, or gutters, are exactly of the
same character in the first formation, or shallow “sinking,” as in
the very deep sinkings, where the rocks have been cut through. In
both cases the gold seems to lie in beds of former rivulets through
which auriferous soil had been carried by the force of the stream, and
the gold had been deposited in the holes or cavities of these courses,
which now form the much talked-of pockets. My experience as a
gold digger and observer leads me to think that the gold has originally
exuded from the quartz reefs and mountain ranges, and been washed
down, in the course of ages, along the channels through which the
water has passed. The heavy gold would be deposited in the level
places, where the current had slackened its velocity, or where any
obstruction had presented itself, the lighter gold being carried still
farther onwards. All experience proves this to be correct, as, when
the lead takes a quick dip, and where, of course, the water would
have fallen with considerable velocity, the lead is utterly worthless;
but at the bottom of these descents, and where the lead proceeds
along a level surface, the rich pocket again begins to appear. The
gold has originally been in the large boulders of quartz in the ranges;
the heavy winter rains have been washing them away, and drifting
the decomposed particles along the small creeks. Various contortions
of nature have no doubt occurred, and a second formation of granite,
sandstone, or slate, has been formed, upon which the very same thing
has happened. There is, doubtless, an inexhaustible store of gold in
the quartz reefs. The machinery for crushing quartz on Ballarat is
limited, compared with other diggings; but there is one large estab-
lishment there, and another at Clunes, belonging to the Port Philip
Company, where there are enormous kilns for burning the quartz,
which, after being withdrawn in a fused state, is suddenly cooled by
cold water, and is then calcined, and the gold extracted in the usual
manner. Quartz washing must ultimately come to be the great source
of our gold production; for the alluvial diggings will in time be ex-


hausted, but it will be ages before the quartz reefs can be crushed
into dust, and deprived of the rich ore they are so deeply impregnated
with; and, in a short time, gold will be procured only by the com-
bination of skilled labour and capital.’
Free and assisted emigration to Victoria, some time suspended, has
been again revived, as we learn by the latest accounts from Mel-
bourne. The conditions and terms on which free and assisted emi-
grants will be conveyed to Victoria will likely soon be made public
by means of advertisements. In the meantime we cannot do better
than quote the Melbourne Argus, the Times of Australia, in describ-
ing the class of emigrants that are likely to succeed in Australia and
those that will not:— ‘ Unfit immigrants—the lazy, the idle, the
drunken, and the dissolute, whether they be rich or poor, we do
not want. But poverty by itself will never be a disqualification in
Victoria. We welcome poor men, because we have a reasonable
expectation that, unless it be by their own fault, they will in time
become prosperous. There is, however, a difficulty to which English
immigrants are exposed, although it has not any special application
to the colony. They leave a country where occupations are divided
to a greater extent than in any other part of the world, and they come
to a country where a man must be ready to turn his hand to what-
ever work he can find to do. Many persons, therefore, trained to
one branch of industry, and skilful in that branch, find their skill
useless to them in a new country. After a little time such persons,
if they are at all energetic, strike out, under the pressure of necessity,
some new line for themselves. But the resourceless man has no
business here. We want the man who, as Mr Nasmyth, after his
old master, Maudsley, says, “ can cut a plank with a gimlet, and bore
a hole with a saw.” In other words, we need active, intelligent,
self-reliant men, who are not afraid of work, and who will make the
best of whatever conditions they may have to work in. For the small
capitalist who can himself employ his money in agriculture or in
grazing; for the farm labourer who may wish soon to become the
owner of his own farm; for the domestic servant, for the skilled
mechanic, this colony presents —and for many years will continue to
present—unequalled advantages ; for men who have neither skill nor
money nor muscle, it is one of the worst places in the world. A poor
gentleman who is “ready to do anything,” but who knows how to do
nothing, who cannot dig, and is ashamed to beg, has a hard t'me in
Victoria.’


With respect to the rates of wages and the demand for labour in the
colony of Victoria, as also in the neighbouring colony of South Aus-
tralia, we learn from the Melbourne Argus, of March 29, that large
works, both of public and private improvement, are going on within
the city itself, and our masons, bricklayers, carpenters, &c., with
their respective labourers, are engaged in the erection of two or three
as fine buildings as will be found in the southern hemisphere. In
addition to this, private enterprise is active in the suburbs, and every
town trade feels the impulse. Recurring to the demand for country
labour, we may just intimate that good ploughmen, useful gardeners,
carters, general agricultural servants, and boys able to milk are most
in request—always, however, after the female domestics, who are a
difficulty to get, because they want more money; a difficulty to keep,
because, as a class, they are apt to think themselves undervalued;
and a still greater difficulty to manage when they are obtained, be-
cause they hold fast to the faith in their own merits. There are,
however, some very excellent servants occasionally found, and these,
it is not too much to say, are valued at a figure that would in Eng-
land seem exorbitant. Although the market is thus in a healthy
state, with a tendency to further improvement, our quotations of
wages are not perceptibly affected, and may be taken as follows :
Stonemasons and bricklayers, 10s per day; carpenters, 9s do.; builders’
labourers, 7s do.; shepherds, L. 30 to L. 40 per annum; shearers, I6s
to 17s per 100; superior do., 18s per do.; hutkeepers, L. 22 per year;
lads (who can milk), 12s per week; general farm labourers, 15s to
20s do.; three-rail fencers (stuff laid on the line), Is 9d to 2s per rod;
grubbers and splitters and fencers, 4s per rod; wood-splitters, 3s 6d
per ton; gardeners, 20s to 23s and 28s (first-class) per week; bush
carpenters, 18s to 20s per week, with rations; general carpenters
undertaking bushwork, 30s do.; black and shoeing smiths, 30s do.;
wheelwrights, 35s to 40s do.; brickmakers, 18s to 20s per 1000, with
rations; married couples, without encumbrance (first-class) from L. 55
to L. 65 per annum; do. (second-class), L. 45 to L. 55 do.; female ser-
vants (good), country, L. 26 to L. 28 do,; laundresses, L.2G to L.2S
do.; cooks, housemaids, L. 26 do.; nurse girls, 5s to 7s per week.
Common labour may be quoted at 6s to 7s per day.’ And the same
authority states that, ‘ unless in some cases where wages are un-;
naturally high, or which is less likely, from an accidental and tem-
porary excess in a particular class of immigrants, it is hardly possible
that wages should be materially reduced by immigration in this


country for many years. We ask, therefore, our friends who ar* -
poor at home to come and do better here. We have room enough fo
all, and the more that come the more work they will find to do, and
the better will their work be remunerated.’
Until the arrangements are completed for taking out free and
assisted emigrants to Victoria, parties paying their own passages will
find in the vessels of the Black Ball line the very best accommoda-
tion, Passages by the Black Bali line of packets may be secured by
applying to Mr J. Gow Bennie, No. 54 Broomielaw, the agent for
Glasgow.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA,
The western portion of the Australian continent would seem to be
the least valuable, but much of it is as yet an unknown land, the
only two settlements being on Swan River and King George’s Sound.
The settlement of Swan River was founded in 1829, but, remaining a
convict settlement up to very recently, its progress has been slow.
Long after transportation had been abolished in the other Australian
colonies, convicts were sent to Western Australia, and it would pro-
bably have remained a penal colony for some time to come, had not
the other colonies remonstrated with the Home Government on the
iniquity of emptying the social and moral rubbish of the mother country
at their doors. Now that convict labour is all but done away with in
Western Australia, there will no doubt arise a demand for free labour,
but it will be some time before the demand is very great, as the popu-
lation is very limited, not exceeding 10,000 or 12,000.
The soil of Western Australia, so far as it is known, is decidedly
inferior to what is found in the southern and eastern parts. There
is, however, tolerable pasture for sheep and cattle, which at present
constitute the chief wealth of the colony. Wheat is also grown to
advantage, and when the country is properly opened up, there is
every likelihood that Western Australia will take a position among
the corn-growing countries of the world. Western Australia, in its
natural features, exhibits in a marked degree the peculiar character-
istics of Australian scenery. The flowers are scentless, and the birds
songless, while the forests all the year round are olive green, while


over all hangs a solitude so vast and oppressive that the European
traveller feels as though he were the first that ever burst into that
silent land. In describing the general appearance of Australian tree
life, travellers say that, amid its apparent sameness, spots may be
found teeming with a luxuriant and gigantic vegetation, sometimes
laid out in stately groves divested of copses or underwood, and at
other times skirting an open country of hill and dale, gracefully
sprinkled with isolated clumps of trees covered with the richest tufted
herbage. Sometimes again they appear in immense thickets inter-
woven with innumerable creepers, and forming covers as impenetrable
and picturesque as those which are found amid the. forests of Brazil.
The trees are mostly evergreens, and have a hard and horny species
of leaves which grow from the branches vertically, and not horizon-
tally as in the northern hemisphere. It is affirmed that one-eighth
of all the known species of vegetables are peculiar to Australia. The
most beautiful tree of the Australian forest is the fern tree, which,
when it has attained a height of 15 or 20 feet, throws out its gigantic
leaves in every direction each to the extent of four or five feet. Grass
trees are also numerous, but palms are confined to the east and north
shores, where the vegetation assimilates itself more to that of India
and the islands of the Indian Archipelago.
The natives of Australia are a peculiar race, and have given great
trouble to ethnologists as to their origin. Generally they are repre-
sented as extremely low in the scale of intelligence, and but a few de-
grees above the brute animals with whom they associate. Mr Grey,
a traveller, who was in Western Australia, gives, however, a some-
what different account. Speaking of the natives that he saw in the
vicinity of Glenelg and the Swan River, Mr Grey says that in many
respects they resemble the other Australian tribes, but in their form
and appearance there is a startling difference. ‘ They are in general
very tall and robust, and exhibit, in their legs and arms, a fine full
development of muscle, which is unknown to the southern races.
They wear no clothes, and their bodies are marked by scars and wales.
They seem to have no regular mode of dressing their hair, this appear-
ing to depend entirely on individual taste or caprice. They appear
to live in tribes, subject, perhaps, to some individual authority; and
each tribe has a sort of capital or head-quarters, where the women
and children remain, whilst the men, divided into small parties, hunt
and shoot in different directions. The largest number we saw toge-
ther amounted to nearly two hundred, women and children included.


Their arms consist of stone-headed spears (which they throw with
great force and precision), of throwing sticks, boomerangs or kileys,
clubs, and stone hatchets. The dogs they use in hunting, I have
already stated to be of a kind unknown in other parts of Australia,
and they were never seen wild by us. The natives make their water-
buckets and weapons very neatly; and make, from the bark of a tree,
a light but strong cord. Their huts, of which I only saw those on
the sea-coast, are constructed in an oval form, of the boughs of trees,
and are roofed with dry reeds. The diameter of one which I mea-
sured was about fourteen feet at the base. Their language is soft and
melodious, so much so as to lead to the inference that it differs very
materially, if not radically, from the more southern Australian dia-
lects which I have since had an opportunity of inquiring into. Their
gesticulation is expressive, and their bearing manly and noble. They
never speared a horse or a sheep belonging to us; and, judging by
the degree of industry shown in the execution of some of their paint-
ings, the absence of anything offensive in the subjects delineated, and
the careful finish of some articles of common use, I should infer that,
under proper treatment, they might easily be raised very considerably
in the scale of civilisation.
* A remarkable circumstance is the presence amongst them of a race,
to appearance, totally different, and almost white, who seem to exer-
cise no small influence over the rest. lam forced to believe that the
distrust evinced towards strangers arose from these persons; as, in
both instances, when we were attacked, the hostile party was led by
one of these light-coloured men. I saw but three men of this fair
race myself, and thought they closely resembled Malays; some of my
men observed a fourth. It seems extremely probable that these
light-hued people are a few Malays who have come from the Indian
Archipelago. It is only matter of surprise that, with their superior
abilities, and active nautical habits, the Malays should not have
already wrested much of Australia from the darker race, as they have
done in the case of Madagascar, a much more distant region. ’
Mr Grey found some curious paintings in caves on his route, one
cavern containing from fifty to sixty figures, chiefly of human beings,
kangaroos, &c. The colours red, yellow, and white, are procured
from earths; black from charcoal; and a blue most probably from
plants. By mixing them with a resin, these tints are kept vivid in
spite of humidity. We cannot agree with Mr Grey that these Aus-
tralian paintings indicate anything superior to the ordinary savage


intellect. One of the most striking human figures is a rude carica-
ture, such as would be drawn or painted by a child; and there are,
besides, no hieroglyphics or letters to indicate a meaning in the figures.
Western Australia is not likely to make very rapid progress until
North Australia is partially opened up and settled. Already steps
are being taken to form settlements on the northern coast, and in a
short time it is expected the fine harbours of the Gulf of Carpentaria
will form the site of rising towns. At present there are very few
vessels sailing direct to Western Australia, and emigrants going to
Swan River or Perth go by way of Adelaide in South Australia. The
cost of a passage from this country to Western Australia is about
L. 18, but a system of free and assisted emigration on a large scale
will, no doubt, be adopted, now that transportation has been abolished.
South of Australia, and separated from it by Bass’s Straits, lies
the fertile island of Tasmania, better known by the name of Van
Dieman’s Land. Tasmania has an area somewhat less than Scotland,
and is agreeably diversified by hill and dale, with many fine rivers—
the chief of which are the Derwent, the Tasman, the Huion, the
Clyde, and the Isis. The two principal mountains are Wyld’s Craig
and Benlomond —and the Tasmanian Benlomond is nearly one-half
higher than the Scottish one, being 4200 feet above the level of the
sea. It was in 1804 that the first settlement was founded, and, of
course, it was a convict one, and for many years the very name of
Van Dieman’s Land conjured up associations of crime and its punish-
ment.
Although transportation of criminals to the shores of Van Dieman’s
Land acted as a deterrent to free emigration, the reports that reached
this country of the mildness of its climate and the fertility of its soil
attracted considerable numbers to its shores, and when the free
settlers increased they grew powerful enough to stop the importation
of convicts, although the original character of the colony is still to be
traced in the population. It may be mentioned that many of the
most wealthy colonists are descendants of convicts. It is also worthy
of remark that the first settlement in the colony of Victoria was
formed at Port Philip, by squatters from Van Diemau’s Land. This
exodus from Van Diemau’s Land took place in the year 1835, and had
a decided effect on the progress of the island. The occasion of this
emigration was rumours of the marvellous fertility of the regions that
lay to the northward of Bass’s Straits.
In the year 1835, wonderful rumours spread themselves over the


pleasant little island of Tasmania of new regions on the other side
Bass’s Straits. At little more than 150 miles distance, it was said,
there spread beautiful pastures, green and fertile and beautiful wood-
lands, where the forest trees were so lightly and airily scattered, that
the turf grew strong, and fresh, and sweet beneath them, as on the
openest plains or the fairest downs. These park-like expanses, stretch-
ing themselves for hundreds of miles in all directions, were here
■washed by the ocean, and here stretched at the feet of far-off blue-
glancing mountains. Rivers and lively brooks wound invitingly
through them, and occasional lakes gave their refreshing charm to
plains of most luxurious fertility.
Certain adventurous men who had assumed the profession of whalers,
it was said, had for some time haunted these elysian shores ; now
skirting their lofty and more thickly-forested portions, and now
anchoring in secluded creeks and bays, where they varied their ocean
life by hunting the kangaroo and the emu through the lovely pastures
and the pleasant evergreen woods. So charming had they found this
life, that they had resolved to enjoy it continually, and had therefore
built huts on the shores of a fine bay, and had stealthily carried over
in their whaleboats flocks and cattle, and all that was necessary for a
jocund and plentiful Robinson Crusoe life.
But such fairylands, wherever they lie, are too alluring to remain
long tewse incognitse. King Arthur is supposed to have lain hidden
some thousand years or more in the Isle of Avalon, waiting for the
day when it shall be necessary to turn out and save his country, and
as said country appears yet very able to save itself, he may, with our
consent and that of posterity, probably stay there another thousand.
But that is the only instance in which a man can keep such a desir-
able country to himself. Little Tasmania having been only inhabited
by the white man about thirty years, had already become glutted with
bis floeks and herds. Fertile as were the vaHeys of Van Dieman’s
Laud, a great portion of the island was occupied by wild, rugged
mountains, and still more by dense and often barren forests. In these
thirty years of European possession the population had reached the
sum of forty thousand, of whom no less than seventeen thousand were
England’s expatriated criminals. The little more than twenty thou-
sand free men already found themselves masters of eight hundred
thousand sheep, which were palpably becoming too many for the
capabilities of the pasturage, especially in summer, when the grass
was scorched, and, as it were, dead.


The news of the new regions of fertility and boundlessness, on the
other side, as the phrase became and remains, were therefore listened
to with avidity. Not only did individuals hasten to get over, but
companies were formed to purchase vessels, and large tracts of
country from the natives, when they had reached the promised land.
First and foremost amongst these adventurers were John Pascoe
Fawkner and his associates, who, procuring a ship from Sydney,
steered across with their cattle, and people from the heads of the
Tamar in Van Dieman’s Land to the present bay and site of Port
Philip. Fawkner will live in history as the founder of the queenly
city of Melbourne, and his name will go down to posterity along with
Pomulus, Constantine, and others, who have founded cities that will
be remembered through all time.
Although a number of the most enterprising of the colonists in Van
Dieman’s Land were attracted to the opposite shores of Australia, the
island did not stand still. Important towns, such as Launcestown,
Hobart Town, and others, have arisen, and are the seats of a busy
population; while every year the yield of corn and fruits has increased.
Emigrants, more especially farm labourers and artisans, find ready
employment at about the same wages as in Australia; and the con-
struction and opening of railways have increased the resources of the
country, and given a stimulus to industry of every description. The
cost of a passage to Launcestown is L. 16, and ships sail regularly for
that and other ports in the island from London and Liverpool.




CANADA.
ONTARIO
Canada, on account of the shortness of the voyage, and conse-
quently the cheapness of reaching it, will attract many who have
neither the means nor the inclination to undertake a voyage to the
antipodes. Until very recently the Canadian Government showed
little inclination to encourage immigration, but since the confedera-
tion of the various provinces the new Government has shown a more
commendable spirit, and Ontario, better known as Canada West, or
Upper Canada, has bestirred itself, and a Commissioner has been
sent to this country for the purpose of diffusing information respect-
ing the country, and diverting a portion of the emigration from this
country to Canada.
Canada West has long been a favourite field for Scottish emigrants,
and many of its townships are exclusively peopled by Scotchmen and
their descendants. Now that the Government has opened up large
portions of the public lands, and held out other inducements, the
province of Ontario ought to receive its fair share of those who leave
our shores to woo their fortune in the New World. In order to give
the intending emigrant some idea of the country and its resources,
we shall begin by giving a description of its situation and principal
productions.
The province of Ontario is situate to the north of the River St
Lawrence, and the great lakes Ontario, Erie, Huron, and Superior.
The river Ottawa, a noble stream, divides it from the province of
Quebec. Its northerly and westerly boundaries are by no means well
defined, so that its area can be given only approximately. However,
it may be safely assumed at about 121,260 square miles, equal to


77,606,400 acres, or almost exactly the same as that of Great Britain
and Ireland. The population of that kingdom is upwards of thirty
millions. It would therefore appear that, after making due allow-
ance for difference of climate and soil, Ontario could well sustain a
population of at least ten millions. Its actual population at different
periods will appear from the following table:—
1830, . . 210,437 By census.
1841, . . , 465,357 do.
1851, . , . 952,004 do.
1861, . . . 1,396,091 do.
1869, ■ . . 1,962,067 Estimated.
It will be seen from the above figures, that its present population
is about ten times what it was forty years ago, a rate of increase con-
siderably greater than that of the United States during the same time.
The figures also show that its present population of about 2,000,000
is only a fifth of that which it is probably capable of supporting, so
that there is still room for a large immigration.
The soil of the country varies in different localities, a very large
proportion being of the very best description for agricultural pur-
poses. The natural advantages of Ontario are very great; its internal
water communication by means of the great lakes is unsurpassed; in
mineral wealth, it has been pronounced by competent authorities
equal to any part of the world, abounding as it does in iron, copper,
lead, gold, silver, marble, petroleum, salt, &c., &c. Its immense
forests of pine timber are too well known to need any description.
The great lakes abound with fish, and the forests with game.
In the valleys of some of the largest rivers of Upper Canada, wheat
has been grown after wheat for twenty years. The first crops yielded
an average of 40 bushels to the acre, but under the thoughtless sys-
tem of husbandry then pursued the yield diminished to 12 bushels to
the acre, and compelled a change of system, which soon had the effect
of restoring the land to its original fertility. This system of exhaus-
tion has effected its own cure, and led to the introduction of a more
rational method of cultivating the soil. Years ago, when the roads
were bad, and facilities for communicating with markets few and far
between, wheat was the only saleable produce of the farm, so that no
effort was spared to cultivate that cereal to the utmost extent. Now,
since railroads, macadamised roads, and plank roads have opened up
the country, and agricultural societies have succeeded iu disseminat-


ing much useful instruction and information, husbandry has improved
in all directions, and the natural fertility of the soil of the old settle*
ments is in great part restored.
The average yield of wheat in some townships exceeds 22 bushels
to the acre, and where an approach to good farming prevails, the
yield rises to thirty and often forty bushels to the acre. On new land
fifty bushels is not very uncommon; and it must not be forgotten
that Canadian wheat, grown near the city of Toronto, won a first prize
at the Paris Exhibition. It may truly be said that the soil of what
may be termed the agricultural portion of Canada, which comprises
four-fifths of the inhabited portion, and a vast area still in the hands
of the Government and now open to settlement, is unexceptionable ;
and when deterioration takes place, it is the fault of the farmer and
not of the soil.
The mineral wealth of the country is not surpassed, if indeed it be
equalled by any other, in variety and richness. It has not yet, how-
ever, received anything like the attention it deserves, and may be
said to be almost entirely undeveloped. To mention some of the
principal articles, we have iron in large quantities a short distance
back from Lake Ontario, in the country between the Georgian Bay
and the Ottawa; also, in the same region, copper, lead, plumbago,
antimony, arsenic, manganese, heavy spar, calc spar, gypsum, or
plaster of Paris, marble pronounced by good judges as fully equal to
Carrara, or that obtained in Vermont, and building stone, all of them
in large quantities near the surface. Gold has also been found in the
same region, but not as yet in quantities sufficient to pay well.
On the north shore of Lake Huron are the celebrated Bruce mines
of copper, from which ore and metal to the value of 250,000 dollars
is exported annually. Silver is also found on the shores of Lake
Superior, particularly round Thunder Bay. Mica is also found, and
Worked in quantities that pay well.
Petroleum is got in the westerly part of the Province in immense
and apparently inexhaustible quantities.
The first wells were struck at Oil Springs, County of Lambton, in
1862, and by March, 1863, over four millions of gallons had been
obtained. Other regions have yielded this valuable mineral in large
quantities—Bothwell, in the County of Kent, and Petrolea, in Lamb-
ton, being the principal. The last-mentioned place is now the largest
producing district. In 1867, 130 wells were sunk with great success,
120,000 barrels being shipped, and 200,000 tanked for future use. In


1868, the produce was about 4000 barrels weekly, equal to 200,000 in
the year. Canada requires for home consumption only about 120,000
barrels, so that there is ample surplus for export. The difficulty in
getting the Canadian oil into European markets has been its odour.
American oil has been readily deodorized, and consequently kept
Canadian out of the market. A process has quite recently been in-
vented, however, with which the Canadian article can be perfectly
deodorized, and as this oil is superior to American in having greater
illuminating power, and, being less explosive, it is expected that a
large export trade will be developed during the present year. Large
refineries are being constructed at immense expense for preparing the
oil according to the new process. The price at present for crude oil
is about one dollar a barrel, but the normal value, taking the price of
American oil as a guide, is from three to four dollars. Should the
price rise to these sums, as is expected will be the case when the
export trade is fully developed, the trade will become of immense
value to Ontario.
Salt is obtained at Goderich and the neighbourhood, in the shape
of brine, from wells sunk to a great depth below the surface. The
article is obtained by evaporating the brine, and is exceedingly good
for table use, having been found, upon chemical analysis, to be of
almost perfect purity. As evidence of its quality, it may be mentioned
that it received a gold medal at the Paris Exhibition of 1867, and the
first prize at the New York State fair for the same year. Although
the manufacture has been carried on for only two or three years,
there is now produced far more salt than is needed by the province of
Ontario, and large quantities will probably be exported. In Novem-
ber, 1866, the manufacture was 45 barrels a day; in August, 1867, it
was 90; in August, 1868,190; and nowit is probably upwards of 300
barrels a day. Over 70,000 dollars have been expended; 13 wells are
now sunk, and about 200 kettles are in operation.
Wages in Canada are not so high as in the Australian colonies or
in New Zealand, but the demand is more steady, and none who are
able and willing to work need have any fear of want of employment.
As in all the countries the useful is more in demand than the orna-
mental, and professional men and clerks have hard enough times of
it in Canada, unless they adapt themselves to the altered circum-
stances in which they are placed. The following may be relied on as
an accurate statement of the rates of wages and the cost of living in
Ontario:—


Farm indoor servants, who are generally treated as members of the
family, get from 10 dollars to 14 dollars a month, by the year.
Female servants, from 4 dollars to 6 dollars a month, by the year.
In country places, wages are somewhat lower. The demand is con-
stant for both these classes throughout the province, and superior
servants will sometimes get higher wages than the largest amounts
above stated.
Labourers, from 75 cents to 1 dollar 25 cents a day, with board.
During harvest, wages have often risen to 1 dollar 50 cents and 2 dollars
a day, with board. Boys of twelve years of age and upwards readily
get employment at proportionate wages. During three or four months
of winter, farm work becomes scarcer, and wages consequently lower,
and in extreme weather but little can be done out of doors, except
chopping, and preparing rails for fencing, &c. But people who are
apt and ready usually find something to do within doors.
For professional gardeners there is but little demand; but an emi-
grant possessing a practical knowledge of gardening, in addition to
that of farm work, will generally find such an acquisition advantage-
ous.
Carpenters in towns get from 1 dollar 50 cents to 2 dollars 25 cents
per day. Bricklayers, plasterers, and stonemasons, from 1 dollar 75
cents to 3 dollars; painters and plumbers, 1 dollar 50 cents to 2 dollars
25 cents; tinsmiths, 1 dollar 25 cents to 1 dollar 50 cents; black-
smiths, 1 dollar 25 cents to 2 dollars; wheelwrights, 1 dollar to 1
dollar 75 cents. Tailors can earn from 1 dollar 50 cents to 2 dollars,
and shoemakers nearly the same.
There is usually more or less work going on in the building trade
during the winter, except in extreme weather, when out-of-door
operations are suspended.
The cost of living in Ontario, for ordinary mechanics and agricul-
tural labourers, when quantity and quality of food are considered, is
cheaper than it is for the same classes in the old country.
The rents of cottages and small houses in cities and towns, suitable
for single families, are from 4 dollars to 8 dollars a month, including
taxes. Facilities are frequently available to workmen enabling them
to purchase a building lot, and erect a cottage, to be paid for by easy
instalments, thus procuring for themselves ultimately the freehold.
In the country, rents are much lower than in towns, and workmen
have often the advantage of a garden, the keep of a cow, pigs, and
poultry.


Flour per barrel (200 lbs.), 5 dollars to 6 dollars.
Butcher meat, from 5 dollars to 7 dollars per 100 lbs.
Both flour and meat have fluctuated considerably in price of late
years.
Cheese, 12 to 16 cents per lb.; butter, 15 to 25 do.; tea, 60 cents to
1 dollar; coffee, 25 to 40 cents; sugar, Bto 13 cents. In the country,
people sometimes make enough sugar from the maple tree of the forest
for their own consumption, and occasionally have a surplus for sale.
Poultry are generally plentiful and cheap. Geese, 30 to 50 cents;
turkeys, 50 to 75 cents. Ducks and chickens in proportion. Turkeys
are common, the climate being naturally adapted to them.
Potatoes and ordinary vegetables are usually procured at moderate
prices. Working people living in the country commonly raise suffi-
cient of the before-mentioned articles to supply their own domestic
wants.
Apples, pears, plums, &c., are commonly produced in most of the
well-settled portions of the Province in quantities sufficient to meet
the demand at moderate prices. In the south-western parts, the
choicest varieties of the principal fruits are raised, including grapes
and sometimes peaches in the open air. The cultivation of the grape
has been of late years constantly extending, and the manufacture of
wine is beginning to assume some importance.
Clothing, strong and well suited to the climate, made from cloth
manufactured in the province, can be obtained at reasonable rates.
A man’s winter suit, including the making, from 14 dollars to 20
dollars; summer clothing lower. Hats and caps but little dearer
than in England. Shoes much the same; men’s good stout boots
from 3 dollars to 4 dollars a pair. Calico and the finer descriptions
of woollen goods, being generally imported, are consequently dearer
than in England.
RED KIVER.
Canada has hitherto been impeded in its progress westwards by the
Hudson’s Bay Company—a corporation that owns a territory of
upwards of two millions of square miles, and who have jealously
guarded their immense possessions from intrusion by virtue of a,
charter they received from Charles 11. In order to deter persons of


an enterprising turn of mind from trespassing on their grounds, they
circulated exaggerated reports about the severity of the climate,
and the poverty of the soil. The climate was represented to be
Siberian in its rigour, and the soil so poor that it was incapable
of producing anything except it might be oats and rye. These
cunningly-devised fables have, however, been proved to be false—
the discovery of gold on the Pacific coast having helped greatly
to dispel the illusion. The creation of the territory beyond the
Eocky Mountains into the colony of British Columbia, a dozen
of years ago, gave the first blow to the monoply of the Hudson’s
Bay Company, and the Confederation of the British North American
Colonies, on the eastern part of the Continent, two years ago, may
be said to have given it the finishing stroke. True the Company is
still struggling for better terms from the Canadian Government ;
but it is certain that this year the whole of the immense territory
lying between Lake Superior and the Eocky Mountains will be opened
up for settlement. The territory known as the Eed Eiver settlement
and the Valley of the Saskatchewan is not only the most healthy por.
tion of the American Continent, but a great portion of it rivals in
fertility the Western States of the Union, and if opened up for settle-
ment, as it doubtless will be immediately, offers to intending emi-
grants an inviting and promising field as is to be found anywhere.
At present the means of communication between it and the settled
portions of Canada are very imperfect, but the Eed Eiver is not more
inaccessible than many of the new States of America, which are being
rapidly filled with settlers.
The Eed Eiver settlement, so called on account of a settlement
formed in the country in 1813 by the Earl of Selkirk, owing to
the discouragement given to settlers, has not progressed as it ought
to have done, yet enough has been done to prove that the country is
capable of immense development. The country is described as about
700 miles in length by 400 in breadth, and the whole a perfect garden,
with woodland and prairie alternating, save where immense peat-beds
break the run.
The space between Fort William, at the head of Lake Superior,
and Fort Garry, Eed Eiver, comprises large and fertile tracts, varying
from 20,000 to 200,000 acres in size. Sir George Simpson, in his evi-
dence on the subject given before a Committee of the House of Com-
mons in 1856, eulogises the qualities of the soil in the valley of
Kamcnis Toquoiah. Every one of the ten thousand settlers already


cultivating the land in the Eed River district is a witness to the
abounding agricultural wealth found there. For 400 miles up the
Assiniboine, to its junction with the Moose River, there is nothing
to be seen but prairie, covered with long red grass, ‘On the east,
north, and south,’ said Sir George, ‘there was not a mound or tree
to vary the vast expanse of green sward ; while to the west were the
gleaming bays of the Assiniboine, separated from each other by
wooded points of considerable depth,’ The productiveness of Red
River settlement may be inferred from the yield of wheat there, as
compared with the average in the adjoining States of America, In
Minnesota it stands at 20 bushels to the acre, in Massachusetts at 16,
and in Red River at 40. The average weight, north of the States’
boundary, is from 64 to 67 lbs, per imperial bushel, while that of the
best Illinois wheat is from 60 to 65 lbs, per bushel. It must not be
thought, however, that there is no background to this pleasant pic-
ture. Last year the crops in the Red River settlement were ravaged
by swarms of grasshoppers, but this plague was not confined to the
Red River, but extended to Missouri and others of the 'Western
States. The plague of grasshoppers, however, only occurs at long
intervals, and Yankee ingenuity is at work to devise some means
whereby the unwelcome visitation may be averted altogether.
North-Western America is watered by numerous rivers, the greatest
of which only need here be named. The Columbia, rising in the
Rocky mountains, traverses the Blue Mountains and the Cascade
Mountain chains. It then, after many windings, sometimes in a
southerly, sometimes in a westerly direction, loses itself in the Pacific
Ocean at Astoria, three degrees south of the boundary line. The
treaty which deprived Great Britain of the latter part of the Columbia
left to her the right of navigating this noble river in common with
the citizens of the United States. The Fraser River also has its
source in the Rocky Mountains. After a circuitous course through
the Blue Mountains, the Cascade Mountains, and the intervening
plains and valleys, it joins the sea at the strait or sound which sepa-
rates Vancouver Island from the continent of America. This river
is celebrated for its sands of gold. Even as to California and Aus-
tralia, thousands of adventurers have already been attracted to its
banks ; and their enterprise has been crowned with success unsur-
passed as yet in the annals of gold-digging.
Of Pelly River there need be little mention, as it half belongs to a
foreign power. It is quite possible, however, that arrangements might


be made with that power (the United States) for navigating this great
river to its Junction with the sea.
The Mackenzie Eiver is wholly within British territory. It is one
of the greatest rivers in the world, its course being 2500 miles from
its source in the Rocky Mountains to its debouch in the Arctic Ocean,
It is navigable for about 1200 miles, thus affording easy access in the
summer months from the Arctic Sea and from the Northern Pacific
by Behring’s Straits to the interior of their North-West territory. It
flows through a fertile and finely-wooded country, skirted by metalli-
ferous hills. According to the best computation, it drains an area of
443,000 geographical square miles.
The Elk and Peace Rivers, although great and beautiful streams,
are only tributaries of the Mackenzie.
The Coppermine and the Great Fish River also discharge their
waters into the Arctic Ocean. The former abounds in copper ore and
galena. On the banks of the latter it is credibly said that there is
excellent grazing. Next comes the Churchill River, which flows from
the interior of the country, across the Granite belt to Hudson’s Bay.
The Saskatchewan, with its two branches rising in the Rocky
Mountains, drains an area of 363,000 square miles. The Red River
and the Assiniboine, flowing from the heights near the sources of the
Missouri and the Mississippi, add immensely to the waters of Lake
Winnipeg, and thence find their way by the Nelson River to Hudson’s
Bay.
There is admirable unity in the geological appearances of this vast
territory. By nature it has been made one land, however much it
may be divided by the policy of man. The great chain of the Rocky
Mountains extends from its southern to its northern boundaries, ris-
ing at its highest elevation to the height of sixteen thousand feet
above the level of the ocean. Parallel with these, to the west, rise
the Blue and Cascade Mountains, as if intended for a vanguard to-
wards the waves of the Pacific. From the base of the Rocky Moun-
tains eastward the country is a gently sloping plain for 800 or 900
miles, to the commencement of the great crystalline belt, which,
taking a north-westerly direction about the head of Lake Superior,
continues in this course, and almost parallel with the Rocky Moun-
tains, as far as fifteen hundred miles, and with only a slight elevation
above the neighbouring plain, until, reaching the Coppermine River,
near the Arctic Ocean, it forms hills eight hundred feet in height-
Its average breadth is two hundred miles. On the side that looks


towards Hudson’s Bay, its outline is pretty much the same as that
of the shores of this sea, thus verifying what geologists say as to the
waters of this region having been confined within their actual limits
by the upheaving of these primary formations. Between this belt or
plateau and the Bay there is a narrow strip of limestone. From this
bed of limestone to the sea the land is low, flat, swampy, and in part
alluvial.
On the western edge of the great crystalline plateau are situated
the principal lakes of the north-western continent—Winnipeg, two
hundred and thirty miles in length and forty miles broad; Artha-
baska, Great Slave Lake, and the largest of them all, Great Bear
Lake, which is intersected towards its north-western extremity by
the Arctic Circle.
To the west of this great chain of waters the country is all habit-
able, and in a northerly direction as far as the sixty-fifth degree of
north latitude. If, indeed, the Mackenzie Eiver should ever be what
nature has adapted it for being—the principal channel through which
a great portion of the trade of the western world must flow, there
may one day be a dense population even so far north as the junction
of its waters with the Arctic Ocean,
Passing to the west of the valleys of the Assiniboine and Bed Rivers,,
we find a country no less fertile, and even more beautiful, as it pos-
sesses the pleasing variety of hill and dale. It is watered by an
infinite number of lesser streams, the principal of which are the Swan
River and the higher tributaries of the Assiniboine. This interesting
region was likewise visited by the exploring expedition sent by the
Government of Canada in 1857-S. In Mr. S. J. Dawson’s official
report of this expedition, published by order of the Canadian House of
Assembly, this extensive portion of the North-West territory Is de-
scribed as being eminently adapted for the purposes of agriculture and
colonisation. Possessing a milder climate than the more elevated
lands to the south of the United States boundary line, all the varieties
of cereal crops can be produced without difficulty or risk of failure.
According to this gentleman’s description, the whole country has more
the appearance of a fine park, beautifully varied with lawns, woods,
gardens, shrubberies, lakes, and streams, than an unreclaimed tract of
unbroken wilderness. If the late Governor of the Hudson’s Bay
Company, Sir George Simpson, had passed through this country, it
would undoubtedly have inspired one of his most eloquent and glow-
ing pictures of woodland, lake, and river scenery.


In order to ascertain the capabilities of the lied River as a field for
■emigrants, not only from the mother country but from Canada, the
Toronto Globe, the most influential journal in Canada, has sent a
‘special ’ to the North-West, to report on its capabilities. After de-
scribing the forests, which lie between Lake Superior and the Red
River, he thus refers to that region:—' No sooner will the immigrant,
who has toiled his way four hundred miles westward from Lake
Superior, emerge from the wilderness of woods than he will feast his
eyes upon one of the richest prairie tracts in America. One is almost
afraid to speak what is merely the sober and now familiar truth, lest
it should be imputed to imagination. For my own part, and much as
I long, in common with every right-minded Canadian, for the honour-
able and powerful extension of our interests westward, I would perish
rather than deceive any one in this regard, there is, in truth, a
prospective poetry in the soil here—the poetry of comfort and inde-
pendence-comfort not to be wrung from the sour and ungracious
earth by slavish and destructive labour, and independence unpur-
chascd by years of biting anxiety and a constitution in ruins. What
would the young Canadian farmer, ploughing and cursing amongst
his rocks, think if he were told that within a bow-shot from where I
now write he could run a furrow for miles through a vegetable loam
two feet deep? He has heard of Minnesota, perhaps, and its boundless
prairies; but Minnesota is sand compared to this. The best of it
requires manuring after a few successive crops of wheat, whilst this
would yield wheat without manuring for a century. He has reaped,
perhaps, his twenty bushels of it to the acre on his new land, and
thought it a famous average. What would he think of the puzzle*
headed and very unscientific Mr Amable Ducharme (the ignorant,
yet agreeable old fellow from whom we rent our head-quarters) reap-
ing, two summers ago, 57 bushels of wheat from 3f planted? While
praising the country in unqualified terms, this correspondent states
that at present all the necessaries of life are scarce, and consequently
dear, but adds—' If one there be, however, whose heart is breaking
over stupid rocks and stones, and who longs for a bit of sound British
prairie, why, let him come along and God-speed! He cant starve
anyway; and, if the right stuff is in him, he may speedily be far re-
moved from the possibility of it. Here, at all events, at the western
terminus of the wooded portion of the proposed route from Canada, are
the three prime desiderata- of the husbandman land, wood, and water,
land upon whose bosom has withered the enriching and procreant


vegetation of centuries—land which drops fatness as if in the fulfilment
of prophecy, at once generous and abundant, and more durable than
its tiller,’ Until the territory is opened up for settlers, it will be
impossible to say with certainty what its capabilities and resources
really are, but enough is known to predict with safety that in a few
years hence the Red River, and the fertile valleys that lie between
it and the Rocky Mountains, will be dotted with thriving settlements
composed of emigrants from all parts of Europe. The Canadian
Government, it is understood, will deal most liberally with settlers,
who will receive a free homestead, the only stipulation being resi-
dence. The cost of reaching the settlement will not be greater than
to the Western States, although for sometime the conveyance to
Lake Superior will be attended with some hardships and difficulties.
The cost of transport from Montreal will not be more than from the
Clyde to that port, and it is safe to say that the whole of the passage
would be about L.lO. Of course none but emigrants possessing a
little capital ought to go until the country is fairly opened up, when
the demand for labour will arise. Had it not been for the monopoly
granted to the Hudson’s Bay Company two centuries ago, the terri-
tory referred to would have been the abode of a prosperous popula-
tion, as it is clear that it is equal if not superior to Minnesota and
others of the Western States. Kings and Queens will not likely
have it within their power again to give two million square miles of
land in exchange for ‘two elks and two black beavers,’ to be payable
when their Majesties may ‘happen’ to stroll that way ; otherwise
the Hudson’s Bay Company would be a warning for royalty to let
out the planet only upon lease. But since we shall get furs and
peltry in plenty for many a long day from these wide and chilly
regions, when the fur merchants are paid off and dispossessed, it is
highly desirable that reasonable terms should be made. Unreason-
able terms the company are not entitled to; for if the owners of a
back alley are not allowed to postpone the erection of a new street
or a railway, it would be a little too much that a knot of gentlemen
meeting in a ‘House in Fenchurch Street’ should oppose obstructions
to the colonisation of British America, and bar the hungry nations
of the earth from corn lands and timber forests—simply that there
may be a few thousands more of musk-rats and beaver mounds in
the world.


NOVA SCOTIA AND NEW BRUNSWICK.
Nova Scotia, or New Scotland, was originally colonised by the
French, who gave it the name of Acadia, but in 1749 the country
was occupied by the British, and, owing to the severe measures taken
by the conquerors, few of the original settlers remained in the colony.
The poem of ‘Evangeline,’ by Longfellow, the American poet, gives
a graphic account of the expulsion of the Acadians by the British
authorities—a proceeding which does not reflect great credit on
the Government of the day. After the expulsion of the French
the name of the colony was changed to Nova Scotia; or, rather,
that name was resumed, it having been formerly bestowed on the
territory by some adventurers of the time of James VI., who failed
in obtaining a footing in it. When the colony passed into the hands
of Britain, about the middle of last century, there was a considerable
number of Scotchmen induced to emigrate to it, and the province still
retains many Scotch characteristics, and some districts are peopled
almost entirely by Scotchmen and their descendants.
In order to convey an accurate account of the country, it is neces-
sary to describe its geographical position, as well as give some account
of its geological structure :
The province of Nova Scotia, including the island of Cape Breton,
lies between north latitude 43 deg. 25 min. and 47 deg. 10 min., and
between west longitude 59 deg. 40 min. and 6G deg. 25 min. Halifax,
the capital, is situated in latitude 40 deg. 40 min., which is nearly
seven degrees farther south than the latitude of Loudon, 51 deg. 30
min., and not quite 4 deg. farther north than that of New York.
The province consists of the Peninsula of Nova Scotia proper,
stretching out into the Atlantic Ocean and the island of Cape Breton,
The length of the peninsula is above 350 miles, and its greatest breadth
100 miles; it is connected with New Brunswick by an isthmus only
twelve miles in width between tide waters, and divided from the island
of Cape Breton by the Strait of Canseau (or Canso) sixteen miles long,
and from half a mile to two miles in width, affording a safe and con-
venient passage for ships between the ocean and the Gulf of St Law-
rence. Its area is nearly 18,000 square miles, or about 12,000,000
acres; of which Cape Breton forms about 2,000,000 acres.


Nova Scotia has a coast line of nearly 1000 miles, indented by
numerous bays and excellent harbours, of which Halifax is the prin-
cipal on the Atlantic. Perhaps no country in the world is so
favoured in number and excellence of harbours. It has numerous
lakes and rivers; of the former there are about 400 —the latter, owing
to the comparatively small extent and peninsular form of the country,
are small—few exceeding fifty miles in length—but they number
scores. The Avon, Annapolis, St Mary’s, and Shubenacadie, are
amongst the largest. The surface of the country generally is undu-
lating but not mountainous; the principal ranges are the Cobequid
Mountains and the South and North Mountains of Kings and Anna-
polis Counties. The highest of these is in the Cobequid chain, which
attains an elevation of 1200 feet.
Nova Scotia is the nearest point of communication with Europe on
the American Continent. It lies in the direct course of vessels sailing
between Great Britain and New York; thus possessing peculiar com-
mercial advantages, from which it must ultimately become the great
highway of traffic between Europe and the North American Con-
tinent.
The island of Cape Breton, in its general features, closely resembles
the Peninsula of Nova Scotia proper. In the northern part it is
elevated and uneven; in the southern and eastern parts it is undulat-
ing, with some ranges of low hills. The most striking geographical
peculiarity of the island is the existence of a saltwater lake, or
inland sea, called the Bras d’Or Lake, which occupies the central
portion of the island, and nearly divides it into two. Its greatest
length is forty miles, and its greatest breadth is twenty miles; its
area is about 500 square miles, and it is navigable throughout for
vessels of the largest class. The mountains and hills of Cape Breton
are not remarkable for height.
Sable Island is situated between north latitude 44 deg. and 43
deg. 54 min.—and between west longitude 60 deg. 12 min. and 59
deg. 40 min. Its breadth varies from one to two miles, and its length
is twenty-five miles. It consists of sand thrown up by the sea and
wind; and the greater part of its surface is covered with coarse grass,
cranberry and whortle bushes. There are herds of wild horses on
this island, the best of which are occasionally brought to Halifax for
sale. Sable Island has frequently been the scene of shipwrecks, the
shoals surrounding it being dangerous to navigators. Of late they
have not been frequent, as the island is easily avoided, and several


men are stationed on it for the purpose of rescuing and aiding ship-
wrecked mariners.
The scenery of Nova Scotia is diversified and picturesque, the sur-
face presenting the alternate features of hill and vale; and in the less-
cultivated portions, with the variety of wood, and stream, and lake,
presents attractive pictures of natural beauty.
Nova Scotia is rich in mineral wealth, gold, coal, iron, and copper
being found in some places in great abundance. Gold was first dis-
covered to exist in large quantities in .1860, and for two or three
years there was quite a rush to the Nova Scotian gold-fields. Although
gold was found in paying quantities, the gold fever gradually abated,
but the workings in operation still afford a handsome return for the
capital and labour invested in them, and the yield, instead of decreas-
ing, is likely to increase as capital and enterprise are brought to bear
upon the mines.
Iron is next in importance. The principal deposit, as yet known,
is situated along the southern slope of the Cobequid Hill, in London-
derry, where the Acadian Iron Works Company have erected works,
which have been in operation for some years; the course of the vein
is marked by the colour of the soil both westward and eastward.
Competent authorities have expressed their opinion that iron of the
first quality, for strength and purity, can be made from the ores;
and it has been proved by experiment that they furnish steel-iron
equal to the best Swedish. Veins of iron ore, similar in character,
occur in nearly every part of the inner metamorphic district. Iron
ores also occur in veins traversing the lower carboniferous limestone
and sandstone near the mouth of the Shubenacadie,
Copper ore occurs at several places in Nova Scotia. In the county
of Sydney large fragments of copper pyrites are found in the surface
gravel; and ore, of very rich quality, has been found on the south
branch of the Salmon River. It has also been found in various other
places; the deposits rich and valuable, but limited, Sulphuret of
lead has been found in crystals and small veins in different places.
Some specimens contain silver. Sulphate of barytes and ochres, from
which paints are manufactured, occur in several places; and also clays
suitable for bricks and common pottery.
Coal is the most valuable mineral deposit in Nova Scotia; the most
important measures yet explored are those of the Albion Mines. In
one section the vertical thickness of the two large seams is 37£ feet
and 224 feet respectively. A block of the largest was sent to the


International Exhibition of 1862. Valuable coalfields occur at Sydney
and Lingan in Cape Breton; and there is a mine in the Pictou coal
measures where oil is found, affording upwards of 63 gallons of crude
oil per ton. It is evident that Nova Scotia will yet become one of
the principal coal-producing countries of the world, and as such offers
a fine field for those of our mining population who are obliged to look
out for other markets for their labour on account of the starvation
wages at home. There is stated to be coal in the counties of Hamp-
shire, Pictou, Cumberland, Guysborough, Sydney, and Colchester.
The coalfield of the county of Sydney alone is computed to cover an
area of 250 square miles, and it is calculated that each square mile of
this area will yield 23,000,000 tons, or altogether 5,750,000,000 tons.
If this estimate is reliable, it will be seen that a well nigh boundless
coal future is opened out before Nova Scotia. It is quite true that this
coal wealth remains practically unworked, but this cannot be said to
prove much either one way or the other, as Nova Scotia is neglected
to such an extent by the outer world that few persons know anything
about her resources. We learn, however, from an official blue-book,
that upwards of thirty workings have been commenced, and statistics
show that the coal production of the colony now exceeds 650,000 tons
per annum, or about as much as France raised from her soil fifty
years since. In the last fifty years France has multiplied her indi-
genous coal production fifty-fold, and it is not too much to suppose
that Nova Scotia may succeed in doing the same, as an almost bound-
less industrial career is opening out not only for Nova Scotia herself,
but also for the vast territories now known as British America. At
present coal is imported to only a small extent at Montreal and
Quebec, the whole imports at Montreal in 1868 having been 46,678
tons, and at Quebec 273,458 tons, Canada has an enormous supply of
vegetable fuel, but every year the axe of the settler reduces the stock
of wood, and recourse must be had to coal in future years in districts
where wood is now consumed. At present Nova Scotian coal is made
available for consumption at about eight shillings per ton at the pit’s
mouth, but when Nova Scotia is better endowed with railways and
more freely supplied with labour, Nova Scotian mineral combustibles
will be cheapened, and will be absorbed more freely than they are at
present. Even now, when the trade is in its infancy, some quantity
of Nova Scotian coal finds its way into the United States, and also
into the Canadian provinces; and, with a further advance in the
miscellaneous industries of Canada, and greater transport facilities.


business in Nova Scotian coal can scarcely fail to experience a consi-
derable expansion.
It is to be regretted that political agitation is retarding the pro-
gress of Nova Scotia, but when the province settles down it is bound
to take a high place in the Confederation, as, in addition to its vast
mineral wealth it possesses great agricultural capabilities, which it
shares in common with the province of New Brunswick, which re-
sembles it so closely that any separate description is superfluous. The
only thing that is urged against Nova Scotia and New Brunswick is
the severity of the climate, but much ill-founded prejudice exists
on this head. The frosts in winter are severer than here, but on an
average the winters are not longer than in Scotland, while the other
seasons are more pleasant. Spring may be said to commence in April,
when agricultural operations begin. Seed-time continues through
May, and part of June, and the next three months comprise the
summer, which is moderately warm, and the vegetation is so rapid
as to admit of the crops being harvested in August, the hay harvest
taking place in July.
From the beginning of July until the middle or end of September,
the nights exceed in splendour any that are experienced in northern
Europe. Mr M'Grigor, in his work on British America, thus de-
scribes them :
‘ To portray them in their true colours would require more than
any language can accomplish, or any pencil, but that of imagination,
can execute. The air, notwithstanding the heat of the preceding
day, is always pure; the sea generally unruffled, and its surface one
vast mirror, reflecting with precision every visible object either in
the heavens or on the earth. The moon shines with a soft silver-like
brilliancy, and, during her retirement, the stars are seen in their
atmost effulgence. Fishes of various species sport in the water; the
angular note of the whip-poor-will is heard from the woods; the fire-
fly floats in the air, oscillating its vivid sparks; and where the hand
of man has subdued the forest, and laid the ground under the control
of husbandry, may be heard the voice of the milk-maid, or the drowsy
tinkling of the distant fold. In another direction may often be seen
the light of the birch torch, which the Mic Mac Indian uses in the
prow of his canoe, while engaged with his spear in fishing.’
The autumn is unsurpassed for its healthful exhilirating atmo-
sphere. The skies have the serenity of summer, and the air is suffi-
ciently cool to be bracing and exhilirating to the human system.


During October the weather is moderately warm at noon; the morn-
ings and evenings cool, with sometimes, towards the end of the month,
slight frosts at night, and now and then, but not frequently, a stormy
day. The appearance of nature is gay until the middle or end of
November, and the forests, tinted by night frosts with all the colours
of the rainbow, present the gorgeous appearance for which American
scenery is remarkable; and being stocked with a variety of game, are
a paradise for the sportsman. Winter cannot be said to begin until
the middle of December. January is remarkable for frequent thaws;
February for the lowest depression of the atmosphere, and the
heaviest falls of snow; March, though cold, variable and blustering,
frequently affords more days of clear sunshine than April. The win-
ters are, however, variable; sometimes moderate and open, and some-
times cold with less frequent changes.
If a similarity in the productions of the field and garden be taken
as furnishing a criterion for the comparison of climates, that of Nova
Scotia cannot differ essentially from the climate of the middle and
northern parts of Europe. Wheat, oats, rye, pease, beans, barley,
Indian corn, turnips, potatoes, beet, mangel wurtzel, and other roots,
grow in abundance. Apples, pears, plums, cherries, and the smaller
garden fruits, attain their utmost perfection. In many localities
peaches, quinces, and grapes, ripen in the open air, and in any
place will thrive luxuriantly under glass without artificial heat.
The cost of a passage to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and St John’s, N. 8.,
is much the same as to Montreal, and during the summer steamers
belonging to the Anchor line are despatched from the Clyde with
emigrants. When affairs in the Province become more settled it is
anticipated that there will be an assisted system of emigration to the
Province, and when the works of the Intercolonial Railroad are
fairly commenced, labour of all descriptions will be in brisk demand,
and with the development of the mineral treasures of the Province,
which the railroad will assist, the demand for labour will go on
increasing.


BRITISH COLUMBIA.
The discovery of gold on the Frazer River was the means of calling
attention to the western territority of British America, so long occu-
pied as a hunting preserve by the Hudson’s Bay Company. Had the
precious metal not been discovered, it is probable that the Company
■would have retained their monopoly for another quarter of a century;
but the influx of settlers into Vancouver Island, and the mainland
immediately opposite, led to the territory being formed into a colony,
under the name of British Columbia, Before referring to this flourish-
ing colony on the Pacific shore of the Continent, it is necessary to
take a glance at the territory lying to the east of the Rocky Moun-
tains, watered by the Saskatchewan River. The Saskatchewan
Valley, known as the Fertile Belt, is about a thousand miles in
length and a hundred in width. This district, comprehending about
a million of square miles, is throughout its whole extent capable of
cultivation; indeed, travellers tell us that in soil and climate it is
equal, if not superior, to the finest of the Western States. Like the
Red River settlement, the whole of the territory from Lake Win-
nipeg to the Rocky Mountains is still claimed by the Hudson’s Bay
Company. In 1863 the Company had its capital raised from half-a-
million to two millions; and, among the inducements held out to
capitalists to subscribe the additional funds the prospectus set forth
that the Company’s territories were capable of being colonised,
although they had hitherto persistently denied that they were fit for
anything of the kind. The difficulty that the Company felt, how-
ever, was that, if they attempted to organise a settlement, and admit
colonists, they did not see how they were to enforce a system of
government. Hitherto, they had only to deal with scattered tribes
of Indians, and a few stray colonists who came across the border


from Canada; but if they were to admit to their territories large
numbers of enterprising Canadians, and emigrants from this country,
who would of course carry with them their notions of self-govern-
ment, it was clear that they would be introducing an element they
would be unable of themselves to control. The Company, therefore,
in their difficulties, applied, in 1863, to the Colonial Office. They
asked the Colonial Minister, who was the late Duke of Newcastle, to
establish a government organisation within the territories. The
Duke of Newcastle said the Home Administration would establish
no government within the Hudson’s Bay territory, until the Hud-
son’s Bay Company gave up the territory to the Crown. The Com-
pany saw at once their difficulty. Colonisation was essential to the
solution of the present state of affairs, and, without the assistance of
the Home Government, they were not able to carry out a system of
colonisation. They, therefore, felt inclined to part with their terri-
tories upon a suitable consideration. They offered to give up their
whole territory if the Colonial Office would pay over a million ster-
ling. The Duke said this sum was exorbitant. The Company then
said, ‘ Give us half-a-million of money, and take the half of the
land.’ The answer of the Government was still that the proposal
was equally unsatisfactory. The present state of the negotiation is
briefly this, and the matter, we may add, was brought before a
meeting of the Hudson’s Bay Company. Lord Granville, as Colonial
Minister, offers to secure that Canada shall, under guarantee of the
British Government, pay over to the Hudson’s Bay Company a sum
of L. 300,000 in money. The Company are further to be secured in
the possession of their trade stations, with territory suitable around
them. In addition to this, they are to have the right of choosing
one-twentieth part of the territory which they presently nominally
hold. This twentieth part may, as we understand, be situated in
different parts of the territory, and can be chosen either now or as
the territory is settled. In addition to all this, the Company of
course are secured in their rights of trading, and of hunting in those
portions of the territory which are unlikely to be used or unsuitable
for human occupation. The Company, at their meeting, were some-
what recalcitrant. It is curious, however, to recall that the late
Government made no better offer to the Company than has been
offered by Lord Granville. The present Governor of the Company,
Sir Stafford Northcote, who was of course a member of the late -
Administration, strongly advised the shareholders to accept the-


terms, in the belief that they would get no better. The meeting was
averse or unprepared to come to a decision, and finally adjourned for
a fortnight. At the adjourned meeting the offer of the Canadian
Government was accepted.
The Saskatchewan country stretches from the borders of the granite
plateau, and from which it is separated by a chain of waters, consist-
ing of Cedar Lake, a portion of the River Saskatchewan, Fine Island
Lake, and Beaver Lake, for a distance of 800 or 900 miles westward
to the Rocky Mountains, It is divided into numerous plains and
valleys by the River Saskatchewan, its two great branches, and its
numerous tributaries, which, rising for the most part in the vast
mountain range, rush down the inumerable vales and glens on its
eastern slope, giving life, beauty, and fertility to a region which
would otherwise be a rugged and forbidding wilderness.
The travellers who have visited this region bear ample witness to
the fertility of the soil. The scenery they describe as ‘ magnificent,’
and the banks of the river on either side as luxuriant beyond descrip-
tion. * Vast forests,’ says Lieutenant Saxon, ‘ cover the hill-tops
and fill the valleys. The climate is mild, and cattle keep fat in winter
as well as in summer on the nutritious grasses.’
Sir George Simpson, who had been for thirty years Governor of the
Hudson’s Bay Company, in his very beautiful and interesting book
(‘Voyage Round the World’), informs us that ‘the rankness of the
vegetation between the forks of the Sashatchewan savoured rather of
the torrid zone, with its perennial spring, than of the northern wild!?.'.
He speaks of himself and his fellow-travellers as ‘ brushing the
luxuriant grass with our knees, and the hard ground of the surface
was beautifully diversified with a variety of flowers, such as the rose,
the hyacinth, and tiger lily.’
‘Towards the foot of the Rocky Mountains,’ says the same impar-
tial writer, * lies a country capable of being rendered the happy home
of millions of inhabitants when facilities of communication shall be
offered which can lead to it.’
Dr King, in his evidence before the select committee of the House
of Commons, 1857, gives a very interesting account of a colony which
was endeavouring to establish itself near Cumberland House, between
Fine Island Lake and the river Saskatchewan. The colony occupied
and had in a high state of cultivation some fifteen hundred acres, on
which they raised excellent wheat. When asked by Mr Christy
whether the cultivation was successful, Dr King replied, * Quite sue-


cessful; the wheat was looking very luxuriant.’ Were there any
other kinds of crops ? 4 There were potatoes and barley, also pigs,
cows, and horses.’ In this small settlement each man had his own
particular allotment, and everything, according to the evidence of
Dr King, was in the most flourishing condition. The learned witness,
however, further states — 4 When I was going away they said: — 44 Can-
not you help us ? You are a Government officer ; the company have
ordered us to quit, and we shall be ruined.’’ ’ Of course, agriculture
and colonisation were not the objects of the company; and, la raison
du plus fort est toujours la meilleure. What became of this interest-
ing little colony deponent said not. The day may not, perhaps, be
far distant when colonisation will be undertaken on a greater scale
and under more fostering auspices.
The valleys of the Elk and Peace Divers, tributaries of the Mac-
kenzie, although much further north than the countries on the Sas-
katchewan, being situated between the 55th and 58th degrees of north
latitude, enjoy a climate and soil adapted to the growth of all the
cereals and all kinds of garden vegetables. Wheat, even, can be
raised easily in these valleys, for it grows at Fort Laird, in 60 degs.
north lat., on Mountain River, another tributary of the Mackenzie.
Although we have no positive evidence before us which decidedly
proves that wheat crops may be relied on at Peace River, there is
surely ground for believing that, where the spring is so early, grain,
which even cold Siberia refuses not to the labour of man, might be
successfully cultivated. Sir Alexander Mackenzie, in his journal of
date May 10, 1793, says that 4 already the buffaloes were seen with
their young ones frisking about them.’ At this time also (10th May)
‘the whole country,’ he writes, 4 displayed an exuberant verdure.
The trees that bear a blossom were advancing fast to that delightful
appearance; and the velvet rind of the branches, reflecting the
oblique rays of a rising and a setting sun, added a splendid gaiety to
the trees which no expressions of mine are qualified to describe.’
Between the two rivers—the Elk and the Peace —55‘56 N. latitude,
4 the ground rises to a considerable height, and stretches inwards to
a great distance. At every interval or pause in the rise there is a
very gently ascending space or lawn, which is alternate with abrupt
precipices to the summit of the whole, or at least as far as the eye
could distinguish. This magnificent theatre of nature has all the
decorations which the trees and animals of the country can afford it. j
Groves of poplar, in every shape, vary the scene, and their intervals


are enlivened with vast herds of elks and buffaloes—the former
choosing the steep uplands and the latter preferring the plains.’
We give the following description of the colony from Lord Milton’s
Book of Travels through the Rocky Mountains :
‘ From Red River to Edmonton, about 800 miles, the road lies
through a fertile and park-like country, and an excellent cart-trail
already exists. From Edmonton to Jasper House, a distance of
about 400 miles, the surface is slightly undulating. . . . From
Jasper House to Tete Jaune’s Cache—the pass through the main
ridge of the Rocky Mountains, about 100 to 120 miles in length—a
wide break in the chain, running nearly east and west, offers a
natural roadway, unobstructed except by timber. The rivers, with
the exception of the Athabasca and the Fraser, are small and
fordable, even at their highest. The ascent to the height of land is
very gradual, and, indeed, hardly perceptible. . . . The
descent on the western slope, though more rapid, is neither steep
nor difficult. From the Cache the road might be carried in almost a
straight line to Richfield, in Cariboo, lying nearly due west. . . .
This part of the country is mountainous and densely wooded, but
the distance is not more than 90 miles, ... and a road has
already been made from the mouth of Quesnelle, on the Fraser, to
Richfield, through similar country.’
British Columbia and Vancouver Island (the latter of which is
about one-half the extent of Scotland) possess a fine climate and a
fertile soil, and are admirably suited for those born in Northern
Europe, being more temperate than any other portion of the Con-
tinent of America, The only drawback to British Columbia is the
great expense, as well as the length of time, required to reach it.
The voyage to British Columbia, is fully as long as to Australia,
and the passage round Cape Horn, even at the most favourable
season, is stormy. When the territory to the east of the Rocky
Mountains is opened up and settled, the expense and difficulty of
reaching the Fraser River will be greatly diminished, and there is
no doubt but that in a few years this will be accomplished, and
then British Columbia will become one of the most attractive fields
for emigrants, not only from this country, but from the Continent of
Europe.
Up to 1858, British Columbia was almost an unknown land, but
has since then been thoroughly explored, and several thriving settle-
ments have been formed on the Fraser River, where the gold diggings


in some cases rival those of California. Gold is, however, not the
only production, as coal is found in great abundance on the mainland
and in Vancouver Island. Not only are British Columbia and Van-
couver Island rich in mineral wealth, but they also possess other
resources which require only to be developed in order to become one
of the richest and most flourishing countries in the world. The
geographical position of British Columbia, to say nothing of Vancou-
ver Island, which shelters its coast from the drift of the Pacific, and
renders its inlets and rivers safe and easy of navigation, possesses
within it the elements of a complete and powerful empire. Harbours,
the most commodious; rivers, even where they are unnavigable,
adapted admirably to water and fertilise the soil through which they
run ; large valleys of rich, fertile land, stretching from the base of the
Rocky Mountains, that form the great backbone of the American
continent, to the sea ; timber enough to stock the navy yards of
Europe for ages to come; coal in sufficient abundance, and easily
worked ; with other mineral wealth almost beyond the power of
imagination to conceive. Such is in reality a correct picture of
British Columbia ; but, in looking at its numerous capabilities, the
drawbacks should not be forgotten. These consist chiefly of want of
roads, and the difficulties and hardships incident to pioneer life in a
new country. In no country where emigrants go to are there perhaps
more difficulties to be encountered than in that remote western land,
washed by the waters of the Pacific ; but in none, on the other hand,
have labour and indomitable perseverance a better prospect of reward.
As we have already stated, the cost of the passage to British Columbia
—which is never lower than L. 18 —will always operate against a large
influx of emigration ; but, when a land route is opened through Bri-
tish territory to the Pacific, and when the Pacific railroad to Cali-
fornia is completed, a large number who leave our shores will find
their way across the Rocky Mountains to a land where the climate is
mild both in winter and summer, and where below the fertile soil lies
hid mineral wealth of every description that is necessary for civilisa-
tion. The construction of a railway through British America to the
Pacific will before long be felt to be a necessity, if we are to retain
our commercial supremacy. Already we see America making gigantic
exertions to secure the lion’s share of the eastern trade by the con-
struction of the Pacific Railroad, and the subsidising of a line of
steamers between San Francisco and the coast of Asia. Vancouver
Island is 200 miles nearer the Amoor river, 300 miles nearer Shanghai,


and 240 miles nearer Canton and Calcutta than San Francisco is.
Yet we are compelled to stand by and see a neighbouring country,
much less conveniently situated to Asia, carry off the prize that ought
to be jealously guarded by ourselves. The young and thriving popu-
lations that increase with such fabulous rapidity on the western shores
of America will soon be found emulating the zeal and enterprise of
ancient nations, in regard to commerce with the East, and that nation
which possesses the greatest topographical advantages for uniting the
two oceans by a railway, and is also quick to improve these advantages,
must become master of the situation. The fear cannot be repressed,
that notwithstanding the obviously superior advantages presented
by our territory for the execution of this noble and desirable work,
these may be nullified by our national indifference about the matter,
and our designs forestalled by more progressive rivals. Our trade in
the Pacific Ocean, with China and with India, must ultimately be
carried through our North American possessions ; at any rate, our
commercial supremacy will have utterly departed from us if we
neglect that very great and important consideration, and if we fail to
carry out to its fullest extent the physical advantages which the
country offers to us, and which we have only to stretch out our
hands to take advantage of. Through the ignorance and neglect of
her rulers, twenty-five years ago, England threw away much rich
territory on the north-west coast, and she has still much at stake in
the Pacific. She once snatched from Holland the East Indian trade,
and if she allows herself to be blinded by past prosperity to the
urgent claims of present interest, some rising power may gradually
eclipse her commercial glory.




THE UNITED STATES.
NEWYORK AND PENNSYLVANIA.
Of all tlie fields for emigrants from every country the United States
occupy the foremost place. The reasons for this pre-eminence are
many and obvious. The perfect freedom guaranteed by the Govern-
ment, and the vast and varied resources of the country, may be
reckoned among the chief of these reasons. The United States enjoy
every variety of soil and climate, from the snows and barrenness of
the Rocky Mountains to the perpetual bloom of the Floridas. The
great Western Republic, moreover, offers to all of every creed and
clime the privilege of citizenship, and not only that, but under the
Homestead Act, every settler of five years is entitled to a grant of
160 acres in some of the new States or territories. These and numer-
ous other inducements will make the United States for many years
to come the chief resort for those who are compelled to seek their
fortunes in other lands than those that gave them birth.
In the United States there are openings for every class of emigrants.
In the cities and towns on the Atlantic seaboard there is always a
demand, more or less, for skilled labour, and factory operatives are,
as a rule, always certain of finding employment at good wages in the
mills in the New England States. In Pennsylvania, Virginia, and
Illinois, miners of every description are in constant demand, although
the extensive emigration of that class this season will no doubt tend
to decrease the demand. The mining industry of the United States
is, however, capable of almost illimitable development, and every year
for a long time to come miners may calculate on being employed at
wages which they can never hope to obtain in this country. For


those who prefer agriculture and its cognate occupations, the fertile
valley of the Mississippi offers a field for their labour second to none
in the world. The thirty-seven States of the Union, with the terri-
tories not yet erected into States, offer a field broad enough for all;
and the variety of industries is so great that it is almost impossible
for any one not to find something that will suit him. In describing
the United States it will be better to take them in sections, as it is
impossible to do anything like justice to so vast a subject in a con-
tinued article. Emigrants, on landing at New York, if they con-
sult their own interests, should make their stay in that city as brief
as possible, as nothing is to be gained by a prolonged stay in that
great mart of the nations.
The northern, or New England States, although they hold out
inducements to factory operatives and skilled artizans from this
country, are not an inviting field for the general emigrant from
Europe. The land in the New England States in many places is com-
pletely worn out, the soil being exhausted, and the consequence is
that for the last fifteen or twenty years there has been a great exodus
of New England farmers to the fertile prairies of the West, where
the husbandman can obtain a better reward for his toil and trouble.
Mrs Beecher Stowe, herself a native of New England, in speaking of
the country, says it is a fine country to emigrate from; and, if this
be true, it follows that it is not a very desirable country to emigrate
to. Although offering no inducements to emigrants who look to the
soil for support, New England, as already stated, offers good induce-
ments to a limited number of our town artizans, and every year the
New England manufactories are increasing, so that the demand in the
future for this kind of labour is likely to increase. One branch of
industry in New England that was at one time the most important —
shipbuilding —has completely collapsed, and those who follow this
occupation will find little or nothing to do in America. The reason
for this collapse is the revolution in shipbuilding caused by substi-
tuting iron for timber; and until America adopts a more liberal com-
mercial policy than is pursued, she is not likely to share in the ship-
building trade.
To the south of the New England, States lies the important State
of New York, where agriculture has attained to the greatest perfec-
tion in America. The State of New York, although small in size
compared with some of the Western States, is as large as England,
and when we mention that the population is only about one-fifth of


the latter it will be seen that there is still room for a good many more.
In the large towns in the interior of the State engineering, iron-found-
ing, and cognate branches of industry are extensively carried on, and
the wages are in general about double what are paid in this country,
but then the cost of living is much higher. For skilled labour two
dollars and a-half, or about ten shillings British money are the usual
wages, but house-rents and provisions, with the exception of flour,
are nearly one-half higher than here. Labourers get from a dollar to
a dollar and a half per day in the public works, which are extensively
carried on in this State, especially in the western parts, where the de-
mand for labour is greatest. The soil of New York State is much
more fertile than that of New England, and grain of every description,
especially wheat and Indian corn, is cultivated with great success.
Orchards are also abundant in western New York; on the shores of
Lake Erie pears, peaches, apples, plums, and even grapes grow in
abundance. The wheat grown in the valley of the Genesee is the
finest produced in the Union; and, possessing great facilities for trans-
portation, farming is more profitable than in the Western States,
only the price of land is high, and there is very little wild land to
be had, except in the north-west parts, where there are still extensive
forests, and the land is said to be of excellent quality.
To the south and west of New York lies the large and important
State of Pennsylvania, first settled by the Quakers, and still retaining
amid the changes of time some traces of its origin. Like New York,
Pennsylvania possesses a fertile soil, but its principal source of
wealth is its minerals. Coal and iron are found in abundance, and
the discovery of petroleum in the western parts of the State about
ten years ago has opened up a new industry which was the means of
realising fortunes to numbers, while at the same time the discovery
added to the general wealth of the community. It is, however, the
coal and iron that lie embedded in the valleys of Pennsylvania and
beneath its mountains that give it its chief importance, and for cen-
turies to come it is likely to occupy a leading place among the States
of the great Republic. In no other state of the Union are miners,
puddlers, and such like more in demand than in Pennsylvania, and
thousands have left the mining districts of Scotland and England this
year for the coal and iron workings in the Alleghany Mountains, and
for years to come, there will, no doubt, be a stream of emigration in
the same direction ; for, although there may be a temporary slack-
ness at times in the coal and iron trades of America, the industry


is one that is capable of almost unlimited expansion, as the mineral
treasures of Pennsylvania are for all practical purposes inexhaustible.
For the information of those who are not acquainted with mining
industry in America, we append a description of a visit to the coal
fields of Pennsylvania a few years ago. We may here state that
Pennsylvania coal is known as anthracite coal, which is different
from the coal of this country, in having neither flame nor smoke.
Wilkesbarre is the principal seat of the coal trade on the Susque-
hanna, some of the beds in that neighbourhood being nearly thirty
feet, with strata of clay intervening. In the coal strata fossil ferns
are found in great abundance, but it is remarkable that the leaves
are all shattered into small fragments, there being no entire speci-
mens such as are found in the coal beds of this country.
It may not be out of place to mention that the Pennsylvanian
coal-fields were first discovered by a German in 1792; and as an illus-
tration of how little discoverers profit by their discoveries, it is stated
that the descendants of the enterprising German are earning their
daily bread as labourers in the neighbourhood of the place where
their ancestor made his invaluable discovery. The Pennsylvanian
coal-fields are chiefly wrought by companies, who display great energy
and enterprise in their management, and many of them are marvellous,
from the magnitude of their operations. In the vicinity of these
gigantic works there are wild solitudes as lonely as they were before
the visit of the white man, and it is not uncommon to find, within a
few miles of the great coal workings, valleys as savage and wild as are
to be found in all America. Unlike our Scottish hills, the Alleghanies
are wooded to the very summit, although at intervals you come upon
a swamp or patch of stony ground, overgrown with briars and thorn-
bushes, which in early summer have a very pretty appearance when
covered with fragrant milk-white blossoms. In the swamps and in
the oak scrubs flowers of every form and hue are abundant, and
nothing can exceed in variety the picturesque scenery of these
mountain regions, where civilisation and nature are strangely blended,
and where even the population seems to partake something of the char-
acteristics of each.
Among the valleys of the Alleghanies, and in the country immedi-
ately west of these mountains, the coal-fields are the richest and most
extensive in the world; indeed, they are equal in extent to all the
other coal-fields put together. The produce of the American coal-
fields cannot compare in quality with that found in this country; but


the quantity in some measure compensates for the inferiority in
quality.
At Mauch Chunk, in the Lehigh Valley, among the Alleghanies,
are to be seen some of the largest coal workings in America. Mauch
Chunk (which, we may mention, is an Indian name, signifying Bear’s
Mountain) is situated at the base of Mount Piscau, which towers
above it to the height of one thousand feet or more. Mount Piscau
may be said to be composed of coal, and there is a railroad up to the
very summit, the waggons being drawn up by a stationary steam
engine. The view from the top of the mountain is very fine, compre-
hending some of the grandest scenery to be seen among the Alle-
ghanies ; but the great object of interest is the coal working which
lies on every side.
The coal working here is literally a field, and not pits, as in the Old
World, and on every side you may see the black diamonds peeping
through the surface, and nothing to do but to scoop them out and
carry them away. Some of the seams are at least fifty feet thick, and
as they generally run in a slanting direction into the mountain, they
are excavated accordingly, walls or pillars of coal being left to support
the mountain of coal. Mining here may be said to partake more of
the nature of tunnelling than mining, and miners from this country
are on their arrival rather awkward, as they have to learn many
things of which they were before entirely ignorant.
The mines of Mauch Chunk and Summit Hill belong to a company
called the Lehigh Company, who display great enterprise in the
working of them, having constructed railroads at almost every point
for the conveyance of the coal to the valley below, where it is sent to
all parts of America.
The Lehigh Coal Company was formed in 1793, and the partners
in the concern are now immensely rich. At the beginning of its
career the company had to contend with considerable obstacles. The
Mauch Chunk Mountain and the whole region was a desolate wilder-
ness, without road or path, and the Lehigh a rocky mountain stream.
Besides these natural obstacles there were others to surmount in the
shape of prejudices against coal. The people of Pennsylvania and the
neighbouring States had never burnt anything but wood, and doubts
existed whether the coal which had been discovered would be of any
wae. During the first 30 years of its existence the Lehigh Company
chiefly devoted its energy to rendering a portion of the Lehigh river
navigable, and in 1821 there were not a thousand tons sold to pay


the expenses. In the next ten years more than 100,000 tons had been
disposed of. Between 1830 and 1840 the construction of canals, the
improvements in the navigation of the Delaware, Lehigh, and Sus-
quehanna, and the making of railways, gave the first great stimulus
to the coal trade, so that in the last-named year the company were
enabled to send considerably upwards of 1,000,000 tons into the market.
The old Lehigh Coal Company possessed in 1855 six thousand acres
of the coal-field, and each acre, it was computed, covered no less than
30,000 tons, so that the whole of their property would yield one
hundred and eighty millions of tons. The coal-fields, which exported
their produce by means of the Lehigh Canal, which belongs to the old
company, contain altogether 152,000 acres, all as rich as those already
mentioned, and this is only about one-half of the coal basin of the
Alleghanies, which is again but a very small portion in the great
geological map of the United States territory—merely a few black
streaks in comparison with the stupendous coal basins of the west of
the Ohio Valley, of the shores of Lake Michigan, and the basin of the
Mississippi. The coal of the Western States is, however, different
from that of Pennsylvania, being mostly all bituminous, and until
the recent opening of the Atlantic Railroad its transport to the great
cities on the seaboard was more expensive than that of coal from this
country. __ ••
VIRGINIA.
Virginia—now divided into two States, the new State being de-
nominated West Virginia—was first settled in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, by Sir Walter Raleigh, -who named the country—in honour
of his mistress, the virgin Queen —Virginia. During the early years
of its existence as a British colony, Virginia underwent many vicissi-
tudes, but after the first difficulties were got over, it became a
flourishing colony; and during the wars between Charles I. and his
Parliament, it became the refuge of a large number of the Cavaliers,
who had to leave England when the Royalist cause was lost. In
consequence of this emigration, the Virginian planters, up to the
late war, were looked on as the aristocracy of America ; but all
this is changed now, and the former grandees have lost their in-


fluence, their wealth, and also their slaves; the two States have
entered a new epoch, the former exclusive policy is abandoned;
emigrants are invited from all parts of Europe, and there is no
doubt but Virginia is as inviting a field for the emigrant, whether
belonging to the labouring or capitalist class, as is to be found in
America. Virginia is the only one of the Southern States where
white labour is likely to oust the negro. In July and August the
heat is very great, but not more so than in the south of France or
Italy; and when the country is better cleared it will be quite as
healthy as any European country situated in the same latitude,
if not more so, as the Alleghanies and Blue Ridge, which traverse
the whole State, give quite a mountainous character to the country,
and on the sides of the hills the climate is as cool and healthy as
the Highlands of Scotland.
Virginia embraces 61,352 square miles of territory, or 39,265,280
acres of land, of which in 1860 only 11,435,954 acres were im-
proved, leaving 27,829,326 acres unimproved! The question may
be asked—How is it that so old a settled State has so large a portion
of her territory unimproved? The question can be easily answered.
Most of the unoccupied lands of Virginia were, during the latter part
the last century, taken up in large tracts by speculators, whose succes-
sors have since held them. No inducement was offered to small and
actual settlers to purchase these lands, and for that reason emigrants
from Europe and from the Eastern States have been attracted to the
far West, where Government lands could be purchased at low rates
and in quantities to suit the purchasers. This order of things in
Virginia is now changed. Not only are these vast unoccupied tracts
of land placed upon the market in moderate quantities at low figures,
but many of the old plantations hitherto tilled by slave labour are
being cut up into small farms and cultivated by white labour. While
slave, or capitalised African labour, answered admirably well in the
semi-tropical states where cotton and rice are produced, that kind of
labour, if anything, retarded the progress of Virginia, because ener-
getic white labour has always been more suited to that State. The
systems of labour—free and slave—will not harmonise; and, as
white labour is so well adapted for the climate of Virginia, it will
eventually annihilate even the free negro labour. The gradual
disappearance of negro labour from Virginia, and the immigration of
white labour, already pouring in from the Northern States and from.
Europe, has given a new impulse to the prosperity of Virginia.


Virginia not only in the productions of her soil but in the vast
mineral treasures that lie beneath it, is an empire within itself, and,
like France, could * live within itself.’ It has long been known to the
world as the great tobacco State, and to the people of the United
States as the great wheat-producing State. The wheat of Virginia
is the only American wheat, excepting that of California, which
when converted into flour, will answer for the South American and
other tropical markets, and from its fine quality is the principal
wheat consumed in the large cities of Boston, New York, Philadel-
phia, and Baltimore. Virginia also is a large maize-growing State •
and owing to her long summer has become the chief vegetable State.
Her soil is as fine as that of any State north of her limits, and finer
than that of any State south of her limits; while her climate, excepting
for cotton and rice, is better adapted for the several productions of
the earth than that of any other State. Virginia is likewise, but to a
limited extent, a cotton producing State. The limited quantity of
cotton grown in Virginia is not owing to any defect in her soil, it is
a question of price. Virginia grows cotton of as good staple as any
other State. But her growing season is shorter than that of the
more northern States, and her sun is less hot. Hence it is that the
cotton plant in Virginia is not only longer in reaching maturity,
but the blooming ceases earlier, and less cotton therefore is obtained
for the amount of labour bestowed upon it than in the extreme
southern States. If the present price of cotton was certain to be
maintained, the planters of Virginia could well afford to grow cotton
in large quantities. The uncertainty as to price, however, retards
the culture of cotton. Of all the American States that can cultivate
cotton with white labour, Virginia, by reason of her climate, heads
the list. No State north of Virginia can grow cotton at all. If Vir-
ginia had sufficient white labour, and twelve pence for cotton could
be assured, it would not be difficult for her to supply the demands
of commerce with the leading staple. She is, too, a very fine fruit
State. Her mountains, as the magnificent growth of trees to their
very summit indicate, are almost as fertile as her valleys, thereby
affording a greater variety of culture than is generally found in the
same locality. In all the elements of agricultural as well as mineral
and manufacturing advantages, Virginia is superior to any other Ameri-
can State. Her rich hill sides, combined with her mild climate, are
adapted for the culture of every variety of grape. The introduction
of emigrants from the wine districts of Europe will make Virginia the


vineyard of America. In her central- position in the Union, in her
proximity to the sea, in her mild and delightful climate, in her vast
forests of pine, oak, chestnut, walnut, poplar, beech, maple, cherry,
and other varieties of excellent timber, in her rich soil, in her deep
navigable rivers she is without a rival. The climate of Virginia is
so genial, and her grasses are so nutritious that in many districts
it is unnecessary to house-feed cattle during the winter. For this
reason sheep are enabled to pasture throughout the year. Thus,
for stock-raising and wool-growing, Virginia is unsurpassed. In
Virginia, swine are fattened chiefly on acorns and nuts of various
kinds, of which there are a great abundance. In the autumn, before
the swine are slaughtered, they are fed on Indian corn. Virginia
is also known in America as an important State for raising horses.
The western and north-western States of America, with a few
exceptions, are purely agricultural, producing but few staples. The
disadvantage under which these States have to struggle, even as far
as their own productions are concerned, is their great distance from
market. Unless there be a European outlet for grain at prices above
the normal rates, but a small portion of their surplus produce meets
a demand; for the cost of transportation from the west to the east
is greater, under ordinary circumstances, than the seaboard value of
the produce. The few States west of the Ohio River that possess
coal have a limited market for that article, and in many instances
the coal beds are remote from navigable rivers, and hence are without
value. The great consumption of coal west of the Alleghanies is
west south west, and south of the western termini of the Chesapeake
and Ohio Line. But the chief consumption of coal in America is east
of the Alleghany Mountains. The large cities of the east, the manu-
facturing towns on the Atlantic coast, and the Federal and Mer-
cantile navies are the great consumers of coal. It will thus be seen,
that while Virginia has, by her fine harbours, commercial advantages
equal to those of the commercial State of New York, she has also-
agricultural advantages superior to the agricultural States of the;
West, and mining advantages superior to the Western States that
have coal deposits. Her nearness to market, places Virginia in this
excellent position. Virginia, too, is already quite a large manufac-
turing State. Her water power at the Falls of the James River, and.
at the Falls of the Kanawha, is extremely valuable. The water-
power, with her cheap coal, gives her advantages over the New
Ragland States, which States arc recognised as the chief manufactur-


ing States of America. Pennsylvania, by reason of her cheap coal
and water power, is now outstepping the New England States in
many kinds of manufactures, and Virginia bids fair soon to follow her
example. Besides coal for ordinary manufacturing purposes, there
is a variety of coal in Virginia of great value. It is called by Pro-
fessor Hall, the State Geologist of New York, the ‘ semi, or lamin-
ated cannel.’ It is entirely free from sulphur, and is wholly inde-
structible from atmospheric agencies. Professor Hall thus speaks of
it:— ‘ When partially burned it presents a fine porous coke, finally
burning away to a white or light-coloured ash, without any appreci-
able slag or other impurity. The flame and quantity of smoke from
a piece of cannel coal burnt at the same time and place were not
perceptibly different. For all the purposes for producing steam, or
for a steady dry burning blazing coal, this bed will answer all
the purposes of the real cannel coal, and for these objects will
be equally valuable, particularly upon the western waters and for
steam boilers of all manufacturers. Where the prevailing coals are
of the soft bituminous character, it is remarkably adapted to bear
transportation with little loss from breaking or waste. This combina-
tion of qualities, which I hesitate not to say is possessed by no other
coal in the region, except the cannel coal, renders it exceedingly valu-
able.’ In addition to the great beds of bituminous, splint, and semi-
cannel coal, there are enormous beds of cannel coal in Virginia.
The Great Kanawha coal and iron fields are thus described:
‘The coal-fields of the Great Kanawha Region, in Virginia, are
superior to those of Great Britain or Pennsylvania. They are re-
garded by eminent geologists as the finest deposit of coal in the
world. The quality of Kanawha cannel coal is equal to the best
English cannel; the quality of its bituminous coal is equal to the
best found in Pennsylvania ; and Kanawha splint coal, for smelting
iron ore, is unsurpassed. The veins lie horizontally, and vary from
three feet to fifteen feet in thickness; and the aggregate thickness
of the various veins in some localities amounts to forty and even fifty
feet of solid coal.*
With respect to wages, miners in Virginia get from two to three
dollars per day, and labourers in mines from one to two dollars.
Other kinds of labour is paid in proportion, and as Virginia becomes
better known in this country, it will every year attract larger numbers
to its shores. From what we have stated it will be seen that her
resources are all but illimitable, and as her great mineral wealth


becomes better developed, the demand for labour will increase, and
will go on increasing for a long period to come. To emigrants
from this country Virginia is more cheaply and expeditiously reached
than the more remote States in the West, which is in itself an in-
ducement. After arriving in New York, the railway journey to
Virginia, by the way of Philadelphia, or by the Atlantic and Great
Western Railroad, is comparatively short, and only costs about the
same as a journey from Glasgow to London, although the distance is
greater.
THE WESTERN STATES.
It was not until the Western States were opened up by the con-
struction of railways and the formation of roads that emigration on
a gigantic scale began to flow into the great Republic from almost
every country in Europe. For twenty-five years this stream of human
beings from the Old World to the New has been flowing, and every
year seems to increase its volume. The fertile and almost bound-
less prairies of the West offer a home to the impoverished German
peasant, the Irish cottar, the English artisan, and canny Scot, which
they find denied to them in their native land ; and we cease to won-
der at the numbers that leave their native land when we reflect that
they leave poverty and dependence for almost certain comfort and
independence. In the far-away States of Oregon and California
beyond the Rocky Mountains, and in the territories not yet erected
into States lying between the Mississippi and the Pacific, the
emigrant from Europe is met by the emigrant from the remote East.
In a few years perhaps all the extreme Western States will be almost
monopolised by the Chinese, who are already beginning to monopo-
lise the labour market, as well as the trade of the places where they
settle.
In order to convey some idea of the stream of emigration pouring
into America from the Atlantic and the Pacific ports, we quote from
the correspondence of a gentleman resident in New York, dated
July 6th, in which it is stated that during the month of June
of the present year 41,339 emigrants arrived at New York from


Great Britain and the Continent of Europe. ‘ The number of immi-
grants who arrived at New York in the first six months of this year
was 142,227, and in the corresponding period of last year the number
was only 109,097—being an increase for the last six months of a little
more than 30 per cent. Great as is this flow of immigration, it
is said that it would be still larger if there were ships or steamers
enough to furnish the requisite means of transportation. The average
number of immigrants brought in each of the seventy-seven vessels
which arrived here in June was 510 ; but ten of them brought more
than 1000 immigrants each, and several brought as many'as 1400.
The number of immigrants arriving at this port in the first quarter
of the present year was 28,098, and in the quarter just ended it was
118,529. The year can scarcely end without the arrival, at this port
alone, of nearly 300,000 immigrants; and as long observation has
shown that each immigrant brings with him, on an average, GO dols.
in money, the wealth of the country will be increased eighteen mil-
lions of dollars from this source, to say nothing of the incalculable
wealth in muscle and brain which the immigrants bring to their
new home. Meanwhile, on the Pacific coast the Chinese are arriving
at the rate of 2500 a month, and as a few immigrants from Europe
are brought to other ports of the United States besides New York,
the total immigration of the year will probably reach 350,000 souls.
Think of these figures for a moment—think of a population almost
twice as large as that of Edinburgh landed on these shores in a single
year.’
California, Oregon, and even the territories of Colorado, Arizona,
and Wyoming lying on the eastern side of the Rocky Mountains will,
it is to be feared, be overrun by the Chinese ; but the valley of the
Mississippi will still remain as the heritage of the Circassian race,
who in the long run will no doubt prove too many for their Mongo-
lian competitors, although it is possible that the race may be greatly
improved by coming into contact with western civilisation. Although
the Chinese may hold their own in California and some of the neigh-
bouring States, and even oust the native Americans and Europeans,
still there is no reason to suppose that they will ever make any great
impression on the valley of the Mississippi, which is beyond all
question the most valuable portion of America, and in magnitude and
fertility is unequalled in the world. The valley of the Ganges may
be richer in vegetation and animal life, but its extent is less. The
valley of the Yang-tze-Kiang, in China, approaches the Mississippi


in extent; but, although the seat of a vast population, it cannot
compete with the marvellous fertility of the lands which lie on either
bank of theFatherof Waters. The Mississippi, rising among the bar-
ren pine woods of the north, flows nearly through the whole extent
of the temperate zone, and when it empties its waters into the Gulf of
Mexico the banks are rich in tropical beauty and laden with the fruits
of the torrid zone, while the breezes which stir their branches are
laden with the perfumes of Araby the blest. In its course from the
Lake of the Woods, in the distant north-west, to the Gulf of Mexico,
the Mississippi receives the waters of eleven magnificent rivers, in
addition to a multitude of other streams, any of which would in this
country be classed as rivers.
Five of the tributaries of the Father of Waters flow from the west,
and six from the east. The five from the west are the Minnesota, the
lowa, the Missouri, the Arkansas, and the Ked Fiver. The six from
the east are the Wisconsin, the Illinois, the Ohio, the Tennessee,
the Cumberland, and the Big Black Eiver. Of these eleven majestic
rivers the Missouri is the largest, exceeding in fact the river in
which it is lost. At St Louis, where the Missouri joins the Mississippi,
the character of the latter is changed from a comparatively clear
stream to a muddy one. For miles below the junction the impetuous
and drumlie Missouri rushes down in a compact volume as though
disdaining to mingle with its lazier neighbour, and protesting against
the injustice of sinking its name in that of an inferior rival. The
Mississippi touches ten States, although the valley, properly speaking,
comprehends fifteen States, covering an area of at least three fourths
of the Union. The ten States which touch the waters of the Missis-
sippi lie five on each side. On the right or western bank are the
States of Minnesota, lowa, Missouri, Arkansas, and Louisiana, On
the left or east bank lie Wisconsin, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, and
Mississippi. The States lying in the Mississippi valley, but not
touching its banks, are the new States of Kansas and Nebraska on the
west, and Indiana, Ohio, and Alabama on the east. It is a singular
fact that in the vicinity of the great lakes the streams almost all flow
to the southward to join the Mississippi or its tributaries, the streams
which flow into the lakes hardly ever coming farther than forty miles.
In Ohio, along the shores of Lake Erie, and in Indiana, Illinois, and
Wisconsin, the rivers all flow south and west, except a few insigni-
ficant ones, which empty themselves into the lakes and go to swell
the St Lawrence. Of the rivers which flow into the Mississippi from


the east, the Ohio is by far the largest; but on the western bank the
Arkansas and Red River approach it in volumes of water, although
neither have so long a course.
The Ohio has a course of over 2500 miles, the Arkansas 2500, the
Tennessee about 1500, the Red River 1500, the Illinois 1200, and
the Missouri and its tributaries more than three thousand miles.
Along the banks of each of these majestic rivers cities and towns are
rising as if by magic, and before a hundred years the population of
the valley of the Mississippi will in all probability amount to one
hundred millions, and even then the country will not be half peopled.
At no very distant period the valley of the Mississippi will be the seat
of an empire, wider and more powerful than the empires which rose
on the banks of the Nile and Euphrates in the elder days of the
world’s history.
Like the Nile, the Mississippi at a certain season overflows its
banks, but it differs considerably from its eastern rival both as to
the time of its floods as well as in extent. In September and October
the autumnal rains commence in the regions drained by the Missouri,
but it is February before they make any great impression on the
parent stream, which this month overflows its banks, and continues
to swell up to April or May, when the waters begin to recede, and
by the month of July the river is confined within its usual channel.
When it overflows its banks the Mississippi inundates the country on
both sides for an extent of from forty-five to fifty miles. From the
mouth of the Ohio to Walnut Hills, in the State of Mississippi, the
difference between the lowest water and the highest inundation is
generally sixteen feet. The nearer it approaches the Gulf of Mexico
the rise diminishes, until at its mouth there is no perceptible difference
between a rise and fall.
Whoever goes to the Mississippi with the expectation of beholding
a sea-like river flowing quietly along will be sure to be disappointed.
The magnitude of the great American river does not consist in its
width, but in its depth, and the immense quantity of water it pours
into the sea. At the junction of the Ohio the Mississippi is a mile
and a-half wide, and this moderate breadth rather diminishes as it
proceeds on its course until at New Orleans, 109 miles from its mouth,
it is scarcely a mile in breadth. Its depth, as might be expected,
increases as the width diminishes. Below the junction of the Ohio
the depth varies from thirty-five to fifty feet ; at the junction of the :
Arkansas the depth is from 100 to 150 feet, while at New Orleans


it is from 150 to 250 feet; but at its mouth, owing to a sand-bar, the
depth greatly diminishes, so that vessels of a large draft of water
often find it difficult to get in or out.
Of all the Western States, Illinois is the most remarkable for the
progress it has made; and notwithstanding the thousands that an-
nually crowd into it, there is room and work for all, and will be for
many years to come. Chicago, whose rapid growth is one of the
miracles of American civilisation, will in a few years rival New York
in population and wealth ; and although it has many rivals, it is no
doubt destined to become the metropolis of the West—a rival to
modern London and ancient Babylon in splendour and power. In
Chicago the restless character of the Americans is seen in its fullest
development. As a port Chicago has few' natural advantages, and in
this respect compares unfavourably with some of its sister cities on
the lakes; but the enterprise of the inhabitants has more than com-
pensated for any natural drawback it possesses. Docks and wharves
of great extent have been constructed, and but little difficulty is felt
in disposing of the immense quantities of produce which pour into
Chicago from Illinois, lowa, and Minnesota. The cereal crops, which
are the staple product of the western plains, are transferred by the
mechanism of the elevator from the granaries to the ships in an in-
credibly short time. A powerful elevator worked by steam will
deposit in the hold of a ship 50,000 bushels in about five hours, being
at the rate of about 10,000 bushels per hour.
On leaving Chicago for the west, the traveller from the Eastern
.'States sees for the first time the prairie in all its grandeur. As far
as the eye can reach nothing is to be seen but one unbroken meadow
of fine undulating grass land, diversified by occasional rows of trees
which gro won the banks of the streams. In the prairie you every
now and again come upon pools of water in which grow in great
abundance the white water lily, the same as cultivated in our gardens,
and a deep blue flower is also abundant; while among the long grass
of the prairie flowers of every form and hue are as numerous as the
stars, and almost as bright.
Nothing can exceed in beauty and grandeur a sunset on the prairies,
it being more impressive than a sunset at sea, and certainly more
■diversified and picturesque. There being nothing to intercept the hue
of vision, the god of day seems to go down like a flame of fire into
space, and there being little or no twilight, in an incredibly short


time the whole scene, which but a few minutes before was bathed
in light, is eclipsed in the shadows of night. As soon as the short
twilight has vanished, the fire-flies come on the stage, and the first
view of these remarkable insects is to the stranger exceedingly strik-
ing. They flit about like small stars of intense brightness, and when
there is no moon they add greatly to the beauty of the night, but
make little or no impression on the darkness. Sunrise on the prairie
is equally as beautiful and impressive as sunset, and in the morning,
as in the evening, the orb of day seems to rise out of immensity and
lighten up the landscape which but a few minutes previously had
been wrapt in total darkness.
Illinois, Wisconsin, lowa, and Minnesota, although older and more
extensively settled than some of the newer States farther west, will
for a long time to come absorb a large proportion of the emigrants
from Europe. Wisconsin and Minnesota possess a much milder tem-
perature than more southern States, and both are favourable resorts
for emigrants from Germany and Scandinavia, In Minnesota and
lowa there are still tracts of Government land, which are allotted
under the Homestead Act to settlers of five years. These Govern-
ment grants consist of 160 acres, and are given to all without dis-
tinction. In Wisconsin and Illinois there are extensive tracts of wild
land, chiefly prairie, which have been conceded to railway companies,
and which may be obtained at prices varying from half a dollar to
two dollars per acre, according to situation. Illinois has also the
advantage of newer States in the demand for labour of every descrip-
tion. In consequence of the coal and other mineral treasures that
are to be found in abundance in Illinois, that State is certain to re-
tain the prominent place it has taken among the Western States.
Every year is bringing to light the great mineral wealth of Illinois,
the coal being greatly superior to that found in Pennsylvania and the
Eastern States, and in many cases almost equal to the finest coal of
this country. The development of the mineral wealth of Illinois will
cause a great demand for miners for many years, and the wages paid
this class are more than the double of what they can ever expect here,
while, at the same time, they have the opportunity of becoming
landowners, which most of them do. When we mention that it is no
unusual sight to see the miners in Illinois going to and from their
work on horseback, we say enough as to the difference of their con-
dition there and here.


In respect to commerce, Illinois is more favourably situated than
any of the Western States, being bounded on the west by the Missis-
sippi, which separates it from Missouri; on the east by the Big
Wabash, which divides it from Indiana; and on the south it is
bounded by the Ohio, while the central part is traversed by the
Illinois river. In addition to these river communications, it is touched
by Lake Michigan, which affords an outlet to the Eastern States and
Europe. The facility of communication is, however, but one of the
natural advantages of Illinois, as no State in the Lnion surpasses it
in fertility, and few in mineral wealth. Every production of the
temperate zone arrives at perfection in the Garden State, as well as
several peculiar to tropical climes, Indian corn, for every bushel
sown, returns a hundredfold, while wheat is proportionally produc-
tive. Rice, indigo, and tobacco can be cultivated with profit, but
the Illinois farmer is prejudiced against the latter crop, as it wastes
the soil and renders it unprofitable, and frequently useless for years.
Although a great portion of the State is prairie land, in some parts
there are magnificent forests of sycamores, maples, honey locusts,
walnut trees, pecan trees, and cotton trees of an immense height.
There is also to be found the wonderful magnolia tree, whose perfume
can be felt at the distance of sixty miles. Nothing could be lovelier
than the fertile bottoms on the banks of the Wabash, where Nature
seems to have exhausted her prodigality in the number and variety of
the flowers which bloom on the savannahs, and in the colossal forests
which stretch away on the rising grounds, which are bounded by the
prairie like a magnificent lawn around some of the baronial residences
of merry England. Only that the magnitude is infinitely greater,
Illinois may be compared to the Carse of Gowrie in Perthshire, the
Mississippi taking the place of the Tay, and the mountains of the
XJpper Mississippi that of the Grampians. The climate of Illinois is
far more temperate than in the Eastern States, the winter being less
severe and the summer, although warm, not disagreeably so, except
before a thunderstorm, when the atmosphere is extremely close and
heavy; but when the storm is past the air is pure and invigorating,
and as cool as on a summer morning at the foot of Benlomond.
Except in marshy situations, fevers and agues are rare; but in
the vicinity of the rivers and in low-lying localities a good deal
of sickness prevails, especially among newcomers, who are not
Tery careful as to the water they drink, and in exposing them-


selves to the night air of the marshes, which is hurtful to
health.
Life in these western regions is, however, very different from what
it is here ; and unless the emigrant is prepared to give up many of his
cherished notions and prejudices, and fall in with those of the country
of his adoption, he had better stay at home, as nobody is more miser-
able than one tormented with home sickness and looking with indif-
ference, it may be dislike, on scenes which, however fair, appear to
him foreign and repulsive.
The temptation to become a landowner is so great in the Western
States that many of the emigrants are unable to resist it, and the
consequence is very often bitter disappointment. Although prairie
land is fertile, and easily cultivated, still a certain amount of skill
and capital is required, and when one or both are wanting, failure is
the natural result. Those new to the country are better to wait and
acquire some experience before purchasing land, and there is always
a good demand for all kinds of labour; the emigrant, while acquiring,
a knowledge of the country and its ways, is at the same time accumu-
lating some little capital, which will be of great use when he com-
mences on his own account. In comparing the capabilities of the
Western States with the Middle and Eastern States, the facility for
bringing the wild land into cultivation ought to be taken into account,
as the prairie land can be brought into cultivation at one twentieth of
the expense required to clear heavy forest land. Prairie land is a
paradise for the farmer, as it is both easily tilled and exceedingly
productive. After being ploughed the first time, a one-horse plough
is sufficient for the purpose of cultivation ; and when it is mentioned
that fifty and sixty bushels of wheat, and eighty bushels of Indian
corn, are no uncommon crops in Illinois and Wisconsin, sufficient is
said to attest the fertility of the soil. Before the opening up of the
country by railways it was no uncommon occurence for the farmer to
leave part of the crops on the ground, the price which he received for
the grain not being sufficient to cover the expense of harvesting. In
this way many a bushel of grain was left to perish in the field, while
millions in Europe were living on short commons, and would have
been glad to exchange the produce of their labour for the grain that
was perishing on the prairies of the west.
With the inhabitants of the Western States, whose wealth consists
in their agricultural produce, and whose prosperity depends on ob-


■taining a market for their produce, free trade with the world is
undoubtedly the best policy, and the farmers of Illinois are naturally
indignant at the selfish conduct of the New England manufacturers
who clamour for protection from foreign competition. Sooner or
later the Western States will sweep away protection, notwithstand-
ing the opposition of the New England or Eastern States, as there
can be no question but the West, both in numbers and influence, will
swamp those States, which at present have the ruling power in the
Union.
Leaving this matter to be discussed by the political economist, we
will turn to Southern Illinois, which is perhaps the richest portion of
the State, extending for hundreds of miles in one rolling prairie, with
here and there a patch of woodland, like an oasis in the desert, or an
island in the ocean. For nearly three hundred miles the prairie is
unbroken save by those oases, but as you advance towards the junc-
tion of the Ohio and the Father of Waters strips of forest begin, and
at Decatur, two hundred miles from Cairo, at the junction of the Ohio
and Mississippi, there is a perceptible change in the landscape as well
as in the temperature. The apparently boundless prairie is broken by
forest, while the climate becomes decidedly warmer, and the vegeta-
tion partakes more of a tropical character. The prairie rose, the
helianthus, and many hundreds of other varieties of flowers, which
blossom only in our gardens, are to be found growing in wild luxuri-
ance. Proceeding still southward, the change in the temperature
becomes more marked, while the face of the country is more diversi-
fied by high bluffs, deep ravines, and alternate patches of wood and
prairie. Approaching Cairo by railway after sunset, you have the
swamp forest, with its myriads of fire-flies, to the west, increasing
gradually as the shadows of evening fall, till every tree seems alive
with wandering stars. The sight is one which is both novel and in-
teresting, flitting as they do like brilliant sparkles from leaf to leaf,
until the dark forest appears to be ablaze with light. To the east is
the broad Ohio, placidly reflecting the declining light, and beyond
the river the wood covered hills of Kentucky, forming a grand and
pictursquc background.


CALIFORNIA AND THE PACIFIC STATES.
Now that railroad communication has been opened between the
Atlantic and the Pacific, California and Oregon, the States washed
by the Pacific, are likely to attract more emigrants from Europe,
unless they are deterred by fear of competition from the Chinese,
who are pouring into California at the rate of many thousands an-
nually, and this Chinese immigration is very likely still to increase.
The Chinese emigration to California is so extensive and so unlooked
for that the question has been asked —Will it fall to the lot of the
superabundant population of China to join the Anglo-Saxon race in
peopling the unoccupied portions of the globe ? A few years ago,
when not a Chinaman could be seen outside the Celestial Empire,
such a question would be regarded as absurd. Now the aspect of
affairs is very different. The race most zealously devoted to its old
traditions is spreading all over the world. The Western States of
America are rapidly becoming peopled with Chinese. During the
year 1566 the arrivals in California from China and Japan were 2300,
in ISG7 they were 3300, and in 18G8 they were more than 10,000,
while in 1869 they were expected to exceed any previous total. One
agent has been sent out to China on behalf of a Chicago firm to nego-
tiate for fifty thousand of these immigrants. The fact is, the Ameri-
cans are disposed to encourage this great flow of the human race to
the utmost extent. They are as glad to receive these useful colonists
as the Chinese themselves are glad to get away from their mandarins
and the bastinado. Twelve hundred and fifty women were landed at
San Francisco in one month. The behaviour of the Chinese immigrants
receives the highest praise from the American journals. They are
very industrious, thrifty, sober, and quiet. A remarkable contrast
between their conduct and that of the Irish and American labourers
is given in one of the Far West journals. The eastern portion of the
Pacific Railway was made chiefly by the Irish or Americans; the
Chinese were employed on the western or Pacific end. The latter
portion of the work was conducted with more regularity and good
order than the former. The Sacramento Union says:— ‘ We do not
recall to mind a single death by wanton violence on the line of the
Central Pacific during the past year, while hardly a day has passed


on the other end of the road without some act of murder or other
atrocity. The Chinese have honestly won a compliment for good
order, sobriety, and good work, which ought to shame those white
ruffians who are in the habit of traducing their morals at the same
time they are murdering each other.’ There is one caution to which
the authorities of the United States would do well to give their atten-
tion —they must keep the whisky bottle from their new subjects.
Hitherto this has been done with the most satisfactory results. The
spread of the Chinese race in different parts of the world is one of the
most remarkable ethnological phenomena of the age. But even should
the Chinese come in increasing numbers to the Pacific States there
will be room enough both for Europeans and Asiatics for many years
to come. California and Oregon comprise a territory of more than
five hundred thousand square miles, extending from 32 to 49 degrees
north. In the southern parts of California the vegetation is tropical,
but the products of the temperate zone arrive at great perfection,
especially wheat, which is famed for its excellence all over the world.
The mineral wealth of California is too well known to require more
than mention, the gold mines of California being unsurpassed for
richness by any in the world. Although more than twenty years
have elapsed since their discovery they seem to be as productive as
ever, and every year new workings are discovered, which more than
replace those which have been exhausted.
In the early years of Californian gold digging a halo of romance was
thrown around the occupation, but all that has been dispelled, and
no one should go to California either to win gold by digging for it or
by cultivating the soil who is not prepared to endure all the hard-
ships incidental to a new country; and above all, no one should go
under the impression that gold is to be had for the gathering without
severe toil. Mr Marryat, who has written a book on his Californian
experiences, gives some good hints to those who intend to make their
fortunes on the golden shore of California—more especially those who
go to that distant land with the intention of prospecting for gold.
That the Californian gold was sought, although not found, by the
early Spanish priests, is evident from the number of old shafts in
some places, sunk sometimes in the centre of rich districts. Often
it has happened that they who seek for the gold miss it, and they
who had no thoughts of it in their minds fall upon heaps. A market-
gardener who had long been abusing his ground for producing cab-


bages that were all stalk, one day pulled up an aggravating sample,
and discovered a piece of gold adhering to the roots of it. Holden’s
garden, near Sonora, was found to be so rich that the gamblers of the
town sallied out and fought for claims in it. For four years it has
yielded riches, pieces of gold weighing many pounds having been
sometimes taken from it. There is a famous digging upon Carson’s
Hill, in the vicinity of which a rich gulch was discovered under cir-
cumstances that were related to Mr Marryat by Mr Carson :—One
of the miners died, and as he had been much respected, it was deter-
mined to give him an unusually ceremonious funeral. A digger in the
neighbourhood, who had once been a powerful preacher in the United
States, was requested to officiate, and after ‘ drinks all round,’ the
party went in solemn order to the grave. Around the grave all knelt
while the man of power laboured indefatigably at a lengthy prayer.
Time began to hang heavy on the hands of listeners ; their fingers
began to work in a nervous or abstracted way among the loose earth
that had been thrown up. It was thick with gold, and an excitement
quickly spread among the kneeling crowd. The preacher’s eye was
caught, and he stopped suddenly in his prayer to exclaim, * Boys,
what’s that ? Gold, and the richest kind of diggings. The congrega-
tion is dismissed! ’ The poor miner was taken from the precious soil
and put aside for burial elsewhere, while the funeral party, with the
parson at its head, lost no time in * prospecting ’ the new digging.
In the work referred to, Mr Marryat recommends prudence in those
who try their luck at the diggings, and advises those who have made
money to use it as the means of setting himself up among the new
community in steady trade. He dwells on the importance of a trifle
of capital, that may be consumed during the days of quiet observa-
tion and deliberation with which an emigrant’s life, in the majority
of cases, is best begun. He recommends daily and complete ablution
for the preservation of health, the constant wearing of flannel next
the skin, in California, and in many other places with a similar
climate; and he most wisely advises against meddling with a medi-
cine chest. The emigrant’s best medicine for home use—good to
swallow, good to use as a salve; efficacious in a hundred cases, and
unlikely to be dangerous in one—is castor oil. This, with a few
trifles for the cure of wounds, a stock of mustard, and some quinine if
it can be afforded, should be all the physic with which an emigrant
would venture to undertake the tinkering of his own constitution.


When headache and sickness give warning of fever, rest, says the
wise adviser. Do not, he adds, take pride in working till an illness
becomes serious, A day or two of repose, and a dose or two of castor
oil, taken in proper time, will often save the digger weeks of misery.
When fever threatens, resist the inclination to bathe in a stream.
The digger is advised to vex himself little about outfit; but to be
very careful as to the good quality of his blankets and flannel cloth-
ing, to select good thick socks and the best highlow shoes that can be
made for money, A blanket with a hole cut in the middle for the
head to go through, is an invaluable poncho wrapper for wet seasons.
India-rubber clothing—except, perhaps, a waterproof cap with a cur-
tain to protect the neck—is scarcely to be recommended. Whoever
intends to dig will find it worth while to have one or two pickaxes
and crowbars made under his own supervision, since the adviser tells
tis *it is money well spent to pay something over market price for a
pickaxe that wont turn its nose up at you the instant you drive it
into the hillside.’
On account of the cost of the passage to California, none but those
who have saved a little money at home have hitherto been able to
proceed to it direct, the more common way being to go to some of
the Eastern States, and, after saving a little money there, join one of
the emigrant parties going overland, and thus reach the land of pro-
mise after weary weeks of marching across the provinces and the
desert which lie between the settlements and the valley of the Sacra-
mento. The opening of the Union Pacific Railroad has changed all
this, and now passengers can leave the Clyde by steamer to New
York, and take the cars direct to San Francisco without a break, the
whole journey not occupying more than eighteen days, while the ex-
pense is less than one-half of what it was under the old regime. Unless
California and Oregon are both inundated by Chinese emigrants, they
will for a long time to come be the most eligible of any of the States
of the Union for those who have to seek their fortunes in other lands
than those which gave them birth. We may mention that the cost
of a passage from the Clyde to California by the new route is about
£l5, being about the cost of a passage to Australia or New Zealand.
In the new territories to the eastward of California, towns and villages
are rising along the line of railroad, but except those who are inclined
to follow a life of adventure in the wilderness they do not as yet
afford eligible fields for those in quest of settled homes.


COLORADO AND THE TERRITORIES.
To the east of California there stretches an immense tract not yet
erected into States, and only within the last two or three years
organised into territories. These new territories comprise Colorado,
Dacotah, Washington, Wyoming, Idaho, Montana, Arizona, and
Utah. These eight territories have an area as large as the whole of
the States east of the Mississippi, and comprise every variety of soil
and climate found on the continent. The territories lying next Mexico
have almost a tropical climate, and nearly every production of the
tropics arrives at perfection. In those lying more to the north the
temperature is more moderate, and the winters are often as severe
as they are in the north of Europe, It is only since the Union Pacific
Railroad was commenced to be made that these immense solitudes
were known to the white man, with the exception of a few trappers
and hunters who earned a precarious living in these western wilds.
Since the great work of connecting the Atlantic with the Pacific has
been accomplished by the completion of the Pacific railroad towns
and villages are springing up as if by magic along the route, and
adventurous bands of prospectors have already discovered that in
these hitherto unknown regions there is mineral wealth hid beneath
the surface rivalling in richness the ancient Ophir. Indeed, it is
asserted by some that California and the adjacent territories in the
Rocky Mountains are really the Ophir of the Phoenicians and Solomon.
The Phoenicians, who were great navigators, and discovered the con-
tinent of South America, and built the temples found in every direc-
tion on that continent, seem to have discovered California also. They
circumnavigated Africa, passed up the Arabian Gulf into the Chinese
seas, and went through Behrings Straits into the Pacific, coasting
down to California, where they discovered gold. King Hiram and
King Solomon fitted out a large number of discovery ships from Elath,
in the Red Sea, w r hich coasted through the same route, well-known
to the Phoenicians, until they reached San Francisco, marked in old
maps as the Golden Gates, and the voyage lasted three years. Since
King Solomon’s time no such deposits of gold and silver have been
found in the Red Sea, on the coast of China, India, or the islands
in those seas. If Ophir was in that neighbourhood, surely succeeding


ages would have profited by the discovery. The wealth and grandeur
of the Phoenicians on the continent of South America, so long concealed
from the world, led Hiram and Solomon to believe that they had
made valuable discoveries in the unknown regions, and their ships
were prepared for those long voyages, and vast amounts of gold were
found on the coast of the Pacific. When Rezin, King of Damascus,
and Pekah, King of Israel, captured the seaport of Elath, they
banished the Jews and colonised the Syrians, and from that time the
great secret of the wealth of Ophir and its position have been lost,
until the Americans, by conquest, possessed California, and the Ophir
of antiquity, with its inexhaustible mines, has been discovered.
It is, however, a matter of little importance whether California
and the adjoining territories can be identified as the ancient Ophir;
one thing is certain, that they are as rich in the precious metals as
any land ever visited by the enterprising mariners of Tyre and Sidon.
In none of these territories are the precious metals found in more
abundance than Colorado, and none offers a better field for the adven-
turous and enterprising emigrant.
Geographically, the territory of Colorado is a little west of the
centre of the United States. The Union Pacific Railroad, just com-
pleted, running from New York to San Francisco, by way of Chicago,
Omaha, Cheyenne, and Salt Lake, skirts its northern boundary. A
branch line, just on the point of completion, extends from Cheyenne
City to Denver, the capital of the territory; and another line is pro-
jected, which will pass entirely through its centre, southwards.
Until the opening up of the Great Pacific Railroad, Colorado was
practically inaccessible to emigrants. Its peculiar advantages were
well known; the future importance of the territory (soon to become
a state) was foreseen; but the tedium, cost, and delay of the old
mode of reaching it, debarred anything like general immigration.
Now, however, the railway sends trains daily; Denver is reached in
from four to five days from New York; and the railway company
have arranged to carry emigrants at a rate which has no parallel in
the history of cheap locomotion. The fare from New York to San
Francisco, 3353 miles, is now fifty dollars, and in all probability the
rates will be still lower, as low rates will alone develope the traffic.
To every class of emigrants Colorado offers uncommon advantages.
Her soil is of the highest grade of fertility; her mountain districts
literally teem with metals, the base and the precious; the climate
Is so salubrious that deaths from natural causes very rarely occur;


sheep and cattle are reared and fed for little more than the cost of
herding; game is abundant; the lakes and rivers swarm with fish of
the most delicious quality; provisions are cheap; and wages for all
kinds of skilled labour are liberal almost beyond example. The
miner, the farmer, the artisan, the sportsman, the man of capital,
and the man of sinew, all find opportunity for the exercise of their
several capabilities. All the minerals found anywhere are found in
Colorado. The yield of gold is plentiful, and apparently so inex-
haustible, that sober, scientific, and practical men are of opinion that
the territory will, in respect of the precious metals, entirely supersede
either California or Australia.
One of the most remarkable characteristics of the territory is the
unique system of natural parks or upland valleys lying at an eleva-
tion of 6000 feet between the great chains of the Rocky Mountains.
These are four in number —the North, Middle, South, and San Luis
Parks, the latter equalling the aggregate area of the other three, and
from its southern position, and the extraordinary richness of its lands,
being of vast superior excellence. The San Luis Park is about 200
miles from north to south, and averages a width of 100 miles. It is
drained and irrigated with numerous streams flowing in all directions.
Its land is of wonderful fertility. All the vegetables known in
Europe attain in Colorado a gigantic size, potatoes weighing 5 lbs.
each, and cabbages of 30 lbs. each, being by no means regarded as
curiosities; while the grain produced is so plump and full that a
measured bushel weighs several pounds more than the standard bushel.
Fruits of every description can be cultivated at an immense profit;
the natural grasses of the country possess the remarkable quality,
due to the extreme dryness and purity of the atmosphere, and pecu-
liar, we believe, to this locality, of ‘ curing ’ standing; cattle prefer
this unmown hay to any other, and thrive upon it. You may tickle
this earth with a hoe, and it will laugh with a harvest; it will split
its sides with superabundant plenty.
Now that the Pacific railroad has opened up this country, it is
contemplated to ‘locate’ several new towns in the most suitable
positions. Builders, masons, carpenters, smiths, sawyers, mechanics,
and indeed all descriptions of workmen will therefore obtain imme-
diate employment at highly remunerative wages.
Colorado and the adjoining territories were a few months ago prac-
tically inaccessible; they are now placed within sixteen days’ journey
of the Clyde, so that one could within two months visit the Rocky


■Mountains and be again at his own fireside in auld Scotland. Tc
the tourist no less than the emigrant these western regions offer grea'
attractions, and in a few years a trip to the Rocky Mountains will be
as common as an excursion to Switzerland or a trip up the Rhine.
UTAH AND THE MORMONS.
Salt Lake City and the territory of Utah are, beyond all question,
one of the most extraordinary instances in modern times of successful
emigration and colonisation under the impulse of a religious idea.
Mormonism is, in fact, the latest outcome of modern civilisation, and,
although located in America, is almost entirely recruited from Europe,
more especially England and Wales, with a good many from Scotland.
It is not our intention to enter into any discussion about the truth
or error in the creed of the Mormons, our object being to record facts.
Mr Hepworth Dixon, in his book entitled New America, was the first
to bring the peculiarities of Mormonism prominently before the pub-
lic, and since then there have been others who have given to the
world what they saw in Utah. The latest writer is Major Walter,
who visited the land of the saints this summer, and of course his
narrative is a picture of Mormon life as it exists; and the same may
be said of his description of Utah and its capital of Salt Lake City,
or the New Jerusalem, as it is called by Brigham Young. In order
to convey to the reader a true and accurate account of the Mormons
and the land they inherit, we cannot do better than quote from Major
Walter’s interesting narrative, commencing with a description of Salt
Lake City:—The city is situated on the east bank of the Jordan, at
an elevation of 4500 feet above the sea level. Behind it the Wahsateh
mountains tower to a height of 10,000 feet, with their summits glit-
tering with eternal snows. Scattered widely over the plain, the
streets and houses mark the landscape with gardens and orchards,
long lines of shade-trees stretching by the road-sides, and adding to
the beauty of the landscape. Salt Lake is a great improvement on
any American city I have yet seen; no internal town lies in such a
field of beauty, with such rich and rare elements of nature’s forma-
tion. Beyond and across, the plain spreads out, five to ten miles in


width, with scattered farm-houses and herds of cattle; below, it is
lost in dim distance; above, it gives way, twenty miles off, to the
line of light that marks the beginning of the lake, the whole flat as
a floor, and sparkling with rivers and irrigating canals, and overlooked
on both sides by mountains, out from which flow the fatness of water
and soil that makes this once desert valley blossom under the hand
of industry with every variety of verdure, and with the products of
many climes. A fine view of this remarkable city and the country
beyond and around is obtained from the high bluff north-east of
President Young’s house. Far off to the east and west rise the tower-
ing peaks of the barren Wahsateh range, whose snow-crested summits
loom grandly and majestically above the clouds, and glisten their icy
crags in the sunshine like diamond drops in a distant tri-coloured
casket. Away to the south, far down as the vision can discern,
stretches, many miles in width, reaching from range to range, the
Utah valley, whose fertile lands are now richly bedecked with the
verdure of the growing grain, vigorous fruit trees and shrubberies,
and through its broad acres, at seemingly equi-distant ranges, there
wind, in serpentine directions, shining streamlets of rapidly running
mountain water, while here and in isolated spots, lie calm
and unruffled the crystal waters of small lakes, and near by towns
and villages and hamlets that look in the dim distance like children’s
toy block-houses. Punning westward on the western side is the
narrow unpretending river Jordan, blessed with pure water and hal-
lowed by the fondest scriptural name. To the north lies the great
Salt Lake, whose deep green waters roll up in the passing breeze like
heavy tufts of mountain moss, and lash the shores with their briny
waves, leaving pile upon pile of their whitened serment to be gathered
at leisure. Through the lake, bearing to the, north-west, in moun-
tainous height, are the verdure-covered Sheep and Church Islands,
whose lands are trod only by the unused and unheeded stock, wild
and tame, deemed property of the Church of the Saints, under the
order of Enoch, as revealed to Prophet Joe Smith. At our feet, on
the level plateau, reposes the strangely-built, comfortably-arranged,
adobe city of the Mormons, created by the dint of their own untiring
industry, by the hardest bone and sinew labour, by the greatest skill
and ingenuity, and that, too, at a time when the savages of the plain
held complete dominion for a thousand miles in a circuit around
them, and at a time when a spade, a hoe, a trowel, a hammer, and
a common axe constituted the only available building tools of this


modern biblical Jerusalem; at a time when Indian dangers threat-
ened from without, and the common wants of life threatened from
within; when cold and hunger peered into every cabin door, and sick-
ness and starvation struck down the strongest and the hardiest of
that pioneer host, who, willing to die for their faith, sought seclusion
in this valley, far away from bitter persecutions. President Young
has residences in various parts of Salt Lake City, and, indeed, nearly
all over the territory, but his best are in a square, with extensive
outbuildings and gardens, surrounded by a somewhat prison-like wall
twelve feet high. On one of these buildings is the insignia of a large
beehive, indicating ‘industry, busy work.’ On the other is that of a
lion, illustrative of ‘strength and courage.’ His wealth is enormous;
on this walled-in property alone there must be value to the extent of
at least three hundred thousand pounds sterling. It is universally
believed that he has half a million of money in the English funds ready
for an emergency, and so retained with that view.
The country surrounding the New Jerusalem of Brigham Young is
in a state of high cultivation, and bursts upon the traveller from the
desert like a revelation of beauty. The horridly parched-up regions
through which the traveller passes ere Utah is reached doubtless causes
an over-appreciation of its fertility, and excites a love of flowing
rivulets never before experienced. The necessity of all agriculture
on the plains, among the mountains, and indeed everywhere on this
western half of the American continent, is irrigation. The long dry
summer, frequently months without rain, the hot sun and dry winds,
the character of the soil, all combine to make defeat to the farmers’
business certain, except he helps his crops to water by artificial means.
Throughout the Mormon territory agriculture is the main occupation;
its population of one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants live by
it, prosper by it, have built up a State upon it. Irrigation is universal
and extensive; the streams that pour down from the mountains are
tapped at various elevations, and the water carried away to the mea-
dows and gardens, over the grain, between the rows of Indian corn,
the apple, pear, and peach trees, and vegetables of all kinds. Indi-
viduals, villages, companies, perform this work on the small or greater
scale as required. The water is apportioned among the takers accord-
ing to their land and payments ; each one gets his share, and when
the supply is scant, as is often the case at moments of great necessity,
each one suffers in like degree. The sparkling brooks coursing down
the paved water-ways of the city keep the shade-trees thrifty, supply


drink for animals, and water for household purposes, delightfully
cooling the summer air, besides being drawn off in right proportion
for the use of each garden. Once a week is the rule for thus water-
ing each crop; to-day a man takes enough for one portion of his garden,
to-morrow for another, and so through his entire possessions and the
week. Under this regular stimulus, with a strong soil made up of the
wash of the mountains, the finest crops are obtained. The regular-
supply of water keeps the plants in a steady growth that may well
be supposed to produce far finer results than the struggling, uneven
progress of vegetation under dependence upon the skies, a week or a
month of rain, and then a like prolongation of sunshine. The gardens
are almost tropical in their rich greenness and luxuriance. Nowhere
•else in the country does the same space of ground produce so much
fruit and vegetables. The soil of the Utah valleys is especially favour-
able to growth of small grains. Fifty bushels per acre of wheat, oats,
or barley, are by no means uncommon. The same soil without irriga-
tion could not be made to produce one-fourth of the present product.
Laborious and expensive as the process is, yet the large crops and
high prices obtained make it pay, and over all this country, that is
forced to have an irrigated farming, there is no occupation that pays
so well, and nowhere else in the whole American union is agriculture
more profitable. The mountain snows, however, do not provide half
the water the valleys need. Salt Lake City has exhausted its pre-
sent supply, and President Young contemplates the construction of a
grand canal thirty miles off to provide water for its extending gardens
and the wide valley below and beyond the city, the most of which is
only a miserably poor pasture, but capable, by means of irrigation,
of being made most productive farming land.
Great attention is paid by the Mormons to the all-important matter
of education. They have schools in every ward of the city, and the
attendance is compulsory. The young people are, it is true, reared
in the nurture and admonition of Brigham Young, but whatever in-
tellectual stimulus can be derived from a more than ordinarily com-
plete education is at their command. Whatever of despotism there
may be in Brigham’s government, he recognises fully the great im-
portance of education, and it cannot be charged upon him that he
fears to venture his doctrines in a discussion illuminated by the light
of knowledge and culture. The first generation of Mormons does no
doubt comprise some of the most ignorant people on the face of the
-earth; none more so than the majority of those drawn from England.


A large proportion of these have been drafted off into the interior,
and occupy the smaller settlements which, to the number of 300, are
dotted all over Utah. The schools are supervised by a board of re-
gents, who also have charge of the Salt Lake University, the head of
the educational department. The course of instruction embraces much
practical science, which might be advantageously imparted in some
of our Old World higher schools. * Utility’ is the Mormon watch-
word ; to that all else is made subservient. The first instruction im-
parted to the newly arrived emigrant is that which will enable him to
earn his living and provide for himself. To grow potatoes, to hoe
Indian corn, to plant fruit trees, are considered as of the first im-
portance. When the emigrant has learned to keep himself, and has
ceased to be a burden on the Church, it is time enough to initiate him
into the mysteries of the Mormon faith. The saints say that we
cannot truly and fairly judge them until the third generation has
grown up and settled in life. The first generation, they say, is a
crude and unfinished foundation. The people who first joined the
church brought with them traditions and prejudices of the Old World,
and they are unable wholly to free themselves of the thraldom of the
customs and teachings of their youth. The second generation is free
from these foreign elements, but many of them were born elsewhere,
and are too closely connected with the first comers. It is in the third
generation, born and bred under the influence of the Mormon Church,
that the full results of the system are to be found, and it is in them
that its success is to be triumphantly vindicated. Certain it is that
Brigham is giving this third generation every opportunity to prove
or disprove the wisdom of his policy, but the result of education on
their opinions remains yet to be seen.
Wages, and indeed expenditure generally, keep high here. Good
mechanics earn from three to five dollars a day, but it must be borne
in mind that all articles of dress and provisions are proportionate.
What should we say to butter at two shillings and sixpence per
pound, and how would an English workman put up with disbursing
sixpence for a very genteel glass of secondary quality ale? The
acquisition of the meanest outer garment needs an outlay of eight to
ten dollars, and a pair of unmentionables demand a heavy pull on a
handful of greenbacks. lamat a loss to understand how very many
of the community provide for their wants, unless the doors of the
tything house spring open to their relief. Mormonism, however, is
full of mysteries, and probably will continue so until its chief is called


away from his labours. What shape it shall assume under his suc-
cessor who shall divine? At the moment all admit there is no man
in the community capable of filling the post, but a revelation may
await his followers even on the matter of succession. However much
Mormonism may be an offence against Christianity, it is certainly no
worse than the free-love institutions which flourish in other parts of
the American Union; it is probably less pernicious in its effect than
many tolerated immoralities, and it is therefore difficult to see why
the Mormons should be warred against and exterminated while the
so-deemed more enlightened communities are to be permitted con-
tinuation of their immoralities uncontrolled. To punish the Mormons
for indulging in many-wivedness, while viler practices are tolerated
unrebuked in old States, would be to discriminate unjustly, and give
to Mormonism the great vantage-ground of martyrdom.
In estimating the merits and faults of Mormonism, it should not be
forgotten that the Mormons were the first to settle in the vast wilder-
ness lying at the foot of the'Rocky Mountains; and had it not been
for the Mormons the Pacific Railroad would not yet have been con-
structed. Were it not for the disgusting custom of polygamy, the
Mormons would have a good claim to be considered social reformers;
as it is, they are entitled to be regarded as the most successful of
modern colonisers. Brigham Young, with all his faults, is a most
successful ruler, and greatly superior to the Emperor of the French
as a despot. President Young’s vast practical ability is abundantly
exemplified in all around and about Salt Lake; everything is of his
arranging and ordering, and it is through his example of industry
and perseverance that the locality has been made what it is. It is
laid out by him with great judgment and taste. The streets are 130
feet in width, with acacia, locust, cottonwood, and alianthus shade-
trees, each house, excepting in the purely business streets, having
large gardens of fruit trees. In all directions the eye is refreshed by
blooming gardens and umbrageous trees, and their exuberance of
foliage, together with the pleasant murmurs of the streams of water
by the roadside, lend a great charm to the Saints’ city. It was among
the first plans of President Young to utilise the rains and melting
snows of the Wahsateh mountains in the rear of the settlement; ever-
flowing streams have been turned from wasteful wandering, and made
to flow through all the streets, and then to trickle at will and irrigate
when needed the plains beyond, making fertile and beautiful what
had previously been an arid desert, almost destitute of vegetation.


While conceding to the Mormons and their able ruler due praise
for the great material improvements they have made in Utah, the
disgusting practice of polygamy cannot be too strongly condemned.
There is, however, good reasons for supposing that Brigham Young is
at work to devise some plan whereby polygamy can be got rid of, as
he sees that it will be impossible to maintain it in the face of the
advancing tide of settlement which is rolling so rapidly across the
Western wilds. On the occasion of Mr Colfax, Vice-President of the
United States, visiting Salt Lake, the subject of polygamy was in-
troduced by Brigham inquiring of Mr Colfax what the Government
and people of America proposed to do with it and them, now that
they had got rid of the slavery question. The Vice-President replied
that he had no authority to speak for the Government, but for him-
self, if he might be permitted to make the suggestion, he had hoped
the prophets of the Church would have a new revelation on the sub-
ject, which would put a stop to the practice. He added, that as the
people of Missouri and Maryland, without awaiting for the action of
the Government against slavery, themselves believing it to be wrong
and an impediment to their prosperity, had taken measures to abolish
it, so he hoped the people of the Mormon Church would see that
polygamy was a hindrance and not a help, and so abandon it. Mr
Young is said to have frankly responded that he should readily wel-
come such a revelation; that polygamy was not in the original book
of the Mormons ; that it was not an essential practice in the Church,
but only a privilege and a duty under a special command of God ;
that he knew it had been abused; that people had entered into poly-
gamy who ought not to have done so, and against his protestation and
advice. At the same time, he defended the practice as having Biblical
authority, and as having, within proper limits, a sound moral and
philosophical reason and propriety. Mr Young was asked how he
got over the fact that the two sexes were about equally divided all
over the world, and that if some men had two, five, or twenty wives,
others would have to go without altogether? His reply was that
there was always a considerable proportion of the men who would
never marry, who remained bachelors from choice. The retort to
this was, are there any more of such than of women who choose to be
old maids? Yes, said the Mormon chief, most ungallantly and libel-
lously, there is not one woman in a million who will not marry if she
gets a chance. One of the leading saints, who was pressing the
Biblical usage and authority for many wives as above all laws and


constitutions, was asked as to the effect of the same usage and
authority for human sacrifice. ‘ Would you,’ he was asked, *if com-
manded by God, offer up your son or your enemy as a sacrifice, kill-
ing them?’ ‘Yes,’he promptly replied. In course of the discussion.
President Young asked the shrewd and pointed question, ‘Suppose
polygamy is given up, will not the Government demand more, will it
not war on the Book of the Mormons, and attack our church organi-
sation ?’ The reply was emphatically * No; that it had no right, and
could have no justification to do so, and that there would not be any
disposition to do so. ’ The talk, which is said to have been the freest
and frankest ever known on this vital Mormon difficulty in Brigham’s
presence, ended with the full expression on the part of Vice-President
Colfax of his hope that the polygamy question might be removed
from existence, and that all objection to the admission of Utah as a
State be taken away; but that until it was, no such admission was
possible, and that the Government could not continue to look indif-
ferently upon the enlargement of so offensive a practice. Brigham’s
whole manner left the impression that if public opinion and the
Government united vigorously, but at the same time discreetly, to
press the question, there would be found some way to acquiesce in
the demand, and change the practice of the Church.
Polygamy as practised in Utah is much more degrading and repul-
sive than the polygamy of the East. There are cases in Utah of men
marrying both mother (widow) and her daughter or daughters—taking
the elder as the means of getting the young ones, and having children
by all. More disgusting associations are known, even to the marrying
of a half-sister. How these children of one father and many mothers,
the latter often blood relations, are likely to become crossed again in
the second, if not in the first generation, is a feature of Mormonism
not to be dwelt upon even by the most careless observer. So inti-
mately has the necessity for a plurality of wives been interwoven with
the doctrine of the Church that a man can scarcely hope to rise in
Utah society until he has taken his third wife. It must not, how-
ever, be imagined either that polygamy is the rule in Utah, or that
the saints are at liberty to take as many wives as they please, or
when they please. Not one-twentieth part of the population have
more than one wife. It is recognised by the Church as inevitable that
the masses must content themselves with monogamy, but these can
never aspire to prominent positions, either here or hereafter. With
regard to the manner in which the wives are taken, every man is


supposed to possess a right to one wife. Should he, however, desire
to add to this number, he must inform his bishop of his wishes, and
the latter will then lay the matter before Brigham Young, who will
proceed to inquire into the man’s circumstances, and to ascertain his
character and his ability to support. Should everything appear to
be satisfactory, Brigham will give his consent to the marriage, and
then, and not until then, is the lady made acquainted with the pro-
posal, but such refusals are not common when the suitor is of good
standing with the Church. According to the Mormon creed, it is
through man that woman must secure eminence above; she will be
an angel after death, but her rank, if she dies unmarried, will be an
inferior one. It is only by becoming the wife of a saint on earth
that she can hope to share the throne of a God in heaven. The
Mormon does not actually assert the inferiority of women, but he
affirms such belief by his practice. Doomed in this world to a divided
share in the affections of her husband, she is taught to subdue her
aspirations for the next to such faint expectation, such feeble com-
fort, as may be found in the promise of the position of an associate
queen in the celestial harem. For her there is no independent life
here, no release from the thraldom of polygamy hereafter. The houris
that wait the arrival of the faithful followers of Mahomet in the
regions of eternal bliss, soulless though they be, sensual and degraded
as is their condition, occupy at least a freer share, possess a broader
range of selection, than the Mormon wives, who are sealed to their
husbands for eternity.
It has been asserted that the Mormons are averse to having any
intercourse with the Gentiles, as those outside of Mormonism are
styled by them, but experience has shown this to be incorrect. Now
that the great Pacific Railroad passes through their midst, it may be
said that they are powerless to prevent the influx of strangers; but
then it should not be forgotten that they constructed 300 miles of the
railway, and were besides the practical originators of the great under-
taking; for as far back as 1852 they petitioned Congress to sanction
the line, and offered every aid in their power to make it. Now the
railway is made, and Salt Lake City is as oper to inspection from
tourists in the States as Edinburgh or Glasgow is to our American
cousins who come here to see the ‘ old country/ a* in most parts of
America it is to this day affectionately called. Gn the 9th of July a
deputation arrived by rail to wait on President Brigham Young in
Salt Lake City and present him with an address. The party had with


them strong credentials, as they stated themselves, formed to promote
international commercial relations between China, Japan, Sandwich
Islands, Alaska, San Francisco, Sacramento, Salt Lake, Denver,
Omaha, and the Territories. What the commercial relations of
Alaska, Omaha, and the Territories may be in the future it is rather
hard to say; but it was certainly a strong instance of American go-a-
headism to represent these wilds just now from a commercial point of
view. At any rate, the deputation was most cordially received, as
we learn from the Deseret Evening News, one of several of the ex-
cellently conducted papers which are published in Salt Lake City.
This journal is loud in praise of the visit and in praise of visits from
any intelligent people who can look on them without prejudice, and
quietly as they are living at home. The address to President Brigham
Young was, of course, of the usual kind, congratulating him on the
completion of the great national highway, which brought together
the distant extremes of their common land, relieved the people of
their long and profound isolation, and placed them and their products
within a few days’ reach of the great markets of the Union. The
address then went on to notice the tremendous nature of the en-
gineering labours which were necessary to overcome the great diffi-
culties of the passage of the Webber and Echo ‘Kanyons,’ two
celebrated ravines in the Rocky Mountains, which western pronun-
ciation has now abbreviated from the Italian word to ‘cannons,’ and
then gave to President Young a large share in the credit and honour
of the achievement, and congratulated him on the progress being made
with the branch line that was so soon to connect the capital of LTtah
with the Great Pacific Railway. Brigham Young’s ro-bly to the address
was plain and open enough. So far from wishing to remain isolated,
he claimed for the Mormons that they had been the pioneers of civili-
sation in the Far West—that they had been the first to urge the course
of the Pacific Railway many years ago, and that their labours towards
building it were now before the world, and spoke for themselves. The
only aim of the Mormons, he said, was to press onward, diligently
performing the work allotted to them in the great drama of life, and
having ever in view the glory of God and their country, and the main-
tenance of the glorious principles which composed the federal consti-
tution. Certainly the whole tone both of the address and the reply
seems eminently calculated to disabuse the popular idea that the
Mormons wish to allow no Gentiles among them. Brigham Young has
recently made a terrible onslaught among the trading Gentiles resi-


dent in Utah, by the establishment of co-operative stores, at which,
every kind of commodity may be obtained. Hitherto most of the shop,
keeping has been in Gentile hands; many have grown rich, and until
now some stores drove very large businesses. President Young, being
unable to see the policy of filling the pockets of these ease-loving
gentry, has very wisely gone into general business on account of the
church, thus keeping in the family all the profits hitherto borne off by
aliens to the faith. A large number of traders will now have to quit
the country or embrace the Mormon faith.
It is indeed odd to find oneself among these nineteenth-century
patriarchs, to be thus suddenly dropped into a community that has
turned so far back as to the book of Genesis for its model, and that
combines the domestic economy of Abraham with the modern habits
of thought and the knowledge of Brigham Young. The effect of an
attempt to engraft the manners and systems of a nomadic race on the
civilisation of the Anglo-Saxon is most strangely impressive here in
its seat of existence. In the women it appears most strongly. To be
face to face with delicate-minded, gentle young women, who think as
oarai thought, and who would as unhesitatingly follow the example
set by Sarai with her handmaid Zillah, is not a little embarrasing to
a wandering Englishmen in pursuit of novelties. The saints think
they understand how the patriarchs lived, but will they not find ic
'fficult to make the people of this age live that life.




THE RIVER PLATE COUNTRIES.
BUENOS AYBBS.
The tropical countries cS North and South America are not suited
for European constitutions, and can never by any possibility form
homes for those accustomed to the temperate regions of the earth.
In the southern parts of the South American continent there are ex-
tensive regions of great fertility, and possessing a climate unequalled
in the world for salubrity. The resources of the River Plate countries,
and their capabilities for becoming the abodes of emigrants from the
British islands, have received much publicity from Mr Graham Gil-
mour, the consul for the Argentine Republic at Glasgow. To Mr
Gilmour we are chiefly indebted for the following particulars :
The province and country of Buenos Ayres and the neighbouring
provinces of Santa F<s, Corrientes, Entre Rios, and the greater part of
Cordova, as to their general appearance may be described as consisting
of vast prairie, plains, or pampas, part of the greatest and most splen-
did plain in the world; to the southward the ground is almost level,
while to the north there are gentle undulations and occasional hil-
locks, sloping with great beauty and variety, asid with a gradual roll
seldom exceeding thirty or forty feet, giving an appearance of great
richness and variety, and throughout there are no obstructions from
atones or wood. In some districts, however, there are considerable
patches of thistles, which with care could be eradicated. The surface
of the country is covered chiefly with a rich natural grass, and in
Buenos Ayres there are extensive districts where wheat and Indian
corn grow in great abundance and luxury, and in some of the other
provinces the growth of cotton has already been attended with great
success. The soil is, as a rule, dry and firm, and there is a general
absence of bog or swampy land, and where wet land is to be found
it is not general but confined to a particular district. The natural


grass, which is everywhere abundant, on which no sheep or cattle
have ever been pastured, grows to a height of three or four feet, and
has a most splendid luxurious appearance, and on the plains which
have nourished flocks the grass is cut down to the usual height of
two or three inches, and presents in the spring as fine an appearance
in many places as the best pasturage in this country. In mid-summer
and autumn the appearance of the face of the country is considerably
altered, the pasturage being dried and burned by the heat of the sun,
but the welcome rains which fall at the end of autumn generally bring
a second crop of grass, which renews the former luxuriant appearance
of the country. In winter again the grass assumes its usual fine
aspect. The preceding description has reference chiefly to the dis-
tricts named. In the higher provinces such as Tucuman, Salta, San
Luis, Santiago del Esterro, San Juan and the others, these plains and
prairie lands also abound, and the general appearance of the country
is partly the same, only it is very much interspersed and obstructed
with trees and shrubs of every description, these provinces containing
not only timber sufficient for the whole industrial wants of the Re-
public, but possessing an enormous surplus for the purposes of expor-
tation. These upper or north-westerly lying provinces have, in
addition to the prairie land, immense tracks of timber forests, moun-
tain ranges of vast extent, many of the latter towering quite to an
Alpine height, and are interspersed with rivers and streams of consi-
derable extent and great beauty. There is a capital city in each of
the provinces generally called by the same name, and there are also
smaller towns. The most important are Cordova, Rosario, Corrientes,
Santa Fe, Parana, Chascomus, Dolores, San Fernando, &c. In point
of population Cordova is the most extensive city after Buenos Ayres,
but as a commercial port Rosario ranks second. The province of
Cordova, embracing a territory of 10,000 square leagues, is one of the
finest regions in South America, both as regards climate and natural
riches, and when connected by railway with Santa Fe (by means of
the Great Central Argentine Rail), the importance of the country
will be immense, as bringing down its valuable products to a market.
The resources of Cordova in wool are immense; hitherto, con-
jointly with Santiago and San Louis, the quantity has been estimated
at 7,500,000 lbs. annually. The export of dry hides, and hides in
every marketable shape, form a staple article; while of tanned hides
the provinces of Tucuman and Salta export 70,000 per annum. Hair,
skins, dried fruits, nuts, &c,, &c,, are also produced.


Cereals may be reckoned to become a great product of Cordova, its
soil, climate, and the facilities it affords for natural irrigation offer-
ing every chance for the cultivation of these great staples.
In Cordova, Rioja, and San Luis, silver mines have been worked
from the time of the settlement of the Spaniards. In San Juan, a
province described as being exceedingly rich in metal, the mines are
only now commencing to be worked on an important scale. Copper,
marble, and freestone have also been found in considerable quantity,
but want labour to work them, and railways to convey them to a port.
The Central Railway already referred to, and now nearly completed,
passes along one side of the forest extending to the north-west for
about seventy leagues, containing hard woods of many description.
The town of Cordova contains about 25,000 inhabitants, and the
whole population of the province 160,000, and is noted as a seat of
learning. The City of Rosario is worthy of notice ;it is situated on
the western shore of the imposing River Parana, an arm of the great
Rio de la Plata, and is 270 miles north-west of Buenos Ayres; it
stands upon a plain about seventy feet above the level of the river,
and contains about 10,000 inhabitants; as the starting point of the
great Central Railway, it will doubtless advance in importance.
The important town of Chascomus is now connected by railway
with the capital city, by means of the Southern Railway, commen-
cing at Buenos Ayres and running south through a most fertile and
productive country to Chascomus, and shortly to Dolores. The line
has been two or three years opened for public traffic. There are
other two lines of railway in the Republic now in active and profit-
able operation, the Northern and the Western; and in addition to
the Central and Southern, there are three more lines in project or
construction, viz.:—the ‘Gran Chaco,’ the ‘Ensenada,’ and the
‘ Entre Rios. ’ These railways will bring with them progress and re-
fined civilisation, and tend still more to the development of the vast
and almost inexhaustible resources of the country.
The interior roads in the central provinces are the highways to the
various Estancias of Scotch and English settlers, and the following
from the Buenos Ayres Standard refers to Cordova: —
‘ The camps along the road from Villa Nueva to the Second River
are not so good, apparently, as those farther south, and, we are told, j
had very little water. There, however, artificial irrigation has been |
essayed, and about 500 squares, or 2000 acres of alfalfa in good con-
dition testify to its success. It belongs to the Cabrera family.


* A short distance from the post house may be seen the new iron
bridge for the railway, having a total length of 510 feet, set upon
cast-iron columns, forming a most substantial work. It is not quite
finished yet, but we were informed that all the material exists in the
country for its completion. The river bed is heavy, sandy, and move-
able ; hence we were towed across by three yoke of oxen, and with
difficulty accomplished the passage. Once on the other side, we rolled
along at a rattling speed, and reached the very disagreeable incline
cut in the bank of the river Primero, close to the town of Cordova,
about 3 p.m. Here we alighted and proceeded down on foot. About
half-way we got a fine view of the “ city of churches,” situated in the
picturesque valley of the Primero, with its background of high rugged
hills, forming the Sierra de Cordoba. Being our first visit, it struck
us as being a very pretty city at a distance, for the abundant confu-
sion of church steeples and domes interspersed with a luxurious
vegetation, gave it all the appearance of a charming and interesting
spot.’
The extent and vastness of the country, its teeming agricultural
and mineral wealth, only require human labour to develope. The
immense territory of the Argentine Republic comprises an area of
720.000 square miles, or in better-defined agricultural measurement,
400,000,000 acres. This immensity in extent, and vastness in na-
tural resources, viewed in connection with the smallness of its popu-
lation, shows that it greatly needs additional inhabitants. In Buenos
Ayres, the most populous province, the settled territory is 5369 square
leagues (about the size of England), in which there are 360,000 or
400.000 inhabitants—or 67 to every square league. In Santiago del
Esterro, the settled territorial extent is 8000 square leagues, and the
population about 65,000, or about 22 inhabitants to every square
league, and if we deduct therefrom 8000, the population of Esterro,
the chief town, we have the very thin population of 17| persons to
every square league of land, and the other provinces are even thinner
as to their inhabitants; in fact, the whole Argentine Republic, much
of which is at present virgin soil, and has the healthiest of climates,
does not contain a population equal to London in amount. These
countries, then, require inhabitants, and this is what the Standard
of Buenos Ayres says ;
‘We want labouring men in the River Plate, one hundred thousand
would find immediate employment at most remunerative wages, either
in this or any of the adjoining provinces. We trust tliat those of oui


readers at home who are connected with any of the grand enterprises
going on here, will do their utmost to increase the emigration of
labourers to this country, which offers every inducement to the sober,
industrious, and persevering. ’
Availing ourselves of the published information of Mr Gilmour,
the Argentine Consul in Glasgow, we may state that the wages of
a station-master —that is, the keeper of a sheep or cattle station—
in Buenos Ayres is from L. 2 10s to L. 3 per month, with rations. The
keepers of stations, in addition to their fixed wages, have generally
a share in the produce of the stock, which at the end of three years
may be estimated at from L. 400 to L. 500. Domestic servants are in
good demand, the wages for efficient cooks or house servants ranging
from L. 2 5s to L. 3 5s per month. For the information of those who
contemplate becoming land owners in the Argentine Republic, we
subjoin the following particulars relating to the price and tenure of
land in the country:—
Land is either held in what is called in England ‘ Fee Simple,’
that is, bought out and out and held for ever without payment to
any superior whatever, and so disposed of by sale, or bequeathed by
will to others, or it is rented from the owner of the soil at a yearly
rent by a tenant for pasturing sheep, cattle, &c. The province of
Buenos Ayres is 480 miles long by about 200 broad, and the whole
of this nearly has been sold by the Government in pieces, mostly
large, forming Estancias, and which are held by title deeds as valid
as any in this country. A few pieces still unsold are leased, the
leases running for eight years. In the other provinces there is a
considerable extent of land for sale, but as railways progress and
emigration increases these will get taken up. Land is sold by the
square league and thousandth part, by which I mean the odd frac-
tion of the piece of land, for the Government does not usually sell
less than three-fourths of a square league, there being about 6000
acres in a square league, the ultimate fraction less than a thousandth
(j.e., less than six acres) is not regarded. They used formerly not to
regard less than a hundreth, or sixty acres. The land surveyors, how-
ever, state the number of square yards, it may be hundreds of millions,
and then reduce these to square leagues and thousandth parts, and
these measurements are part of the title deeds. Proprietors are
selling Estancias every day, and the transfer is easily written, and the
whole cost of it inappreciable. These lands are bounded on two or
three sides, often on all the four, by only the mathematical lines that


extend from the land marks at the corners, and I am informed of au
Estancia of 160 odd English square miles which was originally de-
lineated only by the four land marks at the corners. Purchasers,
however, are often desirous of having the Estancia surveyed, and then
they have some land marks placed at the sides at distances of per-
haps a mile. An Estancia, held by a Scotch house, has, lam told,
36 land marks on a surface of 28 square leagues, about eighty-five
and a half English square miles, or 54,771 imperial acres. These
land marks are of thick upright beams of hard wood, others are of
iron. The Buenos Ayres league is longer than three English miles, so
that instead of nine there are ten and two-fifths English square miles
in the square league, or 6,672 acres. The square league in good land-
holds generally about nine stations, which is about a station to every
700 and odd acres.
The price of land in ‘ Fee Simple ’ varies very much according to
situation, say from L. 1000 sterling per league equal to about 3s 4d.
per acre, (on the frontier) to L. 6000 per league, or about 20s per acre
(within a few miles of the capital), but the average or mean rate
of recent sales in the interior, is from 250,000 to 500,000 dollars cur-
rency, or L.lBOO to L. 3600 sterling per league, or equal to 6s to
12s per acre, but everything, as in all countries depends on quality
of pasture and situation, and the value and price of all lands in the
Eepublic are daily increasing. The Annual run llental of land leased
from the Government varies from about L. 20 to L.BO per annum
according to situation and quality, but many private owners get as
much as L. 300 per annum for a square league in a good situation
for breeding sheep.
The prices of stock like land also vary, a flock of sheep, that is
ewes, lambs, and wethers, ‘ all that walk’ except tups, costing from
3s 4d, to 4s sterling per head, but at this moment (June, 1869),
the price is very low. Horned cattle (including bulls), 12s per head;
milk cow and calf, 20s for the two; fat bullocks or cows for the
market, L.l 10s each—for the great slaughtering establishments 5s
less. All these prices are delivering the animals on the selling
Estancia, Horses (including stallions), 6s Bd, * all that walk;’ riding
horses, L. 3 ; ditto, unbroken, about 15s. Fat mares to be steamed
down, about 12s each.
In order to give some idea of life on the Pampas of South America,
we append the following description of an Estancia, or Head Station: —
The pampas is an Indian word signifying treeless plains, and they


are both the largest and richest pasture plains in the world of their
size. If you arrive at the Estancia or Head Station—not by the short
track of the wool waggons, it will be over the grass up to the steading,
giving a delightful feeling of freshness and purity you then see
within probably a wire fence, the house of the proprietor or manager,
offices for the men, wool stores, baling press, perhaps boiling-down
house, tallow boiler apart with its crackling press, wells, waggons,
garden and orchard, plantation of useful trees, folds and pens. Here
the principal operations of the flocks of the sub-stations are carried
on, such as shearing and boiling down, and it is often a scene of con-
siderable activity and cheerfulness. Horses saddled are seen tied
to a stockade outside the principal gateway, while the owners are
in the office getting instructions, or accounts, or it may be in one of
the cook houses partaking of the ready roast of mutton or beef, with
accompanying hard biscuit—better and handier than the damper of
Australia—which the bracing air of the pampas and the active life
make ever welcome.
Looking round, several of the sub-stations are generally visible
on the horizon or nearer. They are about a mile distant from one
another. Only a limited number of sheep can be kept at each sub-
station or at a head-station, about 3000 ; and hence the necessity of
sub-stations. These are simply a rancho for the shepherd, fold,
pen, well, and it may be also a small garden. Only one man stays
at it, and does every thing, but he is often a married man with a
family, and this is often better than to be single. The rancho or
house is generally two rooms constructed of a framework of posts
and poles, with wattled walls mudded and the roof of straw. When
neatly plastered with the proper mixture of mud, and white-washed,
the comfort is considerable. There are doors and glazed windows,
and often a ladder is fixed outside against the gable, which the shep-
herd mounts to see if his flock—which may have gone a good way
off—is all right. The merino sheep, which, like in Australia and at
the Cape, is the principal breed, does not feed wide as in Scotland
or England, but in a gathered mass, and hence the shepherd or
station keeper, as he may be called, does not always stay with it,
but at intervals is in his garden, or in the rancho cooking, if he is a
bachelor—poor fellow. But one of his horses is standing tied, saddled,
for he tends the flock on horseback. The openness and levelness of
the plain admitting of this partial tending of the flock is a great
advantage over some of the colonies, as the profits of keeping the


flocks on shares (say in thirds), need not he divided among two or
more men, or be lessened to the proprietor if he prefers to pay the
keeper wages instead. At night he brings the flock to the fold, or
ofteuer to merely alongside the fold, but does not shut it in, as this
is better.
For food he kills out of the flock, and if unmarried, and so unable
to consume a sheep before it would spoil, he arranges to kill alter-
nately with some neighbouring station keeper, each getting a half car-
case at a time. Groceries he buys from some of the country stores ;
or if he is on wages, he gets rations weekly at the head station.
Vegetables the garden gives. Fuel is sometimes wood, oftener peats
of the sheep refuse, which accumulating alike in the fold and over
the neighbouring sleeping camps (which may be a couple of acres in
extent) forms a hard trodden mass eight inches thick or more, and
when dug up and dried is piled in a stack for the winter. It gives
no odour, but the smoke has a pleasant peat-like smell.
No previous knowledge of sheep is required. A glazier, collier,
carpenter, ploughman, porter, or clerk, may arrive at a head station,
for the first time and fresh from home, on a Monday, and on Friday
finds himself'installed by the owner or manager in sole charge of a
sub-staG’on and its flock, with an injunction to mind the sheep and
go ahead; he soon learns the first, and, if he keeps steady, the se-
cond.
As for the work carried on at the head stations by the farm ser-
vants or workmen, it will be readily understood to be of a varied de-
scription. There is all the work connected with sheep shearing ; not
shearing itself, for this is generally done by men and women who col-
lect from the neighbourhood and shear by the piece. Catching the
sheep, tying the fleeces, sweeping, sorting, sharpening, baling, &c.
The operation may last a couple of months, 1000 sheep being got
through on a full day. Then there is boiling down sheep for their
fat, which may continue for a large part of the summer. There is
also hoofing, dipping for scab, selecting or parting flocks, arranging
the proportion of tups, marking the ears of lambs. Then there is
thatching, both at head stations and subs, wattling and muddiug
ditto, cutting straw, carting, baling skins, rendering the tallow of the
general consumption of mutton, ditching, gardening, weeding the
steading, mowing hay, digging wells, &c., &c. Men and lads of all
kinds are ever ■welcome at Estancias or head stations for all these
things, and get good wages, and the steady ones promotion to sub sta-


tions, no matter if they don’t know how to do anything, the foremat
ia willing to teach them and they soon learn.
We may state, for the information of intending emigrants, that full
particulars can be learned at the Argentine Consulate in Glasgmv at
160 Buchanan Street. The best season for emigrants to land is the
month of September or October, when the sheep shearing begins, a
work which lasts two or three months, which causes a great demand
for labour of all kinds. September in the River Plate countries is
the first of the spring months, and corresponds to March in this
country, December being the same as our June.
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC.
The countries lying on the River Plate and its tributaries are the
only ones in South America, with the exception of Chili, where
Europeans can work to advantage, and, of course, are the only eligible
fields on that continent. Brazil, possessing as it does an immense
territory of great fertility, can never be worked by white labour; and
even when slavery is abolished, the work will have to be accom-
plished by Africans and Asiatics. On this account the tropical
regions of South America can never be the homes of Europeans to
any extent, and certainly will never be a field for the employment
of European labour. The south-eastern portion of the continent,
comprehending Paraguay, Uruguay, and the Argentine Republic,
is all well adapted for Europeans; but in consequence of the war,
Paraguay is at present closed to emigrants. Uruguay or Monte
Video possesses a fine climate and fertile soil; but it so closely
resembles Buenos Ayres that any separate description is unneces-
sary. The Argentine Republic consists of fourteen provinces, each
having a separate local government. These provinces formed, prior
to 1861, the Argentine Confederation; but-in that year there was a
change which was only in the name, and now the country is known
as the Argentine Republic.
The country consists almost of two immense plains, or * pampas’ as
they are called, and which is an Indian word signifying treeless plains.
These plains are covered for a great portion of the year with a rich


verdure, and are generally considered tlie richest pasture plains in
the world of their size.
A Spaniard, Don Juan Diaz de Solis, gets the credit by historians of
having discovered the country in the year 1515, but the first expe-
ditionary settler seems to have been Sebastian Gabot, or Cabot, who
arrived out in 1526. Various changes took place between parties,
and progress was slow but gradual up to the year 1816, when this,
like mostly all the other American States, became independent of
Spain, and in 1835 Rosas, the successful soldier, became dictator.
After a time he became intolerant, and led the country into war,
and was subsequently defeated by another soldier, Urquiza, \arious
wars and disturbances have interrupted the country in its progress,
and it is not our intention herein to enter into any account of them,
or of the recent war, which, let us hope, has now so happily termi-
nated. We believe a prosperous future is now in store for the
country. The Government both of the Argentine Republic and
the Republic of the Uruguay is upon a firm and settled basis, and
has been for some time devoting itself successfully to progress, the
advancement of the interests of all the inhabitants, and the develop-
ment of the resources of the country.
Before the commencement of emigration the population of the
country may be said to have consisted of the three following classes,
viz:—lst, the Indians of the pampas and gran chaco; 2nd, the
descendants of the early Spanish invaders, a large number of whom
were Andalusians, and who are either Gaucho chiefs or cattle farmers;
and 3rd, the real Gauchos, who are generally of Spanish and Indian
blood, and generally belonging to the lower classes. The Gaucho or
native peon, or labourer, is a type well worthy of minute descrip-
tion. Far from being the blood-thirsty robber imaginative writers
paint him, he is the incarnation of fidelity and endurance. Camped
out at night with his saddle for his pillow and his poncho for his
only covering, he sleeps as calmly and with as little fear as if he
were domiciled in the heart of London. The Gaucho on foot is
but little fitted for hard work, but place him on horseback and
there is no limit to his endurance. Their irregular life, and long
abstinence from food shortens the term of their existence; a robust
Gaucho is seldom to be met with.
One railway already runs from Buenos Ayres, 75 miles, into the
interior, and another, called the Central Argentine Railway, is in
course of construction. The Central Argentine Railway, like the


Pacific Eailroad in the United States, possesses extensive grants of
land along the line, which is laid out in lots for settlers, and offered
on extremely favourable terms. Three sections of the Argentine
Central are now open and working.
This Company was formed for constructing a railway to connect
Rosario, a port on the western shore of the River Parana, with Cor-
dova, (two of the most important cities in the Argentine Republic),
by a line about 247 miles long. Leaving Rosario the line passes
through the fertile provinces of Santa Fe and Cordova, and about
midway will form a junction with the high roads penetrating the
Southern and Western Provinces, thus opening up a vast country at
present very deficient in means of transit. Cordova is the centre and
capital of the province of the same name and is the point of junction
for the traffic of all the northern provinces.
The first two sections go from Rosario to Frayle Muerto, 121 \
miles, and the third to Villa Nueva, a further distance of 354 miles,
making together 157 miles. The remaining 90 miles will be com-
pleted during the present year, (1869,) and would have been finished
earlier but for the scarcity of labour. A reference to the map of
South America will show that the Central Argentine will, in due
time, do something more than link Rosario with Cordova; it will
connect Chili with the Argentine Republic, and the Pacific with the
Atlantic. From a report of survey executed by T. Moneta, Esq.,
under instructions from the contractors, Messrs Brassey, Wythes &
Wheelwright, it is evidently in contemplation to extend the Central
Railway from Cordova through the northern provinces of the Argen-
tine Republic, and to connect the Republic of Bolivia with the valley
and waters of the La Plata. Meanwhile the completion to Cordova
will open an immense country, rich in natural resources, and unite it
with the great system of inland navigation in the valley of La Plata,
by which those resources will be rendered more accessible to the
industry and enterprise of Europe. The province of Cordova is one
of the finest corn and cattle growing countries in the world. It is
beautifully wooded, and the hills teem with silver, lead and copper.
Much of these productions will be transported to Rosario for export.
The company has had conceded to it about one million acres of
land in the provinces of Cordova and Santa Fe, upon the condition of
their being peopled, for which, however, the period is unlimited. As
the grant of the railway is in perpetuity, the company ought eventu-
ally to become very rich indeed in connection with these lands. Some


delays have occurred in dealing with this important branch of its
business ; but the matter is now progressing.
The lands belonging to the Central Argentine Railway Company,
and which they are now offering for sale or occupation, are rich
pastoral and agricultural tracts lying within a few miles of a seaport
town, alongside a railway belonging to an influential English com-
pany, and in a country to which foreigners are flocking from all
parts of the civilised world. In active communication with Europe
on one side, the provinces of Santa Fe and Cordova are, on the other
side, backed by an immense territory, peopled since the sixteenth
century, and sprinkled with large commercial towns. It requires no
effort of the imagination to picture the advantageous position of the
emigrants to the lands of the Central Argentine Kailway Company,
situated in the most favoured region of the Republic, -with the ocean,
the great rivers, and a European civilisation in front, and a growing
nation in their rear.
A series of official documents with regard to the Argentine Repub-
lic have just been published by Messrs Bates, Hendy, & Co., with
the view of giving information to intending emigrants, for which the
Republic is said to present more advantages than any of the other
States of South America or even of the United States, as in the latter
agriculturists can only obtain concessions in the far West at a very
considerable distance from the seaboard. The climate is as nearly
as possible like that of Italy. All the provinces produce cereals of
every description, with vegetables in plenty. There is abundance of
pasturage; the provinces of Buenos Ayres, Santa Ee, Entre Rios,
and Cordova, are pre-eminently favoured in this respect. In the
first-named province the rearing of cattle and sheep represents an
immense value, numbering in this part of the Republic alone 7,000,000
oxen and cows, 2,000,000 horses and mares, 25,000 mules, and
70,000,000 to 75,000,000 sheep. The average value of a horse is
L,l Is; of a mule, L. 2 2s; of a sheep, 5s 6d; of an ox, L. 2 2s.
The central provinces spontaneously produce cochineal, arachid,
indigo, dyewoods, gums, resins, barks for tanning, and aromatic
and medicinal plants. The orange tree, citron tree, peach tree, fig
tree, as well as an immense number of fruit trees, grow in the forest
state. Pear, apple, prune, appricot, cherry, quince trees, &c., have
been planted on a grand scale by European colonists, and now produce
rich yield. The vine is principally cultivated in the provinces of-
Jan Juan, La Rioja, Salta, and Catamarca, and produces excellent


•wine. Tobacco is cultivated in the central and northern provinces,
the export of this article alone being estimated at L. 84,000 per annum.
The production of cotton is at present very limited. The largest sugar
plantation is in the province of Tucuna, the crop of which in 1864 was
worth L. 75,000. There are numerous and varied forest trees, which
furnish excellent woods for constructive and cabinet-making purposes.
Mines of gold, silver, copper, lead, and other precious metals abound
in the central and northern provinces. In the province of San Juan
there are eighty-eight gold and silver mines in full operation, and
more than 200 mines which are not being worked. There are abun-
dance of animals, birds, and fish. The population in 1868 was
1,887,000. In 1867, 23,500 persons emigrated to the Republic, and
in 1868, 29,384—the larger number in the two years, 18,318, going
from Genoa, and only 2150 from England, Land concessions are
readily obtainable, and every encouragement is given to emigrants
throughout the various provinces.




HOMES IN KANSAS.
Among the many inviting fields for emigrants on the Western Con-
tinent there are none superior, and very few equal, to Kansas, one of
the new western states of the Union. Kansas is equal in extent to
the whole of England and Scotland, and its soil, climate, and mineral
resources are unsurpassed by any State of the Union. The people
of this country, in general, are ignorant of the resources of such
States as Kansas and Nebraska, and on that account any reliable in-
formation concerning them cannot be otherwise than acceptable.
From a handbook published last year, and which brings down the
information to that date, we gather several interesting particulars
respecting the country. The handbook is written by Professor Bent,
of Wheaton College, Illinois, who is well qualified for the task he has
undertaken, and his observations on the soil, climate, and mineral
productions of Kansas may be relied on as thoroughly correct.
From personal observation of Kansas fifteen years ago, we can
bear personal testimony to the correctness of the remarks on the
climate and general appearance of Kansas, and his descriptions
of its mineral wealth are corroborated by those who have visited
the far West within the last year or two. Professor Bent, in his
valuable book, says:—
Kansas may be regarded as a vast plain, diversified on its eastern
and northern borders, and sloping from the vicinity of the Rocky
Mountains to the eastern boundary. South of the Kansas River the
slope is slightly south of east. The mouth of Kansas River is 850
feet above the ocean. The bottoms or river valleys constitute a
most important part of the State. The rivers being generally
shallow, with banks deep enough to prevent inundation, the
adjacent alluvial soil, which is everywhere deep and rich, is


especially well adapted to farming. The width of these bot-
toms varies and is generally greatest on the larger streams. The
soil of these bottoms vary in depth from 2 to 50 feet—but usually
is from 2to 5 feet. They are free from swamps and sloughs. The
soil is porous and somewhat sandy, and is very easily worked. The
water from beneath so perculates laterally that by capillary attrac-
tion the ground contains moisture even in time of dry weather, and
good crops are secured in seasons that would be unfruitful in stiffer
soils. There is little or no waste land in these bottoms. In this
respect they differ widely from the bottoms of more eastern States.
The settlements have been principally first made in these bottoms,
not only for their productiveness and promixity to water, but also
because timber is found only near the river courses. In passing
out of the bottoms there is often a narrow strip of quiet rolling
country which along some of the streams is so broken and abrupt
as to be styled bluff. These, in connection with bottom lands,
furnish all the variety necessary for varied farming. Fruit and
some kinds of small grain can be raised with great success on
these bluffs. They also usually contain rock, and springs of never-
failing water, and thus the settler can with ease build his houses,
barns, stock yards, and farm walls, and have pure water ever at
hand. In most parts of the State the rock is so stratified beneath
the soil as not to interfere with the cultivation of the land ; it crops
out on some of the most steep bluffs so as to be visible in the
ravines. No State in the Union is so generally and so well supplied
with rock, and at the same time so free from its being in the way of
cultivating the soil. Stretching off from the bluffs and covering
the divides between the rivers are the prairies and plains. In
the eastern part of the State the general features of these
prairies are as beautiful and magnificent as can be conceived
of. They are entirely different from the flat, monotonous prairies
of large portions of Illinois. They excel most of the prairies of lowa
in being free from swamps and sloughs, while in depth of soil and
productiveness they are not surpassed by upland prairie in any of
the States in the Mississippi valley. This is saying much, but the
average crops of the last ten years will bear out the statement. In
the north-eastern counties, Brown, Doniphan, and Atchison, the
surface is quite rolling. The soil is rich and of a mulatto colour.
In the northern counties, west of these, to the Republican river, the
land lies more gently rolling, and for the general purposes of grain


growing and stock raising it is not surpassed in the State. In tlie
central counties on each side of the Kansas river, the prairies are
finely rolling, and become more level as we advance westward. The
tributaries of the Kansas are usually of sufficient distance from each
other to afford divides wide enough for very broad prairies. The soil
is deep on the summits, and seems to be nearly as rich as the
bottom land. The soil is thinnest on narrow divides, which are cat
by frequent ravines. In the interior of the State the face of the
country becomes more flat and uninteresting, except as a hunting
ground for buffalo. The stinted but nutritious buffalo grass grows
on the vast plains west of Fort Hays, The prairies approach as a
general thing nearer the Kansas river than on Platte river, which
runs nearly parallel in Nebraska. The appearance of the country
is more varied in Kansas. The timber in the eastern part of the
State of Kansas is more abundant and of better quality than in
most parts of Nebraska, In the eastern counties, south of the
Kansas river, there is quite a variety of surface, but generally
very rolling. In Linn county there are many mounds of great
extent and beauty. It would be difficult to find in any prairie
country a more picturesque region than in passing from Fort Lin-
coln to Paola. The summits of many of these mounds are of suf-
ficient extent for many large farms, and what is quite surprising,
water is often found in abundance, while beneath, in the valleys it is
found much deeper below the surface. The prairies in Bourbon
county are rolling and ridgy. Loose stone is excessively abundant
on the surface of many of the ridges. In Crawford and Cherokee
counties, the loud praised neutral lands, the general appearance is
very fine. In the first-named county the land is magnificently rolling
but scarce of timber. In Cherokee fairly rolling, but in the southern
part there is more bottom land on the Neosho and Spring rivers,
which flow across the south-west and south-east corners. The
southern counties west, as far as the sixth meridian, are all, as to
the surface and soil, well adapted to farming. The general features
of the prairies, as you proceed west, is gently rolling, some are level;
but all are free from marshes and sloughs. Of the vast plains in
Central Kansas it is not necessary to speak, for until the lands east,
more rich and more desirable, are occupied, few emigrants will ever
think of going to a country where irrigation would be necessary to
render the crops abundant or reliable. On the whole, Kansas, for
two hundred miles west of its eastern boundary, may be said to be as


fine a prairie region as can be found in tbe United States, The sur-
face is as favourable as any equal portion of our country for farming
with machinery, and for grandeur and magnificent proportions on
region, unless it be Eastern Nebraska, can equal it. There being no
mountains, and very little rough or broken country in the State, it is
easy to travel in any direction in the unsettled portions. Persons
wishing to examine the country would do well to have their own
conveyance, as then they can go in any direction, and avoid the great
expense of livery establishments.
The coal - bearing rocks of Kansas are about two thousand
feet in thickness, and cover an area of over seventeen thousand
square miles. There are 22 distinct beds; ten of them ranging
from 1 to 7 feet in thickness, making an aggregate thickness of over
25 feet. There are outcroppings of coal in 20 counties. The quality
of the coals of Kansas is to a large extent good, being free from
sulphur and other impuiities so common in other States. Large
beds of lignite, or brown coal, are reported to exist in the western
part of the State.
There are large deposits of salt in the State, and the manufacture
of salt is carried on to some extent. Salt works have been estab-
lished at Ossawatomie from which an excellent article is produced.
It is supposed that at no great distant day Kansas will manufacture
a large amount of salt for exportation.
Gypsum, or sulphate of lime, exists in the western parts of the
State in large quantities. Beds of it occur from 1 to 10 feet in
thickness. At Gypsum Creek a massive bed occurs about 16 feet in
thickness. These plaster beds will enable the farmer to fertilize the
sandy ridges of western Kansas to any extent desirable.
Limestone of the finest quality occurs in abundance in nearly all
portions of the State. In a large part of the State it crops out on
nearly every farm, affording material for stone fences and buildings.
When properly burnt it produces excellent lime. Marble, a very
fine variety of limestone, also occurs in some places.
We may mention that a company has been formed, and incorpo-
rated by Act of Legisature, for selling mineral lands in Kansas, and
as they have acquired tracts of land in various parts of the State
they will be able to offer a wide field for selection. The lands of the
company are, we believe, the best in Kansas, and in a short time
will be offered for sale on extremely favourable terms to purchasers
in this country.


CONCLUSION.
I NT the foregoing scries of articles on emigration we have gone over the
principal fields for emigrants, giving a description of the resources
and capabilities of each. The United States, British North America,
and the Australian colonies will continue to be the chief resorts for
emigrants from the United Kingdom, as well as from Germany and
other Continental countries. South Africa and the East and West
Indies are by some classed among the fields for emigrants, but the
classification is made from ignorance, as these regions are not suited
for European constitutions; and in the case of Hindostan, at least, it
would be madness for a working man to go there unless under peculiar
circumstances, as labour is so cheap and abundant that it is in vain
for a European to think of competition. With respect to the ques-
tion so often asked, Who should emigrate ? it is difficult to give an
answer, and it is as difficult to answer where the emigrant should
go to.
The colonies present, in every respect, more desirable fields for
emigration than any other part of the earth, and their promotion
more directly helps the interests of our own commerce and industry
than the prosperity of any other portion of the world; yet emigration
to them even has its evils, and needs its remedies. The reports of
the emigration commissioners form, on the whole, a satisfactory
volume, because they exhibit improvements. There have been very
great reforms in the management of emigrant vessels, and the horrors
of the middle passages have been partially reduced. We contend,
however, that decided improvements are necessary still upon emigrant
ships. Circumstances have occurred in some instances which prove
that a high class of men are requisite for the management of emigrant
vessels. Reports of immoralities on the voyage, consequent upon the


defective character of persons in control of the ship, and in a great
measure of its arrangements, have appeared in the Australian press,
and there is no reason to doubt their truth. The accommodation in
many emigrant vessels some time ago was scandalous. No effective
separation existed between the sexes, or between married and un-
married persons. It might have been once supposed, perhaps, tbdt
the state of misery in which the voyagers existed from other causes
would effectually neutralise any tendency to vice. They had diffi-
culty in cleansing clothes, or cooking meals, and the scarcity of water
must have engendered filth enough to favour ugliness, and render the
whole company desperately uncomfortable. Still the arrangements
were deficient in any regard to common decency and morals; and the
greater part of man and womankind must have felt the passage to be
extremely purgatorial. Even yet we do not think that adequate care
is demanded in this respect by the commissioners of emigration. They
feel, perhaps, that the ship-owners cannot give superior accomodation
for the money. A remedy exists for that circumstance. They can
increase the money payments. It Is only a question of money, but
as money must not be weighed against morals, we will show where
the means may be procured.
Another and a ‘ crying ’ evil has run through okl our emigration, ft
has been left to the energy and enterprise of individuals who have
gone forth to colonise upon their own resources. The consequence,
absolutely necessary to the system, has been an excess of male emigra-
tion, and a disparity between the sexes in the colonies and at home,
productive in both cases of bad results, because it is altogether unna-
tural.
Labour is abundant in the colonies, and the man who attempts to
do for himself a woman’s natural work will lose both comfort and
time. The work will be badly and dearly done. The loss to the
colonies in this respect during the last half century, estimated in
money only, would present a startling sum—more, perhaps, than two
years’ yield of Australian gold. The amount, indeed, could not be
estimated, because negative and positive departments exist ; and while
the value of the former may be known, that of the latter cannot be
ascertained. The work done is seen ; but the work that might have
been effected is unknown.
The mischief originating in the same cause on this side is greater
than in the colonies. A deficiency of employment for females has
been felt here for a long period, and produces painful results. The


earnings of single females are often low; and frequently the want of
employment leaves them almost helpless. The palliatives that have
been devised cannot overtake the multitude of persons who directly
or indirectly suffer from this cause. It may be shown that Australian
colonies should have one hundred thousand more grown up females
than they contain, and that their colonisation has left that number
over the ordinary proportion in this country to live as they could
procure means. This is one cause of the great evil of which the
public have recently been obliged to consider and regret. This
country contains a surplus of females, produced by the neglect of
common prudence in the arrangement of our population. Year after
year, for many years, a large emigration of young men has occurred,
without any provision for female emigration ; and unless the natural
laws were suspended by a miracle to meet our legislative neglect, the
results are certain, and could be confidently predicted.
Is on-intervention in social subjects has been carried to an obnoxious
and prejudicial extent. The population have been allowed, in this
respect, to do what seemed to be good in their own eyes, or what
they could perform, whether it were good or otherwise.
The progress of the colonies has thus been reduced to the smallest
rate consistent with their circumstances and state. The colonists
have accomplished less labour than they might have achieved, because
their time has been misdirected. The colonies have been dependant
upon the mother country for all descriptions of labourers, and the
natural increase of them has been artificially limited.
The evils are acknowledged, but difficulties exist respecting the
remedies ; and yet they are at hand. The colonial funds have been
grossly misappropriated by the colonists themselves. They pro-
ceeded to lands which belonged to the British people. They pur-
chased a certain portion of the wilderness; and after a season, as
their numbers increased, they obtained self-government. Appro-
priation of other people’s property was not included necessarily in
the idea of general and local legislation upon that subject, but it
occurred. The colonists were allowed to annex all the waste lands of
their respective colonies to their collective riches. They have applied
the proceeds of their sales to pay the just and lawful debts incurred
for their own government. They have not even met all these current
expenses, which have been paid in part from the revenues of this
country. The propriety of the latter course is even less disputable
than the allocation of the land. All waste lands within the empire


are the property of the crown, as trustees for the people, until they
be allocated to individuals. They are not the property of any colony
in which they occur, but of the empire. Their proceeds should be
appropriated for the benefit, not of one locality, whose population
either are, or should be, in good circumstances, but of the nation.
This rule might be more easily enforced, because the local corres-
ponds, in this case, precisely with the general good.
The British North American provinces, with the exception of
Upper Canada, advance slowly, because their material wealth is
not employed in bringing labour to the land. The Australian colo-
nies progressed more rapidly than New Brunswick or Nova Scotia,
long previous to the discovery of gold, because a portion of the
revenues derived from the sale of land were used to pay the expense
of emigration. They would have enlarged the boundaries of cultiva-
tion within them more rapidly if they had faithfully used the price
of the land to pay for the migration of more labourers. They would
have had ere now a happier and a healthier state of society than
exists there, if they had adopted better regulations for the choice
and conveyance of passengers. The Australian colonies should only
have paid for the conveyance of married persons, and they have
adopted that practice now, unless in the case of domestic servants
and other females.
The Government cannot interfere with the personal liberty of young
men to emigrate where they please; and they cannot insist upon
their marriage before they commence their travels. Upon the other
hand, they may not be able to persuade respectalle females to
emigrate by themselves. They will rather struggle on with their
difficuites at home than adopt that course. The emigration of females
alone is always difficult; and although the Government officials
have organised a staff of surgeons for vessels taking their emigrants,
on whom great responsibilities are thrown; of schoolmasters, to
whom subordinate trusts are committed; and, although they send
matrons with each emigration of young women, who have also con-
siderable control and power in the ship; yet these regulations are
not sufficient to attract the class who are needed in the numbers
required.
The independent emigration should be reformed, and the means
of accomplishing that object can be procured from the land fund.
The residents in the colony would gain immeasurably more by
a healthy immigration than by the money now abstracted from


the land; while the expense of a passage is the reason for the
great excess in the emigration of single men. They are not bachelors
by intention, but by poverty. The greater part of them would rather
take a partner of their joys and sorrows over the sea than leave alone,
! f they had the means. Many of the male emigrants, on the inde-
pendent principle, are obliged to leave their families in this country;
and yet they decline the assistance offered by the colonial or govern-
ment funds—from the limited accommodation and other reasons.
The Melbourne Argus of July 17, in an able article on emigration,
refers to a letter that had been received from Wigan, in Yorkshire,
which stated that two hundred men and their wives were anxious to
get to Australia, only they wanted money to pay their passage; but
they were quite willing to pay back the money when they were some
time in the colony. The Argus, in commenting on this offer, says:—
‘ It is a lamentable proof of the want of statesmanship in the rulers of
the mother country and of this dependency that, beyond offering a
recommendation to our correspondent to put himself in communi-
cation with our agent-general, in Victoria Street, Westminster, for
the purpose of obtaining information as to the cheapest and readiest
way of reaching Australia, we cannot point out to him any fund
that would be available for the assistance of himself and friends in
the laudable object they have in view. Great Britain wants to be
eased of the superflux of her population, and we want to receive
it. Great Britain has abundance of capital and the largest mercantile
navy in the world. On the other hand, we have abundance of
waste land and a steadily enlarging area of employment for labour.
At one end of the empire the spectacle is presented to us of tens
of thousands of industrious but destitute people looking with wan,
wistful faces in this direction, but unable to compass the means of
arriving at the land of promise ; and at the other we find the culti-
vators of the soil complaining of a dearth of labour because the farm
hands are taking up land on their own account, and dairymaids pre-
fer matrimony to domestic service. We are inviting agricultural
settlement all over the colony, and as soon as we have satisfied the
wants of some 20,000 or 30,000 people, or probably a smaller number,
of our adult male population, where are the rest of the settlers to
come from, and whence are we to draw our supplies of labour for the
farmers in esse? Our correspondent at Wigan will reply, “From
hence;” and as he and his friends and neighbours scan the report of
the labour market in this colony, published in another column, and


observe what are the wages paid to farm labourers and gardeners in
Victoria, and what is the remuneration of the operative classes
generally, while good mutton is being retailed at from to 54d per
lb., and the best bread is selling for 6d the 4 lb. loaf, he and they
will be inclined to feel all the more acutely the privations under which
they now suffer, and to deplore all the more strongly the absence of
any organised system of emigration for their relief. But in this case,
as in so many others in which the imperial Government is incompe-
tent or unwilling to face a great social question, we might surely
expect private energy and benevolence to interpose for the partial
solution, at least, of so important a problem. A country which can
afford to spend upwards of a million and a quarter per annum upon
missionary societies, and displays so much enlightened consideration
for the spiritual welfare of the “ poor blacks ” in the remotest cor*
ners of the earth, ought to have no difficulty in raising a few hundred
thousands of pounds with a view to assist white Christians in escap-
ing from a life of abject poverty, and from a condition of heathenism,
in some of the large towns of England, compared with which the life
and conduct of Quashee and Sambo are quite exemplary. Men and
women, such as those in whose behalf our correspondent at Wigan
writes, do not ask for a gift of money, but only for a loan. They
have too much self-respect to accept the former, and their confidence
in their own industry and perseverance in a new land enable them
to contract an obligation with the fullest conviction of their ability
to repay it, They are people whom it would be a pleasure to help,
because they are willing and eager to help themselves. And surely
such help should be promptly forthcoming in a country like England.
Considering the ease with which large amounts are raised for every
conceivable object of a benevolent character, no difficulty ought to
be experienced in establishing a permanent loan fund for the benefit
of industrious persons anxious to emigrate to these colonies; and
any association organised for the management of such a fund might
calculate upon the co-operation of kindred societies to be established
in the principal cities of Australia, whose duty it would be to collect
and remit to the parent institution the moneys received by way of
repayment from the assisted immigrants. Few of these, we believe,
would prove to be defaulters in the long run, for the moral obligation
would be not less binding upon the borrower than the legal one,
and every immigrant would feel that by evading payment of his loan
to the association he was defrauding a poor countryman at home of


the opportunity of exchanging privation for plenty. Something
more, however, is required than money to carry out satisfactorily
and systematically any large scheme of immigration. The superin-
tendence and sympathy of a leading spirit, of a man personally popular
and socially respectable if not eminent, would be invaluable; and
some of the younger sons of good families in England, with a taste
for adventure and a distaste for the frivolities of a life of ultra-civili-
sation at home, might find an admirable outlet for their superfluous
energy, a novel excitement, and a highly beneficial employment, in
placing themselves at the head of a band of emigrants, in devising
means of occupation and recreation to beguile the tedium of a three
months’ voyage, and in assisting their fellow-passengers with advice,
while affording them protection on landing in a strange country.
They might even organise distinct communities for settlement in
various parts of the colony, negotiate with the Government for a
block of land, and contribute to the work that principle of authority
and that power of co-ordinating scattered effort which are just as
valuable in the foundation of townships as of states. Our immigra-
tion needs a larger infusion of the middle and upper class element, in
order to render our social constitution a closer image, in its best
features, of that which is to be found at home. All must be workers
here; but the work we have to perform will be executed all the mo-e
efficiently and expeditiously if society contains a fair proportion of
men and women with cultivated minds and refined and gentle
manners,’




PRACTICAL HINTS FOR EMIGRANTS.
PORTS OF EMBARKATION.
Now that steam vessels have taken the place of sailing ones in the
conveyance of emigrants, the number of ports from which emigrant
vessels sail have greatly decreased. London, Liverpool, and Glasgow
are now almost the only ports in Great Britain from which there are
regular sailings. Liverpool and Glasgow monopolise almost the whole
of the American and Canadian emigration, and have also a large share
of the emigration trade to Australia and New Zealand. From Liver-
pool steamers sail almost daily to the United States and Canada, and
from Glasgow there are two steamers belonging to the Anchor Line
sailing every week to New York, and one belonging to the Messrs
Allan, of Great Clyde Street, to Montreal. The intending emigrant
from Scotland will find it cheapest and most convenient to sail with
some of the Glasgow steamers belonging to the lines above mentioned,
and he would do well to engage his passage either at the head office
in Glasgow or of some accredited local agent. In all cases the emi-
grant should give a wide berth to the runners, toutors, and such like;
for, if he listens to these harpies, he is certain to be fleeced. Those
who think of trying their fortunes in New Zealand will find ample
accommodation in the fine passenger ships belonging to Patrick Hen-
derson & Co., one of which is despatched every month from the Clyde,
under an engagement with the Otago Association, the offices of which
are at 60 Princes Street, Edinburgh, Emigrants for Australia are
occasionally despatched from Glasgow, and at regular intervals from
Liverpool and London.
COST OF PASSAGE.
The cost of passage to the United States and Canada, by steamship,
is the same from Liverpool and Glasgow, being at the rate of six


guineas for each adult in the steerage, with a plentiful supply of
cooked provisions. To New Zealand the cost of a steerage passage is
fifteen pounds, the cost to Australia being about the same. Passages
for New Zealand can be engaged in Glasgow with Patrick Henderson
& Co,, 13 St Vincent Place; to Australia, with John Gow Rennie,
54 Broomielaw; to New York, with Handyside & Henderson, 45
Union Street; and to Canada, with J, & A. Allan, 70 Great Clyde
Street.
OUTFITS.
With respect to outfits for the voyage, the emigrant should pur-
chase the requisite necessaries in a respectable shop, and by all means
he should avoid the runners, who infest every port from which emi-
grant vessels sail. A few tin utensils, according to the size of the
family, and mattresses to correspond, are all that are necessary, if the
emigrant has not parted with his bedding, which he would do well
not to do.
CHOICE OF A COLONY AND PURCHASE OF LAND.
In fixing on a colony, the intending emigrant will in a great measure
be guided by personal feelings, and by the fact of having relatives or
friends in a particular country. The United States and Canada, being
the nearest, and consequently the most accessible, will always attract
the largest number of emigrants. By the opening up of the north"
western territory, Canada now offers equal, if not superior, induce-
ments to the United States, and in future the tide of emigration will
increase in extent towards those territories lying to the north-west of
Canada, where the most fertile soil on the continent of America is to
be found. The intending settler, no matter what country he goes to,
should by all means wait until he is able to judge by personal obser-
vation and experience of the country he intends making his home.
Much disappointment and misery have been caused by incautious
purchases of land before leaving, and it may be mentioned that those
who have succeeded best in new countries are those who have tested
their capabilities before venturing on investing their small capital in
the purchase of a home. With respect to the rates of wages current
in the various colonies, the reader is referred to the articles on each
country, in which the best information on the subject is furnished.


PERMANENT ENLARGEMENT
OF THE
PENNY POST,
THE Proprietor of the PENNY POST has much pleasure in
announcing that it has been PERMANENTLY ENLARGED, in
order to make room for a greater variety of matter, thereby enabling
it to maintain its character as a FirsLClass Family and Literary
Newspaper. In addition to the Enlargement, several new features
have been introduced, which have tended much to improve its
appearance.


32 & 3<5 ANN STREET, JAMAICA STREET,
G-LASGrO "W.
JA.M E S WrN T T
BEGS to intimate that lie has just added to his Extensive Establish-
ment a great variety of New Type and Machines for JOB and
BOOK PRINTING, which he can now execute in the Best Style,
and at the most Moderate Prices, to which he begs the particular
attention of large Consumers and the Trade.
ORDERS FOR EVERY DESCRIPTION OF PRINTING,
besides being executed in a neat and highly Finished Style, receive
the most p-c'vpt attention, while the CHARGES ARE STRICTLY
MODERATE.
HAND, SHOW, AND POSTING BILLS,
EXPEDITIOUSLY PRINTED, AT MODERATE PRICES, AT THE
Citn Ate am printing ®tndis,
33 34 ANISIN STREET.
INVOICES, RECEIVES, AND ACCOUNT TOPS,
EXPEDITIOUSLY PRINTED, AT THE
CITY STEAM PRINT IHC WORKS,
32 & 34 ANN STREET.
LETTER AND NOTE HEADINGS,
VERY MODERATE, AT THE
CITY STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
32 & 34 AIT IT STREET.
SOIREE AND CONCERT BILLS, &€.,
IN ONE, TWO, OR THREE COLOURS,
IN THE FIRST STYLE, AT THE
CITY STEAM FEINTING- WORKS,
3 2 .aaacl 3SJI7H.3ISI3*X*.
FUNERAL LETTERS AND NOTICES,
MODERATELY PRINTED, AT THE
CITY STEAM PRINTING IVORKS ,
52 Sj 54
