

' ■— : —
rps.
11
HANDBOOK OF INFORMATION
\
V




HANDBOOK OF INFORMATION
INTENDING SETTLERS
BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.




The Administrator of British New Guinea to The Governor
of Queensland.
Strath-Elbess, Dalveen,
9th November, 1892.
Sir,— During the last twelve months many inquiries have been
received by the Government of British New Guinea from men whose
thoughts have been turned towards settlement in that country.
The circumstances of the Possession are now such as to make it
the duty of the Government to try to attract the working settler
possessed of some capital.
Eor the speculator in land the country offers no field ; but land
can be obtained for planting purposes as it may be required, for some
time to come.
The Government of the Possession is now sufficiently firmly
established to protect settlers and to maintain law and order in the
more accessible districts; and the area of its influence and its
supremacy are being steadily extended and acknowledged.
As tribes become settled they have on their hands more leisure
than was formerly the case. It is very desirable that this should be
turned to some use; that they and the European settler should
mutually benefit each other, the one by working with his hands for
the other while at the same time becoming acquainted with new
products and new industries, the use and advantage of which he
would learn from his employer.
The difficulty is, however, that it is not easy to find in quantity
the practical European settler with a good head, strong arms, some
capital, and sufficient experience of tropical cultivation ; and when
met with he has such a wide range of choice that it is not an easy
matter to secure him for such a remote and little-known place as
British New Guinea.
To meet the inquiries of such men, and to supply them with some
account of the country in a brief space, I have drawn up a small
handbook on the Colony, which I herewith forward in the hope that
your Excellency may move the Chief Secretary, Sir Samuel W.
Griffith, to have this, with the usual kindness of your Excellency’s
Government, printed at the Government Printing Establishment.
I have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient, humble servant,
WM. MACGREGOR,
Administrator, British New Guinea.
His Excellency Sir Henry Wylie Norman, G.C.8.,
G.C.M.G., C.1.E., Governor of Queensland.




INDEX.
Page.
Preliminary ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Position and Area of the Possession 1
Political Condition ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Legislation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Administration of Justice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Police ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Communication ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
Health ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
Domestic Animals ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
Sport ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
Land ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
Labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Tariff 9
Exports ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Meteorology ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Map 11
APPENDICES.
The Crown Lands Ordinance of 1890, Parts IV., Y,, and YI. ... ... 13
The Native Labour Ordinance of 1892 ... ... ... ... ... 21
Tariff 32




HANDBOOK OP INFORMATION ON BRITISH
NEW GUINEA.
This little Manual has been prepared to give information on the
subjects that appear to possess most interest for those that are mating
inquiries regarding British New Guinea as a place for settlement.
Our knowledge of the country is still very incomplete in many
particulars, and what is known is widely distributed in books,
despatches, annual reports, &c., so that it is not readily accessible.
Only such subjects as are of special importance for the intending
settler or trader are dealt with here.
POSITION AND AREA OF THE POSSESSION.
According to a return recently prepared in the office of the
Surveyor-General of Queensland, the total area of British New
Guinea is about 90,540 square miles. It has an approximate coast-
line of 1,728 statute miles on the mainland, and of 1,936 miles on the
islands, giving a total coast-line of about 3,664 miles.
Its northern boundary lies from 5° south latitude at the west end
to 8° south latitude on the east end; the southern boundary in the
west is the sea and the Colony of Queensland, and in the east end it
comes as far south as 12° south latitude. The eastern and western
boundaries are respectively the 141° and the 155° of east longitude.
The western boundary meets Dutch New Guinea; the northern
boundary meets Kaiser Wilhelms-land.
POLITICAL CONDITION.
British New Guinea was formally annexed to the Crown on the
4th September, 1888, by the present Administrator. The Government
is carried on subject to instructions from the Secretary of State for
the Colonies ; but the three Colonies of New South Wales, Queensland,
and Victoria participate with the Secretary of State in the controlling
power. Queensland represents the other two Colonies in matters
concerning the Possession, and all official correspondence passes
through the hands of the Governor of Queensland.
A sum of £15,000 a year for a term of ten years from September,
1888, has been guaranteed by the three abovemeutioned Australian
Colonies to defray the cost of administration in British New Guinea.
Queensland is primarily responsible for the payment of this sum.
lievenue raised in the Possession is to go towards reducing the annual
sums to be paid by the contributing Colonies.
LEGISLATION.
Laws are passed by a Legislative Council, consisting of the
Administrator and five other persons appointed by the Crown for a
period not exceeding six years. Of the five members at present


constituting the Council, four are officers of the ’Government, and one
is the manager of a commercial firm established in the Possession.
The Laws, Acts, or Statutes in force within the Colony of Queensland
at the time of the annexation of British New Guinea, and that were
applicable, are in force in the Possession, with such Ordinances as have
been passed there to meet the circumstances of the country.
ADMINISTRATION OR JUSTICE.
The Central Court, which is presided over by the Chief Magistrate
of the Possession, has jurisdiction over all crimes and offences against
the law. The Chief Magistrate has, in administering justice generally,
all the powers and authority of a Judge of the Supreme Court of
Queensland.
In civil matters, when the amount or value in dispute exceeds one
hundred pounds, an appeal lies from any Court in the Possession to
the Supreme Court of Queensland.
In criminal matters, a like appeal lies to the Supreme Court of
Queensland, when a sentence exceeds three months’ imprisonment.
The ordinary seat of the Central Court is at Port Moresby; but
sittings of this Court are held wherever business may require it.
Courts of Petty Sessions, each presided over by a resident magis-
trate having the jurisdiction of a Police Magistrate, are established at
Mabudauan, Port Moresby, Samarai, and at Nivani, in the Louisiade
Group. These Courts do not permit trial by jury, but in other respects
are conducted under the provisions of the Acts regulating such
matters in Queensland at the date of the annexation of the Possession.
Although sittings are ordinarily held at the centres mentioned
above, each resident magistrate travels in his district, and Courts are
held wherever necessary.
Magistrates for native matters are appointed to administer a
series of Native Regulations having the force of law, and affecting
only the aboriginal population.
POLICE.
A duly constituted armed constabulary has been established, the
government and employment of which are regulated by law. This
body is commanded by a European officer. The force consists of about
fifty men, four-fifths of whom are Papuans, and the rest natives of the
Solomon and New Hebrides Islands. Detachments of constabulary,
generally about eight or ten in number, are stationed with each resident
magistrate, and about a score of men, with their head-quarters at Port
Moresby, can be moved about as occasion may require. The natives
have already shown decided capacity for police work, displaying a
fidelity to the Government and an intelligence much beyond what
could have been reasonably expected from such a short period of edu-
cation as they have had.
A village police is being organised, in which a selected native is
appointed to perform police duty in his own tribe only. This promises
to become an extensive and useful institution, all the more so that
chiefs possessing real power hardly exist among the different tribes.


COMMUNICATION. •
A contract has been entered into between the Government of the
Possession and the firm o£ Burns, Philp, and Co. to run a regular
mail service between Queensland and the Possession for four
years, beginning with January, 1893. A round trip will be made
every eight weeks, starting from Cooktown for Samarai and proceeding
thence to visit all ports on the New Guinea coast from Samarai to
Mabudauan, and thence by Thursday Island to Cooktown. The vessels
employed cannot be less than 100 tons.
Other vessels cross at irregular intervals between Australia and
British New Guinea, and many small craft trade on the coast of the
mainland and among the islands.
HEALTH.
With the exception of fever the country is remarkably free from
disease of a serious kind. Such diseases as yellow fever, small-pox,
measles, scarlet fever, typhoid fever, diphtheria, and croup are unknown.
Cases of elephantiasis are met with in many districts, but it is nowhere
so frequent that it could bo considered endemic. Leprosy occurs in
sporadic cases, but the natives have so little fear of its effects that
they do not seem to recognise it as a specific disease, or to have a
special name for it. It is usually called by the word that signifies a
sore or ulcer. It generally assumes the smooth form; but tubercular
leprosy is also met with. Mutilations from leprosy are not common;
but now and then cases are met with, in which the toes and fingers
have been lost. Neither elephantiasis nor leprosy has been seen in
the Possession in a European. Cancer has not been noticed in the
country. Of ordinary skin diseases the most common among the
natives is ringworm ; the more severe form —Tinea Desquamdns —being
common in the east end, whither it has been introduced from the
direction of the Gilbert and Solomon Islands; while, though absent
in the central and inland districts, it is found again in the west,
introduced there in the course of ages, probably from such places as
Formosa. It attacks Europeans ; but with care and attention can be
easily guarded against or got rid of. Itch is unknown ; ophthalmia
and dysentery are rare, and very seldom severe. The most frequent
causes of death among natives are inflammatory diseases of the chest
during the colder season or at the change of seasons. But for fever
the country would be a very healthy one for Europeans ; and the fever
is not nearly so severe as is generally supposed. “ Old hands” become
acclimatised, and, as a rule, suffer from only mild attacks that speedily
pass off. Its great characteristic is uncertainty. Frequently it dees
not follow the greatest exposure to cold, wet, heat, or travelling and
sleeping in mangrove country; at other times it arrives under
apparently favourable sanitary conditions. It begins with a feeling
of cold and uneasiness, with headache and lumbar pains, until the
sufferer begins to perspire, when there is almost instant relief. In
many cases a man will take his breakfast, will be down with fever
at noon, and will meet the muster roll for duty next morning. In
other cases, especially in new arrivals, it remains persistent and is


attended with much prostration, which, in certain persons, requires a
change of climate for a few months. These persistent cases are
dangerous to those that cannot tolerate quinine. In the great
majority of cases the fever is well controlled by quinine and anti-
febrine, but the number of people that cannot take quinine seems to
be considerable. .Natives suffer from occasional mild attacks of fever;
but they are soon over. The congestion of the internal organs during
an attack of fever causes distress to Europeans, and might be a serious
matter to anyone with organic disease of the chest, liver, or kidneys.
The most common predisposing cause of fever is exposure to a cold
wind when one is perspiring; next come great fatigue and exposure
to the direct rays of the burning sun. By reasonable care and by
taking appropriate remedies whenever fever threatens, the danger
from it to a person actively employed and otherwise healthy is not at
all great.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
There are in the Possession some two dozen horses and, perhaps,
about fifty cattle. Both seem to do well, and no specific disease
has been noticed so far affecting either. They have not suffered
from poisonous plants. The horses appear to be less strong during
the hot season, but they do not then appear to be actually out of
health. Cattle are always in good condition unless at times when,
in consequence of drought, pasture is scarce.
Sheep have not been much tried, but they appear to suffer from
spear grass. Pigs thrive well, and are probably indigenous. The
native pig is a handsome, intelligent, active animal, which largely
provides for itself. It would probably, if crossed with more fleshy
kinds, produce a very superior swine. Eowls seem free of disease of
any kind, and do well if protected from mosquitoes during the hot
season, and if guarded from native dogs, carpet snakes, and lizards.
There are restrictions against the importation of horses, cattle,
sheep, goats, swine, and dogs from countries other than Australia,
Tasmania, and New Zealand.
SPORT.
The list of game procurable in the Colony is a varied one, com-
prising wild swine, wallaby, and the never-failing crocodile. Among
birds there are the cassowary, goura pigeon, hornbill, geese, ducks, and
smaller water fowl. There are a great many varieties of pigeons.
Scrub fowl and turkey are to be found everywhere. There are many
birds that are of more interest to the naturalist than to the sportsman,
such for example as the Birds of Paradise. No doubt there are many
birds in the country still unknown to science. But although game
may be abundant, one may, on account of the difficult nature of the
couni ry, make only a poor bag after hard work. Pishing has not been
much tried, and does not seem to be very encouraging.
LAND.
Perhaps the most important question for an intending settler is
that of land and labour. The acquiring of land in the Possession is


regulated by the Crown Lands Ordinance of 1890, Parts IV. and Y.
of (which, having reference to the alienation of Crown lands in fee-
simple and to the leasing of Crown lands, will he found at pages 12-19.
Land cannot he leased or purchased from natives save hy the
Crown. Land for which a Crown grant has not been issued can
therefore be bought or leased from the Government only. The Crown
may either purchase or lease land from the natives, provided that the
Administrator is satisfied that such land, or the use or usufruct
thereof is not required nor likely to be required by the native owners.
The Crown may also take possession of waste and vacant land. When
the Crown acquires laud by purchase, or takes possession of it as being
waste and vacant, a deed attesting the acquisition is prepared and
recorded in the office of the Eegistrar-General. All lands so dealt
with are then legally Crown lands, for which a purchaser from the
Government can obtain a Crown grant.
The Government may sell Crown land by private bargain or by
public auction. If Crown land is sold by the Government by private
bargain on the condition that the purchaser shall introduce some new
industry in cultivating the land, and shall carry out some specified
extent of improvement within a given time, the price of the land
alienated may be as low as two shillings and sixpence an acre. If no
conditions as to improvements are imposed, the price to be paid for
land cannot be less an acre than—
(1) For agricultural land, 10s.;
(2) For pastoral land, 25.;
(3) For land for trading or fishing purposes, £5
(4) For land for the planting of cocoanuts, ss.
When a conditional sale is made by the Government a provisional
Crown grant can be issued, which can be substituted by a Crown
grant absolute, when the conditions of sale have been complied with.
Land in parcels not exceeding 30 acres can be purchased at £1
an acre, this payment being made in instalments extending over a
period of five years.
Crown lands, or land in which the Crown possesses a leasehold
interest, can be leased to applicants by the Government. If no
improvement conditions are attached to a lease of agricultural land,
the annual rent cannot be less than Is. an acre; if the land is leased
subject to improvement conditions, no rent may be payable for three
years, but after that period the minimum rent would be 6d. an acre.
Leases may also be granted with a purchasing clause.
Land suitable for planting cocoanut trees may be leased for
sixty years. No rent may be payable for the first five years, but for
the next five years it cannot be less than 6d. an acre, and for the
remainder of the lease not less than Is. an acre each year.
The Crown reserves all gold and silver in or under any land granted
or leased.
From what precedes it may be seen that the Government will
not, and cannot, deprive any native of his land. This policy has been
deliberately adopted by the three contributing Colonies and sanctioned


by the Imperial Gdvermnent, The great majbrity of the natives are
agriculturists, arid live tin'the produce of their lands, which are handed
down from patent to child, or from one relative to another. In some
large districts in the western hrtlf of the Possession, the natives live
practically exclusively on sago and do not ciiltivate the soil, which,
as a matter of fact, is in such places unfit for agricultural purposes.
But although land the property of and cultivated by natives cannot be
purchased by an intending settler, any land not occupied or required
by natives, and not already alienated, can, as a rule, be obtained by
purchase or by lease. But there is not often any large area, probably
seldom if ever more than 3,000 or 4,000 acres, of good land at any one
place that is either waste or not required by natives. Between tribes
that have long been hostile to each other there are often several hundred
acres of good cultivable land ; and there are some large, and numerous
smaller areas, of hilly land, and of more or less marshy land, that are
unoccupied and often unclaimed by native tribes or individuals. There
are also some unoccupied islands in the East end suitable for growing
cocoanuts, and there are considerable areas of coast land on the
mainland and on the larger islands available for settlers that would
plant cocoanut trees. The country Js remarkably well watered.
Water carriage would be easy in many districts.
To a person thinking 6f taking Up land in the Possession, the best
course would be to visit the country, and see what unoccupied land
would suit best the particular industry he has in view; As already
pointed out, it would be futile to choose land that occupied by
natives ; but, as the Government is extremely anxious to have all lands
now lying idle turned to some useful purpose, and to procure employ-
ment for the native population in their own country, and that the
latter should learn to become producers on their own account of
articles for export, all legal means will be used by the Government to
procure for an agricultural settler the land he may desire to possess.
It is beyond the means of the Government to survey and set apart
lands for prospective settlers; the intending settler must therefore
choose the land in the first place, after which the Government will
procure him a title to the land, if this can legally be done. Fee's for
survey and transfer, registration, &c., will be nearly the same as in
Queensland.
There is a very great variety of soil in the Possession, but of the
quality of the land chosen by an intending settler he should satisfy
himself on the spot, and he must take on himself the sole responsibility
of judging whether any given place is suitable for his special purpose.
There are flat alluvial river lands suitable for rubber growung ; flat,
wet, marshy land, fit for planting wet rice; river bottom land, fit for
growing sugar-cane or maize ; hilly country of brown soil on limestone
conglomerate and slate, suitable for growing coffee and tea ; and there
are fine forest patches of large shady trees on rich soil, well adapted
for vanilla, cocoa, &c., &c.
It may, perhaps, be’considered that the indigenous products give
trustworthy indication as to what might be cultivated in the Posses-
sion. Amongst food articles the natives cultivate a great many


different varieties of yams, as many as three dozen kinds being some-
times used by one large tribe ; different varieties of taro and of sweet
potatoes; and very many different kinds pf bananas, some of which
are of decidedly superior quality. Sago grows in the swamps all over
the Possession, and is used everywhere, more or less, as an article of
diet. In some districts maize is coming much into use. Beans seein
to be indigenous. In some districts the pineapple is domesticated,
and is of excellent flavour. The papaya is übiquitous, but not indi-
genous, The orange family has only very poor indigenous representa-
tives, but the introduced trees do remarkably well. Coffee seeds and
plants have been obtained free from disease, and their importation
from places infected with “ coffee-leaf disease” will now be prohibited.
There is a native ginger of very strong flavour, as yet .untried, which
will probably be found to be of commercial value; East Indian ginger
has also been introduced. Rice has been shown to thrive remarkably
well. As the Possession has almost all varieties of soil, and elevations
varying from sea-level to 13,000 feet, it may, perhaps, be assumed
that the country, extending as it does from the fifth to the twelfth
degree of south latitude, could be made to grow any tropical product.
Tobacco and sugar-cane require special remark. If tobacco is not
indigenous to the country, it has been cultivated there for so long
that for all practical purposes it may bo considered to be so. It has
been found growing on the spurs of the Owen Stanley Range, and on
the Fly River at over 500 miles from the sea. It is cultivated, as far
as can be seen, by all agricultural tribes. It varies so little in appear-
ance wherever grown that it is probably all of one species or variety.
The leaf is very remarkable on account of its small size. It has been
pronounced by London experts to bo of great value. It grows so
readily as to be rather troublesome as a weed at the Government
Station of Mekeo.
Perhaps every tribe in the Possession that plants anything
cultivates a certain amount of sugar-cane. Of this there are many
varieties, of widely different size and colour. Individual canes are
often met with that have been to some extent attacked by a boring
insect; but no other disease has been noticed in it. It may bo regarded
as being indigenous.
It may be that the future of the Possession will depend, as much
on the cocoanut as on any other product. It would appear that,
if it is possible to grow the cocoanut at a profit in any country,
it should pay well in British New Guinea. Nowhere does this tree
bear more fruitfully than it does in many of the districts of the
Possession. There are already large groves of it in the country,
sufficient to provide copra for direct shipment to Europe. There arc
long stretches of coast line and of river bank suitable for this cultivation
and available to the European settler. As hurricanes are unknown in
the Possession, the cocoanut planter could depend on a continuous
yield ; and this most important point, together with the productiveness
of the tree and the cheapness of local labour, ought to make this cultiva-
tion a most attractive industry for a man with some capital. It is an
industry that would be specially suitable for a man that would at the


same time fish for pearl-shell, and trade in copra, beche-de-mer, and
other native products. British New Guinea is not a pastoral country.
The greater portion of its area is covered by a grassless forest. There
are some limestone low hills in the Central and other districts covered
by soft grass, but this is exceptional. The native tribes are too
numerous, their cultivation too great and too widely distributed, to
permit of the existence of large cattle runs. It is essentially an
agricultural country.
LABOUR.
The employment of native labourers is regulated by “ The Native
Labour Ordinance of 1892,” which will be found on pages 20-31.
Natives cannot be removed from the Possession except under such
circumstances as are specially mentioned in that Ordinance. They
can be engaged orally by an employer for periods not exceeding one
month, provided that the natives are not employed ashore or afloat at
a greater distance than twenty-five miles from their home.
They must be engaged before a magistrate if the period of
engagement exceeds a month, or if they are to work at any place more
than twenty-five miles from home. Natives may be engaged before a
magistrate in any part of the Possession, to work in any other part.
Women cannot be engaged to work on board vessels. Persons not
having a residence or place of business in the Possession cannot engage
native labourers before a magistrate. The greatest period for which
natives can be engaged as labourers under engagement is twelve months.
If a native is working under a written agreement entered into
before a magistrate with a resident of the Possession, the native can
be removed beyond the waters of the Possession for fishing in Torres
Straits, or to proceed to Cooktown or Thursday Island, the two
nearest Australian ports, as a seaman or personal attendant.
As the engagement of native labourers is now permitted over the
whole Possession, there is much reason for believing that local labour
would be obtainable to man all fishing vessels that are likely to be
located in the country, and to meet the wants of planters until
planting assumes large proportions.
The Government cannot in any way undertake to procure
labourers for settlers, or guarantee that they can obtain labour.
An intending settler should satisfy himself on that point on the
spot. One difficulty that stands in the way of obtaining native
labour is that the Papuans marry, as a rule, in childhood or early
youth, and a great many of them are reluctant to leave their wives
and children. The men of the Western tribes appear specially desirous
of work from Europeans, and they do not hesitate to go to the Central
district under engagement. The natives of the East end seem also to
be willing to work. The great majority of the natives are good
agriculturists, and are thus well fitted for plantation work; but they
also take readily to boat employment, though they have never been
accustomed to regular and continuous labour on their own lands or
vessels. As a rule, each district has a separate language of its own, but
a great many natives now understand a smattering of English, so that
difficulties connected with interpretation are fast becoming less.


Natives employed by tbe Government receive the first year 10s. a
month in trade goods or money, and are “ found.” After the first year
they receive £1 a month. They have been employed to do plantation
work for private employers, at the eighth of a pound of tobacco a day,
with food. The tobacco would cost about 2s. 3d. to 2s. 6d. a pound.
They appear to work well and faithfully, as a rule. They are
easily managed, being as employees docile, and decidedly sharp. They
are remarkably goodnatured. Quarrels very seldom occur among
those employed by the Government, although members of many
formerly hostile tribes are brought together. Naturally, large
numbers of them are addicted to stealing and lying; but many
tribes are remarkably honest. On the whole, they are a mild and
timid race, without any inherent disposition towards war and blood-
shed. They have often expressed satisfaction that the Government
has supervened to put a stop to long-existing intertribal feuds; and
they are in many cases well pleased at being debarred from the
religious obligation of taking a life “in payment” for that of some dead
relative. Over several of the most populous districts the practice of
carrying arms has been given up where it was universal two or three
years ago. Many of those employed by and associated with Europeans
become very faithful and trustworthy followers, and they have
several times, in the service of the Government, shown touching
devotion, with great courage and presence of mind, in circumstances of
difficulty and danger. They learn in a remarkably short space of time
to thoroughly trust and confide in a European; and, although avarice
is a predominant trait in their character, they readily give a European
“ credit ”in anj* trade or business matter. In domestic relations they
are a tender-hearted people. Perhaps no race in their condition ever
was so free from treachery. In this last trait of character may, per-
haps, be found the explanation of the fact that they are ignorant of
the art of following a person by his track, in this, as in so many other
things, forming a striking contrast with the Australian aboriginal.
On the whole it may safely be said that for a people found in
such a primitive condition they are remarkably amenable to the ways
of civilisation, and show astonishing aptitude for falling into quiet,
peaceful, and regular habits. There is thus every reason to suppose
that they will make good labourers and faithful servants if they are
fairly and justly treated by their employers. It may be mentioned here
that vocabularies of most of the principal coast and island languages
have been prepared and printed. They can be found in the Annual
Reports on the Possession.
TAEIFF.
The tariff of Customs dues is comparatively a light one. It will
be found in full at pages 32-34.
It may be pointed out that there is no duty on machinery, or on
agricultural and mining machines, tools, and implements ; such building
materials as timber, doors and windows, paints, nails and screws, and
galvanized iron, and also furniture, are free. No duty is collected on
canvas for sails, copper, chains, cables, anchors, diving pumps, punts,
and lighters, and materials for building them.


Copra ..."
... 340 tons.
Beche-de-mer
• V
... 50 tons.
G-um...
• • •
• • •
... 13 tons.
Pearl-shell ...
• • •
• • •
18 tons.
Turtle-shell ...
• • •
..., G13 lbs.
(Sandalwood ...
42 tong.
The necessary articles of food are free or are lightly taxed. Live
animals, fresh vegetables, biscuits, flour, green fruit, salt or dried
fish, grains, fresh, preserved, and salt meat, and meals, are free.
The duty on rice, of which a settler would require a considerable
amount, is only 10s. a ton; that on sugar is 2s. 4d. per cwt., and on
tea it is 2d. per lb.
The duty on trade tobacco, much of which is required in the
employment of Papuan labourers, is Is. per lb.
On boots and shoes, drapery, hardware, leather ware, crockery
and glassware, there is an ad valorem duty of 10 per centum.
There are two ports of entry in the Possession —Samarai and
Port Moresby.
EXPORTS.
The principal exports for the year last past were—
The natives begin in some districts to prepare copra themselves.
They have collected nearly all, if not all, the Mche-de-mer, gum,
turtle-shell, and sandalwood that was exported. A great many cocoa-
nuts that could be made into copra are not utilised yet. Many other
articles will be added to the above list of exports as settlement
progresses.
During the same period 1,235 ounces of gold were entered at the
Custom House, Cooktown, as exported from British New Guinea.
This came from the islands of Misima (St. Aignan) and Tagula
(Sudest).
METEOROLOGY.
Great difficulty has been experienced in obtaining anything like
an unbroken series of meteorological observations at the several
stations, because the officers in charge are so often absent, travelling
in their districts.
It does not appear that there is any real rainy season on the
mainland. During the prevalence of northerly and westerly winds,
from December to May, thunderstorms are of almost daily occurrence,
and the rainfall, which is greatest in those months, is chiefly deter-
mined by these. Bain, as a rule, falls during those months in violent
squalls from the west or north-west. Occasionally these blow for
three or four days; but generally they are over in two or three hours.
It seems that the greatest rainfall on the mainland west of about
Mugula (Dufaure Island) takes place during the period of least
rainfall in the islands and on the mainland east of Mugula Island.
Port Moresby.
During 1891 the rainfall at Port Moresby was 72 inches. Of
this 53 inches fell in the first five months of the year. There was no
rain in October and only 2 inches in November and December. Bain


fell on ninety-five days. Between the highest shade temperature
registered, 96 - 2°, on the 2nd February, and the lowest, 72°, taken on
27th August, there is a difference of 24 - 2°. From January to May the
thermometer descends during the night to about 75° or 76°, and rises
during the day to about 95° in the shade. From June to October the
lowest night temperature is, in round numbers, about 73° or 74°, and
the day temperature rises to about 92°. November and December are
the-two hottest months, the thermometer at night falling to 77° and
going up to about 95° during the day.
Samarai.
From April to December, 1891, about 113 inches of rain fell
at Samarai. From January to March, 1892, inches fell, which for
the year from April, 1891, to March, 1892, would give a total rainfall
of 126| inches. In the same twelve months rain fell on 174 days.
The driest months in these twelve were December to March, during
which only about 18 inches fell, on thirty-four days. January to
April are the hottest months at Samarai, the mean shade temperature
being then about 88°, the maximum being from 91° to 94°.
At Mabudauan a rainfall of 53f inches was registered in 1891,
but owing to the frequent absence of the observer these figures are
useful only to show that the rainfall is greater than that given, and
they do not indicate what the total rainfall was for the year. Most
rain seems to fall there from January to April, with variable westerly,
northerly, and easterly winds.
MAP.
A Map of the Possession, prepared in the office of the Surveyor-
General of Queensland, has been added to this Manual. It will be
found to be far more complete and correct than any other map of
British New Guinea that has ever been compiled. It shows the ports
and places touched at by the mail service, and the headquarters of
magistrates and Government agents.
11




APPENDICES.
CROWN LANDS ORDINANCE OF 1890.
Part IY. — Alienation oe Crown Lands in Fee-Simple.
Crown ands may be sold.
XXX. It shall be lawful for the Administrator in Council to sell
any Crown lands either by private bargain or by public auction in
manner hereinafter provided.
Lands may be granted to Missions for religious purposes.
XXXI. When the Administrator in Council is satisfied that any
Crown land is required by any mission body in any part of the
Possession for religious purposes such land may be granted in fee-
simple to any person in trust for such mission body for religious
purposes. When land is so granted it shall be sold to the trustee at
the price (if any) at which it was purchased from the vendors to the
Crown but land so alienated cannot be transferred by the grantee
except in trust for the same mission body and when not used for
religious purposes it shall revert to the Crown.
Sale by auction of building allotments.
XXXII. When building allotments of Crown land are disposed
of by public auction an upset price shall be fixed by the Administrator
in Council in respect of such land and notice of every such sale with
specifications of the land to be offered for sale and a statement of the
upset price shall be advertised for at least three months in the Gazette
before the sale takes place.
Sale by private bargain of building allotments.
XXXIII. The Administrator in Council may sell any building
allotments of Crown lands by private bargain when no sale by auction
of Crown lauds situated at the same place has previously been held.
In any such sale the Administrator in Council shall take into
consideration the character of the applicant the objects for which the
intended purchase is to be made and fhe ability of the purchaser to
improve the land. The price of the laud in any such case may be
fixed at the discretion of the Administrator in Council.
Sale of building allotment may be subject to the improving land sold.
XXXIV. In selling any Crown lands as building allotments
either by private bargain or by public auction the Administrator in
Council may impose such conditions as to improvements as may seem
expedient in each case.
Sale of lands for agricultural pastoral fishing or trading purposes by private bargain.
XXXV. The Administrator in Council may alienate by private
bargain any Crown lands for agricultural pastoral fishing or trading
purposes or for the planting of cocoanut trees or may cause any such


land to be sold by public auction. Notice of any intended sale by
auction shall be notified for at least three months in the Gazette
together with a description of the land and a statement of the upset
price thereof which shall be fixed by the Administrator in Council in
each case.
When conditional sale under Section 35 made price of land may be 2s. 6d. an acre.
XXXYI. When Crown land is alienated by private bargain under
the last preceding section for agricultural purposes and the sale is
made conditional on the introductiou of some new industry into the
Possession or into some district of the Possession and on the further
condition that an extent of improvement of a kind to be specified in
the conditions of sale shall be carried out within a time to be fixed by
the Administrator in Council the Administrator in Council may fix the
price to be paid therefor at any sum not less than two shillings and
sixpence an acre.
Prices of land sold unconditionally for agricultural pastoral &c. purposes.
XXXVII. When land is alienated by private bargain for agri-
cultural pastoral fishing or trading purposes or for the planting of
cocoanut trees under section thirty-five hereof and when no improve-
ment conditions are attached to the sale the Administrator in Council
may fix the price to be paid therefor at any sum not at a less rate an
acre than—
(1) Por agricultural land ten shillings ;
(2) Por pastoral laud two shillings ;
(3) For land for trading or fishing purposes five pounds ;
(4) For land for the planting of cocoauuts five shillings.
On conditional sale provisional grant of land to issue.
XXXVIII. When Crown lands are sold under this Ordinance
subject to conditions of improvement and the introduction of some new
industry as hereinbefore provided a Provisional Grant in such form as
may be directed by the Administrator in Council may be issued to
the purchaser. Every such Provisional Grant shall be prepared in
duplicate one copy of which shall be recorded by the Registrar-General
in the manner in which instruments are directed to be recorded under
“ The Real Property Ordinance of 1889” and the other copy shall be
given to the purchaser on the payment of such fees as would be payable
for the issue of a Crown Grant. When the conditions of sale have
been complied with the Administrator in Council shall on the surrender
of the Provisional Grant order the issue of a Crown Grant for the
land. No further fee shall be charged for the issue of a Crown Grant
under this section.
Land not exceeding blocks of 50 acres may be sold on deferred payments.
XXXIX. The Administrator in Council may by private bargain
alienate on such conditions of settlement thereon as may be deemed
expedient any parcel of Crown land not exceeding fifty acres in area
on deferred payments provided that the last payment shall be made
within five years from the date of sale and that the price to be paid


shall not be at a rate less than one pound an acre and that not less
than one-fifth part of the price with cost or estimated cost of survey be
paid in advance. No Crown Grant for such land shall be issued until
the last instalment has been paid but a license to occupy in the
meantime may be given by the Government Secretary a copy of which
shall he recorded in the office of the Registrar-General.
Lands not to be sold or transferred to aliens.
XL. It shall not be lawful for the Administrator in Council to
alienate any of the Crown lands of the Possession nor for any person
to transfer to or for the Registrar-General to register any transfer of
any land to any person not a British subject either by birth or by
naturalization : Provided that any person not a British subject as
aforesaid may be a trustee to hold lands under section thirty-one
hereof for religious purposes.
Where land sold not duly surveyed provisional grant to issue.
XLT. When on account of the want of a satisfactory survey of
any land or for any other reason a Crown Grant for any land alienated
or granted in fee simple under this Ordinance cannot be issued a
Provisional Grant may on payment of the fees that would be required
for the issue of a Crown Grant be issued by the Administrator in such
form as may be directed by the Administrator in Council: Provided
that when any Provisional Grant is issued as aforesaid on account of
the want of a survey of the land in question by a licensed surveyor the
Crown shall not be held to guarantee in any way the position boun-
daries or area of the said land. Every such Provisional Grant shall
be prepared in duplicate one copy of which shall be recorded by the
Registrar-General in the manner in which instruments are directed to
be recorded under “ The Beal Property Ordinance of 1889 ” and the
other copy shall be given to the purchaser.
Where land in provisional grant duly surveyed grant may be issued.
XLII. Upon the proper survey of the land or the removal of the
obstacles which prevented the issue of a Crown Grant in the first
instance a Crown Grant may be issued in respect of any land for which
a Provisional Grant has been issued under the last preceding section
but the Provisional Grant shall be surrendered and shall be cancelled
at the time when the Crown Grant is issued. No fee for the prepara-
tion of a grant shall be charged on the issue of a Crown Grant under
this section.
Part V. —Leases of Crown Lands or of Lands in which the
Crown has a Leasehold Estate.
Leases of land belonging to or held on lease by Crown may be made.
XLIII. The Administrator in Council may lease to any applicant
any Crown lands or any lands in which the Crown possesses a lease-


hold estate for agricultural or pastoral purposes or for planting
cocoanuts or as trading or fishing stations subject to the following
provisions;—
Agricultura land.
(1) Agricultural land shall not be leased if without any con-
ditions as to improvement at a less rate of yearly rent
than one shilling an acre.
(2) Agricultural land may be leased subject to conditions of
improvement to be imposed by the Administrator in
Council on a graduated scale of rent under which
nothing may be payable for any term not exceeding three
years but not less than sixpence a year shall be payable
for each acre after the first three years.
(3) Leases of agricultural land shall not be issued for any
period exceeding twenty-five years but they may be issued
with a purchasing clause under which a Crown Grant
may be issued to the lessee on the completion of such
improvements as may be specified in the lease and on
payment of any sum inclusive or otherwise as may have
been determined by the Administrator in Council of any
rent that may have been paid by the lessee in respect of
such land.
Pastoral land.
(4) Pastoral land shall not be leased for a term exceeding
fifteen years nor at a less annual rate of rental than
twopence an acre. No such lease shall contain any
purchasing clause.
Land for trading or fishing.
(5) In issuing any lease for land to be used for trading or
fishing purposes the Administrator in Council shall take
care that such lease does not grant any right or privilege
which would confer on any lessee exclusive rights as to
anchorage or the procuring of fresh water or firewood or
which would prevent vessels traders or fishermen from
obtaining shelter ashore or afloat in case of need. No
lease for any land to be used for trading or fishing purposes
shall be given at a less annual rate than ten shillings an
acre or part of an acre. No lease under this subsection
shall be for a period exceeding five years.
Land for the planting of cocoanuts.
(G) Land may be leased for the planting of cocoanut trees for
any term not exceeding sixty years. The conditions of
any such lease may not require the payment of any rent
for the first five years but for the second five years shall
fix an annual rent for each acre at a rate not less than
sixpence and for the remainder of the lease not less than
one shilling an acre. Every such lease shall contain an
improvement condition which shall require that not less


than one-fourth of the land so leased which is fit to grow
cocoanut-trees shall be planted therewith during the first
five years.
(7) Any lease granted under the last preceding subsection
shall be issued subject to such reservations as the public
interest may require with due regard for shelter for vessels
and travellers the procuring of wood and water by vessels
and any other right or convenience which the Administrator
in Council may deem it necessary to preserve. Any such
lease as aforesaid may contain a purchasing clause on such
conditions as the Administrator in Council may impose:
Provided that the price to be paid shall not be at a less
rate than five shillings an acre irrespective of any rent
that may have been paid to the Crown for the use of such
land.
Leases where Crown Grant of land exists.
XLIY. Leases under Section XLTII. of this Ordinance shall if a
Crown Grant of the land leased has issued and remains uncancelled
be under “ The Heal Property Ordinance of 1889.”
Leases where Crown Grant of land does not exist but land duly surveyed.
XLY. Leases under Section XLIII. of this Ordinance shall if
the land leased is not comprised in any subsisting Crown Grant but
the lease is based on survey by a licensed surveyor be in the form as
nearly as possible of a lease under “ The Beal Property Ordinance
q/‘1889” and be registered in the register mentioned in Section XLYII.
of this Ordinance and in the same manner as provisional leases are in
this Ordinance directed to be registered.
Leases and Provisional Leases.
Leases of land not duly surveyed.
XLYI. AYheu it is desired to lease land belonging to the Crown
or land in which the Crown possesses a leasehold estate being in either
case land of which no survey has been made by a licensed surveyor a
Provisional Lease of such land may be granted by the Administrator in
Council for and on behalf of the Crown in the form contained in the
schedule hereto or as near thereto as circitmstances will admit. Any
such provisional lease and any lease made under Section XLY. of this
Ordinance may on the production of all the original parts of the same
to the Registrar-General be registered either by the lessor or lessee in
the office of the Registrar-General.
Register of leases made under Sections 45 and 46.
XLYII. The Registrar-General shall keep a separate register of
provisional leases made under the last preceding section of this
Ordinance and of leases made under Section XLY. of this Ordinance.
Such register shall be open to inspection by the public on the same
terms and in the same manner as registers under “ The Real Property
Ordinance q/’1889.”


Provisional lease no warranty by Crown &c.
XLYIII. A provisional lease made under Section XLVI. of tins
Ordinance and registered under this Ordinance shall be taken and
registered at the risk of the lessee and neither the lease nor the
registration of it shall be deemed to imply a warranty by the Registrar -
General ot by the Crown or any other person that the provisional
lease is valid or correct or in order or that the title of the Crown is a
good one or that the land comprised in any such provisional lease is in
existence or is correctly described or delineated in the provisional
lease or in any paper attached thereto.
Power of Registrar in regard to dealings with leases.
XLIX. The Registrar-General may in the case of any person
who after a lease or a provisional lease has been registered under the
provisions of this Ordinance desires to deal with it in the Registrar-
General’s Department or to register in such department any document
or instrument affecting such lease require such person before it is
done to prove his right to do so.
Leases under Sections 45 and 46 to be subject to provisions of “ The Real Property
Ordinance of 1889.”
L. When a provisional lease made under the provisions of Section
XLVI. of this Ordinance or a lease made under Section XLV. of this
Ordinance has been registered under this Ordinance there shall in such
lease be implied subject to the preceding provisions of this Ordinance
and to any provisions or modifications contained in the lease itself the
covenants and powers implied in leases under ‘‘ The Beal Property
Ordinance of 1889.” And such lease or provisional lease shall except
as aforesaid be subject to the provisions of the last-mentioned Ordinance
and be dealt with in the way in which it is provided that leases under
such Ordinance shall be dealt with or as near thereto as circumstances
will admit.
General Provisions as to Leases.
Fees to be collected in respect of leases.
LI. The Registrar-General shall charge and collect in respect of
any lease or provisional lease registered under the provisions of this
Ordinance or in respect of any transaction or dealing arising out of or
based upon or connected with any such lease the fees chargeable under
“ The Beal Property Ordinance of 1889 ” (including the fees for
registering any such lease) in the same manner as if such lease was a
lease under such last-named Ordinance and also all survey fees for the
land comprised in such lease.
When land duly surveyed lease to be substituted for provisional lease.
LII. When in respect of any land for which a Provisional Lease
has been issued a lease based on a survey by a licensed surveyor has
been prepared and the same has been delivered to the Registrar-
General he shall on the application of the lessee cancel the provisional
lease and deliver to the lessee without further fee for the preparation
of the lease the lease prepared as aforesaid; but before doing so he


shall register the lease as provided for by this Ordinance and shall
note the cancellation of the provisional lease in the register of provi-
sional leases.
“Protected” leases.
LIU. Whenever in any lease or provisional lease from the Crown
there is inserted previously to the execution of such lease or of such
provisional lease the following words namely “This lease is a Protected
Lease under the provisions of ‘ The Grown Lands Ordinance o/*lB9o’ ”
the interest of the lessee under such lease cannot except with the
consent in writing of the Administrator in Council be either by the
lessee or by operation of law or otherwise howsoever transferred or
sold or underlet or mortgaged or hypothecated or pledged nor except
with the written consent of the Administrator in Council or at the
suit of the Crown or some person suing on behalf of the Crown can
the interest of the lessee under any such lease be dealt with by any
court of law or under the process of any court of law. But this
provision shall not apply to the devolution by law of the interest of a
deceased lessee to his personal representatives.
Part Yl.—General.
Reservations to be made in Grants and Leases.
LIY. Every Crown Grant or Lease or Provisional Grant or
Lease issued under this Ordinance shall contain a reservation of all
gold and silver in or under the land comprised in such Crown Grant
or Lease or provisional Crown Grant or Lease and of full right of
access to the Crowm or its licensees to enter upon the land and dig for
and remove the gold and silver therefrom.
Fees to be paid for leases licenses and surveys.
LY. The Administrator in Council may from time to time
establish scales of the fees (if any) that are to be paid by lessees or
licensees for leases or licenses to occupy land or for the survey of
land or the preparation of plans and specifications of land and may
from time to time alter any such scale. Every such scale shall be
published in the Gazette. Provided that it shall be optional with the
Administrator to have the survey plan or description of any land
applied for by any person performed by a surveyor appointed or named
by the Administrator and who shall at the option of the Administrator
be in the first instance paid by the person so applying or by the
Government or to accept the survey plan or description of a surveyor
employed by such person on his own responsibility.
Moneys collected to be expended as Revenue.
LYII. All rents shall be payable in advance on account of each
year of the term of the lease and all fees on Leases on Crown Grants
and on Provisional Leases and Provisional Crown Grants shall be paid
before such instruments are delivered to any lessee claimant or applicant
as the case may be.
19




BRITISH NEW GUINEA
No. 11. of 1892.
ATM ORDINANCE
(Enacted hy the Administrator of British New Guinea with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council thereof)
To Regulate the Employment of Native Labourers and the
dealings between Natives and others.
This Ordinance was assented to hy the Queen in
Council on the 25th August , 1892.
BE it enacted by the Administrator of British New Guinea, with
the advice and consent of the Legislative Council thereof, as
follows:
I.— Pekliminaey.
Ordinance No. 111. of 1888 repealed.
I. Ordinance No. 111. of 1888 entitled “ The Natives Removal
Prohibition Ordinance 1888 ” is hereby repealed. But nothing herein
shall invalidate or affect any act or thing done or any engagement or
obligation entered into under or by authority of the said repealed
Ordinance and all penalties incurred and offences committed under the
said repealed Ordinance may be enforced and punished and all pro-
ceedings commenced may be continued and all engagements entered
into and permits granted under the said repealed Ordinance shall
remain in force as if the said Ordinance had not been repealed.
Meanings o words.
11. In this Ordinance unless the context otherwise indicates the
following terms shall have the meanings set against them respectively
that is to say:—
“Native”—An aboriginal native of the Possession of British
New Guinea;
“ Vessel”—Every ship vessel boat or craft of any description
except canoes owned and navigated by natives.
Contracts between the Government and natives not affected by this Ordinance.
111. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to an
engagement of a native for employment in any capacity in the service
of the Government of the Possession or to any contract made between
such Government and a native or to any dealing or transaction between
such Government and a native.


Criminal laws jurisdiction not affected hereby.
IV. Nothing in this Ordinance contained shall affect any law
relating to criminals or offenders against the laws or affect the juris-
diction of any court of justice.
Pearl-shell and Beche-de-mer Ordinance not affected hereby.
Y. Nothing in this Ordinance contained shall prevent or hinder
a native from being employed within the Possession under and in
accordance with the provisions of “ The Pearl-shell and Beche-de-mer
Fishery Ordinance of 1891.”
Administrator may appoint qualified officers.
VI. The Administrator in Council may appoint fit’ and proper
persons to be officers by whom certain duties specified in this
Ordinance may be performed. Such an officer is hereinafter
designated by the term “ qualified officer.”
ll.— Restrictions on Employment or Removal oe Natives.
Native not to be removed more than twenty-five miles from his residence &c.
VII. It shall not be lawful for any person except as permitted
under this Ordinance or some other law in force in the Possession to
remove any native beyond the boundaries of the Possession nor to
remove any native for any purpose for more than twenty-five miles
from the usual place of residence of such native unless such native
has been engaged as a labourer under this Ordinance by such person
or unless the removal is for the purpose of taking such native before
the nearest resident magistrate or qualified officer for engagement
under this Ordinance or under “ The Pearl-shell and Bsche-de-mer
Fishery Ordinance of 1891 ” :
Provided that in taking a native for engagement as aforesaid the
person removing the native shall .proceed with the native to be
engaged direct to the Magistrate or Officer’s Station without any
unreasonable or avoidable delay.
Native not to be employed on vessel more than twenty-five miles from residence or for
more than one month except &c.
VIII. Except in the presence and with the sanction of a Resident
Magistrate or a qualified officer no person shall enter into any agree-
ment of hiring or service with any native wdiereby such native would —
(1) Be on board of or be employed in connection with any
vessel at a greater distance than twenty-five miles from the
usual place of residence of such native; or
(2) Be on board of or be employed in connection with any
vessel for a loliger period than one month.
Native not to be employed on shore more than twenty-five miles from residence or for
more than one month &c.
IX. Except in the presence and with the sanction of a Resident
Magistrate or a qualified officer no person shall engage any native
labourer —
(.1) To work ashore at a greater distance than twenty-five
miles from the usual place of residence of such native ;
(2) To work at any place ashore for a longer period than one
month.


Women not to be employed on vessels.
X. No Resident Magistrate or qualified officer shall sanction or
permit the employment o£ any native woman or girl on board of any
vessel under the provisions of this Ordinance unless such woman or
girl is the wife of such person and the employment by any person of
any native woman or girl not his wife on board of any vessel shall be
an offence against this Ordinance:
But nothing in this Ordinance contained shall prevent any
person not being a native who is the husband cf a native woman
from removing that woman and his children by her from any part of
the Possession to any other part of the Possession or from removing
her and his children by her beyond the boundary of the Possession.
If native on board foreign going ship except by express authority Master guilty
of offence.
XI. If when a vessel is about to start or has started on a voyage
from any place in the Possession to some place outside the Possession any
native is found on board of such vessel and such native is not on board
of such vessel under the authority of an express provision of this
Ordinance or some other law in force in the Possession the person
then in charge of such vessel shall unless he can prove that the native
is on board of such vessel without his knowledge or consent be deemed
guilty of an offence against this Ordinance.
111. — Engagement oe Natites under this Ordinance.
If native to be employed afloat intending employer must reside or have place of
business within the Possession.
XII. A Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer shall not
sanction the employment of any native to work afloat for any person
who has not for the time being a hondfide residence or place of business
within the Possession. Whether an intending employer has or has not
such a residence or place of business within the Possession shall be
determined by the Magistrate or officer before whom an engagement
is being made.
Magistrate may refuse to sanction engagement.
XIII. A Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer may refuse to
sanction the engagement of any native brought before him for the
purpose of entering into an engagement under this Ordinance and he
shall not be required to state to any intending employer the grounds of
such refusal but they shall in each case be reported to the Government
Secretary.
Magistrate must satisfy himself on certain points before he sanctions engagements.
XIV. Before a Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer sanctions
the engagement of any native to serve on board of any vessel or at any
place or places ashore he shall satisfy himself—
(I) That fair remuneration is offered and will be duly paid
for which the Resident Magistrate or qualified officer may
require and is hereby empowered to demand security to
his satisfaction;


(2) That the native is willing to enter into the engagement;
(3) That the native has the consent of his family to enter into
the engagement and has provided for the maintenance in
his absence of any person dependent on him;
(4) That there is no reason to suspect that the native will be
unfairly treated;
(5) That the native will on the expiration of the engagement
be returned to his home by the employer for which return
the Resident Magistrate or qualified officer may require
and is hereby authorised to demand security to his satis-
faction.
No engagement to be for over twelve months.
XY. No engagement of a native labourer shall be for a longer
period than twelve months but the Resident Magistrate or qualified
officer may at his discretion fix the term of engagement at any period
less than twelve months.
Engagement to begin from day native leaves his home.
XVI. When a native is engaged before a Resident Magistrate or
a qualified officer for a specified term of service such term shall begin
to run from the day when such native leaves his home for the purpose
of entering into such service. But the native need not be returned
to his home within the term although he must be paid at its expira-
tion.
Engagement to be under written agreement.
XYII. Every engagement of a native labourer under this Ordinance
entered into before a Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer shall be
expressed in writing in the form in the Schedule A to this Ordinance
or as near thereto as circumstances will admit. The agreement shall
specify the name of the native engaged his place of residence the
term for which he is engaged the rate and amount of wages to be paid
him the nature of the service he is to perform the place where or the
vessel on which he is to serve the name of the employer and the place
and date at which the labourer is to be paid and it shall contain an
undertaking by the employer to return the native to his home after he
has been paid before a Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer. The
agreement shall be signed by the employer and be signed or marked
by the labourer.
Employer to report death or desertion of native servant.
fXVIII. If a native in the service of any person under an agree-
ment executed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance dies
or deserts from such service it shall be the duty of the person who
under the agreement is for the time being the master of such native to
report at the earliest possible opportunity to the nearest Resident
Magistrate or qualified officer the death or desertion of such native.


IV.—Cancelling oe Alteeinq Weitten Ageeements of Seevice.
Magistrate may cancel agreement
XIX. A Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer may at any
time at his own discretion and without any preliminary legal process
cancel the engagement of any native but he shall by the first opportunity
report such cancellation and the reasons therefor to the Government
Secretary. When an engagement is cancelled as aforesaid the Resident
Magistrate or qualified officer shall determine what wages (it any)
shall be paid to the native concerned. Any native whose engagement
is so cancelled shall be returned to his home by the employer. The
wages that may be paid to a native under this section shall not exceed
the amount that would have been payable if the native had completed
his term of service.
Magistrate may cancel or alter agreement.
XX. Any Resident Magistrate may at any time on the complaint
of any of the parties to an agreement executed in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance cancel such agreement or vary the
terms of the agreement in so far as any person or any native who
is a party to such agreement is concerned if he is of the opinion that
justice requires that it should be cancelled or that the terras should be
varied. If an agreement is cancelled in so far as any particular native
is concerned such native shall be deemed duly discharged but the
cancellation shall not relieve the employer from the obligation of
returning the native to his home. A complaint under this section
shall be a complaint under the provisions of “ The Justices Act of
1886” (Queensland adopted ) and be dealt with under that Act.
Y. Peemitted Removal within the Possession op Natives.
Permit to remove natives within Possession.
XXI. A Resident Magistrate or a qualified officer may grant a
permit to allow a native with his wife and children to be removed from
his home to any place in the Possession for the purpose of education
or the advancement of religious teaching. Such permit may be as
nearly in the form in Schedule B hereto as circumstances admit and
shall be at least in duplicate.
Vessels may carry natives as passengers.
XXII. vessel may carry as a bond fde passenger any native
from any part of the Possession to any other part of the Possession
provided that no native girl or woman slxali be so carried unless accom-
panied by her husband or other natural protector.
yi*—Peemitted Removal beyond the Possession op Natives.
Permit to remove natives beyond the Possession.
XXIII. The Government Secretary or any Resident Magistrate
or any qualified officer may at his discretion grant a permit 1-j allow
any person who has a hond fde residence or place of business within


the Possession to remove beyond its boundaries any native employed
by such person under a written agreement executed in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance for any of the following purposes :
(1) For fishing in the Gulf of Papua or in Torres Straits in
boats that are bond fide stationed in the waters of the
Possession and used by persons who have a bond fide
residence or place of business within the Possession ;
(2) To proceed as a boatman or seaman or personal attendant
to the ports of Cooktown or Thursday Island on vessels
belonging to an employer who has a bond fide residence or
place of business in the Possession.
Nature and form of permit granted under Section XXIII.
XXIV. Every permit granted under section twenty-three hereof
may be as nearly in the form in Schedule C hereto as circumstances
admit and shall be at least in duplicate and shall contain the following
particulars:—
(1) The name and place of residence of every native that may
under it be taken beyond the boundaries of the Possession
the duration of the period for which the permit shall be in
force and the nature of the service or occupation in which
the native is to be employed during that period;
(2) The name of the employer and situation of his place of
residence or place of business within the Possession and
the name of the vessel in which the native is to be
employed beyond the Possession ;
(3) The nature of the security that has been given that the
conditions of the permit shall be complied with by the
employer.
Permits to Missions to remove natives beyond Possession.
XXV. The Government Secretary or any Resident Magistrate
or any qualified officer may at his discretion grant a permit as nearly
in the form in Schedule D hereto as circumstances admit to allow the
authorities of any Christian Mission established in the Possession to
remove beyond the boundaries of the Possession any native for the
purpose of receiving religious education and instruction at any
missionary establishment of such Mission on any island comprised
within the boundaries of Queensland and lying north of the tenth
degree of south latitude. Every such permit shall be at least in
duplicate.
Permits may contain conditions.
XXVI. The officer granting a permit under section twenty-three
or twenty-five hereof may insert therein any reasonable conditions that
he considers necessary or desirable and in them he may specify the
place or places within which any native removed from the Possession
under the permit may be kept and any place or places at which any
such native may be taken ashore or at which he shall not be allowed
to land.


Security to be taken on issue of permit.
XXVII. An officer shall not grant a permit under section twenty-
three hereof without first obtaining security to his satisfaction that the
person to whom the permit is granted will not transfer the services of
any native removed under it to any other person or allow him to be
employed on any vessel save that mentioned in the permit and that the
said person will bring back within the boundaries of the Possession
every native removed therefrom under the permit and will observe
every other condition expressed in it.
Permits may be cancelled.
XXVII [. Any permit granted under section twenty-three or
twenty-five hereof may at any time be cancelled in whole or in part
by the Government Secretary or by any Resident Magistrate or by
any qualified officer.
Vll.— Obligations Incijeeed by Peesons Employing oe
Removing Natives.
Obligations incurred by persons removing natives.
XXIX. When a native not a hond fide passenger under section
twenty-two hereof is taken away by any person from any place in the
Possession for any purpose whatever such taking away of a native
shall impose upon such person or upon any person who has specifically
or by implication accepted the charge or care of such native the
following obligations namely :
(1) When the purpose for which any such native was taken
away has been accomplished to return the native to the
place from whence he was taken:
(2) From the time when any such native is taken away as
aforesaid until the time at which he is returned to the
place from whence he was taken to supply such native
with good and sufficient water food medicine shelter
sleeping quarters and bedding and (if necessary) the
means of preparing food-: Provided always that whilst
a native is in service under an agreement executed in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance these
matters or any of them shall during the subsistence of
such agreement be regulated by such agreement if such
agreement provides for such matters or any of them.
And the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply
in the case of a native who has accepted an office or
position under one of the Christian Missions established
in the Possession on the understanding that he will
provide himself with the things mentioned in this sub-
section.
Government may fulfil obligation at expense of responsible party.
XXX. If any person in respect of any native neglects to fulfil
any obligation imposed upon him by the provisions of this Ordinance
or by the terms or any agreement entered into thereunder the Govern-


ment Secretary or any Resident Magistrate or any qualified officer may
take charge of such native and maintain him and return him to the place
from whence he was taken away. All moneys and expenses reasonably
paid or incurred in so maintaining or returning such native as aforesaid
may in the first instance be paid by the Crown and thereafter may be
proceeded for and recovered from the person so neglecting to fulfil his
obligations by action or upon the complaint of any European officer of
the Government in a summary manner under the provisions of “ The
Justices Act of 1886 ” (Q,uee?islq?id adopted ) and may if‘such person
be dead be recovered by action out of the estate of such person.
Magistrate may absolve from liability to fulfil obligation.
XXXI. A Resident Magistrate if he considers that a reason which
in this section is declared to be a good reason exists for absolving
any person from an obligation imposed upon such person by the pro-
visions of this Ordinance or by any agreement entered into thereunder
in respect of a particular native may by certificate in writing under
his hand in the form in Schedule E hereto or as near thereto as circum-
stances will admit absolve such person from such obligation. But
such magistrate may use his discretion as to whether he grants the
certificate or not. Every such certificate is to be at least in duplicate.
Each of the following is hereby declared to be a good reason :
(1) That the native is dead ;
(2) That the native has without any reasonable excuse deserted
from the service of such person;
(3) That the native refuses to return to the place from whence
he was taken;
(4) That when such person was willing and able and wished to
return the native to the place from whence he was taken
the native was not willing to return ;
(5) That the native is in custody under committal for an
indictable offence;
(6) That the native is in prison under a sentence of imprisonment
imposed for any offence by any court.
Ylll.—Payment and Recovery oe Wages,
Wages must be paid in presence of a Magistrate &c.
XXXII. All wages due to native labourers engaged under the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be paid in the presence of a Resident
Magistrate or a qualified officer. And no payment of wages to any
such labourer made otherwise than in the presence of a Resident
Magistrate or a qualified officer shall be admitted to be of any validity
whatsoever.
Wages may be recovered in a summary manner.
XXXIII. Wages due to a native who is a party to an agreement
executed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and
wages due to a native engaged under an agreement not forbidden by
this Ordinance may be proceeded for and recovered in a summary
manner by complaint under “ The Justices Act of 1886 ” ( Queensland
adopted).


IX.— Eecords of Agreements.
Duplicates of certain documents to be filed in Courts of Petty Sessions.
XXXIY. One duplicate of every written Labour Agreement
made under the provisions of this Ordinance of every permit granted
under this Ordinance and of every certificate issued under section
thirty-one hereof shall be filed of record in the principal office of the
Court of Petty Sessions of the Court District in which the native
affected by such document has his usual place of residence.
X. — Inspection of Vessels and of Native Labourers.
Magistrate &c. may inspect certain vessels and certain premises.
XXXV. Any Eesident Magistrate or qualified officer or any
officer specially appointed by the Administrator in Council as an
inspector of native labourers may enter upon and inspect any vessel
of which a native is or is intended to be a part of the crew or on which
it is suspected that any native is present for any purpose whatever
and may enter at all reasonable hours any premises on which any
native labourer is employed whether such native is employed under
the provisions of this Ordinance or otherwise.
Hindering inspection an offence.
XXXVI. If any person unlawfully hinders any officer in duly
inspecting a vessel or auy premises as provided in the last preceding
section he shall be guilty of an offence against this Ordinance.
Certain fictitious sales or leases of vessels or premises an offence.
XXXVII. If any person with intent to evade any of the provisions
of this Ordinance makes a fictitious sale or a fictitious hire of a vessel
to any other person or to any native or a fictitious sale or lease of any
premises to any person or to any native with intent to evade any of the
provisions of this Ordinance the person making such sale or hire or
lease shall be guilty of an offence against this Ordinance.
Magistrate &c. may inspect native labourers.
XXXVIII. Any person who is an inspector of native labourers
under section thirty-five hereof may at all reasonable hours inspect any
native that is in the service of any person and may question such
native and such person or any person who has charge of such native
in regard to any matter which in the opinion of such inspecting officer
affects the welfare of such native. Any such person so questioned by
an inspecting officer is bound to answer auy question put to him in
regard to such matters. Any person who hinders an inspecting officer
in inspecting any such native or who refuses to answer any such
question as aforesaid shall be guilty of an offence against this
Ordinance.
XI. — Punishment of Offences.
Punishment not to exceed fifty pounds or three months’ imprisonment.
XXXIX. Any person who is guilty of an offence against this
Ordinance shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds and in
default of payment shall be liable to be imprisoned with or without
hard labour for a period not exceeding three months.


Xll.— Coming into force of Ordinance and Short Title.
Ordinance not to come into force until Royal assent received.
XL. This OrdinaDce shall not come into force until it has
received the assent of Her Majesty. When it has received the assent
of Her Majesty it shall forthwith be brought into force in the Posses-
sion by a Proclamation issued by the Administrator for that purpose
and published in the Government Gazette.
Short title.
XLI. This Ordinance may be cited for all purposes as “ The
Native Labour Ordinance of 1892.”
Passed in Council this twenty-third day of May, in the Tear of
Our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-two.
SCHEDULE A.
Labour Agreement.
The Native Labour Ordinance of 1892.
Nature of
Occupa-
tion
Native to
be em-
ployed at.
Place or
Vessel at
or on
which
Native to
serve.
Place at
which
Native to
he paid
off.
Date
when
Native to
be paid
off.
Wages to
be paid
Native.
I the abovenarned do hereby undertake to return the
abovenamed to ■ that being the home of the
said immediately after the said has been
duly paid off for his services under this Agreement before a Resident Magistrate or
a qualified Officer.
Dated this day of 18
Signed by the said 1
in my presence. )
And by the said 1
in my presence. )
SCHEDULE B.
Permit.
[Under Section XXI. of “ The Native Labour Ordinance of 1892.”)
Residence in
possession of
Native.
Name of Vessel
in which Native
to be removed.
Place where
Native to be
removed to.
Purposes for
which Native to
be removed.
Dated this
day of
Signature of Officer,
Residence „ ~
Title „ „
30


SCHEDULE C.
Permit.
(Under Section XXIII.
of “ The Native Labour Ordinance of 1892.”)
Residence or
Nature of
Occupation
Native to be
employed at.
Name of
place of
Business of
Employer.
Name of
Vessel.
Nature of
Security taken.
Employer.
Special Conditions.
(Set out Conditions if any.)
This Permit shall be in force up to and inclusive of the
day of ,18 .
Dated this day of , 18
Signature of Officer,
Residence ~ „
Title ~ „
SCHEDULE D.
Permit.
(Under Section XXV. of “ The Native Labour Ordinance of 1892.”)
, T . t, Maine of Place without
Missionary » "T&ST -SSR&S.
Sociotyi of Native. XZ’L “ *
Special Conditions.
(Set out Conditions if anv.)
Missionary
Society.
(Set out Conditions if any.)
This Permit shall be in force up to and inclusive of the
t ,18 .
Dated this day of
Signature of Officer,
Residence,, „
Title ~ ~
day of
SCHEDULE E.
Certificate.
(Under Section XXXI. of “ The Native Labour Ordinance of 1892.”)
I [ names of Magistrate], of [residence], in the Possession of British New Guinea,
Resident Magistrate, hereby absolve (name of person absolved], of [residence] from all
liability to fulfil in respect of [name of native ] of [home in Possession of native] the
following obligations.
[Set out obligations from which responsible person is absolved.]
Dated this day of 18
(Signed)


BRITISH NEW GUINEA TARIFF.
SCHEDULE.
If any of the following articles are imported in the form or shape of a bag,
package, box, tin, jar, bottle, or similar thing marked or labelled, or commonly sold as
containing or commonly reputed to contain a specific quantity of such article, such
bag, package, box, tin, jar, bottle, or similar thing shall as against the importer be
deemed to contain such specific quantity.
PART I.
Specific and Ad Valorem Duties.
Articles.
Quantities.
Arrowroot, sago, tapioca, maizena, maccaroni, starch,
cornflour
Aerated or mineral waters
Beer, ale, porter, cider (in bottle)
Beer, ale, porter, cider (in wood or jar)
Boots and shoes
Biscuits (fancy or sweetened)
Blue
Bacon •
Brushware
Basketware
Blacking
Bathbrick
Baking powder
Barley, split peas
Boxes and trunks of wood, leather, or metal
Cordage and rope
Cigars and cigarettes, including wrappers
Coffee, cocoa, chocolate, and chicory
Confectionery, including cakes, comfits, ginger, butterine,
sweetmeats, and nuts of all kinds except cocoanuts
Caps (percussion)
Cheese
Candles
Crockery
Cordials and syrups, not included under spirits
Clocks and watches
Cutlery
Cartridges or cartridge cases
Dynamite
Dates, figs, prunes, raisins, and other dried fruits
Drapery, including apparel and all materials composed
wholly or in part of cotton, silk, linen, wool, or other
woven fabric
Drugs, including all articles of the kind and form used
as medicines
Earthenware
Eish, preserved ...
Fruits, bottled or in tins or jars
Firearms
Fuse and fireworks
Floorcloth
Glass and glassware
Glue, gelatine, isinglass
Guttapercha and indiarubba, or manufactures of in whole
or in part
Hams and cured pork
Hard ware and holloware
Hops
Ironmongery /
per pound
per doz. pints
per 6 quarts
or 12 pints
per gallon ...
ad valorem ...
per pound ...
9 )
ad valorem ...
per pound ...
ad valorem ...
per ton
per pound
per 100
per pound
ad valorem...
per gallon ...
ad valorem...
99
per pound
ad valorem ...
per doz. pints
ad valorem ...
99
per pound ...
ad valorem ...
per pound ...
ad valorem ...
per pound ...
ad valorem...
10 per cent.
Id.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
10s.
4s.
2d.
2d.
Id.
Id.
Id.
10 per cent.
Is.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
10 per cent
10 per cent.
Id.
10 per cent.
32


Specific and Ad Valorem Duties— continued.
Articles.
Quantities.
Ink, stationery, and paper (writing and fancy)
Jewellery
Jams, jellies, and honey
Kerosene
Lead, including shot and bullets ...
Leather and leatherware, including all articles made
wholly or in part of leather
Methylated spirits
Molasses and treacle
Mustard
Matches and fusees
Matting
Musical instruments
Opium, or any article containing any of the active ingre-
dients thereof
Oilman’s stores
Oils not otherwise enumerated
Oils, perfumed
Powder, sporting
Pepper, mace, and other spices
Pickles, including chutney and sauces
Paper, brown, wrapping, and paper bags
Perfumery
Potted meat and extract of meat
Printed forms
Pipes (tobacco)
Pictures and picture frames
Plated ware
Spirits of the strength of proof, or of greater strength
than proof by Sykes’ Hydrometer
Spirits and spirituous compounds under proof, or of
which the strength cannot be ascertained by Sykes’
Hydrometer
Case spirits, reputed contents of two, three, or four
gallons shall be charged—
Two gallons and under as two gallons
Over two gallons and not exceeding three as three
gallons
Over three gallons and not exceeding four as four
gallons
gallons
Soap, hard and soft
Salt, saltpetre, and soda crystals
Sponges
Sugar
Tobacco, manufactured
J- UUmV/vUj ulCluUlaLiulUCU ... ... ... ... ••
Tojbacco, “ trade,” and unmanufactured
Tea
Turpentine
jLurpeui/iue ... ... ... ... ... „ ...
Toys
Tinware
Twine and lines for fishing, clothes, lead, and similar lines
Umbrellas and parasols
Varnish
Vinegar
Wines, sparkling
~ Australian
„ other kinds
~ containing over 25 per cent, of alcohol
Whiting
Wooden ware
Wire rope
Aim* ynQnnroofm’aa r»v* in alinofc! 1c? nr tvinoa
»» uo uipo ... ... ...
Zinc manufactures, or in sheets, rolls, or pipes
ad valorem...
99
per pound ...
per gallon ...
per cwt.
ad valorem...
per gallon ...
per cwt.
per bushel ...
per pound ...
ad valorem...
99
per pound
ad valorem...
per gallon ...
ad valorem ...
per pound ...
9 9
ad valorem...
per cwt.
ad valorem...
per pound ...
ad valorem...
» ••• n
n ••• n
» ••• _ »
~ ...
per ton
per proof
gallon
per gallon ...
per pound ...
per ton
ad valorem...
per cwt.
per ewb.
per pound ...
per gallon ...
ad valorem...
99 •••
per gallon ...
99
ad valorem...
99 •••
per ton
ad valorem...
10 per cent.
2s. 4d.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
6d.
10 per cent.
3d.
10 per cent.
2s.
10 per cent,
2d.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
2s. 4d.
3s.
is.
2d.
Is.
10 per cent.
Is.
6d.
6s,
2s.
4s.
10 per cent.
10 per cent.
33


PART 11.
Articles Exempt prom Duty.
Agricultural and mining implements, machines, and tools, and parts thereof. Animals
alive, anchors, axles, and wheels.
Biscuits, not fancy or sweetened. Ballast for ships. Bechc-de-mer. Boats and
vessels and sails therefor. Books and periodicals, including newspapers, photo-
graphs, maps, charts, globes, and models for school purposes. Boilers, steam, and
boiler plates. Bags and sacks, casks, tanks and cases, or parts thereof, for
exporting produce.
Canvas for sails. Cement. Coin—gold, silver, and bronze. Copper—sheet, plain,
rods, tacks, nails. Chains and cables. Coal and coke, cocoanuts, and cocoanut
fibre and copra. Cotton —unmanufactured. Curiosities, antique and “native.”
Diving pumps and dresses and parts thereof. Doors, windows, sashes, and shutters.
Drain pipes.
Engines—steam, gas.
Flour, including “ seconds,” “ thirds,” and “ fourths.” Furniture. Fruit, green. Fire
engines. Fish —salt or dried.
Garden seeds—bulbs, trees, shrubs, plants, flowers. Grain —maize, wheat, oats,
barley. Galvanised iron, corrugated. Gold —unmanufactured. Grindstones.
Iron and steel rails and waggons for running thereon, including plates, bolts, and nuts
therefor. Iron and steel—plain, sheet, rod, scrap, hoop.
Luggage—personal of passengers. Lining for chests to export produce—lead, tin, zinc,
paper, plain and medicated. Living oysters. Lithographic material.
Machinery—agricultural, mining, sawing, steam engines, carding, spinning, weaving,
dyeing, freezing, carpentering, papermaking, printing, ice-making, or parts thereof.
Meat—fresh, preserved, and salt. Meals—maize, oats, barley, and peas. Manures.
Metals —old, yellow for sheathing. Matting for ships dunnage and sugar.
Naval and Military stores imported for the service of the Colonial Governments or for
the use of Her Majesty’s land or sea forces. Nails and screws. Nets for fishing.
Oakum. Oars. Outside packages in which goods are ordinarily contained. Ores.
Paints. Paper, printing. Powder, blasting. Punts and lighters and materials for
building the same.
Quicksilver.
Sandalwood. Sewing machines. Shell—tortoise and pearl. Skins. Slates for schools.
Silver—unmanufactured. Specimens of natural history. Sulphur.
Tar. Type and printing machines and presses. Tanks. Tents. Telegraph and
telephone machinery and materials. Timber, dressed or undressed.
Vegetables, fresh —potatoes, onions, carrots, turnips, cauliflower, cabbages, and beet-
root.
Water pipes. Wire (fencing) and wire-netting (iron) for fencing and iron fencing
materials.
PART 111.
General Duty.
On all goods not enumerated or comprised in the preceding lists or parts, an Ad
Valorem duty of 5 per centum.
By Authority: James C. Beal, Government Printer, Brisbane.






Printed at the Govt. Engraving & Lithographic Office, Brisbane, Queensland


.
m t.-
•»
... " . ■
