

HANDBOOK OF
WESTERN
SAMOA








HANDBOOK
OF
WESTERN SOA.
WELLINGTON, N.Z.
W. A. G. SKINNER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
1925-




CONTENTS.
SECTION I. page
Historical .. .. . . .. .. . . -
Physical Features .. .. .. .. ..17
Fauna and Flora .. . . .. .. .. 27
Climate and Meteorology . . .. . . . . 36
The Samoan People .. .. .. .. ..41
Christian Missions in Samoa .. . . .. .. 60
SECTION 11.
Mandate for German Samoa .. .. . . .. 71
Government Departments .. .. . . .. 74
Products and Field for Development .. . . .. 101
Land Tenure .. .. .. .. .. ..no
Labour .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 113
Tourist Information .. .. .. .. ..117
APPENDICES.
I. Taxation .. .. .. .. ~ ..128
11. Customs and Tariff .. .. .. . . I2 g
111. Shipping and Freights .. . . .. . . 131
IV. Import and Export Tables .. .. ..132
V. Immigration .. .. .. .. ..133
VI. Census Tables .. .. .. .. --ill
VII. Postage Rates and Regulations .. .. ..136
VIII. Meteorological Data .. .. .. ..139
IX. Bibliography .. .. .. .. ..
X. Maps .. .. .. .. .. 175-176


FOREWORD.
r T"'HIS booklet is compiled and published by
authority of the Administration of Western
Samoa, and is designed to give in popular form
concise and accurate information concerning the
Territory, its people and affairs.


HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.
Section I.
HISTORICAL.
SAMOA was first made known to Europe in 1722.
In that year a Dutch exploring expedition dis-
covered Manna, one of the lesser islands of the
Group, and lay at anchor there a few days. In his report
Admiral Roggewein, the leader of the voyage, described the
Natives with fair accuracy, though on his chart he mis-
placed the islands (which he named Baumann Islands) bv
some hundreds of miles.
For more than a century following the Dutch dis-
covery, to the outer world Samoa remained but a name,
and its “ history ” is merely a short list of dates and
names identifying infrequent visits of explorers. After the
departure of Roggewein nearly fifty years elapsed before
the world was reminded of Samoa’s existence. The French
navigatoi, Bougainville, touched at the islands in 1768,
and, like his predecessor, gave them a name that has not
endured. He called them the “ lies des Navigateurs, ”
being inspired, apparently, by the great number of canoes
seen paddling about the shores, as they may be seen to-day.
hollowing him, Fa Perouse touched at Tutuila (now
American Samoa) in 1787. He came into conflict with the
Natives, and seveial of His crew were killed at a place
named since then Massacre Bay- About fifty years
later, Stair, a missionary on Upolu, learned from surviving


eye-witnesses that, although the tragedy occurred in Tutuila,
the instigators had been some Natives from Upolu who were
visiting friends in the Eastern Island at the time of the
Frenchman’s landing. The British ship-of-war “ Pandora ”
next writes her name on the meagre record of the period,
her visit occurring some four years after
it was not until 1830, when the pioneer missionary, John
Williams, landed on Savai’i, that our knowledge of the
Samoans can be said to have begun.
Although there is no authentic record before this date
of visits other than those cited, it is known that ships of
different nationalities were accustomed to touch at Samoa
during the latter part of the eighteenth century and the
early part of the nineteenth. John Williams makes mention
of several white men whom he found living among the
Samoans at the time of his arrival, and, in the absence of
any particular comment upon the circumstance, it may be
assumed that residence of white people in the Pacific
islands even at that early date was no novelty. The
historian can only regret that none of these pioneers seems
to have felt the urge to leave a record of his times.
With the arrival of the missionaries the second period
of the history of Samoa was ushered in. From 1830 to
1850 the Samoans were slowly realizing that beyond the
sea lay a world, shadowy and vaguely sinister, where
their experience was no guide; with whose strange in-
habitants new relationships had to be made, and whose
influence was profoundly disturbing their own little realm.
Matters of education, trade, and religion—ideas foreign to
the Native mind —began to receive consideration. In
1834 the Samoan language was reduced to print in some
tracts compiled by the missionaries ; in 1838 the captain
of H.M.S. “ Conway ” concluded a sort of commercial treaty


“ VAILIMA,” AS IT WAS WHEN R. L. STEVENSON LIVED THERE JUST PRIOR TO HIS DEATH.


VAILIMA, AS IT IS TO-DAY.
8
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.


with the leading chiefs ; in 1844 the Mission Institute at
Malua was founded. Each of these events was a landmark
in its respective field. By the first of them the Native
language took on a permanent form, and was no longer
subject, without due sanction, to those changes incidental
to all living tongues ; the accumulated knowledge of one
generation could be passed to the next in a medium
secure from interference. By the second, the islander began
to learn the rudiments of commerce, and dimly to apprehend
that even Samoa had its place in the great world of modern
activity and progress. In the last event the way was
opened to the Samoan to receive systematic instruction in
religious matters, which ever since have bulked so largely
in his affairs.
A comment on the growth of a foreign population
(mostly traders) at this date was the establishment, in
1847, of a “ church ” in a small corrugated-iron building
where the Apia Protestant Church now stands. For nearly
fifty years it did duty as a place of public worship for
the alien members of the community, whose numbers were
slowly increasing.
In 1848 began a series of Native wars that lasted about
seven years. The event is of importance in island story,
for it was then the Samoan first learned for himself the
deadly efficiency of the white man’s powder and bullets.
His own club and spear began to lose favour, and with
them went the age-old idea of the warrior as the superior
being. The biggest and strongest was killed by a bullet
as easily as the weakest, and no special quality of courage
was demanded of the man behind the gun. The influence
of the new conditions on the Native psychology was
profound; the germ of modern democracy may be said
to have been loosed. From this time onward the discarded


arms of Europe and America found their way to Samoa,
and many a tract of valuable land was surrendered in
exchange for an ancient musket or a keg of powder. The
rivalry of powerful Native clans and their struggles
for hegemony kept alive a spirit of unrest and created a
constant demand for deadly weapons.
The third period of Samoan history dates from about
mid-century. Britain, America, and Germany established
Consular Agents in Apia—in 1847, 1 853, and 1861 respec-
tively. These appointments proved to be the opening acts
of a long-drawn-out and most unhappy drama. The
Consuls appear to have held views on the importance and
dignity of their positions more suited to Ambassadors
Plenipotentiary in the great capitals of civilization. And,
what is more surprising, they appear to have persuaded
their home Governments to concur. Hence it is that
these minute specks on the ocean, of no conceivable value
in those days before the birth of “ Pacific strategy," had
focussed upon them for half a century more attention from
the outside world than could be warranted by a territory
a hundred times the size. The results were perfectly
logical. From such premises the Samoan could deduce no
other conclusion than that his country was of immense
value —the coveted prize of all the Powers —and it need
excite little wonder if at times he appears to exaggerate
his status as owner of such a treasure to-day.
From the year 1850 to 1900 the internal history of
Samoa is one of petty Native warfare between rival
claimants to the overlordship of the islands; and what
makes the quarrels at all memorable is the meddling of the
Consuls, with the consequent partisanship of their respective
nationals. America, Britain, and Germany all seem to
have taken anxious thought for the situation, which from


the present-day standpoint seems decidedly Gilbertian. In
1873 Washington sent a Colonel Steinberger on an un-
official visit to “ advise ” the Natives. The advice led to a
dictatorship for the envoy, with the result that his own
Consul induced a British warship to remove him to Fiji a
step which merely aggravated the situation. In 1877 the
Natives sought peace in a request for annexation b\
Britain, and later in a similar petition to America, but
both appeals were unsuccessful. The latter country, how-
ever, in 1878 arranged for the control of Pago Pago, with
its fine harbour, in return for an assurance that a friendly
interest in Samoa would always be maintained, and, when
necessary, the benevolent offices of America exerted on its
behalf. This was not annexation, and was a doubtful
assistance to the Natives in their contemporary troubles.
From the American point of view the treaty is significant
in that it marks the first step over the confines of the
Monroe doctrine, which forbade the assumption of out-
side responsibilities liable to bring the United States into
conflict with a foreign Power.
The following year, 1879, saw the establishment of still
another landmark in the history of the Group. Sir Arthur
Gordon, High Commissioner of the Western Pacific, visited
Samoa and laid out the boundary of the municipality of
Apia. This consisted of the actual site of the township,
with a more or less well-defined frontier some distance in-
land, and it was to be considered neutral ground in Native
warfare. All within this area were controlled by a Board
consisting of the three Consuls, each appointing one assessor.
Outside the area the Native chiefs dealt with their own
people in their own way. The arrangement was very
timely, and worked well, with the respect of all parties
thereto, for upwards of twenty years, through all the


difficulties produced by the Consuls’ everlasting meddling in
Native politics. In 1888 the perennial disputes concerning
the Samoan chieftainship reached a crisis. The Consuls of
America and Britain gave support to one claimant, the
German Consul supported the other. Warships of the three
Powers were actually assembled in the harbour of Apia.
Shots were exchanged between the antagonists ashore. The
warships hred shells into the bush. Then occurred the
hurricane of the 15th March, 1889, whose story is a
familiar tale. Every ship save H.M.S. “ Calliope ” was
cast away. America lost the “ Trenton,” “ Vandalia,” and
“ Nipsic ” ; Germany the “ Adler,” “ Eber,” and “ Olga.”
Three months later the Berlin Act laid, for a time at
least, the confusion and disputes so dramatically suspended.
The Act, afterwards known as the “ Three-Power Pact,”
was a compromise which arranged for the control of the
islands by the three Powers conjointly, through a local
executive consisting of a Chief Justice, and the President
of the Municipality of Apia, pro tem. The titles to lands
held by aliens were also investigated and settled by a
Commission of three, one appointed by each contracting
Power.
To this unhappy period also is attached another claim
to notice which this little island group has in one way or
another attracted to itself. In 1889 Robert Louis Stevenson
arrived and settled at Vailima. He became deeply in-
volved in the petty intrigues of the time, enthusiastically
joining the play where his ability as a publicist made him
a force eagerly welcomed by the particular party whose
cause he supported. Stevenson’s stay was, unfortunately,
but a brief one. On the 3rd December, 1894, he died
suddenly, and was buried on Mount Vaea, overlooking
Apia.


APIA BEACH : TIVOLI WHARF.
APIA : SAMOAN WAR CANOE.
13
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.


SAMOAN FEAST : MATS SPREAD IN READINESS FOR GUESTS.
NATIVE PAOPAO.


In 1899 the endless bickerings and squabbles over the
Native leadership came again to a head. The Consuls, as
usual, had taken sides, and the white population divided
itself as seemed to it good. Excitement grew until hostil-
ities commenced among the Natives in and around Apia,
and amidst the alarms and excursions some white residents,
including a few officials, took refuge aboard the warships
in the harbour.
It was now abundantly evident to all the three Powers
concerned that Samoan affairs must be settled once for all.
A commission with full powers was hastily despatched to
the islands, and after thorough investigation into the position
its labours resulted in the partition of the whole Group
between America and Germany, while Great Britain, com-
pensated by territory elsewhere, agreed to withdraw.
Western Samoa was now a German colony, and its fourth
historical period begins.
In February, 1900, Dr. Solf, who was at the time
President of the Municipality of Apia, was appointed
Governor. For fourteen years the Administration was
exclusively German, and its troubles were such as have
come to others in like situation. A disturbance arose
among the Samoans in 1908, and was dealt with rigorously.
The ringleader was arrested and deported to the Padrone
Islands, but in 1916, while being returned to Samoa, died
on the voyage. Dr. Solf retired in 1910, and was succeeded
by Dr. Erich Schultz, who had been Chief Justice under
his predecessor. Dr. Schultz was in office on the fateful
4th August, 1914, and three weeks later surrendered the
islands to the New Zealand troops arriving under escort
of the Australian Squadron on- the 29th August. The
military occupation continued under Colonel Robert Logan,
C. 8., until the 30th April, 1920. The latter end of his


regime was saddened by the occurrence of the memorable
influenza outbreak, wherein nearly seven thousand Samoans
lost their lives.
By the Treaty of Versailles the mandate for the future
government of Western Samoa was offered to and accepted
by New Zealand. Colonel Robert Ward Tate, C.8.E.,
C.M.G., became first Civil Administrator, and retired in
1923. He was succeeded bv Major-General Richardson,
C. 8., C.M.G., C.8.E., now in residence at Government
House.


PHYSICAL FEATURES OF
WESTERN SAMOA.
THE Western Samoan Group lies between latitudes
13° a nd 14° South, and longitudes 171 0 and 173 0
West, and consists of the two main islands, Savai’i
and Upolu, and the smaller islets of Apolima, Manono,
hanuatapu, Namua, Nuutele, Nuulua, and Nuusafee.
the Group has a linear disposition in a direction from
west-north-west to east-south-east, along which line Savai’i
has a length of forty-seven miles, its greatest breadth being
twenty-seven miles ; the Apolima Strait occupies about
eight miles, and Upolu has a length of forty-seven miles,
its greatest breadth being only fifteen miles.
All the islands are mountainous, rising to heights of
6,096 ft. in Savai’i, and 3,607 ft. in Upolu. Except in
those regions were the outflow of lava is too recent, the
whole of both islands is clothed in dense bush, the fringe
of occupied land along the seaboard, apart from the large
plantations, being too insignificant in its cultivation and
clearings to affect the general appearance of a rough green
caipet thrown over the whole surface—a carpet fringed
with white surf on reef or iron-bound coast.
The Island of Upolu is of first importance commercially
and politically, and has an approximate area of 430 square
miles. The western end is dominated by Tofua, a well-shaped
extinct volcano 2,195 ft. in height, and containing a crater.
At its north-eastern foot lies the largest coconut plantation
in the Group, near Mulifanua. The land is gently un-
dulating, and lying everywhere near the surface are
weathered vesicular basalt rocks. There are no rivers in
this locality, although there are numerous springs both
inland and on the sea-coast.
Hdbk.—2


Along the south coast of Upolu the barrier reef fails
except across a few harbours, and what reef exists is
fringing. There are several steep promontories of volcanic
rocks, which render travel along the shore from bay to bay
very arduous. The bays generally have low flat shores of
coral sand, or, in the case of Salani, basalt gravel, and the
hills in the background are well eroded. There are numerous
rivers, and the rainfall is heavy. Cultivation is scanty,
and is entirely native.
Aleipata, at the east end of Upolu, is also a coral sand
district with small outcrops of lava. The reef recedes from
the coast, and takes in the islets of Namua and Fanua-
tapu ; the islets of Nuulua and Nuutele lying a few miles
to the south, outside the reef.
The north-eastern coast presents a wild and rugged
appearance, the mountain masses dropping abruptly to the
sea. It is marked by several deep harbours, whose entrances
are not barred by reefs, though the latter follow round the
sides of the harbours a short distance from the land and
thus furnish shelter for small craft.
Uafato Bay is steep-walled, and has a strong creek,
which has brought down to the beach a great variety of
rocks, mostly of basaltic types. Fagaloa Bay is also enclosed
by steep walls, the mountains rising to a height of 1,000 ft.,
with the watershed appearing to be nowhere more than
three-quarters of a mile from the shore. A particular
feature is the number of high waterfalls, which, in spite of
the small catchment area behind them, maintain a fairly
steady flow. In the rainy season they present a beautiful
sight. The three falls on the eastern side above the village
of Lona are all from hanging valleys of about the same
height, 300 ft. or 400 ft. The fall behind Masina is at a
higher level, over 500 ft., and that behind Salimu still






higher, halefa Bay is less steeply walled, and receives on
its south side a fairly large river falling over a low but wide
waterfall. This river drains an extensive flat plain, which
contrasts with the country to the east. It has every
appearance of an exceptionally large crater, with steep
walls on one side. The country from Falefa to Letogo is
more or less hilly, the coastal road running round rocky
bluffs through scenery of great charm.
The country from here westward past Apia and on-
wards is idatively flat and fertile, and supports numerous
plantations and settlements. Rivers are fairly plentiful, and,
in their upper reaches waterfalls again occur. A peculiarity
of these streams is their frequently diminished volume at
the outlet. This is due to the beds of igneous rock allowing
the water to percolate freely through the abundant vertical
cracks and horizontal hollows common to recent lavas.
Take Tanuto o, a high crater lake to the south-west of
Apia, is of considerable depth, and maintains a very even
water-level all the year round. The crater-sides are covered
in virgin bush, and slope steeply down on the interior side
to a gorgeous green lake. Probably Lake Lanuto'o is one
of the biggest and oldest craters in Upolu, and is a prominent
feature in the landscape.
Savai i, the largest island of the Group, has an approxi-
mate area of 703 square miles, of which the greater part
is mountainous, and to the observer it presents a confusion
of mountains, valleys, and gorges, all heavily wooded. One
outstanding feature of this island is the lava-fields on the
northern side, of recent formation and now hardened into
lock, toitured and scored into every fantastic shape,
spreading fanwise down the mountain-side to the sea.
Everywhere one observes crater formations, which
dominate the scenery. While flat coastal strips are found


only on the northern and eastern sides, the mountain
masses come very near to the coast on the southern side,
and a great portion of this coast is iron-bound — i.e., not
protected by coral reefs. In stormy weather a heavy sea
rolling in on the lava is a notable spectacle—the water
forcing its way up through fissures in the rock and rising
to a height of from 20 ft. to 40 ft. through numerous blow-
holes.
There are no sheltered harbours for large vessels in
Savai’i, although at Matautu, on the northern coast, safe
anchorage is assured except in the hurricane season, lasting
from November to April. Twenty miles from Matautu in
a westerly direction there is another small harbour at Asau,
with 30 ft. or 40 ft. of water, handicapped, however, by a
bar on which there is a depth of only about 8 ft. The
eastern coast is fringed by a reef pierced by several boat-
passages.
The oldest portion of Savai’i seems to be to the east,
and appears to be totally different in its shape and formation
from the westerly portion. Numerous mountains, strangely
contorted, separate valleys running far into the interior, and
the scenery is always striking and sometimes even grand.
The peninsula of Tafua, on the south-east corner of
Savai’i, bears a small group of extinct volcanoes, about
660 ft. in height, some of which have particularly well-
preserved craters.
The small island of Apolima, about midway between
Savai’i and Upolu, has a narrow and tortuous entrance to
its boat-harbour, which is only passable by a boat in very
fine weather. The island has very steep profiles, and is
formed of a single crater-wall open to the sea. There are
continuously running springs, and a small stream draining
to the north across the crater, a natural provision for
human habitation.


Manono, about 230 ft. high, lying within the barrier
reef off the west end of Upolu, has no crater, and is mostly
composed of coral sand, with occasional outcrops of vesicular
basalt. Water is very scarce, the supply being obtained
from large reinforced concrete tanks. There are a few
springs, but all are brackish. Two rocks are outlying, one
of which, Nulopa, to the west, contains a lava tunnel
open to the sea.
General. —Certain dry watercourses are found in both
main islands, which are termed by the Samoans alia, of
which the largest is Alia Sega, on the north-east side of
Savai’i. Friedlander describes them as follows :
“ While on the banks of the alia a quite thin stratum
of decomposed rock gives enough food for a high forest, in
the bed itself the fresh surface of the basalt lava is laid
open, and the cake formations are exposed. As the lava
contains many holes and fissures, only a little water is to
be seen for long stretches, with the exception of rare water-
holes, but immediately after a heavy rainfall some of the
alia become torrents. This is proved by masses of boulders
found on the fiat stretches. Here and there the alia have
been used as beds by new lava-streams, and sometimes
one finds in the deeper cut channels sections showing old
river-boulders below fresh lava. The alia form relatively
comfortable roads in the primeval forest, because they can
be used without felling any trees. But, unfortunately,
their course is often winding ; some suddenly end in
crevices, where the water runs underground ; and here and
there they suddenly stop on steep cliffs, where good structures
of basaltic columns can be seen, but not easily climbed
over.”
A particular feature of the lava country is the tunnels,
some of which are of interest. Their height and


breadth are remarkably constant, except where branching
occurs. Hanging from the roof are stalactites of re-fused
lava fluxed by the burning of the inflammable gases dis-
charged from the tunnels below.
The following description of an old lava tunnel at
Falemanga, Upolu (a plantation about ten miles south of
Apia, and about 1,300 ft. above sea-level), by Dr. J. A.
Thomson, is of particular interest : —-
“ The rock is a scoriaceous basalt with the typical
pahoehoe type of vesiculation, and is densely wooded, with
a fair soil. The tunnel is approached by a downbreak in
its course, and lies 20 ft. to 30 ft. below the surface. It can
be followed to the south for a few yards only, but to the
north for about 500 yards, when it is finally blocked by a
large downfall from the roof. The tunnel is no longer in a
primitive state, owing to the falling-in of the roof and the
sides, and varies from 20 ft. to 30 ft. in width, and in
height from 5 ft. to 25 ft. Nowhere do the roof and sides
seem to be the original ones, and lava stalactites are absent.
There are, however, small stalactites 1 in. to 2 in. long, of
a soft white earthy material, evidently arising from the
weathering of the superincumbent rock.
“ Interesting memories are revived in this and other
Samoan lava tunnels. The fallen rock has all been care-
fully stacked into terraces about the size of a single or
double bedstead, generally on each side with a pathway
in the middle. The floors of the terraces are composed
either of large flat rocks carefully oedded in or quite small
material, so that with mats they would be as comfortable
to sleep on as the floor of an ordinary Samoan fale.”
On both main islands at sea-level there are numerous
springs, some of which form ideal bathing-places. Al-
though many have a particularly strong flow, all are tainted
to a certain extent bv the sea-water.


MATAVANU, SAVAI'I. (Lava flowing into the Sea.)


ON THE EAST COAST OF UPOLU.
COASTAL SCENE.


FAUNA AND FLORA.
FAUNA.
THE study of the distribution of living things makes
it clear that terrestrial animals came into the
islands of the Pacific by the westward route. The
number of species rapidly decreases as one progresses east-
ward from the Asiatic seaboard, whereas had animal life
its origin in the east the number of species would have
been found to increase towards the rising sun. Thus, of
the 176 kinds of land-animals in the East Indies, only a
mere handful is found even in New Guinea, while in the
remoter islands of Polynesia, save for the rat, bat, and some
domestic animals, of the great number cited not one has
been observed.
Birds, being less restricted in travel, are moderately
represented in the islands, but their distribution follows
the same law. The innumerable species in Melanesia dwindle
to fifty in Samoa, and of these sixteen are sea-birds, many
visiting the Group only during the breeding season.
Although expectations may be tempered with this know-
ledge, yet is a new arrival in Apia hardly prepared for the
extreme paucity of bird-life about the harbour and settle-
ment. There are no gulls, so inseparable from most sea-
ports, and on shore neither house nor garden knows the
homely presence of the almost übiquitous sparrow or starling.
Nor does Samoa seem able to supply substitutes; only
deep in the native woodlands are any birds to be seen.
But if the list of bird species is small, it has the merit
of distinction. Of the thirty-four kinds observed in these
islands, sixteen (or nearly half) are found nowhere else in
the world —a striking fact clearly pointing to a complete


isolation of the Group from a very remote period. There
still survives the Manu-mea, or tooth-billed pigeon (.Didun-
cuius strigirostris Peale), which has been considered by many
ornithologists to be one of the connecting-links between
bird-life of the present day and the tooth-billed birds of
geological antiquity. Its closest relative is probably the
large ground-pigeon of Mauritius, which is now almost, if
not quite, extinct. A similar fate was close upon the
Samoan Didunculus, but it is hoped that recent protective
legislation will preserve to Samoa and to science this
unique survival.
Many beautiful doves of small but graceful form and
rich plumage haunt the more retired parts of the hills and
ravines. Different species of diminutive parrots of many
colours and diverse cries are common on the fringes of culti-
vation. Game birds are few in kind. Tuli, or golden
plover, are fairly plentiful in season ; lupe, or pigeon (three
species), used to abound everywhere, but are now much
reduced ; toloa, or wild duck, are similarly thinned out by
the modern gun. European pheasants were liberated many
years ago, but survive very scantily to-day.
Introduced domestic cattle have from time to time
escaped to the bush, where they now form considerable
herds both on Upolu and Savai’i. They are shy and wary
beasts, and keep to the most inaccessible parts. Pigs are
found everywhere throughout the Group, especially in the
densely wooded highlands. As with the cattle, domestic
strays have joined the wild herds,* and the original stock
must now be infused with a considerable strain of intro-
duced blood.
Before the white man arrived the only terrestrial mammal
in Samoa was the rat {Mus exulans Peale). It is a small
* Some authorities class the pig as indigenous.


field variety, and at certain times swarms as a plague.
It has proved a serious pest in cocoa plantations, but is
now under control. Its habit is to scoop a small hole in
the ripening cocoa-pod, the contents of which are then
eaten and the pod left to rot on the tree. To add to the
planter’s misfortunes, rain-water collects in the empty
shell, and the mosquito ( Stegomyia pseudoscutellaris), the
carrier of human filaria, finds it an ideal breeding-place.
Another mammal which at times has caused much
destruction of food-supply is the flying-fox ( Pteropus
samoensis Peale), really a species of large bat, which makes
nightly raids on the mango and breadfruit trees when the
fruit is ripening.
Two species of snake, several different lizards, and a
gecko may be seen sunning themselves on the stones and
trees throughout the islands, patiently awaiting for morsels
of food to come within reach. But these may all be classed
as friends of man. Their bite is harmless, and they destroy
numerous vermin and noxious insects.
Samoa is a perfect paradise for the entomologist, for in
its equable climate there is practically no hibernation.
Mason-bees, butterflies, beetles, spiders of many wonderful
habits, ants in great variety and of even greater interest—
all may be seen and studied on any sunny day throughout
the year. At night, cicadas, grasshoppers, and crickets fill
the air with their varied songs, and moths and beetles, often
of brilliant colouring, swarm about exposed lights in window
or veranda.
Of beetles the indigenous afato ( Olethrius seabripcnnis
Thoms) has a place of honour in Native estimation. It
breeds in the soft parts of decaying logs, and when in the
larval stage the Samoan esteems it a delicacy roasted in the
oven to a golden brown. The rhinoceros-beetle ( Oryctes


nasicornis) is notorious. It was introduced with rubber-
plants from Ceylon about 1911 ; and though at one time
it seriously threatened with extinction the plantations of
coconuts, it has been well in hand of recent years.
Crustaceans in Samoa are represented by different sorts
of fresh-water shrimps in the streams ; and the seashore is
the habitat of the celebrated coconut-crab ( Birgits latro
Leach), with skill and strength to climb a palm and to crack
open a coconut.
Molluscs include “ shell-fish ” in the streams and snails
on the land, while the sea teems with many beautiful forms
of this order.
There are few venomous creatures in Samoa. Two
sorts of centipede and a scorpion are found, but their
sting, though unpleasant, is far from dangerous to the
normal human being.
Only one mosquito is disease-bearing ; this is the
Stegomia pseudoscutellaris, already mentioned as the dis-
seminator of filaria.
A small leach exists in the bush, but is seldom seen,
though it sometimes makes its presence known among the
Natives towards the end of the wet season.
The sea fauna is identical with that of all Pacific islands,
and special mention need be made only of the bonito and
the palolo. The former is one of the important food fishes
of the Samoans. It is of the mackerel family, and travels
in large shoals, whose presence is betrayed to the watching
fishermen by attendant flocks of sea-birds. The bonito-
canoe is built for the occasion, its chief quality being speed.
It holds two or three men, one of whom fishes as the others
keep the craft racing through the water. A spinning lure
of gleaming shell, a rush from the fish, and a deft swing
inboard and the bonito is landed. Possibly Bougainville,


COASTAL SCENE.
TYPICAL EUROPEAN BUNGALOW OF SAMOA.


STREET SCENE, APIA : BANK OF NEW ZEALAND AND
UNION S.S. CO.’S OFFICES.
STREET SCENE, APIA, OPPOSITE CUSTOMHOUSE.


who christened Samoa the “ sailor Islands,” was inspired
thereto by the sight of a fleet of bonito-canoes far out to
sea.
Palolo is found widespread in the Pacific, but, from
its natural history having been first studied in Samoa, its
name has become associated with that of the Group.
The palolo, a thread-like worm living deep in the coral,
is about 16 in. long by o-2 in. to o-o 6 in. in diameter.
During the last quarter of the moon in the months
of October and November it liberates strings of spawn
of both sexes, which rise to the surface at dawn. They
appear as black worms writhing on the water, and it
is at this stage that the Native, who has an uncanny
instinct that foretells the exact hour of the occurrence,
takes part in the performance and scoops up masses of the
creatures as fast as possible. The palolo is a great food
delicacy, and in all the year is obtainable only for the
brief hour as described. The male spawn is reddish-brown,
and the female bluish-green. Shortly after sunrise the sacs
burst and the fertile milt floats away. Thus does nature
provide for the survival of the species.
The reefs that border nearly all the coasts of Samoa
are famed for the beauty of their coral gardens. Here
coral of fantastic shape and almost every conceivable shade
of colour may be seen growing tree-like on the floor of the
lagoon or clustering on the sand in strange combinations.
Fish, vividly marked in green, red, yellow, violet, and
electric blue, float and dart between the calcareous masses,
and add life and movement to a piece of marine pageantry
impossible outside the tropics.
Hdbk. —3


FLORA.
The volcanic soil and moist warm climate of Samoa
make it a natural forcing-house for all vegetation. Practi-
cally the whole land-surface is covered with dense forest,
the fringe of reclaimed areas along the seaboard being for
the present purpose negligible.
From any point of the waterfront a short walk brings
the explorer to scenery typical of the whole. Above the
close undergrowth of fern and creeper rise innumerable
tree-trunks —rounded pillars supporting a lofty canopy of
interlaced foliage subduing the light to a mysterious gloom.
The impression gained is a sombre one, and is deepened
by the breath of rotting vegetation and damp mould.
One recognizes the inspiration of the Native animism that
peopled such regions with malignant spirits, making the
lichen-covered rocks and dripping hollows the abode of
fearsome demons. On hillside or stream-bank open glades
occur, and the effect is often extremely picturesque. The
larger trees are usually of symetrical growth, and their
towering shafts touch with grandeur a picture made grace-
ful by fern and trailing moss, creeper and hanging flower.
The giant aoa, or banyan, with its strange natural
architecture, is conspicuous ; the dark-green leaves of the
falaga, or Barringtonia, contrast with its crimson blossom ;
cascades gleam in the shade of stately fern-trees, and
festooned convolvuli swing over rocky pools. These screens
of interwoven creeper and vine are typical of Samoan bush-
land. Everywhere they cling to the higher branches and
fall in heavy curtains of vivid green, occasionally relieved
by the white of parasitic orchid or sprays of flower.
Many of the trees of Samoa have economic value, but
have been little exploited save for the primitive needs


ctt the Native. Fala, or pandanus; fuafua, or Fragraea
Berteriana ; moso’i, or Cananga odorata ; talie, or umbrella-
tree- —all furnish timber for canoes and houses and other
■domestic requirements. The last-mentioned (talie) has a
beautiful grain and texture, and is admirable for cabinet-
work.
The botany of the islands still awaits exhaustive study.
Dr. Kramer, in his “ Samoa-Inseln,” gives the following as
found in Samoa ; Scaevola Koenigii, Fragraea Berteriana,
Morinda citrifolia, Cassysha filiformis, Triumfettia procum-
bens, Wedelia biflora, Uraena lohata, and numbers of the
Sida family, besides Barringtonia, Touaneportia, Thespesia,
Hibiscus, &c. In the deeper and more secluded parts of
the forest are thickets of zingiberacee, balsamum, wild
banana, and the scarce Samoan bamboo. Medicinal herbs
abound, and the Natives are credited with knowledge of
secret recipes and cures of more or less marvellous properties.
If such exist, the results of their application do not seem
commensurate with their reputation.
At different times in the past trials have proven that
many kinds of tropical fruits can be successfully grown in
Samoa, but there is still a large field for experiment as well
as for research.


CLIMATE AND METEOROLOGY.
THE climate of Samoa is mild and equable. Although
within 14 0 of the Equator, even at sea-level the
climate is in pleasant contrast to that of continental
areas in the same latitude. It varies but little from year
to year, on account of the great oceanic surroundings,
whose immense volumes of water act as a modifier of
extreme heat. The highest thermometer-reading during
the last thirty years was 94 0 F., and the lowest 61 0 F.
The average temperature at sea-level over the same period
was 78-4° F. At Afiamalu (1,900 ft. elevation) through
observations lasting three years the average temperature
was 71 -4° F.
December is the hottest month, with an average excess
of only 2J 0 over the mean temperature for July, the
coldest month. In England the corresponding difference
between hottest and coldest months is 24 0 , and in Auck-
land 15 0 . Half an hour before sunrise is the coolest time
of the day. From then on the thermometer rises rapidly
until 10 a.m., reaching a level 7 0 higher, and maintaining
that rather closely until about 3 p.m. The temperature
recession then begins ; as the sun gets lower and the land-
breeze increases, the fall in the thermometer is fairly rapid
until 10 o’clock at night. After that the cooling is more
gradual until the lowest temperature is again reached
shortly after daybreak.
Throughout a period of thirty years it is observed
that successive “ highs ” and successive “ lows ” form a
cycle whose intervals are three years. We shall see the
same phenomenon when we come to study the rainfall.
In addition there is an eleven-year cycle corresponding


to the sun-spot period. It is worth noting that in
Samoa the progressive changes in temperature have been
found to match closely with those in Batavia, far to
the west, and at Arequipa, in Peru, far to the east.
Rainfall. —The year divides itself distinctly, but not
sharply, into a dry season (May to October) and a wet
season (November to April). The precipitation is uneven
as regards territorial distribution, localities not far apart
differing widely as to the amount of rain received. The
northern coast of Upolu gets less than the southern, and
the western end less than the eastern. This, as
explained later, is due to the direction of the prevailing
winds. The figures are 130 in. for the northern coast
(Apia), and no in. for the western end. Observations
on the southern coast do not extend over a long period,
yet the average is about 30 per cent, higher than on the
northern coast. An analogous distribution occurs in
Savai’i. The northern coast of that island received
120 in. during the year, and the southern coast con-
siderably more. It has been found that the precipita-
tion increases in general about 6 per cent, for every
100 ft. of altitude. These differences in rainfall are due
to the effect that land and mountains have upon the
moisture-laden air in motion. The steady south-easterly
wind, saturated with water-vapour collected on its long
sea-journey, strikes the southern coast and the ridges of
hills, and precipitation takes place. As the air moves
up the mountain-slopes, rainfall increases, and reaches a
maximum at the summit. Going inland from either
coast the rainfall is heavier as one leaves the level
and ascends the mountains. The heaviest fall during
twenty-four hours in the mountains was 15 in. On the
coast it was 10 in., with 2‘5 in. as the maximum for a


single hour. The years with a rainfall far below the
average —as low even as 66 per cent, of normal —were
1884, 1893, 1894, 1900, 1905, 1911, 1912, and 1919.
Unusually wet years, in some of which the rainfall was
155 per cent, of normal, were 1886, 1892, 1904, 1907,
1908, 1913, 1916, 1922, and 1923. It will be seen that
both series show noticeable intervals of either three or
six years. These cycles of three have been observed
in other stations in the Pacific.
The amount of rain annually received is commercially
important. Cacao cannot survive any prolonged drought;
on the contrary, coconut-palms do not produce well in
very wet seasons, and the satisfactory preparation of
copra is largely dependent on climatic conditions.
Relative Humidity. —This varies little with the distance
from the coast. At Afiamalu, five miles up the
mountains, the record was only 6 per cent, higher
than at Apia, on the sea-front, where the results were
—in January, the wettest month, a maximum of 84 per
cent, of saturation ; and in August, the driest, the
average humidity throughout the day was 80 per cent.
Barometric Pressure. —In the Temperate Zone changes
in the barometric pressure are frequent, often great,
and occur with suddenness and irregularity. In the
tropics irregularities are less in degrees and frequency,
and diminish as the Equator is approached. In the
latitude of Samoa the movement of the barometer is
markedly regular, its “ highs ” and “ lows ” recurring
twice a day at approximately the same hours. The
mean pressure throughout the year at Apia is 29-83 in.
with high readings at 10 a.m. and 9 p.m., and low
readings at 4 a.m. and 4 p.m. The usual range of the
day is small, being slightly less than roin. ; it is


somewhat larger during the equinoctial months, March
and September.
Wind. —Over the open ocean in the vicinity of Samoa
the prevailing direction of the air-drift, when undisturbed
by proximity to land or by local storms, is normally
from the south-east, ranging a point or two either south
or east of this general direction. Near the Samoan
Islands these winds, the so-called trade - winds, are
deflected, and come from a direction more nearly east.
They are fairly constant throughout the dry season—
that is, from April to October —a season whose beginning
and whose end are both commonly marked by the
occurrence of electric storms.
Daily records indicate that from midnight to sunrise
the wind from the south-east blows at about six miles
an hour, then drops to a calm. This continues until
about 10 a.m. The wind then freshens up again,
reaching a maximum velocity between noon and 2 p.m.;
after that it gradually dies to a calm at sunset. From
that time on, for several hours, a land-breeze prevails,
blows in a reverse direction, and is appreciable as far
as two to four miles offshore. During the wet season
the winds are fitful, and calms are frequent.
Balloons and kites sent up to measure the heights
reached by these various winds prove the land-breezes
extend to about 1,000 ft. above the earth’s surface, the
trade - winds to about a mile and a half. Above this
a great air-stratum, whose thickness is five miles, drifts
from north or north-west, a direction almost exactly
contrary to that of the prevailing wind below.
Storms. Although the “ hurricane ” of 1889 is
frequently cited in connection with Samoa, cyclonic
storms have been unknown in Western Samoa since that


date to the ]'resent time. Winds up to forty miles an
hour have been recorded, but the true path of destructive
hurricanes (seventy-two miles per hour and upwards) lies
between Samoa, Piji, and the Tongan Group.
A summary of meteorological data covering periods
from 1890 to 1919 is given in Appendix VIII.


THE SAMOAN PEOPLE.
SOCIOLOGY, ETC.
THE Samoan people belong to the great Polynesian
race so widely spread throughout the Pacific. Its
origin is still undetermined, though converging lines
of scientific inquiry seem to point to an ancient home in
Neolithic times in the region of the Mediterranean and the
steppes of south-western Asia. It is surmised that the
climatic changes and consequent desiccation of those areas
forced the people to wander abroad and eventually to issue
into the Pacific. Their first pelagic home was probably in
some extensive island, where the duration of their stay can
be only guessed at. Its name survives in Hawaii (North
Pacific), Savai’i (Samoa), Hawaiki (Maori), &c., and it is
thought possible that its gradual subsidence and final dis-
appearance beneath the sea some thousand to two thousand
years ago accounts for the dispersion of the people to
the widely scattered islands where they are found to-day.
Only patient and continuous research can piece together the
story whose ultimate form may or may not be similar to
that suggested.
The Samoan is perhaps the purest surviving type of
Polynesian, who is distinguished everywhere by regular,
almost European features, tall stature (averaging 5 ft. 10 in.),
and light-brown complexion. In character he is, in his
native state, mild, friendly, and hospitable, and easily led
by those who have earned his respect. At the same time
he has all the faults natural to imperfect development, and
the key to his proper understanding is the recognition of the
truth that he is still but a child, well-mannered and attractive
when pleased, but at times capricious and wayward, with


primitive passions easily aroused. That those passions as
easily subside again should not obscure the fact that the
Samoan is a faulty human being, and not the romantically
perfect creature it has been the fashion of superficial
observers to depict him.
In the Samoan social system the unit is the family—-or,
rather, an aggregation of families forming a clan. The
political system is so nearly coincident that for the present
purpose it may be treated as identical.
The clan, whose head is called a matai, owns all the land,
and parcels it out to its members as necessity arises. All
produce of the soil is theoretically the property of the matai
in trust for the community, but in modern days it is
becoming increasingly common to allow the actual cultivator
to retain for his own use the fruits of his labour.
The chieftainship is elective, though the son of a deceased
leader often succeeds his father. The power of the chiefs
is apparently great. They are treated with punctilious
respect, and are hedged about with strict etiquette. In
reality, however, the power is in the hands of a group of
men called tulafale, or orators, whose function is that of
Ministers of State. They " advise ” upon all matters of
public concern, conduct debates where counsel is divided,
and make ceremonial speeches. Their oratory often attains
a high degree of excellence even judged by our standards.
One who has listened to a set oration of a tulafale, where
metaphor, allusion, illustration, and quotation, most happily
chosen, follow one another at times in eloquent and well-
balanced periods, will no longer wonder that speakers
capable of such delivery wield so great an influence over the
emotional islander. Every important affair is in their
hands, and they may even depose a chief whose conduct
does not meet their ideas of propriety.
42
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.




LUFI LUFI : GETTING READY FOR A FEAST.
(Pigs are cooked and placed before the Guests whole.)
NATIVE DANCE OR SIVA, SAMOA.


Lesser officers of Native Government are the pulenu’u,
or village headmen ; the faamasino, or magistrates ; the
pulefaatoaga, or inspectors of plantations ; the komisi, or
Land and Title Commissioners. At the other end of
the scale are the faipule and fautua : the former powerful
officers who are members of the Native Council and act
in the capacity of District Governors ; the latter, who
represent the old clans of Tupua and Malietoa, holding
nominal office, but who do not act in any official
capacity.
This system, with all its defects, appears to have been
equal to the ordinary demands made upon it ; and the
white man had to add to it little more than a precise
definition of function in the various officers, and their endow-
ment with the power of the white man’s law, in order to
fit it with proper safeguards to modern conditions.
The social customs of the Samoans are interesting and
extremely varied. Scarcely a situation in the ordinary life
of an individual or family is without its prescribed rule of
conduct, and in matters of State the ceremony and etiquette
are formidable. In these notes there is no claim to ex-
haustive treatment, and mention can be made only of a
few of the more prominent usages still surviving and still
exerting a strong influence upon the life of the people.
Marriage. —lf the status of its women fixes the position
of any community in the scale of development, the Samoans
must be accorded a high place. Their women are more
nearly the equal of the men, especially after marriage,
than is the case in any known primitive race, other than
Polynesian. A matriarchate is common, and descent is
often through the distaff side of the house.
Polygamy was practised among the Samoans of former
times, but it was bv no means the rule. The moral


question was no factor in the problem; it was rather
economic. The number of a man’s wives depended largely
upon his ability to provide support. Hence it is that chiefs
had usually a plurality of consorts, though such a house-
hold was not forbidden to commoners. The marriage
arrangements, especially the preliminaries, of a chief, or
even of a man of lower rank, were such as to check any
ambition to add unnecessarily to the domestic circle.
Substantially the customs remain the same to-day. In
the case of a chief the tulafale, or advisers, ordinarily choose
the bride whose family alliance is for any reason desirable.
Messengers, loaded with valuable presents of food and goods,
are sent to the house of her parents. Return messages
prolong negotiations. More presents follow, and discussion
and bargaining may protract the affair for months. The
final decision is made without the inclinations of the maiden
weighing much in the scale. Until legislation was intro-
duced restricting the magnitude of these celebrations
wedding festivities at times attracted hundreds, or even
thousands, according to the rank and importance of
the contracting parties. Feasts of incredible magnitude,
followed by song and dance and games, occupied days
and nights on end. Towards the end of the period the
proceedings usually degenerated into licentious orgies.
Often a whole district was impoverished for months
following the marriage of a member of its chiefly house.
The marriage of commoners was on similar lines, modified
by the relative obscurity and poverty of those concerned.
Here the office of the tulafale is taken by the family
elders. Nevertheless, until quite recently, for the majority
of commoners the marriage bond was a flimsy affair.
Mutual consent was all that was required for either the
setting-up of a joint household or its dissolution. It was


not uncommon to find a village where, in practically every
household, there had been a reshuffling of partners since
the original pairing. Such readjusted couples seem quite
happy, and the members thereof mingle in work and play
with discarded wives and husbands with the greatest
amiability and entire absence of embarrassment. This
state of affairs (which is slowly passing) is known locally
as marriage faasamoa, or Samoa fashion—a term widely
quoted in the Group to excuse or justify a diversity of
anomalies and absurdities.
Children are always welcomed in Samoa. Childless
couples go to great lengths to adopt or otherwise acquire
the children of others. A childless marriage is, indeed,
considered by them sufficient grounds for separation on
the part of the couple.
Malagas. The malaga is a very old custom woven into
the life of the islanders. It is a journey or tour of the
neighbours, and it is most frequently made en masse. Any
excuse will serve to start off a crowd of men, women, and
children to impose themselves as guests on their unfortunate
friends. Samoan etiquette is never more rigid than in
relation to malagas and their reception at such halting-
places as they may choose. At all costs the visitors must
be provided for. The best food and entertainment must be
showered upon them, even if their entertainers be im-
poverished for a year or more ahead—a consequence so
common that the malaga is discouraged by the authorities
by ever} 7 possible means, unless the occasion be very
important and thoroughly justifiable. The evil of the
system is intensified and kept alive by the facilities for
retaliation. A district that has had its hospitality abused
awaits its chance for a return malaga, and at the first
opportunity the whole able-bodied population descends like


a swarm of locusts on the offenders, who in their turn are
soon eaten out. Later on the first incident is repeated,
and abuse is heaped on abuse. A commentary on the
Native hospitality, so often a subject of eulogy, and a
striking illustration of the cast-iron grip of custom, is that,
in cases like those cited, the visitors are met by the hosts
with smiles of welcome and honeyed speeches, which,
between the layers of flattery, assure the new arrivals that
no pleasure could surpass that of providing for them in
every way, and they are adjured to go ahead and enjoy
themselves. In private, however, the entertainers, amid
grumblings deep and bitter, register savage vows of an
early revenge. Such conditions often produce distress and
hardship, and happily the Native is beginning to see the
wisdom of the advice of the Government, and no doubt
the malaga and its attendant evils will soon be but a
memory.
Pastimes The pastimes of the Samoans are simple, like
the people. The chief of all is dancing. The Samoan will
dance by day or by night, in rain or in sunshine. Visitors
are received by dances ; the departing guest is farewelled
in like manner. A marriage, a birth, a death, or anything
that can reasonably be offered as an excuse will set a
village capering and singing till sheer fatigue rings down
the curtain. If the degree of indulgence in this amusement
is any guide to temperament, the Samoan is surely the
happiest creature alive.
The only worthy rival to dancing is a game compounded
of cricket and baseball. Every village and every district
has at least one team of players, the size of the team
being limited by the size of the population (male and
female), or, alternately, by the size of the playing-field.
A match will sometimes last for days or even weeks, to the


FRAMEWORK OF SAMOAN HOUSE WHICH WAS SENT TO BRITISH
EXHIBITION, 1924.
ALONG THE WATER-FRONT, SAMOA.
Hdbk. —4


SUN- DRYING COPRA.
RIVER SCENE, SAFUNE, SAVAI'T.


detriment of every useful activity in the neighbourhood.
So much, indeed, has the game captured the Samoan
that its times and seasons have had to be regulated by
Government edict.
Arts. —The arts of the Samoan are perhaps the section
of their activities exciting the most general interest. Of
the useful arts, house-building is probably the most im-
portant survival to-day. Though of skilled workmanship,
Samoan houses are, generally speaking, mere sun-shelters
with the necessary supports. The roof is of thatch, and
there are no walls, but merely adjustable blinds of woven
coconut-leaves. Such structures, whatever their defects,
have the supreme merit of being conformable to the climate
and the needs of the inhabitants.
The building of outrigger canoes is carried to a high
■state of proficiency. There are canoes for a number of
purposes. The paopao is the smallest and commonest, and,
though used for lagoon fishing, the bonito-canoe, larger and
stronger and often beautifully finished, is the true fishing-
craft. It is built for the purpose, especially for deep-sea
work where is caught the fish after which it is named.
In former times huge double canoes, or catamarans, were
common, but have been superseded to-day by the fautasi,
or clinker-built super-whaleboat, taking sometimes twenty-
two oars a side, or a complement of forty-four rowers.
Siapo, or tapa, is the native cloth. It is prepared from
the bark of the paper-mulberry. The women and girls
beat the raw product into strips which have been treated
in water, and, when these are dried, join them together
with the gum of the breadfruit-tree. This was the only
cloth of olden days, and it was often superbly decorated in
stedcilled designs of various colours. More than any other
aboriginal product, tapa has been displaced by the foreign
article supplied from a very early date by the trader.


The weaving of fine mats was, and still is, a notable
industry. This class of mat is the most concentrated form
of property known to the Samoan. Their value is waning,
but in former times often the gravest matters of State
revolved around the disposal of a fine mat. On the fate of
one of them has hung the decision for war or peace.
Alliances and contracts could not be ratified without the
passing of one or more specimens, and practically all wealth
could be reckoned in terms of these extraordinary pro-
ductions. They are made by women and girls, and the
labour involved is incredible. The work goes on more or
less continuously for months, and sometimes for one, two,
or even three years.
Coarser mats for a variety of domestic uses are commonly
made to-day, and are to be found in every Native house.
The kindred product of baskets and fans is still extensively
manufactured.
The art of tattooing is also in vigorous survival. It is
classified by the Natives as ornamental, but foreign opinion
does not always coincide. The men are tatooed from hip
to knee in close pattern suggesting the wearing of drawers
of dark cloth. Roggewein, the discoverer of Samoa, reported
the Natives so clothed in what he took for silk. W omen
are also marked, but in a much less degree.
No list of Samoan customs can pretend to be representa-
tive and omit kava drinking. This practice still retains its
primitive hold on the people, and it is perhaps the most
typical of Pacific-island ceremonies. The preparation of
kava is too well known to bear repeating. In spite of its
muddy, unattractive appearance, the beverage has achieved
an extraordinary place in Samoan favour, and no ceremony,
large or small, can be conducted without its consumption
in quantity.
52
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.


Mythology. —This subject is happily of mere academic
interest to-day, and is too extensive for any adequate
treatment in this place. Stair says : “ The Samoans had
several superior divinities and a host of inferior ones . . .
and they were accustomed to deify the spirits of deceased
chiefs. In addition . . . petitions were offered and
libations made to deceased relatives.”
Several classes of spirits were recognized : (a) Atua, the
original gods, dwelling in Pulotu or Elysium ; {b) tupua, the
deified spirits of chiefs, also dwelling in Pulotu ; (c) aitu,
demons of this world inhabiting natural objects; {d) 0
sauili’i, ghosts or apparitions.
Folk-lore. —Samoan folk-lore corresponds closely to that
of other Polynesian lands. The first couple, Earth and
Sky, produced man and all other created things. Samoa
itself was fished up from the sea-depths by 1 angaloa, the
supreme utuu. This particular subject in its unvarying
appearance throughout the Pacific has furnished one of the
strongest evidences of identity between these interesting
peoples so strangely scattered to the far corners of the
ocean.
POPULATION.
The history of the Polynesian races has, since the advent
of the white man, been one of decreasing populations, until
in some cases the islands are within measurable distance
of depopulation. It is impossible to obtain accurate infor-
mation regarding conditions before the white man appeared,
but the slight amount of evidence available points to the
decrease having commenced before that time. With the
introduction to the Natives of new diseases to which they
had no natural or acquired immunity the decrease became
more rapid.


La Perouse sailed past the eastern end of Upolu in 1787,
and his description of the size of the villages there clearly
indicates a much larger population in that district than
was present when the first missionaries landed in 1830. In
1839 Wilkes estimated the population of Western Samoa
as 46,600 ; seven years later the London Missionary Society
took a census, and, although the figures were only approxi-
mate, the estimate made was 40,000 (Stair considers the
number was between that figure and 45,000) ; in 1849
Erskine made an estimate of 37,000 ; and in 1854 the London
Missionary Society, by that time in a much better position
for the purpose, placed the figure at 29,300. The marked
decrease thus shown to have occurred in fifteen years was
chiefly due to wars, the devastation and resulting famines
which accompanied the wars, and to several epidemics of
disease.
Apparently the population fluctuated around 29,000 for
fully thirty years, for in 1886 Thurston estimated it at
that number. From about this time a gradual increase
must have commenced. In 1906, when the first official
census was taken by the German Administration, the
population was recorded at 33,478 this in spite of a
serious setback due to the introduction of measles in the
year 1893. The influenza epidemic of 1918-19 caused a
decrease of about 7,000, but since that date the increase
has been fairly rapid, and on the 31st December, 1923, the
estimated population was 33,800, practically the same as for
the year 1912.
The birth-rate is high, in 1923 reaching 50-49 per 1,000
of mean population, but the death-rate is also high, resulting
in a relatively slow increase in numbers. The average
death-rate is about 30 per 1,000, but in 1923, due to an
epidemic of dysentery it rose to 41-50. The greatest mor-


CANOE USED FOR FISHING OUTSIDE THE REEF, CALLED THE “ BONITO ” CANOE.


NATIVE BOATS (FANTASI) : KING'S BIRTHDAY SPORTS.


tality is amongst children under the age of two years, and
measures to prevent this wastage of child-life in Samoa are
being actively undertaken. There is every reason to believe
that with settled government and the inculcation of the
principles of sound living the race will continue to prosper
and multiply.
COMMON DISEASES.
Samoa is fortunate in that most of the scourges of the
tropics are unknown in the Group. The commonest tropical
diseases are yaws, ankylostomiasis (hookworm), and filariasis.
Bacillary dysentery is endemic, and in the years 1907, 1911’
and 1923 became epidemic, causing a considerable increase
in the death-rate.
Yaws is so prevalent amongst the Samoans that
practically none reach adult life without having suffered
from it. It is the cause of much suffering, especially
amongst the children, and is directly and indirectly the
•cause of a considerable portion of the mortality in the
first few years of life. By systematic treatment and
stringent regulations it is hoped that the campaign against
this disease, commenced in 1923, will quickly bring it
under control. Y hite children living under proper conditions
rarely contract this disease in Samoa.
Ankylostomiasis (hookworm) is universal in Samoa.
Fortunately the average number of worms harboured by
each individual is low, and it is only occasionally that
•serious cases of hookworm disease are encountered. Never-
theless, the debilitating effect of even mild infections causes
it to be a disease requiring serious attention. The primary
essential in the control of this disease is proper sanitation,
and this, as well as systematic treatment of the whole
population, is receiving attention.


Filariasis : This disease is very widely spread through-
out the Pacific, and is very common in Samoa. It is
caused by a small worm locally transmitted from host to
host by one species of mosquito the Stegomia pseudo-
scutellaris. Research in connection with this disease has so
far failed to reveal a remedy. Two expeditions have been
sent out to Samoa by the London School of Tropical
Medicine to study this disease—one in 1920 under Dr.
O’Connor, and one in 1923 under Dr. P. A. Buxton.
Prevention, by reducing the number of possible breeding-
places and by mosquito-netting dwellinghouses, is the only
method of control known at present.
Other local diseases are occasional mild epidemics of
measles, mumps, and influenza ; pneumonia, chicken-pox,
tuberculosis, skin and eye diseases, intestinal worms, with
occasional cases of typhoid fever, tetanus, and leprosy.
Insect Pests. —The chief insect pests of Western Samoa
are flies and mosquitoes. The fly is well known throughout
the world, and requires no description. A short description
of the mosquito of the islands may, however, be of interest.
Dr. O’Connor, during his residence in Samoa, identified six
species of mosquitoes, of which only one, the Stegomia
pseudoscutellaris, has so far been proved a carrier of disease.
This mosquito is the one which is responsible for the trans-
mission of filaria from man to man.
Dr. O’Connor says :
“ The adult insects are active at dawn, just before sun-
set, and during the day if rain is threatening ; but, though
diurnal in habit, they are extremely intolerant of sun and
wind : their ideal haunt is the still, shady bush around
about the villages. Shade and a still atmosphere thus
appear to be among the necessary conditions of their
existence. In Samoa these conditions exist in and about


every village. It breeds only in water containing decaying
vegetable matter, and in these rainy regions this is to be
found everywhere in the husks and shells of coconuts, in
crevices and holes in trees, in bottles, tins, &c., if they
happen to be lying sheltered in the bush, and in cracks and
depressions in the lava rock at sheltered spots. Particu-
larly favourable breeding-places are afforded by the piles
of husk that accumulate when the copra is being collected,
the larvae being found not in the husks at the surface of
the heap, but in those in the hidden deeper parts. In
Samoa the Pacific rat (Mus exvlans) manufactures breeding-
places in the trees by gnawing and gutting the tender
young cocoa-pods, which then dry up and become small
hanging reservoirs. The larval life is brief —the adult
emerging in ten to twelve days from the hatching of the
egg, but larvae and pupae can live for a long time if their
water evaporates.
“It is obvious, from this account of its habits and
breeding-places, that measures for the control of the insect
would not, particularly in the coral islets, be difficult to
formulate. Periodic cutting and burning of bush and
burning of husks of coconut (if these cannot be used for
coir) could do much, and the use of very dilute cresyl for
water-holes that are not used for drinking, and the em-
ployment of aquatic natural enemies in those that are, would
also tell. But, of course, the success of any measures
would depend upon the wisdom of the inhabitants and
their response to instructions. It is not difficult to imagine
a determined and intelligent people keeping the insect at a
safe distance, with very little assistance.”
Other pests which might be mentioned are the cock-
roach, the centipede, and the scorpion ; but these have
not yet been incriminated as disease-carriers.


CHRISTIAN MISSIONS IN SAMOA.
TOWARDS the end of the eighteenth century explo-
ration of the Pacific was rapidly developing, and
one result of the reports carried back to England
was the formation of the London Missionary Society to
evangelize the newly discovered lands. The first Pacific
station under this body was established in Tahiti in 1796,
and from it the teachings of Christianity radiated across
Western Polynesia.
In 1830 John Williams, one of the leading spirits of
the movement, landed at Sapapalii, in Savai i. He was
accompanied by Charles Barff. Their ship was a small
schooner built at Rarotonga, and named the “ Messenger of
Peace.” This date and these names are filled with meaning
for Samoa, and are deservedly honoured in the history of
the islands.
It was soon discovered that the landing was extra-
ordinarily well timed. Just before this date Samoa was
dominated by Tamafaiga, an evidently able if unsciupulous
personalitv. He had combined in himself the offices of
■chief and high priest, and his rule was despotic. The
district of Aana revolted, and Famafaiga was killed.
Struggles for the succession arose, and Malietoa had just
■concluded a successful contest for the island kingship when
Williams arrived. The office of high priest was, however,
still unclaimed, and Williams very shrewdly seized the
opportunity and practically had himself elected to the
vacancy.
This event, almost unique in missionary effort, was
made possible by a fortunate combination of circumstances.
First, Williams’s personal qualities were exceptional; second,
Lie was accompanied from Rarotonga by an exiled Samoan




GROUP OF NATIVE CHILDREN AT MULINU'U


of chiefly standing, whose influence was exerted to the
utmost on behalf of the new teacher; third, there was
instinctive in the Samoans a strong religions faculty, and
many of their heathen concepts were capable of infusion
with the Christian spirit without violent revolution.
Malietoa received Williams sympathetically from the
outset. Hearing that the strange boat had on board a
“great teacher,” he heaped her decks with offerings of
fruit and food which had been brought for barter. In the
charge of this friendly host were left the Rarotongan and
Tahitian teachers whom Williams had selected to commence
work in Samoa.
Williams and Barff then sailed for Tahiti and Rarotonga,
but the former returned in 1832. He touched at Tau,
Olesega, Ofu, Tutuila, Upolu, Manono, and Savai’i. At
Manono another Rarotongan teacher named Teava was
installed as pastor under the protection of the chief of
that island.
In 1834 Charles Barff returned, accompanied by Aaron
Buzacott, making the journey in a chartered schooner.
They brought with them the first books printed in the
Samoan language, “ a small reading and spelling book, a
small catechism, a small hymn-book, from the printing-
press at Huahine.” The quotation continues in the modest
phrase, “small as they were, they were very useful.” Thus
was foreshadowed the time when the Samoan should possess
the complete volume of the scriptures, which is now a
classic, fixing the language once and for all time. In this
connection the name of George Pratt naturally arises. His
attainments were scholarly, and, although he did not arrive
in Samoa until 1835, without his standard “ Grammar and
Dictionary of the Samoan Language ” the later translations
could scarcely have been possible.


The year 1835 saw the arrival of two more helpers in
the persons of George Pratt and Charles Wilson. These
were from the Tahitian Mission Station, and they remained
until the following year, when the London Missionary
Society sent from England a permanent staff of six mission-
aries and their wives. They arrived in the “ Dunottar
Castle,” and anchored in Leone Bay on the 6th June, 1836,
The first District Committee meeting of the London Mis-
sionary Society was held on the ship’s decks, and the new
workers were distributed throughout the group. A. W.
Murray and G. Barnden were stationed at Tutuila ; W.
Mills at Apia ; T. Heath at Manono ; C. Hardie at Sapapalii ;
and A. MacDonald at Safune. Within a few months of
their settlement they received from the Tahitian mission
press at Huahine a rough translation of the Gospel of St,
Matthew and the story of Joseph —works which had been
prepared by Messrs. Pratt and Wilson.
The London Missionary Society in Samoa may be con-
sidered to be fairly established from this date. The next
important step forward was the setting-up of a printing-
press at Falelatai (removed to Leulumoega in 1845). Here
were printed the Bible and various school-books, while
general knowledge was diffused in the magazine entitled
0 le sulu Samoa. The first issue of this periodical was
made memorable by a signed article from the pen of John
Williams, and the second by a report of the ceremonies of
farewell to himself and the Samoan teachers who accom-
panied him on the fateful voyage to the New Hebrides,
where Williams met his death.
In 1844 the Malua Institute was founded. Primarily its
object was religious instruction, but in its rapid develop-
ment it embraced secular education and the teaching of
handicrafts. Its fruits are seen to-day in every Samoan


village where a graduate from Malua presides in both
Church and school.
It has been said that the Samoan was instinctively
religious. He took up the new teachings with enthusiasm.
As early as 1840 Samoan Natives went overseas to spread
the Gospel in strange places. The islands of Niue, Tokelau,
Ellice, Gilberts, New Hebrides, and others were thus
Christianized, while to-day we find Samoans still engaged
in their devoted work in New Guinea and the Solomons.
In the same religious fervour lies the reason for some
impressive modern observances. The former Native spiritual
beliefs provided for sacred days, disregard of which brought
the severest penalties. The new religion had also its sacred
day every week. Its adoption in place of the arbitrary sa
of the heathen priest was attractive rather than distasteful
to the Samoan mind, and into its observance goes all the
rigidity formerly reserved for celebration of the sacred
seasons of paganism.
The great number of church buildings, so striking a
feature of Samoan environment, has a kindred explanation.
Every village has at least one place of worship, and many
have two or even three. It should be remembered that
every church is also a schoolhouse, and every self-contained
village a community, and pride, if not ancient custom,
forbids the sharing with its neighbour of either its church
or its school.
In a general review of mission work to-day, while there
are many bright spots there are also a few shaded areas of
disappointment. Across the whole picture might well be
written the epitaph on the tomb of Sir Christopher Wren,
“Si monumentum requiris circumspice.” Evervwhere is
religious teaching woven into the life of the people. In
every village, in practically every house throughout Samoa,
Hdbk.—5


daily religious exercises are the rule. In politics, industry,
trade, the Samoan’s whole outlook is through a religious
medium. His concepts may not be of the highest, but the
essential thing is that they exist, and it needs only careful
and patient fostering to develop the tender plants.
One of the disappointments in a work so uniformly
successful is the lack, after ninety years of Christianity, of
outstanding men. The Jaa-Samoa (Samoan environment)
may have a lot to do with this; but, on the other hand,
where young men have shown brilliance the tendency is to
become “ top-heavy,” and a fall usually follows. Ihe
student then drops out of the race. In the Samoan make-
up also there is a considerable strain of snobbishness : he
desires not so much to lead as to be among the leaders.
These disabilities may be through lack of ballast, more
probably through lack of scope. After passing through the
Theological College a young man finds himself at the top
of the tree as far as educational facilities are concerned ;
ambition can have no further object. He has reached the
standard of those who preceded him, and the levelling
influence of communism stultifies any desire to advance.
Were it possible for him to continue study for a reward
in full view there might result the discovery of men of
exceptional ability. Provision of this reward is at present
the aim of the Government, and undoubtedly the best
educational work will be performed in selecting and training
those who show outstanding merit.
Another disappointment is in the technical schools. In
these institutions many of the youths have been taught
valuable trades. But the incentive to our steady plodding
is lacking in Samoa. After learning a craft the Samoan
youth prefers the care-free village life, with its serene
atmosphere of casual irresponsibility, rather than steady


pursuit of the elusive dollar through the dusty channels of
commerce. And who of us is to throw the first stone ?
Besides the work among the Native population, for
many years the education of the half-caste population has
been the responsibility of the missions.
Mention should be made of the devoted work of the
Marist Brothers and the Sisters of Mercy, who have long
provided the education of the sons and daughters of
European-Samoan parents. Some of our leading citizens
of Apia to-day owe their present business acumen and high
standing in Samoa to the teaching they received from these
devoted men and women. Such names as Brother Hilary,
Brother Phillippe, and others will be remembered long
after their active labours have ceased.
Briefly summarized, the facts and figures relating to
the various missions engaged in Samoa are as follows :
The London Missionary Society is a Protestant mission,
founded in the year 1796 in London. John Williams, the
first missionary in Samoa, was sent out by this society.
He arrived in this Group in August, 1830. This mission
is the strongest Church in Samoa to-day, and has a following
of 21,225 adherents. As a Church it is self-supporting.
The Australasian Methodist Mission commenced work in
Samoa in the year 1835, and has now a following of 5,806.
One of the outstanding men in connection with the Methodist
Mission is the late Dr. George Brown, who later went to
New Britain. He is one of the heroes of the Pacific mission
field.
The Roman Catholic Mission (Societe de Marie) com-
menced operations in Samoa in the year 1845, and has now
a following of $,284. A special feature in this mission’s
activities is the educational work among the half-caste
population. A day school for boys is conducted by the


Marist Brothers in Apia, while the Convent Sisters look
after the education of the girls.
The Latter-Day Saints Mission (Mormon) has for some
years been represented in Samoa, and the statistics show
their adherents to be 634.
The Seventh-Day Adventist Mission has never proved
attractive to the Samoans, and their followers are some
twenty-six adherents.


RUBBER-TAPPING IN SAMOA, NOW DISCONTINUED.


PLANTATION SCENE, MULIFANUA.
SAMOAN FISHING-CANOE.


Section II
MANDATE FOR GERMAN SAMOA.
THE Council of the League of Nations :
Whereas by Article 119 of the Treaty of Peace
with Germany signed at Versailles on the 28th June,
1919, Germany renounced in favour of the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers all her rights over her overseas
possessions, including therein German Samoa ; and
Whereas the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
agreed that, in accordance with Article 22, part 1 (Covenant
of the League of Nations), of the said treaty, a mandate
should be conferred upon His Britannic Majesty, to be
exercised on his behalf by the Government of the Dominion
of New Zealand, to administer German Samoa, and have
proposed that the mandate should be formulated in the
following terms ; and
Whereas His Britannic Majesty, for and on behalf of
the Government of the Dominion of New Zealand, has
agreed to accept the mandate in respect of the said Territory,
and has undertaken to exercise it on behalf of the League
of Nations in accordance with the following provisions ; and
Whereas by the aforementioned Article 22, paragraph 8,
it is provided that the degree of authority, control, or
administration to be exercised by the Mandatory, not having
been previously agreed upon by the members of the League,
shall be explicitly defined by the Council of the League of
Nations :
Confirming the said mandate, defines its terms as
follows :


Article i.
The Territory over which a mandate is conferred upon
His Britannic Majesty for and on behalf of the Government
of the Dominion of New Zealand (hereinafter called the
Mandatory) is the former German colony of Samoa.
Article 2.
Ihe Mandatory shall have full power of administration
and legislation over the Territory subject to the present
mandate as an integral portion of the Dominion of New
Zealand, and may apply the laws of the Dominion of New
Zealand to the Territory, subject to such local modifications
as circumstances may require.
The Mandatory shall promote to the utmost the material
and moral well-being and the social progress of the in-
habitants of the Territory subject to the present mandate.
Article 3.
The Mandatory shall see that the slave trade is pro-
hibited, and that no forced labour is permitted, except for
essential public works and services, and then only for
adequate remuneration.
The Mandatory shall also see that the traffic in arms
and ammunition is controlled in accordance with principles
analogous to those laid down in the convention relating to
the control of the arms traffic, signed on the 10th September,
1919, or in any convention amending the same.
The supply of intoxicating spirits and beverages to the
Natives shall be prohibited.
Article 4.
The military training of the Natives, otherwise than
for purposes of internal police and the local defence of the
Territory, shall be prohibited. Furthermore, no military or


naval bases shall be established or fortifications erected in
the Territory.
Article 5.
Subject to the provisions of any local law for the
maintenance of public order and public morals, the Man-
datory shall ensure in the Territory freedom of conscience
and the free exercise of all forms of worship, and shall
allow all missionaries, nationals of any State member of the
League of Nations, to enter into, travel, and reside in the
Territory for the purpose of prosecuting their calling.
Article 6.
The Mandatory shall make to the Council of the League
of Nations an annual report to the satisfaction of the Council,
containing full information with regard to the Territory, and
indicating the measures taken to carry out the obligations
assumed under Articles 2,3, 4, and 5.
Article 7.
The consent of the Council of the League of Nations
is required for any modification of the terms of the present
mandate.
The Mandatory agrees that, if any dispute whatever
should arise between the Mandatory and another member of
the League of Nations relating to the interpretation or the
application of the provisions of the mandate, such dispute,
if it cannot be settled by negotiation, shall be submitted
to the Permanent Court of International Justice provided
for by Article 14 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.
The present declaration shall be deposited in the archives
of the League of Nations. Certified copies shall be for-
warded by the Secretary-General of the League of Nations
to all Powers signatories of the Treaty of Peace with
Germany.
Made at Geneva the 17th day of December, 1920.


GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS.
ADMINISTRATOR’S DEPARTMENT AND SECRETARIAT.
Administrator. —Major-General G. S. Richardson, C. 8.,
C.M.G., C.B.E.
Secretary to Administration. —Colonel J. W. Hutchen,
C.M.G., C.B.E.
Staff. —(i) Assistant Secretary: (2) stenographer;
(3) typist.
THE Territory of Western Samoa is governed under
a Constitution laid down by the Samoa Act, 1921,
an Act of the Parliament of the Dominion of New
Zealand, the mandate to administer the Territory conferred
on His Britannic Majesty by the League of Nations being
exercised through the Government of that Dominion.
The Constitution provides for an Administrator, a
Legislative Council, a Judiciary, and for Educational,
Medical, and other Governmental Departments.
The principal officer of the Government is the Adminis-
trator, who is appointed by the Governor-General of New
Zealand, and is charged with the administration of the
executive government of the Territory, subject to the
control of the New Zealand Minister of External Affairs.
The Legislative Council consists of not less than six
official members, and of unofficial members not exceeding
in number the official members, three of whom are elected,
and is presided over by the Administrator. The official
members are appointed by the Governor-General of New
Zealand. The electoral franchise is exercisable by the male
European population resident in the Territory, subject to a
small property or income qualification.


FAIPULE (NATIVE PARLIAMENT), JUNE, 1924.


FORMER GOVERNMENT HOUSE : NOW THE RESIDENCE OF THE CHIEF JUDGE.


The Administrator, acting with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council, has a limited power of making
Ordinances for the peace, order, and good government of
the Territory. A power of legislation, subject to the
Constitution, also resides in the Governor-General of New
Zealand in Council.
Purely native Samoan affairs are conducted with the
advice of the council of chiefs known as a “ Fono of
Faipules.”
DEPARTMENT OF NATIVE AFFAIRS.
Personnel. —(i) Secretary for Native Affairs ; (2) Resident
Commissioner of Savai’i ; (3) Assistant Secretary for
Native Affairs ; (4) Inspector; (5) Secretary to
Resident Commissioner of Savai’i ; (6) Chief Trans-
lator ; (7-10) Interpreters ; (11-18) Clerks and
Cadets ; (19-32) Police and Messengers.
The Native side of the administrative work of the
Group is conducted by this Department, the efficiency of
which is assured by the appointment of the following
Native officials, who rank as chiefs and orators in their own
right and act as part-time Government servants : 33 Faipule ,
17 Pulefaatoaga, 14 Komisi, 29 Faamasino, 147 Pulenu’u,
85 Clerks and Messengers.
These officials have their distinctive duties, and are
responsible to this Department for the carrying-out of
same.
The Faipule, who is appointed by the Administrator,
is a member of the Native Council, and acts in the
capacity of a Native Governor in his own district. His
duties are wide and varied, and range from advising in
the settlement of domestic and family disputes to the
making of laws for the benefit of the indigenous


inhabitants of the Group. He is also responsible for the
supervision of the Native officials in his district.
The Native Council ( Fono) meets twice a year to
discuss with and advise the Administrator on matters
pertaining to the welfare of Samoa.
The Komisi is a member of the Lands and Titles
Commission, and sits in session with the Chief Judge
and white assessors when called upon to decide matters
in dispute concerning Native lands and titles. He also
investigates (and reports on), when instructed by the
Department so to do, disputes over these matters arising
in his own district.
The Pulefaatoaga is an Inspector of Plantations, and
is responsible for the good condition of village planta-
tions in regard to food-supplies, &c., and the carrying-
out of the Rhinocerus-beetle Ordinance.
The Faamasino, or Native Judge, is an official of the
High Court, and has jurisdiction in his district over
minor offences to the extent of a £2 fine. He alone
of Native officials is authorized to receive moneys in
payment of fines. These he forwards to the Native
Department, where the money is apportioned, one-fourth
being retained by the Government and three-fourths
being paid into Native Village Funds Accounts.
The Pulenu’u is the official responsible for the good
order of his village. He represents his village in
governmental matters. Among his many duties are the
collection of personal taxes and dog licenses, village
inspection, &c. He is invested with authority to inflict
fines for certain offences.
A system of self-government in the villages and
districts was introduced towards the end of 1924. Each
village is represented on committees by chiefs and


orators chosen by the village, and presided over by the
Pulenu’u.
This committee has authority to deal with all local
village matters —the making of village by-laws, &c. All
such by-laws must be submitted to the Administrator
for his approval, after which they may be enforced and
offenders dealt with before the Faamasino, or Native
Judge.
Representatives from the Village Committee are selected
to sit on the District Council. This Council is presided
over by the Faipule of the district. As in the Village
Committee, this Council is authorized to make by-laws
for the district or county; and matters beyond the
jurisdiction of this Council may be referred to the Fono,
or Council, of Faipules.
In encouraging these committees and Councils to
inaugurate a fund for local public works the Government
returns to each village 75 per cent, of the fines imposed
by the Native Judges. These moneys may be used
locally by the committees, under the supervision of the
Native Department, for strictly public works.
A striking feature of the Administration is the entire
absence of police officials outside the municipal area.
The authority of the Native officials and the support of
chiefs and orators are found to be effective in the
maintenance of order.
The Native Department deals with purely Native
offences, and for this purpose the Secretary for Native
Affairs and the Resident Commissioner of Savai’i are
Commissioners of the High Court.
The following is a summary of the work of the
Department in Mulinu’u, Apia, for the past twelve
months (these figures do not include the minor cases


dealt with by the Native Judges in both islands) :
Land disputes, 55 ; title disputes, 42 ; enforcement
Faamasino judgments, 312 ; civil claims, 211 ; insult,
12 ; contempt of Court, 10 ; assault, 11 ; failure to pay
personal taxes, 99 ; failure to pay dog taxes, 73 ;
wandering pigs, 14; breach of Arms Ordinance, 3 ;
unpaid building and water rates, 11 ; provoking breach
of peace, 6 ; theft, 6 ; adultery, 3 ; appeals, 2 ; forgery, 1 ;
miscellaneous, 56 : total number of cases, 927.
The correspondence is handled almost entirely by the
Native Samoan staff.
The salaries paid to the part-time Native officials
previously referred to amount to approximately £5,642
per annum.
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(l) Chief Judge ; (2) Crown Solicitor ; (3) Re-
gistrar of Court and Deputy Registrar of Lands.
General. —The laws of the Territory are to a great
extent the same as those of New Zealand, both being based
on the law of England as it existed in 1840 (the date of
the establishment of New Zealand as a colony). Freedom
of conscience and personal liberty, being root principles of
English law, are therefore assured to the inhabitants of
Western Samoa. To the groundwork of English law is
added a number of enactments of the New Zealand Parlia-
ment which have been made applicable to Samoa in the
same way as they are to New Zealand, and which deal with
particular branches of the law-—as, for instance, partner-
ship, bankruptcy, marine insurance, bills of exchange, sale
of goods, trustees, and the administration of the estates of
deceased persons.
The Constitution itself provides a code of criminal law,
and there is no such thing as a common-law offence.


PORTION OF SAMOAN SECTION OF APIA HOSPITAL.
(The Tales in the Background are the Isolation Fales.)
Hdbk.—6


SAMOAN FALES (HOUSES).
ROAD IN MULINU’U, SEAT OF NATIVE GOVERNMENT AND
BURIAL-PLACE OF SAMOAN KINGS.


The Ordinances, made with the advice and consent of
the Legislative Council, generally deal with local government,
minor matters of local import, and taxation.
The taxation laws are mild. Indirect taxation tty way
of import duties produces by far the largest revenue.
There is also by way of direct taxation a small personal
tax of from £1 to £1 53. payable annually by all male
residents, a building-tax, a store-tax, and a salary-tax
varying from £1 to £2O per annum. Death duties, business
license fees, and other small license fees and charges are
also collected. There is an export tax of £1 per ton on
copra and £2 per ton on cocoa.
Land laws are dealt with in a separate section.
The marriage law presents no special feature except
that the marriage of Chinese contract labourers with Samoan
women is prohibited. The grounds for divorce are the
same as in New Zealand.
The importation, manufacture, and sale of intoxicating
liquor is prohibited, provision, however, being made for its
use for medicinal purposes.
The importation and sale of arms and ammunition is
strictly controlled.
The laws are administered by the High Court of Western
Samoa, which has full jurisdiction in that behalf, subject to
an appeal in certain cases to the Supreme Court of New
Zealand. The procedure of the Court resembles that of
other British Courts, but there is no trial by jury in civil
cases. In major criminal cases the Court sits with four
assessors.
The laws make in general no distinction between the
Native inhabitants and the other residents of the islands.
Statistical. —During the year ending 31st March, 1924,
the High Court dealt with criminal actions on 160 days,


and recorded 618 convictions against 742 persons charged,
54 cases being dismissed, and 80 withdrawn with the leave
of the Court.
Civil cases occupied 93 days, when 428 actions were
heard. Judgment was given in 385 cases, and 55 were
withdrawn or struck out.
Fees collected in stamps by the Registrar amounted to
133 1 7 s -. and in cash for fines, costs, marriage fees, &c.,
£1,987 16s. rod.
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(l) Commissioner ; (2) Sub-Inspector ; (3) Ser-
geant ; (4) Accountant and Storekeeper ; (5) Gaoler;
(6) Constable.
Historical. —Before the year 1879 in Samoa there was no
established Police Force. Any Native offenders against the
community were dealt with by their own chiefs, and
European delinquents were answerable to their respective
Consuls.
Samoa was then the trading and distributing centre for
the Tonga, Ellice, Gilbert, Marshall, and Caroline Islands,
and a fleet of twelve or more schooners at anchor before
Apia was no uncommon sight for the period. The crews
of such a fleet were not remarkable for saintliness, and in
the numerous drinking-dens along the waterfront where
liquor of varying degrees of potency was sold without
restriction of any sort it was their nightly custom to gather
for their only pastimes of drinking and fighting. Law-
lessness was the distinguishing feature of the times, and
a typical example of its fruits, dating from 1877, is still on
record. One Cochrane murdered a fellow-seaman in a
saloon known as “ The Russian Bear.” He was tried by
his own Consul, and on conviction was shipped aboard the


schooner Ada May for transport to San Franciso for
sentence. The citizens, however, fearing that punishment
in America for an offence in Samoa was too doubtful a
sequence, resolved to take no risks. Cochrane was brought
ashore again and hanged on a coconut-palm growing in
front of the site now occupied by the Central Hotel.
It was largely as a step towards proper control of the
foreign community that in 1879 Sir Arthur Gordon, then
High Commissioner of the Western Pacific, set up the
Municipality of Apia. A half-caste named Mickey Scanlon
had the honour of becoming its first police constable,
and his brother was made gaoler. This pair, with the
assistance of a number of Natives, carried out their duties
under a Magistrate administering Ordinances framed and
passed by the Council duly appointed for the purpose.
The system appears to have been effective, for no change
in machinery occurred until 1900, when Western Samoa
became a German colony.
The German criminal code and laws then began to
operate, and the Police Force was increased from time to
time as experience suggested, until at the date of the
military occupation by New Zealand and the establishment
of military police the Force consisted of six European
officers with the gaoler, twenty-four Native police constables,
and thirty fitafita, or Native soldiers.
With the coming of the Civil Administration in 1920
seventy Armed Constabulary from New Zealand carried on
police duty in the Group until replaced in the same year
by a purely Civil force. To-day this comprises two com-
missioned and four non-commissioned officers, or the same
number of Europeans found necessary in German experience.
At the same time the Native assistants are reduced to
thirty-four.


It is noteworthy that under the German system the chief
of police had power in minor offences to inflict fines on
sight or upon reports by his junior officers, and employers
of indentured labour dealt with offences in a summary way.
It was a rough-and-ready method, and it did not involve
careful inquiry, collecting and sifting of evidence, briefing,
preparing, and presenting the case to the Crown Prosecutor,
or conducting it in Court, all of which is demanded in the
administration of British justice. It is to the credit of the
Department concerned that this additional and by no means
inconsiderable burden is borne without detriment to efficiency
and without increase in the personnel over that of former
times.
Statistical. —During the year 1923 offences numbering
652 were reported, 504 convictions resulting. They are
detailed thus ; Offences against morality, 47 ; offences
against the person, 74; offences against property, 98 ;
gaming offences, 2 ; Arms Ordinance, 3 ; police offences,
65 ; opium offences, 4 ; liquor offences, 61 ; by-law breaches,
144 ; miscellaneous, 6 : total, 504.
The proportion of offences to the population was 176
per cent. : that of the police to the population is Ito
1,122-6.
The goal records show 420 persons received during the
year, and 433 discharged.
AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(1) Director ; (2) Clerk ; (3-5) Inspectors.
The Agricultural Department has functions many and
varied. It supervises all cultivated lands, both European
and Native ; carries out systematic search for the rhinoceros-
beetle, and sees that measures for the destruction of the


EUROPEAN HOSPITAL, APIA: BUILT 1912, MOSQUITO-NETTED 1921


OCCASION OF KIN G'S BIRTHDAY SPORTS : NATIVE COURTHOUSE AND OFFICES, MULINU’U.


pest are properly maintained ; inspects weights and measures
throughout the Territory; examines copra and cocoa
bought, sold, and exported, and issues copra-buyers’ licenses.
In addition the Department co-operates with the Health
authorities in supervision of sanitation in the Native villages
and country districts.
During the year 156 licenses were issued to buyers of
copra.
Cocoa exported was examined with the following
results: Standard-quality cocoa, 91 tons; below-standard
quality, 46 tons; Native cocoa, 6 tons; inferior cocoa,
102 tons ; condemned cocoa, 43 bags.
Several varieties of cotton-seed were planted for ex-
periment and observation.
Rhinoceros-beetle inspection resulted in the destruction
of —beetles, 186,128 ; larvae, 4,709,037 ; eggs, 311,861 —all
on Native areas ; the figures from European lands being—
beetles, 23,598 ; larvae, 336,795 ; eggs, 32,115 : giving a
grand total of more than five and a half millions of beetles
destroyed.
The flying-fox nuisance is combated by a bounty of is.
for every twenty-five destroyed, and an additional £l.O
prize for the greatest tally.
Native foodstuffs were planted under departmental
supervision as follows : Coconuts, 180,000 ; cocoa, 115,000 ;
bananas, 1,648,000; taro, 4,950,000; taamu, 3,200,000;
tobacco, 208,000 ; yams, 322,000 ; sugar-cane, 1,539,000 ;
kava, 230,000 ; arrowroot, 900.


EDUCATION DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(i) Superintendent of Schools ; (2, 3,4) Head-
masters, District Schools ; (5) Travelling Teacher;
(6, 7) Assistant Teachers ; (8, 9) Pupil-teachers,
Native Teachers, and Probationers.
Until recently the only schools in Samoa were conducted
by the missions, making uniformity of policy and system
very difficult. The education of the Samoan being a
matter of supreme importance in relation to the future of
the race, the Administration has endeavoured to work out
a definite policy to be followed by all teachers and schools.
To this end a conference on education was held in August
last, when representatives from the missions attended.
The Director of Education in New Zealand was also present.
The following classification of schools was made :
Grade I (Missions’ Pastor Schools) : For children of
five to ten years. Instruction in Samoan only ;
under sole control of the missions.
Grade II (Mission Schools) : To be gradually estab-
lished in each district. Native .Samoan teacher
selected by the missions and paid by the Adminis-
tration ; a common syllabus to be followed, English
being a subject ; competitive examinations to select
scholars for Grade 111 schools.
Grade 111 (Government Schools Malifa (Upolu),
Vaipouli (Savai’i) ) : These schools are under the
direct control of the Administration, and are con-
ducted by white teachers with the aid of qualified
Natives. The instruction is in English only, and
higher education is provided for. Technical training
is given in plumbing, carpentry, wireless, typewriting,
and engineering.


There is also an Agricultural School at Avele for the
training of Samoan youths in agriculture and for the
experimenting with new food products and improved
methods.
The average attendance at Government schools for the
past year was—boys, 419-2 ; girls, 157-5.
The numbers being educated by the various missions
during the past year were- —London Missionary Society,
7,002 ; Methodist Mission, 2,021 ; Roman Catholic, 1,874 ;
Latter-Day Saints (Mormon), 485. There are also the
Marist Brothers and Marist Sisters schools in Apia, with a
roll of 320 and 200 respectivelv.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(1) Chief Medical Officer ; (2) Hospital Superin-
tendent ; (3-5) Medical Officers ; (6, 7) District Medi-
cal Officers ; (8) Dispenser ; (9) Secretary ; (10) Store-
keeper and Supervisor; (n) Clerk : (12-20) Hospital
Matron and Nursing Sisters ; (21) Health Inspector ;
(22) Assistant Health Inspector.
In its general supervision over the health of the mixed
population of Samoa the functions of the Health Depart-
ment are widespread.
During the past year (31st March, 1923, to 31st March,
1924) eighty-six ships, carrying 3,348 passengers and crew, were
inspected on entry into the port of Apia. Pratique was with-
held in two cases owing to the presence on board of influenza.
Food-inspection for the same period condemned 6,658 lb.
of meat and iß| tons of rice. Nine different diseases were
recorded and treated among the Europeans, eleven among
the Samoans, eight among the Chinese, and one among


the Solomon-Islanders. Seven cases of leprosy —one half-
caste, four Samoans, and two Chinese—were removed to
the Leper Station in Mokagai, in Fiji, leaving Western Samoa
practically clean of this disease.
The following are the figures of the work done in Apia
Hospital and medical out-stations :
Apia Hospital. —General attendances, 37,279 ; European
in-patients, 184 ; Samoan in-patients, 663 ; Chinese in-
patients, 512 ; operations (major), 225 ; operations (minor),
270 ; Chinese out-patients, 1,320.
Tuasivi Hospital (nine months return).- —General at-
tendances, 16,038 ; Samoan in-patients, 151.
On the 4th April, 1923, free medical treatment for
Samoans was instituted, the Natives voluntarily agreeing to
subscribe £1 per head adult male towards the cost.
A new hospital at Aleipata (the eastern end of Upolu)
was recently opened, and its returns are not yet available.
Country dispensaries were established during the year in
a number of outlying districts.
By arrangement with the Education Department, twelve
suitable Samoan girls are being taught English and trained
in the hospital as probationer nurses under supervision of
the white Sisters. They attend lectures in elementary
medical and kindred subjects, and when qualified are sent
to out-stations for a further year’s duties under a District
Medical Officer. The services rendered by these nurses are
highly valued. Their contract terminates at the end of
three years, with the option of re-engagement.
In the same way ten suitable Native youths are engaged
as medical cadets for the hospital. The course at the
institution is for two years, during which they receive an
all-round training by means of lectures and practice suited
to their capacity and the work designed for them. After


two years, if they are considered capable, they serve a year
at an out-station, and later may qualify as Native medical
assistants. During the year two cadets satisfied the ex-
aminers and duly qualified.
CUSTOMS AND MARINE DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(i) Collector ; (2) Examining Officer ; (3) First
Clerk; (4) Clerk; (5) Fumigation Officer; (6)
Harbourmaster.
The trading for the year just closed has proved the
quietest on record since 1917. This is due partly to over-
stocking during the recent boom, and partly to the
diminished exports following great damage to plantations
by the gale of March, 1923.
Revenue of £68,450 was collected from all sources, as
compared with £75,938 for the previous year.
Receipts under principal headings stand thus :
£
Import duties .. .. .. 41,948
Export duties —• £
Cocoa.. .. .. 954
Copra.. .. 10,731
Shipping fees .. .. . . 2,195
Lease of export sheds, lighters, &c. . . 1,029
Taxes and Native travelling-passes . . 9,495
Miscellaneous, including sales of
medicinal liquor .. .. 2,098
Total .. .. £68,450
The total trade for the year amounted to £557,655, or
about £90,000 less than the year 1922-23.


Imports amounted to £268,881, from the following
countries£
United Kingdom.. .. .. 19,788
New Zealand .. .. .. 77,782
Australia .. .. .. 98,301
United States of America .. 62,717
Other countries .. .. .. 10,293
Total .. .. £268,881
Exports exceeded imports by £19,893.
The value of cocoa exported fell from £44,513 in 1922-23
to only £12,787 in the year under review. This was a
consequence of market collapse, which in its turn caused
the output to fall from 765 tons to 221 tons.
Copra also shows a decrease, in quantity from 16,956
tons to 13,484 tons, and in value from £319,333 to £269,995.
The greater part of Samoa copra, though purchased in
England, was shipped direct to Germany and Holland for
crushing.
Marine. —The Harbourmaster controls the floating stock
of the Administration, and maintains the leading lights
and beacons. In addition to keeping these in order, a
number of passages at different localities about the islands
have been buoyed during the past year, and repairs effected
where necessary. Such work has been greatly facilitated
by the Administration’s steamer “ Lady Roberts,” which
arrived in Samoa in June, 1923, and she has proved a
much appreciated improvement in the service for passengers
and mail between Pago Pago and Apia.
Apia port entries show : Inwards- —seventy-five vessels,
totalling 87,860 tons; outwards seventy-two vessels,


totalling 89,888 tons. There were, in addition, four British
and four foreign warships and two yachts entered and
cleared the port.
POST AND TELEGRAPH DEPARTMENT.
Personnel. —(1) Postmaster ; (2, 3) Clerks ; (4) Line Foreman.
The activities of the Apia Post Office are considerable
for a small community. Mail-matter delivered during the
last financial year was : Letters, 113,000 ; other articles,
81,141 ; registered letters, 2,639 > parcels, 2,231. The
respective figures for matter posted are- —95,531 16,968 ;
3,053 ; and 902.
Money-orders totalling 1,310, for £10,235, were issued ;
1,992, amounting to £1,102, were paid.
Stamp-sales brought in £1,287, an -d telephone fees £1,506.
The Post Office also conducts a savings-bank, which
shows the following record for the year : Deposits, £21,850 ;
withdrawals, £25,795 ; present deposits, £36,740 ; accounts
opened, 137 ; accounts closed, 103.
The moneys collected by the Post Office for other
Departments amounted to £6,307. Miscellaneous receipts
on behalf of the New Zealand Government totalled £994,
and payments £982. £776 was collected for the Customs
Department of Samoa.
Radio Station.
Personnel. Superintendent, Operators, Engineer and
Assistant.
The station, with a 70 h.p. Allen engine, supplemented
by a 60 h.p. engine of German make, has maintained
communications free from interruption during the year.
It collects weather reports from Tonga, Tahiti, Rarotonga


Fiji, Norfolk Island, New Hebrides, and these, together
with a report from Apia, are broadcasted twice daily during
the hurricane season and once daily for the rest of the
year. Radio connection with Savai’i has been set up, and
is open during daylight hours. A class to train Samoans
as operators has recently been formed, but has not yet
sufficient data to render a report.
For the financial year 1923-24 15,398 messages of
177,178 words were handled, and the amount earned
totalled £3,414.
APIA OBSERVATORY.
The Apia Observatory is situated near the extreme
end of Mulinu’u Peninsula. It is about one mile and
a half from Apia, and is easily reached by motor along
the palm-lined avenue which passes through the Native
village of Mulinu’u.
The Observatory was founded in 1902 by the Society
of Natural Sciences of Gottingen, for the purpose of
taking observations simultaneously with those of an
Antarctic Expedition. The results were of such value
that the Observatory was made permanent, and its
scope extended to include more detailed observations in
magnetism, meteorology, seismology, and related subjects.
It is now not only the most complete of its kind in
the Pacific, but is recognized among the outstanding
geophysical observatories in the world. Although con-
trolled and largely financed by the New Zealand
Government, generous annual grants are received from
the British Admiralty and the Carnegie Institution of
Washington for the maintenance and carrying-out of
research work in meteorology and atmospheric electricity.


MAIN BUILDING, APIA OBSERVATORY.
HdbU.—7




The remote position of the Observatory, situated as
it is far from any continent or land-mass, gives the
results obtained a unique value both from a theoretical
and a practical point of view.
The Observatory is completely equipped with instru-
ments for measuring the changes which are taking place
continuously in the magnetism of the earth. Since the
year 1905 the records have been of a high standard of
accuracy. In the period 1905-24 the compass has changed
its direction about 40' to the eastward, and now (1924)
points io° 19' east of north. At the same time the
horizontal and vertical forces acting on the magnetic needle
have altered I*2 and i*6 per cent, respectively. It is in
the hope of determining some of the causes contributing
to these changes in terrestrial magnetism, which take place
from day to day as well as over long periods, that the
Department of Terrestrial Magnetism of the Carnegie Insti-
tution of Washington continues to contribute towards the
carrying-on of research work at Apia on the electrical state
of the air.
The Samoan Islands are not far from the line of
earthquake disturbance which runs northward from New
Zealand to the Kermadecs and the Tonga Deep. The
position of Apia is well chosen to obtain information
in regard to the nature and progress of earthquake-
waves in this disturbed area of the ocean-bed of the
Pacific. The Observatory is provided with two very fine
and valuable seismographs, which record the movement of
the ground magnified about 150 times.
The ordinary meteorological elements, barometric
pressure, temperature, rainfall, and humidity are recorded
with an unusualty high order of accuracy. AsAa result
of close observations, the existence of periodical changes


in climatic conditions has been found to occur. This is
more fully dealt with in the meteorological section of
this handbook. Observations are made on the variation
of the heat in the direct rays of the sun, and on the
direction and velocity of the winds in the upper atmosphere.
The Observatory is the co-ordinating centre for the
wireless weather stations in the South Pacific ; in the event
of cyclones, warnings are broadcasted as to the probable
path of these destructive storms.
Although the importance of the Apia Observatory is well
known to the scientific world, its exceptional value is not
appreciated by the average individual. Its unique position
in the Pacific renders it an essential link in the chain of
accredited observatories throughout the world. Tourists
would be well advised to take the opportunity of visiting
the Observatory and making themselves acquainted with
its work.


PRODUCTS AND FIELD FOR
DEVELOPMENT.
THE staple products of Samoa are copra and cocoa.
Copra is the dried kernel of the coconut. The palm
grows to perfection, especially around the fringe of
seaboard, where are situated most plantations —generally
speaking, within a radius of twenty-five miles from Apia.
Coconuts grow inland, but their yield decreases at any
distance from the sea.
The yield per acre is commonly from 7 cwt. to 10 cwt.
of dried copra, and here and there a ton or more is not un-
known. European plantations carry from foity-eight to
seventy palms to the acre —the higher figure being the
maximum with economy, though Native coconut areas
often carry much more. Some years ago experiments in
artificial fertilizing were disappointing, and to-day practically
nothing of the sort is done. Hand-weeding coconut planta-
tions is an expensive item, and the soil, though fertile,
is too rocky for plough or harrow. The difficulty is over-
come by grazing cattle between the palms after these have
attained sufficient growth, and thus a source of expense
may be turned to a profit.
Palms bear in six years and upwards from time of
planting. They come into full profit in the twelfth to
fifteenth year, and continue to bear for fifty to one hundred
years. One unit of labour to 30 acres of bearing coconuts
is the standard.


Harvesting is a simple matter. The matured nuts fall
from the tree, and are collected in heaps, split with an
axe, and the kernel prised out at the rate of 600 lb. per
man per day. At this stage the product is known as
“ green ” copra. It is then passed to the drier, where it
loses about 40 per cent, of its weight, and emerges in
twelve to eighteen hours as the copra of commerce. Natives
sun-dry their product, but kilns are now being built for
their exclusive use. By this it is designed to improve the
grade of Samoa copra ; and to the same end there is in
force since 1923 a Copra Ordinance, under which it is a
punishable offence to {a) make copra from other than
matured nuts, or buy or sell copra so made; (b) take
delivery of, buy, sell, or offer for sale undried or imperfectly
dried or sweated copra, or rotten copra, or copra mixed
with shells, stones, dirt, &c. ; (c) buy or export copra
without a license.
Under the same Ordinance buyers’ licenses are issued
by the Department of Agriculture to fit and proper persons,
and copra may be bought only on certain specified days
of the week. Special licenses are granted for purchase of
“ green ” copra.
Government Inspectors enforce these regulations, which
already have considerably improved the quality of the
commodity concerned, and it is only a matter of time when
Samoa copra—for long known as the best in the South Seas
—will rank with the best from any part of the world.
For quantities of copra exported during the last seven
years see Appendix IV.
Cocoa plantations in Samoa are almost exclusively in
the hands of Europeans. In 1917 there were exported 1,207
tons of dried cocoa-beans, but post-war decline in prices


MULIFANUA COCONUT PLANTATION.


TAPATAPAO CACAO PLANTATION.


has greatly reduced this output. Samoa cocoa is of the
best quality, and is eagerly sought for blending in the
manufacture of the highest class of chocolate.
The Criollo variety of cacao-tree was originally planted,
but its susceptibility to disease —particularly “ canker ”
(.Phytophthera Jaberi)— led to the substitution of the hardier
Criollo-Forastero hybrid composing the plantations to-day.
The average number of trees per acre is 1,923. They
bear fruit about the fifth year, and the yield of dried bean
for the unit quoted runs from 3 cwt. to 12 cwt. A fair
average is 6 cwt., but more than double the quantity has
been produced by the best areas. One unit of labour (costing
about 3s. 6d. a day inclusive of all charges) is considered
sufficient for twelve acres of bearing trees.
There is room for development in this industry. With
the inevitable recovery of prices the next few years should
see the opening-up of some of the thousands of acres of
bush land still awaiting exploitation. Such land varies in
price from £3 to £5 per acre according to locality.
As with copra, the improvement of the quality of Samoa
cocoa is the aim of the Administration. All of this com-
modity submitted for shipment is carefully examined, and
the first-grade article is branded “ Standard-quality cocoa.”
For all such the Government pays a bonus of £2 a ton
to the grower. The examining committee may brand as
“ Inferior ” all cocoa of a quality likely to prove detri-
mental to agricultural interests in Samoa, or it may pro-
hibit shipment. Medium qualities are shipped on their
merits without brand.
For quantities of cocoa exported during the last seven
years see Appendix IV.


MINOR PRODUCTS.
Papain.- —-This is the milky latex of the Carica papaya,
or “ mummy-apple/’ which grows wild throughout Samoa,
especially on newly cleared forest land. The demand for
the product recently shows signs of increasing, and the
profits are large. In 1917 a quantity was prepared for
4s. a pound and sold locally at Bs. 6d. This crop can
therefore be made to reduce expense of development of a
permanent plantation.
Bananas. —The banana is a staple article of Samoan
diet, and it has been abundantly proved that a fine-quality
fruit can be produced. The chief disability at present in
the matter of export is the lack of a direct ship to the
market in Australia or New Zealand. Recent efforts to
overcome this obstacle have been partially successful, and
no doubt will be completely so in the near future. There
is then no reason why banana-growing should not at once
take its place with the main industries of the country.
Pineapples. —This fruit grows extremely well in Samoa,
and in the opinion of experts attains a flavour as yet
unsurpassed. A German firm commenced a small plantation
and canning-factory before the war, and the first shipment
of 3,274 cases of fruit (unsweetened) was sent to England
in 1916. It turned out a complete success, and was warmly
commended, but war conditions prevented its being followed
up. In this field of enterprise it would seem that every
condition is favourable.
Kapok. —This product is worthy of attention. The tree
grows practically, wild everywhere, and is at present chiefly
used as a wind-break in cocoa plantations. It bears
prolifically, and almost without cultivation. The expenses
are thus a minimum, and the element of risk non-existent.




METHOD OF COLLECTING NUTS ON A PLANTATION.
PLANTATION SCENE, MAGIA.


Nutmegs. —These have been produced, and were pro-
nounced of good quality. A profitable market, however,
has yet to be found.
Rubber. —A few rubber companies were operating in
Samoa before 1914, and while rubber was at 3s. a pound
they were profitable, the cost of production as late as- 1918
being only is 6d. a pound. Hevea (para) grows very
satisfactorily, and the returns per tree are on a par with
those of other countries. One plantation records 175 lb. to
200 lb. of dried rubber per acre from trees tapped at three
and a half years old. The rubber from Samoa fetched
high prices in London, and the cheaper methods of modern
operations should yet renew the industry on a paying basis.
Citrus Fruits, &c.— Lisbon and Eureka lemons, Wash-
ington Navel and Valentia oranges, all do well in Samoa,
and limes of good quality have long been produced.
Other products are coffee, ginger, tobacco, cinnamon,
cardamon, candlenuts, sisal hemp, Tonka beans, &c., and
cotton.


LAND TENURE IN SAMOA.
THE early history of European land tenure and titles
in Samoa furnishes an interesting commentary on
the history of the country itself.
The first documents by which Europeans sought to
prove their claims to land were commonly recorded with
the Consul sharing the nationality of the claimant,* and
sometimes the recorder was merely a dummy acting as
purchaser or donee of Native land in order to save it from
confiscation during the frequent tribal wars.
The Berlin Act of 1889* provided for a commission to
settle all alien land-titles, and in the instructions to that
body it was charged that there should be disallowed all
claims to land based upon “ the consideration of a sale of
firearms or munitions of war, or upon the consideration of
intoxicating liquors ” —a shrewd hint of the suspected origin
of some of the claims put forward.
The Commission sat until December, 1894, and its
report is amusing reading. Of the total area of land claimed
by aliens, only 8 per cent, was confirmed to them. The
claims aggregated 1,691,893 acres, while the whole area of
the country is about 950,000 acres. Very naturally, the
labours of the Commission did not always give satisfaction.
This was the first attempt to examine and record in a
central registry the European lands in Samoa, and the
decisions then made are still the root of the titles to such
lands in the Group.
In October, 1894, upon receipt of notice that the Com-
missioners would hold session in a certain district, the
Native chiefs and rulers wrote to them : “ Therefore, with
apologies to Your Excellencies, the gentlemen from the
* See “Historical” section.


three great Powers, our decision is that you remain where
you are now ; let not your work come to pass ; this land
of ours will not be examined into ; our chiefs as a body
do not will it so .” Whereupon, following the
devious methods then in vogue under the tripartite control,
the Commissioners conferred and wrote to the Consuls,
and the Consuls conferred and wrote to the Naval Com-
manders ; and the Naval Commanders, being better at
taking action than at conferring and writing, presumably
did what was necessary to cause the chiefs to change their
minds.
Previously to this, in 1891, the then Chief Justice,
Mr, Cedercrantz, had by a Real Property Ordinance estab-
lished the first land-registration system in Samoa, basing it
on the Torrens system, the titles being guaranteed by the
Samoan Government. This system was far in advance of
the times, and proved impracticable, the expense of accurate
surveys being oppressive to the owners of land, and the
guarantee of the Native Government worthless.
This was pointed out by Cedercrantz’s successor, Chief
Justice Ide, who proceeded by a new Real Property
Ordinance to establish a system which was in its turn
superseded in 1900, on the cession of Western Samoa to
Germany, by an entirely different German system of regis-
tration. In 1920 the latter again made way for the present
efficient system, established on the coming into operation
of the mandate.
This system is one of the record only, all past and
future records and deeds being preserved, accurate definition
of boundaries being required in future transactions, but no
guarantee of title being given.
At the present time, of a total of 950,000 acres in the
islands of Western Samoa, 76,000 acres are New Zealand


Crown Estates land,, 854,000 acres Native land, and 20,000
acres European land-—400,000 acres of this can be con-
sidered as waste land.
The New Zealand Crown Estates land consists of the
properties retained and accounted for under the terms of
the. Treaty of Versailles. These areas are being sold, leased,
or managed as plantation land under the direction of a
Board.
Native land is vested in the Crown in trust for such
Natives as are, by the customs and usages of the Samoans,,
entitled to it. It is inalienable, except as mentioned below,
either by sale, lease, or mortgage ; cannot be taken in
execution for debt, or by creditors in bankruptcy ; and
cannot be acquired by a European for himself or his
children through marriage with a Samoan woman.
The Administrator,, consulting the desire and interest of
the Samoan owners, may grant leases of Native land for
any term up to forty years, and may sell such land within
the town area of Apia for the benefit of the owners.
Disputes as to title to Native land are decided by a
Commission under the presidency of the Chief Judge, con-
sisting of European assessors and Samoan advisers.
Such are the beneficent provisions laid down by the
present Government in terms of the mandate for securing
intact to the Samoans their principal birthright and heritage.


LABOUR.
IN Western Samoa at the present time there are three
classes of labour—Samoans, Melanesians, and Chinese.
Samoans. —The Native contribution to the labour-
supply is at present economically negligible. On the products
of his food plantation and his fishing the Samoan can live in
plenty, and so few are his remaining needs that about two-
thirds of the value of his coconuts is all that he troubles to
collect. Having therefore no necessity to work, he naturally
does not do so. For this he should not be hastily written
down as lazy. For his own ends he can work very hard
indeed, and in emergencies he will work for the white man
and earn good wages. It is true he is often seen lounging
about his village or sleeping in his house when all others
are busy, but it should be remembered the scene of his
labours is mostly out of sight on his plantation in some
retired forest-clearing or in his canoe far out at sea. More-
over, it is Samoan custom to work in the cool about
early dawn and again in the late afternoon, and to rest
through the heat of the day. It is white man’s custom
to rest in the cool and to work in the heat, and he is some-
times too ready to revenge himself upon the Native by the
accusation of laziness. The subject is of more than passing
interest, and in connection therewith the words of Sir John
Thurston, an early Administrator in Polynesia and an
authority on its inhabitants, will bear requoting. He said,
“ No Polynesian will ever work according to our ideas of
work. He does not consider it the most important thing
in life.”
Melanesians.- —Mery early in plantation-development in
Samoa the labour situation was fully appraised, and about
Hdbk.—B


1867 the firm of J. C. Godeffroy and Sohn, Hamburg
(afterwards the Deutsche Handels und Plantagen Gesell-
schaft, commonly known as the “ D.H. & P.G.”), obtained
the exclusive privilege of importing Melanesian labour from
the German territories in the Solomon Islands. These
proved excellent workers, and capable of learning skilled
handicrafts. The conditions of recruiting and service were
open to improvement, but with time and experience many
abuses were remedied. In the matter of wages, however,
the original monthly dollar (or its equivalent in goods)
was little altered up to the time of New Zealand’s taking
over in 1914. From that date the wages were gradually
raised till to-day such of this class of labour as remain in
Samoa receive 3s. a day.
The number of Melanesians in Western Samoa at any
one time seldom exceeded one thousand, an aggregate
fairly maintained up to 1914. Recruiting ceased with the
New Zealand occupation, and repatriations from time to
time since then have reduced the number of “ black boys,”
as they are locally called, to 172 to-day. All these have
deliberately rejected repatriation, choosing rather to remain
in Samoa.
Chinese. —The importation of Melanesian labour was the
monopoly of the D.H. & P.G., and private employers and
planters were at length compelled to turn elsewhere for
labour to meet the growing needs of the country. In 1902
a private firm in Apia imported by permission and dis-
tributed 300 Chinese coolies on a three-year contract at
about 15s. a month and found. Later the sole conduct of
the traffic was wisely assumed by the German Adminis-
tration, and New Zealand took over the operations from
1914 onwards. In that year there were in the country
2,184 indentured Chinese absorbed in plantation work.


in private employ as domestic servants, and in trade and
shipping in and about Apia.
Under New Zealand control 2,529 Chinese have been
repatriated and 1,449 imported. The actual number em-
ployed in the Territory at the present day is 938 —sub-
stantial evidence of the sincerity of the Government policy
of reduction of this class of labour. Moreover, Chinese
are not allowed to settle in Samoa, and intermarriage with
Native women is forbidden, and, as a protection of these
latter, coolies may not enter a Samoan dwelling. Some
half dozen Chinese traders settled in Samoa before 1902
are the only free Asiatics in the country.
The present system adopted by the Administration
recruits for a stated term free labour in Hong Kong, and
carries them without charge to Samoa, and home again on
completion of the contract period. The outlay involved is
collected from employers in instalments amounting to about
s|d. a day per unit of labour. Upon arrival in Samoa the
coolie is free to select his own employer, and the Adminis-
tration guarantees him continuous employment.
By co-operation with the Hong Kong authorities the
selection of a good class of labour is ensured, and they have,
on the whole, proved themselves law-abiding and diligent.
They are very thrifty, regularly remitting to relatives in
China large amounts of savings each month. The present-
day terms of service are 3s. a day ; free quarters; ten
holidays in the year, besides Sundays ; and time and a half
for overtime. In addition, rice approved by the Chief
Medical Officer is supplied at 3d. a pound, and fresh meat
at 6d. a pound. The disposition of the coolie towards
these conditions is evidenced by the numerous applications
for return to Samoa made by time-expired coolies who
have been repatriated to Hong Kong.


One has but to see Samoa’s Chinese labourers on Sundays
or holidays, dressed in spotless white clothes and well shod,
many riding their own cycles or horses or driving their own
vehicles, to be convinced that the Administration is not
only receiving the benefits derived from their labour, but
is teaching them to be useful and respectable, thus making
them an asset to their own country on their return.
It is hoped in time to eliminate the Chinese element
entirely and to draw for labour solely upon the Native—a
consummation possible only when the gradual education of
the Samoan is bearing its expected fruit.


TOURIST INFORMATION.
IN proportion to its size Western Samoa caters well for
the visitor who seeks merely entertainment. Within
a compass of a day’s journey from Apia there are
many attractive spots, whose number increases with the
radius traversed.
The township itself is not without an attraction of its
own. Set on the water’s edge, like all South Sea settle-
ments, it straggles casually along the beach, and its archi-
tecture no less than its disposition embodies its history.
Memories of old vagabond days are revived in certain faded
shanties, which by contrast with up-to-date shops and offices
help to emphasize the modem note. Interesting associa-
tions cluster around the well-built Administration offices,
where has been housed the nerve-centre of successive
Governments. Several church buildings represent the
religious element, and are perhaps the feature of Apia
first to catch the eye from the deck of an incoming ship.
The Roman Catholic Cathedral is a fine concrete structure
holding a central position in the panorama ; the Apia
Protestant Church, of the same type and scarcely lesser
proportions, stands near the eastern end, and close by is
the European place of worship.
Lying on the reef in the foreground of the picture is the
rustv hulk of the German warship Adler, recalling the
famous hurricane of 1889.
At the western end of the settlement, where in modern
years business activities tend to concentrate, the Customs


wharf and warehouses are conspicuous, and a little farther
on the fine Casino building shows up arrestingly. Here
were housed the Apia employees of the once famous D.H.
& P.G., or “ German firm,” and latterly the New Zealand
Government officials. To-day, however, the Casino has
been converted to the use of the public as a well-equipped
hotel.
Shade trees dot the main street, following the curve of
the harbour-front ; and behind the town rise wooded hills
cleft by purple-shaded valleys, above which bold summits
against a sky of warm tropic blue complete a setting of
great beauty. On either hand the horns of the bay curve
round in wide sweep, and thrust seaward to connect by a
white thread of reef broken by the navigable passage in the
centre. The western “ horn,” pointed by the modern
Observatory, is a low grass-covered spit carrying a stately
palm-grove, which shades the chief Samoan village of
Mulinu’u, famous in island story. Its eastern counterpart
of Matautu, ending in the red-roofed pilot-station, is hardly
less celebrated as the stronghold of Native warriors in
the troubled early days.
A museum has been erected in Mulinu’u by the
Faipule, and is now being gradually stocked with exhibits
and curios of old Samoa. Admission is gained by inquiry
at the Native Department in Mulinu’u.
Numerous motor-taxis are available for transport along
excellent roads for several miles in any direction.
Mount Vaea overlooks Apia, and bears on its summit
the grave of Robert Louis Stevenson, which calls for devout
pilgrimage from lovers of literature and genius. A pictur-
esque motor-road to the gates of Government House—the
modern enlargement of the ” Vailima ”of “ R.L.S.” —and a


GRAVE OF LATE R. L. STEVENSON AND MRS. STEVENSON ON MOUNT VAEA.


ROMAN CATHOLIC CATHEDRAL, APIA.


walk of half an hour up the mountain leads to the tomb.
The scene from thence is remarkably fine, and, hallowed
by association with the last resting-place of “ Tusitala,” is
a memorable one.
A short distance aside from the Vailima road is Papa-
loloa, or “ Jumping-rock.” Here Natives delight to astonish
the papalagi spectator by leaping 40 ft. into a pool of the
stream tumbling down the hillside. Its setting is wild and
primitive, and is well worth a visit for its own merits. A
similar scene may be enjoyed a few miles by good road on
the opposite side of Apia, where occurs the noted Papaseea,
or “ Sliding-rock,” with its natural water-chute. It is
perhaps the favourite attraction within easy access. By an
arrangement with the Natives it is a simple matter to have
a demonstration of the correct procedure, and nothing
pleases the demonstrators more than to have the papalagi
join with them in “ shooting the chute.”
Lake Lanatoo, only a few miles from Apia, is almost
unique in the Pacific. It is a small lake cupped in a
volcano crater about 2,000 ft. above the sea. Half the
road to it may be covered by car and the remainder on
horseback, along a track winding up through primeval
forest to emerge at a small wooden hut set on the crater-
lip. From this point the lakelet—a polished mirror ringed
in the soft greenery lining the inside of the “ cup ” —is
seen on the one hand, and on the other, through the clear
air, a panorama of mountain-slope and lowland with a
background of sea fading to the horizon.
At a slightly less elevation than Lanatoo, and about
the same distance from Apia in another direction, stands
“ Malololelei,” the Rest-house maintained by the Govern-
ment. It can be reached by car, passing the gates of


“ Vailima ” en route. There is a telephone connection
with Apia, and in the Rest-house itself the traveller will
find every provision for long or short stay. The situation
of 1,850 ft. above the sea makes its temperature a bracing
contrast with that of the coast lands.
Sea-bathing can be had a few miles to the west of the
main township. The road thither follows the shore-line,
passing through “ Vailele —one of the chief coconut
plantations in an extraordinary picturesque setting—to
Fox-trot Beach, a sandy stretch, long a favourite resort
of the residents of Apia. The drive itself is a charming
one, and the coast scenery is, without doubt, among the
most beautiful of its kind in the South Seas.
Twenty miles farther on in the same direction is the
Methodist Mission Institute of Lufi Lufi. Its buildings of
imposing architecture are recently completed, and represent
the last word in design to meet tropical requirements.
Westward from Apia a road available to motor-car
runs parallel to the sea-beach, threading country full of
interest. Native villages in their romantic setting of bowered
shrubs and shady palms occur in rapid succession. Here
the Samoan may be seen leading his care-free life in the
picturesque fashion practically unchanged since primitive
times. European plantations of cacao or coconut are
scattered along the route, which ends its twenty-five miles
in the plantation of “ Mulifanua,” the largest and most
famous in the Group. Midway from Apia is the London
Missionary Society’s Institute at Malua. It is an epitome
of Samoan history, and in some ways the most important
place in the Territory. In its extensive grounds are technical
schools and colleges, with orderly villages of student-
dwellings ; and the up-to-date printing-press, conducted


entirely by Samoans under European supervision, is not
its least interesting feature.
For the visitor desiring more prolonged study of things
Samoan no more commendable method can be suggested
than a.leisurely malaga (pronounced malanga) around Upolu.
To reap the best results the journey should be made on
foot, and it may take any convenient time from four or five
days and upwards. An interpreter-guide is necessary, and
advice should be sought from some of the older residents
before preparation. Such a tour is full of variety and
charm. The Native will be seen at his best, and many
interesting customs may be studied. The Samoan is quick
to respond to the courtesy of deference to his conventions,
and as quickly resents its absence. For this reason, a
guide of good standing, and with intelligence to advise in
proper time and season, should be the first consideration.
The traveller thus journeying will also discover in the
population an element as interesting as. it is little known.
It is made up of the white traders, who still survive in
various stations scattered around the coasts, and among
them are a number of “ old-timers ” whose present-day
lot is not without its pathos. They have, many of them,
helped to make island history, but with the passing of the
pioneer days has gone also the usefulness of the pioneer.
To-day they are forgotten as they bravely face the in-
evitable earning a poor livelihood in the only post where
their unique knowledge of the Native and ability to with-
stand isolation and hardship have any value. They are
hospitable and courteous to a degree, and many interesting
stories of the spacious days of long ago may still be heard
in an evening’s “ yarning ” on the veranda of one of these
forerunners of our prosaic days of law and order.


Still farther afield, in the Island of Savahi, new interest
is added to that found in Upoln. In Mount Matavanu
Samoa has an active volcano. Its last destructive outbreak
occurred in 1906, and the devastation then wrought is still
fresh in sight and memory. Contemporary stories of the
disaster paint terrible pictures of the boiling crater pouring
its flood of molten rock down the hillsides, where every
living thing was blotted out forever. As the lava plunged
into the sea the clouds of steam and violent detonations
were seen and heard for miles. Natives of the ruined areas
were removed by the German Administration to a district
in the neighbourhood of Apia, where they to-day occupy
one of the largest villages in the country.
Many specialist problems can be studied in the lava-
fields of various dates, and an appeal to general interest
is in their frequent tunnels. Some of these are very ancient,
and repay exploration. They formed places of refuge in
Native wars of former days, and relics of such occupation
are numerous. With the passage of time a tunnel will lose
all trace of its origin, and in characteristics differ little from
any other cave save in the length of its windings into the
interior of the mountains. They are haunted by bats and
other creatures of the dark, and great care is needed in
traversing their ramifications, where an explorer may easilv
lose his way. Such caves are found on both the north and
south coasts of Upolu, and are numerous in Savai’i.
Apart from the human element or matters of especial
interest, the diversity of scenery encountered by a rambler
in the Islands is everywhere a delight. No writer of
romances, however exuberant, has yet exaggerated the
beauty of Samoa, and its charm, once tasted, is never
forgotten.


MATAVANU, SAVAI'I. (Lava flowing into the Sea, twelve miles from the Crater, August, 1906.)


MOUTH OF CRATER, MATAVANU, IN SAVAI’I. (Now dormant.)


Scale of Fares by Taxi, as agreed upon by the Apia
Taxi-owners’ Association, are as follows for the principal
places about Apia •
£ s - d -
Aliamalu. . 5 5 o
Aleisa . . 310 o
Fagalii ~ 080
Falelatai. . 700
Fox-trot
Beach 014 0
Hospital 040
Ih Ifi ..030
Letogo .. 012 o
Leulumoega 300
Malifa .. 030
Malua , . 200
Malololelei 400
£ s - d -
Matautu .. 030
Mulinu’u.. 030
Mulifanua 410 0
Papauta .. 070
Papaloloa 090
Papaseea.. o 10 o
Racecourse 040
Sliding-rock 200
Suga (Vai-
lele) . . o 10 o
Tapatapao 150
Vaitele .. 080
Wireless . . 1 15 o
Pleasure rides, £1 per hour. Running and standing
outside Apia, 15s. per hour. Running and standing time
in Apia, 12s. 6d. per hour. Standing-time, ss. per hour.
Long trips for which the charge is £3 or over, two hours’
standing-time free.


APPENDICES.
APPENDIX I.—TAXATION IN WESTERN
SAMOA.
Taxes are grouped under six heads— (i) Personal tax ; (2) building-
tax ; (3) water rates ; (4) salary-tax ; (5) trading licenses ; (6) other
licenses.
Personal Tax. —All males over eighteen, other than Samoans
and indentured labourers, pay an annual tax of £1 ss. provided they
spend six months or more of the financial year in Samoa.
Building-tax. —All dwellings and buildings used for commercial
purposes pay an annual tax of 1 per cent. The taxable value does
not include the land on which the building stands. The minimum
tax is £ 2. Provision is made for relief where the house is unoccupied.
Water Pates. —An annual rate is struck on all buildings within
100 yards of the water-mains, sufficient to provide interest and
sinking fund on the sum invested in the reticulation of Apia. At
present the rate is per cent. As the proximity of a water-
main is to some extent an insurance against fire, the rate is not
remitted in case of a building being empty. The minimum is
£2 1 os. ; if building is over /300 in value.
Salary-tax. —This is based on the gross salary, including bonuses
and allowances, and is collected at the end of the financial year.
The rates are—£2oo and under, exempt ; over .£2OO but not
exceeding /400, £1 ; over but not exceeding £6OO, £2 ; over
£6OO but not exceeding £"1,000, £5 ; over £h,ooo but not exceeding
£lo ; over £"1,500, £2O.
Trading Licenses.-— Store-tax is payable at the end of each
financial year, based on the turnover. It is therefore a sales-tax.
The minimum is £y 10s., and the amounts rise to -£l5, £25, £4O.
When the turnover exceeds £"10,000 the rate becomes \ per cent.
With the exception of carpenters, boatbuilders, and painters,
employees pay no license, being taxable instead on their salary.
These business license fees are payable in advance, with a minimum
of half a year’s fees.


Tariff
No.
Goods.
Rates of Duty.
I
Cigars (including the weight of every
band, wrapper, or attachment to
any cigar)
X2s. a pound.
2
Cigarettes, not exceeding in weight
2h lb. a thousand
£i 5s. 6d. a thousand.
3
Cigarettes (all other kinds)
ios. 6d. a pound.
4
Tobacco in any other form, including
the weight of every label, tag, or
other attachment
3s. 6d. a pound.
5
All other goods not expressly exempted
from duty—
If British goods
t5 per cent, ad valorem.
If foreign goods
22J
Other Licenses. —These comprise gun licenses, dog-tax, launch
and boat licenses, and survey fees, motor-vehicle licenses, amuse-
ments-tax, copra-buyers’ licenses, and certificates for masters and
engineers of coastal vessels. In addition there are pilotage, port
charges and towage fees, travelling passes and permits, as will be
seen from the schedules subjoined.
Taxes are payable in April, with the exception of store, copra,
house, and lighter tax (payable in July), and personal tax (payable
in October i. Taxes unpaid for more than one month are liable to
10 per cent, surtax. After a further three months they are charged
25 per cent, surtax. Full machinery is provided to protect the
taxpayer in case of dispute.
APPENDIX II. —CUSTOMS AND TARIFF,
WESTERN SAMOA.
The Customs tariff is simple, and provides for preference to British-
made goods.
With slight variations to suit local conditions the Customs law
and machinery in force in New Zealand are in force in Western
Samoa, though trade with New Zealand is on the same footing as
trade with any other portion of the British Empire.
Hdbk.- —9


The following goods are exempt from Customs duty :
1. Coin, being legal currency in Samoa.
2. Printed literature, including printed music.
3. Passengers’ baggage and effects, including only wearing-apparel
and other personal effects that have been worn or are in use
by persons arriving in Samoa ; also instruments and tools of
trade, occupation, or employment of such person not exceeding
£5O in value, and household and other effects not exceeding
in value, if such instruments, tools, or effects have been
in use for twelve months by the persons bringing them to
Samoa and are not intended for any other person or for sale.
4. Goods approved by the Administrator for importation by Christian
missions for religious or educational purposes.
5 Medical, surgical, dental, and optical instruments and appliances
approved by the Administrator.
6. Drugs and chemicals approved by the Administrator for medical,
surgical, sanitary, dental, or veterinary purposes.
7. Insecticides and other articles approved by the Administrator for
the destruction of vermin and pests.
8. Fresh vegetables and fresh fruit.
9. Official supplies for Consular officers of countries where a similar
exemption exists in favour of British Consuls.
10. Chinese tobacco—that is to say, tobacco approved by the Adminis-
trator as exclusively suitable for use by Chinese.
11. Live animals and birds approved by the Administrator.
12. Meat, fish, and poultry, if frozen and not in airtight containers.
13. Butter.
14. Honey.
15. Infants’ food, if approved by the Administrator and published
by him from time to time in the Western Samoa Gazette —viz.,
Allen and Hanbury’s foods, arrowroot, glaxo, Horlick’s malted
milk, Lactogen, Mellin’s food, Nestle’s food, sugar of milk.
(Gazetted 15th September, 1923.)
16. Rice : Unmilled rice of such quality and at such times as the
Administrator prescribes by notice published in the Western
Samoa Gazette —viz., Milled, unpolished rice still containing
germ and pericarp in amount equal to or more than that at
present in sample kept in the office of the Secretary to the
Administration. (Gazetted 15th September, 1923.)
17. Manures.
18. Copra sacks and cocoa sacks.
19. Shooks of undressed wood.
20. Gravestones, and such similar memorials to a deceased person as
are approved by the Administrator.
21. Machinery, implements, and materials for the establishment or
development of local industries, if approved by the Adminis-
trator and published by him from time to time in the Western
Samoa Gazette —viz., Machinery, machines, appliances, fittings,
and materials peculiar to cacao-drying and copra-drying—
approved by the Administrator.


APPENDIX III.—SHIPPING AND FREIGHTS,
WESTERN SAMOA.
The regular steamer lines calling at Apia are :
1. The Union Steamship Company of New Zealand (Limited),
which sends a well-equipped passenger-steamer from Auckland every
four weeks. Her route one month is Suva Nukualofa Haapai—
Vavau - Apia - Suva, and the next Suva - Apia - Vavau - Haapai-
Nukualofa Suva.
Cargo from Sydney for Apia is transhipped at Suva.
For the islands round trip the saloon fare from Auckland is £4O.
Freights for general cargo are—
Per Ton.
£ s - d -
From Sydney or Auckland to Apia . . 217 6
From Suva or Haapai to Apia .. 226
From Nukualofa or Vavau to Apia .. 113 6
From Dunedin, Lyttelton, or Wellington
to Apia .. .. . . ..466
From Apia to Sydney or Auckland .. 215 o
From Apia to Suva .. .. ..226
From Apia to Haapai .. ..280
From Apia to Nukualofa or Vavau .. 113 o
From Apia to New Zealand east coast
ports . . . . .. ..440
In all cases lighterage charges approximate Bs. per ton extra
at Apia.
2. Small vessels run to Pago Pago, in American Samoa, to
connect with the San Francisco - Sydney mail-steamers, which call
each way once a month.
The fare is 12s. 6d. single. Freight for general cargo is
£\ ss. per ton.
In addition, cargo-steamers call at Apia to complete loading
with copra for Europe via the Panama Canal. These work on
charter.
Cargo-steamers also occasionally call at Apia on their way to
or from San Francisco or Vancouver.
Sailing-vessels also visit Apia, but less frequently than during
the period when South Sea copra went exclusively to San Francisco.


—
1916.
1917.
1918.
1919.
1920.
1921.
1922.
1923.
Imports ..
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
180,340
301,173
309,396
291, 368
561,153
408, 892
282,939
268, 881
Exports .,
235.415
320,444
306, 640
532,500
386,587
24 1 ,539
365,610
288. 774
Total trade
4 X 5- 755
621,617
616,036
823, 868
947,740
650,431
648,549
567,655
Import duty
24.951
39,335
39,748
37,93i
77.763
59,149
47,053
41,948
Export duty
5.084
7,887
6,508
9,819
8,012
8,928
18,487
11,685
Cocoa exported —
Tons
929
1,207
795
820
785
750
765
221
Value . .
£63,970
£69.549
£54. j 69
£81.110
£90,222
£36, 363
£44,513
£ t 2,789
Copra exported —-
Tons
7.544
8,992
9,370
16,356
7,474
7,428
16,956
13,484
Value . .
£143.245
£230,971
£246,576
£449,917
£296,356
£190,520
£319,333
£269,995
Ships inwards
104
99
”3
77
90
77
94
75
Tonnage ..
52,275
45,587
34,286
34,273
50,837
73,074
65,729
87,870
Cargo (tons)
8,619
12,251
12,473
8,609
12,630
12,065
9,716
10,298
Ships outwards
_
105
96
109
81
88
78
94
72
Tonnage ..
52,657
44,760
32,391
35,94°
50,270
7V523
65,73°
89,888
Cargo (tons)
9,240
1,1153
10,063
18,349
9,633
9,152
r8,116
14,216
APPENDIX IV.—TRADE, COMMERCE, AND SHIPPING, WESTERN SAMOA.


APPENDIX V.—IMMIGRATION, WESTERN
SAMOA.
When the vessel arrives in Apia Harbour all on board hqve to pass
the medical examination. They then file past the immigration
officers, who require immigration declarations (previously supplied
by the ship’s officers) from intending residents, passports from aliens
desiring to settle. A pass is then issued to all, through passengers
included, authorizing them to land.
The following undesirables are excluded : “Any person
disaffected or disloyal, or without adequate means of support,
or of unsound mind, or affected by venereal disease, tuberculosis,
or leprosy, or of such a character that his presence in Samoa
would be injurious to the peace, order, good government, or
public interest of the Territory.”
Should an undesirable land, or should any one be convicted
of vagrancy within twelve months of landing, he may be
deported at the expense of the ship that brought him.
Before leaving Samoa residents require a permit, which is
not issued till all taxes and debts owing to the Administration
have been paid.
APPENDIX VI.
(a.) WESTERN SAMOA SUMMARY OF POPULATION.
Table showing the Population of Western Samoa as at the
Census of ijth April, 1921.
Males. Females. Total.
European population .. .• 1,128 938 2,066
Native Samoan population .. 16,795 16,541 33.336
Chinese indentured contract labour .. 1,290 .. 1,290
Melanesian and Polynesian indentured
contract labour .. . . 456 9 4^5
Totals .. •• 19,669 17, 4 88 37-*57
It should be explained that what is for the sake of convenience
called the “ European ” population includes also those Chinese, South-
Sea-Islanders, &c., who are not indentured contract labourers.


(ft.) EUROPEAN POPULATION-NATIONALITY
PLACES.
Table showing the Nationalities and Birthpi
European Population of Western Samoa as
the Census of 17TH April, 1921.
AI
-AC
R
ID BIRTH-
:es of the
ETURNED AT
Birthplace.
Nationality.
All Nationalities.
British.
American.
Austrian.
Belgian.
Chinese.
A
*3
c3
a
French.
c5
0)
0
Norwegian.
Portuguese.
Russian.
Spanish.
Swedish.
Swiss.
British Empire—
England
Scotland
Ireland
Canada
Barbadoes
India
Hong Kong
Australia
New Zealand
Fiji
Samoa
Tonga
Ellice Islands
Fanning Island
Foreign countries—
Austria . .
Belgium . .
Denmark
France
Germany
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Sweden
Switzerland
United States
China
Reunion Island . .
Society Islands
Sandwich Islands. .
Totals, all countries
78
26
8
2
1
4
7
46
162
35
723
i5
3
1
1
3
2
10
1
1
78
26
8
2
1
5
7
5i
164
38
1467
21
4
1
4
1
6
29
62
1
2
1
2
14
1
37
16
11
4
2
I
I
2
2
3
I
42
2
277
4
1
229
2
2
38
66
I
26
I
31
31
1
2
1
I
3
29
5
55
I
2
I
]
1
I
14
X
37
15
I
I
I
3
....
I
2 3
1129
280
54&9I73 347
2
27
I
I
45
33
2066


(c.) EUROPEAN POPULATION—OCCUPATIONS,
Table showing the Principal Occupations of the_ European
Population of Western Samoa as returned at the Census
of 17TH April, 1921.
Occupation.
Males. |
Females.
Total.
Samoan Administration
82
2
84
Crown Estates
54
3
57
Public Works
41
41
Other —
Accountant, clerk
38
2
40
Baker
10
10
Blacksmith
11
11
Carpenter, cabinetmaker, shipwright. .
53
53
Chauffeur, motor mechanic
7
7
Consul, consular staff
4
4
Domestic duties . .
355
355
Engineer
12
12
Farmer, horticulturist
15
2
17
Master mariner
4
4
Missionary, minister of religion,
40
19
59
member of religious order
Nurse
11
11
Painter . .
4
4
Plantation manager, overseer, &c. ..
20
20
Planter . .
3°
2
32
Plumber ..
4
4
Printer . .
4
4
Shop-assistant
20
14
34
Teacher . .
6
5
11
Trader, storekeeper
99
5
104
Other, or not stated
64
58
122
Scholar . .
348
278
626
Infant
U58
182
340
Totals . .
1,128
938
2,066


APPENDIX VII. —RATES OF POSTAGE.
INLAND.
Inland includes New Zealand ; the Cook Islands—namely, Rarotonga,
Mangaia, Atm, Aitutaki, Mitiaro, Manke (Parry), and Hervey
(Manuae) ; also Palmerston (Avarua), Niue (Savage), Pukapuka
(Danger), Rakahanga, Manihiki, Penrhyn (Tongareva), and
Suwarrow Islands. It also includes Western Samoa (Savai’i and
Upolu Islands).
Registration, 3d.
Letters and Letter-cards : i|d. for first 2 oz., and id. for each
additional 2 oz. (Limits of size : 18 in. in any direction, or,
if in the form of a roll, 30 in. in length by 4 in. in diameter!
Maximum weight, 4 lb. 6 oz.)
Post-cards ; Single, id. ; reply, 2d. (Limits of size : maximum,
5J in. by 3J in. ; minimum, 4 in. by 2f in.)
Inland Packets (comprising commercial papers —both town and
inland delivery—books and printed papers, pattern and sample
packets, and unregistered magazines) : id. for the first 2 oz. or
fraction thereof; over 2 oz. but not exceeding 4 oz., lid. ; and
lid. for each additional 4 oz. or fraction thereof up to i~lb. ; not
exceeding 2 lb., Bd. ; not exceeding 3 lb., lod. ; not exceeding
4 lb., is.; not exceeding 51b., is. 2d. (Limit of weight, 51b.
For limits of size see separate items.)
Commercial Papers : id. for the first 2 oz. or fraction thereof ; over
2 oz. but not exceeding 4 oz., i£d. ; and i£d. for each additional
4 oz. or fraction thereof up to 1 lb. ; not exceeding 2 lb., Bd. ; not
exceeding 3 lb., lod. ; not exceeding 4 lb., is. ; not exceeding
5 lb., is. 2d. (Limits of size : 18 in. in any direction, or, if in
form of roll, 30 in. in length and 4 in. in diameter; limit of
weight, 5 lb.)
Books and Printed Papers : id. for the first 2 oz. or fraction
thereof ; over 2 oz. but not exceeding 4 oz., 1 id. ; and lid. for
each additional 4 oz. or fraction thereof up to 1 lb. ; not exceeding
2 lb., Bd. ; not exceeding 3 lb., lod, ; not exceeding 4 lb., is. ;
not exceeding 5 lb., is. 2d. (Limits of size : 18 in. in any direc-
tion, or, if in form of roll, 30 in. in length and 4 in. in diameter ;
limit of weight, 5 lb.)
Pattern and Sample Packets : id. for the first 2 oz. or fraction
thereof; over 2 oz. but not exceeding 4 oz., ijd. ; and i|-d. for
each additional 4 oz. or fraction thereof up to 1 lb. ; not exceed-
ing 2 lb., Bd. ; not exceeding 3 lb., lod. ; not exceeding 4 lb.,
is. ; not exceeding 5 lb., is. 2d. (Packets must not exceed 2 ft.
in length by t ft. in width and 1 ft. in depth ; limit of weight
5 lb.)


Magazines (not registered) : id. for the first 2 oz. or fraction thereof ;
over 2 oz. but not exceeding 4 oz., i|d. ; and i|d. for each
additional 4 oz. or fraction thereof up to 1 lb. ; not exceeding
2 lb., Bd. ; not exceeding 3 lb., lod. ; not exceeding 4 lb., is. ;
not exceeding 5 lb., is. 2d.
Magazines (registered) : 2d. for each copy, if not exceeding 8 oz. ;
id. for each additional 8 oz.
Newspapers : £d. each.
Parcels (see special table, page 138).
BEYOND NEW ZEALAND.
[See table following.)
TABLE OF BRITISH AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES,
Showing Rates of Postage, Routes of Transmission, and all
Special Items.
N.B. —The rates of postage given in this table are the rates levied
in Samoa only, and are no indication of the rates levied elsewhere
on correspondence for Samoa.
Registration, 3d.
Letters and Letter-cards ; i|d. for first ounce, and id. for each
additional ounce, to United Kingdom, Australia, British Posses-
sions, United States, and many other countries ; for first
ounce, and i£d. for each additional ounce, to all other countries
(Postal Union rates). (Limits of size : 18 in. in any direction,
or, if in the form of a roll, 30 in. in length by 4 in. in diameter.
Maximum weight, 4 lb. 6 oz.)
Post-cards : Single, id. ; reply, 2d. (Postal Union rates). (Limits
of size : maximum, in. by in. ; minimum, 4 in. by 2f in.)
Commercial Papers : zld. for first 10 oz., and |d. for each additional
2 oz. (Postal Union “rates). (Limits of size : 18 in. in any direc-
tion, or, if in form of roll, 30 in. in length and 4 in. in diameter ;
limit of weight, 4 lb.)
Books and Printed Papers : £d. for each 2 oz. (Postal Union rates).
(Limits of size, iS in. in any direction, or, if in form of roll, 30 in.
in length and 4 in. in diameter ; limit of weight, 4 lb.)
Pattern and Sample Packets ; id. for first 4 oz., and |d. for each
additional 2 oz. (Postal Union rates). (Limit of size : United
Kingdom and Australia, 2 ft. by 1 ft. by 1 ft. For other places,
1 ft. by 8 in. by 4 in., or, if in form of roll, 1 ft. in length and 6 in.
in diameter ; limit of weight 1 lb., unless otherwise specified in
col. 6 of following table.)
Magazines : id. for each 2 oz. (Postal Union rates). (For Australia
and Fiji, and certain islands in the Pacific.)
Newspapers : id. each, or id. for first 4 oz. «rnd for each additional
2 oz. according to destination.


PARCELS.
Inland, including New Zealand.
For first pound, 6d. ; for each additional pound up to 10 lb., 2d. ;
for each additional pound between 10 lb. and 28 lb., id.
The postage rates applicable to an 11 lb. parcel are charged on
all parcels (except parcels containing fishing-rods, golf-clubs, or similar
articles, and parcels not exceeding 1 in. in thickness) that weigh leess
than 11 lb. if such parcels exceed 4 ft. length and girth combined.
A “ fragile ” fee of 6d. is charged on all inland parcels (except
parcels containing fishing-rods, golf-clubs, and similar articles) that do
not exceed 4 ft. in length and girth combined, and of gd. on those
that exceed 4 ft. in length and girth combined, which the senders desire
forwarded to destination in hampers. On parcels not exceeding 1 in.
in thickness the gd. “ fragile ” fee will be charged only when the
length and width combined exceed 4ft. The “fragile” fee of 6d.
is payable on parcels containing fishing-rods, golf-clubs, or similar
articles which do not exceed 3 ft. 6 in. in length, but if the length
of such parcels exceeds 3 ft. 6 in. no “ fragile ” fee is payable.
Australia.
Bd. for first pound, and 6d. for each additional pound up to
maximum of 11 lb.
United Kingdom.
Up to 3 lb. in weight, 2s. ; above 3 lb. up to 7 lb., 3s. 4b. ; above
7 lb. and not exceeding 11 lb., 4s. 6d.
MONEY-ORDERS.
For New Zealand.
id. each £1 or fraction thereof, but with a minimum charge of 6d,
Maximum for single order,
For Places beyond Samoa.
United Kingdom (and foreign countries advised through London),
Canada, Ceylon, Hong Kong, India, Norway, Straits Settlements,
Union of South Africa, United States of America. The charge for
commission is at the rate of 6d. in the pound or a fraction of a pound.
The maximum amount for which a single order may be drawn on the
United Kingdom and most other countries named above is
Australian States, Ellice Islands, Fiji, New Guinea (British
administration), Gilbert Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, Papua
(British New Guinea), Solomon Islands, Tonga, and all places in the
South Pacific advised through Australia : For sums not over £2.
the charge is 6d. ; £5, is. ; £7, is. 6d. ; £lO, 2s. ; 2s. 6d. ;
£*s> 3s. ; 3s. 6d. ; £2O, 4 s. ; £22, 4 s. 6d. ; £25, ss. ; £27, ss. 6d. ;
£3O, 6s. ; £32, 6s. 6d. ; 75.; £37, 7s. 6d. ; Bs. The
maximum amount for which a single order can be drawn on Australia,
Fiji, and Tonga is and on Ellice Islands, Gilbert Islands, Nauru,
New Caledonia, Papua .and Solomon Islands, £2O.
138
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.


—
Unit.
Period.
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
April.
May.
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Year.
Atmospheric pressure
Inches
1890-1919
29-764
29-775
29-797
29-822
29-856
29-872
29-883
29-890
29-888
29-862
29-808
29-730
29-832
Temperature
Degrees F.
1890-1919
78-84
78-89
79-23
78-76
78-28
77-65
77-02
77-63
78-08
78-67
78-64
79-30
78-40
Relative humidity ..
Per cent...
1890-1919
85-3
85-4
85-4
85-4
84-1
83-0
81 -8
8o-o
81-3
82-0
82-9
83-2
83-3
Rainfall (Mulinu’u) ..
Inches
igos-igtg
16-5
i5'9
13-1
10-9
5'9
5-6
2-8
3-i
5-2
5-8
9-t
13-8
107-7
Rainy days (Mulinu’u)
Days
1903-1919
21
19
19
10
13
I I
I I
I I
12
15
18
20
188
Cloudiness
io = over-
cast
1890-1919
6-59
6-22
5-99
5-74
4-79
4-43
4-25
4-n
4-77
5-n
5-52
5-92
5-20
Sunshine ..
Hours
146
1.33
166
159
176
157
185
200
177
184
163
145
2,038
Wind- velocity
Miles per
hour
5-8
5-6
5-8
5-2
6-6
7-4
6-7
8-o
7-8
7*4
5-4
4'4
6-4
APPENDIX VIII.—METEOROLOGICAL DATA.


APPENDIX IX. —BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Adams, Emma H. Jottings from the Pacific : Life and Incidents
in the Fijian and Samoan Islands. Pacific Press Publishing
Company, Oakland, Cal. [lB9o], 160 pp. Frontispiece *
illustrations. 12 0 . (Young People’s Library.)
Alexander, James M. The Islands of the Pacific : from the Old
to the New : a Compendious Sketch of Missions in the
Pacific. American Tract Society, New York, 1895. 515 pp
Plates. 8C
Samoa, pp. 274 305.
Allen, Percy S. Cyclopedia of Samoa. Tonga, &c. (Samoan portion
edited jointly by Percy S. Allen and W. Farmer Whyte.)
Sydney, 1907.
[American Samoa.] A General Report by the Governor. Washing-
ton, 1916.
American White Book and Consular Reports. ( See United States.)
Anderson, {Dr.) Tempest. An Ascent of Matavanu in Savaii.
In the Alpine Journal, London, Nov., 1910.
Angenheister, G. A Summary of the Meteorological Observations
of the Samoa Observatory (1890-1920). Edited by E.
Marsden and D. M. Y. Sommerville, Wellington, 1924.
Annual Register, The : a Review of Public Events at Home and
Abroad. R. and J. Dodsley, &c., London, 1876-1900. B°.
German interests in Samoa (1879) pp. 169-170 ; (1885)
pp. 407-408. Difficulties in Samoa (1886) pp. 507-508 •
(1887) pp. 386-387; (1888) pp. 438-439. The hurricane’,
restoration of King Malietooa, &c. (1889) pp. 474-476
Further disturbances (1890) pp. 455-456. Baron Sennft von
Pilsboch, President of the Municipal Council of Samoa (1891)
p. 436. General conditions (1892) p. 383. Outbreak, &c.
( i 893) P- s°° (i 894) P- 4 11 - pt. 2, pp. 15, 50, 56. Award
of the Samoan Land Commission, &c. (1895) PP- 414-415.
General conditions (1896) p. 418. Death of King Malietooa
and renewal of anarchy (1898) p. 392. Civil war, agreement
between the Powers, &c. (1899) pp. 286-289, 415-416 ; pt. 2,
pp. 1, 16, 17, 20, 24, 33, 43, 67, 72, 74. German flag hoisted
at Apia (igoo) p. 460, pt. 2, p. 7. United States ratifies
treaty (1900) p. 419, pt. 2, pp. 2, 6.
Appleton’s Annual Cyclopaedia and Register of Important Events.
D. Appleton and Co., New York, 1879-1900. Illustrations ;
plates ; portraits ; maps. B°.


German interests in Samoa,, new series, viol, 4 (1879),
p. 442. Difficulties in Samoa, new series, vol. n (1886),
pp. 792-795; new series, vol. 12 (1887), pp. 728-732; new
series, vol 13 (1888), pp. 730-735. Samoan question in
Congress, new series, vol. 14 (1889), pp. 218-221. Statistics,
the Samoan question, naval catastrophe, restoration of
Malietoa. new series, vol. 14 (1889), pp. 756-759. General
considerations, new series, vol. 15 (1890), p. 769; new series,
vol. 18 (1893), pp. 683-685. Rebellion of Tamasese, new
series, vol. 19 (1894), pp. 710-711. Statistics, third series,
vol. 3 (1898), p. 690. Provisional government, the joint
Commission, division of Samoa between Germany and the
United States, text of the convention, third series, vol. 4
(1899) pp, 766-771. The German islands, third series, vol. 5
(1900) pp. 642-643.
“ A Roving Printer ” (John D. Jones). Samoa.
In his Life and Adventures in the South Pacific?, 1861.
Austin, 0. P. The Commercial Importance of Samoa.
In National Geographical Magazine, Washington, 1899.
Bahse, M. F. Wirtschafts-und Handelsverhaltnisse der Fidschi-
Tonga-und Samoa-Inseln. Leipzig, 1881.
Ballou, Maturin M. Under the Southern Cross; or, Travels in
Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, Samoa, and other Pacific
Islands. Ticknor and Co., Boston, 1888. xi, (1), 405 pp , 12 0 .
Bancroft, Hubert Howe. The New Pacific. The Bancroft Company,
New York, igoo. iv, (2), 738 pp. Frontispiece. 8L
Samoa, pp. 3, 510, 543-544, 552.
Baquet, A. Les lies Samoa.
In Societe Royale de Geographic d’Anvers, Bulletin,
vol. 15, 1890-91, pp. 287-336, 380-409.
Barradale, V. A. Pearls of the Pacific, being Sketches of Missionary
Life and Work in Samoa and other Islands in the South
Seas. London, 1907.
Bastian, Adolf. Eirnges aus Samoa und anderen Inseln der Siidsee.
Mit ethnographischen Anmerkungen zur Colonialgeschichte.
F. Diimmler, Berlin, 1889, iv, 107 pp. B°.
lnselgruppen in Oceanien Reiseergebnisse und Studien. Mit
drei Tafeln. Ferd. Dummlers Verlags-buchhandlung, Berlin,
1883. xxii, (2), 282 pp. Plates. B°.
Samoa, pp. 42-58
Becke, George Louis. Wild Life in Southern Seas. New Amster-
dam Book Company, New York; T. Fisher Unwin, London;
1898. viii, 369 pp. B°.
In By Reef and Palm ; and other books.
Old Samoan Days, pp. 172-21 1.


Beltran y Rozpide, R. Islas Tongas y Samoa.
In Sociedad Geografica de Madrid, Boletin, vol. 13
(Sept., 1882), pp. 153-191.
Blin, Charles. Voyage en Oceanic. Leguicheux-Gallienne, Le Mans,
1881. (2) 300 pp. Folded map. 12 0 .
L’Archipel Samoan, pp. 248—259.
Boisse, E. Les lies Samoa, Nukonono, Fakaafo, Wallis, et Hoorm.
In Sodete de Geographic, Bulletin, 6 e serie, vol. 10
(Oct., 1875), pp. 428-439.
Bougainville, Louis Antoine, Comte de. Voyage autour du Monde,
par la Fregate du Roi La Boudeuse et la Flute I’Etoile, en
1766, 1767, 1768, & 1769. 2 e ed. augmentee. Saillant
& Nyon, Paris, 1762. 2v. Plates ; folded maps and
plans. 12 0 .
Bougainville discovered and named the Navigators Islands.
(See vol. 2, pp. 123-132.)
• A Voyage round the World, performed in the Years 1766, 1767,
1768, and 1769. By Lewis de Bougainville. Translated
from the French by John Reinhold Forster. Printed for
J. Nourse and T. Davies. London, 1762, xxviii, 476 pp.
Folded map. 4 0 .
Discovery and naming of the Navigators Islands,
pp. 278-284.
Brenchley, Julius L. Jottings during the Cruise of H.M.S. “ Cura-
90a ” among the South Sea Islands in 1865. Longmans,
Green, and Co., London, 1873.
Tutuila, Chapter 111, pp. 36-60 ; Upolu, Chapter IV,
pp. 61-87.
Bridge, Cyprian. Cruises in Melanesia, Micronesia, and Western
Polynesia, in 1882, 1883, and 1884, and Visits to New
Guinea and the Louisiades in 1884 and 1885.
In Royal Geographical Society, Proceedings, new monthly
series, vol. 8 (Sept., 1886), pp. 545-567.
Brigham, William T. An Index to the Islands of the Pacific Ocean :
a Handbook to the Chart on the Walls of the Bernice
Pauahi Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology and Natural
History. Bishop Museum Press, Honolulu, H. 1., 1900.
172 pp. Maps. f°. (B. P. Bishop Museum Memoirs,
vol. 1, No. 2.)
Brown, George. The Samoan Group.
In Garran, Andrew, Picturesque Atlas of Australasia,
vol. 3, pp. 691-695, Sydney (&c.), 1886. f°.
Brown, (Rev.) George. Samoa.
In his Autobiography, 1908.
Melanesians and Polynesians, their Life-histories described and
compared. Macmillan and Co.. 1910.


Burton, (Rev.) J. W. Samoa.
In his Call of the Pacific, 1912.
Churchill, (Mrs.) Llewella Pierce. Samoa ’Uma. Sampson Low ;
Marston and Co. ; London, 1902.
Churchward, William B. My Consulate in Samoa : a Record of
Four Years’ Sojourn in the Navigators Islands, with Per-
sonal Experiences of King Malietoa Laupepa, -his Country
and his Men. Richard Bentley and Son, London, 1887.
xii (2) 403 pp. B°.
Cooper, H. Stonehewer. Coral Lands .. . With illustrations.
Richard Bentley and Son, London, 1880. 2v. Plates. B°.
Vol. 2 largely devoted to description of Samoa, with some
account of exports and imports, politics, &c. Treaties with
Samoa, vol. 2, pp. 354-358. Resume of exports and imports,
Samoa, 1875, p. 359.
Samoa.
In his Coral Lands and the Islands of the Pacific.
Cooper, William. The Samoan Question and the Decision of Chief
Justice Chambers. Wilson and Horton, Auckland, 1899.
Cowan, James. Samoa and its Story. Whitcombe and Tombs
(Limited), Christchurch, 1914.
Crose, W. M. Report on American Samoa. Washington, 1916.
Gumming, (Miss) C. F. Gordon. Samoa.
In her A Lady’s Cruise in a French Man-of-war, 1882.
Curtis, William Eleroy. The United States and Foreign Powers.
Chas. Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1899. vi, 9-314 pp. 12°.
Samoan affairs, pp. 226-227, 289-293.
Dana, James D. Corals and Coral Islands. Dodd and Mead, New
York, 1872. 398 pp. Illustrations; plates; maps. B°.
Navigator Group, pp. 305, 326, 338.
Dawson, Edward Walter. The Isles of the Sea, being an Enter-
taining Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific and Indian
Oceans, and embracing Full and Authentic Accounts of the
Islands of Polynesia, Micronesia, and Melanesia. Betts
and Co., Hartford, Conn., 1886. 698 pp. Plates ; illustra-
tions. B°.
The Samoan Islands, pp. 425-471.
Deeken, Richard. Manuia Samoa. Oldenburg, 1901.
Rauschende Palmen. Oldenburg, 1902.
Dewar, J. Gumming. Voyage of the Nyanza R.N.Y;C., being the
Record of a Three Years’ Cruise in a Schooner Yacht in the
Atlantic and Pacific . . . With a map and illustrations.
William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh and London, 1892.
xviii, 466 pp. Frontispiece ; plates. B°.
Samoan Group, pp. 193-204.


D’Ewes, J. China, Australia, and the Pacific Islands in the Years
1855-56. Richard Bentley, London, 1857. (2), 340 pp.
Frontispiece ; illustrations ; plate. 12 0 ,
Chapter VI, the Navigator Islands.
Doane, R. W. The Rhinoceros Beetle ( Oryctes rhinoceros) in Samoa.
In Journal of Economic Entomology, vi, pp. 437-42,
1913. 2 plates.
Dolph, Joseph N. Speech [on the Samoan question].
In Congressional Record, 50th Congress, 2nd sess., vol. 20,
pt. 2, Jan. 30, 1889, pp. 1325-1337-
Du Fief, J. Les lies Samoa.
In Societe Royal Beige de Geographic, Bulletin, vol. 13
(May-June, 1889), pp. 347-356.
Dumont d’Urville, Jules Sebastien Cesar. Voyage au Pole sud
et dans I’Oceanie sur les Corvettes I’Astrolabe et la Zelee
. . . pendant les Annees 1837-1838-1839-1840. . . . Gide et
J. Baudry, Paris, 1841-1854. 23 v. B°. Atlas, 7v. f°.
Sejour a Apia, vol. 4, pp. 97-125, 331-342. Illustrative
plates in atlas.
Voyage autour du Monde. Nouv. ed. revue et corrigee. Furne
et Cie, Paris, 1853. 2v. Plates. 4 0 .
Samoan Islands, vol. 2, pp. 79—90,
Ehlers, Otto E. Samoa die Perle der Siidsee a jour gefasst .. .
Mit zehn Illustrationen. Fiinfte Aufiage. Hermann Paetel,
Berlin, 1900. (2), 195 pp. Frontispiece (portrait) ; plates.
B°.
Ella, Samuel. The Ancient Samoan Government.
In Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, Proceedings, vol. 6, 1895, pp. 596—603.
Settlements of Tahitians and Samoans on Mangareva (Gambler
Islands).
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 5 (Dec., 1896),
pp. 237-239.
translator. The War of Tonga and Samoa, and Origin of the
Name Malietoa.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 8 (Dec., 1899),
pp. 231-234.
Erskine, John Elphinstone. Journal of a Cruise among the Islands
of the Western Pacific, including the Feejees and Others
inhabited by the Polynesian Races, in Her Majesty’s ship
“ Havannah.” With maps and plates. Murray, London,
1853. vi, (2), 488 pp. Illustrations; folded map. B°.
See pp. 5,9, 34-H2.
Featherman, A. Social History of the Races of Mankind : Second
Division—Oceano-Melanesians. Triibner and Co., London.
1888. xxxii, 420 pp. B°.
Samoans, pp. 144-159.


Festetics de Tolna, {Count) Rodolphe. Samoa.
In his Chez les Cannibales, 1903.
Findlay, Alexander G. A Directory for the Navigation of the Pacific
Ocean : Part 11. The Islands, &c., of the Pacific Ocean.
Printed for R. H. Laurie, London, 1851. xxx, 651-1388 pp. B°.
Samoa, &c., pp. 898-907.
Finsch, 0., and G. Hartlaub. Beitrag zur Fauna Centralpolynesiens.
Ornithologie der Viti-, Samoa- und Tonga-Inseln. . . . Mit
14 nach der Natur lithographirten und colorirten Kupfertafeln.
Druck und Verlag von H. W. Schmidt, Halle, 1867. xxxix,
(1), 290 pp. B°.
Forbes, Litton. The Navigator Islands.
In Royal Geographical Society, Proceedings, vol. 21
( 1 877), pp. 140-148.
Fornander, Abraham. An Account of the Polynesian Race, its
Origin and Migrations, and the Ancient History of the
Hawaiian People to the Times of Kamehameha I. Triibner
and Co., London, 1878-1885. 3v. B°. (English and
Foreign Philosophical Library.)
Vols. 1 and 2 not in library of Congress, but ordered.
Vol. 3 : Comparative Vocabulary of the Polynesian and
Indo-European Languages . . . With Preface by W. D.
Alexander.
Fraser, John. Some Folk-songs and Myths from Samoa.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 5 (Sept., 1896),
pp. 171-183; vol. 6 (Mar., 1897), pp. 19-36; (June, 1897),
pp. 67-76 ; (Sept., 1897), pp. 107-122 ; vol. 7 (Mar., 1898),
pp. 15-29 ; vol. 9 (Sept., 1900), pp, 125-134.
Fraser, Marie. In Stevenson’s Samoa. Smith, Elder, and Co.,
London, 1895. vi, (2), 190 pp. Frontispiece. 12 0 .
Frazer, (Sir) J. G. The Belief in Immortality and the Worship of
the Dead. Vol. ii. The Belief among the Polynesians.
Macmillan and Co., 1922.
Friedlander, I. Beitraga zur Geologie der Samoainseln Abhand-
lungen K. Bayer. Akad. Wissensch., vol. xxiv, part 3,
PP- 5°9-4L 1910. 2 maps, 5 plates.
Funk, B. Kurze Anleitung zum Verstandniss der Samoanischen
Sprachen. Grammatik und Vocabularium . . . Nebst
einem Anhange : Meteorologische Notizen. Mit einem
Plane von Apia. E. S. Mittler und Sohn, Berlin, 1893.
(6), 82 pp. Map. 12 0 .
Genthe, (Dr.) Siegfried. Samoa, Reiseschilderungen. Berlin, 1908.
Graeffe, Eduard. Samoa oder die Schifferinseln. Abschn. 1-4.
In Museum Godeffroy, Journal, 1873, Heft 1, pp. 48-51 ;
Heft 2, pp. i-n ; 1874, Heft 6, pp. 119-122; 1879, Heft
14, pp. 225-240. Contents: 1, Topographic von Samoa;
2, Die meteorologischen Erscheinungen in Samoa; 3, Notizen
fiber die geologischen Verhaltnisse Samoa’s ; 4, Die Einge-
borenen in Bezug auf Rassencharakter und Krankheiten
Hdbk.—lo


Graeffe, Eduard. Ueber die Sprache, Sitten und Gebrauche der Samoaner.
In Geographische Gesellschaft in Hamburg, Mittheilungen,
1887-1888, Heft I, pp. 64-75.
In Library of the United States Geological Survey.
Great Britain. Admiralty. Pacific Islands, vol. 2 (Central and
Eastern Groups) . . . Sailing Directions for Fiji, Kermadec,
Tonga, Samoa, Union, Phoenix. 2nd ed. Compiled from
various sources. Printed for the Hydrographic Office,
Admiralty, London, 1891. xxvi, 498 pp. Maps. B°.
General remarks, pp. 1-17 ; Samoa or Navigators Islands,
pp. 60-80.
sth edition, 1918. xliii, 696 pp. Maps. B°.
General remarks, pp. 1-44 ; Samoa, pp. 535~57-
Foreign Office. British and Foreign State Papers. London,
1841-1900. B°.
This publication comprises the principal documents relat-
ing to the political and commercial affairs of nations. The
volumes containing documents relating to Samoan affairs
are indicated below. For the complete documentary material
of the different Governments, giving full correspondence and
reports of diplomatic agents, the publications of the respective
countries must be consulted—the German in the “ Steno-
graphischer Berichte d. deutschen Reichstags ” ; the English
in the Parliamentary Sessional Papers (see entries under
Great Britain, Parliament) ; the American in reports on
“ Foreign Relations,” published by the Department of State.
Vol. 33. 1844-45. Commercial regulations made by
the principal chiefs of the Samoan or Navigators
Islands. Nov. 5, 1839. pp. 52-54.
Vol. 70. 1878-79. Treaty of Friendship, &c., be-
tween Great Britain and the King and Government
(Malo) of Samoa. Signed at Apia, Aug. 28, 1879.
pp. 133-135-
Vol. 70. 1878-79. Treaty of friendship between Ger-
many and Samoa. Signed at Apia, Jan. 24, 1879.
pp. 241-246.
Vol. 70. 1878-79. Convention between Great Britain
(Germany, the United States), and the King and
Government of Samoa, for the government of the
town and district of Apia. Signed at Apia, Sept. 2,
1879. pp. 294-296.
Vol. 70. 1878-79. Address of the British, German,
and United States’ representatives to the chiefs and
rulers of the different districts of Samoa, advising
them not to engage in civil war. Apia, July 2, 1879.
pp. 1192-1193.


Great Britain. Foreign Office —continued.
VoL 73. 1881-82. Treaty between Germany and Samoa
(cessation of civil war ; maintenance of peace by all
the provinces and places of Samoa). Apia, Dec. 15,
1879. pp. 1170-1172.
Vol. 73. 1881-82. Agreement between Germany and
Samoa (appointment of Malietoa Falavoa to be King,
and of Malietoa Laupepa to be Regent; Samoan flag ;
Government of Samoa; &c.). Apia, Dec. 23, 1879.
pp. 1173-1176.
Vol. 75. 1883-84. Agreement between Germany and
Samoa with reference to jurisdiction over German
subjects in Samoa. Signed at Apia, Nov. 10, 1884.
pp. 508-510.
Vol. 76. 1884-85. Correspondence between Great
Britain and Germany respecting New Guinea, Samoa,
&c. 1884, 1885. pp. 778-811.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. Agreement between Germany and
Samoa respecting public works in the late municipality
of Apia, &c. Jan. 24, 1888. pp. 161-163.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. German notification of the with-
drawal of Germany from the convention of Sept. 2,
1879, respecting the municipality of Apia, Samoa.
Apia, Jan. 18, 1888. p. 665.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. Notification by King Tamasese of
Samoa respecting the municipality of Apia. Jan. 18,
1888. pp. 665-666.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. Protocols of conferences between
Great Britain, Germany, and the United States re-
specting the affairs of Samoa. Washington, June 25-
July 26, 1887. pp. 900-962.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. Correspondence between Great
Britain, Germany, and the United States respecting
the affairs of Samoa. 1885-1888. pp. 963-1053.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. Samoan law relative to mortgage
of land or copra produce. Mulinuu, June 5, 1888.
pp. 1028-1029.
Vol. 79. 1887-88. Proclamation by Tamasese defining
the limits of neutral territory. Samoa, Oct. 9, 1888,
p. 1047. Proclamation by Malietoa Mataafa. Oct. 9,
1888. p. 1048.
Vol. 81. 1888-89. Correspondence between Great
Britain, Germany, and the United States respecting
the affairs of Samoa. Jan.-Feb., 1889. pp. 579-594.
Vol. 81. 1888-89. Message from the President of the
United States transmitting information respecting
affairs in Samoa. Washington, Jan. 15, 1889. pp.
584-586.


Great Britain. Foreign Office —continued.
Vol. 81. 1888-89. Message from the President of the
United States in relation to affairs in the Samoan
Islands. Washington, Jan. 30, 1889. pp. 589-590.
Vol. 81. 1888-89. Final act of the conference on the
affairs of Samoa. Signed at Berlin, June 14, 1889.
pp. 1058-1072.
Vol. 81. 1888-89. Protocols of conferences between
Great Britain, Germany, and the United States re-
specting the affairs of Samoa. Berlin, April 29-
June 14, 1889. pp. 1217-1273.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. Correspondence between Great
Britain, Germany, and the United States respecting
the affairs of Samoa. 1889. pp. 613-629.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. Proclamation respecting the recogni-
tion of Malietoa Laupepa as King of Samoa. Apia,
Nov. 8, 1889. p. 628.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. Proclamation recognizing Malietoa
as King of Samoa. Apia, Dec. 5, 1889. pp. 628-629.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. German law respecting consular
jurisdiction in Samoa. July 6, 1890, pp. 1024-1025.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. German Ordnance respecting con-
sular jurisdiction in Samoa. Berlin, Oct. 29, 1890.
pp. 1025-1026.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. Assent of King Malietoa of Samoa
to the General Act of the Berlin Conference of June 14,
1889. Apia, April 19, 1890. p. 1038.
Vol. 82. 1889-90. Decree of the King of Sweden
and Norway, nominating M. Cedercrantz to be
Chief Justice in Samoa. Stockholm, Oct. 3, 1890.
pp. 1084-1085.
Vol. 85. 1892-93. Correspondence respecting the affairs
of Samoa. 1890-93. pp. 880-1049.
Vol. 86. 1893-94. Message from the President of the
United States, in response to the Senate resolution
of April 6, 1894, transmitting a report from the
Secretary of State relative to the Samoan Islands.
Washington, May 9, 1894. pp. 1209-1221.
Vol, 86. 1893-94. Message from the President of the
United States, in further response to the Senate reso-
tion of April 6, 1894, transmitting a report from the
Secretary of State relative to the Samoan Islands, and
copies of correspondence relating thereto. Washing-
ton, July 9, 1894. pp. 1221—1222.


Great Britain. Foreign Office —continued.
Vol 86. 1893-94. Correspondence between the U.S.
Department of State and the British Embassy,
pp. 1222-1228.
Vol. 86. 1893-94; Correspondence between the U.S.
Department of State and the German Embassy,
pp. 1229-1246.
Parliament. Accounts and Papers;
Consular reports, &c., from the Navigators Islands :
Extract, dated Samoa* Dec. 31, 1834. Vol. 55, 1854-55
(No 2006) p. 75. Abstracts for 1858, vol. 65, iB6O (No.
2753). PP- 14-I5- Report for 1859, vol. 58, 1862 (No. 3054).
p 98. Report for 1862, vol. 70, 1863 (No. 3222), p. 252.
Report for 1863, vol. 61, 1864 (No. 3392). pp. 183-184.
Report for 1864, vol. 69, 1866 (No. 3582), pp. 73°, 731-
Report for 1866, vol. 68, 1867-68 (No. 3953). PP- 171-172-
Report for 1868, vol. 64, 1870 (C. 19), PP- 49, 5°- Report
for 1869, vol. 65, 1871 (C. 343). pp- 156-157- Report for
1870, vol. 66. 1871 (C. 429), p. 915- Report for 1871, vol. 58,
1872 (C. 637), pp. 1179-80. Report on consular establish-
ments, dated Dec. 22, 1871, vol. 61, 1872 (C. 661), pp. I 5“i 8 -
Report for 1872, vol. 65, 1873 (C. 828), pp. 923-24. Letter
dated Samoa, Aug. 24, 1872, vol. 67, 1873 (C. 799), p. 347.
Report for 1873, vol. 67, 1874 (C. 1079), pp. 1403-4. Report
for 1874, vol. 76, 1875 (C. 1284), pp. 1257—58. Report for
1875, vol. 76, 1876 (C. 1589), PP- 1424-27- Report for 1878,
vol 73 1880 (C. 2460), pp. iio-xii. Report for 1879.
vol. 74, 1880 (C. 2577), pp- 813-15. Report for 1882, vol. 73,
1883 (C. 3631), pp. 796-98. Report for 1883. vol. 80, 1884
(C. 4030), pp! 1052-53. Report for 1890, vol. 88, 1890-91
(No 831), 3 pp- Supplementary report for 1890, vol. 88,
1890-91 (No. 885), 2 pp. Report for 1891, vol, 88, 1892
(No. 1064), 6 pp. Report for 1892, vol. 98, 1893-94 (No. 1262),
spp Report for 1894, vol. 101, 1895 (No. 1587), 14 pp.
Report for 1895, vol. 94. 1897 (No. 1823), 6 pp. Report for
1896, vol 94, 1897 (No. 1915). 8 pp. Report for 1897,
vol. 99, 1898 (No. 2049), 11 pp. Report for 1899 (No. 2914).
9 pp. Report for 1900 (No. 2561), 19 01 . 7 PP-
Samoa. No. 1 (1881). Treaty of Friendship, &c. ; between
Her Majesty and the King and Government (Malo) of Samoa.
Signed at Apia, Aug. 28, 1879. (2), 3 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1881, vol. 99, C. 2747.
Samoa. No. 2 (1881). Convention between Her Majesty
and the King and Government of Samoa for the Government
of the town and district of Apia. Signed at Apia, Sept. 2,
l 8? /w Great Britain, Parliament, Sessional Papers i3Bi.
vol. 99, C. 2748.


Great Britain. Parliament. Samoa. No. i (1885). Convention be-
tween Great Britain, Germany, the United States, and
Samoa, as to the revision of the Convention of Sept. 2,
1879, relative to the Municipal Board of Apia. Signed at
Samoa, Sept. 29, 1883. 3 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1884-85, vol. 87,
C. 4276.
Report of Proceedings, H.M.S. “ Calliope ” at Apia, Samoa,
Mar. 20, 1889. 5 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1889, vol. 50, C. 5732.
H.M.S. Calliope ” ; Report of the Hurricane at Samoa
on the 16th March, 1889. In continuation of Parliamentary
Paper No. 5732 of 1889. 12 pp. 2 folded plans. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1889, vol. 50, C. 5756.
Samoa. No. 1 (1889). Correspondence respecting the Affairs
of Samoa. 1885-89. xv, (1), 308 pp. Folded plan. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1889, vol. 86, C. 5629.
Samoa. No. 1 (1890). Further Correspondence respecting the
Affairs of Samoa. In continuation of Samoa No. 1, 1889,
C. 5629. iv, 95 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1890, vol. 81, C. 5907.
Samoa. No. 2 (1890). Final Act -of the-Conference on the
Affairs of Samoa. Signed at Berlin, June 14, 1889 (2)
9 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1890, vol. 81, C. 5911.
Samoa. No. 1 (1893). Further Correspondence respecting the
Affairs of Samoa. In continuation of Samoa No. 1, 1890,
C. 5907. 16, (1), 238 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1893-94 vol 109
C. 6973.
Samoa. No. 1 (1899). Correspondence respecting the Affairs
of Samoa: Report of the Joint Commission. (2), 24 pp. f°.
In Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1899, C. 9506.
Germany. Ro. 1 (1899). Despatch to Her Majesty’s Charge
d’Afifaires at Berlin, enclosing Copies of the Convention and
Declaration between Great Britain and Germany of Novem-
ber 14, 1899, for the Settlement of the Samoan and other
Questions. 5 pp. f°.
n Great Britain, Sessional Papers, 1899, Cd. 7.
Treaty Series. No. 7 (1900). Convention and Declaration
between the United Kingdom and Germany for the Settle-
ment of the Samoan and other Questions.
Treaty Series. No. 8 (1900). Convention between the United
Kingdom, Germany, and the United States of America for
the Adjustment of Questions relating to Samoa.
Treaty Series. No. 10 (1900). Convention between the United
Kingdom, Germany, and the United States of America,
relating to the Settlement of certain Claims in Samoa by
Arbitration.


Greene, Charles S. Talofa, Samoa: a Summer Sail to an Enchanted
Isle. News Company, San Francisco, 1896. 3rd ed., pub-
lished by Oceanic Steamship Company, 1904.
Grey, (Sir) George. German Colonization: a Review of Recent Anglo-
German Negotiations and the Samoan Situation. A. Brett,
Auckland, 1889.
Grimshaw, (Miss) Beatrice. Samoa.
In her Strange South Seas, 1907.
Samoa.
In her Three Wonderful Nations, 1910.
Guillemard, F. H. H. Australasia. Vol. 2 : Malaysia and the Pacific
Archipelagos. Edited and greatly extended from Dr. A. R.
Wallace’s “ Australasia.” Edward Stanford, London, 1894.
xvi, 574 pp. Illustrations ; maps. 12 0 . (Stanford's Com-
pendium of Geography and Travel. New issue.)
The Polynesian race, &c., pp. 487-496; Samoa, pp.
500-507.
Hale, Horatio. Ethnography and Philology. Printed by C. Sher-
man, Philadelphia, 1846. xii, 666 pp. Charts ; maps. 4 0 .
(United States Exploring Expedition, vol. 6.)
Ethnography: Polynesia, pp. 4-43, 117-196. Philology;
Polynesia, pp. 229-356.
Hall, D. 8., and Osborne, (Lord) Albert. Samoa.
In their Sunshine and Surf, igoi.
Henderson, John 8., jun. American Diplomatic Questions. The
Macmillan Company, New York, 1901. ix, (1), 529 pp. B°.
The United States and Samoa, pp. 203-286.
Herbert, George Robert Charles, Earl of Pembroke, and G. H. Kingsley.
South Sea Bubbles. sth ed. Richard Bentley and Son,
London, 1873. viii, (2), 323 pp. 12 0 .
Samoa, pp. 198-236. Missionaries, pp. 279-321.
Hertslet, Lewis, and Edward Cecil Hertslet. A Complete Collection of
the Treaties and Conventions and Reciprocal Regulations at
present subsisting between Great Britain and Foreign Powers.
London, 1827 [&c.]. B°.
Treaty of friendship, &c., between Great Britain and the
King and Government (Malo) of Samoa, Aug. 28, 1879,
vol. 15, pp. 334-336.
Convention between Great Britain and the King and
Government of Samoa for the government of the town and
district of Apia, Sept. 2, 1879, vol. 15, pp. 336-339.
Convention between Great Britain, &c., and Samoa, for
the prolongation of the convention of Sept. 2, 1879, for the
government of the town and district of Apia, Sept. 29, 1883,
p. 1051.
Declaration between the Governments of Great Britain
and the German Empire relating to the demarcation of the
British and German spheres of influence in the Western
Pacific, April 6, 1886, vol. 17, pp. 442-443. (Map.)
151
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.


Final act of the conference between the plenipotentiaries
of Great Britain, Germany, and the United States respecting
the affairs of Samoa, June 14, 1889, vol. 18, pp. 1068-1081.
Assent of King Malietoa of Samoa to the general act of
the Berlin conference of June 14, 1889, Apia, April 19, 1890,
vol. 18, p. 1082.
Detailed regulations for the execution of the Universal
Postal Union Convention of July 4, 1891, so far as relate
to extraordinary services, rates of postage, division of ex-
penses, and the scope of the union. Signed at Vienna,
July 4, 1891. Vol. 19, pp. 341-345 (Apia, p. 344). British
Order in Council providing for the exercise of Her Majesty’s
jurisdiction in the Pacific Islands, Windsor, Mar. 15, 1893,
vol. 19, pp 570-631 (Navigators Islands, p. 573). See also
“ Regulations,” vol. 19, p. 631.
Hesse-Wartegg, E. von. Samoa, Bismarckarchipel und Neu Guinea.
Leipzig, 1902.
Hessler, Karl. Die deutschen Kolonieen. Beschreibung von Land
und Leuten unserer auswartigen Besitzungen. Nach den
neuesten und besten Quellen bearbeitet. 5 verm und verb.
Aufl. G. Lang, Leipzig, 1900. viii, 238 pp. Illustrations ;
map. B°.
Die Samoa-Inseln, pp. 208-213.
Hood, T. H. Notes of a Cruise in H.M.S. “ Fawn ” in the Western
Pacific in the Year 1862. Edmonston and Douglas, Edin-
burgh, 1863. ix, (3), 268 pp. Frontispiece; illustrations ;
plates ; plan ; folded chart. B°.
Samoa, &c., pp. 28-145.
Hutton, James. Missionary Life in the Southern Seas. Henry S.
King and Co., London, 1874. xi, (3), 346 pp. Frontispiece ;
plates. 12 0 .
Chapter X, the Samoa or Navigators Islands.
Indra, K. R. Sudseefahrten : Schilderungen einer Reise nach den
Fidschi-Inseln, Samoa und Tonga. Berlin, 1903.
Jepson, F. P. The Rhinoceros Beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros Linn.) in
Samoa.
In Dept, of Agric. Fiji Bulletin No. 3, 1912.
Johnson, Martin. Samoa.
In his Through the South Seas with Jack London, 1913.
Jordan, S., and Seale, A. The Fishes of Samoa : Descriptions of
the Species found in the Archipelago, with a Provisional
Check-list of the Fishes of Oceania. Department of Com-
merce and Labour, Washington, 1906.
King, (Miss) Agnes Gardner. Samoa.
In her Islands Far Away. 1920.


Kotzebue, Otto von. A New Voyage round the World, in the Years
1823, 24, 25, and 26. Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley,
London, 1830. 2v. Frontispieces (vol. 2, portrait) ; maps.
12°.
The Navigators Islands, vol 1, pp. 253 287.
Kozle, J. F. G. Neuer Wegzeiger fur die deutschen Schutzgebeite in
Afrika, der Siidsee und Ostasien. Nach den neusten Quellen.
M. Kielmann, Stuttgart, 1900. viii, 119, (1) pp. Map. B°.
Die Samoa-Inseln, pp. 95-106.
Kramer, Augustin. Die Samoa-Inseln. Entwurf einer Monographic
mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung Deutsch-Samoas. Her-
ausgegeben mit Unterstiitzung der Kolonialabteilung des
Auswartigen Amts. 1 te, 2te Lief. E. Schweizerbartsche
Verlagsbuchhandlung (E. Naegele), Stuttgart, 1901. 240 pp.
Illustration in text; plates ; maps. 4°.
Ueber den Ban der Korallenriffe und die Planktonvertheilung
an den Samoanischen Kiisten, nebst vergleichenden Bemerk-
ungen und einem Anhang; Ueber den Palolowurm von
A. Collin. Lipsius and Tischer, Kiel, 1897. xi, 174 pp.
Illustrations; map. B°.
Kurze, G. Samoa : Das Land, die Leute und die Mission. M. War-
neck, Berlin, 1899. v, 108 pp. B°.
Lafarge, John. Samoa.
In his Reminiscences of the South Seas, 1914.
La Perouse, J. F. G. de. A Voyage round the World in the Years
1785, 1786, 1787, and 1788 . . . Translated from the
French. Printed for J. Johnson, London, 1798. 3 v.
Plates; maps ; tables. B°.
Navigators Islands, vol. 3, pp. 58-127.
Leary, L. P. New-Zealanders in Samoa. 1918.
Lenwood, (Rev.) F. Samoa.
In his Pastels from the Pacific. 1918.
Lesson. A. Les Polynesiens, leur Origine, leurs Migrations, leur
Language. Ouvrage redige d’apres le Manuscrit de I’Auteur
par Ludovic Martinet, Membre de la Society d’Anthropologie.
Ernest Leroux, Paris, 1880-1884. 4v. Folded map. B°.
Recherche du pays d’origine des Samoans et des Tongans,
vol. 2, pp. 371-546. Alphabet, vol. 3, p. 209.
London, Charmian. Samoa.
In her Voyaging in Wild Seas, 1915.
London, Jack. Samoa.
In his Cruise of the Snark, 1913.
Lundie, G. A. Missionary Life in Samoa, as exhibited in the Journals
of the late George Archibald Lundie during the Revival in
Tutuila in 1840-41. Edited by his brother. Edinburgh,
1846.


Luschan, F. von. Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Tattowirung in .Samoa.
Berlin, 1897.
McLennan, John Ferguson. Studies in Ancient History : the Second
Series, comprising an Inquiry into the Origin of Exogamy.
Macmillan and Co., London, 1896. xiv, (2), 605 pp. B°.
Chapter XII, the Samoa or Navigators Islands.
Marques, A. Notes pour servir a une Monographic des lies Samoa.
[Conference faite devant la Societe de Geographic de Lis-
bonne, 5 fevrier, 1889.] 158 pp. Folded map.
In Sociedad de Geographia de Lisboa, Boletim, 8a ser..
Nos. 1, 2.
Marin, Aylic. Samoa.
In his En Oceanic, 1888.
Meade, Herbert. A Ride through the Disturbed Districts of New Zea-
land ; together with some Account of the South Sea Islands.
John Murray, London, 1870. x, (2), 375 pp. Illustrations;
coloured plates ; maps. B°.
Tutuila, pp. 182-195 ; Upolu, pp. 195-202.
Monfat, A. Les Samoa, ou Archipel des Navigateurs : Etude his-
torique et religieuse. E. Vitte, Lyon, 1890. xv, (1), 414 pp.
Plates (woodcuts) ; map. B°.
Moors, H. J. With Stevenson in Samoa. Boston : Small, Maynard,
and Co., 1910 ; London : Fisher Unwin, 1910.
Morris, Henry C. The History of Colonization from the Earliest
Times to the Present Day. The Macmillan Company, New
York, 1900. 2v. B°.
Yol. 2, pp. 294-298, the Germans in Samoa, &c.
Mulligan, James H. Samoa : Government, Commerce, Products, and
People.
In United States, Consular Reports, vol. 51, No. 191
(Aug. 1896), pp. 656-748. (54th Congress, Ist sess., House
doc. No. 377, pt. 4.)
Murray, A. W. Forty Years’ Mission Work in Polynesia and New
Guinea, from 1835 to 1875. James Nisbet and Co., London,
1876. xvi, 505 pp. Plates ; maps ; folded table. B°.
Largely devoted to Samoa.
Missions in Western Polynesia : being Historical Sketches of
these Missions from their Commencement in 1839 to the
present time. John Snow, London, 1863. xi, (1), 489 pp.
Plates; map. B°.
The Samoan mission, pp. 450-468.
New South Wales. Legislative Assembly. Intercolonial Convention,
1883.
See Powell, J. ; also Seed, William.


Newell, J. E., editor. The Legend of the Coming of Nareau from
Samoa to Tarawa, and his Return to Samoa.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 4 (Dec., 1895),
pp. 231-235.
Notes on Rev. J. B. Stair’s Paper on “ Early Samoan Voyages
and Settlement.”
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 4 (Dec., 1895),
pp. 238-240.
New Zealand :
GENERAL.
1874. Letter from Commodore J. G. Goodenough to Governor of
New Zealand, reporting the establishment of Government
in Samoa under body of seven chiefs called Taimua (Tumua),
with constitution, laws, and flag, and his recognition thereof,
1879. Constitution of High Commissioner’s Court at Suva, Fiji,
under “ Western Pacific Order in Council, 1879,” giving
jurisdiction in certain islands, including Western Samoa,
to His Majesty as vested in the High Commissioner’s Court.
(Amendments" 1879 (2). Rules under, iBBx. Notice re,
1884, 86, 87.)
1889. Prohibiting supply of intoxicating liquor to Natives of Western
Pacific (including Samoa).
1890. The Final Act of the Conference on Samoan Affairs, signed
at Berlin, 14th June, 1889.
1892. Regulation for Sale and Use of Firearms in Samoa.
1893. Despatches respecting the issue of labour licenses under the
Imperial Acts entitled “ The Pacific Islanders Protection
Acts, 1872 and 1875.”
1893. Regulations under the Western Pacific Order in Council, 1879,
for Preservation of Peace and Good Order in Samoa (2).
1895. Order in Council prohibiting the export of firearms into
Samoa.
The Samoa Arms Regulations, 1895 (Imperial).
1901. Translation of Order of German Government abolishing ex-
port duties on copra, cotton, and coffee, and capitulation-
tax on coloured plantation labour, and raising import
duties on certain articles.
1920. League of Nations : Mandate for German Samoa.
1923. Appointment of Apia as Port of Entry for Union (Tokelau)
Islands.
Appointment of Apia as Port of Entry for certain Islands of
the Cook Group.


New Zealand— continued.
LEGISLATION*
1919. Treaties of Peace Act, 1919. (Extended, 1920, 1921.)
External Affairs Act, 1919. (Amended, 1920.)
1920. Western Samoa Order in Council (Imperial), 1920. (Amend-
ment, 1920.)
Treaties of Peace Order, 1920.
Fugitive Offenders Order, 1920.
Bank of New Zealand Order, 1920.
Crown Estates Order, 1920. (Amendments, 1920, 1921, 1922,
1923 (3). 1924-)
Registration of Europeans Regulation, 1920.
Land Registration Order, 1920. (Amendments, 1921, 1924.)
Native Lands and Titles Commission Order, 1920. (Amend-
ment, 1924.)
Sale of Intoxicating Liquor Regulations, 1920. (Amendment,
1922.)
Maintenance and Affiliation Order, 1920.
Post and Telegraph Order, 1920. (Amendment, 1923.)
Public Service Regulations, 1920. (Amendment, 1923.)
Quarantine Order, 1920.
Customs Order, 1920. (Consolidated, 1923.)
Rules of the High Court, 1920. (Consolidated, 1924.)
Immigration Order, 1920. (Consolidated, 1924.)
Samoan Act, 1921. (Amendment, 1923.)
1921. Board of Trade Order, 1921. (Amendment, 1925.)
Health Order, 1921.
Public Trust Office Order, 1921. (Amendment, 1921, 1924.)
1922. Bankruptcy Order, 1922.
Companies, Order, 1922.
Death Duties Order, 1922.
1923. British Nationality and Status of Aliens (in N.Z.) Act, 1923.
(Amendment, 1924.)
Ex Enemy Absentee Property Order, 1923.
Legislative Council (Elective Membership) Order, 1923.
Mortgages Extension Order, 1923.
1924. Appropriation Act, 1924 ; Extending Benefits of Super-
annuation to Samoan and Cook Islands Services.
Extradition Order, 1924.
Freemasons Trustees Order, 1924.
Pharmacy Order, 1924.
Treasury Regulations, 1924.
New Zealand Government. Annual Reports of, to the League of
Nations, Geneva, on the Mandated Territory of Western
Samoa.
Nicholas, Henry, translator. Genealogies and Historical Notes from
Rarotonga.
In Polynesian Society Journal, vol. 1 (April, 1892),
pp. 20-29; (July, 1892), pp. 65-75 ; vol. 2 (Dec., 1893),
pp. 271-279.


Nicoll, M. J. Tutuila and Upolu.
In his Three Voyages of a Naturalist, 1909.
Tutuila, Chapter xxiii, pp. 226-230 ; Upolu, Chapter xxiv,
pp. 231-239.
Nightingale, Thomas. Oceanic Sketches . , , With a Botanical
Appendix by Dr. Hooker, of Glasgow. James Cochrane and
Co., London, 1835. x, (2), 132 pp. Frontispiece (portrait) ;
plates. 12 0 .
Chapter VI, Samoa, &c.
Obermuller, Julius. Samoa. Zur Geschichte der deutschen Colonien
in der Stid-See mit besonderer Riicksicht auf die Kampfe
um dieselben und die Ereignisse von 1888-1889. Mit Ab-
bildungen und einem Kartchen des Hafens von Apia. Ed-
ward Heinrich Mayer, Leipzig [lBB9]. viii, 79, (1) pp.
Coloured chart. 12 0 .
O’Connor, {Dr.) Francis W. Researches in the Western Pacific,
being a Report of the Expedition sent from the London
School of Tropical Medicine to the Ellice, Tokelau, and
Samoan Islands in 1921-1922. Research Memoirs of the
Lond. Sch. Trop. Med., vol. iv, pp. 1-57. 8 plates. 1923-
[O le Kalena Samoa]. Printed at Malua, Samoa, by L.M.S. annually.
Osbourne, Lloyd, and Strong, Isobel. Memories of Vailima. London.
1903.
Petin, H. Les Etats-Unis et la Doctrine de Monroe. A. Rousseau,
Paris, 1900. (2), 452 pp. B°.
Pp. 375-391, La nouvelle Politique des Etats-Unis, Samoa.
Phillips, {Rev.) Charles. Samoa, Past and Present: a Narrative of
Missionary Work in the South Seas. J. Snow and Co.,
London [lB9o]. 96 pp. B°.
Phillips, Coleman. Samoa and Pacific Islands.
New Zealand Parliamentary Paper, 1894.
Powell, J. Navigators Islands.
In Victoria, Parliament, Australasian Convention, 1883,
Report of the proceedings of the convention ... to con-
sider the subjects of the annexation of neighbouring islands
and the federation of Australasia, pp. 84—85. Melbourne,
1884. f°.
Same article is also to be found in the report of the
Intercolonial Convention of 1883, printed in the Votes of
and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, 1883-84, vol. 9, pp. 95-96.
Powell, T. A Samoan Tradition of Creation and the Deluge.
In Victoria Institute, Transactions, vol. 20 (1886-87),
pp, 145-147-
On various Samoan Plants and their Vernacular Names.
In Journal of Botany, vol. vi, pp. 278-285, 342-347,
355-37°- 1868 -


Pratt, George. A Samoan Dictionary : English and Samoan, and
Samoan and English ; with a Short Grammar of the Samoan
Dialect. London Missionary Society’s Press, Samoa, 1862.
223 pp. B°.
A Grammar and Dictionary of the Samoan Language, 2nd ed.
Edited by S. J. Whitnee. Triibner and Co., London, 1878.
vi, (2), 379 pp. 12 0 .
translator. The Genealogy of the Sun : a Samoan Legend.
In Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, Proceedings, vol. 1, 1887, pp. 447-463.
-- translator. The Samoan Story of Creation : a “ Tala.”
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 1 (Oct., 1892),
pp. 164-189.
Pratt, George, and Powell, T. Some Folk-songs and Myths from
Samoa. With an Introduction and Notes by John Fraser.
In Royal Society of New South Wales, Journal and
Proceedings, vol. 24 (1890), pp. 195-217 ; vol. 25 (1891),
pp. 70-86, 96-146, 241-286; vol. 26 (1892), pp. 264-301 ;
vol. 29 (1895). PP- 366-393.
Pritchard, W. J. Notes on the Physical and Psychological Condition
of the Inhabitants of Viti, Tonga, and Samoa.
In Anthropological Society of London, Journal, vol. 3
(1865), pp. cxlvi-clx.
Polynesian Reminiscences ; or, Life in the South Pacific Islands.
Preface by Dr. Seemann. Chapman and Hall, London,
1866. xii, 428 pp. Frontispiece; plates. B°.
Samoa, the Samoans, &c., pp. 50-208, 376-428.
Prout, Ebenezer. Memoirs of the Life of the Rev. John Williams,
Missionary to Polynesia. M. W. Dodd, New York ; Allen,
Morrill, and Wardwell, Andover, 1843. viii, 416 pp.
Frontispiece (portrait) ; plate. 12 0 .
Abridged edition, Philadelphia, 1844.
Quatrefages, A. de. Les Polynesiens et leurs Migrations. A. Bertram,
Paris [1864]. (2), 199, (1) pp. 4 0 .
Randolph, Carman F. The Law and Policy of Annexation. Long-
mans, Green, and Co., London and Bombay, 1901. xi, (1),
226 pp. B°.
Protectorate over the Samoan Group, pp. 155, 157.
Ratzel, Friedrich. The History of Mankind . . . Translated from
the second German edition by A. J. Butler, with introduc-
tion by E. B. Tylor. Macmillan and Co., London, 1896-1898.
3v. Illustrations ; coloured plates ; maps. B°.
Samoa Group, or Navigator Islands, vol. 1, pp. 124, 125,
166, 174, 190, 195-197, 199, 201, 238, 240, 253, 254, 261,
266, 270, 283, 290, 291, 296, 297, 304, 306, 311-322.
Rechinger, {Dr.) Karl. Botanische und Zoologische Ergebnisse einer
Wissenchaftlichen Forschungsreise nach den Samoainseln,
dem Neu Guinea Archipel und den Salomonsinseln. Wien,
1907-8.


Rechinger, Karl. Botanische und Zoologische Ergebnisse einer
wissen schaftlichen Forschungszeise nach den Samoainseln,
dem Neu-Guinea Archipel, und den Salomoninseln.
Denkschr. Math-Naturwiss. Kaiserlichen Akad., Vienna,
Vols. Bi, 84, 85, 88, 89, 1907-1914.
Reclus, Jean Jacques Elisee. The Earth and its Inhabitants : the
Universal Geography. Edited by A. H. Keane. Vol. 14,
Australasia. J. S. Virtue and Co., London [lB9o]. vii, (1),
512 pp. Plates ; maps. 4 0 ,
Samoa, pp. 470, 471, 474, 478, 481, 483-485.
Reinecke, F. Samoa. Berlin, 1901.
—— Die Flora der Samoa-Inseln.
Botanisch. Jahrbuch, vol. xxiii, pp. 237-368 ; vol. xxiv,
pp. 578-708. Plates 8-13. 1898.
Reeves, Edward. Brown Men and Women ; or, the South Sea Islands
in 1895 and 1896. With Sixty Illustrations and a Map.
Swan, Sonnenschein, and Co., London, 1898. vi, (2), 294 pp.
inch plates. Folded map. B°.
Samoa, pp. 141-167.
Rieman, George B. Papalangee ; or, Uncle Sam in Samoa. [Butler
and Stilwell, Oakland, 1874.] 43 pp. B°.
Roskoschny, (Dr.) Hermann. Samoa.
In his Europas Kolonien ; die Deutschen in der Sudsee.
Rothschonberg, Otto. Samoa deutsch ! Geographische Beschreibung
und historischer Abriss der Beziehungen Deutschlands zu
denselben. O. Gracklauer, Leipzig, 1899. 30 pp. B°.
Russell M. Polynesia : or, an Historical Account of the Principal
Islands in the South Sea. With a Map and Vignette. 3rd ed.
Oliver and Boyd, &c., Edinburgh, 1845. 440 pp. 16 0 .
Navigators Islands, pp. 267-278.
St. Johnston, Alfred. Samoa.
In Camping among Cannibals, 1883.
Samoa (Western) :
ORDINANCES, MADE BY THE ADMINISTRATOR.
1914. Proclaiming the occupation of the Territory of Western
Samoa by New Zealand troops on behalf of H.M. Govern-
ment.
Declaring certain German notes legal tender; prohibiting
import and export of certain currency.
Trading with belligerent subjects.
Enemy Trading: Royal Proclamation dated sth August,
1914-
Coconut-beetle Ordinance.
Courts of law.
Restraining movements of population ; prohibiting the manu-
facture or supply of spirituous liquor.
Enemy trading.


Samoa Western— continued,
1915. Native Court, Institution of.
Method of payments to Natives.
Exchange of currency—German to British.
Enemy trading.
Customs and taxation.
Chinese contract labour.
Shops and offices.
Coconut-beetle Ordinance.
Prohibiting supply of liquor to Natives.
Motor-vehicl es.
Building restrictions.
Fixing penalties under Proclamations.
Criminal jurisdiction in Savaii.
1916. Insect pests and diseases.
Export tax on produce,
Restrictions on export of coconuts.
Insect pests and diseases.
Enemy trading.
Enemy trading.
Chinese indentured labour.
Authorizing a Crown Prosecutor to act in the Territory.
Protection of interests of mortgagors.
Taxation.
Copra.
Survey of vessels.
Construction of roads and ways.
Control of sale of liquor.
Enemy property.
Native and Police Departments.
1917. Chinese indentured labour.
Census of Western Samoa.
Enemy subjects.
Enemy subjects.
Quarantine restrictions.
Hours for shops and offices.
Port and marine.
Births, deaths, and marriages.
Stamp duties.
1918. Claims by British subjects against the enemy.
Enemy subjects ; Statements of affairs.
Indentured labourers.
Establishment of a Police Court.
British property claims and debts in Western Samoa.
1919. Validation of acts of Military Administration.
Noxious weeds.
Importation of munitions.
Importation of spirituous liquor.


Samoa (Western) — continued.
1919. Enemy Property Ordinance.
Native and Police Courts.
Duties of landowners.
Port regulations.
Ex-enemy Deportation Order.
1920. Existing Local Laws Continuance.
Fees of High Court.
Fees for Land Registration.
Importation of Fruit from Fiji Prohibition.
The Companies Ordinance.
Births and Deaths Registration.
Importation of Infected Goods.
Arms and Ammunition.
Copra.
Pacific Islands Contract Labourers.
1921. Prevention of Intimidation.
Commissions of Inquiry.
Fees and Costs of High Court.
Land for Quarantine Purposes.
Vacant Titles.
Census.
Beetles.
Hours for Shops.
Beetle Amendment.
Time-expired Chinese Labour.
Chinese Contract Labour Control.
Samoan Marriages.
Boat Traffic.
Taxation, Licensing, and Revenue.
Coroners.
Surveyors.
Land for Education Purpose.
Land for Water-supply Purpose.
Samoa Health.
Building Alignment.
Building Alignment Amendment.
Births and Deaths Registration Amendment.
Road Traffic.
Arms.
Permits.
1922. Water-supply Offences.
Taxation, Licensing, and Revenue Amendment.
Building Alignment Amendment.
Lands Surveys Regulation.
Police Offences.
Samoan Offenders.
Hdbk.—11


Samoa (Western) — continued.
1923. Dog Registration.
Arms Amendment.
Copra.
Merchandise Price-list.
Horse-racing.
Chinese Labour Control Amendment.
Stallions and Bulls.
Road Traffic Amendment, 1923.
Cocoa-beans Export.
Chinese Free Labour.
Sale of Apia Native Lands.
Samoan Women’s Property.
Importation of Fruit from Fiji.
Samoan Medical Levy.
1924. Land for Quarantine Purposes.
Taxation, Licensing, and Revenue Amendment.
Samoan affairs. [Collection of Congressional Documents, Washing-
ton, 1874-1895]. 17 v. in 2. B°.
Schanz, Moritz. Australien und die Sudsee an der Jahrhundertwende.
Kolonialstudien. W. Siisserott, Berlin, 1901. (4), 325 pp.
Plates ; portrait. B°.
Samoa, pp. 209-259.
Schmidt, Rochus. Deutschlands Kolonien ihre Gestaltung, Entwicke-
lung und Hilfsquellen. Verlag des Vereins der Biicher-
freunde, Berlin [1895]. 2v. Illustrations ; folded maps.
12°.
Die Samoa-Inseln, vol. 2, pp. 413-429.
Seed, William. The Navigators Group.
In Victoria, Parliament, Australasian Convention, 1883,
Report of the proceedings of the convention ... to con-
sider the subjects of the annexation of neighbouring islands
and the federation of Australasia, pp. 96-102. Melbourne,
1881. f°.
Same article also to be found in the report of the Inter-
colonial Convention of 1883, printed in the Votes and Pro-
ceedings of the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales,
1883-84, vol. 9, pp. 106-113. Mr. Seed’s report also contains
that by Captain Wakeman on the harbour at Tutuila.
Sherman, John. The Condition of Affairs in Samoa.
In Congressional Record, 50th Congress, 2nd sess., vol. 20,
pt. 2, Jan. 29, 1889, pp. 1283-1291 ; Jan. 30, 1889, pp. 1372,
1374-
Shipley, Conway. Sketches in the Pacific : the South Sea Islands.
T. McLean, London, 1851. (6), 35, (1) pp. Plates ; fac-
similes. f°.
Samoa, or the Navigators Islands, pp. 19-25. Three plates
accompanying.
162
HANDBOOK OF WESTERN SAMOA.


Shoemaker, Michael Myers. Islands of the Southern Seas : Hawaii,
Samoa, New Zealand, Tasmania, Australia, and Java. Illus-
trated. G P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London, 1898.
xiv, (2), 277 pp. Plates ; folded map. B°.
Slocum, Joshua. Sailing alone round the World . . . Illustrated by
Thomas Fogarty and George Varian. The Century Company,
New York, 1900. xvi, (2), 294 pp. Frontispiece; illustra-
tions. B°.
Samoa, &c., pp. 150-167.
Smith, S. J. The Samoa (N.Z.) Expeditionary Force, 1914-15.
Stair, John B. Early Samoan Voyages and Settlements.
In Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, Proceedings, vol. 6, 1895, pp. 612-619.
Flotsam and Jetsam from the Great Ocean ; or, Summary of
Early Samoan Voyages and Settlement. With Supplementary
Notes and Comments.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 4 (June, 1895),
PP- 99-131-
Jottings on the Mythology and Spirit-lore of Old Samoa.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 5 (Mar., 1896),
PP- 33-57-
The Names and Movements of the Heavenly Bodies, as looked
at from a Samoan Point of View.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 7 (Mar., 1898),
pp. 48-49.
Old Samoa ; or, Flotsam and Jetsam from the Pacific Ocean.
With an Introduction by the Bishop of Ballarat. The
Religious Tract Society, London, 1897. 296 pp., inch map
and plates. Illustrations. 12 0 .
Palolo, a Sea-worm eaten by the Samoans.
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 6 (Sept., 1897),
pp. 141-144.
—— Samoa ; Whence peopled ?
In Polynesian Society, Journal, vol. 4 (Mar., 1895),
pp. 47-58.
Statesman’s Year-book, The : Statistical and Historical Annual of
the States of the World for the Year 1900. Edited by
J. Scott Keltie . . . with the assistance of I. P. A. Ren-
wick. Macmillan and Co., London, 1900. xxxvi, 1280 pp.
Folded maps. 12 0 .
Samoa : American interests, pp. 1200-1201 ; German
interests, pp. 626-627.
Sterndale, H. B. Samoa.
In his Memorandum on some of the South Sea Islands,
New Zealand Parliamentary Paper, 1874.


Stevenson, Robert Louis. A Footnote to History : Eight Years of
Trouble in Samoa. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York,
1892. viii, 322 pp. Map. 12 0 .
Letters from Samoa.
In his Letters and Miscellanies, pp. 447-527, New York,
1898. B°. (Works, vol. 22.)
—— The Letters of Robert Louis Stevenson to his Family and Friends.
Selected and edited, with Notes and Introduction, by Sidney
Colvin. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1899. 2v.
Plates ; portraits ; facsimile. B°.
Vailima Letters, being Correspondence addressed by Robert
Louis Stevenson to Sidney Colvin, November, 1890-October,
1894. Stone and Kimball, Chicago, 1895. 2v. Portrait;
frontispiece. 16°.
Description of Samoa, vol. 2, pp. 209, 228, 245-248,
251-253, 257, 269, 279, 299. Letters from Samoa, vol. 2,
pp. 249-440. Political troubles in Samoa, vol. 2, pp. 206,
215, 246, 289. 290, 309, 312, 325, 329, 359, 360, 373, 400.
[Stevenson.] See Moors’ With Stevenson in Samoa, and Isobel Strong
and Lloyd Osbourne’s Memories of Vailima.
Stevenson, Fanny van de Grift {Mrs. R. L.) Life of Mrs. Robert Louis
Stevenson, by Nellie van de Grift Sanchez. Scribner, New
York, 1920.
[Stevenson’s Shrine.] See Laura Stubbs.
Stewart’s Handbook of the Pacific Islands.
Published at Sydney annually.
Stout, {Sir) Robert. A Trip to Samoa.
Reprinted from New Zealand Herald, Wilson and Horton,
Auckland, 1893.
Strong, Isobel, and Osbourne, Lloyd. Memories of Vailima. London,
1903.
Stubbs, Laura. Stevenson’s Shrine. Alexander Moring, London, 1903.
Stuebel, 0. Samoanische Texte, unter Beihiilfe von Eingeborenen
gesammelt und übersetzt von O. Stuebel. Herausgegeben
von F. W. K. Muller. D. Reimer, Berlin, 1896. ix, 188 pp.
f°
Swazey (0. H.) Notes on Insect Pests in Samoa.
In Hawaiian Planters’ Record, vol. xxviii, pp. 214-219,
April, 1924.
Thompson, R. Wardlaw. Samoa.
In his My Trip in the “ John Williams,” 1900.
Thomson, J. A. The Geology of Western Samoa.
In New Zealand Journal of Science and Technology,
vol. iv, pp. 49-66, 1921.
[Tichborne, Herbert.] Rambles in Polynesia. By “ Sundowner.”
European Mail, London, 1897. ix, (3), 307 pp. B°.
About Samoa, pp. 160-166.


Tilley, B. F. Report. [With accompanying correspondence.]
In Annual Reports of the Navy Department for the Year
1900, pp. 99-107, Government Printing Office, Washington,
1900. B°. (56th Congress, 2nd sess., House document
No. 3 .)
[Trade.] Reports on the Trade of Western Samoa and the Tongan
Islands. By Mr. R. W. Dalton. British Board of Trade,
1919.
[Treaties.] For treaties of 1878 and 1879 see appendix Stonehewer
Cooper’s Coral Lands, 2nd voh, Ist ed., 1880.
Tripp, Bartlett. My Trip to Samoa. The Torch Press, Cedar Rapids,
lowa, U.S.A., 1911.
Trood, Thomas. Island Reminiscences. McCarron, Stewart, and Co.
(Limited), Sydney, 1912.
Troost, E. Samoanische Eindrucke und Beobachtungen. Berlin, 1901.
Turner, George. Nineteen Years in Polynesia : Missionary Life, Travels,
and Researches in the Islands of the Pacific. John Snow,
London, 1861. xii, 548 pp. Plates ; illustrations : folded
table. B°.
Samoa, &c., pp. 95-355-
—- Samoa a Hundred Years Ago and Long Before. Together with
Notes on the Cults and Customs of Twenty-three other
Islands in the Pacific. With a Preface by E. B. Tylor.
Macmillan and Co,, London, 1884. xvi, (2), 395 pp. Plates ;
maps. 12°.
Tyler, Charles Marion. The Island World of the Pacific Ocean.
Samuel Carson and Co., San Francisco, Cal., 1887. 337 pp.
Plates ; map. B°.
Samoa, pp. 54—62.
Union Steamship Company. A Cruise in the Islands —Tonga, Samoa,
Fiji, 1895.
Three Wonderful Nations —Tonga, Samoa, Fiji. By Beatrice
Grimshaw, 1910.
United States. President. A Compilation of the Messages and Papers
of the Presidents, 1789-1897. Published by authority of
Congress, by James D. Richardson. Government Printing
Office, Washington, 1896-1899. 10 v. Illustrations ;
portraits. BJ.8 J .
Affairs of the Samoan Islands, and the policy of the United
States regarding them, discussed by President Grant, vol. 7,
pp. 162, 168, 203, 361, 428 ; discussed by President Hayes,
vol. 7, pp. 469, 481, 497, 570, 611 ; discussed by President
Cleveland, vol. 8, pp. 503, 612, 804, 805, 806, 812 ; vol. 9,
pp. 439, 531, 532, 635 ; discussed by President Harrison,
vol. 9, pp. 34, 44, 45, no ; discussed by President McKinley,
vol. 10, p. 189.


United States. Congress. The Statutes at Large of the United States of
America, from December, 1899, to March, 1901, and Recent
Treaties, Conventions, Executive Proclamations, and the
Concurrent Resolutions of the Two Houses of Congress.
Vol. 31. Government Printing Office, Washington, 1901.
i„ (2), 2167 pp. 4 0 .
Convention between the United States of America, Ger-
many, and Great Britain relating to the settlement of certain
claims in Samoa by arbitration, Nov. 7, 1899, pp. 1875-1877.
Convention between the United States, Germany, and
Great Britain to adjust amicably the questions between the
three Governments in respect to the Samoan group of islands,
Dec. 2, 1899, pp. 1878-1880.
Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. Compilation of
Treaties in Force. Government Printing Office, Washington,
1899. xviii, 779 pp. B°.
Samoan islands. Treaty of friendship and commerce,
Jan. 17, 1878, pp. 551-552 (from “ Treaties and Conventions,”
1889, p. 972). General Act for neutrality and autonomous
government of the Samoan islands, pp. 553 — (Agree-
ment between the United States, Germany, and Great
Britain, June 14, 1889, from U.S. Statutes, vol. 26, p. 1497.)
3sth Congress, 2nd sess. House Report No. 212. Aaron Van
Camp and Virginius P. Chapin. Report [of] the Committee
on Claims, to whom was referred the Memorial of A. Van
Camp and V. P. Chapin, asking Compensation for Property
of which they allege they have been deprived, at Apia, in
the Navigators Islands, by the Wrongful Acts of the Com-
mercial Agent of the United States exercising Authority
there . . . March 3, 1859. 18 pp. B°.
Also appears as Senate Report No. 148, 36th Congress,
Ist sess., Mar. 21, iB6O, and as House Report 569, 36th Con-
gress, Ist sess., May 25, iB6O.
43rd Congress, Ist sess. Senate Ex. Doc. No. 45. Message
from President of the United States, transmitting a Com-
munication from the Secretary of State, and the Report by
which it is accompanied, upon Samoa, or the Navigators
Islands. April 22, 1874. 58 pp. B°.
Contains report by A. B. Steinberger, Special Agent of
the United States Government to the Samoan Islands.
44th Congress, Ist sess. House Ex. Doc. No. 161. Message
from the President of the United States, transmitting a
Report from the Secretary of State and accompanying
Papers. May 2, 1876. 125 pp. B°.
Inquiry into the extent and character of the power con-
ferred on Mr. Steinberger as Special Agent or Commissioner
to the Samoan Islands.


United States. 44th Congress, 2nd sess. House Ex. Doc. No. 44. Message
from the President of the United States, transmitting to the
House of Representatives the Report of the Secretary of
State concerning the Agency of A. B. Steinberger in the
Samoan Islands. Mar. 2, 1877. 159 pp. BJ.8 J .
4 f)th Congress, Ist sess. Senate Ex. Doc. No. 2. Message
from the President of the United States, communicating, in
answer to a Senate resolution of Mar. 3, 1879, information
in relation to the Samoan Islands. Mar. 21, 1879. 29 pp.
B°.
Contains reports of Gustavus Go ward on the Samoan
Islands.
soth Congress, Ist sess. House Ex. Doc. No. 238. American
Rights in Samoa ; Message from the President of the United
States, with Enclosures, in response to the Resolution of the
House of Representatives in relation to Affairs in Samoa.
April 2, 1888. 311 pp. Folded maps. 8 .
Contents include—Treaty between the United States and
Samoa, concluded Jan. 17, 1878 ; treaty between Germany
and Samoa, concluded Jan. 24, 1879; treaty between Great
Britain and Samoa, concluded Aug. 28, 1879 ; Municipality
Convention, concluded Sept. 2, 1879 ; declaration relative
to British and German possessions in the West Pacific Ocean,
signed April 6, 1886 ; Appendix A, report of George H. Bates,
Special Agent of the Department of State to Samoa ; Ap-
pendix B, Report of Consul-General Travers, German Special
Commissioner, concerning affairs in Samoa; Appendix C,
Report of J. B. Thurston, British Commissioner, on the con-
dition of the Samoan Islands.
soth Congress, 2nd sess. Senate Ex. Doc. No. 31. Message
from the President of the United States, transmitting Docu-
ments relating to the Condition of Affairs in Samoa. Dec. 22,
1888. 167 pp. Folded map. B°.
Includes correspondence, Oct., 1887 —Dec., 1888.
Senate Ex. Doc. No. 68. Message from the President of
the United States, transmitting Information touching Affairs
in Samoa. Jan. 16, 1889. 22 pp. B°.
Correspondence, Dec., 1888 —Jan., 1889.
Senate Ex. Doc. No. 92. Message from the President of
the United States, transmitting Information touching Affairs
in Samoa. Jan. 31, 1889. 2 pp. B°,
— Senate Ex. Doc. No. 102. Message from the President of
the United States, transmitting Information relative to Affairs
in Samoa. Feb. 8, 1889. 45 pp. 8 .
Accompanying papers include correspondence, Feb., 1889,
and the joint protocols of the six Samoan conferences held
in Washington, June, 25- July 26, 1887.


United States. 30th Congress. 2nd sess. Senate Mis. Doc. No. 58.
Letter of the Secretary of State, transmitting a Copy of the
Deed of Transfer of the Harbour of Pago Pago, Samoa, to
the United States. Feb. r, 1889. 2 pp. B°.
— House Ex. Doc. No. 118. Affairs at Samoa: Message
from the President of the United States, in relation to Affairs
in the Samoan Islands. Jan. 30, 1889. 15 pp. B°.
Accompanying papers include further dispatches from the
Vice-Consul at Apia, and the commander of the United
States naval vessel “ Nipsic,” and the full text of an instruc-
tion from Prince von Bismarck to the German Minister at
Washington.
House Ex. Doc. No. 119. Samoa: Message from the
President of the United States, transmitting Additional
Information relating to Affairs in Samoa. Feb. 1, 1889.
3 PP- 8C
House Mis. Doc. No. 108. Affairs in Samoa : Resolution
[submitted by Mr. Ford], Jan. 28, 1889. Ip. B°.
slst Congress, Ist sess. Senate Mis. Doc. No. 81. Message
from the President of the United States, transmitting a
General Act, or Conventional Agreement, concluded and
signed at Berlin on the 14th day of June, 1889, by the
Plenipotentiaries of the United States, Germany, and Great
Britain, in regard to the Neutrality and Autonomous Go-
vernment of the Samoan Islands. Jan. 7, 1890. 76 pp. B°.
The same document also appears in Executive B, 51st
Congress, Ist sess.
— Senate Mis. Doc. No. 84. Letter from the Acting-
Secretary of State, transmitting a Copy of a Letter from
the Navy Department communicating late Advices on the
Political Situation in Samoa. Feb. 12, 1890. 3 pp. B°.
-—— House Ex. Doc. No. 1. Part 3 : Report of the Secretary
of the Navy. Nov. 30, 1889. Vol. 1. 482 pp. Plates;
maps. B°.
Disaster at Apia, Samoa, pp. 95-123. Chart. Gives the
official reports.
s3rd Congress, 2nd sess. Senate Ex. Doc. No. 93. Message
from the President of the United States in response to
Senate Resolution of April 6, 1894, transmitting a Report
from the Secretary of State relative to the Samoan Islands,
with Copies of the Correspondence in relation thereto. May 9,
1894. 219 pp. B°.
Correspondence with Great Britain and Germany,
1890-1894.


United States. 53yd Congress, 2nd sess.. Senate Ex. Doc. No. 132.
Message from the President of the United States, in further
response to the Senate Resolution of April 6, 1894, trans-
mitting a Report from the Secretary of State relative to
the Samoan Islands, and Copies of Correspondence relating
thereto. July 9, 1894. 18 pp. B°.
Correspondence, April-June, 1894.
s3rd Congress,. 3rd sess. Senate Ex. Doc. No. 97. Message
from the President of the United States, in response to
Senate Resolution of Jan. 29, 1895, transmitting a Report
from the Secretary of State, with Copies of Correspondence,
touching Samoan Affairs. Feb. 26, 1895. 483 pp. B°.
Correspondence, 1889-1895. The accompanying papers
also include the report of W. L. Chambers, United States
Land Commissioner to Samoa, and the petition of King
Malietoa for the removal of President Schmidt.
House Ex. Doc. No. 242. Interests of the United States
in the Samoan Islands : Letter from the Acting-Secretary
of the Treasury, transmitting an Estimate of Appropriations
submitted by the Secretary of State for protecting the
Interests of the United States in the Samoan Islands,
for the Fiscal Year ending June 30, 1896. Jan. 23, 1895.
Ip. B°.
36th Congress, Ist sess. Senate Doc. No. 51. Samoan Com-
mission : Message from the President of the United States,
transmitting, in response to Resolution of the Senate Of
Dec. 15, 1899, a Report from the Secretary of State, enclosing
Report made by Hon. Bartlett Tripp, the Member of the
Samoan Commission on behalf of the United States of
America. Dec. 20, 1899. 18 pp. B°.
Senate Doc. No. 157. Message from the President of the
United States, transmitting a Convention, signed at Wash-
ington, Dec. 2, 1899, between the United States, Germany,
and Great Britain, to adjust amicably the Questions between
the Three Governments in respect to the Samoan Group of
Islands. (Message dated Dec. 6, 1899.) 3 pp. 8A
36th Congress, 2nd sess. House Doc. No. 3. Annual Reports
of the Navy Department for the Year 1900 : Report of the
Secretary of the Navy. Miscellaneous Reports. 1258 pp.
Plates ; maps ; plans. B°.
’ Tutuila", Samoa, &c. : Report of the Secretary of the Navy,
pp. 18, 24 ; report of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy,
pp. 68, 69 ; report of Commander B. F. Tilley, U.S.N.,
pp. 99, 100 ; correspondence accompamdng report, pp.
100-107 ; report of Bureau of Yards and Docks, p. 205 ;
report of Bureau of Equipments, pp. 282, 292.


United States. Bureau of Foreign Commerce. Commercial Relations
of the United States with Foreign Countries. Washington,
1857-1900. 4 0 and B J .
SAMOAN ISLANDS, ETC.
1856, pp. 392, 393. (34th Congress, 3rd sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 60.)
1857, pp. 203, 204, 456, 457- (3.5 th Congress, Ist sess.
House Ex. Doc. No. 17.)
1862, pt. 1, p. 607 ; pt. 2, No. 246. (37th Congress,
3rd sess. House Ex. Doc. No. 63.)
1863, pp. 555, 858. (38th Congress, Ist sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 41.)
1864, p. 691. (38th Congress, 2nd sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 60.)
1865, pp. 513-516, 770. (39th Congress, Ist sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 56.)
1866, pp. 546-547. 810. (39th Congress, 2nd sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 81.)
1867, pp. 720-721. (40th Congress, 2nd sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 160.)
1868, pp. 638-639. (40th Congress, 3rd sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 87.)
1870, pp. 444-446. (41st Congress, 3rd sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 93.)
1872, p. 708. (42nd Congress, 3rd sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 160.)
1873, pp- 879-880. (43rd Congress, Ist sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 143.) , TT „
1874, p. 886. (43rd Congress, 2nd sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 157.) , TT
1875, pp- 1158-1165. (44th Congress, Ist sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 166.)
1878, pp. 1029-1032. (45th Congress, 3rd sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 108.)
1882-83, pp. 848-852. (48th Congress, Ist sess. House
Ex. Doc. No. 176, pt. 2.)
1884-85 pt. 1, pp. 575-582. (49th Congress, Ist sess.
House Ex. Doc. No. 253.)
1892-93. p. 304. (53 r d Congress, 2nd sess. House Ex.
Doc. No. 83.) ,
1894-95, vol. 2, pp. 630-634. (54th Congress, Ist sess.
House Doc. No. 186, pt. 2.) ~
1896 vol. 1, pp. 1019-1022 ; vol. 2, appendix, pp. 639 644.
(54th Congress, 2nd sess. House Doc. No. 323, pts. 1 and 2.)
1896-97, vol. 1, pp. 206, 1254-1256. (55th Congress,
2nd sess. House Doc. No. 483,. pt. 1.)
1898, vol. i, p. 153. PP- 1228-1231. (55 th Congress,
ard sess. House Doc. No. 266, pt. 1.) ,
1899, vol. 1, pp. 151-15 2 . 1066-1070. (56th Congress,
Ist sess. House Doc. No. 481, pt. 1.)
1900, vol. 1, pp- 212, 1202. (56th Congress, 2nd sess.
House Doc. No. 380.)


United States. Bureau of Foreign Commerce. Special Consular
Reports . . . Government Printing Office, Washington,
1899-1900. B°. (Continues set issued by the Bureau of
Statistics.)
1899. Samoa duties, taxes, and licenses. (Extract from
Berlin Act, proclaimed May 21, 1890.) Vol. x 6, pt. 3, pp.
641-642.
1900. Paper trade. Samoa. L. W. Osborn. Jan. 23,
1899. Vol. 19, p. 448.
1 goo. Foreign markets for American coal. Samoa.
Vol. 21, pt. 1, p. 303.
Bureau of Statistics ; Treasury Department. Monthly Summary
of Commerce and Finance . . . Feb., 1899. 1745-2014 pp.
Folded table. 4 0 . (House Doc. No. 573, pt. 8, 55th Con-
gress, 2nd sess.)
The Samoan Islands, their area, population, form of
government, and commerce, and the relation of the United
States thereto, pp. 2005-2014.
Monthly Summary of Commerce and Finance . . . Nov.,
1899. 1244-1561 pp. 4 0 . (House Doc. No. 15, pt. 5,
56th Congress, Ist sess.)
Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Hawaiian, Philippine, and Samoan
Islands, pp. 1253-1399-
Bureau of Statistics : Department of State. Special Consular
Reports. Government Printing Office, Washington, 1890-
1897. B°.
1889. Samoa : Cultivation of tropical fruits. Report
by W. Blacklock. Dec. 6, 1889. Vol. 1, p. 936-
1894. Extension of markets for American flour. Report
by W. Blacklock. April 24, 1894. Vol. 10, p. 513.
1894. American lumber in foreign markets : Samoa;
with list of Samoan woods. April 24, 1893. Vol. 2, pp.
216-217..
(For continuation see U.S. Bureau of Foreign Commerce.)
Department of State. Papers relating to the Foreign Relations
of the United States. Government Printing Office, Wash-
ington, 1878—1901. B°.
1878. Attack upon the United States Consulate at Apia,
Sept. 21, 1877. pp. 165-166.
1879. Text of German treaty with Samoa, signed Jan. 24,
1879, pp. 381-383. Debate in the Reichstag upon the treaty,
pp. 388-392, 397.
1887. Treaty of political confederation between Samoa
and Hawaii, Feb. 17, 1887, pp. 569-570.
1888. Affairs in Samoa, pp. 574, 575- 577- 57 8 - 59U 594.
613, 627, 648, 651, 662, 675, 676, 704, 714, 725, 738, 743,
752, 780, 790, 794.


United States. Department of State —continued.
1889. Renewal of Samoan Conference proposed, p. 193 ;
approved, p. 194. Protocols of the Samoan Conference of
1887, pp. Proposals of the United States, pp. 204,
205, 231—236. Proposals of Germany, pp. 205, 206, 212—217.
Proposals of Great Britain, pp. 206, 207.
1889. Instructions to United States Commissioners to the
Samoan Conference of 1889, pp. 195-204. Report by the
Secretary of State, pp. 349-353. General Act, pp. 353-364.
Protocols, pp. 364-420. Corrections in protocols, p. 423.
1889. Samoan affairs. Agreement with foreign Consuls
(1879), pp. 295, 296. Agreement made on U.S.S. “ Locka-
wanna ” (1881), pp. 196, 296, 297. Agreement made on
U.S.S. “ Mohican ” (1886), pp. 320, 321* Annexation
to Great Britain requested by the king and chiefs of
Samoa, pp. 297-300. Annexation to New Zealand proposed,
pp. 253-259. History of Samoa, pp. 239-248. Raising of
American flag at Mulinuu in 1877, p. 286. Raising of German
flag at Mulinuu in 1885, p. 300. Report of George H. Bates,
pp. 237-248 ; Samoan Constitution (1875), pp. 283—286,
320-324. Samoan declaration of rights (1875), p. 282.
Correspondence with Germany, &c., pp. 287 et seq.
1894. Affairs in the Samoan Islands. Report of the
Secretary of State, App. I, pp. 504-513. Correspondence
between the Department of State and the British Embassy,
App. I, pp. 513-625. Samoan Customs Ordinance, 1892,
App. I, pp. 546-563. Correspondence between the Depart-
ment of State and the German Embassy, App. I, pp. 625-755.
1894. Embassy from Hawaii to Samoa, Jan., 1887,
App. 11, p. 659.
1895. Samoa ; Correspondence with the German Em-
bassy at Washington, pp. 1126-1149. Correspondence with
the British Embassy at Washington, pp. 1150-1159.
1896. Samoa. Correspondence with the Embassy of
Germany at Washington, pp. 531-548. Correspondence with
the Embassy of Great Britain at Washington, pp. 548-561.
1897. Samoa. Correspondence with Germany (preser-
vation of records of Land Commission, &c.), pp. 448-453.
Correspondence with Great Britain (performance of duties
of Chief Justice by Consular Board, criminal jurisdiction
over men-of-war’s men), pp. 454-460.
1899. Samoan affairs. Correspondence with Germany
and Great Britain, &c., pp. 604-673. Appointment of, and
instructions to, Bartlett Tripp as Commissioner on behalf of
the United States, pp. 615-616. Reports by Mr. Tripp,
pp. 616-636, 648-663. Report of the Commissioner to the
Secretary of State, pp. 636-640. Declaration respecting the
neutrality of the islands, &c., pp. 640-648. Convention for
the settlement of Samoan questions, pp. v. 65-667. Procla-
mation by President McKinley, Feb. i&, 1900, pp. 667—669.
Convention for the settlement of Samoan claims, pp. 671-673.


Victoria. Parliament. Australasian Convention, 1883.
See Powell, J. ; also, Seed, William.
Vossion, Louis. Les lies Samoa ou des Navigateurs et I’ Arrangement
anglo-allemand-americain. Avec une Carte des lies et Cinq
Gravures. Augustin Challemel, Paris, 1900. 27 pp. Plates.
B°.
Wakemaa. [Report on Harbour at Tutuila.]
See Seed, William.
Walpole, Frederick. Four Years in the Pacific in Her Majesty’s ship
“ Collingwood.” From 1844 to 1848 ... In two volumes.
Richard Bentley, London, 1849. Frontispiece ; illustrations.
B°.
The Navigators Islands, vol. 2, pp. 320-390.
Watson, R. M. A History of Samoa.
Wegener, G. Samoa.
In his Deutschland in der Sudsee, 1903.
Wharton, Francis. A Digest of the International Law of the United
States, 2nd ed. Government Printing Office, Washington,
1887. 3v. B°.
Samoa, Caroline, and other Pacific islands, vol. 1,
pp. 436-44 1 ( sec - 63).
Whetham, J. W. Boddam. Samoa.
In his Pearls of the Pacific, 1876.
Wigglesworth, L. W. Aves Polynesia, a Catalogue of the Birds of
the Polynesian Subregion, not including the Sandwich
Islands.
Abhand. und Berichte des Kk. und Anthrop. Museums
zu Dresden, 1892.
Wilkes, Charles. Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition
during the Years 1838, 1839, 1840, 1841, 1842. Printed by
C. Sherman, Philadelphia, 1844. sv. 4 0 . Atlas, Iv. F.
[Same.] Lee and Blanchard, Philadelphia, 1845. sv. B°.
Atlas, 4°.
[Same.] In sv. Philadelphia, 1850. Plates; folded maps. B°.
Note. —The narrative forms vols. I—s of the series of
reports of the Wilkes Expedition. The scientific reports
follow :
Vol. 6. Hale, H. Ethnography and philology. 1846.
xii, 666 pp. ; 2 maps. 4 0 .
Vol. 7. Dana, J. D. Zoophytes. Text, 740 pp. 4 0 .
Atlas, f°.
Vol. 8. Cassin, J. Mammalogy and ornithology. 1858.
Text, xiii, 466 pp. 4 0 . Atlas, f°.
Vol. 9. Pickering, C. Races of man. 1848. 447 pp.
Map ; col. plates. 4 0 .


Wilkes, Charles— continued.
Vol. 10. Dana, J. D. Geology. 1849. Text. 4 0 .
Vol. 11. Wilkes, C. Meteorology. 1851. 4 0 .
Vol. 12. Gould, A. A. Mollusca and shells. Text, xv,
510 pp. 4 0 . Atlas, f J .
Vol. 13-14. Dana, J. D. Crustacea. Iv.in 2. viii,
1618 pp. 4 0 . Atlas, L.
Vol. 15. Gray, A. Botany. Phanerogamia. 1854-56.
Text, 777 pp. 4. 0 . Atlas, f°.
Vol. 16. Brackenridge, W. D. Botany. Cryptogamia.
1854-56. Text, viii, 357 pp. Atlas, f J .
Vol. 17. Gray, A. Botany. Cryptogamia and phanero-
gamia. 1874. (2), 514 pp. 4".
Vols. 18, 19. Not published.
Vol. 20. Baird, S. F. Herpetology. 1858. Text, xv,
492 pp. Atlas, f J .
Vols. 21, 22. Not published.
Vol. 23. Wilkes, C. Hydrography. 1858-61. Text.
4°. Atlas, 2v. f°.
The narrative, vol. 2, pp. 74-88, describes Tutuila ;
pp. 91-120, Upolu, Manono, Savaii ; pp. 123-262 are
devoted to the Samoan Group in general ; pp. 453-455 treat
of the commercial regulations in 1839. The natural history,
ethnology, &c., of the islands are treated in the volumes
devoted to these subjects.
Voyage around the World, embracing the Principal Events of
the Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition.
In one volume. Illustrated with 178 engravings on wood.
George P. Putnam, New York, 1851. xx, 668 pp. B°.
Williams, John. Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands.
With an Introduction by Wm. P. Breed. Presbyterian
Board of Publication, Philadelphia 11888]. 416 pp. Frontis-
piece. 12°.
A Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands ;
with Remarks upon the Natural History of the Islands,
Origin, Languages, Traditions, and Usages of the Inhabitants.
John Snow, London, 1838.
Wise, John C. A Brief Consideration of Elephantiasis arabum as
observed in the Samoan Islands.
In Pan-American Medical Congress, Transactions, 1893,
pt. 2, pp. 2035-2038.
Woeri, E. Samoa, Land und Leute. Leipzig, igoi.








W. A. G. Skinner, Government Printer, Wellington.
96a1 —24








V*-


