

Notified in Army Orders for May, 1936
Crown
Copyright
Reserved
26
Manuals
1173
THE WAR OFFICE
HANDBOOK FOR THE
Ordnance, B.L. 9-2-inch
Marks X, X and X
on Mountings, B.L. 9.2-inch
Marks V, VI, VI A and VII
LAND SERVICE
1936
LONDON
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses :
Adastral House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2; 120 George Street, Edinburgh 2 ;
York Street, Manchester I ; 1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff ;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast;
or through any Bookseller
1936
Price Ios. o d. Net




Notified in Army Orders jor May, 1936
Crown
Copyright
Reserved
26
Manuals
1173
THE WAR OFFICE
HANDBOOK FOR THE
Ordnance, B.L. 9-2-inch
Marks X, X v and X-
on Mountings, B.L. 9 2-inch
Marks V, VI, Vla and VII
LAND SERVICE
1936
LONDON
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses :
AdSaf Home, Kingsway, London. W C. 2; .20 George S.reet Edmburgh 2 ;
York Street, Manchester x ; i St. Andrew s Crescent, Cardiff ,
80 Chichester Street, Belfast;
or through any Bookseller
1936
Price 1 or, o d. Net


By Command of the Army Council,
The War Office,
31 si! May, 1936.


CONTENTS
PAGE
Preface —
Part I—Ordnance ... ... 9
Part 11-—The Fixed Mounting 19
Part lll—Ammunition ... 27
Chapter I
Ordnance—
Particulars ... ... ... 40
Construction ... ... ... 41
Ballistic data ... ... ... 43
Breech mechanism ... ... 44
Action of breech mechanism 68
Safety arrangements ... ... 71
To assemble—
Lock and slide box ... 71
Breech mechanism... ... 72
To dismantle—
Breech mechanism... ... 73
Lock and slide box ... 74
To gauge protrusion of striker 74
Chapter II
Mounting, Mark VII—
General description ... ... 75
Holdfast ... ... ... 75
Pedestal ... ... ... 76
Pivot plate ... ... ... 76
Pivot plug ... ... ... 76
Centre pivot with casings ... 77
Roller ring ... ... ... 78
Covers protecting roller ring 78
Body ... ... ... ... 78
Shell pit shield ... ... 79
Fixed platform ... ... 79
Sliding platform ... ... 80
Cradle ... ... ... ... 82
Trunnion ball bearings ... 83
Mantlet ... ... ... 84
Gun bands and sliding bars ... 84
Elevation and depression stops 85
Recoil indicator ... ... 85
Elevation degree scale ... 85
Recoil system ... ... ... 86
Shield 89
Elevating gear ... ... 89
Traversing gear ... ... 92
Hydraulic system — 94
Swashplate engine ... 98
Cradle lock ... ... ... 100
Cradle lock control and
interlock ... ... ... 108
Wash-out ... ... ... 110
Elevation cut-off ... ... 113
Hoist ... ... ... 115
PAGE
Chapter II —( contd.)
Mounting, Mark Vll— {contd.)
Hydraulic system — [contd.)
Interlock for rammer and
wash-out... ... ... 121
Rammer, loading tray and
rammer rocker ... ... 126
Airblast ... ... ... 136
Cartridge guide ... ... 142
Projectile trolleys ... ... 142
Voice pipe ... ... ... 143
Drain system ... ... ... 143
Sighting-
General remarks ... ... 143
Automatic sight ... ... 144
Direction sight ... ... 148
Range receiver gear ... 150
Bearing receiver gear ... 152
Firing gear, Mark II ... ... 153
Frame supporting cover ... 156
Runner and tackle for S.C.
gun ... ... ... ••• 156
Electric installation ... ... 156
Mounting, Mark V
General description ... ... 157
Holdfast 158
Pedestal ... ... ... 158
Pivot plate ... ... ... 158
Pivot plug ... ... ... 158
Traversing arc ... ... 158
Roller ring ... ... ... 159
Covers protecting roller ring 159
Body ... ... ... ... 159
Shields... ... ... ... 159
Cradle ... ... ... ••• 160
Trunnion ball bearings ... 161
Gun bands and sliding bars 161
Recoil system ... ... ... 162
Elevating gear ... ... 163
Traversing gear ... ... 164
Loading gear ... ... ... 164
Sighting-
General remarks ... ... 173
Automatic sight ... ... 173
Rocking bar sight ... ... 175
Elevation indicator gear ... 176
Firing gear, Mark I ... ... 178
Mounting, Mark VI
General description ... ... 181
Holdfast ... ... ... 181
Pedestal ... ... ... 181
Pivot plate ... ... ... 181
Traversing arc ... ... 181
Roller ring ... ... ... 181
3


PAGE
Chapter II — [contd.)
Mounting, Mark Vl— [contd.)
Covers protecting roller ring 181
Trunnion ball bearings ... 181
Gun bands and sliding bars 181
Pivot plug ... ••• 182
Body ... ... ••• ••• 182
Shields ... ••• ••• 182
Cradle ... ... ••• ••• 183
Recoil system ... ••• 183
Elevating gear 184
Hele-Shaw pumps ... ••• 185
Electric motor and starter ... 189
Hele-Shaw motor. ... ••• 189
Traversing gear ... ••• 190
Loading gear ... ... ••• 190
Sighting—
General remarks ... ... 193
Automatic sight 193
Rocking bar sight 194
Elevation indicator gear ... 194
Firing gear, Mark I ... ... 194
Mounting, Mark VIA —
General description ... 194
Weights, dimensions, etc. ... 194
Chapter 111
Miscellaneous stores —
Apparatus, traversing P.F.
dials ... ••• ••• I^s
Bar, testing, auto and rocking
bar sights ... ... ... 195
Bit, vent, 36-inch ... ... 195
Bolts, eye ... ... ••• 195
Borers, tube chamber ... 196
Box, obturator ... ••• 196
Box, spare parts ... ... 196
Brush, piasaba ... ... 196
Brush, rammer and sponge ... 197
Calculator, range correction... 197
Cleaner, piasaba ... ... 198
Clinometer, large 199
Connection, pressure gauge ... 200
Cover, breech ... ••• 200
Cover, mounting ... ... 200
Cover, muzzle, No. 7 ... 200
Cover, packing breech ... 200
Cover, sights and gear ... 200
Tackle, differential ... ... 201
Drifts, ejecting tube 201
Extractor, cartridge 201
Extractor, drill shell ... ... 201
Extractor tube hand ... ... 201
Frames, supporting, cover,
sights and gear 201
Funnel, filling cylinder, No. 9 201
Gauges, pressure ... ... 201
PAGE
Chapter III —( contd.)
Miscellaneous stores — [contd.)
Gauge, striker, eccentricity ... 202
Gauge, striker, protrusion ... 202
Grab, projectile ... ••• 203
Implements ammunition —
Key, No. 8 203
17 203
;; ;; i« 203
,23 203
’’ ’’ 88 203
Lanyard, cocking ... ••• 204
Lanyard, firing ... ••• 204
Press, obturator ; gauge and
tommy ... ••• ••• 204
Pump, air, double ... ••• 205
Pump, air or liquid ... ... 206
Pump, running back ... 208
Reservoirs, compressed air ... 209
Rimer, vent axial ... ... 210
Separator, air pump ... ... 210
Spanners and special imple-
ments ... ••• ...211
Staves, end and intermediate 217
Telescopes, sighting 217
Tray, spare parts ... ... 220
Wrenches, breech mechanism 220
Chapter IV
Ammunition —
General remarks 221
Tubes ... ••• ••• ••• 221
Cartridges ... ••• ••• 225
Projectiles ... ••• ••• 228
Fuzes ... 239
Notes on fuzing ... ••• 255
Drill ... ••• ••• ••• 255
Statement of ... ••• ••• 258
Chapter V
Markings on ammunition and
packages ... ••• ••• 260
Chapter VI
Care and preservation —
Lubrication ... ... ••• 267
List of lubricators ... •• • 268
Gun and fittings 279
Mounting—
Recoil system —
Filling and charging ... 282
4


PAGE
Chapter Vl— [contd.)
Care and preservation — [contd.)
Mounting — [contd.)
Recoil system — [contd.)
Packings ... ... ••• 283
Observation in and out of
action ... ... ••• 285
General precautions ... 287
Liquids ... ... ••• 287
To charge ... ••• 288
General instructions —
Buffer, air cylinder and
intensifier ... ••• 289
Roller ring ... ... •• • 292
Cradle ... ••• ••• 292
Trunnion ball bearings ... 292
Elevating and traversing
gears ... ••• ••• 293
Firing circuits ... ••• 293
Sighting—
Care of sights and tele-
scopes ... ... ••• 298
Instructions for changing
cams ... ... ••• 299
Sight tests —
Clinometer ... ••• 300
Telescopes ... ... 301
Backlash ... ••• 302
Test and adjustment of
rocking bar sights ... 302
General instructions for
testing and adjusting
auto sights ... ••• 303
Test for vertically of
pivot with auto-sights 304
Mechanical test with auto-
sights ... ... ••• 305
Test of zero of deflection
scale of auto-sights ... 306
To datum the auto-
sight ... ... ••• 306
Test for verticality of
pivot with elevation
indicator ... ... 308
PAGE
Chapter Vl—( contd.)
Care and preservation — [contd.)
General instructions [contd.)
Sight tests — [contd.)
Instructions for the initial
setting and subsequent
testing of elevation in-
dicator with M.V. and
charge temperature
scales on Marks V, VI
and VIA mountings ... 308
General ... ••• ••• 309
Mounting, Mark \
Hydraulic loading system —
To fill 310
Position of valves ••• 311
Causes of failures and
remedies ... ••• 313
Derrick loading gear ...314
General ... ... ••• 314
Mounting, Marks VI and VIA
Elevating gear 314
Hydraulic loading gear •••314
Derrick loading gear ... 313
General ... •■• ...315
Mounting, Mark VII —
Airblast —
To test the pressure ... 315
To charge the system ... 316
To charge the air cylinder 316
To drain the system ... 317
To empty the system ... 317
Hydraulic power system
Position and use of control
levers ... ••• ••• 317
Position of air and drain
valves ... ••• 31®
Elevating gear 319
Traversing gear ... ... 319
Cradle lock ... ••• 319
Hoist gear ... ••• 320
Wash-out ... ••• 320
Rammer gear ... ... 321
Auxiliary hoist loading gear 321
General ... ••• •■• 322
Ammunition ... ... ••• 323
5


LIST OF PLATES
Ordnance —
1. Gun bodies.
2. Breech mechanism —general arrangement.
3. Lock, electric and percussion, “ E.”
Box, slide, “ A.”
Mounting, Mark VII—
4. View from right—exterior.
View from right rear —airblast fittings, etc.
5. Centre pivot and casings.
6. Cradle—buffer, gun bands, etc.
7. View from left —elevating gear.
View from right —traversing gear.
8. View from right—
Exhaust standard, traversing gear, etc.
Traversing gear engine, etc.
9. Arrangement of—
Elevating gear.
Traversing gear.
10. View from front —pipes, valves, elevating engine and depression stop.
View of wash-out pump.
11. Hydraulic system —diagram.
12. View from left front —pressure standard, etc.
View from left —hydraulic and auxiliary hoists (lower portion).
13. Arrangement of —
Wash-out.
Control standard.
Elevation cut-off.
Cradle locking gear.
14. Hoist.
15. View from left rear —rammer rocker and loading tray.
View from left front —hoist, etc.
16. Interlock for rammer and wash-out.
17. Arrangement of rammer, rammer rocker and loading tray.
18. Arrangement of rammer rocker jack, loading tray balancing spring
and semi-automatic valve operating mechanism.
19. View from right rear —
Rammer with ram tube in chamber.
Rammer with ram fully home.
20. Arrangement of airblast.
21. Automatic sight.
Direction sight.
22. Arrangement of —
Range receiver gear.
Bearing receiver gear.
23. Electric firing gear, Mark 11.


Mounting, Mark V—
-24. General arrangement —side elevation.
25. Arrangement of—
Elevating gear.
Traversing gear.
26. Hydraulic loading gear.
27. Windlass.
28. Automatic sight.
Rocking bar sight.
29. Elevation indicator gear.
30. Electric firing gear, Mark I.
Mountings, Marks VI and VIA—
-31. General arrangement —side elevation.
32. Arrangement of elevating gear.
33. Hydraulic loading gear.
Auxiliary hand loading gear.
Miscellaneous —
34. Calculator, range correction.
35. Gauges.
36. Pumps —-
Air, double, Mark I.
Air or liquid, Mark 11.
Running back, portable, Mark I.
Ammunition—
-37. Shell-
High explosive.
Armour piercing, capped.
Common pointed, capped.
Shrapnel.
38. Fuze, percussion, base, large —
No. 16. Mark IV.
No. 16D. Mark IV.
39. Fuze, time and percussion, No. 88, Mark VI.
Note. —This book has been corrected up to October, 1935. Any
alterations that may be suggested should be forwarded to the Chief Inspector
of Armaments, Royal Arsenal, Woolwich.




Ordnance, B.L. 9.2-inch,
Marks X, X v and X*
on Mountings, B.L. 9.2-inch,
Marks V, VI, VI A and VII
PREFACE
PART I
ORDNANCE
Definition
The term “ Ordnance ” is applied to weapons designed for the
propulsion of missiles by explosive force, and includes guns,
howitzers and mortars. Any one of such weapons may be referred
to as a “ piece ” of ordnance.
Modern developments have rendered it somewhat difficult to
draw any clearly defined line between gun and howitzer. Generally
speaking, for any given calibre, the gun is longer, has a more
powerful propelling charge, higher muzzle velocity, and a flatter
trajectory than the howitzer. The howitzer cartridge is designed
to provide varying charges. Guns may also be provided with
reduced charges in order to minimize wear. The special
characteristics of each type of weapon may be summarized thus :
Gun ... ... High velocity. Long range.
Howitzer ... Varying charges. Steep angle of descent.
Construction
There are three systems of gun * construction employed at the
present time, namely :—“ wire wound,” “ built up ” and “ auto-
frettage.”
The wire wound system has for many years been the normal
method of construction for weapons of 3-inch calibre and upwards,
but since the advent of modern nickel chromium molybdenum and
* In this preface the term gun is often used in a general sense to include
both guns and howitzers.


other steels, it is possible, provided the steel is available, to get all
the circumferential strength needed and save weight by making a
built-up or even a monobloc gun. It will be clear that any reduction
in the weight of the piece is of the greatest importance, more
particularly with mobile equipments.
A wire wound gun has the A-tube wound with layers of
rectangular steel wire, at varying tension, so arranged that the
radial firing stresses are distributed suitably through the material.
The wiring is greatest over the chamber portion of the bore and is
carried over the rifled portion as far as is considered necessary, in
some cases right up to the muzzle.
Wire wound ordnance may be subdivided from the point of view
of construction into two types :
(i a ) Those having an inner A-tube.
( b) Those not having an inner A-tube.
The component parts of each type are as follows :
(«) ( b)
Inner A-tube. A-tube.
A-tube. Wire winding.
Wire winding. Jacket.
B-tube. Breech bush, and/or
Jacket. Breech ring.
Breech bush, and
Breech ring.
The higher calibres, 5-inch and upwards, are usually of type ( a) ;
the lower calibres, below 5-inch, belong usually to type ( h ). Fig. 1
shows an example of both types.
The general aim of gun construction is to relieve the metal of
the tube (which bears the brunt of the circumferential stress) from
all longitudinal stress, consequently the breech bush or breech ring,
which receives the breech screw, is screwed into the A-tube in guns of
type [a), and into, or over, the jacket in guns of type ( b ).
The built up system in the British service is at present confined
to the smaller calibres, and in these the circumferential tension is dis-
tributed suitably through the material by the process of shrinking
on the exterior portions, such as the B-hoop and jacket. It should
be noted that the exterior portions of wire-wound ordnance are also
shrunk into position.
With the auto-frettage system, the gun body is forged as a
single tube. The method of setting up a state of residual com-
pression in the inner and residual tension in the outer layers of the
steel is by the application of liquid pressure applied to the bore of
the tube.
After the auto-frettage operations, the forging is given a special
heat treatment which restores and increases the elasticity of the
steel permanently deformed by the auto-frettage process.
At present the auto-frettage system of construction is only


employed in the Land Service with the smaller natures of gun in the
form of a loose liner.
The liner fits inside a jacket, the latter having a removable
breech ring to carry the breech mechanism.
FIG. 1
A worn liner can be easily and quickly removed and a new one
inserted at the gun position.
The inner A-tube, A-tube or liner, according to the type, is
11


bored throughout its length to form the bore, the rear portion
of which is plain, called the chamber, and the front part rifled, called
the rifling. „ . , , • r
The chamber portion receives the propellant charge and is ot
slightly larger diameter than the rifled portion. The shape varies
considerably, but in all cases a slight forward slope merges the
chamber into the rifling. With Q.F. ordnance, the chamber
corresponds in plan to the brass cartridge case, being tapered
slightly throughout its length ; whilst with B.L. ordnance the rear
of the chamber is prepared to form a seating for the obturator.
Rifling
The objects of rifling are to obtain accuracy and to enable an
elongated projectile to be used.
A satisfactory system of rifling should provide for
(a) Accuracy of fire, by ensuring perfect centring of the
projectile when it leaves the muzzle, and the provision
of sufficient spin to keep it travelling nose first during
flight.
{b) Durability and simplicity of gun and projectile.
(c) Moderate stress on gun and projectile.
Modern guns, howitzers and certain mortars are rifled by cutting
numerous shallow spiral grooves down the bore, leaving ribs of
metal called “ lands ” between the grooves. The projectile has a
band of metal, usually copper, secured near its base. This band
is called a driving band and is slightly larger in diameter than the
bore measured across the grooves ; consequently, on discharge
the lands cut into the driving band as the projectile passes down
the bore, sealing the escape of gas past the shell and causing the
projectile to follow their spiral course and to rotate. Owing to
the large number of grooves employed the technical term
" polygroove ” is applied to such systems of rifling.
The system of rifling may be considered under two headings :
[a) The shape of the grooves.
(, h ) The twist at which they are cut.
(a) There have been several systems of polygroove rifling m
use, but the one employed in all modern equipments is known
as the P.P.S. (polygroove, plain section), with or without modifica-
tion. In this system the groove is provided with loading and
driving edges, the driving edge being that one against which the
driving band presses as the projectile passes up the Hie
most recent example is known as the P.P.S. further modified,
the typical details and dimensions of which are shown in Fig. 2.
It will be observed that in this type the edges of the groove, both
loading and driving, are parallel to a line normal to the bore through
the centre of the groove, the lower edges being rounded off to avoid
the tendency of the tube to crack along the angle of the groove.


(6) The twist of rifling may be either uniform or increasing.
Practically all modern guns and howitzers have the uniform twist,
although a number of present service equipments have the increasing
twist. . ..
In a uniform twist the path of the grooves follows a uniform
spiral, whilst in an increasing twist the rifling gradually increases
from a zero or small twist at its commencement to a greater twist
at its termination. _ .
With the increasing twist there is less initial strain thrown on
the gun and projectile, and the rotation pressure is kept fairly
even along the bore, yet the mean pressure is higher and the driving
band is being continually re-engraved. This causes increased
friction and loss of energy. The effects of erosion are less with an
FIG. 2
increasing twist, but this advantage has been neutralized to a large
extent by the introduction of a less erosive propellant. For these
and other reasons the uniform twist is in normal use with the latest
designs, particularly where high velocities are required, in which
the increased tendency of the driving bands to wear renders any
avoidable source of friction, such as increasing twist entails,
VlXl.CioSir3.blo
The question of the amount of twist necessary ensure the
shell travelling nose first throughout its flight, called its stability ,
may be found fully discussed in the Text Kook of Ballistics and
Gunnery. Generally speaking, the longer the shell the greater the
twist required, whilst the greater the twist the greater the stress
put on the gun and driving band and the greater will be the “ drift.”
The twist is measured at any point in the bore by the distance


the shell would travel lengthways whilst it makes one complete
turn or revolution on its axis, assuming the form of the spiral to
remain uniform from the point considered. It is usually expressed
as one turn in a certain number of calibres. The rifling of guns and
howitzers designed for the British service is right-handed.
Provision is made in construction to counteract the twisting
effect on the inner tube of the gun caused by the reverse thrust of
the shell on the rifling. This is done either by cutting sharp-edged,
shallow grooves, called combing, on the inside of the “A” tube,
which grip the inner tube, or by some system of feathers and
featherways.
Breech mechanism
All modern guns, howitzers and certain mortars are breech
loading, the breech being closed by a screw or block. On firing,
the screw or block, as the case may be, receives the pressure of
the explosion, but, as neither can form a sufficiently close joint
with the piece to be gas-tight, some provision must be made to
prevent the highly erosive gases from the propelling charge passing
FIG . 3
over or through the breech fittings. The term applied to the pre-
vention of this form of gas escape is obturation.
The mechanism may be considered from the points of view of :
(a) Breech closing arrangement.
(b) Method of obturation.
(c) Means of firing.
{a) Breech closing arrangement (Fig. 3). —The most usual form of
breech closing is by screw, but certain smaller natures employ the
block. The breech screw is invariably of the interrupted screw


type, either cylindrical or stepped. The stepped or Welin type is
employed in the more modern designs of breech mechanisms. In
this system the threaded portions are of different radii, and, the
breech bush being correspondingly prepared, an increase in the
proportional bearing surface, as compared with the interrupted
cylindrical type, is obtained. This advantage permits of the use
of a shorter breech screw than was formerly necessary, with the
result that it is possible to insert and lock the breech with a single
motion.
The use of the cylindrical breech screw in conjunction with the
single continuous motion of the lever has also been successfully
accomplished by the aid of a sliding hinge bolt. The hinge bolt
slides in a lateral direction during the swinging in or out of the
breech mechanism, thus providing clearance for the long breech
screw. Certain early types of medium guns employ this
method.
In the block system the breech is slotted horizontally or vertically
to form a guide for the block. It is only employed with Q.F. guns,
howitzers and mortars.
FIG . 4
( b) Method of obturation. —There are two main systems of breech
obturation, known as the B.L. system and the Q.F. system (Fig. 4).
With the B.L. system, a mushroom-headed bolt passes
through the breech screw; an asbestos pad is placed between
the mushroom-head and the face of the breech screw. On firing,
the mushroom-head is driven back by the explosion of the charge,
squeezing the asbestos pad against the face of the breech screw,
causing the pad to expand radially and press against the seating,
so sealing the escape of gas past the breech screw.


With the Q F. system, the propellant charge is contained in a
metal cartridge case, which, on firing, expands against the chamber
by the pressure of the propellant gases.
FIG . 5
Owing to the difficulty arising through weight of case, etc., this
system is confined to the lighter natures.
(c) Means of firing (Fig. 5). —Guns and howitzers using the B.L
system have an axial hole drilled through the mushroom-headed
bolt to form a fire channel, the rear end of which is prepared as a


tube chamber for the reception of the tube. The tube is a brass
cylinder, fired by the striker of the lock. All tubes are vent sealing—
i.e. they are designed to prevent the passage of gas through the
vent from the explosive charge. They are of two types, percussion
or electric.
Guns of the Q.F. system have the rear of the case prepared to
take a percussion primer or an adapter in which is inserted an
electric or percussion tube. The percussion primer or tube is
arranged to function on being struck by the firing pin of a striker,
the electric tube on closing of an electric circuit of which the
pin and tube form part. The striker is carried in the breech
mechanism, the firing pin passing through the firing hole bush to
reach the primer or tube. The primer and adapter with tube are
vent sealing.
Finally, some means must be provided to extract the cartridge
case or tube after firing, and in modern types the extractor, operated
by the breech mechanism or by the lock, not only extracts, but
completely ejects the fired case or tube.
Attachment of gun to the carriage or mounting
Practically all present day equipments are designed to allow
the gun or howitzer axial recoil, and for this reason the piece is
attached to a recoiling part of the carriage or mounting. A lug is
usually formed on the underside at the breech, to which the cylinder
block or piston rod is firmly secured. Instances occur in which the
point of attachment is above the piece.
Wear of Ordnance
The “ life ” of a gun is the number of rounds for which it will
give efficient service, and varies considerably with the size of the
gun, nature of the propellant, etc.
Fair wear defects include erosion of the bore, due to wear and
scoring, cracks and choke.
Wear is the gradual washing away of the surface of the
bore.
The causes of wear are said to be :
[a) The abrasive action of the hot gases moving over the
surface of the bore with high velocity.
( h) The sudden heating and cooling of the bore, which gives
rise to disintegration of its surface.
(c) The corrosive action of the products of combustion.
[d] The friction of the driving band.
In B.L. guns and Q.F. guns (separate ammunition), wear at
commencement of the rifling allows the projectile to be rammed
2 (2)


farther into the bore than is normal in a new gun, thereby increasing
the chamber space which affects the ballistics.
Wear also gives rise to inaccuracy, owing to bad centring of the
projectile. Wear begins from the first round and is most rapid
when the gun is new. In consequence of this, the M.V. falls off
most rapidly with the first rounds, the loss for each round becoming
less during the life of the piece.
Wear is increased by an accelerated rate of fire. —The rate of fire
therefore should be no greater than is necessary. Dirt also tends
to increase wear, and may be the initial cause of scoring. Projectiles
should, therefore, be clean before loading.
Scoring is caused by the hot gases from the propellant charge
and does not, in general, set in until wear has enlarged the bore
at the commencement of rifling, so that the gases are not properly
sealed by the driving band ; it may also be started by any roughness
or original defect at this point. Scoring once established rapidly
increases, and may even penetrate the inner tube if firing is continued
too long.
Cracks occur at points of weakness and, once started, tend to
increase rapidly. A crack entails provisional condemnation of the
piece.
Choke is caused either by coppering or by the stretching of the
inner tube. The metal may override at certain points where there
are steps on the exterior, thus causing a local contraction of the
bore. The contraction is located by means of a gauge and has to be
removed by grinding the bore.
Coppering is due to the deposit of metal from the driving band on
to the surface of the rifling, it produces irregular shooting and may
lead to copper choke ; it is indicated by the roughened appearance
of the bore.
The copper can be removed from the gun by a chemical process,
or by using tinfoil with the propellant charge. It may be prevented
by using small quantities of tinfoil with each round. The tinfoil
combines with the copper to form a brittle alloy which is swept
away by the driving band of the next projectile.
The tinfoil is usually incorporated in the cartridge, and when this
is done the word FOIL is marked on the cartridge or cartridge
case. Tinfoil can also be used with other B.L. cartridges by
inserting it loosely between shell and cartridge.


PART II
THE FIXED MOUNTING
Principles of Construction
Mountings used in coast defences conform to the same general
type, the gun being mounted in a cradle carried on the body of the
mounting, the whole supported on a pedestal, or race, fixed
permanently to the concrete emplacement. The mountings being
fixed, questions of weight are not of great importance, so it is
possible to provide greater refinement in regard to adjuncts than is
possible with gun carriages for use in the field.
The main features of design are :
(a) Provision of all round traverse.
( b) Rigidity and level of mounting.
(c) Alternative elevating gears.
(d) Accurate sighting and laying gear.
{e) Loading gear.
(/) Power for traversing, elevating and loading.
(g) Protection from hostile fire.
The rigidity of the mounting and its level is necessary to obtain
full advantage from the accurate laying devices provided.
All round traverse permits of the guns being turned inland
should it be necessary to use them in the defence of landing
places.
Alternative elevating and traversing gears provide for sub-
division of the operation of laying and for casualties to gears.
Accurate sighting and laying gears are essential to ensure the
successful engagement of small craft travelling at high speed through
short distances.
Loading gear must be resorted to when the shell exceeds a
reasonable lift for a gun number. All heavy gun mountings are
now provided with loading gear.
Power is used with heavy gun mountings to facilitate the rate
of loading and laying and so increase the rate of fire.
Protection of the detachment and the various gears adds greatly
to the efficiency of the gun.
Structure
Mountings may be sub-divided into two main portions known
respectively as the basic structure and the superstructure.
The basic structure is the fixed part of the mounting. It consists
of a pedestal, with fittings, and the anchorage by which it is secured.


The basic structure of the latest type of heavy mounting consists
of a lower roller race and its anchorage embedded in the concrete.
The basic structure forms the support for, and on which is
traversed, the superstructure.
The pedestal is bolted to an anchoring ring embedded in the
concrete floor of the emplacement. A levelling ring may be inter-
posed between pedestal and floor to provide for the pedestal being
set truly level by the aid of three levelling screws. This level is
essential to the accurate functioning of the automatic type of sight
though it is not of the same importance for other designs of sighting
gear. The basic structure for very heavy mountings is somewhat
individual in design.
The nature of the contact between the basic structure and the
superstructure is such as to reduce friction to a minimum and
varies according to the weight of the rotating mass. It is generally
one of three types :
{a) A hardened steel stud formed on the base of the pivot of
the mounting body bearing on a similar stud in the
pedestal (generally used with light mountings).
{b) A ball bearing whose lower race is formed in the top of a
pivot held in the pedestal (generally used with medium
mountings).
(c) A roller bearing whose lower race is formed on a pivot plate
fixed to the pedestal, or secured to the concrete (generally
used with heavy mountings).
The term “ pivot ” is generally applied to the fitting about which
the superstructure rotates. In (a) * the “ pivot ” forms part of
the rotating mass, while in (c) the pivot does not support the
weight of the superstructure, but is a cylindrical fitting held in the
centre of the pivot plate.
The superstructure provides for the movement of the gun in
action, viz., traverse, elevation and recoil, and the parts which
enable these movements to be carried out are the body and
cradle.
The body is usually a two-sided steel structure connected by one
or more transoms, and provided with bearings for the cradle
trunnions, the elevating and traversing gears, elevation indicator
and sighting gears. The body forms a support for the shield.
The cradle is usually of trough section and contains the recoil
gear. It has trunnions to pivot on the bearings of the body or
pivot ; anti-friction devices being provided round the trunnions
in the heavy mountings to reduce the labour of elevating. Slides
or guides are provided for the recoiling portions to slide in. By using
a cradle the important advantage of axial recoil is obtained.
The more important gears of the mounting will now be considered.
* Note. —With this type the “mounting body” is referred to as the
“pivot ”.


Recoil Gear
When the gun is fired the pressure in the bore produces equal
forces on gun and projectile. The gun is accelerated backwards
acquiring velocity and, consequently, an energy. Therefore to pre-
vent undue stress on the mounting some form of a cushion is required
to absorb this energy and bring the gun to rest gradually. This
function is performed by the recoil gear.
With a given recoil energy the greater the distance travelled
by the gun, the less will be the average stress on the mounting, but
as with coast defence mountings considerations of weight are not of
great importance, a system of short recoil is adopted which facilitates
loading and so tends to increase the rate of fire. On completion of
recoil it is necessary to return the gun to the firing position smoothly,
FIG . 6
and here again cushioning arrangements are necessary to avoid
jar in the final stages of the run-out.
The recoil energy is absorbed principally by the buffer, the
recuperator assisting, the rate of movement is regulated by the buffer,
the return to the run-out position is effected by the recuperator.
The buffer (Fig. 6) comprises a cylinder filled with liquid in which
works a piston with piston rod. In some cases the piston is
attached to the gun, in other cases it is attached to the mounting ;
consequently on recoil the piston is drawn through the cylinder,
or the cylinder over the piston, causing the liquid therein to pass
from one side of the piston to the other by way of the ports in
the piston, thereby setting up a fluid resistance which opposes the
energy of recoil and brings the gun gradually to rest.


To reduce the maximum stress on the mounting by a distribution
of the recoil energy equally throughout the period of recoil, it is
necessary to vary the area of the ports in the piston in accordance
with the velocity of recoil at any given point. The area of the
port will be greatest at the position of maximum recoil velocity.
This is effected in most fixed mountings by the insertion of a
suitably shaped metal bar called a valve key in the buffer cylinder
over which the port in the piston rides during recoil.
As the effectiveness of the buffer depends upon its being filled
with liquid, a reserve supply is usually provided in a reservoir
or tank which is permanently connected to the cylinder by a suitable
passage.
The recuperator may be either of springs or of air. Generally
FIG . 7
speaking, mountings up to and including the 6-inch use springs
whilst heavier mountings have air recuperators.
The spring recuperator (Fig. 7) may employ one or two sets of
springs according to the weight of the gun, each set comprising one
or more spiral springs placed end to end and fitted with certain
mechanical adjuncts to ensure smooth functioning. One end of
each set bears against a non-recoiling part of the mounting whilst
the other bears against a disc connected to a recoiling part, so
that on recoil the springs are placed under a greater degree of
compression than existed at the beginning of recoil, thus storing up
the energy needed to return the gun to its run out position.
Air recuperators (Fig. 8) are employed with heavy mountings and
comprise a cylinder containing air under pressure into which a
ram is forced on recoil. In one type of mounting the buffer
cylinder acts as a ram. The air cylinder may be divided into


two compartments and the diaphragm fitted with a leaky non-return
valve to reduce the rate of run out in the initial stages. One
great difficulty connected with air recuperation is the prevention
of air leakage, and the most usual method of dealing with this
problem is the provision of a liquid gland at the point where the
ram enters the cylinder, the pressure on the liquid in the gland
being intensified so that it is greater than the air pressure inside the
recuperator. The detailed method of intensification will be dealt
with in the Handbook of each equipment.
Initial compression is the phrase used to indicate the energy
stored up in the recuperator, whether spring or air, before firing,
and is the power necessary to hold the gun in the run out position
FIG. 8
at all angles of elevation. The compression is increased as the
gun recoils, resistance is offered to the recoil of the gun, therefore the
recuperator must absorb a proportion of the recoil energy.
Run out. —When recoil is finished the recuperator returns the
gun to the run out position, and it is necessary to arrange that this
movement is carried out smoothly, in particular, that the final
efforts should bring the gun gradually to rest without stress or shock
on the mounting. For this purpose the action of the recuperator is
controlled during the run out by means of a suitable control plunger
working in a control chamber which is formed in the hollow piston
rod. As the control chamber contains liquid, the entrance of the
plunger displaces the liquid setting up a fluid resistance which
cushions the shock of running out. A tapering flat on the plunger
or an adjustable valve provides the by-pass element.
With air recuperators the action of the air is further controlled
throughout the whole period of run out by the operation of a leaky
non-return valve in the diaphragm which separates the inner from
23


the outer chamber. This valve is lifted off its seating during recoil
to permit a free passage for the air into the inner chamber and on
recoil ceasing the valve closes, thereby confining the passage of
air from inner to outer chamber to one or more small holes in the
valve head.
Packings. —The efficiency of the buffer and air recuperator
depends upon the prevention of leakage, which is most likely to
occur where there are moving surfaces, e.g. the piston rod. As
air is normally excluded from these positions, it is only necessary
to provide against liquid leakage, and this is effected by packing
which presses on the cylinder or moving part with sufficient force
to retain the liquid. The packing should not, however, press too
tightly and so cause undue friction on the cylinder or piston rod.
Two classes of packing may be found :
{a) Rings of leather.
(b) Rings of hemp or other fibre.
The former ( a ) are, as a rule, in the form of rings of “L”or “ U ”
section. They depend on the pressure of the liquid for their sealing
effect ; the greater the pressure the more effective will be the seal
The latter ( h ) usually depend upon the pressure of the gland for their
sealing effect, and is normally of hemp, square or round in section,
treated with mineral jelly and graphite.
The packing is retained in position by suitable fittings.
The two types of packing are usually employed in combination ;
the leather ring forming the inner gland in contact with the liquid,
and arranged so that it functions during the recoil movement. The
other type is pressed into a coned recess, and pressure adjusted by a
screw-threaded gland, also coned.
Sighting
All equipments are provided with the means of directing the
gun on any spot within its field of fire, the gear for this purpose
being fitted to the mounting. This gear is usually arranged so that
the gun may be laid by direct laying, indirect laying, or by a com-
bination of the two ; it must provide for the laying for line and for
elevation.
The gear may comprise, for any mounting, one or more of the
following mechanical devices :
Rocking Bar Sight.
Automatic Sight.
Direction Sight.
Elevation Indicator.
Bearing Indicator.
The various methods by which these gears are utilized to lay
the gun in the most suitable manner are dealt with fully in the
Coast Artillery Training Manuals.


The rocking bar sight comprises a sight bar with telescope which
can be set to any desired angle with reference to the axis of the gun,
in accordance with the tangent elevation due to the range to the
target. The gun is then elevated and traversed until the pointer of
the telescope is on the target when the gun will have the quadrant
angle to hit the target. In this manner the gun can be layed
directly by the sight without any further assistance. It is, however,
rarely employed in this manner, the most usual procedure being to
lay the gun for line only by its aid, the elevation being imparted by
another device.
The automatic sight differs from the rocking bar in that there is
no need to discover the range of the target or to place an angle on
the sight. All that is necessary is to bring the pointer of the
telescope on the water line of the target and the gun will be auto-
matically set at the quadrant elevation necessary to hit the target.
This sight thus combines the functions of the range-finder and
the sighting gear and, in theory, is the ideal solution of the problem
of direct laying. In practice, however, so many difficulties arise
that its use is confined to short-range shooting, more particularly for
night gunnery. The automatic sight may be used to lay the gun for
elevation only ; line being obtained by rocking bar, or it may be used
to lay for line, elevation being obtained by the indicator.
The direction sight is a simple pillar sight used on the more
recent designs of mountings to lay the gun for line only. Where it is
fitted the rocking bar sight is not used.
The elevation indicator is used to lay the gun indirectly for
elevation only. It is purely a recording device, usually in the form
of a disc, to indicate, in yards, the range due to the elevation at
which the gun is laid. When in use the action of setting the
indicator to read a given range by means of the elevating gear,
automatically places the gun at the correct quadrant angle corre-
sponding to the range.
The hearing indicator is employed to lay the gun indirectly
for line and its use is confined to medium and heavy equipments.
It too, is purely a recording device consisting of a scale graduated
in degrees and sub-divisions of a degree. It may be in the form of a
traversing arc, fixed to the pedestal or pivot plate and read by a
pointer on the body of the mounting, or incorporated in an indicator
dial on the " follow the pointer ” principle.
The zero reading indicates the axis of the gun to be pointing grid
north and the graduations are arranged to follow the normal
bearings, i.e. clockwise. When the pointer is set to read any given
bearing, by means of the traversing gear, the gun is laid that
number of degrees or minutes from grid north.
Range and position finding instruments are required to obtain
the information necessary to use the elevation indicator and bearing
arc, and electrically driven range and bearing dials are placed on
the mounting convenient to the respective layers. In more recent


mountings these dials are combined with the indicator dials on
the “ follow the pointer ” principle, so that the mere action of keeping
the indicator pointers in coincidence with the electrically driven
pointers by means of the elevating and traversing gears ensures that
the gun is kept laid for the range and bearing transmitted from the
plotting room.
In the case of all these adjuncts for elevation, the scales, or in
the case of the automatic sight the cam, must be suitable for the
charge and projectile in use. In addition, height must be taken
into account with the automatic sight and elevation indicators.
Provision is usually made to compensate for any variation of the
M.V. from the standard to which the scales have been graduated
or the cams cut. The automatic sight has a tide lever to com-
pensate for rise and fall of tide, as the sight is designed for mean
sea-level condition.
Drift is the lateral deviation of the shell from the plane of
departure caused by the rifling and, in the British service, is to the
right. Rocking bar and automatic sights compensate for this defect
by being tilted slightly so that an approximately correct left deflection
is given automatically by the process of laying. Some sights have
an additional correction in the form of a false zero to the deflection
scale. The direction sight embodies a cam which provides the
correct deflection for the range when properly set. When using
the bearing arc for line, the drift correction must be incorporated
with the other corrections for line, and placed on the deflection
scale.
Level of the mounting is necessary to ensure accuracy with auto-
matic sights and, to a lesser extent, with elevation indicator.
Means may be provided in the pedestal to adjust the level. Certain
automatic sight adjusting devices are incorporated in some
mountings.
Traversing Gear
With the exception of the very lightest mountings, gearing
is provided to rotate or traverse the mounting in the horizontal
plane through the complete circle, i.e. all round traverse. In
practice, the amount of traverse permitted may be limited by safety
or other considerations, e.g. the hydraulic loading gear of some
9-2-inch mountings and consequently stops are usually provided
to prevent traverse beyond certain limits. The gear is arranged
to allow of traverse being effected from either the right or left
side of the gun or from the emplacement floor, with facilities for
quick motion from one of these positions. The usual mechanical
arrangement of the gear is to have a traversing rack bolted to the
basic structure into which a pinion carried on the mounting is meshed.
This pinion is driven by a suitable chain of wheels and spindles
from one or other of the positions referred to previously, and in
this manner the mounting is rotated on the basic structure.


Traversing by the shoulder is usual with light Q.F. mountings, the
traversing gear, if fitted, being undamped.
Most modern heavy mountings employ power for traversing
purposes.
Elevating Gear
Practically all of these gears are of the toothed arc type in which
one or two arcs are fixed to the underside of the cradle to gear with
pinions carried on a cross shaft in the body of the mounting. This
shaft is rotated, through worm gearing, from alternative positions
on the right or left side of the gun, or from the emplacement.
Ball bearings are placed at the trunnions of heavy mountings
to facilitate elevating, and power is employed in modern designs of
this nature.
The use of worm gearing provides a self-locking device to
prevent the gun running down accidentally from elevation, it also
facilitates the operation of laying. On the other hand, this gear
is liable to damage by the blow on firing experienced by the elevating
arcs, so to avoid this a slip on firing gear is inserted between the
worm wheel and the cross shaft in the form of friction rings which
permit movement of the cross shaft on firing independently of the
worm wheel.
Most modern heavy mountings employ power for elevating
purposes.
Shield
Protection is afforded to the vital parts of the mounting and to
the personnel by means of shields. The protection may be confined
to the simple gun shield used on medium mountings, or it may
comprise pit and side shields in addition. Overhead cover is some-
times arranged.
PART III
AMMUNITION
Ammunition for guns comprises four principal components ;
(a) The means of ignition.
(b) The propellant charge.
(c) The projectile.
(d) The fuze.
Although all equipments require to be provided as above, it
does not follow that the ammunition used is of the same general
type. In practice, differences arise between the ammunition used
with B.L. and Q.F. guns respectively.
With B.L. guns the four parts of the complete round are, as a
general rule, made up separately and are issued, stored and loaded


independently of each other (except that shell and fuze are loaded
together). The propellant charge is contained in a cloth bag and
the means of ignition is a tube, either electric or percussion.
Q.F. coast defence equipments normally have “ separate ”
ammunition, i.e. the ammunition is made up into two parts for
loading purposes. The propellant charge in its metal case, with
means of ignition attached, forming one portion and the projectile
with fuze the other. With the very small natures, however, “ fixed ”
ammunition may be employed in which all four parts are joined
together to form a complete round.
With “ separate ” ammunition the means of ignition normally
takes the form of an electric or percussion tube ; while a percussion
primer is generally employed with the “ fixed ” ammunition.
The Means of Ignition
Some provision must be made for the ignition of the propellant
charge. As already mentioned, this takes the form of an electric
or percussion tube or primer. With B.L. guns the tube is inserted
in a chamber prepared at the rear of the axial vent of the mechanism ;
its flash being communicated, by means of a fire channel, to the
chamber of the gun.
With Q.F. guns the tube is placed in an adapter screwed into the
base of the cartridge case.
The tube contains a small charge of gunpowder and must
fit the tube chamber closely. The tube must be vent sealing in
its action to prevent erosion of the fittings of the lock or striker by
the hot gases of the propellant charge.
For Q.F. guns not taking tubes, a primer screws into the base of
the cartridge case ; it is usually of the percussion type and contains
a small charge of gunpowder. Like the tube, it must be gas-sealing
in its action, i.e. must prevent gas escaping between primer and case ;
it must also prevent internal gas escape.
The Propellant Charge
The propellant charge is converted into gas which imparts the
necessary velocity to the projectile and, for use with modern guns,
is made from smokeless explosives to obtain the advantage of
concealment. The explosive normally used is cordite in the form
of sticks tied into a suitable bundle.
It is necessary to provide a covering for the explosive to form a
package, and to provide protection against the direct rays of the
sun. B.L. charges have a cover of some readily consumable material,
such as silk cloth, as it is dangerous to permit smouldering residue
in the bore ; whilst Q.F. charges use the metal cartridge case as a
cover.
Propellant charges for B.L. guns are usually made up in portions


to admit of reduced charges being used and for convenience in loading
with the heavy equipments.
Reduced charges prolong the life of the gun greatly as wear of
the bore is much less.
As smokeless powders are difficult to ignite, the strength of the
flame produced by the tube, or primer, would be insufficient to
ignite the charge if any distance separated them.
With Q.F. cartridges the primer is in contact with the propellant
explosive. If tubes are used a reinforcement is necessary and a
metal igniter (containing gunpowder) is screwed to the front end of
the adapter. In B.L. guns, the tube and cartridge are separated
by the breech mechanism and, in order to reinforce the flash from
the tube, a small amount of gunpowder (which is easy to ignite) is
placed at one or both ends of the B.L. cartridge to form an igniter.
If the igniter is at one end only, care must be taken that this end is
loaded towards the breech.
Propellant charges from different manufacturers or of differing
dates may vary in the muzzle velocity which the standard weight
produces. To avoid difficulties from this cause, most propellant
charges are “ adjusted ” so that the cartridge, as issued, may
produce the standard M.V. under normal conditions. The weight
marked on the cartridge is therefore purely nominal. Adjusted
charges are marked A.C. after the lot number, except where they
have been grouped, when the group letter and number is used
instead.
The Projectile
The artillery projectile is elongated, the head ogival, the base
flat, whilst the body is given the necessary structural strength to
withstand the shock of firing, plus a reasonable factor of safety.
An armour piercing shell, however, must have sufficient structural
strength to carry it intact through the class of plate it is designed to
penetrate, and this may be a more severe test than that of firing.
A copper driving band pressed into an undercut groove near
the base of the shell, acts as a gas seal, and as the means of giving
rotation to the projectile. The bottom of the groove has waved
ribs, to prevent the driving band rotating independently of the
projectile. The exterior design of the driving band has a most
important bearing on the accuracy and life of the gun. Great
care should be exercised where different designs of band are issued
for the same equipment, to see that, as far as possible, the projectiles
are grouped for use according to the design of the band.
The base portion of the projectile in the rear of the driving band is
usually cylindrical, known as “ plain ” base ; some designs for
mobile equipments have this portion tapered and under certain
ballistic conditions range further than the plain base. The tapered
shell are known as “ streamline ”.
The shape of the ogival head will depend upon the radius at
which the ogive is struck. The radius of head, as it is termed, may


be as low as 1-5 calibres or as high as 10 calibres. The greater
the radius the more pointed the nose, and the further will the
projectile range under certain conditions. Its effect is more
pronounced with high velocities. The pointed shell may, however,
have less accuracy.
High explosive shell (H.E.) have forged steel bodies. The ex-
plosives used with such shell are lyddite, shellite, trotyl or amatol,
pressed or cast into the shell at a considerable density. Because of
this density and the insensitiveness of these high explosives the
ordinary fuze magazine has insufficient power to detonate the filling
successfully; consequently it is found necessary to introduce between
fuze and shell an intermediary explosive, of less density or more sen-
sitivity, known technically as an “ exploder ”. The exploder consists
of one or two small bags of picric powder, trotyl, or C.E. crystals,
in a central cavity, in close contact with the fuze and shell filling.
Contact between fuze, exploder and shell filling is a vital factor in
the efficiency of these shell, as an air gap, however small, may lead
to partial or complete failure to detonate. Picric powder exploders
are normally used with lyddite or shellite-filled shell taking igniferous
fuzes. Exploders of trotyl may be used with any H.E. shell
usually in conjunction with detonating fuzes. C.E. exploders may
be employed with either trotyl or amatol-filled shell and are of
special value for filling intended for hot climates. They are not
to be used in lyddite or shellite-filled shell.
Amatol 80/20 is more difficult to detonate than either trotyl or
lyddite, and requires a more powerful exploder system. This is
arranged by giving the exploder a “ surround ” of trotyl.
Shrapnel shell have forged steel bodies and a solid base. The
head is separate, except with the small calibres, being secured lightly
to the body so that it may be blown off readily by the bursting charge.
Shrapnel shell are filled with metal bullets (lead and antimony),
the number varying with the size of the shell. They are held in
position by resin, which, on explosion, produces smoke, thus
assisting observation of the burst. The bursting charge of gun-
powder is very small, consequently the penetrative effect of the
bullets will depend upon the remaining velocity of the shell at the
moment of burst.
Shrapnel shell are normally burst in the air by means of a time
fuze, and are then found to be very effective against troops in the
open. They are burst on graze occasionally and may then have good
effect on gun equipments, etc. A combined time and percussion
fuze is employed.
Star shell are of forged steel, with a blow-off base, lightly secured
to the body by mild steel pins. The present type of shell has one
large star which is attached to and suspended by a parachute ; a
time fuze is used to give air bursts and the burst should be timed to
take place high in the air, 2,000 to 3,000 feet, in order to illuminate
as large an area as possible. The minimum time of burning of the


star for the 6-inch shell is 20 seconds. A very small bursting charge
of gunpowder is placed in the head, below the fuze, to perform
the dual function of igniting the star and projecting it, together with
the parachute, through the base. The shell body does not break,
but travels on. They are used to illuminate.
Common pointed shell are designed for the attack of lightly
armoured vessels. They are made of forged or cast steel and have a
pointed nose and large capacity. Certain designs of the larger
calibres have the point hardened and are provided with a cap
(C.P.C.). The capped shell are lined with copper containers to
prevent accidental prematures through spontaneous cracking of the
head. The explosive used for the bursting charge is gunpowder.
These must not be confused with C.P.B.C. (common pointed with
ballistic cap) which also have a hardened head and are filled H.E.
in an aluminium container.
Armour piercing shell are intended for the attack of armoured
vessels. They are made of specially treated forged or cast steel
and have a pointed nose which is hardened. Modern designs of shell
are provided with a cap. The explosive used for the bursting charge
may be gunpowder or H.E. ; base fuzes are used. The shell body is
exceptionally strong to withstand the shock of impact and the
capacity small, every other consideration being subordinated to
that of getting the projectile through an armoured plate. The
junction between fuze and shell must, in the case of H.E. fillings,
be protected from ingress of the flame from the propelling charge, as a
premature would destroy the gun.
Semi-Armour piercing shell are intended for use against lightly
armoured vessels. They are similar in design to A.P. shell, but there
is not so much material in the head and the capacity is greater.
They are filled lyddite or trotyl.
Target shell are used in anti-aircraft equipments to provide an
aerial target when towing is not possible. They may be of forged
steel, or of cast iron, and have a solid base. The main filling is a
smoke producing substance, charged into a container or through a
charging hole in the body. The shell is provided with a bursting
charge of high explosive. The power of the bursting charge has
to be kept within limits, as its object is to open and not to disrupt
the shell. If too powerful it may disperse the smoke mixture
unduly and thus reduce the efficiency. The smoke producer
and the explosive must be kept apart to avoid accident ; the latter
is placed in a container, screwed into the body of the shell. Time
fuzes are employed, used in conjunction with a gaine which detonates
the T.N.T. or C.E. exploders used as the bursting charge.
Special precautions must be taken to prevent leakage of the
smoke substance, as it is highly inflammable; therefore such shell
require special conditions of transport and storage. Some earlier
types of target shell contain a bursting charge of gunpowder only,
and are strictly speaking, common shell used for targets.


Fuzes
Fuzes are used to initiate the explosion or detonation of the
bursting charge of shell. They are of various designs, nomen-
clatured by the nature of fuze and with exceptions, in a numbered
series from 1 upwards.
Externally the fuze body is screw-threaded for screwing into
the fuze hole bush or adapter, and prepared with a flange provided
with a leather washer or luting to make a tight joint.
The 2-inch and G.S. (l-inch tapered) are the most common
gauges for nose fuzes.
Base fuzes have a left-hand and nose fuzes a right-hand screw
to avoid the possibility of the fuze becoming unscrewed by the
rotary motion of the shell.
Fuzes may be divided and sub-divided into types depending
upon the filling and the mechanism.
From the filling point of view they may be divided into “ igni-
ferous ” and “ detonating ” fuzes, the former designed to give a
flash, and the latter a detonating impulse.
Both types are provided with detonators. These consist of a
small copper cup into which is pressed, with a fairly high density,
3 to 5 grains of mercury fulminate or lead azide, or from 1 to 3
grains of detonating composition. Mercury fulminate or lead azide
detonators are used in detonating and certain igniferous fuzes,
while those filled with detonating composition are only employed
with igniferous fuzes. Detonators must be carefully filled, and
securely held in the fuze to prevent accidental ignition should the
fuze or shell be dropped or struck.
The igniferous fuzes have a magazine of gunpowder; for this
reason such fuzes are not usually employed in H.E. shell, unless the
filling is provided with picric powder exploders, or the fuze used in
conjunction with a gaine to convert the flash into a detonation.
The detonating fuzes have the magazine filled with C.E. When
detonation is initiated in the detonator, the small channel con-
necting it with the magazine is filled with lightly stemmed C.E. to
provide a continuous column of explosive and to build up the
detonating impulse. When a shutter is employed the filling of this
central channel is a matter of some difficulty.
Fuze mechanism. —Mechanically, fuzes may be divided into two
main types, “ percussion ” and “time", and these again into sub-
divisions as shown below :
32


Further, the time and the percussion types may be combined
together in one fuze, viz. “ time and percussion
Graze fuzes. —The interior mechanism of graze fuzes is so
arranged that when the shell receives an appreciable deceleration, a
movable part, usually called the graze, or percussion pellet, can
move forward to carry the detonator on to the needle.
A creep spring keeps the two apart until this deceleration is
experienced.
As the movement of the pellet gives rise to an “ air gap ” the
fuze detonator is of the flash type.
When employed with shell having high explosive bursting
charges, the graze type of fuze is used in conjunction with picric
powder exploders, gaines, or designed with a suitable filling to give a
detonating impulse.
For safety in storage, transport, and in the bore, the fuzes are
provided with certain safety arrangements such as a centrifugal
bolt to keep the pellet back until centrifugal action takes place, the
bolt being retained by detents and springs, or in the case of many
of the base fuzes, by spindles actuated by the gases from the
propellant charge.
In the combined T. and P. fuzes the safety arrangement of the
percussion part usually consists of a ferrule, or distance piece,
supported on a suitable spring, or stirrup, keeping the needle and
detonator apart until acceleration has taken place. In certain cases
this arrangement is augmented by a small ball interposed between the
pellet and detonator plug in such a way that it can only move clear
after acceleration and rotation.
The above-mentioned safety devices do not, however, give
immunity from over-sensitive detonators ; consequently, in a large
number of fuzes used with H.E. shell there is a shutter arrangement
placed between the primary detonator and the main magazine of the
fuze, closing communication until centrifugal force causes the
shutter to open, or to bring a channel in it coincident with a similar
channel or channels, in the fuze body.
Direct action fuzes (. D.A. ). —These fuzes may be of the igniferous or
detonating types, the mechanism consisting of a needle supported on
a thin metal disc, or a hammer or striker supported on a shearing
wire or coiled spring, exposed to a direct blow ; its sensitivity
depending on the strength of disc, shearing wire or coiled spring.
It may be provided with a safety pin or tape, and modern designs
usually embody a shutter. It is a nose fuze.
D.A. impact fuzes. —These fuzes may be of the igniferous or
detonating types, they differ mainly from the D.A. in being less
sensitive. The mechanism usually consists of a steel hammer
supported on a stout shearing pin ; a shutter is embodied in the
latest designs.
3 (2)


Time fuzes. —In the combustion type of fuze the detonator, in a
suitable pellet, is supported on a stirrup or coiled spring sufficiently
weak to allow the pellet to “ set back ” on acceleration, bringing the
detonator on to a needle. The flash ignites a variable column of
gunpowder or other compound, which continues to burn until a
channel leading to the magazine is reached. The time between
ignition and explosion depends upon the “ setting ” of the movable
ring of the train.
With the above fuzes the gases generated by the fuze composition
must be allowed to escape, otherwise an explosion would take place
instead of the required burning. In the ordinary British fuze the
gases escape through a hole in the ring.
The mechanical fuze has a fully wound-up watch mechanism
retained by a trigger, which is released by the “ set-back on
acceleration, after which the mechanism works until the movement
of its parts releases a needle which is driven on to the detonator by a
spring. The time between the starting of the watch and the release
of the needle can be varied by the “ setting ” of the fuze.
The T. and P. fuze is the combination of a combustion time
fuze with a graze action percussion fuze having a common magazine.
If the time action fails in the air, the percussion portion functions on
graze.
At present the Time and T. and P. fuzes are of the igniferous
type and have to be used in conjunction with a gaine, or similar
component, if a detonating impulse is required.
The materials used in the manufacture of fuze bodies are brass,
bronze, aluminium, steel and iron ; the interior components are
usually brass, except the steel needle, and copper detonator.
A gaine, or transformer, may be used when it is necessary to
combine a graze or time action with a detonating effect, its function
being to transform an igniferous action into detonation. Ihis is
done by using a considerable fulminate detonator with a column of
gunpowder on the fuze side and of C.E. on the shell side of the
detonator, or, alternatively, the gaine may be of the fuze design
type, having the ordinary 4 or 5 grain detonator and needle, the
latter being driven on to the detonator by the explosion of a time
fuze. In the latter type a shutter is placed between the detonator
and C.E. In the former type of gaine there is no shutter.
The delay between ignition and explosion is an important point.
D.A. fuzes, filled C.E., are instantaneous in their action. Graze
fuzes have a small inherent delay, as have D.A. gunpowder fuzes,
though from different causes. This inherent delay may be aug-
mented by placing a delay powder column between fuze and
gaine detonator.
Explosives
An explosive is a substance which is capable of rapidly converting
itself into gas with liberation of heat. To start this action a blow.


friction, or the application of heat is generally necessary. Artillery
explosives are usually solid substances.
Explosion is of two kinds :
Simple explosion. Detonation.
The difference between these two lies in the rate at which the
explosive is turned into gas. In a simple explosion the explosive
substance is burnt layer by layer. The rate of burning is com-
paratively slow. Detonation is caused by the propagation of a
disruptive wave through the explosive, with such great velocity—
-6,000 to 8,000 yards a second —that the effect is practically instan-
taneous and consequently severe. Simple explosion is influenced
considerably by the amount of confinement.
Service explosives are divided into ;
1. Propellants (explosion rate only).
2. High explosives—
{a) Initiating agents.
( h) Intermediaries (or exploders).
(c) Fillings (bursting charges).
3. Miscellaneous.
Gunpowder, pyrotechnics, etc.
Propellants are used to impart velocity to the projectile, the
propelling force being due to the pressure of the gas evolved by the
burning. Explosives suitable for use as propellants are those in
which the rate of burning is regular and, relatively speaking, slow,
as with such explosives pressure may be controlled in the gun by
means of the shape or size of the finished article.
High explosives, as far as artillery is concerned, consist of
substances that may be readily detonated in a shell, but which are
yet sufficiently insensitive to withstand the shock of being fired from
the gun.
Miscellaneous explosives include gunpowder and other explosives
classed with it. They are used for general purposes in connection
with explosive and pyrotechnic articles.
1. Propellants
Propellants used in the British service consist of gelatinized
nitrocellulose with or without nitroglycerine. Nitrocellulose is
made by the action of nitric acid on cellulose, usually in the form of
cotton waste or paper made from wood pulp. By the application of a
solvent the fibrous nature of the nitrated cotton is destroyed and a
jelly-like substance produced, which can be worked into any
convenient shape and subsequently dried.
The solvents used are usually volatile and evaporate in the
drying process, the nature of the solvent depending upon the degree
of nitration of the explosive.
The propellants likely to be encountered are :
Cordite. N.C.T.


Cordite
Mk. I
Cordite
R.D.B.
Cordite
M.C.
Cordite
M.D.
Cordite
S.C.
Cordite
W.
N itr ogly cerine ...
Nitrocellulose
58
42
30
30
41
29
(Insoluble)
Nitrocellulose
37
—
65
65
—
65
(Soluble)
—
52
—
—
50
—
Mineral Jelly
5
6
5
5
—
—
Carbamite
—
—
—
9
6
Cordite. —There are several types of cordite in the service, viz.
cordite Mark I, cordite M.D., cordite M.C., cordite R.D.8., cordite
S.C., cordite W. They are composed of nitro-glycerine, nitro-
cellulose, mineral jelly or carbamite, the proportions in each case
being as shown below :
The insoluble nitrocellulose mentioned above is known in the
service as guncotton. Insoluble nitrocellulose requires acetone as
the solvent whereas, with soluble nitrocellulose, ether alcohol or
other gelatinizing agents may be employed.
Properties
Cordite is practically smokeless and is also poisonous. It is
much affected by the direct rays of the sun ; these cause it to
deteriorate rapidly. Water or moisture does not affect it.
Cordite deteriorates progressively from the day it is made, the
rate of deterioration depending on the storage temperature, the
higher the storage temperature, the shorter the storage “ life ”. This
deterioration, however, does not appreciably affect the ballistics.
The temperature of the cordite charge at the moment of firing
has a most important effect upon ballistics.
Cordite causes considerable erosion of the bore ; this effect is
more pronounced with Mark I.
When fired to windward there may be a troublesome back flame
when the breech is opened.
Cordite is comparatively difficult to ignite. For this reason all
cordite cartridges for B.L. guns are fitted with gunpowder igniters.
Cordite is usually manufactured in the form of sticks or cords ;
these may be solid or tubular. The cords may be sliced to form
sliced cordite, or the cordite may be made in sheets and cut into
squares, known as “ square flake The larger the diameter of the
cord, i.e. its size, the slower it is consumed. Cordite is issued to the
service in LOTS, the cordite in each lot having the same stability
and ballistic coefficients.
N.C.T. is gelatinized nitrocellulose, with which a stabilizer is
incorporated. It is made in the form of short, perforated sticks.
Compared with cordite, N.C.T. has less power and requires a larger


charge, is not so stable, consequently is not suitable for use in hot
climates ; N.C.T. gives less flame, but more smoke than cordite.
A gunpowder igniter is used. N.C.T. should be kept dry because it
absorbs moisture readily, which produces irregular ballistic results.
N.C.T. has less erosive effect than cordite.
2, High Explosives
The following are the high explosives used in artillery
ammunition :
(a) Initiating agents or detonators are used to initiate explosion
or detonation and are usually employed in very small quantities,
owing to the extreme sensitivity of the substances employed. Their
use is confined to caps of primers and tubes, and detonators of fuzes.
Mercury ' fulminate is used alone in detonators of detonating
fuzes or gaines. It is characterized by having great sensitiveness
to impact and friction and is at the same time violent. To obtain
full effect it must be confined. Any article containing mercury
fulminate should be handled with great care. Water or oil will
render it insensitive temporarily. It is mixed with other substances
for use in non-detonating fuzes, primers, etc., the resultant product
being known as detonating composition A, B, or C.
Lead azide has properties somewhat similar to those of mercury
fulminate, but is less sensitive to percussion and may require a layer
of detonating composition. It is much more stable in storage than
fulminate, being unaffected by moisture or hot climates. The
density is high and a smaller amount is required for a detonator
than is the case with fulminate. Carbon dioxide in the presence
of moisture may attack it.
(b) Intermediaries or exploders are employed to amplify the
impulse given by the fuze.
C.E. is a pale yellow, crystalline substance and is used in fuzes
and exploders for initiating the detonation of the main charge.
It is not affected by the exudation from amatol, and is more
sensitive to shock and more responsive to initiation by fulminate
or lead azide than either picric acid or trotyl.
C.E. must not be used in lyddite or shellite filled shell, as
dangerous chemical action may occur.
Picric powder is a mixture of 43 parts of ammonium picrate
with 57 parts of saltpetre. It is used as an exploder for shellite
and may also be found with certain lyddite shell.
It absorbs moisture readily and when damp is useless as an
exploder.
Picric powder exploders are used in conjunction with a non-
detonating fuze.
(c) Fillings or bursting charges consist of high explosives,
viz. lyddite, shellite, trotyl, and amatol.


Lyddite is picric acid melted and poured into the shell, where it
solidifies. It is unaffected by moisture or by temperature, and
consequently can be stored under almost any climatic conditions.
It is a very powerful explosive and can be easily detonated. It is
not used so much now as formerly, owing principally to its suscep-
tibility to sympathetic detonation and to its tendency to form
dangerous metallic picrates if brought into contact with metals,
more particularly lead. Lead picrate is extremely unstable and
dangerous ; for this reason all components of lyddite shell, such
as fuzes, plugs, varnish, etc., must be “lead free". Special care
must be taken when fuzing lyddite shell in exposed positions to
keep out dust, dirt, etc., which may contain lead, even in small
quantities. The detonation of lyddite is indicated by dense smoke of
a dark colour. Any yellow discoloration in the smoke indicates
imperfect detonation.
Shellite is a modified form of lyddite, being less sensitive and not
so liable to sympathetic detonation. It has a lower melting point,
but is also susceptible to lead.
Trotyl or trinitrotoluene has been known as T.N.T. It is
manufactured from a derivative of coal tar and is slightly less
powerful than lyddite. It is unaffected by moisture or by tempera-
ture when pure. Shell filled with trotyl are not so liable to accidental
detonation as lyddite. Pure trotyl has little or no action on metals.
This explosive, especially if not pure, in contact with certain
metallic compounds, such as lead oxide, may form sensitive sub-
stances analogous to the picrates ; “ lead free ’’ conditions, although
not so important as in the case of picric acid, should therefore be
observed. It is usually melted and poured into the shell, where it
solidifies. Trotyl in crystal form is used in exploders for lyddite,
trotyl and certain amatol-filled shell.
Amatol is formed by the mixture of trotyl and ammonium
nitrate, in varying proportions such as 40/60, 50/50, 80/20, the
first figure in each case being the amount of ammonium nitrate
used. The first two mixtures are usually poured into the shell,
the trotyl being melted first and the nitrate stirred in. The 80/20
mixture is inserted in a dry or plastic state under pressure.
Amatol is more powerful but not so violent as lyddite, and is
more difficult to detonate than either lyddite or trotyl. It is very
susceptible to moisture and should therefore be kept dry.
Ammonium nitrate is itself an explosive, and amatol should not
be regarded merely as diluted trotyl.
If crude trotyl is used in the making of amatol and a storage
temperature of 70° F. or over is experienced, some of the oils of the
trotyl exude from the shell at the fuze hole, etc. Where the
percentage of trotyl is small, this exudation will not be found
troublesome, particularly where exploders of C.E. are used in lieu
of trotyl crystals. If the exudation dries in the threads of base
plugs or fuze hole bush, there is a possibility of prematures occurring


at the moment of firing. On the other hand, the most likely trouble
is the liquid exudation getting at the trotyl in the exploder bags
which thereby may be rendered useless, causing a blind shell.
Amatol filled shell produce little smoke and require the addition of
a smoke mixture for observation purposes.
3. Miscellaneous
Gunpowder, although no longer used as a propellant, is used in
many components, such as fuzes, tubes, igniters, etc.
It is a mixture of charcoal, saltpetre, and sulphur in the pro-
portions respectively of 15, 75, 10. Many sizes of this have been
manufactured, but present supply is confined to the sizes suitable
for filling tubes, primers, igniters for propelling charges, magazines
of non-detonating fuzes, blank charges and bursting charges of
shrapnel shell.
It is very susceptible to friction, but is unaffected by ordinary
temperatures, is easily ignited and invariably explodes when
ignited, giving a large flame. For this reason gunpowder is much
used to ignite other explosives. As moisture or damp affects
gunpowder greatly, rendering it useless, all articles containing
gunpowder must be specially protected against moisture.
Effects of Climate on Ammunition
Continued high temperature is harmful to ammunition, which
should also be shielded from the direct rays of the sun. There
should be free circulation of air through a stack of ammunition.
Moisture is harmful, as it may cause steel components to rust,
and because it may penetrate an absorbent component of the
ammunition. In the case of time fuzes, if the waterproofing
of the rings is not quite perfect, damp will injure the time com-
position and spoil the burning of the fuze. Similarly, the igniter
of a cartridge may be so affected as to render it useless. Detonators
are also adversely affected by damp storage.


CHAPTER I
ORDNANCE, B.L. 9.2-INCH, WIRE, MARKS X,
X v AND X*
Particulars
Material ... ... ... ... ... ... Steel (wire construction).
Weight—
With breech mechanism, nominal ... ... 28-tons.
Without breech mechanism ... ... ... 27-tons 8-cwt.
Length ... ... ... ... ... ... 442-35-inches.
Bore—
Calibre ... ... ... ... ... ... 9-2-inches.
Length ... ... ... ... ... 429 325-inches.
Capacity ... ... ... ... ... 32,900-cubic inches.
Chamber—
Diameter
Largest ... ... ... ... ... 13-inches.
Smallest ... ... ... ... ... 10 2-inches.
fLength to base of projectile ... ... ... 70 93-inches.
•(•Capacity ... ... ... ... ... 8,116-cubic inches.
Rifling J
Length ... ... ... ... ... ... 353-8-inches.
Twist—-Marks I and I* ... ... ... Straight from breech end of
rifling to 303-585-inches
from the muzzle, the
latter increasing from 0 to
1 turn in 30-calibres at
the muzzle.
Grooves, number ... ... ... ... 37.
Mark I—-
System ... ... ... ... ... Polygroove, modified plain
section.
Grooves—
Depth ... ... ... ... ... Straight -08-inch.
Twist -06-inch.
Width ... ... ... ... ... Straight -62-inch.
Twist -602-inch.
Mark I*—
System ... ... ... ... ... Polygroove, plain section.
Grooves—
Depth ... ... ... ... ... -08-inch throughout.
Width ... ... ... ... ... -65-inch throughout.
Mark II
System ... ... ... ... ... ... Poly groove, plain section.
Twist ... ... ... ... ... ... Uniform, 1 turn in 30-
calibres.
| For projectiles with driving band No. R.L. 14093 A
J Mark I rifling will be modified to Mark I * as opportunity offers.
Guns of future manufacture, and existing guns when relined on repair, will
have Mark II rifling.
40


Mark 11-
Grooves —
Number ... ... ... ... ••• 46.
Depth -07-inch.
Width -4188-inch.
Firing mechanism ... ... ... ••• Electric and percussion.
Centre of gravity—
Without breech mechanism ... ... ... 164-5-inches from face of
breech.
Construction
The Mark X * gun body (Plate 1) is of steel, wire construction,
and consists principally of an inner A-tube, A-tube, a series of layers
of wire, B-tube, breech bush and jacket.
The inner A-tube extends from the obturator seating to the muzzle
and projects slightly from the muzzle end of the A-tube. It is
tapered externally throughout its length and inserted into the A-
tube from the rear, being secured longitudinally by the breech bush
at the rear and five shoulders immediately in front of the chamber.
The tube is bored to form the chamber and bore, the latter being
rifled with Mark II rifling.
The central portion of the chamber is cylindrical, the front and
rear ends being reduced in diameter by tapering. The entrance
to the chamber is coned to form a seating for the obturator.
The A-tube extends from the breech face to the muzzle and has a
series of layers of flat steel wire wound at varying tensions over the
exterior of the tube. The wire extends from the shrunk collar
at the breech to stop ring I at the muzzle, the number of layers
varying throughout, the maximum number being over the beginning
of the bore and chamber. The shrunk collar and stop ring I are
shrunk over the tube to form shoulders for longitudinal support of
the wire. Additional stop rings are shrunk over the wire and
filling-in rings are fitted to the shoulders of the tube to facilitate
wiring. Longitudinal slots are prepared around the inner surface of
the tube at the forward end, the metal of the inner A-tube biting into
these tends to check any turning movement between the two tubes.
The B-tube is fitted over the wire at the forward end and extends
from stop ring 111 to the muzzle.
The breech brush is screwed into the A-tube at the rear and
prevented from turning by means of a fixing screw inserted in the
breech face. The interior of the bush is prepared with interrupted
screw threads for the reception of the breech screw.
The jacket is fitted over the wire at the rear and shrunk over the
rear portion of the B-tube. It is secured longitudinally to the B-tube
by an internal shoulder at the front and a corresponding shoulder
on the exterior of the B-tube. A collar, screwed into the rear of the
jacket, also serves to secure the shrunk collar on the A-tube, and the
jacket. Two projections around the exterior of the jacket near the
breech end, together with a key on the underside of the front
projection, serve for positioning the rear band. The latter, by


means of two sliding bars, is rigidly connected to the front band,
which is connected to the buffer, and therefore the recoil system of
the mounting.
Three tapped holes are prepared in the right side of the jacket
for the attachment of the catch retaining carrier.
A clinometer plane is prepared in front of the swell on the
upper surface of the jacket at the breech. It is provided with
longitudinal and transverse lines to facilitate the correct positioning
of the clinometer.
Axis lines are cut on the horizontal axis at the breech and
muzzle ends on the right side. Horizontal and vertical axis lines
are also cut on the breech and muzzle faces.
The actual weight of the gun (without the breech mechanism)
is engraved on the top of the jacket at the breech and the Royal
Monogram in front of the position of the rear band.
A line with the letters “ C. of G.” to indicate the centre of
gravity (without breech mechanism) is cut transversely on the upper
side of the jacket.
The nature, mark, registered number, manufacturer's initials
and year of manufacture are engraved on the upper portion of the
breech face.
The breech end is shaped to form a seating for the breech
mechanism frame and six tapped holes are prepared in the rear
face of the jacket for the frame fixing screws.
The mark of the rifling is stamped on the muzzle face of the inner
A-tube.
Gun bodies for use on the Mark VII mounting are prepared as
follows ;
A hole for admission of airblast is drilled in the upper
portion of the breech face, to the right of the vertical axis,
and continued through the breech bush so as to allow the
blast to enter the chamber and disperse the gases on opening
the breech after firing. The entrance to the hole is enlarged
and tapped to receive the airblast pipe adapter, and four
tapped holes are arranged in the exterior of the jacket for
attachment of the airblast pipe supporting bracket.
The Mark X gun body (Plate 1) is generally similar to the
Mark X*. It differs principally in the inner A-tube, which is of
smaller diameter throughout and arranged with forward shoulders.
The rifling may be Mark I* or 11.
The Mark X v gun body (Plate 1) differs from the Mark X* in
the construction and consists of an A-tube with an inner A-tube,
both extending the whole length of the bore, the A-tube forming the
chase. Layers of flat wire over the A-tube extend from the breech
to a little more than half the length of the gun. Over the exterior
of the wire is the jacket, secured longitudinally by corresponding
shoulders on the A-tube and a screwed steel collar over the A-tube
at the rear.


Charge
Full Charge
f Charge
4 Charge
Propellant
M.D.26
(107 lb.)
S.C.150
(109 lb.)
M.D.37
(120 lb.)
M.D.26
(80i lb.)
S.C.150
(8 If lb.)
M.D.37
(90 lb.)
M.D.26
(534 lb.)
S.C.150
(5441b.)
M.D.37
(60 lb.)
Muzzle Velocity, new
gun 60° F. (f.s.) ...
2722
2724
2738
2271
2278
2230
1756
1761
1700f
Full Charge
| Charge
4 Charge
5/10 c.r.h.
4 c.r.h.
2 c.r.h.
5/10 c.r.h.
4 c.r.h.
2 c.r.h.
5/10 c.r.h.
4 c.r.h.
2 c.r.h.
Maximum range in
yards lor elevation
(approx.) 35°
30°
15°
29,600
27,900
19,800
25,800
24,300
17,400
22,600
21,100
15,100
23.200
21,700 *
15.200
21,700
20.300
13,900
18,900
17,700
12,300
17,200
16,100
10,700
16,600
15,500
10,300
14,700
13,800
9,200
Projectile weight with fuze (approx.) lb. ... 380 Shot travel (inches) • 3 J 32
Cubic inches in chamber 8,116 Working pressure (tons per sq. inch) ...
Total cubic inches in bore and chamber ... 32,900
Area of cross-section of bore, rifling grooves (sq. in.) :
Mark I rifling —Breech to 50-215 inches ... ... ••• 68- 15
Remainder of rifling to muzzle (303-585 inches) ... = 67-77
~ I* ~ Area throughout ... ... ... ••• ••• = 68-42
~ II ~ Area throughout ... ... ••• ••• ••• =67-82
j- Approximate only.
BALLISTIC DATA. B.L. 9-2-INCH GUN—MARKS X, X v & X*
43


Breech Mechanism
(Plates 2, 3 and 4)
The breech mechanism is of the single motion type having
a parallel breech screw of the Welin pattern actuated by a lever
pivoted on the right side. Obturation is obtained by means of a
steep coned obturator. The mechanism is arranged for electric or
percussion firing; safety arrangements are provided.
The principal parts of the mechanism are as follows :
Frame, breech mechanism—bronze with 6 fixing screws, lubricating
screw, and loading tray locking catch plate with 4 fixing screws ;
2 set screws each with lock nut, and 2 clamping nuts for ball-
bearing bushes.
Bushes, ball-bearing—steel (2 per gun).
Carrier, Mark ll—bronze body with hard steel piece for carrier
retaining catch with 2 fixing screws, stop piece for breech screw
with 2 fixing screws, link pinion stud with nut, washer, keep pin
and keep screw, 2 ball-bearing cups, 34 |-inch anti-friction
balls, 4 lubricating screws, (and hinge bolt key with two fixing
screws and preserving screw for guns on Mark V II mountings) ;
Mark I hinge bolt with nut, keep pin and preserving screw, (or
Mark I* hinge bolt with cam with rivet, castle nut, keep pin
and preserving screw for guns on Mark VII mountings) ; link
pinion and cam with 2 fixing screws each with check screw,
and link axis pin with keep screw ; breech screw actuating
link ; breech mechanism lever pinion ; breech mechanism lever
with nut and keep pin ; breech mechanism lever retaining catch
plunger with nut and keep pin ; breech mechanism lever retain-
ing catch spring; breech mechanism lever retaining catch bracket
with 2 fixing screws each with check screw; breech screw re-
taining catch ; and No. 2 breech screw retaining catch spring.
Catch, retaining, carrier—steel and bronze ; plunger, spiral spring,
and bracket with plunger retaining bush and 3 fixing screws.
Link, actuating, lock—steel; slide with locking plate with fixing
screw ; adjustable bush ; and guide bolt in 2 parts with keep
pin and No. 1 actuating link guide bolt spring.
Hook, supporting, cable—steel, with securing screw and spring
washer.
Clip, supporting, cocking lanyard—steel; bracket with spring and
fixing screw.
Screw, breech—steel with 2 lubricating screws and hard steel piece
for retaining catch with fixing screw.
Vent, axial—steel; bolt, sleeve, spiral spring, collar, nut, and anti-
friction washer No. 1.
Box, slide, A Mark lll —steel, body with safety slide with 3 fixing
screws, extractor consisting of lever, actuating collar, and axis pin
with washer and keep pin, tube retainer bolt with head and
keep pin, tube retainer spring; and stop pin with spiral spring.


Lock, electric, and percussion, “E ” Mark II —steel; frame
with extractor actuating plate with 2 screwed rivets, and
tripping piece with 2 screwed rivets ; cylindrical toe piece ;
toe-piece retaining plate with fixing screw ; firing hole bush ;
guide bolt bush; needle with Mark II firing pin, retaining
and locking nuts, sleeve, sleeve spring, and sleeve securing nut
for use with expendable cables ; needle insulating bush ; 2
washers ; sheath with nut ; main spring ; case with fixing
screw and cap ; Mark I trigger (or Mark II for guns on
Mark VII mountings) in 2 parts with keep pin and spiral
spring ; firing arc with axis pin with collar and keep pin ;
cocking handle ; and guide bolt in 2 parts with keep pin and
No. 2 lock guide bolt spring.
Obturator, Mark lll —pad, wire woven, with front and rear
protecting discs and front ring.
FIG . 9
The hreech mechanism frame (Fig. 9) is of bronze. It is shaped
to fit on the breech end of the gun body to which it is secured by


6 fixing screws. Two lugs, upper and lower, are formed on the
right of the frame for the support of the carrier, each lug being
bored and screw-threaded internally to receive a ball-bearing bush
through which passes the hinge bolt. The lugs are also recessed
to accommodate a clamping nut, and prepared with a tapped hole to
receive a set screw for securing and clamping the nut.
The upper lug is also prepared with a lubricating hole closed by a
set screw, and a tapped hole to accommodate a hook supporting
cable.
A hole is prepared in the face of the frame, on the left side, to
receive a steadying pin pertaining to the loading tray of the Mark V
carriage. A recess is cut in the metal on the lower side of the
hole to receive a steel plate which originally served to receive the
loading tray retaining catch.
The frame for the 9-2-inch Mark X w gun differs in having a
smaller internal diameter at the rear.
The hall-hearing hushes (Fig. 10) are of steel in the shape of
hollow cylinders, screw-threaded on the outside for a portion of
their length for insertion into the upper and lower lugs of the
breech mechanism frame. The inner end of each bush has a semi-
circular groove cut around it to form one half of the ball race,
and the outer ends are slotted to suit the No. 37 breech mechanism
wrench. Vertical serrations on the outside engage corresponding
serrations on the clamping nuts. The clamping nut, of bronze,
is curved and serrated to grip the bush, and prevent it turning.
Each nut is furnished with a set screw. A lock nut prevents the
set screw from working loose.
The Mark II carrier (Figs. 11 and 12) is a bronze arm with a hinge
for attachment to the upper and lower lugs of the breech mechanism
frame. The hinge is bored for the hinge bolt and recessed at both
ends to accommodate removable ball-bearing cups which, with those
of the ball-bearing bushes, complete the ball races. Each race is
arranged to hold 17 hardened steel balls. The weight of the breech
mechanism is taken by the ball bearings and its vertical position
regulated by the position of the bushes.
A projection is formed on the exterior of the hinge to serve as a
stop for the carrier in the open position, and a steel plate with a
spherical recess to engage the plunger of the carrier retaining catch
is fitted to the underside of the projection and secured by two rivets.
A tapped hole is also prepared to receive a hook for supporting the
cable leading to the lock.
The carrier has a pintle formed on its front face. The exterior
of the pintle is prepared with interrupted screw threads to correspond
with those on the interior of the breech screw. The interior is
bored axially to receive the axial vent, the boring being enlarged
at the rear end to accommodate the slide box ; a featherway is
also provided for the feathers on the sleeve and collar.
The front face of the carrier arm is hollow and has a circular


FIG . 10


projection which is bored and screw-threaded to receive a steel
stud which forms a pivot for the link pinion. The stud is secured
FIG . 11
by a keep screw, and furnished with a washer, nut and keep pin
for retaining the link pinion in position. Two projections are
FIG . 12
formed on the inner face of the washer to engage recesses in the
stud to prevent the washer from turning. To the right of the
stud a horizontal bearing is formed for the pinion of the breech


mechanism lever and a vertical boring to receive the axis shaft
of the lever. To the left of the stud a recess with featherway is
formed to receive the breech screw retaining catch and spring,
a small hole being bored into the recess from the rear face of
the carrier in order to facilitate removal of the catch.
On top of the carrier near its inner end is a deep slot, through
which works the breech screw actuating link. To the front
of the slot on the upper side a shaped hardened steel piece is fitted
to form a stop for the link when the breech screw reaches the
unlocked position. On the top side lugs are formed and a groove
prepared to accommodate a projection on the underside of the
breech screw actuating link and thus provide a guide for the link.
On the rear of the carrier an undercut groove is prepared to
accommodate the lock actuating link and a slot is cut through
the carrier to receive the bossed portion of the link and permit
of the link guide bolt engaging the cam of the link pinion. The
upper side of the groove is cut away to provide a clearance for the
guide bolt and tripping piece of the lock and so permit the attachment
or removal of the lock.
A steel bracket is fitted to the underside of the carrier to
accommodate a steel catch plunger for retaining the breech
mechanism lever in the closed position.
Four lubricating holes, each closed by a screw, are bored in the
carrier, two of which are at the front to lubricate the bearings for
the breech mechanism lever axis and pinion, and two in the rear
face to lubricate the lock actuating link and breech screw retaining
catch respectively.
The hinge holt (Fig. 13) is of steel, flanged at the top, and has a
tapped hole to receive an eyebolt. This hole serves for lubricating,
being connected to an oil channel cut in the outside of the bolt,
and is closed by a preserving screw. At the bottom the bolt is
prepared to receive a flanged nut and keep pin.
The preserving screw has a tapped hole prepared for the fixing
screw which secures the cocking lanyard supporting clip.
Note. —With guns on Mark VII mountings the hinge bolt is
adapted to operate an air blast as follows :
A removable key to secure the hinge bolt to the carrier is located
in the hinge portion of the carrier body, the key being secured
by two fixing screws and arranged so that its inner end enters a
keyway in the hinge bolt ; a castle nut being used to secure the
bolt.
A tapped hole, closed by a preserving screw, is prepared in
the key to permit a |-inch bolt or screw being used to facilitate
the withdrawal of the key when dismantling.
A steel cam, to operate the airblast on opening the breech,
is fitted to the upper end of the hinge bolt, the cam being attached
by means of a keyed spigot and a rivet inserted through the spigot
and bolt,
4 (2)


Owing to the fitting of the cam, the tapped hole for the eye bolt
is repositioned in the upper side of the cam.
The remaining airblast fitments are components of the mounting.
FIG . 13
The hreech mechanism lever (Fig. 14) is of steel. It is secured
in the carrier by means of a vertical shaft with nut and keep pin.
The shaft, which acts as an axis for the breech mechanism lever, has
three featherways to receive the breech mechanism lever pinion,


one featherway being wider than the other two which ensures
correct assembly. The lever is furnished with a double handle which
has bronze sleeves. On the underside of the lever a spherical
FIG. 14
recess is formed to engage the breech mechanism lever retaining
catch plunger which retains it in the closed position. At the lower
end of the vertical shaft a hexagon is formed to which a No. 36
FIG . 15
breech mechanism wrench may be applied when additional power
is required to open the breech.
The hreech mechanism lever pinion (Fig. 15) is of bronze. It is


bored to fit on the vertical shaft of the breech mechanism lever,
having three feathers in the interior which correspond with the
featherways on the shaft. Four helical teeth are formed on the
outside to gear with similar teeth on the link pinion, and the word
“ TOP ” is engraved on the upper surface to ensure correct assembly.
The pinion is positioned in a bearing in the carrier.
The Mark II link pinion (Fig. 16) is of steel. It is bored to
fit and pivot on the link pinion stud in the carrier and retained in
position by a washer, nut and keep pin. Four helical teeth are
formed on one side of the circumference to gear with similar teeth
on the breech mechanism lever pinion. On the opposite side a
large projection is formed, slotted, and furnished with an axis
FIG . 16
pin with keep screw for the attachment of the breech screw actuating
link. A cam is fitted into the rear face of the projection and
secured in position by two fixing screws each furnished with a
check screw. A groove cut in the cam serves to engage the guide
bolt of the lock actuating link and so provide means of operating
the link and with it the lock. Oil grooves are prepared in the front
and rear faces of the pinion, also a groove in the metal surrounding
the boring which is in communication with an oil hole drilled through
from the front face of the link.
The hreech screw actuating link (Fig. 17) is of steel in the shape
of a rectangular bar with edges slightly rounded. The ends are
enlarged, bossed and bored for attachment respectively to the stud


on the rear face of the breech screw and to the link pinion by
means of the axis pin. A projection formed on the underside
engages in a groove in the carrier and prevents the link being
strained by the forward or rearward movement of the breech screw.
FIG . 17
A lubricating hole and channel are prepared for the bearing at
each end.
The hreech screw retaining catch (Fig. 18) is of steel. It is
cylindrical in shape, bored to form a seating for a spiral spring,
FIG. 18
has a feather formed on the exterior to prevent it turning and fits
into a corresponding recess in the front face of the carrier. A
projection towards the front end engages in the hardened steel
piece in the rear face of the breech screw to retain it in the open


position. The front end is semi-circular in shape to clear the
flange of the breech screw and engage the breech face when the
mechanism is swung to the closed position and thereby release the
projection from the hardened steel piece in the breech screw.
The hreech mechanism lever retaining catch is of steel. It consists
of a steel plunger and spiral spring which are housed in a steel
bracket secured to the underside of the carrier by two fixing screws
each furnished with a check screw. The upper end of the plunger
FIG . 19
is shaped to engage a recess in the underside of the breech mechanism
lever and retain it in the closed position. The lower portion of the
plunger is reduced in diameter and so forms a seating for a spiral
spring, the lower end is prepared for and furnished with a nut
and keep pin by means of which both the plunger and spring are
retained in position in the bracket.
The carrier retaining catch (Fig. 19) consists of a bronze bracket
with steel plunger, spiral spring, and retaining bush. The bracket
is secured to the right side of the breech end of the gun by means of


three fixing screws. It is bored vertically to receive the plunger and
spring, the lower end being screw-threaded to receive the retaining
bush. The upper end of the plunger is shaped to engage the recess
in the steel plate on the exterior of the carrier hinge and thereby
retain the carrier in the open position. A collar is formed near the
upper end of the plunger to limit its protrusion and form a seating
for the upper end of the spring. The retaining bush is bored to
allow the lower end of the plunger movement whilst the boring in the
upper part of the bush is enlarged to form a seating for the lower end
of the spring.
FIG . 20
The lock actuating link (Fig. 20) is of steel. It is designed
to slide horizontally in the undercut groove in the rear face of the
carrier and to serve as a connecting link between the cam of the
link pinion and the lock.
The left end of the link has a circular hole to receive the guide
bolt of the lock, a groove being prepared on the upper side of the
hole to allow the bolt to clear the link when removing the lock.
Towards the right end on the front side a hollow projection is
formed, the boring of which passes through to the rear. In this,
an adjustable bush is retained by means of a bayonet joint and


prevented from turning by a serrated locking plate engaging similar
serrations on the flange of the bush, the plate being secured in a
recess in the link by a fixing screw. The adjustable bush is bored
eccentric to receive the guide bolt and guide bolt spring of the link,
therefore any turning movement of the bush will move the guide bolt
and with it the actuating link which controls the movement of the
lock. By this means the firing pin in the lock can be adjusted
laterally over the head of the tube. Graduated marking from oto
•05-inch, each successive marking representing -01 -inch horizontal
movement of the lock, are engraved on the flange of the bush and
an arrow on the locking plate to indicate the reading. An arrow with
the word “ ENTER ” is also engraved on the flange of the bush to
coincide with an arrow engraved in the locking plate recess in the
link to indicate the position for assembling the adjustable bush.
These assembly markings are filled with red wax.
On the upper and lower bearing surfaces of the actuating
link oil grooves are cut, these being connected by a vertical channel.
The guide bolt is in two parts. Part I consists of a spindle
enlarged at one end to engage the groove in the cam of the link
pinion and also to form a seating for one end of the spring. This
part together with the spring are housed in the adjustable bush.
The rear end of the spindle is screw-threaded and bored to take a
keep pin. Part II is screw-threaded to fit on the spindle and bored
for the reception of the keep pin. It is furnished with an eye for
use in withdrawing the bolt.
The cable supporting hook consists of a steel disc with two
arms bent in opposite directions to form a double hook. The hook
is furnished with a spring washer and fixing screw which permits
the hook to revolve so that the cable can be easily inserted and
retained. It is fitted to the carrier hinge.
The cocking lanyard supporting clip consists of a steel bracket,
spring clip and fixing screw. It is secured to the preserving screw
in the upper end of the hinge bolt and is provided for the support of
the cocking lanyard when not in use.
The breech screw (Fig. 21) is of steel. It is a parallel interrupted
screw of the Welin type having the circumference divided into
twelve equal portions, three of which are plain and the remaining
nine prepared with a left-handed screw thread, thus allowing a
three-fourths bearing surface to the screw when locked in the
breech opening of the gun. The three plain interruptions are
positioned at equal intervals round the screw and have the smallest
radii. There are three threaded segments between each of the plain
interruptions, the radii of which are stepped up in turn. The
breech opening of the gun is prepared to correspond, thus when
the screw enters the gun the plain interruptions on the breech screw
are opposite the threaded segments of smallest diameter in the breech
opening, and the threaded segments of largest diameter on the screw
are accommodated in the plain interruptions in the breech opening,


the intervening segments being correspondingly disposed. One
twelfth turn of the breech screw, anti-clockwise, brings the plain
portions of the screw and breech opening opposite each other and the
threaded segments into complete bearing. The breech screw and
breech are shaped to allow for swinging clearance.
FIG . 21
The front face of the screw forms a flat bearing surface for the
rear disc of the obturator, whilst the rear face is flanged and has a
stud near the top to engage the outer end of the breech screw
actuating link. Portions of the flange opposite the plain interrup-
tions are chamfered on the inner edge to permit the escape of gas
which may from any cause get past the obturator. A hardened
steel piece, provided with a recess, is dovetailed into the rear of
the flange on the right side and secured by a fixing screw, for
engagement of the breech screw retaining catch.
The breech screw is bored to receive the vent axial, the rear
part enlarged and prepared with interrupted screw threads to fit
on the pintle of the carrier. A bearing surface for the sleeve is
formed in the interior.
Two lubricating holes, closed at the upper ends by screws,
are drilled from the top left side, one leading to the pintle of the
carrier, the other to a groove inside the bearing for the axial vent.
The Mark II axial vent (Fig. 22) consists of a steel bolt
enlarged at the front end to form a mushroom-shaped head, and
furnished with a sleeve, spiral spring, collar, nut, and No. 1 anti-
friction washer.
The rear end is prepared externally with interrupted thrust
collars for the attachment of the slide box, and screw-threaded to


receive the axial vent nut. To the rear of the screw threads an
interrupted seating is prepared for the anti-friction washer to
prevent it from turning. Two slots are cut in the rear face to permit
the use of the hand extractor when necessary for the extraction of
the tube and a clearance is cut to admit of the requisite movement
when attaching or detaching the slide box.
On the bolt a feather is provided to correspond with a featherway
in the sleeve.
The bolt is bored from front to rear to form a fire channel, the
rear part being enlarged to form a tube chamber, whilst the front
part is recessed to provide a water baffle.
FIG . 22
Note.— The Mark I axial vent differs from the Mark II by having
no water baffle.
The sleeve is of steel. It is bored to fit over the bolt and has
the exterior prepared for insertion into the front end of the
carrier pintle. Inside, a featherway is cut which is engaged by a
feather on the bolt and outside a feather is formed which engages
a featherway in the carrier, thus preventing any turning move-
ment of the bolt inside the carrier.
The spring is of steel, rectangular in section, and is assembled
between the sleeve and collar on the bolt. It serves to maintain
contact between the front end of the sleeve and the interior bearing
surface in the breech screw and acts as a cushion to any jar that
would otherwise be thrown on the axial vent and slide box as
the fittings set forward after firing.


The collar is of steel and acts as a distance washer between
the spring and nut of the bolt. It is prevented from turning by
means of a feather on its exterior engaging a featherway in the
carrier, therefore the spring is not turned when the nut is tightened
up.
The nut is of steel. It fits on the rear end of the bolt which
it retains in position, and keeps the spring under initial com-
FIG . 23
pression. Four holes are drilled in the rear face to permit the
application of No. 20 breech mechanism wrench.
The No. 1 anti-friction washer is of steel. It is shaped to fit
over the rear end of the bolt and on the interrupted seating. A
tapped hole is prepared to permit the application of a withdrawing
tool. Its use is to prevent the slide box and axial vent nut jamming
should the latter work loose.
The Mark 111 “A ” slide box (Fig. 23) is of steel and shaped at
the front to form a hollow cylindrical projection within which are


formed interrupted thrust collars to permit of its attachment to the
rear end of the axial vent. Through the left side of this projection
two slots are cut for the insertion of the tube hand extractor.
On the right of the cylindrical portion of the slide box, towards
the rear, a recess is cut and two hinge lugs are formed to accommo-
date an extractor lever and actuating collar for use in extracting
the tube from the vent. The lugs are drilled to receive the
axis pin, and a small hole is prepared in the inner face of the upper
lug to receive a stop pin and spring.
Two flanges with dovetailed grooves are formed on the rear
face of the slide box for the reception of the lock frame. In the
interior of the slide box at the rear a seating is formed for the
head of the tube and slots are prepared for the arms of the
extractor lever.
A hardened steel safety slide, bevelled at each end, is fitted to
the rear face of the lower flange. This slide, working in conjunction
with a lug on the sheath of the lock, forms a safety arrangement by
withdrawing the needle and firing pin clear of the tube on the first
motion of opening the breech mechanism lever and retains it until
the final movement of closing the lever.
The front side of the body is chamfered at the top and bottom
to enable a grip to be taken and the slide box drawn squarely off
the axial vent.
On the left side of the body a projection is bored and shaped
to receive the tube retainer and spring.
The extractor (Fig. 24) is of steel and consists of a lever, actuating
collar, axis pin with washer and keep pin.
The lever is bored to fit over the axis pin on which it is pivoted
in the slide box. Two arms formed on the left end of the lever
are shaped at the rear to suit the head of the tube, and at
the front to fit on the rear end of the axial vent. The lever is
prolonged to the right and shaped to form an unseating toe for
en g a g emen t with the extractor actuating plate fitted to the front
face of the lock. Two projections are formed about the axis,
one for engagement with the tappet on the extractor actuating
collar, whilst the other forms a stop to engage the cylindrical
portion of the slide box which limits the movement of the extractor
to the rear.
The actuating' collar is bored to fit over the axis pin on which it is
pivoted in the slide box. It is assembled above the extractor lever.
The collar has a tappet to engage the projection on the extractor
lever, also a toe to engage the cylindrical toe-piece fitted to the
front face of the lock, and a lug to engage the tripping piece of the
lock. Two spherical recesses are prepared in the upper face of the
collar for engagement with the stop pin fitted in the slide box.
The axis pin fits in the lugs on the slide box and is secured by a
washer and split keep pin. The head of the axis pin forms a seating
for the stop pin and spring.


In order to facilitate correct assembly, the axis pin is shaped in
two diameters, the larger of which fits the upper lug of the slide
box and actuating collar, the smaller suiting the extractor lever and
lower lug.
The stop pin and spring form an indefinite catch for the actuating
collar by means of which the extractor lever is retained in the open
or closed positions. The head of the stop pin is spherically shaped
to engage the recesses in the upper side of the actuating collar
FIG . 24
and the inner end is reduced in diameter to receive the spring.
The spring is spiral in shape and secured to the pin by riveting.
The tube retainer consists of a cylindrical bolt furnished with a
head, keep pin and spiral spring. It is housed with its spring in
the projection on the left side of the body, being secured by
the head and keep pin. The bolt is shaped to form a seating for
the spring, screw-threaded and bored to receive the head and keep
pin, whilst the inner end is coned. The coned portion slightly
overlaps the head of the tube and prevents the tube falling out of
the tube chamber when the jar takes place on closing the breech.


but admits of the bolt being pressed outwards by the head of the
tube when inserting it into the chamber.
The Mark I*** and ll* slide boxes are earlier patterns modified
to conform to the Mark 111 pattern. The body of the Mark I***
slide box differs from the Mark ll* and 111 in being fitted with a
filling-in collar to form a seating for the vent sealing tube, and in
having a tube retainer bracket secured by rivets in lieu of being
formed solid with the slide box.
The Mark II “ E ” electric and percussion lock (Figs. 25, 26 and
27) is of steel, designed to operate in the “A” slide box and effect
the firing of the electric or percussion tubes.
The lock frame at the front is provided with flanges to engage
with the grooves in the slide box.
The left end of the frame is provided with a cylindrical projection
at the rear, the boring of which passes through to the front of the
frame and is designed to accommodate the needle, sheath and
FIG . 25
main spring, the front end of the boring being screw-threaded
internally to receive the firing hole bush which has a small hole
through which the point of the needle protrudes. The cylindrical
projection is screw-threaded externally for the attachment of the
case and a tapped hole is prepared in the upper side to receive a
fixing screw for the case, also a semi-circular hole for the escape of
gas. The projection is also slotted to receive the lug on the sheath,
lo the right of the projection a hole is drilled obliquely through the
frame into the needle recess to allow for the escape of gas in the
event of a tube proving to be defective.
The right end of the frame is bored from front to rear, the
latter end being screw-threaded to receive a bush for the support
of the lock guide bolt and spring, and a featherway is cut in the
side of the boring to correspond with a feather on the guide bolt.
On the front face of the lock the leading edge .is prepared
with an incline to ensure the tube being pressed home into
its seating as the lock moves to the closed position. A groove
62


is cut in the face to accommodate the toe of the extractor actuating
collar, and across the groove, near the left end, a cylindrical toe-
piece is fitted to operate the extractor and thereby eject the tube.
The toe-piece is inserted from the upper side of the frame and held
in position by a retaining plate which is secured by a fixing screw.
Parallel to this groove on the lower side of the front face a hardened
FIG . 26
steel actuating plate is fitted to engage the unseating toe of the
extractor lever, and in prolongation another groove to accommodate
the unseating toe when the extractor is forced home with the lock
in the open position. About the centre of the face a tripping piece is
fitted for the purpose of returning the toe of the extractor actuating
collar into its groove as the lock is moved to the closed position.
The case is screw-threaded internally for attachment to the


projection on the rear face of the frame and is secured by means of a
set screw. It is recessed to receive and form a seating for the
main spring and bored through to allow the spindle portion of the
sheath to pass through, and a clearance is provided on one side of
the recess to allow the lug on the front end of the sheath to be
drawn to the rear. The exterior of the case at the rear is cylindrical
and prepared with a featherway for the assembly of the cocking
FIG. 27
handle, also an oil groove is cut on the opposite side to the feather-
way. A hole is bored through the cylindrical portion to permit escape
of gas should a defective tube be used. A projection on the front of
the case is slotted to engage the safety slide on the slide box.
On the underside of the case a projection is bored and prepared
with a featherway to receive Part I of the trigger and screw-threaded
on the exterior to receive a milled cap for securing the trigger and
spring.


The Mark II trigger is designed for guns mounted on the
Mark VII mounting.
It is in two parts and furnished with a spiral spring.
Part I consists of a short spindle, screw threaded at its outer end
for the attachment of Part II and bored to receive a split pin which
retains it. The inner end has a head which forms a seating for one
end of the spring. An incline is cut on the front of the head to
enable the trigger to be pushed clear by the lug on the sheath when
withdrawn, and a flat to engage the lug and so retain the sheath
in the cocked position. It is assembled in the projection on the
case, has a feather to engage a featherway to prevent it turning, and
is retained by a screw cap.
The cap is screw-threaded internally for attachment to the
projection on the case. It is recessed to receive and form a seating
for the outer end of the trigger spring, and bored through to allow
the spindle of the trigger to pass through. The cap is milled
externally so as to be manipulated by hand, and has two flats cut
for the application of No. 20 breech mechanism wrench. The outer
end is flat to form a working surface for the firing arc.
Part II is screw-threaded internally to fit on Part I and a hole is
provided for a keep pin. It is shaped for the attachment of the
firing arc and axis pin, the position of the firing arc when assembled
being such that the pull of the firing lanyard is from the right side of
the gun at an angle of 45-degrees from the right rear of the breech.
The Mark I trigger differs from the Mark II by having the
firing arc attached in such a position that the pull of the lanyard
may be from the left or right side of the breech. This is accomplished
by having the hole in Part I of the trigger repositioned. It is
used with guns mounted on other than Mark VII mountings.
The firing arc is hinged to Part II of the trigger by means of an
axis pin with collar and keep pin. It is arc-shaped at the front to
take a bearing against the outer end of the cap and arranged at the
rear with an eye for the attachment of No. 7 firing lanyard.
The cocking handle is of gunmetal. It is recessed at the front
and provided with a feather to fit over the cylindrical portion of the
case. It is bored to receive the sheath to which it is secured by
the sheath nut. It is furnished with two arms to provide a grip
when cocking the lock and a small hole is bored at the root of each
arm to permit the passage of air.
The sheath consists of a spindle, bored to accommodate the
needle and ebonite insulating bush and arranged externally to
receive the main spring. A collar is formed on the front end to
take a bearing in the recess in the lock frame and also to provide a
seating for the front end of the main spring. The rear end is slightly
reduced in diameter to admit of rigid attachment of the cocking
handle, and screw-threaded to receive the sheath nut which secures
the handle. Three grooves are cut in the collar to provide for the
escape of gas from defective tubes. A lug is formed on the side
5 —(2)


of the collar with two bevelled surfaces. One surface is to assist
the sheath to ride up the incline on the safety slide of the slide
box, the other to push the trigger outwards when cocking the lock.
The front of the lug has a plain surface which is engaged by the
trigger to retain the sheath in the cocked position.
The main spring is spiral, rectangular in section, and fits over
the sheath. The front end bears against the collar of the sheath
and the rear end against the seating inside the case.
The Mark IV needle is enlarged at the front end with a
cone-shaped head into which is shrunk a firing pin, the rear
surface of the head being flat for a paxolin or bakelite insulating
washer to bear against. The stem of the needle is arranged to
receive an ebonite insulating bush and the rear end is screw-threaded
in two diameters, the larger to receive the retaining and locking
nuts, the smaller for the nut which retains the sleeve and spring of
the cable connector. The needle and insulating bush are housed
in the sheath and held in position by the retaining nut, a paxolin or
bakelite insulating washer being placed on the needle between the
retaining nut and the sheath nut.
The guide holt hush is recessed to form a seating for its spring
and bored to allow Part lof the guide bolt to pass through. It is
screw-threaded at the front end to engage threads in the lock
frame, and has two flats at its outer end to suit No. 20 breech
mechanism wrench and also to receive the flange on Part II of the
guide bolt which prevents the bush from turning, the guide bolt
being feathered to the lock frame.
The guide holt is in two parts. Part I consists of a spindle
enlarged at the front end to engage the lock actuating link and form
a seating for the front end of its spring. The enlarged portion also
takes a bearing in the lock frame and is provided with a feather
which engages a featherway in the frame and so prevents any
turning movement. The rear end of the bolt is screw-threaded to
receive Part II and has a hole bored through to take a keep pin.
Part II is screw-threaded to fit on Part I and has a hole bored for
the keep pin which secures it. It is provided with a flange to fit
over a flat on the guide bolt bush to prevent it turning and also
an eye for use in withdrawing the bolt when dismantling the lock.
The obturator (Fig. 28) is of the steep coned type and consists of a
pad with front and rear protecting discs.
It is supported on the vent and is held firmly between the
inner face of the mushroom head and the front face of the breech
screw by means of the axial vent nut.
There are three Marks of obturator used with the Mark X, X v
and X * guns.
The Mark 111 obturator consists of a wire woven pad furnished
with front and rear protecting discs and a steel front ring. The pad
is made of asbestos worked up with rape oil to a proper consistency.
It is enclosed in an asbestos cloth cover over which is placed a brass


wire mesh and the whole is pressed into shape with the addition of
graphite to form a smooth exterior. The front protecting disc
is made of sheet copper pressed into shape, and the front ring is
made of steel which is split so as to fit in the coned seating in the gun.
The rear protecting disc is made of tin with a steel outer ring and
bronze inner ring, both of which are incorporated in the disc.
Discs and ring are engraved with nature and mark of gun,
mark of obturator, contractor’s initials and date of manufacture.
The front disc has FRONT engraved on the inside, the rear disc
REAR similarly. The pad has the above information and the words
RAPE OIL stencilled on.
Thin steel adjusting discs are provided for insertion between the
FIG . 28
obturator and the breech screw as may be required to adjust the
obturator to its seating in the chamber.
The Mark II obturator differs from the Mark 111 only in the
pad which is canvas covered and without wire mesh.
The Mark I obturator differs from the Marks II and 111 obturators
in the pad and the front protecting disc. The pad is canvas
covered and is thinner than the pad of the Mark II or 111
obturator. The front protecting disc differs in being made of tin
with a steel outer ring incorporated in the disc.
Action of the obturator
When the breech screw is swung into the breech opening the
obturator enters the chamber with perfect ease; on turning the breech
screw the pad is pressed home into the coned seating by the for-
ward travel of the breech screw. The bore is thus closed by the pad
which is in contact all round its circumference. On firing, the


pressure in the chamber acts on the mushroom head of the axial vent
bolt compressing the pad and causing it to expand. This expansion
is radial to the axis, equal in every direction, and is sufficient to
prevent the escape of gas over the breech screw ; the escape of
gas through the vent channel is prevented by the tube. On the
pressure being removed, elasticity comes into play, and the obturator
can be withdrawn from the coned seating as soon as the breech
screw is unlocked.
Action of the Mechanism
To close the breech
This operation is carried out by a continuous movement of the
breech mechanism lever.
The first motion of closing the breech disengages the carrier
from the retaining catch on the breech ring. Continuing the
movement of the breech mechanism lever the carrier is swung on its
hinge until the breech screw enters the breech opening and the
carrier comes in contact with the face of the breech when the
breech screw retaining catch is forced clear of the recess in the
rear face of the breech screw leaving the screw free to revolve
on the pintle of the carrier.
With the Mark VII mounting the hinge bolt is keyed to the
carrier hinge and revolves with it, thereby causing the cam at the
top to operate.
Further movement causes the breech mechanism lever to revolve
on its axis thereby turning the lever pinion and in turn the link
pinion. The breech screw actuating link, being connected to
the link pinion, is forced upwards and to the left. The upper
end of the link is connected to the stud on the breech screw, there-
fore the breech screw is turned anti-clockwise, the threads of the
screw engaging those in the breech. As the screw is revolved it
travels forward and forces the obturator into its seating in the gun,
this movement being permitted by the pitch of the threads on the
carrier pintle. When the breech screw is locked the breech
mechanism lever retaining catch plunger engages the spherical
recess in the lever and retains it in the closed position.
During the foregoing movement the cam of the link pinion
engaging the guide bolt of the lock actuating link moves the latter
to the left, carrying with it the lock to the closed position.
To close the lock
On placing a tube in the vent the tube retainer is temporarily
forced outwards, returning under the action of its spring immediately
the tube has passed. The extractor lever is forced forward and
bears against the rear end of the axial vent, the tappet on the lever
bearing against the tappet on the actuating collar revolves the collar,
disengaging the stop pin, and causing the toe to enter the groove
to the left of the toe piece of the lock frame. The unseating toe of


the extractor lever is now in the recess with an inclined plane on the
front face of the lock frame.
As the lock is moved to the left, the unseating toe of the extractor
lever rides up the incline which causes the extractor jaws to come
slightly to the rear, thereby unseating the tube and slightly
separating the tappets. The toe piece on the frame engages the toe
on the actuating collar, thereby revolving it clear of the groove
and separating the tappets. The stop pin now enters a recess in
the collar and retains it.
Further movement of the lock causes the bevelled end of the
frame to force home the tube and extractor jaws, the tube retainer
being pressed outwards, and the unseating toe to enter the groove
of the lock frame where the actuating plate is secured. At the same
time, the tripping piece on the lock frame, engaging the lug on
the actuating collar, revolves the latter, disengaging the stop
pin, and revolves the toe into its groove ready to be engaged by
the toe piece on opening the lock, the tappets now being together.
During this movement, the projection on the sheath riding down
the incline plane on the safety slide of the slide box allows the
firing pin to be pressed forward on to the tube at electric firing.
When firing by percussion the lock is cocked before the breech is
closed by pulling the cocking handle to the rear which results
in the main spring being further compressed and the bevel on the
projection of the sheath to engage a corresponding bevel on the
front of the trigger thereby forcing the trigger outwards and
compressing its spring. As soon as the projection has passed the
trigger, the latter is forced inwards by the action of its spring
and the flat on the rear of the trigger engaging the flat on the
front of the projection retains the sheath, and with it the needle
and firing pin, in the cocked position. In this case the safety
slide on the slide box does not function when closing the breech.
To fire
(1) Electric firing. —The tube is fired by an electric current
obtained from a battery or dynamo. When a battery is used the
circuit is completed through the medium of a pistol grip. In the
case of a dynamo the current is obtained by revolving the armature.
(2) Percussion firing. —The No. 7 firing lanyard is hooked in the
eye of the firing arc and pulled to a flank. The arc revolves on
the outer face of the cap and withdraws the trigger from in front
of the projection on the sheath. The main spring now forces the
sheath forward, thereby causing the firing pin to strike the cap
of the percussion tube a violent blow which fires it.
To open the lock
This operation is normally carried out by opening the breech.
The first movement of the breech mechanism lever, by means


of the lever pinion and link pinion, causes the lock actuating link
and lock to move to the right, the projection on the sheath riding
up the incline on the safety slide of the slide box draws the firing
pin from the head of the tube.
Further movement causes the actuating plate on the front face
of the lock to bear against the unseating toe of the extractor lever,
revolving it, and unseating the tube.
The lock continues its movement to the right and the toe on
the actuating collar is engaged by the toe piece on the front face
of the lock, thereby causing the collar to revolve and with it the
extractor until stopped by a lug on the latter engaging the cylindrical
portion of the slide box, the tappets being together. Ihis action
ejects the tube from the vent, the tube retainer being forced out-
wards by the head of the tube returns to its seating immediately
after. The stop pin engages a recess in the actuating collar and
retains it.
The lock may be opened with the breech in the closed position
by withdrawing the guide bolt of the lock actuating link from its
groove in the cam of the link pinion and slightly withdrawing the
cocking handle to the rear when the link actuating lock and lock
can be moved to the right.
To open the hreech
This operation is carried out by a continuous movement of the
breech mechanism lever.
The first movement of the breech mechanism lever disengages
the retaining catch plunger from the spherical recess in the lever.
Continuing the movement, the breech mechanism lever revolves
on its axis, thereby turning the lever pinion, which revolves the
link pinion downwards pulling with it the screw actuating link,
thus causing the breech screw to turn and become disengaged
from the threads of the gun. Whilst the screw is turning it travels
to the rear, due to the pitch of the threads, and bearing against
the sleeve forces it back in the pintle of the carrier ; the sleeve
compresses the vent spring between its rear end and the vent
collar, and the spring in seeking to reassert itself carries back the
axial vent, thereby unseating the obturator.
During the foregoing movement the groove in the cam of the
link pinion, engaging the guide bolt of the lock actuating link,
causes the link and lock to be moved to the right.
As the threads of the breech screw become disengaged from
those in the breech, the upper end of the breech screw actuating link
bears against the upper surface of the carrier and prevents further
turning movement and, at the same time, the breech screw retaining
catch comes opposite its recess in the rear face of the breech screw
being forced into it by the spring as soon as the carrier leaves
the rear face of the breech, thereby locking the screw to the carrier.
The mechanism is now swung on the carrier hinge into the


open position where it is brought to a stop by a projection on the
carrier hinge engaging the side of the gun, and is retained by
the plunger of the carrier retaining catch entering the recess in
the underside of the projection.
With the Mark VII mounting the hinge bolt is keyed to the
carrier hinge and revolves with it, thereby causing the cam at the
top to operate the air blast.
Safety Arrangements
Electric firing
The safety lug on the sheath of the lock is held back by the safety
slide on the slide box, thereby preventing the firing pin from making
contact with the tube until the breech mechanism lever is properly
closed.
Similarly, the first movement of the breech mechanism lever when
opening the breech causes the safety lug to ride up the inclined plane
on the safety slide, which withdraws the firing pin from the tube.
Percussion firing
The firing pin is not opposite the cap of the tube until the breech
mechanism lever is properly closed.
The first movement of the breech mechanism lever when opening
the breech causes the firing pin to be withdrawn from the head of
the tube as in para. 2 for electric firing above.
To Assemble the Lock and Slide Box
1. Lock, E and P, “ E.”
(a) Place the toe piece and retaining plate in the lock frame and
secure by set screw.
(b) Screw the firing hole bush in from the front.
(c) Screw the guide bolt bush into the frame, insert Part I guide
bolt with spring from the front, force in the bolt, screw on Part II
and secure the latter by its keep pin.
{d) Place the front insulating washer and insulating bush on
the needle and insert into the sheath. Place the sheath in the lock
frame, screw on the case and secure it by its fixing screw. Assemble
the cocking handle on the case and secure it by the sheath nut.
Place the rear insulating washer on the needle. Assemble the
needle nut, locking nut, and spring, sleeve and nut of the cable
connection.
(e) Place the spring on Part I of the trigger, assemble the cap
and screw on Part 11, securing the latter by its keep pin. Assemble
the firing arc and axis pin on Part 11, securing them by the washer
and split pin. Insert the trigger into the lock frame and secure by
the cap.


2. Slide box “ A.” __
{a) Place the spring on the tube retainer, insert in the slide
box, screw on the head and secure by its keep pin.
(b) Assemble the stop pin with spring in its recess in the slide
box.
(c) Assemble the actuating collar and extractor together in
the slide box, insert the axis pin and secure by the collar and keep
pin.
To Assemble the Breech Mechanism
Note. —The derrick, or run-way tackle with the Mark VII
mounting, may be used when lifting heavy parts of the breech
mechanism.
{a) Place the breech mechanism frame on the breech end of the
gun and secure it by its fixing screws.
{b) Assemble the spring, plunger and retaining bush in the
carrier retaining catch bracket. Secure the latter to the gun by
fixing screws.
(c) To assemble the carrier and ball bearings—place the clamping
nuts in their recesses in the hinge lugs, then partially screw up
the bottom bush and place its set of balls round the ball race. Put
the cups in the carrier, securing the bottom one, whilst slinging the
carrier, by a coating of thick oil.
Sling and hoist the carrier into its position between the lugs
and drop in the top set of balls, and screw both bushes hard home.
Remove the sling.
(d) Assemble the link pinion on its stud with its washer, nut and
keep pin.
(, e ) Place the breech mechanism lever pinion in its recess, assemble
the breech mechanism lever and secure it with its nut and keep
pin.
(f) Assemble Parts I and II of the guide bolt with spring and
split pin in the adjustable bush. Slide the lock actuating link in
the carrier from the left, place the adjustable bush, with arrow
marked “ ENTER ” opposite the arrow in the locking plate recess
in the link and turn to secure. Fix the locking plate and screw in
position.
(g) Place the axial vent sleeve in the recess in the pintle of the
carrier.
(, h ) Assemble the breech screw open retaining catch with
spring in its recess in the carrier.
(i) Sling the breech screw and hoist on to the pintle of the
carrier, place the breech screw actuating link on the stud on the
breech screw, revolve the screw until engaged by its retaining
catch, connect the link to the link pinion by its axis screw and
secure by the check screw.
(j) Carefully swing the mechanism to the closed position and


adjust the carrier by means of the ball bearing bushes until the
breech screw is truly central with the breech opening, screw home
the set screws of the clamping nuts and tighten the lock nuts.
{k) Remove the preserving screw from the top of the hinge
bolt, sling the bolt and lower it in position. Remove eyebolt
and replace the preserving screw. Secure the hinge bolt by its nut
and keep pin. With Mark VII mounting insert removable key.
(/) Place the obturator on the axial vent bolt and assemble the
axial vent by inserting the bolt from the front, place the spring
and collar in position and secure them with the nut.
(m) Place the anti-friction washer on the axial vent bolt,
assemble the slide box, with lock, vertically on the bolt, withdraw
lock guide bolt and turn through a quarter of a circle to the right,
and release the guide bolt to engage the lock actuating link.
To Dismantle the Breech Mechanism
Remove the expendable electric cable from the lock and swing
the breech mechanism into the open position.
(a) Draw back the guide bolt of the lock, turn the lock and slide
box through a quarter circle in an upward direction and remove
separately or together.
(, b ) Remove anti-friction washer, unscrew axial vent nut and take
off the axial vent bolt, obturator, collar and spring.
(c) Disconnect the breech screw actuating link from the link
pinion by removing check screw and axis screw; press in the
breech screw retaining catch and turn the breech screw until the
link is clear of the slot in the carrier, remove link ; disengage the
threads on the pintle of the carrier from those in the interior of the
breech screw, sling the latter and remove it when the retaining catch
will be forced out of its recess by the spring.
(d) Remove the sleeve from the recess in the pintle of the carrier.
(e) Remove the fixing screw and locking plate of the adjustable
bush in the lock actuating link and turn the bush until the arrow
marked “ ENTER ” coincides with the arrow in the locking plate
recess, remove bush and guide bolt, slide actuating link to the left
and take off. Remove split pin, unscrew Part II of the guide
bolt and withdraw Part I with spring.
(/) Remove the keep pin and nut from the top of the axis of the
breech mechanism lever and take off the lever. Remove the
pinion from its bearing in front of the carrier.
(g) Remove keep pin, nut, and washer from the link pinion
stud and slide the pinion from its pivot.
(h) Remove securing screw, cable supporting hook and spring
washer. Dismantle removable key from hinge bolt, if fitted.
(i) Sling the carrier, remove keep pin, nut and washer from
the lower end of the hinge bolt, remove the preserving screw from
the upper end, screw in eyebolt and remove the hinge bolt. Release


lock nuts and set screws of clamping nuts, remove bushes and
lift out the top set of balls. Remove the carrier being careful
to receive the bottom cup, take out top cup, and lift the clamping
nuts out of their recesses in the hinge lugs.
(j) Unscrew the fixing screws and remove the carrier retaining
catch bracket from the gun. Unscrew the retaining bush and
remove the plunger and spring.
(k) Remove the fixing screws and the breech mechanism frame
from the breech end of the gun.
To Dismantle the Lock and Slide Box
Remove the lock from the gun.
{a) Unscrew cap and remove the trigger ; take out split pin,
remove washer, axis pin and firing arc ; remove split pin and unscrew
Part II of the trigger when the cap and spring may be removed
from Part I.
(b) Remove nut, spring and sleeve of cable connection, unscrew
locking nut, needle nut and remove rear insulation washer ; remove
sheath nut and cocking handle ; remove set screw and unscrew
the case from the frame. Take out the sheath and remove the
needle, insulating bush and front insulating washer. The coned
head of the needle must be heated in order to remove the firing pin.
(c) Remove keep pin, withdraw the looped head of the guide
bolt clear and unscrew it, take out bolt with spring.
( d) Unscrew firing hole bush to the front.
\e) Remove set screw, retaining plate and toe piece.
Remove the slide box from the gun.
(/) Withdraw split pin, take off collar and remove the axis pin,
extractor and actuating collar.
(g) Lift out stop pin and spring.
[h) Remove split pin, unscrew head and pull out the tube retainer
bolt and spring.
To Gauge the Protrusion of the Striker
[a) Remove the lock from the slide box.
( h ) See that the lock is correctly assembled.
(c) Place the lock in the fired position, forcing the firing pin
through the firing hole bush as far as it will go.
(d) Apply the No. 3 striker protrusion gauge to the point of the
firing pin and ascertain whether the protrusion is within the limits
of the gauge measured from the face of the lock, i.e. between
•07-inch and -09-inch ; the minimum should foul the firing pin, the
maximum should clear.
{e) If the protrusion is not correct, renew the insulation washer
behind the head of the needle ; should this be insufficient, the firing
pin or needle should be replaced.


CHAPTER II
MOUNTING, B.L. 9-2-INCH, MARK VII
(Plates 4-23)
The Mark VII mounting is of the fixed type and is erected
in an emplacement approximately 8-feet deep. It is capable of all
round traverse and admits of the gun being fired between the angles
of 5-degrees depression and 35-degrees elevation. The loading
angle is 5-degrees elevation and the maximum recoil (metal to metal)
42-inches. Normal recoil is 40-inches.
The elevating and traversing gears are normally operated
by hydraulic power, but can be worked by hand if necessary.
The cartridges and projectile are hoisted in an ammunition
cage by power from the emplacement floor to gun level, where they
are transferred to the ram tube and loading tray respectively, and
then loaded into the gun by a hydraulic ram. Should the hoist
fail, the projectile may be raised by a hand operated windlass
and shell grab to the gun level, the loading operation being as
before. Should the hydraulic rammer also fail, the loading tray can
be disconnected from the rammer and used independently, hand
ramming being resorted to.
Fittings are provided on the mounting to give an air blast
to the gun chamber after firing in order to minimise the possibility
of back flash. A wash-out gear, consisting of three squirts, is also
fitted to throw jets of water on the mushroom head, obturator and
into the chamber when the breech is opened after firing.
The sighting gear consists of an automatic sight on the left
side and a direction sight on the right side of the cradle which provide
for direct laying. Indirect laying is provided for by means of a
range receiver gear and a bearing receiver gear which are fitted
to the left and right sides of the mounting respectively, the receivers
being placed adjacent the sights.
Overhead and shell pit shields are provided to protect the gun
numbers and vulnerable parts of the mounting.
No. 4A Pedestal Holdfast
The holdfast is of steel and consists of 13 anchoring plates
and 52 holding down bolts, each bolt being 9-feet 11-inches long
and having a bulbous end formed with a feather. The bolts are
provided with tapered cotters which are inserted in slots above the
plates to retain them in position.


The plates are segmental in shape and, when assembled, form a
complete ring. Each plate is formed with four bolt holes which
are slotted to receive the feather on the bolt ends and prevent
rotation.
Six bolts, evenly distributed around the anchoring ring, are
furnished with an additional nut to facilitate levelling the pedestal.
The holdfast is embedded in a concrete foundation with the
upper ends of the bolts protruding a few inches above the concrete.
The upper ends are screw-threaded to receive the nuts which
hold down the pedestal. A conduit is formed in the foundation
for the fluid and electric mains leading to the centre pivot.
No. 15 Pedestal
The pedestal is made up of two semicircular hollow iron castings
having rectangular holes in the sides and internal ribs at each end
by which the halves are bolted together.
The pedestal is formed with top and bottom flanges, the latter,
which is strengthened by joint plates bolted on the underside,
being nutted up to the holding down bolts of the holdfast, whilst the
former is prepared to receive the pivot plate and also supports on
its periphery the drain trough of the wash-out.
Pivot Plate
The pivot plate is a circular steel casting, commensurate with
the top of the pedestal which supports it, and formed with a flange
on the underside to bear against the inner face of the top flange of
the pedestal to which it is secured by bolts disposed inside and
outside a roller racer.
The upper side is formed with radial strengthening ribs, a central
hollow boss suitably prepared with shoulder and feather way for the
pivot plug, also with an annular seating to which the lower roller
racer is secured by screws. A flange formed on the periphery
provides a bearing for the clip plates on the body. A small toothed
rack is secured to packing blocks below the flange and a large
toothed rack above it for the spur pinion on the vertical shaft
of the bearing receiver gear and the rack pinion of the traversing
gear, respectively.
The pivot plate is provided with a number of drain holes, also
man-holes which give access to the interior of the pedestal.
Nos. 19 and 22 Pivot Plugs
The No. 19 pivot plug is of steel, cylindrical in shape to suit the
centre pivot bearing in the body of the mounting and the bore of
the boss of the pivot plate.
It is supported in the pivot plate by a flange formed about its
centre which bears on the shoulder in the boss and is prevented from
turning by a feather fitted below the flange, the feather engaging a
corresponding featherwajL


A circular steel plate, with centre opening to pass over the
centre pivot, is secured by screws to the base of the plug. The plate
bears against the underside of the pivot plate and retains the plug in
position.
The plug is bored vertically to receive the centre pivot which
permits all round traverse to be given to the mounting.
The No. 22 plug is similar but has no feather.
•
Centre Pivot and Casings
(Plate 5)
The centre pivot and casings constitute a rotating joint between
the mounting and the fluid supply mains.
The pivot is a steel cylindrical body formed with a circular
flange below an irregular-shaped head. The pivot is secured through
its flange to a packing plate superimposed on the pivot plug bearing.
The packing plate is raised centrally to clear the pivot plug and is
secured to the body, thus ensuring the plate and centre pivot revolve
with the mounting. The pivot is thickened up slightly in two
places below the flange to form bearings within the upper and
lower orifices of the pivot plug bore. A small internal channel and
a lubricator in the pivot head provide for lubrication between the
upper bearing surface and the pivot plug.
A small bore air pipe is fitted to the upper end of a pressure
conduit in the pivot head. It leads to an air valve on the left side
front cantilever of the shell pit shield.
Internally the pivot has four longitudinal and parallel borings
which form conduits for pressure and exhaust fluid, electric mains
and wash-out water supply. The lower ends of the pressure
and exhaust fluid conduits open into “ D ” ports in the sides of the
pivot which communicate with their respective casings and the
upper ends into orifices on opposite sides of the pivot head from
which pipes are led to the pressure and exhaust standards. The
electric main conduit is a plain boring, but that for wash-out water
supply is prepared top and bottom for the attachment of the pipe
flange.
Upper and lower casings surround the lower part of the pivot,
the former being the outlet or exhaust casing and the latter the
inlet or pressure casing. The casings are held rigidly by a steel
supporting frame secured to the underside of the pivot plate.
The casings are made of manganese bronze, flanged top and bottom
to receive a gland cover and formed with a slight centre bulge with
flanged orifice for the main pipe. A circular internal chamber
ensures communication between the main pipe and “ D ” port
during all round traverse. Each casing is fitted with similar packing
glands top and bottom, the inlet casing glands have, in addition,
U-section packing rings. The glands are closed by gunmetal covers
secured to the flange by studs and nuts.


Roller Ring
The roller ring is of steel and consists of an inner and outer
concentric hoop riveted together, the rivets being passed through
distance tubes, and 26 steel rollers which are mounted on steel axles
between the hoops.
The rollers are flanged at each end and coned to run between
upper and lower racers on the underside of the bolsters of the
body and the top of the pivot plate, respectively. They are bored
axially, the bore being fitted at each end with gunmetal bushes
to form bearings for the axle.
The axles are formed at one end with a cheese head and prepared
at the other end with nut and keep pin. The head is fitted with a
lubricator and formed with a feather to engage a corresponding
featherway in the axle holes in the hoop to prevent the axles turning.
The roller ring being interposed between the pivot plate and body,
the rollers carry the entire weight of the body and all that it supports.
Roller Ring Protecting Covers
The roller ring protecting covers are of wood. One is inserted
between the bolsters from each side of the body to prevent the
ingress of dirt, grit or moisture to the roller ring. The covers
are supported on, and secured to, the inner flanges of the bolsters.
Each cover, which consists of four boards strengthened by three
battens on the underside, has the inner edge shaped to the contour
of the pivot plug bearing and the outer edge, which extends slightly
beyond the pivot plate, curved and fitted with a steel plate guard.
Four hand holes, closed by plugs with lifting handle, are provided
in each cover to give access to the roller axles for lubricating
purposes.
Body
The body is built up of steel plates and angles. It consists prin-
cipally of left and right sides connected by front, centre and rear
transoms and strengthened by two transverse bolsters fitted below
the front and rear transoms. A segment of the upper roller path
is secured to the underside of each bolster.
A steel pivot plug bearing, with manganese bronze bush, is
laid longitudinally between the bolsters and is supported on, and
secured to, the bolster inner flanges, also a steel strengthening
plate for the bearing is fitted transversely below the centre transom.
The bearing and plate, together with a steel centre pivot packing
plate mounted thereon, are secured together and serve for the
attachment and support of the centre pivot. The pivot plug bearing
fits over the upper end of the pivot plug, the latter forming the fixed
point about which the superstructure revolves.
Manganese bronze brackets, fitted with steel capsquares, are
secured to the top of each side of the body to support and secure


the cradle trunnions. A projection on each bracket is screw-
threaded and fitted with an adjusting screw for the trunnion ball
bearings.
Front and rear clip plates are secured to the body and engage
under the outer flange on the pivot plate in order to prevent the
body rising on the gun being fired. The front clip plate is furnished
with a tapped hole for a lifting eye, and the rear clip plate with a
plain hole in the centre vertical stiffening angle for the purpose of
slinging.
The body is suitably prepared for the attachment of the shell
pit shield, gears, etc., particulars of which will be found in their
appropriate section. Apertures are formed in the plates where
necessary to clear various shafts, rods, pipes, etc.
Shell Pit Shield
The shell pit shield is of steel and is circular in shape with a
central longitudinal opening. It covers the emplacement between
the body of the mounting and the wall.
It is supported horizontally by front, rear and side cantilevers,
which are attached to the body.
The shield supports wholly, or in part, a number of fittings,
including the main shield, platform, hydraulic press of loading gear,
drain tank of gun wash-out, pressure and exhaust standards of the
hydraulic system, etc. ; it also serves as a platform external to the
main shield.
The top plate work consists of two side plates, a number of
smaller plates which are laid between them at the front and along
their inner edges, also a narrow plate which bridges the extreme
rear end of the longitudinal opening. Certain plates adjacent the
opening are cut away along their inner edges, or are provided with
holes, to clear various fittings. On each side, towards the front, is a
rectangular aperture fitted with transverse bars to form gratings.
Another rectangular aperture towards the left rear provides clearance
for the ammunition lift. Facing plates are provided, one for the
ram cylinder of the hoist which is secured to the underside of the
shield towards the left rear, one for the elevating engine bracket on
the left top of the front cantilever, and several on top of the top
plates for the bottom edge of the main shield to rest on.
A circumferential valance, built up of plates and angles, is fitted
to the periphery of the shield.
A short steel ladder, secured to the shield in front of the body,
facilitates access to various fittings from the shell pit.
Tapped holes, fitted with preserving screws, are provided to
take lifting eyes for slinging purposes.
Fixed Platform
The fixed platform is supported jointly on the body and shell
pit shield. It is of steel and consists of a frame built up principally


of two sides with front and rear transoms on which are laid top
plates ; the latter are chequered to prevent slipping and are fitted
with stiffening angles on their outer edges.
The rear end of the platform is shaped to provide clearance for
the gun on recoil, and it is closed or opened by the sliding platform.
The platform extends along the sides of the body and across at
the rear of the clearance. It is stepped (two risers) midway along
each side, thus forming two portions, the front and higher portion
being for the laying numbers, the rear and lower portion for the
loading numbers. Three-quarters of its length is within the main
shield, but the rear extends beyond the shell pit shield.
A rectangular manhole and cover plate is provided on each side
about midway ; also two inspection plates, one to give access to
the elevating wormwheel friction rings is situated on the left in
rear of the cradle lock control standard, the other, which is situated
in front of the control lever bracket on the right of the platform,
to give access to the control valves for the rammer, rammer rocker
and wash-out pump.
Two steel angle rails with stops, front and rear, are secured
to the inside of the frame sides for the rollers of the sliding platform.
A short ladder is provided on each side near the rear end to
give access to and from the shell pit shield ; also stanchions and
hand-rails are fitted around the rear end, a hinge bar joining the rail
opposite each ladder.
The platform is cut away, where necessary, to clear various
pipes, rods, etc., and suitably prepared with openings and tapped
holes, etc., to mount various fittings, such as the cradle lock control
standard, rammer and rammer rocker on the left side, pump of
the wash-out and the semi-automatic valve at the rear, and on
the right the valves for the rammer, wash-out pump and cradle
lock interlock underneath the platform, and the control levers
above the platform. Full particulars for these and other fittings
are given in appropriate sections.
Sliding Platform
A sliding platform is provided to enable personnel to work at the
breech. It is situated in rear of the breech and operated by the
elevating gear, being designed to slide under the fixed platform to
the rear as the cradle is elevated in order to provide clearance
for the gun on recoil and to the front when bringing the gun to
the loading angle.
The sliding platform is built up of steel angles and plates. It is
rectangular in shape and is provided on each side with brackets for
large and small rollers and, at the front end, with brackets for the
connecting rods.
A pathway, with stops for the large rollers, is provided by the
angle rails secured to the platform frame, the small rollers, bearing
against the sides, act as guides.


The movement of the sliding platform is controlled by gearing
from both sides of the cradle. Both sets of gearing are similar and
consist of the under-mentioned principal parts :
Actuating bracket with roller ; bracket supporting actuating
lever, actuating lever, catch stop, catch lever, axis pin, block,
plunger and spring, retaining plate ; actuating lever guide, con-
necting rod with front and rear connectors ; sliding platform with
brackets, rollers and axis pins ; front and rear stops.
The roller actuating bracket is of bronze and is secured to the
rear end of the cradle by four bolts. The rear end of the bracket is
curved upward and is fitted with an axis pin for a steel roller to
revolve on. The axis pin has an oil groove to ensure free move-
ment of the roller and the outer face of the head is bevelled to bear
against and release a catch lever from a catch stop.
The actuating lever supporting bracket is of bronze and is secured
to the rear slope of the side brackets of the body by four bolts.
The upper end is prepared for an axis on which pivots the actuating
lever. A quadrant formed on the bracket has a catch stop secured
to it by two screws. The stop corresponds in shape to the quadrant,
the ends being stepped down to form a catch for the catch lever
when the roller disengages from the fork of the actuating lever
during elevation or depression.
The actuating lever is of steel, rectangular in shape, having long
and short arms prepared to pivot at the vertex on the axis of the
bracket supporting. The upper end of the short arm is forked to
engage with the roller on the roller bracket.
The catch lever is a steel bar prepared to pivot near its upper
end on an axis pin supported in lugs at the base of the fork. The
upper end is formed with a round projection on the inside to engage
with the bevel on the roller axis pin of the roller actuating bracket.
Below the axis pin a steel block is riveted. The block is bored
centrally to hold a steel plunger formed with a flange and a spiral
spring which are kept in position by a steel retaining plate secured
by two screws. The function of the plunger is to keep the lower end
of the catch lever engaging with the catch stop. The lower end of
the long arm is attached to an angle steel connecting rod by means
of a front connector. A steel bar guide is secured to the body
and platform frame for the actuating lever to operate along. The
rear end of the connecting rod is attached to the front end of the
sliding platform by means of a rear connector.
Action
(1) Gun horizontal.
As the gun and cradle are elevated the roller of the actuating
bracket enters the forked end of the actuating lever. The bevelled
head of the roller axis pin bearing against the round projection on
the catch lever causes the latter to move outward on its axis pin,
6 2)


thereby disengaging its lower end from the catch stop and at the
same time forcing the plunger into the block and compressing the
spring.
Further movement of the cradle rotates the actuating lever
about its axis pin, thereby moving the lower end of the long arm
towards the rear. This movement, being transmitted through
the connecting rod to the sliding platform, causes the sliding platform
to move to the rear under the fixed platform.
As the cradle is further elevated the roller disengages from the
forked end of the actuating lever. At this point the catch spring
in the block reasserting itself causes the plunger to force the lower
end of the catch lever into engagement with the lower end of the
catch stop. The actuating lever being thus held, the sliding platform
remains in the rearward position.
(2) Gun elevated.
As the gun and cradle are depressed, the roller re-enters the
forked end of the actuating lever, the action of the catch lever, etc.,
as in (1) being repeated. The sliding platform is drawn towards
the forward position where, upon the rollers disengaging from
the forked end of the actuating levers, it is retained by the catch
lever re-engaging the upper end of the catch stop.
In both cases the catch stop ensures the forked end of the
actuating lever being in correct position to engage with the roller
of the actuating bracket, the stops on the rails preventing any
tendency of the sliding platform to over-run its limits.
Cradle
(Plate 6)
The cradle is of steel and comprises two guides (with guide
clips), which form the left and right sides, connected, front and rear,
by transoms.
Both guides are fitted on the inside with a steel full length
L-section guide clip which forms the upper side of a guideway (in
which the sliding bars connecting the front and rear gun bands
travel during recoil and run-out) and prevent the gun from rising
on firing. The clips are provided with lubricators for the sliding
bars. The lower side of each guideway has latticed oil grooves.
On the outside the guides are fitted with stop brackets to engage
with the pawls of the cradle lock at the loading angle, and are formed
with flanged trunnions to pivot the cradle in the trunnion bearing
brackets on the body. The outer ends of the trunnions are screw-
threaded to receive the ball bearing retaining nuts.
On the underside the guides are prepared for the attachment of
the elevating arcs.


At the rear end the guides are prepared for the attachment of the
roller brackets for the sliding platform.
The right guide and clip are prepared for the attachment of
the air blast fittings, also with a clinometer plane in rear of the
trunnion. An air passage is bored from the top edge of the right
guide to the trunnion through which it passes centrally to the outer
face where it is enlarged and threaded for the spindle of the swivel
joint of the air blast. The orifice of the passage on top of the
guide is prepared for the attachment of the air pipe.
The left guide is prepared on top for the attachment of the
bracket carrying the rod which actuates the pointer of the elevation
degree scale, and the trunnion is recessed and screw-threaded to
receive the automatic sight pivot.
The front transom is shaped to suit the gun, and has a circular
opening for the piston rod. It is fitted with a running out stop
to engage with the front gun band and is prepared for the attachment
of the mantlet.
The rear transom is curved on the upper part to suit the contour
of the gun, the bearing surface being fitted with six metal transverse
liners or rubbing strips. It is formed with a circular opening on
the underside for the air cylinder, and is fitted with a striking plate
for the elevation stop.
Trunnion Ball Bearings
The trunnion hall hearings are fitted on a shoulder formed
outside the flange on the cradle trunnions in order to reduce the
friction between the trunnions and main trunnion bearings.
Each bearing (see Fig. 52) consists of 24 steel anti-friction balls
which revolve between bevelled faces on a pair of inner bearing
rings (forming the inner ball race) and the inside face of a large
diameter outer bearing ring, of plain section, which surrounds the
balls and forms the outer ball race.
The outside bevelled ring is mounted on a flanged metal retaining
nut which is screwed on the trunnion ; the outer bearing ring is
held in place in an L-section steel band by a retaining ring secured
by screws.
The band surrounds the live bearing and is formed on the under-
side with a short projecting socket which fits over a pintle on an
adjusting screw and rests on a pair of disc springs supported on
the screw head. The screw works in a gunmetal nut in a lug on
the main trunnion bearings and is fixed, after adjustment, by a set
screw.
Inner and outer dust excluders are fitted to the band, the inner
one comprising a leather washer and steel stiffening ring and the
outer one a spring steel plate which is in halves to facilitate assembly
or removal.
On firing, the shock of discharge compresses the disc springs
slightly, allowing the main thrust to be transferred to, and taken


on, the main trunnion bearings, thus obviating damage to the anti-
friction balls.
When mounting or dismounting the cradle the trunnion ball
bearings are removed and the trunnions protected by screwed caps.
For instructions for assembling and adjusting the ball bearings,
see page 292.
Mantlet
The mantlet is of cast steel in two curved portions (top and
bottom) which are bolted together and to the guides and front
transom of the cradle.
It is formed with large and small circular openings to pass
over the gun and to clear the buffer piston rod nut, respectively,
and is fitted on the underside with a striking plate for the depression
stop.
It is designed to mask the gun port at all angles of elevation
and depression. It moves in the vertical plane between the right
and left side plates, passing inside a top plate and blast excluding
plate which are fitted above and below the gun port of the shield,
respectively.
Gun Bands and Sliding Bars
(Plate 6)
Two steel bands surround the gun, front and rear, and are
connected on each side by a longitudinal sliding bar, the whole
serving to support the gun in the cradle.
The hand connecting gun and buffer (front band) is in two parts,
with splined joints, and encircles the gun about its centre of gravity.
The upper (Part I) has a central tapped hole for a lifting eye, fitted
with a preserving screw. The lower (Part II) has a lug on the
underside, with cap, which receives the front end of the buffer
cylinder and its large gland. The cap is formed with a keyway for
a key on the buffer cylinder.
The rear gun hand is in two parts, with splined joints, and
encircles the gun between two circumferential projections on the
gun jacket near the breech. The upper (Part I) is prepared on
the right side with facings for air blast fittings and has a central
tapped hole for a lifting eye, fitted with a preserving screw. The
lower (Part II) has a keyway formed for a key on the gun to prevent
the latter turning.
The sliding bars are of channel section steel, about 12 feet long,
and are secured to side projections on the bands. They travel in
the guideways in the cradle during recoil and run-out and are
fitted at the front end with top and bottom anti-friction plates.
The top plates are provided with latticed oil grooves, also several
oil holes which lead to the bottom plates. Two holes for lifting
eyes are provided in each bar.


Elevation and Depression Stops
The elevation and depression stops each consist of a buffer and a
supporting bracket which is secured to the centre and front transoms
of the body respectively. The buffer includes an external oil
chamber, or reservoir, which is supported on the end of a short
communicating pipe. In the case of the elevation stop the pipe is
secured to the transom by a bracket and clip.
The buffers are generally similar in construction and comprise
a cylinder in which works a hollow piston head having a pintle
which projects through a packed gland in the cylinder front end.
To keep the piston up to its work, a spiral spring is inserted in the
piston recess and rests against a closing cap. To cushion the
blow, the cylinder is filled with oil which is forced over the piston
to the front and into the oil chamber during operation. When the
pressure on the stop is relieved, the spring reasserts itself and the
piston is returned to the front.
The oil chamber is provided with an internal annular groove to
denote the limit of filling and with a cover, screwed in, which is
engraved with filling instructions and provided with a central relief
hole.
Recoil Indicator
A recoil indicator is provided on the right side of the mounting.
It consists of a steel rectangular plate bent along its longitudinal
axis to form two flanges by one of which it is secured to the right
guide clip of the cradle. The other flange supports a scale strip,
suitably graduated in inches. A sliding reader is fitted to the scale
strip and is operated on recoil by a striking plate secured to the front
gun band. The slider must be returned to zero by hand after each
reading.
Elevation Degree Scale
The elevation degree scale is provided on the left side of the body
and consists of a scale plate, two supporting angles, pointer and
supporting bracket, pointer actuating rod and carrying bracket.
The scale plate is graduated in degrees from 5-degrees depression
to 35-degrees elevation and is supported between front and rear
supporting angles mounted on the rear slope of the body side adjacent
the auxiliary elevating hand wheel. The scale is read by an
index arrow engraved on a reader plate fitted on the upper end
of a pointer. The latter is pivoted to a bracket secured to the
rear supporting angle and is connected by an actuating rod to a
bracket bolted on the cradle side above the trunnion.
As the cradle is moved in the vertical plane, corresponding
motion is transmitted through the rod to the pointer and the
reader indicates on the scale the amount of angular movement with
reference to the horizontal plane.


Recoil System
(Plate 6)
The recoil system comprises an hydraulic buffer to regulate
recoil, with an air recuperator to return the gun to the run-out
position and retain it there ; an intensifier is incorporated in the
air recuperator to intensify pressure in a liquid gland.
The buffer consists principally of a steel cylinder, stuffing box,
large and small glands, piston with rod, valve key, and controlling
plunger.
The buffer cylinder is sheathed with metal, as it forms the ram
of the air cylinder. The front end of the cylinder is threaded in-
ternally to take a large gland screwed against a leather washer, a
stuffing box is screwed into the large gland against an L-section
packing ring, which makes rubbing contact with the piston rod,
and the stuffing box is fitted with a hemp packing ring and small
gland.
The front end of the cylinder is connected to the connecting
band by a securing collar which is screwed against the band and
secured by a set screw. A key on the cylinder engages a keyway
in the band and prevents turning. A filling and emptying valve is
fitted on the underside and an air plug on the top side of the cylinder
at the front.
The piston and rod, of steel, are bored throughout, an air valve
being fitted at the front end to permit the escape of air. The piston
rod is shaped internally to form a control chamber fitted at the rear
orifice with a metal throttling bush. The piston is fitted with metal
rings to prevent scoring, whilst a ball type non-return valve in
front of the piston permits liquid to be drawn into the chamber
during recoil, but closes during run-out, thus forcing the liquid to
pass through the regulated opening between plunger and throttling
bush. A port is cut in the underside of the piston to ride over
a longitudinal valve key. The front end of the piston rod passes
through the front transom of the cradle, where it is secured by a
screwed collar in rear and a nut with keep pin in front
The air valve complete may be removed and replaced by a lifting
eye when necessary to withdraw the piston.
The valve key is of manganese bronze and is dovetailed into the
bottom of the cylinder. The upper surface is tapered suitably to
vary the size of the port in the piston during motion of the buffer
cylinder and thus regulate the liquid flow from one side of the piston
to the other during recoil, in conformity with the speed of recoil.
The controlling plunger, of steel, is screwed to the cylinder from
whence it projects into the control chamber. A groove, of rectangular
section and varying depth, is cut along one side to regulate the flow
of liquid out of the chamber past the throttling bush during run-out.
The front of the plunger is formed hexagonal to facilitate assembly
and removal.


The air cylinder is of manganese bronze and is secured in the
rear transom of the cradle by three screws. The cylinder is divided
by a diaphragm into front and rear chambers, the latter embodying a
small chamber for an intensifier.
The front chamber is enlarged at the front end to form a stuffing
box which is fitted with a perforated “ H ” ring, the latter supports
on its opposite flanges two U-shaped linen fibre packing rings, each
of which is backed by an inner supporting ring, greased hemp
packing, and outer supporting ring, the whole being compressed in
the gland chamber by a metal gland ring. The latter is secured to the
stuffing box by steel studs.
The rear chamber is closed at the rear end by a plug with a
tubular perforated stem. The head of the plug is formed with two
screwed nozzles, provided with protecting caps, from which “ V ”
channels lead to a central channel opening into the stem and fitted
at the outer end with a screw down air valve. The stem of the
plug is fitted at the front end with a spring loaded control valve.
A front plug, fitted in the diaphragm, provides a seating for the
controlling valve and also receives and steadies the end of the
stem.
The intensifier chamber is cylindrical and communicates with the
rear chamber of the air cylinder by means of a small hole in its
front end by which air pressure is admitted to the piston. A copper
pipe connects the rear portion of the intensifier to the front end of
the air cylinder opposite the “ H ” ring of the liquid gland (Fig. 29).
The rear end of the intensifier chamber is fitted with a tubular
stuffing box, with greased hemp packing, and a tubular gland. A
piston head is fitted with front and rear cup-shaped leather rings,
each with a steel supporting washer, and the piston rod projects
rearwards into the well of the gland, according to the quantity
of liquid in the intensifier, connecting pipe and liquid gland.
As the area of the piston head on the air pressure side is greater
than that on the liquid side, the pressure to the square inch on the
liquid gland is greater than that of the air in the air cylinder and
thus seals the air cylinder at the sliding part,
A filling and emptying valve, with adapter, is provided on the
right side of the intensifier chamber for liquid filling, the normal
method of charging being by pump.
(For instructions re charging and replenishing, see page 288.)
Action of the Recoil System
On firing the gun slides through the cradle to the rear, taking
with it the buffer cylinder. The movement of the cylinder over
the piston causes liquid to pass through the port in the piston from
front to rear, setting up a fluid resistance which absorbs and checks
the recoil.
During this movement of the cylinder, the effective flow space
of the piston port is being altered by the tapered valve key, becoming


smaller as the speed of recoil diminishes, thereby equalising the
pressure within the buffer cylinder throughout recoil.
The moving cylinder, acting as a ram for the recuperator, forces
the air into the rear chamber, the control valve being lifted off
its seating to facilitate the passage of air. On recoil ceasing,
the valve closes, and the air moves from rear to front chamber by
means of the small holes in the valve head, acting on the buffer
FIG . 29
cylinder, the gun is carried forward towards the run-out position.
The function of the control valve is to prevent a violent reaction on
recoil ceasing.
During run-out the control plunger enters the control chamber,
which has become charged with liquid during recoil, forcing the
liquid out via the flat or groove in its side, acting as a throttle on
the recuperator and preventing a violent return to the run-out
position.


Shield
(Plate 4)
An overhead shield is supported on the shell pit shield and
encloses the forward portion of the fixed platform for the protection
of the personnel, fittings, etc. It is secured to cantilevers and
transoms projecting from the sides of the frame of the fixed platform.
It is of steel and consists of several plates which are secured
together to form the front, sides and roof. The latter is strengthened
by three hogbacked girders (front, intermediate and rear) supported
on channel section side pillars. The front and rear edges of the
sides are shaped to give a slope to the front and to suit the rear
overhang of the roof. Fittings are provided on the intermediate
and rear girders to support a runway beam for the lifting tackle
runner which is used when assembling the sub-calibre gun in the
parent gun.
The front of the shield is formed with an elongated gun port to
permit movement of the gun in the vertical plane, the gun port
being flanked by side plates which support a blast excluding plate
below the gun and a top plate above. On either side of the gun
port a rectangular sight port, fitted with a hinged cover with handle
and closing catch, is provided. Catches to retain the covers in the
open position are provided on the front.
Note. — The number and the thickness of the plates vary
according to the emplacement for which the shield is intended, in
order to facilitate assembly in position. The size and shape
of shields when assembled, however, are practically the same.
Elevating Gear
(Plates 7, 9 and 10)
The elevating gear may be operated from two positions on the
left of the fixed platform, viz. in front and in rear of the trunnion,
also by two methods, “ Power ” —using a swashplate hydraulic
engine mounted on the front cantilever, and “ Manually " —using
the front or rear (auxiliary) hand wheel which operates mitre and
bevel gears, the motion of the front and rear hand wheels being slow
and fast respectively. The front hand wheel is also used to operate
the engine control valve when using power.
The gear consists of two arcs secured to the underside of the
cradle sides and strengthened by a cross tie bar which is passed
through a distance tube and nutted up at both ends. Two arc
pinions engage with the arcs, each pinion being in two parts,
divided by a bearing collar, the two inner parts fitting on helical
keys on the shaft by which means a slight rotation can be given
to them to facilitate adjustment for backlash, two nuts (with tommy


holes) being used to secure the parts to the shaft after adjustment.
The method of adjustment is by means of four thrust rods which
pass through holes in the inner part (Part II) of the pinion and
rest against the bearing collar. The rods, being longer than their
holes, protrude slightly and the nut takes a bearing on the exposed
ends. Screwing up the nut on the threaded portion of Part II
has, therefore, the effect of drawing the Part II along the arc
pinion shaft in the direction of the nut, i.e. away from Part I.
During this movement the helical key forces the Part II to rotate
slightly thus taking up the backlash. The pinion shaft is supported
in centre, left and right brackets on the body. A worm wheel
is mounted freely on the left end of the shaft, and is hollowed
out to accommodate an adapter, which is keyed to the shaft and
a series of friction rings. The latter are of steel and manganese
bronze, placed and feathered alternately to the adapter and worm
wheel. The compression of the rings is effected and adjusted by
means of a jamming plate, spring disc and two nuts. This arrange-
ment provides for a slight slip between the rings which prevents
damage to the worm gearing when the gun is fired, or should the
gear be suddenly stopped or reversed. The worm wheel is enclosed
by a cover, in two parts, to exclude dust, etc. The left bracket also
accommodates the worm, which is mounted on a shaft supported in
bushed bearings. To minimize friction, a roller thrust bearing
(consisting of inner and outer bearing rings and conical rollers) is
fitted on each side of the worm.
The front end of the worm shaft carries a bevel wheel and a
double-ended lower sliding “ dog ” clutch. This clutch connects
the worm shaft to the front “ Manual ” gear or, alternatively, to the
engine. The bevel wheel is in constant mesh with a bevel pinion
on the lower end of a vertical shaft, but does not rotate until
engaged with the sliding clutch which is keyed to the worm shaft.
The vertical shaft passes up through a front elevating hand wheel
bracket and its supporting bracket and is fitted at the upper end
with a mitre wheel. The latter engages with a second mitre wheel
keyed to a mitre wheel sleeve mounted on a horizontal spindle
which carries the hand wheel. A double-ended upper sliding
“ dog ” clutch is mounted on and keyed to the spindle midway
between the foregoing sleeve and a cam sleeve. The latter is
fitted with a circular elevating cam on its outer end having a
spiral groove cut in its face for the cam roller. The upper and
lower sliding clutches move together, but in opposite directions,
by a series of levers, forks and rods, actuated by a clutch lever
situated below the front elevating hand wheel.
For elevating by hand the upper and lower sliding clutches
are moved into engagement with the mitre wheel sleeve, and bevel
wheel on worm shaft, respectively, by the clutch lever, when the
rotation of the hand wheel imparts corresponding motion through
the spindle, upper clutch and sleeve to the mitre and bevel gearing


thence to the worm shaft, etc. Meanwhile, the cam and cam
sleeve have been locked in the neutral position (indicated by a
clicking device on the top of the elevating bracket) by means of a
spring-loaded cam stop (also on top of the elevating bracket),
which is forced into engagement with a notch in the cam sleeve by a
lever operated by the sliding clutch when moving same along the
spindle into engagement with the mitre wheel sleeve.
When elevating by power, the upper sliding clutch is moved
away from the mitre wheel sleeve into engagement with the cam
sleeve. By this motion the cam stop lever is released, and the stop
is withdrawn from the notch in the cam sleeve under the action
of its own spring, thus releasing the cam. On the hand wheel
being rotated, corresponding motion is imparted through the
spindle, upper clutch and cam sleeve to the cam which, by means
of a cam roller, sliding block and rod, operates the control valve
of the elevating engine (Plate 10). At the same time, the lower
sliding clutch is moved away from the bevel wheel into engagement
with a fixed clutch on the second motion spindle which is driven
by a pair of bevel wheels off the first motion spindle, this being
keyed to the driving shaft of the engine.
The rear end of the worm shaft is fitted with a fixed clutch
to receive a sliding clutch on the front end of a longitudinal bevel
wheel shaft of an auxiliary gear, thus enabling the gun to be elevated
or depressed from the rear of the trunnion when power is not used.
A bevel wheel is fitted on the rear end of the bevel wheel shaft
and engages with a bevel pinion on the lower end of a vertical
shaft. The upper end of the vertical shaft is fitted with a mitre
wheel, gearing with a similar wheel on a hand wheel spindle. The
mitre gearing and spindle are supported in a rear elevating gear
bracket on the body. The sliding clutch is connected by a rod to a
clutch lever which works in a quadrant bracket below the auxiliary
hand wheel.
Action
(1) When elevating by “power.”
The clutch lever situated below the front elevating hand
wheel must be moved over to the position marked “ power.” This
operation puts the upper and lower sliding clutches into clutch
with the cam sleeve and fixed front clutch to engine respectively.
Subsequent rotation of the hand wheel imparts motion, through
the hand wheel spindle and cam sleeve to the cam which, by means
of the cam roller and connecting rod, opens the control valve
(situated below the hand wheel), thus permitting and regulating
the flow of fluid pressure to the engine which, in turn, drives the
worm gear and arc pinions and results in the gun being elevated or
depressed.
Note. —The control valve will be found described on page 104.


(2) When elevating by “ hand.”
(a) Using the front hand wheel. —The front clutch lever must
be moved over to the position marked “ hand ”, thus disconnecting
the gear from the engine and placing the upper and lower sliding
clutches into clutch with the mitre wheel sleeve and bevel wheel on
worm shaft respectively.
Subsequent rotation of the hand wheel imparts motion through
the spindle, mitre wheel sleeve, mitre and bevel gearing to the worm
gear and arc pinions, thereby elevating or depressing the gun.
(b) Using the auxiliary hand wheel. —The front clutch lever is
placed at “ hand.” The auxiliary clutch lever is also moved to the
engaged position, thus bringing the sliding clutch into engagement
with the fixed clutch on the worm shaft.
Subsequent rotation of the auxiliary hand wheel imparts motion
through the mitre and bevel gearings to the worm gear and arc
pinions, thereby elevating or depressing the gun.
It will be seen that the rotation of the auxiliary hand wheel
operates the front “ hand ” gear as well as the auxiliary. This is
done through the medium of the worm shaft, the auxiliary gear being
normally employed to assist the front elevating number when power
is not being used.
Traversing Gear
(Plates 7, 8 and 9)
The traversing gear may be operated from two positions on the
right of the fixed platform, viz. in front and rear of the trunnion,
also by two methods, “ Power ” —using a swashplate hydraulic
engine mounted on a bracket on the bolster, and “ Manually ”
using front or rear (auxiliary) hand wheels which operate spur,
worm, mitre and bevel gears. The front hand wheel is also used to
operate the engine control valve when using power.
The gear consists of a toothed rack which encircles and is fixed
to the pivot plate. Working in the rack is a rack pinion on the
lower end of a short vertical spindle. On the upper end of the
spindle a worm wheel is mounted freely and is hollowed out to
accommodate a series of steel and manganese bronze friction
rings, placed alternately and feathered to the spindle and worm
wheel respectively. The compression of the rings is effected by
means of a jamming plate and spring disc, with sleeve, nut and
lock-screw. This arrangement provides for a slight slip between
the rings should the gear be suddenly stopped or reversed, thereby
preventing damage to the worm gear.
A worm engages the worm wheel, the worm and worm shaft
being supported in the worm gear bracket. To minimize friction,
journal bearings are fitted on each side of the worm with an
additional double thrust bearing on the rear end. The worm shaft
carries a spur wheel which gears with a spur wheel on a lower
clutch shaft which is fitted at the opposite end with a mitre wheel


and mitre wheel sleeve. The latter is mounted freely on the shaft
and does not rotate until engaged with a lower sliding clutch which
is keyed to the shaft. This clutch also forms the connection with
the traversing engine when using “ power.” The mitre wheel is in
constant mesh with a second mitre wheel on the lower end of a
vertical shaft. The latter passes up into a traversing gear bracket
and is fitted at the upper end with a spur wheel which gears with a
spur pinion on the lower end of the hand wheel spindle. The latter
is also fitted, above the spur wheel, with a keyed sliding “ dog ”
clutch, a circular traversing cam and a hand wheel. The spur wheel
and cam are mounted freely on the spindle and do not rotate
unless engaged with the sliding clutch. The upper and lower
sliding clutches are connected by a vertical rod and clutch forks
and move together when the clutch lever, which is situated below
the hand wheel, is operated.
On moving the clutch lever to “ hand,” the upper and lower
sliding clutches engage with the spur pinion and mitre wheel sleeve
respectively, and the engine is disconnected. At the same time a
projection on the upper clutch fork enters a notch in the rim of
the cam and secures the latter in the neutral position which is
indicated by a clicking device carried on the cam. On rotating
the hand wheel, motion is imparted through the upper clutch and
spur gearing to the vertical shaft mitre and spur gearing, and thence
through the worm gear to the rack pinion, thus traversing the
mounting.
Similarly, on moving the clutch lever to “ power,” the upper and
lower sliding clutches disengage from the spur pinion and mitre
wheel sleeve respectively, and engage with the cam and fixed
clutch of the engine. This movement withdraws the projection
on the upper clutch fork from the notch in the cam and releases
the cam. On rotating the hand wheel, motion is imparted through
the spindle and clutch to the cam which, by means of a slide bar
fitted with cam roller and actuating a bent valve lever, operates
the control valve of the traversing engine (Plate 8) which, through
the spur and worm gearing, operates the rack pinion and traverses
the mounting.
Ihe main vertical shaft is connected to the auxiliary gear by a
mitre wheel fitted about its centre which is in constant mesh with a
mitre wheel on an auxiliary cross shaft. Similar gearing connects
the cross shaft to a short vertical shaft. The latter is provided
with a fixed and sliding clutch, and is connected at the top by further
mitre gearing to the spindle of the auxiliary hand wheel.
The sliding clutch is operated by a clutch lever situated below
the auxiliary hand wheel. On moving the latter to “ hand,”
the sliding clutch engages the fixed clutch. Rotating the hand
wheel imparts motion through the spindle and mitre gears to the
main vertical shaft, thence through mitre, spur and worm gears to
the rack pinion, thereby traversing the mounting.


A ction
(1) When traversing by “ power.”
The clutch lever situated below the front traversing hand
wheel must be moved to a position marked “ power.” This
operation forces the upper and lower sliding clutches into clutch
with the cam and fixed clutch of the engine respectively.
Rotation of the hand wheel imparts motion through the hand
wheel spindle to the cam which, by means of the slide bar and valve
lever, opens the control valve (situated below the hand wheel)
thus permitting and regulating the flow of fluid pressure to the
engine which in turn drives the spur and worm gears, rack pinion,
and traverses the mounting.
Note. —The control valve will be found described on page 104,
(2) When traversing by “ hand.”
[a] Using the front hand wheel. —The front clutch lever must be
moved over to the position marked “ hand,” thereby disconnecting
the engine, and placing the upper and lower sliding clutches into
clutch with the spur pinion and mitre wheel sleeve respectively.
Rotation of the hand wheel imparts motion through the spindle,
clutch, spur gear, vertical shaft, mitre, spur and worm gears to the
rack pinion, thereby traversing the mounting.
(b) Using the auxiliary hand wheel. —The front clutch lever
being placed at “ hand,” the auxiliary clutch lever is moved to the
engaged position, thereby bringing the sliding clutch into engage-
ment with the fixed clutch on the auxiliary vertical shaft.
Rotation of the auxiliary hand wheel imparts motion through
the mitre gear and auxiliary cross shaft to the vertical shaft, thence
by mitre, spur and worm gears to the rack pinion, thereby traversing
the mounting.
Rotating the auxiliary hand wheel operates also the front
“ hand ” gear through the medium of the main vertical shaft,
the auxiliary gear being normally employed to assist the front
traversing number when “ power ” is not used.
The Hydraulic System
(Plates 8, 10, 11 and 12)
The fluid pressure required to operate the hydraulic system of
the mounting, is supplied from an installation.
Main pressure and exhaust pipes lead from the installation
through the concrete foundation of the holdfast to the centre pivot
which, with its casings, forms a rotating joint permitting the
mounting to be traversed without interrupting the flow of fluid
pressure.
Further main pipes connect the centre pivot to pressure and
exhaust standards situated below the shell pit shield on the left
94


and right side of the mounting respectively. A main stop valve
(Fig. 30) is provided near the pressure standard to enable fluid
pressure to be turned “ on ” or “ off ” as required, and a sluice
valve adjacent the exhaust standard which should be normally
kept open. Both standards are provided with pressure gauges,
each with connecting pipe with stop and relief valves.
The pressure standard forms a distributing centre from which
the fluid pressure is conveyed to the various hydraulic mechanisms
by a series of pipe-lines. Each pipe-line is provided with a stop
FIG . 30
valve (Fig. 30) adjacent the pressure standard to enable it to be
isolated if required.
The exhaust standard forms a receiving centre for the exhaust
fluid from the various pipes, valves, etc., each pipe line, except
that from the engines, being connected to the standard by a non-
return valve (Fig. 31).
The pipe lines are briefly as follows :
(1) Traversing gear. —A pipe-line is led from left to right in
front of the body under the shell pit shield and up to a control


valve situated below the traversing hand wheel. From the contro
valve two pipes, alternatively pressure and exhaust, lead to the
engine. An exhaust pipe connects the control valve to the exhau
standard.
(2) Rammer and rammer rocker— A pipe-line is led along t e
left side of the mounting to a three-way junction block, thence to a
FIG . 31
control valve under the right rear of the platform. From the
control valve, two pipes, alternatively pressure ex “;' ead ‘““
semi-automatic valve situated at the rear end of the platfo .
semi-automatic valve forms a secondary distributing from
which the fluid pressure is diverted in succession (via cut-oflhalves)
to the rammer rocker jack and rammer through a swivel joint,


during the process of rocking the rammer into the loading position
and ramming home ; the flow being reversed when withdrawing
the rammer and rocking it back to the “ receiving position.”
The pipes from the semi-automatic valve to the rammer rocker
jack, swivel joint and from thence to the rammer, are in duplicate
and utilized for pressure and exhaust alternatively.
A pipe leads from the junction block to the base of the semi-
automatic valve and supplies constant pressure to keep the semi-
automatic valve piston up to its work. Another pipe conveys the
exhaust from the control valve to the exhaust standard.
(3) Wash-out. —A pipe-line is led along the left side of the mount-
ing to a control valve below the right rear of the platform. From
the control valve two pipes, alternatively pressure and exhaust,
lead to the hydraulic cylinder of a wash-out pump situated on the
front transom of the platform in rear of the breech. An exhaust
pipe connects the control valve to the exhaust standard.
(4) Elevating gear. —A pipe-line leads from the pressure standard
to a branch piece which forms a secondary distributing centre.
From this branch piece a pipe conveys pressure to the elevating
control valve and thence by two pipes, alternatively pressure and
exhaust, to the engine, passing through auto-stop and cut-off valves
en route. A pipe conveys the exhaust fluid from the control valve
to the exhaust standard.
(5) Loading gear. —A pipe-line is led along the left side of the
mounting below the shell pit shield to a control valve, thence to a
cut-off valve, and the hydraulic press cylinder of the hoist. Similar
pipes convey the exhaust fluid from the hydraulic press via the cut-off
and control valves to the exhaust standard.
(6) Cradle lock control and interlock. —Two pipes lead from the
branch piece to an interlocking valve on the control standard
and control valve situated under the right rear of the platform
respectively. A third pipe, alternately pressure and exhaust,
connects the interlocking valve to control valve, and a fourth
carries off exhaust from the control valve to the exhaust standard
via a junction block in the wash-out exhaust pipe.
(7) Cradle lock. —Two pipes convey constant pressure from the
branch piece to the cradle lock locking valve and two further
pipes, alternatively pressure and exhaust, from the locking valve to
the elevating engine. A fifth pipe, alternately pressure and
exhaust, connects the locking valve to a pair of auto-stop valves in
the main elevating pipe-lines, via a three-way connection. A sixth
pipe conveys pressure from the branch piece to the cradle lock
control valve on the control standard and a seventh pipe, alternately
pressure and exhaust, from thence to the front of the locking valve.
Two pipes carry off exhaust fluid from the control and locking
valves to the exhaust standard.
7 — 12)


(8) Elevation cut-off. —A single pipe conveys constant pressure
from the branch piece to the piston of the elevation cut-off valve
in the main elevating pipe-lines.
The flow of liquid pressure to the hydraulic engines, mechanisms,
etc., is started, regulated, diverted or stopped, as the case may be,
by means of the various valves (all readily accessible) which are
distributed throughout the system as indicated above, the valves
being operated by means of levers or cams.
SwASHPLATE ENGINES
The hydraulic engines for the elevating and traversing gears
are of the non-variable swashplate type. The speed can be varied
and direction of rotation reversed at will by means of a control
valve interposed between the engine and the power installation and
actuated by a cam and hand wheel.
The engine consists of the following principal parts, which are
briefly described.
The casing has an opening at one end into which is fitted a
cylinder block with pressure cover. It is formed with a longitudinal
guideway in each side for the trunnion blocks of the oscillating
swashplate. A spring-loaded packed gland, with gland nut, is
fitted in the closed end for the driving shaft of the rotating swash-
plate. The casing is connected by a drain pipe to a convenient
exhaust pipe in the hydraulic system and is fitted with a lifting eye
at the top.
The cylinder block is secured in the casing by through bolts
and is formed with nine equidistant cylinders arranged parallel to a
central valve. The base of each cylinder is connected by a passage
to ports in a valve sleeve.
The pressure cover is secured to the cylinder block and formed
with flanged orifices for pressure and exhaust pipe lines, also with a
central boring formed with a tubular extension or sleeve for the
central valve, the sleeve being provided with nine circular ports
corresponding to the cylinder ports.
The pistons and piston rods. —Steel cylindrical pistons work
in the cylinders ; the piston rods are made with spherical ends,
the large end being secured in the piston and the small end to the
oscillating swashplate.
The central valve is cylindrical in shape with two inner and two
outer ports cut in its opposite sides, the ports being connected
by internal passages. On either side of each inner port is a groove
connected by a passage with the port in the opposite side and
designed to balance the thrust due to pressure. The valve is fitted
in the valve sleeve of the pressure cover with a working clearance
to facilitate lubrication and reduce friction. It is slotted at the
inner end to engage with a key on the spigot of the rotating swash-
plate.


The oscillating swashplate is in the form of a broad ring with
trunnions having bearing blocks which move to and fro in the
guideways of the casing. The plate is mounted on the inclined
face of the rotating swashplate and surrounds the shoulder on the
spigot It is prepared on one face for the attachment of the piston
rod small ends.
The rotating swashplate is in the shape of a circular wedge
having a driving shaft formed on its base, whilst its inclined face is
prepared with a circular groove for a thrust bearing, also a shouldered
spigot to mount the oscillating swashplate. A key on the end
of the spigot engages with a slot on the central valve and ensures
both rotating together, a locating peg formed on the spigot ensures
correct assembly to the valve.
Bearings. —To reduce friction between the moving parts and to
take the thrust, ball and roller bearings are fitted as follows :
Ball bearings on the end of the swashplate spigot and between
the oscillating and rotating swashplates, also on the driving shaft.
Roller bearings are between the spigot shoulder and oscillating
swashplate, and on each end of the central valve.
Action
Move the clutch lever to “ power ” and open the control valve
by rotating the hand wheel and cam from the neutral position,
thus admitting liquid under pressure to the engine. Pressure
passes through the central valve into four cylinders which, owing
to the extent of the port opening, always lie on the pressure side
of the centre line. The pistons of these cylinders exert a combined
thrust, through the oscillating swashplate, on the inclined face of
the rotating swashplate which is thereby forced to revolve. In
doing so, it also turns the central valve, which is keyed to it, and
thus brings the pressure port opposite successive “ exhausted ”
cylinders which always lie in advance of the filled ones. As the
swashplate further rotates it brings the exhaust port of the central
valve opposite successive filled cylinders and at the same time
the incline on its wedge formation forces the pistons to recede into
their cylinders and expel the contents into the exhaust pipe-line.
On turning the hand wheel and cam over to the opposite side of
neutral, the liquid pressure enters the engine through the former
exhaust and the direction of rotation is reveresd.
Note. —Relief valves are provided in the hydraulic system for
the elevating engine to prevent overloading, and are secured to the
main inlet and outlet orifices of the pressure cover to the engine.
Each valve (Fig. 32) consists of a T-piece body with three flanges,
two of which are connected to the main pressure and relief pipes.
The third flange mounts the relief valve and is fitted with four
pillars which pass up through a bridge plate and are nutted up.
Two of the pillars are long to allow for initial compression of the


spring. A spiral spring, working between upper and lower telescopic
guides, is fitted between the pillars. The lower guide rests on the
stem of a valve head supported in a seating in the valve body. A
FIG . 32
U-section packing ring with supporting rings is fitted round the
valve stem. The upper guide engages an adjusting screw working
in the bridge plate and provided with a locking plate.
Cradle Lock
(Plate 13)
The cradle lock is designed to bring the gun and cradle rapidly
to the loading angle, viz. 5-degrees elevation, and to retain it in
that position during loading operations. After loading, the gun is
elevated or depressed in the normal way by the elevating hand wheel.


An interlock mechanism provides a control for locking the
cradle lock during loading operations in order to prevent the gun
being moved prematurely from the loading angle and is described
on page 108.
In addition to the pipes mentioned {see page 97), the following
valves and fittings are also included.
FIG . 33
Two auto-stop valves (Fig. 33). —Each valve consists of a three-
branched body, two branches being flanged for pipe connection and
the third offset and enlarged to contain a valve head. The latter
is formed with a guide collar at the inner end and a stem which is
fitted with small and large (inner and outer) U-packing rings, with
supporting rings and central distance sleeve, the whole being held
between a shoulder and securing nut.
The valves are closed by pressure from the locking valve via a


pipe and 3-way connection which is connected by two pipes to a
plug-shaped cover in the end of each offset branch.
On resuming engine control by the hand wheel, the valve in
the primary pressure pipe to the engine is opened by pressure
from the elevating control valve acting against the auto-stop
valve face, and that in the primary exhaust pipe by exhaust liquid
acting against the inner packing supporting ring.
Cradle lock locking valve (Fig. 34). —This valve consists of a
rectangular body prepared internally to take a piston and formed
with side openings for the various pipes (see page 97). The body
FIG. 34
is fitted in front with an end cover with nozzle for the union of
pipe (A) and at the rear with a piston rod gland. The piston is
provided with four heads, the interspaces forming front and rear
pressure chambers and a centre exhaust chamber. The two inner
heads have small exhaust side ports connected by an internal
channel, which carry off the exhaust from pipe (C), also with V-ports
in their inner and outer edges. The piston rod is fitted with a
connecting eye, the hole of which is elongated to provide for the
initial inward and outward movements of the piston as explained on
page 106. Two lugs on the eye base act as stops and also preserve
the original set of the piston when adjusting the gland subsequently.


Control valve for cradle lock (Fig. 35). —This valve consists of a
body and piston. The body, which is secured in position by a nut,
FIG. 35
is formed with three screwed nozzles and is bored to receive the
piston. The bore is closed at one end by a plug and at the other


with a packed piston rod gland. An internal channel connects the
main pressure nozzle with the pressure chamber. The piston is
formed with two heads, the outer one being provided with circum-
ferential grooves for lubrication purposes, and the inner one with
valve ports on the inner edge. The interspace forms the pressure
chamber which is always open to the main pressure inlet. An
internal channel provides relief for the outer head. The rod is
fitted with a forked connection with pin.
On moving the piston outwards, the inner head closes the
FIG . 36
exhaust outlet and opens the pressure chamber, via the piston ports,
to the pressure outlet. Moving the piston inwards cuts off the
main pressure and opens the exhaust outlet to pressure fluid
returning to the exhaust through the former pressure outlet.
The engine control valve (Fig. 36) (one for elevating and one for
traversing) consists principally of a rectangular body and a
piston. The body is formed with side openings for the pressure
and exhaust pipe connections and is bored longitudinally to receive


the piston. The bore is fitted with upper and lower packed piston
glands and is provided with a small screw-down relief valve (Fig. 37)
at the upper end. An internal channel connects the upper and lower
exhaust chambers to a common exhaust outlet. The piston is
provided with two heads, the interspace forming a pressure chamber
always open to the main pressure inlet. Both heads are bevelled
on the inner edge to provide a lead and have V-ports cut in their
outer edges which admit pressure, from the pressure chamber, to
the upper and lower pressure outlets when the piston is moved up
or down from the neutral position, by means of its cam and hand
wheel (for elevation and depression respectively). The upper end
of the piston rod is fitted with a forked connection with pin.
FIG . 37
The fittings actuated by the cradle lock locking valve comprise
an actuating rod which connects the valve piston rod to a cross
shaft having short arms mounted on each end. The arms are
connected by rods to pawls pivoted in brackets in the sides of the
body and formed with a hole for a stop. Handles on the pawls
provide for operating them by hand should the power fail.
A spring-loaded stop is provided for each pawl, to lock it in the
disengaged position. The stops are carried in brackets on the sides
of the mounting and are operated by an arm and lever mounted
on a common transverse spindle and actuated by a curved rib on
the cradle stop brackets.


A ction
On pulling back the control lever of the control standard, the
cradle and gun are brought rapidly to the loading angle by the
elevating engine which is driven by liquid pressure conveyed through
secondary pipe lines (A, B, D and E or F), the locking valve and
the cradle lock control valve ; the elevating control valve in the main
pipe is temporarily placed out of control by the auto-stop valves
{see Fig. 41) which cut off the pressure via the pipe lines (G or H)
and are automatically operated by pressure from the locking valve
via pipe (C).
(1) To depress the gun to the loading angle.
Pull back the control lever of the control standard situated on
the left front of the platform. This opens the control valve near
the base of the standard and allows liquid pressure to flow via pipe (A)
to the front of the locking valve piston. An initial outward move-
ment is thereby given to the piston (to the limit of the elongated
hole in the connecting eye on the piston rod) which opens the valve
port of pipe (C) and allows pressure to flow from the branch piece
via pipes (B) and (C) and close the auto-stop valves. The flow of
pressure to the engine via pipe (G) or (H) is thereby stopped and the
engine control valve ceases to function. Meanwhile liquid pressure,
flowing via pipe (D), the small pressure chamber of the locking
valve piston and pipe (E) (which is the depression pipe) has reached
the engine, driving the latter and thus depressing the gun to the
loading angle. The exhaust liquid from the engine returns via
pipe (F) into the exhaust chamber and thence, via the exhaust
pipe, to the exhaust standard.
As the gun nears the loading angle its movement brings the
levers actuating pawl stops into engagement with ribs on the cradle
stop brackets, forcing them (and with them the arms actuating
pawl stop) to rotate about their pivot in the pawl stop brackets on
the body, thus withdrawing the stops from the pawls. On being
released, the constant propulsive effort of the locking valve piston
forces the pawls inward into contact with the cradle stop bracket
and also keeps them up to their work as they move down the upper
inclined plane on the stop brackets until, finally, the pawls slip into
en g a g emen t with the striking face on the stop bracket under
the thrust of the piston in its final movement outwards. The gun
and cradle are now in the loading position. This final movement
of the piston closes the port of pipe (D), thus cutting off pressure
via depression pipe (E) to the engine, and opens the valve port of
pipe (F), thereby permitting the flow of liquid pressure through pipe
(B), the large pressure chamber of the piston, and the elevation
pipe (F) to the engine. The engine is thus reversed and its constant
effort to elevate the gun holds the cradle stops down on to the pawls.
The rotation of the engine ceases, however, under this check.


(2) To elevate the gun to the loading angle.
Should the gun be laid below the loading angle, the pawl stops
are already disengaged from the pawls. Consequently, on pulling
back the control lever and admitting pressure to the locking valve
via pipe (A), the piston is forced outward its full travel (there is a
momentary opening of the pipes (D) and (E) to the depression
side of the engine during its travel which, however, may be dis-
regarded). The movement of the piston imparts motion to the
fittings actuating the pawls and forces them inward against the
lower inclined plane on cradle stop brackets, it also opens the
valve port of the elevation pipe (F), thereby permitting pressure
to flow from pipe (B) via the large pressure chamber of the piston
and pipe (F) to the engine, which elevates the gun until the pawls
engage with the striking face on the cradle stop brackets. The
elevating effort of the engine continues (although its rotation
ceases) and thus holds the cradle stops down on the pawls.
(3) To elevate or depress the gun from the loading position.
It is assumed that the control lever interlock has been released
by pushing forward the inner lever situated on the right rear of the
breech.
Push the control lever of the control standard forward ; this
closes the pressure port of the control valve and cuts off the pressure
via pipe (A) to the locking valve piston and opens the exhaust port
to exhaust of pipe (A). On pressure being cut off from the locking
valve piston, pressure via pipe (B) forces the piston inwards to
its original position. The sequence of events during the travel of
the piston is as follows :
(a) The initial movement of the piston takes up the play in the
elongated hole of the piston connecting eye and closes the valve
ports of pipes (F) and (E), thus relieving the downward pressure
of the stop brackets on the pawls due to the constant elevating
effort of the engine.
( b ) Further movement of the piston momentarily opens pipe (D)
to pipe (E) (also pipe (F) to centre exhaust chamber, which is always
open to the exhaust pipe). This results in a slight rocking move-
ment of the cradle which eases the stop brackets from the pawls.
The actual withdrawal of the pawls now begins.
(c) Continued travel of the piston opens the valve port of pipe (C)
to exhaust ports and internal channel in the piston heads, and
thence to exhaust, thereby relieving the pressure from the auto-
stop valves. The control of the movements of the gun in the
vertical plane now passes to the elevating hand wheel and control
valve and, on opening the latter, pressure flows along the primary
pipes (G) or (H) to the engine and elevates or depresses the gun
respectively.
107


The auto-stop valves are opened to admit the passage of this
pressure in the manner described on page 102.
(d) By the total movement of the piston the liquid in front of
the piston head is expelled through pipe (A) and cradle lock control
valve via exhaust pipe to exhaust standard, also the pawls are
completely withdrawn (by the actuating fittings) clear of the stop
brackets, thus permitting the gun to be elevated or depressed on
operating the elevating hand wheel.
The pawl stops are released on elevating the gun and move
into engagement with the pawls under the action of their springs.
Cradle Lock Control and Interlock
(Plate 13)
A control standard is mounted on the left front of the fixed
platform adjacent the main elevating hand wheel and supports,
contains, or is connected to, the various valves and fittings employed
to bring the gun and cradle to the loading angle and lock them
there during loading operations.
The standard consists of a rectangular casing with webbed
pedestal and formed with suitable slots and lugs to mount the
following fittings :
A control lever is pivoted in lugs on the casing floor and moves
in a guide slot in the top of the standard. The cradle lock control
valve (see page 103) is secured in the front side near the bottom
and its piston is attached to the lower end of the lever, whilst a
horizontal sliding bar is secured about its centre. The bar is drawn
through slots in the front and rear sides of the casing by the move-
ment of the control lever, and is locked, when in the rearward
position, by a pawl which engages a notch in its lower edge. The
pawl moves vertically in a pair of lugs on the interior of the casing
front side and is operated by a bent lever. The latter is pivoted
between a pair of external lugs and its longer (vertical) arm is
attached to the outer end of a pawl rod. A spiral spring is fitted
between the rod connector and a guide bracket on the casing and
keeps the pawl up to its work. The inner end of the rod is pinned
to the piston connector of the interlocking valve. When not in
use, the control lever is secured by a padlock to a lug at the front
of the guide slot.
The interlocking valve (Fig. 38) is held in the rear side of the
casing by a securing nut and consists of a body and piston. The
body is bored to take the piston and has a screwed nozzle on one
side for the union of pipe (C). The bore is fitted with a piston rod
gland and a screwed nipple for the union of pressure pipe (B). The
piston is formed with a single plain head and the rod is fitted with a
connector (with pin) having an elongated hole.
For detail of pipes connecting this valve to the branch piece


and control valve in rear of the breech {see page 97). This latter
control valve is similar to that described (see page 103), and is
operated by the inner lever which is pivoted in a bracket mounted
on the platform at the right rear of the breech.
Action
Pulling the control lever to the rear opens the cradle lock
control valve in the standard and brings the cradle lock mechanism
into operation as described {see page 106). The lever also draws the
sliding bar to the rear until the notch in the bar is opposite the
locking pawl. The latter, however, does not engage until re-
leased.
On pulling back the inner lever on the right rear of the breech,
the interlock control valve situated below the lever is opened
FIG . 38
and pressure admitted from the branch piece via pipe (A) to the
control valve and thence by pipe (B) to the interlock valve on the
standard. This pressure overcomes the constant pressure via pipe
(C) on the opposite side of the piston head and forces the piston
forward. The pawl rod, under the action of its spring, follows up
this movement, thereby turning the pawl lever about its pivot
and lifting the pawl into engagement with the notch in the sliding
bar. The control lever and bar are thus locked in the rearward
position.
On completion of loading operations, the inner lever is pushed
forward, thereby operating the interlock control valve below it
which cuts off pressure via pipe (A) and opens pipe (B) to exhaust.
Constant pressure via pipe (C) now forces the piston of the interlock
valve to the rear. The piston draws the pawl rod with it, com-
pressing its spring, and turning the pawl lever about its pivot, thereby


withdrawing the pawl from the notch and releasing the sliding
bar. The control lever can now be moved forward, closing the
cradle lock control valve, reversing the operation of the cradle
lock and placing the elevation of the gun once more under hand
wheel control.
Note. —The above is the normal procedure. The order, how-
ever, may be reversed owing to the elongated hole in the interlocking
valve connector which permits the piston to move forward should
the inner lever be operated first. When, subsequently, the control
lever is pulled to the rear, the sliding bar is drawn back bringing the
notch over the locking pawl, and the latter, which has been pressing
against the lower edge of the bar, rises immediately into engage-
ment under the impulse of its spiral spring conveyed through the
rod and pawl lever.
On the other hand, should special circumstances require, the
elongated hole permits the rod to be forced back against its spring
by pressure on the pawl lever. The pawl being thus disengaged,
the control lever can be pushed forward previous to operating the
inner lever, when the movement of the gun towards the loading
angle under the action of the cradle lock will cease.
Wash-Out
(Plates 10 and 13)
Fittings are provided to wash out the gun chamber and cool the
obturator after firing.
They consist principally of three squirts (which direct jets of
water, one into the gun chamber and two upon the obturator),
supply and drain tanks, pump, various valves and pipes.
The squirts are operated by the centre lever on the right rear
of the platform. Provision is made to prevent the use of the
squirts until the breech is fully opened in the loading position
{see page 121).
A rectangular supply tank is fitted above the platform near the
cartridge guide. It is fitted with an inlet strainer in the top and a
tubular glass water level gauge, with stop cock, at the front.
The water pipes are as follows :—A head of water is maintained
in the tank by an inlet pipe (E) which is connected to the water
conduit of the centre pivot and is furnished with a stop valve near
its upper end. An outlet pipe (F) leads from the bottom of the
tank to a junction block, and another pipe (G) from the block to the
non-return valve (K) on the side of the large cylinder of the pump.
A third pipe (H), with stop valve, connects the junction block to a
drain tank to enable the supply tank to be emptied. Further
pipes (P, R, N, S, T) connect the pump to the squirts. Pressure
and exhaust pipes (A and B alternatively) connect the pump to
110


the control valve ; pressure pipe (C) and exhaust pipe (D) connect
the control valve with the pressure and exhaust standards,
respectively (see Fig. 39).
The valves employed in the system are :
Control valve (Fig. 39) is situated below the centre lever, to which
its piston is connected by a bar link. It consists of a rectangular
FIG . 39.
body formed with side openings for pressure and exhaust pipes and
prepared internally to take the piston. The piston chamber is
fitted at each end with similar glands, and is provided near the upper
end with a small relief valve. The piston is provided with two heads
having grooved ports in their inner edges, the interspace between the
heads forming a pressure chamber.
Non-return valves (Fig. 40) (K, L, M, W) are similar and consist
of an L-shaped body fitted with a spring-loaded valve head.
Valves (K) and (W) form the inlet and outlet (suction and delivery)
valves of the pump and are mounted on the large cylinder.
Stop valves are of the screw-down type with wheel operated
valve spindle, and differ only in their size.
111


The pump is supported on the front transom of the fixed platform
in the rear opening below the breech. It consists chiefly of two
cylinders, large and small, in which work a plunger and piston
respectively, connected by a common piston rod. The large cylinder
is fitted at the rear with suction and delivery non-return valves
(K, W) and at the front with a packed gland. The plunger is a
hollow cylinder, cast with four internal webs supporting a central
boss which is screwed on to the piston rod. The small cylinder
is formed with two screwed nozzles on the upper side for pressure
and exhaust pipes, a small screw down valve with drain pipe being
fitted opposite each nozzle. The cylinder is fitted at the rear with
FIG . 40
a dash pot and at the front with a packed piston gland. The
piston is fitted with two cup-shaped rings, placed back to back,
with supporting rings and securing nut. A small plunger on its
inner end enters the dash pot, and the outer end is fitted with a
number of bronze and leather rings to form a beating face between
the plunger and the gland of the small cylinder.
A drain tank (which also serves as a gun recoil guard) is provided
below the breech opening in the platform, being suspended from
the left side plate of the platform frame and right rear cantilever
of the shell pit shield. The tank collects the waste water from the
jet squirts and empties through a short pipe into a circular trough
on the pedestal and thence from the emplacement.


Action
The piston is operated by liquid pressure conveyed to the
small cylinder by pipes (A) or (B), alternatively pressure and exhaust,
from the control valve. Its motion is transmitted to the plunger
and thereby causes the suction and delivery of water. The control
valve is operated by means of the centre lever on the right rear of
the platform, the catch being first disengaged from the link con-
necting control valve piston to the centre lever as described on
page 122. Water is delivered through the non-return delivery
valve (W) to a 3-way connector and thence by pipes (P) and (R)
via valve (M) to the gun bore jet squirt and along pipes (N, S, T) to
the obturator squirts.
To operate the squirts
See tank is filled.
Draw back the inner lever, if this has not already been done.
Pull the centre lever to the rear, thus opening the control valve.
This admits pressure via pipe (A) to the small cylinder, moving the
piston outward and the plunger inward which forces the water out
of the large cylinder through valve (W) (valve (K) being closed by
the action of its spring) along pipes (P) and (R) to the gun bore jet
squirt and along pipes (N, S, T) to the obturator jet squirts.
Note. —The supply tank should be replenished from time to
time, whenever the “ wash-out ” is being employed.
Elevation Cut-off
(Plate 13)
The elevation cut-off is actuated by cams on the right elevating
arc which are brought into operation by the movement of the gun
and cradle in the vertical plane.
It is designed to reduce and finally cut-off the flow of pressure
from the elevating control valve to the engine as the cradle and
gun approach the maximum elevation or depression angle and thus
prevent the cradle, etc., coming violently down on stops.
It consists of elevation and depression actuating cams which
are secured, one near each end, to the inside of the right elevating
arc. The cams work in conjunction with a cam roller on the
upper (long) arm of a bent actuating lever which is pivoted in a
bracket on the front transom of the body. The lower (short) arm
of the lever is attached to an actuating rod, which is connected to
the piston rod of the cut-off valve.
The cut-off valve (Fig. 41) is fitted in the main pipe lines from
the elevating control valve to the engine and consists of a rectangular
body and a piston. The body is formed with pressure and exhaust
openings on two opposite sides, those on one side being prepared
for the attachment of the auto-stop valves and those on the other
for the main pipes (pressure and exhaust) to engine. It is bored
8 —(2)


to receive the piston, the bore being fitted at one end with a packed
piston gland and at the other with a screwed nipple to which is
attached a pipe from the branch piece supplying constant pressure
to keep the piston up to its work. The end spaces of the bore in
front and rear of the piston are connected by a small internal relief
channel.
The piston is formed with three heads, the rear and centre ones
FIG . 41
having the front face recessed and the rim notched, two of the
notches in each head being slightly deeper to form trickle ports
which admit a slight pressure to the engine through the otherwise
closed valve ; this is necessary to facilitate restarting the elevating
engine in the reverse direction. The third or front head receives
the constant pressure.
114


Action
As the cradle and gun approach the maximum angle of elevation
or depression, the cam concerned engages the cam roller and
depresses the upper arm of the actuating lever causing the latter
to rotate about its pivot. This motion is transmitted in a horizontal
direction through an actuating rod to the valve piston, forcing it
inwards against the constant pressure and closing the valve (except
the trickle ports in each head), thus bringing the gun and cradle
gently to rest on the elevation or depression stop.
On reversing the direction of the flow of pressure to the engine
by means of the elevating hand wheel, the small pressure flowing
through the trickle ports causes the gun and cradle to move gently
away from the stop. This movement, however, carries the cam
away from the cam roller and permits the piston (under pressure on
the front head from the constant pressure pipe) to be forced outward
until the valve is once more fully open, thus bringing the elevating
control valve and engine into full communication.
Hoist
(Plates 12, 14, 15 and 19)
The normal method of raising ammunition from the emplacement
floor to the loading platform is by means of a hoist operated by
hydraulic power. Auxiliary fittings, including a windlass, are
provided to raise the ammunition by hand in the event of a
breakdown in the power system.
The hoist consists principally of an ammunition lift, with
cartridge hatch frame, in which an ammunition cage (containing a
complete round) is raised by means of a hydraulic press. It is
lowered by its own weight under control of the hydraulic press.
Projectiles are conveyed to the lift by trolleys running over a
circular railway around the emplacement floor, and cartridges are
brought to the cage by hand.
The ammunition lift is situated on the left of the mounting
opposite the breech. It is built up of angles, plates, guards, stays,
etc., and is secured to the loading platform frame and shell pit
shield. It is fitted on the inside with vertical front and rear channel
section guides for the ammunition cage rollers, and at the top with a
platform to support three sheave brackets, with sheaves, for the
wire rope. A stop for the projectile trolley is fitted at the lower
end of the lift. The stop consists of a bracket and spring-loaded
spindle with handle. A safety retaining catch, fitted on the left
side of the lift, engages a stop on the cage and prevents its descent
should the power fail with the cage in the raised position. The
catch is mounted on the spigot of a bracket and is operated by a
spiral spring carried on a rod attached to the catch and working in a
lug on the bracket. It is prepared with inner and outer flats (to


clear the stop on the cage and engage the catch lever, respectively),
and is released from, returned to and retained in the disengaged
position by a catch lever mounted on the same spigot and con-
nected by a horizontal rod to the upper hand lever of the press.
On operating the lower hand lever to raise the cage, motion is
transmitted through the vertical connecting rod, upper hand lever
and horizontal rod to the catch lever which moves to the front and
releases the catch ; the latter moves into the engaged position under
the action of its spring. As the cage nears the top of the lift, a curved
edge on the stop engages the inner flat and rotates the catch to the
disengaged position until the cage carries the stop clear when the
spring reasserts itself and returns the catch to the engaged position
under the stop.
On operating the upper hand lever to lower the cage, motion is
transmitted through the horizontal rod to the catch lever, which
moves to the rear and rotates the catch into the disengaged position,
when the inner flat clears the stop and permits the descent of the
cage.
The cartridge hatch frame consists of top and bottom plates
with angles, and forms a front extension to the lift. The top
plate supports the upper hand lever bracket of the press and the
bottom plate supports a tip-up loading tray for cartridges. The
tray is hinged to the lower edge of the hatch opening and is operated
by its handle. Cartridges are carried by hand and placed on the
tray, one half charge (or two quarter charges placed end to end) at a
time. The tray is then tipped up by its handle when the cartridges
roll through the hatch into the cartridge compartment of the cage ;
this process is repeated with the remaining half charge which will,
consequently, lie above the first half charge. Alternatively, a
complete charge may be placed on the tray before tipping.
The ammunition cage consists principally of a body built up of
angles and plates to form front and rear compartments for cartridges
and projectile respectively.
The front compartment is fitted with upper and lower guide
plates, the latter forming a sloping floor which assists the cartridges
to roll into the cartridge guide above the platform. A sliding door,
supported in guides by two wire ropes passing over sheaves mounted
on top of the compartment and attached to a counterweight,
prevents the movement of the cartridges until the cage arrives at
the top of the lift. As the cage approaches the top of the lift a stop
on the cartridge guide draws the door down and permits the first
half charge to roll into the guide. This charge is forced by means of
a hand rammer over the loading tray into the tube of the rammer.
On withdrawing the hand rammer clear, the upper half charge rolls
into the guide and is transferred to the rammer tube in a similar
manner.
The rear compartment is designed to hold one shell. The floor
is inclined to correspond with the loading angle and also slopes


inwards to facilitate rolling the shell on to the loading tray. The
shell is retained between two catches fitted in the compartment. As
the shell rolls into the compartment it first raises and then lowers
an outer catch which thus retains the shell against an inner catch.
The latter is carried on a shaft supported in brackets in the compart-
ment and is disengaged by means of levers and link actuated by a
hand lever at the front of the cage. A pawl on the inner end of the
small (lower) lever of the inner shell catch protrudes slightly beyond
the cage and engages a stop lever pivoted on a hinge bracket on the
cartridge guide and prevents the operation of the inner shell catch
until the loading tray has been brought to the receiving position
ready to receive the shell. A spiral spring, supported in a case
between the large (upper) catch lever and the cage plate work,
returns the catch to its original position on releasing the lever.
Front and rear stops on the cage engage similar stops on the
lift when the cage is lowered and serve to relieve the stress from the
wire rope.
When in the raised position an intermediate stop engages a
similar stop near the top of the lift.
Guide rollers are fitted and work in the channel guides on the
lift, also a lifting bracket is fitted to the cage and supports a safety
device (Fig. 42). The latter consists of a spring loaded rod sliding in
a bracket and carrying at its lower end a link which engages the
inner ends of two similar jamming levers. The latter are pivoted
on the bracket in such a manner that, should the wire rope break
(the rope being attached to the upper end of the rod) during transit
of the cage, the inner ends of the levers come under the action of the
spring and the outer ends are thus forced into rubbing contact
with the front channel guide and vertical angle member of the
lift and act as a brake which prevents the violent descent of the
cage to the bottom of the lift.
The hydraulic press consists principally of a cylinder, a ram
and a wire rope rove over sheaves on the cylinder and ram head,
and attached to the ammunition cage. The flow of pressure and
exhaust liquid to and from the cylinder, respectively, passes through
a control valve in the main pipe lines (the valve being opened first
to pressure and then to exhaust by lower and upper hand levers
worked alternately) to a cut-off valve which is operated by cams
attached to the ram and regulates the flow. The valves are described
on page 119.
The cylinder (which is secured to the underside of the shell pit
shield) is a hollow casting closed at one end and fitted at the other
with a stuffing box and packed ram gland. It is provided near the
front with a drain plug and air valve and is formed at the rear with
openings for the pressure and exhaust pipes (B 1 and C 1). Grooves,
with cover plates, are formed in the sides for the cams to work in,
also three lugs on top, two being for bearings of a valve lever
spindle and the other one for an adjustable anchorage for the


wire rope. A sheave bracket, with two sheaves, is mounted on the
rear end of the cylinder, also a jockey pulley on top for the wire
rope.
The ram consists of a cylindrical body formed with a trident
head to mount a pair of sheaves. The head is slotted on each side
to work over angle bar guides which are attached to the cylinder,
and a supporting bracket in front, the latter being bolted to the
shell pit shield. Safety stops are fitted at the front end of the
FIG . 42
guides to engage the ram head and prevent damage in the event of
the wire rope breaking, as the ram, relieved of the weight of the
cage, would move rapidly forward.
Left and right (exhaust and pressure) fiat bar cams are attached
to the front sheave pin (in ram head) and slide in the grooves in
the sides of the cylinder. The upper edges are shaped to form cam
roller paths which serve, by means of cam roller levers and valve
levers, to operate the cut-off valve.


The control valve (Fig. 43) consists of a body and piston. The
body is rectangular and is formed with side openings for pressure
and exhaust pipes (A, B, C, D) which connect it to the cut-off
valve, pressure and exhaust standards. It is bored to form a
piston chamber which is fitted at each end with similar packed
FIG . 43
glands for its piston rod. A small air relief valve is fitted. Ihe
piston is formed with a single central head having grooved ports in
each edge and the rod is fitted with a connector for attachment to
the lower hand lever of the press.
The cut-off valve (Fig. 44) consists of a rectangular body with
side openings for pipes B, 81,B 1 , C, C l , which connect it to the
FIG . 44
control valve and cylinder, the body being prepared with twin
parallel valve chambers (for pressure and exhaust, respectively),
in each of which works a valve spindle with a bronze valve head
which is kept up to its work by a spiral spring between the head
and a plug closing the rear end of the chamber. Ihe spindle passes
through a front plug and is fitted with an adjusting nut attached


by two side links to a valve lever which is pivoted in bearings on
the cylinder. The cut-off valve regulates the flow of liquid to and
from the press cylinder during the outward and inward movement
of the ram, respectively ; that is, as the cage nears the top of the
lift during the outward run of the ram, the pressure side of the cut-off
valve is gradually closed under the action of the pressure cam,
thus cutting off the pressure. As the ram commences to move
outwards the exhaust side of the cut-off valve is opened by the
exhaust cam and thus affords free communication between the
cylinder and the control valve, the exhaust ports of which, how-
ever, remain closed until the upper hand lever is moved to
“ lower.”
Similarly, as the ram moves inwards on lowering the cage, the
pressure side of the cut-off valve is opened at the commence-
ment, pressure being cut off at the control, and exhaust side of
the cut-off valve gradually closed towards the end of the movement.
A smooth outward and inward run and a cushioned finish to
the inward run is thus ensured to the ram.
Two hand levers are provided to operate the control valve,
and thus the hoist, an upper one situated above the platform and
a lower one below the shell pit shield, for use when lowering or
raising the ammunition cage respectively. The levers are pivoted
on brackets on the cartridge hatch frame and are connected by a
vertical rod which ensures that they are locked, released and moved
simultaneously. Each lever is provided with a spring-loaded hand
grip catch to engage a notch in the bracket and guide quadrant.
The notches are so arranged that both levers cannot be engaged
at the same time and also that the engagement of one lever
automatically locks the opposite lever.
The auxiliary fittings used for hand-loading, should the power
fail, consist of a windlass [see below), which is mounted on the
left of the rear bolster, also a wire rope which is rove over an
auxiliary sheave on the top of the lift and the fall then passed down
the lift over a guide roller, supported in a bracket on the shell
pit shield cantilever, and attached to a shell grab {see page 203).
When raising the shell by this means two arms, hinged to the
inside of the lift, are disengaged, lowered and employed to guide the
shell on to the loading tray. The arms are secured in the housed
position by catches on the lift. A hinged plate at the top of the
lift (rear side) also serves as a guide to the shell when lowering it on
to the tray.
The windlass (Plate 27) consists principally of brake and wire
rope drums, spindle, winch handle, brake band, lever with counter-
weight, ratchet wheel, pawl and spring, and wire rope, the whole
being supported in a bracket (Parts I and II) on the left rear of the
rear bolster.
The wire rope drum is mounted freely on the spindle and consists
of a barrel having large and small flanges and formed with a right


hand spiral groove for the wire rope. A pin and slot is provided
near the small flange for attachment of the wire rope, whilst two
pinions are mounted diametrically on studs in the face of the
large flange to revolve between a sun wheel formed on the spindle
and teeth on the inside of the brake drum. The spindle is also
formed with a square at one end to mount a winch handle and a
hexagon at the other for a ratchet wheel. A pawl for the ratchet
with flat spring is mounted on the bracket. The brake drum is
mounted freely on the spindle and is formed with internal teeth
for the planet pinions. A brake band surrounds the periphery of
the brake drum, one end being adjustably secured to the bracket
and the other to a lever pivoted on the bracket and fitted with a
counterweight adjustable for position The rope is 1-inch wire,
45-feet long, and has an eye splice at each end fitted with a thimble
for attachment to the wire drum and projectile grab, respectively.
To raise the shell, the winch handle is turned in the direction
which causes the ratchet teeth to pass successively under the pawl
which thus holds the weight. The rotation of the spindle and
sun wheel forces the planet pinions to revolve around the teeth on
the brake drum. As the latter is held stationary by means of the
brake band, the wire rope drum is thus forced to revolve in a direction
opposite to that of the spindle, winding in the rope and raising the
grab.
To lower the shell (or grab), the counterweight lever is raised
which eases the brake band, whereupon the weight on the fall
causes the wire rope drum to rotate in the reverse direction about
the spindle (which is held stationary by means of the ratchet wheel
engaging the pawl), and the planet pinions force the brake drum
to rotate in an opposite direction to the wire rope drum against
the friction of the brake band, thus unwinding the rope and lowering
the shell (or grab).
Interlock for Rammer and Wash-out
(Plate 16)
Three interlocking hand levers (inner, centre and outer) are
mounted in a supporting bracket on the platform to the right
rear of the breech for the purpose of operating the control valves
of the cradle lock, wash-out and rammer mechanisms respectively.
These valves must be operated in sequence; otherwise serious
damage to the mechanisms would occur. To ensure the correct
sequence, an interlocking and release system is fitted.
The system provides that, preparatory to the operation of loading :—
{a) The gun and cradle are locked in the loading position.
\h) The rammer and loading tray, containing shell and cartridges,
are in the “ receiving ” position.
(c) The breech is in the fully opened position.
[d] The wash-out has been operated.


Three distinct methods of interlock are employed, viz. :
(1) Each hand lever is fitted with a grip release spring catch
which engages front or rear notches in the supporting bracket.
(2) Each hand lever (Fig. 45) is formed with a lug or lugs on
the boss overlapping corresponding lugs on the next lever in such a
manner that the levers can only be operated backward or forward
in the correct sequence.
(3) The link connecting the centre hand lever to the control
valve is provided with a catch lever which requires the preparatory
action as shown in {a), (h), ( c ) above to release it.
The method and sequence of release are as follows :
{a) To release the inner hand lever, operate the grip release
spring catch. The lever can now be pulled back until its catch
FIG . 45
engages the rear notch in the quadrant. The movement of this
lever disengages the lugs on the inner and centre levers and thus
partially releases the centre lever. It also operates the control
valve for cradle lock interlock valve on the control standard,
whereby the gun is locked in the loading position.
( h) To complete the release of the centre hand lever it is necessary
to roll a shell from the ammunition cage on to the loading tray,
to fully open the breech (these two operations actuate a series of
levers and rods which combine to release the catch lever from the
link connecting lever to control valve) and to operate the grip release
spring catch. The centre hand lever can now be pulled back.
The movement of this lever disengages the lugs on the centre and


outer levers and thus partially releases the outer lever. It also
operates the wash-out.
Note.—The first two operations may be carried out in the
reverse order or simultaneously.
(c) To complete the release of the outer hand lever, operate the
grip release spring catch. The hand lever can now be pulled
back. The movement of this lever commences the operation of
rocking the rammer and tray over to the ramming position and
loading the round.
The interlock system necessitates that, after loading, the hand
levers should be pushed forward in the reverse order to above
[i.e. outer, centre, inner) before the gun can be moved from the
loading position.
The interlock mechanism consists principally of a supporting
bracket and a series of interworking levers, rods, cams and cam
rollers, etc., assembled as follows :
The supporting bracket is a hollow casting with flanged base for
attachment to the platform. The ends, together with a parallel
dividing wall, form quadrants for the inner, centre and outer hand
levers and are provided with front and rear notches for the grip
release spring catches which are mounted on the levers. The levers
are pivoted on a common axis pin and are formed at the lower
end with a short arm, the arms being connected to the links of three
control valves situated below the platform. A stop for the outer
hand lever is pivoted at the rear end of the outer quadrant for use
in drill or when operating the rammer without a shell or cartridge.
When in the engaged position it limits the rearward movement of
the lever, thus restricting the flow of pressure through the control
valve and consequently slowing down the movement of the rammer
rocker and rammer.
On the left side of the mounting, left and right upper levers
are mounted on the ends of a short horizontal spindle supported in
the rear end of the cartridge guide. The left lever is fitted with a
roller to engage the shell in the tray and the right lever is attached
to the upper end of a vertical rod. The lower end of the latter is
connected to one of a pair of lower levers mounted on a spindle
supported in a bracket on the platform, the rear lever (which is
formed with a second arm having a lug to engage a notch in the
flange of the split coupling of the rammer rocker shaft) is con-
nected to a transverse rod extending across to the right side of the
platform, where it is attached to a cam carried on the rear end of a
longitudinal rod, the pin passing through an elongated hole in the
cam. The foregoing rods and levers are actuated by the left upper
lever (with roller) when rolling the shell from the ammunition
cage to the loading tray and are returned to the normal position by a
spring on the transverse rod exerting pressure towards the left.
The longitudinal rod extends from the transverse rod to the


front and has its front end attached to a lower lever carried on a
vertical spindle near the breech. The spindle carries an upper lever
fitted with a roller which engages the breech mechanism lever
when opening the breech, so that, through the lower lever, the
longitudinal rod with cam is drawn towards the front. On closing
the breech, the levers and rod are returned to the normal position
by a spring on the rod exerting pressure towards the rear.
The cam on the longitudinal rod is brought into engagement
with a cam roller on a lower lever, carried on a short vertical spindle
supported in a bracket on the platform, by the combined movements
of the transverse and longitudinal rods. A lever on the upper end
of the spindle is connected to the left end of an oblique rod. The
right end of the rod is attached to a catch lever for the connecting
link of the wash-out control valve. The catch lever is pivoted in a
bracket on the underside of the platform and below the bracket
supporting hand levers. It is disengaged by the combined move-
ments of levers and rods which follow the rolling of the shell from
the ammunition cage to the loading tray and fully opening of the
breech. On rocking the rammer to the receiving position and
closing the breech, the levers and oblique rod are returned to the
normal position by a spring on the oblique rod exerting pressure
towards the right..
Action
It is assumed that the gun has been brought to the loading
position consequent on operating the control lever of the control
standard on the left front of the platform.
On pulling back the inner hand lever (its grip release spring
catch being first disengaged) the gap (A) between the lugs on the
boss of the inner and centre levers is closed, thus partially releasing
the centre lever, and the control valve is opened to admit pressure
from pipe A to pipe B, which overcomes pressure via pipe C, thereby
operating the cradle lock interlock valve, on control standard, and
locking the gun in the loading position {see Plate 13).
On rolling a shell from the ammunition cage to the loading
ra y> the shell bears against the roller and forces the left upper
front lever upwards. This motion is transmitted through the
left upper rear lever in a downward direction to the vertical rod
causing the left lower front and rear levers to rotate slightly about
their pivots. The lug on the second arm of the rear lever is thereby
disengaged from the notch in the split coupling on the rammer
rocker shaft, thus leaving the rammer free to be rocked from the
receiving to ramming position when required, and the transverse
rod forced to the right, compressing its spring. The movement of
the transverse rod causes the rear end of the longitudinal rod to
move slightly to the right in a horizontal plane about its front
connecting pin and this forces the cam on the rear end of the rod to
bear against the cam roller on the lower rear right lever.


As the breech mechanism approaches the fully open position,
the breech mechanism lever bears against the roller of the upper
front right lever and forces it to the front, transmitting a similar
motion through the vertical spindle to the lower lever and thereby
drawing the longitudinal rod to the front, compressing its spring.
The pin connecting the right end of the transverse rod passes
through an elongated hole in the cam and thus permits the free
forward or rearward movement of the longitudinal rod without
affecting the position of the transverse rod. The forward movement
of the longitudinal rod, through the cam bearing against the cam
roller, causes the lower and upper rear right levers to rotate with
their spindle and thus draws the oblique rod towards the left,
compressing its spring, and disengages the catch lever from the
link connecting control valve to the centre hand lever. The latter
is now fully released and can be pulled back when required, thus
opening the control valve and operating the wash-out squirts (see
page 122). Pulling back the centre lever also closes gap (B) between
the lugs on the bosses of the centre and outer levers, thereby releasing
the latter.
The outer lever can now be pulled back when required to
operate the rammer rocker jack (see page 123).
The interlock, which has been fully released by the above
procedure, cannot come into full force again until the rammer has
been returned to the receiving position by the outer lever, the
centre hand lever pushed forward, and the breech closed.
[а] On pushing forward the outer hand lever the rammer
is returned to the receiving position. This movement permits the
lug on the left lower rear lever to re-enter the notch on the split
coupling of the rammer rocker shaft, when the compressed spring
on the transverse rod re-asserts itself and, by means of the inter-
vening levers and rods, returns the left upper lever to its normal
position in readiness for operation by the next shell. It also draws
the longitudinal rod towards the left, thus partially withdrawing
the cam from the cam roller with consequent slight movement of the
oblique rod and catch lever towards re-engagement.
(б) On pushing forward the centre hand lever the control valve
connecting link is lowered until the gap in the link is opposite the
catch lever.
(c) On closing the breech the upper right lever is released by the
breech mechanism lever when the longitudinal rod with cam is
forced by its compressed spring to the rear, thus fully releasing the
cam roller and lower rear lever and allowing the oblique rod to
move to the right under the action of its compressed spring, when
the catch lever once more engages the connecting link.
The inner lever is now free to be pushed forward to release the
control of the elevating gear.


Rammer, Loading Tray and Rammer Rocker
(Plates 15, 17, 18 and 19)
The projectile and cartridges, when raised to the level of the
gun by means of the hoist, are normally loaded into the breech by
means of a rammer and loading tray which are rocked from the
receiving to the ramming position by the rammer rocker. The
hydraulic mechanisms employed in these operations are set in
motion immediately the outer control lever on the right of the
fixed platform is pulled back, thus opening a control valve situated
below and permitting the flow of pressure via semi-automatic and
cut-off valves, etc., to the rammer rocker jack and rammer hydraulic
press.
The rammer, loading tray and rammer rocker are situated
on the left rear of the breech, the rammer extending beyond the
rear of the platform.
The rammer consists of the following principal parts, which are
briefly described.
The casing, which is designed to contain the ram, hydraulic
press, charge ejector, etc., consists of a deep channel section cover
plate, opening downwards, the sides being supported by front and
rear connecting plates secured to the lower edges. Packing and
stiffening plates are provided where necessary. Two brackets are
provided on the left side for attachment of the front and rear arms
which support the rammer on the rocker shaft. Guide and bearing
rollers are fitted on the interior of each side for the ram guides. A
charge ejector retaining catch is secured below the casing towards
the front.
A crosshead guide rack is secured longitudinally to the under-
side of the top of the casing towards the front. The rack engages
with a centre spur pinion carried in a crosshead on the piston
rod of the hydraulic press and a crosshead stop is fitted at its
fiont end.
The hydraulic press consists of a cylinder screwed into front and
rear end pieces which are secured to the underside of the top of
the casing. A packed piston with rod works in the cylinder, the
front end of the rod passes through a packed gland at the front and
is screwed into a crosshead. A dash pot closes the rear opening of
the rear end piece and receives an extension on the piston rod. Both
end pieces are prepared for the attachment of the pressure and
exhaust pipes from the cut-off valve. A small drain valve, with
tube, is provided near each end of the cylinder. The crosshead is
secured to right and left guides (which consequently conforms to its
movement) and supports three spur pinions, the centre one meshes
with the teeth of the guide rack on the casing and the outer pair (of
larger diameter) mesh with the teeth on the ram racks.
The ram guides are left and right, of “ I ” section, and are


supported by their upper outer flanges on rollers mounted on
the interior of the sides of the casing, which facilitate their longi-
tudinal movement. The guides are spanned by front and rear
brackets which support the cut-off valve controlling cams. In
addition, the right guide is fitted with a centre supporting bracket
for right controlling cam, also a rear bracket for cam adjusting
screw. A “T ” section bar cam for the semi-automatic valve
is fitted to the underside of the left guide at the rear end. A
small steel plate at the front end of the cam ensures the roller of the
semi-automatic valve (on the left spindle) taking a correct bearing
on the cam.
The ram consists principally of a manganese bronze tube, steel
ram shoe and a pair of ram racks. The tube, which receives the
cartridges and propels the shell into the breech, is fitted at the rear
end with the ram shoe. The latter, which is bored centrally to form
a front bearing for the charge ejector rod, supports on its sides
the front ends of the ram racks, the latter extending rearwards on
either side of the charge ejector. The racks are opposite channel
section members, having teeth formed on the upper flange which
engage the outer spur pinions on the crosshead, and the lower
flange formed with cams which, at a predetermined moment,
disengage the locking pawl of the charge ejector from its retaining
catch below the casing. The sides of the racks are provided with
rollers to support them between the inside flanges of the guides.
Top and bottom charge ejector stops are fitted between the racks
adjacent the cams and distance tubes with bolts between the rear
ends. A striker for the “ down ” catch of the semi-automatic
valve is fitted below the left rack at the rear end.
The charge ejector works between the ram racks and consists of a
circular head situated in the ram tube and carried on the front end
of a tubular rod which passes through the centre boring of the
ram shoe. In rear of the shoe the rod is fitted with four spiral
springs, placed end to end, with parting rings. The springs, which
are held under initial compression between the ram shoe and a
locking pawl bracket on the rear end of the rod, are fully com-
pressed by the operation of withdrawing the ram from the breech
and serve to return the ejector to the normal position when the
locking pawl is released from its catch. The locking pawl bracket is
supported during travel by a pair of rollers on each side bearing
against the flanges of the ram racks. The pawl is formed with two
arms which are pivoted about their middle in lugs on the bottom of
the bracket, and is actuated by a pair of springs on guide rods
carried on a common hinge pin supported in flanges on the bracket.
The springs are connected to the rear ends of the pawl arms by a
guide plate and control rod. A tubular T-head on the rod passes
over the axis pins of a pair of rollers. The latter are mounted
external to the arms and are depressed by the cams on the ram
racks as they move towards the rear on withdrawal from the


breech. The pawl is thereby released from its catch, whereupon
the ejector is returned to its normal position under the expanding
effort of its springs.
The controlling cams for tho cut-off valve, left and right, arc
of the grooved bar type. They are supported longitudinally above
the left and right guides by transverse brackets at their front and
rear ends. The right cam is in two parts, with dowel joint, in
order that the length of the cam may be regulated to suit by means
of an adjusting screw at the rear end.
Two levers, each in two parts, which form upper and lower
arms, are pivoted in bearings fixed on the top of the casing
for the purpose of operating the cut-off valve. The rollers are
mounted on the lower arms (Part I) and work in bent cam grooves
in the cams, and the upper arms (Part II) are pinned to links on
the outer ends of the cut-off valve spindles.
The cut-off valve (Fig. 44) is mounted centrally on top of the
casing. It is similar to that described ( see page 119), and is con-
nected by pressure and exhaust pipes to the front and rear end
pieces of the hydraulic press cylinder, also to the swivel joint on the
rammer rocker shaft.
The control valve (Fig. 39) is situated on the right of the platform
below the outer lever to which its piston is connected by a bar link.
A pipe connects the valve to the pressure standard, two pipes
(alternatively pressure and exhaust) connect it to the semi-automatic
valve, whilst a fourth leads to the exhaust standard.
The loading tray is situated between the breech and rammer, in
prolongation of the latter and consists principally of a carrier,
movable platform, and catch; the tray being provided with an
arm, shaft and balancing spring, etc., the whole being supported
in a frame secured to the platform frame. The arm is built up of
angle and plate and is mounted, by means of a bottom bracket, on a
shaft, working in a bearing bracket, the latter being supported on
knee angles on the frame. The shaft is connected by a split coupling
to the rammer rocker shaft, thus ensuring that the tray is rocked
together with the rammer when power is used. A steel socket is
secured to the underside of the carrier at the rear to receive a hand-
spike in order that the tray may be levered over should the power
fail. In these circumstances it is necessary to disconnect the shaft
at the split coupling.
The carrier is trough-shaped and provided with rubbing strips
for the shell and longitudinal grooves in each side for the rollers
on the movable platform to work in ; it is also fitted with left and
right grooved cams for the rollers on the catch. A stop is fitted in
each side to engage front and rear beating faces on the platform
and limit its longitudinal movement.
The platform is curved on top to suit the contour of the shell and
is supported in the carrier by two rollers on each side which run in
grooves in the carrier sides and thus facilitate the propulsion of the


weighted platform in the carrier. The platform carries the shell
to the chamber and protects the breech threads.
A catch is hinged to the rear of the platform and is actuated by
cam rollers working in the grooved cams on the carrier. A lug on
the underside of the catch is in engagement with a spiral spring
carried on a guide rod below the platform which is attached at the
front end to a bracket on the carrier. The catch is so arranged
that, when depressed, it holds the platform in the forward position
until the front edge of the ram tube, during its withdrawal into
the rammer casing, clears the rear edge of the catch, the spring
then raises the catch and returns the platform to the normal
position.
The balancing spring for the tray consists principally of a spiral
spring enclosed in a tubular case fitted with upper and lower caps.
The lower cap is attached by a bracket to the shell pit shield.
The spring is carried on a plunger working in the case, the rod of the
plunger being passed out through the upper cap and secured by an
adjusting bolt to the bracket carrying the loading tray arm.
The frame consists of two vertical angle members, bent outward
at the upper end (the bent portion of the rear member partly supports
the rear cartridge guide), and fitted with stiffening plates. The
latter are connected near the upper end by a U-shaped angle, the
bottom of which serves as a stop for the balancing spring arm on
the bottom bracket of the loading tray arm, when the tray is in
the ramming position. Two knee angles with stiffening plates are
secured to the vertical members about their centre ; they support a
packing plate and bearing bracket for the shaft.
Action of catch and platform
When loading, the front lower edge of the ram tube engages
the catch and the thrust propels the platform and shell forward
until such time as the catch, through the action of its cams and
cam rollers, is forced downward away from the ram tube. The
latter then passes over the catch and engages the base of the shell
which it propels forward off the platform into the breech. During
its forward and backward movements over the tray and platform,
the ram tube holds the catch down, its rollers resting in front
of a shoulder in the cam grooves, thereby preventing any rearward
movement of the platform until the front edge of the ram tube is
withdrawn clear of the rear end of the catch when the spring (which
has been compressed by the forward movement of the platform),
reasserting itself against the lug on the catch, raises the catch
until the cam rollers are clear of the shoulder in the cam groove
and returns the platform to its normal position.
The rammer rocker supports the rammer and is operated by a
double-ended rammer rocker hydraulic jack.
The rammer rocker consists principally of two arms, front
and rear, mounted on a shaft (in two parts with sleeve coupling)
9 —(2)


which rotates in brackets secured to packing plates on the platform.
The shaft has mounted an actuating lever which is connected to the
Crosshead of the hydraulic jack. A swivel joint is fitted on the
shaft to maintain an uninterrupted flow of pressure to the rammer
during its movements to and from the ramming position. The
rocker also includes left and right balancing springs which are
provided to steady the rammer as it arrives at the receiving and
ramming positions.
A brief description of the parts is as follows ;
The arms are built up of plates and angles and are secured
to bottom brackets mounted on the shaft. The front arm is fitted
with a roller bracket and roller between two upright members.
When the rammer is in the receiving position the roller engages with
the top of the case of the left balancing spring. The rear arm
is fitted with a bracket between the upright members for the
attachment of the upper end of the right balancing spring.
The front and rear shafts are splined where they receive the
arms, actuating lever and couplings.
The front shaft is provided with a split coupling with keys by
which it is secured to the loading tray shaft.
The rear shaft is provided with a sleeve coupling with taper pins
by which it is connected to the front shaft. It is also formed
internally with two liquid channels which provide communication
between the swivel joint and the pipes leading to the cut-off valve
of the rammer. The rear end is screwed and fitted with a nut.
The brackets for the shaft are provided with manganese bronze
bearings and are fitted with caps with lubricator. They are mounted
on facing plates on the platform having tapered seatings which are
designed to lay the shaft at the loading angle.
The lever actuating shaft is fitted on the front shaft immediately
in rear of the front bearing bracket. It is formed with two parallel
arms which have rectangular openings at their outer ends to take
sliding bushes for the pin of the crosshead of the rammer rocker
jack.
The swivel joint is mounted on the facing plate supporting the
rear bearing bracket and is fitted with large and small U-section
packing rings (each in pairs) with common supporting collar, the
latter being channelled and perforated to afford free communication
between the internal channels of the shaft and a pair of nipples
fitted on the side of the swivel joint body and prepared to receive
the unions of pipes leading from the semi-automatic valve. The
joint is provided with inner and outer backing collars for the
U-section rings and is closed by a gland. A felt dust excluder
is fitted in the gland and the rear end of the body.
The left balancing spring consists of a spiral spring enclosed
in an inner and outer telescopic casing, the two casings being held
together by an adjusting bolt which is passed down through the
bore of the spring and is nutted up below the barrel of the outer


case. The barrel is formed solid with a box pedestal by which
the balancing spring is secured to a facing plate and angle on the
fixed platform. When the rammer is rocked to the receiving
position the roller on the front arm bears against the bolt head
(the bolt being formed with a large flanged cheese-head for this
purpose) and compresses the spring.
The right balancing spring consists of a spiral spring enclosed
in inner and outer telescopic casings. The outer ends of the
casings are provided with screwed on caps formed with a lug by
which they are pinned to a bracket on the right of the platform
and the rear arm supporting rammer. When rocking the rammer
to the ramming position the spring is compressed and shares the
thrust of the rammer rocker jack with the balancing spring of the
loading tray.
Stops or facing plates on the frames supporting the semi-auto-
matic valve and loading tray respectively, serve to limit the move-
ment of the rammer and tray when rocked to the ramming position
and ensure that they rest in correct alignment with the breech
opening. The tray stop also operates when using the tray
separately from the rammer. Similarly, front and rear frames
attached to the platform are prepared with facings which serve to
limit the movement of the rammer and tray when returned to the
receiving position and also ensure they are in correct alignment
with the cartridge guide.
The rammer rocker jack consists principally of a double ended
ram working in separate and opposed cylinders, each of which
is connected by a pipe (alternatively pressure and exhaust), to one
of two chambers in a cut-off valve, the action of which is regulated
by cam levers and cams, the latter being secured to the pin of an
intermediate crosshead on the ram.
The ends of the crosshead pin are supported in bushes sliding
in the rectangular openings in the lever actuating rammer rocker
shaft, the function of the jack being to revolve the shaft, thereby
moving the rammer and loading tray from the receiving to the
ramming position and vice versa.
The ram consists of a central crosshead, with crosshead pin,
which is fitted with large and small diameter ends, the latter
functioning as rams in cylinders of corresponding size.
The cylinders are of large and small diameter to suit the rams
and are fitted with packed glands. They are supported in brackets
which, together with facing plates, are secured —one on a plate at
the upper end of a supporting frame for the large cylinder and the
other to the frame of the platform for the small cylinder. Each
cylinder is provided with air and drain valves and is connected by
a pipe to a cut-off valve.
The cut-off valve (Fig. 44), which is generally similar to that
described (see page 119), is mounted outside the lower cylinder.
Its action is regulated by a pair of cam levers pivoted in the cylinder


bracket and fitted with cam rollers which move in slotted bar
cams. The front ends of the latter are secured on the cross-head
pin and their rear ends slide in covered recesses in the bracket of the
lower cylinder.
The frame is designed to support the large cylinder and its bracket.
It is built up of steel plates and angles and is secured vertically to
the platform frame by its two vertical members. The upper end
FIG . 46
of the frame stands above the platform and is fitted with a curved
hinged cover, with padlock, to enclose the upper end of the jack.
The semi-automatic valve (Fig. 46) is supported on a frame fixed
to the rear end of the platform. It consists principally of a body
and piston.
The body is prepared internally with a piston chamber which
is fitted at the upper end with a packed gland for the piston rod


and at the lower end with a screwed nipple. Ports are provided in
the sides for attachment of the various pipes, viz., two each to the
control valve, cut-off valve of the rammer rocker jack, and to the
swivel joint, respectively, the pipes being alternatively pressure
and exhaust. A further pipe is connected to the nipple and supplies
constant pressure to the lower piston head to keep the piston up to
its work.
The piston is formed with three heads, the interspaces forming
pressure and exhaust chambers, alternatively. Ihe outer end of
the piston rod is fitted with a forked connector with pin in which
is pivoted a double ended lever.
The frame (which is designed to support the rammer in the
ramming position, also the semi-automatic valve and its operating
mechanism) consists of a U-shaped angle having its arms secured to
to the rear end of the platform and fitted at the top with a facing
plate (or plates) to receive the weight of the rammer in the ramming
position. A manganese bronze bracket is fixed between the arms
at the upper end, and supports the semi-automatic valve and its
operating mechanism and safety catches. The operating mechanism
consists of a double-ended lever, with forked ends, pivoted in the
connector on the piston rod of the valve. The right forked end
engages a double flanged adjusting nut carried on a vertical fixed
spindle secured in two lugs on the bracket. This nut serves as a
fulcrum for the lever and is adjustable for height, if necessary,
being secured by means of lock nuts above and below it. Ihe left
forked end engages a similar adjusting nut carried on a movable
vertical spindle working in a lower lug on the supporting bracket
and in the bracket carrying the catches. The left spindle is feathered
to its bearing to prevent turning and is forked at the upper end to
take a roller for the semi-automatic valve cam (on the left guide
of the rammer) to ride upon during travel of the ram. Iwo safety
catches are provided for the left spindle and are designed to retain
it in the up and down position respectively. The catches are
spring-loaded and are pivoted in the bracket which provides the
upper bearing for the spindle. The catch retaining spindle up is
on the left and has the lower end formed as a hook to engage an
undercut on the left feather of the spindle. It is released by means
of a striking piece (secured to the left side of the rammer casing
and the rear rocker arm) which engages its upper end as the rammer
casing nears the ramming position. The catch retaining spindle
down slides in a T-shaped slot in the bracket and engages a stop
plate on the spindle and holds it down during the travel of the
ram until released by a striker on the left ram rack as the ram
returns to the rear position. The movements of the left spindle
transmit similar movements, through the double-ended lever, to
the valve piston, i.e. from the up to the down position and vice
versa. This alteration of position has the effect of diverting the
flow of pressure from the rammer rocker jack to the swivel joint


(for rammer) and vice versa. The piston being depressed against
the constant pressure exerted against its lower head, the same
pressure serves to return it to and retain it in the up (or normal)
position.
Action
[a) To move the rammer and tray to the ramming position and ram
home.
It is assumed both the inner and centre levers on the platform
have been pulled to the rear, thereby permitting the outer lever to be
operated.
Release the handgrip catch and pull back the outer lever which
raises the piston of the control valve and opens its pressure chamber
to the upper port of the valve and admits pressure to the
semi-automatic valve.
The ports of the semi-automatic valve are always open at
this stage to the cut-off valve of the rammer rocker jack and the
pressure flows uninterruptedly through these valves into the lower
cylinder of the jack which forces its ram upwards and thereby rocks
the rammer and tray over to the ramming position. As the ram
moves upward, the liquid in the upper cylinder is forced through
the exhaust side of the cut-off valve semi-automatic and control
valves to the exhaust standard: also, at the same time, the
cartridge stop plate of the cartridge guide is raised by the action
of its spring.
As the rammer approaches the ramming position, the striking
piece on the left side of the casing disengages the “ catch retaining
left spindle up ” situated above the semi-automatic valve. After
the catch is disengaged, the small plate on the front end of the T-
section cam on the left ram guide engages the roller on the spindle
and ensures the cam correctly engaging the roller. The spindle is
thereby partially depressed and transmits similar motion, by means
of the double-ended lever, to the valve piston, forcing it down
about half the extent of its travel. By this movement of the piston
liquid pressure to the rammer rocker jack is partially cut off and
pressure partially opened, via the swivel joint and cut-off valve to
the rear of the piston in the hydraulic press of the rammer.
At this point the rammer concludes its rocking movement to
the ramming position, when (the cut-off valve on the rammer rocker
jack, through the action of its cam having gradually cut off pressure
to the ram of the jack, thus ensuring a smooth finish) the balancing
springs of the rammer and loading tray cushion the blow as the
rammer casing comes to rest on the centre supporting frame at the
rear of the platform, and at the same time the bottom bracket of
the loading tray arm engages its stop.
The liquid pressure in the hydraulic press of the rammer forces
the piston forward, which causes the centre pinion in the cross-
head to travel along its rack on the rammer casing and thereby


actuate the two outer pinions which are engaging the racks on the
ram racks, driving the ram forward. The outer pinions being of
larger diameter than the centre pinion, the ram is given a longer
travel and quicker movement than the piston. The movement of the
crosshead also transmits motion to the guides (to which it is
attached) thereby causing the T-section cam on the left guide to run
over the roller on the spindle operating the semi-automatic valve,
fully depressing it, in which position it is retained by the “ catch
retaining spindle down.” This final movement of the spindle, by
means of the double-ended lever, forces the piston to complete its
travel, thereby cutting off pressure to the rammer rocker jack and
opening pressure fully to the hydraulic press of the rammer.
Meanwhile, the ram tube has engaged the hinged catch of the
loading tray and forced the movable platform (with shell) forward.
As soon as the hinged catch, by the action of its cams, has been
disengaged from the ram tube, the latter engages the base of the
projectile and propels the latter off the platform into the breech
and rams home. The charge ejector (and charge) has been carried
forward with the tube and, at this point, its locking pawl engages
the catch below the rammer casing, so that the ejector is in readiness
to eject the charge from the ram tube on the latter being withdrawn.
Liquid in front of the piston is forced through the exhaust side of the
cut-off valve, semi-automatic and control valves to the exhaust
standard. The cut-off valve on the rammer casing, through the
action of its cam, gradually cuts off pressure to the hydraulic press
as the ram approaches the end of its travel, thereby ensuring a
smooth finish.
(b) To withdraw the ram and return the rammer and loading tray
to the receiving position.
Push forward the outer lever, thereby forcing the piston of
the control valve down which alters the direction of flow so that
the former exhaust pipe now becomes the pressure pipe and vice
versa.
The pressure is now directed, via the lower ports of the semi-
automatic valve and opposite chamber of the cut-off valve, to
the front of the piston in the hydraulic press of the rammer, the
piston being forced to the rear carrying the crosshead with it. The
action of the crosshead spur pinions engaging the racks on the
rammer casing and ram racks is thereby reversed and results in the
ram tube being withdrawn within the casing. During this move-
ment, the charge ejector, due to its locking pawl engaging the
retaining catch, remains stationary, thereby extruding the cartridges
from the ram tube into the chamber of the gun. At this point in
the rearward movement of the ram, the two cams on the lower
edge of the ram racks ride over and depress the two rollers on the
outer end of the locking pawl, compressing its springs, and disengages
the pawl from its catch. The springs of the charge ejector, which
have been compressed by the act of withdrawing the ram, reassert


themselves and return the ejector to its original position. As soon
as the front edge of the ram tube is clear of the loading tray catch,
the spring below the movable platform reasserts itself, raises the
catch, and returns the platform to its original position.
As the ram nears its rearmost position, a striker on the underside
of the left ram rack engages the catch lever and releases the “ catch
retaining spindle down ”of the semi-automatic valve. The incline
of the T-section cam on the left guide has now arrived over the
spindle roller, thus permitting the piston of the valve to be forced
upwards a portion of its travel by the constant pressure against its
lower head. This results in (i) the partial cutting off of the pressure
to the hydraulic press, via the swivel joint and cut-off valve,
(ii) the starting of a partial flow of pressure to the upper cylinder of
the rammer rocker jack (via its cut-off valve) which begins to rock
the rammer and tray to the receiving position. Meanwhile, the
cut-off valve of the rammer, through the action of its cam, gradually
cuts off the pressure and ensures a smooth finish as the ram reaches
its normal position in the casing.
Immediately the rammer begins to move away from the ramming
position, it is followed up by the left spindle of the semi-automatic
valve until the “ catch retaining spindle up ” engages in the notch
in the spindle feather under the action of its spring and holds the
spindle in the up position. This movement of the left spindle is
actuated by pressure under the valve piston, the latter moving to
the full extent of its travel which cuts off pressure to the hydraulic
press of the rammer and allows full pressure to flow to the rammer
rocker jack.
The rammer and loading tray are rocked over to the receiving
position (the cut-off valve on the rammer rocker jack, through the
action of its cam, gradually cutting off pressure towards the finish
of the movement thus ensuring a smooth finish), and are cushioned
down to rest on supporting frames by the roller in the front support-
ing arm engaging the left balancing spring of the rammer. In this
position the cartridge stop plate of the cartridge guide is depressed
by the loading tray, thereby releasing the pawl from the inner shell
catch of the ammunition cage and thus permitting another charge
and shell to be placed in the ram tube and on the loading tray
respectively.
Airblast
(Plates 4 and 20)
An airblast system is fitted on the right of the fixed platform,
primarily to supply compressed air to a valve mounted on the
breech, the valve being operated by a cam on the upper end of the
carrier hinge bolt. It is so arranged that the valve opens during
the time the breech is being swung to the open position and allows
a blast of air to enter the gun chamber to force any remaining


gases from the fired charge towards the muzzle. The system also
serves as a source of supply from which the air cylinder of the
mounting may be charged or replenished.
The compressed air required to charge and replenish the system
is supplied from an installation.
The system consists principally of four air reservoirs, various
valves, pressure gauges, pipes, connections, control panel, swivel
joint, telescopic pipe, etc., which, for the purpose of description,
may be considered as divided into high and low pressure portions
situated on opposite sides of a reducing valve. The high pressure
portion contains three of the reservoirs and the low pressure portion
the remaining reservoir, each having a pressure gauge, valves, etc.
The components may be briefly described as follows :
The four reservoirs are supported vertically on the shell pit
shield by means of a steel framework. They are of one design and
each consists of a steel cylinder having spherical ends which are
formed with a neck, the upper neck being fitted with an emptying
valve and the lower one with a two-way connector. The emptying
valve consists of a screwed stem formed solid with a T-handle,
the stem being provided with an internal channel through which
the air escapes when the valve is opened. The two-way con-
nector enables the three reservoirs of the high pressure portion to be
connected to each other, also to a common drain valve and a
charging pipe. The fourth reservoir is similarly connected to a
drain valve and a charging pipe in the low pressure portion.
The framework is built up of vertical and horizontal angle
members together with brackets, plates, clips, packing blocks, etc.,
also with front and rear supports for a control panel on which are
mounted various valves, pressure gauges, etc.
The pressure gauges differ only in the range of registration
for which calibrated, the No. 12 (high pressure) and No. 13 (low
pressure) reading up to 6,500-lb. and 5,000-lb. per square inch
respectively.
The stop valves “A ” and “ B ” are of the globular type with
wheel operated screw-down spindle. They are placed at con-
venient points in the pipe lines to facilitate the charging of the
reservoirs from the main supply, charging the air cylinder of the
mounting from the reservoirs or direct from the main and also to
supply airblast to the gun as required. The stop valve “ A,”
which is fitted to the pipe line from the main supply, differs from the
“ B ” valves only in that the valve head is mounted loosely on the
spindle (the latter being formed without the retaining flange), in
order to provide for a “ non-return ” action.
The stop valves “ C ” and “ D ’’ are of the globular type with
wheel operated screw-down spindle and embody a small relief
valve with T-handle ; the relief valve is opened to release the pressure
in the gauge after closing down the stop valve. They are situated
immediately below the pressure gauges on the control panel and


differ from each other in the adapter, fitted to take the pressure
gauge.
A spring loaded reducing valve is fitted to ensure that the pressure
from the high pressure portion of the system to the low pressure
reservoir, admission valve or air cylinder of the mounting will not
exceed 1,250-lb. to the square inch. Should the pressure in the
low pressure portion tend to exceed that figure, the valve auto-
matically cuts off supply from the high pressure portion until such
time as the pressure falls. Normally, the original setting of the
valve should require no alteration.
FIG . 47
A relief valve (Fig. 47), with four branches, is provided in the
pipe line to the gun and is situated below the stop valve for the
No. 13 pressure gauge. The valve mechanism is contained in one
of the four branches, the other three providing connection with
the stop valve “ D ” and pipes to the swivel joint on the right
trunnion and a four-way connector. The valve is spring loaded and
is designed to open automatically should the pressure in the gun
supply pipe rise above 1,250-lb. per square inch. Normally, the
valve should require no adjustments after original setting.
The admission valve (Fig. 48) is mounted on the breech of the
gun. It consists of a body in which works a spring loaded valve


consisting of a head formed with front and rear spindles. The
rear spindle carries a spring which bears against an adapter fitted
in the body to receive the pipe which connects the valve to the
telescopic pipe. The front spindle passes through a gland and
engages with an actuating lever pivoted between lugs on the body
and is provided, near its outer end, with a tripping lever which is
operated by a cam on the carrier hinge bolt. The tripping lever
FIG . 48
is kept up to its work by a spring plunger housed within the
actuating lever. An offset branch on the body communicates
between a central chamber in the body and, by means of a short
pipe, an internal channel in the breech.
The main supply pipe is provided at the lower end with a con-
nector which is attached to a bracket below the shell pit shield. The
connector receives one end of a bent pipe leading to a semi-universal


gyro connection which is supported in a bracket below the shell pit
shield. From this connection two rigid tubes connected by a
“ Mediex" gyro connector lead to another semi-universal gyro
connection mounted in a bracket on the emplacement wall. This
flexible conduit allows for about 60-degrees arc of traverse. The
upper end of the main supply pipe is connected to one end of stop
valve “ A,” which is fitted in turn to a T-piece. From the latter
two pipes run, one to a similar T-piece (to which is fitted a stop valve
“ B ” on the charging pipe to the high pressure reservoirs also a stop
valve “ C ” for the No. 12 pressure gauge), and the other to a stop
valve “B” on the high pressure side of the reducing valve. The low
pressure side of the latter is connected by a short pipe to a four-way
FIG . 49
connector from which three pipes lead, one to stop valve “ B ”on
the pipe charging the air cylinder (the end of which is provided with
a connector, valve and key), another to a stop valve “ B ” for low
pressure reservoir, and a third to the relief valve.
The swivel joint (Fig. 49) consists of a bracket in which works a
spindle. The bracket is attached at one end to the trunnion
bearing bracket and is formed at the other end with a transverse
boring which surrounds the outer end of the spindle and is fitted
with a number of packings to make an air-tight joint. An internal
channel connects the central perforated supporting ring of the
packings to a pipe from the relief valve on the control panel. The
spindle is formed with an internal channel communicating through
small holes with the perforated ring of the packings, it is screwed


into a central boring in the right cradle trunnion which is in com-
munication, by means of an internal channel in the cradle side, with
a pipe leading to the front end of the inner tube of the telescopic
Pipe-
The telescopic pipe (Fig. 50) is situated between the swivel joint
on the cradle and the admission valve on the gun and is designed
to allow for recoil. It consists of an inner and outer tube with
supporting brackets. The inner tube works in a gland in the
FIG . 50
front end of the outer tube ; its outer end is supported in a bracket
secured to the top of the rear end of the cradle and guide clip.
The outer tube is supported in front and rear brackets secured to
the rear band of the gun. A globular lubricator with tube is
mounted on the front bracket to lubricate the gland. The rear end
of the outer tube is connected by a short pipe to the admission
valve.
Note. —lnstructions for charging, testing pressure, draining, etc.,
will be found under “ Care and Preservation,” page 315.
141


Cartridge Guide
The cartridge guide is situated above the platform and between
the ammunition cage (when raised) and the breech. It is designed
to facilitate the transfer of the cartridges to the tube of the rammer
when using power.
It is of rectangular construction, closed on three sides by top,
bottom (tray) and inner (guard) plates. The top plate extends
to the rear beyond the bottom and inner plates, and is secured to a
rear cartridge guide bracket having a circular opening which comes
opposite the tube when the rammer is in the receiving position
and thus forms a guide for the cartridge. The tray and guard
plates are fitted with rubbing plates. A hinge bracket is fitted
between the plates at the rear end for a cartridge stop. The latter
is a steel plate secured to the long arm of a bent roller lever which is
pivoted on the bracket. Normally, the upper portion of the stop
plate extends above the level of the tray plate, partially closing the
rear opening of the guide, and prevents the cartridges being ejected
from the guide prematurely. When, however, the loading tray
is brought to the receiving position it depresses the roller lever,
lowering the stop plate clear and thus permitting the ramming
of the cartridges over the loading tray into the rammer tube.
Both the roller lever and stop lever rod are spring loaded to keep
them up to their work and to return them to their original positions
when the tray is moved from the receiving to the ramming position.
Projectile Trollies
Two projectile trollies are provided, each mounted on four
flanged wheels to run on a circular railway around the emplace-
ment floor. The top plate has a 5-degree inclination to agree with
the loading angle and also slopes downwards towards the lift to
facilitate transferring the shell to the ammunition cage.
Each trolley is constructed to carry two shell and, when loaded,
is brought to the left side of the lift to which it is secured by the
projectile trolley stop, so that its subsequent movements conform
to that of the mounting during traverse. A pair of spring loaded
stops is provided for each shell to retain it in position on the trolley,
the stops being released, as necessary, by depressing a foot pedal.
On releasing the front stops, the front shell can be rolled into the
ammunition cage. The second shell is then rolled to the front
position by depressing the rear pedal which releases the rear stops.
This shell is transferred to the cage similarly to the first one.
Note. —There should be a small clearance between the base of
the shell and the rear side plate of the cage or the shell may not roll
freely into the loading tray.


Voice Pipe
A voice pipe is secured (above the platform and adjacent the
hand levers) to the right rear supporting pillar of the shield and is
then led under the shell pit shield, on which it is supported by
packing blocks and clips, to a position near the lower control
lever of the hydraulic press on the left of the mounting. A conical
mouthpiece is fitted at each end of the pipe, and drain plugs at
intervals.
Drain System
A pipe line runs along each side of the mounting, with funnels
at intervals, to collect the drainage, via small pipes, from various
valves (control and semi-automatic), pressure and exhaust standards,
centre pivot, hydraulic cylinders of the hoists, rammer rocker,
rammer, and wash-out pump and convey same to a rectangular
drain tank supported by an angle frame on the left of the front
cantilever of the shell pit shield adjacent the pressure standard.
The tank is fitted with a copper gauze strainer at the top and a
drain cock at the bottom.
Sighting
The sighting gears are carried on the left and right sides of the
mounting and are operated from the sighting platforms in front of
the cradle trunnions being suitably placed in relation to the front
elevating and traversing hand wheels to facilitate the work of the
layers.
The sighting gears provide for direct laying for elevation and
direction. The range and bearing receiver gears, used for indirect
laying, though not actually component parts of a sight, are described
under the above heading for convenience.
Direct laying is carried out by means of an automatic sight
for elevation and a direction sight for direction.
Indirect laying is provided for by means of range receiver
gear for elevation and bearing receiver gear for direction.
A combination of these gears may be used.
Sighting gears consist of ;
(1) On the left side —
(a) An automatic sight for laying for elevation at targets
within the auto-sight limit of range.
( h) Range receiver gear for indirect laying for elevation
at all ranges.
(2) On the right side—
(a) Direction sight for direct laying for direction.
[b) Bearing receiver gear for indirect laying for direction.


Automatic Sight
(Plate 21)
The automatic sight is situated on the left side of the mounting
and provides a direct means of laying the gun for elevation. The
sight is in itself a range-finder, in that, when the pointer in the
telescope is laid on the water line of the target, the gun will be laid
at the quadrant angle required for the range to the target.
The automatic sight consists of the following principal parts :
Sight lever pivot bearing.
Sight lever.
Sight pivot.
Sight carrier.
Hinge flap supporting bracket.
Telescope carrier hinge flap.
Telescope carrier.
Error of day gear.
Cam roller lever.
Spring case.
Automatic sighting gear.
The sight lever pivot hearing is of manganese bronze and is
secured to the front elevating hand wheel bracket by three bolts and
a screw. It is formed with a bearing to take a steel pivot for
the sight lever. The pivot is provided with a nut at each end, one
to secure it in its bearing and the other to retain the sight lever in
position.
The sight lever is of manganese bronze. It is in the form of a
bent arm pivoted vertically at its elbow to the pivot and connected
at its front end to the sight carrier by a bolt. The connecting bolt
passes through a slide block in a rectangular recess in the carrier,
with a clearance between the slide block and short edge of the
recess to permit of the carrier adapting itself to the position of the
connecting bolt when moving round the sight pivot.
The pivot bearing is fitted with a renewable manganese bronze
bearing bush and provided with a lubricator for lubrication of the
pivot. The bearing bush is secured in position by a grub screw.
A connecting bolt with a bearing bush at the rear end of the
lever provides the means for connecting the lever to the sight
correcting gear.
The sight lever functions as a support for the sight and as a
lever to level the sight by the action of the correcting gear.
The sight pivot is of steel and is screw-threaded to engage a
socket in the left cradle trunnion, two flats being formed about its
centre for the use of a spanner. It forms the means of pivoting the
sight to the cradle.
The pivot is provided with a collar and nut at its outer end
to retain the sight in position, the latter being free to be moved


round the pivot by the action of the cam on the cam roller lever
when the elevating gear of the mounting is operated.
The sight carrier is of manganese bronze in the form of a bent arm.
It is pivoted at its rear end to the sight pivot and hinged at its
front end to the cam roller lever to permit of it being moved round
the pivot by the action of the lever.
On the rear upper side of the carrier a rectangular recess is
formed for the reception of the slide block, and a flat surface prepared
with six tapped holes for the attachment of the spirit level and
cover.
The carrier is fitted with two renewable manganese bronze
bushes for the sight pivot, which are secured in position by grub
screws and provided with a lubricator for lubrication of the pivot.
The hinge flap supporting bracket is of manganese bronze. It
fits into an undercut groove in the cam roller lever and is secured to
the latter by a bolt.
It is formed at its front end with a bearing for the hinge pin of
the telescope carrier hinge flap and at its rear end with a square
section recess for the reception of the error of day adjusting screw.
The bracket is provided with a tapered pin to secure the hinge
pin of the telescope carrier hinge flap, also a reader for the error of
day scale which is secured to the rear end by two screws.
The telescope carrier hinge flap is of manganese bronze. It is
formed at its front end with a bearing for its hinge pin and a
rectangular hole at its rear end for the connecting bolt of the error
of day gear adjusting screw; it is connected to the hinge flap
supporting bracket by the pin and bolt.
It is prepared with a vertical tapped hole towards its front end
to take the telescope carrier pivot, which is secured by a tapered
pin, and about its centre with a vertical clear hole which provides
the means of attachment of a bearing pin for the telescope carrier
traversing screw.
The hinge flap carries the telescope carrier traversing screw
which works in a long and short bearing pin, the latter for attachment
to the telescope carrier.
The traversing screw is actuated by a knurled head and a plate
attached to the hinge flap by three screws acts as a lateral guide for
the telescope carrier.
The telescope carrier is of manganese bronze. It is pivoted
horizontally about its centre to the hinge flap. The carrier is
formed with bearings for the Nos. 1, 3 or 7 and 22 sighting telescopes
respectively and prepared, towards its right rear end, with a vertical
clear hole for the short bearing pin of the traversing screw.
An arrow-head is engraved on the carrier and filled in with black
wax ; it is employed in conjunction with a black line on the guide
plate of the carrier to indicate when the line of sight is parallel to the
axis of the gun.
Lateral movement of 12-degrees right and left of the centre line
10—(2)


is allowed for to enable the layer to bring his line of sight parallel
to that of the direction sight, the latter being used to apply deflections
and to automatically correct for drift at all angles of elevation.
The error of day gear forms an adjustable connection between the
rear ends of the telescope carrier hinge flap and its supporting bracket.
The gear consists principally of a steel adjusting screw with a
spiral spring, a gunmetal adjusting nut with a nickel alloy scale
ring and a steel reader for the scale ring.
The adjusting screw is formed with a fork for attachment to the
hinge flap and the adjusting nut provides the means for connection
of the adjusting screw to the supporting bracket, the nut being held
friction tight by means of the spiral spring.
By revolving the adjusting nut the screw is worked up or
down thereby raising or lowering the rear end of the hinge flap
and consequently the telescope carrier with telescope. This
movement increases or decreases the angle between the line of sight
and the axis of the gun.
The nickel alloy scale is graduated in curves representing
100 yards to 400 yards + or —.
The cam roller lever is of manganese bronze. It is hinged to
the sight carrier and connected to the hinge flap supporting bracket
by a bolt.
It is formed with two bearings for the securing bolt on its upper
end and prepared with a tapped boring at its lower end to take the
cam roller axle, which is secured in position by a tapered pin. Ihe
axle is prepared with an oil hole and carries a roller with an internal
cannelure to facilitate lubrication.
The lever is fitted with two renewable bearing bushes for its
hinge pin and provided with three lubricators, two for lubrication
of the hinge pin and one for the cam roller axle.
The spring case is of gunmetal and made in two parts.
Part II fits into Part I and is retained by a guide screw
working in an elongated slot.
The case is cylindrical and carries a steel spiral spring ; it is
looped at one end to a stud on the cam roller lever, the other end
being secured by a stud to the cradle in a position to keep the
roller pressed against the driving edge of the cam groove by the
action of the spring. ...
The automatic sighting gear consists of the following principal
parts :
Cam supporting bracket.
Upper and lower muzzle velocity corrector gears.
Cam.
Tidal arc.
Cam adjusting lever.
The cam supporting bracket is of manganese bronze. It is
formed with an upper and a lower bracket for attachment of the


upper and lower muzzle velocity corrector gears respectively, and
is secured to the cradle by six screws.
The upper and lower muzzle velocity corrector gears are generally
similar but differ in function, the upper gear being for horizontal
adjustment of the cam and the lower gear for vertical adjustment.
Each gear consists principally of a nickel alloy muzzle velocity
corrector scale plate and a steel eccentric pin with a reader for the
muzzle velocity corrector scale.
The eccentric pins are screw-threaded for attachment to the
cam supporting bracket, formed with flanges on the outer ends for
attachment of readers and square section bosses on their inner ends
for the application of a spanner for setting purposes.
The function of the gear is to adjust the cam to suit the muzzle
velocity of the gun for the nature of projectile and charge to be
employed.
The cam is of phosphor-bronze with cam groove cut to the
shape of the required curve to regulate the movement of the sight
in conjunction with a cam roller lever, the roller of which bears
against the driving edge of the cam groove. Cams cut for three-
quarter and half charges differ from the full charge in the contours
of their grooves only.
The contour of the cam groove is based on the range table
to suit the gun with the nature of projectile, charge employed,
normal muzzle velocity and height of trunnions above mean sea
level. These particulars are stamped on the cam, together with
the number of the emplacement, battery and district for which
they are intended.
The cam is prepared with two holes for attachment to the
eccentric pins of the muzzle velocity corrector gears and two tapped
holes for the attachment of the tidal arc. The upper hole is fitted
with a bronze eccentric bush and provision made for a steady pin
and set screw to retain the bush in position.
The tidal arc is of gunmetal and is attached to the cam by two
hexagon headed screws.
It is graduated to represent rise and fall of tide in feet and
stamped with the test range.
The cam adjusting lever is of steel and is used to apply corrections
for alteration in height due to rise and fall of tide.
It is carried on the eccentric pin of the lower muzzle velocity
corrector gear.
The lever is fitted with an index screw for the tidal arc, also a
stud with a clip and thumb nut to secure it in the desired position.
Action
The cam is carried on a supporting bracket attached to the
cradle, therefore any movement of the cradle by the elevating gear
causes the cam to move round the cam lever roller. This movement
slightly rotates the cam roller lever about its pivot thereby tilting


the telescope forward or backward according to whether the cradle is
depressed or elevated.
The amount of movement of the telescope is governed by the
contour of the cam which ensures the angle of sight corresponds to
the same range as the quadrant angle of the gun.
No. 1 Direction Sight
(Plate 21)
The No. 1 direction sight is fitted on the right side of the mounting
and provides a direct means of laying the gun for direction.
It is pivoted horizontally to a bracket which is clear of the
cradle and connected at its front end to a drift correction cam which
is attached to the right side of the cradle.
The method of pivoting the sight and connecting it to the drift
correction cam ensures accurate correction for drift being auto-
matically applied on the sight, and permits of the gun being moved
through all angles of elevation without appreciably altering the
lay of the sight, thereby enabling the gunlayer to remain on the
target and follow it during loading operations by manipulating the
traversing hand wheel of the mounting.
The sight is adjustable for drift correction to suit the various
natures of projectile and charge that may be employed with the
gun.
Corrections for drift and deflection are applied on the sight
through the same worm gear, but the automatic action of the drift
correction gear does not affect the deflection gear and vice-versa.
Movement in the vertical plane is provided for, the gunlayer
raising or lowering the rear end of the telescope carrier by hand
through the medium of an arm, the carrier being clamped in the
desired position.
The No. 1 direction sight consists of the following principal
parts :
Pivot bracket.
Worm spindle bearing.
Cam supporting bracket.
Drift correction gear.
Deflection gear.
Telescope carrier.
Elevating arm.
The pivot bracket is attached to the sight supporting bracket by
four bolts, the supporting bracket being secured to the front part of
the front transom of the platform on the right side of the mounting.
It is of steel and carries a pivot at its rear end for attachment of
the sight. The pivot is secured to the bracket by a nut at its lower
end, and a collar and nut at the upper end of the pivot retains the
sight in position. The top of the pivot is drilled and tapped for the


reception of a lubricator and, for distribution of the lubricant, the
pivot is prepared with a channel running down its centre, which has
two outlet holes.
A plate secured to the front end of the bracket carries an
adjusting screw to provide the means of adjusting the worm spindle
bearing to keep the worm spindle in gear with the worm segment.
The worm spindle hearing is of manganese bronze and is attached
to the pivot bracket by four screws.
It is provided with an end plate, a drain hole screw with a fibre
washer, and four lubricators for the lubrication of the worm spindle.
The cam supporting bracket is of manganese bronze. It is attached
to the cradle by two bolts and two screws.
The drift correction gear consists of a cam, cam roller lever,
drift adjusting nut, and an actuating screw for the drift adjusting
nut.
The cam is of phosphor bronze. It is hinged to the cam
supporting bracket at its lower end and connected to the bracket
about its centre by two screws, the latter working in elongated slots
in the cam to permit of adjustment.
An eccentric bolt with milled edge provides the means of
adjusting the cam, the bolt being locked after adjustment by means
of a locking plate with milled edge. The two screws must be
slackened before turning the eccentric bolt.
The cam roller lever is of steel in the form of a bent arm. It is
formed with a rectangular opening which has a drift correction
nut within it, the nut travelling on an actuating screw.
The drift correction nut is formed with an axle on its rear face
for a roller to work in the cam groove, and a square boss on its
front face to carry an index plate for the drift correction scale
plate, which is attached to the arm by two screws.
The lower end of the lever is formed with a socket and tapped
to take an actuating screw on the end of the deflection worm spindle.
The deflection gear comprises a worm segment bracket, spur
wheels bracket, hand wheel spindle bearing, hand wheel spindle,
worm spindle, and a deflection scale plate.
The worm segment bracket is of cast steel. It is pivoted
horizontally at its rear end to the pivot of the pivot bracket and
attached to its front end is a worm segment to gear with the
deflection worm. The bracket is fitted with four renewable man-
ganese bronze bushes to facilitate repair and with a lubricator for
the lubrication of the telescope carrier pivot.
The spur wheels bracket is of gunmetal. It is attached to the
right end of the worm spindle bearing by three screws and carries
the spur wheel gear, which consists of three spur wheels termed
large, medium and small.
The gear is actuated by a pinion on a sleeve at the end of the
worm spindle, which, in turn, is actuated by a pinion at the end of
the hand wheel spindle.
149


The bracket is provided with a lubricator for lubrication of the
pinions.
The hand wheel spindle hearing is of gunmetal. It is attached
to the spur wheels bracket by four screws and is prepared with two
oil holes for lubrication of the hand wheel spindle.
The hand wheel spindle is of steel and is actuated by a hand wheel
which is secured to the spindle by a collar and nut.
The worm spindle is of steel. It is provided with a removable
worm, which is retained in position and adjusted, if necessary, by
means of a nut.
The deflection scale plate is of nickel alloy and is graduated
from 0 to 10-degrees, in multiples of 10-minutes, left and right for
deflection.
It is attached to the large spur wheel by a screw with a collar,
and prepared with two tapped holes for the insertion of screwed
pins to adjust, if necessary, the scale plate.
The telescope carrier is of manganese bronze. It is pivoted
vertically to the worm segment bracket about its centre and con-
nected to the rear end of the bracket by a clamping bolt with a
wing nut, which provides the means of clamping the carrier in the
desired position in the vertical plane.
The carrier is fitted with two renewable bushes and formed
with telescope bearings for the Nos. 1, 3 or 7 and 22 sighting
telescopes respectively.
The elevating arm is of manganese bronze. Its upper end is
keyed to the telescope carrier pivot and its lower end prepared to
receive and secure a dummy pistol grip. The pistol grip and
elevating arm are actuated by hand which rotates the pivot, and
with it the carrier and telescope, in the vertical plane.
Range Receiver Gear
(Plate 22)
The range receiver gear is used in conjunction with the No. 3
range receiver. It embodies two drives (elevation and bearing)
and a converter for elevation to range.
The elevation drive consists of a small arc (secured to the left
elevating arc of the cradle) gearing with a pinion mounted on the
inner end of a transverse shaft, the pinion being in two parts to
facilitate adjustment for backlash. The shaft is supported in
brackets on the body of the mounting and fixed platform and
transmits motion through a bevel gear at its outer end to an inclined
driving shaft. The wheel of the bevel gear consists of an inner part
nesting in an outer part, a spring being fitted between the parts to
take up backlash. The inclined driving shaft, which is in three
parts connected by muff couplings, passes up into a bracket bolted
to the side of the body near the front elevating hand wheel, and is
connected to the converter by means of a clutch plate arrangement.


The converter mechanism, by which the quadrant elevation on the
gun is converted to range, is contained in the above bracket
which is furnished on the rear face with rings carrying a muzzle
velocity scale and a charge temperature scale. The scales are
set by hand, and the corrections are incorporated in the range
by means of subsidiary mechanisms.
Adjustment for coincidence between the elevation drive and
the converter mechanism is provided for by means of a serrated
clutch plate (accessible on removing a rectangular cover plate),
interposed between the inclined driving shaft and a driving collar
[see Fig. 51), the number of serrations on the faces of the clutch
plate are 35 and 36 and engage corresponding serrations on the shaft
FIG . 51
and collar respectively. By this means a fine adjustment can be
made varying as the number of serrations between old and new
positions of the clutch plate. The setting of the clutch plate
can be adjusted by first slacking back the grub screw securing the
driving collar nut, and then screwing the latter clear by means of a
tommy, when the clutch plate becomes accessible.
The hearing drive is' worked off the left end of the cross shaft
of the automatic sight correcting gear (lengthened for this purpose).
It consists of a short spindle connected to the cross shaft by muff
coupling and transmits motion to a vertical shaft by means of mitre
gearing enclosed in a bracket secured to the shell pit shield. The
vertical shaft transmits motion, by means of bevel gearing, enclosed
in a bracket on the platform, to an inclined driving shaft which


enters an upper chamber in the bracket containing the converter
and adjusts the mechanism to include a correction to range due to
the bearing of the gun.
The composite result from the converter mechanism is trans-
mitted by means of a single spindle through the top of the bracket
to the No. 3 range receiver which is secured on top of the converter
bracket, the spindle being keyed to a spindle in the base of the
receiver.
The No. 3 range receiver, Mark I consists of two dials, correction
gear and illuminating gear, enclosed in a metal case which is
secured to the top of the bracket containing the converter mechanism
of the range receiver gear situated near the front elevating hand
wheel on the left of the mounting.
The dials are graduated for ranges, the left-hand dial being
marked in 25-yards and numbered every 500 to 5,000-yards, the
right-hand dial every 5,000-yards to 40,000-yards. Two hands
are provided in each dial to indicate the range, one being controlled
electrically and the other by the spindle from the bracket containing
the converter of the range receiver gear. When the pointers
coincide, the gun will be laid at the range transmitted electrically
from the fire control or range-finding instrument.
A range correction gear is fitted and controlled by a spotting
handle on the outside of the metal case. The nett correction
applied is shown on a scale which can be seen through a window.
Corrections are in 25-yards up to ± 3,000-yards.
The illuminating gear contains a number of 24-volt lamps
with bayonet connections to which access may be obtained by
removing screwed covers on the front of the metal case. A switch,
with milled head for operating the gear, is fitted to the side of the
case.
Bearing Receiver Gear
(Plate 22)
1 he hearing receiver gear is used in conjunction with the No. 3
bearing receiver. It embodies two drives (traverse and elevation)
and a corrector for drift and convergence.
The traverse drive consists of a recording rack supported by
packing blocks on the pivot plate, gearing with a spur pinion on
the lower end of a short vertical shaft carried in a bracket attached
to the front bolster of the body of the mounting. The shaft
transmits motion through a bevel gear contained in the bracket to a
horizontal shaft, in three parts connected by muff couplings, which
in turn transmits motion to a vertical driving shaft through a second
bevel gear. The latter is contained in a driving shaft bracket
which is also attached to the front bolster. The bevel wheels
of the above gears are formed in two parts, the inner part nesting
in the outer, and a spring is fitted between the parts to obviate
backlash. The driving shaft, which is in three parts connected by


muff couplings, passes up through bearings in the shell pit shield
and platform and enters a pedestal secured on the platform adjacent
the front traversing hand wheel and is connected to the corrector
mechanism by a clutch plate arrangement.
The corrector is contained in a bracket secured on top of the
pedestal and applies corrections for drift and convergence to the
bearing. For displaced guns a convergence cam, special to each
mounting, is incorporated in the mechanism, a concentric blank
being substituted in the case of pivot guns.
Adjustment for coincidence is provided for between the traverse
drive and the corrector as described for the range receiver gear, the
fittings being accessible on removing from the pedestal the larger
of two rectangular cover plates situated below the corrector bracket.
The elevation drive consists of a toothed arc which is secured
to a supporting bracket on the right side of the cradle near the front,
and gears with an arc pinion carried on a transverse shaft (in two
parts with muff coupling). The inner end of the shaft is supported
in a bracket secured with facing plate on the breast of the body,
whilst its outer end passes into a gear box formed in the pedestal
and transmits motion through a mitre gear to the corrector and
adjusts the mechanism to embody a correction for drift in the
bearing.
The composite result from the corrector mechanism is transmitted
to the No. 3 bearing receiver, which is secured on top of the corrector
bracket, by means of a single spindle which passes through the top
of the bracket and is keyed to a spindle in the base of the receiver.
The No. 3 hearing receiver, Mark I is secured to the top of the
bracket containing the corrector mechanism of the bearing receiver
gear situated near the front traversing hand wheel on the right of the
mounting.
It differs from the range receiver, No. 3, Mark I, as follows :
The dials are graduated for bearings, the right-hand dial being
marked in 5-minutes and numbered 3O-minutes to 10-degrees,
the left-hand dial every 10 to 360-degrees.
The bearing correction gear provides for 5-minute corrections
up to 5-degrees right or left.
Electric Firing Gear, Mark II
(Plate 23)
The Mark 11 electric firing gear consists principally of a removable
firing grip (including dynamo), which is supported in a firing grip
holder, attached to the inside of the shield opposite the right
cradle trunnion, also a plug and plate sliding contact between the
cradle and right sliding bar ; cables, with hook contacts, connect
the sliding contact to the lock of the gun and to a terminal
on the firing grip holder. The cables are secured to the mounting


by clips at suitable points. A testing instrument is incorporated
in the gear.
The firing grip comprises a dynamo box and dynamo. The box
consists of the following principal parts ; —A hollow oval body,
partitioned near one end to form large and small compartments
for the dynamo and its actuating mechanism respectively. One
terminal of the dynamo is connected by a copper link to an earth
terminal on the partition, and the other by a short lead to a spring-
loaded contact plunger held in a recess below the body. The rear
of the body is formed with keyways to engage keys of the grip
holder, also with lugs which serve to guide assembly of the grip on
the holder. A catch is pivoted in lugs on top of the grip ; its upper
end is fitted with a wood T-handle for carrying purposes, and its
lower end has a projection which, under the action of a spring
plunger contained in a recess in the body, engages a lip near the
top of the holder and retains the grip in position. Ihe large
(dynamo) compartment is closed by a plain end cover and the small
(mechanism) compartment by a cover formed with bearings, recesses,
etc., for various fittings. A firing lever to operate the mechanism
is mounted outside this cover on a spindle which passes through
the cover and is fitted on the inner end with a segmental arc. The
latter gears with a small spur pinion, the spindle of which is supported
in bearings in the cover and the partition. This spindle engages,
through gearing, with the armature spindle of the dynamo. When
the lever is pulled outward to the end of its stroke, the mechanism
causes the armature to rotate, thereby generating an electrical
current. When released, the firing lever is returned to its original
position by a spring plunger which engages a toe formed on its
pivoted end, the plunger being carried in a recess in the cover.
The lever is provided with a spring catch consisting of a stud
formed with a semicircular inner end, and fitted at the outer end
with a milled head which is marked with an index arrow. When
the latter is turned to “ FIRE ” or “ SAFE,” marked on the lever,
the lever is released or locked respectively. The locking is effected
by the semicircular end of the stud engaging a semicircular slot
in an arc on the cover. The positive movement of the lever is
limited by an adjustable stop which is supported in a lug on the
cover and engages a beating face screwed into the lever when the
latter reaches the end of its stroke.
The arc on the cover is formed with a second locating semi-
circular slot above which the cover is marked “ TEST.” The
lever is locked in this slot by its catch when testing the circuit.
When not required for use, the firing grip is kept in store, lo
remove the grip, release the catch by raising the handle when it can
be lifted clear of the holder.
The firing grip holder consists of a plate and contact.
The plate, which is secured by four screws to the inside of
the shield, is formed with a key on each side to engage keyways
154


Cables.
Length (inches)
Position
104
Gun to sliding contact.
252
Sliding contact to firing grip.
36
Firing grip to testing instrument.
in the firing grip and with a lip near the top which engages the
catch on the firing grip and retains the latter in position.
The contact is supported in a recess in the bottom of the holder.
It consists of a plug contact placed at right angles to the centre of a
horizontal bolt, each with insulating bushes. A bolt is fitted at each
end with a spring-loaded sleeve for cable contact.
The sliding contact consists of a plate and spring-loaded plug
which make rubbing contact when the gun is in the fully run out
position and, together with their insulating bushes, etc., are con-
tained in recesses formed in separate contact boxes. A stem on the
underside of the plate is fitted with a spring-loaded sleeve to grip
the cable contact, and the upper end of the plug is fitted with two
thumb nuts for a similar purpose. The boxes are formed with a
short stem which is secured in a socket in a bracket by a bolt. The
brackets for the plug and plate contacts are secured to the rear edge
of the cradle and top edge of the right sliding bar respectively.
Instrument testing
The instrument is provided for the purpose of testing the firing
circuit, dynamo and grip holder connections, also to measure tube
resistance. It is fitted in a wood box which is housed in a manganese
bronze case.
The case is formed with three lugs for attachment to the shield
above the grip and is provided with a front cover which is hinged
at the bottom and fitted at the top with a clamping bolt with wing
nut. One side is fitted with a non-insulated terminal (earth), and
on the opposite side, with an insulated terminal (with milled nut)
for an outside cable to the firing grip holder.
The box contains a galvanometer, rheostat and T5-volt dry cell.
The galvanometer is of the flush type, with centre zero, and gives a
full scale deflection for a current of 0-3-milliamperes. The scale on
either side of zero is marked “ Break ” and “ Short ” respectively.
The galvanometer is connected to the terminals on the case. The
resistances are arranged to give a fully visible, but not violent,
deflection of the needle for both short and broken circuits. The
galvanometer needle is balanced by manipulating the rheostat,
the latter being operated by an external knob and its setting read
by means of a pointer on the knob moving over a circular dial,
on the front of the box, graduated in ohms. A knob switch is
provided in front of the box.
155


Frame Supporting Cover
A frame is mounted on the platform to support a draw cover
which closes the rear opening of the main shield. It consists of
two side rails which extend to the front from the ends of a cross rail,
the rails being supported on vertical members. The latter consists
of angles, with stay frames, for the front ends of the side rails and
tubes with top and bottom brackets for the rear ends of the side
rails and the ends of the cross rail. The rails each consist of a pair of
angles having their lower flanges turned edge to edge leaving,
however, a narrow central gap, and held together by connecting
clips near each end. The runners consist of a body mounted on a
spindle between two rollers which run on the lower flanges of the
rails. A hook is screwed into the lower end of the body and hangs
below the rail to support the cover.
Runner and Tackle for Sub-calibre Gun
A runner and lifting tackle is provided to mount, and dismount,
the sub-calibre gun in the breech.
It consists principally of a beam and trolley. The beam is
supported longitudinally by angle brackets at each end between
the intermediate and rear girders of the roof of the main shield.
It is H-section steel and has a narrow bearing strip riveted on the
top flange to form a path for the trolley. The latter consists of
two double-flanged rollers mounted on front and rear spindles from
which are suspended two side plates, one on each side of the beam.
The lower ends of the side plates support an eye to take a 15-cwt.
differential tackle.
t)
Electric Installation
The electric installation includes the following ;
(a) Pendent lamps within the main shield, also one pendent
lamp and two hand inspection lamps under the shell-pit shield.
(&) Power and light for range and bearing receivers, also power
for a system of telephones and loud-speakers which facilitate the
passing of orders, etc.
Connections
{a) The R.E. service cable is connected to a 5-way distribution
box secured on the inside of the right side of the main shield.
Leads are led from the box to five fixed lamps and their switches,
with extension to two plug sockets for wandering leads, viz. :
(i) Two pendent lamps attached to the underside of the roof
of the shield on either side of the breech and their switches
on the side of the shield.
156


(ii) Two pairs 3-way junction boxes on either side of the shield
and thence to similar pendent lamps above the front
elevating and traversing hand wheels and to their switches
on the side of the shield, also to two watertight sockets
(with self-contained switches), one on each side of the shell
pit shield front cantilever to which is connected, by means
of a plug, the wandering lead of a hand inspection lamp.
(iii) One pendent lamp attached to the underside of the shell
pit shield adjacent the hydraulic press of the hoist
and its switch on the rear bolster of the body of the
mounting.
The lamps are protected by glass globes and wire guards.
(■ h) The R.E. service cables are connected to a 12-way junction
box (consisting of panels and terminals, hinged door and padlock),
supported by wood packing blocks on the left side of the pedestal.
Leads are passed within the pedestal from the junction box and
and up through the cable conduit in the centre pivot. From the top
of the pivot the leads are distributed—
(i) To the motors (Magslip) and the 24-volt lamps of the range
and bearing receivers.
(ii) To a 6-way junction box (consisting of panels and terminals,
hinged door and padlock) on the inside of the right side
of the main shield. Further cables connect up the box
to loud speakers and telephones suitably disposed.
MOUNTING, B.L. 9 2-INCH, MARK V
(Plate 24)
The Mark V mounting is designed to allow the gun to be fired
between the angles of 10-degrees depression and 15-degrees elevation,
over an arc of 265-degrees. The normal length of recoil is 42-inches.
The mounting can be prepared for all round traverse when specially-
required.
The Mark V mounting differs generally from the Mark VII as;
follows :
The trunnion bearings of the body are lower.
The projectiles are raised from the emplacement floor to the
loading tray by hydraulic pressure from an accumulator.
Projectiles are rammed home and cartridges inserted into the
chamber by hand.
The chamber is sponged out when ramming the shell home,


and the mushroom head and obturator cooled by the application of
a wet sponge cloth. There is no airblast nor water squirt provided.
Elevating and traversing gears are operated by hand only.
A front shield and two side shields are provided, but no overhead
shield.
A rocking bar sight is fitted, there is no direction sight.
Elevation indicator gear is provided.
Range and bearing receiver gears are not fitted.
The mounting consists of the following principal parts :
Holdfast. Trunnion ball bearings.
Pedestal. Gun bands and sliding bars.
Pivot plate. Recoil system.
Pivot plug. Elevating gear.
Traversing arc. Traversing gear.
Roller ring. Loading gear.
Covers protecting roller ring. Sighting gear.
Body. Elevation indicator gear.
Shields. Firing gear.
Cradle.
No. 4a Pedestal Holdfast
The holdfast is similar to that used with the Mark VII mounting.
No. 7 Pedestal
The No. 1 pedestal is similar to the No. 15 used with the Mark VII
mounting, but is not prepared to receive the circular drain trough.
Note, —The No. 4 pedestal is similar to the No. 7, but has no
rectangular holes.
Pivot Plate
The pivot plate is similar to that used with the Mark VII
mounting except that a graduated traversing arc is fitted to the
pivot plate in place of the rack for the bearing receiver gear of the
Mark VII mounting.
No. 19 Pivot Plug
The pivot plug is similar to that used with the Mark VII
mounting. It is, however, prepared for the pipes and rotating
joint of the hydraulic gear; no centre pivot nor pivot casings are
used.
Traversing Arc
The traversing arc is of brass in two ring (upper and lower)
sections. The degree figures are engraved on the upper half and the
divisions and sub-divisions on the lower half.
It is secured round the outer face of the pivot plate below the clip
ring. The angle of traverse is indicated by a pointer fixed to the body.
The No. 34 traversing arc is graduated to show trainings,
and the No. 38 to show bearings, i.e. the former is read anti-clockwise
and the latter clockwise.


Roller Ring
The roller ring is similar to that of the Mark VII mounting.
Roller Ring Protecting Covers
The roller ring protecting covers are similar to those of the
Mark VII mounting.
Body
The body is generally similar to the Mark VII, the chief variations
being height, weight and preparation for fittings.
The trunnion bearings are about 4-feet lower, thereby allowing
the gun to be fired between 10-degrees depression and 15-degrees
elevation only.
A stop limiting elevation is fitted to the rear transom.
There being no centre pivot, the centre pivot packing plate is not
fitted.
A pointer for the traversing arc is fitted near the lower traversing
hand wheel.
A stop, consisting of a steel pin, passes through and projects
inside the right side to limit the elevation to 7-degrees ; this pin
must be removed when firing above 7-degrees.
Cradle locking gear is not fitted.
Mountings which are served by a position finding instrument are
fitted with pointers having deflection scales to indicate a deflection
of 3-degrees right or left independently of the bearing ; the degree
scales are divided into divisions of 10-minutes. Each pointer
consists principally of a bracket which carries a screw with a nut
and scale plate ; the nut is formed with two projections, one of
which indicates the amount of deflection on the scale plate and the
other the bearing on the traversing arc.
Shields
Four steel shields are provided. They are :
Shell pit shield.
Front shield.
Side shields (right and left).
The shell pit shield is similar generally to that used with the
Mark VII mounting. The space between the left and right side
plates in rear of the breech is closed by hinged cover plates, or doors,
which are fitted with flaps and short ropes with chain ends for
lifting purposes. The flaps open and close as the rear hoist is
raised or lowered. The flaps are prevented from fouling the tray
of the hoist by guards fitted to the upper portion of the outer
ram of the hoist. The flaps close automatically as the tray passes '
down through the shell-pit shield. The hinged doors with flaps
must be opened wide when firing at angles of elevation above
7-degrees to allow the gun to recoil through the opening in the
159


shield, and, at the same time, a pin in the right side of the body
limiting elevation is removed (see instruction plate on the body) .
The shield supports wholly, or in part, a number of fittings
which include the front shield, two side shields, rear hoist control
bracket, derrick of auxiliary loading gear and circular railway with
six trollies for carrying shell; it also serves as a platform from which
the sighting positions are reached, and for loading numbers.
On the underside of the circumferential valance a flange is
formed which, together with a similar flange on an inner rail fixed
to the cantilevers of the shield, form a railway on which the pro-
jectile trollies run. A portion of the inner rail at the rear is
detachable to facilitate the removal of the trollies when required.
An opening, closed by a steel door with lifting ring, is cut
through the left side shield above the windlass for the purpose of
raising shell from the emplacement floor to the loading tray when
the auxiliary derrick loading gear is used.
The top of the shield is furnished with sheet lead to provide a
foothold, alternatively the surface of the shield is roughened.
A sighting platform is fitted at each side of the body on top of
the shield.
The front shield is made in halves and fitted together when m
position. A steel butt plate is secured on the inside by screws.
The shield is winged to the rear and splayed outwards at the bottom.
It stands on the shell pit shield and is secured to the body by
steel elastic stays with disc springs. The front is cut away to suit
the gun and sights. Two steel stops limiting depression are fixed
to the stays. ,
The side shields are secured to the body by steel elastic stays and
stand on the shell pit shield. The right side shield is fitted with a
bracket to carry tube boxes.
Cradle
The cradle is similar generally to that used with the Mark VII
mounting, the chief variations being :
Stop brackets are not fitted as the gun can be loaded between
5-degrees elevation and 5-degrees depression.
Roller brackets are not fitted as there is no sliding platform.
There are no airblast fittings, neither is the air passage provided
through the right guide and trunnion.
The elevation degree scale is not fitted.
It is not prepared for the attachment of a mantlet.
No striking plate is fitted to the rear transom to act on the
elevation stop. , , ,
The left trunnion (Fig. 52) and left guide are hollowed to form
part of the gun pressure pipe which conveys liquid from the com-
pressor cylinders to the accumulator ; the compressors are secured
by brackets to the right and left guides of the cradle. Ihe trunnion
is prepared to receive a rotating joint and packing with gland, the


left guide being screw-threaded at the aperture for connection
pipe to left compressor cylinder.
In later manufacture the right trunnion is engraved with one
vertical and one horizontal line.
FIG . 52
Trunnion Ball Bearings
The trunnion hall bearings (Fig. 52) are similar to those of the
Mark VII mounting.
Gun Bands and Sliding Bars
The gun hands and sliding bars are similar to those of the
Mark VII mounting, but are not prepared for fittings of airblast
or elevation degree scale gear.
11 (2)


Recoil System
The recoil system is built up on the same principle as for the
Mark VII mounting.
The buffer and air cylinder are similar to those of the Mark VII
mounting, varying only in a few details, viz. :
{a) The piston rod is fitted at the front with a screwed plug
instead of a valve.
(&) The control plunger has a tapered flat in place of a groove.
FIG . 53
(c) The non-return valve is not fitted in front of the piston,
liquid passing to and fro over the tapered flat.
(d) The valve key is slightly different in contour.
(e) The valve in the diaphragm of the air cylinder has only one
hole.
(/) The liquid gland (Fig. 53) has no U-shaped packing rings,
consequently the H-ring is of a different shape. There are rings
162


of greased hemp packing on either side of the H-ring, the whole
being compressed by a gland as in the Mark VII mounting.
(g) Air pressure in the air cylinder is 200-lb. per sq. inch.
The action is similar to that of the Mark VII mounting, differing
only in the way liquid enters the control chamber.
Elevating Gear
(Plate 25)
The elevating gear consists generally of worm and bevel gearing,
working two arc pinions which gear with elevating arcs on the cradle.
The gear is actuated by hand wheels from either sighting platform
or from the emplacement floor on the left side.
The elevating arcs are bolted to the underside of the cradle
sides, the arcs being connected and strengthened by a cross tie bar.
The arc pinions, which are split to adjust for backlash in the
gear, are secured to an arc pinion shaft which revolves in metal
bearings in the sides of the body, A worm wheel is clamped on
the right end of the shaft by means of friction rings, the worm wheel
being operated by a worm on a worm shaft. This shaft works in
metal bearings, coned roller rings being fitted on the shaft between
the worm and the bearings to take the end thrust of the shaft.
On the right side a right vertical shaft engages with the worm
shaft through bevel gearing. The top of this shaft has a bevel
wheel which gears with a bevel pinion on the hand wheel spindle,
the latter being actuated by a hand wheel.
On the left side the gearing is similar to the right side. The
right and left side gears are connected by a cross shaft and mitre
gearing with the vertical shafts, the vertical shaft on the right side
operating the worm shaft.
The gear as worked from the underside of the shell pit shield is a
continuation of the vertical shaft on the left side and gears with a
spindle actuated by a hand wheel having a folding handle.
Friction rings are used to attach the worm wheel to the arc
pinion shaft to prevent damage to the teeth of the worm gearing
when the gun is fired. These rings are alternately of steel and gun-
metal and are feathered to the shaft and worm wheel respectively.
They are jammed through the medium of two jamming plates, a
spring disc and two steel nuts. The nuts are tightened up so that,
ordinarily, friction causes the worm wheel and shaft to turn together,
but on shock of discharge the shaft can turn a little inside the worm
wheel.
It was found that the gun had a tendency to elevate con-
siderably on firing. To counteract this, a brake has been fitted to
act on the rim of the upper elevating hand wheels. The brake is
operated by a foot lever from the sighting platform, or by a hand
lever from the emplacement floor near the lower elevating hand
wheel.


Traversing Gear
(Plate 25)
The traversing gear consists generally of spur and bevel gearing
working a rack pinion at the front of the mounting ; the rack
pinion gears with the traversing rack which is fixed to the pivot
plate. The gear is actuated by hand wheels from the same positions
approximately, as the elevating gear. The upper hand wheels work
the slow-motion gear and the lower the quick-motion.
The rack pinion fits on a shaft working in bearings in the right
front box transom of the body ; this shaft carries a spur wheel
which gears with a spur pinion on the intermediate shaft. The
latter has a spur wheel on its upper end in gear with a spur pinion
on the right vertical shaft; the vertical shaft has on its upper end a
bevel wheel gearing with a bevel pinion on the hand wheel spindle,
the latter being actuated by a hand wheel having a folding handle.
The gear on the left side, spindle and left vertical shaft, is similar
to that on the right side. The right and left gears are connected
by a cross shaft and mitre gearing with the vertical shafts, the
vertical shaft on the right side operating the intermediate shaft.
The gear as worked from the underside of the shell pit shield is a
continuation of the vertical shaft on the left side which is in mitre
gearing with a spindle actuated by a hand wheel having a folding
handle.
Stops are provided so that practice may be kept within safe
lateral limits except for such mountings as are fitted with a rotating
exhaust joint for hydraulic gear as well as with an “ Apparatus
traversing position-finding dials.”
Loading Gear
(Plate 26)
Projectiles are raised from the emplacement floor to trollies and
loading tray by means of hydraulic gear. Hand-loading gear,
consisting of a derrick with windlass and wire rope, is provided in
case of failure in the hydraulic gear, in which case the trollies may
not be required.
The loading gear works in conjunction with a loading tray
hinged to a steel arm. The arm is bolted to a projection on the
left rear of the cradle ; the outer end is prepared for a joint pin
upon which the tray pivots. The tray is of metal and connected
to the steel arm by a joint pin ; it is V-shaped in rear to afford
clearance for the front part of the shell when raised by hoist and has a
groove formed transversely across the centre to facilitate the removal
of a selvagee when used ; a hole in the left rear is provided for a
loading tray stop. The steel arm is provided with two locking


catches which secure it in the loading position or clear of recoil
respectively. A steadying holder is provided to engage a corre-
sponding hole in the left face of the breech mechanism frame of
the gun for supporting the tray when in the loading position. The
tray is intended to protect the screw threads of the breech of the
gun whilst the projectile is being rammed home. After the cartridge
is loaded, the projectile tray is swung back clear of recoil and
retained by a catch.
The hydraulic gear consists principally of an accumulator;
front and rear hoists with controls ; compressors, valves, pipes and
air screws.
The accumulator frame consists of two cast-iron cylinders and a
tank in one casting with a base plate ; at the side of the tank there
is cast a smaller tank to take the pump which provides the initial
pressure for the accumulator or restores loss of pressure in the
compressors when necessary. The large tank is covered by a lid
fitted with a filling hole, strainer and cover, whilst the small tank
is fitted with a cover, both covers being secured by bolts.
Between the two cast-iron cylinders there is fixed, by a band, a
metal cylinder, and in the three cylinders are rams which take a
bearing against a steel bottom plate which forms a block for com-
pressing the springs, the plate being free to slide on vertical tension
bolts secured by nuts to the base plate of the casting. The move-
ment of the bottom plate up or down is limited by collars on the
tension bolts. The latter also pass through a steel top plate, and
both plates have telescopic spring cylinders bolted to them, inside
which are placed strong spiral springs. The springs are put in
initial compression by metal nuts screwed on the upper ends of the
tension bolts and secured by lock nuts.
The outer cylinders are connected by a passage near the bottom,
and this passage communicates with the accumulator pressure pipe
through the delivery valve.
The centre cylinder is of manganese bronze. The bottom of it is
solid ; its lower end rests in a recess in the base plate of the accumu-
lator, and is kept from rising by a band near its upper end.
Leakage is prevented and the top closed as described below [see
ram of centre cylinder).
A projection is cast on one side of it for the reception of the
stop valve. This stop valve is the means of communication
between the centre cylinder and the gun pressure pipe. The centre
cylinder is connected by a short copper pipe, with suitable unions,
to the pump.
The centre cylinder is also connected with the side cylinder
furthest from the pump, by a connecting pipe and equalising
valve.
The rams of the outer cylinders are of gunmetal, cast hollow,
their lower ends are open, and their upper ends closed. Each has a
projection which fits into a recess in the bottom plate of the springs,


a tapered pin passing through the top of each ram and the plate.
The rams pass through stuffing boxes formed in the top of the
cylinders ; these are packed with rings of hydraulic packing retained
by cylinder covers secured by bolts. Each ram has an air plug
similar to that described below for the centre cylinder.
The ram of the centre cylinder is of manganese bronze, and is,
like the other two, hollow ; it passes through a stuffing box at the
top of the cylinder, in which is placed an L-leather, retained in
position by a cylinder cover secured by bolts. The cover is
recessed to take hydraulic packing secured by a metal gland. A
small hole is bored through the side of the ram at the top of the
cavity to allow for the escape of air, the hole being closed by a
metal screw plug with a conical point.
The valve, stop, centre cylinder “A ” allows the liquid to pass
from the compressors, on the gun being fired, to the centre cylinder
of the accumulator, and after the energy has been absorbed it
closes again, and so retains the pressure.
Two suction valves are provided, one communicating from
the tank to both outer cylinders, and the other from the tank to the
compressors.
A delivery valve is situated in an elbow on the base plate of the
accumulator and forms the means of communication between the
accumulator pressure pipe to hoists and the accumulator cylinders.
It allows liquid to pass from the cylinders into the accumulator
pressure pipe and retains it.
An equalizing valve “ E ” is contained in a hollow cylindrical
projection cast on the side of the centre cylinder, and it com-
municates by a short steel pipe, with suitable unions, to the cylinder
furthest from the pump. On firing, the pressure from the com-
pressors closes the valve and prevents liquid escaping into the outer
cylinders of the accumulator, but a certain amount of liquid filters
through a small hole in the valve thus equalizing the pressure in
the three cylinders, when the spring is enabled to again open the
valve and put the centre cylinder into communication with that
furthest from the pump.
A relief or safety valve is provided on the end of the gun pressure
pipe in the tank. It opens under great pressure, i.e. when the
accumulator rams are at their highest point, and allows surplus
liquid to return to the tank.
A valve stop, pump to gun pressure pipe “ D ” is situated in
the coupling of the gun pressure pipe, near the centre cylinder of the
accumulator, and is connected with the delivery pipe of the pump
by a short pipe. It is used to connect the pump with the pipe leading
to the compressors.
A pump is contained in a smaller tank cast on the side of the
tank proper of the accumulator. There is a small hole bored
through from the bottom of the pump tank into the larger tank.
This is closed by a steel screw inlet valve “ C,” the outer end of which


is fitted with a hand wheel. The spindle passes through a stuffing
box with packing and metal gland.
By-pass valve “ B ” is situated in the pipe leading from the
pump to the centre cylinder and gun pressure pipe. It is operated
by a hand wheel situated outside the pump and below the pump
handle. The valve is used to allow liquid to return from the system
to the tank via the pump.
The rear hoist is secured in a V-shaped arm projecting to the
rear of the body and secured to cantilevers of the rear shell pit
shield. The cylinder is of steel and has a steel pipe leading to a
control valve. A gunmetal cap with metal stuffing box, and leather
washer, is secured to the top of the cylinder. Hydraulic packing
and metal gland in the stuffing box prevents escape of liquid over the
outer ram. The bottom of the cylinder is closed with a gunmetal
screw plug with leather washer. A drain hole, closed by a screw, is
bored through the plug. A featherway is cut in one side the whole
length of the cylinder to take a feather on the outer ram. The
ram is made telescopic and consists of an inner and outer ram.
The outer ram is a hollow metal cylinder. It has a stuffing box
with hydraulic packing and metal gland to prevent leakage over the
inner ram. A metal cap is screwed on its lower end, and has a
hexagonal hole through it for the passage of liquid, and for the
same reason its exterior is made hexagonal instead of cylindrical.
A long feather is dovetailed into one side of the cap to work in
the featherway of the cylinder and to form a stop. The inner ram
is of manganese bronze and has a shot tray keyed over its upper end
to take a projectile. It has a steel feather let into its lower end,
which works in a featherway in the outer ram, forming a guide and
stop. It is hexagonal in shape for some distance from its bottom
end. Projectiles may be loaded from the rear hoist at any angle
between 5-degrees elevation and 5-degrees depression.
The front hoist cylinder is of cast iron, having a flange near
its upper end which rests on and is bolted to a supporting plate
secured over a recess in the concrete floor at the front of the emplace-
ment. A metal stuffing box with hydraulic packing and metal
gland is fitted to the upper end to prevent escape of liquid over the
ram. The bottom of the cylinder is closed by a metal plug having an
emptying hole and screw. A featherway is formed in the cylinder
extending its whole length ; for about 18-inches from both ends it is
parallel to the axis of the cylinder, but the remaining (or central)
portion is formed spiral making a quarter left-hand turn, the object
of this is to turn the tray into a suitable position for loading the
projectile into the trolley. A pipe connects the cylinder to a control
valve. The ram is a solid cylinder of gunmetal and is shaped at the
bottom similar to the rear hoist. A gunmetal tray for the projectile
is fitted over its top end, and is secured by a set screw. A guide
stud screwed into it near its lower end engages the featherway of
the cylinder. The recess in the concrete is closed by a covering


plate with hinged doors. Reversible steel plates are fitted to indicate
the position of the feet of the barrow according to the projectile to be
used.
The control valves for front and rear hoists are similar. A
lever controls the valve which has three positions, i.e. raise, centre
and lower. At raise, the liquid passes through the accumulator
pressure pipe to the cylinder; at centre, no liquid flows; at lower,
the liquid flows from the cylinder via the exhaust pipe to the tank.
A lanyard is fitted to the rear hoist ram to assist in hauling the ram
down.
The compressors are of manganese bronze and are held in bearings
inside the sides of the cradle. The rear end of each compressor
cylinder, two in number, is solid, the front ends being open through
which the rams operate. Hydraulic packing, L-leather, stuffing
box and gland prevent escape of liquid. The cylinders are con-
nected by a steel equalizing pipe and are provided with air and
drain holes, closed by plugs with leather washers. The rams are of
manganese bronze and are secured to the front gun band by nuts
and pins. An elbow pipe forms a communication to the gun
pressure pipe through a longitudinal hollow in the left guide of the
cradle and the left trunnion.
Various pipes and fittings are used to connect the accumulator
with the hoists and compressors. The pipes pass through the pivot
plug (Fig. 54) of the mounting as follows :
The gun pressure pipe, which is connected with the centre
cylinder of the accumulator by the stop valve, and with the tank by a
suction and a relief valve, is carried under the floor to the centre
pivot pipe, through the latter, and is continued by a bent pipe
through the side of the body to an elbow pipe in the left trunnion of
the cradle, the elbow pipe being arranged so that the trunnion may
revolve in elevating or depressing the gun without affecting the
pipe. From the trunnion the liquid is conveyed by the hollow in
the side of the cradle to another bent pipe in rear, which is attached
to the left cylinder of the compressors.
The accumulator pressure pipe, which is connected to the
accumulator by the delivery valve, and the exhaust pipe leading
to the tank, both run under the floor, each being joined by a three-
way connection in the work below the position of the pivot plug.
From one of the connections a branch of the pressure pipe is led
through the centre pivot pipe, through a stuffing box (Fig. 54),
and on to the control valve on the right of the mounting. The other
connecting pipe runs through the floor to the control valve of the
front hoist.
In the same way the exhaust pipe is connected to the control
valves, but in this case the pipe passes through a hole bored through
the pivot plug to one side of and parallel to the centre pivot pipe.
A gunmetal telescopic pipe, with suitable glands, is connected at
one end to the top of the side hole in the pivot plug, and has working


in it a steel telescope pipe which is connected at the outer end to a
twin connection inside the body and from thence to the rear control
valve (see Fig. 54).
The telescopic pipes allow for traverse of 132° 30' either side of
FIG . 54
the centre line only. Greater traverse requires the substitution of a
trough and cover for the gunmetal telescopic pipe (see Fig. 55).
The centre pivot pipe is a manganese bronze casting, which
fits into the opening in the pivot plug, has a flange formed on its


upper end through which it is bolted to the pivot plug, and another
flange on its lower end to take a twin coupling for the connection of
the gun and accumulator pressure pipes. Another manganese
FIG . 55
bronze casting, forming a bent pipe, fits inside the top of the centre
pivot pipe, the joint being sealed with packing and glands. The
bent portion is cast with a flange on it by which it is bolted to one of
the centre transoms.
The accumulator pressure pipe passes up through a stuffing box


at the top of this bent pipe ; the packing for the top of the centre
pivot proper being an L-leather secured by an inner gland, the
latter taking hydraulic packing secured by an outer gland.
Six projectiles trollies, each consisting of a steel frame, four flanged
rollers, clip plate at each end, wood buffers or striking blocks with
rope handles for hauling on, a pair of steel hinged bearing straps
with automatic catches and locking keys, are provided to convey the
projectiles from the front hoist to the rear hoist. They run on a
railway on the underside of the shell pit shield. The trollies are
retained in position over the hoists by spring catches which are
attached, one to a bracket on the outer rail under the rear shell
pit shield and one to a bracket secured to the front of the
emplacement wall.
Action
It is presumed the system is filled with liquid.
Valves “ A,” “ C ” and “ E ” to be open, “ B ” and “ D ’’closed.
{a) To raise the projectile by front hoist.
A barrow, with projectile, is placed in position over the hoist,
and a trolley, with straps open, secured in position over the barrow
by the spring catch.
Place the control lever to “ Raise.”
Liquid is forced by the pressure of the springs from the three
cylinders in the accumulator through the delivery valve and
accumulator pressure pipe to the control valve where it is diverted
into the pipe leading to the hoist cylinder, thereby forcing out the
ram and raising the projectile. As soon as the projectile is high
enough the control lever is put to “ centre.” The straps on the
trolley are securely fastened, the lever is now put to “ lower.”
The weight of the ram forces the liquid back through the pipe
to the control valve where it is diverted to the exhaust pipe which is
connected to the tank.
( b ) To raise the projectile by rear hoist.
The trolley with projectile is run anti-clockwise over the rear
hoist and secured by the spring catch. The loading tray is placed
in the loading position.
Place the control lever to “ raise.”
The action is the same as for the front hoist. As soon as the
shell is high enough place the control lever to “ centre.” When the
projectile has been rammed clear of the hoist the control lever is
placed to “ lower,” The ram is lowered, partly by its own weight
and partly by hauling on the lanyard, the liquid flowing via the
exhaust pipe back to the tank.
(c) Action of the compressors.
When the gun recoils the compressor rams are forced back into
their cylinders. The liquid is displaced and forced through the
gun pressure pipe, lifting stop valve “A ” and entering the centre
cylinder raises the centre ram which forces up the bottom plate and


compresses the springs. At the same time the rams of the two
side cylinders are lifted by the bottom plate, thereby causing a
vacuum. This draws liquid from the tank through a suction valve
into the side cylinders, pressure being equalized in all three cylinders
by means of the equalizing valve.
When the gun runs out to the firing position, the compressor
rams are drawn from their cylinders, thereby causing a vacuum
which draws liquid from the tank through a suction valve and the
gun pressure pipe, stop valve “A ” having reseated itself under
action of its spring.
Should the rear hoist be out of action the front hoist may still
be used to raise projectiles to the trollies, derrick or bearer loading
being then resorted to.
The auxiliary [derrick, or hand ) loading gear is situated at the
left rear of the mounting. The derrick consists of two steel curved
jib plates connected together by collar bolts and secured to a pivot
piece by screws. The jib plates are in two parts and connected by
joint plates, thereby permitting the upper portion to be folded down
when the derrick is not in use. When folded down, the upper
portion is supported in a bracket fixed to the left side shield ; the
bracket is fixed in such a position that the loading arm supporting
bracket on the cradle will clear the derrick at all angles of elevation
and depression. The pivot piece is provided with two bearing
surfaces, which fit into corresponding metal bushes in the lug of a
steel bracket at the left rear of the body. The gear is fitted for a fall
of steel wire rope, 44|-feet long, and a sheave block with hook and
thimble. A shackle and three gunmetal guide sheaves are fitted
to the plates of the derrick. One end of the wire rope is spliced to
the shackle at the top of the derrick, the other end is rove through
the sheave block, over the guide sheaves, down through the hole in
the pivot piece of the derrick and then spliced to the thimble which
is secured to the wire drum of the windlass (Plate 27) by a pin.
Fixed to the wire drum is a ratchet wheel, so arranged that the
drum, with ratchet wheel, and the supporting spindle always move
round together. The spindle is turned by a cranked handle.
Enclosing the ratchet wheel, but loose on the wire drum and
spindle, is a brake drum ; inside the rim of the latter two spring
pawls are pivoted, which engage the teeth of the windlass ratchet.
Round the brake drum passes a steel band lined with leather ; one
end of the band is attached to a socket on the windlass bracket by
means of two nuts, which permit of adjustment; the other end is se-
cured to a hand lever which is pivoted in the bracket and is fitted with
an adjustable counterweight. The brake drum is, therefore, not free
to turn, except when the lever is raised and the brake band slackened.
The windlass is carried by the steel spindle which rests in a cast
iron bracket attached to the rear bolster of the body of the mounting.
When using the hand loading gear, the barrow containing the
projectile is run under the hinged flap in the left rear of the shell


pit shield, the tackle over-hauled, and the block hooked into the
eyebolt or selvagee round the projectile ; the latter is raised through
the opening and placed on the loading tray, which is then swung into
the breech opening.
Action
When raising, the brake drum is held fast by the brake band,
and as the cranked handle and wire drum are turned the ratchet
clicks round under the pawls and prevents the weight running down
should the handle be released.
When lowering, the cranked handle is removed by withdrawing
the keep pin, and the brake band slackened by raising the weighted
hand lever (the movement of which is limited by a stop), when the
brake drum, wire drum with ratchet and spindle, all turn in the
reverse direction.
Sighting
The sighting gears are carried on the left and right side of the
mounting and are operated from the sighting platform in front of the
cradle trunnions.
They are suitably placed in relation to the elevating and
traversing hand wheels.
The sighting gears provide for direct laying for elevation and
direction. The elevation indicator and traversing arc, used for
indirect laying, though not actually component parts of a sight are
described under the above heading for convenience.
Direct laying for elevation and direction may be carried out by
either the automatic sight or the rocking bar sight, the former
finding its own range and the latter having ranges supplied to it.
Indirect laying is provided for by means of an elevation indicator
for elevation and traversing arc for direction.
A combination of these gears may be used.
Sighting gears consist of ;
(1) On the right side—
An automatic sight for laying for elevation at a target
within the auto-sight limit of range. It may also be used for
laying for direction.
(2) On the left side—
{a) A rocking bar sight for laying for elevation at all
ranges. It may also be used for laying for direction.
(ib) An elevation indicator, situated below the shell pit
shield, for laying for elevation at all ranges.
(c) A traversing arc on the pivot plate with pointer on
the body for laying for direction.
Automatic Sight
(Plate 28)
The automatic sight is situated on the right side of the mounting
and provides a direct means of laying the gun for elevation and


direction. The sight is in itself a range-finder on the same principle
as that for the Mark VII mounting. . . ,
The automatic sight consists of the following principal parts .
Hinge flap supporting bracket.
Telescope carrier hinge flap.
Telescope carrier.
Error of day gear.
Cam roller lever.
Spring case.
Automatic sighting gear.
The hinge flap supporting bracket is similar generally to that on
the Mark VII mounting. . . ~ „ , , w
The telescope carrier hinge flap is similar generally to that on
Ma jhe telescope carrier differs from that of the Mark VII mounting
as follows :
Bearings are fitted for the Nos. 1, 3 or 7 telescopes.
Deflection gear at the rear end of the carrier consists of an
arc with worm teeth into which gears a worm on a spindle m
bearings in the carrier hinge flap. A drum, with graduated scale,
is attached to the outer end of the worm spindle and is read by a
pointer secured to the flap. The scale is marked m 5-mmute
graduations up to 2-degrees right and ieft of zero ;> every 15-mmute
graduation being numbered and marked K or L,. me
tilt of 3-degrees given to the sight to compensate for drift has been
corrected by engraving a true zero line at 6|-mmutes left on t e
graduated scale, the line being filled m with red wax. The scale
is also engraved with the words Right and Left , with
directing arrows, and “ True Zero.
The error of day gear is similar to that of the Mark VII mount-
cam roller lever is of manganese bronze. It is hinged to
a bracket attached to the right side of the cradle, the pivot
being inclined at an angle of 3-degrees to give a permanent angle
to the sight to correct for drift. The pivot is made eccentric to
permit of adjustment. A nut with washer retains the lever m
P The upper end of the lever supports the hinge flap supporting
bracket which is dovetailed in and secured by a bolt
The lower end of the lever is prepared to take the cam roller
axle, which is secured in position by a tapered pm. The axle is
prepared with an oil hole and carries a roller with an internal
cannelure to facilitate lubrication. , T/TT
The spring case is similar generally to that of the Mark
mounting, one end being looped to the cam roller axle and the other
Td to a stud at the lower end of a cam slide block of the automatic
sighting gear.


The automatic sighting gear is similar generally to that of the
Mark VII mounting, the variations being ;
There is no muzzle velocity corrector gear.
A cam slide block fits in an undercut groove in a slide block
guide, the latter being secured to the body of the mounting by eight
screws. It is designed to carry the cam and cam adjusting lever
and forms a means of keeping the sight level through the action of
the correcting gear.
The cam is attached to the cam slide block by two studs, the
upper being termed the cam adjusting lever stud and the lower
the cam hinge stud. The tidal arc is attached to the cam by two
screws.
The cam adjusting lever is similar generally and is carried on its
stud at the upper end of the cam.
Separate cams and levers are provided for various charges and are
stamped accordingly.
A ction
The cam roller lever is carried on a bracket attached to the
cradle, therefore any movement of the cradle by the elevating gear
causes the cam lever roller to move round the cam groove. The
resultant action is the same as for the Mark VII mounting.
Rocking Bar Sight
(Plate 28)
The rocking bar sight is situated on the left side of the mounting
and provides a direct means of laying the gun for elevation and
direction.
A metal bracket is secured to the left front of the cradle to support
the sight which consists of the following principal parts ;
Carrier.
Rocking bar.
Sight bar.
The carrier, of steel, is secured to the bracket on the cradle by
two screws, which work in bushes in the carrier, the rear bush being
made eccentric to permit of adjustment of the sight. The face of the
bracket is arranged to give an inclination of 3-degrees to the carrier,
and consequently to the pivot of the sight bar, to compensate for
drift. The front of the carrier is prepared for the rocking bar pivot.
A bracket to carry the worm gear is attached to the rear end of the
carrier.
The worm gear is operated by a hand wheel which carries
a worm on the inner end of its spindle. The worm engages a worm-
wheel carried on a spindle supported in the bracket on the carrier,
A pinion on the spindle engages the teeth on the arc attached to the
rear end of the rocking bar.
On the left end of the spindle a gunmetal yard scale drum is
keyed and secured by a nut. The drum is 11-inches in diameter
175


and is prepared on its periphery to receive a yard scale ring which is
secured by three screws. The ring is graduated to read up to
14,000-yards. A reader is attached to the carrier to indicate the
range on the ring. .. , . . ,
As the hand wheel is revolved the rear end of the sight is raised
or lowered and at the same time the yard scale drum with ring is
revolved, the range indicated corresponding to the tangent eleva-
A separate yard scale ring is provided for each charge, t.e. full,
three-quarter, half, 6-pr. and 1-inch aiming rifle. ,
The rocking bar, of steel, is pivoted about its centre to the front
end of the carrier, the pivot being inclined to compensate for drift.
Near the rear end an arc is attached, which is formed with teeth on
its front face ; a range strip, graduated in degrees from 0 to 15 is
let into its rear face. A stop, secured by a screw, is let into the
lower end of the arc to prevent it becoming disengaged horn the
P The rear end of the rocking bar is prepared to receive the
deflection gear consisting of a nut which works on a screw with a
milled head attached at either end ; a deflection scale secured by
four screws and graduated in 10-minute divisions up to 2-degrees
right and left of zero ; a red line, 6|-minutes left of 0 is marked
“ true zero ” to correct the 3-degree compensation tilt to the sight tor
drift An arrow for reading the deflection scale is engraved on an
adjustable reader which is attached by two screws to the deflection
The sight bar, of tubular steel, is pivoted at its front end to the
rocking bar, whilst its rear end is formed with an eye to fit over a
projection on the nut of the deflection gear, any movement of the
nut carrying with it the rear end of the sight bar.
Two telescope holders are fitted to the sight bar to carry the
No. 1,3 or 7 telescope. , , ,
An acorn foresight is fitted to the front end of the bar, also
a sighting blade which is fitted with a spring and thumb piece m
rear to enable it to be folded down when not required.
A hind sight with two V-notched leaves, one on either side of the
sight bar, is attached by two screws to the rear telescope holder,
that on the left for employment under normal conditions and the
other for “ throw-off ” firing to the right only. A cover plate is
pivoted to the rear telescope holder to obscure the view over either
notch of the hind sight as desired.
Elevation Indicator Gear
(Plate 29)
The elevation indicator gear is designed to indicate the range in
yards equivalent to the quadrant elevation of the gun, and inclusive
of any corrections necessary for charge temperature and muzzle
velocity of charge and projectile used.


The Mark II elevation indicator gear consists of a toothed arc,
bolted to the front of the left elevating arc, which engages a spur
pinion on a tranverse spring barrel shaft. The latter is supported in
inner and outer brackets on the side plate and front bolster of the
mounting respectively. A spring barrel is fitted over the outer
end of the shaft and encloses a clock spring which is attached to the
barrel and a stud in the outer bracket, and is designed to obviate
backlash between the arc and the pinion. A facing plate is fitted
across the barrel and keeps the spring in position. The barrel
carries a cam to which a selected yard scale plate is attached by
screws. A feather on the cam ensures the plate being assembled
in its correct position. The cam is formed with spiral grooves on
each side, one for the stud of the pointer reader and the other for
the stud of the actuating link. In order to obviate the possibility
of fracture of the clock spring by over-winding, the groove in the
front face of the cam is prepared with a ramp at each end up which
the stud of the pointer reader can ride on to the cam face.
Four yard scale plates are provided, one each for use with
2 c.r.h. and 4 c.r.h. projectiles, these being engraved on one side
for full charge and on the reverse for f-charge, one plate for use
with 6 c.r.h. projectiles engraved on one side only for full and one
for use with 6-pr. sub-calibre gun and l-inch aiming rifle. The three
former plates are of nickel alloy and graduated to suit station require-
ments before issue ; the latter plate is of steel with a zinc disc
soldered to each face, the discs being graduated locally for use with
the 6-pr. sub-calibre gun and 1-inch aiming rifle respectively. The
plates are graduated spirally in yards of range, the graduations
being read by a pointer which fits freely over the end of the spring
barrel.
The pointer is formed by a bracket which, at its upper end, has a
collar to fit over the spring barrel behind the cam. Two guide
bars are hinged to the lower end of the bracket and have their upper
ends attached to a hinged collar which fits over the spring barrel
outside the cam. A manganese bronze reader is fitted between the
guide bars and is fitted with adjustable plate engraved with an
arrow to read the graduations on the yard scale plate. The reader
embodies a spring-loaded stud which works in the spiral groove
cut in the outer face of the cam and thus ensures that the move-
ment of the reader conforms to the spiral graduations on the plate.
The stud has a lever at its outer end to enable the stud to be
withdrawn from the groove when necessary. A rectangular opening
is cut in the reader to expose the graduations on the plate.
A steel cam lever is pivoted to a lug on the side of the outer
supporting bracket. The cam lever carries, at its inner end, a
stud to work in the spiral groove in the rear face of the cam, while
its outer end has screwed to it the muzzle velocity scale strip. Two
undercut grooves are formed in the outer end of the cam in one of
which slides the charge temperature scale strip and in the other a
12—(2)


reader for the latter. The reader consists of a grooved sliding plate
engraved with an index arrow for the charge temperature scale
strip formed with a hollow stud for the attachment of the link
actuating pointer and a clamping screw (with milled head), which is
fitted in the hollow centre of the stud. The inner end of the
actuating link is secured to a lug on the top of the pointer bracket so
that any alteration in the setting of the charge temperature scale
reader gives a slight rotary movement to the pointer about the
spring barrel.
Charge temperature and muzzle velocity scale strips are provided
for use with each full charge and f-charge yard scale plate and these
must be exchanged or reversed, as the case may be, when any
change of plates takes place. Three muzzle velocity scale strips
are provided, the appropriate one being fixed in position on the cam
lever. One strip is graduated for 2 c.r.h. and 4 c.r.h. projectiles,
another for 6 c.r.h. projectiles with full charge, and a third for
2 c.r.h. or 4 c.r.h. projectiles with f-charges. The charge tempera-
ture scale strips are mounted on a sliding plate in the grooves in
the cam lever and are locked in position, when set, by means of
a clamping screw using the key provided. Alternative strips
are provided for use with 2 c.r.h., 4 c.r.h. and 6 c.r.h. projectiles for
full charges, also for 2 c.r.h. and 4 c.r.h. projectiles with f-charges.
They are marked with an index arrow to read the muzzle velocity
scale, the arrow being engraved opposite the standard charge
temperature of 60-degrees Fahrenheit. By means of the above
scale strips, corrections can be made to the gear as may be neces-
sitated by variations from normal muzzle velocities as found by
calibration, or the charge temperature, the shape of the cam groove
being such as to ensure the combined correction being a true one at
all ranges.
The Mark 1* gear as used with the Mark V mounting is generally
similar to the Mark 11.
Electric Firing Gear, Mark I
(Plate 30)
The electric firing gear is arranged on the mounting so that the
gun may be fired from either sighting platform or below the shell pit
shield. ...
It consists of a battery with connections, three pistol grip
connectors, a pistol grip, junction connector, sliding contact and a
series of cables.
The battery consists of four “ Cells, electric, inert, A,” which
stand on strips of rubber in a galvanised box, separated from each
other by a strip of felt, and are connected in series.
A cable is attached to the positive pole of the battery and led
through a hole in the box to a junction connector on the outside
of the box. From the latter the current is distributed by cables


to the pistol grip connectors. A copper strip connects the negative
pole with the outside of the battery box. An earth return terminal
is also secured to the battery box, a short lead (L) being connected
from it to a terminal on the mounting.
The pistol grip connectors (Fig. 56) are secured, one to the holder
on the right side of the body, another to the left side, and a third
in such a position that the pistol grip can be used from a position
below the shell pit shield. Each connector is formed for the
contacts on the pistol grip. Each contact in the connector is
insulated and prepared on the outside with a spring connector for the
FIG . 56
reception of a cable. A clamping screw is provided to retain the
pistol grip in position, and a cover to prevent ingress of dirt, etc.,
when the pistol grip is not in position.
The pistol grip (Fig. 56) is used to close the circuit when testing
a tube and circuit, as well as for firing the tube. It may be divided
into two parts :
{a) When testing a tube or circuit, a lever contact on the hand
grip is depressed, thereby closing a circuit, the current passing
through indicator coils revolves an indicator (electro-magnet) if
the circuit is complete. The resistance to the current offered by the
coils prevents the tube being fired.


LIST OF EXPENDABLE CABLES
Mounting
Reference
Colour
Length
(inches)
Position
(IViKS.j
Letter
V
VI &
VIA
A
White
104
Gun to sliding contact
(automatic circuit
breaker).
1
I
B
Purple
221
/Sliding contact to June-
1
257
\ tion connector (or box).
1
141
177
/ Junction connector to
< right-hand pistol grip
1
C
Red
1
t connector.
/ Right-hand pistol grip
D
Yellow
196
J connector to junction
1
234
1 connection on Battery
[ box.
1
77
114
/ Junction connector to
left-hand pistol grip
1
E
Black
1
[ connector.
/Left-hand pistol grip
H
Light
114
J connector to junction
1
Brown
150
1 connection on battery
[ box.
J unction connector to
1
J
Blue
52
lower pistol grip con-
nector.
1
1
K
Green
44
Lower pistol grip con-
nector to junction con-
nection on battery box.
1
1
L
Black and
white
alternate
13
Battery box to body
earth return terminal.
1
1
( b ) When firing a tube, a trigger is pressed, thereby causing
the indicator coil to be short-circuited. This cuts out the resistance
and the tube is fired.
The sliding contact (automatic circuit breaker) consists principally
of a plate and spring-loaded plug. The plate and plug with insulating
bushes are contained in separate contact boxes which are attached
by bolts to brackets, the bracket carrying the plate being secured
to the right sliding bar, and the other to the rear end of the cradle.
Both plate and plug are prepared for the attachment of a cable,
the former being connected to the lock and the latter to the junction
connector.
A releasing lever is attached to the plug contact box by which
the circuit can be completed when it is required to fire the gun.
The contacts are so arranged that when the gun is fired the
circuit is broken and remains so until completed by hand. This
is done to keep the control of fire in the hands of the No. 1, who
does not complete the circuit till the rear hoist is lowered clear of
recoil and doors in the shell pit shield open if necessary.
180


MOUNTING, B.L. 9-2-INCH, MARK VI
(Plate 31)
The Mark VI mounting is designed to allow the gun to be fired
between the angles of 10-degrees depression and 30-degrees elevation,
and to provide all round traverse. The normal length of recoil is
42-inches.
The Mark VI mounting differs generally from the Mark VII
as follows :
The trunnion bearings of the body are lower.
The projectiles are raised from the emplacement floor to the
loading tray by a crane, using power from a motor-driven Hele-Shaw
hydraulic pump.
Projectiles are rammed home and cartridges inserted into the
chamber by hand.
The chamber is sponged out when ramming the shell home,
and the mushroom head and obturator cooled by the application
of a wet sponge cloth. There is no airblast nor wash-out
provided.
The traversing gear is operated by hand only,
A front shield and two side shields are provided but no overhead
shield.
A direction sight is not fitted but a rocking bar sight is provided.
Elevation indicator gear is provided.
Range and bearing receiver gears are not fitted.
The mounting consists of the following principal parts :
Holdfast. Cradle.
Pedestal. Trunnion ball bearings.
Pivot plate. Gun bands and sliding bars.
Pivot plug. Recoil system.
Traversing arc. Elevating gear.
Roller ring. Traversing gear.
Covers protecting roller ring. Loading gear.
Body. Sighting gear.
Shields. Elevation indicator gear.
Loading platform. Firing gear.
The following parts are similar generally, but not necessarily
interchangeable, to those used with the Mark of mounting shown
opposite :
Holdfast VII
Pedestal ... ... ... ... V
Pivot plate ... ... ... ... V
Traversing arc ... ... ... V
Roller ring ... ... ... ... VII
Covers protecting roller ring ... VII
Trunnion ball bearings ... ... VII
Gun bands and sliding bars ... V
181


No. 19A Pivot Plug
The pivot differs from the No. 19 used with the Mark V
mounting in that it is solid and is not provided with a steel feather.
It is prepared with a hole at the top to take the No. 3 lifting eye.
Body
The body is similar generally to that used with the Mark VII
mounting, the chief variations being height, weight and preparation
for fittings.
The normal loading angle is 5-degrees elevation, but some
mountings are designed for loading with the gun horizontal.
There being no centre pivot, the centre pivot plate is not fitted.
A reader for the traversing arc is fitted at the front.
A spring stop with lever and catch pin for plunger is fitted to the
right side of the body to limit the elevation at 15-degrees. The
plunger projects inside the body, being withdrawn by hand when
firing at angles above 15-degrees elevation and automatically
reasserting itself, under action of its spring, as the gun is depressed
past that angle. The lever is used to withdraw the plunger and
compress its spring, the catch pin to retain it in the out position if
required. The lever is pivoted to a bracket secured to the body,
the front end being forked and hinged to the outer end of the plunger
by a bolt. A casing is secured to the body by bolts to retain the
plunger and spring in position. The casing and plunger are bored
to receive the catch pin, the latter being attached to the body by a
short chain and screw eye.
An elevation stop (extreme) is secured to the centre transom of
body. It consists of a steel bracket and wood block.
Shields
Four shields are provided, viz. :
Shell pit shield.
Front shield.
Side shields (left and right).
The shell pit shield is similar generally to that used with the
Mark V mounting.
It has been altered in the following details :
(a) The rear part has been raised about one foot by means of a
loading platform.
(b) The raised portion has been extended to the rear and guard
rails provided.
(c) The hinged doors have been fitted to the platform and
provided with counterweights to facilitate opening, and must be
opened when firing above 15-degrees elevation.
(d) On top, the shield is prepared to receive the crane, control
valve bracket, derrick and to reposition the left side shield ; on
the underside for the hydraulic press, frames for loading and elevating
182


motors and pumps, elevating control lever bracket and guide
pillar for projectiles with stop to position trollies on the emplace-
ment floor. No trolley rails or trollies are provided on the underside
of the shell pit shield.
{e) The sighting platforms which are situated on either side of
the body above the shell pit shield have been raised and short
steel ladders fitted to facilitate access. Hand-rails have also been
fitted.
(/) Where the gun is loaded in the horizontal position instead of
5-degrees elevation, a Mark II loading platform is provided which is
two feet high.
The front shield is similar generally to that used with the Mark V
mounting, the principal difference being an increase in height of
3-feet.
A depression stop consisting of a steel bracket and wood block is
fitted in the gun aperture.
The side shields are similar generally to those used with the
Mark V mounting, the principal difference being an increase in
height of 3-feet. The left side shield has been moved forward
about 12-inches to clear the loading gear arm.
Cradle
The cradle is similar generally to that used with the Mark V
mounting, the principal difference being that as the accumulator
system is not used with the Mark VI mounting, the left trunnion and
left side no longer function as part of the gun pressure pipe.
Recoil System
The recoil system is built up on the same principle as for the
Mark VII mounting.
The buffer and air cylinder are similar generally to those used
with the Mark VII mounting, varying only in a few details,
viz. :
[a] The control plunger has a tapered flat in place of a groove.
{b) The non-return ball valve is not fitted in front of the
piston, liquid passing to and from the control chamber over the
tapered flat.
(c) The metal case covering the buffer cylinder is retained in
position by grub screws instead of a steel preserving ring.
(d) The valve key is of a different contour.
{e) There are no U-shaped packing rings in the liquid gland and
consequently the perforated H-ring is of a different shape.
(/) Air pressure in the air cylinder is 320-lb. per square inch.
The action of the buffer and air cylinder is similar to that of the
Mark VII mounting.


Elevating Gear
(Plates 32)
The elevating gear is similar generally to that used with the
Mark V mounting, the main difference being that arrangements
have been made to operate the gear by power as well as by hand.
The differences are :
{a) Longer vertical shafts to suit the body and elevating arcs
with five more teeth fitted to provide for greater elevation.
(b) Each vertical shaft is fitted with a hand operated dog clutch
(Fig. 57) to disengage its upper elevating hand wheel when power is
used. The upper clutch with its lever is, in each case, situated
below the upper elevating hand wheel. Each lever is fitted with
FIG . 57
a hand catch to engage in one of two notches on a quadrant-shaped
bracket which has a clutch lever quadrant guide attached. The
notches are for “ engaged ” and “ disengaged ” positions.
( c ) The lower end of the left vertical shaft is fitted with a
double-ended dog clutch which connects the elevating gear with
either the lower hand wheel or a motor, but not with both. A
quadrant bracket with two notches as in ( h ) above is provided for
the clutch lever.
(d) The power is derived from an electric motor, Verity’s V.M.
12| type F, shunt-wound 100-volts, which is connected to a Hele-
Shaw P 1-5 pump, both motor and pump being carried in a frame
suspended from the right side of the shell pit shield towards the front.
Three pipes connect the pump with a Hele-Shaw M 6 special hydraulic
motor which is situated near the lower elevating hand wheel, two
pipes being for pressure and exhaust alternatively, and one for drain.


(e) A control lever with hand catch is pivoted on a bracket
fitted to the underside of the shell pit shield. By the movement
of the lever, motion is transmitted to the sliding guide blocks of the
pump by means of connecting rods, thereby controlling the direction
and rate of flow of the liquid, or cutting it off upon return to the
neutral position. A quadrant bracket with notch for the neutral
position is fitted.
(f) Voice tubes provide communication between the upper
elevating positions and the lower hand wheel position.
Action
It is assumed that the electric motor and the pump are running
with the pump in the neutral position.
Connect the Hele-Shaw motor to the elevating gear by means of
the lower hand clutch. The upper clutches should be in the
disengaged position.
On placing the control lever to “ Elevate ” motion is transmitted
to the guide blocks and floating ring of the pump, the latter being
moved away from the neutral, or “ no throw ” position, and liquid
is forced from the pump, through the pressure pipe to the Hele-
Shaw motor. The latter is set in motion and, being connected
to the elevating shaft by dog clutch, revolves the vertical and cross
shafts and worm gear, thereby elevating the gun. Exhaust liquid
passes through the exhaust pipe to the tank via the pump.
On moving the lever over to neutral, the floating ring of the
pump is moved to the neutral position, the pressure is thus cut off
and the movement of the elevation gear ceases.
On moving the lever over to “ Depress,” liquid is forced from the
pump through the alternative pressure pipe to the Hele-Shaw motor.
This sets the latter in motion, but in the opposite direction, thereby
revolving the elevating shaft in the reverse direction and depressing
the gun. Exhaust liquid returns to the tank as before.
When the motor is not functioning, the gun may be elevated
and depressed by the hand wheels in a similar manner to the
Mark V mounting in which case the Hele-Shaw motor must be
disconnected by the lower clutch and the upper clutch levers set for
“ hand.”
Brake gear is fitted to the upper hand wheels similar to that
for the Mark V mounting. It is not used when the gun is elevated
by power.
The friction rings allow for a slight slip of the gear when the
gun is fired, or, should the pressure from the motor be suddenly
stopped or reversed, thereby preventing damage to the worm
gearing.
Hele-Shaw Pump
The following is a brief general description of the P I*s and
P 3-3 “ Hele-Shaw ” pumps used for the elevating and loading gears
respectively. Their variations will be found set out on page 187,


The “ Hele-Shaw ” pump is of the rotary type, with multiple
radial pistons, and can be driven at high speeds.
Its delivery and suction action is reversible, without change of
direction of rotation, and is effected by means of a floating ring
which encloses the cylinder body, pistons, etc., and rotates in guide
blocks which can be traversed slightly across the pump casing.
Its capacity is variable and is directly proportional to the
displacement of the floating ring out of centre —or the “ no throw ”
position, this displacement also defines the length of piston
stroke. During operation, the pistons recede in succession from a
central valve as their slippers are carried round the “ throw ”
side of the floating ring by the cylinder body and thus create
suction. As the pistons are carried round to the opposite side of the
ring they are forced towards the central valve down their cylinders,
which discharge their contents into the central valve and thus
produce the delivery. The ports in the central valve being
diametrically opposite, the suction and delivery are equal, uniform,
and steady at all speeds.
Each pump is mounted with its motor on a bedplate which
embodies a storage tank for the pump liquid.
The tank is filled through the cover plate, approximately five
gallons of oil M.BO being required for each pump.
The principal parts of the pump are :
Cylinder body, having five radial piston cylinders bored through
into the central chamber which receives the central valve. Parallel
guide slots are formed in the outer ends of each cylinder to
receive the piston gudgeons. The cylinder body rotates within a
floating ring and its spindle works in a bearing in the driving side
cover and is flexibly coupled to, and driven directly by, the electric
motor.
Pistons are cylindrical in shape. They are fitted at the outer
end with gudgeons which are parallel to the axis of the central valve.
Each gudgeon carries a pair of slippers which move in an annular
groove in the floating ring. The gudgeons work in the parallel slots
in the cylinder so that any tangential pressure due to the friction
of the slippers is borne directly by the cylinder walls.
Floating ring is in halves bolted together circumferentially to
form a drum which encloses the cylinder body. Thus any oil
leaking past the pistons is retained by centrifugal force and serves
to lubricate the gudgeons and slippers. Each half of the ring is
formed with an inner annular groove to form a path for the slippers,
and an outer hollow boss which surrounds the cylinder body valve
chamber and is supported freely in sliding guide blocks. The blocks
are connected to a stroke varying control spindle passing through the
side of the case and operated by a control lever, etc., which are
situated below the shell pit shield and on the loading platform for the
P 1 -5 and P 3*3 pumps respectively.


Differences between P 1-5 and P 3-3 pumps
Part
P 1-5 pump
(elevating gear)
P 3-3 pump
(loading gear)
Driving side cover
Guide blocks
Suction and delivery
orifices
Cylinder body
Is fitted with ball bear-
ings for cylinder body.
Fitted with ball bearing
for floating ring.
Are formed in delivery
side cover.
Fitted with keyed spindle
with securing nut.
Has bearing bolted on for
cylinder body spindle.
Bearings for floating ring
lined with white metal.
Are formed in head of
central valve.
Has spindle formed in one
piece.
Central Valve is fixed in the delivery side cover and forms the
pivot on which the cylinder body revolves. It is formed internally
with four longitudinal channels (in pairs) opening into two ports
cut in opposite sides and communicating with suction and delivery
outside orifices.
The casing encloses the floating ring and is provided with driving
and delivery side covers. It is formed with a flange on the base for
securing studs, and with a side opening for the control spindle
varying the stroke, also at the top with a lifting eye. Ihe side
covers are formed on the inside with parallel and horizontal guide
ribs for the sliding block, and with a central opening for the cylinder
body spindle and central valve respectively.
Action
The floating ring, pistons, gudgeons, and slippers, etc. (Fig. 58),
being in the neutral, or “no throw ” position, i.e. concentric with
the central valve, no radial movement of the pistons takes place
during rotation of the cylinder body and floating ring. There is,
therefore, no suction or delivery.
On operating the control lever, motion is imparted through the
control spindle to the guide blocks and floating ring, so that the
latter becomes more or less eccentric to the central valve and
cylinder body —thus varying the piston stroke. This causes the
slippers, gudgeons and pistons to approach and recede from the
central valve once in each revolution. Liquid is drawn through
the suction port by each piston as it recedes, and is expelled through
the delivery port as it approaches the central valve. The length of
piston stroke governs the quantity of liquid drawn in and delivered,
and is directly proportional to the amount of eccentricity of the
floating ring from the central valve.
To stop delivery bring the floating ring to the central position,
i.e. concentric with the central valve.


To reverse delivery move the floating ring into eccentricity on
the opposite side of the central valve. The suction port will then
become the delivery port, and vice versa.
FIG . 58
Flow of liquid—P 1 -5 pump
On moving the floating ring from neutral or “no throw ’’
position by operating the control lever, the pump draws liquid
188


through a safety valve in the tank in the bed plate and delivers it
as pressure to the motor which is thereby rotated.
After initial start of the pump, the flow of the exhaust liquid from
the motor is merged with the suction flow at a three-way connection
and forms the main supply for the pump.
Any variation of the piston stroke of the pump varies the amount
of liquid required and the shortage, if any, is drawn up from the
tank. Similarly, any surplus liquid, whether due to variation in
piston stroke, sudden return to neutrality, or reverse of pump, is
returned to the tank through a second safety valve which is fitted
in the opposite "Side of the tank to the supply pipe.
Should the pump be reversed, the same procedure takes place,
but in the opposite direction.
Flow of liquid—P 3-3 pump.
On moving the floating ring from neutral or “no throw ”
position by operating the control lever, the pump draws liquid
from the tank in the bedplate and delivers it as pressure to the
hydraulic press, forcing the ram out and raising the projectile.
On changing the rotation of the pump to lower the projectile,
the flow of liquid in the suction and delivery (pressure) pipes is
reversed, i.e. the pump draws the liquid from the hydraulic press
and returns it to the tank, the former suction and delivery pipes
now becoming exhaust.
Any surplus liquid due to overload when raising or lowering a
shell, e.g. by sudden return to neutrality or reversal of the pump, is
returned to the tank via the relief valve.
Electric Motor and Starter
The electric motor used with the “ Hele-Shaw” pumps on the
Marks VI and VIA mountings is termed “ Motor, Electric,
‘ Verity’s ’ V.M. 12| Type F, shunt-wound, 100-volts, 54 D.C.”
and the starter used in conjunction is the “ Starter, Electric Motor,
Verity’s Type D.A. 110-volts.” Both starter and motor are 6
8.H.P., the latter having 700 revolutions per minute.
The starter is fitted with ten renewable contacts and is operated
by a single lever. Each contact has a resistance coil so that the
voltage may be varied and the speed of the motor controlled.
The motor is flexibly connected by its driving shaft to the
spindle of the pump. Lubricators are provided for the Hoffman
ball and roller bearings.
Hele-Shaw M 6 Special Hydraulic Motor
The motor is of the rotary type, with multiple pistons working in
radial cylinders formed in a cylinder body rotating on a central
valve, the whole being enclosed in a case with side covers. The
speed is variable and is governed by the rate of delivery from the
P 1 -5 Hele-Shaw pump which supplies the necessary liquid pressure
from its delivery side. The direction of rotation is reversible and is


automatically changed when the direction of flow of liquid from the
pump is changed via alternative pressure and exhaust pipes.
The motor is similar generally in design to the Hele-Shaw pump
but differs in having no floating ring or guide blocks, also the slippers
are replaced by cam rollers.
The liquid under pressure from the pump enters through the
pressure side casing cover and the central valve. The latter is
formed with four inner ports, two pressure and two exhaust, commu-
nicating with two outer ports. The cylinder body is formed with six
radial cylinders, each having a port in the base which opens into a
central valve chamber in the body. The cylinders are formed
with parallel guide slots for the piston gudgeons, which are fitted
with ball bearings and cam rollers. The latter run over an internal
ovular cam path formed in two cam rings which are placed one on
each side of the cylinder body, and are secured between the case
body and its side covers. The driving side cover is provided with
ball bearings for the cylinder body spindle which is fitted to the
body by keys and securing nut, and drives the spur gearing at the
lower end of the left vertical shaft of the elevating gear.
The cam rings in the motor are assembled with the longer axis
of the ovular cam path vertical, whilst the four inner ports of the
central valve are disposed criss-cross to the axis, i.e. at 45, 135,
225 and 315-degrees respectively. The channels from opposite
inner ports ( e.g . 45 and 225-degrees) communicate with a common
outer port. Consequently, when pressure is admitted to the motor,
it is exerted on the first pair of opposite pistons which lie opposite
the pressure ports, forcing them to recede from the central valve
and causing their cam roller to ride along the cam path towards its
crown and base, thus imparting rotation to the cylinder body.
The momentum gained by this initial movement carries the body
round until the next two adjacent pistons arrive opposite the
pressure ports, when the above process is repeated. The first two
full cylinders are thereby brought opposite the exhaust ports, into
which they discharge their contents under the action of their pistons
which are forced to approach the central valve by their cam rollers
as the latter ride along the cam path towards its short axis.
Internal lubrication is provided for by oil which escapes over the
pistons during motion, any surplus being conveyed to the pump
tank via a drain pipe attached to the motor casing.
Traversing Gear
The traversing gear is similar to that used with the Mark V
mounting, the only difference being longer vertical shafts to suit the
body of the Mark VI mounting.
Loading Gear
(Plate 33)
Projectiles are raised from the emplacement floor to the loading
tray by means of a crane mounted on the shell pit shield and


operated by hydraulic power. Should the power fail, projectiles
may be raised to the tray by hand power applied above the shield
to a windlass mounted on the crane, the hydraulic gear being first
disconnected, alternatively, by hand power applied below the shield
to a second windlass attached to the body and an auxiliary derrick
(removable) mounted on the shell-pit shield.
The loading gear used with power consists of an electric motor,
hydraulic pump and press, control lever and pipings, crane, wire
rope, and grab for the projectile. To carry the latter to the breech
opening, a pillar, post, arm, tray and stop are provided, these also
being used for hand loading.
The electric motor, for which a starter is provided, is connected
to the hydraulic pump by a direct drive with, however, an elastic
coupling.
Both the motor and pump are carried in a frame suspended
from the left side of the shell pit shield.
A description of the above will be found under their respective
headings (see page 189).
The hydraulic press consists of a cylinder, ram (working between
guide bars suspended between the cylinder and bracket at the
front), and four sheaves (two in rear of the cylinder and two on the
ram head), an air valve and drain hole closed by a plug and screw
respectively being fitted near the front end of the cylinder. Suitable
packing prevents the escape of liquid. The press is connected to a
union on the hydraulic pump by a single pipe which serves alter-
nately for pressure and exhaust, a relief valve being fitted to the
union for overload and connected to the tank by relief pipe.
The crane consists of a jib, jib post and jib pillar. The jib is of
plate and angle steel, and is secured to the jib post which fits and
revolves in the jib pillar. The jib is furnished with two single sheaves
at the top which revolve on axis pins, each sheave being fitted with a
lubricator, also a guard for the wire rope. The jib pillar is secured
to the upper side of the left side pit shield and is hollow to receive the
jib post.
The wire rope is rove over the sheaves of the hydraulic press, the
standing end being secured by an adjusting rod with nuts to lugs on
the press cylinder, the running end, passing up through an aperture
in the shell pit shield and the crane pillar and over the sheaves on the
crane, is shackled to a grab.
The grab consists of two curved steel pieces, pivoted at the upper
ends and controlled by levers actuated by the rope on raising to
close them, and by a hand lever, when the weight is supported, to
open them. A shackle is hinged to the pivot pin to which the wire
rope is secured.
The control lever is pivoted to a bracket secured to the top of the
left side of the shell pit shield near the crane pillar. It is fitted with
a hand-operated spring catch to engage a notch, when in the neutral
position, on the curved upper side of the bracket. Motion is trans


mitted by the movement of the lever to the sliding guide blocks of
the pump by means of connecting rods, thereby controlling the
direction and rate of the flow of liquid or cutting it off upon return
to the neutral position.
Three pipings are used :
(a) To connect the pump with the tank situated in the bed plate
under the pump.
( b ) To connect the pump with the ram cylinder.
(c) To connect the relief valve of the pump with the tank.
The fittings which support the loading tray are also situated
on top of the shell pit shield.
The tray is of manganese bronze and is fitted to an arm about
three feet above the shell pit shield. It is shaped to receive a
projectile, hollowed transversely to facilitate removal of a selvagee,
if used, and has its front end curved to enter the breech opening
and protect the threads of the breech.
The arm is secured to a post which forms its pivot in a hollow
pillar. It consists of two bent angle members which are secured to
the loading tray.
The post is provided with a flange near the top which rests on a
metal bush in the top of the pillar. Below the flange the post is
cylindrical in shape, the upper and lower ends of this portion take a
bearing in the bush and the bottom of the pillar respectively. The
flange is provided with a Stauffer grease cup for lubrication purposes.
Above the flange a thick plate is formed to which the arm is attached.
Two recesses are cut in the cylindrical portion about 27-inches
from the bottom to receive the manganese bronze stop pin, one
retains the tray in the loading position and the other in the receiving
position clear of recoil.
The pillar is mounted on top of the shell pit shield. It is hollow
and is fitted with a bearing bush at the top also shaped at the base
to receive the post. An opening in the side receives the case of the
spring stop.
The stop consists of a steel plunger with handle, spring and case.
It is fitted into the side of the pillar, the plunger entering alternative
recesses in the post.
Action
It is assumed the motor and pump are running with the pump in
the neutral position.
On placing the control lever to “ Raise," liquid is forced from the
pump into the cylinder of the hydraulic press, thereby forcing out the
ram and separating the sheaves which haul in the wire rope and
raise the grab with projectile through the shield to the loading
tray.
On placing the lever to neutral the pressure is cut off at the
pump and the grab remains stationary.


On placing the lever to “ Lower,” the liquid in the cylinder is
drawn out by the pump, thus causing the ram to re-enter the
cylinder and bring the sheaves closer to each other, the grab, by its
weight, lowers itself and takes in the slack wire.
The hand loading gear consists of a windlass and wire rope, the
grab used for power loading being transferred.
The windlass is similar to that described for the Mark VII
mounting. It is secured by a metal bracket to the crane, the upper
end of the brake band being attached to a weighted lever pivoted
in a bracket fixed to the crane immediately above.
To change from power to hand-loading, disconnect the grab
and remove guards and wire rope from the sheaves of the crane ;
the wire rope of the windlass is now rove over the sheaves of the
crane and secured to the shackle on the grab, the guards being
replaced.
The auxiliary hand loading gear (Plate 33) differs from that
described for the Mark V mounting in that the derrick is not
hinged for folding down purposes, that it is removable by fitting into
a socket only in the shell pit shield, and that it is provided with a drop
handle for traversing purposes.
The wire rope is fitted with a hook and is rove over guide
sheaves below the shell pit shield to a windlass on the bolster of the
body.
The windlass is similar to that as described for the Mark VII
mounting.
A circular railway (18-inch gauge) is laid on the floor of the
emplacement. Special trollies are provided to carry two shell from
the walls of the emplacement to a guide pillar, the trollies being
fitted with a spring catch automatically engage with a stop on the
guide pillar and therefore conform to the movement of the mounting
during traverse. As soon as one trolley is empty it is removed and
replaced by a filled one.
The guide pillar is suspended from the shell pit shield ; it keeps
the projectile square in its ascent to ensure it being in correct
alignment for passing through the opening in the shield. At the
bottom a stop catch is provided to retain the trolley in correct
position for the grab whilst the mounting is being traversed.
Sighting
The general remarks on sighting gear for the Mark V mounting
are applicable to the Mark VI mounting.
Automatic Sight
The automatic sight is similar generally to that of the Mark V
mounting, differing as follows :
The tidal arc is attached to the cam by four screws as compared
with two.
13—(2)


Rocking Bar Sight
The rocking bar sight for the Mark VI mounting differs from that
of the Mark V mounting as follows :
The rocking bar is pivoted near the front securing screw of the
carrier which is about 7-inches to the rear of that of the Mark V
mounting.
The yard scale drum is 14-inches in diameter.
The No. 11 yard scale ring for 4 c.r.h. projectiles with full
charge is graduated up to 25,800-yards and the No. 11A for 2 c.r.h.
projectiles up to 22,000-yards.
The telescope holders allow for the telescope to be J-inch
higher.
The hind sight is secured to the sight bar instead of the rear
holder and the cover plate is pivoted to the hind sight, the latter
being about 6-inches in rear of the holder.
The range strip on the arc is graduated to 30-degrees.
Elevation Indicator Gear
The elevation indicator yard scale plates, scale strips, cam, cam
lever, etc., are generally similar to those described for the Mark V
mounting. The gear differs, however, as follows : —A large con-
necting bracket is secured to the underside of the cradle at the
front and has a smaller bracket attached to it. The upper end of an
inclined rack rod is connected to the small bracket, the lower end
(which passes through a guide) being formed with teeth on the under-
side which engage with a spur pinion carried on the inner end of a
transverse driving shaft. The latter is supported in end bearings in
a bracket on the front bolster of the body. The outer end of the
driving shaft is connected by mitre gearing to the rear end of a
longitudinal spring barrel shaft, laid to the front, the gear being
enclosed in a small box formed in the above-mentioned bracket.
The front end of the longitudinal shaft works in a supporting bracket
and is fitted with the spring barrel, etc., of the indicator as described
for the Mark V mounting.
Electric Firing Gear, Mark I
The electric firing gear is similar to that described for the Mark V
mounting (see pages 178-180).
MOUNTING, B.L. 9-2-INCH, MARK VIA
The Mark VIA mounting is similar generally to that of the
Mark VI, differing principally by having its body converted from
that of the Mark V mounting to allow for the increased elevation
being given to the gun.


Mark V
Mark VI
Mark VIA
Mark VII
Name of main portion
No. o
Liftin
eye
No. c
Liftin
eye
•
Weight
Tns.Cwi
I No.
5 usee
Centre oi
Gravity
Weight
Tns.Cw
’‘No.
6 usee
Centre of
1 Gravity
Weight
Tns.Cwi
No. o
Liftin
eye
[ No.
° usee
Centre of
Gravity
Weight
Tns. Cwt
No. o
Liftin
eye
No.
5 usee
Centre of
Gravity
Bands—
Connecting gun and buffer,
in two parts, with cap
and screws
Gun, rear
Bars, sliding, gun (2) each
Body, including capsquares,
1 8|
0 15*
0 12*
3
3
1
1
1
2
1 8|
0 15*
0 12*
3
3
1
1
1
2
1 8*
0 15*
0 12*
3
3
1
1
1
2
1 8*
0 15*
0 12*
3
3
1
1
1
2
brackets, cross-shaft, shaft
arc pinion and two pinions
friction ring, wormwheel
and guard
13 8
34-inches ii
i 17 14
34-inches ir
i 18 0
34-inches ir
18 0
rear of cen-
rear of cen
rear of cen-
tre line of
tre line of
tre line of
Cage, ammunition ...
trunnions
trunnions
trunnions
0 7*
Cradle, including air cylinder.
hydraulic buffer and 4 caps
securing compressors
9 8
31-inches ir
9 7*
31-inches ir
9 7*
31-inches ir
10 0
rear of cen
rear of cen-
rear of cen-
tre line of
tre line of
tre line of
Frame, platform
trunnions
trunnions
trunnions
1 13
Gear, hydraulic (emplace-
ment fittings)—
Accumulator ...
3 15*
38-inches
from tank
Plate covering accumu-
end
lator chamber
1 14
Hoist front (with plate)
0 10*
Holdfast, pedestal, No. 4A...
4 12
4 12
4 12
Pedestal, carriage (in halves
4 12
with joint plates and
bolts) —
No. 4 ... each half
9 2*
No. 7 Mark II each half
8 8
8 10
36-inches
from joint
8 10
36-inches
from joint
No. 15 ... each half
line
line
8 8
Plates, pivot (with racer and
traversing rack, bolts and
screws) —
No. 4 pedestal ...
8 12
No. 7 pedestal ...
8 16
8 16
8 16
No. 15 pedestal
8 16
Plug, pivot—
No. 19 (with plate)
0 6
No. 19A ...
0 8*
0 8*
No. 22
0 6
Rammer
Ring, roller—
0 14*
Without axles and rollers
With axles and rollers ...
Shield—
0 11*
1 14*
0 11*
1 14*
0 11*
1 14*
0 11*
1 14*
Front, with stays—
Left portion (with butt
plate)
Right portion ...
Side (2) ... ... each
No. 1—
7 15
7 6*
1 14*
2
2
4
2
2
2
10 3
10 2
3 0
12
12
4
2
2
2
10 3
10 2
3 0
12
12
4
2
2
2
Left side
5 19
Right side
Front
6 2
Roof
6 3
No. 2—
7 13
Left side—
Front ...
2 0
1 12
Intermediate
Rear ...
Right side—
2 5
Front ...
2 1
Intermediate
Rear ...
1 12
Front—
2 5
Left ...
2 0
1 13
Right ...
Roof—
Front ...
1 13
2 1
Rear ...
Intermediate (2) (with
jointing angle)
/I 13
No. 3—
'
U 9
Left side
5 19
Right side
Front
6 2
Roof—-
6 3
Front ...
1 14
Rear ...
Intermediate
2 0
No. 4—
3 2
Left side—-
Front ...
2 1
Intermediate...
Rear ...
1 12
Right side—
2 5
Front...
2 1
Intermediate...
Rear ...
1 13
Front ...
2 5
Roof—
6 4
Front...
1 14
Rear ...
Intermediate...
2 0
Shell pit—
3 2
Left
Right
Front
Rear
7 18
7 18
2 2*
1 14*
4
4
4
3
3
1
50-inches
7 18
7 18
2 2*
1 10
4
4
4
3
3
1
50-inches
7 18
7 18
2 2*
1 10
4
4
4
3
3
1
50-inches
7 18
7 18
2 2*
1 14*
4
4
4
3
3
1
from rear
from rear
from rear
and meas-
and meas-
and meas-
ured along
ured along
ured along
Plates, top, front (1 left and
centre line
centre line
centre line
1 right) bolted together ...
1 6
1 6
1 6
1 4
[To face p. 194.
PARTICULARS OF MOUNTING FOR LIFTING PURPOSES


CHAPTER III
MISCELLANEOUS STORES
Apparatus, Traversing P.F. Dials
The apparatus is employed if, for any reason, two P.F. instru-
ments are installed for use with one mounting. In connection with
each instrument is a pair of trollies carrying range and training
dials. The trollies, which are connected by a bar, run on rollers on a
circular rail secured to the pedestal, so that they can be readily
moved to any convenient position within the arc of traverse served
by their particular instrument. The trollies are prevented from
moving beyond the limits of this arc by stops. The cables from the
P.F. instruments are led to a terminal board inside the pedestal
of the mounting, and thence through the side of the pedestal over
guide rollers to the dial trollies. Sufficient slack, taken up by the
counterweights, is left in the cables to permit of the movement of the
dial trollies.
Note.— This apparatus is not used with Mark VII mountings.
Bar, Testing, Auto and Rocking Bar Sights
The bar is used for testing, by means of the service clinometer,
the accuracy of the automatic and rocking bar sights. It is formed
to fit the telescope holders and with a plane for the clinometer.
An arrow-head is engraved on the rear end, which will be set to
correspond with a similar arrow-head on the rear telescope holder
to ensure correct cross-level of the plane.
When testing the angle between the gun and the sight the
clinometer readings will be taken from the bar fixed in the holders.
Bit, Vent, 36-inch
This is of round tempered steel wire, furnished with a spiral
bit at one end and hardened at the point; the opposite end is
formed into a loop for convenience in handling. It is used for
removing debris from the vent channel and for cleaning it.
Bolts, Eye, Breech Fittings
Ihe eye-holts consist of steel loops with shank having a screw
thread corresponding with that in the carrier hinge bolt of Marks X,
X y and X* guns.


Borers, Tube Chamber, Small (Square End) (Pointed End)
The borers are of steel, coned at one end to fit the tube chamber
in the axial vent, and are provided with cutting edges for removing
obstructions of a hard nature from the tube chamber. The other
ends of the borers are provided with a cross-handle.
Box, Obturator, B.L. 9-2-inch, Marks X, X v and X* Guns
The box is of wood with two rope handles, designed to
hold two obturators, held in two compressor discs, and three
adjusting discs. The box is fitted with a cover and lid, a gun-
metal bolt passes through the bottom, compressor discs, cover and
lid. A securing nut, fitting on the bottom of the bolt, prevents
any turning movement of the latter. The cover and lid are each
secured by a fly nut, both nuts being on the bolt, the cover thus
securing the compressor discs in the box by having the fly nut
screwed down upon it.
A felt washer is secured to the underside of the lid to make a
tight joint between it and the box.
The cover, disc and the interior of the box and lid are coated with
paraffin wax.
Box, Obturator, Steep-Coned, B.L. 9-2-inch Marks X, X v and
X* Guns
The box (Mark I) is of gunmetal ; the top has a flanged shoulder
to take the cover. A steel bolt passes up through the box and a
gunmetal nut on the bolt screws down on to the cover, thus com-
pressing the contents. The box holds an obturator and one adjusting
disc.
Box, Spare Parts
The box is of deal divided into 17 compartments, and is intended
to hold the spare springs and other small parts belonging to the gun.
Brush, Piasaba, B.L. Bore, 9-2-inch
The brush comprises a head and stave.
The head is of elm, having piasaba tufts secured into it by pitch
or marine glue.
The stave is of Oregon pine and is secured in the head by a
copper rivet. It is fitted with a metal socket-joint which consists
of a metal plug fixed to the intermediate stave and a metal cylinder
fixed to the brush stave. The plug is inserted in the cylinder and
secured in position by a thumbscrew fitted to the cylinder.
Total length with end stave 28-feet 2|-inches.
The above brush is obsolescent and will be replaced by Cleaners,
Piasaba, No. 22.
196


Brush, Rammer and Sponge, B.L. 9-2-inch Chamber, No. 1,
Mark I
The head is of elm, protected in front by a brass plate secured by
brass screws. The part in front of the brush is covered with wool
and canvas secured by copper tacks, marine glue, securing cord and
the brass plate. The brush portion is made of beech or birch in two
parts, one part forming the brush and the other a packing ring.
The tufts of bristles are secured in position by brass wire, which is
housed and secured in suitable grooves ; the brush is retained in
position on the head against a shoulder by an undercut and by an
angle copper ring and screws. The head is secured to the stave by a
copper rivet.
The stave, which will be provided locally, is of ash, 186-inches
long, 1-75-inches diameter except where it enters the head where the
measurement increases to 2-5-inches.
A white band, 2-inches wide, painted on the stave is to denote
when the shell is rammed home.
Brush, Rammer and Sponge, B.L. 9-2-inch Gun, Chamber,
Mark II
The Mark II pattern head is of the solid type and consists of an
elm stock provided with a sponge portion, a brush portion and a
rammer cap. The sponge portion consists of a coating of wool
tufts stitched to canvas and secured to the stock by marine glue
and copper tacks. The brush portion consists of five rows of
bristle tufts secured in an elm stock by union or copper wire and
held in position round the inner end of the stock by a copper ring.
The rammer cap is of manganese bronze and is secured to
the outer end of the stock by six screws. The head is secured to
the stave by a copper rivet.
The stave, which will be provided locally, is of ash, 186-inches
long and 2-inches diameter.
A white band, 2-inches wide, painted on the stave is to denote
when the shell is rammed home.
Calculator, Range Correction, B.L. 9-2-inch, Nos. 1
and 2
(Plate 34)
The calculators are for use with the Marks X, A v and X* guns.
The No. 1 for guns on Mark V and the No. 2 for those on Marks VI
and VIA mountings. They are similar in design differing only in the
range scale graduations.
By its means the battery commander is enabled to calculate
the correction required to the range for any variation from the
normal in the external ballistic conditions.
The calculator consists of a metal plate (A) mounted on a wood
base (B). Sliding on the metal plate is the main carriage (C), which


is actuated by a rack and pinion. The rack, which is fixed to the
metal plate, is engraved with a scale of ranges.
Sliding on the main carriage, at right angles to the range scale,
are two scale arms (D D) ; one scale arm is engraved with a scale
of corrections, the index for which is engraved on the other. The
former at its outer end is fitted with scales for barometer, thermo-
meter, and wind, the latter carrying the travel of target and tide
corrections. These scale arms are moved with respect to each
other in the following manner
The wind, travel of target and tide scales are attached in sliding
blocks which are moved across the arm by means of the handles
(E E E). On the underside of the travel of target and wind blocks
are studs, which move along grooved rocking bars ; the two scale
arms are connected together by a spiral spring which is attached to
the rocking bars.
Each rocking-bar is pivoted at its centre and attached to the
underside is a lever which has a roller attached to its free end ;
this roller follows the shaped edges of the metal plate, causing the
rocking bars to rotate.
When the barometer and thermometer scales are set at normal
and the wind, travel of target and tide scales are set at zero, any
movement of the main carriage, which is caused by the rotation
of the handle (F), will not alter the reading of the correction scale
either up or down owing to the studs attached to the sliding blocks
being over the centre of the rocking bar pivot.
When the scales are set at any reading other than normal or
zero any rotation of the handle (F) will give corrections up or down ;
this is caused by the studs attached to the sliding blocks being
displaced in the rocking bars.
Instructions for Use
Set the barometer, thermometer and the two tide scales to the
prevailing conditions.
Set the wind and travel of target scales to indicate the respective
velocity components in the plane of sight.
Set the main carriage to the range and read the correction ; if on
the “UP ” scale the correction to the range is “ ADD ” ; if on
the “ DOWN ” scale it is “ DROP.”
Scale plates and readers for |-charges and 4-c.r.h. projectiles
are issued for use with the above-mentioned calculators.
Cleaner, Piasaba, No. 22
The No. 22 piasaba cleaner consists principally of a metal rod,
socket with joint plug, retaining plate, two securing nuts and six
brush portions. The socket is of gunmetal in two parts, front and
rear ; the rear part (which is a 3-inch joint) is secured to the front
part by means of the threaded end of the rod and a set screw.


The brush portions are of elm provided with rows of piasaba
tufts ; they are held in position round the spindle by circum-
ferential projections on the inner face of the retaining plate and the
socket.
One end of the cleaner is provided with a securing nut with a
loop to take a lanyard whilst the other end is provided with a joint
plug to enable either a lanyard or a stave to be used.
The intermediate and end staves for use with the No. 22 piasaba
cleaner will be “ Stave, intermediate, B.L. 9-2-inch,” and “ Stave,
end, No. 8, Mark II.”
The “ Cleaner, piasaba, No. 22 ” supersedes “ Brush, piasaba.”
Clinometer, Large
The clinometer (Fig. 59) consists of an angular frame of gun-
metal, containing a metal drum graduated in 5-minute divisions
up to 45-degrees elevation and 40-minutes depression, a pivoted
FIG . 59
spirit level being made to conform to the movement of the drum
by means of a spring.
An index plate on the frame is graduated in minutes up to 5,
to permit of smaller readings (to 1-minute) being obtained.


Graduations on the elevation side are filled with black wax
and those on the depression side with red wax. The depression
scale is mainly intended for use in testing the instrument.
The spirit level is adjusted and secured by capstan headed
nuts.
In the latest pattern clinometer, the reader is a single arrow
and the 5-minute graduations on the drum up to the 5-degree
graduation are sub-divided by dots to read single minutes.
Connections, Pressure Gauge
The pressure gauge is attached to the vessel to be charged by a
three-way connection, one opening of which screws on to the nozzle
of the filling valve connectors, the opposite one takes the pump
pipe, and the centre one the gauge. When the gauge is not on this
opening, it is closed by the closing plugs. There is a cut-off valve
with supporting nut, which closes the way to the gauge while leaving
the passage free between the pump and the cylinder. The way to
the gauge should not be left open while pumping or firing is going on
as the gauge is likely to suffer.
Cover, Breech, B.L. 9-2-in. Marks X, X v and X* Gun, Mark I
The cover is of canvas having the inside (at the rear) lined with
leather, the outside being waterproofed. It is arranged to cover the
whole of the breech and breech fittings and is secured round the
gun by a strap sewn into the front edge of the cover.
Cover, Mounting
The cover is of waterproof canvas, formed to protect the working
parts of the mounting. It is secured in position by straps and
buckling pieces, which are stitched on.
Cover, Muzzle, No. 7
The cover is of waterproof canvas and is secured to the muzzle
by a leather strap.
Cover, Packing Breech
The cover consists of a steel plate disc, steel clamping bar, and a
clamping bolt with washer and nut.
It is used for the preservation of the bore of the gun when the
breech mechanism is not fitted. The clamping bar engages the
threads of the breech opening, and the cover is held tightly against
the face of the breech by being secured to the clamping bar by the
bolt. A coating of putty prevents the ingress of damp.
Cover, Sights and Gear
The cover is of waterproof canvas and is supported on a steel
frame.


Tackle Differential
The sub-calibre gun is raised to the breech by means of a
15-cwt. differential tackle, the upper block being secured to a runner
on the underside of the top of the main shield. The tackle may
also be used when assembling or dismantling the breech mechanism.
Drift, Ejecting Tube, No. 2
The drift is of round steel, slightly smaller in diameter than the
fire channel in the axial vent. The front end of the drift is coned
to prevent burring and the rear end is furnished with a steel head.
The drift is for use in removing tight tubes from the tube
chamber in the vent.
Extractor, Cartridge, B.L. 9-2-inch to 7-5-inch
The cartridge extractor is a manganese bronze hook which is
secured in a wood stave. The total length is 6-feet.
Extractor, Drill Shell, No. 2
The extractor consists of an ash stave grooved circumferentially
at one end to enable a good grip to be taken when extracting the
drill shell. The other end of the stave is furnished with a steel
hook for engaging the cross bar of the shell. Total length, 8-feet.
Extractor, Tube, Hand, Box Slide, “ A ” No. 2
The hand tube extractor is for use with B.L. 9-2-inch Marks X,
X v and X* guns, when the tube is so tightly jammed in the vent
that the extractor in the box slide fails to remove it.
The extractor consists of a steel lever shaped so as to admit of the
insertion of one end under the extractor lever in the box slide.
On exerting pressure on the outer end of the hand extractor, the
tube will be forced out.
Frames, Supporting, Cover, Sights and Gear
The frame is of steel and supports the waterproof canvas cover
over the sights and gear.
Funnel, Filling Cylinders, No. 9, Mark I
The funnel consists of a tin-plate cone-shaped body, having at
the top a wired beaded edge and a wire (D) loop secured by a tin
strip riveted and soldered on the outside and at the bottom, with a
tin-plate spout. This funnel is for use with Marks VI and
VIA Mountings.
Gauges, Pressure
(Plate 35)
The gauges generally consist of a metal cylinder containing the
mechanism, which is closed in by a dial and a sheet steel plate at the
back.
201


The mechanism consists of a metal bearing which is attached
to the cylinder and dial plate ; that part of the bearing which is
attached to the dial plate is flattened and suitable bearings are
secured to it for the spindle of the dial indicator and for a crank
through which the indicator is actuated, while that part of the
bearing which is attached to the side of the cylinder has a channel
which is in continuation of the connection ; in one side of this
channel is a hole in which one end of a short tube is inserted and
soldered. The tube is slightly flexible and is bent partly round the
cylinder, its opposite end being closed with a cap, to which is
attached a crank arrangement working on a pivot and which has an
adjustable arm attached to a segmental rack in gear with a pinion on
the spindle of the dial indicator.
Each instrument is provided with a dial indicator stop, fixed
either on the dial or within, against some part of the mechanism.
Each one is constructed to register the hydraulic pressure in lb. per
square inch. Gauges registering high pressures are provided with a
safety device to prevent extensive damage to the mechanism should
the tube burst, e.g. due to excessive pressure. This device is denoted
by a small nut in the centre of the back.
Action
On pressure entering the bent tube within the gauge, it gradually
inclines the tube outwards ; thus the dial indicator is actuated
through the pivoted crank and segmental rack. When the pressure
is removed from the instrument, the dial indicator returns to stop
at the normal position.
Pressure gauges Nos. 1 to 5, 12, 13, 14 and 15, also spanners
Nos. 103 and 104 for gauges and connections, are used with the
mountings.
A box for the pressure gauge, not mounted in position, will
be provided locally. It is made of deal and fitted with a hook and
staple.
Gauge, Striker, Eccentricity, Small
The gauge is of brass, with a removable copper plug, for testing
eccentricity of striker.
Gauge, Striker, Protrusion, No. 3
The gauge is of flat steel plate and is for gauging the protrusion
of the firing pin of the needle or striker in electric or percussion
locks for B.L. guns and the striker in 1-inch Elswick “ B ” aiming
rifle. It has separate recesses for maximum and minimum gauging
and the depths of the recesses are as follows :
Maximum ... ... ... ... -09-inch
Minimum ... ... ... ... -07-inch


Grab, Projectile, No. 2
The grab consists principally of a pair of jaws, hand lever, safety
catch, four links (two long and two short), cam with spindle and
lifting link assembled as follows :
The jaws (Parts I and II) are connected by a hinge pin and are
fitted on the inner side with serrated studs to grip the projectile.
The outer ends of the links are connected to the jaws by pins and
the inner ends to a tube working in an elongated hole in the jaw,
Part I. A cam and spindle work in the tube, the outer end of the
spindle being fitted with a hand lever formed with a similar cam.
The cams work over projections on the sides of the jaw Part I.
A lifting link is fitted on the tube and is provided with a pin for
attaching the grab to the eye of the lifting rope. A safety catch is
mounted on the joint pin of the short links.
The jaws are “ closed ” about the shell by disengaging the
safety catch and pressing down the hand lever, until a pawl on its
cam engages a projection on jaw, Part I. This movement causes
the tube (with the inner ends of the links) to be raised fully in the
elongated hole, thus forcing the jaw, Part 11, to close on Part I
and grip tightly the projectile, and also locking the grab.
The jaws are “ opened” by disengaging the safety catch and
bringing the hand lever vertical (thus lifting the jaw, Part II),
in which position they are retained by the safety catch engaging
a lug on the long link and also by flats on the cams.
Implements, Ammunition
Key, No. 8 [Mark IV) is of steel with suitable projections
formed on it to fit the slots in the Nos. 11, 15 or 16 base fuzes,
for inserting or removing purposes, or their corresponding plugs.
Key, No. 17 is used for fixing the No. 88 fuze.
The Mark II key is of steel, one end being shaped to fit over the
fuze ; the lower edge of the ring portion is bevelled to suit all
Marks of fuzes, and is provided with a projection to fit the square
notch in the flange of the fuze body.
Key, No. 18 is used for setting the No. 88 fuze.
The Mark VI key is of steel in one piece, having a handle and
circular portion. The circular portion is recessed and shaped to fit
over the lower time ring, and is provided with a projecting prong
on the underside to fit over the setting stud on the fuze.
A lanyard loop is fitted to the end of the handle.
Key, No. 23 is of steel, T-shaped, for use with G.S. and 2-inch
plugs. It is also suitable for fixing or removal of D.A. percussion
fuzes.
Key, No. 88 is of steel used for setting the delay plug in the
base cover plate of shell fuzed with the No. 346 fuze. It consists


of a stem fitted with a cross-handle. The stem has two projec-
tions to fit the plug. A steel ring serves for the attachment of a
lanyard.
Lanyard, Cocking, No. 2
The No. 2 lanyard is of tarred white line with toggle at one end
and furnished at the other end with loops for looping over the lugs
of the cocking handle of the lock. Length, 4-feet, 6-inches.
A clip for supporting the cocking lanyard, consisting of a steel
bracket with spring, is attached by a fixing screw to the upper end
of the carrier hinge bolt, the existing lubricating screw in the hinge
bolt being removed for this purpose.
Lanyard, Firing, No. 7
The No. 7 lanyard is of tarred white line with toggle at one end
and furnished at the other end with hook for hooking on to the
trigger of the lock. Length, 8-feet, 8-inches.
Press, Obturator, Steep-Coned, B.L. 9-2-inch, Mark I
Gauge, Thickness, Obturator, Steep-Coned, B.L. 9-2-inch
Tommy, Presses, Mark I Obturator, Steep-Coned, B.L. 13-5-inch
to 6-inch Guns
The press and gauge are intended for use in re-forming steep-
coned obturators which have become so distorted as to cause difficulty
in placing them in position on the axial vent in the gun.
The press consists of a steel body shaped internally to suit the
contour of the obturator and fitted with a steel cover. The cover
is secured by means of a steel bolt with disc spring, washer and
cross handle, a disc spring guard being attached loosely on the bolt
below the cross handle to act as a shield should the spring break up.
The bolt is provided with a square head, by means of which the
press can be held in a vice while the cross handle is revolved when
compressing or releasing the obturator. A steel tommy is provided
for use with the cross handle in compressing the obturator. Recesses
are formed round the periphery of the press so as to admit of the
application of the gauge for testing the thickness of the obturator
while under compression. If the obturator does not readily com-
press to the correct thickness it should be left under compression
for about an hour, then removed and all exuded oil quickly wiped
off the pad, discs and interior of the press. The compression
and further wiping off of the oil should then be repeated as often
as necessary till the obturator is not only of the correct thickness,
but also the correct weight (except obturators with wire-woven
pads for which limits of weight are not yet specified).
Th e gauge is of flat steel plate and is for use in testing the thickness
of the obturators as described above.


Pump, Air, Double, Mark I
(Plate 36)
The pump is intended to charge the cylinders of mountings
with fluid or compressed air.
It consists of two gunmetal cylinders of different diameters
in one casting, with a base plate, on the top of which an iron frame
is bolted to form a tank for the fluid while being pumped into the
cylinders. The pump cylinders are fitted with plungers actuated
by a rocking lever, which is supported on brackets riveted to the
tank.
The pump is in duplicate, and is bolted to an iron bedding
plate, which is secured to the floor by clips and cotters. It is
worked by two “ T " handles which are attached to the rocking
levers and are connected at the top by a link to ensure uniform
action.
When charging the cylinders with fluid it is drawn through
suction valves from the tank into the large pump cylinders, and on
the down stroke of the plunger is forced into the small cylinder and
delivery pipe through delivery valves. When charging with air
the connection between the tank and the cylinders is cut off by
closing the valves near the copper delivery pipes, and the air is
drawn through a suction valve at the bottom of the large cylinder.
This valve is never cut off, but is more heavily weighted than the
water valve, and when the water passage is open liquid is drawn in
in preference to air, provided the strokes are not too jerky.
Either pump can be disconnected if necessary and worked
independently ; the delivery of either is cut off by closing the
delivery valve. When this is closed the handle must be disconnected
so that the pump which is cut off may not be worked.
The pump tank should always be kept full.
To keep the leathers in good order they should be slightly
under pressure. To obtain this, screw one length of pipe on to the
delivery nozzle, blanking the free end of the pipe with a cap, set
the pump for “ Air ” and pump air into the pipe till the handles
become difficult to work.
When standing long in store the pump should be worked
occasionally to see that the pressure is still on.
A cover is fitted to the iron bedding plate to protect the small
pipes which connect the base of the pump to the three-way
connection.
When it is found that the cylinders of the pumps are defective
from excessive wear and scoring they will be bored to a larger
diameter according to the amount of wear and fitted with new
plungers and L-leathers. The thickness of the cylinders will
not allow, at the most, of more than 0-15-inch enlargement, and
this amount must not be exceeded. On the enlargement of a
cylinder the word “ Large ” will be stamped on the new plunger.


Accessories for use with the pump are four J-in. bore con-
necting pipes, five spanners (Nos. 96 to 100), and one No. 2 lifting
loop.
Weight, 4-cwt. 1-qr.
Maximum working pressure, 2,800-lb. per square inch.
Pump, Air or Liquid, Marks I and II
(Plate 36)
The Mark I pump is double-acting, and is intended for charging
the cylinders of mountings with fluid or compressed air and
reservoirs with compressed air. (Whenever it is possible the
reservoirs should be recharged by engine power. This can usually
be carried out in the local workshop). It is contained in a metal
tank bolted to an iron stand, which is secured to a wood platform.
The pump consists principally of the following parts ;
1. High and low-pressure plungers. The former is fixed
to a crossbar at the top of the tank, having a gun-
metal washer inserted between the seating and the
L-leather and the latter to the bottom of the tank.
2. Suction, intermediate and delivery valves.
3. Metal cylinders, formed at one end to receive the high-
pressure plungers and at the other the low-pressure
plungers.
4. Outer plungers.
5. Release valves in cylinders.
6. Cock with water inlet strainer for admitting air or liquid
to the pump.
7. Double handle lever for actuating the cylinders.
8. Drip feed lubricator.
9. Drip feed lubricator strainer.
The stand, which is of cast iron, 7-inches high, is attached to a
wood platform 5-feet 9-inches long by 3-feet s|-inches wide.
The undermentioned accessories are used with the pump :
Adapter, pump pipe A. —This adapter, which is for use with
the connecting pipes of the “ Pump, air, double,” is a metal casting
2-625-inches long, with connections to suit the discharge nozzle of
the “ Pump, air or liquid,” and the unions of the £-inch bore
connecting pipes.
Adapter, pump pipe B (3). —This adapter, which is for coupling
the |-inch bore connecting pipes to the “ Pump, air or liquid ”
pressure gauge connection, air pump separator and 9-inch diameter
air reservoirs, is a metal casting 4-45-inches long, with connections
to suit the unions of the pipes.
Cover, canvas. —This is provided to prevent grit and dirt getting
into the working parts when not in use.


Pipes, connecting. —These pipes are |-inch bore and are each
10-feet long, two with unions at each end and two with a plug at one
end and a union at the other.
The spanners (Nos. 157 to 160) are of steel, formed to suit
the various parts of the pump, pump adapters, or for use with other
spanners of the series.
Arrangement of connecting pipes. —The pump is connected
to the cylinders of mountings or to reservoirs by means of con-
necting pipes, which may be either those described above or the
bore connecting pipes of the “ Pump, air, double,” whichever
are available.
When the connecting pipes of the “ Pump, air, double ” are
used for connecting to the cylinder or reservoir through a separator,
the pump pipe adapter “A” is first screwed on to the discharge
nozzle of the “ Pump, air or liquid,” and the pipes are then connected
as required.
When the pipes of the “ Pump, air or liquid ” are used for
connecting —
1. To the cylinder, the adapter pump pipe “ B ” is first screwed
on to the “ Connection, pressure gauge,” in use with the
mounting and the pipes are then connected as required.
2 To the reservoir through a separator, three adapters “ B
are first screwed on, one to the nozzle of the inlet valve,
one to the nozzle of the outlet valve of the separator, and
one to the nozzle of the valve connector on the reservoir.
The pipes are then connected as required.
Method of use. — Pumping air. —When charging with air the
lever working the cock is turned to the side of the tank marked
“ air.” On the up stroke of the cylinder air is drawn through the
cock along the passages and through the suction valve into the
low-pressure cylinder. On the down stroke of the cylinder the air is
forced through the intermediate valve and compressed into the
high-pressure cylinder, and on the next stroke of the cylinder is
forced through the delivery valve and pipe to the cylinder of the
mounting or reservoir.
When beginning to pump air, the area of the low-pressure
cylinders can be increased and consequently a larger volume of air
pumped by connecting the outer plungers to the bottom of the
tank. When the pressure in the cylinder which is being charged
becomes too high for the pump to be worked by this arrangement
the outer plungers are connected to, and move with, the cylinders.
The outer plungers are connected to the tank or cylinders by
moving a lever on each side of the tank towards the words low-
pressure ”or “ high-pressure,” respectively. The connections must
not he made until the cylinder is on the bottom stop on that side.


Weights,
ETC.
Weight
Tonnage
cwt.qrs.lb.
tons
Pump ...
3 0 0
0-3695
Stand, with platform
3 2 3
0-451
Pumping liquid. —When pumping liquid, the lever of the
cock is turned to the side of the tank marked “ Liquid,” and at
high pressure the plugs of the overflow valves are unscrewed
sufficiently to allow the liquid that cannot be contained in the
high pressure pump to exhaust into the tank. On the up* stroke
of the cylinder the liquid is drawn through the suction valve into
the cylinder and on the down stroke of the cylinder is forced
through the intermediate and delivery valves and pipe into the
cylinder of the mounting.
Maximum working pressure, 2,000-lb. per square inch.
The Mark II differs from Mark I generally as follows : —The
tank is of an increased depth, in order to ensure the high-pressure
plungers being kept wet.
The same instructions as given for the “ Pump, air, double,”
should be followed with this pump to ensure it being kept in a
serviceable condition.
Pump, Running-Back, Portable, Mark I
(Plate 36)
This pump is used for filling the buffers, charging the intensifies
and running back the guns on the mountings for attending to the
packings, etc. It is of the ordinary double-acting hydraulic type,
and is contained in a portable tank on wheels, so that it may be
conveniently moved from one mounting to another.
The pump itself consists of a metal casting fitted with plungers
which, when actuated by the handles, draw the liquid through the
inlet valves and force it past the delivery valves through a connecting
pipe into the cylinder to which it is connected.
The “ Pipes, copper, connecting, £-inch bore,” used with the
“ Pump, air, double,” are also used for connecting the portable
running-back pump to the buffers, etc., of the mountings.
An adapter is fitted to the portable pump for connecting the
copper pipes.
Before beginning to pump a gun back, the tank must be filled
to a depth of 6-inches with the same description of fluid as is used
in the hydraulic buffers.
When the gun is run-out to firing position the liquid is forced
back again from the hydraulic buffer to the tank through a by-pass
valve. This valve must be closed before beginning to pump the
gun back and opened to run-out.


Weight, 5-cwt. 1-qr.
The undermentioned accessories are used with the pump :
Pipes, copper, connecting, |-inch bore
by 10-feet
With unions
With union and plug
"For use with pump, air,
I double ; pump, air or
liquid ; pump, running-
. back, portable.
Loops, lifting, No. 8 for delivery valves.
Reservoirs, Compressed Air, Marks II and 111
The reservoir (Fig. 60) is in the form of a flask with a short neck
at one end, strengthened by having a steel collar screwed on the
outside. The neck is fitted with a socket with spindle valve, which
is closed by a preserving plug. The latter is replaced by a valve
FIG . 60
connector when charging and discharging the reservoir. The
connector is formed with a screwed nozzle on one side to receive the
connecting pipe and is fitted with a valve key, with T-handle, by
which the valve in the socket is opened and closed as required.
14 (2)
209


The pressure in the reservoir should not exceed 2,000-lb. per
square inch.
A preserving plug and three grummets are issued with the
reservoir.
The Mark 111 reservoir is similar to above but has a neck at each
end, one being fitted with the valve socket and the other with a
drain plug.
Rimer, Vent Axial, Short
This is of bronze and is used for clearing the tube chamber of
the axial vent.
Separator, Air Pump, Mark 1
The separator (Fig. 61) consists of a copper tube screwed at both
ends. At one end of the copper tube a wrought iron cap is fitted,
furnished with gun-metal inlet and outlet cocks and a |--inch copper
pipe, which carries the air and water in a downward direction
FIG. 61
into the separator. At the other end of the copper tube is a
wrought iron cap which is fitted with a gunmetal drain-cock.
The separator is connected up between the pump and the air reservoir
to be charged and the moisture of the air, while passing through the
copper tube, falls to the bottom and is blown off from time to time
during the operation through the drain-cock. When the separator
is used, it must be always fixed in a vertical position, the inlet and
outlet cocks being at the top.
210


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
1
Detail of Use
V
VI
VIA
VII
Clamp, adjusting in-
tensifier piston
(with lever)
(«)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Eyes, lifting—
No. 1
(a)
(«)t
. (<»)t
(«)t
For gun sliding bars and
capsquares.
r
(«)
For front shield and
No. 2 ... J
withdrawing piston
rod.
I
{a)
(a)
(al
For withdrawing piston
rod.
No. 3
[a)
(«)
(a)
(«)
For cap, gun bands and
No. 19a pivot plug.
r
(a)
(a)
(a)
For side and shell pit
No. 4 ... J
shields.
\
[a]
For shell pit shield.
No. 12
[a]
(a)
For front shield.
No. 15
(a)
For shields.
Key—
No. 1
(«)
For hydraulic press
rammer piston.
No. 2
(a)
For rammer right con-
trolling cam adjusting
screw.
No. 3
(a)
For converter range
receiver gear disc ad-
justing clamping
screws and cover
locating screws.
Keys, elevation
indicator—
No. 1
(a)
{a)
(a)
For temperature strip
clamping screw.
Lever No. 4...
(a)
(«)
(a)
(a)
For lengthening spanner.
Loop, lifting, No. 6
(a)
(a)
(a)
For elevating gear fric-
tion rings with |-inch
tapped holes.
Pipe, filling, hydraulic
buffer (with funnel
and union)
[a)
(aj
(a)
(a)
Screwdrivers—
No. 10
(«)
(a)
(a)
(«)
For small screws of
automatic sighting
gear.
No. 14
(a)
For pump accumulator
fixing screws.
Spanners and Special Implements
(a) Used with mounting as shown,
f Used also for rear clip plates.
211


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
V
VI
VIA
VII
Detail of Use
Spanners —
For air cylinder in-
tensifier gland and
stuffing box.
No. 1
(«)
(«)
(a)
(a)
No. 51
(a)
(a)
(«)
(«)
For hydraulic buffer
filling and emptying
valve connections ;
intensifier pipe con-
nections ; also air
cylinder filling and
emptying valve con-
nection ; filling valve
adapter; intensifier
pipe adapter.
No. 98
(«)
(«)
(a)
( a )
For connecting pipe and
water suction stop
valve, double air
pump ; unions, B.L.
9'2-inch charging
pipe ; filling pipe
connection; and
nozzle protecting cap.
No. 103
(a)
(»)
(a)
(a)
For gauges, pressure.
Nos. 1 to 4 also con-
nections pressure
gauge.
No. 104
(«)
(«)
{a)
(a)
For connections, pres-
sure gauge and
filling valve.
No. 203
(a)
(«)
(a)
(a)
For air cylinder valve
and gland of outer
plug.
For piston rod plug.
No. 206
(a)
(a)
(«)
No. 208
(a)
(«)
(a)
(a)
For air cylinder outer
plug.
No. 209
No. 211
(a)
(a)
(a)
(«)
(a)
For ball bearing ring
trunnion adjusting nut.
For accumulator charg-
ing compressor elbow
pipe securing bolt.
No. 212
No. 213
No. 214
No. 215
No. 216
(a)
(a)
(a)
[a)
(a)
(a)
(«)
(«)
For arc pinion shaft
nuts.
For rear hoist stuffing
box.
For rear hoist cylinder
cap.
For front hoist cylinder
plug.
For centre pivot pipe
gland.
(a) Used with mounting as shown.
212
Spanners and Special Implements-— continued


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
Detail of Use
V
VI
VIA
VII
Spanners — contd.
For centre pivot pipe
No. 217
(a)
bend gland.
No. 218
{a)
For accumulator valve
seatings (suction,stop,
and relief valves).
No. 219
[a)
For accumulator valve
seatings (equalizing
and delivery valves).
No. 220
[a)
For accumulator pump
plunger glands.
No. 221
(«)
\For tightening trench
No. 222
(a)
j pipe joints.
No. 223
(a)
For cradle trunnion
elbow pipe securing
nut.
No. 224
(a)
For accumulator pump
connecting pipe
coupling.
No. 225
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For 3-546-inch holding
down bolt nuts, No.
4A pedestal and hold-
fast.
No. 226
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For 3-17-inch joint plate
bolts and nuts, Nos. 4
and 7 pedestals.
No. 227
(a)
For accumulator charg-
ing compressor glands.
No. 228
(a)
For accumulator charg-
ing compressor con-
necting pipe unions
and loading arm pivot.
No. 229
(a)
(a)
(a)
For screws, adjusting
eccentric rod, gear
correcting auto sight.
tNo. 230
(a)
(a)
(a)
For 3-8-inch holding
down bolt nuts, No.
4A pedestal holdfast.
No. 235
(a)
For accumulator centre
cylinder gland.
No. 236
(a)
For tightening trench
pipe joints (flanges).
No. 243
(a)
(a)
(a)
For air cylinder gland
studs (with No. 34
tommy).
No. 483
{a)
For rammer rocker jack
large ram gland.
No. 484
1
For rammer rocker jack
!
small ram gland.
(a) Used with mounting as shown.
f For oversize nuts, alternative to No. 225 for standard nuts.
213
Spanners and Special Implements —continued


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
V
VI
VIA
VII
Detail of Use
Spanners— contd.
No. 485
{a)
For rammer rocker
swivel joint gland and
rear shaft nut.
No. 486
[a)
For swivel joint and
telescopic pipe air
blast inner gland.
No. 487
K a )
For cradle lock control
valve piston.
r
(a)
For semi-automatic
No. 488 |
stores spindle lock and
[a)
(a)
{a)
adjusting nuts.
For piston rod plug.
No. 489
{a)
For air or drain valve
and buffer and air
cylinder filling and
emptying valve
spindles.
No. 490
(«)
For swivel joint tele-
scopic pipe airblast
outer gland.
No. 491
(a)
For rammer, rammer
rocker and hoist cut-
off valve spindles.
No. 492
(a)
For cradle lock locking
valve spindle, also
pistons of elevating,
traversing, rammer
and rammer rocker
and wash-out control
valves; elevation cut-
off valve ; and
rammer and rammer
rocker semi-auto-
matic valve.
No. 493
(a)
For buffer and air cylin-
der filling and empty-
ing valve gland.
No. 494
[a)
For hydraulic press
rammer cylinder nut.
No. 495
[a)
For range receiver eleva-
tion drive arc pinion
collar.
No. 496 ...
[a)
For range receiver con-
version quadrant
pivot arm securing
nut.
No. 497
[a)
For range receiver guide
adj ustable slide
pinion bush.
[a) Used with mounting as shown.
214
Spanners and Special Implements— continued


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
Detail of Use
V
VI
VIA
VII
Spanners— contd.
No. 498
\°)
For elevation and de-
pression stop glands.
No. 499
[ a)
For range receiver con-
version quadrant
pivot arm quadrant
bolt nut.
No. 500
[a)
For hydraulic press
rammer pinion dust
e x c 1 uder ; rammer
ram racks and
casing roller bearing
securing plate.
No. 501
[a)
For centre pivot inlet
casing dividing ring.
No. 503
(a)
'j For bolts, nuts and
> fittings of corre-
No. 504
(a)
J spending size.
Spanners, hydraulic
buffer—
No. 26
(«)
(«)
(a)
(a)
For trunnion ball bear-
ings supporting
screws.
No. 49
(«)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For No. 19 filling hole
plug.
r
{a)
For front and rear hoist
No. 83 ... |
glands.
{a)
For hydraulic press hoist
ram gland.
No. 104
{a)
(a)
(a)
{a)
For large gland.
No. 105
(«)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For small gland.
No. 106
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For stuffing box.
No. 107
(«)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For piston rod nuts.
No. 108
(«)
(a)
(a)
For retaining valve
collar; filling and
emptying valve
spindle; and with-
drawing air cylinder
packing ring.
No. 109
109 A
(a)
(a)
(a)
{a)
'j For running out control
> plunger (with No. 32
J tommy).
Tommies—
No. 18
(«)
For spanners Nos. 211,
219 and 236.
No. 29
(»)
For spanners Nos. 217
and 218.
No. 66
(a)
For elevating gear arc
pinion nuts.
(a) Used with mounting as shown.
215
Spanners and Special Implements— continued


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
Detail of Use
V
VI
VIA
VII
T ommies— contd.
No. 67
(«)
For converter range re-
ceiver gear and tra-
verse drive bearing
receiver gear vernier
coupling driving
collar nut.
No. 68
(a)
For use with Nos. 486,.
494, 503 and 504
Tools, artillery—
spanners.
No. 63
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
For withdrawing B.L.
ordnance antifriction
washers.
No. 72
(a)
For positioning conver-
ter range receiver gear
and corrector bearing
receiver gear cams.
No. 73
(«)
For withdrawing air
cylinder liquid gland
No. 74
supporting collars.
(a)
For withdrawing ram-
mer rocker swivel
joint small U-ring
collar and inner
No. 75
backing collar.
(a)
For withdrawing ram-
mer rocker swivel
joint large U-ring
collar and outer back-
ing collar; centre
pivot inlet and
outlet casing gland
collars, inlet casing
backing and U-ring
collars and dividing
ring; also wash-out
pump inner and outer
small cylinder gland
collars and large
cylinder gland collar.
No. 76
(a)
For withdrawing ram-
mer, rammer rocker
and hoist cut-off
valves inner and
outer gland collars ;
swivel joint airblast
inner and outer
inner gland collars;
also swivel joint and
telescopic pipe air-
blast backing and
outer gland collars
and inner gland.
(a) Used with mounting as shown.
216
Spanners and Special Implements— continued


Mounting (Mks.)
Designation
Detail of Use
V
VI
VIA
VII
Tools, artillery— contd.
No. 77
(a)
For withdrawing ram-
mer rocker jack
small backing collar;
also backing collars
of elevation cut-off
valve, rammer and
rammer rocker semi-
automatic valve and
hoist control valve.
No. 78
[a)
For withdrawing ram-
mer rocker jack
large and small U-
ring collars and large
backing collar; hy-
draulic press hoist
inner and outer U-
ring collars; also
airblast stop and
admission valves
gland collars.
Wrench, front gun
band
(«)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Sleeve, supporting
spring blocks
accumulator
(a)
(a) Used with mounting as shown.
Staves
The end stave of the piasaba brush or cleaner is of ash, fitted with
a metal plug to suit the socket-joint on the brush stave. The
length is 16-feet.
The intermediate stave is for lengthening the piasaba brush or
cleaner stave. It is of ash and is fitted at one end with a metal
plug and at the other end with a metal cylinder to suit the brush
stave and end stave. The length is 11-feet 6-inches.
Telescopes, Sighting.
Telescopes, sighting, are used with mountings as follows :
Marks V, VI and VIA—Nos. 1, 3 or 7.
Mark Vll—Nos. 1, 3 or 7 and 22.
217
Spanners and Special Implements —continued


Telescope, sighting, No. 1
The telescope has the following ;
Magnification 3-diameters
Field of view ... ... ... ... 10-degrees
Length overall ... ... ... ... 24-inches
Weight ... ... ... ... ... 7-lb.
The Mark I telescope is of the ordinary erecting type with an
object glass and terrestrial eyepiece.
The body is fitted with two long gnnmetal collars which accurately
fit the bearings on the sight bar, but allow 3-inches of movement
backward or forward to suit the convenience of gun layers.
The eyepiece is fitted with a fixed dermatine eyeguard.
A diaphragm carrying a diamond-shaped pointer having a
blunted tip is fixed between the third and fourth lenses of the
eyepiece.
The object glass is fitted with an eccentric cell and ring and is
fixed in the correct position for infinite focus, or, in other words,
for all objects over 400-yards distant. It is protected by a ray shade
and metal cap.
The Mark I* telescope differs from the Mark I in having a
detachable dermatine eyeguard.
The Mark II telescope differs from the Mark /* in having
improved focussing arrangements. The turning movement of the
eyepiece can be read off an engraved ring, numbered 0 to 7 in
conjunction with an arrow on the body, 4 being the position for
normal vision, so that individual layers may set their focus to the
figure previously determined.
The pointer is fixed at the focal length of the object glass.
The Mark 111 telescope differs from the Mark II in the dia-
phragm, which carries the pointer, being made adjustable so that
collimation may be carried out by means of the diaphragm instead
of by rotating the object glass in eccentrics.
Telescope, sighting, No. 3
The telescope has the following :
Magnification 10-diameters
Field of view ... ... ... ... 3^-degrees
Length overall ... ... ... ... 24-5-inches
Weight ... ... ... ... ... 7-lb.
The Mark I telescope is generally similar in construction to
No. 1, Mark 11, but differs in having a triangular shaped pointer.
The No. 3, Mark II telescope differs from the Mark I in the
diaphragm, which carries the pointer, being made adjustable by
four screws, as in the No. 1, Mark 111.
218


To focus the telescope :
No. 1, Marks I and I* —Screw the eyepiece in or out until the
pointer is clearly defined.
No. 1, Marks II and 111, also No. 3, Marks I and ll —Revolve
the eyepiece by means of the knurled ring to the graduation required.
Telescope, sighting, No. 7 *
The telescope has the following :
Magnification ... ... ... ... sto 21-diameters
Field of view ... ... ... ... 6to I^-degrees
Length overall ... ... ... ... 31-5-inches
Weight B|-lb.
This is a variable power telescope with a steel body in place
of bearing bands. By revolving the eyepiece end the magnification
can be altered from 5 to 21-diameters without throwing the telescope
out of focus. The telescope is fitted with a blunted chamfered
pointer. The diaphragm is placed inside the eyepiece adapter.
Telescope, sighting, No. 22
The telescope has the following :
Magnification ... ... ... ... 1-diameter
Field of view ... ... ... ... 21-degrees(apprx.)
Effective aperture of object glass ... 0-82-inch
Length overall ... ... ... ... 13-465-inches
It is of the fixed focus type.
The body is a brass tube of one inch external diameter with a
short length of larger tube at the front; it contains the optical
components and has a stop collar provided with a positioning stud
to ensure the telescope is placed in its correct position for alignment
on the outside to secure it in the sight bracket ; an internal collar
positions the diaphragm.
There are four lenses numbered from the front, each of equal
focal length and spun into brass cells. The second and third
cells screw into tubes which act as distance pieces, whilst the edge
of the fourth cell is milled.
Locking rings with set screws are provided for the first lens,
diaphragm and third lens.
The glass diaphragm is retained in its cell by a ring, the cell
being screwed into the front end of a distance tube. A circle and
dot are etched on the glass. The radius of the circle subtends an
angle of 28-minutes.
The window is of plain glass, spun into a cell, which screws into
the front end and acts as a protection for the first lens.
The telescope is provided with a detachable eyeguard, brass
rain shade and end caps of leather with connecting strap and loop.
219


Tray, Spare Parts
The tray is generally similar to the “ Box, spare parts ” described
on page 196, and is intended to hold the spare parts of the mountings
of a Work.
Wrenches
The following wrenches are used with the breech mechanism :
Marks X, X v and X* Guns
Wrenches, breech mechanism—
No. 20 ... ... Axial vent bolt nut, also small nuts and
screws.
No. 36 ... ... Nuts for carrier hinge bolt and link
pinion stud.
No. 37 ... ... Ball-bearing bushes, axis pin for link,
fixing screws of cam and “ screws
fixing, bracket, catch, retaining breech
mechanism lever.”
220


CHAPTER IV
AMMUNITION
Ammunition for the 8.L., 9-2-inch gun is of the B.L. type
and comprises a tube, cartridge, shell and fuze, each of which
is issued, and stored separately except certain shell which are issued
fuzed.
Tubes, cartridges and fuzes are issued in hermetically sealed
packages which are not to be opened until actually required for
use.
Shell, except A.P.C. filled H.E., are issued plugged.
The driving bands are protected by rope grummets which
should not be removed until the shell are required for use.
Cartridges are of cordite. They are made up in half or quarter
charges to facilitate handling and enable reduced charges to be
fired at practice which reduces the wear of the gun.
The ammunition and the various packages have certain identifica-
tion stampings and stencillings, details of which will be found in
Chapter V.
The tables on pages 258-259 show the ammunition approved for
use with this equipment.
TUBES
Tube, Vent, Percussion, -4-inch
The Mark VIII tube (Fig. 62) consists of a body, cap, cap-
holder, striker-holder, sleeve, striker, shearing wire and closing
plug.
The body is of brass ; the head is enlarged to prevent it being
pushed too far into the vent, and is bevelled underneath to enable
the tube to be readily extracted. The body tapers slightly towards
the front end, and is made to fit the vent with great accuracy. The
head is bored and screw-threaded to take a striker holder and a
cap-holder. The centre of the body is left solid to form an anvil
and has two fire holes bored through it.
The cap is of copper, cup-shaped to fit over the anvil and contains-
a detonating composition.
The cap-holder is a small screwed plug having a central hole for
the striker to pass through. The cap-holder retains the cap over
the anvil.
The striker-holder is of metal, threaded to screw into the head
of the tube, and bored through to receive the striker, a shoulder is
formed inside it, which bears against a corresponding flange on the


striker. At the rear end, a recess is formed to take the sleeve
and to accommodate the shoulder on the latter when forced in on
firing. Two slots are cut in the rear face to facilitate insertion into
the body. It is prevented from unscrewing by stabbing.
The sleeve is cylindrical and prepared to receive the rear end
of the striker, the sleeve allows for eccentricity of the firing pin of
the breech mechanism.
The striker is of metal. It consists of a flange with cylindrical
projections at either side, one of which fits into the hole in the cap-
holder. The other projects into the sleeve and is riveted over and
FIG . 62
faced flush with the latter. The flange is bored diametrically to
receive the shearing wire.
The shearing wire is of copper and secures the striker in the
striker-holder until struck by the firing pin. It passes through the
flange of the striker and walls of the holder.
The closing plug is of cork and has a disc of paper shellacked to
each side. The metal of the tube is burred over the cork plug.
The tube is filled with powder pellets. It is blackened externally
and has four notches cut on the head to distinguish it from the
electric tube.
Note. —Future issues will not be blackened.
Action
The striker is forced inwards by the firing pin of the lock at
percussion firing, shears the copper wire, and fires the cap. The
flash passes through the two fire holes in the anvil to the powder,
which ignites, blows out the closing plug, and ignites the primer of
the cartridge.
The explosion of the powder expands the tube against the walls
of the vent and so prevents the rush of gas between the tube itself


and the vent, while the copper cap and the shoulder of the striker
prevent any escape through the head of the tube.
The Mark VII differs from the Mark VIII in not being fitted
with a striker sleeve, the rear end of the striker being undercut and
fitted with a brass washer.
The filling is R.P. powder.
The Mark V tube differs from the Mark VII in not being fitted
with an anvil. A detonator holder, centring a small copper
detonator, is screwed in position over a sharp pointed striker. A
striker holder is not fitted, the striker being assembled direct into
the body of the tube and the copper shearing wire passed through
the flange of the striker and the walls of the tube.
FIG. 63
The tube is filled with pellet powder.
The Mark IV tube (Fig. 63) differs principally from the Mark V
in the striker not having a needle-point, the flange bearing direct
on to the cap. The anvil, which secures the cap in position, has
three fire holes connecting the cap chamber and magazine. There
is no recess under the brass washer on the outer end of the striker,
such as is provided in the Mark VII, to allow for eccentricity of the
firing pin.
The Mark 111 tube is similar to the Mark IV, except that the
end is closed with a sulphur pellet which is embedded in a small
brass ball.
This tube must not be used unless the range is clear.
Tube, Vent, Electric, -4-inch
The Mark X tube (Fig. 64) consists of a brass body with ebonite
cup ; copper pole plug with insulated wire and bridge ; contact
piece, glazed-board cup and closing disc.
The body of the tube is solid drawn, the head enlarged to prevent
it being pushed too far into the vent, and is bevelled underneath
223


to enable it to be readily extracted ; the body tapers slightly
towards the front end, and is made to fit the vent with great
accuracy.
The interior is bored and recessed from the front to form a
magazine and to take the copper pole plug.
A small central hole is bored through from the upper part of
the body leading into a larger hole in the head; the latter is screw-
threaded and fitted with an ebonite cup, having an undercut recess.
The copper plug is inserted through the mouth of the tube.
Through the centre of the plug a piece of insulated tinned and
enamelled copper wire is passed, the plug being pressed on to it.
The end of the wire projects slightly in front of the plug and is
FIG . 64
bared of its insulation to enable one end of an iridio-platinum bridge
to be soldered to it.
The other end of the bridge is soldered to a small pole piece
attached to the copper plug.
The bridge has a resistance of -9 to 1-1-ohms.
After soldering, the protruding insulated copper wire and
lower end of the plug are shellac varnished.
The front end of the plug is shaped to act as a gas check, the
rear end being shaped to fit into the seating in the body.
The rear end of the insulated wire is passed through the central
hole in the tube, through a small copper washer in a recess in the
ebonite plug and is bared of its insulation and coiled down in the
recess. A small plug of tin and antimony is pressed into this recess
to form the contact piece.
The contact piece is slightly below the head of the tube, and
the inner edge of the ebonite plug is bevelled off all round.
The tube is lacquered internally, and contains a small charge of
224


priming composition (about 2-grains of guncotton dust) placed
round the bridge, kept in position by a glazed board cup with paper
disc attached.
The glazed board cup is perforated and has a white fine paper
disc secured over the perforations with collodian varnish.
The tube is filled with as many powder pellets as possible, about
5-grains of R.P. powder or G. 20 being intermixed with the pellets.
A cork plug, with paper discs shellacked on, closes the mouth
of the tube, the edge of which is burred over.
Action
On contact being made the current passes from the battery
through the firing pin to the contact piece, along the insulated wire
in the copper plug, through the iridio-platinum bridge to the small
copper pole and the body of the tube, back, via the gun, to the
battery. The bridge becomes incandescent, fires the priming com-
position which in turn fires the powder pellets, blowing out the
closing plug and firing the primed end of the cartridge.
The body of the tube expands against the vent, and the copper
sealing plug is forced inwards, the rear portion of the plug fitting
into the small coned seating in the body, prevents the gas escaping
through the head of the tube. The gas check portion expands and
helps to seal.
The Mark VI tube differs from the Mark X in having a glazed
board disc instead of a cup ; the lower end of the copper plug is
recessed and filled around the insulated copper wire with special
cement. The priming composition consists of guncotton dust and
mealed powder, and the tube is filled with R.P. powder.
The Mark V tube differs from the Mark VI mainly in the form of
the pole plug, gas check and contact arrangements.
The Mark IV tube differs from the Mark V in the method of
internal gas sealing and in the form of connection of the bridge.
The Mark 111 tube differs principally from the Mark IV in
having a paper disc instead of a glazed board disc between the
priming composition and the powder charge. The bridge is made of
platinum silver.
The Mark II tube differs from the Mark 111 in having a smaller
contact disc, which in some of the earlier issues were made of white
metal instead of pure tin.
The Mark I tube is for instructional purposes only. It differs
principally from the Mark II in having two bridges and in the form
of the contact disc.
Cartridges
The charges are made up into quarter or half. Each charge
is contained in a cartridge bag of silk cloth, a gunpowder igniter
being fitted to one end. The weight shown on the bag is purely
nominal, as the charges may be adjusted to give standard velocities.
15—(2)


Cartridges may be adjusted to give standard velocities
before being issued or they may be issued in groups according to
the ascertained ballistic properties of the lot at proof. If adjusted
before issue the letters A.C. are stencilled on the outside of the
cartridge bag, and if grouped before issue the group letter and
number are similarly shown. Lots of cordite having the same
group letter may be considered as having the same ballistic pro-
perties. This arrangement avoids a common source of inaccuracy
when a change from one lot to another takes place during firing.
M.D., R.D.8., or S.C. cordite, the ballistic properties of which
are practically identical, are used in making up the cartridges.
Cartridge, 8.L., 9-2-inch Gun, 54J-lb. Cordite,
S.C. 150
(Half Charge)
The Mark I FOIL cartridge (Fig. 65) consists of a charge of
Cordite S.C. 150 contained in a silk cloth bag, closed at one end
FIG . 65
with an igniter with cover, the opposite end being fitted with tin-
foil discs and a lifting becket.
The charge is made up into a cylindrical bundle of 29-inch length
cordite sticks, secured by six ties of sewing silk and surrounded
by a ring of similar length sticks secured by six ties of silk webbing.
The “ O ’’-igniter consists of two discs of shalloon and one of silk
cloth or cream serge, the latter being nearest the cordite, sewn
together by rings of stitching and cross-sewn to form five parallel
compartments which are filled with 8-oz. of R.F.G.2 or G. 12
gunpowder.
The igniter cover consists of a millboard disc covered with
silk cloth which projects over the edge. It is threaded with a


drawstring by which it is secured to the igniter end of the cartridge.
The ends of the drawstring are tied with a single bow and the
running end of the bow is tied to a “ tear-off ” loop sewn to the
cover.
The cover is removed before loading by sharply pulling the
“ tear-off ” loop. This unties the bow and releases the drawstring.
A red cross is printed on the outer face of the cover to distinguish
the igniter end of the cartridge.
The maximum length of the cartridge is 30-25-inches and the
maximum diameter 7-75-inches.
The cartridge is issued packed in a No. 36 or 50 cartridge cylinder.
Cartridge, 8.L., 9-2-inch Gun, 27-lb., 4-oz. Cordite
S.C. 150
(Quarter Charge)
The Mark I FOIL cartridge consists of a charge of Cordite
S.C. 150 contained in a bag similar to that for the 54i-lb. cartridge,
but without a lifting becket.
The charge consists of a cylindrical bundle of 14-5-inch length
cordite sticks, secured by four ties of sewing silk and surrounded
by a ring of similar length sticks secured by four ties of silk webbing.
The maximum length of the cartridge is 15-5-inches and the
maximum diameter 7-75-inches.
The cartridges are packed two in a No. 36 or 50 cartridge
cylinder.
Cartridge, 8.L., 9-2-inch Gun, 26-lb., 12-oz. Cordite
M.D. or R.D.B.
(Quarter Charge)
The Mark 111 FOIL cartridge is made up similarly to the
27-lb. 4-oz. Cordite S.C. 150 cartridge.
The charge is 26-lb. 12-oz. of cordite M.D. and consists of a
cylindrical bundle of 14-4-inch sticks tied in four places with silk
webbing.
The cartridges are packed two in No. 36 cartridge cylinder.
The Mark II FOIL cartridge differs from the Mark 111 FOIL
in being made up with R.D.B. cordite.
The Mark II M.D. and Mark I R.D.B. cartridges differ from
the Mark 111 FOIL M.D. and Mark II FOIL R.D.B. cartridges
respectively in not having tinfoil discs incorporated.
Cartridge, 8.L., 9-2-inch Gun, 60-lb., Cordite M.D. 37
(Half Charge)
The Mark 111 cartridge consists of a charge of Cordite M.D. 37
contained in a silk cloth bag, closed at one end with an igniter with
cover, the opposite end being fitted with a lifting becket.
The charge is made up into a cylindrical bundle of 30-8-inch or


31-7-inch length cordite sticks tied together in six places with silk
webbing.
The A-igniter has five parallel compartments which are filled
with 8-oz. of R.F.G.2 or G. 12 gunpowder.
The maximum length of the cartridge is 32-5-inches and the
maximum diameter 8-inches.
The cartridge is issued packed in a No. 36 cartridge cylinder.
The Mark I and Mark II differ principally from the Mark 111
in the igniter being stitched across the centre to form four compart-
ments in the Mark I and eight compartments in Mark II and in
the arrangement of the beckets for lifting purposes.
Cartridge, 8.L., 9-2-inch Gun, 30-lb., Cordite M.D. 37
(Quarter Charge)
Marks I, II and lll. —These cartridges are generally similar
to the 60-lb. cartridges (half charge), but are shorter.
The cartridges are issued packed two in a No. 36 cartridge
cylinder.
Cartridge, B.L. 9-2-inch Gun, 53|-lb., Cordite, M.D. 26
(Half Charge)
The cartridge is made up in the same way as the 60-lb. and 30-lb.
Mark 111 charges, but with cordite M.D. 26.
The maximum length of the cartridge is 30-25-inches and the
maximum diameter 7-75-inches.
The cartridge is issued packed in a No. 36 cartridge cylinder.
PROJECTILES
The natures of shell used with this equipment are high explosive,
shrapnel, common pointed with cap, armour piercing and armour
piercing with cap.
The H.E. projectiles are manufactured from forged steel. They
may be fitted with sockets screw-threaded to the G.S. gauge or,
with later designs, prepared with the 2-inch fuze-hole gauge, an
adapter being employed when fuzed with a G.S. gauge fuze.
The shrapnel shell are of forged or cast steel and have the 2-inch
fuze hole bush.
The common pointed shell with cap are of forged or cast steel,
filled with gunpowder. The base is closed by an adapter, the
latter being screw-threaded internally to take a base fuze.
The armour piercing shell are of forged steel, with a pointed
nose, and are filled with gunpowder. They are prepared to take a
base fuze.
The armour piercing shell with cap differs principally from the
armour piercing in being fitted with a cap over the point. The
filling may be gunpowder or high explosive.


Ihe shell may be classified under the following :
(a) 1 hose having the head of 6-calibre radius.
( b ) Those having the head of 4-calibre radius.
(c) Those having the head of 2-calibre radius.
There is a considerable difference in the ballistic properties of
FIG . 66
the three types. Those of the [a) and ( h ) types are distinguished
by having the letter B or A respectively after the mark.
The driving bands of the shell are of copper, a typical modern
design being R.L. 14093. Earlier marks of shell were banded with
the gas check type of band ; R.L. 10862 is an example of this
method. These are shown in Fig. 66.
229


As the ballistic properties of the projectiles are affected by the
design of the driving band, care must be exercised to store and issue
projectiles of the same band design together, as far as possible.
Projectiles are painted primarily to preserve the bodies from
rust. Advantage is taken of this necessity to indicate, by the colour
employed, the nature of the filling, thus ;
High explosive shell are painted yellow.
In addition, certain other identification markings are painted
on the shell, details of which are given in Chapter V.
Shell, 8.L., High Explosive, 9-2-inch
(Plate 37)
The Mark XIIIA shell (Fig. 67) is of forged steel with a
4-calibre radius head ; when filled and fuzed it weighs 380-lb.
The walls are tapered and the nose is tapped and fitted with a
screwed fuze hole bush of mild steel which is threaded internally
to the 2-inch fuze hole gauge. The fuze hole is suitable for use with
an exploder container. The base is solid and is recessed to receive
a steel plate disc which is screw-threaded and riveted in position.
An undercut groove near the base is provided with seven waved
ribs to retain a copper driving band to design R.L. 14093 A.
FIG . 67
The estimated total capacity is 568-cubic inches and the weight
of the bursting charge is 31-lb. 13-oz.
The Mark XIII differs from the Mark XIIIA in having a
9-pnliHrp rnrlniQ nppn
The Marks XIIIjVIII and XIII/VIIIA are converted from
the Marks VIII and VIIIA to approximate to the Marks XIII
and XIIIA respectively. The conversion consists of removing the
G.S. fuze hole socket and fitting a metal or mild steel 2-inch fuze
hole socket suitable for use with a steel exploder container.
The Mark XIIA differs from the Mark XIIIA in the shape of


the tapered cavity and in the base being bored and screwed to take
an adapter instead of a steel plate disc.
The Mark IX*** is converted from the Mark IX by the removal
of the G.S. fuze hole socket and fitting a 2-inch fuze hole socket
suitable for use with a steel exploder container.
The Mark IXA is similar to the Mark XIIA but has the G.S.
fuze hole bush. The driving band is to design R.L. 14093.
The Mark IX differs from the Mark IXA in the head being
struck at a different radius.
The Marks VIIIA and VIII differ from the Marks XIIIA
and XIII respectively in being fitted with a G.S. fuze-hole bush and
a driving band to design R.L. 14093.
Adapter, No. 2
The No. 2 Adapter is used to adapt H.E. shell with 2-inch fuze
hole to the G.S. gauge ; it can be made of metal, steel or iron,
and has a tapered flange on the exterior, below which it is screwed
to suit the 2-inch fuze-hole, leaving a plain portion at the bottom.
It is bored through the centre and screwed to the G.S. fuze hole
gauge.
Method of Filling
High explosive shell may be filled with either lyddite, trotyl or
amatol and are fitted with a suitable exploder system. The space
between the top of the filling and the underside of the adapter is
filled with one or more millboard or leatherboard washers.
Before filling, the interior of the shell is varnished to ensure a
smooth surface for the explosive, with a view to preventing the
formation of picrates and avoiding premature action.
The explosive may be melted and poured into the shell in the
fluid state and allowed to solidify. This is the normal procedure
with lyddite and trotyl and is commonly spoken of as poured
filling. It is also used with amatol 40/60 or 50/50.
Care has to be taken, when filling shell by the pouring process,
that no cavities are formed by the contraction of the explosive on
solidification, and that the density of the explosive in the shell is
most suitably arranged from the point of view of safety and
efficiency.
When the explosive is cast or pressed into position in this
manner, it is somewhat inert and difficult to detonate. This factor
forms a valuable safeguard in transport, loading and firing, but
renders it necessary to introduce an intermediary between bursting
charge and fuze, as the service fuze would have great difficulty in
completely detonating the shell.
The intermediary is known technically as an “ exploder ” and is
arranged as follows :
A cavity is formed in the bursting charge immediately below
the fuze during the operation of filling. The exploder is inserted
231


in this cavity in the form of a crystalline explosive enclosed in a bag
or bags. The normal filling is lyddite and the exploder usually
5-drs. of picric powder for use in conjunction with the igniferous
type of fuze.
Trotyl exploders are normally employed with detonating fuzes.
When these exploders are inserted in the shell, a certain amount
of pressure is necessary to get the fuze fully home in order to
provide for the compression of the exploder and thus prevent set
back on firing. This is most important, for if the act of firing
produces a gap between fuze and exploder, the efficiency of the
shell will be very much impaired, even to the extent of producing
blinds. When detonation is initiated in the fuze it is essential that
the latter must be in contact with the exploder at all times. For
the same reason the exploder bag or bags must be inserted in the
shell with the choked end downwards, i.e. away from the fuze.
Shell, 8.L., Shrapnel, 9-2-inch
(Plate 37)
The Mark XB shrapnel shell (Fig. 68) consists of a steel body
and head, the latter being struck at 6-calibres radius.
The walls, which are stepped, are thickened at the base to form a
shoulder on which rests a steel disc to support the bullets ; below
FIG. 68
the shoulder a recess is formed to take a tinned-plate cup, for the
bursting charge. A hole is bored through the centre of the disc
and threaded to take the lower end of a central iron tube, which
projects slightly through the disc into the mouth of the tinned
plate cup. The upper end of the tube is prepared to take the


lower part of the fuze hole socket, and thus preserves a clear
passage for the flash from the fuze to reach the bursting charge in
the tinned-plate cup.
The shell contains about 2,790 bullets, 27 to the lb., with a few
buckshot to regulate the weight, the bullets being set in resin. A
felt washer is placed above the bullets.
The front end of the shell is closed by a steel head, secured to
the shell body by twelve rivets and eight twisting pins. A 2-inch
fuze hole socket is screwed into the head, the latter being fitted
with a conical-shaped wood block, or, alternatively, a composition
block shaped to the interior of the head and slightly longer than
the wood block, thus obviating the use of the felt washer between
the block and the bullets.
The bursting charge is 2-lb. 3-oz. of fine grain gunpowder.
A shalloon or cambric disc is shellacked to the bottom of the fuze
hole socket to prevent the powder working out of the central tube
during transport.
The design of driving band is R.L. 14093 A, the method oi
attachment being the same as that used with the H.E. shell.
Action
On discharge from the gun, the steel disc takes the set back
effect of the bullets. When the fuze magazine explodes, according
to the fuze setting, the flame passes through the central tube to the
bursting charge in the tinned-plate cup. The explosion of the
bursting charge forces the steel disc and bullets forward, relatively
to the shell body, so forcing the head off the shell and liberating
the bullets. The bursting charge is just sufficient to clear the
bullets out of the shell, but adds practically nothing to their
forward velocity.
When the bullets are clear of the shell they retain their original
forward motion and also their rotational motion ; consequently
they spread out from the centre, forming a “ cone of dispersion,”
the “ angle of opening ” being the angle between the lines of flight
of the outer bullets of the cone. The longer the range, the larger
becomes the angle, for the remaining velocity of the shell falls off,
but its spin does not decrease to the same extent.
The Mark XA differs principally from the Mark XB in the
radius of the head and the internal shape of the body and contains
about 2,507 bullets.
Shell, 8.L., Common Pointed, with Cap, 9-2-inch
(Plate 37)
The Mark IXA shell (Fig. 69) is of steel with a pointed head
which is fitted with a cap. The base is screwed and recessed


internally to receive a steel cup-shaped full-bore adapter, which is
screwed internally to receive the base fuze or plug. The cavity
is lined with a copper container to prevent accidental premature
through spontaneous cracking of the head.
The driving band is to design R.L. 14093 A, the method of
attachment being the same as that used with the H.E. shell.
FIG . 69
The bursting charge is gunpowder placed in a burster bag.
The base of the shell is packed with 7-drm. primers, while a 14-drm.
primer is placed between the base of the burster bag and front of
fuze. The gunpowder primers make a compact filling and facilitate
ignition of the bursting charge.
Shell, 8.L., Armour Piercing, 9-2-inch
The Mark 111 shell (Fig. 70) is of forged or cast steel with a
pointed head which is hardened. The base is fitted with a steel
bush screwed in and riveted over. The bush is prepared to take
a base fuze or plug.
An undercut groove near the base is provided with seven waved
ribs to retain a copper driving band (gas check type) to design
R.L. 10862.
The bursting charge is of gunpowder placed in a cloth burster
bag. The base of the shell is packed with 7-dr. primers filled
gunpowder to make a compact filling and facilitate ignition of the
bursting charge.
The Mark II differs from the Mark 111 in the ribs in the groove
for the driving band not being waved.


The Mark I differs from the Mark 7/ in the form of the lower
part of the driving band.
FIG . 70
Shell, 8.L., Armour Piercing with Cap, 9-2-inch
(Plate 37)
The Mark XIIB shell (Fig. 71) is of cast or forged steel with
a pointed head provided with a protective cap. The latter secured
by indenting into notches, pressing into a groove, or pressing
into a waved rib, and further secured by sweating. A ballistic
cap is attached to the penetrative cap.
The cavity of the shell is fitted with an aluminium container
and the base is recessed and screw-threaded to receive a steel cup-
shaped full-bore adapter.
The adapter is bored, recessed and screw-threaded internally to
receive the fuze, gas check plate and gas check plate cover. The
outer portion of the adapter, behind the flange, is of smaller
diameter than the bore of the shell, the space thus formed being
partially filled in by a steel sleeve which is clamped in position by a
screwed steel ring.
Copper washers are placed between the inner flange of the adapter


and the shell body and between the outer side of the flange and the
inner end of the sleeve.
The bursting charge is a mixture of trotyl and bees-wax in the
proportion of 93 and 7 respectively. The filling is prepared with a
cavity, having a trotyl surround, for the exploder system which
consists of two 2|-oz. trotyl pellets. The front end of the shell
cavity is filled in with a block of R.D. composition No. 1006.
A copper gas check plate is placed over the base of the fuze
and recessed portion of the adapter to prevent the propellant
gases penetrating through or over the fuze. The gas check plate
is, in turn, covered by a perforated gas check cover plate. The
FIG . 71
latter is grooved on its inner surface and perforated with four holes.
It is prepared to take a stop screw and a delay setting plug.
The setting plug has two keyholes for setting purposes which
allow the fuze to be prepared for delay or non-delay action as
required. The exterior face of the setting plug is inscribed with
indicating arrows and the letters “ D ” and “ ND " to indicate
the direction it has to be turned when setting for delay and non-
delay action respectively. Key, No. 88 is used for setting purposes.
The gas check cover plate is retained in place by a guide ring,
positioned by two steel pins, and a screwed ring.
The perforated steel plate (with the exception of the setting
plug) is painted red.
An undercut groove near the base of the shell is prepared with


seven waved ribs to retain a copper driving band to design
RL./14093A.
The Mark XIB shell differs from the Mark XIIB in the guide
and screwed rings being combined in one piece and positioning pins
are not provided.
The Mark XB shell differs from the Mark XIB in having
a tapered instead of a parallel driving band groove. The driving
band is to design R.L. T/14093A.
The Mark XIA (Fig. 72) shell is made of cast or forged steel with
a pointed head which is hardened and fitted with a mild steel
cap.
The cavity of the shell is fitted with an aluminium container
and the base recessed and screw-threaded to receive an adapter.
FIG . 72
The adapter is bored, recessed and threaded to take the No. 16
or 16D fuze, gas check plate and gas check cover plate.
The shell is filled nearly to the base, with lyddite or shellite,
in which a short cavity is formed ; this cavity is lined with a paper
tube, fitted with an exploder bag, containing 4-oz. of picric powder,
inserted choke end first. The space between the lyddite or shellite
and the adapter is filled with “ bees-wax composition.”
A copper gas check plate is placed over the base of the fuze and
is held in position by the cover plate.
The cover plate is in two parts, i.e. a perforated steel plate and a
steel locking ring ; the latter screws on to the base of the adapter
and is prevented from unscrewing by two fixing screws.
The Mark VIIA shell differs from the Mark IXA in being fitted
with a larger base cover plate and gas check plate. The base cover
plate is secured by a fixing screw passing through the wall at the
base of the shell instead of by two fixing screws to the base of the
adapter.


The Mark VII shell differs from the Mark VIIA in the head
being struck at a different radius.
The Mark V (Fig. 73) shell is made of cast or forged steel with a
pointed head which is hardened and fitted with a mild steel cap.
The bursting charge is gunpowder, contained in a cloth burster
bag; the choke of the burster bag is primed with a number
of 7-dr. primers.
The base of the shell is fitted with a steel bush screwed in
FIG . 73
and riveted over. The bush is bored and threaded to take the
No. 15 fuze or No. 1 Plug.
An undercut groove near the base of the shell is prepared to
take a copper driving band to design RL./14093.
The Mark IV shell differs from the Mark V in having a gas check
type of driving band to design RL./10862.
- The Mark IV* shell is the Mark IV rebanded as with the
Mark V.
Rings, Augmenting, B.L. 9-2-inch, Projectile
The No. 1 Mark I is for use with projectiles banded to design
R.L. 10,862.


The augmenting ring is a copper split ring.
Instructions for fitting augmenting rings. —Remove the grummet
from the projectile and place the latter on its side with the base
slightly raised. The projectile should be placed in a block No. 3if
available.
See that the groove into which the ring fits is free from burrs ;
if any are found they must be removed with a smooth file.
Spring the ring over the base of the projectile and into the
groove. Should it appear that the gas check has been pressed down
so that the ring will not fit into its place, the ring must be removed
and the groove rectified with the “ Tool, rectifying gas check.”
When the groove is rectified, place the ring and, beginning at
one end, work round it, drive it home into its seating with a
wood drift and mallet, securing it by striking the lip of the gas check
in five or six places with a blunt chisel (the edge held parallel with
the axis of the projectile), so that a small portion of the metal is
turned over the ring, taking care to damage the gas check part of
the band as little as possible. There should be an “ indent,” one
close on each side of the split in the ring, the remainder spaced
equally so as to secure the ring firmly.
Replace the grummet on the projectile, and when single grum-
mets are used, lace them together in three places, equidistant from
each other, with spun yarn threaded through the grummet.
Weight of Shell
For various reasons, it is not always possible to bring shell,
other than shrapnel, within dead weight limits, consequently
it becomes necessary to mark the actual filled weight (which
includes the fuze) on the shell, in order that the required ballistic
adjustments be made by the battery commander.
The system is as follows :
All shell whose weight, filled and fuzed, is within OT per
cent, of the mean weight, are stencilled “ DEAD WT.”
Shell which are outside the above limits are stencilled with the
actual weight to the nearest 1-lb. This marking is stencilled on
the head of uncapped shell and on the cap of capped shell.
FUZES
Fuze, Percussion, Direct-Action Impact, No. 13
The Mark IV fuze (Fig. 74) consists of the following principal
parts : —Body, safety cap with securing pin, steel hammer with
screwed ring and shearing pin, detonator plug with mealed powder
detonator and brass screwed washer.
The metal body is bored throughout its length, and in its centre
is screwed the steel detonator plug which is recessed on the upper
side to take one grain of mealed powder enclosed in a tinfoil cap,


forming the detonator, which is held in position by the screwed
washer.
Leading from this recess are four conical fire holes filled with
pellet powder, and closed on the underside by a disc of paper.
The lower portion of the body is filled with R.F.G.2 powder, retained
in position by a brass disc spun in.
In the upper part of the fuze, suspended by means of a steel
shearing pin, is a steel hammer, the lower part of which is reduced
FIG. 74
in diameter and is directly over the recess in the detonator plug.
The top of the hammer is also reduced in diameter to form a shoulder
for the screwed collar ; a brass disc spun in on the top of the ring
prevents the ingress of damp.
The safety cap is of steel, metal or manganese bronze and has
two T-shaped slots to engage with pins in the head of the fuze,
and is further secured by a securing pin which passes horizontally
through the sides of the cap and body.
Action
Before loading, the securing pin and safety cap are removed.
On impact, the hammer is driven in, shearing the pin, firing
the detonator, the resulting flash passing through the detonator
plug into the magazine explodes the R.F.G.2 powder which forces
out the brass disc and ignites the exploder in the shell.
In later issues of this mark of fuze a slot was cut across the head


of the cap and painted red to indicate a straight lead for the
withdrawal of the pin.
The Mark 111 fuze differs from the Mark IV by having the head
of the fuze entirely covered with a thin brass disc, instead of only
the top of the steel hammer.
The Mark II fuze differs from the Mark 111 in having a thicker
brass disc.
The Mark I differs from the Mark II in having the top covered
with a paper instead of a brass disc.
Fuze, Percussion, Direct-Action Impact, No. 45P.
The fuze (Fig. 75) consists of the following principal parts :
body, shutter with helical spring, detonator holder, screwed collar,
detonator, detonator plug, hammer, brass disc, base plug, safety
cap with securing and safety pins.
The body is of metal, tapered and screw-threaded externally to
FIG . 75
the G.S. gauge ; the upper portion being left plain to receive the
safety cap. Two pins are screwed into the head, diametrically
opposite to one another, to retain the cap in position.
The body is bored internally with two chambers separated by a
diaphragm ; the upper chamber is prepared to accommodate the
16 (2)


detonator holder and shutter, also with an oblique channel, closed
externally by a disc coated with cement and spun in, which com-
municates with the detonator via a similar channel in the holder ;
the lower chamber forms the magazine which is filled with R.F.G.2
or G. 12 powder.
A central channel is bored nearly through the diaphragm, leaving
only a thin metal partition ; should this break through in manu-
facture it may be replaced by a brass disc. This channel is filled
with rifled pistol powder lightly pressed in. A paper disc and
muslin disc secured with shellac is placed on the underside of the
diaphragm.
The shutter is of bronze or sheet brass and is a perfectly smooth,
flat piece of metal of irregular shape, having three holes drilled
vertically through it, and a fourth hole through the side, com-
municating with the largest hole for the accommodation of the
spring. The shutter is fitted above the diaphragm and secured to it
by a small screw, on which it pivots.
The hole which comes over the central channel when the shutter
is fully open is left empty.
A two-armed spring, of tinned steel piano wire, fits on a small
stud screwed into the diaphragm, one arm fits into a recess in the
shutter, the other bears against the wall of the fuze. This spring
ensures that the shutter covers the hole in the diaphragm until
moved by centrifugal force.
The detonator holder, is of metal and is screw-threaded externally
to screw into the body. Internally, at the top it is bored to take
the hammer and prepared for the screwed collar; at the bottom
a recess is prepared to receive the detonator below which the
detonator plug is screwed in position. The holder is bored trans-
versely to receive the shearing pin, vertically for the safety pin
shutter and obliquely to form a communicating channel with a hole
bored through the body; the latter allows for the escape of the
pressure should the detonator be fired prematurely, but is masked
by the holder on impact.
The detonator cap contains a five-grain fulminate or lead azide
detonator and is fitted into the recess in the bottom of the holder
and retained by the detonator plug.
The detonator plug is screw-threaded to fit in the bottom of the
holder.
The hammer is of steel. A needle point is formed at the bottom,
whilst the top is reduced to form a shoulder for the screwed collar
to engage. A hole is bored through for the shearing pin which
keeps the hammer and needle clear of the detonator until
impact.
The screwed collar fits in the top of the holder and retains the
hammer.
The brass disc is spun into the collar and closes the top of the
fuze.


The base plug is screw-threaded and fits in the bottom of the
body. A flash hole is prepared, a linen disc being secured on the
inside of the plug.
The safety cap is of manganese bronze. Slots are made in it
to form bayonet joints for engaging with the pins on the body.
It is provided with a milled edge and has two holes drilled through
it, one for its securing pin and the other to retain the cord of the
safety pin. Earlier marks have two securing pins with corresponding
holes in the cap.
A ction
Before loading, the securing pin or pins, cap and safety pin are
removed.
On firing, the acceleration of the shell in the bore causes the
safety shutter to set back, resulting, most probably, in the shutter
remaining in its original position, whilst the shell is in the bore.
The rotation of the shell when acceleration ceases, that is, on
leaving the bore causes the safety shutter to swing outwards, com-
pressing its spring and bringing its fire hole in line with the central
channel, which position is maintained throughout the trajectory.
On impact the brass disc and hammer are crushed inwards, the
needle of the latter pierces and fires the detonator, the flash of
which ignites the gunpowder which in turn explodes the powder in
the magazine of the fuze the flash passing through the hole in the
base plug to the exploders in the shell.
When not in shell the fuzes are packed one in a cylinder, 50 in a
wood packing case.
The weight without cap is 10-oz. 3-dr.
Fuze, Percussion, Direct-Action Impact, No. 45
It differs from the No. 45P as follows :
The fire hole in the diaphragm is filled with C.E. stemmed in and
covered with a fine paper disc.
The fire hole in the shutter is filled with stemmed in C.E.
The magazine of the fuze contains a C.E. pellet.
The base of the fuze is closed by a solid screwed plug having a
shalloon disc on its inner surface.
Fuze, Percussion, Base, Large, No. 11
The No. 11 Mark IV fuze (Fig. 76) described below is typical
of the earlier marks of the No. 11 and 15 fuzes. It differs con-
siderably from the later marks.
It is for use with uncapped armour-piercing shell.
The fuze consists of the following principal parts:—body,
needle pellet, centrifugal bolt, pressure plate with spindle and nut,
steel protecting plate, screwed top cap with detonator and screwed
plug, phosphor-bronze spring, and four screws.


The body is turned and screw-threaded on the exterior to suit
the shell. The interior is bored to receive the needle pellet and
screw-threaded at the top to receive the cap.
In the centre of the base a hole is bored, through which passes
the pressure plate spindle ; a recess is also formed in the base into
which fit the pressure plate and steel protecting plate. A hole is
bored through the side of the body to allow of a small recess being
formed in the opposite side, in which the small end of the centrifugal
bolt engages. This hole is closed by a small brass screw-plug, the
FIG . 76
end of which is reduced in diameter, and fitted with a small spiral
spring which bears against the heavy end of the centrifugal bolt.
Two elongated holes are made in the base to suit key No. 8 which
is used for fixing or removing the fuze.
The needle pellet is cylindrical and rests on the bottom of the
recess in the body. It is reduced in diameter at the top end to form
a seating for a phosphor-bronze spiral creep spring which prevents
the pellet creeping forward during flight. A hole is bored through
the pellet at right angles to its axis for the centrifugal bolt, and
another along its axis in which works the nut of the pressure plate


spindle ; the upper part of this hole is threaded to receive the needle
plug ; after the needle plug is screwed home the metal of the pellet
is spun over it to prevent it from unscrewing. There is a small
longitudinal groove in the side of the pellet, into which a screw
projects from the side of the body ; this prevents the pellet from
turning during flight.
The centrifugal holt is cylindrical and fits in the hole in the needle
pellet; one end is reduced in diameter to fit into the recess in the
body made for it. An elongated hole is bored through it from
top to bottom, for the spindle ; the upper part of the bolt has a slot
formed, into which the flange on the underside of the nut fits ;
this locks the bolt till the pressure plate is forced in.
The pressure plate is of copper and has a boss on one side into
which the spindle is screwed ; it fits in the undercut recess near the
base of the fuze, and when in position the metal of the body is spun
over it.
The pressure plate spindle is threaded at both ends ; one end
screws into the boss of the pressure plate, and the other receives
the nut on top of the centrifugal bolt. The end of the spindle is
riveted over the nut when screwed home.
The protecting plate is of steel and perforated with eight holes.
It fits into a recess in the base and covers the pressure plate, being
secured by a lip spun over. It is intended to protect the pressure
plate from accidental blows.
The screwed top cap and screwed plug close the top of the fuze.
When assembled they form a magazine to contain a pressed pellet
of R.F.G.2 powder, pierced with a central hole, A recess is made
in the underside of the screwed cap to receive the detonator (an
R.L. cap), and there are six fire holes to convey the flash from the
latter to the powder pellet; the metal is spun over the detonator to
retain it in position. A locking screw through the body of the fuze
prevents the cap from unscrewing.
The screwed plug is pierced with four fire holes to allow the
flash to pass into the shell; it is covered on the inside with a disc of
muslin. When screwed home in the top cap it is secured by a
locking screw. The plug closes the top of the fuze.
The approximate weight of the fuze : —2-lb. 8-oz.
The fuzes are issued, wrapped in brown paper, one in a tinned
plate cylinder.
Action
On discharge, the gas passes through the holes in the protecting
plate and crushes in the pressure plate, carrying forward the spindle
and nut, thus releasing the centrifugal bolt. The rotation of the
shell causes the heavy end of the bolt to fly outwards which with-
draws the small end from the recess in the body, leaving the needle
pellet free to move forward ; the phosphor-bronze creep spring
now prevents the pellet from moving forward and the small screw
245


fitting in the longitudinal groove prevents it from turning during
flight.
On graze or impact, the pellet is carried forward compressing
the creep spring, and carrying the needle on to the detonator.
The flash from the detonator passes through the six holes in the
cap and fires the pellet of powder. The flash from the pellet passes
through the four fire holes in the screwed plug into the shell and
fires the bursting charge.
Mark 111 differs from Mark IV in having less protrusion of the
centrifugal bolt into the body.
Mark II differs from Mark 111 in having no steel protecting
plate.
Mark I differs from Mark II in the form of recess for the
pressure plate, the shoulder of which is not cut away so much.
The fuze is less sensitive since the pressure plate offers greater
resistance.
Fuzes of early marks (except Mark III), converted to the
Mark IV pattern, have a star added to the numeral, e.g. I* and ll*.
Fuzes of later marks, i.e. Marks VI and V differ from the
“ Fuze, percussion, base, large, bronze, No. 15, Marks IV and 111
respectively,” referred to below, in being made of metal instead
of bronze.
Fuze, Percussion, Base, Large, Bronze, No. 15
The Mark IV fuze is similar to the No. 16 fuze, described on
pages 246-249, except that the steel protecting ring is replaced by a
steel protecting plate.
The Mark 111 fuze differs from the Mark IV only in the position
of the vertical channel containing the powder pellets, which in
the case of the later marks is so altered that it is not under one of
the key slots in the head.
The Marks I and II fuzes are similar internally to the “ Fuze,
percussion, base, large, No. 11, Mark IV,” described on pages 243-
246, except that they are made of bronze. Mark 11, however,
has a cupped pressure plate and steel plug (with four holes only),
and is slightly longer.
No. 15C fuzes are converted from No. 16 or 16D. The con-
version consists of fitting a pressure plate, protecting plate and
creep spring as in the No. 15 Mark VI fuze. In addition, when
converting the 16D fuzes the delay holder is omitted and a single
perforated powder pellet is inserted in the horizontal chamber
without any loose powder.
Fuze, Percussion, Base, Large, No. 16
(Plate 38)
This fuze is used with armour-piercing shell filled with H.E.
The Mark IV fuze consists of the following parts : —body.


detonator pellet, detonator, detonator plug, pressure plate, pro-
tecting ring, screwed cap, needle, centrifugal bolt and retaining
bolt, pea ball and retaining bolt, locking pellet, screwed pin, three
springs and four closing plugs.
The body, of aluminium bronze, is turned and screw-threaded
on the exterior to suit the fuze hole in the shell. The interior is
bored to form a chamber for the percussion arrangement and
screw-threaded at the top to take the cap, and the bottom of the
chamber is coned and recessed to suit the detonator pellet. A
hole is bored through the side of the body to receive the small
end of the centrifugal bolt, the hole is closed by a screwed plug.
A hole is also bored through the opposite side of the body to receive
the retaining bolt, and is closed by a screwed plug. A third hole is
bored at an angle of 45-degrees to the first hole and screw-threaded
to take the pin for the detonator pellet. Further holes are bored,
one to receive the retaining bolt for the pea ball, and two others
longitudinally, one for the channel which contains five powder
pellets and the other for the pressure plate ; a flash hole is also
bored from the powder pellet channel to the percussion chamber.
The top of the body has an annular recess, filled with 110-grains
of compressed powder, which forms the magazine of the fuze.
Two elongated holes are cut in the base to receive the fuze key
when fixing the fuze in the shell.
The detonator pellet is bored, recessed and screw-threaded at the
top to receive the detonator plug and detonator, a flash hole being
bored through. Holes are bored at right angles to the axis for the
centrifugal bolt, locking pellet and small retaining bolt. The exterior
of the pellet, at the top, is recessed to form a seating for the creep
spring, and is tapered in order that on impact the pellet will be driven
into the coned seating in the screwed cap and thus assist the locking
pellet in preventing the detonator pellet from being blown back
and masking the flash hole in the fuze body. The bottom is
reduced in diameter, forming a cone and stem to suit the interior
of the percussion chamber, and is provided with a circular flange
which fits into a groove in the body and seals the flash hole from the
detonator until the pellet moves forward on graze or impact.
A slot in the pellet engaging with a pin screwed into the body
prevents the pellet turning in flight.
The detonator consists of a copper alloy shell containing three
grains of detonating composition, and is secured to the detonator
pellet by means of a screwed detonator plug. The composition
rests on a brass disc and is covered by a brass disc and copper
washer which are secured in position by turning over the lugs formed
on the copper shell.
The pressure plate, of copper, is cupped and has a lip round the
edge to form a gas check and is held in position by the steel pro-
tecting ring, which is screwed into the recess in the base below the
pressure plate and secured by punch stabs. Near the top the spindle


of the plate is reduced in diameter to enter the slot in the small
retaining bolt when in flight.
The screwed cap has a curved top and the lower part is reduced
in diameter and threaded externally to suit the percussion chamber.
The centre of the cap is prepared to take a steel screwed needle and
six fire holes are bored through the flange ; the cap is secured in the
body by a set screw.
The centrifugal holt is fitted with a brass pin which engages
in a hole in the detonator pellet and prevents the bolt turning,
thus ensuring that the flash hole in the stem of the bolt is always
in correct alignment with the flash hole in the pellet. The retaining
bolt prevents any movement of the centrifugal bolt except when in
flight.
The pea hall seals the flash hole communicating with the channel
in the body containing the powder pellets, and is held in position
by its retaining bolt with spring until the rotation of the shell during
flight causes th 6 bolt to move outwards.
The locking pellet, on impact, locks the detonator pellet in the
forward position, it being forced in to the recess for the centrifugal
bolt in the body through the action of its spring.
The fuze requires no preparation before loading.
The approximate weight of the fuze is 2-lb. 10-oz.
Action
On firing, the gas pressure crushes in the pressure plate, carrying
forward the spindle, thus bringing the reduced diameter of the
spindle opposite the small retaining bolt.
The rotation of the shell causes the centrifugal bolt to move
outward ; the slot in the small retaining bolt fitting round the
reduced part of the spindle allows the centrifugal bolt to withdraw
its projecting end from the recess in the body and to bring its
vertical flash hole in line with the fire channel in the pellet. At the
same time the retaining bolt in the base of the fuze moves outwards,
compressing its spiral spring, thus allowing the pea ball to move
out of its seating and open the fire channel in the base.
During flight the tendency of the pellet to creep forward, in
consequence of deceleration, is checked by the spiral creep
spring.
On graze or impact, the detonator pellet moves forward, over-
coming the spring and carrying its detonator on to the needle, at
the same time withdrawing the flange round its base from the
groove in the bottom of the percussion chamber. The locking bolt,
en g a gi n g with the recess in the body, retains the pellet in the
forward position and thus allows the flash from the detonator to
pass down through the channel in the centrifugal bolt and pellet
through the hole left open by the pea ball to the pow'der pellets
in the vertical channel, thus firing the magazine in the front end of


the fuze, the flash from which passes through the six fire holes in the
cap to the bursting charge of the shell.
The Marks 111, II and I differ from the Mark IV in minor
manufacturing details.
Fuze, Percussion, Base, Large, No. 16D
(Plate 38)
The No. 16D Mark IV fuze differs from the No. 16 Mark IV,
described on pages 246-249 in having a chamber formed in the
horizontal channel in the body leading from the vertical powder
channel to the pea ball, to receive a delay fitment, the chamber
being afterwards closed by a screwed plug.
The delay is made up in a holder in two parts. Part I consists
of a metal rod bored and recessed internally to receive a 0-17-inch
perforated powder pellet, a charge of gunpowder and a layer of
mealed powder, a flange is formed about the middle below which it
is screw-threaded to suit the thread in Part II; the body is turned
plain above the flange and is perforated with six flash holes which are
covered with a strip of fine white paper shellacked on. The outer
end is closed by a paper disc secured in position with shellac.
Part II is bored and recessed internally to receive a 0-1-inch
perforated pellet, below which is placed a baffle plate which is held
in position by the stem of Part I which is screwed in on top of it.
The fuzes are distinguished from the No. 16 fuzes by the cap
being painted blue and by a blue ring 0-75-inch diameter on the
base.
A ction
The action of the fuze is generally similar to that of the No. 16
fuze, except that on graze or impact the flash from the detonator,
after passing through the hole left open by the pea ball, ignites the
delay, the flash from which ignites the powder pellets in the vertical
channel and thus fires the magazine.
Fuze, Time and Percussion, No. 88
(Plate 39)
The Mark VI fuze (Fig. 77) consists of the following parts,
which are of metal, unless otherwise stated : —body, percussion
pellet, detonator, ferrule, creep spring, stirrup spring, steel ball,
time pellet, detonator, spiral spring, screwed needle, pins and
washers, base plug, screwed plug, top and bottom time rings and
cap.
The body has the lower portion threaded externally to the
2-inch fuze hole gauge, above which it is enlarged to form a platform
or flange for the time rings. A stem formed above the platform
centres the time rings, the upper end is reduced in diameter and
threaded for the cap. The interior of the body is bored throughout


to accommodate the mechanism. The centre part of this is of
reduced diameter and threaded to take a double-ended steel needle,
which separates the time chamber from the percussion chamber.
A radial fire channel in the stem, in line with the needle, connects
the time chamber with the top time ring, whilst two small vertical
slots down the side of the stem engage the securing pins of the top
ring. A small oblique channel leads from the upper end of the
percussion chamber to the base of the stem for the steel ball to enter
during rotation. The percussion chamber is prepared to receive
the percussion mechanism and has the lower part threaded to take
FIG . 77
the screwed plug which retains the parts in position. Below this,
the interior is enlarged to form a magazine which is threaded for
the base plug and has an oblique channel connecting the magazine
with the top of the platform and bottom time ring. The upper
surface of the platform is recessed and grooved circumferentially
to grip the cloth washer, whilst the lower surface is chamfered
to fit in the prepared seating of the fuze hole bush. The circum-
ference of the platform is sloped and engraved almost completely
with equally spaced setting graduations, reading from 0 to 22,
subdivided into tenths. The fire channel leading from the bottom
ring to the magazine is in the centre of the unengraved portion of


the platform to one side of which is a safety mark, thus "I", in red,
and to the other side a recess for the fuze key used for fixing the
fuze in the shell.
The bottom ring has the upper surface recessed and grooved
for the top ring ; the circumference is sloped and provided with an
engraved index line to act as reader to the body scale, whilst a pin
is inserted to take the fuze setting key. The lower surface is
reduced in diameter slightly to fit in the recess of the body and has a
groove formed in it for nearly the whole circumference to take the
fuze composition. One end of this groove is connected to the top
time ring by a vertical hole, whilst at the same place a radial
hole leads to the exterior of the ring to allow the gases to escape.
This latter is known as the gas escape hole. The groove is charged
with a special long burning fuze composition, in consequence of
which the exterior of the ring is painted red. A perforated gun-
powder pellet is placed in the vertical flash hole, and the gas escape
hole has a small charge of gunpowder pressed in to blow out the
closing arrangements which consist of brass and paper washers
secured in four places by chisel punch, and coated with shellac. A
vegetable paper washer is shellacked to the bottom surface, which
rests on a cloth washer on the body of the fuze. A hole in the
cloth washer comes opposite the fire channel in the body of the
magazine.
The reader on the bottom ring is in the centre of the ungrooved
portion, which comes opposite the magazine channel when the fuze
is at safety, consequently there is no connection between the time
portion and the magazine.
The top ring rests on the bottom ring, and has the upper surface
plain to form a support for the cap. The circumference is sloped
and plain. The lower surface is reduced in diameter to fit in the
recessed portion of the bottom ring, and has a groove for No. 83
fuze composition. One end of the groove has a gas escape hole,
fitted with a perforated powder pellet and closed by a brass disc
stabbed and shellacked, also with a second radial channel which
leads to the interior surface and connects with the lighting channel
in the stem. The whole has a perforated powder pellet and paper
tablet, whilst a vegetable paper washer is secured to the underside
of the ring. Two semi-circular grooves are formed on the interior
surface at the upper end for the securing pins which prevent the top
ring turning.
The cap is dome-shaped and screws on the stem to retain the
time rings in position. A screwdriver slot on the upper surface
takes the No. 48 fuze key. The No. and Mark of fuze, together with
the maker’s initials, date of manufacture, and lot number are
engraved on the circumference.
The base plug is threaded to enter the body, the threads being
coated with R.D. No. 1 Cement. Two key holes are formed on
the underside, whilst recesses on the upper side contain gunpowder.


A central flash hole is provided covered with a brass washer and linen
disc, which are secured in position by burring over the metal.
The screwed steel needle has a flange which rests on a lead washer
in the fuze body to make a flash-tight joint between the time and
percussion chambers. The needle is double-ended, one point
projecting into the time chamber, the other into the percussion
chamber.
Time arrangement
The time pellet is supported on the spiral spring and has the
underside recessed to receive the detonator.
The spring is of steel piano wire and supports the pellet clear of
the needle until the shock of firing. It is designed to function with
reduced charges and is thus somewhat sensitive. It may possibly
allow the pellet to function if either shell or fuze is dropped on its
base for a sufficient distance.
The detonator consists of a perforated copper shell charged with
•75-gr. of a detonating composition “ B,” on top of which is a *B7-gr.
powder pellet. One end of the explosive column has a brass disc,
the other a copper disc with paper disc attached.
Percussion arrangement
The percussion pellet is a cylindrical fitting having a flange on
its lower end to form a seating for the creep spring and reduced in
diameter slightly at the upper end to form a seating for the stirrup
spring. The interior is bored from the underside to take the
detonator and plug, a hole being pierced in the top part to give the
needle access to the detonator.
The detonator comprises a perforated copper shell charged
with I'7-gr. of a detonating composition “ A,” which rests on a
brass or copper disc and is covered by a similar disc secured in
position by a copper washer and lugs on the shell.
The plug screws into the pellet below the detonator, which it
supports ; a screwdriver slot is cut on the lower surface and a
central fire channel bored through the fitting.
The creep spring is of brass wire and surrounds the detonator
pellet, one end bears against the flange of the pellet, the other end
bears against a shoulder on the body. It prevents the pellet
creeping or boring forward during flight.
The stirrup spring is a U-shaped two arm fitment which rests
on the top of the pellet with two arms hanging down ; the lower
ends of the arm are curved outwards slightly to support the ferrule.
The ferrule is a plain brass cylinder, slightly tapered, with a
groove and recess in the interior at one side to take the steel ball.
Its lower end rests on the arm of the stirrup spring.
The steel hall lies between the needle and pellet where it is retained
by the ferrule.


The screwed plug enters the fuze body and supports the percussion
pellet. It is provided with a central fire channel, which is closed
by a linen disc supported by a metal washer.
The magazine is charged with a fine grain gunpowder, as is also
the communicating channel; the top of the latter carries a perforated
powder pellet.
The waterproofing composition is inserted in the space between
the rings, cap and body.
When issued, the fuze is set at “ safety.”
To set the fuze
Unclamp the cap and with the No. 18 key, or by hand, revolve
the bottom ring until the vertical line coincides with the required
graduation on the body. Then clamp the cap and check the setting.
If the fuze is required to act on percussion only, it should be set at
“ safety ” and clamped.
A ction
Time arrangement
On firing, the time pellet sets back, overcomes the resistance of
the spiral spring, and carries the detonator on to the needle. The
flame from the detonator passes through the radial hole in the
stem to the top ring, where it ignites the fuze composition, and also
explodes the pellet in the gas escape hole, which blows the brass
disc away.
During flight the composition in the upper time ring burns round
until the burning surface is opposite the hole in the lower time ring.
The lower time ring is then ignited, the explosion of the powder
pellet clears the gas escape hole and the composition burns round in
an opposite direction to that of the top ring, though much slower,
until the channel leading to the magazine is reached. The explosion
of the magazine then occurs followed by that of the shell.
Percussion arrangement
On firing, the acceleration of the shell causes the ferrule to set
back, straightening the arms of the stirrup spring and locking itself
to the percussion pellet. The steel ball and creep spring prevent
the pellet rebounding towards the needle.
On rotation, when deceleration occurs, the steel ball is spun
outwards into the channel in the body, leaving the percussion
pellet under the control of the creep spring, which prevents forward
movement of the pellet due to creeping or boring.
On impact or graze, the retardation of the shell leads to the
forward movement of the percussion pellet on to the needle point,
consequent on the resistance of the creep spring being overcome.
The flame from the detonator passes through the magazine which is
exploded should the time arrangement not have functioned during
flight.


Total time of burning, under normal atmospheric conditions
at rest, with fuze set 22=48-seconds. The lower time ring filling
burns at a very much slower rate than that of the upper ring, as it is
filled with special long burning composition.
The Mark V differs from the Mark VI in certain minor
differences.
The Mark IV (Fig. 78) is of the same external dimensions
as the Mark V , from which it differs principally in the arrangement
of the time lighting arrangements.
The percussion needle screws into the body of the fuze from the
FIG . 78
upper side, and has a single point which projects into the percussion
chamber.
The time pellet is carried in a side channel bored in the stem and
carries a detonator of somewhat similar design to that in the per-
cussion pellet except that the charge is 1 -5-grains only of detonating
composition. The pellet is supported on a steel spiral spring, the
other end of which rests on a steel needle fitted loosely in the
bottom of the recess.
The gas escape hole of the bottom time ring is. closed by a
perforated powder pellet with asbestos cap on the outer end, over
which is placed asbestos and brass washers, stabbed in position and
coated with shellac and waterproofing composition.


The Mark III * is the Mark 111 fuze converted to approximate
to the Mark IV.
The Mark lII*Z differs from the Mark IV in the time arrange-
ment which has the needle and pellet in opposite positions to that
of the Mark IV.
The Mark 111 fuze differs from the Mark IV in having a smaller
time pellet and needle, and a larger base plug with small flash
hole.
Notes on Fuzing Shell
Only those keys and appliances officially approved for the
purpose, are to be used for removing plugs or inserting and setting of
fuzes. The use of unauthorized tools, particularly those with
greater mechanical leverage than the approved keys, may cause
distortion of the fuze body and damage to the working parts.
The keys approved for use with this equipment, also the plugs
and fuzes to which each is applicable, are shown in this hand-
book.
Only the number of shell actually required for use should
be fuzed. A plugged shell is safer for transport and storage than a
fuzed shell. Moreover, the fuzes are best preserved in an efficient
condition by their retention in the hermetically sealed cylinders
in which they are issued.
The arrangements for fuzing should avoid leaving shell unplugged
for lengthy periods, as such conditions facilitate the entrance of
foreign and perhaps dangerous substances into the shell, such as
damp, grit, etc. ; therefore plugs should be loosened, but not
removed until the fuzes are ready for insertion.
When shell are fitted with exploders of trotyl or C.E. it is most
important, if efficient functioning of the shell is to be achieved,
that the fuze, or gaine, should be in rigid contact with the exploder.
The fuze is consequently called upon to compress the upper exploder
somewhat, and difficulty in screwing home the fuze for the last
thread or so must be expected.
DRILL AMMUNITION
The greatest care is necessary in the storage, handling and use
of ammunition held on charge as drill and every possibility of its
being mixed with service ammunition is to be avoided, as errors of
this kind may lead to serious accidents.
Tube, Vent, Percussion, Drill, -4-inch, Mark II
The vent percussion drill tube (Fig. 79) is made of metal to the
same external dimensions as the service vent percussion tube, but
differs from it in external appearance in having four longitudinal
grooves on the body, and the rim of the head is milled.


The head of the tube is fitted with a coned indiarubber plug kept
in position by a long screwed metal plug.
The Mark I percussion drill tube differs from the Mark II in
being much shorter. The head is not milled and the body is not
fluted or blackened.
FIG . 79
Cartridge, Drill, B.L. 9-2-inch Gun, 53|-lb., Mark I
The drill cartridge is designed to represent the service cartridge
(half-charge). It is of wood, weighted with lead or iron in the
centre and is covered with raw hide. A lifting becket of leather is
fitted at the small end and a leather loop at the large end.
Cartridge, Drill, B.L. 9-2-inch Gun, 26-lb. 12-oz., Mark II
The cartridge consists of a brown paper cylinder, fitted internally
with two millboard strengthening discs which are held in position
by three cylindrical brown paper distance pieces ; each end of the
cylinder being closed with a millboard disc, thus forming three
compartments.
The cylinder is filled to the required weight with sawdust and lead
or iron scrap, equally distributed in the three compartments. It is
enclosed in a dowlas bag, having a felt and red dowlas disc stitched
to one end to represent the igniter, and a 1-0-inch linen tape becket
sewn to the opposite end.
The word “ Drill ” is stencilled on the bag and igniter, in black,
in addition to the usual markings.
The maximum length of the cartridge is 16-5-inches and the
maximum diameter 8-0-inches.
Shell, Drill
Empty shell are supplied for drill purposes.


Fuzes, Drill
Fuzes for drill purposes are of the same external dimensions as
the service fuzes, but are without internal parts.
Metal portions of fuzes are bronzed and steel portions oil
blackened externally to denote they are to be used for drill purposes
only.
Drill fuzes have the word “ Drill ” stamped on them.
Later issues of drill fuzes are painted black.
Base fuzes do not contain internal mechanism and a circular
hole is cut in the cap.
The No. 88 type is not fitted with a base plug, percussion
mechanism, time detonator pellet or stirrup. A hole is bored
through the centre of the top cap and the needle plug removed.
Other fuzes of the nose type are not fitted with shearing pin,
hammer, base plug or detonator plug. A circular hole is cut in the
safety cap.
No fuze should be used for drill unless stamped “ DRILL ” and
bronzed or blackened.
257


Means of Ignition
Tube, Vent, Electric, -4-inch or
Tube, Vent, Percussion, -4-inch
Cartridges
Cartridge, B.L. 9-2-inch gun
120-lb. cordite M.D. 37
107-lb. cordite M.D. or R.D.B. 26
109-lb. cordite S.C. 150
|> Full Charges issued in J and £ charges
Nature
of
Filling
H.E.
A.P.
A.P.C.
Shrapnel
C.P.C.
Projectiles
Lyddite
Powder
Shellite
Powder
Lyddite
Trotyl
Beeswax
Bullets
Powder
Exploder
or Burster
P.P. or
Trotyl
Exploders
7-dr.
Primers
P.P.
Exploders
7-dr.
Primers
P.P.
Exploders
Trotyl
Pellet
Exploders
Gunpowder
2-lb. 3-oz.
14-dr. Primer
and 7-dr.
Primers.
Fuzes
13
45
45P
11, 15
or 15C
16
16D
15
15C
16
346
88
15 or 15C
116
f A number of C.P.C. shell have been issued fitted with No. 16 fuze. No further issues will be made.
Statement of Ammunition (9-2-inch Marks X, X v and X* Guns)
258


Diameter
Weight
Filled
and
Nature of
Shell
Mark
Driving
Band
Length
Band
over
Driv-
ing
Bursting
Charge
Nature of
Exploders
or Primer
Fuze
Remarks
Body
Band
Fuzed
R.L.
inches
inches
inches
lb.
High Explosive
VIII
14093
32-11
9-165
9-71
H.E.
P.P. or Trotyl
380
13, 45 or
VIIIA
14093
33-7
9-165
9-71
45P
IX
14093
31-95
9-165
9-71
IXA
14093
33-75
9-165
9-71
jX***
14093 A
31-77
9-165
9-71
'
XIIA
14093 A
33-45
9-165
9-71
ft * f
XIII
XIIIA
14093A
14093 A
32-
33-
9-165
9-165
9-71
9-71
»
-With Adapter No. 2.
ft > f
XIII/VIII
14093 A
31-44
9-165
9-71
11 >»
XIII/VIIIA
14093A
33-1
9-165
9-71
> >
,,
Armour Piercing
I
10862
—
9-165
9-71
Gunpowder
7-dr. Primers
, ,
,,
Note.— The combina-
11, 15 or 15C
tion of No. 45P fuze
II
10862
—
9-165
9-71
,,
,,
,,
,,
with picric powder
III
10862
—
9-165
9-71
,,
,,
,,
,,
exploders is adopted
Armour Piercing
for future new fillings
With Cap
IV
IV*
V
10862
14093
14093
—
9-165
9-165
9-165
9-71
9-71
9-71
”
”
”
15 or 15C
of H.E. for Coast
Defence.
VII
14093
34-7
9-165
9-71
H.E.
P.P Exploder
16 or 16D
VIIA
14093 A
34-7
9-165
9-71
IXA
14093A
34-7
9-165
9-71
XB
T14093 A
37-0
9-185
9-71
Trotyl/Bees-
wax
Trotyl Pellets
Exploder
”
346
XIB
14093 A
37-0
9-185
9-71
»»
XIIB
14093 A
37-0
9-185
9-71
„
Common Pointed
IXA
14093A
34-7
9-165
9-71
Gunpowder
14-dr. and
15 or 15C
With Cap
7-dr. Primers
Shrapnel
XA
XB
14093A
14093A
31-33
33-09
9-185
9-185
9-71
9-71
Gunpowder
”
88
Details of Projectiles (9-2-inch Marks X, X v and X* Guns)
259


CHAPTER V
MARKINGS ON AMMUNITION AND PACKAGES
General Remarks
Ammunition issued to the service is suitably marked to facilitate
identification, and to ensure correct segregation in store and
transport. Markings also ensure that the correct types are used
in the gun, and assists greatly in tracing defects in design or
manufacture to their source.
Markings are of two kinds, permanent and temporary, the former
are in the nature of stamping in the metal of the article concerned,
and relate, as a general rule, to the process of manufacture, while
the latter are usually painted or stencilled and refer more particularly
to the explosive elements employed in the ammunition.
Very great care should be exercised in the handling of ammuni-
tion, either loose or in packages, to avoid causing damage to
the markings, as partial obliteration may render it difficult, and in
some cases impossible, to identify the article.
In drawing up a scheme of marking, the general principle observed
is that it should always be possible to identify, from the information
on the exterior, the contents of a package or a separate article and
the conditions of manufacture.
The following pages show the markings to be found on B.L.
9'2-inch gun ammunition and packages with their significance.
Tubes
Stamping
(a) Mark of tube.
(b) Manufacturer’s initials or trade mark.
(c) Lot number.
Cartridges
Each cartridge is marked in black printer’s ink with the
following :
(a) Mark of cartridge.
( b ) The word FOIL where tinfoil is incorporated in cartridge.
(c) Initials or trade mark of manufacturer of empty bag.
(i d ) Calibre of gun.
(i e) Weight of charge.
(/) Nature and size of propellant.
( g) Lot number of propellant.


(h) If charge is adjusted, the letters “ A.C. ” after lot number.
(i) If of a group, the group letter and number.
(/) Monogram of filling station or initials of firm filling.
{k) Date of filling.
On the igniter
(/) The letters “ IG ” and the letter of the igniter, e.g. “ O,” etc.
[m) Calibre of gun.
Projectiles
Stampings on the base
A ll nature of shell
[a] Calibre and Mark.
(&) Manufacturer’s initials or trade mark.
(c) Date of manufacture.
(i d) Lot number of empty projectile.
{e) “ C.S.” or “ F. 5.,” denoting that the projectile is made of
cast steel, or forged steel.
Painting and stencilling on the body
H.E. shell
Painting
(a) High explosive shell are painted yellow.
(b) Amatol or trotyl filled shell have a 2-inch green band round
the body.
(c) The fraction to suit the proportion of poured amatol filling,
e.g. 40/60, is stencilled below the band.
(d) Trotyl filled shell have the word “TROTYL ” stencilled in
black on the green band.
(e) Lyddite filled shell have the body painted plain yellow.
(/) Filled shell have a red ring round the nose.
(g) Filled amatol or trotyl shell which are suitable for issue to
hot climates have the red ring in (/) replaced by a ring of red crosses.
{h) Amatol shell not containing smoke mixture have a black
tip.
(i) A black ring in front of the red ring indicates that the
shell is filled with exploders only suitable for powder-filled fuze.
(J) “ Use 45P FUZE ” on plugged H.E. shell with P.P. exploders
for which only 45P fuze is allocated.
Stencilling in black
[k) Calibre and Mark of shell.
(l) Dead weight or actual weight to the nearest 1-lb.
(w) Design number and method of filling, e.g. 861.
(n) Monogram of filling factory or station.
(o) Date of filling.


(p) "EXPR. C.E.” when H.E. shell are fitted with C.E.
exploders.
(q) Series number of ring detonating the filling lot.
{*) /l\ Stencilled in black in three places equally spaced at
'l' centre of gravity.
C.P.C., A.P. and A.P.C. shell
Painting
(а) Shell filled gunpowder are painted black.
(б) Shell filled H.E. are painted yellow.
(c) Armour piercing shell have two white rings around the nose
or below the cap, one on either side of the red filling ring.
(d) Shell filled trotyl beeswax have the word TROTYL stencilled
in black on the green band with a fraction below the band indicating
the proportion of trotyl and beeswax, e.g. “ 93/7.”
{e) Armour piercing capped shell filled shellite are dis-
tinguished by having the cap painted light green.
(/) Fuzes A.P.C. and C.P. shell have the base cover-plate painted
blue when No. 16D fuze is fitted, and red in all other cases.
Stencilling
( g ) “ Dead Weight ”or actual weight to the nearest 1-lb.
(h) Calibre and mark of shell.
(i) “ FZD ” with the lot No. of the fuze. The stencilling is red
on black and black on yellow projectiles.
(J) Monogram of filling factory or station.
(£) Date of filling.
(/) Lot number of picric powder in exploder bag when used as the
exploder.
(m) Design number of filling.
(n) A Stencilled in white on black shell and black on yellow
N' shell in three places equally spaced at centre of gravity.
Shrapnel Shell
Painting
(a) Shrapnel shell have the body painted black with a red tip.
(b) Filled shell have a red ring round the nose.
Stencilling
(c) Calibre and mark of shell.
(d) Monogram of filling factory or station.
(e) Date of filling.
Note.— (c) in white, (d) and (e) in red.


Table of Cartridge Packages
No. of
Charges
No. of
Case, Wood, Packing,
Weight of Charge
in
Cartridge
Skeleton For
Cylinder
Cylinder
54£-lb. S.C. 150
1
•
36
No. 36, Cylinder, Cartridge,
r or
Mark I A.
27-lb. 4-oz. S.C. 150...
2
J
50
No. 50 or 50A Cartridge
Cylinders, Mark I.
60-lb. M.D. 37
1
30-lb. M.D. 37
2
53£-lb. M.D. 26
1
No. 36, Cylinder, Cartridge,
Mark I A.
26-lb. 12-oz. M.D. or
R.D.B. 26
2
Fuzes
Stampings on body
{a) Number and mark of fuze.
(b) Manufacturer’s initials and date of manufacture.
(c) Initials of filling station and date of filling.
(d) Lot number of filled fuze.
(e) “ R ” when fuzes have been refilled.
Stencilling
{a) Lower ring lacquered red on No. 88 fuze indicates filled with
R.D.202 composition.
AMMUNITION PACKAGES
Tubes
The tubes are packed, heads and tails, in a flat tinned-plate
box and the lid secured by a tinned-plate strip soldered on. The
strip should not be removed until the tubes are actually required
for use. The filled boxes of tubes are packed in a “ Case, packing,
tubes, vent, -4-in.” (10 boxes in a case). On the ends of the boxes
and the case is a label giving details of the contents.
The dimensions, in inches, of the boxes and case are
approximately :
Box, tube, vent, percussion, -4-in., Mark 11, 5-75 x3T X LO5.
Box, tube, vent, percussion, drill, Mark 11, 5-75 x3T x 0-825.
Box, tube, vent, -4-in., Mark I, 5-73x3-11 xO-825.
Box, tube, vent, -4-in., Mark 11, 5-75x3-1 xO-825.
Case, packing, tubes, vent, -4-in., T. 7, Mark I A, 18-375 x7-25x
3-25.
Cartridges
B.L. 9-2-inch gun cartridges are issued in hermetically sealed
cylinders, the particulars of which are shown below. The cylinders
are protected by skeleton wood packing cases.
263


Case or Box
No. of Fuze
No.
Dimensions
Packed
Length
Width
Depth
inches
inches
inches
Case, packing, fuzes
F 1 Mark I
13
50
15-125
13-125
8-125
IA
F 11 Mark I
13
11, 15,
50
15-125
13-125
8-125
15C, 16 or
16D
25
17-625
15-625
6-375
Mark IA
11, 15, 15C,
16, 16D
25
17-875
15-625
6-375
Box, fuze
F 13, Mark I
13
50
15-45
14-15
9-0
F 15, Mark I
11 Mk. V up
15 Mk. II up
16
25
17-7
16-25
6-6
The dimensions, in inches, of the cylinders and cases are
approximately :
Cylinder, cartridge, No. 36, 34-815 long, 10-6 diameter.
Cylinder, cartridge, No. 50, 32-55 long, 8-85 diameter.
Case, wood, packing, skeleton for No. 36, cartridge cylinder
38x11-875.
Case, wood, packing, skeleton for No. 50 or 50A, cartridge
cylinder 35-9 Xll -38.
The packages are stencilled on the exterior as follows :
[a] Monogram of station and date of filling on side of cylinder.
( h ) Number of cartridges contained in the package on side of
cylinder.
(c) Calibre of gun on side and lid of cylinder, and end of skeleton
cases.
(d) Weight and Mark of cartridge on side of cylinder.
(e) Nature and size of propellant as for [d).
(/) Lot number, followed by the letters “ A.C.” on side and lid of
cylinder.
Note. —Cylinders fitted with observation windows will have a
letter “ W ” added to the Mark.
Fuzes
Fuzes are issued in hermetically sealed cylinders, one fuze
in a cylinder. On the lid of the cylinder is a contents label showing
the information stamped on the body of the fuze.
The cylinders containing fuzes are issued in boxes as follows :
Cases and Boxes for Fuzes Nos. 11, 15, 16, 13, 45, 45P, 88 and
346.
264


No.
Dimensions
Case or Box
No. of Fuze
Packed
Length
Width
Depth
inches
inches
inches
Case, packing, fuze...
¥ A3, Mark I ...
\ 4 5
\ 50
16-0
13-875
11-25
Mark IA ...
/ 45P
J
Box, fuze
F 44, Mark I
13
50
16-0
14-75
9-7
F 45, Mark I ...
45
| 50
16-0
14-5
11-5
45P
F 80, Mark I
Mark I*
| 88
25
19-5
18-0
5-5
Mark II
88
25
20-0
18-25
5-375
Case, packing, fuze
F 83, Mark I ...
Mark IA ...
| 88
25
18-25
17-25
5-5
F 85, Mark I ...
Mark IA ...
| 88
12
15-375
10-375
5-375
F 88, Mark I ...
88
25
19-25
17-35
5-375
Mark 1C ...
88
25
19-25
17-35
5-6
Mark II ...
88
16
16-125
14-125
5-25
Box, fuze
F 159, Mark I ...
346
25
18-45
16-0
7-625
Stencilling on fuze box
[a) Number of fuzes in Box. Serial Number and Mark of fuze.
( b) Manufacturer’s initials.
(c) Monogram of filling station and lot number of filling.
[d) “ 0.D.” in yellow, if package has been oil dressed.
Labels
A packer’s label will be found inside all packages containing
ammunition.
The following labels will be found on the exterior of the various
packages: —
Tube Packages
(a) Description labels, white with black printing for per-
cussion and red for electric tubes, on lids of tube boxes.
(b) Government explosive and classification label "I
on lid - . I
(c) Station label (2) at junction of box and lid. [
(d) Descriptive label on inside of lid. J
On case,
packing
tubes.
Cartridge Packages
{a) Government explosive and classification label on side.
{b) Station labels at junction of lid and body of cylinder.
265


Fuze Packages
(a) Descriptive label as under on lid of cylinder :
(1) White with black printing for Nos. 11, 15, 15C, 16, 16D,
13 and 45P fuzes.
(2) White with red printing for Nos. 45 and 346 fuzes.
(3) Lemon yellow with black printing for No. 88 fuze.
(b) Government explosive and classification label on lid of case
or box.
(c) Station labels (2) at junction of lid and case or box.
266


CHAPTER VI
CARE AND PRESERVATION
LUBRICATION
Artillery equipments have a number of parts liable to damage
by dirt and rust; cleaning and oiling are therefore necessary to
preserve the equipment.
Thorough and frequent lubrication of all working parts is
essential. Whenever and wherever fresh lubricant is applied,
the old should, where practicable, first be wiped or scraped off and
the parts well worked to distribute the fresh lubricant.
Lubricators and lubricating holes should be kept free from dirt
to allow a free passage to the working parts ; holes and channels,
when possible, being cleaned out with a wire. Lost or damaged
lubricators and lubricating screws will be renewed. Lubricators
and lubricating screws should be kept bright so as to be readily
seen.
In cleaning the parts of mechanisms and the bright parts of
mountings, etc., oil only should be used and no part is to be burnished
or polished with any gritty substance, such as emery paper or
bathbrick.
Lubricant will be used as follows :
Grease M.T. Stauffer Lubricators.
Grease C.C. or H.C. Teeth of cog wheels.
Mineral jelly. Rollers and roller bearings, ball
bearings and as a preservative
generally.
Mineral jelly thinned with Enclosed gear and teeth of pinions
lubricating oil. and wheels.
Oil, C. 70. Cleaning bright parts of guns
and mountings and for general
purposes of lubrication.
Olive Oil. 1 Preservation of obturator pads.
Tallow. ) _
Oil mineral burning. Cleaning clogged oil off gears.


Fitting to be lubricated
No.
of
holes
Remarks
Breech mechanism frame ...
1
On top lug for hinge bolt.
Carrier
4
2 on rear face for lubrication of lock
actuating link and breech screw
retaining catch respectively. 2 on
front face, one for breech mechanism
lever axis shaft and pinion, the other
for the lower part of the shaft,
accessible with the mechanism in the
loading position.
Carrier hinge bolt
1
Top of hinge bolt or cam attached, pre-
serving screw to be removed.
Breech screw actuating link
2
1 in each end of the link for lubrication
of the breech screw stud and link
axis pin respectively, the latter being
accessible with the mechanism in the
loading position.
Link pinion ...
1
On front face at the top, accessible
with the mechanism in the loading
position.
Breech screw...
2
On top interruption for lubricating
carrier pintle and interior of breech
screw, accessible with the mechanism
in the loading position.
Fitting to be lubricated
No.
of
holes
Remarks
Bracket, arc pinion shaft,
centre
1
Accessible under cradle.
Bracket, cross-shaft—
1 These brackets, which are not capped,
Elevating, centre ...
are accessible under cradle in front
Traversing, centre
| of the body ; should be oiled slightly
j where shafts take bearing.
Hinges of doors, shell pit
shield
—
Accessible from top of shield.
Plug, pivot ...
—
Four oil grooves in centre pivot
bearing ; accessible under cradle.
List of Lubricating Holes
ORDNANCE, B.L. 9-2-INCH, MARKS X, X v AND X*
MOUNTING, B.L. 9-2-INCH, MARK V


No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Above shell pit shield
Left side —
Bearing, ball, trunnion
1
In retaining nut, accessible by
removal of top spring dust excluder.
Bracket, arc pinion shaft, left
1
Bracket, cross and vertical
shafts—
Elevating, left
Traversing
2
2
j>One in each shaft bearing.
Bracket, elevating and tra-
versing gear, upper, left ...
4
One in each bearing for hand wheel
spindle. Both bearings for vertical
shafts cupped to receive oil.
Bracket, supporting elevation
indicator —
Inner
2
In spring barrel shaft bearings.
Accessible inside of left side of body
bracket under cradle.
Outer
2
One in each spring barrel shaft
bearing.
Capsquare
1
The tapped hole for lifting eye, fitted
with preserving screw.
Clip, guide, cradle ...
8
For lubricating sliding surfaces.
Derrick, loading gear—
Post
In shoulder of post, communicating
with upper bearing.
Sheaves, guide
—
In boss.
Tray, Loading
2
One in each bearing for lubricating
loading arm joint pin.
Wheel, bevel, vertical shaft—
'jin boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
> bearing. Accessible through cover
J of guard.
Elevating gear, upper
Traversing gear ...
1
1
Right side —
Bearing, ball, trunnion
1
In retaining nut, accessible by removal
of top spring dust excluder.
Bracket, arc pinion shaft,
right
3
Two in cap for worm bearing, one in
lubricating pipe to shaft. Accessible
through hinged door of right-hand
sighting platform.
Bracket, cross and vertical
shafts—
Elevating, right ...
2
One each in cross shaft and worm
shaft bearings.
Traversing
2
One in each bearing.
Bracket, elevating and tra-
versing gear, right
3
One in each bearing for hand wheel
spindle, also bearing for vertical
shaft cupped on top to receive oil.
Capsquare
1
The tapped hole for lifting eye, fitted
with preserving screw.
269
List of Lubricating Holes— contd.
MOUNTING, B.L. 92-INCH, MARK V—contd.


No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Above shell pit shield — contd.
Right side — contd.
Clip, guide, cradle ...
8
For lubricating sliding surfaces.
Wheel, bevel, vertical shaft—
1
'I In boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
Elevating gear upper
V bearing. Accessible through cover
1 of guard.
Traversing gear ...
1
Below shell pit shield
In head of axles. Accessible from
Axles, roller ring
26
right and left side, but to lubricate
all the axles, the mounting must be
traversed.
Wheels, projectile trolley (6)
One in each bracket carrying axle
and roller. Accessible from top of
shell pit shield through the doors.
Left side —
Bracket, elevating and tra-
One in each bearing for hand wheel
spindle. Both bearings for vertical
shafts are cupped on top to receive
oil.
versing gear, lower, left ...
3
Bracket, intermediate shaft.
Each bearing cupped to receive oil.
traversing ...
2
Derrick, loading gear—
Lower bearings cupped and upper
Bracket, supporting
—
bearing grooved to receive lubri-
cant.
Windlass, loading gear—
In spindle bearings.
Bracket, wire rope drum
2
Lever, counterweight
1
For axis pin.
Plates, brake drum, inner (2)
2
One in each plate.
Right side —
Bearing, rack pinion shaft.
traversing—
Centre
_
Cupped on top to receive oil.
Lower
2
One in side. Bearing cupped at top
to receive oil.
Upper
3
One in each bearing. Accessible
through removable door of right-
hand sighting platform.
Pinion, spur, vertical shaft,
In boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
traversing ...
1
bearing. Accessible through hinged
door of gear cover.
Pump, air
1
In outer cylinder, for lubricating
plungers and slide for rocking
levers.
Shaft, rack pinion, traversing
1
In upper end of shaft. Accessible
through removable door of right-
hand sighting platform.
Shaft, vertical, right, tra-
In collar.
versing
1
270
List of Lubricating Holes— contd.
MOUNTING, B.L. 9 2-INCH, MARK Y—contd.


Fitting to be lubricated
No.
of
holes
Remarks
Below shell pit shield — contd.
Right side — contd.
Wheel, spur, intermediate
shaft, traversing ...
Wheel, spur, rack pinion
1
In boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
bearings. Accessible through
removable door of right - hand
sighting platform.
shaft, traversing ...
1
In boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
bearings. Accessible through
hinged cover of gear cover.
No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Bracket, arc pinion shaft,
centre
1
Accessible under cradle.
Bracket, cross shaft—
'j These brackets, which are not capped,
Elevating, centre
—
1 are accessible under cradle in front
Traversing, centre
—
j of the body; should be oiled slightly
J where shafts take bearing.
Hinges of doors, shell pit
shield
—
Accessible from top of shield.
Plug, pivot ...
—
Four oil grooves in centre pivot
bearing. Accessible under cradle.
Above shell pit shield
Left side —
Bearing, ball, trunnion
1
In retaining nut, accessible by removal
of top spring dust excluder.
Bearing, vertical shaft, ele-
vating, upper, left
1
•
Bracket, arc pinion shaft, left
1
Bracket, cross and vertical
shafts —
Elevating, left
Traversing...
2
j- One in each shaft bearing.
Bracket, elevating and tra-
versing gear, upper, left ...
4
One in each bearing for hand wheel
spindle. Both bearings for vertical
shafts cupped to receive oil.
Capsquare
1
The tapped hole for lifting eye,
fitted with preserving screw.
Note. —In addition to the foregoing, all working parts, e.g. joints of
levers, catches, etc. (where lubricating holes are not provided), should be
occasionally oiled.
MOUNTINGS, B.L. 9 2-INCH, MARKS VI & Vla
271
List of Lubricating Holes - contd.
MOUNTING, B.L. 92-INCH, MARK contd.


No.
•
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Above shell pit shield — contd.
Left side — contd.
For lubricating sliding surfaces.
Clip, guide, cradle ...
8
Crane, loading—
1
1
Bracket, left
Bracket, right
j>For pinion spindle of windlass.
Bracket, shaft (2)...
1
Drum, brake
3
Two for pinion studs, three for
Drum, wire rope ...
5
pinion spindle bearing.
Lever, hand
1
In bearing.
Pillar, jib ...
1
In lower bearing for post.
Pins, sheave
2
For sheaves.
Post
1
For upper bearing in pillar.
Derrick, loading—
For sheaves.
Pins, sheave
2
Post
1
For lubricating jib post socket.
Pillar, loading arm ...
1
In lower bearing for post.
Post, loading arm ...
1
For upper bearing in pillar.
Rack, elevation indicator ...
1
In hinge pin bearing, front end of
rack.
Wheels, bevel, vertical shaft —
1
1
I In boss of wheel, conveying lubricant
> to shaft bearing. Accessible through
Elevating gear, upper
Traversing gear ...
J guard cover.
Right side —
Bearing, ball, trunnion
1
In retaining nut, accessible by
removal of top spring dust excluder.
Bearing, vertical shaft, ele-
1
vating, upper, right
Bracket, arc pinion shaft,
Two in cap for worm bearing, one in
right
3
lubricating pipe to shaft.
Bracket, cross and vertical
shafts —
One for wormshaft bearing, one for
Elevating, right
2
cross shaft bearing.
Traversing
2
One in each bearing.
Bracket, elevating and
One in each bearing for hand wheel
traversing gear, right
3
spindle, also bearing for vertical
shaft cupped on top to receive oil.
Capsquare
1
The tapped hole for lifting eye ; fitted
with preserving screw.
Clip, guide, cradle ...
8
For lubricating sliding surfaces.
Stop, elevating—
1
Bearing, plunger ...
Cap, plunger
1
Wheel, bevel, vertical shaft —
Elevating gear, upper
1
In boss of wheel conveying lubricant
L to shaft bearing. Accessible
Traversing gear ...
1
j through guard cover.
272
List of Lubricating Holes — contd.
MOUNTINGS, B.L. 9 2-INCH, MARKS VI & Vla —contd.


No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
holes
Remarks
Below shell pit shield
Axles, roller ring
26
In head of axles. Accessible from
right and left sides, but to lubricate
all the axles, the mounting must be
Wheels, projectile trolley (2)
traversed.
8
For lubricating axles.
Left side —
Bearing, control hand lever
spindle, elevating...
1
Bearing, vertical shaft,
elevating, lower, left
—
Cupped to receive oil.
Bracket, control hand lever
spindle, elevating
1
Bracket, elevating and tra-
versing gear, lower, left ...
3
One in each bearing for hand wheel
spindle. Both bearings for vertical
shafts are cupped on top to receive
oil.
Bracket, intermediate shaft.
traversing ...
Derrick, loading—
2
Each bearing cupped to receive oil.
Bracket, windlass—
Part I
2
For pinion spindle and counterweight
Part II ...
Drum, brake
lever bearing.
1
3
For pinion spindle bearing.
Drum, wire rope ...
5
Two for pinion studs, three for
Pins, sheave
pinion spindle bearings.
2
For sheaves.
Socket, jib post
1
Indicator, elevation—
Bracket, driving shaft
3
One in each bearing.
Bracket, supporting
2
One each in cam lever and spring
Guide, rack
barrel shaft bearing.
3
One for rack pinion, two for driving
shaft.
Right side —
Bearing, rack pinion shaft,
traversing—
Centre
—
Cupped on top to receive oil.
Lower
2
One in side. Bearing cupped at top
Upper
to receive oil.
3
One in each bearing.
Pinion, spur, vertical shaft.
traversing ...
1
In boss, conveying lubricant to
shaft bearings. Accessible through
Pump, air
hinged door of gear cover.
1
In outer cylinder, for lubricating
plungers and slide for rocking
levers.
Shaft, rack pinion, traversing
1
In upper end of shaft.
18—(2)
273
List of Lubricating Holes—
MOUNTINGS, B.L. 9'2-INCH, MARKS VI & VlA —contd.


No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Below shell pit shield — contd.
Right side — contd.
Shaft, vertical, right,
In collar.
traversing ...
1
Wheel, spur, intermediate
shaft, traversing ...
1
In boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
bearings. Accessible through
removable door of right-hand
sighting platform.
Wheel, spur, rack pinion
shaft, traversing
1
In boss, conveying lubricant to shaft
bearings. Accessible through hinged
cover of gear cover.
No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Cradle —
8
Clip, guide cradle, right ...
,, left
8
Capsquare, right
1
1
left
Bearing, ball trunnion,
1
right
\ln retaining nut, accessible by removal
Bearing, ball trunnion,
1
f of top spring of dust excluder.
Pivot, centre...
1
Roller ring—
Axles
26
See note for Mk. V (page 270).
Gear, elevating—
6
Bracket, hand wheel, front
Cover, cam
1
J 1 for handwheel spindle bearing.
Cover, end
2
for roller cam.
Hand wheel spindle
1
Bracket, vertical shafts,
1
front ...
Cap, bearing
1
Note.—ln addition to the foregoing, all working parts, eg. joints of
levers, catches, etc. (where lubricating holes are not provided), should be
occasionally oiled.
MOUNTING, B.L. 9-2-INCH, MARK VII
274
List of Lubricating Holes could.
MOUNTINGS, B.L. 9'2-INCH, MARKS VI & Vla could.


Fitting to be lubricated
No.
of
holes
Remarks
Gear, elevating— contd.
Bracket, front lower clutch
1
Bracket, elevation engine
2
Bracket, pinion shaft, left
1
Cap, bearing
2
Bracket, clutch lever rear,
J 1 for cross shafts cradle lock.
lower
2
\ 1 oil hole for fork spindle.
Cap, bearing
1
Bracket, vertical shaft, rear
1
Cap, bearing
1
Bracket, clutch lever, rear,
upper
1
Oil hole.
Bracket, hand wheel, rear
2
Cover
1
Bracket, pinion shaft, centre
1
Bracket, arc pinion shaft,
1
right
Gear, traversing—
1
Hand wheel spindle
Bracket, hand wheel, front
1
Oil hole.
Cover
1
Lever, clutch, upper—
Handle ...
1
Oil hole.
Bracket, mitre wheel, front—
Caps
2
1 in each cap.
Bracket, mitre wheel
4
Cover, front
—
Oil groove.
Cover, side
—
To be removed periodically for sliding
Bearing, lower clutch shaft
1
clutches.
Bracket, worm, wheel —
Cover, top
1
Spindle rack pinion
1
Auxiliary gear (traversing) —
Bracket, mitre wheel, rear—
Caps
2
1 in each cap.
Bracket, clutch lever and
rear vertical shaft —
Cap
1
For vertical shaft bearing.
Lever, clutch—
Handle ... ...
1
Oil hole.
Bracket, hand wheel, rear
2
Cover
1
Cradle locking gear—
Oil holes.
Control standard ...
2
Bracket, supporting cross
1
shaft
Bearing, cross shaft, right
1
1 left and 1 right.
Pawl
2
Bracket, pawl stop,
1 left and 1 right (oil holes).
actuating lever ...
2
275
List of Lubricating Holes — contd.
MOUNTING, B.L. 92-INCH, MARK Vll— contd.


Fitting to be lubricated
No.
of
holes
Remarks
Wash-out gear—
Bracket, operating shaft,
right
1
Bracket, operating shaft,
centre
1
Bracket, operating shaft,
left
1
Hoist—
Sheaves, ammunition, lift
2
Catch, retaining ammuni-
tion cage
1
Lever, operating
1
Oil hole.
Lever, hand, upper
1
,, lower
1
Oil hole.
Tray-
Hinge, Part I ...
2
Oil holes.
Auxiliary gear (hoist) —
Sheave, guide, rope
1
Bracket, shell arms
4
Bracket, guide roller —
Spindle, roller ...
1
Windlass —
Bracket, windlass, Part I
1
Bracket, windlass. Part II
1
Lever, counterweight—
Spindle ...
1
Drum, wire rope ...
5
Cage, ammunition —
Sheaves
4
Oil holes.
Rollers, guide
8
Oil holes (1 in each).
Bracket, shell catch
4
Oil holes (2 in each).
Bracket, inner shell catch
shaft
1
Oil hole.
Bracket, hand lever shaft
front
1
Oil hole.
Bracket, hand lever shaft
rear
1
Oil hole.
Lever, jamming ...
2
Oil holes (1 in each).
Hydraulic press—
Oil holes (1 in each).
Sheaves
4
Cylinder
2
1 either side for cam bearings.
Troiley, loading—
Wheels
8
(4 in each trolley).
Cartridge guide—
Bracket, rear guide
1
Lever, stop
1
Oil hole.
Lever, roller
1
Oil hole.
Roller
1
Oil hole.
Platform, sliding—
Lever, actuating, left
1
„ „ right ...
1
Oil holes (1 in each).
Lever, catch
2
276
List of Lubricating Holes — contd.
MOUNTING, B.L. 92-INCH, MARK Vll —contd.


Fitting to be lubricated
No.
of
holes
Remarks
Platform sliding— contd.
Bracket, large and small
rollers, left
4
Bracket, large and small,
rollers, right
4
Bracket, large roller
2
1 each side.
Bracket, roller sliding plat-
form, left
1
Bracket, roller sliding plat-
form, right
1
Tray, loading—
Cap shaft bracket
2
1 in each cap.
Bracket, carrying arm
1
Eye, rod guide, return spring
1
Front end of tray.
Body, tray
4
2 in each side.
Catch, tray
2
1 each side rear end.
Rammer Rocker —
Cap, shaft bracket, front
1
,, ,, ,, rear ...
1
Jack-
Bush, sliding, crosshead
1
Oil hole.
Rammer —
Crosshead—
Spindle, pinion ...
1
Ejector, charge—
Bracket, locking pawl ...
1
Pin, axis, roller locking
pawl
2
1 each side accessible through holes in
Bracket, controlling cam
rear
2
casing.
Right side of rammer.
Lever, operating cut-off
valve
2
1 in each lever.
Roller bearings
30
6 accessible by removal of covers on
casing.
Control standard—
Lever, hand, inner
1
Oil hole.
,, ,, centre
1
Oil hole.
,, ,, outer
1
Oil hole.
Rammer and rammer rocker—
Valve, semi-automatic —
Bracket ...
4
Interlock, wash-out and
rammer —
Bracket left lower inter-
lock
1
Bracket, rear spindle, inter-
lock
1
Bracket, front spindle,
lower
1
Bracket, front spindle,
upper
1
277
List of Lubricating Holes — contd.
MOUNTING B.L. 92 INCH, MARK YU—contd.


No.
Fitting to be lubricated
of
Remarks
holes
Bearing receiver gear—
f 2 for vertical shaft.
Bracket, supporting
3
\l for horizontal shaft.
Bracket, cross shafts
1
Bracket, driving shaft
2
J 1 for vertical shaft.
\ 1 for horizontal shaft.
Bearing, driving shaft
1
Bearing, recording pinion
shaft ...
2
Cover, bevel gear
1
Bracket, receiver gear
7
Range receiver gear—
Bearing, recording pinion
spindle ...
2
Bracket, driving shaft
3
J 1 for vertical shaft.
\2 for horizontal shaft.
Bracket, cross and vertical
shaft, correction gear ...
2
Bracket, driving shaft
1
Bearing, driving shaft
1
Bracket, supporting receiver
7
Trolley, runway—(for sub-
calibre gun) —
Axle, roller
2
1 in each roller.
Sight, Direction, No. 1, Mark I
Bearing, worm spindle—
Body
4
Bracket, worm segment ...
1
Bracket, spur wheels
2
1 lubricator, 1 oil hole.
Bearing, hand wheel spindle
2
Oil holes.
Sight, Automatic—
Carrier, sight—
Body
1
Lever, cam roller—
Body
3
Lever, sight—
Body
1
Gear, correcting automatic
sight—
Bracket, cross shaft, left...
1
Bracket, cross and vertical
2
(1 for vertical shaft.
shaft
for horizontal shaft.
Bearing, lower pinion shaft
1
Spindle, intermediate wheel
1
In bracket worm wheel traversing.
Bearing, worm spindle ...
—
Cupped to receive oil.
278
List of Lubricating Holes — conid.
MOUNTING, B.L. 9'2-INCH, MARK Vll— contd.


GUN AND FITTINGS
Removable fittings should be frequently taken apart and
examined to ascertain that they are sound and in proper working
order. They should be treated with care, violence and jerks being
avoided and no unnecessary force employed.
All spare parts should be tested for interchangeability as soon as
possible after receipt.
Working surfaces and mechanisms should be well lubricated,
work easily and be free from burrs, which must be removed by a
qualified artificer.
If a flaw or crack be observed in a gun, the gun will be put out
of action and arrangements made for it to be examined by the
inspecting officer. Should a similar defect be observed in any part
of the mechanism, the spare part allowed will be taken into use
and the defective part examined.
The whole of the exterior part of the gun except the clinometer
plane, working surfaces at the breech end and portions engaging the
mounting will be painted.
Clinometer planes will not be cleaned with abrasive material
such as emery cloth, scratch card or bath brick. Any rust on the
plane may be loosened with a coating of paraffin and then rubbed
off with cotton waste. Care should be taken to prevent the plane
being damaged or burred. The planes of guns in general use should
be kept oiled. If a gun is not likely to be used for a considerable
period the plane should be coated with mineral jelly.
Before firing, the bore will be thoroughly wiped out to ensure
that it is quite clean and dry ; it will be examined visually by an
officer.
At the close of each day’s firing the bore will be thoroughly
washed out with fresh hot water and the muzzle depressed. It
should then be dried and, when cool, well oiled. On completion
of practice, or when intervals of days occur between firing, the bore
will be cleaned and oiled daily, until sweating has ceased.
After sub-calibre or aiming rifle practice, and before firing with
service ammunition is resumed, the bore of the parent gun will be
thoroughly cleaned to remove any residue which may have formed.
This residue will usually be found as a broad band in the bore in
front of the position of the muzzle of the sub-calibre gun or aiming
rifle, and if not removed at once, it becomes hard and difficult to
remove.
Should the bore be very dirty, it may be cleaned out with
paraffin, after which the bore will be wiped dry and oiled.
Soda in any form must on no account be used for cleaning the
bore.
Immediately after firing, any deposit on breech screws and other
parts should be removed and the parts thoroughly cleaned and


oiled. At stations where extremely low temperatures are prevalent
in winter, a very thin coating of “ oil, low cold test, No. 1 ” should
be used for the breech screw and the breech mechanism.
Obturators
On receipt, the obturator is to be placed at once in the box and
to be maintained under pressure at all times. The registered number
of the gun with which the pad is to be used should be stencilled on
box and pad.
Spare obturators should be examined fortnightly by an officer
to see that they are correctly assembled and kept under pressure
in the boxes. They should not be removed from the box until
actually required for assembly on the mechanism.
Obturators with canvas - covered pads should be examined
periodically to see that the canvas is intact and in good condition.
If found to be loose, frayed or torn or to overlap either of the
protecting discs or rings, the pad should be exchanged. They should
also be measured quarterly and the results compared with the
particulars shown in “ Regulations for Care and Preservation of
Artillery Equipment/’ If the obturator is found to be below the
limit of thickness, it is to be soaked in a hot mixture of equal parts of
tallow and olive oil; if this treatment does not bring the obturator
within the limits laid down, it should be condemned and exchanged.
Obturators with wire woven pads should be exchanged if the
outer cover becomes damaged or broken. No limits have been
laid down for wire woven pads, but the pad should be condemned
and exchanged when a good seating cannot be obtained in the gun
with the aid of adjusting discs.
Obturators will be gauged quarterly for thickness by means of
the “ Gauge, thickness, obturator ” ; any obturators which do not
accept the gauge will be brought to plan dimensions in the obturator
press.
The protecting discs and rings should also be carefully examined
and if the tin be fused, or the steel rings eroded, burred or cracked,
they should be replaced by new discs or rings. If the tin is found
to be expanded over the circumferential surface of the steel rings
of the protecting discs, the expanded tin should be filed away, care
being taken not to reduce the diameter of the steel rings. Split rings
showing abnormal distortion should be replaced.
When fitting the obturator on the axial vent care must be taken
to see that the parts are placed in their correct order. The face of
the pad marked “FRONT” should be towards the muzzle, whilst
the discs and rings should be placed in front or rear as marked.
Steel adjusting discs may be required to ensure a proper fit, but in
all cases the obturator must be able to turn freely.
Before firing with reduced charges from a gun, special care
must be taken to see that the obturator is properly seated.
280


The whole efficiency of the obturator depends upon the test
and adjustment laid down being carried out with great care.
Obtaining the correct, i.e. light, adjustment of the obturator is
one of the most important adjustments carried out in the mechanism.
The effort required to close the breech should first of all be deter-
mined by doing so with the axial vent bolt and obturator removed.
Assemble the obturator complete on mechanism without any
adjusting discs and cover the cone seating with red lead, or chalk
a series of thin lines across the seating. Close the breech gently,
allowing the turning of the breech screw to advance the pad towards
the cone seating. The breech must not be slammed or pushed hard
otherwise a false marking will be obtained. Open the breech.
If the marking has not been transferred from the cone seating all
round the pad add one adjusting disc and repeat the operation.
Continue adding one disc each time until all round marking has
been obtained.
Moderate adjustment has then been secured, i.e. when by gently
closing the breech all round marking of the obturator is obtained.
Light adjustment is then secured by removing one disc.
Note. —Where light adjustment is not obtainable, all round
marking having been obtained without any adjusting discs, moderate
adjustment must be accepted. Heavy adjustment, i.e. definite
effort to close the breech due to the obturator accompanied by
heavy marking, must be avoided. Heavy adjustment without
adjusting discs indicates that the pad is swollen and therefore should
not be used until repressed.
Lightly adjusted obturators should be watched for :
{a) Dished pads.
(■ b) Tendency for adjusting disc to be pushed out by the rear
protecting disc and for the split in the rear ring to hammer it out.
A possible result of this is that the edge of the adjusting disc may
become splayed out and turned over, causing stiffness in working.
( c ) The hammering in ( b ) may cause cuts in the surface of the
adjusting disc. Discs should be replaced as necessary. Care
must be taken that by adding an excessive number of discs the
axial vent is not pushed so far forward in the mechanism that the
slide box cannot be correctly assembled on the axial vent.
After completing the test and adjustment, the obturator should
be given a liberal coating of tallow, which should be worked as
far as may be possible well into the pad. The mechanism should
be opened and closed several times in order to settle the obturator in
after its adjustment.
During action, every precaution should be taken to keep the
head of the axial vent and obturator as cool as possible, by pouring
water over them or sousing them thoroughly with wet sponge
cloths, suitable pauses being made for this purpose. After prolonged
firing the head of the axial vent may become exceedingly hot and


the pad very soft ; when this is the case they should be thoroughly
soused with water before being taken apart. If time permits, the
axial vent and obturator together can be removed and plunged into
a bucket of water before attempts are made to remove the obturator.
With the Mark VII mounting, water squirts are provided.
In consequence of the unavoidable slight difference in dimensions
of the seating for the obturator, it is necessary that the first time
any pad is used in any particular gun, it should be fired with a full
charge and projectile.
Opportunity should be taken of any full charge firing to expand
the obturators allotted to, but not previously used with, the gun,
and to mark them with the registered number of gun.
THE MOUNTING
The Recoil System
The recoil system comprises a buffer and air cylinder with
intensifier.
Many considerations affect the correct working of the system.
Broadly, these may be grouped under three headings ;
1. The correct filling and charging of the system.
2. Packings.
3. The careful observation of the system both in and out of
action.
1. The Correct Filling and Charging of the
System
It is most important that the system should be correctly filled
and charged with liquid and air, in accordance with the instructions
laid down on pages 288-289. Should these operations be per-
formed incorrectly, or should there be any appreciable loss of liquid
or air pressure, unsatisfactory recoil or run-out must be expected.
The energy of recoil is absorbed mainly in the buffer, although
a certain amount is taken up in overcoming the friction in the
slides and packings.
The method of filling the buffer provides for a small air space
being left when the buffer is correctly filled. Should this precaution
be omitted and the buffer completely filled, then any expansion of
the liquid may prevent the gun returning fully to the run-out
position. This fault can be remedied by releasing a little oil from
the filling valve.
Length of recoil
The extreme length of recoil is fixed by the dimension between
the buffer piston and its stuffing box ; i.e. Marks V to VIA —44-9-
inches, Mark V11 —42-inches. This length should not, however,
be reached.


The normal recoil for these mountings is 42-inches and 40-inches,
respectively. Greater recoil will lead to damage to the equipment ;
on the other hand, abnormally short recoils are to be avoided, and
just as much care is necessary to guard against short as is usually
spent on avoiding long recoils.
Control of run-out
The run-out of the gun has an important bearing on the steadiness
and service of the equipment; a violent run-out would cause a
shock to the mounting and a sluggish run-out means slower rate of
fire. On the Mark VII the action is controlled throughout by the
control plunger, but on Marks V —VIA the plunger controls only the
final stages. With a given pressure, it will be easier to run out at the
lower elevation owing to the absence of the gravity element. Hence,
mountings designed for high angles of elevation have a greater air
pressure than others, e.g. Mark VII mounting 35-degrees elevation
and air pressure of 350-lb. per square inch, Mark V mounting
15-degrees elevation and air pressure of 200-lb. per square inch.
It is therefore essential that the normal air pressure in the air
cylinder be maintained in accordance with instructions laid down for
each mounting.
Loss of air pressure
This may be due to escape of air through the liquid gland or the
filling valve, the former being the most likely cause. The air
pressure, and position of the end of the piston rod of the intensifier
must be checked periodically.
It must, however, be quite clear that in action the vital test of
the air pressure is the working efficiency. If the gun is being
taken up to the run-out position satisfactorily there is no need for
adjustments.
The intensifier
The intensifier ensures that the pressure in the liquid gland is
greater than that in the air cylinder. Great care must be taken
to ensure the end of its piston rod being well inside the gland, other-
wise the intensifier will cease to function and the air will escape from
the air cylinder through the liquid gland. When fully charged the
end of the rod should be about 10-inches within the rear face of
intensifier gland.
2. Packings
Packings are provided at the front of the buffer cylinder where
the piston rod enters ; at the front of the air cylinder where the
buffer cylinder enters ; and at the rear end of the intensifier
cylinder where its piston enters.


Packings comprise L- or U-shaped rings made of leather, or
linen fibre ; and formed packings, i.e. rings formed from greased
hemp.
L- or U-shaped packings
The L-shaped packing in the buffer stuffing box is held in position
by the large gland, which is screwed fully home ; consequently
there is no question of tightening this packing to prevent leakage.
The U-shaped packings of the liquid gland {Mark VII Mountings)
are interposed between the formed packings and are held in position
by the gland ring which when tightened by the securing nuts
affects the formed packings only as far as leakage is concerned.
The skirt of these rings which bears against the piston rod or
cylinder is exposed to the full pressure of the liquid, and is so
arranged that the greater the pressure the tighter it fits. Therefore,
if the rings are in good condition, clean and correctly assembled,
they are not likely to permit leakage. Should they be cut, or rest
on a gritty surface, trouble may readily arise.
Before taking fresh rings into use they should be carefully
examined to see that they are in a fully serviceable condition.
They should be perfectly smooth and sharp at the edges, and not
perished in any way, also clean and free from grit, flaws or cuts.
Care must be taken during assembly to avoid damage and to ensure
that they are evenly embedded on their supporting rings.
When leather packings or joint rings are used for sealing, they
should be well soaked in oil similar to that used in the system until
they are sufficiently flexible to ensure that a satisfactory joint will
be obtained.
All spare leather packings should be kept in store and occasionally
rubbed with dubbing in order to prevent them from becoming hard
and brittle.
Formed packings
The formed packings consist of lengths of “packing, greased
square,” (hemp cord, mineral jelly and graphite), which is com-
pressed to shape by metal rings and/or the glands, and are so
arranged to be pressed tightly on to the moving surfaces.
The packings should be wrapped in oiled paper and stored in
tins, boxes, or any suitable receptacle so that the shape and finish
may be maintained. These tins need not be sealed, but they should
be kept as much as possible at an even temperature.
A ssembly
Before assembling the packings, the parts in contact, both
internal and external, should be well rubbed with a mixture of
graphite and mineral jelly.


After assembly, the exterior of the rings should be well smeared
with the mixture in order to reduce the friction between the packings
and the moving part and also to facilitate the assembly of the
piston into the cylinder.
In every case before application the mixture and the packings
must be free from grit and dirt.
If the graphite and mineral jelly mixture is not available, the
various packings should be dipped before assembly in clear oil,
similar to that used in the system.
Leakage
The object of all such packings is to prevent leakage ; if excessive,
or persistent, leakage is observed an examination of the packings
should be carried out.
External liquid leakage shows itself by drippings at the under-
side of the stuffing box concerned.
Having located which packing is at fault, the appropriate-
remedy should be applied either by tightening or repacking.
Tightening of glands
The operation of tightening glands must be carried out with
discretion, as a gland with undue tightness is detrimental to the
run-out of the gun and to the wear of working parts.
If judicious tightening of the gland does not prevent leakage the
packing should be renewed.
Glands should be examined as often as opportunity permits
and tightened if necessary. Such examination must be carried
out after firing and, if possible, during pauses in action.
The glands pack better if tightened when the packings are hot
from firing, e.g. during pauses in action. When tightening a packing
the gland should not be screwed home, metal to metal, in the stuffing
box.
Tightening of glands by the artillery personnel should he done very
carefully and only on emergency.
3. The Careful Observation of the System Both in and out
of Action
As soon as the gun is mounted, it should be seen that the buffer,
air cylinder and intensifier are correctly filled and charged ; that
the piston rod is secured to the front transom of the cradle, the
intensifier rod inside its cylinder, that all plugs have washers and
are properly screwed home and that there is no leakage at any of the
glands.
To prepare for action, the glands should be examined for signs
of leakage and, if necessary, tightened. Care should be taken
that the piston rod nut is properly tightened up and that its
keep pin is in position. The position of the intensifier rod should be


Fault
Cause
Remedy
Recoil violent or
Reduced air pressure in
Test and recharge air
excessive.
the air cylinder.
Insufficient liquid in
buffer cylinder.
cylinder. Examine posi-
tion of intensifier piston
and if necessary pump
in more liquid.
Fill the buffer.
Recoil short.
Excessive air pressure.
Packings too tight.
Damaged sliding bars or
guide bars.
Test and expel surplus.
Repack.
Examine and repair.
Run-out slow.
Reduced air pressure in
air cylinder.
Packings too tight.
Burrs and grit on slippers
and guide bars.
Test and recharge air
cylinder.
Repack.
Remove obstruction.
Run-out violent.
Control plunger worn.
Excessive air pressure in
air cylinder.
Exchange with new
plunger.
Test and expel surplus.
Failure to run-out.
Insufficient air pressure in
air cylinder.
Too much liquid in the
buffer.
Packings too tight.
Burrs on sliding bars and
guide bars.
Test and recharge air
cylinder. Examine posi-
tion of intensifier piston
and if necessary pump
in more liquid.
Fill buffer and draw oft
J-pint.
Repack.
Remove obstruction.
measured and the air cylinder tested for air pressure. If considered
necessary it should be re-charged. The buffer should be filled as
there is no other satisfactory way of ascertaining how much liquid
it contains ; a quarter of a pint of oil being drawn off after filling.
During action, air may escape from the air cylinder past the
liquid gland, thus reducing the pressure in the cylinder. This may
be remedied by seeing the intensifier is correctly charged and
tightening the liquid gland.
The recoil system should be carefully watched during action.
The recoil should be smooth and the length not more than normal,
the run-out should be steady and not terminate in a violent impact.
Should any irregularity be noticed, steps will at once be taken to
have it rectified.
The following are the more common faults :
(For any giyen fault the causes and remedies are set out in the
sequence, which should be followed to ascertain the particular cause
and remedy, so that the simplest and more readily removed causes
may be eliminated before proceeding to the more difficult).
Note. —Should the intensifier fail to hold liquid it should be
dismantled and packing renewed.


Pitting
Occasionally it is found that the buffers show signs of corrosion
and pitting. To counteract this, the gun should be pumped back
in its cradle for a foot or so at least once a month. Buffer oil
only will be used for this operation and the gun placed at full
elevation.
General Precautions
To ensure that buffers and air cylinders are kept in good order,
it is important that all adjustments or repairs to them should
be carried out by skilled artificers, care being taken to prevent
ingress of grit or foreign matter.
During severe weather buffers and air cylinders should be
protected as much as possible from the cold, in order to prevent the
liquid contents from becoming frozen.
Service buffer oil should remain unfrozen down to a temperature
of 20-degrees Fahrenheit.
Should the liquid become frozen, firing must not take place ;
steps will be taken to thaw the liquid.
To ascertain if the liquid is frozen, open the air plug and filling
valve of the buffer. Elevating and depressing, or pumping the
gun back in the cradle, tend to prevent the liquid freezing.
Before releasing the air pressure to strip the system down, the
gun and cradle must be made safe by supports and lashing.
The greatest care must be taken to see that the system is
correctly prepared for action or serious damage may result.
Liquids
The liquid officially approved for use in buffers and intensifies
is “ Oil, mineral, hydraulic buffer,” which is sometimes referred to
as “ Service buffer oil.”
In cold climates, hydraulic buffers will be filled with service
liquid composed of the following ingredients and in the proportion
shown :
Methylated spirit, industrial ... ... 7-gallons.
Distilled water 3|-gallons.
Oil, mineral, hydraulic buffer ... ... |-gallon.
Soda, ash ... ... ... ... 250-grains.
In an emergency, the liquid shown in the preceding paragraph
may be us»d in buffers anywhere as a substitute for “Oil, mineral,
hydraulic buffer.”
Under peace conditions no other liquid whatever is to he used as an
alternative.
On active service, should the supply of correct liquid fail, any
ordinary lubricating oil may be used and in extreme cases even water
may be employed. These alternative liquids may, quite possibly,
cause grave damage to the recoil system if they are retained in
287


the cylinder for any length of time ; consequently, every effort
should be made to obtain a supply of the correct liquid as soon as
possible, on receipt of which the emergency liquid should be removed.
Under no circumstances whatever should illuminating oils such as
-paraffin or kerosine, or explosive oils like petrol, etc., he used.
The liquid must be “ dry ” and clean ; consequently, before
using any liquid it should be decanted and strained, particles of
dust should be excluded from filling and air holes, liquid pumps
covered whilst pumping, and the whole operation performed with as
much freedom from dust as possible.
The oil in the buffer should be changed every 12 months, ine
cylinder will be emptied and cleaned out every three years, the
date of last cleaning will be clearly painted upon the buffer. Oil
emptied from the buffer must not he used again in the cylinder except
in very great emergency.
The receptacle employed for storing and transporting buffer
oil must be proof against the ingress of moisture, and care mus
be taken to see that the oil is kept thoroughly dry ; that is, quite
free from any admixture with water. The presence of water m the
oil has a serious effect on the buffer and recuperator, and every
precaution should be taken to avoid any trouble arising from
this cause. . . . . ~ , ~ ,
For this reason receptacles containing mineral oil should De
carefully handled to avoid denting or damaging them m transport
and they should not be opened until actually required for use,
care being taken not to damage the sealing cap, after which, it not
empty, they should be carefully resealed. They should not be left
out in the open.
Buffer and Air Cylinder with Intensifier
To charge the recoil system
The operation should be carried out in the following sequence
1. Charge the intensifier with liquid.
2. Charge the air cylinder with air.
3. Fill the buffer with liquid.
1 . To charge the intensifier and liquid gland
{a) Connect oil pump to valve on right side of air cylinder near
the rear. «
(&) See intensifier piston is to the rear.
Ic ) Remove air plug from top of air cylinder near the fron .
{d) Open valve and pump in oil until it appears at air hole then
replace air plug. , . . . ,
(e) Continue pumping until fully charged, i.e. when intensifier
piston rod is about 10-inches within the rear face of intensifier gland
and the pump handles are too stiff to work.
(/) Close valve and disconnect pump.


2. To charge the air cylinder
{a) Remove the protecting cap from one of the nozzles of the
plug at the rear end of air cylinder. Connect pump, open valve and
pump in about three quarts of oil to act as a lubricant. Disconnect
pump if not used for pumping air.
(6) The air cylinder may now be charged with air using a pump,
reservoir or pressure system. Connect air pipe to nozzle, a pressure
gauge being connected to the other union (or to pipe near union),
see valve is open and allow air to flow until the pressure gauge
records readings as under ;
Mounting —Mark V11 —350-lb. per sq. inch.
Mark VI and VIA —32O-lb. per sq. inch.
Mark V —2oo-lb. per sq. inch.
Note. —The supply of pressure should be cut off before taking
the final reading of the gauge.
(c) Cut off pressure and close valve.
(d) Disconnect air pipe and gauge ; replace protecting cap.
3. To fill the buffer
Note.—9|-gallons of oil are required.
(a) Lay the gun at about 5-degrees elevation.
fb) Connect oil pump to filling valve under buffer cylinder.
(c) Slacken air plug or open valve at the front of the piston rod
and air plug of the cylinder,
( d) Pump in oil until it appears at the air plug or valve in the
piston rod ; tighten air plug or close valve.
(e) Continue pumping until oil appears at the air plug on the
buffer cylinder, then close filling valve and disconnect pump.
(/) Open filling valve, draw off f-pint of oil and reclose filling
valve.
Note.—Leakage may be made good by charging the intensifier
as above, or by forcing the piston rod to the front by means of a
“Clamp, adjusting intensifier piston” so that oil may be drawn in
through the valve using a special funnel with union.
Loss of air from the air cylinder and oil from the buffer is
made good by recharging as above.
General Instructions
Buffer, Air Cylinder and Intensified
Note.—Operations which include the removal of glands,
packings, stuffing boxes, etc., must be carried out by skilled artificers
under conditions which will prevent the ingress of grit or foreign
matter.
19—(2)
289


(1) To empty the buffer
(a) Connect pipe to valve under buffer cylinder, the other end
of pipe to receptacle.
(, b ) Depress the gun.
(c) Slacken air plug on top of buffer.
(d) Open valve.
(e) Slacken air plug or valve in front of piston when approxi-
mately half empty. . . , ,
(/) When empty, close valve, disconnect pipe, tighten air plugs
(or valve).
(2) To empty the air cylinder
(a) Lay gun horizontal or at depression. .
{b) Support rear transom of cradle on skidding placed m the well
of the body. ' T TrT TrT , j t/tt
( c ) Lash elevating handwheel (with Marte VI, VIA and 111
mountings elevating gear should be in hand ).
[d) Remove cap from nozzle at rear end of air cylinder and open
valve slowly.
{e) Close valve and replace cap when empty.
(3) To empty the intensifier
(a) Empty air cylinder as in (2) with gun horizontal.
lb) Remove air plug from top of air cylinder.
(c) Open valve on right side of air cylinder and allow oil to run
into a receptacle. The small quantity remaining may be removed
by unscrewing the stuffing box and withdrawing the piston.
(d) Close valve and replace parts when empty.
(4) To tighten glands in recoil system
Tighten the gland concerned by means of the special spanner
Pr °NoTE.—When leakage from a gland is persistent and cannot
be remedied by the ordinary process of tightening, the only remedy
is to repack the gland.
(5) To replace packing in small gland of piston rod
(a) Connect oil pump to valve under buffer cylinder.
[b) Force buffer cylinder to the rear by pumping m oil until
small gland may be unscrewed ; close valve.
[c) Insert preventer skidding between guide bars and front of
cradle.
(d) Unscrew gland to the front.
{e) Remove old packing and replace with new, taking care that
it is well bedded. . .
(/) Replace gland taking particular care not to get the packing
too tight, using no other tool than the spanner provided.


(g) Remove preventer skidding.
(h) Open valve and allow oil to return to the pump.
(i) Close valve and disconnect pump ; see the buffer contains
the correct amount of oil.
(6) To replace L-leather in stuffing box on piston rod
[a] Lay gun horizontal.
{b) Support rear transom of cradle on skidding placed in the
well of the body.
(c) Lash elevating handwheel (with Marks VI, VIA and VII
mountings elevating gear should be in “ hand ”).
{d) Fix check tackles to gun.
[e) Remove cap from nozzle at rear end of air cylinder and open
valve to release air pressure.
(/) Force buffer cylinder to the rear by pumping in oil until
stuffing box can be removed, if necessary the gun may be hauled
back.
(g) Slacken air plugs (or valve) and empty buffer.
(h) Remove piston rod keep pin and nut.
(i) Unscrew gland and stuffing box.
(j) Push in the piston rod and remove inner nut.
(k) Remove stuffing box and gland.
(/) Replace old leather with new.
(m) Replace stuffing box and gland on piston rod.
(n) Replace inner nut, pull out piston and secure it to the
cradle transom with outer nut and keep pin.
(o) Screw home stuffing box and gland.
(P) Recharge air cylinder and buffer as previously described.
(q) Remove lashings, tackles and supporting skidding.
{7) To replace packings in liquid gland
(a) Secure the gun as in (2), (a) to (c).
(b) Release the air from the air chamber as in (6) (e).
(c) Empty the intensifier as in (3).
(d) Remove gland by unscrewing nuts from studs on the front
of the air cylinder.
(e) Remove metal rings and packings.
(/) Replace metal rings with new packings.
(g) Replace gland and nuts.
(h) Recharge intensifier as previously described.
(i) Recharge air cylinder as previously described.
(8) To replace packings in intensifier
(a) Secure the gun as in (6), (a) to (c).
(bj Release the air from the air chamber as in (6) (e).
( c ) Empty the intensifier as in (3).


[d] Unscrew gland and stuffing box when intensifier piston may
be withdrawn with the latter.
( e ) Remove old packings from the stuffing box and insert new.
(/) Replace piston with new leathers if necessary, stuffing box
and gland.
(g) Recharge intensifier as previously described.
[h) Recharge air cylinder as previously described.
Roller Ring
Traversing rollers and their axles should be frequently removed,
thoroughly cleaned and greased before replacing.
Roller racers should be scraped and cleaned and well greased at
the sides where the flanges of the rollers bite.
Cradle
The guideways on the cradle in which the sliding bars ride should
be kept clean, free from burrs and well lubricated.
Trunnion ball bearings should be lubricated with mineral jelly.
The exposed portion of the buffer cylinder and piston rod should
be periodically cleaned and lightly coated with mineral jelly.
Trunnion Ball Bearings
To overhaul trunnion hall hearings
{a) Run the adjusting screw fully down.
\b) Remove the spring dust excluders.
(c) Take off outer bearing ring and band, being careful to catch
the balls.
{d) Unscrew the retaining nut with outer bevelled bearing ring.
[e) Remove inner bevelled bearing ring.
After overhaul the ball bearings are replaced in the reverse
order, taking care that the inner bevelled bearing ring rests against
the shoulder on the trunnion and the retaining nut with outer
bevelled bearing ring is screwed squarely in position. The balls
are replaced by tilting the band outwards. The springs are then
adjusted.
To adjust the spring pressure of the trunnion hall hearings
Turn the adjusting screw in the required direction by means of
the spanner provided, at the same time operating the hand elevating
gear, rocking the cradle about its trunnions, until the gear works
easily.
Both bearings should be adjusted simultaneously.
Care should be taken, when adjusting the spring pressure, that
the trunnions are not raised, the intention being that the weight on
the trunnion bearing should be merely relieved and the elevating
effort thereby eased.


Elevating and Traversing Gears
The elevating and traversing gears should be kept free from
grit and well lubricated j all arcs, pinions, bevel and worm gears,
trunnion bearings, etc., must all have the old lubricant removed
periodically and be thoroughly cleaned before applying fresh
lubricant.
While lubricating, the gears should be well worked through their
full range to distribute the lubricant and test the gears.
Friction rings should on assembly be clean, smooth, and very
slightly oiled to prevent seizing.
Friction rings of elevating gear should be tightened by means
of adjusting nuts, so as to allow a slight slip in the gear on firing.
Firing Circuits
Electric Firing Gear, Mark I
(a) Care of firing circuits.
1. Missfires may occur from the following causes as well as from
weak cells ;
i. Bad contacts and loose terminals.
ii. Breaks in the circuit.
hi. Oil or dirt between the contacts.
iv. Short circuits.
v. Defective tubes.
vi. 111-fitting components of sliding contact, lock, etc.
2. To deal with the above.
i. All contacts should be tested frequently to see that they
are tight, that the springs in spring contacts are in
good order and that the terminals do not work loose
during firing.
ii. Pistol grips must be treated with care to avoid damage.
Spare cables should be available to replace faulty ones.
iii. Od may have dried on contacts thus introducing resistance
in the circuit, this should be removed.
iv. Short circuits may result from crushed or defective
insulation, which may be caused by screwing the
contacts too tight. They may be discovered by
testing each lead separately.
v. Defective tubes are not common, but a bridge may be
broken or have so low a resistance that the current will
not raise the temperature to fusing-point. Bridges
are often broken by rough usage in handling, and
special attention should be paid to this point.
3. The continuity of circuits in tubes should be tested with the
pistol grip. It must not be overlooked that a short circuit will also
work the indicator.
293


4 It is advisable to test all tubes for resistance as well as for
continuity. This is best done by the Wheatstone bridge method
[see Notes on Electricity).
(6) Overhauling of firing circuits.
1. Remove the battery box, cable connection to battery box,
cables, connector pistol grip, cradle contact and gun contact (sliding
contact). Disconnect all connections inside the battery box and
remove the cells, taking out the two centre cells first. Remove
the cork plugs, this assists the cells to recover. The battery
box should be dried and the copper strip thoroughly cleaned and
examined to ascertain that there is no break between it and the
connection to the box itself. It should then be given a slight film
of paraffin oil, this prevents the formation of verdigris. The
cable positive' pole should be tested for continuity and firmly
secured to the positive pole of the battery and terminal on junction
connection on the outside of the box.
2. Scrape the ends of the corks and cane centres, and see that
the inner end of the cane is flush with the bottom of cork. See
that the cells are filled to within l|-inches of the top. Clean the
terminals with bath-brick, and connecting wires with emery cloth,
and give a slight film of paraffin. Put the short pieces of copper
wire on the positive poles only, so that they will be ready to connect
up when the cells are replaced in the battery box. They must be
put under both terminals so that the top one locks the lower one.
Test each cell separately. Each cell should read 10 amperes. Any
cell reading less than 4 amperes will be discarded. Replace cells
in battery box, connect up in series and replace corks. Take
care that the copper strip does not rest on the corks, otherwise the
salammoniac solution will soon eat through it. Take the reading
at the battery box for the four cells from the positive and negative
terminals on the outside of the box —then test to see that there is
no short circuit between the battery box and the insulated junction
connection.
3. Thoroughly clean the cable connection to battery box, con-
nector pistol grip, cradle contact and gun contact (sliding contact).
Ensure that the terminals screw down tightly on the cables and that
this is not prevented by fouling of the lower portion of the threads
on the terminal pillars. See that the insulating bushes are complete.
Test each in circuit with a volt-ammeter and a cell, both for con-
tinuity and also to see if there is a short circuit. Test each cable for
continuity and for short circuit. This should be done with the cable
straight and also bent, as it is very often the case that although the
cable appears correct on test when straight, yet a make-and-break in
continuity or a short circuit appears when it is replaced on the
mounting and bent.


Whenever H, D, or K cables are disconnected from the connector
pistol grip they should also be disconnected from cable connection
to battery box, otherwise they may touch some part of the mounting
and short circuit the battery.
Now fit each cable to the contact and see that there is a good
metallic contact.
4. Overhaul and test the lock for protrusion and short circuit.
5. Replace connections and cables, see that the bracket which
carries the gun contact is properly screwed home to the gun,
otherwise a broken cable may be the result.
6. Clean the pistol grip contact pieces and place it in position,
clamping it with the clamping screw in the connector.
(c) Testing of firing circuits.
1. Close the breech, press the lever indicator and there should
be no deflection ; if a deflection is given, there is a short circuit,
which should be remedied. (A short circuit in H, D, or K cables
will not be indicated.)
2. Open the breech, remove the lock from the slide box, and
test the current at the point of the needle of the lock in the following
manner :
Connect the positive terminal of the volt-ammeter to the point
of the needle of the lock, and the negative terminal to the breech
screw, using very short cables. Press the “ amperes ” button. Press
the lever indicator, when the indicator should appear. Still pressing
the lever indicator and with the volt-ammeter connected as above,
pull the trigger, when the indicator should disappear.
Note, —The reading on the volt-ammeter should be not less
than 4 amperes.
3. During wet weather firing circuits should be tested frequently
in order to detect short circuits.
Electric Firing Gear, Mark II
Points to be observed in connection with the dynamo firing gear
(a) The action of the dynamo depends to some extent on the
residual magnetism of the magnets. At preparation for action,
the armature should be spun by going through the motion of firing
half a dozen times to bring the residual magnetism to a maximum.
(b) If the firing lever is not pulled with sufficient firmness a
missfire may result, hence—
i. The lever must be pulled in a firm and smart manner to
reach stop; contact is obtained near the end of the stroke.
ii. If a missfire occurs a further attempt to fire should be
made with the dynamo before deciding it is a missfire.


(c) The firing grip holder should make good electrical contact
with the shield.
{d) The contact stud of the holder should be clean.
[e] The firing grip must be well down and the catch fully
engaged in the notch in the holder to secure good contact between
the spring contact and stud.
(/) The adjustable stop of the firing grip should be set as
follows :
i. Slack right back.
ii. Pull firing lever to its maximum throw. (Note. —This is
limited by a stop.)
iii. Advance the adjusting screw so as to just take the thrust
of the handle off the stop of the dynamo.
iv. Screw up lock nut tightly.
v. Carry out test for the correct functioning of the dynamo
spring contact, vide “Tests for firing circuit before
action ’ ’ (3) ( d ).
Possible causes of failures
(a) Firing grip not home on holder.
(i h) Earth terminal of firing grip not tight.
(c) Lock nuts on dynamo terminals not tight, allowing the
terminal to retire inside the firing grip and thereby allowing the
dynamo contact to make too early against the flange.
(d) The terminal arrangement on the holder may give poor
electrical contact if the nut has become slack. To test this, remove
dynamo, short the contact stud to earth and measure the resistance.
If this is appreciable the terminals should be stripped down, the
bolt withdrawn, cleaned and reassembled. By means of the securing
nut draw the shoulder of the bolt up tight to the shoulder in the
plug.
The commutator may oxidise slightly through lack of use,
giving poor brush contact and resulting in a high terminal resistance.
This can be rectified by pulling the firing lever repeatedly until
the resistance falls between 11 and 15-ohms. Dynamos not in
regular use should be worked monthly.
Tests for firing circuit before action
(1) To test the testing instrument.
{a) Disconnect the external cable from the insulated “ terminal,
case.”
(b) Set the dial to 12-ohms.
(c) Press the push plunger —needle should show a full scale
deflection in the direction of “ Break.”
(i d ) Short the “ terminal, case ” to the “ case body.” Press
the plunger —needle should show about 8-divisions deflection in the


direction of “ Short.” Balance needle —dial should read zero
resistance.
(e) If the accuracy of the dial indications is suspected, it can be
checked by measuring known resistances, e.g. P.O. resistance box.
(2) To test the holder connections.
[а] Press the plunger, needle should show full scale deflection
in direction of “ Break.”
(h) Short circuit the “ plug ” to the “ plate ” of the holder.
Press the plunger and balance the needle—if the resistance is
appreciable check assembly of terminals of holder. Shake the cable,
if connections are good the balance will not be disturbed.
(c) Restore connections to normal.
(3) To test the dynamo.
{a) Place dynamo correctly in position on the holder, making
sure that the catch engages the recess on the holder. Go through
the motion of firing six times to bed the brushes.
(б) Pull firing lever to the end of its stroke and wait until
armature has ceased to revolve.
(c) By means of the safety catch, lock the lever in the position
marked “Test,” press the plunger and balance the needle. The
resistance of the circuit should lie between 11-ohms and 15-ohms.
(d) At the conclusion of (c) release the firing lever gradually,
the needle should show a full scale deflection in the direction of
“ Break ” after about £-inch travel of the end of the firing lever.
This tests the internal dynamo contact which should only make
contact at the end of the firing stroke.
(4) To test the firing circuit.
(a) Short circuit the firing pin to the breech.
( b ) Press the plunger and balance the needle of the galvano-
meter. The resistance indicated should be very low (approximately
0* 1-ohm).
(c) Repeat this test at full elevation and shake the cables between
each of the connections with the plunger pressed. The needle
should remain quite steady ; if not, it shows an intermittent fault.
(d) If a fault is detected it may be located by earthing successively
at :
i. The terminal of the lock.
ii. The sliding contact.
(e) Restore connections to normal.
(5) To measure the resistance of a tube.
(a) Insert the tube and close the breech.
( b ) Press the plunger and balance the needle, the resistance
should be approximately between 1 and T2-ohms, i.e. tube resistance
0-9 to IT-ohms plus the resistance of the firing circuit as determined
at (4) ( b).
(c) Remove the tube.


(6) Confirm the results of the tests by firing a tube at maxim um
elevation.
During action the dial should be set at IT-ohms. If the tube
missfires after the second stroke of the firing lever press the
plunger.
If the needle deflects to the left there is a short circuit and the
firing circuit requires examination in detail as in (4) {d).
If the needle deflects to the right there is a break in the circuit
and missfire drill should commence. At a second failure to fire,
test the firing circuit in detail as in (4) {d).
If the needle is undeflected, the firing circuit is correct. The
holder should be tested as at (2) ( b) and (c).
The spare dynamo should be fitted and the faulty dynamo tested
as in (3).
The dynamo should fire a tube through 40-ohms resistance.
If the dynamo itself is proved to be defective, repair should be
carried out by the R.A.O.C.
Sighting
Sights are to be handled with great care. All parts are to be
kept clean and working parts well lubricated with clean oil, and
(with the exception of the cam groove and roller) lightly smeared
with anti-corrosive grease when not in use. Bath-brick, emery,
and other abrasive substance must not on any account be used for
cleaning.
The parts of mountings to which sights are attached must be
absolutely clean and free from burrs.
The sight gear should not be taken apart unnecessarily, and
adjustment should not be made by scraping or filing except on
special authority.
If a sight is taken to pieces for any reason, it must be carefully
tested on replacement and, if necessary, adjusted.
The exterior surfaces of telescopes are to be cleaned with a soft
rag and paraffin only. The exterior surfaces of lenses should be
cleaned with a piece of linen cloth, which must be kept perfectly
clean and dry, and used for this purpose only.
The bearing surfaces of telescopes must be very carefully
protected. Any burrs or dents on these surfaces throw the telescope
out of adjustment.
Telescopes must not be taken to pieces, nor the lenses removed,
nor adjustment for collimation attempted, except by a competent
person. When not in use telescopes should be closed up, caps
replaced, and they should be kept in their cases. They must be
kept in as dry a place as possible.
With “ Automatic,” “ Direction ” and “ Rocking Bar” sights,
when not in actual use, the telescope and sight bar with other
fittings attached should be removed and placed in a dry store. When


removed from the mounting the sight bar will be placed in a wood
holder.
For testing the sights, changing or setting cams, or setting
yard scale drums, and in any case where it is necessary to check the
angle of sight by a clinometer, a “ Bar, testing sight ” will be placed
in the telescope holder and used as a clinometer plane. When not
in use the “ Bar, testing sight ” will be kept in a wood holder.
Automatic sight
The efficiency of the sight depends on the accuracy of the cam.
Special care must be taken to ensure that it receives no damage.
It must on no account be dropped, or in any way subjected to rough
usage. It must be kept clean (not polished), free from dust and
grit, by wiping with a clean rag moistened with a few drops of oil.
When not in use it will be kept in the wood cam holder.
When changing a cam it is essential that the correct tide lever
for the cam is taken into use.
After a cam has been changed the sight should be tested and, if
necessary, adjusted.
Instructions for changing cams
Marks V, VI and VIA mountings
1. Place the gun at about 1-degree elevation.
2. To remove the spring case, remove the pin and collar from
the studs carrying the spring case and remove the spring case from
studs.
3. Unscrew the nut on the threaded end of the “ Pivot, lever,
cam roller,” until its outer face is flush with the threaded end of the
pivot, then slide the lever out on its pivot as far as it will come.
4. Remove the keep pin and nut from the cam stud and the
keep pin from the “ Stud, lever, adjusting, cam.” Remove the
thumb nut and clip from the “ Lever, adjusting cam.”
5. Remove the cam out towards the right, facilitating its
removal by moving the adjusting lever up and down.
6. To mount the required cam with its adjusting lever the
order of the instructions detailed above is reversed. Care must be
taken that the cam roller and driving edge of the cam are clean.
7. Test and adjust the sight if necessary.
Mark VII mounting
1. Place the gun about 1-degree elevation.
2. Disconnect and remove the spring case from the cradle and
cam roller lever respectively.


Automatic sight
Rocking bar sight
with telescope
horizontal
Direction sight
Axis of
Axis of
Axis of
Axis of
Axis of
Axis of
Mark of
telescope
telescope
telescope
telescope
telescope
telescope
mount-
above
right or
above
right or
above
right or
ing
gun
left of gun
gun
left of gun
gun
left of gun
axis
axis
axis
axis
axis
axis
inches
inches
inches
inches
inches
inches
V and
VI
24-65
46-6 right
27-05
46-9 left
VIA
24-65
46-6 right
28-9
45-3 left
—
—
VII
22-5
48-7 left
—
22-5
43-4 right
3. Remove the cam roller lever securing bolt from the front of
the hinge flap supporting bracket and dismantle the latter by with-
drawing it to the rear.
4. Remove the nut which secures the cam roller lever to the
sight carrier and take off the lever to the left.
5. Remove the keep pin, nuts and collars securing cam to
eccentric stud, also the thumb nut and clip from the cam adjusting
lever.
6. Remove the cam, with tidal arc, to the left, facilitating its
removal by moving the adjusting lever up and down. Remove the
adjusting lever.
7. Proceed as in 6 and 7 for Marks V, VI and VIA mountings.
Sight Tests
All sights and clinometers should be kept in perfect condition
and adjustment.
When testing and adjusting the sights the gun should be balanced
as if loaded and the last motion of the elevating gear must be one of
depression.
All adjustments, except those to be carried out by detachments
as laid down in the gun drill, must be performed by a qualified
person.
The following table shows the position of the axis of the telescope
with reference to the axis of the gun :
Test I. —To test and adjust the clinometer for index error.
{a) Carefully clean the clinometer and the clinometer plane.
(6) Turn the drum to zero.
(c) Place the clinometer on the plane drum towards the rear,
mark the position on the plane, and elevate or depress the gun until
the bubble is in the centre of its run.
300


{d) Turn the clinometer end for end, taking care to place it
exactly on the same part of the plane as before.
(e) Should the bubble not be central the instrument is out of
adjustment.
(/) Turn the drum until the bubble is again in the centre of its
run; one half the reading on the drum is the “ index error.” This
is a new zero point on the scale.
(g) If the new zero is on the black markings add the index error
when setting the clinometer to give any required angle. Subtract
the index error when taking a reading with the clinometer.
[h) If the new zero is on the red markings, subtract the index
error when setting the clinometer to give any required angle. Add
the index error when taking a reading with the clinometer.
To adjust the clinometer and eliminate index error, set the
drum to the index error and bring the bubble to the centre of its
run by elevating or depressing the gun ; place the drum at zero and
bring the bubble central again by manipulating the capstan-headed
nuts.
1 urn the clinometer end for end and the bubble should remain
central, if not, proceed as before until there is no change.
This adjustment must not be undertaken by any but a qualified
person.
Clinometers should be sent periodically to the R.A.O.C. in
order that wear may be ascertained and readings checked. A
calibration table is then issued to show the small errors that the
clinometer will give at the various readings.
Note. —The angular deviation between the axis of the bore at
the muzzle and the clinometer plane should be allowed for when
laying a gun by clinometer. This information is recorded in the
" Memorandum of Examination ” of the gun as “ Up ” or “ Down ”
according to whether the muzzle is inclined up or down in relation
to the clinometer plane.
Test 2. —Tests for sighting telescopes.
{a) Telescopes of recent manufacture are focussed for individual
eyesight by revolving the eyepiece until the pointer is clearly
defined. Since with these telescopes changes in focafidistance due to
change of range are inappreciable, no means of focussing the object
glass are provided. The pointer is placed at the focal distance of
the object glass, and both it and the distant view should become
clear at the same time. An inverted image of the distant view is
formed at the focal distance of the object glass.
(b) To test if the pointer is at the proper distance from the
object glass, focus it with the eyepiece, and then lay so that a very
small bright space is left between the tip of the pointer and some
distant object; now move the eye behind the eyepiece, and note if
the bright space vanishes or changes size. If it does either, the


adjustment of the pointer is incorrect. An inaccuracy, called
parallax, will then be caused by changing the position of the eye,
and, since both pointer and distant view can no longer be focussed
together, the eye will be strained and will tire rapidly. Telescopes
found wrong in this respect should be sent for adjustment to a
qualified person.
(c) Telescopes are issued and should as a rule remain correctly
collimated. To test for collimation, the telescope is placed in its
holders, focussed and then directed on a well-defined object not less
than 400-yards distant. When the telescope is turned round in its
brackets, the tip of the pointer should not move off the point
layed on. In carrying out this test care should be taken that
movements of the gun are not mistaken for movements of the pointer.
Telescopes found incorrect for collimation must be adjusted by a
qualified person.
Test 3. —Test for backlash.
{a) The sight should occasionally be tested by bringing it to a
certain angle, first by a wide sweep of depression, and then by a
wide sweep of elevation, and noting the difference between the
readings of the clinometer on the gun on each occasion. This
should be done at angles corresponding to three or more widely
different ranges.
( b) When a considerable discrepancy is found between readings,
the sight requires overhauling.
Test 4. —Test and adjustment of rocking bar sights.
{a) Lay the gun horizontal by means of a clinometer, place
the bar, testing sights, in the Y brackets, bringing the marks on
it and on the bracket to coincide so as to obtain correct cross
level; bring the rocking bar to angles of depression corresponding
to the tangent elevations for various ranges corrected for the
height of the telescope above the axis of the gun, and for refraction,
by working the hand wheel, and see if these ranges correspond with
those on the sight drum. If they do not correspond, slacken the
screws on the outer circumference of the range drum, and turn the
scale until the correct range is read, afterwards tightening the
securing screws.
(b) The sight may be datumed at M.S.L. on a datum post by
giving the requisite Q.E. to the gun by clinometer, and turning
the range drum of the sight till the telescope pointer is on the
water line of the datum. The range drum should then read the
true range to the datum. If it does not, adjust as in para. 1, above.
This is the most satisfactory adjustment in the case of bent telescope
brackets.
(c) To test for deflection, lay the gun on a distant mark,
obtaining a line of sight through the axial vent and the intersec


tion of two fine cords stretched on the axis lines on the muzzle.
The sight, with elevation and deflection set at true zero, should
be on the same mark. If it is not, bring the sight on to the mark
with the deflection gear and adjust the reader of the deflection
scale to zero.
General instructions for testing and adjusting auto-sights.
1. The auto-sights of all guns will be tested annually by the
O.M.E. The tests will be such as are prescribed for the original
setting up of the sight, and, if necessary, the sight and cam will be
re-set.
A test will be made of all cams, whether for full or reduced
charges, or for aiming rifles.
2. Verticality of pivot and truth of correctional gear will be
tested and, if necessary, adjusted, at the same time by the same
officer.
A certificate from this officer that he has set up the sight,
and that it is in correct adjustment, will be furnished to the
0.C., R.A. An entry showing date, and by whom tested, will be
made on a form provided for the purpose.
These tests should be carried out before the first series in the
annual practice is fired from the gun.
3. If the sights cannot be set up true for all ranges up to the
extreme limit of range, and the cam cannot conveniently be returned
to be trued at the Royal Arsenal, the O.M.E. will furnish a table
showing the errors at each angle on the Woolwich table of angles.
This table will be filed with the Woolwich table of angles.
4. After testing, the eccentrics on the carrier will be painted over
and will on no account be re-adjusted, except by an O.M.E. or
artificer detailed by the O.M.E.
With the above tests and adjustments, the responsibility of
the O.M.E. with regard to the sights ceases, except as regards sights
which may again require to be set up during the year.
5. Officers in charge of guns are responsible for the care and
preservation of the sights and for such tests and adjustments as
can be carried out without the assistance of a skilled artificer.
All officers should be able to carry out such tests and such
adjustments as do not require the assistance of artificers.
6. Clinometers, large, should be used for adjusting auto-sights.
It is very important that these should be in perfect adjustment
and be provided with calibration sheets. When placing the bar,
testing sights, in the telescope brackets, the marks on it and on the
brackets should coincide, thus ensuring correct cross-level.
7. The gun must be balanced as if loaded, and must always
be brought into position by a large sweep of depression (except in


the case of those guns with which the last motion should be one of
elevation) ' the latter rule must also be observed when firing.
In the case of a mounting with sighting steps, it must be balanced
by keeping men in the positions of the layer and setter during t e
test.
8. When setting the clicker or error-of-day drum, both for testing
and putting on corrections, the last movement given should be one
of “add.”
When setting the tide-lever the last movement should be m
the direction of “ fall.”
9. Cams will be changed as seldom as possible. This operation
may be performed under the supervision of the section commander.
Guns should, however, usually be fitted with the full charge earn,
and in any case a full charge cam must be fitted and teste
annually.
Whenever a change is made from one cam to another, and always
in preparing for action, the sights will be tested by the layers, and
if out of adjustment reported to the No. 1 for the information of
the section commander.
Unnecessary adjustments of eccentrics should be carelu y
avoided.
Test 5. —Test for verticality of pivot with auto-sights.
{a) With guns the sights of which cannot be corrected for want of
level independently of the rest of the mounting :
Place clinometer on gun and bring bubble central.
Traverse through 180-degrees, halting every 30-degrees. The
bubble should return to the same position each time the gun is
halted. The bearing of maximum tilt and the amount the pivot is
out of the vertical can be determined by this test.
[h) Means are provided with certain guns for correcting the
sight independently of the rest of the mounting. With guns thus
fitted, the bubble of the spirit level on the cam should come to the
same spot, no matter in what position the gun be halted.
An alternative test is to place a clinometer on a bar, testing
sights in the telescope brackets and traverse through 180-degrees,
halting every 30-degrees. The gun should be brought horizontal
each time, and the angle of depression of the sight should then
always be the same. If rapidity be necessary, and the pivot only
slightly out of truth, this test may be modified by giving the gun
extreme elevation ; small movements of the gun, due to want of
level, would have then an inappreciable effect on the sight, and the
elevation of the gun need not be attended to during the test.
3. Adjustments for verticality of pivot require the services of an
artificer.


Test 6.—Mechanical test with auto-sights {Marks V, VI, and VIA
mountings ).
Note. This test should only he employed when the Datum Test 8
cannot he carried out.
(a) If it is necessary to use auto-sights before the mounting
can be restored to level, this test should be carried out in the middle
of the arc of fire.
( b) Set the error-of-day drum and deflection scale at zero and
tide-lever at M.S.L., and clamp the bar, testing sights, in the
telescope brackets, hrom the Woolwich table of angles, supplied
with each auto-sight, select a suitable range ; bring the gun to
the corresponding Q.E.f ; the angle of depression of the sight
should now be the one corresponding to this range. For guns used
at night the range selected should be as near the “ test range ” as
possible.
(c) The test range for guns used by day is the effective limit of
the auto-sight for a destroyer target. For guns used by night
the test range is the range of the searchlights under normal atmos-
pheric conditions, if this is less than the effective limit of the auto-
greater, the test range will be taken as the effective
limit of the auto-sight for a destroyer target. The test range must
not be beyond the effective limit of the auto-sight.
(d) If the depression angle is not correct, it must be made so
by turning the error of day drum, after which the movable skin is
adjusted to read zero.
{e) If time is available, this test may be repeated for every
range in the Woolwich table of angles ; if, after adjusting the sight
for one of these ranges, the remaining readings are incorrect the
eccentrics on the carrier require adjustment; for this, the services
of an artificer are necessary.
Instructions for resetting up auto-sights to allow for loss of muzzle
velocity
(a) When M.V. corrector eccentric bolts are fitted to the auto-
sight, the cam should be set by the Woolwich table of angles, and
the M.V. Corrector should always be set to the present M V of the
gun.
{b) When M.V. corrector eccentric bolts are not fitted, the cam
will be set up originally by the Woolwich table of angles (if this
suits the present M.V. of the gun) or by a corrected table of angles
(if the Woolwich table does not suit) ; the cam will subsequently
be reset up by a new corrected table of angles after each drop of
50 f-s. in M.V. from that used in the last setting up or earlier if
f The corrected Woolwich tables will be used in the circumstances
mentioned in para (6.) above.
20—(2)


considered necessary. The corrected Table of Angles will be issued
by the LG. of the Command.
[c) When the drop in M.V. has not yet reached 50 f.s. below
that used in the last setting up, the difference should be allowed
for at the test range by means of the adjustable skin of the “ error-of-
day ” drum.
This is carried out as follows ; —Loosen the screws securing the
bar stop on the graduated skin and turn the milled head of the drum
until the sight is set at the correct angle of depression. Re-set the
skin to zero and tighten the screws.
[d) Although it is difficult to re-set a sight so that it is accurate
at all ranges every endeavour should be made to re-set the sight
accurately at the test range and as far as possible on each side of
the test range.
[e) After' setting or re-setting the auto-sight for the full charge
no alterations should be made in the setting or re-setting for the
reduced charges or sub-calibre. For guns using reduced charges
or sub-calibre for peace practices, any necessary alterations to the
auto-sight will be carried out by using the eccentric in the cam
only. In such cases where alterations have been found necessary
the final readings showing angular errors in the auto-sight will be
tabulated.
The final results of the setting and re-setting of all auto-sights
for all cams will be forwarded to the C.0.M.E., subsequently they
will be forwarded by the C.O.M.E. to the command LG. for the
information of the battery commander.
Test 7. — Test of zero of deflection scale of auto-sights.
{a) In the case of guns fitted with rocking bar sights and auto-
sights, the former is tested for line as described in Test 4, and the
latter is then checked against it by laying with the auto-sight on a
distinct mark on the water. If the deflection scales of the two sights
do not then read alike, that of the auto-sight must be made to agree
with that of the rocking bar sight.
(, h) When guns have auto-sights only, the sight must be tested
with the bore of the gun, but the mark must be near enough to
allow both gun and sight to be laid on it for line, and to eliminate
most of the drift correction which is automatically applied on the
sight.
TestS.—To datum the auto-sight [Marks V, VI, and VIA, mountings).
[a) It is desirable to have a false datum mark to which the
angle of depression is the same as that of the test range at M.S.L.
A false datum mark should be erected where possible and used
in preference [see para. (/), page 307) to a waterline datum when
datuming auto-sights, as the operation can then be carried out for


M.S.L. at all states of tide ; also inaccuracies due to waves are
eliminated.
Such a mark should not be less than 400-yards from the gun,
to avoid parallax in the telescope.
Failing this, a natural mark should be selected at a range as
near the test range as possible.
( h) To datum auto-sights using a false datum. —From the datum
slide rule or table of Q.Es. (Army Form B 2508) ascertain the Q.E.
necessary for calibration M.V., allowing for wear of gun since
calibration, charge temperature, and for raising M.P.I.
All breech fittings should be on, shell and cartridge in the
bore, thus balancing the gun exactly as for firing. Set the tide
lever at M.S.L. ; test the clinometer for index error, and then lay
the gun at the required Q.E., taking care that the last motion is one
of depression.
If the tip of the pointer is not now on the datum mark, loosen
the screws securing the bar stop on the graduated skin and turn the
milled head of the drum until the pointer is on, care being taken
that the last motion is one of “ add.” Re-set the skin to zero and
tighten the screws.
(c) After adjusting the sight, the layer must lay the gun at least
three times by the auto-sight. If the bubble of the clinometer,
set to the required Q.E., comes central each time, the sight is
satisfactorily datumed.
If the bubble does not come central each time, adjust on the
error-of-day drum, and again try the three lays.
Not till three consecutive lays are correct can the sight be said
to be properly datumed.
(■ d ) In datuming, errors of collimation are automatically
corrected. Once the sight has been datumed, the telescope must
on no account be shifted in the “ Y ” brackets ; if it is moved at all
a considerable error may be introduced, due to worn “ Y ” brackets,
worn telescope bearings, or both.
(e) To datum auto-sights using a water-line datum. —The pro-
cedure in datuming an auto-sight using a water-line datum is the
same as described in para. 2, above, for a false datum, except that—
i. The tide lever must be set at the actual height of tide.
ii. The Q.E. as calculated will be corrected for rise or fall of
tide.
(/) To determine the position for the false datum mark. —Calculate
the depression angle for the test range {see Test 6), taking into
consideration the height of the axis of the telescope above the
trunnions, and the necessary correction for curvature and refraction.
See that the pivot of the mounting is vertical and that the telescope
is in correct adjustment for collimation and parallax. Set the sight
to the above depression angle, traverse on to some object, and
307


paint a mark thereon in line with the pointer of the telescope. If
no natural object is available a post should be erected.
A convenient mark may be used, should one exist approximately
in line with the pointer of the telescope, but in this case the range
corresponding to the depression angle to this mark must be calculated
{see Coast Artillery Training, Vol. I).
In selecting a position for a false datum care should be taken that
there is no ground, such as sand, etc., between the gun and the
mark, which might cause variations in refraction.
Test 9. — Tests, etc., for verticality of pivot with elevation indicator.
{a) Verticality of pivot should be tested as in Test 5.
(. h) Since the elevation indicator indicates the elevation of the
gun relatively to the mounting, it follows that any inclination of the
latter will cause an equal angular error in quadrant elevation. The
error will be or -f according as to whether the tilt of the mounting
is to the front or rear.
(c) The proper correction can be applied at any one bearing as
follows :—Lay the gun by clinometer at the Q.E. for a selected
range, and adjust the elevation indicator to read the proper range.
This adjustment should be made at the bearing where there is no
tilt, or at what is considered the most important bearing in the arc of
fire as decided locally, and the elevation indicator should always be
tested at the same bearing.
(d) For further consideration of the effect of tilt and corrections
required, see Coast Artillery Training, Vol. I.
Test 10. — Instructions for the initial setting and subsequent testing of
9-2-in. elevation indicator with M.V. and charge temperature
scales on Mark V, VI, and VIA mountings.
{a) Initial setting. —Clamp the reader bracket in the “ no throw ”
position. Lay the gun horizontal and set the centre of the keyway
vertically below the centre of the spindle.
Note. —The initial setting is performed by the battery artificer.
( h ) To test the elevation indicator. —Set the M.V. strip to read
the latest calibration M.V. and the charge temperature strip to a
charge temperature.
Lay the gun at the corresponding Q.E. for the above M.V. and
charge temperature for any suitable range, and the elevation
indicator should read that range. If it does not, there must be
an error in initial setting and a readjustment by the battery artificer
is necessary.
Note. —With three-quarter charges a table of errors is issued
with the elevation indicator. When testing these elevation indicators
the range selected should, when the gun has been laid at the
corresponding Q.E., read the selected range plus or minus the error
for that particular range.


General
When mounting a gun care must be taken that all bearing
surfaces are perfectly clean and lubricated.
Every precaution must be taken to avoid damage to parts by
rough usage. A hammer should never be used unless with a piece
of wood or soft metal to transmit the blow.
All gears should be tested once a week to ensure they are in
working condition.
All gears should be overhauled where backlash is excessive,
worn parts being renewed as required. Where bearings are bushed,
the renewing of worn bushes will usually remove any slackness due
to wear.
All nuts and screws should be properly tightened up, split pins
inserted and the various gears correctly adjusted.
Split pins, after insertion, should be well splayed. Lost or
damaged pins should be renewed at once.
Care must be taken that all working parts of the various
mechanisms are kept free from dirt and rust. They must be
thoroughly cleaned and oiled periodically.
All lubricators, nipples and lubricating holes must be kept clean
and oil passages clear.
When cleaning bright or working parts, under no circumstances
must coarse grinding materials, such as sand, emery, bath-brick,
files, etc., which wear the surfaces and cause looseness to fitted parts,
be used. Oil only should be used.
Dirt or congealed oil must not be allowed to accumulate in the
ratchet teeth where pawls engage.
The teeth of all pinions and wheels should be well smeared
with mineral jelly which has been thinned with lubricating oil, to
prevent rust.
All hydraulic pipe joints should be maintained in a perfectly
tight condition. They should be examined periodically for leakage.
Wire ropes must be kept lubricated, treated with consideration
and care, and kinks avoided. They should be examined periodically
for undue wear and broken strands. Care must be taken to see the
ends are properly secured.
Pulley wheels should be examined periodically to see that they
are working freely.
Care must be exercised in the manipulation of all valves, which
should be operated with the officially approved tools without any
additional leverage.
Spanners and implements provided should only be used for the
purpose intended.
Defects and damage should be immediately reported.
Leathers for glands, pistons or other joints, when kept in store,
should be free from dust and periodically smeared with dubbing to
keep them soft and flexible.


Where mountings are not frequently used, all detachable fittings
and movable parts may be removed and placed in store, where the
bright parts liable to rust will be well oiled to preserve them. These
parts should be thoroughly cleaned and placed in position at least
once in three months to ensure that they are in working order.
Guns when not in use should be slightly depressed.
INSTRUCTIONS SPECIAL TO MARK V MOUNTING
In addition to the instructions for care and preservation already
laid down in this chapter, the following should be observed with the
Mark V Mounting.
The initial pressure required in the air cylinder is 200-lb. per
square inch.,
The following points should be attended to during preparation for
action :
Hydraulic Loading System
See the system is charged, not leaking at the glands, that all
air has been expelled and the hoists function.
To fill the system —
The system requires about 70-gallons of “ Fluids, Jack.”
{a) See tank is full of liquid.
(■ h ) Depress the gun.
[c) Slacken all air screws ; also the gland covers and gland of
the accumulator cylinders. The position of each screw is shown in
the table on page 311.
[d) Place control levers to “ raise.”
[e) Open valves C, D, and E. Valve Bto be closed.
(/) Work the pump until liquid shows at the glands and air
screws of the accumulator rams, tighten glands and screws
successively.
(g) Continue pumping until liquid runs out at the air screws of
the hoist, tighten screws, and, as soon as the hoists commence to
rise, put the control levers to centre or neutral position.
(h) Tighten the air screws of the compressors and elbow pipe
successively as liquid appears.
(i) Close stop valve D, refill the tank, and continue pumping
until the accumulator springs are fully compressed.
Notes
In order that the system may be properly filled with liquid—
the exact quantity varies with the distance between the accumulator
and the mounting—after all air screws have been opened to release


Detail
No.
Remarks
Compressor cylinders
3
1 at rear of left cylinder.
Hoist front ...
1
1 at rear of right cylinder.
1 in elbow connection pipe.
At top of ram cylinder.
Control valve
1
At top of control valve casing.
Hoist rear
2
1 at top of ram cylinder.
Control valve
1
1 at top of ram.
At top of control valve casing.
Accumulator—
Centre ram
1
At top of ram.
Side rams
2
1 at top of each ram.
Valve
U)
Position
(2)
Use
(3)
1. Stop (marked
On side of centre
Allows the liquid under press-
“ A ").
cylinder of accumu-
ure to pass from gun pressure
lator (fitted with
pipe to centre accumulator
hand wheel).
cylinder and retains it there.
If the system breaks down it
must be closed.
any accumulated air, the liquid should be just visible in the bottom
of the strainer attached to the cover of the tank-accumulator, both
hoists being down.
When expelling accumulated air from the system, it is advisable
to work the accumulator and hoists to their highest lifts a few
times, opening the air screws frequently during the operation.
If the pump fails to work at drill it will probably be due to
accumulated air, which can be got rid of as above. The lift of
accumulator should be noted during firing (normal lift when firing
full charge is approximately 14-inches).
The accumulator suction valve does not open quickly enough to
enable the side cylinders to be filled as quickly as the centre cylinder
is filled for the gun pressure system. The accumulator will therefore
drop slowly until the liquid in all three cylinders is on the same level.
This drop is called the “ Equalizing drop,” the normal when firing
full charge being about 2-inches. If the drop is more than normal
there is air in the system.
Air Screws (lettered AIR)
Valves
The “ Stop ” Valve (A), “ Inlet ” Valve (C) and “ Stop ” Valve
(E) should be open. The “ By-pass ” Valve (B) and Valve (D)
(gun pressure pipe) should be closed, and the Relief Valve set to the
lift stamped on it.
311


Valve
(1)
Position
(2)
Use
(3)
2. By-pass
(marked “ B ”).
On side of pump away
from accumulator.
To permit of liquid passing into
pump chamber from accumu-
lator or gun pressure pipe.
3. Inlet (marked
" c ”)•
Between pump and
tank ; hand wheel
on side of pump.
To allow liquid to flow from
tank to pump and vice versa.
4. Stop to gun
pressure pipe
and pump
(marked “ D ”).
On side of centre
cylinder, lower down
than Valve “ A.”
To permit of the compressors,
etc., on the mounting, being
charged before action.
5. Equalizing.
On side of centre
cylinder away from
tank.
To trap the liquid under press-
ure in the centre cylinder
during recoil, and afterwards
to equalize the pressure in
the three cylinders.
6. Stop (marked
“ E ”) for equal-
izing valve.
Fitted to equalizing
valve.
To facilitate the testing of the
gun pressure pipe.
7. Relief.
In the tank.
If the centre cylinder is full
before the gun finishes its
recoil, the surplus liquid from
the compressors forces open
the relief valve and passes
through it into the tank. It
also allows the liquid to
escape when the gun is fired
with the stop valve closed.
8. Suction (2).
Both in tank.
One allows liquid to pass from
tank to outer accumulator
cylinders, the other to the
compressors by way of the
gun pressure pipe.
9. Delivery.
On side cylinder farthest
from tank.
To prevent the possibility of
the ram at the front hoist,
with shell, dropping should
the gun be fired with the
control valve at “ Raise.”
Also prevents either hoist
dropping should pressure fail
at the accumulator.
10. Controlling
hoists.
One at front hoist.
One at rear hoist.
To permit and control the pas-
sage of liquid to ram chamber,
and from thence to tank.
Note. — Gun pressure pipe is painted Red. Accumulator pressure
pipe is painted White.
312


Failure
(1)
Probable Cause
(2)
Remedy
(3)
1. Hoists fail to
work after firing
the accumulator
being “ up.”
Equalizing valve not
acting, opening
choked.
Open and shut the by-pass
valve rapidly, to clear sub-
stance choking the valve.
2. Accumulator
running “down”
rapidly after
firing.
(а) Suction valve not
acting.
(б) Air accumulated in
system.
( c ) Suction valve not
properly closed.
(i a ) If accumulator fails next
round, open and close by-
pass valve a few times as
quickly as possible.
( b) Expel by opening air screws
and work the accumulator
and hoists.
( c ) Open out and examine.
3. Accumulator
failing to lift.
(а) Air accumulated
in compressors.
(б) Suction valve stuck
or jammed, and
compressors not
filling automatically
when previous round
fired.
(c) Relief valve fittings
broken.
(a) Slacken air screw and
fill compressors by opening
valve “ D.”
(&) Open and examine valve.
( c ) Open out and examine.
4. Damage to
accumulator
pipe.
Any cause.
Close stop valve “ A.”
5. Hoists stick
when raising.
Delivery valve choked.
Momentarily open and close
by-pass valve.
6. Hoists stick
when lowering.
Friction.
Force down. (Examine after
practice.)
The following points should be attended to during action :
Accumulator system—possible causes of failure and their remedies.
In the event of the hoists being out of action they should be
lowered and control levers put to centre.
The following points should be attended to after firing or drill:—
Hoists should be lowered and control levers put to centre.
Accumulator should be pumped up a few inches, thereby
ensuring the packings are under pressure.
To lower the accumulator rams, open the by-pass valve B,
when the liquid will flow back to the large tank.
The system may be drained when overhauling or stripping by the
removal of drain plugs, replacing them when empty.
313


Detail
No.
Remarks
Compressor cylinders
2
1 at rear of left cylinder.
1 at rear of right cylinder.
Hoist front ...
1
At bottom of ram cylinder.
Hoist rear
1
At bottom of ram cylinder.
Accumulator-tank ...
1
At bottom of tank.
The positions of these plugs are shown in the following table ;
Drain plugs (plain)
Auxiliary derrick loading gear
The auxiliary derrick loading gear, i.e. windlass, rope and
derrick, should be examined. The brake should be tested and
adjusted if necessary.
General
Thorough overhaul of the main mechanisms should be carried
out periodically, particularly the recoil system, the elevating and
traversing gears and the accumulator pressure system.
All valves and rotating joints should be examined periodically
for leakage, care being taken in tightening the glands. Should
leakage occur after the glands have been tightened, as far as
practicable, the glands should be repacked. When repacking the
glands of the accumulator rams, the spring block should be supported
on “ Sleeves, supporting spring block, accumulator.”
INSTRUCTIONS SPECIAL TO MARKS VI AND VIA
MOUNTINGS
In addition to the instructions for care and preservation already
laid down in this chapter, the following should be observed with the
Marks VI and VIA mountings.
The initial pressure required in the air cylinder is 320-lb. per
square inch.
The following points should be attended to during preparation
for action :
Elevating gear
The elevating gear should be tested by fully elevating and
depressing the gun by power to ensure correct working.
Hydraulic loading gear
The wire rope, crane and grab should be examined for ser-
viceability. The gear should be operated with projectile in grab
to ensure correct working. The hand loading gear on the crane,
i.e. windlass, rope, hook and brake, should be tested and adjusted
as necessary.
314


Auxiliary derrick loading gear
The auxiliary derrick loading gear, i.e. windlass, rope and
derrick, should be examined. The brake should be tested and
adjusted if necessary.
The following points should be attended to during action:
Should the power loading system show signs of jerkiness when
functioning it may be due to air in the system. The air valve
on the extension at the top of the press cylinder, accessible through
the plug on the shell pit shield, should be opened to allow the air to
escape and then closed.
The following points should be attended to after firing or drill: —
Control levers for elevating and loading gears should be placed
in the neutral position and power cut off.
General
Thorough overhaul of the main mechanisms should be carried
out periodically, particularly the recoil system, the elevating and
loading gears with their control mechanisms, and the traversing
gear.
Control valves and joints should be periodically examined for
leakage, care being taken in tightening the glands. Should leakage
occur after the glands have been tightened, as far as it is practicable,
the glands should be repacked.
INSTRUCTIONS SPECIAL TO MARK VII MOUNTING
In addition to the instructions for care and preservation already
laid down in this chapter, the following should be observed with the
Mark VII mounting.
The initial pressure required in the air cylinder is 350-lb. per
square inch.
Points to he attended to during preparation for action :—
Padlocks secure fittings as shown below and should be removed,
with pins where fitted, as required.
{a) Inner hand lever in bracket on right side of platform.
( b ) Lever of cradle lock standard near elevating control.
(c) Door of frame supporting rammer rocker jack.
(d) Sluice valve below shell pit shield.
(e) Box of 12-way electrical installation housed on pedestal.
(/) Box of 6-way electrical installation housed inside shield.
Airblast
To test the pressure
Ascertain that all stop valves on the air blast panel are closed..
Open stop valve B to high pressure reservoirs and the No. 12
pressure gauge stop valve. The pressure should be 3,500-lb. per
square inch when fully charged. Close No. 12 pressure gauge stop
valve and release pressure from the gauge by its relief valve.
315


Open stop valve B (air blast), stop valve B to low pressure
reservoir and the No. 13 pressure gauge stop valve. The pressure
should be 1,250-lb. per square inch when fully charged. Close
No. 13 pressure gauge stop valve and release pressure from the
gauge by its relief valve.
If the pressure in the low pressure system is much above normal,
it is likely to be due to leakage through the reducing valve and
non-functioning of the relief valve in the pipe line to the gun.
The relief valve is adjusted to blow off at 1,255-lb. per square
inch. When the system is not in use, all stop valves on the air-
blast panel should be closed and the pressure released from the
Nos. 12 and 13 pressure gauges by their relief valves.
To charge the system
{a) See all valves are closed.
(b) Connect flexible conduit to main supply pressure pipe on
emplacement wall.
(c) Open stop valves B to high and low pressure reservoirs
and reducing valve, also stop valves C and D to Nos. 12 and 13
pressure gauges respectively.
(d) Open stop valve A (main supply) ; close it as soon as a
pressure gauge reads the correct amount. The gauge will give
the correct reading when the pressure is equalized.
(e) Disconnect flexible conduit from pipe on emplacement wall.
Note. —The mounting must not be traversed unless the flexible
conduit is disconnected from main supply pipe on emplacement wall
and housed under shell pit shield.
To charge the air cylinder
{a) Test the pressure of the system.
{b) See No. 1 valve connector, also stop valve A (main supply) is
closed.
(c) Connect the removable charging pipe between the No. 1 valve
connector and a nozzle on the air cylinder, cap being removed.
[d) Connect pressure gauge No. 5 to the other nozzle, or it
may be used as an adapter between pipe and nozzle in which case
one nozzle must be closed by its cap.
{e) Open remaining valves including screw valve to air cylinder
and pressure gauge.
(J) Open No. 1 valve connector gently and close it as soon as the
pressure gauge on air cylinder reads the correct amount. The gauge
will give the correct reading when the pressure is equalized. The nor-
mal pressure for the Mark VII mounting is 350-lb. per square inch.
(g) When fully charged, close stop valve B to air cylinder and
screw valve on air cylinder; disconnect removable charging pipe
and gauge, replace caps.
Note.—The air cylinder may be charged direct from the main
supply in which case stop valves A (main supply) and B to reducing
valve should be open. The procedure is then the same as from


Situation
Function
Remarks
1. Lower control
To raise ammunition
Can only be used for raisins:
lever of ammuni-
cage.
cage.
nition hoist.
2. Upper control
To lower ammunition
Can only be used for lowering
lever of ammuni-
cage.
cage.
tion hoist.
3. Inner hand
Locks and unlocks
Puts control of elevating in
lever on plat-
form.
cradle locking lever.
hands of gun number in rear
of breech.
4. Centre hand
lever on plat-
form.
Operates water squirts.
Unlocked only by a combina-
tion of : —No. 1 lever (inner),
release of pawl catch on
horizontal shaft of rammer
gear by shell on loading tray,
and opening of breech
mechanism lever.
5. Outer hand
lever on plat-
form.
Operates rammer gear.
Unlocked by No. 2 (Centre)
lever. Rocks rammer and
rams.
6. Lever on stand-
Brings cradle to loading
This lever is locked and un-
ard at rear of
angle and locks it
locked by the movement of
elevating con-
trol.
there.
the inner hand lever on the
right-hand side of platform.
7. Control hand
Operates elevating
Three “ clicker ” positions are
wheel at front
of platform on
left-hand side
control valve.
provided, the centre is
neutral and the two outer
are for creep speed.
of mounting.
air reservoirs, stop valves B to high pressure and low pressure
reservoirs being closed.
To drain the system of water
See that stop valve A (main supply) is closed.
Open all other valves on the panel.
Open the two drain valves at bottom of reservoirs on shell pit
shield slightly, closing as soon as water is cleared.
On no account should the screw valves at the top of the reservoirs
be opened excepting for emptying purposes.
When emptying, valves should be unscrewed only two or three
turns.
All connections throughout the airblast system, especially
the glands of the telescopic pipe and trunnion, should be examined
periodically when under pressure, for leakage.
The oil reservoir for the telescopic pipe should be kept filled.
The admission valve on the breech end of the gun should be
operated periodically to ensure correct functioning.
Hydraulic Power System
Before opening the main and other stop valves on the pressure
standard, all control levers and control hand wheels should be in
the neutral or closed position. Their positions and functions are
detailed below.
317


Situation
Function
Remarks
8. Control hand
wheel at front
of platform on
right-hand side
of mounting.
Operates traversing
control valve.
A clicker position is provided
for neutral.
Position
Section of System Served
Over main stop valve.
Main pressure pipe centre pivot.
Exhaust standard.
Main exhaust pipe.
Front end of hoist press cylinder.
Hoist press cylinder.
Hoist control valve.
Hoist control valve.
Elevation control valve.
Elevation control valve.
Traversing control valve.
Traversing control valve.
Wash-out control valve.
Rammer and rammer rocker control
Water pump control valve.
valve.
Top of rammer rocker jack small
Rammer control valve.
cylinder (2).
Top of rammer rocker jack large
Lower cylinder.
cylinder (2).
Upper cylinder.
Rear end of rammer press cylinder.
Rear end of rammer press cylinder.
Front end of rammer press cylinder.
Front end of rammer press cylinder.
Outside end of pump wash-out small
Outside end of power cylinder for
cylinder.
water pump.
Inside end of wash-out pump small
Inside end of power cylinder for
cylinder.
water pump.
Pressure standard.
Between rammer and wash-out
stop valves.
The inner, centre and outer hand levers are mounted in a
bracket on the platform to the right rear of the breech.
The main stop valve and stop valves of elevating, rammer
hoist, wash-out and traversing gears on pressure standard should be
opened. The sluice valve on exhaust standard must always be open.
Check pressure gauges for liquid pressure and exhaust. These
should read approximately 1,200-lb. and 0-lb. per square inch
respectively. ■
Air valves are provided at various points of the system by means
of which air may be released.
Each system (hoist, elevating, wash-out, etc.) should be worked
gently after air has been expelled from the main pressure pipe and
pressure standard, the appropriate valves being opened, and closed
when clear liquid flows.
The valves should be closed by means of the spanner provided,
other tools to obtain greater leverage must not be used.
The positions of these valves, and the drain valves are shown in
the following table.
Air and drain valves
318


An examination of the gears should be carried out in the following
order :
Elevating gear
The clutch lever of the elevating control gear should be placed
at power and gun elevated and depressed through the limits of
movement by the elevating control hand wheel care being taken
that the auxiliary hand gear is declutched and that the hand wheel
handle is in the housed position during the above operation or at any
time that power is being used for elevating or depressing. These
precautions are necessary to prevent the hand wheel from rotating
and probably causing injury to personnel.
The gun should be fully elevated and depressed to ascertain
that the cut-off valve and elevation and depression stops are
functioning correctly. It should be noted that if the valve and
stops do not function correctly, the elevating worm may jam, and
it may take considerable time to free the gear because the friction
plates must be slackened and re-adjusted.
Clutches should then be set at “ hand ” and gears worked
to ascertain that they work freely.
Note.— When moving the clutch lever of the elevating control
from hand to power position, it is moved as far as possible towards
the power position. The handle of the control hand wheel is
then rotated backwards and forwards, about the neutral clicker
as mid-position, over an arc of approximately 120-degrees. It
should be noted that the clutch lever operates the upper and lower
sliding clutches simultaneously.
Traver sing gear
(t Tiie clutch lever of the traversing gear should be placed at
power ” and the mounting traversed through its arc of fire by the
traversing control hand wheel, care being taken that the auxiliary
hand gear is declutched and the hand wheel handle in the housed
position during the above operation or at any time that power is
being used for traversing.
Clutches should then be set at “ hand ” and gears worked to
ascertain that they work freely.
Note. When moving the clutch lever of the traversing control
from “ hand to “ power ” position, it is moved as far as possible
towards the “ power ” position. The handle of control hand wheel
is then rotated clockwise and anti-clockwise, about the neutral
clicker as mid position, over an arc of approximately 120-degrees.
It should be noted that the clutch lever operates the upper and
lower sliding clutches simultaneously.
Cradle lock
The cradle lock should be operated for correct functioning when
power elevating or depressing from positions above and below
319


the loading angle, i.e. 5-degrees elevation. The cradle lock control
lever should be drawn to the rear, bringing the gun to the loading
position. The pawls locking cradle should engage the striking
faces of the cradle stop brackets and locking bolts function correctly.
Hoist gear
The cage should be raised by means of the lower control lever
when it should be ascertained that the sliding door of the cartridge
cage opens, the counterweight is working freely and the ammuni-
tion cage retaining catch is functioning.
The lever operating shell stops of the ammunition cage should
function correctly, otherwise the shell cannot roll on to the loading
tray.
The cage should be lowered by means of the upper control
lever.
The wire of the ammunition cage should be examined for
serviceability.
The safety device on the ammunition cage should be inspected
periodically for efficient service.
Wash-out
To charge the system
Open stop valve (see plate 13) in pipe (E) and fill the supply
tank ; close valve.
Pull back the inner lever to release the centre lever.
The centre lever is inoperative by reason of the catch lever
on the end of the oblique rod. Release the catch lever by lifting
the left front upper lever (or pulling down the vertical rod) of
interlock and opening the breech mechanism lever, both these
operations should be necessary to do this.
Draw the centre lever once to the rear and return it to the
front position. This movement opens the control valve, firstly to
pipe (A) by which pressure flows into the small cylinder, forcing
the piston outwards and the plunger into the large cylinder and,
secondly to pipe (B) forcing the piston in and withdrawing the
plunger, thereby drawing water from the supply tank along pipes
(F) and (G) over valve (K) into the large cylinder.
Replenish the supply tank and close the stop valve.
Bring the gun to the loading position by the cradle lock control
lever, the last named being locked by drawing back the inner lever
on the right side of the mounting.
Draw back the centre lever when all the squirts should operate.
If an air lock is present, it may require one or two initial strokes
of the lever to operate squirts.
It should be ascertained that the water jets play correctly on
the mushroom head and in the bore of the gun, if not, the nozzles
should be adjusted to suit.


Rammer gear
Under no circumstances should the rammer gear be operated
with the breech fittings removed.
The left front lever at the top of the hoist frame, actuating
the pawl engaging the rocker shaft of the rammer gear, should be
tested to see that it works correctly. Failure to function will prevent
the rammer being rocked.
After testing wash-out gear the outer lever is free. Draw back
the outer lever when the rammer gear should rock over and rammer
operate.
The outer, centre and inner levers should be returned to
the forward, or closed position, which will return the rammer
gear to the normal position and free the cradle lock control
lever.
hor drill purposes a ramming gear stop is provided to restrict
the movement of the outer lever so that the full pressure is not used
when ramming without a projectile. The rammer should never be
rammed at full pressure without a projectile.
For examination of the rammer, the gun should be fully elevated
when the rammer may be operated and examined clear of the gun,
the interlock being operated by hand.
A uxiliary hoist loading gear
See that the power is cut off by closing the stop valve marked
“ Hoist ” on the pressure standard.
The auxiliary hoist loading gear, i.e. windlass, rope, grab and
sheave should be examined for serviceability, care being taken
to see that the ends of the rope are properly secured.
Points to he attended to during action :
Hand gear should be declutched when power is used.
Trollies, when filled, should be run round to the left side of the
ammunition lift; if allowed to remain on the right, a jam may occur
as the mounting is traversed.
Projectiles should be placed correctly on the trollies to ensure a
smooth run into the cage and tray.
In the event of a change to hand operation in any section, viz.
elevating, traversing, rammer or hoist, the appropriate stop valve
on the pressure standard should first be closed.
Should any section of the hydraulic system show signs of jerki-
ness when functioning it may be due to air in the system. The
appropriate air valve should be opened to allow air to escape and
then closed.
The supply of water in the gun wash-out tank must be main-
tained.
21 (2)


Points to he attended to after firing or drill :—
The ammunition cage should be lowered.
All levers and control hand wheels to be placed in the neutral
or closed positions.
All valves on airblast panel should be closed, and air released
from the pressure gauges.
Main pressure valve and all valves on the pressure standard to
be closed. Pressure should be released from gauges on standards.
All pressure gauge covers should be replaced.
Sluice valve on the exhaust standard must be left open.
Gun wash-out system should be emptied and stop valve closed.
Padlocks should be replaced.
General
Thorough overhaul of the main mechanisms should be carried
out periodically, particularly the recoil system, the elevating
and traversing gears, rammer, loading and wash-out gears, with
their control mechanisms.
All control valves, cut off valves, elevation and depression stops
and rotating joints should be examined periodically for leakage, care
being taken in tightening the glands ; also the valve spindles and
rods to see that they are in free working condition and not jammed.
Should leakage occur after the glands have been tightened as far as
is practicable, the glands should be repacked. If leakage still occurs,
a faulty cup packing is indicated (on valves where these are also
fitted) and should be replaced.
Leaking valves fitted with cup packings only should have these
replaced. .
All control valves should be examined periodically to ascertain
that the spindle couplings are firmly and correctly secured. An
insecure spindle may upset the correct setting of the valve.
Normally, the control valves need no adjustment after initial
setting, but should they require overhauling, or stripping for the
purpose of repacking, the work should only be carried out under
the armament artificer’s supervision. Before stripping, particular
care should be taken to note the setting of the valve to guide
re-assembly. , . , ~
The hemp, cotton and linen fibre packings for the valves should
be wrapped in oiled paper and stored in tin boxes, or any suitable
receptacle so that the shape and finish may be maintained These
tins need not be sealed but should be kept as much as possible at an
even temperature. .
The reservoirs of the elevation and depression stops must be
correctly filled. , ,
Cam rollers should be examined frequently to see that they are
working freely. ~, . , . „
The rammer shaft split coupling should be examined periodically
to see that the shaft can readily be uncoupled.
322


AMMUNITION
Rough usage of ammunition packages and their contents is
calculated to cause missfires, hangfires, blinds, or even premature
explosions, and further, ammunition cases and boxes so handled
cannot be expected to retain their air-tightness, or their contents
their efficiency ; consequently, every person whose duty it may be
to supervise or perform work in connection with the handling of
ammunition, explosives, etc., must exercise the utmost care in the
performance of such duties.
Care must be taken in handling projectiles to ensure that the
driving bands are not damaged, the points of A.P. shell are not
broken, caps on capped shell are not loosened, cracked or dented, or
the markings obliterated.
Projectiles
Projectiles should be thoroughly oiled with boiled linseed
oil as often as is considered necessary. In the case of H.E. shell
only special lead-free linseed oil will be used.
Projectiles should be stored on their bases on wood battens.
They should never be rolled on the ground or on stone floors.
Fuzes
Fuze cylinders should not be opened until the contents are
required for immediate use.
Safety pins should not be withdrawn, nor safety caps removed
until immediately before loading.
When once a fuze is exposed to the atmosphere it begins to
deteriorate.
Time fuzes are issued with the recesses, etc., coated with “ Fuze,
waterproofing composition,” which, whilst unbroken, will provide
considerable protection. The protection, however, is lost once the
time ring is moved ; consequently, such fuzes as require setting
some considerable time before use should, after setting, be coated
with huze, waterproofing composition.” Should the composition
not be available, Mark IV lead free (thick) luting may be used
instead, hut under no circumstances must thinned luting he so employed.
If the fuze already shows signs of dampness, it should be allowed to
dry before being coated with composition or luting.
Dampness may cause blinds, or in the case of time fuzes premature
action.
Cartridges
Cartridges are issued in hermetically sealed cylinders and, as a
rule, only a sufficient number as are required for immediate use
should be opened.


Cordite cartridges have gunpowder igniters, which are readily
affected by moisture. Damp igniters may cause missfires or hang-
fires. Consequently, made up cartridges require careful protection
against damp. Cartridges with damp igniters should not be
loaded, they should be set aside for special examination.
Cartridge cylinders should be stacked vertically, when possible,
unless racks are provided. If they cannot conveniently be stored
vertically, they may be piled on their sides on wood battens.
When cordite is undergoing the 100 per cent, surveillance
test, the cylinders will be so stacked that test papers are always
readily accessible for inspection purposes.
Cartridges should be stacked by lot numbers.
Tubes
No more tube boxes than are absolutely necessary should be
opened, and tubes in opened boxes or in any other exposed receptacle
should be kept in a dry place.
Electric tubes should be tested carefully before issue for firing, in
order that faulty tubes due to defective or broken bridges may be
eliminated. If dropped by accident, they should not be used until
retested. To prevent corrosion of exposed tubes, which may cause
difficulty in extraction, the bodies may be wiped over lightly with
mineral jelly, but the heads of electric tubes must be kept clean
and dry. Mineral jelly may also be placed over the cork plug.
Particular care is necessary to avoid damage to the sealing of the
cork plug in the mouth of the tube. Damp tubes may cause
hang-fires or even missfires.
Unfired tubes should be replaced in their boxes, which must be
resealed immediately the necessity for keeping them open ceases.
Printed under the Authority of HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
by William Clowes & Sons, Ltd., London and Beccles
(2) Wt. 3839—9502. 2,625. 6/36. W. C. &. S., Ltd. Gp. 394.
S.O. Code No. 57-160-0-36
324


Plate 1.


Plate 2.




Plate 4.
VIEW FROM RIGHT—EXTERIOR.
VIEW FROM RIGHT REAR —AIRBLAST FITTINGS, ETC.
(SHIELD AND BEARING RECEIVER DIAL REMOVED.)
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9*2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate 5.


Plate 6.


VIEW FROM LEFT—ELEVATING GEAR.
(SHIELD, RANGE RECEIVER DIAL AND WORM GEAR COVER REMOVED.)
Plate 7.
VIEW FROM RIGHT—TRAVERSING GEAR.
(SHIELD AND BEARING RECEIVER DIAL REMOVED.)
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9*2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate 8.
VIEW FROM RIGHT—EXHAUST STANDARD AND TRAVERSING GEAR, ETC.
(GEAR COVERS REMOVED.)
VIEW FROM RIGHT FRONT—TRAVERSING GEAR ENGINE, ETC.
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9-2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate 9.


VIEW FROM FRONT—PIPES, VALVES, ELEVATING ENGINE, DEPRESSION STOP.
(SHIELD, BEARING RECEIVER DIAL AND GEAR COVER REMOVED.)
Plate 10.
VIEW OF WASH-OUT PUMP.
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9-2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate 11.


Plate 12
VIEW FROM LEFT FRONT—PRESSURE STANDARD, ETC.
(TRAVERSING GEAR STOP VALVE REVERSED END FOR END.)
VIEW FROM LEFT—HYDRAULIC AND AUXILIARY HOISTS, LOWER PORTION.
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9 2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate 13.


Plate. 14.


VIEW FROM LEFT REAR—RAMMER ROCKER AND LOADING TRAY.
VIEW FROM LEFT FRONT—HOIST, ETC.
(SHIELD AND WORM GEAR COVER REMOVED.)
Plate 15.
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9*2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate.16.




Plate. 18.


Plate 19.
VIEW FROM RIGHT REAR—RAMMER WITH RAM TUBE IN CHAMBER.
VIEW FROM RIGHT REAR—RAMMER WITH RAM FULLY HOME.
MOUNTING, 8.L., 9*2 INCH, MARK VII.


Plate 20.


Plate 21.




Plate 23.


Plate 24.


Plate 25.






Plate 28.


Plate 29.


Plate 30.


Plate 31.


Plate 32.


Plate 33.


Plate 34.
CALCULATOR, RANGE CORRECTION, 8.L., 9-2-INCH.


Plate 35.


Plate 36.


Plate 37.


Plate 38.


Plate 39.




