

HANDY BOOK
OF THE
ELECTORAL LAW
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Being a systematic arrangement of the 24 Constitution and
Electoral Acts, with Forms, Examples how to fill them up,
List of Electorates showing Counties, Hundreds, Numbers
of Sections, Voting Places, Situation of Polling Booths
therein, and General Index thereto; also, Schedule
of British Possessions, and other information for
Candidates, Returning Officers, Electors, and all
concerned in Electoral Matters,
BY
A. M. DOWLEANS.
REVISED BY W. A. MAGAREY, LL.B.
A Practitioner of the Supreme Court.
Adelaide:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. H. SHEERING & CO.,
42. CURRIE STREET.




PREFACE.
THIS Book is intended to supply a long-felt want, viz., a
systematic arrangement and easy reference to the twenty-
four Acts of Parliament dealing with our Constitution and
The Electoral Law. The absence of such a work is, in some
degree, an excuse for the ignorance which exists as to the privileges,
rights, and duties of those who are affected by these Statutes.
Continuous work in electoral matters has shown me the
advantage of having a sort of electoral vade mecum by which
clauses bearing upon a particular point may he promptly
referred to. This difficulty is especially manifest at times of
election, when rapidity of reference is of the utmost importance.
My object is to aid those who are connected with election work
in any of its various phases, be they Returning Officers, electors
registered, those desirous of being enrolled as electors, can-
didates for Parliament, or others. This being the first work
of this kind ever attempted in South Australia, it has been
my desire to make it practical, and with this view the forms
mentioned in the Schedules to the various Acts are given with
explanations as to the method of filling them up. The various
Electoral Districts are also appended, showing what voting
places, Counties, and Hundreds, or parts of them, are within
each electorate, and also an alphabetical Index to them. The
Appendix will enable Returning Officers to check the voters in
the different Districts or Divisions. It often happens that a
person living in a Hundred of one District selects a voting
place (because of its proximity) in another electorate, and there
are some so registered. The absence of a map was an excuse
for so doing, hut now there can be none. Ho one ought to
experience any difficulty in correctly fixing the District and
voting place if he will proceed according to the following
example by way of illustrating the use of the Appendix:—
A person residing on Section 1210, in the Hundred of Hilbert,
having found in the general part of the work that he is qualified
and entitled to he registered as an elector refers to the Claim
Forms for the particulars required. Hot knowing his correct
electorate he turns to the Gleneral Index to Counties, Hundreds,
and Yoting Places and finds “Gilbert” Hundred, to he partly
in Light and partly in Wooroora. Then referring to Hundred
Gilbert in “ parts of Hundreds in two or more electorates,” he
scans the numbers of the Sections given in Light electorate,
and not finding Ho. 1210 there, can conclude it is in Wooroora


District. Carefully following the explanations given under
Claim Dorms he accordingly fills in the particulars and forwards
them to the Returning Officer at the address given in the
Assembly electorates, having previously inserted the name of
the most convenient polling place out of those given there.
The Wooroora Returning Officer on receipt of the claims, on
referring to the parts of Hundreds, checks the applicant, and
finding claims correct, registers accordingly. Transfers from
one District to another are similarly dealt with.
If country Returning Officers would strictly enforce the
provisions or the Schedule Forms, as to giving numbers of
Sections and name of Hundreds in every document for either
House, many an elector would be saved from being successfully
challenged, and the Returning Officer from the imputation of
neglecting their duties. A list of the British Possessions (with
dates of acquisition) is also added to aid those in doubt on the
the question of natural-born subjects and the obtaining of
letters of naturalization.
The compilation of this work is the outcome of a good deal
of electoral experience in all its branches. Correctness has
been aimed at, and any further suggestions will be received
with esteem. My thanks are due to Mr. W. A. Magarey,
Solicitor, for having generously revised the entire work, to the
various Returning Officers for furnishing the situations of the
polling booths at the polling places in their respective Districts,
and to the Deputy Surveyor-General, Mr. Strawbridge, for his
kindness in marking out the Sections comprised in the different
electorates where a Hundred has parts in two or more Electoral
Districts. The entire work has been brought up to date. I
leave it in the hands of the public, who will, I trust, find that
it carries out its author’s intent.
A. M. DOWLEANS.
10th April, 1894.
REVISER’S NOTE.
I wish here to disclaim all credit which may attach to the
publication of this Work. The conception, the method, and the
application have been entirely the Author’s, and the book leaves
my hands in practically the form in which it was submitted.
Never were the duties of Reviser lighter.
W. A. MAGAREY.
13th April, 1894.


INDEX TO CONTENTS.
Page.
Absent Voters (See Electors) ... ... ... ... 29
Acts of Parliament Referred to. List of ... ... ... ...Tin.
Aliens (See Electors) ... ... ... ... 22
Assembly Electorates (See Appendix) ... ... ... 92-106
Assistant Returning Officers (See Returning Officers) ... ... 19
Appendix, Index to ... ... ... ... ... VI -
British Possessions (See Appendix) ... ... ••• 112-114
Candidates ... ... ... ... ... ••• 2®
Challenges (See Election Day) ... ... ... ••• ... 45
Constitution ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 1
Counties in each Electorate (See Appendix) ... ... 92-106
Court of Disputed Returns ... ... ... ••• ... 50
Declaration of Poll (See Election Day) ... ... ... ... 48
Election Day—Challenges ... ... ••• ... 45
" Declaration of Poll ... ... ... 48
“ Polling, Proceedings at ... ... ... ... 41
“ Scrutiny ... ... ... ... 45
Electors—Absent Yoters ... ... ... ... 29
“ Aliens ... ... ... ... ... 22
“ General ... ... ... ... ••• 23
“ Northern Territory ... ... ... ••• ••• 23
Forms (See Appendix) ... ... ... ... ... 73-89
General Matters ... ... ... ... ••• 67
Hundreds in each Electorate (See Appendix) ... ... 92-106
“ Parts of in each Electorate (See Appendix) ... 108-111
Legal Procedure ... ... ... ... 64
Legislative Council Districts (See Appendix) ... ... ... 90
Ministers ... ... ... ... ... •• ••• 8
Nomination Day (See Returning Officers)... ... ... ... 40
Objections and Objectors ... ... ... ... 23
“ Grounds for ... ... 35
Offences and Penalties ... ... ... 56
Parliament ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Returning Officers, Names and Addresses of (See Appendix) 92-106
“ “ Duties re Absent Voters “ ... ... 21
“ “ “ of Asssistant “ ... ... 19
" “ “ in General “ ... ... 11
“ " “ on Nomination Day “ ... ... 19
“ “ “ Prior to Election Day “ ... ... 18
Rolls, Dates when Compiled (See Appendix) ... ... ... 135
Vacancies in Parliament ... ... ... ... ... 9
Writs ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 36


APPENDIX.
Perms referred to throughout the work, with directions as to
filling them up p ages 73-89
Legislative Council Districts, showing the Assembly Districts
comprised in each Upper House District, together with the
names and addresses of the Returning Officers and places of
nomination p age 90
Assembly Electorates, giving the names of Counties, Hun-
dreds or Parts, and voting places therein, and the names and
addresses of the Returning Officers and places of nomination
Pages ... 92-106
Parts of Hundreds referred to in the Assembly Electorates,
showing the various Sections comprised in each portion of
Electorate contained in such Hundreds Pages ... 108-111
List of British Possessions, how and date acquired
Pages ... 112-114
Index to Counties, Hundreds, and voting places mentioned in
each Electorate Pages ... 115-134
Dates when present Rolls compiled, for reference when claim-
ing registration under Section 17 of “ The Electoral Act, 1879,”
commonly known as “ under the Old Roll ” ... Page ... 135
R-B.—For direction how to use Appendix tee Preface.


INDEX TO FORMS.
1. *Correction ... ... ... a |g
2. Change of Polling Place ... 73
3. Legislative Council Claim ... 74
4. House of Assembly Claim ... .. 74
5. Transfer for Legislative Council ... ... 75
6. Transfer for House of Assembly ... ... 76
7. Travelling Certificate ... . ... 78
8. * Application for Travelling Certificate ... ... 78
9. Certificate, Absent Voters Act, for Legislative Council 79
9a. Voting paper, Absent Voters Act, for Legislative
Council ... ... ... ... yg
10. Certificate, Absent Voters Act, for House of
Assembly ... ... ... 80
10a. Voting paper, Absent Voters Act, for House of
Assembly ... ... ... 80
10b and 9b. Envelope to enclose Certificate and Voting
Paper {This form is the same for either) ... ... 80
11. Declaration, Absent Voters Act, for Legislative
Council ... ... ... 81
12. Declaration, Absent Voters Act, for House of
Assembly ... ... ... ... 82
13. Notice of Objection, for Legislative Council 83
14. Notice of Objection, for House of Assembly ... 83
15. Summons upon Objection, for Legislative Council ... 84
16. Summons upon Objection, for House of Assembly ..! 84
17. of Service of Summons upon Objection ... 85
18. Return of Electoral Expenses ... . 86
19. Declaration verifying Return of Electoral Expenses!!! 87
20. Nomination for Legislative Council ... ... ... 88
21. Nomination for House of Assembly ... ... 88
22. * Appointing Scrutineer at Polling ... 89
23. * Appointing Scrutineer at Scrutiny ... ... ... 89
The examples, showing how the forms are to be filled up, are
illustrated by taking the explanation or instances shown at
each letter and applying it to the vacancy for which same
intended, thus enabling person about to fill up any form to
see what is or ought to be inserted there.
For names and addresses of the various Returning Officers see
Legislative Council Districts and Assembly Electorates.
* These forms are not supplied by Returning Officers ; the others
are.


Letter
Reference.
Title of Act.
Number and
Year.
! Reserved or
j Assented to.
Date Reserved
for Queen’s
Assent or
Assented to by
the Governor.
Date of
Proclamation if
Act Reserved.
Government Gazette
Reference.
Date when
to operate.
No.
Year.
Date.
Page.
A
Constitution ...
2
1855-6
*
R
Jan. 4, 1856
Oct. 24, 1856
Oct. 25, 1856
Forthwith
B
Writs of Election
15
1872
E
July 31, 1872
Dec. 17,1872
Dec. 19, 1872
1819
After date of
proclamation
C
Electoral Districts
27
1872
E
Nov. 27,1872
April 30,1873
May 1, 1873
650
July 24, 1873
D
§ Constitution Amendment
5
1873
E
Deo. 18,1873
April 8,1874
April 9,1874
563
July 1, 1874
E
Acting Minister’s Appointment
16
1873
A
Deo. 18,1873
—
—
—
—
F
§ Constitution Act Further Amendment
236
1881
R
Nov. 18,1881
April 11,1882
April 13,1882
1182/3
April 14, 1882
G
§
278
1882
E
Nov. 17, 1882
May 16, 1883
May 17, 1883
1701/2
Forthwith
H
Payment of Members
399
1887
A
Nov. 16, 1887
—
—
—
—
I
ft (S
476
1890
A
Oct. 24, 1890
—
—
—
J
T Constitution Act Further Amendment
462
1889
A
Dee. 6, 1889
—
—
—
—
K
§ Officers of Parliament ... ...
496
1890
A
Dec. 23, 1890
—
—
—
—
L
§ f Constitution and Electoral Act Amendment
561
1892
E
Dec. 17, 1892
May 25, 1893
May 25, 1893
1127
Silent
M
Altering Albert and Ontaparinga Districts .,.
581
1893
A
Dec. 23, 1893
—
—
—
—
N
Contractors in Parliament
19
1869-70
E
Feb. 23, 1870
Aug. 31,1870
Sept. 1, 1870
1144
Forthwith
0
§ Northern Territory Representation ...
450
1888
E
Deo. 8, 1888
April 10,1889
April 11,1889
837
Silent
P
Electoral
141
1879
A
Oct. 25, 1879
—
—
—
—
0
f “ Act Amendment
183
1880
A
Oct. 25, 1880
—
—
—
E
ft “ " “
242
1882
A
Aug. 30,1882
—
—
—
—
S
ft" “ Further Amendment
280
1883
A
Aug. 30, 1883
—
—
—
—
T
| <t ft t( ff
352
1885
A
Deo. 11, 1885
—
—
—
tr
i Voting Hours, Alteration
469
1889
A
Dec. 6, 1889
—
—
—
—
V
i Absent Voters, Electoral
498
1890
A
Dec. 23, 1890
—
—
—
—
w
II “ “
577
1893
A
Deo. 23, 1893
—
—
—
X
§ f Electoral Law Amendment ...
583
1893
A
Dec. 23, 1893
—
wjan. 25,1894
173
Jan. 27, 1894
♦ £ denotes ** Reserved for the Queen’s Assent.” A signifies “ Assented to by the Governor” without reservation. § Incorporated with the Constitution Act (A).
% Incorporated with Act (G). f Incorporated with the Electoral Act (P). J Incorporated with Act (Q). || Incorporated with Act (V).
CT By Sec. 28, this Act was to be inoperative until proclaimed.
INDEX TO THE VARIOUS ACTS REFERRED TO THROUGHOUT THIS WORK.






HANDY BOOK
OF THE
Electoral Law of South Australia.
CONSTITUTION.
1. Our Constitution was established in pursuance of :
an Act of the Imperial Parliament, passed in the 13th and
14th years of the reign of Her Majesty Queen Victoria,
intituled “An Act for the better Government of Her
Majesty’s Australian Colonies,” which empowered the
Governor and Legislative Council (the then only House of
Parliament) from time to time, by any Act or Acts, to
alter the provisions and laws for the time being in force
concerning the election of the elective members of such
Legislative Council, the qualification of electors and
elective members, or to establish instead of the Legislative
Council, a Council and a House of Eepresentatives, or
other separate Legislative Houses, to consist of such mem-
bers to be appointed or elected by such persons, and in
such manner, as by such Act or Acts should be determined,
and to vest in such Council and House of Eepresentatives,
or other separative Legislative Houses, the powers and
functions of the Legislative Council for which the same
may be substituted.
* This refers to the Section of the Act. See list of Acts.
2 The Council having thought it expedient to create a
second House, a Bill was introduced, having, inter alia,
that object. This Bill was duly passed, and was on the 4th
January, 1856, reserved by the Governor for Her Majesty’s
assent. This was granted, and the proclamation required
by S 41 of the Act (A), was published in the Government
Gazette of 25th October, 1856, and dated, 24th October,
1856.
3. The then members of the Council were to continue
in office until the issue of the first writs for the election of
members of the Parliament thereby constituted.
A
How derived.
Preamble A.*
Two Houses of
Parliament.
Proclaimed.
Present mem-
bers to continue
till writs issued.
§42 A.


Number of
members.
§5 A, 14 A.
4. The Parliament bo established consisted of eighteen
members for the Council and thirty-six for the Assembly.
By subsequent statutes the numbers have been increased to
twenty-four and flfty-four respectively, and the latter
number includes two members for the Northern Terri-
tory. These represent four districts of six members
each in the Upper House, and twenty-seven districts of
two members each in the Assembly.
5. The Governor may transmit, by message, to either
House of Parliament, for their consideration, any amend-
ment which he shall desire to be made in any Bill presented
to him for the Queen’s assent, and all such amendments
shall be taken into consideration, in such convenient
manner, as shall, by the rules and orders of Parliament be
provided.
1 6. The appointment to all public offices under the Govern-
ment are vested in the Governor with the advice and con-
sent of the Executive Council, while minor appointments,
may, by Parliamentary statute or Executive Council order,
be vested in heads of departments or other persons. The
Governor alone can deal with appointing or dismissing a
Ministry.
7. The Judges are appointed by the Governor and
Executive, and hold office during good behaviour, and can
only be removed by Her Majesty upon the address of both
Houses of Parliament.
8. No officer of the Government need obey any order of
the Governor involving any expenditure of public money;
nor shall any warrant for the payment of money, or any
appointment to, or dismissal from office be valid, except as
shown in § 29 A ante , unless such order, warrant, appoint-
ment, or dismissal shall be signed by the Governor, and
countersigned by the Chief Secretary.
§ 6 F, 5 G.
Governor's
message.
§2B A.
Officers in
whom vested.
§29 A.
Ministry.
Judges.
§3O A.
§3l A.
Certain orders
invalid, unless
countersigned.
§33 A.
2


PARLIAMENT.
The Legislative Council.
1. The term for which members of the Upper House
occupy their seats, under ordinary circumstances, is nine
years.
2. Every three years, from the 14th April, 1893, two
members of each of the four districts retire.
3. The order of retirement is this : —A roll is to be kept
showing the names of the members elected and their
districts, and placed in the order of time in which they
were elected. If two or more inembers are elected at the
same time for the same district, the one who received the
least number of votes is placed first on the roll, and the
one with the next lowest number of votes is placed next,
and so on in rotation; if the votes were equal the members
decide by lot the order in which they shall be respectively
placed on the roll.
The coming elections are to fill the vacancies caused by the
retirement of the first two members on the roll for
each District—these are the earliest elected members —
and the existing roll gives the future order for retiring.
4. In the event of the Council being dissolved, the
order of placing the new members’ names is that in § 12 E '
supra.
5. Should a vacancy occur from death, resignation, or
any other cause before the time of retirement, it shall be 1
supplied by the return of a member for the district for 1
which the member causing the vacancy was returned ; and
the newly elected member’s name shall be placed last on
the roll for that district.
6. The Council cannot be dissolved, except by the |
■Governor upon the following ground:—
7. Whenever any Bill for an Act shall have been passed :
by the House of Assembly during any session of Parlia-
ment, and the same or a similar Bill with substantially the
same objects and having the same title, shall have been
passed by the House of Assembly during the next ensuing
Parliament, a general election of the House of Assembly
having taken place between such two Parliaments, the
second and third readings of such Bill having been passed
in the second instance by an absolute majority of the
whole number of members of the House of Assembly and
ai
: Duration of
membership.
§l3 F.
Number who
retire trienni-
ally.
id.
Order of retir-
ing.
§I2F.
When Council
dissolved.
§l7 F.
Vacancies from
death, resigiia-
tion, or other
cause.
§ll P.
Council cannot
be dissolved.
§2 A.
Exception.
§l6 F.
3


both such Bills have been rejected by or fail to become
law in consequence of any amendments made therein by
the Legislative Council, it shall be lawful for, but not
obligatory upon, the Governor, by proclamation published
in the Government Gazette , to dissolve the Council and
Assembly—in such case all members for both Houses
vacate their seats —or the Governor may issue writs for
the election of one or not more than two new members
for each district of the Council.
The proviso to this section runs thus: —“ Provided
always that no vacancy, whether by death, resignation, or
any other cause shall be filled up while the total number
of members shall be twenty-four or more.”
House oe Assembly.
8. This branch of the Legislature continues to exist for
a term of three years from the day on which the members
first meet for dispatch of business.
Both Houses.
9. No member of Parliament can sit or vote in Parlia-
ment until he shall have taken and subscribed the following
oath before the Governor, or such person or persons
authorised by the Governor to administer such oath.
10. Affirmation may be taken instead of the oath.
11. “I, A. 8., do sincerely promise and swear, that I
will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty
Queen Yictoria, as lawful Sovereign of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of this
Province of South Australia, dependent on and belonging
to the said United Kingdom, and that I will defend her
to the utmost of my power against all traitorous conspira-
cies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against
her person, crown, and dignity; and that I will do my
utmost endeavour to disclose and make known to Her
Majesty, her heirs and successors, all treasons and traitorous
conspiracies and attempts which I shall know to be against
her or any of them; and all this Ido swear without any
equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation, and
renouncing all pardons and dispensations from any person
or persons whatever to the contrary. So help me God.”
12. At first meeting, and before proceeding to the dis-
patch of business, some member of the Council must be
elected President, and similarly in the event of the
Proviso.
Duration of
Assembly.
§3 A.
No member to
sit or vote until
taken the oath
of allegiance.
§22 A.
Affirmation in-
stead of oath.
§24 A.
Porm of oath.
§22 A.
Election of
President of
Council.
§7 A.


Presidentship being rendered vacant by death, resignation,
vacating the seat, or removal by vote of the Council.
"When the President has been elected a deputation of the
Council shall notify such election to the Governor.
13. The same course exists as to the election of Speaker
■of the Assembly and notification to the Governor.
14. When the President vacates his seat as a member of
the Council, by periodical retirement, or dissolution, he
■still holds office as President until the next meeting of
Parliament, unless he shall not be re-elected.
15. In the same way, in case of any dissolution of Par-
liament (sic) the Speaker at the time shall be, and he
deemed to be, the Speaker until the first meeting of the
new Parliament, unless not re-elected. The same rule
applies to the Chairman of Committees.
The word “Parliament” by preamble and § 1 A means, and
includes, both Houses of the Legislature. If there be
a dissolution it is of the whole Parliament. It there-
fore seems that the word Parliament is badly used here;
the section is evidently intended to apply to the Assem-
bly only.
16. When President granted leave of absence, or absent;
through illness, or other unavoidable cause, some other i
member of Council may be temporarily appointed to act.
17. The same provision applies in the event of Speaker’s s
absence. |
18. The President or Acting President, and the Speaker 3
•or Acting Speaker have only a casting vote. t
0
i:
19. For the Council, nine members present form a t
quorum, while for the Assembly, one-third of the members,
•exclusive of the Speaker or Acting Speaker, is necessary.
If there be no quorum, no business can be transacted.
20. The Governor may, by proclamation in the Govern- 1
ment Gazette, fix the places and times for holding the ij
sessions of Parliament, and also, upon giving sufficient s
notice, from time to time, change or vary the same, and
may prorogue Parliament and dissolve the Assembly.
, Election of
• Speaker of
Assembly.
§l9 A.
- President to
‘ hold office till
) meeting of Par-
; liament, unless
■ not re-elected.
, §IK.
Speaker and
’ Chairman of
i Committees to
hold office till
) new Parliament
v meet, unless
3 not re-elected.
§2K.
I
; Absence of Pre-
' sident provided
1 for.
§9 A.
Speaker’s ab-
sence provided
for.
§2O A.
President and
Speaker or
those acting
only have cast-
ing vote.
§lO A, 21 A.
Quorum.
§ 15 F, 21 A.
Place and time
for holding Par-
liamentary
Sessions.
§2 A.
5


Intervening
time between
Sessions.
§3 A.
Money Bills.
§1 A.
§4O A.
Standing Rules
and Orders.
§27 A.
21. Twelve calendar months must not intervene between
the last sitting of one session and the first sitting of next
session.
22. All Bills for appropriating any part of the revenue,
or imposing any rate, tax, duty, or impost, must originate
in the Assembly, and be first recommended by the Governor
to the Assembly.
3 23. All standing rules and orders made and adopted for
regulating the proceedings of the Council and Assembly
respectively, and the dispatch of business, and for the
manner in which the Houses shall be respectively presided
over in case of the President’s or Speaker’s absence, and for
the mode in which the Council and Assembly shall confer,
correspond, and communicate with each other relative to
votes or Bills, passed by, or pending, in such Council and
Assembly respectively, and for the proper passing, intitu-
ling, and numbering of the Bills to be introduced into, and
passed by both Houses, and for the proper presentation of
the same to the Governor for Her Majesty’s assent, shall
by such Council and Assembly respectively be laid before
the Governor and approved by him before being binding
and of force.
24. Parliament has f ull power and authority, from time
to time, by any Act, to repeal, alter, or vary all or any of
the provisions of the Constitution Act, and to substitute
others in lieu thereof. Ho such alteration is effective
unless the second and third reading of the Bill shall have
been passed with the concurrence of an absolute majority
of the whole number of members of each House. Every
Bill so passed shall be reserved for the signification of Her
Majesty’s pleasure thereon.
25. Parliament may, by any Act, define the privileges,
immunities, and powers to be held, enjoyed, and exercised
by each House, and by its members, but in no case can
such exceed those now allowed to the House of Commons.
26. Members of Parliament are entitled to receive for
their services, payment at the rate of £2OO a year.
27. The payment is to be made out of the general
revenue on the first day of every calendar month.
28. Any member receiving any official salary or annual
sum can only receive payment as member so far as the
member’s salary may exceed the official salary or annual
sum.
Power to Par-
liament to alter
Constitution
Act.
§34 A.
Absolute majo-
rity requisite.
Must be re-
served.
Privileges of
Parliament.
§35 A.
Members paid.
§1 H.
Mode and time
of payment.
§ 2 H.
Deductions
from payment.
§ 3 H.
6


Although the Act was only intended for one year, it has
been continued by Act I, and is “to be in force until
repealed or amended.”
29. The salary of the President shall be at least equal
to that of the Speaker, and the salaries and allowances of
the various officers of either House shall be the same.
The Chief Clerk of the Council and Assembly respectively,
can only be removed in accordance with a vote of the
House of which he is an officer.
30. The Governor, upon address from both Houses, may
proclaim other polling places beyond those stated in
Schedules, and in like manner close those or any hereafter
proclaimed and direct at which other polling places electors
are to vote.
31. The Legislative Council, within one week after its
first meeting, subsequent to each election to supply the
place of members who shall retire by rotation, and the
House of Assembly, within one week after its first meeting,
subsequent to every general election, shall each elect out
of its own body respectively, four persons, who, with the
Junior or sole Acting Judge of the Supreme Court, shall
constitute a court for the trial of disputed returns. —See
Court of Disputed Returns.
[ Salaries of£Pr«-
* sident,Speaker,
t and Officers.
. §37 A.
r Polling places.
I §6C, 7 G.
3 Members of
Court of Dis-
-5 puted Returns
» to be elected.
§B7 P.
i
7


MINISTERS.
Ministry (old
•tyle).
§32 A.
1. The Ministry formerly consisted of five persons, who
received payment under § 38 A as follows :
Chief Secretary ... ... ... £1,300 a year.
Attorney-G-eneral... ... ... 1,000 “
Treasurer .. ... ... ... 900 “
Commissioner of Lands and Immi-
gration 800 “
Commissioner of Public Works... 800 “
and no person shall hold any of such offices for longer
than three months, unless he be a member of one of the
Houses of Parliament.
2. So far as the Attorney-G-eneral is concerned by Sec.
1 D, he need not be a member, but he can only hold that
office so long as the Ministry of which he is a member
continues in office.
3. This section authorised the appointment of a sixth
Minister, to bear such title as the Governor may from
time to time appoint, and he cannot hold office for a longer
period than three months unless a member of Parliament.
4. The salaries of the Ministers are now equalised, each
being allowed £l,OOO a year.
5. All Ministers for the time being are ex officio
members of the Executive Council.
6. Any Minister of the Crown may be appointed to act
for another Minister, who through ill-health, temporary
absence from the seat of government, or the Province, or
other like cause, shall be unable to perform the duties of
his office, and the Minister so acting has the same powers,
authorities, and discretions to do and fulfil the acts and
functions of the Minister for whom he is acting.
The appointment is by a Commission under the Gover-
nor’s hand and Public Seal of the Province.
Attorney-
General need
not be a M.P.
Sixth Minister,
§2D.
Salaries.
S3D.
Executive
Council.
§32 A.
Governor may
appoint acting
Ministers.
§IE.
8


VACANCIES IN PARLIAMENT.
1. Any member may, by writing under his hand,
addressed to the President or Speaker, and delivered forth-
with after the signing thereof to the President or Speaker,
resign his seat; and upon the receipt of such resignation
by the President or Speaker, the seat of such member
shall become vacant.
2. A member’s seat may also be rendered vacant on any ;
of the following grounds; —• j
Pailing for two consecutive months of any session to
give his attendance in the Council or Assembly without
the permission of the House of, which he is a member.
In the case of leave by the Assembly being granted, such
permission must be entered upon the Assembly Journals.
This is not required in the Council.
Taking any oath or making any declaration or act of
acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to any Poreign
Prince or Power.
Concurring in or adopting any act whereby he may
become a subject or citizen of any Poreign state or Power.,
Becoming bankrupt or taking the benefit of any law
relating to insolvent debtors.
Becoming a public defaulter.
Being attainted of treason, or convicted of felony or
any infamous crime.
Becoming of unsound mind.
3. Any question arising respecting any vacancy in
either House shall he heard and determined by the Council
or Assembly respectively.
4. Any member accepting any office of profit or pension
from the Crown during pleasure (except Ministers and
Acting Ministers by § 1 E proviso).
5. Any person who shall directly or indirectly, himself
or by any person whatsoever in trust for him, or for his
use or benefit, or on his account, undertake, execute, hold,
or enjoy in the whole or in part any contract, agreement,
or commission made or entered into with, under, or from
Resignation.
§ 11 A, 23 A.
Failing to
attend to duties
for two consecu-
tive months.
§ 12 A, 25 A.
Acknowledging
or giving alle-
giance to any
Foreign Power.
id.
Becoming a
Foreign subject
or citizen,
id.
Insolvency,
id.
Public defaulter
id.
Treason or
felony.
■id.
Unsound mind.
id.
Question of
vacancy, how
determined.
§l3 A.
Accepting office
of profit or pen-
sion during
pleasure.
§l7 A, lE.
Holding con-
tracts for public
service.
§IN.
9


any person or persons whatsoever, for or on account of
the Government of South Australia, or shall knowingly
and willingly furnish or provide in pursuance of any such
agreement, contract, or commission which he or they shall
have made or entered into as aforesaid, any money to be
remitted abroad, or any wares or merchandise to be used
or employed in the service of the public, or any members
of any company, or any person holding any office or
position in any company formed for the construction of
any railway or other public work, the payment for which,
or the interest on the cost of which has been guaranteed
by the said Province, shall be incapable of being elected,
or of sitting or voting as a member of the Parliament
during the time he shall execute, hold, or enjoy any such
contract, agreement, or commission, or office, or position,
or any part or share thereof, or any benefit or emolument
arising from the same.
6. If any member shall directly or indirectly, himself, or
by any other person whatsoever, in trust for him, or for
his use or benefit, or on his account, enter into, accept, or
agree for, undertake or execute, in the whole or in part,
any such contract, agreement, or commission as aforesaid
( i.e . last preceding Section) the seat of every such mem-
ber in the Parliament shall be declared void.
Bondholders and persons contributing towards loans for
public purposes are exempted from the scope of the
above Section. From both Sections members of trading
companies are exempted, while persons completing any
contract, devolving upon them by descent, limitation,
or marriage, or as devisee, or legatee, are also excepted
for the first twelve calendar months in possession, and
executors or administrators for the first three years of
possession.
7. If any person, by the Constitution Act disabled, or
declared to be incapable to vote or sit in Parliament, shall,
nevertheless, be elected and returned as a member for any
electoral district, such election and return is void to all
intents and purposes whatsoever.
The disabilities referred to are those in paragraphs 2 and
4 under this heading. Under §3l of the Municipal
Corporations Act, No. 497, of 1890, in addition to aliens,
no person* in receipt of public relief or alms shall be
entitled to be enrolled on the citizens’ roll of any muni-
cipality. A similar provision might well be introduced
in respect of political franchise.
8. As to any member of Parliament sharing contracts,
see Offences and Penalties.


RETURNING OFFICERS.
General —Prior to Election Day —Nomination Day —
Assistant Returning Officer —Absent Voters.
GENERAL.
1. The Governor shall, from time to time, appoint some j
fit person to be the Returning Officer for the Province, i
and may, from time to time remove such person, who shall
perform the duties hereinafter mentioned. The occupant
of the office when Act came into force continues in office.
2. The Governor shall, from time to time, appoint fit
persons to be District Returning Officers for each of the j
Electoral Districts, to perform the duties assigned to them
respecting the election of members to serve in the House
of Assembly. Each District Returning Officer is also a
Deputy Returning Officer, and shall perform the duties
assigned to him for that portion of the Province, included
in the Electoral District for the election of members for
the Legislative Council, within which, the district for
which he is Returning Officer is situated. He must reside,
or have his chief place of business, other than that of
Returning Officer, in his district.
3. The Returning Officer for the Province, and every •
District Returning Officer, shall act until his appointment,
be cancelled or his resignation be accepted, and in the case j
of his temporary absence, inability, or disability to act, the
Governor shall appoint a substitute to act temporarily in
his stead. The substitute can perform and exercise the
duties and powers, and is subject to the liabilities of the
Returning Officer in whose place he is appointed.
4. Every person hereafter appointed Returning Officer
for the Province or District Returning Officer, shall, before
he enters on the performance of any duty under the same,
make and subscribe, before a Justice of the Peace of the
said Province, the following declaration, and the Justice
before whom such declaration may be made, is hereby
.required to transmit the same, by the first convenient
opportunity, to the Attorney General: —
“ I, A. 8., do hereby declare that I accept the office
of and I do hereby promise
and declare that I will faithfully perform the duties
of the same, to the best of my understanding and
ability, and that I will not reveal or disclose any
knowledge that I may acquire in the discharge of my
said office touching-the vote of any elector.”
Appointment
Returning
Officer for Pro-
vince.
§ 5 P.
Appointment
Returning
Officers.
§ 14F,6 P, 7 P*
§3R.
Must act till
appointment
cancelled or
resignation
accepted.
§ 8 P.
Substitutes.
Declaration of'
office to be
made.
§ 10 P.
Form, of
declaration..


Form of Roll.
§I3P.
5. Every Returning Officer shall be provided with hooks
according to the respective forms, 1 and 2 of the Eirst
Schedule (to the Act), for entering the names and particu-
lars of the persons claiming to vote, according to the first
letter of the surname, under the headings of the respective
voting places, and the date when claims received (the date
of registration of claims to be taken as of the date when
received by the Returning Officer). After an elector has
been registered on the roll for six months (calendar), the
date of registration need not be continued.
6. The Returning Officer shall file in his office all claims
he receives, and enter thereon the date of its receipt by
him, and shall immediately enter the name of the claimant
on the roll for the division or district, as the case may
require, and shall enter in the column, under the heading,
“ Date of Registration,” the date on which he actually
received such claim ; and such date shall be the date of
registration of such claimant as an elector, unless such
claimant shall in such notice state that his name appeared
in the electoral roll immediately previous to the then
existing roll, in which case, the date entered in the said
column shall be the date on which such claimant was
registered on such previous roll.
It is the duty of Returning Officers to carefully peruse all
claims, transfers, and other documents, and, if there
be any omission therein of the particulars required, to
reject such as are incomplete. Their failure to so act
in this respect, is a neglect of duty and renders them
liable accordingly. The Act is particular about the
Returning Officer having to file all claims, but silent as
to compelling him to allow their inspection. As the
printed copies of the rolls do not contain a verbatim
transcription of the particulars on the claims, the
claims and other documents should be open to inspec-
tion, or the rolls contain an exact copy of the particu-
lars. This is more particularly the case with the
Legislative Council rolls, and as there is nothing in any
of the Acts requiring brevity, the words "freehold,”
“occupier,” “leasehold,” are improper. With regard
to “ leasehold ” there are three essentials under that
qualification, none of which can be gathered from the
simple word “leasehold.” All claims for entry on
the roll should be filed and kept so long as the roll
exists, i.e. until a new roll is compiled. See also
Electors.
To enter
claimants on
Roll.
§ 17 P.
Form is given at
end of par. 7,
Electo rs — Gen eral
Notice of deli-
very of forms to
be gazetted for
new rolls.
§ 18 P, 3 T.
7. In the month of May, in every five years from 1886,
the Returning Officer for the Province shall cause to be
published, in the Q-overnment Q-ozette , and exhibited at
every telegraph office, post office, and police station in the
12


Province, other than that part known as the Northern
Territory, a notice calling attention to the fact that fresh
rolls are about to be formed, and that returns, which are
about to be, or have been left at every dwelling house in
South Australia, are to be filled up, and every person
desirous of having his name inserted in the new rolls,
must cause his name, qualification, and residence to be
inserted in such return, or otherwise send to the Eeturning
Officer of his district, a notice of claim as provided by the
Act. The Eeturning Officer for the Province is also,
annually in February, to publicly notify, in the Govern-
ment Gazette , that all claimants requiring registration on
the electoral roll, are to send in their claims for entry.
By Act P, the month was originally fixed for February; this
was altered to May by Act T. The present rolls were
compiled at time of corses, sth April, 1891.
8. The Governor, before Ist May, 1881, and before Ist '
May in every fifth year after (1886 was exempted by T), J
shall cause to be ascertained, the names of all male persons ]
qualified to vote for the election of members of Parlia-,
ment with their qualifications and residences, for the for-
mation of fresh electoral rolls, and for that purpose, shall
appoint, by notice in the Government Gazette , fit and
proper persons, at reasonable remuneration, to be collectors,
and shall assign to them certain limits, and who, within
their respective limits, shall discharge the duties required
of them by the Act and their instructions.
9. As the collectors’ duties are carefully set out in the
printed instructions given them, viz.: —how to collect and
dispose of the returns, it is unnecessary to state them here.
The collector is paid on the Eeturning Officer’s certificate
of the due performance of the duty.
10. Each Eeturning Officer shall, on receipt of any such
returns, or any notice of claims, file the same in his office,
noting thereon the date of the receipt by him, and shall
examine the said returns, and ascertain the same are pro-
perly filled up, and may require from the person who
compiled the same, any information or explanation he may
consider necessary.
It is to be observed that the returns and claims are to be
filed, not destroyed, as has been sometimes done.
Filing must continue during the existence of the roll,
i.e., until a new roll is compiled, not until fresh copy is
printed.— See also Electors.
Governor to
ascertain per-
sons entitled to
be on rolls and
to appoint
collectors.
§I9P.
i Collectors*
duties.
§ 20 F.
To forward
! claims to Re-
turning Officers*
§2l P.
§44 P.
L Returning
Officer to see to
1 the proper pre-
[ paration of list.
. § 22P.
13


Returning
Officers to com-
pile fresh rolls.
§ 23 P.
11. Each Eeturnmg Officer, shall, on the receipt of the
returns and claims so sent to him, forthwith compile fresh
electoral rolls for his division (to form a portion of the
electoral roll of the Province) and particular district, by
inserting the names of all persons who shall appear to be
entitled to have their names inserted in such roll, and he
shall, in the column under “ Date of Registration,” enter
the date then appearing on the electoral roll then in force
for the district or division against the name of any elector
who shall not have been registered six months on such roll,
and in ease of a claimant whose name is not upon such
roll, then the date on which he actually received such
claim, and such date as aforesaid shall for all purposes be
deemed to be the date of registration of such claimant as
an elector on the electoral roll for the Province or particu-
lar district, as the case may be, and the Returning Officer
J date and sign the same; and the rolls so prepared
shall be the electoral roll for the division or district, to
which the same relates, and shall come into force and
i operation on the 30th day of June, in the year they are so
dated and signed, and shall remain in force with such
alterations and additions as may be made therein for five
years from the said 30th day of June. Provided that if
from any ca/use the roll of any division or district shall
not have been completed on the said 30th June, the
Governor may, by notice in the Government Gazette, en-
large the time for completing the said roll, until a day to
be named in such notice, and shall name a day when the
same shall come into force. —See also Electors .
12, Each Returning Officer, shall, annually in May, for-
ward to the Returning Officer of the Province, a fair copy
of the rolls, certified correct, who shall thereupon, with all
convenient speed, cause the same to be printed, blank spaces
being left after each letter for the addition from time to
time of the names of claimants, and each Returning Officer
shall be supplied with a sufficient number of such printed
copies, r
13. Every Returning Officer shall, annually, within four-
• teen days after receiving the copies of the corrected rolls
from the Government Printer, cause a copy of them, cer-
tified to be correct to the date of his signing them, to be
forwarded by post to the place of meeting of every Cor-
poration or District Council within the electoral division
or district to which the said copies refer respectively, and
also to every police station and post office in any such
When come into
force.
Duration.
§2T.
§24P.
Electoral Rolls
to be exhibited.
§3Q.
14


division or district beyond the limits of a Corporation or
District Council, and the said copies shall be kept open
for public inspection.
14. Each Returning Officer shall always keep, in his :
office, the electoral roll for his district and division, and j
permit them to be perused by any person, at all reasonable i
hours, without payment of any fee, and shall furnish to
any person desiring same, the last printed copy of either
roll on payment of one shilling for each copy. He is also
to keep copies of rolls of all electoral districts and divisions,
and permit any elector to inspect them.
15. When any new electoral districts are created, or the
boundaries of districts altered, the Returning Officers
shall, within one calendar month, make up or alter the rolls
accordingly, and shall erase the names of all persons regis-
tered on the rolls, who, after any such alteration of
boundaries, are not residents within their respective dis-
tricts or divisions, and forward to the Returning Officer of
any newly-created or altered district, a certified list of the
names of such persons as shall reside in such newly-created
or altered districts, their abodes, qualifications, and period
or date of registration, as appearing on the electoral rolls
for the Council and Assembly respectively ; and such last
mentioned Returning Officers shall, on the receipt of such
lists, enter the names of such electors on the electoral rolls
of their distriet or division, as the case may be, inserting
against the name of persons not registered for six months,
in the column, “ Date of Registration,” the date of regis-
tration, as appearing on the roll on which the elector was
previously registered, and shall make a memorandum
against each name, stating the fact of the transfer, and
shall initial same, and every such elector shall be deemed
to have been registered upon the electoral roll for such
district or portion of the electoral roll for the Legislative
Council district within which such division is included as
from such date, and be entitled to vote accordingly.
16. Whenever any polling places are closed, or new
polling places proclaimed, the proclamation, in case of
closing, may state at which other polling places the electors
are to vote, and the rolls are thereupon to be altered
accordingly.
17. Every Returning Officer may, on the personal or
written application of any elector,
Returning
Officer to keep
rolls and allow
inspection.
§ 26 P.
§nx.
Duty on altera-
tion of electoral
districts.
§27P.
§ 12 R.
Altering polling
places.
§6C.
May correct
errors and
omissions in
roll.
§ 28 P.


(a) Change his description of qualification,
(S) Change his residence,
provided that the Returning Officer shall be satisfied that
the change proposed to be substituted is sufficient to entitle
such person to vote.
He may also correct any mistake, or supply any omission
which shall be proved to have been made in any such roll
with respect to the
0) Name of elector,
( d) Place of abode of elector,
(e) Elector’s qualification,
(/) Date of registration,
and may change the voting place of any elector to any
other polling place ; this last cannot, however, be done
during the four days next immediately before the day
appointed for, nor on the day of the election. He must
initial the names struck out or inserted, and all mistakes
corrected or altered, and place the date of so doing.
18. Returning Officers shall object to all persons who
they have reason to believe are dead, or are not entitled to
be retained on rolls.
19. Returning Officers must be supplied by the Registrar-
General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages, in May, August,
November, and February in each year, with a dated, signed,
and certified correct list, containing the names, addresses,
and occupations of all adult males whose deaths have been
registered in the Returning Officer’s district during the
then next preceding three months.
20. Each Returning Officer shall, for his district and
division, in the months of June, September, December, and
March in each year, by notice in the Government Gazette ,
give a list of the names of persons on his rolls to whom
he objects as not being entitled to be retained on his roll
or rolls, and shall, by such notice, state a day, time, and
place when and where he will sit to erase such names off
his roll or rolls, and thereupon it shall be lawful, then and
there, for such Returning Officer to erase the names of
such persons, or to (sic) such of them as shall not satisfy
him that they are entitled to have their names retained
upon such roll or rolls.
21. In addition to the notice in the Government Gazette,
the Returning Officer shall send to each person mentioned
Form: 1.
PORM 2.
Change polling
place.
Objections.
§29P.
To be supplied
with Mortuary
Returns.
§ 30 P.
To give notice
of persons he
objects to, and
erase names of
unqualified
persons.
§3l P.
Must be also
summoned.
§ 32 P.
16


in such notice, a summons containing the particulars
thereof, requiring him to appear and answer such objection,
and such summons may be served by posting the same in
manner provided.— See Objections and Objectors , 2.
22. As to acting on certificate of Local Court’s decision ■
on an appeal. — See Objections and Objectors, 8. <
23. As to granting transfers from one division to '
another, or one district to another, and Travelling Certifi-
cates. — See Electors, General, 12.
24. Every Eeturning Officer, upon giving any such cer-
tificate of transfer, shall strike the name of the person to
whom same issued, off the electoral roll for his division and
district (as case may be), and make a memorandum against
such name, stating the fact of the transfer, thus —“ Certi-
ficate to (name of division or district),” and initial same.
The Eeturning Officer inserting the name of any person on
his roll by virtue of any such certificate of transfer, shall
make a memorandum against such name, stating the fact
of the transfer, thus— “ Certificate from (division or dis-
trict as case may be),” and initial same.
In point of exactness, the words “ Certificate to ”
or “ Certificate from ” are applied only to the
Assembly transfers, but the intention to Council trans-
fers is similar. In actual practice among the Eeturning
Officers they adopt the words “ Certificate to ” or
“ from,” as case may be, for both Houses, and insert the
name of the district or division, as case may be, since
both bear same name.
All transfers and applications for transfers should be filed
(though the Act does not require this) for protection
and in case of dispute.
25. The fees payable to the Eeturning Officer for the
Province, and each Eeturning Officer and assistants, are ,
set out in the schedules, the alteration being as to the
second item in the 9th schedule, from £5O to £25, and £25 1
also for each division. This meant a curtailment of £5O
annually to each Eeturning Officer.
26. The Eeturning Officer for the Province is more a
titular than actual office. It is practically extinct; his
real office being that of Eeturning Officer for the Central
Electoral District (i.e. for the Legislative Council). His
duties are limited and consist of the following :
1. To insert annually during February a notice in the
Government Gazette, reminding electors to register their
claims.
Certificate of
Local Court’s
decision.
§ 38 P.
Transfers and
Travelling
Certificate.
§39 P, 42 P,
40 P.
Transfer to be
noted on both
rol's, and
initialled.
§ 41P, 43 P.
Issuing Officer.
Receiving
Officer.
Fees to Officers.
§ 44 P.
9th Schedule.
54T.
Schedule.
§ 18 P, 3 T.


§24 P.
§4R
§6R, BR, 9 R.
§6X, 9X.
§l3 V.
§67 P.
2. To receive annually in May, from Returning Officers,
copies of their rolls, forward them to Government
Printer to be printed, and on receipt from latter, to
redistribute them accordingly.
3. On receipt of writ for Central District, to forward copies
to the six Deputies, and insert notice announcing issue
of writ, dates of nomination, and polling.
4. To receive nominations for the Central Legislative Council
District, attend on nomination day and read them out,
and, after election, declare who elected, endorsing and
returning writ accordingly.
5. Receive, file, and (if required) furnish copies of candi-
dates return of electoral expenses, permitting their
inspection on payment of fee.
6. Also a few minor duties of routine and departmental
nature, such as—
(а) Supplying voting papers required under Absent Voters
Act.
(б) Receive from the various Assembly Returning Officers
tabulated returns concerning the voting papers and
votes.
Peioe to Election Day.
1. On receipt of any writ for an Assembly election, the
duty of the several Eeturning Officers is as follows:
1. Endorse thereon the date of its receipt.
2. Cause to be printed and published, a notice stating the
receipt of the writ, the day of nomination, the date of
the polling day, and the chief and other polling places
for his district, and shall forthwith cause the notices to
be circulated in his district at such places and in such
manner as he shall think necessary.
2. On the receipt of any writ for the election of a
member or members to serve in the Legislative Council,
the duty of the Eeturning Officer for the Legislative
Council (division is omitted) shall be as follows :
1. Endorse thereon the date of its receipt.
2. Forthwith forward a copy of the writ to the Deputy
Returning Officers for each division in the Legislative
Council district for which such writ is issued.
3. Cause to be printed and published, a notice stating the
receipt of the writ, the day and place of nomination,
the date of the polling day, the names of the polling
places, and of the Deputy Returning Officers for each
such division, and forward sufficient copies of such
notice to the said Deputy Returning Officers.
3. The Deputy Eeturning Officers duties shall, on receipt
of copies, writ, and notice, be as follows;
On receiving
Writs for H.A.
elections.
§ 49 P,
Duty of Divi-
sional Return-
ing Officer on
receiving Writ
for L.C.election
§4R.
Duty of Deputy
Returning
Officers.
id.
18


1. Endorse thereon the day of its receipt.
2. Forthwith cause the notices forwarded to them to he
published and circulated within their respective divi-
sions, at such places, and in such manner as they shall
think necessary.
Nomination Day.
1. The Eeturning Officer (for the Legislative Council or ;
Assembly District, according for which chamber the election f
is to be held) shall attend at the place of nomination (for
the Legislative Council) or chief polling place (for House
of Assembly) at noon on the day of nomination, and there
publicly produce the several nomination papers he shall
have then received and give notice of the names of the
persons nominated.
For places of nomination for Legislative Council see
Appendix.
2. In case there shall he no greater number of candi-
dates duly nominated than are required to be elected, the
Eeturning Officer shall declare such candidate or candi-
dates to be elected, and make his return accordingly.
3. In case more such candidates shall be duly nominated
the Eeturning Officer shall give notice thereof, of the
names of the candidates, and of the day and time of taking
the poll.
In case of riot or open violence see Election day. Declaration
of Poll 7.
For the several duties on election day (polling hours,
scrutiny, and declaration of poll) see Election day and
the sub-divisions.
For penalties Eeturning Officers are liable to, see Offences
and Penalties, 39.
Assistant Eeturning Officers.
1. By Act No. 280 of 1883, whenever in the opinion of
-the Grovernor any one or more portions of any electoral
district are so remote from the chief polling place of such
district as to make it impracticable for the Eeturning
Officer of the district to conduct the elections in the
manner provided by the Electoral Act, 1879 (and the Acts
amending it), it shall be lawful for the Governor, by
proclamation, to appoint one or more Assistant Eeturning
Officers for such electoral district, who shall at such out-
lying portions of the district, and within the limits pre-
scribed by such proclamation, perform, subject to the
provisions of this Act (S), the same duties and exercise
the same powers as if they were the Eeturning Officers of
b 1
Notice to be
given of candi-
dates.
§5O P.
§6B.
If no contest,
candidates to
be declared
elected.
§ 51P.
If contest,
notice to be
given.
§52 P.
Governor may
appoint Assis-
tant -Returning
Officers for out-
lying portions
of electoral
districts.
§2S.


the said district; and such Assistant Returning Officers,,
when so appointed, shall also be Assistant Deputy Return-
ing Officers for the corresponding electoral division, and
shall, before they enter on the performance of their duties,
make the declaration required to he made by Section id
of The Electoral Act, 1879.
See Returning Officers, General, 4.
3 - 2. In the event af any such appointments being made,
such officer is to be furnished with books for supplementary
rolls and acts as is the case with Returning Officers in
respect of claims, transfers, certificates, corrections, &c.,
revisions, objections, and conduct of elections within such
outlying portion of the district, having, exercising, and
enjoying the same powers and rights, and performing the
same duties and being subject to the same penalties and
liabilities as if such outlying portion of the district were
an electoral district and he the Returning Officer thereof.
For the duties, see those of Returning Officers.
3. With respect to writs, the Returning Officer for the
district or division, on receipt of writ or copy telegraphs
the contents, together with day of nomination and polling
day, to the Assistant Returning Officer, who proceeds in
the same way regarding notices for his portion of the
district as a Returning Officer.
4. Any candidate for election may forward his nomina-
tion papers to the Assistant Returning Officer, who shall
forthwith telegraph the contents thereof to the Returning
Officer for the district, if for the Assembly, or if for the
Legislative Council, to the Returning Officer of the Legis-
lative Council District to which such election relates.
5 When the Returning Officer for the district has
received the telegram from the Assistant Returning Officer
stating whether any, and if any, what nominations have
been received, the Returning Officer shall immediately tele-
graph to the Assistant Returning Officer all the nomina-
tions for such election, including any that may have been
made in such outlying portion of the district; and the
same course is adopted with regard to Upper House
election nominations.
6. Upon the receipt of such list of nominations the
Assistant Returning Officer, if an election is necessary
appoints such persons and does and causes to be done such
acts and things as are required by the Electoral Act, 1879,
General duties.
§ 3 S, 4S.
Writs
telegraphed to
Assistants.
§ 7 S.
Assistants to
telegraph to
Returning
Officer nomi-
nations he has
received.
§8 S.
Returning
Officers to
telegraph
whole of nomi-
nations to
assistants.
§9S.
Assistants to
appoint sub-
stitutes.
§lO S.
20


■and any Acts extending or amending the same, for the
purpose of taking the poll in accordance with those Acts
in the outlying portion of the district.
For those duties, see Election day and the suh-divisions.
7. When the Assistant Returning Officer shall have ■
received all the ballot-boxes from the several polling places ]
within such outlying portion of the district, he shall con-
duct the scrutiny for such outlying portion of the district
in accordance with the said Acts, and such scrutineers as
desire to be present shall be present and shall sign the record
of the votes, and such Assistant Returning Officershall in the
presence of such scrutineers as desire to be present tele-
graph the result to the Returning Officer.
8. The Returning Officer shall forthwith ascertain
the total number of votes, including the numbers so
received by telegraph, that have been polled for each
candidate, and shall make his return accordingly, and shall
telegraph the final result to the Assistant Returning Officer,
who shall give public notice of the same.
9. In case telegraphic communication is interrupted
between such outlying portion of the district and the office
of the Returning Officer for the district, the Governor or
Speaker, as the case may be, may from time to time at
discretion extend the time appointed for the nomination,
or for the polling, or for the return of the writ, or for
any of the proceedings connected with such election. Any
such extension of time must be duly notified in the
Government Gazette.
Absent Votees.
As to duties regarding persons applying for Absent Voters’
forms, see Electors —Absent votes.
As to how such votes are dealt with at scrutiny, see 'Election
Day — 8 crutiny.
1. The Returning Officer for the Province shall supply
to Returning Officers, on requisition, the necessary
number of voting papers, envelopes, and forms to carry
the provisions of the Absent Voters Acts into effect.
2. The return and declaration (including the accompany-
ing documents) sent to the Returning Officer for the Pro-
vince shall at all reasonable times during three months
next after they are received be open for inspection by any
person on payment of a fee of 2s. The Returning Officer
-shall during that time furnish copies thereof, or any part
thereof, at the price of 6d. for every seventy-two words.
Assistant to
conduct scru-
tiny.
§l2 S.
Wire result
to Returning
Officer.
Returning
Officer to count
votes and
telegraph
result to
Assistant.
§ 13 S.
Provision for
interruption of
telegraph.
§ l i S.
Supply of
absent voters’
forms.
§I3V.
Return of
electoral
expenses open
for inspection.
§9X.
21


ELECTORS.
Aliens—Northern Territory — General—Absent Voters.
Aliens.
1. No Alien, unless a naturalized subject of Her-
Majesty, can be registered as an elector for either the
Legislative Council or House of Assembly.
For the Upper House, any person legally made a denizen of
this Province, may vote. This provision is not extended
to the House of Assembly.
The Aliens Act, No. 5, of 1864, which repeals all previous
Acts without revival, recognises all persons naturalized
under the repealed Acts, and all former grants, con-
veyances, &c., enacts that “ every person now born, or
who may hereafter (that is from 3rd November, 1864)
be born out of her Majesty’s dominions, of a mother
being a natural born or naturalized subject of Her
Majesty, shall be capable of taking to him, his heirs,
executors or administrators, any estate, real or personal,
within the said Province, by devise, or purchase, or in-
heritance, or succession.”
*' When any alien woman is married to any natural born
or naturalized subject of Her Majesty, such woman
shall thereby become and be naturalized within the
limits of this Colony.”
Aliens, before obtaining letters of naturalization, must have
resided six months in the Province, and be of good
repute, while those who have obtained letters of natura-
lization in any British Colony or Possession, can obtain
like privileges here, by depositing a copy of the letters
so granted. An oath of allegiance has to be taken, and
the fee to the Government in either case is ten shillings
and sixpence under the amending Act, No. 5, of 1872.
Section 19 of the Aliens Act, 1864, provides that—“ Nothing
in this Act contained, shall in any way alter or affect
any of the laws relating to the Constitution of the Par-
liament of the said Province or the election of members
to serve therein.”
Except in the rare cases of grants of denizenship by letters
patent (the effect of which seems to be limited to voting
for the Legislative Council) no alien, who is not natura-
lized here, or has not deposited a copy of the letters of
naturalization granted to him as above explained, can
vote for either House. It would be well if it were pro-
vided that every Returning Officer should compel pro-
duction of Letters to him at the time claim is made for
registration. This would entail no hardship upon the
applicant, and prevent a great deal of improper
registration and prove a source of considerable revenue.
See British Possessions, Appendix.
22
51-
Act No. 489, of
1890.


Noethers' Teeeitoet.
1 Notwithstanding anything contained in Acts (A and '
P) no person brought into the Northern Territory of the Pro-
vince of South Australia, under the provisions of the Northern
Territory Indian Immigration Act, 1882, shall be qualified
to vote in the election of members to serve in the Parlia-
ment of the said Province, and no person residing in such
Northern Territory, shall be qualified to vote, unless he be
a natural born subject of Her Majesty, or a naturalized
subject of Her Majesty of European nationality or a
citizen of the United States of America, naturalized as a
subject of Her Majesty.
General.
1. Every man of the age of twenty-one years, being a (
natural born or naturalized subject of Her Majesty, and ‘
having a freehold estate in possession, either legal or equit- (
able, situate within the province, of the clear value of £5O
sterling money, above all charges and encumbrances
affecting the same, or having a leasehold estate in pos-
session, situate within the province, of the clear annual
value of £2O, the lease thereof having been registered
in the general Eegistry Office for the registration of
deeds or in the Land Titles Eegistration Office, or in
any other office established for the purpose of registering
titles to land, and having three years to run at the time ot
voting, or containing a clause authorising the lessee to
become the purchaser of the land thereby demised, or
occupying a dwelling house of the clear annual value ot
£25 sterling money, and who shall have been registered
on the Electoral Eoll of the province six months prior to
the election, shall be entitled to vote at the election ot
members of the Legislative Council.
Legal estate of course includes all persons having the
legal title irrespective of any beneficial interest.
The following “lessees” if in possession, provided the
lease is registered and the rent reserved is £2O clear
annually after deduction of all rates, taxes, charges
and imposts payable by the lessee :
(a). Having three years to run at time of voting.
( h). Containing covenant to purchase.
The leases may be
(a). Ordinary, i.e. dwelling house, farming, &c.
(V). Pastoral.
(c). Mineral.
See note to G in Form 2.— (Appendix).
Qualification of
voters for N.T,
§BG.
Qualification of
electors for
Legislative
Council.
§6 A, 11 P.
|IL.
23


The heading “occupying a dwelling house of the clear
annual value of £25” is in the absence of any
decision upon the point almost incapable of definite
explanation. The various aspects which must be con-
sidered are innumerable.
Some definite method ought to be laid down for ascertaining
the clear value of freehold. At present there are ii
existence assessments for the Land Tax, Corporations
District Councils and Water Works Department, bui
land values fluctuate to such an extent that it is diffi-
cult to precisely fix the value. The value at the time
the claim is registered might leave an ample margin,
but the matter is more difficult where the valuation is
on the border line.
• Every man o£ the age of twenty-one years, being a
natural born or naturalized subject of Her Majesty, and
having been registered upon the electoral roll of any district
nn if per \ ol i! °/ s,x calender months prior to any election,
shall be qualified to vote in the election of members to serve
in the House of Assembly that no man shall be
entitled to vote at the election of a member of the Legis-
lative Council or House of Assembly who has been attainted
or convicted of treason or felony, or other infamous offence
in any part of Her Majesty’s Dominions, unless he has
received a free pardon for such offence, or has undergone
tliG sentence passed on him for such offence.
Persons imprisoned for misdemeanors could vote, permission
being obtained on a habeas.
3. Any qualified person whose name does not appear on
the electoral roH for the province or for any particular
district may have his name registered on the electoral roll
tor the said province or district, as the case may be by
giving or sending to the proper Returning Officer for the
division or district in which he is resident, and for which
he claims to be registered, a notice of his claim, which
notice shall also state the polling place at which he intends
to record his vote, and the division or district in which he
was last registered to vote ; and if he shall state no polling
place, he shall be taken to intend to vote at the chief polling
place tor such division or district. 6
It is clearly enacted that an elector can only claim for the
division or district in which he resides and must state
tne division or district in which last registered.
4. No person shall at the same time be registered as an
elector on the electoral roll of more than one electoral
district or division, and no person shall be entitled to vote
at any election m any district or division except the district
or division in which he resides.
Qualifications
for electors for
Assembly.
§l6 A, 12 P.
Proviso to
qualification
for Legislative
Council and
House of
Assembly.
id.
Claim may be
made to be
placed on rolls.
§ISP.
If no voting
place stated,
chief voting
place is
presumed.
Must not be
registered on
electoral rolls
of two or more
districts.
S3IX.
24


5. The notice of claim (for each House) shall contain the
particulars and be in the form in the schedule or to the like
effect.
6. There are now further particulars required in the claim
viz., whether the claimant is a natural born or naturalized
subject of Her Majesty and the claim shall have the claim-
ant’s signature at foot.
By § 16 above, two essentials comprise tbe claim—lst the
notice of claim, and 2nd the particulars, either without
the other would make it senseless. The notice may be
in any form so long as the division or district, voting
place and date be given, but the particulars must be
those given in forms in Schedule, therefore the
further particulars required under § 12 X, must be
placed as shown in Forms. Any non-compliance or
deviation renders claim void, and no lieturning Officer
should register any claim not strictly in accordance with
amended form. Although there is nothing in the Con-
stitution, or Electoral, or Amending Acts, compelling a
lieturning Officer to show the claims, yet Eeturning
Officers being both Ministerial and Judical Officers are
under the control of the Supreme Court in its Common
Law Jurisdiction. An order could be obtained from the
Judges to inspect such claims and the Eoll and all such
claims found to be not in accordance with the Acts could
be prevented from being registered by prohibition, and
if registered their erasure might be ordered. The
Eeturning Officer in such case might be liable to a
penalty of not less than .£lO nor more than £2OO for
neglect of duty.
7. The Eeturning Officer, on receipt of the claims,
notes thereon the day he received them, which is the
date of registration, and is to immediately enter the names
and such date in the roll for the division or district as the
case may be. If, however, ar elector claims in such notice
that his name appeared in the electoral roll immediately
previous to the then existing roll, in such case the date of
his registration shall he the date he was registered on such
previous roll.
The intention of this clause is to enable electors who by
any error or oversight have had their names omitted in
the new roll, although registered on the immediately
previous roll, and thus obviate the necessity of waiting
six months before being able to vote. Although a
useful clause where the claim is bona-fide, yet it has
been grossly abused and led to a good deal of roll
stuffing. The provisions ought therefore to be re-
stricted, and it would be well if the period within
which an elector could claim under this Section were
limited. Even now, by strictly enforcing that part of
§ 15 P. (requiring the claimant to state the division or
Form of Claim.
§ 16 P.
Forms 3 & 4.
Further parti-
culars and
claimant’s
signature.
§I2X.
Entering
claimants on
roll.
§ 17 P.
25


district in which he was last registered to vote)
Returning Officers can materially check improper
registration and refuse dual registration, thus com-
pelling transfers in the ordinary way. Some very
gross instances of abusing this clause have come under
the writer’s knowledge. A very severe penalty should
be imposed upon those convicted of improperly
registering or attempting to improperly register any
person on any electoral roll for any district or division
either by means of the Section 17 P or by duplicating
his vote. For bona-fide claimants under this Section
the formula is as follows, and placed at the end of the
notice (i.e., before the date) and shown at Z in Claim
Forms •
My name appeared in the electoral roll immediately pre-
vious to the now existing roll (give number on roll and
name of voting place), and I claim registration [pur-
suant to Section 17 of “The Electoral Act, 1879”] or
as of the (date when roll compiled). List of dates see
Appendix.
i 8- if 8 * 0 notifying every fifth year of the intention to
compile fresh electoral rolls, and ascertaining by means of
collectors who are eligible to be registered as electors
leaving returns to be filled up by house-holders, calling for
them afterwards on a certain date, and the duties of the
collectors with respect to such returns, see these Sections
under Returning Officers, General.
9. Any elector, personally or by written application,
may request the Eeturning Officer of the district or
division where such elector is registered to correct any
arror as regards his name, residence, or qualification, &c
llns clause ts fully set out under Returning Officers , General
17, which see. ’
10. Any person whose name may have been registered
for six months upon any electoral roll in any division, and
who may desire and be entitled to have Lis name inserted
upon any other electoral roll in any other division may, on
written application signed by the person desiring to be
transferred, obtain from the Eeturning Officer for the
division on the electoral roll of which his name then is a
certificate of transfer, in the form of the 6th Schedule
addressed to the Eeturning Officer of the division to
which he shall desire to be transferred, and thereupon
such last-mentioned officer shall insert the name of such
person upon the portion of the electoral roll of the said
.Province relating to his division, according to the tenor of
such certificate, and such person shall be deemed to have
been registered upon the electoral roll of the said Province
Form.
Compiling
fresh electoral
rolls.
§lB P, 19 P,
20 P, 21 P.
Correcting
errors, and
omissions on
roll, changing
residences,
qualifications,
and voting
place.
§2B P.
Upper House
transfers.
§39 P.
Form 5.
26


for the division to which he is transferred, and shall be
entitled to vote accordingly. No person is entitled to
receive a certificate of transfer during the four days next
immediately before the day appointed for taking the poll
at any election of a member or members to serve in the
Legislative Council, nor upon the day of such poll.
The form referred to in the Schedule omits the important
words “ and be entitled.” They are essential, as upon
that condition the certificate of transfer is granted.
The form is in three parts—Nos. 1 and 3 being signed
by the person desiring the transfer, and No. 2 by the
Returning Officer who grants the certificate. The
particulars required to be inserted at the bottom of
Part 3 of the transfer are the same as the particulars
required for the registration of a claim, except the
statement that the elector is a natural born or
naturalized subject of Her Majesty. The place for
date in the bottom left hand corner of Part 3 in Form
should be left blank until after the certificate has been
granted—and then a date, subsequent to the date of
the certificate, should be inserted. You cannot in any
document say you are the person named in a certificate
which bears a later date. If no voting place be stated
the Returning Officer will register such elector at the
chief voting place. See §l5 P. supra. The person .
transferred can vote at the election, provided the
transfer is in the hands of the Returning Officer of the
division to which the elector is transferred on the fifth
day before the polling day.
11. Any person whose name may for the time being be
upon any electoral roll of any district, and who has
been registered thereon for six months, and who shall have
honajide changed his residence into another electoral dis-
trict, shall be entitled to have his name inserted upon the
electoral roll of such other district, and he may, on written
application, in form in the Bth Schedule, apply to the Re-
turning Officer of the district upon whose roll his name is
&c., <fec. (in the same way as explained in the previous
Section 39 P). No name, however, can be inserted in any
Assembly roll after the writ has issued, nor until after its
return.
The remarks in note to § 39 P, as to the parts Nod. 1,2, and 3
of transfer, apply equally to Assembly transfers, and
also with regard to dating, subsequent to certificate
granted. Both forma in Schedule state about being a
bona fide resident; the Act, however, only applies it to
Assembly transfers. There is great variance between
the forms and the clauses in the Act. As power is
given under § 26 X to alter these forms and substitute
others, by proclaiming notice of the alteration and
giving the new forms, no doubt, some day they will be
amended.
Transfer to be
registered five
days before
polling day.
Assembly
transfers.
§42 P.
Form 6.
After writ
issued no names
to be inserted
in roll till writ
returned.
27


Attention is directed to the proviso forbidding the insertion
of any names upon the roll, between the date of the
issue of the writ and its return ; this prohibition applies
equally to transfers and claims.
The Certificates of Transfer are addressed to the Returning
Officer of the district or division where the applicant
shall then reside. Some Returning Officers return the
applications to the persons forwarding the same, as
requested by them, others ignore the direction and send
them to the Returning Officer of the division or district
to which it is sought to be transferred. As they send
no intimation to the applicant of their having done so,
electors are sometimes doubtful about their votes. The
adoption of a settled system in this branch of the work
is highly desirable. As absent voters'’ papers are
allowed through the post free, the same concession
might be allowed in respect of all documents relating
to electoral matters. Claims, transfers, corrections, and
changing voting places are equally important.
12- nv person whose name may have been registered
for six months upon any electoral roll, in any division,
may obtain from the Returning Officer for the division, on
the electoral roll of which his name then is, a certificate,
in the form in the 7th Schedule, and on giving such certifi-
cate, the Returning Officer giving the same, shall write the
word Certificate ”on his electoral roll, opposite the name
of the elector receiving the same; and such elector shall
not be entitled to vote at any election without the pro-
duction of such certificate, but the production of such
certificate shall entitle him to vote at any polling booth in the
Legislative Council district: Provided* that such certificate
i bs given up and cancelled on the holder exercising
Ins vote. Provided also that the application for such cer-
tificate, by any elector, shall be made in sufficient time,
prior to any election, so as to enable the Returning Officer
to write the word “ Certificate,” on the list of voters, prior
to forwarding the same for use at such voting place.
The time for applying depends upon the voting place, size
of district, postal facilities, and other circumstances
Which will have to guide the applicant. This section
only applies to Upper House elections and is a simpler
way of voting than under the Absent Voters Acts.
The last of these Acts (No. 577, of 1893), although
intended to apply to elections for both Houses, contains,
by an oversight, reference to Schedule A only, which is,
as will be observed, solely applicable to the House of
Assembly, and its object was to assist those who "believe
they will be absent” on polling day, by enabling them
to apply for the voting papers through the post instead
of doing so personally. The above clause, 40, enables
an elector, of say Glenelg, to vote at Port Adelaide and
Travelling
certificates.
§4OP.
Form 7.
Form
Application.
Form 8.
§ 12 E.
Must be applied
for in time to
enable roll
being marked
accordingly.
28


was doubtlessly framed to accommodate electors when
the polling hours were from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.; the time
has since been extended to 7 p.m. It is now within the
range of most electors to vote at their proper polling
places, and consequently, few certificates are applied
for. It is still particularly useful, for those who,
although likely to be absent from their own division,
will yet be at some other voting place in the Legislative
Council district and prefer the secresy of the ballot to
the other somewhat open way of voting under the Absent
Voters Acts.
Although Section 21 X says “no person shall be entitled to
vote at any election, in any district or division except
the district or division in which he resides,” it does not
repeal § 40 P, and the error regarding “ division ” has
arisen through the confusion of the terms district and
division. Travelling certificates may therefore still be
issued and used.
A.s to Voting, see Election Day — Polling.
13. When new polling places created, or boundaries of ;
districts altered, see 'Returning Officers —General , 15.
14. When any polling place closed and new one pro- \
claimed, see Returning Officers — General, 16. ■■
Absent Voters.
1. Any voter who shall have reason to believe that he j
will be absent from the electoral district in which he is
registered as a voter on the day of voting, shall be entitled
at any time after the issuing of the writ to obtain a cer-
tificate in one of the forms, as the case may be, of the
Schedule, from the Returning Officer, that he is registered
as a voter upon the electoral roll and entitled to vote at
the forthcoming elections.
The words “ from the electoral district in which he is
registered as a voter ” do not imply that any person,
notwithstanding his non-residence in the district for
which he is registered is entitled to the certificate, for
the elector must be registered and can only vote in
the district in which he is resident. Any elector there-
fore improperly applying for such certificate will be
liable to penalties, and every Returning Officer should
put all the questions (see Election Day — Polling) to
ensure proper applications and frustrate improper
voting. The time for applying for the certificate is
“after the issuing of the Writ” These words also
occur in § 6 W, and the provision would have been more
useful had they been “ after the day of nomination ”
for sometimes a Writ is issued nearly two months
before an election, and many of the then intending
candidates do not go to the poll. In such an event
the votes in their favor are lost.
New i>olliny
places, or
altering district
bounds.
§27 P.
Closing polling
X>Laces and
appointing new
ones.
§ 6 C.
Certificate to
be granted.
§3V.
After writ
issued.
Foems 0 & 10.
29


The Act was by §l6 declared to be in force for three
years from the 23rd December, 1890 (date assented to)
to permit of its trial at the General Assembly Elections
for 1893. That clause is repealed by §2 W, but the
words “at the forthcoming elections” appearing at
the end of the section have remained unaltered.
2. Should any voter desire to record an absent vote,
there are two ways of obtaining the certificate—the one
by personal application, the other by applying through
the post.
3. In case of personal application the elector proceeds
thus:
Declares to the Returning Officer or his deputy (as by
§ 6 W the Returning Officer shall appoint a substitute to
act for him in regard to the issuing of certificates and
voting papers to absent voters whenever he shall be absent
from his office for more than four hours between the day
of the issuing of the writ and the day of election)
1. That he is the person named on the register of voters.
2. That he makes the said application believing that he
will be absent from the district on the fortheomins day
of voting. & J
4. The Returning Officer shall, if he thinks fit, put to
the applicant proposing to vote the questions authorised
to be put to voters on the day of voting before the delivery
of any voting paper. J
The questions referred to are those in § 60 P, schedule 11
of P and § 22 X, and are set out under the title—Elec-
jv° n —Polling, 8. As the Returning Officer, in
the matter of applications for absent voters' certificates,
has not the assistance of scrutineers, he should put all
the questions allowed to be put. Under §6O P, the
presiding officer has the discretionary power of
questioning _an elector, but when requested by a
scrutineer it _is obligatory to do so. Any elector
talsely answering any question is liable to two years’
imprisonment.
applicant shall refuse to answer any questions,
or shall answer the same in such a manner as to show that
he is not qualified to vote, the Returning Officer shall refuse
to grant the certificate.
6. The certificate is made on the back of an envelope
which together with a voting paper numbered and initialled
by the Returning Officer and having printed instructions on
the back, and another envelope already addressed to the
Returning Officer at the chief voting place of the district.
Two ways of
obtaining
Personal
application.
§4V.
Questions may
be put to
applicants.
§SV.
lieturning
Officer may
refuse to grant
certificate.
§6V.
Certificate, and
voting paper.
§7V.
Forms 9a, 9b,
10a, 10b.
30


are handed to the applicant, who has to sign the receipt
book kept by the Returning Officer acknowledging the
receipt of the certificate and voting paper.
No provision exists for losing or accidentally spoiling or
destroying any voting paper.
7. When the application is intended to be made through :
the post the procedure is as follows:
The elector fills up the declaration in Schedule, signs and
declares to it before a Justice of the Peace or Postmaster
(which under § 8 W means that any person acting as Post-
master may exercise all the functions of a Postmaster under
this Act or the principal Act) and forwards it by post or
any other way to the Returning Officer for the district.
The Justice of the Peace or Postmaster should, after the
form is filled up and signed, put these questions to the
intending declarant: —
X. Is that your name and handwriting ? (pointing to and
showing the signature.)
2. Do you solemnly and sincerely declare the contents of this
document (meaning the proposed declaration) are true ?
On the questions being answered in the affirmative, the
Justice or Postmaster then affixes his signature to the
declaration and returns it to the declarant.
The form mentioned in the Clause, and set out in the
Schedule to the Act applies only to the House of As-
sembly. By a very palpable oversight, the form is
given in the Act whereby to vote for the Legislative
Council Elections. The form given in Schedule B is
nowhere referred to in the Act.
8. The Returning Officer, on the receipt of the application :
(i. e. the declaration) shall forward the necessary certificate !
and voting paper through the post as a registered letter,
addressed to the applicant at the address given in the ■
application. ■
We have now arrived at the stage where the elector
is in posession of two envelopes (the smaller with the
certificate endorsed, the larger into which the smaller is to be
placed and addressed to the Returning Officer at the chief
voting place of the district) and the voting paper. The
treatment (whether under the personal application or by
means of the declaration) is precisely the same. It is cs
follows:
9. The elector writes the name or names of the candi- ■
dates for whom he intends to vote on the inside of the
voting paper.
Application
through the
post
§3W.
Forms 11 & 12.
Issue of the
certificate and
votluar paper.
§ 4 W.
Forms 9,9 a,
9b, 10,10 A,
10 b.
Candidates
names to be
written.
§BV.
31


Similar sur-
names, mis-
takes in
spelling.
Elector signs
his name in
presence of
postmaster.
9 V.
The surnames alone will suffice, when there not two candi-
dates of the same surname. Any mistake in spelling
the surname, where “it sounds the same, or the
intention is clear” shall not, under § 12 Y, prevent the
vote being counted.
10. The elector then (a) signs his name in the presence
only or any Postmaster in South Australia on the counterfoil
on back of voting paper, and ( b ) folding the voting paper
up hands it to the Postmaster to be witnessed and stamped
with the letter stamp of the day and date, then being
used at the post office, (c) The Postmaster then hands it
back to the elector who, ( d) in the Postmaster's presence,
must place the voting paper in the (smaller) envelope
haying the certificate on it; and fasten it up and (e) place
it inside the larger envelope, addressed to the Returning
Officer, fasten it up and (/) hand it back to the Postmaster
tor delivery in the usual course through the post.
11. Having issued the certificate, the Returning Officer
shall notify the fact on the lists of voters to be used at
the booths on the day of voting; and no elector who has
received any such certificate shall be entitled to vote at
any polling-booth unless he shall have delivered up the
same to the Returning Officer to be cancelled two days
before the day of election.
The time means the third day before election day. For a
large district the lists would have been sent out before
this time, but no provision is made for informing the
Deputy of their return for cancellation.
As to counting absent votes see Mection Day—Scrutiny—
Absent Votes. v
Returning
Officer to notify
issue of certifi-
cate.
§IOV.
Returning cer-
tificate, voting
papers, &c.
32


OBJECTIONS AND OBJECTORS.
1. Every person whose name shall he on the electoral
roll for the said Province, or on the electoral roll for any
district, as the case may be, may object to the name of any
other person being retained on such roll.
2. A person, other than a Returning Officer, intending:
to object to the name of some other person being retained '
on any roll, shall give notice to the Returning Officer in
the form in the Fourth Schedule, who shall, on the
application of the person objecting, issue a summons to
the person objected to, in the form in the Fifth Schedule,
and shall state a day, time, and place, when he will hear
such objection, and such summons may be served by
posting the same addressed to the last known place of
abode of the person objected to, or if that be not known,
then to the address appearing on the electoral roll; and
proof upon oath by the person who posted such summons
endorsed on the duplicate thereof that the original was so
posted by him shall be evidence of the summons having
been received by the person objected to at the place
mentioned in such duplicate on the day on which such
notice would in the ordinary course of post have been
received.
The objector must be an elector for the district or division
and be on the roll for that House to the voting in
respect of which he objects. The forms given in the
Schedule are mandatory, but the Returning Officer,
when he is the objector, may use any form of summons
so long as it contains the particulars required ( i.e
name, address, day, time, and place). The objector’s
correct address must be given in objection, and if that
on the roll be incorrect it should be corrected
accordingly. The objectee’s “last known place of
abode” is the place to which the summons should be
posted, and strictly speaking, the affidavit of service
should distinctly state this.
A form of affidavit of service is given in Appendix.
No names need be published in the Government Gazette
when an elector objects; it is otherwise when the
objection is by the Returning Officer. The time for
hearing of the objections should be after the lapse of a
reasonable period computed from the date of posting
the summonses, having regard to the size of the
district, postal facilities, and means of travelling.
3. At the time and place mentioned in the summons, or
at some adjournment, the Returning Officer shall hear the
person objecting and his witnesses, and afterwards the
person objected to, on oath, which he is authorised to
c
Who may
object to names
on roll.
§ 29 P.
Mode of
objection.
§32 P.
Forms 13 & 14,
Forms 15 & 16,
Fobm 17.
Hearing of
objections.
§ 33 P,
33


administer, and shall determine the matter; and if he shall
decide against the person objected to he shall strike out
the name from the roll, and shall initial and date the
same.
The only persons who can give evidence are the objector
and his witnesses—then the objectee. The evidence
must be on oath. It is advisable that the evidence be
taken down in writing and signed by each witness or
party, as upon that evidence the appellate Court would
have to decide. Failing this an affidavit (giving the
evidence or the gist of it) would perhaps do, but it is an
improper way of conducting the proceedings. Although
no printed form for the depositions is given, yet it is
suggested that so long as the evidence is fairly stated
therein, the witness duly sworn, the objectee present,
and the depositions duly signed by the witness or
party and by the Returning Officer, they would be
admissible.
Provision ought to have been made for Returning Officers
to adjourn the hearing where the proceedings are
interrupted or obstructed by any riot, open violence, or
threatening conduct. Such provision is made for
nomination and polling days. See Declaration Poll, 7.
4. If the person objected to shall not appear, either
personally or by some person on his behalf, according to
the exigency of the summons, the Returning Officer, upon
due proof of the service of the summons, may strike out
the name from the roll, and shall initial and date the same.
See note to § 32 P, supra, re “ last known place of abode.”
5. If the person objected to shall appear, and the party
objecting shall not appear, or if neither party shall appear,
the Returning Officer shall take no further action in the
matter.
6. If any person shall have made, or attempted to sus-
tain any frivolous and vexatious objection, the Returning
Officer, in his discretion, may order the payment by such
person of the costs, or any part of the costs of any person
in resisting such objection, such order being in writing,
and specifying the sum (such sum not to exceed Two
pounds), and by, and to whom, and when, and where to be
paid, failing which, such order may be sued upon by the
person in whose favor it is made, in a Local Court, and
the production of such order shall be conclusive evidence
in favor of the person in whose name it is made.
Costs can only be awarded if the objection is " frivolous and
vexatious.”
If persons
objected to
shall not
appear, name
to be struck
out.
§34P.
If objectee
appears, or if
neither party
appear, no
action to be
taken.
§ 35 P,
Costs may be
awarded in
-certain cases.
§36 P.
34


7. If either party is dissatisfied by (sic) the determina-
tion of a Returning Officer, he may appeal to the nearest
Local Court of Lull Jurisdiction, to be first holden seven
days after such determination, and the proceedings on such
appeal shall be conducted in manner appointed by the said
Ordinance, No. (5, of 1850, for appeals to Local Courts.
8. The judgment of the Local Court on such appeal
shall be certified to the Returning Officer under the hand
of the Clerk of the Local Court, and the seal of such
Court, and thereupon the Returning Officer shall make
such alteration or correction in the roll as the necessity of
the case requires.
No form of Certificate is given.
Geotjnds toe Objection.
That the person on the roll —
(а) Is not a natural born or naturalized subject of
Her Majesty.
(б) Is not twenty-one years of age.
(c) Is dead.
( d ) Is not residing within the district or division (as
case may be).
(e) Has parted with, lost, or ceased to have the quali-
fication registered (this may arise through sale,
insolvency, assignment, or having given up a
house).
(/) Has not properly stated his place of residence, or
occupation.
(g) Had not the qualification he claimed at time of
registration.
4h) Is registered on the electoral roll of another district
or division.
Appeal to
Local Court.
§37P.
Decision to be
certified to
Returning
Officer.
§3B P.
§ 6 & 16 A,
and
11 & 12 P.
id.
§ 29P.
§ 15 P & 21X.
§ 11 P & 6 A,
§ ]6 P & 3rd
Schedule to
P, & §39 &
42 P, &
Schedules 6
& 8 to P.
§6 A & lIP,
§ 15 P & 2IX.
35


WRITS.
Upon vacancy
resolved by
Council or
Assembly.
§26 A.
1. "When and so often as a vacancy shall occur in the-
Legislative Council or House of Assembly, upon a
resolution by the House declaring such vacancy and the
causes thereof, the President or Speaker, as the case may
be, shall forthwith cause a writ to be issued for supplying
the vacancy.
2. Writs for the election of Members to serve in the
Legislative Council and House of Assembly shall be
issued by the Glovernor or the Speaker of the House of
Assembly for the time being, as the case may be, and shall
be directed to the proper Returning Officers, and in each
writ shall be named the day of nomination for the election
therein named, and, in the event of any such election
being contested, the day for taking the poll at the different
polling places, such day to be not less than two days nor
more than thirty days from the day of nomination.
■ 3. All writs hereafter issued to Returning Officers for a
general election of members for the House of Assembly
• shall appoint the same day for the nomination of all can-
didates, and no candidate shall be nominated for more
than one district at the same election.
4. Where any election has been declared void by the
Court of Disputed Returns, the President or Speaker (as
the case may be) on the same being certified by the Presi-
dent of the Court, shall forthwith cause to be issued a new
writ for the holding of another election for the district
concerned.
5. The following five sections apply only to the House
of Assembly:
If any vacancy happens in the House of Assembly by
death or insolvency of any member or acceptance by him
of office of profit or pension during pleasure when Par-
liament is not in session, the Speaker of the House on
being informed of such vacancy, and the cause thereof, by
notice in writing under the hands and seals of any two
members of the said House, shall, after giving notice in
two consecutive numbers of the South Amtralian Govern-
ment Gazette , cause a writ to be issued for supplying
such vacancy, unless the Speaker shall have any doubt on
the subject, or unless good reason to his satisfaction to
the contrary shall be shown by writing under the hands
of any four members of the said House.
Council and
Assembly
elections.
§46 P.
§ 14 F.
Nominations to
be fixed for
same day for
Assembly gene-
ral elections.
§ 13 X.
Election de-
clased void by
Court of Dis-
puted Eeturns.
§ 98 P.
Vacancy hap-
pening when
Parliament not
in session.
§IB.
36


6. If, when any vacancy happens in the said House of '■
Assembly, or at any time thereafter, before a writ has i
been issued, there be no Speaker, or the Speaker be absent j
from the Province, or if the member himself be Speaker,
any two Members of the Assembly may address their
warrant or order in their joint names to the Clerk of the
House, and such Clerk shall, after giving notice in two
consecutive numbers of the South Australian Government
Gazette, cause a writ to be issued as if he were the
Speaker of the House, for supplying such vacancy, unless
good reason to his satisfaction to the contrary shall be
shown by writing under the hands of any four members of
■the said House.
7. If any member of the House of Assembly, by
writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker, and
delivered to the Speaker, shall resign his seat in the said
House, then upon the receipt of such resignation by the
Speaker, the seat of such member shall become vacant;
and such Speaker on receiving such resignation in writing,
shall, if the said House be not in Session, forthwith cause to
be issued a writ for the election of a new member in
■the place of the member resigning.
8. If any Member of the House of Assembly wishes to
resign his seat in the interval between two Sessions of
Parliament and there is then no Speaker, or if such
member be himself the Speaker, the resignation may be
addressed to any two Members of the House, and upon
their receiving same they shall forthwith address their
warrant or order in their joint names to the Clerk of the
House who shall forthwith cause a writ to be issued, as if
lie were the Speaker, for supplying such vacancy.
9. After any general election of the House of Assembly
and before its dissolution or other lawful determination,
any seat therein having become vacant, the writ for the
election of a member to serve in the place so vacant shall
be issued by the Speaker, under his hand and seal. If at
the time such vacancy occurs and there be no Speaker, and
the Assembly be not in Session, or if the Speaker be
absent from South Australia, the Governor shall issue
such writ under his hand and the public seal of the
Province.
10. All writs shall be framed in any manner and form
which is sufficient for carrying the provisions of Act P
into effect.
Errors of return. —See Court of Disputed Returns, 19.
If there be no
Speaker, or, in
his absence,
two members to
issue writ.
§2B.
On resignation
to Speaker.
§3B,
> How to issue if
! no Speaker.
L §*B.
When Speaker
may issue writ.
§SB.
Form of writs.
§47P.
37


Aliens not
elegible until
after five years
residence.
§l5 A.
Candidate for
Council.
§5 A.
Judges and
Ministers of
religion
ineligible.
§36 A.
CANDIDATES.
Who cannot he—Duties of.
1. No person, not being a natural born subject of Her-
i Majesty, shall be qualified and entitled to be elected a
Member of Parliament unless he shall have resided in the
said Province for the full period of five years.
2. No person shall be capable of being elected a member
(of the Legislative Council) who shall not be of the full
age of 30 years, and a natural born or naturalized subject
of Her Majesty, or legally made a denizen of the Province,
and who shall not have resided within the Province for the
full period of three years.
There is a marked difference between the above two clauses.
The former omits all reference to naturalization and
fixes the residence at five years; the latter permits the
election of naturalized subjects or denizens, and makes
the residence three years, and refers only to the Upper
House. There is apparently a conflict between the two
Sections. It seems from the position of the Section in
the Act that “ Parliament” should be read “ Assembly.”
See Electors — Aliens, and note there.
3. No Judge of any Court of the said Province, nor any
clergyman or officiating minister shall be capable of being
elected a member of the Legislative Council or House of
Assembly.
Upon the whole construction of this Act there appears to be
sufficient repugnancy to reading the clauses as in-
cluding either gender within the meaning of the
Language of Acts Act.
4. No candidate for election in any electoral district
shall be competent to act as Returning Officer, or in any
way to take part in the conduct of any election.
As to appointing Scrutineers during the polling see Election
Day — Polling.
As to appointing Scrutineers during the scrutiny see
Election Day— -Scrutiny.
As to who are ineligible to be elected or sit see Parlia-
mentary Vacancies—Holding contract for public service.
See also Offences and Penalties re Bribery—lllegal Practice—
and General —Electoral Expenses.
5. No electoral expense shall be incurred by or on
behalf of a candidate except in respect of the matters
mentioned in Part I. (see General—Electoral Expenses)
of Pirst Schedule, and no electoral expense by or on behalf
Not to act as
Returning
Officer.
§9P.
Limit on
expenditure.
§2X.
38


of a candidate shall be in excess of any maximum amount
in that behalf specified in Part 11. (see General —Electoral
Expenses) of such Schedule.
6. Every payment made by any candidate, or on his
behalf, in respect of any electoral expense shall, except
where less than forty shillings, be vouched for by a bill
stating the particulars and by a receipt.
7. (1) Within twenty-one days after the day on which '
the declaration of the poll shall take place, every can- i
didate at that election shall transmit to the Returning
Officer of the Province a true return in the form set
forth in the Second Schedule, or to the like effect,
containing, as respects the candidate :
(a) A statement of all electoral expenses, together
with all bills and receipts respecting the same :
( h ) A statement of all disputed and unpaid claims
of which the candidate is aware :
(c) A statement of all money, securities, and
equivalents of money received by the candidate
for the purpose of electoral expenses, with a
statement of the name of every person from
whom the same may have been received.
(2) The return so transmitted to the Returning Officer
shall be accompanied by a declaration made by the
candidate before a Justice of the Peace, in the form
of the Third Schedule; and any candidate who shall
fail to comply with the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of an illegal practice.
8. The provisions of the above Section 6 X shall, so far as
the Electoral District of the Northern Territory is con-
cerned, be read as if an additional term of six weeks were
added to the time limited for doing any act or thing under
this Act.
9. See Court of Disputed Returns. See also Nominations.
10. Candidate may attend any meeting of electors held
for electoral purposes not later than forty-eight hours
before the opening of the poll.
If election day is fixed for a Saturday a candidate can now
address electors at any time up to 8 o'clock of the
morning of the Thursday before the polling day.
Vouchers
payments.
§SX.
To transmit an
account of
election
expenses.
§6X.
Form 18.
Accounts to be
verified.
Form 19.
Extension of
time for Nor-
thern Territory.
§I6X.
Excuse for non-
compliance
with, provision
as to return
and declaration
§BX.
Time up to
which may
attend
meetings.
§ 25 X.
39


NOMINATIONS.
1. The places of nominations for the Legislative Council
and House of Assembly respectively, are given in the
appendix, together with the polling places.
As to closing any polling place and proclaiming others. See
Parliament Polling Places , and lieturning Officers —
General—Altering Polling Places.
2. In the event of any contested election, the day for
taking the poll shall be not less than two days nor more
than thirty days from the day of nomination.
3. In order that any person may become, or be a candi-
date at any election, he shall be nominated by not less than
two persons entitled to vote at such election, in manner
following, that is to say, after the issue of the writ, and
before the time fixed for the nomination, there shall be
delivered to the Returning Officer, a nomination paper, in
f°rm, or to the effect of the form, in the Tenth
.Schedule, naming such person as a candidate at such
election, and signed by the persons nominating as afore-
said, and having at the foot thereof a statement, under
the hand of the person so nominated, that he consents to
act if elected.
4. In case of proclaimed outlying districts, where
Assistant Returning Officers are appointed, nominations
may be forwarded to him.
See Returning Officers—Assistant Returning Officers.
See also Returning Officers —Nomination Day.
5. For general House of Assembly elections, all nomi-
are tp b e fixed for the same day, and no candidate
shall be nominated for more than one district at the same
election.
.-krducing or procuring a person to become a candidate
or withdraw from being a candidate. See Offences and
Penalties—lllegal 'practice .
Places of nomi-
nations and
voting places.
§ 7 G, 6 C.
Interval
between nomi-
nation day and
polling day.
§ 46 P.
Mode of
nomination.
§ 48 P.
Forms 20 & 21.
§BS.
Nominations
for same day in
Assembly
general
elections.
§l3 X.
§IOX,
40


ELECTION DAY.
Polling — Challenges — Scrutiny —Declaration of Poll.
Polling.
1. When any election is contested, the Returning ] (
Officer shall, for the purpose of taking the poll, cause i
proper polling-booths to be hired or erected, and shall
properly furnish the same, and shall, by writing under his
hand, appoint a substitute to preside at each polling-place,
when he is not personally present, together with such poll
clerks and doorkeepers as are necessary for the due and
orderly taking of the poll.
It is to be remembered that the deputy or substitute and
poll clerks must have their appointments in writing.
2. Each polling-booth shall have separate compartments’ :
and shall be provided with a ballot box, having an inner
cover, with a cleft therein, for receiving the voting papers, 1
and a lock and key, and an outer cover with a lock and
key, and the said compartments shall be constructed so as
to screen any voter therein from observation, and shall be
furnished with pencils for the use of voters.
3. The Returning Officer shall cause voting papers to be |
printed, which shall contain the Christian and surnames of :
the several candidates, arranged in alphabetical order,
according to such surnames ; and if there are two candi-
dates of the same surname, then according to the Christian
name of such candidates ; and if there are two candidates
of the same Christian and surname, then according to the
residences of such candidates, arranged in the like order,
and a square printed opposite the name of each candidate,
and he shall obtain a sufficient number of voting papers.
4. Before the hour of polling, the Returning Officer
shall deliver to the substitutes, at each polling-booth, a list
of the electors on the said roll who have been registered
for six months, and who claim to vote at such polling-
booth, herein called “list of voters,” together with a copy
or copies of the roll in force for the division or district, as
the the case may be, for use at the said polling, and shall
sign each page of such list, and shall also deliver to each
substitute, and himself retain, such numbers respectively
of the voting papers as shall he sufficient for the use of
•electors at such booth.
5. Before delivering the voting papers to the electors,
■each Returning Officer, or his substitute, shall initial such
Booths to be
erected or
hired for taking
votes.
§S3P.
Polling-booth,
how construc-
ted and fur-
nished.
§54 P.
Contents and
printing of
voting papers.
§ 55 P.
Polling-booth
to have copies
of roll and
voting papers.
§56 P.
Voting papers
to be initialled.
§ 57 P.


Proceedings on
voting day.
§SBP.
Opening booth.
Closing hour.
§IU.
Voter applying
for voting
paper.
id.
Two voters
under same
name.
Marking and
treatment of
voting paper.
papers on the face thereof, and fold them, and keep am
exact account of all initialled voting papers.
At rejected thly ' Toting P a P ers not initialled must be
6. The regulations at the taking of the poll are these
1; The polling booth is to be open to the public at
«o clock m the forenoon, when the presiding officer
shall exhibit the ballot-box empty, and then securely
fasten and seal the inner cover thereof, so that no
voting papers can be removed therefrom without
breaking the seal.
,‘ 2 c ; poll shall be open to voters at the said hour
ot 8 o clock in the forenoon, and shall continue so open
until all the votes of electors present in the polling
booth at the hour of 7 o’clock in the evening shall
have been taken, and shall then finally close.
3. Every person proposing to vote, shall state to the
presiding officer, or to some one of his clerks, his
Christian and Surname, and if so required any other
ot the particulars necessary to be expressed in the roll
winch the said officer may require for the sole purpose
ot enabling him to ascertain the name upon the roll
intended by such person.
4- The presiding officer, or voting clerk shall ascer-
tain it the name intended by the voter is upon the list
ot voters, and if so found he. shall, subject as after
provided, deliver to such voter a voting paper bearing
the initials of the Returning Officer, or his substitute,
and shall place a mark against the voters name on the
list ot voters.
5. If a person representing himself to be a parti"
eular elector named on the roll, applies for a voting
paper after another person has voted as such elector
the applicant shall, upon duly answering the questions’
in the Eleventh Schedule, (the questions are set out
below) be entitled to receive a voting paper in the
same manner as any other voter.
This is a highly dangerous clause—it opens up personation,
and a, dozen votes could by this means be fraudulently
recorded under the same name.
6. The voter shall forthwith retire alone to some
unoccupied compartment of the said booth, and shall
there in private and without delay indicate the name


of each candidate for whom he intends to vote by
making a cross, the centre of which cross shall be con-
tained within the square opposite the name of such
candidate, and shall then fold the voting paper, and
immediately deliver it so folded to the presiding officer,
who shall openly forthwith, and without unfolding the
same, deposit it in the ballot-bos, and the voter shall
then quit the polling-booth.
7. Any voter may signify to the presiding officer 3
that by reason of blindness he is unable to comply
with the last preceding regulation ; and thereupon
the presiding officer is satisfied that such voter is
afflicted with blindness, shall permit any agent named
by such voter to accompany him into the compartment
set apart for the purpose, to mark the voting paper on
such voter’s behalf, and hand the same to the Return-
ing Officer, who shall deposit the same in the ballot-
box.
8. Any person who by mistake or accident shall i
spoil any voting paper, may, before the same shall
have been deposited in the ballot-box, upon signifying
the same to the Returning Officer and delivering up
the spoiled voting paper, obtain a fresh voting paper,
and the spoiled voting paper shall be then and there
destroyed by burning the same.
9. At the close of the poll the presiding officer shall
publicly close, fasten, and seal the outer cover of the
ballot-box, and shall take charge of the same, and the
same shall not be opened until, and at the scrutiny.
7. The Returning Officer (or his substitute) the poll
clerks, and doorkeepers and scrutineers (not exceeding two
for each candidate to be appointed in writing) and electors
about to vote shall alone be permitted at any one time with-
out the consent of the Returning Officer or his substitute
to enter or remain in the polling booth during the taking
of the poll.
The number o£ Scrutineers now allowed is regulated by
§ 24, X., as follows: —“ At every polling place at which
more than 1,000 electors claim to vote a candidate shall
be entitled to appoint an extra scrutineer for each 1,000
electors or part of 1,000 electors in excess of the first
1,000 electors.”
Payment, however, by division 5 of Schedule 1 to that Act,
is only allowed to be made to one scrutineer.
Blind voter.
Spoiled voting
paper.
Must be in-
stantly burnt.
Close of poll,
box to be
sealed.
L Who are to
) remain in
polling-booth.
* §59.
)
r
f Alteration in.
] number of
i scrutineers
* allowed.
43


The following table shows number allowed :
Fr ° m * elector up to 1,000 electors—2 scrutineers (§ 59 P )
1.001 " " 2,000 “—3 « )| 2 lvi
“ 2,001 « « 3,000 «-I « ( *
3.001 “ " 4,000 “ —5 “ „
" 4,000 “ « 5,000 “ —6 «
And so on in equal ratio.
For form appointing Scrutineers see Appendix.
i 8 ' N ° eil, l uir y shall be permitted as to the right of any
person to vote except as follows, that is to say, the pre-
siding officer may if he thinks fit, and shall if requested by
any scrutineer, put to the person proposing to vote before
the voting paper !s delivered to him, or before such paper
the'Flfl Slte l r « l he j b i al 0t box ’ tbe fi ueBtion s contained in
the Eleventh Schedule, or any of them, and no other.
Two further questions are permitted by § 22 X.
The whole of them are here given
• l i.\.' A ' re i y ° U tbe P ersorl whose name appears as A B
in the electoral roll now in force for this electoral
district (or division) being registered therein for
property described to he situated in ? (Here specify
the street or place described in the electoral roll).
2. Have you already voted at the present election?
3 Had you, at the time of being registered, the
qualification for which your name now stands in the
electoral roll for the Division of (specify-
ing in each case the particulars of the qualification as
described in the electoral roll), and are you still
possessed of the same qualifications ? (or Are you of
6 twenty-one years, and do you reside within
tne District or pj
4. Are you registered as an elector, on the electoral
roll of any other electoral division (or district) ?
5. Do you reside within the electoral division (or
district) tor which you now claim to vote ?
9. If the person so proposing to vote shall refuse to
answer any question, or shall answer the same in such
manner as to show that he is not qualified to vote, he shall
not be permitted to vote, and he shall forthwith return to
the presiding officer the voting paper, if any, delivered to
mm, and which paper shall thereupon be immediately
destroyed by the said presiding officer. J
The destruction should by analogy with above sub-section
o oi Section 58 be by burning.
For falsely answering any question see Offences and Penalties.
Form 22.
■Question may
foe put to voters
§6O P.
■Questions.
On refusal to
answer, or if
not qualified,
voting paper to
-be destroyed.
§ 61 P.
44


10. At the close of the voting each presiding officer
shall, with the least delay possible, cause the ballot boxes
to be' delivered to the District Returning Officers.
11. At the close of the voting each presiding officer
shall, with the least delay possible, cause the ballot box to .
be delivered to the Returning Officer. ;
12. All voting papers issued to any substitute and not
used by him, and all lists of voters, shall be returned by
him to the Returning Officer with the ballot box.
Me Eiot see Declaration of Poll.
C H ALLEN” G-E S .
1. The following are grounds for challenging voters ;
(a) Non-residence in district or division. — Electors
— General.
(V) Being under twenty-one years of age.
(c) Having parted with or lost qualification, i.e.,
by sale, insolvency, assignment, or given up
the house.
((f) That the intending voter is personating the
real elector.
(e) That the person named on the roll is dead or in
prison.
(f) That the qualification claimed was never
possessed by the elector at the time of
registration.
(y) That the intending elector has been convicted
of felony, and is serving his sentence.
( h) 'that the intending voter has already previously
voted at the same election.
(i) That he is registered on the electoral roll of
another district (or division).
Sceutiny.
1. The Returning Officer presides at the scrutiny.
2. The proceedings for ascertaining the candidate or
candidates who have been elected is called “ the scrutiny.”
Each candidate may, either by letter or telegram, nominate
an agent, called a “ scrutineer,” to attend the scrutiny, on
his behalf, by giving to the Returning Officer the name
and address of such agent before the opening of the poll,
or without such notice, by permission of the Returning
Officer.
Legislative
Council ballot
boxes to be
delivered to
District Re-
turning Officers
§7B.
Assembly ballot
boxes to be
delivered to
Returning
Officers.
§ 62 P.
Unused voting
papers.
§ 63 P.
§ISP & 21X.
§ 6 & 16 A, &
11 & 12 P.
§IIP & 6A.
§B4P.
§ 29 P & 12 P.
§ 6 A & 11 P.
§I2P.
§ 83 P.
§ 21 X.
Proceedings at
scrutiny.
§ 64 P.
Form 23.
45


id.
Commencement
Must reject
•certain voting
papers.
May adjourn
scrutiny.
Equality of
votes.
E.O. has
casting vote.
Objections.
E.O’s. duty
thereon.
The scrutiny shall be conducted as follows:
1. Within one hour after the close of the poll, the
Returning Officer shall, at the chief voting place, in
the presence of, and subject to the inspection of the
scrutineers, or such of them as shall be then in atten-
dance, and such other persons as may be approved of
by the Returning Officer, proceed to open one of the
ballot boxes, and shall examine the voting papers
therein, and shall reject all voting papers (1) not
initialled, or (2) which shall contain crosses against
the names of a larger number of candidates than are
required to be elected, or (3) shall contain anything
marked or written, other than the initials of the
Returning Officer or his substitute, and the cross
indicating the name of such candidate for whom the
elector intends to vote, and proceed to ascertain the
result of the votes by counting the votes given to each
candidate ; and shall in like manner open every other
ballot box, and examine and ascertain the number of
votes therein contained, until all the ballot boxes shall
have been opened, and shall ascertain the final result
of the poll. The Returning Officer may adjourn the
scrutiny from time to time, as he may consider neces-
sary, having first sealed up all ballot boxes uncounted
at such adjournment, and allowing any scrutineer also
to seal the same, and then depositing the boxes in
some secure place.
2. Where an equality of votes is found to exist
between any candidates, and the addition of a vote
would entitle any of the candidates to be declared
elected, the Returning Officer shall give such additional
vote, but he shall not be entitled otherwise to vote at
an election for which he is Returning Officer : Pro-
vided, however, that the substitute of any Returning
Officer may vote at any election in like manner as if
he had not been appointed and acted as such substitute.
3. At the scrutiny, any scrutineer may object to
any voting paper as being informal, and" thereupon
the Returning Officer shall give his decision, and shall
mark on the voting paper the word “ admitted ” or
“ rejected,” as the case may be, and the decision of
the Returning Officer thereon shall be final, subject to
reversal by the Court for the Trial of Disputed
Returns.
46


4. All voting papers which shall have been used for j
voting, except those which any scrutineer may have i
objected to as informal, or which the Returning j
Officer may determine to be informal,, and all unused
voting papers, shall be forthwith destroyed. Voting ■
papers not required to be destroyed, and the several j
marked lists of voters used in the voting on the day of'
election shall be retained by the Returning Officer
until after the time for hearing of a petition ques-
tioning the election or return.
The time for presenting a Petition to the Court of Disputed
Returns was twenty-one days, but by sub-section 2 of
§ 8 X it is extended to within twenty-eight days from
the day of election or one week from the meeting of
Parliament, which shall last happen. The list of voters
used at the voting should be allowed to be inspected by
any elector of South Australia with view of ascertaining
those who have violated the Act. The present secresy
assists the frauds.
,3. The Returning Officer shall produce all letters with
absent votes addressed to him and received up to the time
of commencing the scrutiny of the votes, and at such
scrutiny the letters shall be opened in the presence of the
agents for the candidates who may attend, and shall be
dealt with thus: —
(a) The Returning Officer to produce the list of
persons to whom certificates granted and their
signatures of receipt.
(I) Returning Officer, without unfolding voting
paper, or allowing it to be inspected, shall
compare the signature on back with that in
receipt book, and allow scrutineers to inspect
same, and shall determine whether the signa-
ture is that of the person entitled to vote.
(c) In case certificate applied for through the post,
comparison shall be between the signatures on
declaration and voting paper.
(d) If vote allowed, Returning Officer shall tear
off the counterfoil bearing the signature and
insert, folded, the voting paper in the ballot
box.
(e) If Returning Officer shall reject the voting
paper, then the certificate and ballot paper shall
be preserved by the Returning Officer for
All voting
papers not
used or objected
to, to be des-
troyed.
Time for
retention of
those not
destroyed.
Absent votes.
Letters to be
produced.
§IIV.
Produce list to
whom certifi-
cates granted.
Signatures to
be compared.
§ 5 W, sub-
sec.' in.
If vote allowed.
§7W.
t If vote rejected.
L


production at any Court of Disputed Returns
that may be held on or about the election, the
Toting paper being at once sealed up, without
being unfolded or inspected.
(/) Voting papers so allowed, shall be placed in a
ballot box by themselves, and, when they have
all been inserted, the casting up of the votes
shall commence.
0/0 No voting paper shall be counted at the scrutiny
which doesnot bear the name of the Postmaster
or his deputy as witness, and which is not
stamped with the letter and date stamp.
These rejected voting papers should also be kept for Court
of Disputed Returns.
4. When any difference of opinion may arise between
the Returning Officer and the scrutineers as to the signa-
tures, the Returning Officer shall finally decide, subject to
reversal by the Court for the Trial of Disputed Returns.
There is no provision for challenge in the matter of absent
votes, except as to signatures.
Declaration op Poll.—Legislative Council.
1. The District Returning Officer shall immediately after
the result of the poll within his division has been ascer-
tained, return to the Returning Officer for the Legislative
Council the copy of the writ previously sent to him, with a
statement endorsed thereon of the number of votes polled
by each candidate, and such statement shall be certified as
correct by the District Returning Officer.
2. On receipt of the copies of the writ, certified as afore-
said, the Returning Officer for the Legislative Council shall
forthwith ascertain the total number of votes polled for
each Candidate in the Legislative Council district to which
the election relates, and shall at the place of nomination,
as soon as conveniently may be, publicly declare the result
of the election, and shall return the name or names of the
persons elected, by endorsement on the writ, and shall for-
ward such writ to the Governor within the time by which
the same is made returnable.
Foe House of Assembly.
B. At the chief voting, as soon as conveniently may be
after the final results of the poll shall have been ascertained,
the Returning Officer shall publicly declare to be elected
the candidate or candidates to whom the majority of votes
shall have been given.
To be placed in
separate box.
Must be wit-
nessed by post-
master or
deputy and be
stamped.
Returning
Officer decides
in event of
dispute.
§ 12 V.
Certificate for
number of
votes to be
forwarded to
Returning
Officer for
Legislative
Council.
§BR.
Returning
Officer for
Legislative
Council to
declare poll and
return writ.
§ 9 R.
Declaration of
Poll for House
of Assembly.
§6SP.
48


4. The Returning Officer shall return the name or names
of the persons elected, by endorsement on the writ, and
shall forward such writ to the Governor, or Speaker, as
the case may be, within the time by which the same is
made returnable.
Roe Legislative Council and House oe Assembly.
5. The Returning Officer of the district shall send to the
Returning Officer of the Province a return, in a tabular
form, of the number of electors on the roll, the number of
voting papers found in the ballot boxes, the number of
voting papers allowed, the number of voting papers rejected,
distinguishing the number —Ist not initialled by the
Returning Officer or his substitute; 2nd voting for more
candidates than entitled to be elected ; 3rd containing writ-
ing or marks by which the voter can be identified ; 4th
unmarked or informally marked voting papers.
6. Where the proceedings, whether of the nominations
of candidates, or of taking the votes, shall be interrupted
or obstructed by any riot or open violence the Returning
Officer shall not for such cause terminate the business of
such nomination nor finally close the voting, but shall
adjourn the proceedings until the following day, and it
necessary shall further adjourn such proceedings until such
interruption or obstruction shall have ceased, when the
Returning Officer or his deputy shall again proceed with
the business at the place at which the interruption or
obstruction occurred; and the day on which the business
of the nomination shall have been concluded shall be
deemed to have been the day fixed for the election, and the
commencement of the voting shall be regulated accord-
ingly ; and any day whereon the voting shall have been so
adjourned shall not as to such place be reckoned the day of
taking votes at such election, within the meaning thereof.
Whenever the voting shall have been so adjourned by any
deputy of any Returning Officer, such deputy shall forth-
with give notice of such adjournment to the Returning
Officer, who shall not finally declare the state of the voting,
or make return of the member chosen, until the voting so
adjourned at such place shall have been finally closed, and
the boxes containing the votes delivered or transmitted to
such Returning Officer.
Return to writ.
§ 66 P.
Returns of
voting to be
sent to Return-
ing Officer for
Province.
§67P.
In case of riot
or open violence
proceedings
may be adjour-
ned.
§69 P.
49


COURT OF DISPUTED RETURNS.
Formation of
Court for trial
of complaints
against the
validity of
returns by
Returning
Officers.
§B7P.
1. For the purpose of forming a Court for the trial of
any complaints which may be made against the validity of
any returns of members to serve in the Legislative Council
or House of Assembly, the Legislative Council, within one
week after its first meeting subsequent to each election to
supply the place of members who shall retire by rotation,
and the House of Assembly within one week after the first
meeting subsequent to every general election, shall elect,
each out of its own body respectively, four persons to be
members of the said Court, and the junior or the sole
acting Judge of the Supreme Court shall be President of
such Court.
lf , the legislative Council or House of Assembly shall
tail to elect the said four members of the said Court within
i the said one week, such four members may be nominated
at any time afterwards by the President or Speaker, as
the case may be ; and if any member shall be incapacitated
to attend a meeting of the Court by reason of resignation,
refusal to act, acceptance of office, death, sickness, or any
other impediment, to be allowed by the President of the
Legislative Council or Speaker of the House of Assembly,
his place shall be supplied by a person nominated for that
purpose by the Legislative Council or House of Assembly
respectively, or in default of such nomination for the
period of one week by the President or Speaker.
3. The record of the election or nomination of the said
members of the said Courts shall be entered by the Clerk
of the Legislative Council or House of Assembly on the
proceedings of their respective Houses ; and proof of such
shall be sufficient authority for the proper con-
stitution of such Courts.
■L The said Courts respectively shall not proceed to any
business unless convened by order of the Legislative
Council or House of Assembly, nor until each member
thereof shall take the following oath or affirmation, as the
case may be, which shall be administered by the President
to each of the members, and afterwards by any member to
the President :
, 5 ; “ L-, do swear (or affirm, as the case may be)
that 1 will duly administer justice in all matters which
may be brought before this Court, and that I will decide
in all such matters according to the principles of good
Nomination of
members of
Oourt in event
sucbnot chosen
as above
directed or of
vacancy.
§ 88 P.
Record of nomi-
nation of mem-
bers to be
proof of proper
Constitution of
Courts.
§B9P.
Courts not to
proceed to busi-
ness unless
convened by
the Council or
Assembly.
§ 90 P.
Oath to be
taken by mem-
bers of Court.
50


faith and equity, without partiality, favor, or affection,
and according to the best of my understanding. So help
me, Giod.”
6. The Courts thus constituted shall have power to J
inquire into all cases which may be brought before each
Court by the House by which it shall have been appointed,
respecting disputed returns of members to serve in the
said House, whether such disputes arise out of any alleged
error in the return of the He turning Officer, or out of the
allegation of bribery or corruption against any person
concerned in any election, or out of any other allegation
calculated to affect the validity of the return.
By the Act No. 583 of 1893 X. the further offence of
“illegal practice” is imported, which is also triable by
this tribunal.
The words “ out of any allegation calculated to affect the
validity of the return ” seem ample for all and every-
thing concerning an election —but § 95, infra, seems to
repel this idea; although the correctness or otherwise
of the claims registered do affect an election and form
a most importent groundwork on that point.
7. In the trial of any complaints as aforesaid the
members of the said Courts shall be guided by the real
justice and good conscience of the ease, without regard to
legal forms and solemnities, and shall direct themselves by
the best evidence that they can procure, or is laid before
them, whether the same be such evidence as the law would
require in other cases or not; and shall have power to
compel the attendance of witnesses and to examine them
upon oath ; and also to send for and examine papers,
records, and other documentary evidence affecting the
matter under investigation.
8. Each of the said Courts shall be an open Court, and
shall have power to adjourn its sittings from time to time,
as in its discretion it may think proper, provided that the
interval of adjournment shall not in any instance exceed
four days, and shall be competent to regulate the form of
its own proceedings ; but such proceedings shall in no case
. extend beyond the period of five sitting days, unless by
leave of the House by which it shall have been appointed ;
and that if no decision be adopted by a majority within
five sitting days, or any enlarged period as aforesaid, the
President of the Court shall, on such evidence as may then
be before the Court, pronounce a decision; and that
every decision, whether so pronounced by the President or
by the Court shall be final and conclusive without appeal.
Dl
Powers of
Courts.
§ 91P.
Courts to be
guided only by
the real justice
and good con-
science of each
case.
§92 P.
Courts may
adjourn and
regulate the
form of its own
proceedings.
§93 P.
Decision to be
given within
five days and to
be final without
appeal.
51


9. The said Courts shall be attended by one of the
officers of the Legislative Council or House of Assembly,
as the case may be, who shall make a minute of all pro-
ceedings of the Court in such manner and form as shall
from time to time be directed by the Court; and a copy of
the minutes shall be laid from time to time, or at the
termination of any inquiry, before the Legislative Council
or House of Assembly, as the case may be.
10. The said Courts shall not have power to inquire into
>y the correctness of any electoral roll, or into the qualifica-
tions of proposers or into the qualifications of persons
whose votes may on the day of election have been either
admitted or rejected, but simply into the identity of the
persons, and whether their votes were improperly ad-
mitted or rejected, assuming the roll to be correct.
Does this imply the right of the Court to inquire into the
correctness or otherwise of the Returning Officer or his
substitute in allowing or disallowing persons, who were
challenged, to vote ? If so, and such challenged
persons did vote, how are their votes to be be known ?
No provision exists in such cases. They could easily
be initialled on the back of the voting paper by the
Returning Officer, his deputy or substitute, with the
elector’s number upon the roll endorsed, and then kept
in same manner as those votes challenged at the
scrutiny. —See Election Day — Scrutiny , 2 and 4.
11. All complaints of the undue return of members to
serve in the Legislative Council or House of Assembly,
shall be addressed in the form of a petition to the said
1 Legislative Council and House of Assembly respectively;
and no petition shall be noticed nor any proceedings had
thereon unless it shall have been so presented :
1. By a person who was a candidate at the election
whereof it may be alleged that an undue return has
been made, or
2. (a) By a number of persons who either voted (b)
or were qualified to have voted at the said election,
amounting to not less than one-tenth of the whole
number on the roll of electors, the signature of each
petitioner being attested by two witnesses whose place
of abode and occupation shall be given.
3. And unless a sum of £5O shall be lodged with the
President of the Legislative Council or the Speaker
of the House of Assembly, as the case may require, by
the petitioner or petitioners as security for costs.
Minutes of
proceedings.
§94P.
Restriction of
the inquiries by
Court.
§ 95 P.
Complaints ot
undue returns
to be by peti-
tion to that
Chamber which
-election for.
§ 96 P.
52


4. And no petition shall be noticed which shall not
be presented (d) within twenty-eight days from the
day of election or (b) one week from the meeting of
Parliament, which shall last happen.
Provided that in case that the branch of the Legislature
to which a petition is presented shall have adjourned, and
not again met before the expiration of said periods of
seven or twenty-eight days, then such petition may be
presented not later than the second sitting day after the
next meeting of the House.
12. Any such petition shall, within ten days after the ]
same shall have been duly received, be referred to the Court J
above mentioned, appointed by the House to which the
said petition shall be addressed, and such Court shall
inquire whether or not such petition is duly and properly
signed.
18. The said Courts respectively may declare that any ;
person was not duly elected who was returned as elected ;
by the lie turning Officer of any electoral district, and
thereupon the person so declared to have been not duly
elected shall cease to be a Member of the Legislative
Council or House of Assembly, as the case may be ; and
if such Court shall declare any person to have been duly
elected who was not returned by any lieturning Officer,
the person so declared to be duly elected shall be sworn a
Member of the said Legislative Council or House of Assembly,
as the case may be, and take his seat accordingly ; and if
such Court shall declare any election to have been abso-
lutely void, the President or Speaker, on the same being
certified to him by the President of the Court, shall forth-
with cause to be issued a new writ for the holding of
another election for such district.
14. The said Courts respectively may, in writing under
the hand of the President, award to the party petitioning,
or the candidate against whom the petition shall have been
presented, such reasonable costs and expenses as such Court
may deem fit; and the President of the Legislative Council or
■ Speaker of the House of Assembly, as the case may require,
shall, by order under his hand, direct the payment of the
£5O deposited as aforesaid, or a sufficient sum thereof, to
any party or parties who, by such award, shall be entitled
to recover costs and expenses against the person or any of
the persons by whom such deposit was made ; and the
party entitled to any such costs and expenses such
award may recover the same, or so much thereof as shall
§ 8, sub-sec.
ii. W.
Petition to be
referred to
Court,
§97 P.
Proceedings of
Courts on
petitions.
§ 98 P.
Costs and
expenses may
be awarded.
§ 99 P.
53


not be paid out of any such deposit, from the party liable
to pay the same. If the party liable to pay the costs and
expenses shall not pay the same upon demand being made
within seven days thereafter, the President or Speaker shall,
by warrant under his hand, direct the Sheriff to levy for the
amount due upon the lands and tenements, goods and chat-
tels, of the party liable to pay the same, and the Sheriff
then proceeds in the same manner as on a writ of fi. fa .,
and on recovering the amount pays the same to the party
entitled.—Any person from whom the said amount shall
have been received, or who shall have paid the same on
demand thereof, shall be entitled to recover in any Court
of competent jurisdiction, from the other persons, if such
there be, who are liable to pay the same, or a proportionate
share thereof, according to the number of persons so liable,
and according to the extent of the liability of each person.
Every such warrant shall be returned to the said President
or Speaker, as the case may be.
All persons who intend signing any petition should remem-
ber that if the petition be not upheld they are liable
for costs and expenses.
15. "Where the return and declaration (as to electoral
expenses) have not been transmitted by a successful candi-
i date or being transmitted, contain some error or false
statement, then, if the candidate applies by petition to the
Court of Disputed Eeturns, which is hereby authorised to
enquire into the matter, and shows that the failure to trans-
mit such return and declaration or either of them, or any
part thereof, or any error or false statement therein, has
arisen (1) by reason of his illness, or (2) by reason of
inadvertence, or (3) of any reasonable cause of a like nature
and not by reason of any want of good faith on his part,
then the Court may make such order permitting such
accounts to be transmitted or to be corrected as to the
Court seems just, and may acquit such candidate of an
illegal practice.
This evidently means a counter petition.—No time is fixed
within which it must to be presented after the lapse of
the time allowed for filing accounts and declaration.—
The § 96 P refers to petitions against the return of
a candidate.
For illegal practices. —See Offences and Penalties.
16. No election shall be held to be void in consequence
solely of any delay of the holding of such election at the
time appointed, or in the return of the writ, or the absence
of the Eeturning Officer, or any deputy, the use of written
How recover-
able.
Contribution
recoverable.
Warrant to be
returned.
Excuse for non-
compliance
with provision
as to return and
declaration.
§BX.
Errors of form
not to vitiate g
election. ,
571 P.
54


instead of printed rolls, or any error on the part of any
Returning Officer or deputy, which shall not affect the
result of the election, or of any error or impediment of a
mere formal nature. Within the period of twenty days
before or after the day appointed for the holding of any
election, the Governor or Speaker, as the case may be, may
extend the time allowed for the holding of such election,
or for the return of the writ issued for the same, and may
adopt or cause to be adopted such measures as may be
necessary to remove any obstacle by which the due course
of any election may be impeded, and may supply any
deficiency that may otherwise affect the same : Provided
that any measures so adopted by the Governor, or the
Speaker, as the case may be, shall be duly notified in the
Government Gazette.
55


OFFENCES AND PENALTIES.
N.B. —Wherever a time such as one year, three months, &C. appear, it
denotes that is the period from date of offence within which pro-
ceedings are to be taken.
1. If any person by this Act (A.) disabled, or declared
to be incapable to vote or sit in the said Parliament, shall,
nevertheless, be elected and returned as a member to serve
in the said Parliament for any electoral district, such
election and return shall and are hereby declared to be
void to all intents and purposes whatsoever; and if any
person so elected and returned, contrary to the provisions
of this Act, shall presume to sit or vote as an elected
member of the said Parliament of any Session to be here-
after summoned and holden, such person shall forfeit the
sum of £5OO, to be recovered by any person who shall sue
for the same in the Supreme Court of the said Province,
or in any other Court of Eecord in the said Province
having competent jurisdiction.
The disabilities are set out under heading Vacancies in
Parliament —Paragraphs 2 and 4.
2. In every such contract, agreement, or commission to
be made, entered into, or accepted as aforesaid, there shall
be inserted an express condition that no member of the
said Parliament be admitted to any share or part of such
contract, agreement, or commission, or to any benefit to
arise therefrom; and in case any person or persons who
hath or have entered into or accepted, or who shall enter
into or accept any such contract, agreement, or com-
mission, shall admit any member or members of the
Parliament to any part or share thereof, or to receive any
benefit thereby, all and every such person and persons
shall forfeit and pay the sum of £5OO, to be recovered,
with full costs of suit, by any person or persons who shall
sue for the same in the Supreme Court, or in any other
Court of competent jurisdiction.
The contracts, agreements, or commissions referred to are
given under the head "Vacancies in Parliament.”—
Paragraphs 1 and 2.
3. If any person disabled or declared by this Act (JN T .)
incapable to be elected shall presume to sit or vote as a
member of either House of the said Parliament, such
person so sitting or voting shall forfeit the sum of £5OO,
to be recovered, with full costs of suit, by any person or
persons who shall sue for the same in the Supreme Court,
or any other Court of competent jurisdiction.
Election of dis-
qualified per-
sons void.
§lB A.
Condition to
be inserted in
all public
contracts.
§SN.
Penalty on
contractors
admitting mem-
bers of Parlia-
ment to share
of their
contracts.
Penalty.
§6K.
56


4 No person shall be liable to any forfeiture or penalty :
inflicted by this Act (N.) unless a prosecution shall be '
commenced within twelve calendar months after such
penalty or forfeiture shall be incurred.
Attention is directed to the difference in time allowed for
proceedings under the two Acts (A. and N.).
former mentions no limit, the latter confines it to
within twelve calendar months from time the penalty
or forfeiture incurred.
5. If any person misconducts himself in any polling
booth, or fails to obey the lawful orders of the Returning
Officer or his substitute, he may immediately, by order of
the Returning Officer or his substitute, be removed from
the polling station by any police officer or constable, or by
any other person authorised in writing by the Returning
Officer or substitute, and the person so removed shall not,
unless with the permission of the Returning Officer or sub-
stitute, again be allowed to enter the polling booth.
The person misconducting himself can be removed by any
police officer or constable (i. e. corporation or district
council or special constable) on the verbal authority ot
the Returning Officer or his substitute—any other
person asked to do the duty must he authorised in
writing. The person misconducting himself renders
himself liable to be excluded from the polling booth,
and thus may disfranchise himself for that election.
6. Any person —
(p) Rorging or fraudulently defacing, or fraudu-
lently destroying any nomination paper, or delivering to the
Returning Officer any nomination paper knowing the same
to be forged;
(2) Rorging or counterfeiting, or fraudulently de‘
facing, or fraudulently destroying any voting paper or the
initials thereon;
(3) Without due authority supplying any voting
paper to any person ;
(4) —Fraudulently putting into any ballot box any
paper other than the voting paper which he is authorised
by law to put in :
(5) —Fraudulently taking out of the polling booth
any voting paper:
(6) —Without due authority destroying, taking, open-
ing or otherwise interfering with any ballot box or voting
papers then in use for the purposes of an election :
Limitation of
actions.
§7N.
Misconduct in
polling-booth.
68P.
Respecting
nomination
1 papers, voting
: papers, and
ballot boxes.
§ 72 P.
57


(7)—Eefvising to deliver to the Eeturning Officer or
ms substitute any voting paper in his possession, whether
having obtained such voting paper for the purpose of
recording his vote or not:
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be liable, if a Eeturning
Officer, or any officer or clerk in attendance at a polling
booth to imprisonment not exceeding two years, with or
without hard labor ; if committed by any other person, to
imprisonment not exceeding six months, with or without
hard labor.
7. Any attempt to commit any of the offences in this
section shall be punishable in the same manner as the
offence itself—
Within one year. (§ 86 P.)
8. Every person who—
(1) Directly, or indirectly, by himself, or by any
other person on his behalf, gives, lends, or agrees to give
or lend, or offers, or promises to procure, or to endeavour
to procure any money or valuable consideration, to or for
any voter, or to or for any person on behalf of any voter,
or to or for any other person in order to induce any voter
to vote, or refrain from voting, or corruptly does any such
act as aforesaid, on account of such voter having voted, or
refrained from voting at any election; or
(2) Directly or indirectly, by himself, or by any
other person on his behalf, gives, or procures, or agrees to
give or procure, or offers, promises, or promises to procure,
or to endeavour to procure, any office, place, or employment,
to or for any voter, or to or for any person on behalf of
any voter, or to or for any other person, in order to induce
such voter to vote, to refrain from voting, or corruptly
does any such act as aforesaid on account of any voter
having voted, or refrained from voting, at any election; or
(3) Directly or indirectly, by himself, or any other
person on his behalf, makes any such gift, loan, offer,
promise, procurement, or agreement, as aforesaid to or for
any person, in order to induce such person to procure, or
endeavour to procure the return of any person to serve in
Parliament, or the vote of any voter at an election; or
( 4i)—Vpon or in consequence of any such gift, loan,
offer, promise, procurement, or agreement, procures or
engages, promises, or endeavours to procure, the return of
any person to serve in Parliament, or the vote of any voter
at an election; or
Respecting
■bribery.
§74P.
Money or
valuable
consideration.
Any office,
place, or
■employment.
Enlarging both
(1) and (3).
Enlarging (1)
and (2).
58


(5) —Advances or pays, or causes to be advanced or
paid, any money to, or for the use of any other person
-with the intent that such money, or any part thereof, shall
be expended in bribery at any election, or shall knowingly
pay, or cause to be paid, any money to any person m dis-
charge of any money wholly or in part expended in bribery
at any election;
shall be guilty of bribery, and shall be liable to be unseated
by Court of Disputed Returns.
9. After the issue of the writ for any election, it shall
not be lawful for any candidate for election as a Member
of Parliament to solicit personally the vote of any elector.
Such solicitation is to have the same effect as Acts of Bribery
and Corruption so far as they render an election void.
10. Any candidate proved to have been guilty of any of
the acts declared to be bribery, not only renders his election
void but also disqualifies him from sitting and voting in
Parliament during the whole period that may intervene
between the decision of the Court of Disputed Returns
and the time of the next periodical or general election.
The punishment for illegal practice goes further, by having
his name removed from the roll for two years. (See
infra § 17 X).
§4B P. says —" In order that any person may become or be
a candidate at any election he shall be nominated, &o.
Therefore, until one of the person’s nomination forms
are in the hands of the Returning Officer after the
writ has been issued, such person, notwithstanding his
advertised announcement as to being a candidate,
would not be a candidate within the meaning of the
Act.
11. Every person who —
(1) —Before or during any election, directly or
indirectly, by himself, or by any other person on his behalf,
receives, agrees, or contracts for money, gift, loan, or valu-
able consideration, office, place, or employment, for himself,
or for any other person, for voting or agreeing to vote,
or for refrainjng or agreeing to refrain from voting at any
election; or
(2) After any election, directly or indirectly, by
himself, or by any other person on his behalf, receives any
money, or valuable consideration, on account of any person
having voted, or refrained from voting, or having induced
any other person to vote or refrain from voting at any
■election —
Advancing, or
repaying money
for bribery.
Soliciting
votes, bribery.
§4Q.
Penalty on
candidates for
bribery.
§BOP.
Accepting
bribes.
§7SP.
Before or
during any
election.
After any
election.
59


Shall be liable to forfeit the sum of J2lO, to any person
suing, within one year (§ 86 P.).
12. Every candidate at an election wh.o shall, by him*
self, or by or with any person, by any other ways or means
on his behalf at any time, either before or dliving his
election, with a view to influence his rote, directly or
indirectly gire, or provide, or cause to be given, or pro-
; vided, or who shall be accessory to the giving or providing
any meat, drink, entertainment, or horse or carriage hire,
or conveyance for any voter whilst at such election, or
whilst engaged in coming to or going from such election,
shall be guilty of bribery—
Such candidate would be liable to be unseated by Court of
Disputed Returns.
13. Every person who shall, directly or indirectly, by
himself, or by any other person on his behalf, make use of,
or threaten to make use of any force, violence, or restraint,
or inflict, or threaten the infliction, by himself, or by or
through any other person, of any injury, damage, harm, or
loss, or in any other manner practice intimidation upon,
or against any person, in order to induce or compel such
person to vote or refrain from voting, or on account of
such person having voted, or refrained from voting at any
election ; or who shall by abduction, duress, or any
fraudulent device or contrivance, impede, prevent, or
otherwise interfere with the free exercise of the franchise
of any voter, or shall thereby compel, induce, or prevail
upon any voter, either to give or refrain from giving his
vote at any election—
Shall be liable to forfeit the sum of .£lOO, to any one who
will sue, within one year (§ 86 P.).
In cases of threats the names and discription of the person
making them and their companions should at once be
reported to the Secretary of the candidate such elector
supports, or to the Returning Officer of the Province or
Commissioner of Police. Failing prompt action by any
of these persons, the person threatened should himself
proceed against the offending parties.
14. Any person wilfully making a false answer to any
of the questions authorised to be put to the electors on
voting day shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and liable
to two years’ imprisonment, with or without hard labor.
Within one year (§ 86 P). Triable at Supreme Court.
For such questions see Election Day — Polling.
Candidates
treating or
paying voter’s
expenses.
§76P.
And accessories
Respecting
interference
with exercise
of voting.
§77P.
Falsely answer-
ing questions
allowed on
polling day.
§ 82 P.
§22 X.
60


15. Any person voting at any election for the Legis-
lative Council or House of Assembly more than once for
the election of a member or members to supply the same
vacancy, and any person voting in two or more districts for
the election of members to serve in the House of Assembly
after any dissolution of Parliament shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, liable to be fined £5O or three months im-
prisonment —
Summary Jurisdiction, within one year. (§ 86 P.).
16. No person shall at the same time be registered as an
•elector on the electoral roll of more than one electoral
district, or on the electoral roll of more than one electoral
division, and no person shall be entitled to vote at any
election in any district or division except the district or
division in which he resides. Any person who shall vote
or attempt to vote contrary to the provisions of this
section shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine
not exceeding £5O, or to imprisonment, with or without
hard labor, for a period of not more than three months
Within three months. (§ 20 X.).
17. Every person who applies for a voting paper in the
name of some other person, whether living or dead, or of a
fictitious person, or who in any other manner personates
any other person for the purpose of voting at any such
election shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and liable to
three calendar months’ imprisonment —
Summary Jurisdiction, within one year. (§ 86 P.).
18. If any person summoned by any Court of Disputed
Returns shall disobey such summons, or shall refuse or
neglect to produce any papers, records, or other docu-
mentary evidence relating to or affecting the matter under
investigation, or shall refuse to submit himself to ex-
amination shall be deemed guilty of contempt as of
Supreme Court.
19. Any person wilfully or knowingly giving false
evidence before any Court of Disputed Returns shall be
deemed guilty of wilful and corrupt perjury and shall be
liable to the penalties for such offence —
Four years imprisonment (§ 291, Criminal Law Consolidation
Act No. 38 of 1876),—Supreme Court, within one year,
(§ 86 P).
20. Any person who shall wilfully make any false state-
ment in any declaration provided by the Absent Voters
Act, shall be guilty of a Misdemeanor—
Voting twice at
any election.
§ 83 P.
Only to be on
one electoral
roll at same
time.
§ 21X.
Voting or
attempting to
vote except in
district or
division in
which resident.
Personation.
§B4P.
Disobeying
summons or
refusing to
produce papers,
&c., or to be
examined at
Court of Dis-
puted Returns.
§IOOP.
Perjury before
Court of Dis-
puted Returns,
i Id.
■ False state-
i ment under
Absent Voters
Act.
§9W.
61


Two years imprisonment—Supreme Court, within one year
(§ 86 P, §l5 Y). * '
21. Every person who shall wilfully destroy, mutilate,
eftaee or remove any notice, or list, or other document
affixed by any Returning Officer or by his authority during
the period for which the same is required by law to be
affixed—
£2,,—Summary Jurisdiction— within three months, (§ 20 X).
22. Any person wilfully making any false statement
required to be made by this Act (X), shall be guilty of a
Misdemeanor : —two years imprisonment—within three
mouths, (§ 20 X).
23. No electoral expense shall be incurred by or on
behalf of a candidate except in respect of the matters
mentioned in Part I. of the Eirst Schedule, and no electoral
expense by or on behalf of a candidate shall be in excess
of any maximum amount in that behalf specified in Part
11. of such Schedule. Any candidate who knowingly acts
in contravention of the preceding section shall be guilty
of an illegal practice.
What “ electoral expenses ” are and the Parts I. and 11. of
the schedule and scale of amounts allowed accordingly
are fully set out under the head of " General.” °
E j 2 ! 4 ' i,ailing to f° r ward return of electoral expenses and
declaration to the Returning Officer for the Province within
t wenty-one days after declaration of poll.—flee Candidates.
By § 16 X, the time in respect of the Northern Territory elec-
torate is extended, a further period of six weeks being
allowed. See also Court of Disputed Returns —15.
20. Any person who induces or procures any other person
to become or withdraw from being a candidate at an election
in consideration of any payment or promise of payment to
such candidate, shall be guilty of illegal practice and any
person withdrawing in pursuance of such inducement or
procurement shall also be guilty of an illegal practice.
5 26. All money provided by any person other than a can-
didate for any electoral expense whether as a gift, loan,
advance, or deposit, shall be paid to the candidate, and not
otherwise—any person contravening this section shall be
guilty of an illegal practice.
27. («) Every circular, card, bill, placard, or poster
having reference to an election, or to any candidate thereat,
shall bear upon the face thereof—the name and address
Hindering
publication.
§I4X.
False state-
ment in dec-
laration as to
electoral
expenses.
§ 7X.
Illegal
practice.
§ 2X.
Limit on
expenditure.
§3X.
Failing to for-
ward return of
electoral
expenses and
declaration.
§6X.
Corruptly
becoming or
withdrawing
from being a
candidate.
§IOX.
Person
withdrawing.
Mode of making
payments.
§4X.
Respecting
cards, bills,
posters, &c.
§ 15 X.
62


of the printer thereof, and the name and address of the
person who authorised the printing of such circular, card,
bill, placard or poster.
(i) —Every advertisement having reference to an election, .
or to any candidate thereat, shall bear at the end thereof
the name and address of the person by whom the same was
authorised.
(c) —Any person authorising the insertion of, or printing, :
publishing, or posting, or causing to be inserted, printed, 1
published, or posted any such advertisement, circular, card,
bill, placard, or poster as aforesaid, contrary to this section
shall, if he is the candidate, or the election agent of
the candidate, be guilty of an illegal practice ; if any other
person, liable to fine of £2O or imprisonment not exceeding
one month.
Summary Jurisdiction, within three months, (§ 20 X).
28. The commission by any successful candidate of :
any offence declared by the Court of Disputed Returns |
to be an illegal practice, shall be held to render his election
void, and to disqualify him from sitting or voting in Par-
liament for two years, and from voting at any election for
members of Parliament for a like period, and his name shall
be removed forthwith from the roll of electors for the
district or division in which the same appears.
Punishment for bribery, (see supra §BO P).
29. Any person other than a successful candidate guilty
of an illegal practice shall, on summary conviction, be
liable to a fine not exceeding £5O.
Within three months. (§ 20 X.)
30. If any Returning Officer for the said Province, or
any District Returning Officer, after having accepted office
as such, shall neglect or refuse to perform any of the
duties which by the provisions hereof (Act P.) he is
required to perform, every such Returning Officer, or
District Returning Officer shall, for every such offence,
forfeit and pay any sum not less than £lO nor exceeding
£20,0 ; and in like manner, if any substitute, clerk, or other
officer or person appointed or required to perform any
duty, under or by virtue of this Act (P.), shall neglect or
refuse to perform any of the duties which by the provisions
hereof he is required to perform, every such clerk or other
officer or person shall, for every such offence, forfeit and
pay any sum not less than £5 and not exceeding £5O.
Summary Jurisdiction, within one year. (§ 86 P.).
Advertisements
Respecting
both above.
Penalties for
successful
candidate.
§I7X.
Penalty for
other persons.
§ 18 X.
Penalty on
Returning-
Officers refusing
or neglecting
duty.
§BSF.
Substitutes,
clerks, or other
officers.
63


LEGAL PROCEDURE.
1. No person shall be liable to any forfeiture or penalty
inflicted by this Act (N.) unless a prosecution shall be com-
menced within twelve calendar months after such penalty
or forfeiture shall be incurred.
2. No person shall be liable to any penalty or forfeiture
hereby enacted or imposed unless some prosecution, action,
or suit shall he commenced against such person within the
space of one year next after such offence against this Act (P.)
shall be committed, and unless such person shall be
summoned or otherwise served with writ or process within
the same space of time, so as such summons or service of
writ or process shall not be prevented by such person
absconding or withdrawing out of the jurisdiction of the
Court out of which such writ or other process shall have
issued; and in case of any such prosecution, suit or pro-
cess as aforesaid, the same shall he proceeded with and
carried on without any wilful delay.
3. No person shall be liable to any penalty or forfeiture
hereby enacted or imposed (X.) unless some prosecution or
proceeding shall be commenced against such person within
three months after the date of the election in respect of
which such offence shall be committed, and unless such
person shall be summoned or otherwise served with process
within such time.
4. Every proceeding under this Act (P.), for omissions,
defaults, acts, or offences, to which any pecuniary penalty
is attached, shall, unless some other mode be prescribed
for the recovery thereof, be had and taken, and may be
heard and determined in a summary way, by any Special
Magistrate, or two Justices, under the provisions of an
Ordinance of the Governor and Legislative Council, No. 6
of 1850—“ To facilitate the performance of the duties of
Justices of the Peace out of Session, with respect to sum-
mary convictions and orders,” or of any Act hereafter to
be in force relating to the duties of Justices with respect
to summary convictions and orders, and all convictions
and orders may he enforced as in the said Ordinance is
mentioned.
5. Appeals against the determination of a Eeturning
Officer (at a [Revision Court).
See Objections and Objectors, — 7.
Limitation of
actions.
§ 7N.
§ 86 P.
§ 20 X.
Summary
procedure.
§ 102 P,
Appeals.
§ 37 P.
64


6. There shall be an appeal from any conviction by any
Special Magistrate for any offence against this Act (P),
or from any order dismissing any information or com-
plaint, or from any order for payment of money for costs
or otherwise ; which appeal shall be to the Local Court of
Adelaide of Pull Jurisdiction only, and the proceedings on
such appeal shall be conducted in manner appointed by
the Ordinance, No. 6 of 1850, for appeals to Local Courts;
but the Local Court of Adelaide aforesaid may make such
order as to the payment of the costs of appeal as it shall
think fit, although such costs may exceed £lO.
7. The Local Court of Adelaide, upon the hearing of an
appeal, may state one or more special case or cases for the
opinion of the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court
shall hear and decide such special case or cases according
to the practice of the Supreme Court on special cases, and
the Supreme Court shall make order as to costs of any
special case as to the said Court shall appear just; and any
two or more Justices of the Local Court of Adelaide shall
make an order in respect to the matters referred to the
Supreme Court, in conformity with the certificate of the
said Supreme Court, or of any Judge thereof; which order
of the Justices or Local Courts shall be enforced in manner
provided for the enforcement of orders of Justices, under
the said Ordinance, No. 6 of 1850; and save as herein
provided, no order or proceeding of any Special Magistrate
or Justice, or of any Local Court, made under the
authority of this Act (P), shall be appealed against, or
removed by certiorari, or otherwise into, the Supreme
Court of the said Province.
8. In any indictment or other prosecution for an offence ■
in relation to the nomination papers, ballot boxes, and
voting papers at an election, the property in such papers i
and boxes may he stated to be in the Returning Officer at
such election.
9. On any prosecution under this Act (X), the certifi-
cate of the Returning Officer that the election mentioned
in the certificate was duly held, and that the person named
in the certificate was a candidate at such election, shall he
evidence of the facts therein stated.
10. In any petition or other proceeding before any Court
for bribery,’or undue influence, or to recover any penalty,
or sum of money for bribery or undue influence, or com-
plaining of any undue return of any Member of Parliament,
X
§iosp.
§ 104 P.
Indictment or
prosecution
respecting
nomination or
voting papers or
ballot boxes.
§73P.
Keturning
Officers certifi-
cate to be
evidence.
§I9X.
Evidence in
proceedings for
bribery, &c.. Or
any offence or
undue return.
§7BP.
65


it shall be sufficient to allege that the defendant or respon-
dent was at the election at, or in connection with, which
the offence is intended to be alleged to have been commit-
ted, guilty of bribery, or undue influence, as the case may
require, and the certificate of the lieturning Officer in this
behalf shall be sufficient evidence of the issue of any writ
for any election, and of the due holding of the election,
and of any person therein named having been a candidate
thereat: and it shall not be necessary to prove agency in
the first instance for giving in evidence the facts whereby
the charge of bribery or undue influence is to be sustained
11. The acts of all authorised agents of a candidate or
i. Member (sic) shall, in matters connected with elections,
be held to be the acts of their principal, provided that it
shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Court that such
acts were committed with his knowledge or consent.
12. In any proceeding or petition as in § 78 (supra)
mentioned, the person alleging bribery, or his counsel, may
cross-examine his own witnesses, not being agents of such
person, unless the Court, without argument by counsel,
shall direct the examination of any witness to be conducted
in the ordinary manner, which the Court may do if such
witness appears to be hostile to the other party.
This is a most remarkably drawn section.
13. No action, suit, or other proceeding shall be main-
tainable in any Court of the said Province against any
person who may have been a candidate at any election for
or in respect of any costs or expenses whatsoever in or
about or relating to such election.
Principals
bound by acts
of their agents.
§ 81 P.
Petitioner may
cross-examine
his own
witnesses.
§79 P.
No action
against candi-
dates for costs
of expenses
of election.
§ 106 P.
66


GENERAL.
1. The electoral rolls for the several divisions made in :
pursuance of The Electoral Act 1879 (§ 14), and therein |
declared to he portions of the electoral roll of the Province
shall continue to be the electoral rolls for such divisions
and shall form portions of the electoral roll for the Legis-
lative Council district within with such divisions are
included. The provisions as to claims, transfers, removal
of names, etc. in the Electoral Act 1879 are still to be
exercised within the limits of each Legislative Council
district.
2. The polling places for the Assembly districts are to :
he also polling places for the respective Legislative Coun-
cil districts.
3. When any matter or thing is hereby directed to he
peformed on a certain day, and that day shall happen to
he a Sunday, Good Friday, Christmas Day, or other public
holiday, the said matter or thing may he performed on the
next succeeding day, not being any of the days aforesaid.
4. One moiety of all moneys received for penalties
imposed for offences against this Act (P) shall be paid to the
informant, and the other moiety to the Treasurer on behalf
of Her Majesty, her heirs and successors, for the public
uses of the said Province, and in support of the Govern-
ment thereof.
5. The Minister controlling the Post Office Department
shall give the necessary directions for duly carrying into
effect the provisions of this Act (Y) as to the duty of Post-
masters and their deputies, and for seeing that all letters
to the Returning Officer so lodged with the Postmaster
shall be sent to the Returning Officer as registered letters
free of charge, on being marked “ Electoral Returns.”
6. Within the period of twenty days before or after the
day appointed for the holding of any election or for the
return of the writ issued for the same, the G-overnor or
the Speaker, as the case may he, may adopt or cause to he
adopted such measures as may be necessary to remove any
obstacle by which the due course of any election may be
impeded, and may supply any deficiency that may other-
wise affect the same : Provided that any measures so adopted
by the Governor, or the Speaker, as the case may be, shall
be duly notified in the Government Gazette.
Electoral rolls
for divisions
reserved.
§ 10 E.
Polling-places
reserved.
§ll E.
When matters
to be done fall
on a holiday.
§ 101 P.
Appropriation
of moneys.
§ 105 P.
Minister con-
trolling Post
Office Depart-
ment to give
necessary
directions re
provisions of
Absent Voters
Act.
§l4 V.
Time in which
obstacles or
impediments to
an election may
be removed.
§ 71P.
67


7. The Sheriff and his officers shall give effect to any
order given by, and execute any warrant under the hand
of, the President of the Court of Disputed Eeturns.
8. The expression “ electoral expenses ” shall mean and
include all payments, including any pecuniary or other
reward (other than personal expenses of a candidate in
travelling and attending electoral meetings) made by a
candidate, or on his behalf and with his knowledge, and
any money, security, or equivalent of money received by a
candidate six months before, during, or six months after
an election for, or account of, or in respect of the conduct
or management of the election : —■
Those electoral expenses to be incurred are as follows by
Part I. of First Schedule.
1. The expenses of printing, advertising, publishing,
issuing, and distributing addresses and notices.
2. The expenses of stationery, messages, postages,
and telegrams.
3. The expenses of holding public meetings, and
hiring halls for that purpose.
4. The expenses of committee-rooms.
5. One scrutineer at each voting place and no more.
6. One agent for any electoral district.
The maximum amount of electoral expenses allowed by
Part 11. of First Schedule is thus ;
1. For elections to the House of Assembly, except
the Northern Territory, the electoral expenses (other
than personal expenses) shall not in respect of all
matters referred to in Part 1., items 1 to 6 inclusive,
exceed in the whole the maximum amount as follows :
If the number of electors on the Register does not exceed
2,000 the maximum amount shall be .£lOO, and if the
number of electors exceed 2,000 an additional £lO for
every 200 electors above 2,000. In the Electoral District
of the Northern Territory, the electoral expenses, other
than personal expenses, shall not exceed double the
above rate.
2. For elections to the Legislative Council the
electoral expenses, other than personal expenses, as
aforesaid, shall not exceed in the whole the maximum
amount as following :
If the number of electors on the Register for all the
divisions of the district does not exceed 2,000 the
Sheriff to
execute orders
of President of
Court of Dis-
puted Returns.
§lOO P.
(t Electoral
expenses
defined.
§IX.
68


According to the above scale the amounts
•will be as follows : —
expendable
Number ot Amount.
Electors.
2,000 ... £100
3.000 ... 150
4.000 ... 200
5.000 ... 250
6.000 ... 300
7.000 ... 350
8.000 ... 400
Number of
Electors.
9,000
10,000
11,000
12,000
13.000
14.000
15.000
Amount.
£450
500
550
600
650
700
750
FRACTIONAL.
200
400
£10
20
600
800
£30
40
maximum amount shall be .£lOO. If such number
exceeds 2,000, £lO in addition for every complete 200
above 2,000.
9. The return and declaration (including the accompany-
ing documents) sent to the Eeturning Officer (for the
Province) shall, at all reasonable times during three
months next after they are received, be open for inspection
by any person on payment of a fee of two shillings; and
the Eeturning Officer shall, at any time during which such
return is open for inspection, furnish copies thereof, or
any part thereof, at the price of sixpence for every seventy-
two words.
Return of
electoral
expenses and
declaration.
§ 9 X.
69




APPENDICES.




CORRECTION FORM. (1.)
To the Returning Officer for I /
Division and District of 5 ' '
Please correct in your Roll the following error as to my (6)
Name (c) Residence (d) Profession
or Occupation (e) Qualification (/)
Situation of qualifying Property (g) Voting place (h)
_ „ f L.C. (i)
Roll No. H A
Date Signature (k)
EXAMPLE—a. Onkaparinga. b. Residence or qualification, or situation of qualifying
property, c. John Henry Stokes. d. Forest Range, e. Market Gardener. /. Re-
gistered leasehold of £20, having 7 years to run. g. Section 1027, Hundred Onkaparinga.
h. Woodside. i. 15. j. 29. k. J. H. Stokes.
Under Electoral Act, No. 141, 1879. (2.)
CHANGE OF POLLING PLACE.
To the Returning Officer of the Electoral District and Division of (a)
I hereby request yon to change the Polling Place appearing against my
name on the Electoral Roll or Register of Voters from (b)
to (c) Polling place.
Name (d) Address (e)
Occupation (/) or Qualification ( g )
„ „ ( Legislative Council (i)
No. on Roll for jj ouse 0 f Assembly ( j)
Dated 189 Signature (h)
This form is only applicable to voting places in the same District and Division.
EXAMPLE-u. Sturt. h. TTnley. c. Glenelg. d. Charles William Spencer, e. Scar-
borough Street, Gleuelg. /. Grocer. *g. Occupying dwelling house of clear annual value
of £25, Scarborough Street, Glenelg; or Freehold clear value of £50, Main Street’
Port Darwin; or registered leasehold of £20, either with right of purchase or having 3
years to run. Section 98, Hundred Light, h. C. W. Spencer, i. 49. j. 37.
U.B. —The numbers given at i and j refer to the numbers on the Rolls at Unley.
• Whichever of these qualifications the Elector possessesit should be distinctly stated
in above manner—The words, freehold, leasehold, or occupier (or tenancy), without
specifying the rest, practically makes the claim, transfer, or document void. It should
not be registered then.


[Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, 3 rd Schedule, (3.V
and Act No. 583 of 1893.]
NOTICE OF CLAIM-LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
To the Deputy Returning Officer for the Division of (a)
of the (6) Electoral District.
I hereby give you notice that I claim to have my name inserted in the
Electoral Roll for the above Division in virtue of the undermentioned
qualification, and to vote at (c) in the said Division. (2)
Dated day of in the year one thousand
eight hundred and
Christian and Surname in full (d) Place of Abode ( e)
Qualification (/) # Where situate (/I)
Division or District in which last registered (gf)
Naturalized
Natural born Subject ° f Her Ma j est y-
Signature ( h)
Qualifications. —1. Freehold, clear value of £50. 2. Registered Leasehold of £20,
with three years to run or right of purchase. 3. Occupying dwelling-house of clear
annual value of £25.
* N.B. — State fully where qualifying property is situate —in the country , giving section; in
own, name of street. f StHke out as case may he.
[Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, 3rd Schedule, (4.)
and Act No. 583 of 1893.]
NOTICE OF CLAIM—HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY.
To the Returning Officer of the District of (a)
I hereby give you notice that I claim to have my name inserted in the
Electoral Roll for the District of (6) and to vote at
(c) in the said District.
(z) Dated at day of one thousand eight hundred and
Christian and Surname in full (d)
Place of abode (e) Occupation (/)
Division or District in which last registered ( g )
Naturalized
born Subiect ° f Her MaJesty-
f Strike out as case may he.
Signature (h )
EXAMPLES.
Legislative Council. — a. Albert, h. Southern, c. Kingston, d. James William
Clark, e. Mount Benson. /. bee Electors—General, 1, and g in Example to Form 2.
fl. See remarks to f. g. Not previously registered at or since last Census for Legisla-
tive Council, h. Jas. Wm. Clark.
House of Assembly. — a, Albert, h. Albert, c. Kingston, d. James William
Clark, e. Mount Benson. /. Farmer, g. Stanley [or Burra, but struck off at Revi-
sion Court, June, 1892.] h. Jas. Wm. Clark.
2. See Electors—General, 7, and Form given there in note. This is the place to insert
that.
The Section Number and Hundred or Street and Town must be distinctly stated in
fl. See footnote to Upper House claim.
74


No.
Christian and Sur-
name of each
Person at full
length.
Place of
Abode.
Nature of
Qualification.
Where Property
affording Qualifica-
tion is situated.
Remarks,
(«)
0»)
(*>
( V )
Electoral Act, No. 141, 1879, 6 th Schedule .] (5.)'
TEANSFEE—LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
No. 1.
*1 (a) registered to vote at (6)
removed from the Division of (c) and am now a bona
fide resident in the Division of (d) and I request you
to remove my name from your Eoll, and grant to me a certificate ot
registration according to Form No. 2 in “The Electoral Act,
1879.” t
Dated this day of 1S9
Signature (e)
Present address ( f )
To ( g ) Esq.,
Deputy Eeturning Officer for the Division of (h)
* Here insert name, abode, and occupation, as described in Roll.
No. 2.
I ({) Deputy Eeturning Officer for the Division of ( j)
do hereby certify that (k) has been registered on
the Electoral Eoll for the Division of (I) f° r Slx
months, and his name still remains on the said Eoll.
Dated this day of 189
To the Deputy Eeturning Officer
Division of (a) ( m )
No. 3.
p p do hereby declare that I am the person named
in the annexed certificate of (p) Deputy Eeturning
Officer for the Division of (3)
2. I have removed from the said Division of (r) and am
now a bond fide resident in the Division of (s)
3. I am desirous of being registered on the Electoral Eoll for the Division
of (t) and to vote at («) and request
the Deputy Eeturning Officer to register me as follows
Date (oo) Signature (*)
Qualifications. —1. Freehold, clear value of £5O. 2. Registered leasehold_of £2O
with. 3 years to run, or right of purchase. 3. Occupying dwelling-house of clear
annual value of £25.
N.B.—State fully where qualifying property is situated—in the country, give section;
in towns, name of street.
t “ I being entitled thereto.” These words are required by the Act, but not by the-
Schedule Form.
75


No.
Christian and Surname
of each Person at full
length.
Place of Abode.
Profession or
Occupation.
Remarks.
(»)
(m)
(U)
Electoral Act, No. 141, 1879, 8th Schedule.'] (6.)
TEANSFEE-HOUSE OP ASSEMBLY.
. No. 1.
*1 (a) registered to vote at (6) have
removed from the District of (c) and am now a bond
fide resident in the District of (d) and I request you
to remove my name from your Eoll, and grant to me a certificate
of registration according to Form No. 2 in “ The Electoral Act,
1879.”
Dated this day of 189
Signature (e)
Present address (/)
To (g) Esq.,
Eeturning Officer for the District of (h)
* Here insert name, abode, and occupation, as described in Eoll.
No. 2.
I (i) Eeturning Officer for the District of (j)
do hereby certify that (fc) has been registered on the
Electoral Eoll for the District of (I) for six months,
and his name still remains on the said Eoll.
Dated this day of 189
To the Eeturning Officer
District of («) ( m )
No. 3.
1. X ( 0 ) do hereby declare that I am the person named
in the annexed certificate of (p) Eeturning Officer
for the District of (q)
2. I have removed from the said District of (r) and am
now a bond fide resident in the District of (s)
3. I am desirous of being registered on the Electoral Eoll for the District
0 f (t) and to vote at (it) and request
the Eeturning Officer to register me as follows —
Date (an) Signature (2)
76


These two Forms (5 and 6) are for removing Vote from one District or
Division to another District or Division.
EXAMPLE (for both 5 and 6)—
a. Francis Henry White.
b. Caltowie. No. on 801 l (give number each House Roll).
c. Gladstone.
d. Flinders.
e. F. Hy. White.
f. Section 58, Hundred Charra.
g. J. P. StOW.
h. Gladstone.
i. Jefferson Pickman Stow v
j. Gladstone / Th ese are often done by the Returning
fc. Francis Henry White ( Officers themselves ; the signature
l. Gladstone T of course is.
m. Signature of Returning Officer \
n. Flinders J
o. Francis Henry White.
p. Jefferson Pickman Stow.
q. Gladstone.
r. Gladstone.
s. Flinders.
t. Flinders.
u. Charra.
v. Francis Henry White.
w . Section 58, Hundred Charra.
See Electors, General 1, and Example g to Form 2,
y. Same remarks as to x.
z. F. Hy. White.
aa. This is dated subsequent to the Certificate.
lh. Grazier.
■ N.8.-The particulars for x and y require the same exactness as for/and/1 mUpper
House Claim.
77


£Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, 7th Schedule, (7.)
and Act No. 212 of 1882, Section 12.]
CERTIFICATE ENTITLING ELECTOR TO VOTE AT ANY
POLLING-BOOTH—LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
I (a) Returning Officer for the Electoral Division of
(6) hereby certify that (c) ' of (d)
is entitled to vote at the election to be held for the Legislative
Council on the (e) day of at any
polling-booth in the Legislative Council District on production of
this certificate. (/)
Returning Officer for the Division of (jr)
EXAMPLE—This form is issued by a Returning Officer. It is only available for the
same Legislative Council Distinct as the Division whereon Elector is registered is in.
a. John Moody, h. Prome. c, Isaac Smith, d. Yatina. e. Day fixed for the elec-
tion for Northern Electoral District. /. John Moody, g. Prome.
This certificate has to be given up by Isaac Smith on his exercising his vote. See
Electors — General, 12.
APPLICATION FOR TRAVELLING CERTIFICATE. (8.)
To the Deputy Returning Officer for the Division of (a)
of the (6) Electoral District.
Dear Sir —Please issue to me certificate under Section 40 and Schedule 7
of “The Electoral Act, 1879,” and Section 12 of Act No. 242 of 1882,
and forward same to me (c) My name is registered
upon the Legislative Council Roll for your Division to vote at
( d ) and is No. ( e )
Yours faithfully.
Date 189 Signature (/)
Example.—a. Frome. b. Northern, c. At the Post Office, Yorketown, or addressei
care of Mr. Thomas Brown, farmer, Gulnare, Georgetown Post Office, d. Yatina.
e, 12 (number on Legislative Council Roll for Yatina). /. Isaac Smith.
78


No. of Certificate (a) (9.)
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL ELECTION.
Envelope for Inserting Voting Paper.
Day of Election (b)
Certificate entitling Elector to vote through the Post-Office.
I hereby certify that (c) of ( d ) is entitled
to vote at the above Election. Signed (e)
Returning Officer, Electoral District of (/)
N.B. —When you have fastened up the voting paper, as directed herein, place this
in the other envelope addressed to the Returning Officer, and give it to Postmaster.
EXAMPLE.— a. 5. h. 28th February, 1891. c. Charles Williams. d. Cherry
Gardens, e. C. H. Myles. /. Noarlunga. See Electors—Absent Voters —1, 9, and 11.
(9a.)
•XI pui> ‘OX ‘6 ‘I
's.ojqd — sjo'jooig aag -gSSia;— .to i - y -fi •? duress ax'Bp
piiu ’V aouaaex •srauin'M. ' fel BqO >c l S *»—' , a f IdKVXar
(2) —: joj eqx jo sam'Bu oift M0X9g;
•XNaMassociNi
(•clm-BXS 0ot5O^ so <I eq ox) (p)
•qo^SEin^soj
(o) sseu^ijVV
(q) wjoa jo omjBitgig (») -o&
■ r riOiaaaxmoo
Schedule C. —Form of Voting Paper.
VOTING PAPER.
Instructions. —In the presence of the Postmaster, the Voter must
sign his name in the place shown thereon. The Postmaster will witness
the signature and stamp the voting paper, without unfolding the same,
with the Post-Office letter stamp for the day and date, and return the
voting paper to the Voter. The Elector will then insert this voting
paper in the envelope on which the certificate is signed and marked
" For voting paper," and fasten. Then, after sealing up or fastening the
letter in the envelope addressed to the Returning Officer, will hand it at-
ones to the Postmaster for delivery through the Post.
79


No. of Certificate (a) (10-)
HOUSE OP ASSEMBLY ELECTION.
Envelope por Inserting Voting Paper.
Day of Election (h)
Certificate entitling Elector to vote through the Post Office.
I hereby certify that (c) of (d) is
entitled to vote at the above election. Signed (e)
Returning Officer, Electoral District of (/)
N.B. —When you have fastened up the voting paper, as directed herein, place this in
the other envelope addressed to the Returning Officer, and give it to Postmaster.
EXAMPLE—a. 6. b. 28th February, 1894. c. Oharles Williams, d. Cherry Gardens.
e. C. H. Myles. /. Noarlunga. See Electors —Absent Voters, 1, 9, and 11.
. 'll P" ‘0t
‘6 ‘x •sMfoA pasqr—sMp» sag 'sSSja V ‘TOmg H ■<» ‘sSSia ‘qi™S '« -draws epsp
pun eorgo 4 so d 'V ‘fipljupj; ormei-'X -o •snimnijw sepinqo '1 'S aaaKVXK
(a) — :oioj ojoa noA ssjupipung 9tjj jo seuren eqj 9}i.iw MOjog
■XNawasaocmi
(-draws 90i[io isoj pliAi podirnns eq ox) (p)
-.rajsnrajsog;
(a) ssoujijw
( q ) .raqoA. jo oanjnuSig (») "OH
•TiOLiaaxNEOO
Schedule C. —Form of Voting Paper.
VOTING PAPER.
Instructions. —In the presence of the Postmaster, the Voter must sign
his name in the place shown thereon. The Postmaster will witness
the signature and stamp the voting paper, without unfolding the
same, with the Post Office letter stamp for the day and date, and
return the voting paper to the Voter. The Elector will then insert
this voting paper in the envelope on which the certificate is signed
and marked “ For voting paper,” and fasten. Then, after sealing
up or fastening the letter in the envelope addressed to the Returning
Officer, will hand it at once to the Postmaster for delivery through
the Post.
(vQT) __
ON HER MAJESTY’S SERVICE. (10b.)
To the Returning Officer, Electoral District of {a) (b)
Postage free —Act No. 498, 1890.
Electoral Returns.
EXAMPLE—a. Noarlunga. h. Noarlunga. See Electors—Absent Voters, 1, 9, and 11.


FORM OF DECLARATION (11.)
Under the Absent Voters Act No. 577, 1893, to be used to obtain Certificate
to Vote through the Post-Office at
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL ELECTIONS.
To the Deputy Returning Officer, Division of (a)
I ( Christian Names and Surname ) (6) Residence (c)
Occupation (d) do hereby declare as follows, that is to say
f 1. I have been duly registered for six months on the electoral roll
for the Division of (e) and to vote at (/)
2. I reside at the above address in the said Division, and I am not
registered in any other Division. I am still possessed of the
same qualification for which my name now stands in the
electoral roll for the Division of (/I) I am
the age of twenty-one years.
8. I make this application for a certificate to entitle me to vote
through the Post-Office, believing that I shall be absent from
the above-named Division on the day of voting at the forth-
coming election.
I request that the necessary Certificate and Voting-paper be
forwarded to me at the above address (or to ( g )
Dated this day of 189 .
Signature (h)
* Signed and declared in the presence of (i)
* N.B. —To be signed in the presence of either a Justice of the Peace or Postmaster,
or Deputy Postmaster.
Any false statement in the above is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment,
with or without hard labor, not exceeding two years.
t The Section 1 for Legislative Council should have been—“ X have been duly regis-
tered for six months on the electoral roll for the Province of South Australia, and
am entitled to vote in the above Division of at
r
81


FORM OF DECLARATION (12.)
Under the Absent Voters Act No. 377 , 1893, to he used to obtain Qertijlcate
to Vote through the Post-Office at
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS.
To the Returning Officer, Electoral District of (a)
I (Christian Names and Surname ) (b) Residence (c)
Occupation (d) do hereby declare as follows, that is to say :—
* 1- I have been duly registered for six months on the electoral roll,
and am now entitled to vote for the District of (e)
and to vote at (/)
2. I reside at the above address in the said District, and I am not
registered in any other District, and I am of the age of
twenty-one years.
3. I make this application for a Certificate to entitle me to vote
through the Post-Office, believing that I shall be absent from
the above-named District on the day of voting at the forth-
coming election.
I request that the necessary Certificate and Voting-paper be
forwarded to me at the above address (or, to (p)
Dated this day of 189 .
Signature (h)
f Signed and declared in the presence of (i)
t N.B.—To be signed in the presence of either a Justice of the Peace or Postmaster,
or Deputy Postmaster.
Any false statement in the above is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment,
with or without hard labor, not exceeding two years.
* The Section 1 for House of Assembly should have been—“ I have been duly regis-
tered on the electoral roll for the District of and am now entitled to
vote at .”
Note.—The words “ for six months on the Electoral Poll ” are confusing. A person
recently transferred (if effected before writ issued for Assembly, or six days before
election for Legislative Council) would be entitled to vote although in fact only
registered, say six weeks or two mouths. The Sections 1 as now standing in Schedules
invite declaring to a falsehood.
Postmaster and Deputy Postmaster under Language of Acts Act means and includes
any postmistress and her deputy.
EXAMPLE to Hand 12 — a. Noarlunga. h. Charles Williams, c. Cherry Gardens.
d. Market Gardener, e. Noarlunga. /. Cherry Gardens. /I. Noarlunga. g, Coromandel
Valley Post-Office, or care of Mr. Henry Crabb, gardener, McLaren Vale. N.B. —If
the certificate and voting-paper are to be sent to a place other than the address given
at c, then strike out the words just before g , 1 ‘ the above address.” The words struck
out should be initialled by the person before whom declaration is made. h. Chas.
Williams, i. Jabez Phillis. N.B.—Jabez Phillis must state whether he is a Justice
of the Peace, a Postmaster, or Deputy Postmaster.
82


J£ Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, ith Schedule .] (13.)
NOTICE OP OBJECTION—LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
To the Returning Officer of (a)
I hereby give you notice that I object to the name of (6)
being retained on the Electoral Roll of the Electoral Division of
(c) Dated this
Signed (cl)
*(«)
* Here state the place of abode of objector on the Electoral Koll.
[Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, 4 th Schedule.'] (14.)
NOTICE OP OBJECTION.
To the Returning Officer of (a)
I hereby give you notice that I object to the name of (b)
being retained on the Electoral Roll of the Electoral District of
(c) Dated this
Signed (d)
*(e)
* Here state the place of abode of objector on the Electoral Koll
EXAMPLE to 13 and 14— a. West Adelaide, h. Christopher Snooks, of Gouger
Street, Adelaide, storekeeper (Roll No. ). c. West Adelaide, d. Edgar Dimble.
«. West Terrace, Adelaide, butcher.
N jj.—No grounds of objection need be stated in the notice of objection.
rl


[Electoral Act , No. 141 of 1879, 5th Schedule.'] (15.X
(duplicate.)
SUMMONS.—LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
You are hereby required to appear before me at ( a ) on the (6)
day of (e) 189 , at the hour of (d) o’clock in
the (e) to show cause why your name should not be erased
from the Electoral "Roll for the Division of (/) ( g)
having given me notice that he objects to your name being retained
thereon. ( h )
Eeturning Officer for the Division of (i)
N. B. —In case you do not attend you will be liable to bave your name erased without
further notice.
Electoral Act, No. 141 of 1879, 5 1it Schedule.] (16.)
(original.)
SUMMONS.—HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY.
You are hereby required to appear before me at ( a ) on the (6)
day of (c) 189 , at the hour of (d) o’clock in
the (e) to show cause why your name should not be erased
from the Electoral Roll for the District of (/) ( g )
have given me notice that he objects to your name being retained
thereon. ( h)
Eeturning Officer for the District of (i)
N.B. —In case you do not attend you will be liable to have your name erased without
further notice.
Example to 15 and 16.—a. My office. Supreme Court Buildings, Adelaide (or other
place in the Division or District;, b—c. Date of holding Court. d. Hour of holding
Court, e. Forenoon or afternoon. /. West Adelaide, g. Edgar Dimble, of West
Terrace, Adelaide, h. O. H. Schomburgk. i. West Adelaide.
N.B.—Note that one Summons at head is “ Duplicate," the other “ Original.”
Summonses are issued in duplicate for either and both Houses. The original is
posted, the duplicate is retained, and has the following endorsement printed on it
The Original summons, of which this is a true copy, was posted by
me to the person herein named on the of 189 .
(Signature)
Sworn before me on this day of 189 .
For proper Form of Affidavit see Form 17.
84


(17.)
AFFIDAVIT OF SERVICE OP SUMMONS ON OBJECTION.
I, (o) of (I) in the Province of South
Australia (c) make oath and say that I did
on (cl) day of (e) 189 , between
the hours of (/) .m., and (g) m -> P os t
(at the ( h) Post-Office) [or in the pillar letter-
receiver situated in (i) Street at ( j)
in the said Province] the original summons, whereof the other side
hereof is a true copy, enclosed in an envelope, upon which the
postage was duly prepaid and addressed to the person named in the
said summons, the said address being his (last known place of
abode) [or address appearing in the said electoral roll, and is, so
far as I can ascertain, his last known place of abode.]
Sworn at (Jc)
this day of > (m)
189. Before me J
I
A Justice of the Peace in and for the Province of South Australia.
The above form, if followed, must be endorsed on each duplicate summons.
EXAMPLE. —a. Frederick Jones (the person posting the original summons). b.
Tynte-street, North Adelaide, c. Bootmaker, d— e. (Day of posting the original
summons.) /. 7a. g. 8a. h. General [or Hindley, j. Adelaide.] k. Adelaide.
I. Patrick Kelly, to. Fredk. Jones,
85


RETURN OF ELECTORAL EXPENSES (18.>
Under Act No. 583, “ The Electoral Law Amendment Act, 1893.” 2nd
Schedule.
I * of Candidate at the election for the
District of * held on the day of
make the following return respecting my electoral
expenses at the said election: —
Receipts. —Received of
[Here set out the names and description of every person, club, society, or
association from whom any money was received in respect of expenses
incurred.]
Total
Expenditure.—Paid f
[Here set out the names and descriptions of every polling-agent and clerk ;
and the sums paid to each set out separately.]
Paid to the following persons in respect of goods supplied or work and
labor done
[Tbe names and the description and the nature of the goods supplied, or the
work and labor done by each, must be set out separately.]
Paid hire of rooms for holding public meetings
[The name andl description of each person to whom any sum is paid and the
reason for which it was paid to him must be set out separately.]
Paid hire of rooms for holding committee meetings
[The name and description of each person to whom any sum is paid and the
reason for which it was paid to him must be set out separately.]
Paid for miscellaneous matters
[The name and description of each person to whom any sum is paid and the
reason for which it was paid to him must be set out separately.]
In addition to the above, I am aware of the following disputed and
unpaid claims : —By for
[Here set out the name and description of each person whose claim is dis-
puted, the amount of the claim, and the goods, work, or other matter on
the ground of which the claim is based.]
Total
t Dated at this day of 189 .
Signature
♦ The words “ of ” and " held *’ are not in Schedule of Act.
+ Paid to ( a -, s ***** at , voting place > .
~ ( clerk for days’ services S are lVOa
in Schedule to Act.
% This is not given in form in Schedule to Ac
86


[The Electoral Law Amendment Act, No 583 of 1893.] (19.)
TUB THIRD SCHEDULE.
DEC LAE ATIOK AS TO ELECTORAL EXPENSES.
I, (a) having been a Candidate at the Election for
the (b) of (c) on the (d)
day of (e) do hereby solemnly and sincerely declare
that the return of electoral expenses transmitted by me to the
Returning Officer for the Province *is, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, correct:
And I further solemnly and sincerely declare that, except as appears
from that return, I have not, and, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, no person has made on my behalf any payment, or given,
promised, or offered any reward, office, employment, or valuable
consideration, or incurred any liability on account of or in respect
of the conduct or management of the said election ;
And X further solemnly and sincerely declare that I have paid the sum
of (/) pounds, and no more, for the purpose of the
said election, and that, except as specified in the said return, no
money security, or equivalent for money, has to my knowledge or
belief, been paid, advanced, given, or deposited by any one to any
other person for the purpose of defraying any expenses incurred on
my behalf on account of or in respect of the conduct or management
of the said election.
Signature of declarant ( g )
Declared by the above-named declarant
on the (h) >
day of (i) J
Signed ( j ) Justice of the Peace.
• The word " ia ” is omitted in form given in Schedule to the Act.
EXAMPLE.—a. Henry Augustus Smallpage. t. Legislative Council or Assembly
Electoral District, c. Central Electoral District or East Adelaide, i—e. Date of the
polling day. /. Two hundred, g. H. A. Smallpage. h.—£. (Date of declaring.) j.
Wm, Owens.
87


Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, 10th Schedule .] (20-)
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
To the Returning Officer of the* (al) District.
Sir, —We, the undersigned, do hereby nominate (a) of
0>) as a candidate to serve in Parliament as a Member
for the Legislative Council for the (c) District.
Dated the (d) day of 189
Names and Residences op the Proposers.
w (/)
(?) (h)
« (?)
I (*0 of (I) consent to the above nomi-
nation, and to act if elected. (m)
» Four Districts—No. I, Central Electoral District; No. 2, Southern Electoral Dis-
trict ; No. 3, North-Eastern Electoral District; No. i. Northern Electoral District.
[Electoral Act No. 141 of 1879, 10 th Schedule.'] (21.)
HOUSE OE ASSEMBLY.
To the Returning Officer of the District of (a2)
—We, the undersigned, do hereby nominate (a) of
00 as a candidate to serve in Parliament as a Member
of the House of Assembly for the District of (cl)
Dated the (d) day of 189
Names and Residences of the Proposers.
0) (/)
(?) (A)
0) (?)
0) of (I) consent to the above nomi-
nation, and to act if elected. (m)
EXAMPLES 20 Ann 21.—al. No. 2 Southern Electoral. a2. Encounter Bay.
0. James Finch, h. Myponga, farmer, c. Southern Electoral, cl. Encounter Bay.
1. Date (which should be day prior to that appointed for receiving nominations).
«. Henry Johns. /. Port Victor, g. Joseph Josephs, h. Second Valley, i. Ernest
Bean. ;. Goolwa. It. James Finch. 1. Myponga, farmer, m. James Pinch.


(22.)
APPOINTING SCRUTINEER POE TIME OP POLLING.
I hereby appoint (a) of ( h ) a Scrutineer
for me and on my behalf at the taking of the poll at (c)
voting place.
Dated this day of 189
Signature (d)
a candidate at the above election.
Division
To the (e) Returning Officer for (/) of (g)
District
EXAMPLE.—a. Samuel Weller, b. Dingley Dell, gentleman, or Bundle Street,
Kent Town, gentleman, e. Eastwood, d. Nich, Nickleby. e. If for Legislative
Council election insert Deputy; if for Assembly election leave space blank. /. Strike
out Division if for Assembly election, or District if for Legislative Council election.
g. East Torrens.
N.B. —This form refers to the day time, between 8 a.m. and 7 p.m., during the
voting.
(23.)
APPOINTING SCRUTINEER FOE TIME OP COUNTING VOTES.
I hereby appoint (a) of (6) a Scrutineer
to attend the scrutiny for me and on my behalf.
Dated this day of 189
Signature (d)
a candidate at the above election.
_ ,, , , Division
To the (e) Returning Officer for (/) of ( g)
District
EXAMPLE. —a. Martin Chuzzlewit. h. Little Pedlington, merchant, or O’Connell
Street, North Adelaide, merchant, d. Wm. Starleigh. See e, /. g in Example
to Form 22.
N.B. —This form refers to the scrutiny, or counting of the votes after polling hours.
89


Number and Name
of District.
Assembly Districts comprised therein.
Name of Returning Officer.
Address of Re-
turning Officer.
Chief Voting Place
and Place of
Nomination.
1.—Central
Electoral District
(23)
East Adelaide 1 Sturt ... ... 9
North Adelaide 3 West Adelaide 1
Port Adelaide 4 West Torrens 5
William Robinson Boothby, J.P.
Supreme Court,
Adelaide
Corporation Acre
(i.e. Town Hall),
Adelaide
2.—Southern
Electoral District
(78)
Albert ... 12 Noarlunga ... 12
Bast Torrens 10 Onkaparinga ... 14
Encounter Bay 11 Victoria ... 8
Mount Barker 11
Wm. Archibald Sinclair Blue, J.P.
Strathalbyn ...
Strathalbyn
3.—North-Eastern
Electoral District
(81)
Barossa ... 11 Light ... ... 14
Burra ... 16 Wooroora ... 15
Gumeracha... 13 Yatala... ... 12
James Shakes, J.P.
Kapunda
Kapunda
4.—Northern
Electoral District
(135)
Flinders ... 27 North. Territory 19
Frome ... 26 Stanley ... 13
Gladstone ... 8 Wallaroo ... 7
Newcastle ... 21 Yorke’s Penin-
sula .. ... 14
Jefferson Pickman Stow, S.M. ...
Gladstone
Port Pirie
N.B. —All the voting places in each Assembly District are also voting places for the Legislative Council elections.
The numbers after each Assembly District denote the number of polling places in that electorate ; those given under
the Legislative Council Electoral District give the total number of polling places therein,
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL DISTRICTS.


ASSEMBLY ELECTORATES.
Showing Counties and Hundreds (or parts) and Voting Places
comprised therein, names and addresses of the Returning Officers
and places of Nomination respectively.
The Counties and Hundreds of the Northern Territory have been
omitted.
Wherever the word “ part ” follows the name of a County or Hundred,
it denotes that a part only of such County or Hundred is within such
Electorate.
Those Hundreds which are parts of different Electorates are given
further on.
The Chief Voting place is placed first on the list of Voting Places.
91


VOTING PLACE.
§ SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Kincraig (Narraooorte)
... District Council Office,
Border Town ...
... Local Courthouse.
Bast Wellington
,.. Some convenient room is hired.
Prances
... Institute.
Glen Eoy Kailway Station
Railway Station.
Keith ...
... Railway Station.
Kingston
Local Courthouse.
Lucindale
Institute.
Meningie
... 1 Most convenient rooms available are
Muudalla
... i hired.
Kobe ...
.., Local Courthouse,
Wolseley
... Institute.
ALBERT.
Legislative Council District— Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer —Alexander Wallace, J.P.
Address of Returning Officer —-Narracoorte.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Kincraig (the
official name for Narracoorte).
§ The localities of the different polling booths have been readily supplied by the
various Returning Officers, and are given from their lists.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Alfred * ( C)
Bakara
Baker
Bews
Binnum
Bonney
Bookpurnong
Bowaka
Bowhill
Bray
Buccleuch (C)
Buckingham ( C )
Cardwell (C)
Chandos (C)
Comaum
Conmurra
Coolinong
Cotton
Duffield
Ettrick
Pox
■Glen Eoy
Glyde
Gordon
Holder
Hynam
Jessie
Joanna
Joyce
Killanoola
Lacepede
Landseer
Lochaber
MacDonnell (C)
Malcolm
Mantung
Marcollat
Mincrow
Moorook
Mount Benson
Murbko
Murrahinna
Murtho
Narracoorte
Neville
Nildottie
Paisley
Parilla
Paringa
Parsons
Peacock
Pinnaroo
Pyap
Eobe ( C)
Eobertson
Eoss
Eussell (C)
Santo
Seymour
Smith
Spence
Stirling
Tatiara
Townsend
Waikerie
Waterhouse
Wirrega
Woolumbool
* (C) denotes County. The others are Hundreds.
92


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Tanunda
... Court House.
Angaston ...
... Institute.
Anna
... Some convenient room.
Crawler
... Town Hall
Keyneton
... Temperance Hotel.
Lyndoch Yalley ...
... One of tlie Hotels.
Nuriootpa ...
... Institute.
Sedan
... Some convenient room.
Stockwell
... Mr. Drescher’s house.
Truro
... Institute.
Williamstown
... District Council Office
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Kooringa or Eodruth
... Institute, Kooringa.
Black Springs
... Uninhabited detached Dwelling.
Braemer
... Private house.
Franklyn
... Store and private room.
Hanson
... Store and private room.
Hundred of Hallett
... Institute.
Jamestown...
Institute.
Manoora
... Institute.
Mount Bryan
District Council Office.
Mount Bryan East
... Private dwelling house.
Eenmark ...
... Store and private room.
Saddle worth
... Institute.
Steelton
... Store and private room.
Terowie
Store and private room.
World’s End or Lapford ...
... Tent.
Yaroowie
... Store and private room.
BAROSSA.
Legislative Council District —North-Eastern, No. 3.
Returning Officer —William Clark, J.P.
Address of Returning Officer —Angaston.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Tanunda.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C) part
Anna
Barossa
Eyre (C) part
Fisher
Light (0) part
Moorooroo
North Ehine
Skurry
BURRA.
Legislative Council District —North-Eastern, No. 3.
Returning Officer —Augustus Highermore Forder.
Address of Returning Officer —Redruth.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Kooringa or Redruth,
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
.Anne
Apoinga
Ayers
Baldina
Belalie
Bright
Bundey
Burra
Hallett
Hamley (C)
Hanson
Ketchowla
Kimberley (0) part
King
Kingston
Kooringa
Mongolata
Rees
Reynolds
Saddleworth
Stanley, part
Terowie
Tomkinson
Waterloo, part
Whyte
Wonna
Young (C)
93


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Norwood...
... Town Hall.
Burnside
... Burnside Hotel.
Eastwood
... Parkside Hotel, Eastwood.
Glen Osmond ...
... Institute.
Glynde ...
... Glynde Hotel.
Kent Town
... Kent Town Hotel.
Magill
... East Torrens Hotel.
Payneham
... Duke of Wellington Inn.
Eose Park
... Tent nearly opposite Eose Park School.
St. Peters
... Town Hall.
EAST ADELAIDE.
Legislative Council District.— Central, No. 1.
Returning Officer.— George Hamilton Ayliffe, J.P.
Address op Returning Officer.— Local Board of Health Offices, King
William Street, Adelaide.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place. —Corporation Acre
(i.e., Town Hall, Adelaide.)
The bounds of this Electorate are all that part of the City of Adelaide
south of the River Torrens and east of the centre of King William
Street (known as Hindmarsh and Young Wards), and include those
portions of the Park Lands within such part.
EAST TORRENS.
Legislative Council District. —Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer. —James Dominick Woods, J.P.
Address of Returning Officer. — George Street, Norwood.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place.— Town Hall, Norwood.
COUNTY AND HUNDRED.
Adelaide ( C ), part. Adelaide, part
This being a suburban electorate, to avoid confusion it will be well to
remember that it comprises the entire Corporations of Kensington and
Norwood and St. Peters; the District Councils of Campbelltown and
Payneham; the whole of the District Council of Burnside, excepting
sections 920, 984, 985, 1001, 1002, 1006, and 1286 (which are in the
Onkaparinga electorate) ; the following part of the District Council of
Craters, viz., the southern part of section 1052, the whole of sections
1053 and 1054, and the south-eastern portion of section 1056, south of
the load intersecting it; also the following portion of East Torrens
District Council, viz., parts of sections 1052 and 1056 north of the road
running through them, and the whole of the following sections :—304 to
307—810 to 825, 828 to 830, 847, 849 to 855, 857—906, 913 to 919, 998,
999—1051, 1055—1102 to 1104, 1108 to 1110—5654, 5655.
94


VOTING- PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Port Elliot
... Court House.
Bullaparinga
... District Council Chamber.
Cape Jervis
... Mr. Isaac Norman's house.
Goolwa ...
... Court House.
Hog Bay (K.I.)...
... District Council Chamber.
Inman Valley ...
... Post Office.
Kingsoote (K.I.)
v ... Queenscliffe Hotel.
Myponga...
.. District Council Chamber.
Port Victor
... Institute.
Second Valley ...
... Mr. John Daniel’s bouse.
Yankalilla
... District Council Chamber.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Port Lincoln
... Court House.
Beltana ...
... Mr. Buttfleld’s premises.
Blinman...
... Mr. Shepherd’s premises.
Bookable
... Post Office.
Bramfield
... Mr. Scott’s premises.
Calca
... Post Office.
Charra ...
Post Office.
Cleve
Post Office.
Colton
... Post Office.
Coulta ...
... Eating House.
Cowell ...
... Franklin Harbor Hotel.
Farina Town
... Hotel,
Lake Wangary ...
... Hotel.
Marree
... Mr. Wyly’s premises.
Oodnadatta
Post Office.
Parachilna
H otel.
Parallanua
... Head Station.
Phillips Ponds ...
... Eating House.
Port Augusta West
... Mr. James Bryant’s residence.
Port Blliston
... Church Meeting House.
Sheringa
Institute.
Streaky Bay
Institute.
Talia
Eating House.
ENCOUNTER BAY.
Legislative Council District —Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer —Charles Wilson Colman.
Address op Returning Officer —Port Elliot.
Place op Nomination and Chief Voting Place — Port Elliot.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Carnarvon (K. 1.) (C) Goolwa Myponga
Cassini (K. 1.) Haines (K. 1.) NangHta
Dudley (K. 1.) Hindmarsh (C) part Waitpinga
Encounter Bay Menzies (K. 1.) Yankalilla
(K. 1.) denotes that the place is on Kangaroo Island.
FUNDEES.
Legislative Council District —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Officer —William Ogle Bennett.
Address of Returning Officer —Port Lincoln.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Port Lincoln.
95


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Warrina...
... Railway Station Master’s premises.
Yalata
... Hotel.
Tarandale
... Post Office.
Yardea
... Head Station.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Orroroo ...
... Institute.
Booleroo Centre
... Institute.
Dawlish
Residence of Mr. C. Price, J.P.
Dawson ...
Private ball.
Lancelot...
... Some private house.
Mambray Creek
... Some private house.
Mannahill
... Some private house.
Mannanarie
... Some private house.
Melrose
... Institute.
Morohard
... Institute.
Murray Town
... Adj oining hotel.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Bags ter
Bartlett
Blacker
Bonython
Boothby
Burgoyne
Caldwell
Campbell
Carawa
Carr
Castine
Catt
Chillundie
Cohen
Colton
Copley
Downer
Dufferin (0)
Edeowie
Pinlayson
Flinders (C)
Forest
Giles
Gillen
Goode
Guthrie
Hague
Handyside
Haslam
Hawker
Homburg
Hopetouu (C)
Horn
Hutchison ,
Jenkins
Jervois (0)
Keith
Kevin
Kiana
Kintore (C)
Koppio
Lake Wangary
Lincoln
Louth
Lucy
Magarey
Manchester (C )
Mangalo
Mann
May
Miller
Miltalie
Minbrie
Moule
Murray
Musgrave (0)
Nash
Nilpena
Paraohilna
Pearce
Petina
Playford
Punyeroo
Ripon
Robinson (0)
Rounsevell
Scherk
Scott
Sleaford
Squire
Stokes
Talia
Tarlton
Taunton (C)
Tinline
Uley
Ulipa
Wallanippie
Wandana
Wanilla
Ward
Warrow
Way
Way (C)
Witera
Wrenfordaley
Wright_
Yadnarie
Yaranyaoka
FROME.
Legislative Council District —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Officer — John Moody, J.P.
Address of Returning Officer— Orroroo.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Orroroo.
FLlNDERS.— {Continued.)


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Nackara
... Some private house.
Pamaroo
... Some private house.
Pekina ...
... Some private house.
Petersburg
... Town Hall.
Port Germein ...
... Mr. N. Simon’s office.
Tarcowie
... Some private house.
Telowie ...
... Some private house.
Wadnaminga ...
... Mr. Copley’s store.
Walloway
... Mr. Hemmler’s store.
Willowie
... Private house.
Wirrabara
... Institute.
Yarrowie
... Institute.
Yatina
... Adjoining hotel.
Yongola ...
... Institute.
Yuuta
... Railway Station.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Gladstone (or Booyoolie)
Institute.
Caltowie ...
... Institute.
Crystal Brook ...
... Institute.
Georgetown
... Institute.
Laura
... Town Hall.
Narridy ...
... District Council Chamber.
Port Pirie
... Courthouse.
Wandearah
... Private house.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Appila
Baroota
Black Rock
Booleroo
Cavenagh
Coglin
Coomooroo
Dalhousie (C) part
Darling
Erskine
Prome (C) part
Gregory
Gumbowie
Hardy
Herbert (C)
Kimberley (0) part
Mannanarie
Minburra
Morgan
Nackara
Paratoo
Parnaroo
Pekina
Taroowie
Telowie
Walloway
Waroonee
Willowie
Wongyarra
Tongola
GLADSTONE.
Legislative Council District —Northern. No. 4.
Returning Officer —Jefferson Pickman Stow, S.M.
Address of Returning Officer— Gladstone.
Place op Nomination and Chief Voting Place — Gladstone.
COUNTY AND HUNDREDS.
Booyoolie
Bundaleer
Caltowie
Crystal Brook
Howe
Napperby
Narridy
Pirie
Victoria (C) part
Wandearah
Yangya
97
PROME.—( Continued.)


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Gumeraeha
... Local Court House.
Blumberg
... Institute.
Cournamont
... Private house.
Houghton
District Council Chamber.
Maidstone
... District Council Chamber.
Mannum
Institute.
Mount Pleasant
Private house.
Mount Torrens ...
Private house.
Palmer ...
Palmer Hotel.
Rhine Villa
... Institute.
■South Petherton
... Private house.
Springton
... Springton Hotel.
Teatree Gully ...
... District Council Chamber.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Kapunda...
... Court House.
Dutton Town ...
... Post Office Store.
Bbenezer
School house.
Eudunda...
District Council Office.
Pi eeling...
... Private house or office.
Greenock
... Institute.
Linwood ...
... Private house or school.
Marrabel...
... Private house.
Morgan ...
... Private house.
Mount Mary
... Store.
Point Pass
... Post Office Store.
Eobertstown
... Private house.
Sheoak Log
Private house.
Sutherlands
... Private house.
GUMERACHA.
Legislative Council District. —North-Eastern, No. 3.
Returning Officer.— William Haines, J.P.
Address op Returning Officer. —Teatree Gully.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place.— Gumeraoha.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C), part
Angas
Finniss
Forster
Para Wirra
Ridley
South Rhine
Sturt (C), part
Talunga
Tungkillo
Yatala, part
Younghusband
LIGHT.
Legislative Council District. —North-Eastern, No. 3.
Returning Officer. —James Shakes, J.P
Address of Returning Officer.— Kapunda.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place. —Kapunda.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Belvidere
Bower
Brownlow
Cadell
Dutton
Eba
English
Eyre (C), part
Gilbert, part
Hay
Julia Creek
Kapunda
Krichauff
Light (C), part
Light
Lindley
Neales
Nuriootpa
Schomburgk
Stuart
Waterloo, part
98


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Stratlialbyn
.. Court House.
Echunga
... Institute.
Hahndorf
... Institute.
Langhorne’s Creek
... Oddfellows’ Hall.
Macclesfield
,.. Institute.
Milang
... Institute.
Mount Barker
... Institute.
Mylor
... Lapidge’s Store.
Stirling East ...
... Institute.
Wellington West
... Court House.
Woodohester
District Council Hall.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Port Augusta ...
... Court House.
Belton
... Store.
Bruce
... Hotel.
Carrieton
... Assembly Boom.
Cockburn
... Hotel.
Cradock ...
... Hotel.
Eurelia
... Hotel.
Gordon
... Store.
Hammond
... Hotel.
Hawker ...
... Institute.
Johnburgh
... Hotel.
Limestone Wells
... School House.
Mootooroo
... Hotel.
Quom
... Court House.
Saltia
... Hotel.
Stirling North ...
... Hotel.
Teetulpa...
... Store.
Waukaringa
... Store.
Wilmington
... Court House.
Wilson
... Store.
Tanyarrie
... Store.
MOUNT BAREKER.
Legislative Council District —Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer —William Archibald Sinclair Blue, M.D., J.P.
Address of Returning Officer —Strathalbyn.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Strathalbyn.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C) part
Alexandrina
Bremer
Brinkley
Freeling
Hind narsh (C) part
Kondoparinga, part
Ku'l.* > part
Macclesfield
Noarlcmga, part
Onkaparinga, part
S ! athalbyn
S j ’-t (0) part
NEWCASTLE.
Legislative Council District —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Opeicer— John Rndall, S.M.
Address of Returning Opeicer —Port Augusta.
Place op Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Port Augusta.
99


VOTING- PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Noarlunga
... District Hall.
Aldinga
... District Council Hall.
Ashbourne
... Mr. It. Haines’ residence.
Cherry G-ardens
... Private residence.
Clarendon
Local Court House.
Coromandel Valley
District Hall.
Happy Valley
... Private residence.
Maclaren Vale ...
... Mr. J. Morgan’s residence.
Meadows...
... District Council Hall.
Morphett Vale ...
Institute.
SellicFs Hill
Private residence.
Willunga
... Local Court House.
Arkaba
Barndioota
Bendleby
Blachford ( C )
Boolounda
Coonattoo
Cotabena
Crozier
Cudla Mudla
Dalhousie (0) part
Davenport
Derby (C)
Eurelia
Eurilpa
Erome (0) part
Granville (C)
Hanson (C)
Kanyaka
Lytton (C)
McCulloch
Mookra
Newcastle (C)
Oladdie
Palmer
Pichi Riohi
Pinda
Uroonda
Warrakimbo
Willochra
Winninowie
Wirreanda
Wonoka
Woolundunga
Woolyana
Wyaoca
Yalpara
Yanyarrie
Yarrah
Yednulie
NOARLUNGA.
Legislative Council District —Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer— Charles Hegan Myles, J.P.
Address of Returning Officer— Morphett Yale.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Noarlunga.
COUNTY AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C) part
Kondoparinga, part
Noarlunga, part
Kuitpo, part
NORTH ADELAIDE.
Legislative Council District—Central, No. 1.
Returning Officer— Llandaff Brisbane Mathews, J.P.
Address of Returning Officer— (Private), Gloucester Street, Prospect;
( City ), Pirie Chambers, Pirie Street, Adelaide.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place — North Adelaide.
VOTING PLACES. SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
North Adelaide ... ... ... Institute, Tynte Street.
Prospect ... ... Wesleyan Schoolroom, Highbury Street.
Walkerville ... Sussex Arms, Hotel.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
NEWCASTLE.—( Continued .)


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Woodside
... Local Court House.
Balhannah
Balhann ah Hotel.
Callington
,.. Callington Hotel.
Forest Range ...
Forest Range Hotel.
Harrogate
... Mr. Artemus Appleton’s residence.
Kanmantoo
.. Kanmantoo Hotel.
Lobethal
... Either of the two hotels (Rising Sun or
Alma).
Monarto ...
... Mr. Bernard Hoff’s residence.
Montaoute
... Mr. Thomas Trebilcock’s residence.
Murray Bridge ...
... Murray Bridge Hotel.
Nairne ...
... Mr. J. W. King’s residence.
Norton’s Summit
Norton’s Summit Hotel.
Stirling East ...
... Mr. Wm. Hy. Milford’s residence.
Uraidla ...
... Institute.
Adelaide (C) , part. Yatala, part.
This Electorate comprises all that portion of the City north of the
River Torrens (known as Robe and Mac Donnell Wards) and the whole of
the District Councils of Prospect and Walkerville.
NORTHERN TERRITORY.
Legislative Council District —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Officer — John James Symes.
Address op Returning Officer —Palmerston.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Palmerston (Port
Darwin.
Palmerston (Port Dar-
win)
Alice Springs
Anthony’s Lagoon
Arltunga
Barrow’s Creek
Borroloola
VOTING PLACES.
Burrundie
Charlotte Waters
Daly Waters
Eveleen
Fountain Head
Howley
Maude Creek
Pine Creek
Powell’s Creek
Tennant’s Creek
The Katherine
Union
Warnardo
Time precluded obtaining the situations of the Polling booths for this District.
Section 2, of Act No. 450. of 1888, defines “the Northern Territory”
as meaning “ all that portion of the province lying north of the 26th
parallel of south latitude, and between the 129 and 138 degrees of east
longitude, together with the bays and gulfs therein, and all and every
the islands adjacent to the mainland, within such limits as aforesaid.”
ONKAPARINGA.
Legislative Council District. —Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer. — Hermann Carl Frederick Esau, M.D., J.P.
Address of Returning Officer —Woodside.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place. —Woodside.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C), part
Adelaide, part
Burdett
Kanmantoo
Mobilong
Monarto
Noarlunga, part
Onkaparinga, part
Sturt (C), part
101
NORTH ADELAIDE. — (Continued.)
COUNTY AND HUNDRED.


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Port Adelaide
Town Hall.
Alberton
Cottage close to Alberton Hotel.
LeFevre’s Peninsula (or Sema-
Exeter Hotel, or close to it.
phore ...
Woodville
Institute.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLINO BOOTH.
Clare
... Court house.
Myth
... District Hall.
Koolunga
... Institute.
Lochiel
... Hotel.
Mintaro ...
... Institute.
Mundoora
... Hotel.
Port Broughton
... Institute.
Eedhill
... Institute.
Eoohester
... Hotel.
Sevouhills
... Hotel.
Snowtown
... Institute.
Spalding..,
... Hotel.
Yacka
... Institute.
PORT ADELAIDE.
Legislative Council District.— Central, No. 1.
Returning Officer. —John Formby, S.M.
Address op Returning Officer. —Port Adelaide.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place.— Port Adelaide.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (0), part Port Adelaide, part Yatala, part
This Electorate comprises Torrens Island; the Corporations of Port
Adelaide and Semaphore ; the District Councils of Queenstown, Alberton,
and Rosewater; also the following sections in the Hundred of Yatala
contained in portion of the District Council of Woodville, viz 88 to
96, 97a, 98 to 108—405 to 408, 409 (northern half), 412, 417 to 421, 424,
425, 434, 435, 439, 441 (southern half), 442—902, 903, 920 to 929 —2070
2071, 2073, 2074.
STANLEY.
Legislative Council District —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Officer— Frederick Auburn Bleeohmore.
Address of Returning Officer —Clare.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Clare.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Andrew
Barunga
x
Boucaut
Cameron
Clare
Everard
Hart
Eoolunga
Milne
Mundoora
Kedhill
Stanley (C part
Stanley, part
Upper Wakefield, part
Victoria ( C ) part
Wokurna
Tackamoornndie
102


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF FOILING
BOOTH.
TJnley
... Town Hall.
Belair
... Belair Hotel.
Brighton
... Institute.
Glenelg
... Town Hall.
Goodwood
... Institute.
Mitcham
... Institute.
Parkside
... Baptist Schoolroom, Young
Street.
South Hoad
... Avoca or Maid of Auckland
Hotels.
Upper Sturt
... Store and Post-Office.
STURT.
Legislative Council District —Central, No. 1.
Returning Officer —De Neufville Lucas.
Address of Returning Officer —( Private ) Fisher-street, Pullarton;
( Official ) Goodwood.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Unley.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C) part Adelaide, part Noarlunga, part
This Electorate comprises the Corporations of Brighton, Glenelg, and
Unley; the District Councils of Mitcham and Marion, and portion of
the District Council of Stirling, viz., the following Sections of the
Hundred of Adelaide 922, 935, 942, 943, 944, 946 to 958, 960 to 966,
968, 970 to 975—1085.
VICTORIA.
Legislative Council District.— Southern, No. 2.
Returning Officer. —Henry Charles Swan, S.M.
Address of Returning Officer. —Mount G-ambier.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place. —Gambierton (offi-
cial name for Mount Gambler).
VOTING PLACES.
Situation of Polling Booths not supplied by Returning Officer.
Gambierton (Mount
Gambler)
Beachport
Furner
Millioent
Penola
Port Mac Donnell
Tantanoola
Tarpeena
COUNTY AND HUNDREDS.
Benara
Blanche
Caroline
Grey (C)
drey
Hindmarsh
Kennion
Kungorong
Lake George
Mac Donnell
Mayurra
Mingbool
Monbulla
Mount Muirhead
Nangwary
Penola
Riddoch
Rivoli Bay
Short
Symon
Young
103


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Wallaroo
... Court House.
Alford
Mr. Phillip’s, storekeeper, residence.
Bute
... Temperance Hotel.
Green’s Plains ...
... Paskeville Eailway Hotel.
Kadiua
... Court House.
Kulpara . .
... Residence of Mr. G. W. Brown, post-
master.
Moonta
... Court House.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Hindmarsh
... Town Hall.
Garfield
... District Hall.
Grand Junction...
... House at Junction of the two roads on
Thebarton
Section 920, Hundred Port Adelaide.
... Town Hall.
York
... Eechabite Hall.
WALLAROO.
Legislative Council District. —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Officer.— John Banks Shepherdson, J.P,
Address of Returning Officer.— Wallaroo.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place.—Wallaroo.
COUNTY AND HUNDKEDS.
Daly (C), part
Kadina
Kulpara
Ninnes
Tickera
Wallaroo
Wiltunga
WEST ADELAIDE.
Legislative Council District—Central, No. 1.
Returning Officer— Otto Heinrich Schomburgk.
Address op Returning Officer— Supreme Court Buildings, Adelaide.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Post-Office Build-
ings, Adelaide (i.e.,the General Post Office).
The bounds of this Electorate are all that part of the City of Adelaide
south of the River Torrens and west of the centre of King William
(known as Gawler and Grey Wards), and in3lude those portions
or the Park Lands within such part.
WEST TORRENS.
Legislative Council District—Central, No. 1.
Returning Officer—Richard Baxter Cox.
Address op Returning Officer— King William Street, Adelaide.
Place op Nomination and Chief Voting Place —Hindmarsh.
104


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Riverton
... Court House.
Alma
... *
Auburn ...
Court House.
Balaklava
... Court House.
Halbury ... ... ...
*
Hamley Bridge ...
... Court House.
Hoyleton
*
Mount Templeton
*
Nantawarra
*
Owen
*
Port Wakefield ...
*
Rbynie ...
.... District Council Office.
Stockport
*
Tarlee
Institute.
Watervale
*
Adelaide (C) part Adelaide, part Port Adelaide, part
Yatala, part
This Electorate comprises the Corporations of Hindmarsh and
Thebarton; the District Council of West Torrens, and portions of the
District Councils of Woodville (being that portion not contained in the
Port Adelaide Electorate), and Yatala South.
The following Sections (of Hundred Yatala) are in this Electorate
and belong to Woodville District Council ; — 373, 375,376, 387 to 398 —
408 to 411, 4Ue, 4Llw, 412, 413, 423, 425 to 428, 430 to 434, 440 to 453
900, 901—1006—2068, 2075, 2076, 2080.
The portion of Yatala South District Council in this Electorate
comprises the following Sections of Hundred of Port Adelaide:—97—l9l
to 208—920 to 977, 979 to 983—1000, 1001.
Also the following Sections of Hundred Yatala : —355 to 366, 378 to
393, 397 to 410.
WOOROORA.
Legislative Council District —North Eastern, No. 3,
Returning Officer— James Scholefield.
Address of Returning Officer —Riverton.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place — Riverton.
* Unknown to the Returning Officer.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Alma
Balaklava
Dalkey
G-awler (C) part
Gilbert, part
Goyder
Hall
Inkerman
Stanley (C) part
Stanley, part
Stow
Upper Wakefield, part
Waterloo, part
105
WEST TORRENS. — (Continued.)
COUNTY AND HUNDREDS.


VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OF POLLING BOOTH.
Salisbury
... Court house.
Buchsfelde
... Mr. Collypriest’s house.
... Mr. O’Callaghan’s house.
Dry Creek
Dublin ...
... Institute.
Enfield ...
... Institute.
Gilles Plains
... O.G. Hotel.
IVtallala
... Mr. S. Church’s house.
Eedbanks
... Mr. Jamieson’s house.
Smitbfield
... Institute.
Two Wells
... Institute.
Virginia..
... Mr. Mahar’s house.
Wasleys ...
... Mr. Paynter’s house.
VOTING PLACES.
SITUATION OP POLLING BOOTH.
Minlatou
... Institute.
Ardrossan
... Institute.
Brentwood
... Store and Post Office.
Corny Point
... Post Office.
Curramulka
... Institute.
Edithburgh
... Old Court House building.
Kalkabury (or Arthurton)
... Private house.
Maitland
... Institute.
Mount Eat
... A closed public house.
Port Victoria
... Private house.
Price
... Hotel or private house.
Stansbury
Institute.
Varooka
... Institute.
Torketown
... Local Court House.
YATALA.
Legislative Council District —North Eastern, No. 3.
Returning Officer —James Harvey, J.P.
Address op Returning Officer —Salisbury.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Salisbury.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Adelaide (C) part
Dublin
Gawler (0) part
Grace
Mudla Wirra
Munno Para
Port Adelaide, part
Port Gawler
Yatala, part
TORKE’S PENINSULA.
Legislative Council District —Northern, No. 4.
Returning Officer— Frederick William Allen.
Address of Returning Officer— Edithburgh.
Place of Nomination and Chief Voting Place— Minlaton.
COUNTIES AND HUNDREDS.
Carribie
Clinton
Coonarie
Cunningham
Curramulka
Dairy mple
Daly (0) part
Ferguson (0)
Kilkerran
Koolywurtie
Maitland
Melville
Minlacowie
Moorowie
Muloowurtie
Para Wurlie
Ramsay
Tiparra
Warrenben
Wauraltee
106


PARTS OF HUNDREDS:
Showing what Sections belong to the different Electorates
partially contained therein.
Adelaide
Gilbert
Kondopaeinga
Kuitpo
Noaeltjnga
Onkaparikga
Poet Adelaide
Stanley
Upper Wakefield.
Waterloo
Tatala
107


HUNDRED ADELAIDE.
(Parts East Adelaide, East Torrens, Onkaparinga, Sturt, West Adelaide,
and West Torrens).
East Adelaide and West Adelaide are parts of the City.
Sections are in Onkapaeinga Electorate17, 18—
152 826, 827, 836, 856 —920,924 to 929, 931, 932, 936, 959a 967 969 978
996.. 997-1000, 1001, 1002, WlOlO.1011.1015, 1016lS
10 f 8, 10 ° 9 ’ 1064 1064 fco 1°66. 1071, 1079, 1081, 1082—
m^’e 11 ! 0 ! 6^ 110 . 7^ 1111, 1U2 > 1114 1149 to 1X51, 1157, 1160 to 1166, 1172,
1175 to 1184—1286. ’ • >
oontains 1 to 21, *22, *29, 30 to 34, §35, §36, 41, 42,
lfi 3 s«^et 5 a? 4 ?V+ 49j 51 ’ 52 - § 53 > 54 to 67, *68, 77, 78, 79, *81, 82 to
t 8 l°r 9 ' §11 °’ 111 t0 U6 ’ m ’ + 134 346 t0 151—221 to
Q?n. 23 f a 252, §^ 253 > +§ 2 ° 4 255 to 263, +265, 266, 267, 268, 1270, +271—
350 *° 3^ 9 “ 842 ’ 843 ’ 864 862 > 866 to 875, 878. 879, 882, 884, 885, 886, 890
898 ,921, 922 923, 934 to 966, 968, 970 to 977—1003, 1004, 1017, 1036,
loQ9 t 1 0 OQd 5^’on= 63 1 niv 72 1084 1084 l085 ’ 1086 > 1087 > 1089 > 10 90, 1091,
?? 4 10 ll 7 ’ 1098, 109 9—1120 to 1123, 1140 to 1144, 1146, 1147,
2oS 2100:2200 to 220L 1200 ’ 1279 ’ 1285 ’ 1287> 1288 - 2083 ’ 2084 2084
§ There are two sections in this part numbered alike.
in'NoLtunga^rec* WlmS StUrt Eleotorate - the otb « P orti °“ «
° f “““ ®° Uth E ° a,i iS in Sturt - tbe other P ar ' ; be “S
the S^inE^t °' ““ “ Barker ( ° r Gle “ 0 “ ond )
numbered 2s e t C n tl 27 nS N^ e <; < i Ut bloois ’? eing as follows :_No - 49 > subdivisions
SZbSed 17 lASw 4 S o b on^r°i 18 f um i > ? red 118 t0 133 5 No. 253, sub-divisions
numbered 37, 3S, 70 to 76, and 80 (the first and last numbers inclusive).
West Toekens Electorate contains:—1 to 5,+44, 45, 47, 48 49 $50
f53, 88, 90, 92, 93, 94, §95, 96, 97, 98, §99—101, 102, 103, +104,' 10g!
107, 108, f!36, 144, 145, §152, 153 to 172, 183, 185 to 187, 192, 194—203,
215 to 229— # 433—522, 523—2023 to 2031, 2033, 2034, 2037.
§ There are two sections in this part bearing this number.
belongs t(7sturt th and W ® St ° f th ® Main Soutb Koad - is in tbis Electorate; the other
* 0al J tbat P 01 ’*™ 1 sou th of the Eiver Torrens is in Hundred of Adelaide although
both sides are in West Torrens electorate. ' uirnougn
East Toeeens electoral district contains the remainder.
HUNDRED GILBERT.
(Part Light, part Wooroora).
The following Sections belong to the Electoral District of Light
the remainder are in Wooroora Electorate: —55, 56, 57, 97—334 368 374*
875, 376, 379, 381, 382, 383, 384, 386, 387, 391, 393, 394—507 508 *509—
625, 626,627, *628—706—1087, 1088, 1089, 1096 to 1099—1100 1101 1102
1109 to 1116, 1123 to 1129, 1135 to 1138, 1144 to 1148, 1154 to 1159’ 1164
to 1167,1172 to 1175,1180 to 1183, 1188 to 1192, 1196 to 1200—1205,1206—
1588, 1589, *1590, *1591, 1592, 1595 to 1598, 1599, *1600 1601
• The sections marked • have a range of Hilis running through them which divides
and 0 Ele J torates J all th*t P art of ttese sections east of the range belong to Light
ana the western part to Wooroora. &
108


HUNDRED KONDOPARINGA.
(Part Mount Barker, part Noarlunga.)
The following Sections are in the Mount Baekee Electorate, the
balance of this Hundred is in KToarlunga Electoral District: —1742,1746,
1822, 1842, 1843, 1844, 1859 to 1875, 1877 to 1888—*2009, *2010, *2012,
2015 to 2019, 2021, *2022, 2023 to 2034, 2036 to 2040, 2043 to 2048, 2051
to 2065, 2067, 2069 to 2073, *2076, 2082, 2083, 2084, 2085, *2089, 2132 to
2153, 2255, 2256, 2327, 2328, 2346, 2426, 2427, 2448, 2611, 2613 to 2618,
2627, 2635, 2636, 2640, 2641, 2644 to 2651, 2653, 2656 to 2660, 2664, 2665,
2667, 2668, 2690, 2691, 2700, 2701, 2703, 2717, 2722 to 2731, 2733, 2734,
2741 to 2745—3353 to 3360.
* The boundary line between the two Electorates runs through these Sections, the
south-eastern parts being in Mount Barker, the rest in Noarluuga.
HUNDRED KUITPO.
(Part Mount Barker, part Noarlunga).
The following Sections are in the Mount Baekee Electorate, the
others in Noarlunga*22—*l37, 138. 139, 140, 145 to 154,156 to 165,171,
175 to 178,182,190 to 195—290—304, *313, 314 to 319, 321 to 334, 337 to
345, 350, 351, 353, 355, 356, 357, 359 to 365, 367, 369, 370, 372, 373 to 380,
383 to 385, 388, 389, 390, 392 to 395, 397—400 to 416, 418 to 427,429 to 432,
434 to 437, 441, 442, 463, 492, 493—817,818, 819,828—3324, to 3329, 3482,
3483, 3484, 3493, 3194, 3495, 3498, 3499, 3500, 3530 to 3534, 3809, 3811 to
3822, 3824, 3825, 3826, 3828, 3829, 3830, 3834, 3839, 3842, 3847 to 3880,
3882 to 3885, 3887, 3888, 3891 to 3899, 3901 to 3906, 3908 to 3913, 3915 to
3921, 3932—*4174, 4175, *4176, *4177, 4231 to 4239.
* These Sections have the boundary line of the two electoral districts running*
through them in a north-westerly and south-easterly direction. The easterly and
northerly parts of these Sections are in Mount Barker —the Electorate —while the
westerly and southern portions are in Noarlunga.
HUNDRED NOARLUNGA.
(Parts Mount Barker, Noarlunga, Onkaparinga, and Sturt.)
Noarlunga Electorate has the following Sections : —§ Ito 49, 53, 54,
55, 58, 59, 61, 62, 64. 69 to 81, 98—106, 107, f 123, +124, +126, +l2B, f 129,
fl3o, 154—202, 203, 217J218, 219, K 220, 221, f 222, 227 to 233, 256 to 259,
260, 261, 264, 265, 266, 268, 269, 270, 272, 273, 276 to 281,284 to 295—300
to 308, 311 to 317, 319, 320 to 325, 329, 338, 343 to 346, 348, 349, 352, 353,
355, 357, 359, 360 to 372, 374, 376—404 to 411, 432 to 434, 441, 451, +456,
457 to 459, 465 to 468, 474 to 477, 489 a, 493 to 495—500 to 504, +5lO, § 511
to 521, 523 to 524, 526 to 530, 533 to 558, 572 to 599—600 to 669, 671 to
675, 678 to 699—700 to 706, 708 to 736, 739, 740, 749, 764 to 775, 777 to
799—800 to 808, 810, 812, 814 to 821, 828 to 833, 842 to 846,857, 858. 860,
863 864, 865, 899—902, 988, 990, 996—1019 to 1021,1048,1056, 1059, 1100
1101, 1(1159, 1160, 1174, 1175, 11191, 1192, 1193, 11194—1261 to 1265,
1280—1330 1331, 11332, 11353, 1356,1361, 1375—1638, 1639, 1640—2102,
+2106, 2107, 2108, 2759, 2878.
S There are two Sections in this part, both numbered 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, aud
29( Also two 516, 517, 618, 619, 520, and 521.
t That part of these Sections east of the main South Hoad belongs to Noarlunga
Electorate, the other portion being in Sturt.
H Only the western part is in Noarlunga, the eastern being in Mount Barker
Electoral District.
109


In Onkapaeinga Electorate there are—43 to 47, 81, 86, 90, 91—1141,
1142—2797, 2798.
The following are in Stuet:—+ll7 to 150, 153, §172 to 199—§200 to
216, 234 to 252—452 to f 456,460 to 464, 469 to 473, 478 to 483,487 to 490
496 to 499—505, 506, 507, 509, f5lO, 559 to 571—670—1018—2103, +2106,
2451.
t The part of the Sections 123, 124, 126, 128, 129, and 130, and 456, 510, and 2106 wrst
of the main South Eoad belongs to Sturt Electorate, the other side being in Noa
lunga,
§ There are two Sections in this part numbered alike.
The Remaining Sections belong to Mount Barker Electoral District.
HUNDRED ONKAPARINGA.
(Part Mount Barker, part Onkap .ringa).
The following Sections belong to Mount Barker Electorate, the
rest to Ontaparinga;—los, 121, 122—1781, 1783, 1922—3816, 3817, 3820
to 3828, 3830 to 3833—4001 to 4007, 4029, 4 )30, 4031, 4081, 4082, *4083,
4093, 4094, 4C26 to 4107, *4216, 4217 to 4228, *4229, 4230.
* These Sections have the boundary line of the two Electorates running along the
road which divides the Sections into north and south parts.
HUNDRED PORT ADELAIDE.
(Parts Port Adelaide, West Tonens, and Yatala).
To West Toebens Electorate belong the follow -ng .-—97—191 to 2C
—920 to 977, 979, 980 to 983—1000, 1001.
Yatala Electorate possesses the following ; —26 to 60, 69, 76 to 96, 98
99—100 to 158,160 to 190—209 to 287, 290 t0~299—300 to 304—*978 to 999’
—lOO2 to 1024—2263, 2275, 2276, 2277, 2280, 2290—3061 to 3072, 3231 to
3234, 3500 to 3503—5000 to 5048 -7500 to 7530, 7534 to 7540, 7551 to
7560, 7592, 7598, 7599, 7600.
* Sections 979, 983, and 989 only those portions north and west of the Dry Creek and
Port Adelaide Railway line belong to Yatala.
The rest are in Port Adelaide Electorate.
HUNDRED STANLEY.
(Part Stanley, Burra, and Wooroora).
The following Sections are in Wooeooba Electorate 48,49,50, 61,
€8 to 77, 91 to 107, 195 to 212, 218, 219, 220, 224, 225, 226, 228 to 231.
The following Sections are in Bueea Electorate :—l, 22, 24 to 42, 65 to
67 —235—348 t0'351, 356,357, 362, 363, 367,368—420, 421, 426 to 507, 510
to 519, 521 to 525, 527 to 550, 559, 560 to 567, 575 to 589—2002 to 2011,
2013 to 2033—3050, 3055 to 3060, 3064, 3065, 3200 to 3203.
The remainder is in Stanley Electorate.
110
HUNDRED NOARLUNGA.—( Continued .)


HUNDRED UPPER WAKEFIELD.
(Part Stanley and Wooroora).
The following Sections are in Stanley Electorate : —33 —176, 177, 180
to 186, 188 to 199—301 to 309, 312 to 315, 353, 354—421—584 to 587, 593.
The remaining Sections are in Wooroora Electorate.
HUNDRED WATERLOO.
(Part Burra and Light.)
The following Sections are in Light Electorate, rest in Bubka :
1,2, 10 to 14, 16 to 79, 81 to 89—104 to 125, 127 to 147, 149 to 153, 158 to
161,178 to 186—213 to 227, 229 to 239,264 to 270, 280—1090 to 1095, 1103
to 1108, 1117 to 1122, 1130 to 1134, 1139 to 1143, 1149 to 1153, 1160 to
1163, 1168 to 1171, 1176, 1177, 1179, 1184, 1186, 1187, 1193 to 1195, 1201,
1202, 1204, 1210, 1211, 1214 to 1216, 1219 to 1224, 1227 to 1233, *1234,
*1235, 1236 to 1238, *1239, 1240, 1247 to 1254, 1259, 1273 to 1276, 1278,
1280, 1281, 1290, 1291, 1295.
* The Sections 1234, 1235, and 1239 are suburban to the township laid out as Victoria
and subdivided having Sections thereon consecutively numbered 53 to 100 (both
inclusive).
HUNDRED YATALA.
(Parts Gumeracha, North Adelaide, Port Adelaide, West Torrens, and
Yatala).
North Adelaide Electorate comprises the following Sections: —327,
328, 345 to 354, 367 to 373, 375 to 377, 394, 395—460, 474 to 477—2062,
2064, 2065.
Port Adelaide Electorate contains: —*66, *67, *68, *71, *72, *73, *74,
75 to 78, 80 to 96, 97a to 108—105 to 408, §409, 412 to 425, 429, *441, 442,
443, 454—699—902, 903,920 to 929—1128, 1129—2070 to 2074. 2,300.
• The southern parts of these Sections are in Hundred of Yatala, the major portion
(the northern) being in the Hundred of Port Adelaide.
§ The northern half is in Port Adelaide Electorate, the southern in West Torrens.
In West Torrens Electorate there are —353 to 366, 370 to 376, 378 to
411, 411e, 411w, 412, 413, 423, 425 to 428,430 to 434, 440 to 453—900,901,
_1006—2066, 1T2067, 2068, 2075, 2076, 2080.
* There are two Sections in this portion numbered 355, 374, 387 to 893, 396, 397, 398,
408, 409, 410, 432, 433.
§ These two Sections are cut up into several small blocks or Sections numbered
consecutively from 62 to 66, 109 to 112, and 114 to 161.
This Section is similarly cut up, the numbers being 9 to 37 and 39 to 61.
Yatala Electorate contains the following:—97—313, 316 to 326, 329
to 344—478 to 480, 488 to 504, 508—*1566, 1567 to 1572—2020,2021,2060,
2061, 2135, 2136,2153, 2168, 2182, 2185 to 2187,2189 to 2215, 2217 to
2229, 2231 to 2269, 2271 to 2275, 2278, 2279, 2281, 2282—3000 to 3038,
3038a, 3038b, 3039 to 3041, 3043 to 3055, 3235, 3236, 3501.
* A creek runs in a north-easterly and south-westerly direction through this Section,
and is the boundary line between Yatala and Gumeracha Electorates.
Gumeracha Electorate has the remainder of the Sections.
111


Name of Possession.
Date
Locality. How acquired. acquired.
Aden
As.
Taken by England
1839
Alderney
See Channel Isles ...
—
Amirante Isles...
Af.
Taken from France
1794
Anguilla...
W.I.
Colonised ...
1650
Antigua...
W.I.
((
1632
Aracan
As.
Conquered by England first Bur-
Ascension
Af.
mesewar...
Occupied ...
1826
1815
Bahamas
W.I.
(<
1629
Barbadoes
“
1625
Barbuda...
({
“
1632
Bermudas
(<
a
1641
Bombay ...
As.
By marriage of Charles II. to
British Columbia
Catherine of Portugal
N.Am. Annexed
1662
1791
British G-uiana...
S.Am.
Taken from the Dutch ...
1803
Burmese Colonies
Calcutta...
As.
See Aracan, Pegu and Tenasse-
rim
Taken
1757
Canada ...
N.Am.
Taken from France
1759
Cape Breton
(<
Island of Nova Scotia, taken from
Cape, The
Af.
the French
Taken from the Dutch, 1795, but
1758
Candy (Ceylon)
As.
restored to them by Treaty of
Amiens; recaptured ...
Fell
1806
1815
Ceylon ...
Coasts, taken from the Dutch ...
1796
Chagos Isles
Af.
Taken from France
1794
Channel Isles
Eur.
Belonged to England since the
Columbia, British
N.Am.
Norman Conquest
Annexed
1066
1791
Dominica
W.I.
Taken from France
1783
Falkland Isles
S.Am.
Taken
1765
Gambia ...
Af.
Founded
1631
Gibraltar
Eur.
By treaty of Utrecht
1713
Gold Coast
Af.
Taken from the Dutch ...
1661
Grenada...
W.I.
Taken from France
1762
Guernsey
See Channel Isles ...
—
Guiana, British
S.Am.
Taken from the Dutch ...
1803
Heligoland
Eur.
Occupied by England, September
Honduras
N.Am.
1807 ; formally ceded by Napo-
leon, 1814 ; given by England
to Germany about 1886
Ceded by Spain
1763
Hong Kong
As.
Ceded by China ...
1842
Hudson Bay Territory S.Am.
Transferred to Canada ...
—
India
As.
Formerly taken over from East
Jamaica...
W.I.
India Company, 1st September
Taken from Spain
1858
1655
*BRITISH POSSESSIONS.
The letters denote as follows;— Af., African ; As., Asiatic; W.I., West
Indian ; N.Am., North American; .S'.Am., South American ; Eur., Euro-
pean ; and Aus., Australasian.
* From Collier’s History of the British Empire.
112


Name of Possession.
Locality
How acquired. acSdred.
Jersey ...
See Channel Isles ...
Kandy
See Candy ...
—
Koo Loon
As.
Ceded to Britain ...
1861
Labuan ...
tt
Off Borneo, ceded by the Sultan
1846
Madras Presidency
Settled
1639
Malacca ...
Transferred by the Dutch
1824
Malta
Eur.
Taken by English and Maltese
from Bonaparte in 1800 and
given by Maltese to England...
1809
Man, Isle of
Eur.
Finally purchased by England
from the Dukes of Athol
1825
Mauritius
Af.
Taken from Prance
1819
Mona
See Man, Isle of ...
Montserrat
W.I.
Colonised ...
1632
Natal, Port
Af.
Established 1842, and fully recog-
nised
1845
Nevis
W.I.
Colonised ...
1628
New Brunswick
N.Am.
“
1630
Newfoundland ...
“
Annexed by Cabot
1497
New South Wales
Aus.
Discovered by Cook, 1770 ; foun-
ded as a penal settlement
1788
New r Zealand ...
Comprising New Leinster, New
Munster, and New’ Ulster;
recognised as a British Colony
1839
Nova Scotia
N.Am.
Ceded to Britain by Treaty of
Utrecht ...
1713
Ontario ...
“
Or Upper Canada, see Canada ...
—
Oude
As.
Annexed
1856
Pegu
“
Taken by England, second Bur-
mese war...
1852
Penang ...
"
Purchased from Quedah ...
1786
Prince Edward’s Island
N.Am.
Taken
1758
Punjaub...
As.
Conquered ...
1849
Quebec ...
Or Lower Canada, see Canada ...
—
Queensland
Aus.
Occupied
1851
Eodrigeuz Isles...
Af.
Taken from the French ...
1794
San Domingo ...
See Dominica
—
Sark
See Channel Isles ...
—
Sciude ...
As.
Annexed
1843
Seringapatam ...
f f
Pell to England ...
1799
Seychelles Isles
Af.
Taken from France
1794
Sierra Leone ...
Colonised ...
1787
Singapore
As.
Purchased from Sultan of Jehore
1824
South Australia
Aus.
Taken
1834
St. Helena
Af.
Taken from the Dutch ...
1651
St. Kitts...
W.I.
Colonised ...
1623
St. Lucia
Taken from Prance
1803
St. Vincent
“
•• “
1762
Tasmania
Aus.
Discovered by Tasman, 1642,
occupied as a penal Colony ...
1803
Tenasserim
As.
Conquered by England in first
Burmese war
1826
Tobago
W.I.
Taken from France
1793
H
113
BRITISH POSSESSIONS. — (Continued.)


Name of Possession,
Locality, How acquired.
Date
acquired.
Trinidad
... W.I. Taken from Spain
1797
Vancouvers Island
... N.Am. Annexed
1791
Victoria...
... Aus. Occupied by England
1837
Virgin Isles
... W.I. Colonised ...
1666
Wellesley Province
As. Acquired with Penang by pur-
chase from Quedah
... 1786
West Australia...
... Aus. Colonised ...
1829
114
BRITISH POSSESSIONS.— (Continued.)


A.
County,
Name.
Electorate.
or Polling
Place.
Adelaide
part C
Barossa.
East Adelaide.
<• Torrens.
Gumeracha.
Mount Barker.
Noarlunga.
North Adelaide.
Onkaparinga.
Port Adelaide.
Sturt.
West Adelaide.
“ Torrens.
Yatala.
“
“ H
East Adelaide.
“ Torrens.
Onkaparinga.
Sturt.
West •‘delaide.
“• Torrens.
“ East
... V
East Adelaide(Corporation Acr»).
“ North ...
“
North Adelaide.
“ Port
...
Port Adelaide.
“ West ...
“
West Adelaide (P.O. Buildings).
Albert
.!. c
Albert.
Alberton
... V
Port Adelaide.
Aldinga
Noarlunga.
Alexandrina
... H
Mount Barker.
Alford
... V
Wallaroo.
Alfred
... C
Albert.
Alice Springs
... y
Northern Territory.
Alma
... H
... V
Wooroora.
<<
Andrew
... H
Stanley.
Angas
“
Gumeracha.
Angaston ...
... V
Barossa.
Anna
... H
... V
«
Anne
... H
Burra.
Anthony’s Lagoon
... V
Northern Territory.
Apoinga
... H
Burra.
Appila
... ‘ ‘
Frome.
Ardrossan ...
... V
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Arkaba
... H
Newcastle.
Arltunga ...
... V
Northern Territory.
Arthurton (or Kalkabury)
Yorke’s Peninsula.
INDEX
to Counties, Hundreds, and Voting Places.
The letters C, H, or Y, denote County, Hundred, or Voting Place ; and
(K. 1.), after a name, that it is on Kangaroo Island,
115


County,
Name,
Hundred, T-.ij.a_
or Polling Electorate.
Place.
Ashbourne...
.. ... Y Noarlunga.
Auburn
.. ... “ Wooroora.
Ayers
H Burra.
Bagot
B.
H
Barossa.
Bagster
((
Flinders.
Bakara
“
Albert.
Baker
<C
Balaklava ...
it
V
H
Wooroora.
Baldina
Burra.
Balhannah...
Y
Onkaparinga.
Barndioota...
H
Newcastle.
Barossa
«
Barossa.
Baroota
“
Frome.
Barrow’s Creek
V
Northern Territory.
Bartlett
H
Flinders.
Barunga
“
Stanley.
Beaehport ...
V
Victoria.
Belair
«
Sturt.
Belalie
H
Burra.
Beltana
Y
Flinders.
Belton
Newcastle.
Belvidere ...
H
Light.
Benara
«
Victoria.
Bendleby ...
Newcastle.
Bews
Albert.
Binnum
«
Blatchford...
C
Newcastle.
Blacker
H
Flinders.
Black Eock...
“
Frome.
" Springs
V
Burra.
Blanche
H
Victoria.
Blinman
V
Flinders.
Blumberg ...
«
Gumeracha.
Blyth
H
Stanley.
V
Bonney
H
Albert.
Bonython ...
“
Flinders.
Bookabie ...
V
Bookpurnong
H
Albert.
Booleunda ...
...
...
((
Newcastle.
116
INDEX.—( Continued .)


County
Name.
•^ U T»^rrElectorate
or Polling
Place.
Booleroo
... H
Frome.
“ Centre
... V
“
Boothby
... H
Flinders.
Booyoolie ...
:.. “
Gladstone.
■ - “ (or Gladstone ...
... V
<(
Border Town
“
Albert,
Borroloola ...
‘‘
Northern Territory.
Boucaut
... H
Stanley.
Bowaka
Albert.
Bower
“
Light.
Bowhill
“
Albert.
Braemar
... V
Burra.
Bramfield ...
“
Flinders.
Bray
... H
Albert.
Bremer
“
Mount Barker.
Brentwood...
... V
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Bright
... H
Burra.
Brighton ...
... V
Sturt.
Brinkley
... U
Mount Barker.
Brownlow ...
Li<)-ht.
Brace
... V
Newcastle.
Buecleuch ...
... c
Albert.
Buohsfelde...
... V
Yatala.
Buckingham ...
Bullaparinga
.. c
Albert.
... V
Encounter Bay.
Bundaleer ...
... H
Gladstone.
Bundey
Burdett ...
■■ «
Burra.
Onkaparinga.
Burgoyne ...
v
Flinders.
Burnside ...
East Torrens.
Burra
... c
Burra.
Burrundie ...
... v
Northern Territory,
Bute
Wallaroo.
Cadell
C.
... H
Light.
Calca
... y
Flinders.
Caldwell ...
... H
<<
Callington ...
... V
Onkaparinga.
Caltowie
... H
Gladstone.
(i
... V
(<
Cameron
... H
Stanley.
Campbell ...
C(
Flinders.
117
INDEX. — (Continued.)


County,
Name.
SbX Electorate
Place.
Cape Jervis
V Encounter Bay.
Cardwell
C Albert.
Carawa
... H Flinders.
Carnarvon (K.I.) ...
C Encounter Bay.
Caroline
H Victoria.
Carr...
“ Flinders.
Canibie
“ Yorke’s Peninsula.
Carrieton ...
V Newcastle.
Cassini (K.I.)
H Encounter Bay.
Castine
“ Flinders.
Catt...
" “
Cavenagh ...
“ Frome.
Chandos
... C Albert.
Charlotte Waters ...
V Northern Territory.
Charra
“ Flinders.
Cherry Gardens ...
“ Noarlunga.
Chillundie ..
H Flinders.
Clare
“ Stanley.
... V
Clarendon ...
“ Noarlunga.
Cleve
" Flinders.
Clinton
H Yorke’s Peninsula.
Cockburn ...
V Newcastle.
Coglin
H Frome.
Cohen
“ Flinders.
Colton
!” v
Comaum
H Albert.
Conmurra ...
l< S(
Coolinong ...
“
Coomooroo ...
“ Frome.
Coonarie
“ Yorke’s Peninsula.
Coonattoo ...
Newcastle.
Copley
“ Flinders.
Corny Point
V Yorke’s Peninsula.
Coromandel Valley
" Noarlunga.
Cotabena ...
H Newcastle.
Cotton
“ Albert.
Coulta
V Flinders.
Cournamont
“ Gumeracha.
Cowell
“ Flinders.
Cradock
“ Newcastle.
Crozier
... H
Crystal Brook
“ Gladstone.
i( <<
... V “
Cudla Mudla
H Newcastle.
Cunningham
“ Yorke’s Peninsula.
Cnrramulka
... V
118
INDEX.—( Continued.)


D.
County
Name.
Hundred, Electorate,
or Polling
Place.
Dalhousie
... part C
K It
Newcastle.
((
Frome.
Dalkey
Dalrymple
”. ... H
Wooroora.
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Daly
... part C
Wallaroo.
Daly Waters
1" ... V
Northern Territory.
Darling
Davenport ...
H
Frome.
Newcastle.
Dawlish
V
Frome.
Dawson
... ... ii
C *
Derby
C
Newcastle.
Downer
... H
Flinders.
Dry Creek ...
V
Yatala.
Dublin
... H
“
Y
<<
Dudley (K.l.)
Dufferin
H
C
Encounter Bay.
Flinders.
Duffield
H
Albert.
Dutton
“
Light.
Dutton Town
... v
E.
East Adelaide
V
East Adelaide.
Eastwood ...
“
East Torrens.
Eba
.. H
Light.
Ebenezer ...
V
**
Echunga ...
“
Mount Barker.
Edeowie
... ... H
Flinders.
Edithburgh
Y
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Encounter Bay
H
Encounter Bay.
Enfield
V
Yatala. . .
English
... H
Light.
Erskine
“
Frome.
Ettrick
“
Albert.
Eudunda ...
...• ... V
Light.
Eurelia
H
Newcastle.
V
fi
Eurilpa
Eveleen
H
V
Northern Territory.
119
INDEX. — {Continued.)


County,
Name.
Hundred,
or Polling
Electorate.
Place.
Everard
H Stanley.
Eyre
... part C Barossa.
«
“ “ Light.
F.
Farina
V
Flinders.
Ferguson ...
0
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Finlayson
H
Flinders.
Finniss
“
Gumeracha.
Fisher
“
Barossa.
Flinders
C
Flinders.
Forest Range
Forrest
V
H
Onkaparinga.
Flinders.
Forster
“
Gumeracha.
Fountain Head
Fox
Y
II
Northern Territory.
Albert.
Frances
V
Franklyn ..
Burra.
Freeling
H
Mount Barker.
V
Light.
Frome
part C
Frome.
Newcastle.
Furner
V
Victoria.
G-ambier .
a.
H
Victoria.
Gambierton (Mount Gambier) ...
V
((
Garfield
West Torrens.
Gawler
... part
c
Wooroora.
... “
“
Yatala.
<(
Y
Barossa.
Georgetown
“
Gladstone.
Gilbert
... part
H
Light.
“
Wooroora.
120
INDEX.—( Continued .)


County
Name.
Hundred, Electorate,
or Polling
Place.
Giles
.. H
Flinders.
Gillen
(t
Yatala.
Gilles Plains
Y
Gladstone
“
Gladstone.
Glenelg
Sturt.
Glen Osmond
.. “
East Torrens.
Glen Eoy ...
.. H
Albert.
Glen Eoy Eailway Station
.. V
Glyde
Glynde
Goode
.. H
.. V
., H
East Torrens.
Flinders.
Goodwood ...
.. V
Sturt.
Goolwa
“
Encounter Bay.
.. H
(t ft
Gordon
“
Albert
.. V
Newcastle
Goyder
Grace
... H
W ooroora.
Yatala.
Grand Junction .
V
West Torrens.
Granville
... c
Newcastle.
Greenock ...
... V
Light.
Green’s Plains (or
Paskeville)
Wallaroo.
Gregory
Grey
... H
... c
... H
Frome.
Victoria.
((
Gumbowie ...
Frome
Gumeracha
... Y
Gumeracha.
Guthrie
... H
Flinders.
Hague
H.
... H
Flinders.
Hahndorf ...
... y
Mount Barker.
Haines (K.I.)
... H
Encounter Bay.
Halbury
... V
W ooroora.
Hall
... H
Hallett
“
Burra.
“
... Y
“
Hamley
... C
((
Hamley Bridge ...
... V
Wooroora.
Hammond ...
“
Newcastle.
Handy side...
... H
Flinders.
Hanson
... 0
Newcastle.
... Y
Burra.
121
INDEX. —( Continued.)


County,
Name,
Hundred, ,
or Polling Electorate.
Place.
Hansou
H
Burra.
Happy Valley
V
Noarlunga.
Hardy
H
Frome.
Harrogate ...
V
Onkaparinga.
Hart
H
Stanley.
Haslam
... ... “
Flinders.
Hawker
“
“
“
V
Newcastle.
Hay
H
Light.
Herbert
C
Frome.
Hindmarsh
part C
Encounter Bay.
“
t< (I
Mount Barker.
“
H
Victoria.
V
West Torrens.
Hog Bay (K.I) ...
V
Encounter Bay.
Holder
H
Albert.
Homburg ...
“
Flinders.
Hopetoun ...
C
(<
Horn
H
{(
Houghton ...
V
Gumeracha.
Howe
H
Gladstone.
Howley
“
Northern Territory.
Hoyleton ...
“
Wooroora.
Hutchison ...
H
Flinders.
Hynam
“
Albert.
I.
Inkerman ...
H
Wooroora.
Inman Valley
V
Encounter Bay.
Jamestown...
J.
... Y
Burra.
Jenkins
... H
Flinders.
Jervis, Cape
... V
Encounter Bay.
Jervois
... C
Flinders.
Jessie
... H
Albert.
Joanna
“
((
Johnburgh...
V
Newcastle.
Joyce
... H
Albert.
Julia Creek
“
Light.
122
INDEX. —( Continued .)


K.
County.
Name*
Hundred, Electorate
or Polling
Place.
Kadina
H
y
W allaroo.
Kalkabury (or Arthurton)
H
Y
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Kanmantoo
Onkaparinga.
ff
Kanyaka ...
H
Newcastle.
Kapunda ...
Y
Light.
Katherine, The
Northern Territory.
Keith
H
Flinders.
Y
Albert.
Kennion
H
V ictoria.
Kent Town
V
East Torrens.
Ketchowla ...
H
Burra.
Kevin
Flinders.
Keyneton
Kiana
V
H
Barossa.
Flinders.
Kilkerran ...
*•
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Killanoola ...
Albert.
Kimberley
part
C
Burra.
Frome.
Kincraig (or Narracoorte)
TTin cr
V
H
Albert.
Burra.
Kingscote (K.I.) ...
V
Encounter Bay.
Kingston
“
Albert.
H
Burra.
Kintore
C
Flinders.
Kondoparinga
part
it
H
Mount Barker.
Noarlunga.
Koolunga ...
ft
Y
Stanley.
Kooly wurtie
H
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Kooringa ...
Burra.
“ (or Redruth) ...
V
Flinders.
Koppio ...
H
Kriehauff ...
((
Light.
Kuitpo
part
Mount Barker.
Noarlunga.
Kulpara
v
Wallaroo.
Kungorong...
H
Victoria.
L.
Lacepede ...
H
Albert.
Lake George
<C
Victoria.
'• Wangary
(i K
Flinders.
123
INDEX. —( Continued .)


County,
Name.
Hundred, -mix
or Polling Electorate.
Place
Lancelot
... V
Prome.
Landseer ...
... H
Albert.
Langhorne’s Creek
... V
Mount Barker.
Lapford (or World’s
End)'
“
Burra.
Laura
“
Gladstone.
LePevre’s Peninsula (or
Sema-
phore)
“
Port Adelaide.
Light
part C
... H
Barossa.
Light.
Limestone Wells ...
... V
Newcastle.
Lincoln
... H
Flinders.
“ Port
... V
“
Bindley
... H
Light.
Lin wood
... V
Lobethal ...
...
Onkaparinga.
Lochaber ...
... II
Albert.
Loohiel
... V
Stanley.
Louth
... H
Flinders.
Lucindale ...
V
Albert.
Lucy
... H
Flinders.
Lyndoch Valley ...
... V
Barossa.
Lytton
... c
Newcastle.
Macclesfield
M.
... H
Mount Barker,
... V
“ «
MacDonnell
... C
Albert.
"
... H
Victoria.
“ Port ...
... V
“
Maclaren Yale
...
Noarlunga,
Magarey
... H
Flinders.
Magill
... V
East Torrens.
Maidstone ...
“
Gumeracha.
Maitland ...
Yorke’s Peninsula.
“
... H
(( ft
Malcolm
• <
Albert.
Mallala
v
Yatala.
Mambray Creek ...
.
Frome.
Manchester
... c
Flinders.
Mangalo
... H
Mann
“
Mannahill ...
v
Frome.
124
INDEX.— ( Continued .)


Countj’,
Name.
Electorate,
or Polling
Place.
Mannanarie
... Y
... H
Frome.
Mannum ...
... Y
Gumeracha.
Manoora
Burra.
Mantung ...
... H
Albert.
Marcollat . • •
Light.
Marrabel • • •
v
Marree
“
Flinders.
Maude Creek
(<
Northern Territory.
May...
Mayurra
McCulloch ...
"... H
Blinders.
... H
Victoria.
Newcastle.
Meadows ...
!'.! v
Noarhmga.
Melrose
“
Frome.
Melville
... H
Torke’s Peninsula.
Meuingie ...
Menzies (K.I.)
... V
Albert.
... H
Encounter Bay.
Milang
... V
Mount Barker.
Miller
... H
Flinders.
Millicent . • •
... V
Victoria.
Milne
... H
Stanley.
Miltalie
“
Flinders.
Minbrie
...
Frome.
Minbnrra ...
Mincrow
Albert.
Mingbool ...
Minlacowie...
((
Victoria.
Torke’s Peninsula.
Minlaton ...
... V
t( <<
Mintaro
i(
Stanley.
Mitcham
ft
Sturt.
Mobilong ...
H
Onkaparinga.
Monarto
... i(
... V
ei
Monbulla ...
... H
Victoria.
Mongolata ,,.
Montacute ...
v
Burra.
Onkaparinga.
Mookra
... H
Newcastle.
Moonta
... V
Wallaroo.
Moorook
... H
Albert.
Moorooroo ...
“
Barossa.
Moorowie ...
tt
Torke’s Peninsula.
Mootooroo ...
... Y
Newcastle.
Morchard ...
h
... Y
Frome.
Morgan
Light.
Morphett Yale
Moule
... V
... H
Noarlunga.
Flinders.
Mount Barker
... V
Mount Barker.
" Benson
... H
Albert.
“ Bryan
... V
Burra.
“ " East
... <e
“ Gambier
ti
Victoria.
125
INDEX. —( Continued.)


County,
Name.
SpX Electorate -
Place.
Mount Mary
... V
Light.
Muirhead...
... H
Victoria
“ Pleasant ...
... v
Gumeracha.
“ Hat
“
Yorke’s Peninsula.
“ Torrens
Gumeracha.
Mudla Wirra
H
Yatala.
Muloowurtie
...
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Mundalla
V
Albert.
Mundoora ...
... H
Stanley.
H
.V
“
Munno Para
... H
Yatala.
Murbko
“
Albert.
Murrabinna
“
Murray
...
Flinders.
“ Bridge
... V
Onkaparinga.
“ Town
“
Frome.
Murtho
... H
Albert.
Musgrave ...
... C
Flinders.
Mylor
... V
Mount Barker.
Myponga ...
... H
... V
Encounter Bay.
N ackara
re.
H
Froine.
“
V
“
Nairne
“
Onkaparinga.
Nangwarry...
H
Victoria.
Nangkita ...
Encounter Bay.
N anta warra
V
Wooroora.
Napperby ...
H
Gladstone.
Narracoorte
e
Albert.
“ (or Kincraig)
Y
“
Narridy
H
Gladstone.
“
Y
"
Nash
H
Flinders.
Neales
“
Light.
Neville
“
Albert.
Newcastle ...
C
Newcastle.
Nildottie
H
Albert.
Nilpena
a
Flinders.
Ninnes
Wallaroo.
Noarlunga ...
part
Mount Barker.
“
(t
*'
Noarlunga.
“
k
Onkaparinga.
“ ...
r
Sturt.
126
INDEX.—( Continued .)


County,
Name.
, Electorate,
or Polling
Place.
North Adelaide ...
V North Adelaide.
“ Rhine
H Barossa.
Norton’s Summit...
V Onkaparinga.
Norwood
“ Bast Torrens.
Nuriootpa ...
“ Barossa.
... H Light.
o.
Oladdie
Onkaparinga
Oodnadatta
Orroroo
Owen
H
part “
K «
... V
Newcastle.
Mount Barker.
Onkaparinga.
Flinders.
Frome.
Wooroora.
Paisley
F.
H
Albert.
Palmer ...
“
Newcastle.
V
Gumeracha.
Palmerston (Port Darwin)
“
Northern Territory
Para Wirra
H
Gumeracha.
Para Wurlie
“
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Paraehilna
“
Flinders.
Y
Parallanna
“
“
Paratoo ...
H
Frome.
Parilla
“
Albert.
Parins;a
“
Sturt.
Parkside
V
Parnaroo ... ...
H
Frome.
“
V
“
Parsons
H
Albert.
Paskeville (or Green’s Plains) ...
Y
W allaroo.
Pay neham ...
East Torrens..
127
INDEX. — (Continued.)


County,
Name.
Ele “-
Place.
Peacock
... H
Albert.
Pearce
Flinders.
Pekina
... V
Frome.
Penola
... H
... y
Victoria.
Petersburg.
Frome.
Petina
... H
Flinders.
Phillip’s Ponds ...
... Y
Pichi Eiohi
... H
Newcastle.
Pinda
“
Pine Creek...
... y
Northern Territory.
Pinnaroo ...
... H
Albert.
Pirie
«
Gladstone.
Pirie, Port...
... V
“
Playford
... H
Flinders.
Point Pass...
... V
Light.
Port Adelaide
part H
Port Adelaide.
«
West Torrens.
Yatala.
“ “
... V
Port Adelaide.
“ Augusta
... “
Newcastle.
“ “ West
**
Flinders.
“ Broughton ...
“
Stanley.
“ Elliot
Encounter Bay.
“ Elliston
Flinders.
“ Gawler
... H
Yatala.
“ Germeiu
... y
Frome.
“ Lincoln
...
Flinders.
“ MacDonnell...
•*
Victoria.
“ Pirie
Gladstone.
“ Victor
“
Encounter Bay.
“ Victoria
Yorke’s Peninsulai.
“ Wakefield ...
*<
W ooroora.
Powell’s Creek
et
Northern Territory.
Price
“
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Prospect
North Adelaide.
Punyeroo ...
... H
Flinders.
Pyap
Albert.
Q-
Quorn
Y Newcastle.
128
INDEX.—( Continued .)


R.
County,
Name.
Hundred, Electorate.
or Polling
Place.
Ramsay
Redbanks
H Yorke’s Peninsula.
V Yatala.
Redhill
... H Stanley.
V
Redruth (or Kooringa) ...
“ Burra.
Rees
H “
Renmark ...
... V “
Reynolds ...
Rhine Villa
... H “
V Gumeracha.
Rhynie
Riddoch
Ridley
Ripon
Riverton
“ Wooroora.
H Victoria.
“ Gumeracha.
“ Flinders.
V Wooroora.
Rivoli Bay...
Robe
H Victoria.
C Albert.
... V
Robertson
... H
Robertstown
V Light.
Robinson ...
C Flinders.
Rochester ...
Rounsevell...
V Stanley.
H Flinders.
Russell
C Albert.
S.
Saddleworth
H
V
Burra.
Salisbury
Saltia
• • • • • V
it
Yatala.
Newcastle.
Santo
" H
Albert.
Scherk
Flinders.
Schomburgk
Scott
it
Light.
Flinders.
Second Yalley
Encounter Bay.
Sedan
“
Barossa.
Selliek’s Hill
“
Noarlunga.
Semaphore (LeFevre’s Peninsula) “
Port Adelaide.
Sevenbills ...
Stanley.
Seymour ...
H
Albert.
Sheoak Log
V
Light.
Sheringa ...
“
Flinders.
129
INDEX. —( Continued .)


County,
Name,
Hundred, ,
or Polling Electorate.
Place.
Short
... H
Victoria
Skurry
tt
Barossa.
Sleaford
f'
Flinders.
Smith
• ••
<<
Albert.
Smithfield
...
... v
Yatala.
Snowtown ...
tt
Stanley.
South Petherton ...
tt
Qumeracha.
" Ehine
... H
ft
“ Eoad
... V
Sturt.
Spalding
ft
Stanley.
Spence
H
Albert.
Springton
... V
Gumeracha.
Squire
... H
Flinders.
Stanley
part C
Stanley.
“
it <c
Wooroora.
ft ... ...
“ H
Burra.
it <{
Stanley.
a
tt t'
Wooroora.
Stansbury
... V
Yorke’s P<
Steelton
“
Burra.
Stirling
H
Albert.
" East
... V
Mount Baj
tt ft
Onkaparin
“ North
... (t
Newcastle.
Stockport
... V
Wooroora.
Stockwell
tt
Barossa.
Stokes
” H
Flinders.
Stow
“
Wooroora.
St. Peters
... V
East Torrens
Strathalbyn
... H
Mount Barker
U
... Y
Streaky Bay
“
Flinders.
Stuart
... H
Bight.
Sturt
part C
tt ft
Gumeracha.
Mount Barker.
Sutherlands
ft tt
... V
Onkaparinga.
Light.
Symon
... H
Victoria.
130
IND EX.—( C ontinued, )


T.
County,
Kama.
Caro'S “ate.
Place.
Talia
... H
Flinders.
tt
• ••
... V
ft
Talunga
... H
Gumeracha.
Tantanoola
... V
Victoria.
Tanunda
tt
Barossa.
Tarcowie
tt
!” H
Frome.
Tarlee
... V
Wooroora.
Tarlton
... H
Flinders.
Tarpeena
... Y
Victoria.
Tatiara
... H
Albert.
Taunton
... C
Flinders.
Teatree (Jully
... V
Gumeracha.
Teetulpa
. . “
Newcastle.
Telowie
.!. H
Frome.
tt
... V
Tennant’s Creek ...
tt
Northern Territory.
Terowie
tt
Burra.
tt
... H
“
The Katherine
... V
Northern Territory.
Thebarton
tt
West Torrens.
Tickera
H
Wallaroo.
Tinline
ft
Flinders.
Tiparra
... “
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Tomkinson
ft
Burra.
Townsend ...
Albert.
Truro
". V
Barossa.
Tungkillo
... H
Gumeracha.
Two Wells
... Y
Yatala.
Uley
U.
H
Flinders.
Ulipa
ft
ft
Union
y
Northern Territory.
Unley
ft
Sturt.
Upper Sturt
ft
tf
“ Wakefield...
... part
H
Stanley.
(( ft
tt
ft
Wooroora.
Uraidla
V
Onkaparinga.
Uroonda
H
Newcastle.
131
INDEX.—( Continued.)


V.
County,
Name.
Hundred, Electorate,
or Polling
Place.
Victoria
part C Stanley.
... • “ Gladstone.
Virginia
V Yatala.
w.
Wadnaminga
Y
Frome.
Waikerie ...
H
Albert.
Waitpinga...
“
Encounter Bay.
Walkerville
V
North Adelaide.
Wallanippie
H
Flinders.
Wallaroo ... '
c
Wallaroo.
“
V
“
Walloway ...
H
Frome.
((
V
Wandana ...
H
Flinders.
Wandearal)
ft
Gladstone.
“
V
c<
Wangary, Lake ...
Y
Flinders.
Wanilla
H
Ward
<(
Warnardo ...
V
Northern Territory.
Warooka ...
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Waroonee
H
Erome.
Warrakimbo
Newcastle.
Warrenben...
(<
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Warrina
V
Flinders.
Warrow
H
Wasleys
Y
Yatala.
Waterhouse
H
Albert.
Waterloo ...
.... part
“
Burra.
C(
“
Light.
Watervale ...
V
Wooroora.
Waukaringa
((
Newcastle.
Wanraltee ...
H
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Way
C
Flinders.
“
H
“
Wellington East ...
V
Albert.
“ West ...
“
Mount Barker.
West Adelaide (P.O. Buildings)
“
West Adelaide.
Whyte
H
Burra.
Williamstown
V
Barossa.
132
INDEX.—( Continued .)


County,
Name.
Hundred, Electorate.
or Polling
Place.
Willochra
... H
Newcastle.
Willowie ...
(<
”! v
Frome.
Willunga ...
Noarlunga.
Wilmington
Newcastle.
Wilson
Wiltunga
Winninowie
... H
(<
Wallaroo.
Newcastle.
Wirrabara ...
... V
Frome.
Wirreanda...
... H
Newcastle.
Wirrega
Witera
«
Albert.
Flinders.
Wokurna ...
“
Stanley.
Wolseley ...
... V
Albert.
Wongyarra...
... H
Frome.
Wonna
“
Burra.
Wonoka
“
Newcastle.
Woodchester
... V
Mount Barker.
Woodside ...
((
Onkaparinga.
Woodville
“
Port Adelaide.
Woolumbool
H
Albert.
Woolundunga
“
Newcastle.
Woolyana
“
Burra.
World’s End or Lapford...
... V
Wrenfordsley
... H
Flinders,
Wright
Wyacca
Newcastle.
Y.
Yacka
... V
Stanley.
Yackamoorundie ...
... H
Flinders.
Yadnarrie ...
“
Yalata
... V
((
Yalpara
Yangya
... H
Newcastle.
Gladstone.
Yankalilla ...
!" H
Encounter Bay.
.f
... V
<{
Yanyarrie
... H
Y
Newcastle.
(C
Yaranyacka
... H
Flinders.
Yarcowie ...
... V
Burra.
Yardea
....
(<
Flinders.
133
INDEX. —( Continued.)


County,
Kama.
Sg ElactoraU.
Place.
Tarrah
H
Newcastle.
Yarrandale
V
Flinders.
Tarrowie
it
Frome.
Yatala
... part H
Gumeraoha.
If
*t it
North Adelaide.
tt
<{ tt
Port Adelaide.
tt
tt tt
West Torrens.
tt
ft tf
Yatala.
Yatina
... Y
Frome.
Yednulie
H
Newcastle.
Yongola
tt
Frome.
“
!!’. !'.! v
((
York
«
West Torrens.
Yorketown
a
Yorke’s Peninsula.
Young
c
Burra.
it
H
Victoria.
Youughusband
“
Gumeracha.
Yunta
V
Frome.
134
INDEX.—( Continued .)


District and Division.
Legislative Council
Roll.
Assembly Roll.
Albert
April 6, 1891
April 6, 1891
Barossa ... ...
May 1, 1891
May 1, 1891
Burra ...
April 20, 1891
April 28, 1891
East Adelaide
April 21, 1891
April 21,1891
“ Torrens ...
April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Encounter Bay
May 1, 1891
May 1, 1891
Flinders ...
April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Frome ... ...
April 6, 1891
April 6, 1891
Gladstone
* April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Gumeracha
May 16, 1891
May 5, 1891
Light
§June 30, 1891
§June 30, 1891
Mount Barker
April 6, 1891
April 6, 1891
Newcastle... ...
§July 31, 1891
§July 31,1891
Noarlunga...
April 6, 1891
April 6,1891
North Adelaide ...
April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Northern Territory
Sept. 18, 1891
Sept. 18,1891
Onkaparinga ...
April 6, 1891
April 6, 1891
Port Adelaide
April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Stanley
April 6, 1891
* April 7, 1891
Sturt
April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Victoria
April 6, 1891
April 6, 1891
Wallaroo
April 6, 1891
April 6, 1891
West Ade aide
April 28,1891
April 28,1891
“ Torrens
April 28, 1891
April 28, 1891
Wooroora ...
April 6, 1891
*April 6, 1891
Tatala
§June 15, 1891
May 16, 1891
VorkeVPeninsula
May 20, 1891
May 20, 1891
DATES WHEN PRESENT ROLLS COMPILED.
For reference when claiming registration under Section 17 of "The
Electoral Act, 1879,” commonly known as “ under the Old Roll.”
♦ All dates are given, some even before the Census
§ No dates are given j the one taken and stated above is [that when Roll certified
correct.
135


J. H. SHBREING & CO.,
-Printers itnt> ■Pttblisljcrs,
42, Cdkkib Street,
3U>Elali>£.
