



*5
nr?
liir! G?-
r H4'i 11] R R f(T
jßßLjifl


HANDBOOK
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE GUIDANCE OF THE
OFFICERS
|idqr jjiploration Isjjqdition
TO THE UNKNOWN PORTIONS OF AUSTRALIA.
ISSUED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA, SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH.
Adelaide :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.


ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA
(SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH),
18 9 1.
Patron :
His Excellency The Earl of Kintore, G.C.M.G., Governor-in-Chief..
President :
Sir Samuel Davenport, K.C.M.G.
Vice-President :
Sir Thomas Elder, G.C.M.G.
Trustees :
Sir Samuel Davenport, K.C.M.G. | Sir Thomas Elder, G C.M.G.
Council
Hon. J. L. Parsons, M.P.
C. H. Goode, J.P.
W. B. Wilkinson, J.P.
R. K. Thomas.
Hon. F. E, H. W. Krichauff,
Charles Todd, C.M.G., F.R.S.
G. W. Goyder, C.M.G., Sur-
veyor-General.
M.L.C.
Simpson Newland, J.P,
Hon. Treasurer :
Thomas Gill.
Hon. Secretaries :
A. T. Magarey.
J. W. Jones, J,P.
Rooms : Broken Hill Chambers, King William Street, Adelaide.


/Y33SS iFQUoq
fQ-s-no
THE ELDER SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATION
EXPEDITION.
To the patriotism and munificence of Sir Thomas Elder,
G.C.M.G., F.R.G.S., etc., are due the origin of the Expedi-
tion and provision for its entire cost. The administration
has been placed under the auspices of the President, Sir
Samuel Davenport, K.C.M.G., and the Council of the South
Australian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia (of which Branch of the Society Sir Thomas
Elder is Vice-President), with the co-operation of Baron Sir
Fred. Von Mueller, K.C.M.G. (President), and the Council of
the Victorian Branch of the Society.
Notwithstanding the numerous Explorations which have objects of the
been so admirably and heroically conducted by Australian Expedltlon '
Explorers, the Map of Australia is still far from complete ;
the very extensive blank spaces between latitudes 15° S. and
30° S. represent a vast area of country of which the physical
geography remains altogether unknown.
The object of this Expedition is to make an exhaustive
Scientific Exploration of these regions, and to determine and
map with certainty and accuracy the position and nomen-
clature of all geographical physical features, and ascertain
the nature of its fauna, flora, geological structure, and
climatic conditions.
It will also be a special object of the Expedition to search
for information of the long-lost Explorer, Ludwig Leichardt,
and his exploration party, which left in the year 1848
and of which no reliable information has since been ascer-
tained, although strenuous efforts have been made by all
subsequent explorers to throw some light upon the fate of
this heroic though ill-fated explorer. It is still hoped that
some traces may yet be found which will in some measure


F. W. Leech
Second Officer.
L. A. Wells
... ... Surveyor.
Dr. Elliott ...
Medical Officer.
F. P. V. Streich ...
... Geologist and Meteorologist.
R. Helms
Zoologist and Botanist.
A. P. Gwynne
R. G. Ramsay
| General
j Assistants.
A. Warren ...
Four Afghans
... ... Camel Drivers.
•clear up the painful mystery so long locked up in Central
Australia, The Expedition now inaugurated will have
special facilities for making au exhaustive search and
enquiry, and as it will traverse the localities where the proba
bilities indicate some reliable information may be expected
to be found, the hope is still cherished that the mystery will
be at last cleared up.
THE OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE PARTY.
David Lindsay, F.R.G.S., F.R.G.S. of A., Leader.
TO THE LEADER.
The supreme control of the Expedition, and the respon-
sibility for the organization of the party, and the successful
completion of the objects of the Expedition, primarily
devolves upon the Leader, who is authorized to act
independently on his own judgment in the general manage-
ment of the party. In cases of great distress or much
perplexity, the Leader should call to a Special Council his
officers for their opinions, without necessarily being required
to act on any advice thus tendered. The work to be
performed is briefly outlined under the section defining the
objects of the Expedition.
The areas to be explored are shown in red on the Map
herewith, and are marked A, B, C, D, E, respectively, and may
be briefly described as the unexplored and unknown country
in South Australia, the Northern Territory, and Western
Australia, situated near as well as between the routes of
previous Explorers Forrest, Giles, Warburton, and Gosse,


within the fifteenth to the thirtieth parallels of south
latitude, comprising an area of about a million square miles.
It is desired that the exploration shall be as complete
and exhaustive as possible, so that the information obtained
may enable the whole of the blank spaces on the map of
Australia to be filled up in all important geographical
aspects. It will, therefore, be necessary to depart very
largely from the usual manner of determining the route to
be traversed when the task of the explorer is to proceed by
the most direct practicable route through unknown regions.
Ever bearing this in view, the Leader will so order the
courses he determines upon that Depots may be estab-
lished from which the surrounding country may be
elaborately examined by radial traverses, thus making
absolutely certain that no important topographical or other
physical feature is left undiscovered. The precise method
of conducting this detail examination, dependent as it must
be upon the existence of reliable waters, is left so that the
work be done to the Leader s judgment and discretion. All
that can therefore be defined in these instructions are the
principal areas of unknown country to be examined ; the
starting point of the Expedition ; the Stores Depot at the
western and the eastern terminii of the main routes ; the
nature of the geographical and other more strictly scientific
information which should be obtained ; and to impress upon
the Leader the importance of doing the work to obtain the
end in view by the Promoter, and at the same time with
promptness and good judgment, so that time shall not be
wasted over unimportant petty details, or for lack of proper
organization.
It has been decided that the officers and members of the starting point,
party, with the equipment, outfit, provisions for six months,
camels, Ac., shall go by rail to the Peake on or about the The Peake.
20th April, 1891, and immediately proceed via Cootanoo-
rinna Station by the most direct route to the Everard The Everard
Ranges, about lat. 27° S. lon. 132° 30' E., and a start made RangBS '
thence on a westerly course into the section of unexplored
country marked (A) on the plan. It is anticipated—from the Section A.
x . . i Probable diffi-
expenence ot previous explorers m the adjacent country—that cuityin obtain-
there will at first be considerable difficulty in obtaining suffi- mgwa u


cient supplies of water. Provision should therefore be made
for taking the greatest possible quantity of water in camel
casks, so as to bridge over the dry stages ; and as it will be
impossible to carry for the camels, it will not be safe
Known perma- to depend too much upon their endurance. The permanent
waters described by John Forrest on his 1874 route to the
northward, and those discovered by Giles on his 1875 route
to the southward, will be available, and can be reached in
case of necessity. The waters on the former route can be
Section B. made Depots, from which the section of country marked (B)
can be explored.
stores Depot Arrangements have been made for six months’ supplies of
provisions to be sent by vessel from Adelaide via Gerald-
ton, Western Australia, to Messrs. Hope & Morris’ Station
on the River Murchison, about lat. 25° 40' S. lon. 117° 45' E.,
to be in readiness on the arrival of the party at that western
terminus of the route through sections (A) and (B).
arrfvai S tobe° f On arr ival at the Depot intelligence should be at once
forwarded. forwarded, and refitting and repacking proceeded with pre-
Preparations , #
for return paratory to starting on the advance journey.
jonrney.
.start on return. As soon as convenient a start to be made north-easterly
Section c. through Sections marked on map (B), (C), and (D), and the
exploration conducted in a similar manner to that already
described, Macdonald’s Station on the Margaret River, W.
Stores Depart- about lat. 18° 3 / S. and long. 127° 3 r E., has been determined
Margaret River, upon as the Second Stores Depot. This will be the northern
terminus of the second division of the work, and six months’
provisions will be sent there to await the arrival of the party.
Report. After reporting progress by wire, if possible, and refitting,
Section D.
the exploration of the section of country marked (E) and
Tennant’s on P^ an 18 to undertaken, and Tennant’s Creek made
Creek. Depot No, 3. Six (6; months’ provisions will be sent from
Adelaide so as to reach this Telegraph Station before the
tionstoYewSed arr i va l tbe party. Further instructions will be wired to
Creek nnant ' S this Station on receipt of intelligence of the arrival of the
party, and of the results of the exploration.
Return by route Unless anything unforeseen occurs to alter the pre-
telegraph line, sent intentions, and after completing the exploration
of other unknown tracts of country marked on the


map, the Leader is instructed to return with his
party by a south-easterly route through the unmapped
country to the eastward of the Transcontinental Telegraph
Line in the Northern Territory and Queensland ; and one
special object of this will be to follow up any trace of
Leichardt if the search to the westward has proved fruitless,
d he hope of finding some traces of this lost joai'ty must not Leichardt.
be given up so long as the remotest chance exists of making
any discovery ; and as there is good reason to believe that the
xoute of the party has been reliably traced to a point in Queens
land, about lat. 23° 30' S., lon. 144° E., a zealous search may
yet reveal some further information. The Leader’s special at-
tention is called to this obligation as one of the objects of the
expedition; and not only the Leader, but all members of the
party, must be ever on the alert to seize upon the minutest facts
which may be likely to throw some light upon this deeply
interesting mystery.
A special journal, on the forms of the South Australian Records.
Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australia (Ap- Jour-
pendix B), shall be kept by the Leader. It must be entered
up every day, and great care taken to ensure the accuracy
of the information.
The Leader will keep an elaborate journal, as complete in journal lloll
every essential particular as possible. It should contain a
record of each day’s proceedings from the date of starting
to the final return. The details of primary importance are
the following : —A correct fixing of the starting point; a
consecutive record of the courses travelled, with the mag-
netic bearings and distances; a careful determination
of the position of each important camp by astronomical
obsrvation as well as dead reckoning; all camps to
be numbered consecutively, and the numbers recorded
in the journal and on the map; a description of the position
and character of all important topographical and other
physical features, particularly noting all important hills and
ranges, with their elevation ; also all watercourses and
drainage channels, noting any evidence of periodical flood;
springs (stating if artesian, and if so giving temperature of
water), waterholes, rock waters, lakes, lagoons and other waters


—stating the quality of the water and whether considered
permanent or otherwise; a general description of the country
—the soil and subsoil, timber trees, dwarf timber, shrubs,
grasses, and herbage; the names of native animals, saying
whether numerous or otherwise ; the presence of aborigines,
and whether friendly or not. (Fuller details concerning the
native tribes will be kept by the Surgeon).
markeii° be The Leader will cause all important camping places to be
marked on the ground as permanently as reasonably pos-
sible. Where there are trees, they should be marked, after
removing a sheet of the bark, by cutting with a chisel the initial
letters of his name, with the date and number, thus:—
D. L.
No. 1.
16-4-91.
Hocks may be similarly marked, or cairns of stones built and
particulars placed beneath them. Where it is convenient,
Cairns of stones such small cairns of stones should be erected on hill tops,
on hilltops. and if the name of the hill has been determined, it should be
shown on the record left.
Map. The Leader will cause to be prepared, from his or his officers’
observations and records, a map showing the route traversed
and the natural features of the country, the map to be daily
completed up to date. A skeleton projection map for this
purpose will be supplied with these Instructions. The
variation of the magnetic needle to be ascertained by fre-
quent observation, and shown on the map, and a special
record made both in the journal and on the map of any
remarkable local attraction.
Names of In recording the names of the principal ranges, hills,
natural features , 1 , , 0 c , ,
watercourses, permanent waters, &c., preference to be given
to the native names, where such can be ascertained ; when
this cannot be done, the Leader may decide the name. The
names to be given to some of the most important discoveries
to be left undecided until the return of the Party.
The Natives. The Leader is specially counselled to exercise the
utmost discretion and caution in all matters relating
to the natives; and whilst no member of the Expedition
should at any time venture among the natives unarmed,


lie should carefully avoid any possible collision with them,
and persistently impress this upon the members of the
Party, and insist upon his orders and instructions in this
respect being strictly complied with. Only in extreme
necessity and danger should firearms be resorted to for
defence. All proper safeguards to be taken for the safety
of the Party, and particularly of the Scientific Officers or any
other member when away from the main Party, and the
performance of whose duties are of an engrossing nature and
likely to take them off their guard.
The Leader is responsible for the safe keeping and proper stores and
use of all stores and provisions, and shall keep aaccounts-
detail account of any expenditure that ma} r bo incurred,
which should be attested by vouchers. He is authorized to
pay any such accounts by orders on the Council of the
Royal Geographical Society, South Australian Branch, and a
book of proper order forms is supplied for the purpose.
Orders must not be issued for any excess over the amount
authorized by formal debit order by the said Council under
the hand of the President and Secretary.
All communications to be addressed by the Leader to the Correspondence
President and Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society, anc * iepmts '
South Australian Branch , Adelaide • any communication from
the other officers to be forwarded through the Leader. The
telegraph can be used for brief reports, and such progress
reports should be forwarded on all possible opportunities,
particularly from the Depots on the Murchison in Western
Australia and Barrow’s and Powell’s Creeks in South Aus-
tralia. The Leader will prepare a complete report on
completion of the exploration and deliver the same under seal
to the President and Secretary of the said Society, together
with all records, journals, maps, sketches, photographs,
specimens, Ac., in his possession or in possession of the
officers of the party, and no copies of such documents or
duplicates of any specimens are to be otherwise disposed of
without the special approval of the Council of the said
Geographical Society. The Leader shall at all times have
access to all scientific records kept by the officers of the
party. No scientific observations or work that would be


likely to interfere with the progress of the expedition shall
be undertaken by the scientific officers contrary to the
expressed wish of the Leader.
Each Sunday a chapter from the Bible and a prayer
should be read, for which religious service if possible all the
members of the party should be called together.
Instructions. THE SECOND OFFICER.
The Second Officer shall assist the Leader in the manage-
Generally assist th e Expedition, and be responsible for the carrying
Leader. out 0 f his instructions in all matters relating to travelling,
camping, protection supplies, and the general details. In
Control in tem- the Leader’s temporary absence he shall have control of the
of Leader! 8 ” 06 party, and must strictly carry out the instructions given
by the Leader. In the event of the Leader becoming
even^of'Leader incapacitated, the command of the Expedition will devolve
incapacitated. U p on the Second Officer, wbo will then exercise the full power
and carry out the instructions provided for the Leader.
THE SURVEYOR.
The Surveyor’s special vocation should be the performance
of those professional duties which relate directly to Sur-
veying. He is to keep complete records, and undertake the
observation in this department of the work of the Expedition.
Held Book. His field-book must show the fixing of starting points to
some established position, the magnetic bearings and the
estimated distances of all courses travelled over, the position
of the principal natural features on or seen from the line of
route, also the observed compass bearings of all prominent
features within view on each side of the course, so as to
fix their positions ; a sketch of the outlines of
the hills observed to be shown, with all other details neces-
sary for the compilation of a feature map of the country
explored. At all principal camps, and at most minor camps,
the latitude of the place and the variation of the needle are
to be carefully determined, and all observations entered in
detail in the field-book.
MajJ A travelling map on a scale of not less than -eight miles
to an inch to be drawn by the Surveyor as the exploration
progresses, and all notes of distances and bearings must be
plotted up on the day they are taken.


As fai' as can be done with the aneroid-barometer and Heights,
hypsometer, the height above sea-level of all camping places,
and of the principal hills, should be determined, and noted
in the field-book and on the plan.
Ihe Surveyor will act under instructions of the Leader, subject to
and, in the Leader’s absence, under the instructions of the instructions.
Second Officer.
Should anything happen to incapacitate the Leader, or
Second in command, the Surveyor is to complete the work
of the expedition to the best of his ability and to bring the
party back to town with all its records, gentlemen com-
prising the scientific portion of the expedition, instruments,
and camp equipage.
He will be expected to cheerfully assist his colleagues in
every way possible, and to the utmost of his ability further
the work of the expedition.
THE MEDICAL OFFICER.
In addition to the duties directly pertaining to his pro- Ethnology,
fessional position on the staff, the Medical Officer will please
take charge of the ethnological section of the scientific work
of the Expedition. It will be necessary to keep a journal
and recoi'd the fullest possible information respecting the
aboriginal tribes met with. The number of men, women,
and children in each tribe should be ascertained if possible,
and any diseases to which they are subject noted, as well as
their general physique and shade of colour. It is of con-
siderable importance to obtain accurate comparative
measurements of a considerable number of individuals, both
men and women, of each tribe, recording particularly any
striking points of similarity common to many tribes, or any
special tribal peculiarity. A careful representation of tatoo
marks is of interest ; also all information concerning
tradition, folklore, totems, mythology, initiatory ceremonial
to manhood, circumcision, betrothal, marriage, polygamy,
degrees of kinship, funeral customs, corrobborees, songs,
natural food, method of making fire, utensils for preparing
food or carrying water, clothing, ornaments, manufactures
(such as twine, nets, baskets, &c.), habitations, implements,
weapons, signals and communication with other tribes,


curative remedies, &c. As complete a vocabulary as-
possible of each tribal language is much to be desired.
Rules for an uniform orthography are contained in
appendix. Efforts should be made to ascertain to what
extent words are common to several tribes, such words
as fire, water, head, foot, man, woman, boy, girl, 6ic.,
are suggested for special enquiry. A list of additional
words are given in the appendices. Native drawings on
wood, bark, stone, or rock carvings (to be looked for in
caves) are of exceptional interest, and should be zealously
searched for, and, when found, copied in their actual colours
with the greatest faithfulness, the dimensions and other
details to be recorded. Careful enquiry to be made as to-
the existence of cannibalism, as on this point there is a
great conflict of opinion. More than ordinary care is
requisite to ensure the accuracy of the information gained,
on this question.
The Medical Officer will also be entrusted with the
photographic apparatus to secure views of natural scenery
illustrative of the geological and botanical features of the
country; also portraits of the natives. Large-sized portraits
of single individuals are much to be preferred to groups. It
is desirable to have a standard of measurement, numbered
in feet and inches, by which the aboriginal can stand when
the portrait is being taken. The plates to be
and full detail entered on the photographic record book.
The greatest possible care is necessary to ensure good;
results, and the plates should be forwarded to Adelaide as
soon as possible after the photos are taken.
The Medical Officer will be expected to be good enough
to render every reasonable assistance to the Leader and to
the other officers of the party, and to generally comply with
the Leader’s wishes.
THE GEOLOGIST, MINERALOGIST, AND
METEOROLOGIST.
The scientific work which the Geologist will undertake is
of primary importance and may result in discoveries of great
value. The informa,tion obtained should be of such a
comprehensive character as will enable the Geologist to-


■compile a geological map of the country explored. A very Map.
complete journal should be kept containing as complete a journal.
description of the geological structure of the country as the
nature of the examination vill allow. The metalliferous
■character of some of the known adjacent districts justifies
the hope that a zealous search for metals where the forma-
tions are favourable will not be unrewarded. No opportunity
should be missed for washing likely drift for gold, tin, or
gem stones.
Rock, gem stone, metalliferous, or organic specimens illus-
trative of the various formations should be carefully collected
and separately packed in envelopes marked with number, date,
•and locality. Each sample to be recorded in the journal
with a corresponding number and full descriptive detail of
the locality, manner of occurrence, elevation above sea, &c.
The specimens of rocks should be obtained from the rock
formation in situ, care being taken to reject decomposed
portions, and for convenience of transp >rt two inches cube
will be found a convenient size. A sufficient number of
■specimens should be obramed to make up at least four com. ~
‘ . r Specimens,
plete sets or specimens.
Fossils of all descriptions should be secured wherever
possible. Fossil casts are of little or no value.
Special attention should be given to the question of under-
ground water supplies, and, as far as possible, the Geologist
should record his opinion of the prospect of finding good Water supplies,
water in wells or deep bores.
The Geologist having consented to keep the meteorological
records the necessary instruments have been provided and Meteorologist
the following general directions are to be observed as far as
•such can conveniently be done without interfering with the
Leader’s arrangements for the movements of the party.
On completion of the field work of the expedition it will
be necessary for the Geologist to prepare a general report Report.
■embodying the information obtained, and hand the same to
the Leader together with his journal, map, records, and
specimens for transmission to the President and Secretary
of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, South
Australian Branch.


The successful accomplishment of the work of the expe-
dition largely depends upon the support which the officers
accord to the Leader, and therefore the Geologist’s willing
assistance in the general routine work of the party, and his
compliance with the wishes of the Leader are confidently
anticipated.
Travellers and explorers in different parts of the world
have occasionally been startled by loud booming sounds
resembling the distant discharge of heavy pieces of artillery.
Captain Sturt, in his explorations on the Darling in 1828,
and again in 1844 in the Far North, between the Stony
Desert and Eyre’s Creek, reports having heard similar noises,
but was unable to offer any suggestions as to their cause.
In the event of such sounds being heard by yourself or bv
other members of the party, you will be careful to note the
exact time on which heard, the supposed distance away and
the direction, the state of the atmosphere (whether clear or
cloudy), the nature of the surrounding country (whether
sandy and flat or rocky and mountainous), and, by way of
comparison, refer to similar well-known sounds. Enquiries
on these points should also be made at all stations through-
out Central Australia, and at all outlying sheep and cattle
stations at which the expedition may happen to call,
carefully noting every instance of these loud noises being
heard, together with the name of your informant, his opinion
as to the cause, and such other matter as would be recorded
under the above instructions if heard by yourself.
It is of the utmost importance to note whether such,
sounds are accompanied by any sensible vibrations of air or
earth, and whether accompanied by any rumbling like
thunder.
INSTRUCTIONS AND NOTES ON TAKING
METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.
[By C. Todd, Esq., C.M.G., Government Astronomer, Adela de
Observatory.]
The following Instruments have been supplied:—
1 large Aneroid Barometer (no number)
1 small “ “ No. 38,602 (this is a
superior Instrument)


1 Swing Thermometer, No. 74,841
1 “ “ No. 74,844
1 “ “ No. 74,845
1 Maximum Thei*mometer (small, no number)
1 Minimum “ « «
1 Small Hygrometer on stand (dry and wet bulbs,
no number).
If possible, the hours of observation should be 9 a.m.,
3 p.m., and 9 p.m., local time, and it is important that
the Instrument should be read punctually at those hours.
If, however, circumstances arise to prevent this, a note
should alway* be made in the Field Book, and the time
entered at which the observations were made.
At each observation: —Read both Aneroids and attached
Thermometers (Thermometers after swinging). Read dry
bulb and wet bulb Swing. Read or set Maximum or Mini-
mum Thermometer (see next paragraph). Note the direction
and force of the wind ; the amount and kind of cloud and
upper currents, or directions from which clouds are moving;
and the state of the weather at the time of observation. All
these should be entered as read, or noted in the Field Books
supplied. As far as possible the general state of the weather
during each day and night should also be entered.
Note. — The Aneroid Barometers are always to be read in
a horizontal position, and should be gently tapped before
reading.
The Siving Thermometer used as a dry bulb should have a
piece of strong cord (about 18 inches long) attached, and
before being read should be rapidly rotated in a vertical
plane for about three minutes. The one used as a ivet bulb
should also have a piece of cord attached, and be swung in
a similar manner until the lowest point is reached ; the bulb
of the thermometer should be covered by fine mull muslin,
and dipped in water each time before swinging, care being
taken to change the muslin wheneverit becomes hard or dirty.
A supply of muslin is sent herewith.
The Maximum Thermometer should be set at 9 a.m., and
suspended in any convenient place where it will be protected


from the sky, but otherwise freely exposed to the air, and
read at 3 p.m. or 9 p.m.
The Minimum Thermometer should be set at 9 p.m. and
9 a.m., and suspended in similar manner to the Maximum.
The Force of the Wind should be noted in terms of the
Beaufort Scale, which is as follows :
Beaufort Scale of Wind Force.
per Hour.
0. Calm 3
1. Light air
Or, just sufficient to give steerage way 8
Or, that in which a
well - conditioned
2. Light breeze man-of-war, with
3. Gentle breeze y all sails set, and-
4. Moderate breeze clean full, would
go in smooth
J water
5. Fresh breeze ..
6. Strong breeze..
7. Moderate gale
8. Fresh gale
9. Strong gale
'
Or, that to which
she could just
carry in chase, full
and by
Ito 2 knots ... 13
3to 4 knots ... IS
sto 6 knots ... 23
Royals, &c. ... 28
Topgallant-saiF 34
Topsails, jib, &c. 40
Reefed upper
topsails and
courses 48
Lower topsails
and courses 56
10. Whole gale ... Or, that with which she could scarcely
bearlower maintop-sail and reefed
foresail ... .. ... ... ;.. 65
11. Storm Or, that which would reduce her two
storm-staysails ... ... ... 75
12. Hurricane ... Or, that which no canvas could with-
stand ... ... ... ... ... 90
The amount of Cloud should be recorded on the scale
0 to 100, 0 being clear sky, and 100 overcast sky.
Character of Cloud. —It will be quite sufficient to note
the following five types of cloud, and for the observer_to
assign any particular cloud to the type which be thinks
it most nearly approachable :
1. Cirrus. —Fibrous, hairy, or feathery clouds, usually
thin and white. The forms of Cirrus are innumer-
able, and are capable of classification by a
specialist ; but the only variety which need be
specially remarked by general observers is the long
linear or sti'ipe form. The direction in which
these stripes lie should be noted.


2. Cirro-cumulus. —A high, thin cloud, usually in flocks
of small detached fleecy structure —“ mackerel
sky.”
3. Cumulus. —A lumpy cloud, rocky topped, usually
with a flat base.
4, Slcatus. —A thin uniform layer of cloud at a very
low level.
5. Nimbus. —Rain cloud.
The Direction from which the clouds are moving is most
important, particularly in the case of types 1 and 2,
which should always be obtained if possible.
The Monthly Meteorological Forms supplied should be
filled in from the Field Book, and sent to the Observatory
on the return of the Expedition.
THE BOTANIST AND ZOOLOGIST.
The Botanist and Zoologist’s division of the scientific work
of the expedition shall be the collection and preservation of
specimens of indigenous plants and animals. It will be
necessary for him to keep a scientific journal recording the j ourna i
result of each day’s observations, enumerating, as far as such
can be done, the specimens collected, and generally describing
the characteristics of the flora and fauna of the country. It is
usual for explorers to simply record the names of the various
species discovered ; this is not an example to be followed as
the value of the botanist’s journal will be greatly enhanced
if it contains a discriminative description of the botanical
physical aspect of the country and the conditions which
govern the existence of the various species of timber trees
and plants. The presence of trees of abnormally large
growth in some of the localities where almost the minimum
rainfall of Australia obtains is worthy of special note, and no
doubt keen observation will discover in both the animal and
vegetable kingdom many such problems of much economic
and scientific interest.
Specimens of all plants suspected to be deleterious to
animals should be sought for and such a quantity preserved
as will suffice for chemical analysis and experiments.


A considerable number of each description of specimens
should be obtained so as to make up many separate complete
collections. Of rare specimens at least ten or twelve should
be obtained if possible.
The Botanist and Zoologists’ report together with his
journal, records, specimens, &c,, to be handed to the Leader
for transmission to the President of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, South Australian Branch.
The following general directions for collecting botanical
specimens are by Baron Sir Ferd. von Mueller, K.C.M.G.,
F.R.S., &c., &c,, President of the Victorian Branch of the
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
To endeavour to secure as many different kinds of plants
as circumstances will permit, in order that the fullest insight
into the vegetation of any of the districts traversed by the
expedition be obtained.
To collect each phanerogamous plant, as well in flower as
in ripe fruit, whenever and wherever possible, and under no
circumstances to miss collecting a plant when in fruit only.
Not to pass even the minutest plants, but in the case of
mosses to endeavour to obtain fruiting specimens.
Not to miss collecting fresh-water weeds whenever the
opportunity presents itself.
For hastening the drying of plants, so as to save time, the
specimens, after being put and pressed in paper, to be laid
out soon, in thin sets (plants and paper together with cross
string) in the open air or near a fire, to halve the set (as in
shifting of cards) after an hour or two, so that the moist
inner specimens and paper come outward, and the outer
drier portion inward; this process to be repeated till the
specimens are quite dry. Time and convenience for shifting
plants from moist into dry paper being, during travelling,
rarely available. Under no circumstances to allow speci-
mens to rot.
Large dry fruits to be wrapped up carefully in strong
paper, and to be numbered correspondingly to the flower and
foliage specimens in the general collection ; large succulent
fruits to be preserved in methylated alcohol, small labels to


be attached to them indicative of the number to be assigned
to the flowering and leafy specimens in the general collection.
Parcels of specimens, when 'perfectly dry , to be wrapped
up at once into wax cloth or some other fabric impervious
to moisture, of which material a large quantity , as well as of
printing and packing paper for drying plants, should be
provided.
Some kerosene to be dropped between the dried specimens
before packing the parcels into wax cloth, with a view of
keeping off insects of all sorts, and such parcels, if possible,
to be packed into water-tight boxes, which might be provided
purposely at the outset of the expedition.
On the labels to be noted, in the case of any specimens,
their precise locality, the date of collecting, the colour of the
fresh flowers, any scent of the flowers. Further, the colour
of fresh fruits, should they be succulent; also in the case of
trees, their approximate height, the outer appearance of their
bark, and should a tree be felled, the nature of its wood.
A piece of wood to be secured of any kind of tree, from
which flowering or fruiting branchlets can be obtained for
identification. Timber specimens without such accom-
panying flowering or fruiting branchlets, will prove of little
or no value.
It is of the greatest importance to muster as many
different kinds of distinct species of plants as ever possible,
as the result of the expedition, so that a creditable enumera-
tion can be published therefrom ; thus all sorts of fungi
should also be collected, the hard kinds requiring simply
drying; the soft kinds will need quickly to be immersed in
methylated alcohol, from which they should be removed
after a few hours, and then be simply dried, a note of the
fresh colour to be attached to each kind.
Careful inspection of bark and roots should take place for
lichens in fruit: some are mere little specks of various
colour, each sort representing, however, microscopic charac-
ters of its own.
It is a mistaken notion to rely on bulbs, tubers, seeds, and
living plants to be carried away instead of flowering and
fruiting specimens. Such tubers, seeds, seedlings, shoots.


tfec., may, in conservatories not flower for years, and seldom
ever produce mature fruits in culture.
If any particular insect or bird, &c., lives on any par-
ticular plant, a note to that effect should be made on the
label. Entries of such kind in the diary should, as speedily
as possible, be copied out, and placed with the specimens
at once, as otherwise, subsequent confusion is sure to occur.


NOTES ON THE COLLECTION OF BOTANICAL SPECIMENS.
[By J, G. O. Tepper, Adelaide Museum.]
In collecting of Herbarium specimens, the following is to be
noted : —Some specimens of all plants discovered, especially the
smaller varieties, should be taken when first observed, no
matter in what state to make sure of them. If better specimens
are met with the former could be discarded, they will serve to
denote what is to be looked for in future. Perfect specimens
consists of all parts of the plant, either on the one or on separate
sprigs or branches. The size depends on circumstances, the lai’ger
they are the more valuable, and vice versa , but the more bulky the
collection becomes. The collector must therefore consider his
means of transport. If possible a few larger and as many smaller
ones as he can manage should be taken, either with flowers or
fruit, or both, besides the leaves. Spare leafy sprigs or dis-
jointed flowers or fruit are no good, except when first obtained,
when they should be kept till others are at hand. All woody and
herbaceous plants \mder nine or ten inches should be taken whole,
roots included, or at least their upper part, if much branched the
superfluous parts should be reduced ; thick rhizames, roots, and
tubers can be pared down to about half their thickness on one side
before putting into press, taking care not to injure the other.
Too many leaves, branches, or flowers should not be permitted in
a specimen as they are apt to spoil its appearance. The stalks
of the removed leaves however should be left to indicate their
positions. Grasses and long scapes of any kind should be doubled
to the size of the press, and tied together so as to retain their
position.
Large leaves, ferns, &c., can be folded together and pressed in
that position. Such succulent plants as the Mesembryanthemum
should first be put in boxes or tins, then dipped for a second in
boiling water, or the water poured on them, and then dried in
the sun between paper and under a weight. Succulent herbs,
&c., should not be put indiscriminately amomg woody or coriaceous
specimens or grasses, as the moisture arising from them is apt to
spoil the others by inducing mouldiness. The botanist should
carry a hand press, say of the size of a sheet of foolscap, formed
of two cedar boards d inch thick, or, better still, pasteboard £ inch


or thereabout, a quantity of roryh brown paper, somewhat smaller,
and two strong leather straps connected by handle with a ring in
each end, through this passes another strap, by means of which
the press, is suspended over the shoulder. He should also carry a
few collecting tins and bottles and a bundle of brown paper, &c. f
of the size of a copy book, between the leaves of which are to-
be put the specimens as he collects them until he has several
kinds, when they can be removed into the larger press. This
saves much time, gets the specimen at once into gentle pressure,
and prevents shrivelling and shrinkage of leaves and flowers.
Every evening the specimens should be removed from the
temporary to the camp presses and labelled. Labels of the kind
attached to this memo, will be found most handy. On them is
noted the locality, date, nature of habitat (“among rocks;” “stiff'
(loamy, loose) clay;” “sandy scrub;” “sedgy plain,” &c.), common,
native, and botanical name (if known), and the finder’s name; one
label to each species for each locality is sufficient, but one to each
specimen is better. For the packing presses, Ac., so-called
“botanical drying paper” cannot be recommended under circum-
stances, rendering frequent changes of paper difficult or impos-
sible. Newspapers cut to size, or common rough brown paper
is much better as it does not absorb so much moisture, ana
dries better. The specimens should be arranged on one side
of the open sheet and when the page is full two or three
sheets laid on top. Thus proceed until all specimens are
exhausted, when the rest of the paper is put on top and with the
board on each side strapped tightly together. It is well to place
a heavy weight on top whenever convenient. In the evening the
specimens of the previous day must be removed to fresh sheets. As-
the specimen gets drier, fewer sheets will do for each layer, until
finally each sheet may contain them, even overlapping. If not too'
moist the sheets from the previous day’s collecting can be used
again. When a tropical moist heat prevails great care must be taken
in drying, else mould will destroy the specimens and render them
unfit for use. I have found the covers of large bank ledgers very
convenient travelling and packing press covers. The plants and
papers between these book-covers being strapped together in one
tight bundle are open at the three sides and the contents con-
tinue to dry during transit, thus securing the safety thereof.
When tightly packed no amount of rough handling can injure the


specimen while loose strapping may result in the destruction of
most specimens in a single day. The ledger covers can be had
for the asking from the Banks, and I beg to recommend them in
preference to wood on account of their being less liable to injury
by cracking or warping. In wet weather a covering of two
or three folds of oiled calico should be provided. The fully
pressed and dried parcels of specimens should be wrapped in
larger sheets of brown paper and tied securely before being put
between the boards, some naphthalene, insect powder, or eucalyptus
oil should be liberally applied to keep away destructive insects,
larva;, &c., and the parcels occasionally untied and aired on warm
dry days.
SPECIMEN
LABEL.
Locality—
Date—
Size of Plant—
Nature of Habitat—
(Sandy scrub) swamp, among
rocks, &e.
Botanical Name—
Common or Native Name—
Finder’s Name—
THE ZOOLOGIST is particularly directed to endeavour to
obtain specimens of the following members ot the Parrot family
of birds, viz. :~-
1. Polytilis Alexandra (the Princess of Wales Parakeet),
To be looked for north of 25° south latitude.
2. The Spinifex Parakeet.
3. Black Cockatoos from Central Australia, supposed to
have red under wings and upon head.
4. Any other Cockatoos from Central Australia.
5. Any species of Platycercus, Psephotus, Euphema,
Trichoglossus, or Loriquet.


GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE PRESERVATION OF
SPECIMENS OF NATURAL HISTORY.
[F rom the Proceedings of the New South Wales Branch of the Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia].
Mammalia.
Remove all blood-stains if possible, and plug any shot holes
or other bleeding wounds with tow, wadding, or rag ; put a plug
of moss or tow in the mouth to keep any blood or other matter
from exuding. Note the shape and colour of the eyes and the
fleshy parts, and the sex. Slit the skin open from about the
centre of the belly downwards to the vent, but in the case of
female marsupials, take care not to cut into the pouch ;or this
may be avoided by cutting from the chest between the fore arms
downwards, and making an opening, in all cases large enough to
extract the body; looslU the skin round it with the fingers or
handle of the knife, being careful not to use the blade more than
is absolutely necessary ; generally the skin will be found to be
easily separated; now sever the legs from the pelvis hones at the
body, leaving the tail attached to the body, by which it may be
more easily slipped out of the skin ; turn the skin back, outwards,
and slip the tail out entire, the skin will then draw off over the back
with ease; sever the fore limbs from the body with the shoulder
blades attached, to them, and the neck close up to the back of
the skull (at the atlas vertebra); skin the head as far as the tip
of the nose, remove all the flesh from it, take out the eyes, and
remove the brains by enlarging, if necessary, the opening at the
back of the skull; anoint it well, inside and out, with arsenical
soap, and fill out the orbits with tow or wadding, &c.; clean "the
limbs, stripping the skin back as far as the paws, anoint all the
bones, and roll a little tow round them to make up for the amount
of flesh removed ; the tail often strips easily enough, but in some
animals (as in the Platypus) requires literally to be cut out,
making an incision along one side of it. Anoint the skin inside
well all over with arsenical soap, and dust it well with the
powdered burned alum, now turn the skin back, and pull the
limbs and tail into their original position ; open the palms of the
hands and soles of the feet, remove the fleshy parts, and rub in some
soap and alum ; remove the testes and fill up the skin to its natural
size—if a female marsupial, fill out the pouch with a little tow.


Allow the skin, after it has been prepared as directed, to remain
for a few hours, or a day, if the time can be spared, before filling
it out, afterwards fill out the skin to about the natural size, and
sew up the opening ; tie the mouth shut, and pull up the wadding
in the orbits, and adjust the eye-lids, but do not distend them.
Anoint the eye-lids, face, ears, the fleshy parts of the feet, and the
pouch, &c., with a solution of mercuric chloride and camphor in
spirits of wine, hang the animal up in a dry airy situation, not
in the sun, until quite dry , when, if required to save space in pack-
ing, the filling may be removed from the body, and the feet and
tail folded up over the belly, and the skin doubled up.
The smaller mammals, such as mice, rats, bats, and even the
smaller species of native cats and bandicoots, are best preserved
entire, in strong spirits of wine , to which a little arsenic has been
added, taking care to make an opening in the abdomen to allow
the spirits to enter freely. The body should be well covered with
the spirit, and care taken that the stopper or cark of the vessel be
made air-tight. A very good contrivance for large vessels is that
known as a “ man-hole fastening ,” used for steam boilers, &c.
Before putting the specimen in the spirit, inject through the vent
with strong spirits.
Birds.
When first obtained, push a small piece of cotton wool, tow, or
moss into the throat, to prevent any liquid from escaping, and
remove any blood from the feathers. Note the colour of the eyes,
bill, legs, and feet. If the weather be hot and the bird cannot be
skinned at once, it is advisable to brush the bill, eyelids (being
careful to note the colour of the eyes first), the inside of the
mouth, and other fleshy parts, as well as the abdomen under the
feathers, and the vent, with the solution of mercuric chloride and
camphor ; this will prevent those parts being blown by flies, and,
to a great extent, arrest putrefaction.
Before beginning to skin, for convenience sake dislocate or break
the first bone (the humerus) of the wings about the middle, and
then, after separating the feathers on tire abdomen, open the skin
from the lower end of the breast-bone, or from a little above it,
down to the vent, being careful not to cut into the intestines ; if
there is much moisture or fat, dust these parts well with powdered
lime, or better, plaster of Paris; detach the skin from the flesh on
either side until you come to the knee-joints, which push up


inside the skin, and cut through the exposed joints carefully
draw the legs back again, and detach the skin round on either
side to the tail, cut through the vertebra at the tail, taking care
not to injure the skin, which is very thin, about this part; draw
the skin over the back, holding the feathers clear of the body,
which may be powdered well with plaster of Paris to keep it from
soiling them. The skin will now easily strip off as far as the
wings, which must be cut through at the broken part or at
the jirst joint ; pull back the skin carefully over the neck until
you come to the skull, and ease it gently over the head with your
nails; detach the head, cutting the neck off with a small portion
of the skull attached ; pinch up the skin over the ears and pull it
carefully over them as far as the eyes, the tough skin round which
cut through, when it has been eased over the orbit, taking care
not to cut the eyelid, detach the skin as far as the base of the bill,
remove the eyes and flesh from the head, and the tongue, &c., and
take out the brains through the opening enlarged at the back of
the skull; anoint the head well with arsenical soap inside and
out; fill up the orbits with a plugget of cotton waddiixg for eyes
roll up a piece of tow or wadding and plug the end of it tightly
into the back of the skull, leaving a piece out of sufficient length
to form the neck. Now turn to the legs —remove the flesh from
the bones, anoint them, and Toll a little cotton wadding round
them, leaving some of it over the end of the bone; clean the wing
bones, but put no wadding round them, cut off the humerus, or
the broken part of it, tie them a little apart \>y passing a string
between the bones and drawing the wings together’, buff not too
close, leaving a space of about one quarter of an inch in a bird as
large as a thrush, and proportionately greater or less for other
birds, as the case may be (in very small birds the wing bones may
be tied close, just leaving room enough for them to play); clean
the tail carefully and remove the fat and oil glands, anoint it well
with the soap, and turn it back into its place with a small piece of
wadding over it; soap the legs and wings and adjacent skin, and
turn them back as near as possible into their original position ;
soap the remainder of the skin well all over, especially the neck,
ease it carefully back over the skull, pulling the head through,
assisted by the string previously passed and left through the
nostrils ; in some birds, as the larger cockatoos and parrots, and
the stilts and avocets, &c., the neck being very small, the head


cannot with safety be drawn through, it is advisable to open the
skin at the back of the head or along the throat, and turn out the
head through the opening, which can be sewed up afterwards.
Having turned the skin back, and pulled the head, legs, and
wing into their original position, arrange the feathers of the head
and ears as neatly as possible, with the point of a long needle,
lifting up the skin here and there, and getting all smooth, pull
up the wadding in the orbits to fill out the eyes, taking care not
to distend it or bulge the eyelids out ; shorten the neck by pulling
the false neck of wadding down a little inside, place a piece on
either side near the wings, and thrust a small piece up from the
breast as far as the throat, to fill it out, and close the bill on
the end of it to hold it in position, or by pulling the end of it the
neck can be shortened at will; fill the body out to about its
natural dimensions, or a very little more, to allow for the
shrinking of the skin in drying, and arrange the wings dosed on
the sides, in the natural position; pull the legs down to their
proper length, and take care not to elongate the neck ; see that
the bird is filled out enough, and sew up the opening—small
birds need not be sewed up. Cross the legs, the tarsus of one
over the tarsus of the other, and tie them ; the right leg, as the
bird lies on its back, should be crossed over the left, if the bird is
a male, and vice versa for a female. The legs and feet, margins of
the wings, the bill, orbits, and nostrils, should be brushed over
with the solution of mercuric chloride, which may be repeated
two or three times as the skin dries, if the specimen be a large
one. Having settled the feathers, and affixed a tided, with date,
locality, sex, colour oj eyes, bills, and legs, and a number referring
to the note book, in which particulars should be entered as to the
contents of the stomach, <fec., the skin should be carefully pushed,
head first into a cylinder of a stiff paper (not funnel shaped) made
just wide enough to contain it, and not small enough to cramp
the bird—this keeps the wings together and the feathers smooth
whilst drying.
Carefully ascertain the sex of each specimen by dissection. On
I’emoving the intestines the ovaries (if a female), resembling a
small cluster of round seeds or beads, may be plainly seen,
situated on the inner surface against the back bone ; if a male,,
two small (usually yellowish) oval bodies will be found near the
same place. Large birds require to have the last joint of the


wings opened from without, along the inner margin, and any flesh
removed, and the bone and skin well anointed with the soap, after
which the incision may be sewed up, and the margins and joints
of the wings and legs well brushed with the solution of mercuric
chloride ; should the legs (tarsi) of the birds be fleshy, as in some
of the larger ducks and geese, and some of the eagles, or puffed
out by decomposition, it will be necessary to slit them open along
the under portion, down to the soles of the feet, and rub in
arsenical soap or dry arsenic, bind the legs round tightly with
strips of rag or tow, to bring the skin into its original position,
until quite dry. This is, however, seldom necessary with the
Australian species, except when decomposition has set in.
Fishes.
Specimens of all fresh - water fishes are much desired.
These are best preserved in strong spirits of wine (methylated
spirit will do). Care must always be taken to have close air-tight
fitting stoppers to the vessels containing the spirits. The speci-
mens may be plunged in whole, after first having a small opening
made in the abdomen , to allow the preserving fluid to enter the
intestines. If they can be put in alive, all the better. If spirits
cannot be obtained, strong brine may be used, to which a little
alum may be added with advantage, and after the specimens have
been in soak for two or three days, they may be taken out and
well salted inside, and packed between layers sawdust, and
fastened up tightly in a box or keg. In all cases where small
specimens are placed among larger ones, or when they are packed
for transit in fluid, each one should be rolled up separately in
cloth or paper to prevent friction, without which precaution the
fins and spines are likely to get broken and the fish damaged.
Specimens too large to be conveniently preserved whole may
be skinned, and the skin, with the head attached, be placed in the
preserving fluid, or salted, or they may be only partially skinned
—an opening being made in the abdomen (the intestines pushed
aside but not removed), and as much as possible of the back bone
and flesh should be taken out ; this greatly reduces the bulk, and
permits of a long fish being doubled up into a comparatively small
compass.
The colour of the eyes and fins, and the general colouration of
the specimens should always be noted; any information as to
their capture, &c., or respecting their habits will be valuable.


Reptiles.
Lizards, Snakes, Frogs, Turtles, Crocodiles, &c.—These
animals, when not too large, are best preserved in strong spirits;
a small incision should be made in the abdomen to allow the
spirit to enter. The larger specimens of lizards may be skinned
in the manner described for mammals, but in filling out the tail,
feet, and limbs, the material should be cut up fine, to allow its
being pushed into the small recesses, or dry sand or sawdust may
be used. Care must be taken in skinning the tail—which
Cannot be stripped back, as in most cases with mammals—the
skin of the under side must be carefxdly slit up to the tip and the
tail removed, which can be replaced by an artificial one made of
tow wound round two or three rushes. In skinning lizards,
particularly the glossy species of Tropidolepisma Cyclodus , &c.,
care should be taken not to break the tails, which are particularly
brittle.
In preserving large specimens in spirits, the bodies can be
skinned out through an incision made down the belly, the bones
of the legs, arms, tail, and head being left attached to the skin.
Snakes are always best preserved in spirits, but if it
be desirable to skin some of the larger ones, it may be
done by making an opening in the skin just below the neck,
a few inches in length along the belly, sever the vertebra
through to the skin, and turn out the body after the manner of
skinning eels ; do the same with the head portion, leaving the shull
attached to the shin, removing as much of the flesh as possible, the
eyes and the brains ; anoint the head and the whole of the skin
on the inside with arsenical soap, and powder it with burned
alum ; turn the skin back and fill it out with dry sand, &c., as
directed for fishes; curl the body into shape.
Tortoises and Turtles may be pi'eserved dry, the breast-plate
being more or less severed along the sides, laid back, and the head,
limbs, and tail skinned and cured as before described for animals ;
the carapace (back) should be well cleaned and anointed with soap
and burned alum, and the breast-plate returned to its original
position, may be sewn or wired on, and the specimen set out to
dry on a board; in the smaller specimens the bones within the
body need not be removed, but cleaned carefully and left in their
places.


In the case of large Alligators or Crocodiles, &c., the entire
skeleton should be preserved, if possible. The flesh may be easily
removed from the bones, and the head carefully cleaned, and after
drying a little may be packed in dry sawdust, grass, or seaweed ;
if the whole cannot be secured, obtain the head at least.
Land Shells.
Search on the leaves and stems of trees and large foliaged plants,
i especially after a shoiver of rain, under leaves by the sides of logs
and fallen timber, sometimes burrowing the rotten timber or in the
ground beside it several inches deep. Also under lai’ge stones on
hillsides; and deep in the ground at the roots of shrubs, &c. Do
not put into tin boxes, as by doing so they get rusted. If too
many are not packed together the animals need not be killed.
Fresh-Water Shells
Are found along the banks of rivers and creeks sticking to logs,
stones, leaves, aud aquatic plants; also in small pools, swamps,
and rivulets. All species or specimens must be killed with boiling
water poured over them, then extract the animal with fine bent
wire. All bivalves must be tied together when dry, then put
away in boxes with any packing, such as moss, so as to prevent
them from getting broken. All specimens should kept clear of the
sides of the boxes if made of tin.
Crustacea.
Many species may be obtained in fresh water, or even on land,
as the robber crabs, and hermit crabs, or in the streams, as the
fresawater crayfish, Ac. -Lhey should have an incision made under
the carapace, to allow the spirits to penetrate into their bodies.
All may be preserved by throwing them into strong spirits of
wine. The smaller ones should be put into separate tubes or
bottles. 1 n every case attach a label written with a lead pencil on
strong paper, or a tin-stamped number. Enter in your note-book
a corresponding number, and as much information as possible
about each species, and the nature of the locality, and circum-
stances under which it is found ; also its native name, if that can
be ascertained.
General Remarks.
Wounded birds and animals may be easdy killed by pressing
them tightly across the windpipe. In the case of smaller birds,


place the thumb and second finger under the wings on either side
and the forefinger in the hollow of the chest, just over the wind-
pipe, press all tightly together for a minute or so, until you find
that respiration has ceased.
The collector should always be careful to note down the colour
of the. eyes and fleshy pen ts as soon as possible after the specimen
is captured. The locality and situation in which the animal is
taken, with a few remarks as to the style of the country and the
nature of the vegetation, geological characters, and elevation, Arc. •
also the vulgar, local, or native name, and the rarety or com-
monness of the animal, and any information respecting its habits ?
&c., being particular about the dates and season of the year.
Should the collector obtain what he believes to be a scarce or
rare animal, the skull should not be cut or the opening at the
■back part enlarged ; with a little trouble the brains may be
extracted through the natural opening.
In preparing skeletons of animals, if you have a choice of the
animals, select the largest and oldest, discarding those with
fractured bones, if you can get better. All the flesh should be
■carefully cut off, aiid the bones made as clean as possible, the
head, arms, legs, and tail may be severed from the body, the back
disjointed in convenient sized pieces, and the parts thrown into a
tank or tub of cold water, with a few handfuls of salt, or about
two or three ounces to the gallon, the salt and water renewed
every second or third day for about a week or so; the remainder
of the flesh can then be removed, and the brains extracted through
the opening at the base of the skull, which must not be enlarged
or cut in any way, and the bones when dried packed up.
When none of the chemicals aforementioned can be obtained,
the specimens may be skinned in the way described, the skin and
the bones carefully cleaned, and the bodies filled out with fresh
dry charcoal, or wood ashes, crushed into a coarse powder, to
which may be added with advantage grated or bruised “galls,”
the excrescences found on the twigs and leaves of many of the
gum trees ( Eucalypti ) ; hang the specimens up in a dry airy place
till quite dry.
The skulls and leg bones should invariably be left in the
specimens of birds and animals, but the bones must be most
carefully cleaned of flesh.


Receipt for making Arsenical Soap
White Arsenic ... ... ... ... 1 lb.
Common or Hard White Soap ... ... 1 lb.
Salts of Tartar ... ... ... ... 4 oz.
Lime in Powder ... ... ... 3 oz.
Camphor ... ... ... ... 2 oz.
Cut the soap into thin slices and melt it in a saucepan over a
slow fire; when melted add the salts of tartar which will reduce
the mass into a creamy consistency, take it off the fire and put in
the arsenic, and stir it up well, add the lime, and then the
camphor either reduced to a fine powder or dissolved in a small
quantity of strong methylated spirits of wine, stir the whole up
well, and pour out into earthenware jars to cool; if it is required
very hard to pack up for travelling with, it may be poured out
into porous vessels, when cold it may be cut out and pressed
together into cakes like common soap, and when wanted for use.
softened with a brush in a little water.
Solution No. 1
Mercuric Chloride ... ... ... f oz.
Camphor ... ... ... ... 1 oz.
Spirits of Wine... ... ... ... 1 pint
Dissolve the camphor in methylated spirits with the mercuric
chloride, shaking it up occasionally until it is all dissolved.


SUGGESTIONS FOR COLLECTING ENTOMOLOGICAL
SPECIMENS.
[By Mr. G. O. Terper, Entomologist, Adelaide Museum.]
Insects.
Beetles, bugs, wasps, flies, earwigs, cockroaches, locusts, mantists
and phasmids, are readily killed by putting in a large-mouth bottle
with a piece of cyanide of potassium wrapped in paper or cloth
and tied by a thread. The packet should fit somewhat tightly in
the bottom, so as not easily to shake about, and be pierced with
numerous holes so as to let the fumes of the very poisonous
chemical escape. If this is not handy, the insects can be collected
in a tin, and killed from time to time by applying a burning piece
of paper to the bottom. Care must be taken only to kill, not to burn
them. The dead insects should then be put into a separate tin or
bottle. They can also be thrown into hot -water (not quite
boiling) for a few seconds, or the tin held in (when delicate ones)
without wetting them. All smaller ones should be packed in saw-
dust (or bran, sifted) in the evening every day, each day’s collection
being covered with a piece of paper, tightly fitting, on which is
marked the date and place (latitude and longitude described where
there are no named settlements). The larger ones (especially all
the soft ones) must be first rolled in paper, the limbs straightened
along the body, and then dried either near the fire or by exposure
to the sun, then the ends of the rolls tightly squeezed together,
and the whole packed in a tin so that they cannot shake about
nor be broken by the pressure. It is requisite that some
naphthalene or camphor, or a drop or so of eucalyptus oil be put
in every tin with the sawdust, so as to keep insects and mould
away. The tins to be then wrapped tightly in common brown
paper (the glazed smooth kind is not so good) and firmly
tied with string. This allows the moisture to escape, and prevents
ingress of depredating insects. Butterflies and the larger moths
to be put singly in envelopes of paper and then put in tins tight
enough to prevent shaking about without crushing, being held in
place until the tin is full by cotton wool or crumpled soft paper
&c. Naphthalene or eucalyptus oil should, from time to time
before finally closing up, be put in to prevent mould, etc. Butter-
flies and moths are best killed by pressing or squeezing them with
thumb and forefinger for a minute or so below the wings. Small
moths cannot easily be preserved where there are no facilities to


put them on pins at once in corklined boxes, as they otherwise
get so injured by transport as to make them almost useless. All
other insects should be taken, no matter how small, and a dozen
specimens of each, or more, if circumstances permit. The wings
of small and delicate muths must be set, if possible, at once.
Some specimens of all the small and the softer insects
should also be preserved in spirit for critical examination, if
circumstances permit, but alcohol destroys most colours, and is
not good for the bulk of them. A little glycerine should be added
to the spirit, as it keeps the insects in a softer and more pliable
state. In packing insects the sawdust, bran, &c., before use should
be sifted, to get rid of dust, and heated in a tin over the fire,
being constantly stirred to kill or drive out any live insects which
would otherwise destroy the collection. For packing, the four-
angled mustard tins are about the best and cheapest (not above
the pound size), as they pack well and could be filled with the
sawdust before leaving town. They may also be utilized to hold
all sorts of small objects that might be requisite on the journey,
and gradually made use of for specimens as required.


A-iPiPEnsriDiEix:
The following “ System of Orthography for Native Names of
Places” has been adopted by the Council of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society, of London, and should be strictly followed: —
1. The true sound of the word as locally pronounced will be
taken as the basis of the spelling.
2. An approximation, however, to the sound is alone aimed at.
A system which would attempt to represent the more delicate in-
flections of sound and accent would be so complicated as only to
defeat itself. Those who desire a more accurate pronunciation
of the written name must learn it on the spot by a study of local
accent and peculiarities.
3. The broad features of the system are that vowels are pro-
nounced as in Italian, and consonants as in English.
4. One accent only is used—the acute—to denote the syllable
on which stress is laid. This is very important, as the sounds of
many names are entirely altered by the misplacement of this
“ stress.”
5. Every letter is pronounced. When two vowels come to-
gether, each one is sounded, though the result, when spoken
quickly, is sometimes scarcely to be distinguished from a single
sound, as in ai, au, ei.
6. Doubling of a vowel is only necessary where there is a dis-
tinct repetition of the single sound : thus, Nuulua, Oosima.
7. All vowels are shortened in sound by doubling the following
consonant, as in Yarra, Tanna, Mecca, Jidda, Bonny.


The amplification of the rules is given
Letters.
Pronunciation and Remarks.
ah, a as in father
eh, e as in benefit
o
u
ai
au
ao
ei
g
h
k
kh
gh
m
t n
ng
As in English.
should never be employed; qu is given as lew
t
v
w
X
y
below—
English e; i as in ravine', the sound of ee in beet.
Thus, not Feejee, but
o as in mots
long uas in flute ; the sound of oo in boot.
Tims, not Zooloo, but
Engl sh i, as in ice
oiv as in how Thus, not Foochow but
is slightly different from above
is the sound of the two Italian vowels, but is fre-
quently slurred over, when it is scarcely to be dis-
tinguished from ey in the English they.
English b.
is always soft, but is so nearly the sound of s that it
should be seldom used
If Celebes were not already recognized it would be
written Selebes.
is always sounded as in church
English d.
English/, ph should not be used for the sound of/.
Thus, not Haiphong, but
is always hard. (Soft gis given by j)
is always pronounced when inserted.
English j. Dj should never be put for this sound ..
English k. It should always be put for the hard c.
Thus, not Corea, but
The Oriental guttural
is another guttural, as in the Turkish
j- As in English.
has two separate sounds, the one hard as in the
English word finger, the other as in singer. As
these two sounds are rarely employed in the same
locality, no attempt is made to distinguish between
them.
in English.
is always a consonant, as in yard, and therefore
snould never be used as a terminal, i or e being sub-
stituted
Thus, not Mikinddny, but
not Kwaly, but
English
Accents should not generally be used, but where
there is a very decided emphatic syllable or stress,
which affects the sovind of the word, it should be
marked by an acute accent.
Examples.
Java, Banana, Somali,
Bari, Suakin.
Tel-el-Kebfr, Oldleh,
Yezo, Medina,
Levuka, Peru.
Fiji, Hindi.
Tokio.
Zulu, Sumatra.
Shanghai.
Fuchau.
Macao.
Beinit, Beilul
Celebes.
Chingchin.
Haifong, Nafa.
Galapagos.
Japan, Jinchuen.
Korea.
Khan.
Dagh, Ghazi.
Kwangtung
Kikuyu.
Mikindani.
Kwale.
Zulu.
Tongatabu, Galapagos,
Palawan, Sarawak.


Sun
Fish
Good
Tongue
I
Moon
Dog
Bad
Teeth
Thou
Star
Kangaroo
Man
Ear
He, she, it
Cloud
Fire
Woman
Foot
We
Heavens
House
Boy
Nose
Ye
Rain
Spear
Girl
Hair
They
Heat
Club
Father
Blood
This
Cold
Wommera
Mother
Living
Who
Hill
Boomerang-
Husband
Dying
One
Land
Day
Wife
Hearing
Two
Sand
Night
Head
Seeing
Three
Stone
Great
Mouth
Sitting
Four
Water
Small
Hand
Making
Five
Sea
His
Eye
Giving
Ten
Tree
My
Thumb
Dual
Twenty
Canoe
Thy
Hair of head
Bone
Plural
My foot
-A_ IP IP IB ItT UDIIXI 18.
LIST OF WORDS, THE RESPECTIVE NATIVE NAME
OF WHICH IS TO BE ASCERTAINED WHEREVER
POSSIBLE.


o.
ABSTRACT OFMOURNAL of.
Date 18
Camp No Situation of
Time of starting from camp a.m.
State of weather—fine, cloudy, or raining.
travelled over —flat, undulating, or hilly.
Mountains, creeks, &c,, named during day.
Why so named.
Native name for same
Height of mountains.
Position of waters seen during day—fresh or otherwise, and supply
Whether native wells or running water
nature of country —sandy, stony, rocky, «kc.
Describe rocks —give strike and dip.
Rock specimens collected.
features of country—large timber, scrub, or plain.
Describe timber trees, shrubs, &c.—height, size, &c.
Specimens collected —(secure flower, seed vessels, and bark).
Animals or birds seen.
Describe the varieties, and say if numerous or otherwise.
Carefully note any supposed new species
Aborigines—locality and number seen, and whether friendly disposed
Numberbf men, women or children seen; if aged, infirm, or diseased
If any photographed, and number of plate.
If native drawings seen
Native weapons, implements, utensils secured
Photograph taken of.
Direction and distances travelled
Barometer Thermometer at 3 p.m
fTime of camping ; situation of camp
Altitude of evening camp
Remarks.
* If country variable during day give estimated proportions of each in the order met
with.
t Camps to be numbered, and to correspond with those shown on the plan.


Barometer Thermometer
Above plain, feet; above sea level, ...feet.
Copied in page draughtsman’s book, or photo. No
; No.
Above sea level ft.; Lat and variation of compass
Note. —This record is to be completed on the evening of each day, and is considered
the property of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, S. A. Branch.


