

h MO a ■ c
O N H i
j L O C O M O T V E
•-C SCRIPT!ON, MAINTENANO 1
ECONO RATIO
II . . ir.tr,--, , ■ ■


NAME OCCUPATION
1
This book is the
property
of The VICTORIAN
j RAILWAYS
COMMISSIONERS,
and is issued to
who, by accepting it, agrees to return it to the proper
officer when called upon to do so.
A. C. AHLSTON
Chief Mechanical Engineer


VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
HANDBOOK
ON THE
LOCOMOTIVE
ISSUED FOR.THE
GUIDANCE OF ENGINEMEN
IN THE
DESCRIPTION, MAINTENANCE AND
ECONOMICAL OPERATION
OF THE LOCOMOTIVE
JULY 1951


INTRODUCTION.
Although experience is the best teacher in determining
how the best can be obtained from a locomotive, a
knowledge of its construction and reasons for equipment
provided will guide enginemen along correct lines of
thought and avoid many pitfalls which otherwise might
be encountered. That is the object of this book which
does not profess to be comprehensive but it does deal
with the salient features and should give the young
engineman an appreciation of the machine of which he
is in charge and perhaps for the older man it will clear
up some points on which he has been in doubt.


3o.
Page
... 75
... 12
... 20
7
... 75
... 144
ml, (re
INDEX.
Axle boxes ... ... ... ... 75
Blow off cock ... ... ... ... 12
Blower ... ... ... ... ... 20
Boiler ... ... ... ... ... 7
Booster ... ... ... ... ... 75
Breakdowns, General ... ... ... 144
Bye Pass Valves ... ... ... ... 48
Cab ... ... ... ... ... 13
Coal sprinkler ... ... ... ... 24
Combustion ... ... ... ... 65
Crank path ... ... ... ... 95
Cylinder release cocks ... ... ... 22
Damper door lever ... ... ... 24
Drawbar pull ... ... ... ... 50
Effect of Hot and Cold Water mixture in boiler ... 67
Engine bogie ... ... ... ... 81
Firehole door ... ... ... ... 21
Firing practice ... ... ... ... 51
Foaming ... ... ... ... ... 69
Frames ... ... ... ... ... 75
Friction ... ... ... ... ... 25
Gauge glasses ... ... ... ... 20
Injectors lifting ... ... ... ... 14
Injectors non-lifting ... ... ... 15
Lubrication ... ... ... ... 25
Lubricators, Hydrostatic ... ... ... 28
Lubricators, Mechanical ... ... ... 39
Locomotives, with 3 cylinders ... ... 92
Mechanical stoker ... ... ... ... 116
Motion gear ... ... ... ... 84


INDEX, (continued)
" Page
Oil fired locomotives ... ... ... 108
Pistons ... ... ... ■• • ... 46
Piston clearance ... ... ... ••• 47
Pony truck ... ... ... ... 81
Pressure gauges ... ... ... ••• 21
Preparation of locomotive ... ... ... 55
Priming ... ... ... •• • ... 69
Pulverised coal fired locomotives ... ... 130
Regulator handle ... ••• ••• ... 24
Sanders ... ... •• • •• • ... 23
Shaker grate levers ••• ••• ••• 24
Smokebox ... ••• ••• ••• 59
Speed recorders ... ••• ••• ••• 25
Springs ... ... ••• ••• ... 79
Steam saturated and superheated ... ... 62
Steam temperatures ... ••• ••• 61
Steam pressure gauges ... ••• 21
Stephenson valve gear ... ■ ••• 86
Stoker (Mechanical) ... ...116
Stuffing boxes ... ... ••• ... 48
Temperature of steam and water ... ... 61
Tender bogie ... ... ••• ••• 83
Three cylinder locomotives ... ... ••• 92
Tractive effort ... ... ••• ••• 50
Trailing truck ... ••• ••• ... 81
Valves and pistons ... ••• ••• 44
Valves, Stephenson ... ••• ••• 86
Valves, Walschaert ... ••• ... 88
Valve, lead ... ... ••• ... 89
Valve, lap ... ... ••• ... 91
Valve, events ... ... ... ... 96
Walschaert valve gear ... ... ... 88
Washout plugs ... ... ... ••• 12
Water treatment ... ... ... ... 73


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Figure Page
Locomotive Boiler ... ... 1 Back of book
Smoke Box ... ... ... 2 ... 11
Arrangement of Cab ... ... 3 Back of book
Lifting Injector ... ... 4 ... 14
Non-lifting Injector ... ... 5 ... 16
Hydrostatic Lubricator ... ... 6 ... 29
Lubricator Choke Valve ... 7 ... 30
Lubricator Section ... ... 8 ... 31
Lubricator Section ... ... 9 ... 32
Lubricator Oil Control Valve ... 10 ... 37
Lubricator Oil Control Valve Sections 11 ... 38
Arrangement of Mechanical Lubricator 12 ... 40
Nathan Mechanical Lubricator ... 13 Back of book
Terminal Check Valve ... ... 14 ... 41
Cylinder and Piston ... ... 15 ... 45
Stuffing Box ... ... ... 16 Back of book
Effect of Hot and Cold Water ... 17 Back of book
Water Treatment Fceding Device... 18 ... 72
Axle Box Horn ... ... 19 ... 78
Underside of Engine Bogie ... 20 ... 80
Pony Truck Arrangement ... 21 ... 82
Stephenson Valve Gear ... 22 Back of book
Walschaert Valve Gear ... 23 ... 88
“H ” Valve Gear 24 ... 94


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS, (continued)
Figure Page
Crank Path ... ... ... 24A ... 95
Valve Events 2 cylinders ... 248 Back of book
Valve Events 3 cylinders ... 24C Back of book
Oil Fired Locomotive ... 24D Back of book
Stoker, Applied to Locomotive ... 25 ... 117
Stoker, Engine ... ... 26 ... 119
Stoker Reversing Valve ... 27 ... 120
Stoker Crusher ... ... 28 ... 121
Stoker Distributor Jet ... ... 29 ... 122
Side view of Stoker Coal Distributor 30 ... 123
Plan view of Stoker Coal Distributor 31 ... 123
Stoker Driving Shaft ... ... 32 ... 124
Pulverised Coal Fired Locomotive 33 ... 131
Cab Arrangement ... ... 34 ... 136
Tender Arrangement ... ... 35 ... 137
Valve centred ... ... ... 36 ... 148
Piston Chocked Back ... ... 37 ... 149
Emergency Collar on Crank Pin ... 38 ... 151
Wheel Arrangement “ X ” Class ... 39 ... 153
Slide Bar Bolt Broken ... ... 40 ... 159


THE LOCOMOTIVE BOILER.
Locomotive boilers belong to the horizontal fire tube
class with internal firebox. The requirements of a
locomotive boiler are very exacting as it has to withstand
high steam pressure and very rapid changes in temper-
ature in supplying steam to satisfy the varying demands
of the locomotive under working conditions.
Enginemen must possess a general knowledge of the
construction of the locomotive boiler and the functions
of its various parts.
The principal parts of the locomotive boiler are as
follows :—■
(a) The inner firebox containing the fire grate, brick
arch, arch tubes, thermic syphons.
(, h) The firebox outer casing which provides water and
steam space around the inner firebox.
(c) The cylindrical barrel containing the boiler tubes
and the flue tubes through which gases flow from
the firebox to the smokebox. The flue tubes
contain the superheater elements.
(d) The smokebox containing the blast pipe, blower
pipe, steam pipes, superheater header, spark
arresters, and chimney extension.
There are two types of firebox used on the Victorian
Railways ; the round top, the top of the firebox being
round as its name implies, and the Belpaire type which
has a flat firebox top.
The diagram (Fig. I) clearly shows the construction
and names of parts of a modern Belpaire type locomotive
superheater boiler.
The boiler barrel is made from steel plates rolled into
circular rings. The meeting edges of the plates are
connected by means of riveted butt joints having cover
plates inside and outside known as butt straps. The
barrel consists of a number of sections which are fitted
telescopically into each other and then riveted together
by means of lap joints.
A smokebox tube plate is fastened to the leading end
(See Figure 1 at back of book) 7


of the barrel. The firebox, in which is incorporated the
firebox tube plate, is fastened to the rear end of the barrel.
Passing through the barrel are a large number of small
tubes known as boiler tubes and a smaller number of
large tubes known as flue tubes. In boilers fitted with
copper fireboxes flue tubes which are of copper are
screwed into the firebox tube plate and beaded over.
The other ends are expanded into the smoke box tube
plate.
In this type of construction, the boiler tubes are of
brass or copper and are expanded and beaded over at
the firebox end and expanded at the smokebox end.
In the case of all steel boilers all tubes are of steel which
are expanded, beaded over, and seal welded at the firebox
end and expanded at the smokebox end.
Small tubes are provided rather than large tubes
because a greater heating surface can be provided in a
given space by their use. They are also less dangerous
in case of failure.
A dome is provided on top of the barrel for the purpose
of providing a space as high as possible above the water
level in order to allow the steam to separate itself from the
water. The dome contains the regulator valve, steam
separator and internal pipes to the air compressor, blower,
injector and other devices requiring dry steam. The
main steam pipe is connected to the regulator valve and
provides a passage for the flow of steam from the boiler
to the superheater header.
The firebox consists of an inner and outer shell. The
outer casing plates are made of steel. The inner casing
plates are made of copper on the older type of boilers and
of steel on the modern types and correspond generally
in shape to the outer shell. The outer and inner casing
plates are riveted at the bottom to the foundation ring,
the width of which determines the minimum water space
around the firebox.
At the rear of the firebox are the inner and outer back
plates. A fire hole opening is formed by flanging the


plates towards each other and forming the joint by weld-
ing or riveting. The bottom ends of the back plates are
riveted to the foundation ring.
On large boilers the firebox is extended into the barrel
and this portion is known as a combustion chamber.
This chamber allows the tubes to be kept to a reasonable
length, provides greater firebox heating surface and
assists combustion. In the crown of the inner firebox,
fusible plugs are provided. They have a threaded hole
in the centre which is filled with lead.
While the plug is covered with water the temperature
of the lead is kept below its melting point, but if the plug
is uncovered due to a low water level in the boiler, the
lead will melt and steam and water will then escape into
the firebox and dampen the fire. It also warns the
enginemen of the absence of water over the firebox crown.
A brick arch is fitted in the firebox, its purpose being
to lengthen the path of the hot gases on their way to the
smokebox thereby providing more time in the firebox
for the hot gases to mix with the oxygen from the air and
promote proper combustion. The fire bricks become
intensely hot and maintain a more even temperature in
the firebox and prevent the gases being cooled below
ignition temperature.
The brick arch also protects the tubes from the cold
air that is drawn into the firebox when the fire door is
open. It also assists in preventing particles of unburnt
fuel being drawn into the tubes. On the larger boilers
the brick arch is sometimes supported on arch tubes.
These are water tubes running between the inner throat
plate and the inner back plate of the firebox. In addition
to supporting the brick arch they provide additional
heating surface and assist in the circulation of the water.
On some of the latest boilers thermic syphons are also
provided in the firebox. The front end is connected to
the inner firebox throat plate and the top end is connected
to the crown of the inner firebox. The syphons help td
support the brick arch and also ensure a much bettef
circulation of the water around the firebox. In the


event of low water they circulate water on top of the
firebox crown and minimise the risk of the crown collaps-
ing.
A baffle plate is fitted in the fire door which directs the
cold air below the brick arch and prevents it coming in
direct contact with the tube plate.
The bottom of the firebox is formed by the fire grate.
The grate consists of cast iron bars perforated with holes
or slots to allow the required amount of air to circulate
through the burning coal.
All flat surfaces of the boiler plates require stays to
prevent bulging due to the steam pressure. The lower
parts of the inner and outer firebox plates are held
together and supported by both rigid and flexible stays
through the sides and ends of the firebox. The flexible
stays are used along the upper parts of the firebox. The
firebox crown is supported by crown stays and two rows
of crown stay bolts which are situated in the rows nearest
the tube plate.
The upper flat surfaces of the smokebox tube plate
and of the back plate are supported by diagonal stays
which are pinned to brackets riveted to the barrel at the
inner end. The flat sides of the outer firebox casing
above the firebox crown are tied together and supported
by cross stays.
A smokebox is fitted at the front end of the boiler barrel
into which are fitted the superheater header or steam
collector, steam pipes leading to the steam chests, blast
pipe, blower and spark arrester. The chimney is fitted
to the top of the smokebox and extends downwards into
the smokebox. Safety valves of which there are two
types, namely. Coale and Ramsbottom, are fitted on top
of the firebox and are for the purpose of relieving the
boiler when steam pressure is raised beyond the_;working
pressure of the boiler.
An ashpan is provided below the fire grate to collect
the ashes that fall through the grate. It is fitted to the
foundation ring. A damper door is provided at the front
c- along the sides of the ashpan. These damper doors


STEAMPIPE FROM / CHIMNEY \ SUPERHEATER
HEADER j E XT E|N SI 0 E M^^8j|
CARRIER FOR / / SPARK \ \ L FLUE TUBES
SPARK ARRESTER / / ARRESTER \
GRIDS / / CAGE \ l BOILER TUBES
STEAM PIPE J
STEAMPIPE TO
AIR COMPRESSOR
HEADER
STEAM PIPEJ |_EXHAUST PIPE FROM BLAST PIPE
TO BLOWER AIR COMPRESSOR TO
BLAST PIPE
SMOKEBOX WITHOUT DEFLECTOR
PLATE AND GRIDS


are operated by the fireman and are used to control the
flow of air to the fire on the grate. Sliding or swing doors
are provided at the bottom of the ashpan to enable the
ashes to be discharged.
The inner firebox plates, arch tubes, syphons, boiler
tubes and flue tubes constitute what is known as the
heating surfaces. In addition to the heating surfaces
mentioned, additional heating surface is provided by the
superheater elements which superheat the steam during
its passage from the boiler to the cylinders.
The firebox heating surface is only about 8 to 10 per
cent, of that of the boiler tubes and the flue tubes, but due
to the higher temperature of the firebox, generates about
40 per cent, of the steam.
Washout Plugs are provided in the firebox side and
back plates, in the front and back bottom corners of the
firebox and at the top and bottom of the boiler barrel as
well as in the front tube plate at the smokebox end.
These plugs are removed for washing out purposes and
are so located to allow the flow of water to be directed by
nozzles across and along water spaces to dislodge and wash
out sediment and sludge from the boiler. These plug
holes permit of internal examination being made of
water spaces, stays and plates, by means of torches and
mirrors.
A Blow-off cock is provided at the bottom front
centre of the throat plate immediately above the founda-
tion ring and clockwise operation of the cock spindle hand
wheel above the right hand footplate makes it possible for
the boiler to be blown down under steam in order to
reduce the amount of concentration of impurities in the
boiler water. The blow-off cock also serves to allow the
water in the boiler to be reduced or emptied out when the
boiler is not under steam.
Improvements being effected to locomotives include the
provision of cab operated blow-off cocks with discharge
piped to muffler boxes which separates the water from
the steam and reduces the noise and hazards of blowing
down operations. These cocks are operated from the


cab by handles and are fitted with stainless st;el strainers
to eliminate the possibility of foreign bodies preventing
the cocks from closing.
THE LOCOMOTIVE CAB.
The diagram of the cab is that of a modern “N” class
locomotive with names and positions of all fittings and
mountings associated with the back of the boiler. The
brake valve and other component parts of the air brake
are fully described in the Westinghouse Brake Book
of Instructions. The operation of the various devices
in the cab is described in the following pages.
SAVE THE
COAL
The volume of air required varies with the vola-
tile nature of the coal supplied. To fire a loco-
motive efficiently and economically, the required
volume of air must be admitted through the fire-
grate and the firehole door.
Maitland Coal contains a high percentage of
volatile hydrocarbons, it burns freely and if not
correctly fired, can entail considerable loss. To
obtain the best results admit a plentiful supply
of air through the firehole door to assist in
burning the gas which might otherwise be lost.
Correct firing will result in less manual
labour and reduce fuel consumption.
{See Figure 3at back of book) 13


INJECTORS.
Injectors are for the purpose of supplying the boiler
with water when under steam. There are two types in
use, namely, the lifting and non-lifting injectors.
DELIVERY
'CONE
CLACK
VALVE
STOP VALVE
FLOATING
CONE
STEAM VALVE
COMBINING
CONE
STEAM CONE
OVERFLOW
LIFTING INJECTOR
Fig. 4
SAVE
THE COAL
Correct boiler water level is inseparable from
good firing practice. Adjust the injector to supply
the minimum quantity of water required to main-
tain the correct water level whilst the engine is
steaming.
The essential features in the economical handling
of coal are :
(1) High firebox temperature.
(2) Regular supply of feed water when steaming.


THE LIFTING INJECTOR :
The injector shown on diagram Fig. 4, is the lifting
type. This type consists of a bronze casing containing
four cones, namely, steam, combining, floating and
delivery cones, situated under a large cap, and a clack
valve located under a small cap which prevents the escape
of water from the boiler when the injector is not working.
A stop valve is provided for closing the delivery passage
to the boiler so that repairs can be effected to the clack
valve under steam; also a steam valve controlled by a
hand wheel for admitting steam, a water cock for regul-
ating the flow of water into the injector, and an overflow
cock for use as a warming cock if required.
When steam is admitted to the injector it passes at
a high velocity through the steam cone, forces the air
from the water chamber and creates a partial vacuum in.
the chamber and suction pipe. Atmospheric pressure
approximately 15 lbs. to the square inch, exerts pressure
on the surface of the water in the tank and forces the
water into the water chamber and the steam from the
steam cone then coming in contact with the water is
condensed. It, however, imparts its velocity to the water
and forces it through the combining cone, the waste water
escaping through the overflow. By admitting more
steam and adjusting the water cock the velocity is
increased and the water is forced through the delivery
cone with sufficient energy to raise the clack valve against
the boiler pressure and pass through the delivery pipe
into the boiler. The steam will carry forward about 12
times its own weight of water at a velocity of about 20
miles per hour.
NON-LIFTING INJECTOR (Fig. 5):
This type of injector differs from the lifting injector
only in general construction. With the exception that
it is not dependent on a partial vacuum for the supply of
water, its operation is similar in all respects. It is situated
under the floor of the cab and being below the bottom of
the tender tank the water flows to the injector by gravity.


NON-LIFTINC INJECTOR
Ilf WATER VALVE
DELIVERY /i
|
CHECK VALVE Z!
o
*
To operate the non-lifting injector, first turn on the
steam valve at the turret, open the water valve, see that
water is flowing out of the overflow under the footstep,
gradually open the steam starting valve in the cab until
it is wide open. If the injector is working properly
there should be no water wasting at the overflow. The
injector can be regulated by opening or closing the feed
water valve in the cab.
The delivery pipe passes along the side of the boiler to a
point on top of the boiler between the dome and smoke-
box where it is connected to the clack valve and internal
delivery pipe. On top of the boiler there is a stop valve
which closes the internal delivery pipe so that repairs to
the clack valve can be effected whilst the boiler is under
steam.
Fig. 5


Ash Pan Sprinklers :
On the right-hand injector of either type there is an
ashpan sprinkler which consists of a plug cock in the
injector overflow pipe connected to perforated pipes
along the sides of the ashpan.
The sprinkler is operated by causing water to flow
from the tender through the injector overflow pipe and
then operating the plug cock so as to divert the water
from the overflow through the perforated pipes into the
ashpan.
The sprinkler must be used every 15 miles when
running on goods trains and every 30 miles on passenger
trains and at all times when cleaning fires or operating
shaker grates.
INJECTOR FAILURES.
Although as a general rule little trouble is experienced
with modern injectors, they are, like any other device,
subject to failure. The cause of failure, however, is
usually confined to such accessories as the strainers,
suction pipe, flexible hose between engine and tender or,
in the case of the non-lifting injector, the boiler check
valve on the delivery pipe.
Injectors may either fail to prime or lift the water, or
fail to deliver the water. The most common causes
of the injector failing to prime and their remedies are :
(1) Suction pipe or strainer choked.
This may be due to weeds and leaves in the water chok-
ing the strainer, the lining of the flexible hose collapsing,
or rubbish entering the tank fouling the suction pipe,
preventing the free flow of water towards the injector.
Temporary relief may be obtained by closing the warm-
ing cock and opening the steam valve when the steam
may blow the obstruction back into the tender. If this
fails to produce the desired result, remove and clean the
strainer. If on removal the strainer is found to be clean,
disconnect the flexible hose and search for the obstruction.


(2) Suction pipe or union joints leaking.
Leaks of this nature allow air to enter the injector
and prevent the formation of the partial vacuum necessary
for the raising of the water. In such cases the injector
will not prime.
Tighten up the union nut on the suction pipe to exclude
the entry of air. If the trouble is caused through a
cracked suction pipe, the trouble can be temporarily
overcome by binding over the cracked section of the pipe.
(3) The injector being overheated.
This may be caused through the injector clack valve
blowing back or a leaking steam valve causing the water
in the injector and suction pipe to become overheated.
The vapour from the overheated water tends to destroy
the vacuum and prevents the injector priming.
Closing the overflow cock and opening the steam
valve will usually blow the overheated water back into
the tender. The trouble may also be overcome by
pouring cold water over the injector. Should either of
these fail, when opportunity offers, close the tender water
cock to the injector, slacken back the injector strainer
and drain the suction pipe, tighten up the strainer nuts
and open the tender cock ; cold water will then flow into
the suction pipe and the injector will operate.
(4) Lid of tender tank too tight.
If the lid of the tender tank is too tightly fitted, air
will be prevented from entering. As the pressure of the
atmosphere is necessary to force the water through the
suction pipe to the injector to fill the vacuum, its exclusion
will prevent the operation of the injector. In this case
relief can only be obtained by opening the lid of the
tank. Book for attention at first opportunity
Injector failing to deliver water.
When the injector lifts the water but fails to force
it into the boiler, any of the foregoing defects may be the
cause due to the volume of water being insufficient to
condense the steam. In addition, the following will
also cause the injector to fail in delivery :


(a) Too much water being supplied.
In such a case the difficulty will be overcome by
adjusting the water cock on the lifting injector, or water
valve on the non-lifting injector.
(, b ) Worn, broken or obstructed cones.
Any of the above defects in the cones will cause the
injector to fail in delivery. Repairs can only be effected
by obtaining the services of a Fitter.
(c) Injector Clack Valve Blowing back.
A clack valve blowing back usually indicates the
presence of boiler scale or dirt around the valve or valve
seat. To remedy, lightly tap the cap of the valve
chamber with the hammer, taking care not to disfigure
or injure the injector. If this fails, close the stop valve,
remove the cap, and take out and clean and grease the
clack valve, replace the valve and cap and open the stop
valve. If this does not relieve the trouble put in a
repair card on completion of the trip.
SAVE THE COAL
Steam discharged through the safety valve
represents coal wastage. The discharge of
steam in this manner for one minute entails
a loss equivalent to 12 lbs. of coal which is
sufficient to haul one ton a distance of 50
miles .... Eliminate this wastage by your
personal thought and effort.
As water flows by gravity to the non-lifting injector
it is not affected to the same extent by air and steam leak-
age as the lifting type, but as these defects affect the flow
of water towards the injector in proportion to their
magnitude, they will correspondingly affect the delivery
to the boiler.


THE BLOWER.
The blower valve is situated about the centre of the
back plate of the boiler. When opened it allows steam to
pass from the dome to the blower ring on the blast pipe
cap where it is discharged through holes around the cap
into the chimney. As the jets of steam pass up the
chimney they draw the smokebox gases with them
through the chimney and this creates a partial vacuum
in the smokebox. By this means a draft is induced and
air is forced through the damper, grate, firebed and
boiler towards the smokebox.
The blower should be operated to clear the black smoke
when the locomotive is standing or drifting ; when clean-
the fire, only sufficient steam should be used to carry the
light dust away from the cab.
Use of the blower when the locomotive is steaming is
only a waste of steam which reacts on the consumption
of coal and water. When a locomotive is steaming the
exhaust steam creates the necessary partial vacuum in
the smokebox without assistance from the blower.
WATER GAUGE GLASSES.
There are two water gauges attached to the back plate
of the boiler for registering the level of water in the boiler;
one on the right-hand and the other on the left-hand side.
Steam is admitted to the top of the glass through a
wheel valve known as the steam valve, and water is
admitted to the bottom of the glass through a double-
faced valve known as the water valve. When the water
valve is fully open from the boiler to the glass, it is closed
to the blow-through passage by means of the double seat
of the valve and, when the blow-through is fully open,
the passage to the boiler is closed. On high capacity
engines the right-hand glass is attached to a water column,
the object of which is to provide a stable body of water
free from the influence of disturbances due to steam
bubbles or surging from the arch tubes or thermic
syphonsi


Water gauges should be tested at all times when
taking over an engine and also at frequent intervals
on the road. When testing the gauges, the water
column should also be blown through. When reading
water levels, if the glasses show different levels the
one showing the lower level should be accepted as the
true level.
STEAM PRESSURE GAUGES.
Steam pressure gauges are provided for registering
the steam pressure in the boiler. The gauge consists of a
round brass case with a calibrated dial and pointer show-
ing the boiler pressure in lbs. per square inch. The
pointer is operated by a curved brass tube attached to
the pointer by means of a toothed rack and gear wheel.
A coiled pipe is used to connect the steam valve to the
gauge. This pipe is filled with water so that steam will
not come in direct contact with the curved tube as the
action of the steam would destroy the tube.
When the boiler pressure is exerted on the water in
the coiled pipe it forces it into the brass tube which then
tends to straighten out in a similar manner to a coiled
garden hose when the water is turned on. This action
causes the toothed rack to move and operate the pointer
according to the pressure exerted.
FIREHOLE DOOR.
There are two types of firehole door in use, namely,
the hand operated drop door and the air operated butter-
fly door. The hand operated door requires no descrip-
tion beyond the fact that a rack is provided to hold the
door open to admit sufficient air to the surface of the
fire to ensure the burning of the light volatile gases and
prevent them passing unburnt to the atmosphere. The
pneumatic or butterfly door is operated by means of a
foot treadle, which, when depressed, operates an air valve
which opens and allows air at main reservoir pressure to
pass to the operating cylinder and force the piston out-
wards. The piston operating on a link causes the door,
which is in two sections, to open sideways. The
advantage of this type of door is that it shuts between


shovelfuls of coal, thus excluding cold air from the
firebox. The door can also be operated by means of the
hand lever provided. A hinged stop is provided at the
bottom of the door frame and when in use it keeps the
doors slightly open so as to provide the additional air
necessary to burn the more volatile parts of the coal.
THE REVERSING GEAR.
The reversing gear is situated on the left-hand side
of the cab. The gear is operated by a hand wheel and
screw and is connected to the reversing links by means
of a reversing rod connecting the block on the screw to
the reversing shaft. When the block is fully forward,
the engine is in full gear for forward motion, and when
the block is fully back, the engine is in full gear for
backward motion.
A tabulated brass plate, named the sector plate, is
fitted along the reversing pedestal, the figures on it show
the inches of piston stroke during which steam is admitted
through the valves into the cylinders.
CYLINDER AND STEAM CHEST RELEASE
COCKS.
There are two methods of operating the cylinder
release cocks, namely, hand operated and air operated.
With the hand operated type the operating lever is
situated on the right-hand side of the engine. The
operation of the lever in the cab is transmitted through
rods to the release cocks under the cylinder which can be
opened or closed as required. These release cocks
are fitted with a small spring under the valve which
lifts the valve off its seat when the engine is standing
and prevents water from accumulating in the cylinders
and steam chests.
With the air operated type, the operating valve is
situated on the left hand side of the cab. To close the
cocks, air is admitted to a small cylinder near the release
cocks. The air pressure acts against a spring to close the
cocks. When the air is released, the spring opens the
release cocks.


Release cocks should always be opened for a short
period after an engine is started to ensure that
water condensed from the steam by the cold
cylinder walls is drained from the cylinders. If
this water is trapped in the cylinder by closed release
cocks, cylinder covers may be broken or connecting rods
bent. Release cocks must be left open when the loco-
motive is stabled or when standing on a train.
SANDERS.
There are two types of sanders in use, namely, hand
operated and air operated. The lever for operating
either type is situated on the left-hand side of the engine.
With the hand operated type, the movement of the
lever in the cab is transmitted through rods to the sand
valve, when the valve is open sand is free to fall by
gravity through the sand pipe on to the rail.
When the driver opens the air sander valve, main
reservoir air flows into a sand trap at the bottom of each
sand box where one jet of air agitates the sand and
another blows it through the pipe on to the rail.
SAVE THE COAL
T JNBURNT or partly burnt coal at the
ashpits is a clear indication that the fire
has not been properly prepared for cleaning.
Before fires are cleaned the fire should
be raked over with the pricker and the back
corners banked with fresh coal in readiness
for spreading after the fire is cleaned.
Enginemen should assist in preventing
this waste.
If the engine is slipping badly the regulator must
be shut before sand is applied to the rails, otherwise
severe stresses will be set up when the wheels begin to
grip with consequent risk of damage to the motion gear,
wheels and axles.


REGULATOR HANDLE.
The handle for operating the regulator valve in the
dome is situated about the centre of the back plate of the
boiler. The spindle passes through a gunmetal stuffing
box and gland and is maintained steam and water-tight by
means of special packing. The stuffing box is provided
with stops at the fully-open and fully-closed positions to
prevent the regulator being strained or damaged.
In locomotives fitted with a balanced regulator valve
a pawl is attached to the regulator handle and a rack to
the stuffing box so that the regulator valve can be securely
held in any position.
DAMPER DOOR OPERATING LEVERS.
On locomotives fitted with front dampers the operating
lever is on the fireman’s side. On locomotives fitted with
side dampers an operating lever is provided on each side
in which case either the right or left damper can be
operated independently as required.
SHAKER GRATE OPERATING LEVERS.
On locomotives fitted with shaker fire-grates the levers
for operating the shakers and dump grate are situated in
the cab on either side near the floor line.
The operation of the levers rocks the fire-grates back-
wards and forwards. This movement breaks the clinker
and causes the ashes to fall into the ashpan, thus enabling
the firebed to be maintained at a regular thickness and
allowing a free passage of air through the fire grates.
COAL SPRINKLER.
A coal sprinkler valve is provided near the back of
the cab on the right-hand side, and has a length of half-
inch rubber hose attached. The action is similar to that
of a small injector. When steam is turned on, water is
taken from the tender tank and delivered through the
hose. This warm water may be used for damping the
coal or washing down the cab floor.


SPEED RECORDER.
The speed recorder is attached to the left-hand side
of the cab. Instructions regarding the driver’s duties in
connection with the speed recorder are set out in the
Rolling Stock Book of Instructions.
FRICTION AND LUBRICATION.
Friction may be defined as the resistance to movement
of two bodies in contact, offered by one to the other to
change in relative position.
This resistance is offered along the surfaces in contact
and is directly opposed to the force along these surfaces
producing or tending to produce the relative motion.
When this force is not great enough to overcome the
friction, and as a result no motion takes place, it is
referred to as static friction or friction of rest and is some-
times referred to as adhesion, but when the force is
greater than the resistance of friction and one of the
bodies slides over the other, it is called sliding friction
or friction of motion. Static friction is normally higher
than sliding friction ; for example, if the wheels pick up
during a brake application the retardation is not as great
as when the wheels continue to revolve.
Generally speaking the smoother the surfaces are, the
less the friction will be, likewise the rougher the surfaces
in contact, the greater the friction will be. A lubricant
such as oil or grease, tends to produce the effect of a
smoother surface. Two surfaces of oil in contact would
have very little friction, and the use of oil between two
solid surfaces results in partially making each a surface
of oil. It can, therefore, be said that the use of a lubric-
ant reduces friction.
The amount of friction between two bodies in contact
depends on the pressure of the one on the other, on the
nature of the materials in contact and on the quality of
the oil or other lubricant which is interposed between
them.


The greater the force pressing the surfaces together,
the greater the force necessary to move one relative to
the other, which is to say, the friction will be greater.
The tendency when the pressure becomes excessive is to
force out the lubricant which is between the two surfaces
and ordinary experience proves that the greater the force
per square inch on the bodies in contact, the greater the
difficulty in keeping them lubricated. Thus it will be
seen that it is easier to keep the journals of a vehicle well
lubricated when it is empty than when it is loaded.
Likewise the slide bars and crossheads of a locomotive
are more liable to be cut when pulling a heavy load.
The amount of friction is very much influenced by the
nature of material used for the bearing surface and the
material used as a lubricant.
Some metals, such as brass and white metal, when
rubbing against steel are much less liable to abrasion and
retain lubrication better on their surfaces than other
metals, and are, therefore, much used for journal and
other bearings.
With the surfaces in the same condition, the friction is
practically independent of the velocity of motion of the
surfaces against each other, but perfect lubrication be-
comes more difficult as the velocity increases. For this
reason an increase of velocity will often indirectly increase
the amount of friction. Thus taking a previous illustra-
tion it is more difficult to keep the journals of a vehicle
or locomotive well lubricated when running fast than it is
when running slow and the same theory is true with the
slide bars.
Different lubricants are needed for different purposes.
No matter what kind of lubricant is used the pressure
put upon it must be taken into consideration. Its
viscosity or body must be able to stand whatever pressure
is to be put upon it if it is to maintain a film between the
parts strong enough to prevent them from actually comin i
in contact with each other. Should the parts come in
contact while in motion, the effect of the lubricating
medium for reducing frictional resistance would be lost.


The qualities of a good lubricant are :
1. The largest possible amount of fluidity consistent
with sufficient viscosity or body to keep the surfaces
free from contact with each other under the pre-
scribed pressure.
2. Freedom from dirt or corrosive impurities
3. A high flash point.
In order to provide for lubrication that will accomplish
the desired results, the method of applying the lubricant
must be given attention. Just as much depends on the
method of application as on the lubricant. A suitable
lubricant improperly applied may produce results
similar to an unsuitable lubricant.
Various methods are in use for applying lubricants in
locomotive practice such as force, splash and capillary
action feeds for the oils. The valves and pistons are
lubricated through the medium of mechanical and
hydrostatic lubricators described later.
Locomotive boosters and stokers are lubricated by the
splash system while the slide bars, trunnions and axle
boxes are lubricated by capillary action.
In the Victorian Railways the slide bars, link trunnions,
spindle guides, etc,, are lubricated by tail trimmings.
They are so simple that little need be said about their
construction beyond mentioning that two or three strands
of wool are sufficient for the slide bars and one strand is
sufficient for the link trunnions. Tail trimmings should
be removed when the locomotive is stationary to prevent
waste of oil.
Axle box journals are lubricated through the medium
of wool pads which are attended to by the Shed staff.
Should, however, a driver be called upon to replenish
the oil at any time, care should be exercised in seeing
that the oil is not poured in faster than it can be absorbed
by the pads, otherwise it will run out and be wasted.
Locomotive and tender boxes are usually oiled on a
mileage basis.


The moving parts such as the crank pins, eccentrics
and crossheads are oiled by means of pin feeds. The
action of the pin feed is simple and positive ; as the parts
move, the pin moves up and down in the syphon pipe.
On its upward movement the pin becomes covered with
oil and on the downward movement this oil is delivered
to the bearing surface. Pin feeds require little attention
beyond inspection to see that they are not broken in the
syphon pipe.
Trimmings should be removed before leaving the
locomotive. If the trimmings are allowed to remain in
the syphon pipes, they will continue to feed until the oil
cup is empty and oil is wasted. Apart from this, the
shed floor becomes slippery and may cause accidents to
the staff.
LUBRICATORS.
The ability of the modern locomotive to do the work
for which it is intended, its economy in fuel and its
maintenance as well as its hauling power, are dependent
to a large extent upon proper lubrication of its valves and
pistons. There are two types of lubricators for lubricat-
ing the valves and pistons, namely, the hydrostatic type
positioned in the locomotive cab under direct control by
the driver and the mechanical type positioned on the side
footplate in view of the driver.
The Hydrostatic Lubricator.
The type of hydrostatic lubricator (Figs. 6, 8 and 9)
used on the Victorian Railways is known as the Detroit
Bullseye Lubricator.
The operating principle of the lubricator is a column
of water exerting a pressure upon the oil in the reservoir
in such a manner as to force the oil past the regulating
valves and thence to the point of discharge.
Steam from the boiler at full pressure enters the
lubricator and is condensed in the condensing chamber.
When the water valve is opened the water flows through a
passage past the ball check valve and into the oil chamber,
and fills the space not occupied by the oil. Because of


its lower specific gravity, the oil floats on the water. The
weight of the column of water exerted under the oil in the
reservoir, forces the oil in the manner indicated by the
arrows in diagram Fig. 8, down the oil passages and
past the regulating valves drop by drop into the sight feed
chamber. The latter is kept filled with water through
the condensation of steam from the equalising passages.
The drops of oil float to the top of the water in the sight
feed chamber, and are carried by the circulation of steam
from the equalising passages into the oil delivering pipe
and thence to the point of discharge.
Detroit Bullseye Locomotive Lubricators
A—Oil Reservoir
B—Steam Valve
C —Oil Control Valve
D—Water Feed Valve
E—Feed Regelating Valves
to Cylinders
F—Condenser
G—Drain Valve
1, -Feed Regulating Valve
to Air Pump
O—Filler Ping
R—Coupling to Air Pump
S —Steam Connection
T—Sight Feed Drain -Sterns
\V—Coupling to Right and
Left Hand Cylinders
Fig. 6
A particular point to be noted is that the boiler pressure
has no effect on the operation of the lubricator because by


/ —j Ho/e
L f —
virtue of the equalising passages there is the same
pressure at both ends of the lubricator.
Steam is admitted through a pipe connection from
the boiler to the condenser where it is condensed. A
constant level of water is thus maintained, the rate of
condensation being more than sufficient to replace the
water that enters the oil reservoir to displace the oil fed
by the lubricator to the oil discharge pipes. The water,
which is controlled by the water valve, is carried to the
lowest point in the oil reservoir, thus floating the oil
which is then forced down the oil passages through the
oil control valve, along the passages leading to the
regulating feed valves, where the rate of feed is con-
trolled.
When the regulating feed valve is opened, the oil is
forced past a small ball valve through the feed nozzles,
and floats to the top of the water in the sight feed chamber
where it is picked up by the steam coming through the
equalising passages and carried to the oil pipes, and
thence through the choke valve Fig, 7, to the point of
delivery.
/& diameter.
LUBRICATOR
CHOKE VALVE
Fig. 7
Illustrations Fig. 6, 8 & 9 show a three-feed lubricator,
but the principle is the same in all sizes. An air space is
provided between the filler plug and the top of the oil
reservoir to allow for the expansion of oil when heated.
The sight feed chamber and oil passages are located
within the reservoir. This construction tends to main-
tain the oil at an even temperature and by preventing
it from chilling, results in a minimum fluctuation in the


-'.CONDENSER
PASSAGE FOR
WATER FROM ----
CONDENSER TO ‘ ,-EQUALISl
| OIL CHAMBER -^ WAT - ER O
a:f" f /TOP OF S
;V- . |0 FEED CHA
11 h®
’ASSAGE FOR OIL * |l|~/
: ROM RESERVOIR . J ; ; ; }/
■0 FEED REGULATING U ~
r VALVE — -T}01 /
FEED REGULATING
VALVE M )
rate of feed, and once the feed regulating valves have been
adjusted, the use of the oil control valve makes the
stopping and starting of the lubricator an instantaneous
operation and ensures the correct amount of lubrication.
The driver knows that as soon as the lubricator has
reached its proper temperature, the oil will feed at the
rate required.
STEAM FROM
BOILER
STEAM VALVE
EQUALISING PASSAGE
HEAD OF WATER
CAUSING OIL TO
FLOW THROUGH
TOP OF SIGHT
FEED CHAMBER
OIL CHAMBER
OIL AND
STEAM TO
VALVES
AND PISTONS
WATER
PASSAGE FOR OIL
FROM RESERVOIR /
TO FEED REGULATING
Fig. 8


*-»n
.^X^cC
econdensEr=
= WATER —
B fH E.XPA
CHAl
rrrr) aroi crl 1 !]
x-< J
The lubricator is fitted with a brass ball check valve
at the bottom of the water passage to prevent syphoning
or equalisation of pressure should the driver fail to close
the water valve before closing the steam valve to the
condensing chamber. It should be considered as a safe-
guard only and does not relieve the driver of the re-
sponsibility of closing the water valve before the steam
valve.
EXPANS/ON
CHAMBER.
PLUG.


The improved sight feed glasses are designed to over-
come the possibility of breakage and consequent danger
to the driver. They are so designed that the pressure
from within keeps the glass hard up on the packing
gasket and its follower thus preventing leakage.
Oil heated to the temperature of steam at 200 lbs
pressure will expand about one fifth in volume and
while in common practice the oil in the reservoir is not
heated to this degree, nevertheless when the lubricator
is not in operation, considerable expansion does take
place and provision for this is made by extending the
reservoir above the level of the filler plug.
The hydrostatic column which operates the lubricator
is measured from the top of the equalising tubes to the
discharge to the oil pipes.
The large capacity of the condenser is most important
in that it furnishes an abundant reserve supply of con-
densation, so that even a large amount of water can be
withdrawn from the condenser without materially
affecting the height of the hydrostatic column.
Steam chest chokes are installed near the point where
oil is delivered into the valve chambers or cylinders in
order that the lubricator may feed against a constant
boiler pressure in the oil pipes instead of a pressure
fluctuating with that in the steam chest.
The opening in the choke valve (Fig. 7) is 1/16 inch,
the size necessary to maintain the balance in the lubric-
ator.
Filling the Lubricator.
To fill the lubricator, close the oil control valve and
feed regulating valves, close the water valve and steam
valve, open the drain cock and loosen the filler plug and
drain the water into the shovel or other receptacle.
When the lubricator is drained of water, close the drain
cock and take out the filler plug and fill the oil chamber,
taking care not to spill oil about the cab. When full,
replace the filler plug, and tighten it lightly but firmly.


If a spanner is used, care should be taken not to twist the
plug. When filling the lubricator, a piece of waste
should be placed at the filler hole to absorb any overflow.
When filling a lubricator, if there is insufficient oil to fill
it, add sufficient water so that the reservoir will be full
before admitting steam.
Error of mixing oils.
The practice of mixing engine bearing oil with the
cylinder lubricating oil is altogether wrong. Owing to
the difference in their specific gravity, these oils, when at
rest will separate, and each in turn will pass through the
feed nozzles as bearing oil or cylinder oil.
To start the Lubricator.
Always start the lubricator about 15 minutes before
leaving the shed. Be sure the boiler steam valve is open
wide, then open wide the steam valve on the lubricator
and keep it open. Allow sufficient time for the con-
denser and sight feed chambers to fill with water. Then
open the water valve, three full turns will give full port
opening, move the control valve to the “ all open ”
position, then open the regulating feed valves, and adjust
to the maximum feed required for the hardest level track
service. The drops can be decreased for lighter service
by throttling with the oil control valve.
When running in bad water districts, the water may
become impregnated with saline matter. This is carried
over into the sight feed chamber, and as the percentage
increases, it in turn increases the buoyancy of the water,
thereby exerting a greater influence on the drop of oil
forming on the end of the feed nozzle, with the result
that the drop becomes smaller and the feed faster. To
correct this, close the regulating valves and open the sight
feed drain plugs and blow the sight feed chamber out
thoroughly. Then close the drain plugs and allow
reasonable time for the sight feed chambers to refill
before again opening the feed regulating valves.


Erratic action in the rate of feed may be due to lack of
condensation owing to the steam valves not being wide
open. To correct, keep the steam valves wide open.
It may also be due to sediment collecting in the oil
passages or around the feed nozzles.
If when in operation the feed valves act sluggishly or
do not respond properly, close all feed valves, then the
water valve, and lastly the steam valve. Open steam
valve slightly and then open one feed valve. Air and
water will probably appear followed by a stream of oil,
thus removing any obstruction which may be in the
nozzle. Close the feed valve and repeat this operation
for each feed, then restart the lubricator.
Obstructed feed nozzles.
When feed nozzles are obstructed, try the following :
Open and close quickly the vent of the sight feed chamber
of the obstructed nozzle. If the oil does not flow, open
the vent wide so that all water will be exhausted. The
escaping steam lessens the pressure within the one sight
feed chamber which is equivalent to adding additional
force to the hydrostatic pressure. If this fails, try
closing the regulating valves of those feeds which are
working and also the water valve, then gradually throttle
the steam valve to a point where the boiler pressure,
confined within the oil reservoir, becomes sufficient to
force the obstruction from the nozzle tips. Should both
these methods fail, try opening and closing the feed
valves a number of times with the object of crushing out
the obstruction.
If these methods fail the oil control valve should be
closed, the centrepiece of the affected feed removed and
a piece of fine wire used to raise the ball check valve,
which will allow steam pressure to force the obstruction
downward and out to the atmosphere.
To keep the lubricator clean, it is necessary that
dirt and foreign matter be cleaned out of the
lubricator at regular intervals. When all the oil


has been fed from a lubricator, it is in an ideal condition
for cleaning it. The oil reservoir and all passages
should be thoroughly blown out.
Syphoning.
Lubricator failures are frequently but erroneously
attributed to syphoning. If a lubricator is maintained
and operated in accordance with instructions, syphoning
cannot occur.
ENGINEMEN’S KITS
THE tools supplied in the enginemen’s kits
should be maintained fully complete.
The kit system is to the driver’s advantage and
therefore every driver should take a
personal interest in the kits at all
times and ensure that not one
item of the kit is mis-
laid or lost.


OIL CONTROL VALVE.
Operating the Oil Control Valve.
The Oil Control Valve is a rotary plug placed in the oil
passage between the reservoir and the feed regulating
valves, designed for the driver’s convenience for in-
stantly starting, throttling or shutting off the feeds of the
lubricator without disturbing the permanent adjustment.
This valve has three positions, indicated on the dial.
“ All open ” —ln this position the passage
from the oil reservoir to all feeds is open and
the oil will pass through the sight feed nozzles
at the rate to which the regulating valves
have been adjusted.
By moving the lever handle away
from the “ All Open ” or “ Pump ”
position, the rate of feed to the respective
valves can be throttled. As the valve
is purposely made to fit tightly, it may
be necessary to tap or jar the valve
handle lightly to secure exactly the right
adjustment.
If the valve turns hard, pull and turn
at the same time. If oil continues to
feed with the lever handle on the
“Closed” or “Pump” positions,
push in and turn at the same time.
“Pump” (Air Compressor) —With
the lever handle in the “Pump”
position, only the feed to the air pump
is left open.
Closed ”■—When the lever handle is
moved to the “ Closed” position, the oil
supply to all feeds is cut off.
To Shut Down Lubricator —For short
stops, close Oil Control Valve “ C” Fig. 6
Fi g- 10 only
For terminal stops, close Oil Control Valve first,
then water valve, and lastly the steam valve.


fk
CONTROL VALVE.
POSITIONS iy —J
BALL VALVE
/j J T\ SECTION -Z-Z
J
ALL OPEN ,Lc>,—\
"”7~ fE\
GLAND I 1 fi
THROTTLED SECTION-Y:Y
Fig. 11
In the event of an oil control valve being stiff to operate,
the control plug may be eased by :
(a) Slackening the gland nut on the spindle.
(6) Inserting a spanner or short lever between the
gland nut and the handle and exerting a gentle


pressure to force the plug outwards off its seat
against the resistance of the spring on the spindle
in the lubricator.
This operation will allow oil to pass around the plug
valve and make it easy to operate.
If the control valve is seized in the closed position
and cannot be operated by hand no undue force should
be used by leverage or striking the handle of the control
valve which will only tend to break or bend the spindle.
In such cases, insert a distance piece between the
gland nut and the control valve handle and slacken
back the nut until pressure is brought to bear against
the handle, thereby forcing the plug back off its seat.
The distance between the gland nut and the handle
varies, and if the distance is less than 3/16 of an inch no
distance piece will be required and the gland nut can be
unscrewed up to and against the handle to force the valve
off its seat.
If the distance is greater than 3/16 of an inch the jaws
of a 1/2 inch spanner may be used as a distance piece,
but every endeavour should be made to insert a distance
piece that will have a two-point contact against the handle
on opposite sides of the spindle otherwise an eccentric
load may be exerted on the spindle which may bend it.
Under no circumstances must a control valve
spindle be struck on the end as this will aggravate
the seizure.
MECHANICAL LUBRICATORS.
The lubricator equipment (Figs. 12 and 13) consists
of six reciprocating pumps which work in oil in a box
fitted to the footplate above the engine valve gear, six
terminal check valves, four atomisers, two cylinder
check valves and a lubricator steam valve.
The pumps are driven from a rotating shaft on which
is mounted a ratchet wheel and pawl. The pawl is driven
by the lubricator lever and links from the valve link
trunnion.


TERMINAL CHECK VALVES
BOTTOM OF TOP OF L.H. L.H. VALVE
L.H.CYLI NDER CYLINDER CHAMBER
1 / /
OIL PIPES FROM
LUBRICATOR TO
TERM. CHECK VALVES
/
STEAM PIPE FROM
LUBRICATOR STEAM FILLING
VALVE TO MANIFOLD PLUG
1 J
OIL LEVEL
GAUGE GLASS
/
*1
-, v ■...■,. y
MMWI
;■
Hi
iy$is|
K 9
T^r
felBM* — | N| •
< | i ' j ' BBS 8 ||L
IBS
’i* i
life i'lji' 1 1 m
aotr^HSgy
py** •■
1 \ \ \ \ 7 X <r
S!. P c^. A 7°^!! ED \ AT0MISER STEAMP1PE FROM STEAM FLUSHING LUBRICATOR DRAIN
OIL&STEAM FROM \ MAN1F0LDT0 ATOMISER MANIFOLD HANDLE LEVER VALVE
ATOMISER TO CONNECTION FOR OIL PIPE
VALVE CHAMBER TO BOTTOM OF CYLINDER MECHANICAL LUBRICATOR FOR VALVES &• PISTONS


During the suction stroke oil flows into the pump
cylinders and during the delivery stroke this oil is forced
along pipes to the terminal check valves. When the
pumps have raised the pressure of oil to 250 pounds per
square inch, the six terminal check valves open and the
STEAM
PROM
LUBRICATOR
STEAM VA LVI
TERMINAL CHECK VALVE & ATOMISER. NATHAN TYPE
oil from four of them flows into the four atomisers and
from them it is blown by steam into the two valve
chambers and the tops of the two cylinders. The oil
(See Figure 13 at back of book ) 41


from the other two terminal check valves flows through
pipes to two valves, one in the bottom of each cylinder.
These valves are opened by the pressure of oil which
then flows into the cylinder.
The object of the terminal check valve (Fig. 14) is to
prevent condensed steam flowing back into the lubricator
and filling it with water. The object of the atomiser is
to divide the oil into a fine spray and blow it on to the
walls of the valve chambers and cylinders and on to the
SAVE
'T’HE prevention of smoke and
vb v A firing practice are closely re-
| C lated. Black smoke indicates
wastage of coal or oil and is
caused by—
(1) Heavy firing.
(2) Insufficient air.
(3) Low firebox temperature.
Remember that the fire that!
produces the maximum amount
of steam burns the minimum
quantity of fuel.
valve spindles and piston rods. In addition the bottom
of the cylinder is lubricated with plain oil. The object
of the valve in the bottom of the cylinder is to prevent the
oil pipe from emptying when the engine is not moving
and to provide oil immediately it starts.
Preparation.
Open fully the lubricator steam valve on top of the
boiler. Clean the lubricator filler hole plug or lid,
and the oil kettle, and fill the lubricator to the FULL
mark with clean cylinder oil. Turn the ratchet handle
at least 10 turns and examine the oil and steam pipes
for leaks.


See that the driving levers, links, pins and split pins
are in position and in good order.
Operation.
When the lubricator is working, the ratchet handle
can be seen from the cab to be revolving. Should it
stop due to failure of the driving gear, it must be turned
by hand when the engine is stationary as often as neces-
sary to keep the engine working freely. When it is con-
sidered that the engine is not getting sufficient oil, the
driver must operate the ratchet handle by hand to
increase the amount of oil supplied, but only when the
engine is stationary. On arrival of the engine at a Depot
a suitable entry must be made on a repair card.


VALVES AND PISTONS.
(See Fig. 15)
When the regulator is open steam flows from the
dome of the boiler through the internal steam pipe to the
saturated side of the superheater header or steam col-
lector in the smokebox. From there is passes through
the superheater elements to the superheated side of the
header and then through the smokebox steam pipes to
the steam chests. A valve is placed in each steam chest
to control the flow of steam, through passages known as
ports, alternately to each end of the cylinder.
There are two types of valves in use in Victorian
locomotives, they are the “ D ” slide valve such as used
on Y and E class shunting locomotives and piston valves
as used on all road locomotives.
The “ D ” slide valve is now considered obsolete and
will eventually disappear as the old shunting engines are
scrapped.
The piston valve is a hollow spool shaped assembly
consisting of:
(a) A mild steel tube with flared ends called a distance
piece.
(, h ) Two cast steel valve heads known as junk heads
with flanged ends and central bosses held by four
webs.
(c) Two wide rings called bull rings which fit over the
cylindrical portions of the valve heads.
(d) Four cast iron valve rings.
The valve rings are separated by the bull rings and
are cut so that they may spring out and press
against the valve chamber bushes and thus ensure steam
tightness. Small lips on the edges of the rings ensure
that pieces will not escape should ring breakage occur.
All the parts mentioned are assembled on a round
steel rod known as a valve spindle. This spindle is
screwed and provided with a gunmetal nut so that the
parts may be held together. Suitable pegs and keys are
provided to prevent the valve rings and bull rings from
turning.


t
REFERENCE
m ■
1 1
1 1
If
EX.
EXHAUST CHAMBER
1 r
' V
Hi
i-i---
T*
1 * '
'f'i
Hi
I
Y 1
J i|
SC
STEAM CHAMBER
[ V
SR
STEAM PORT
STEAM CHEST FROHTp
- - d-.n
>5
STEAM CHEST BACK COVER
1*1*1
pa WITH SPINDLE GUIDE
MW
XNWW^-
>e:
/VALVE SPINDLE
COVER -f
VALVE BUSH L
DISTANCE PIECE/
— - ; XujX; s c -
" ff/
■■■ —Tf/
:f~v
I
— 1
— — -t- —; — 1
I ,
“T>( 1 1— i—fiv-i
_____
— H—-
M 1 i-lNTERMEDlATE VALVEi SPINDLE/
ftr "HjifW
in
- —
•1/
"“rzrmr
A
VALVE JUNK HEAD^
WexJ>
s.c.
STEAM CHEST DRAI
i
T
VALVE RING
t rm -
SLIDE BAR \
VALVE BUSH^
CYLINDER FRONT COVER
rw^n
■"-PISTON BULL R1N6
-PISTON 'CENTRE
[At End of Stroke)
FOR ATOMISED LUBRICATION
1 \
VAZ/wk
— nr A
' i
jZfl J
\ 11 /
1 fitm"
/
/packing cover
\Jl, CROSSHEAD /
TAIL ROD COVER
ijpi
yPISTON ROD
- -i-
t=i.+d- /
/CYLINDER BUSH
L— 1 1 .
i-i—
piston rod
TAIL ROD BUSH
J
/PISTON RING
V?
-CYLINDER BACK COVER N.
"R 1 CLASS '
r~\/i iKincn a Mn DIQTHM
RELEASE COCK
FOR OIL LUBRICATION
* L/TLIIYULH HMU riv^iw.^
VALVE (INSIDE admission)


Valves may be either inside or outside admission, that
is if live steam is admitted to the cylinders from the
chamber between the valve heads it is termed inside
admission, but if it is admitted from the chambers
outside the valve heads it is termed outside admission.
The advantage of piston valves is that the valve can be
easily moved as it is balanced by the even steam pressure
on both ends.
While some of the older engines which have been
converted from the use of saturated steam to superheated
steam use outside admission valves, all modern engines
are built with inside admission valves. The chief advant-
age is that exhaust steam only comes in contact with the
stuffing box packing of the valve spindles and being low
in pressure and temperature is less severe on the packing.
A further advantage is that the valve being hollow, ex-
haust steam can flow to both ends at the one time, thus
reducing back pressure on the piston.
With outside admission any blow from the spindle
glands is live steam which in turn represents waste and
fuel losses. As the outside admission valve admits steam
to the cylinder from the outside of the valve head, it
follows that the two valves must travel in opposite
directions to perform the same functions. The outside
admission valve must move backward to admit steam to
the front port, whilst the inside admission valve must
move forward. The cycle of valve events are, however,
not affected. In the diagram (Fig. 15) will be seen an
inside admission Pennsylvania valve.
PISTONS.
When steam is admitted alternately to each end of the
cylinder it exerts its full pressure against the piston, which
is forced backwards and forwards by the energy of the
steam. This motion is transmitted through the piston
rod and crosshead to the connecting rod and crank which
convert it to a rotary motion.
To withstand the strains and pressure to which it is
subjected, the piston head must have sufficient strength


combined with ability to prevent leakage from one side of
the cylinder to the other.
The piston of an N. class engine as shown in the
diagram (Fig. 1) is made up of a cast iron bull ring which
is pressed on and up against the shoulder on the front of
a cast steel piston centre. A circular groove 3/16 of an
inch wide is machined in the bull ring near the rear face
and into this groove is driven a mild steel retaining ring
3/16 inch wide. The retaining ring is welded in three
places to the cast steel piston centre.
In the centre of the cast steel piston is a large tapered
hole into which is fitted the steel piston rod. The
piston rod is tapered at both ends to suit the taper of the
piston and the taper of the crosshead respectively. The
piston is forced on to the tapered piston rod and secured
by a large gunmetal nut, which is prevented from slacken-
ing back by a mild steel split cotter, which is fitted through
the piston rod.
Two - grooves are turned in the face of the bull ring to
accommodate two piston rings. These rings are of cast
iron and are 3/4 inch x 5/8 inch in section. A short
piece is cut out of the ring and this enables the ring to be
compressed and sprung into the cylinder, where it presses
outwardly against the cylinder wall, thus ensuring steam
tightness.
CLEARANCE.
The space between the cylinder covers and the piston
when the piston is at the extreme end of the stroke is
known as cylinder clearance. This clearance is an im-
portant factor in regard to the consumption of steam
and the smooth running of the locomotive. Clearance,
beside being necessary to allow for any alteration in the
position of the rods due to wear, also allows room for
water due to condensation. Cylinder clearance is of
great assistance in arresting the momentum of moving
parts by allowing room for steam which is compressed
and cushions the piston in such a manner that it is
brought to a standstill and the return stroke commenced
without shock. The period of admission and exhaust is
specially provided for this purpose when setting the valve.


Excessive clearance is avoided as too much live steam
would be required to bring the pressure in the clearance
volume up to steam chest pressure at the commencement
of the stroke.
STUFFING BOXES.
To prevent leakage of steam from the steam chests
and cylinders as the valve spindles and piston rods pass
in and out, stuffing boxes are provided into which
packing is inserted. On engines fitted with Walschaert’s
gear, the valve spindle stuffing boxes are usually packed
with a fibrous packing held in position by a gunmetal
gland. Similarly the stuffing boxes of the piston rods
of saturated locomotives are packed with square section
asbestos base packing, which is also held in position by a
gunmetal gland secured by 3/4 inch studs and nuts.
The piston rod stuffing boxes of superheater engines
are maintained steam tight by metallic packing known as
the King type. The general assembly is shown in the
diagram (Fig. 16).
The principal feature is a cone-shaped ring of lead
antimony mixture in halves with circular joints from the
bore to the outside. These joints give the packing ring
its self closing feature. A spring is used to keep the
packing ring tight on the piston rod. The parts such as
packing retainers and neck ring can be clearly seen in the
diagram. The whole of the packing assembly is held in
position in a cavity in the cylinder cover by a cover
secured by studs and nuts.
On superheated engines having outside admission
valves, the valve spindles are similarly packed except
that the metal used in the ring is a copper lead mixture
because of the higher temperature encountered.
BYE PASS VALVES.
Again referring to the cylinder portion depicted in
figure 1, it will be seen that a valve is fitted at the bottom
of each end of the cylinder. These valves are called
bye pass valves. They consist of a small piston valve


fitted with rings to prevent steam leaking past. The end
of the valve nearest the cylinder is mitred off to conform
to a seat in the valve body.
Pipes are connected from the live steam section of the
steam chest to the underside of the bye pass valve. The
pressure in the steam chest is higher than that in the
cylinders so the valves are forced upwards to the closed
position and will remain in that position while steam is
in the steam chest, as once the valve is seated the area at
the top is less than that of the underside of the valve.
Set screws with lock nuts are provided in the cover of the
bye pass valve to enable the driver to blank the valve
in case of failure of the pipes or valve.
Bye pass valves provide relief in the cylinders in case
of condensation or priming, when the excessive pressure
will tend to force the valve off its seat and allow the water
to escape.
When the regulator is shut, steam leaves the steam
chests and the bye pass valves drop, thus free com-
munication is opened to either end of the cylinder and to
the atmosphere. This tends to relieve compression and
enables the engine to roll more freely.
SAVE - THE - COAL
Wastage of coal can be prevented by keeping
the footplate clear of coal and by trimming the
coal in the bunker. Coal falling from engines
in motion may also cause injury to employees
working near the line.
(See Figure 16 at back of book )


TRACTIVE EFFORT AND DRAW BAR PULL.
Among the leading particulars of an engine, the
TRACTIVE EFFORT is generally quoted. This
expression denotes the pull which the engine can exert
on the draw bar when worked at full boiler pressure with
regulator wide open, maximum cut-off and operating on
a straight level track.
If there were no drop in steam pressure from the boiler
to the cylinders, and the cut-off occurred at the end of
the stroke, and no back pressure and no friction of
moving parts or engine on the track, the tractive effort
would be given by: —
T = d 2 SP
where T = tractive effort in lbs.
d = diameter of cylinder in inches.
S = stroke of piston in inches.
P boiler pressure in lbs, per sq. inch.
D = diameter of driving wheels in inches.
To allow for the factors mentioned, the tractive effort
is generally given as—
85 d 2 SP
T=— x
100 D
where the symbols have the meanings mentioned above.
The DRAW BAR PULL of the engine is the force it
exerts at the draw bar.
On curves, due to the added resistance of the engine
on the track on grades, some of the effort has to be
expended on lifting the engine, with reduced boiler
pressure or short cut-off, and therefore the draw bar
pull is less than the nominal tractive effort.


FIRING PRACTICE.
PREPARATION OF THE STARTING FIRE.
The success of any run depends largely on the starting
fire. If the starting fire is forced with the blower hard
on, the engine will almost invariably arrive on the train
with a full boiler of water and head of steam, but with
insufficient depth of coke on the firegrate to form a suit-
able starting fire; in consequence trouble will be
experienced early in the trip.
The building of the starting fire should be commenced
early. The spark arresters should be cleaned and the
joint of the smokebox door greased; the reason for
greasing the door joint is to prevent jamming and also
the grease assists in making an air tight seal of the door.
The live coal in the firebox should then be spread over the
grate and the fire built up; the damper should be closed
and the firehole door also closed to exclude air from
entering the firebox. In this way the temperature of the
firebox will rise slowly, the light volatile gases in the
coal will be expelled and the coke bed will remain. In
cases where steam and water are low, admitting a little
surface air or raising the damper a notch will admit
sufficient air to brighten the fire sufficient to raise steam
and water as desired, after which the damper should
be again closed. Burnt out spots occurring in the firebed
should be covered with fresh coal as required. When
built up under the above conditions the coke bed, with
the damper down, will present a dull red appearance.
When the damper is raised, however, the draft caused
by the first few beats of the exhaust will fan the dull red
firebed into a white incandescent one.
ON THE ROAD.
On the road the best results will be obtained only by
close co-operation between the driver and fireman.
When necessary the driver should keep the fireman
advised in advance how he intends to work his loco-
motive so that the fireman can arrange the fire accord-
ingly.


The fireman should adopt the habit of regular and
light firing and maintain an even fire. Large lumps of
coal should not be used; coal should be broken to sizes
not exceeding 4 inches.
When large lumps of coal are used the firebed soon
becomes uneven ; cold air passes through the weak spots
and playing on the firebox plates sets up local contractions
whilst other parts of the same plates are under expansion.
The inequalities of temperature thus set up will eventually
cause tube and stay troubles in the firebox. No
firebox will withstand the strains and stresses set up by
firing with large lumps of coal.
Apart from the damaging effects on the plates good
results cannot be obtained with large coal. With small
coal a greater surface is exposed to the action of the air
thereby providing a better opportunity for the gases to
mix and burn ; combustion will, therefore, be more
rapid. Small coal lies more evenly over the firegrate
and holes in the fire are less likely to occur. The fire
should be kept as white or incandescent as possible.
A red fire will not produce steam quickly enough for the
work required.
The depth of colour of the gases passing from the
chimney is the best indication of the condition of the
fire and the temperature of the firebox. Continuous
black smoke indicates heavy firing and low temperature.
When after a fresh charge of coal has been put on, the
smoke does not become black, the indications are also
of low temperature, but in this instance the cause is
holes or dead spots in the fire.
BLACK SMOKE.
Black smoke is unburnt carbon mixed with a high
percentage of combustible gases and therefore, repre-
sents a considerable loss of the coal required for heating.
When coal is fired in large quantities it absorbs heat so
rapidly that the temperature is reduced below fhat of the
ignition of the gases. The coals lie close together and
the necessary air is prevented from passing upward
through the firebed and the fire is robbed of oxygen.


The result is soon registered on the pressure gauge.
Firing fresh coal on a fire already emitting clouds of
black smoke can only result in waste of fuel and loss of
steam pressure.
When a fire is in good shape and the firebox temper-
ature high, the indication at the chimney will be black
smoke after each charge of coal, the black smoke quickly
clearing and when cleared another charge is required,
such indications represent a perfect fire.
Whilst it is preferable for air to be drawn through the
firebed, some coal, owing to its volatile content, requires
more air than others, and to assist in burning these light
volatile gases which are the first distillation of the fuel,
air should be admitted to the surface of the fire by partly
opening the firebox door.
TOPPING A GRADE.
When topping the summit of a grade the boiler water
gauges should register a sufficient height of water to cove-
the crown plates when descending the other side of the
grade. The fire should be bright and free from smoke
when the engine is rolling, as smoke is liable to be drawn
into the steam chest and cylinders and lap up the lubrica-
tion with damaging results. The damper should be
dropped to maintain the coke bed, thus saving fuel and
keeping the fire in good condition until the driver again
commences steaming.
Dropping the damper will not, as generally thought,
cause the fire to clinker. Nature put the ingredients
that form clinker in the fuel and such being the case,
clinker will form whether the damper is dropped or not.
Clinkering of the fire cannot be prevented, but it can to a
big extent be controlled. Forcing the fire will cause the
clinker to run over the firegrate and form in sheets.
Sheets of clinker lying over the grate will prevent the
entry of air through the fire as surely as dropping the
damper. If, however, the fire is built up as previously
described, the clinker forming material will run over the


coke and form in lumps ; the air will force its way past
the lumps of clinker and although reduced in quantity,
will enable the fireman to produce sufficient steam to
reach the terminal or at least the E.R. station.
ARRIVING AT THE TERMINAL STATION.
On arriving at the terminal station the boiler should
be filled before bringing the engine over the ashpit. The
fire should be raked over with the pricker to ensure all
coal being burnt out. Green coal knocked into the ash-
pit represents not only a waste of coal, but also a lack of
interest and appreciation on the part of the men con-
cerned.
SAVE THE
g Enginemen can reduce coal
m consumption by carefully
studying the characteristics of the various coals
supplied and by varying their firing methods in
order to obtain the most efficient combustion.
Lithgow, Indian and African coals produce the
best combustion when air is supplied mainly
through the firegrate and less through the fire-
hole door.
In order to dispose of the high ash content use
the shaker grate with discretion before the fire-
bed becomes too thick, thus ensuring that the re-
quisite volume of air flows through the grates.
When taking coal and water the tender should not be
overloaded to allow coal to drop off in running. This is
dangerous as well as wasteful.
The tank should not be allowed to overflow when
taking water ; water also costs money. When the tank


overflows, water lodges under the tool box and soon
destroys the box and tools.
PREPARATION OF THE LOCOMOTIVE FOR
SERVICE.
Enginemen when preparing a locomotive for service
must see that it is equipped with the necessary tools and
fire irons, red flags, detonators and spare oil. The tender
tank must be full of water and the coal properly stacked
on the bunker. The firebox and brick arch must be
examined and the water gauges tested in the manner
laid down in the Rolling Stock Book of Instructions.
These tests are made for the purpose of ensuring that the
steam and water valves are sufficiently open to provide
proper communication through the steam and water
passages from the boiler. When the water gauge glasses
are in proper order, the water in the gauge glass is never
entirely at rest under pressure. When steam is being
used, water circulation is established in the boiler which
causes the water to increase its agitation in the gauge
glass, and when the engine is moving, the motion of the
boiler is transferred to the water, which adds to the
agitation caused by the circulation due to the generation
of steam. Thus, when a locomotive is standing and no
steam is being used from the boiler, the water in the
gauge glass is comparatively calm, but when the regulator
is opened, water circulation is increased throughout the
boiler and the water tends to rise in the gauge glass. If
boiler foaming occurs in running, the water in the gauge
glass will rise higher than when foaming does not occur.
In order to lessen the disturbance of the water in the
gauge glasses due to agitation of water in the boiler,
modern locomotives are provided with a water column.
Water gauges and water columns should be blown out
and tested at frequent intervals on the road as well as
during the preparation of the locomotive for service.
After testing the water gauges, always make sure that
the steam and water valves are fully open. When the
water valve is open, if the steam valve is not wide open,


the water may be forced up the gauge glass and register
a full glass even though the water in the boiler is just
about the water passage. If due to track undulations
or any other reason, the water disappears from sight at
the bottom of the gauge glass, do not close the steam
valve to ascertain if there is water in the bottom gauge
glass mounting, as the adoption of this practice will
eventually lead to disaster.
After testing the water gauges, check the steam
pressure, fill the lubricator and slowly start the air
compressor. Whilst the air compressor is working, test
the driver’s brake valves in their various positions, sign
the speed chart, note if both pencils are marking and
wind the speed recorder clock. Test the whistle,
reversing lever, hand brake and release cocks, operate the
sanders and the air-operated fire door if fitted, test the
electric light turbo and lights. Test the mechanical
stoker and booster if fitted, examine the fire prevention
appliances, see that the sand boxes are full, check the
brake piston travels and test all air brake equipment.
When examining the locomotive adopt a method-
ical routine. Always commence at a definite
point and after passing completely around and
underneath the locomotive finish at the same point.
Keep in mind the fact that the success or failure of a trip
frequently depends upon the efficiency of the preparation
of the locomotive for service.
ON THE ROAD.
When starting a train from a state of rest, ensure that
the locomotive will start promptly and, if 'required
develop its full horse power by putting the reverse lever in
full gear. See that the cylinder cocks are open and
keep them so until dry steam appears. Avoid coupling
slack shocks and stresses on draw gear by admitting only
sufficient steam to slowly start the train and gradually
take up the coupling slack. Rough starting of a pas-
senger train is unpleasant and annoying to the passengers.
In the case of goods trains, it may cause damage to the


loading or equipment. With double headed trains the
driver of the second engine should not open the regulator
until the slack has been taken up by the leading engine.
Do not inject too much water into the boiler whilst
the engine is standing or drifting, as priming may occur
when the regulator is opened. This is particularly im-
portant when approaching a grade, where the conditions
are such that the maximum capacity of the engine may be
required as early as practicable.
When drifting, the reversing lever must be moved
to the full gear position and the regulator cracked
sufficiently to prevent a vacuum being formed in
the steam chests and cylinders, thus preventing
hot gases being drawn down the blast pipe from
the smoke box.
When steaming, the reversing lever and regulator
should be operated in accordance with the speed and
work required. When negotiating a heavy grade the
lever should be let out gradually as the speed decreases.
It is not good practice to let the lever out a number of
turns at the one time.
When ascending heavy grades, the best results will be
obtained by working the regulator full open and the
reversing lever as close to mid gear as circumstances will
permit. Operating with a fully opened regulator pro-
vides the highest possible pressure in the steam chest
and reduces the wire drawing of the steam between the
boiler and the cylinders. If the speed is too high under
a full regulator and a short valve cut off, the regulator
should be eased. It is not advisable to work a locomotive
at a smaller cut off than 6 inches. To economically
operate the locomotive, the reverse lever must be ad-
justed to provide the proper valve cut off for the various
speeds and loads, and • the regulator opening adjusted
accordingly. The driver can, by exercising his judgment
intelligently, note the results produced by working the
engine at various reverse lever and regulator positions
with different trains at varying speeds, and become
familiar with the proper and most economical method
to use for both level and grade work.


nspect the locomotive thoroughly at every opportunity
and feel for hot bearings and journals. When oiling,
see that the oil holes are clear so that the oil actually
reaches the bearing points.
Do not depend on others in any locomotive run-
ning conditions for which you are responsible.
Make it your business to know that the duties devolving
on you are properly carried out.
ENGINE REQUIREMENT AND TURN ROUND
POINTS.
At engine requirement and turn round points the
engine should be inspected in conjunction with engine
requirements, and the speed recorder clock wound
so that a record of standing time will be shown on the
speed chart.
ARRIVAL AT TERMINAL STATIONS.
On arrival at engine terminal points the fire should be
raked over and the boiler filled before the fire is knocked
out. This is very necessary in order to avoid the
possibility of damage to the boiler caused by water
having to be injected into it after the fire has been knocked
out.
Water and coal must be taken and all ashes removed
from the smokebox and ashpan. Oil trimmings must
be removed, tools cleaned and put away and the footplate
left clean and tidy for the next crew. The locomotive
must be examined and all defects booked for repair and a
report submitted on R.S. 12A form of any irregular
train running incident that occurred on the trip.
TURBO ELECTRIC LIGHT GENERATOR AND
AIR COMPRESSOR.
The steam valves for operating the turbo electric
light generator and air compressor are situated in the
cab. The operation of these devices is outlined in the
Rolling Stock Book of Instructions and the Westinghouse
Brake Book of Instructions respectively.


SMOKEBOX AND DRAFT APPLIANCES.
The economical use of fuel depends to a large extent
on the correct arrangement and maintenance of all
parts of the draft and spark arrester appliances.
Given an artificial draft arrangement to produce the
best results from the fuel, it is then the enginemen’s part
in the correct combustion of fuel to see that the loco-
motive is properly handled, that it performs the maximum
amount of work for the steam produced, and that the
firing is regulated in accordance with requirements. A
locomotive that is artificially drafted to the best ad-
vantage is a free steamer, usually having a margin in
steaming qualities. This margin can only be obtained
if all appliances are maintained in good order and the
driver and fireman co-operate in working the engine to
its best advantage.
Three methods are employed to supply the necessary
amount of air to the firebox; the natural chimney or
funnel draft; the draft induced by the use of the blower ;
and the draft which is produced by the exhaust steam
being discharged from the exhaust cap through the chim-
ney which creates a partial vacuum in the smokebox in
direct relation to the way the engine is being worked.
Air at atmospheric pressure then rushes through the fire-
box to destroy the partial vacuum in the smokebox.
If the fire is clean, the air will force its way through
the firebed in sufficient quantities to ensure complete
combustion of the fuel. If the fire is dirty or clinkered,
the air will not force its way through the firebed but will
endeavour to pass through the firehole door when
wholly or partly open cooling the firebox temperature
with consequent adverse effects on the steaming condition
of the engine. The smokebox, with the exception of
the chimney, must be maintained completely air tight
so that air cannot be admitted to it by any other path to
destroy the partial vacuum except through the firebed.
Steam leaks into the smokebox must also be eliminated
as leaks of this nature will also destroy the partial vacuum
with similar bad steaming results.


The diagram (Fig. 2) shows the arrangement of a
standard locomotive smokebox. Besides containing the
superheater header, blast pipe, steam pipes, blower pipe,
air compressor exhaust pipe, and spark arrester netting,
it also contains the back plate situated in front of the
header and the deflector plate and table plate.
The deflector plate (see Fig. 1) is set to a predetermined
distance from the smokebox floor so that the draftt
produced will be sufficient to keep the smokebox clear of
ashes and at the same time, burn the required amount
of fuel on the grate.
On the larger type locomotives the chimney is ex-
tended down into the smokebox as owing to lack of
clearance of tunnels, bridges, etc., it is not practicable to
extend the smoke funnel upwards from the smokebox.


TEMPERATURES OF STEAM AND WATER.
The temperature of steam at 200 lbs. boiler pressure in
a boiler such as shown in diagram Fig. 1 is approximately
385 degrees Fahrenheit. This is also the temperature
of the water in the boiler at that steam pressure. When
an injector is operated, the water passing through the
injector on its way to the boiler is heated to a temperature
from 160 to 200 degrees. It is, therefore, 185 to 225
degrees cooler than the water in the boiler and being
colder is heavier than the higher temperature water in
the boiler and on entering the boiler it must, therefore,
take a downward course until it eventually reaches the
lowest part.
The weight of a cubic foot of water delivered from the
injector is 60 lbs., while a cubic foot of water at 385
degrees temperature is only 54 lbs. The difference in
weight, therefore, makes it clear why the cooler and
heavier water seeks the lowest levels.
Working the injector whilst the locomotive is standing
causes more variations in temperature throughout the
boiler and therefore sets up destructive stresses.


SATURATED AND SUPERHEATED STEAM.
Steam is water in a gaseous form; under pressure
steam is invisible. The so-called vapour seen escaping
from a vessel of boiling water or from the exhaust of a
locomotive is composed of very minute drops of water.
Actually it is steam resolving itself back to water through
the process of condensation. The visible change is
caused by the contact of the steam with the cold air.
SATURATED STEAM.
Steam is said to be saturated when its temperature and
pressure are the same as the water from which it was
generated. Sometimes saturated steam is referred to
as wet steam. This, however, is incorrect. Wet steam
is steam holding in suspense unevaporated water in the
form of minute drops. It holds this water in suspense
mechanically, either through ebullition or from a rapid
flow of steam from the surface of the water in the boiler
or from partial condensation through contact with the
cold cylinder walls.
Saturated steam free from suspended water is referred
to as dry steam and is distinct from wet steam or super-
heated steam.
The temperature of steam and water in a boiler varies
with pressure. The temperature of water boiling in an
open vessel is 212 degrees Fah. When the vessel is
sealed, however, and the steam cannot escape, the
pressure and temperature rise accordingly.
The following is the temperature of steam and water
under different pressures ;
50 lb. 100 lb. 150 lb. 200 lb.
281° 327° 358° 385°
As the water in a boiler is transformed into steam it
rises into the dome where it separates itself from the water.
From there it is released by opening the regulator valve
and is conveyed through the dry steam pipe to the steam
chest and cylinders. On the larger type locomotives
where the dome is necessarily lower, the steam first
passes through a steam separator.


SUPERHEATED STEAM.
Diagram (Fig. 1) shows the steam superheater in
position and the method of securing the superheater
pipes or elements to the header. The arrows indicate
the passage of the saturated steam from the boiler to the
saturated section of the header through the elements to
the superheated section of the header to the steam pipe,
steam chest, cylinders, blast pipe and chimney.
Steam is said to be superheated when its temperature
is raised above that of the water in the boiler from which
it was generated. The rise in temperature is obtained by
the steam being collected in the saturated section of the
header flowing through pipes or elements through the
large flue tubes where they are in direct contact with the
hot gasses from the firebox. The elements extend
through the large flue tubes almost to the firebox tube
plate where they are bent and returned towards the
smokebox. Another return bend near the smokebox
tube plate brings each element through the same tube
almost to the first bend near the firebox where another
return bend takes the element back to the superheater
side of the header, from which the steam flows through
the steam pipe to the steam chest and cylinders. A
number of these large flue tubes are placed in the top part
of the barrel of the boiler, into each of which is inserted
one of the abovementioned pipes or elements. The
superheater is, therefore, made up of a number of units
all connected to one header.
Steam at a certain pressure possesses a certain tem-
perature, and when it loses its heat it loses its power.
Steam at 200 lbs. boiler pressure enters the cylinders at
about 385 degrees. If its temperature drops 100
degrees, the pressure would drop to 50 lbs.
The temperature of steam leaving the dome of the
boiler at 200 lbs. pressure is 385 degrees and superheating
adds to this from 100 to 300 degrees. The additional
heat is sufficient to overcome the cooling effects of the
steam chest and cylinders so that a much higher pressure


is maintained. Therefore, its power of doing work is
greater than with saturated steam. The advantages to
be derived from superheating steam are :
(a) Increased volume of steam per pound of water
evaporated.
(b) Reduced steam consumption due to the greater
expansive force.
(c) Elimination of cylinder condensation resulting
overall in a saving of about 30 per cent, water and
25 per cent. coal.
The ability to obtain the best results with a superheater
locomotive rests largely with the enginemen and a simple
rule for obtaining such results can be expressed in a few
words —
“ Keep water out of the elements.”
SAVE
THE
COAL
STEAM leakage is fuel wasted.
BOOK steam leaks for Depot attention.


COMBUSTION.
Three things are essential to the proper combustion or
burning of fuel in a locomotive firebox. They are, the
fuel to be burned, the oxygen which is a supporter of
combustion, and the igniting temperature of the fire,
the latter being necessary to expel the gases contained in
the fuel in order that they can unite with the oxygen in
the air. In order then to provide for proper combustion,
it is essential that a fireman understands the nature of the
elements contained in the atmosphere and the fuel he is
using and be able to concentrate his attention upon the
relation of fuel, oxygen and ignition temperatures.
Oxygen is a part of the air forming about one-fifth by
volume, the remaining four-fifths being made up of
nitrogen with a small amount of carbon dioxide gas. As
oxygen is the only supporter of combustion, it will be
seen that in order to provide proper combustion of the
fuel in the firebox, it is necessary to draw through the
firebed a quantity of air equal to five times the volume of
the oxygen required. This must be accomplished
through the action of the draft through the firebars,
tubes and smokebox.
All coal used on the Victorian Railways is of a bitumin-
ous nature and, although the carbon and volatile content
vary, the method of handling is similar in all cases.
Bituminous coal consists of up to 80 per cent, carbon,
the remainder being composed of hydrogen, nitrogen,
sulphur and ash. One pound of good quality coal,
properly burned, will give about 14,000 British Thermal
Units. The British Thermal Unit (8.T.U.) is the heat
required to raise the temperature of one pound of water
one degree Fahrenheit.
When coal is fired into the firebox it throws off various
gases, each of which when properly combined with oxy-
gen will give off heat.
The process of burning fuel in a locomotive firebox is
the uniting of oxygen which is a gas, with the gases con-
tained in the fuel but in order to cause these gases to


unite, it is necessary that the firebox temperature be
sufficiently high to cause the gases to be expelled from the
coal.
When coal comes in contact with heat, if the temper-
ature is from 1,300 to 1,800 degrees F., the gases in the
coal will be expelled and mix with the oxygen contained
in the atmosphere. Uniting under these conditions
heat is evolved and used in generating steam.
If the supply of air is sufficient, a pound of carbon will
burn to form a colourless gas called carbon-dioxide and
sufficient heat will be evolved to convert about 8 lbs. of
water into steam. If, however, the supply of oxygen is
insufficient, then another colourless gas will be formed
called carbon-monoxide and only about four pounds of
water will be evaporated. It will thus be seen that
there is a wide difference between just burning the coal
and doing it efficiently.
The average temperature of the firebox with a good
incandescent fire is about 2,500 degrees F. With the
fire in a condition to produce this temperature, the
highest number of B.T.U.’s are being produced and the
resultant gas, carbon-dioxide, is being given off at the
chimney but when the firebox temperature is lowered
through heavy firing and carbon-monoxide is being
given off at the chimney, the B.T.U.’s being produced
per lb. of coal has fallen to 4,000, representing a definite
loss of 10,000 B.T.U.’s.


EFFECT OF FEEDING LARGE QUANTITIES OF
RELATIVELY COLD WATER INTO A BOILER
UNDER STEAM.
When steam is generated in a boiler, the temperature
to which the water in the boiler must be raised is governed
by the working pressure. This rise in temperature will
cause the various parts of the boiler to expand in pro-
portion to the rise in temperature of that part above its
original temperature.
When steam is being raised the temperature of the
tubes, in a locomotive boiler, will be higher than that of
the barrel, and this will cause the tubes to become
greater in length than a corresponding length of barrel.
This increased length of the tubes over that of the barrel
will tend to have the following adverse effects :
(a) Increase the natural sag of the tubes as a result of
the longitudinal thrust of the tubes on the tube
plates.
(b) Bulge the tube plates as a result of the longitudinal
thrust of the tubes.
(c) Put a compressive stress in the tubes due to the
resistance of the tube plates to the longitudinal
thrust of the tubes.
The magnitude of the effect of these actions depends
upon the difference in temperature of the tubes and
barrel, the stiffness of the tubes and tube plates, and the
efficiency of the fastening of the tubes in the tube plates.
The difference in temperature of the water delivered
by the injector and the water in the boiler under 200 lbs.
pressure may be as much as 225°. If a large quantity of
this relatively cold water is fed into the boiler when it is
under steam, the colder water, being heavier than the hot
water in the boiler, will sink to the lowest parts and will
have a chilling effect on those parts with which it comes
in contact, see Fig. 17. This sudden cooling will
set up local differences in temperature and contraction
of the cooled parts, resulting in damaging stresses being
set up. If the quantity of cold water injected is sufficient
(See Figure 17 at back of book) 67


to reach the lower tubes it will cause them to contract
and may even put them under a tensile stress.
Large quantities of relatively cold feed water should
never be injected into a boiler when under steam, as it
tends to cause cracking of boiler plates and stays, leakages,
and tube failures. The injurious effects of this practice
is considerably increased with a locomotive boiler when
the locomotive is standing, as at this time the circulation
in the boiler is greatly reduced below that which prevails
when the locomotive is in motion and using steam.
SAVE THE
The volume of volatile
air required hydrocarbons,
varies with the volatile
nature of the coal sup-
plied. To lire a loco-
motive efficiently and
economically, the re-
quired volume of air
must be admitted
through the firegrate
and the firehole door.
Maitland Coal con-
tains a high percentage
it burns freely and if
not correctly fired, can
entail considerable
loss. To obtain the
best results admit a
plentiful supply of air
through the firehole
door to assist in burn-
ing the gas which might
otherwise be lost.
Correct firing will result in less manual labour
and reduce fuel consumption.
Intelligent use of the injector will greatly reduce
the harmful temperature variations in the boiler, and will
thus help to increase its working life and efficiency as a
steam producing agent, whilst improper use of the
injector is the cause of more boiler troubles than all other
causes combined. If the injector is used whilst the
locomotive is steaming, the circulation of water in the
boiler will keep the temperature even. If the injector is
used when the locomotive is standing, small quantities of
water should be injected at the one time.


FOAMING AND PRIMING.
When water with its impurities is taken into a boiler
and evaporated, practically pure water passes out in the
form of steam whilst the impurities remain inside the
boiler. As water continues to be evaporated, the
impurities accumulate in the water left in the boiler.
These impurities may consist of solids in suspension (mud)
or solids in solution (salts) or both. As the solids in sus-
pension accumulate they settle out as a sludge at the
bottom of the boiler and can cause overheating similar to
what takes place when a pot is burned cooking porridge.
As the solids in solution accumulate they can produce a
degree of concentration which will cause the water to
foam when boiled and hence may cause priming. This
foaming is similar to what takes place when milk is boiled.
Foaming is the term applied to the condition in the
boiler when steam bubbles build up over the surface of
the water to form a layer of foam in the steam space.
Apart from the operating features that produce this
condition, it is sufficient to say that foaming is caused by a
high concentration of alkaline salts in the water.
There is no economic chemical treatment that will
remove foaming salts, and since these salts remain in the
water in the boiler, the prevention of foaming depends on
removing all or portion of the concentrated water from
the boiler —that is, by emptying the boiler as for a washout
or change-water or by blowing out a part of the con-
centrated water at frequent intervals, and refilling with
fresh water.
The degree of concentration required to produce foam-
ing varies somewhat, but for any operating district the
variation is not great, and foaming can be prevented and
satisfactory operation secured by keeping the con-
centration below thejcritical stage.
If part of the accumulated impurities in the boiler are
blown out through the blow-off cock at sufficiently fre-
quent intervals, the critical concentration of the water
is not reached, and no foaming occurs.


The benefit from blowing down most noticeable to the
driver is the decrease in engine failures and train delays
due to priming, and this trouble can be practically
eliminated when systematic terminal and en route blow-
ing down is properly done.
Priming is said to occur when water is carried over to
the cylinders, and can be caused by excessive foaming.
Before reaching this condition, however, and when
nearing the critical stage of concentration the water, to
use the enginemen’s expression is “ light,” and cannot be
carried so high in the gauge glass without giving trouble.
Sudden opening of the regulator, or the use of
an excessive cut-off when the boiler is too full,
tends to cause priming even with low concentration
in the boiler.
To obtain immediate relief when a boiler foams, the
regulator should be eased as far as possible and the
reverse lever put forward to increase the valve travel.
The boiler pressure should be lowered by opening the
firehole door and operating the injectors, and the cylinder
release cocks opened to get rid of the water in the
cylinders.
As one of the effects of priming is to wasn off the
lubrication from the walls of the steam chest and cylind-
ers, the oil feed should be increased for a short period
after priming has eased.
The principle that governs the blowing down of a boiler
to prevent foaming is to get rid of the accumulated
impurities. When a boiler is being blown down the
steam pressure sometimes rises and the safety valves blow
off. When this occurs the injector should be used just
sufficiently to stop the blowing off. When using the
blow-off cock the boiler should not be filled above the
top of the gauge glass and then blown down. Before
commencing to blow down a boiler give the water in the
boiler sufficient time to settle, thus the mud in the
vicinity of the blow-off cock —the lowest part of the
boiler—will be blown out.


“Keep water out of the elements” —When water
gets in, efficiency drops and even though the water may
not show at the chimney, as the elements may be turning
it into steam, this steam is not superheated as it would
be if water was not present. Moreover, the solids
in the water tend to form scale and reduce the efficiency
of the elements. The solid matter also gets into the
steam chest and cylinders and mixing with the lubricants
reduces the efficiency of the lubricating oil.
The elements are for superheating steam. They are
not an auxiliary to the boiler for boiling water. When
water is carried over into the superheater, closing the
regulator will not stop the supply of steam to the cylinders
until the water in the elements has been evaporated and
used. Water should be carried at the same level with a
superheater locomotive as with a saturated one to
ensure dry steam entering the elements.
High level of water will increase the consumption of
fuel and water besides causing lubrication and packing
troubles and the economy available from superheated
steam is reduced.


SUPPLY TANK LID
SUPPLY TANK AIK VENT
SUPPLY TANK
BRIQUETTE CONTAINER
SPLASH PLATE
CHARGE TANK
DELIVERY TUBE
SPILL TUBE
COMPRESSION TUBE
CHARGE TANK SUMP
CHECK VALVE
MOUNTING FRAME
SUPPLY TANK SUMP
STRAINER
BRACKET
WATER TREATMENT FEEDER
DEVICE
FOR LOCOMOTIVE TENDER TANKS
DISPLACEMENT TYPE
PREPARATION The system is designed to provide sufficient chemical in liquid form
to treat the water used by the Locomotive in running 3000 miles. Thus at every
A-B examination, the BRIQUETTE CONTAINER is charged with a pre-determined
number of briquettes and the SUPPLY TANK filled with water.
The feeder will then automatically charge a quantity of chemical into the TENDER
TANK every time water Is taken into it. This quantity will be proportional to
the amount of water taken.
OPERATION (o) CHARGING Water rising in the TENDER TANK during filling,
rises at the same time in the COMPRESSION TUBE trapping the air inside and
compressing it.
Pressure is therefore exerted on the surface of the liquid in the CHARGE TANK
causing the CHECK VALVE to seat and liquid to rise in the DELIVERY TUBE. In
this way pressure is maintained inside the CHARGE TANK and the liquid is del-
ivered into the TENDER TANK via the SPILL TUBE for so long as the water level
in the TENDER TANK rises.
(f>) RE-CHARGING As water is used by the injectors, the level in
the TENDER TANK falls and pressure in the CHARGE TANK is reduced. This
allows the head of liquid in the SUPPLY TANK to un seat the CHtCK VALVE ana
permit a flow through the pipe connecting tnem. Thus the CHARGE TANK is
re-filled and is ready for the next time water is taken.
Fig. 18


WATER TREATMENT.
OBJECTS. The objects of boiler feedwater treat-
ment are :
(1) To increase the life of boilers and reduce main-
tenance by minimising corrosion of the steel
internal surfaces and tubes.
(2) To improve the efficiency of the boilers by reducing
the build-up of scale on the heating surafces.
In order to attain these objects the feedwater is con-
ditioned by the addition of chemicals in solid form —the
usual material being briquettes composed of a mixture
of Soda-ash and Tannin.
METHODS OF ADDITION.
The following are the methods of addition in use at
present: —
(1) Wayside in which, part of the water running into
the overhead supply tanks at watering stations is
directed through a bye-pass feeder which is
regularly charged with water treatment briquettes.
The water passing through the feeder dissolves
the chemical and mixes with other raw water in the
storage tank. This method is in use on the
Maryborough-Mildura line where all water taken
into tender tanks is conditioned.
(2) Displacement Type Tank Feeder (Fig. 18), in
which the solid chemicals are dissolved in a supply
tank, which connects to a smaller charge tank.
The rise and fall of water in the tender tank causes
the liquid to discharge from the charge tank to
the tender tank and recharge the charge tank from
the supply tank. Thus each time water is taken
into the tender tank a proportion of conditioning
chemical is automatically added to it.
(3) Tender Tank Additions. This method in which
various quantities of solid chemicals are hand-
charged into tender tanks either on a trip basis or
1,000 mile basis is in use temporarily, until the
necessary apparatus for methods 1 and 2 is in-
stalled.


BLOWING DOWN.
Supplementary to water treatment, regular controlled
blowing down of boilers is carried out by shed staff at
depots, and sub-depots, and by engine crews at certain
depots and watering stations in defined areas.
Samples of boilerwater are taken regularly from all
water treated locomotives and are tested in boilerwater
testing instruments to determine the amount of blowing
down necessary to keep the concentration of dissolved
solids within a safety margin where the risk of priming
is negligible.
It will be appreciated that in the case of water treat-
ment by tender tank additions, any indiscriminate blowing
down by engine crews will seriously affect the benefits
to be obtained.


LOCOMOTIVE BOOSTER.
Most of the X class locomotives are equipped with
a Booster which is a horizontal two cylinder steam
engine mounted on the trailing truck and connected
by suitable gearing to the trailing truck wheels by which
means it may be engaged or disengaged as required.
The booster applies power to the trailing truck wheels
in the FORWARD DIRECTION ONLY and must
not be used when the speed exceeds 20 m.p.h.
The control of the booster is semi automatic and is
fully described in the Instruction Book on the Locomotive
Booster.
FRAMES AND AXLE BOXES.
The main frame of the locomotive is the foundation
upon which rests the boiler and to which are attached
the cylinder castings, brake gear and other component
parts.
The frame is supported by springs at the coupled
wheels and by bogies or trucks at the front and back
ends.
There are two types of locomotive frames in use on the
Victorian Railways—(a) Plate frames, and (b) Bar frames.
Bar frames are used on H, R and S class locomotives
and plate frames on all other classes.
Plate frames are made of mild steel 1-in. or 1-1/8-in.
thick according to the size of the locomotive. They
are of substantial depth and shaped to suit the number
of wheels according to the design of the locomotive.
They are placed vertically inside the wheels for the full
length of the locomotive. Transverse stays are fitted
between the frame plates to keep them the correct
distance apart. At the front end there is a cylinder frame
stay casting to which are also bolted the cylinders. This
casting forms a support for the front end of the boiler.
The frame plates are connected at the front and back
end by headstock plates and castings. At the back end
a drag box is formed which accommodates the inter-


mediate draw bar which connects the engine to the
tender. On the front headstock, castings are attached to
accommodate the automatic coupler. Buffers and cow-
catcher are also attached to the front headstock. The
smokebox, which is attached to the boiler at the front end,
is bolted to the cylinder frame stay casting.
The firebox end of the boiler is carried on expansion
brackets riveted to the main frame plates! These
expansion brackets permit the boiler to move and this
provides for the expansion and contraction of the boiler,
as the boiler is longer when it is hot than when it
is cold.
Openings are cut in the main frame plates to accommo-
date the horn blocks into which the axle boxes of the
coupled wheels are fitted. These horn blocks are riveted
to the main frame plates and are prevented from being
distorted by fitting horn stays which are securely bolted
to the lower portion of the horn blocks.
On some classes of engines the plate frame finishes
just at the rear of the trailing coupled wheels. From
there on a one-piece casting known as a cradle is fitted.
This cradle incorporates the drag box, the rear headstock
and the supports for trailing truck rockers. At the front
end of the cradle, pads are provided to support the firebox
and allow for expansion of the boiler as with plate
frames.
Bar frames as used on H, R and S class locomotives
consist of steel castings about 5-1/2-in. thick and placed
one on each side, inside the wheels. They are braced
transversely by the cylinder frame stay casting and other
intermediate castings as with plate frames. A cradle
casting is fitted at the rear end on all bar frame loco-
motives.
Axle boxes consist of steel castings into which is fitted
a gunmetal casting lined with white metal to form a
bearing at the axle journal. The axle boxes can slide up
and down in the horn blocks. This sliding action in


conjunction with the springs, allows a vertical movement
of the box which reduces vibration and jolting of the
locomotive in running.
In the lower part of the axle box, an axle box pan is
fitted which contains the wool waste pads and oil for
lubrication of the journal. Movement of the axle boxes
in the horn blocks results in wear of the faces of the box.
To overcome this wear and maintain the axles in proper
alignment with the frames, a metal wedge is interposed
between the axle box and the horn blocks.
The wedge (Fig. 19) is raised to take up any slack due
to wear. Suitable adjusting screws are attached to the
horn stays to allow of this wedge adjustment. When
adjusting wedges by hand, the engine brake should be off
and the slack forced away from the wedge by means of a
pinch bar.
On plate frame engines the bolt through the centre of
the wedge should be slackened back, then the nut on the
wedge adjusting bolt unchecked and screwed out.
Place a bar under the wedge and force the wedge up-
wards till it is tight. The wedge should then be lowered
about 1/8-in. and all bolts and locking plates securely
fastened.
On bar frame engines no bolt is provided at the centre
of the wedge. The wedge adjusting bolt is screwed
through the horn stay to raise the wedge.
In setting up wedges care should be taken to ensure that
they are not set up too tightly. The best time to adjust
wedges is when the boxes are at the running tempertaure,
as the wedges may then be adjusted closer than when the
boxes are cold as when a box warms up it expands and
tends to tighten itself between the two faces. If set up
closely when cold, the expansion may cause the engine
to ride the wedges resulting in rough riding and possible
fracture of the springs.
Many locomotives are fitted with automatic wedges.
These adjust themselves automatically according to the
wear of the box and wedge faces.


Wjp Iff ~
| p|.;5f x |
/ \ L horn CASTING.
/ l hornstay.
/ l wedgel .
/ l wedge adjusting bolt.
/ L-lockiisg plates for wedge
ADJUSTING BOLT.
LOCK WASHER FDR HORN STAY BOLT.
l HORN STAY BOLT.
'-WFDRF RdlT
■WEDGE BOLT
AXLE BOX HORN
Fig. 19


This device consists of a horn wedge held at top and
bottom between the horn stay and the horn block and an
automatic wedge which is held in proper position by a
coiled spring. The automatic wedge is tapered on one
side to suit the taper of the horn wedge, and on the other
side to suit the taper of the horn block. The coil spring
fits on to a spigot on the automatic wedge and is held up
by a spring plate bolted to the horn stay. The action of
the spring automatically maintains proper adjustment of
the axle box.
Close attention should be paid to the lubrication of the
horn plates and wedges. This will greatly contribute to
smooth riding of the locomotive and although the
lubrication of the axle boxes is attended to by the running
shed staff, drivers should not neglect oiling the horn
plates when preparing the locomotive for service.
SPRINGS AND SPRING RIGGING.
The transmission of the load from frames to the axle
boxes is made through springs.
The laminated type of spring is generally used on
locomotives, although coiled or helical springs will be
found in conjunction with laminated springs on the
bogies of heavy tenders. Laminated springs are com-
posed of a number of flat steel plates, varying in number
and thickness and cambered to suit the load imposed on
them. The longest plate has a slot at each end through
which passes the spring hanger. The weight is taken on
the spring through a cotter resting on the spring cotter
seat. The plates are held together at the centre by a
forged spring buckle. Older types of end fastenings
consist of a forged end to take a pin or a hook.
Springs are fitted above or below the axle boxes
according to the design of the locomotive. When
fitted below the axle box, suitable lugs are provided on
the spring buckle to take a pin which connects the
spring to the hanger on the axle box.
When springs are fitted above the axle boxes as in
the case of bar frame locomotives, a spring saddle which


is a U-shaped casting or forging, spans the top rail of the
frame and rests on the axle box with one leg on the inside
and the other on the outside of the frame. The spring
rests on top of the saddle. The ends of the springs are
arranged to take spring hangers, cotters, etc., as with
underhung springs.
On both types of springing, some hangers are attached
directly to the frame, while others are attached to com-
pensating beams which consist of forgings held to the
frame by a bracket with a pin on which the beam pivots.
If all axles were sprung individually they would get
varying loads on more or less uneven track. The com-
pensating beams divide the load variations over a number
of axles.
Bogies or pony trucks are generally provided at the
front end of an engine and sometimes trailing trucks at
the rear end of an engine. The wheels of these bogies
or trucks are smaller in diameter than the coupled
wheels and are carried in frames with a suitable system
of springs. They help to support the weight of the engine
and give flexibility in negotiating curves.
The types are described as follow :
c COTTER
GUDGEON
BOLT
UNDERSIDE OF ENGINE BOGIE
Fig. 20


ENGINE BOGIE (Fig. 20)
This is a four-wheeled arrangement at the front of
the engine and because of its natural stability it is gener-
ally used on passenger locomotives. The weight is taken
on the bogie centre and thence through the gudgeons and
swing links to the frame. From the frame it is taken on
the centre pins of the two springs and thence through
links and spring beams to the tops of the axle boxes.
The bogie is provided with self centering swing links
which enable it to move sideways when entering a curve
and which return it to its central position when the engine
is clear of the curve.
The bogie is free to pivot about its centre and the
combination of pivoting and side movement enables the
engine to travel freely round curves.
PONY TRUCK (Fig. 21)
This is a two-wheeled arrangement at the front of the
engine generally used on goods locomotives. The
weight is transmitted from the front end of the equalising
beam through the sliding sleeve, the pony centre and
swing links to the frame and thence through springs to the
tops of the axle boxes. The swing links enable the pony
truck to move sideways when entering a curve and
return it to its central position when the engine is clear
of the curve. To keep the pony truck on the rails a“ Y ”
shaped radius bar extends from the back of its frame to a
pivot pin under the cylinder frame stay casting.
TRAILING TRUCK
On locomotives with large and heavy boilers and fire-
boxes, the extra weight at the back end is carried on a
trailing truck, which may have two or four wheels. The
weight is taken on the pivot centre at the front end of the
frame and is transmitted from the back end of the cradle
through two heart-shaped self-centering rockers to the
back end of the frame. From the frame the weight is
transmitted through springs to the tops of the axle boxes.


D
c s
< ? S Z t H-
2 s * o :1 i
a » £ 5 5 I * v
SS
1 1 rii '
x ISi ‘ =
H-
z
LU
z
UJ
a
z
<
a;
a;
<


The rockers enable the trailing truck to rotate about the
front pivot when entering a curve and they return it to
its central position when the engine is clear of the curve.
TENDER BOGIES
Tenders are carried on either four or six wheels bogies.
They may be made from steel castings or built up from
plates and steel sections. Their general construction is
similar to that described for engine bogies.
ENGINEMEN’S
- KITS -
DON’T be misled that the
enginemen’s kit is all there.
Check it yourself before and
after each trip and when
changing over.


MOTION GEAR.
The moving parts or driving machinery of a locomotive
are commonly referred to as the motions. They comprise
pistons, piston rods, crossheads, connecting rods and
coupling rods.
The piston as previously described is fixed rigidly to
the leading end of the piston rod. The crosshead is
fixed rigidly to the rear end of the piston rod, the tapered
end of the rod being held in a tapered socket in the
crosshead shank by a tapered steel cotter; a split cotter
is fitted through the small end of the cotter to prevent it
slackening back.
The crosshead fitted to the majority of Victorian Rail-
ways locomotives is known as the “Alligator type.” It
consists of a steel casting with machined white metal
faces at top and bottom. The crosshead slides between
two slide bars which are in true alignment with the centre
line of the cylinder. The crosshead and slide bars take
the upward and downward thrusts from the connecting
rod. The thrust is on the top bar when steaming in fore
gear and on the bottom bar when steaming in back gear.
On the H class locomotive a different crosshead is used
known as the “ Dean” type. This has one broad face
at the top and two narrow faces underneath but close
to the top face. A single slide bar is fitted which takes
the upward thrust. An angle shaped piece is bolted
to each side of the slide bar which takes the downward
thrust.
On both types of crossheads there are two longitudinal
webs through which is bored a tapered hole to take the
gudgeon pin. The gudgeon pin is held in position by
lock nuts and is prevented from turning by a feather on
the pin fitting into a recess in the crosshead. The centre
portion of the gudgeon pin which is parallel, carries the
brasses of the little end of the connecting rod.
The connecting rod, which is made of steel of H section,
conveys the backward and forward movement of the
piston from the crosshead to the crank. The big end of


the connecting rod is shaped to accommodate the brasses
which have a bearing surface of white metal and are fitted
to the crank pin and secured in the connecting rod by a
distance piece and big end bolt.
Both big and little ends are fitted with adjustable
wedges operated by wedge bolts. The wedges keep the
two halves of the brasses tightly together. The correct
length of the connecting rod is maintained by the use of
liners of various thickness to allow for the closing of the
brasses.
Some locomotives are fitted with connecting rods hav-
ing solid big ends. The big end is bored to take a
hardened steel bush which is fitted tightly into the rod.
Inside this bush there is a revolving bronze bush running
on the pin. This revolving bush has a large number of
small holes drilled through it to convey the oil from one
surface to the other.
The crank of the locomotive, together with the con-
necting rod, converts the backward and forward motion
of the piston and crosshead to a rotary one. The crank
consists of an extension of the hub casting of the coupled
wheels. A hole is bored through the crank half the length
of the stroke from the centre of the hub into which is
pressed a steel crank pin. The crank pin is riveted over
on the inside.
On engines fitted with Walschaert valve gear a square
is formed on the outer end of the pin to take the eccentric
arm which is bolted on. On engines fitted with Stephen-
son valve gear, the end of the pin is screwed to take a collar
which is prevented from screwing off by means of a split
pin.
COUPLING ROD.
Coupling rods of H. section made from forged steel are
fitted to the required number of wheels of a locomotive
so that the tractive force may be distributed between
them. The amount of weight that can be placed on one
pair of wheels is limited by track conditions. If all the
tractive force were applied to one pair of wheels they


would slip, as the friction between rail and wheel would
not be great enough to resist slipping. Coupling rods
enable the locomotive to utilize the weight on more than
one pair of wheels to overcome any tendency to slip.
The coupling rods are provided with eye ends into
which are pressed gunmetal bearings lined with white
metal. These bearings run on crank pins provided
in the driving wheels.
On four wheel coupled locomotives a single rod on each
side is used, but for six or eight coupled wheels the side
rods are in sections, joined together by a knuckle joint and
pin. This system allows for the irregularities of the road
and provides vertical flexibility.
VALVE GEAR.
The term valve gear refers to the system of eccentrics,
eccentric rods, links, rods and levers that transmit motion
to the valves which admit and exhaust steam to and from
the cylinders. The principal parts are the eccentrics,
eccentric rods, links, quadrant block, link hangers, and
valve and intermediate valve spindles.
There are two kinds of valve gear used in the Victorian
Railways, namely, Stephenson and Walschaert.
THE STEPHENSON VALVE GEAR
The Stephenson valve gear Fig. 22, is located between
the frames and consists of four eccentric sheaves fastened
to the driving axle and which revolve with the axle.
Eccentric straps are fitted around the eccentric sheaves
to which are fitted the eccentric rods. The hole through
the sheave is bored out of centre sufficiently, so that as
the axle revolves with the sheave, the rotary motion of
the axle is converted into a to and fro motion at the straps,
which motion is transferred to the eccentric rods.
The eccentric rods are fastened to the top and bottom
of the links. The motion of the rods is, therefore, trans-
ferred to the links. Inside the curved links is fastened a


sliding block called the quadrant block which is fastened
to the intermediate valve spindle, which in turn is fastened
to the valve spindle. The links are suspended from the
reversing shaft by link hangers which are attached to
trunnions about the centre of the links.
When the reverse gear is moved forward, the reversing
shaft also moves and as the link hanger is attached to the
reversing shaft and the centre of the link, it causes the
link to move downward so that the quadrant block in the
link will be in line with the eccentric rod connection at
the top of the link, the eccentric rod being connected to
the eccentric which is adjusted in its relation to the
crank pin as to cause the engine to move forward.
If the reverse gear is moved backward the link will be
raised so that the quadrant block will be at the bottom
of the link and almost directly opposite the eccentric
rod which is connected to the other eccentric; this
eccentric being set in relation to the crank pin as to cause
the engine to move backward.
The locomotive having a cylinder on each side and two
eccentrics for each cylinder, in order that it will be possible
to start the engine from any position, the cranks on the
driving wheels are so placed that when the crank on the
right hand side is on the front dead centre, that is the
extreme end of the piston stroke, the left hand crank will
be on the top quarter or 90 degrees behind the right hand
crank. The valve on the left hand side, therefore, will
have the back port full open admitting steam behind the
piston and forcing it forward.
The piston being connected to the crosshead by the
piston rod and the crosshead to the crank by the con-
necting rod, they move with it and as the connecting rod
is connected to the crank pin and crank, the driving wheels
are forced to revolve.
As the driving wheels revolve, the axle revolves
carrying with it the eccentrics and the movement is
transmitted to the eccentric rods, links, spindles and
valves in the steam chest. As the crank pin passes the
{See Figure 22 at back of book) S7


front dead centre, the valve reaches a position to exhaust
the steam that has driven the piston forward and at the
same time, admits steam from the steam chest to the
front of the piston causing it to be pushed back. From
this it will be seen that while one crank is on the dead
centre, in which case it would be impossible for the
piston and crosshead to move in either direction on
account of the connecting rod being on a straight line
through the cylinders, the crank on the opposite side is
on either the top or bottom quarter, so that full power is
being exerted on the piston on that side.
WALSCHAERT VALVE GEAR.
The Walschaert valve gear as shown in Fig. 23,
derives its motion from the main crank pin and the
crosshead. The two motions are so combined as to
produce a motion similar to that obtained by the Stephen-
son gear.
The motion for opening and closing the valve is
obtained from the eccentric arm attached to the main
crank pin, whilst the lap and lead of the valve is directly
controlled by the combination lever attached to the
crosshead arm by means of the combination link.
The parts of the Walschaert gear comprise the eccentric
arm fixed to the main crank pin, which with the eccentric
rod attached to the foot of the slotted link, converts the
rotary motion of the crank to a to and fro motion and
causes the slotted link to oscillate in its trunnions, the
trunnion bearings being supported by stretcher bars or
brackets.
A quadrant or link block operating in the slot, in a
similar manner to the Stephenson gear is attached to a
radius rod, the other end of which is attached at or near
the top of the combination lever, the combination lever
being attached to the crosshead arm by means of the
combination link.
A radius rod hanger is attached at one end to the
radius rod and at the other to the reversing arm so that
(See Figure 23 at back of book) 8 8


any movement of the reversing gear raises or lowers the
quadrant block inside the slotted link. When the block
is moved either to the top or bottom of the link slot, any
movement of the link backward or forward will be
transferred to the radius rod and the top of the com-
bination lever. The crosshead moving back and forth
in the motion bars causes a corresponding motion at the
lower end of the combination lever. The intermediate
valve spindle connected to the valve in the steam chest is
also connected to the combination lever, so that any
movement of the combination lever will be transferred to
the valve and cause it to move backward and forward,
corresponding to the movement produced on the com-
bination lever by the radius rod and the crosshead.
Walschaert valve gear is placed outside the frames.
It has several advantages over the Stephenson gear
which in the main are : It is lighter in construction,
more convenient for inspection and oiling. It is more
easily dismantled in case of failure; there are fewer
parts and consequently less maintenance. A feature of
the gear is that through the action of the combination
lever, the lap and lead of the valve is constant at all
positions of the reversing gear.
VALVE LEAD.
Steam begins to flow into the cylinder a few degrees
before the crank reaches the dead centre. The instant
at which steam begins to flow is known as the point of
admission. The valve is thus open a little before the
piston is ready to begin its stroke but a supply of steam
has had time to enter the cylinder and fill the space
between the piston and the steam port. The amount of
opening thus given to the steam port by the valve is
known as lead and is measured when the crank is in
front or back dead centre. It may be described as the
amount the steam port is opened when the piston is at the
beginning of its stroke.
If the valve is set so that the crank is past the dead
centre before the valve opens the steam port to the


cylinder, the valve is set blind. If the valve is set so that
its admission edge is in line with the admission edge of
the steam port the valve is set line in line.
With the Stephenson valve gear the valve is controlled
by two eccentrics which are connected to a link by means
of eccentric rods and eccentric straps. One eccentric is
for forward running and the other is for backward
running. The link is slotted and is curved to a radius
equal to the distance between the centre line of the axle
and the centre line of the link slot. If the lead is measur-
ed when the engine is in full fore or back gear and
then the reverse gear is moved to the mid gear position
it will be found that the lead has increased.
If the reverse gear is placed in mid gear while the
engine is moving, the valve will move only sufficiently to
open the ports at each end of the cylinder by the amount
of lead so that steam will be admitted to the cylinder
through a very small port opening, and will follow the
piston for a very short distance before the valve closes the
admission port.
With the Walschaert gear the valve is controlled by
two motions, one derived from the crosshead and the
other from the eccentric crank. The crosshead motion
through the combination lever controls the lap and lead
of the valve and this is constant irrespective of the position
of the reversing gear.
LEAD ADJUSTMENT.
In the case of the Stephenson gear the lead could be
varied by shifting the position of the eccentrics on the
axle but usually this is not practicable as the forward and
backward eccentrics are cast together in pairs and move-
ment in one direction to suit one eccentric would adverse-
ly affect the other. The eccentrics are therefore designed
and machined to give the required amount of lead.
The eccentric rods are butt jointed on to the eccentric
straps and liners are placed between the straps and
the rods at the butt joints. These liners are changed in
thickness for the purpose of adjusting the length of the


eccentric rods so as to equalise or adjust the lead for
forward and reverse running. Altering liners has no
effect on the total amount of lead opening, the total lead
cannot be changed by altering the lengths of the eccentric
rods. Any attempt in this direction will cause the lead
to be changed unequally, i.e., what is taken off at one end
will be added to the other and vice versa.
In the case of Walschaert valve gear, the lead is fixed
by the proportions of the combination lever and this
cannot be altered. If it is necessary to equalise the lead
this is done by shortening or lengthening the radius rod
as may be required.
VALVE LAP.
When the valve is placed in its central position its
admission edges overlap the admission edges of the
steam ports to both ends of the cylinder. The amount
that the valve overlaps the steam ports when in its central
position is known as steam lap. If in this position the
exhaust edges of the valve overlap the exhaust edges of
the steam ports leading to the cylinders, the overlap would
be known as exhaust lap.
The lap of a valve is provided for the purpose of
providing an early cut off of steam from the cylinders,
thereby obtaining the full expansive force of the steam.
Exhaust lap when provided is for the purpose of
closing the exhaust port slightly before the piston com-
pletes its stroke, the compression so obtained serves to
cushion the piston and provide a high initial pressure for
the return stroke. To obtain later or earlier cushioning
a piece may be taken away from or added at the exhaust
edge of the valve. If the piece be added, it is called
positive exhaust lap, or if taken away, negative exhaust
lap.
Positive exhaust lap causes the valve to open to exhaust
later and gives earlier cushioning. Negative exhaust
lap causes the valve to open to exhaust earlier and
cushioning is later.


THREE CYLINDER LOCOMOTIVES*
The Victorian Railways possess two classes of three
cylinder locomotives, namely, the “H ” and “ S ”
classes. Three cylinder locomotives are used when a
powerful engine is required and it is not possible to
use two cylinders of sufficiently large diameter owing to
limitation imposed by structures adjacent to the running
track. Whereas in two cylinder engines the cranks are
at right angles to each other, in three cylinder engines the
cranks are set up at 120° to each other. However, due to
space limitations it is usually necessary to raise the
centre cylinder a little and this varies the 120° angle
between the centre and the outside cranks by a small
amount.
Due to the cranks being at 120° the turning moment
on the wheel is more even on a three than
a two cylinder one, consequently with the same adhesion
ratio a three cylinder engine is less likely to slip. The
two outside cylinders drive on to crank pins set in the
wheel centre castings in the usual way, but for the
inside cylinder a cranked axle must be provided.
In the case of the “ S ” class the three cylinders all
drive on the one axle but on the “ H ” class the centre
cylinder drives on the leading coupled axle and the two
outside cylinders on the second coupled axle.
On the “ S ” class the centre connecting rod passes
over the leading coupled axle and this axle is set in the
middle to clear the connecting rod when it is in its
lowest position.
The necessary motion must be imparted to the third
valve which is located between the frames. Some rail-
roads employ a separate set of valve gear for this purpose
while on others, including the Victorian Railways, the
motion for the centre valve is derived from the two out-
side valves. On the “S ” class the valve spindles are
extended forward and to these are fastened rectangular
pieces called valve steam buckles. The buckles have
a pin at the forward end to carry the buckle links. In
front of the valve chests and attached to buckle links are
two beams called the long sway beam and the short sway
beam.


The long end of the long sway beam is attached to the
left hand valve. The beam is carried on a pivot attached
to the frame of the engine. The short end of the long
sway beam is forked and carries the short sway beam
between the jaws. The inner end of the short sway
beam is attached to the centre valve and the outer end to
the right hand valve. The ratio of the lengths of the arms
of the long sway beam is 2 to 1 and of the short sway
beam 1 to 1.
The motion for the centre valve is imparted through
the sway beams from the outer valves. The events of
these valves are 120° apart and this together with the
ratio of the sway beam arms ensures that the centre valve
moves in correct sequence. Valve gears of this kind
are called conjugate valve gears and the particular kind
used on the S. class is known as the Gresley gear. On
the H class conjugate shafts are used instead of sway
beams but the general principles are exactly the same.
The shafts are placed behind the valve chests.
The long conjugate shaft (Fig. 24) is carried in bearings
attached to the engine frame and it is driven by a double
rod extending backwards from the right hand valve
spindle to the long wiper on the shaft.
At the left hand end of this shaft are two short
wipers which carry the short conjugate shaft on bearings.
The short conjugate shaft has two wipers, the left hand
one being connected to the left hand valve and the
right hand one to the centre valve. The ratio of the
lengths of the wiper arms on the long shaft is 2 to 1, and
those on the short shaft are equal. This type of gear is
known as conjugate gear; its advantages over the
Gresley gear are the lower weight of parts which have
to be moved and stopped, easier accessibility and elimin-
ation of effects of expansion of valve spindles.


PART
DESCRIPTION
PART
DESCRIPTION
PART
. DESCRIPTION
PISTON VALVE
7
ECCENTRIC ROD
13
REVERSING SHAFT
2
INTERMEDIATE VALVE sp/mc
8
ECCENTRIC CRANK
14
REVERSING ROD
3
COMBINATION LEVER
9
CONJUGATE ROD
IS
PRECISION REVERSE CYL
4
COMBINATION UNK
to
LONG CONJUGATE SR AFT
le
REACH ROD
S
RADIUS ROD
n
SHORT CONJUGATE SHAFT
/7
REVERSING NhEEL
6
TRUNNION (See Note,
12
HANGING LINK
-<6)
(slotted link
<p
_
r~\
NOTE- TRUNNION < TRUNNION PLATT 6
f
(5)
i
(7)
[Olt
Block
rHri—
1
\
— V
.—,.
L_l—
D— *
\\p~<D
T^r~<S)
(9)
\V— @
Long
Conjugate Shaft Ratio = 2. to /
X
f
(J4)
©
JL.
LC~U —
r
/T— —• *— —fl r 'J(
qi
V, @
‘
f
,
f
Jftor/ Conjugate Shaft Ratio = t fof
Q
-3D-
— t—==—-
i T /c\
/'"'N
\
v —®
®-\t
(Z)
H
VALVE GEAR
*ig. 24


A*
T0P Q (t
QUARTER .0 V 0
i
> rjf
h~ j
v A* <S-$.
\°>
BOTTOM A
rtP A QUARTER V<%.
V c <
THE CRANK PATH
Vo,
FRONT
DEAD CENTRE
BACK
DEAD CENTRE
Fig. 24a


VALVE EVENTS AND STEAM DISTRIBUTION
The valves move to and fro in the steam chest, opening
and closing ports and passages for the flow of steam
to and from the cylinder. The steam acting alternately
on each side of the piston does work finally
converted into a tractive force to haul a lokd. The
functions to be performed by the valve include —
(1) admission of the steam to the cylinder to give an
impulse to the piston,
(2) to cut off the supply of steam when the piston has
travelled a certain portion of the stroke,
(3) to open a passage to exhaust just before the com-
pletion of the stroke,
(4) to close the exhaust passage before the piston reaches
the end of the return stroke so that some steam
may be trapped to provide “ cushioning.”
Thus there are four periods in the distribution of
steam within the cylinders, and they are known as —
(1) Admission.
(2) Expansion.
(3) Release.
(4) Compression.
When the crank is on the first quarter or dead centre
the piston is at the extreme end of the cylinder and the
valve has opened the front steam port by the amount of
lead, thus admitting steam to provide a high initial pres-
sure for the return stroke of the piston. The opening of
the steam port to lead is the commencement of the
period of admission. As the piston moves from the
front dead centre towards the back dead centre, lever in
full gear, the valve (inside admission) moves in the oppos-
ite direction, thus continuing to open the steam port
until the crank is near the bottom quarter when the valve
having reached the end of its travel commences its
return journey, and gradually closes the steam port until
the crank is near the bottom back eighth, when the valve
has completely closed the steam port, and the steam
by its expansive force continues to force the piston to-
wards the back dead centre. This is the period of


SAVE
HE
expansion. The valve having reached the limit of its
travel commences its return stroke and opens the back
port to lead, for the purpose of admitting steam to
provide a high initial pressure for the return stroke of the
piston. At the same time the valve commences to open
the exhaust port so that the steam that has pushed the
piston from front to back can be exhausted. This is the
period of release, and continues until the piston has
THE COAL
Keep the fire-bed even by
breaking the coal, putting
large pieces in the fire will
cause the fire to become
uneven and result in a drop
in steam pressure, the fire
will require cleaning more
often and cause delays to
the train and more hard
labour than breaking the
lumps.
nearly reached the end of its stroke when the valve closes
the exhaust port and imprisons any steam left in the
cylinder for the purpose of cushioning the reciprocating
parts. This is the period of compression.
Whilst the inside admission valve first travels in the
opposite direction to the piston, the outside admission
valve performs the same function by first travelling in the
same direction as the piston.


CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
2 CYLINDER ENGINE.
"*■» - 11
For ward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port shut —front shut.
Forward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port shut —front open
to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust-
front shut.


Back
CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
2 CYLINDER ENGINE.
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Forward
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to lead.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to lead.
Forward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut —front open
to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port shut —front open
to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
(See Figure 24fc at back of book) 99


CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
2 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Bock
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port shut—front shut.
Forward
Bock
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
Right cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.


CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
2 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
Forward
Bock
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front shut.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
T --


/ rSc \
I \ L.C. i
V c / /c I
CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
3 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Back
Forward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to steam.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to steam.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front shut.
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to steam.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to steam.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder —back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Centre cylinder —back port open to ex-
haust —front open to exhaust.


CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
3 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Bock
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to lead.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to steam.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to steam.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Centre cylinder—back port shut —front
open to exhaust.
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
Forward Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
®haust —front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to steam.
IN MID. GEAR.
Back Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
' front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
{See Figure 24c at back of book) 103


I \ C.C. \
\ R / c ' /
V R| ' c ' /
CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
3 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Bock
Forward
Bock
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to lead.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front shut.
Centre cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to steam—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam—
front open to exhaust.


CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
3 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
'Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Right cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Forward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust-
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust-
front open to steanl;
Centre cylinder—back port ppen to steam-
front open to exhaust;
in mid. Gear.
Left Cylinder-—back port open to exhaust —
, front open to steam; , ,
Right cylinder l —back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust,
tenure Cylinder— back port open to ex-
haustI—front 1 —front open to exhaust;


f CXQ.
I V, y / I
CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
3 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Back
Forward
Bock
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust-
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to lead-
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam-
front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to lead.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front shut.
Right cylinder—back port open to lead —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust —front shut.
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder-—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre eylinder--—back port open to ex-
haust —front open to exhaust.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder-—back port open to exhaust—
: front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to
haust—front open to lead.


/ R i c ' \
I I
CRANK POSITIONS AND PORT OPENINGS.
3 CYLINDER ENGINE.
Forward
Back
Forward
Back
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam-
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to lead.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port shut—front open
to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port shut —front open
to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to lead.
IN FORE GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to steam.
IN BACK GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to exhaust —
front open to steam.
Right cylinder—back port open to steam —
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to exhaust.
IN MID. GEAR.
Left cylinder—back port open to lead—
front open to exhaust.
Right cylinder—back port open to exhaust—
front open to exhaust.
Centre cylinder—back port open to ex-
haust—front open to steam.


OIL FIRED LOCOMOTIVES.
Various types of locomotives have been converted to
oil burning, the capacity of the fuel oil tank on the tender
being made to suit the class of locomotive so concerned.
The oil is fed by gravity to the oil control valve adjacent
to the oil burner which is situated at the forward end of
the ash pan below the firebox foundation ring. The oil
burner is of the steam operated weir type and the oil
flowing from the larger slot at the top of the burner is
atomised and sprayed into the firebox by a steam jet
from the smaller slot at the bottom of the burner. The
main controlling features are the oil control valve and
the steam jet atomiser control valve.
Proper manipulation of controls is necessary to pro-
duce complete combustion and too strong a jet of steam
will damage the firebrick flash wall and cause deposit of
carbon. Too weak a jet of steam will cause smoke and
imperfect combustion and sooting up of tubes, etc..
Too much oil and not enough steam will allow oil to
accumulate in the firepan or run out onto the ground.
Preheating of oil in the tank and in the pipe line by steam
allows the oil to gravitate more freely and permits easier
adjustment of controls to reduce smoke, to prevent oil
from dropping into the ash pan and to obtain proper
combustion.
Oil burning locomotives were originally designed to
burn coal fuel, but were converted to burn residual oil
by providing an oil tank in the coal space of the tender,
and by removal of the firegrates in the firebox and the
substitution of a fire brick floor with refractory lining
and air slot openings. The brick arch was retained and
fire brick side walls and firebrick flash walls at the
back boiler plate were provided. An altered firebox
door in the closed position provides a peep hole and
allows of sand being directed into the firebox through a
funnel whilst the locomotive is steaming heavily so that
the sand will be drawn into and carried along by the
draft to clear soot from the tubes and superheater
elements *


As heavy residual oil requires continuous heating the
equipment provides the means to heat the oil and to blow
through the oil passages in the event of the flow of oil
becoming restricted due to the oil solidifying whilst the
locomotive is not in service.
In Diagrammatic Arrangement, Figure 24d, it will
be seen that the oil tank heater coil is vented to the
atmosphere, an oil pipe line heater is provided, a steam
pressure gauge is fitted to the atomiser steam pipe line
to the burner and a steam manifold with five valves is
provided; the 5 valves being as follows :
1. Blow through valve : for heating and clearing
oil passages.
2. Tank heater valve
for heating oil in tank to
about 120° F.
3. Pipe heater valve
is working.
for use when locomotive
4. Atomiser valve : for atomising oil at the burner.
5. Shed line valve : for shed use only when
necessary to light-up by using shed air or steam.
The steam manifold is connected by piping to a steam
cock situated on the dome of the boiler.
Lighting up.
Locomotives must be lit up only in accordance with
specific instructions relevant to the availability of steam
or air pressure for lighting up when ;
(a) Boiler below 20 lbs. steam pressure and shed
line steam available.
(b) Boiler with 20 lbs. or more steam pressure.
(c) Boiler below 20 lbs. steam pressure and shed line
are available.
(d) Boiler cold or below 20 lbs. steam pressure and
no shed air or shed steam available.
The sequence of operations for each method is briefly
described hereafter.
(See Figure 24d at back of book) 109


Boiler cold or below 20 lbs. steam pressure
and Shed steam supply available. Test the
water level in the boiler. Remove chimney
cover, close dome steam stop cock, inspect
firebox and smokebox, close all valves on the
steam manifold and connect the shed steam line
to the shed line valve on the bottom of the
steam manifold. Open this valve and when
steam is being supplied, open the atomiser
valve slowly till the pressure gauge shows from
15 to 30 lbs. per square inch.
Close the oil shut off cock at the fireman’s side
of the cab and fully open the oil control valve
then slowly open the blow through valve and
keep it open for one minute before closing it
and the oil control valve. Open the oil tank
stop cock and oil shut off cock at the fireman’s
side of the cab and slowly open the blow through
valve and keep it open for about 2 minutes before
closing it firmly. Open the tank heater valve
and leave it open. Shut the atomiser valve.
Open the damper, open the firehole door and
throw lighted waste in front of the burner.
After shutting and clamping the firehole door,
slowly open the oil control valve until oil flows
from the burner. Slowly open the atomiser
valve until the oil ignites and then adjust it and
the oil control valve to obtain a long, clear flame
and avoid oil dropping from the burner to the
firepan.
The blower valve must be used when
sufficient steam is generated in the boiler.
Should the flame go out, shut the oil control
valve and the atomiser valve immediately and if
possible, use the blower valve to clear the fire-
box of smoke and fumes. Do not attempt to
relight the fire from the heated brickwork
or until the smoke and fumes have cleared
for such practice is dangerous and can


cause explosions. When the boiler pressure
has reached about 30 lbs. per square inch, open
the steam cock on the dome and shut off the
shed line valve on the bottom of the steam
manifold before disconnecting the shed supply
line.
When boiler has 20 lbs. or more steam
pressure. Test the water level in the boiler.
Close all valves on the steam manifold and fully
open the steam cock on the dome. Open the
atomiser valve until the pressure gauge on that
pipe line shows 20 to 30 lbs. of steam then con-
tinue the sequence of operations as for (al) (a 2)
excepting any which refer to use of shed
line valve.
When boiler is cold or steam pressure
below 20 lbs. per square inch, and shed
air line pressure is available and oil runs
freely from the tank to the burner. Test
the water level in the boiler. Shut the steam
cock on the dome and all valves on the steam
manifold. Connect the shed air line to the
shed valve on the bottom of the steam manifold
and after opening this valve and the atomiser
valve, supply air from the shed air line to allow
air to blow through to the burner then close
the atomiser valve and continue the sequence
of operations as for (al) (a 2).
When boiler steam pressure has been raised
to about 30 lbs. per square inch, open the steam
cock at the dome and shut off the shed line valve
on the bottom of the steam manifold before
disconnecting the shed line supply. While
changing over from air to steam pressure, the
flame may go out and if it does, immediately
close the oil control valve and the atomiser
valve and clear the firebox of smoke and fumes
by opening the blower valve before attempting
to relight the fire.


(d) Boiler cold or below 20 lbs. steam pressure
and neither shed air nor shed steam supply
can be made available. Test the water level
in the boiler and light up with firewood follow-
ing the procedure laid down in the Rolling
Stock Book of Instructions.
When placing the firewood in the firebox,
care must be taken not to damage the floor,
side walls and flash wall brickwork and to pre-
vent any piece of wood from striking the burner.
When steam pressure has been raised to about
25 lbs. per square inch, the oil burner can then
be lit in the manner described in (b) for lighting
up boilers with 20 lbs. or more steam pressure.
Preparation.
With the boiler at least 25 lbs. per square inch steam
pressure and the fire out and all controls shut off, the
locomotive is prepared on similar lines to a coal burning
locomotive in regard to inspection and lubrication of its
various parts. The procedure for residual oil burning
equipment is as follows
Inspection of firebox. Open drain cock at bottom
of oil tank sump in tender and allow any water to drain
SAVE THE FUEL..
Black smoke issuing from the funnel is
sure evidence of imperfect combustion with
oil fuel as well as with coal. The soot de-
posited by smoke on the heating surfaces of
the boiler is a non-conductor of heat and
will make an oil burning locomotive a dull
steamer ...... If steam cannot be
produced without making heavy black
smoke, the cause of the trouble should be
ascertained and promptly reported.


out. Use the dip-stick to measure the quantity of oil
in the oil tank and see that the sand funnel and scoop
are in good order and the sand box under the oil tank
is filled with suitable sand. Inspect the oil tank, valves,
hoses, piping and burner, and all steam valves, hoses
and piping for leaks and security, see that the smoke-
box door is securely fastened. Light up as described
in (b) for boilers having 20 lbs. or more steam pressure
See that the tank heat valve is open and test the tem-
perature of the oil in the tank which should be about
120°Fah. and which will allow of an engineman holding
the palm of his hand on the end of the oil tank for more
than 3 seconds without discomfort.
OPERATION ON THE ROAD.
The firing of an oil burning locomotive differs very
materially from that for a coal burning locomotive and
economical combustion and satisfactory results can only
be achieved by intelligent operation of controls and co-
operation of driver and fireman. As a general guide a
white incandescent color at the firedoor peephole and the
complete absence of black smoke from the chimney is
most desirable. Black smoke from the chimney or dull
red smoky flame through the peephole indicates incom-
plete combustion and waste of fuel. The fireman should
regulate the controls to increase the fire when the
regulator is opened and reduce the fire when the
regulator is closed and to regulate the fire by adjustment
of controls to suit the work being done by the locomotive.
When the locomotive is working, the steam jet from
the burner should only be sufficient to produce complete
combustion. Excessive jet of steam will damage the
flash wall by cutting away the bricks and causing carbon
deposits, and will produce succession of explosions
commonly termed “ Drumming.” Too weak a jet of
steam will cause smoke and incomplete combustion
together with the dropping of oil onto the ashpan floor
and into the ashpan. Proper adjustment of the steam
jet therefore lies between the two extremes.
A good strong fire should be maintained whilst the


injectors are working. The injectors should not be
put on when the fire is out. The oil control valve and
not the injectors should be used to control the steam
pressure and the injectors should be operating nearly
continuously whilst the locomotive is working. When
the locomotive is standing or rolling, the use of too much
steam at the burner with a light fire will create a disagree-
able gas and cause light explosions to puff pungent
smoke at the peephole. Too little steam under the same
conditions will not carry oil far enough into the firebox
and oil will drop onto the floor and into the firepan.
Oil running out of the firepan to the ground is likely
to start a fire.
When the locomotive is standing, a light fire should be
maintained and the blower reduced to minimise cold air
being drawn through the tubes. Black smoke should at
all times be avoided. The soot deposited by smoke on
the heating surfaces is a non-conductor of heat, and
frequent light sanding whilst the locomotive is working
hard allows the draft to draw the sand through the
tubes and in its passage to cut away the soot and dis-
charge it from the chimney. Sanding must not be effected
when passing through stations, etc., but suitable locations
should be selected en route where risk of objection is
unlikely. When the locomotive is rolling, the regulator
should be cracked to preserve the piston rod packing
and distribution of oil in the cylinders.
The steam supply to the oil tank should be regulated
and checked frequently by hand contact with the tank
to ensure the oil is not allowed to become overheated.
The pipe heater valve must be fully opened when the
locomotive is starting and remain fully open whilst the
locomotive is working with the exception that in all
cases it must be shut off when the locomotive is to roll
or be stationary for more than three minutes or when
on “UP ” running the locomotive is entering the
suburban area at Caulfield, Broadmeadows, Sunshine
or Newport or while passing through the suburban
area on “UP ” running.


If the pipe heater valve is not shut off when the loco-
motive is rolling or is stationary for more than three
minutes, the oil will become overheated and the flame
will go out.
If the flame goes out due to overheated oil, immed-
iately close the oil control valve, the atomiser valve and
the pipe heater valve for about three minutes and use
the blower to clear the firebox of smoke and fumes before
attempting to relight the burner. If the flame goes
out through the oil being overheated immediately close
the pipe heater valve.
The Blow through valve must not be used whilst
the locomotive is in motion.


THE MECHANICAL STOKER.
The “ H ” Class locomotive is fitted with a mechanical
stoker and other classes will be similarly fitted in the
future.
The Mechanical Stoker is a labour saving device
designed to relieve the fireman of the labour of firing
by hand; the stoker firing the locomotive mechanically.
The continuous delivery of coal in small pieces over
the entire grate area is under the fireman’s control.
Since there is no manual labour connected with the
operation of the stoker, the maximum capacity of even
the heaviest locomotive can be obtained without taxing
the strength of the fireman. The stoker must not be
used to build the starting fire or when the locomotive
is at rest. Under these conditions coal should be
supplied by hand.
The positions of the various parts of the Stoker
apparatus as installed on the locomotive are shown
in figure 25.
The principal parts of the apparatus are (1) a reversible
two cylinder steam engine located on the left side
of the locomotive under the cab. (2) a conveyor
screw in a trough under the bunker. (3) a coal crusher
at the front end of the trough. (4) an intermediate
conveyor screw with flexible joints extending from the
coal crusher to an elbow under the fire grate. (5) a
vertical conduit from the elbow to a point just below
the firehole door opening. (6) distributing steam jets
at the top of the vertical conduit.
Coal is fed to the fire as follows :
The floor of the bunker is provided with sliding
doors and when one or more of these is opened, coal
falls by gravity into the stoker trough under the bunker.
The coal in the trough is moved forward by a cast steel
conveyor screw. Large pieces of coal are broken up
by being forced by the screw against the coal crusher
at the front end of the trough. The coal after passing
through the crusher is conveyed by the intermediate


•f®|


conveyor screw through a conduit fitted with flexible
joints to an elbow beneath the fire grate and is then
forced to the top of the vertical conduit from which
point it is distributed to the various portions of the
grate by means of manually controlled steam jets.
The amount of coal fired is determined by the speed
of the stoker engine, the control of which is manual
and under the direct care of the fireman. The dis-
tribution of coal over the grate is effected by the proper
manipulation of the valves controlling the steam supply
to the jets.
Surrounding the vertical conduit above the level
of the fire grate is a protective grate which serves to
prevent the vertical conduit from becoming over-
heated, and allows air to be drawn in by the draft
both under and above the fire to assist the process of
combustion.
DESCRIPTION OF THE VARIOUS PARTS.
(a) The Stoker Engine. The stoker engine
(figure 26), is a horizontal two cylinder type operated
at slow speed and completely enclosed so that the
working parts are protected against the entry of water
and grit.
The motion for each valve is effected by single
eccentrics. A manually operated reversing valve is
placed in the steam piping under the cab to enable
the engine to be reversed. This is effected by inter-
changing the functions of the steam and exhaust ports,
and this does away with the necessity of double eccen-
trics and reversing gear and makes for simplicity.
It is seldom necessary to give more than a few turns
in the reverse direction for the purpose of relieving
an obstruction.
(b) Throttle and Booster Valves. Two steam
valves are provided in the steam piping to the Stoker
engine; the smaller one is called the throttle valve,
and the larger one, the booster valve; the use of
these valves is explained on page 126, Clause (c),
“ Operation of Stoker.”


Si ;,-. ' i-’-1 -
M i
:■ ■'■ ■ -■ J« ' V'.il
(c) Reversing Valve. The reversing valve is an
ordinary piston type valve (see Fig, 27) with inside
admission, and in normal operation steam passes from
boiler, around the valve to the cylinders of the engine.
The steam exhaust passes out at the end of the valve
to the atmosphere. In the reverse position the revers-
ing valve handle in the cab is pushed down ; this lifts
the valve, permitting live steam to enter the exhaust
steam chamber of the engine through the exhaust pas-
sage, the engine exhausting through the reversing
valve to the atmosphere. The change in the position
of the reversing valve changes the engine valves from
inside admission in normal position to outside ad-
mission in reverse.
Fig. 26 D.S. Stoker Engine.
The reversing valve handle in the Cab has three
positions, viz., (1) Up or Running position, (2) Central
(in the notch) or Neutral position, and (3) Down or
Reversing position.
(d) Driving Shaft and Gear. The drive from the
engine to the conveyor screw is effected by shafting
provided with a sliding joint and two universal joints,


S ' J
RUsNNG POSITION.
/
] cn
NEUTRAL IN NOTCH
REVERSE POSITION.
JL
V a LV E
cr \ / c o c: i \ r
J
r'
S
If
V
A
j
£- 1
f|:
11
LIVE STEAM .
FROM BOILER
-
*
/j
1
1;
lj
LIVE STEAM BMr
FROM BOILER
I:
II ‘1
11
LrVE STEAM
TO STOKER -
ENGINE
|r ‘
1
!s
"BI-exhaust steam exhaust steam JBIr
■ FROM STOKER FROM STOKER Ht
B- ENGINE ENGINE
p LIVE STEAM
| V ■ "TO STOKER
ENGINE
I
Exhaust steam
to atmosphere
EXHAUST STEAM
TO ATMOSPHERE
RUNNING POSITION
or VALVE,
Fig. 27 REVERSE POSITION
OF VALVE.


to ensure flexibility between engine and tender, to
gearing at the rear of the tender trough. The gearing
is enclosed in a dust-tight casing.
(e) Tender Trough and Coal Crusher. The
tender trough, containing the conveyor screw and
crusher plates (Fig. 25) is rigidly attached to the tender
underframe and is designed to prevent foreign sub-
stances from working under the conveyor screw and
interfering with its operation. The crusher plate
(Fig. 28) is bolted to the front end of the trough and
large lumps of coal are crushed by being forced against
projecting spikes. The conveyor screw is increased
in thickness near the crusher to allow for greater wear.
Fig.2B Crusher
(f) Conveyor and Screws. Flexible connections
containing the intermediate conveyor screw are pro-
vided between the engine and tender. The conduit
has two ball and socket joints and a slip joint and the
conveyor screw has two universal joints.
Four hand holes are provided on the horizontal
conduit to permit the removal of foreign matter which
may have become jammed there.
An inspection grille is provided in the floor of the
cab through which the flow of coal to the fire-box
may be observed when the stoker is working.
After passing through the horizontal conduit, the
coal is forced up the vertical conduit at the top of which
is the firing plate and the steam distributor jet. A
protective grate surrounds the vertical conduit, and
this serves to protect the conduit and distributor jet
steam pipes from the heat of the fire. It also provides
for the introduction of air above the fire to assist com-
bustion while the fire door is closed.


.
(g) The Distributor Jet. This is shown in Fig. 29
and it is designed to provide for the proper distribution
of the coal under all operating conditions. The jet
has 14 holes, three to serve each back corner, three
to serve each side, and two for the centre of the grate ;
thus there are five groups of jet holes, and each group
is controlled by a separate steam valve on a manifold
fixed to the back of the firebox. When the coal rises
above the firing plate, it can be evenly distributed over
the grate by adjusting the steam supply to each group
of holes by means of the manifold valves.
Fig.2.9 Distributor Jet,
The steam to the jet is controlled by a main jet valve
which, when open, allows steam to pass to the jet mani-
fold. The five valves controlling the steam to the
groups of holes in the distributor jet are located in the
manifold.
Figures 30 and 31 are side and plan views showing
the distribution of coal on the grate of a locomotive
by means of a stoker.
LUBRICATION.
(a) Stoker Engine. The stoker engine cylinders
are supplied with cylinder oil from a sight feed lubri-
cator in the cab. The feed should be from 2 to 3
drops per minute when the stoker engine is running.
When the stoker is stopped, the lubricator regulating
valve for the stoker shall be cut off and the cock in the
delivery pipe closed to prevent steam going to the
stoker.


7T7T T nr r rrrrnTrrr >:;; 17 n, 11T,^,, 1 iili
|‘ M I llllll Ml I II I I I I 111 I I 1 1 I ! 11 1 ! I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I. I 1
Fig. 50 Side View of Fire Box Showing Distribution
with Standard Stoker.
Fig.3l. Plan View of Fire Box Showing Distribution.


f~~i
! : ° _ . , , . . Universal Joint
f=t^________ —I Universal Joint
Vi in. Pet Cock for Testing
Oil Level in Engine Bed
® > 1ju, oil Drain
Bin ,., ril
LI j in. Oil Filler Pipe for Engine Bed
fjSj! | STOKER
I DRIVING SHAFT
The working parts, other than the cylinders of the
stoker engine, are lubricated by splash lubrication
in the engine bed. There should be 1| inch of oil in
the engine bed and oil should show when the petcock
is opened. Bearing oil is supplied to the engine bed,
when required, through the 1 inch oil filler pipe.
(b) Reversing Valve. Sufficient lubrication for the
reversing valve is provided by the oil in the exhaust
steam from the cylinders.
(c) Driving Shaft and Gear. The slip joint and
the universal joints in the drive shaft should be oiled daily.
The drive shaft bearings on the stoker trough are
lubricated with bearing oil from a four compartment
oilbox located on the front of the tender.
The driving gear and pinions on the tender are
enclosed in a steel housing which is filled with cylind-
er oil. A filling pipe with an oil gun connection,
near the intermediate buffer, is provided. A drain
plug is also provided for use when the gear case is
cleaned out. The oil shall be replenished at regular
intervals by the shed staff.
Fig.s2
Fig. 32 illustrates the lubricating facilities on the
stoker engine.


OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
(a) Lighting Up. When a locomotive fitted with
a stoker is being lit up, the procedure adopted shall
be the same as for a locomotive not fitted with a stoker,
i.e., by hand firing. The stoker must not be started
until the steam pressure in the boiler has been raised
to 150 lbs. per sq. inch or more, and then only to test
the stoker to ensure that it is in proper working order
before the locomotive leaves the Depot.
(b) Preparation of the Stoker. It is the duty
of the Enginemen, before the locomotive leaves the
Depot, to attend to the following :
(i) See that the fire is clean and in good condition
before taking the engine out.
(ii) Inspect all visible parts of the stoker to see
that it is in good order.
(iii) See that the stoker engine has sufficient oil
in the engine bed by opening the petcock. If
no oil appears at the petcock, bearing oil shall
be added through the oil filler pipe until it
shows at the petcock.
(iv) Fill the oilbox on the tender front with bearing
oil. If the locomotive is in running for more
than eight hours, it will be necessary to replenish
the oil during the trip.
(v) Apply a few drops of bearing oil to the slip
joint in the drive shaft and to the universal
joints.
(vi) Fill the stoker sight feed lubricator with cylinder
oil, and when the stoker engine is running, set
the lubricator to feed from two or three drops
per minute to the stoker engine.
(vii) When the steam pressure has been raised to
150 lbs, per sq. inch or more, test the stoker
by allowing it to run idle for about one minute
See Clause (c) “ Operation of Stoker ”.


(viii) If the stoker idles satisfactorily, open the front
slide in the bunker floor and feed coal up to
the distributing point in the firebox. Then
shut off the stoker engine and lubricator, build
up the fire by hand and do not commence stoker
firing until the fire conditions require the stoker
to be used after the train has started.
(c) Operation of Stoker.
In firing with a mechanical stoker a light even fire
must be built up by hand and full steam pressure
should be raised before leaving the terminal, the stoker
should not be used until the locomotive is steaming,
the operation should then be as set out hereunder.
(i) Before starting the stoker, the fireman shall
set the lubricator to feed from two to three
drops per minute to the stoker engine. Start
the stoker gently and then open the distributor
ject manifold steam valves. Next, slowly open
the main steam jet valve.
(Note —Do not open this valve suddenly as it
might result in the distributor being cracked,
due to a sudden rush of water from the pipes.)
Then test the distributor jet as follows; First
close the five manifold valves ; next, open each
manifold valve separately and see that all the
holes in each compartment of the jet are open,
and also note to which part of the firebox each
group of holes leads.
(ii) Open the stoker engine throttle slowly, so as to
permit any condensation to escape through the
automatic drain valve. Then place the reversing
handle in the running position and give the
stoker sufficient steam to run at the desired
speed.
The speed of the stoker and the flow of steam from
the distributor jet should be varied to suit the operating
conditions, with the view of maintaining a thin, level,
bright fire uniformly distributed over the grate surface
at all times. The fire should be kept as thin as possible.


Should a bank of coal form on the grate in service,
it should be disposed of as soon as possible. This can
be accomplished by re-adjusting the manifold valves
to the distributor jet, or if necessary by use of the
pricker. When thin spots develop in the fire, it
will be found more convenient to supply the
required coal by hand firing than to re-adjust
the manifold valves. The coal is to be inspected
frequently and pieces of rock, iron, wood or other foreign
materials are not to be allowed to feed through the
stoker.
When the train is standing or drifting down long
grades, the stoker engine should be shut off and the
main jet valve partly closed.
The manifold valves to the distributor jet should
never be closed when there is a fire in the firebox,
and the main jet valve should be left c ' cracked ” so
that a slight amount of steam will flow through the
jet holes when the engine is drifting or standing, to
prevent the holes in the jet from becoming blocked.
The fire should be maintained by hand.
(Note ; —There is a small bye-pass hole in the jet
valve body and in each manifold valve to prevent
steam being completely shut off, therefore do not damage
these valves by trying to completely shut off the steam,
by them. If it is necessary to completely shut off the
jet steam supply, the valve on the turret should be closed.)
To do a good job of firing, the fireman must use
judgment in controlling the supply of coal to the firebox
in accordance with the way the engine is being worked,
and in seeing that the manifold valves are set so that
the coal is distributed uniformly over the grate.
Frequent observation of the fire is necessary to guard
against heavy firing which may cause “ banks,” or
insufficient coal, which will cause “ thin ” spots.
The amount of coal fired is determined by the speed
of the stoker engine, which is under the direct control
of the fireman. Correct distribution of the coal to


the various parts of the grate is effected by the proper
manipulation of the distributor jet manifold valves.
When the stoker engine is running at normal speed,
the pointer of the stoker engine steam gauge should
vibrate between 15 and 25 lbs. pressure. Should the
reading on the stoker steam gauge rise to almost boiler
pressure and remain stationary, it indicates that the
stoker has stopped. The steam booster valve to the
stoker should then be fully opened, and if this will
not start the stoker, then reverse the stoker engine a
few times. If, on reversing the stoker, it will not
start, flush the tender and conveyor trough with water
from the coal sprinkler and continue to reverse the
stoker to try to work the obstruction through. Never
place a hand or foot in the trough whilst the stoker
is in motion.
If, after repeated efforts, the stoker will not start,
close the stoker throttle valve, place the reversing
valve handle in neutral position, (i.e., in the notch),
look for the obstruction and remove it.
If the stoker stops while the train is running and
cannot be started readily, the fire should be maintained
by hand until the first stopping place is reached. If
the stoker can be re-started without delay to the train
it should be done; if not, the train must be brought
in to the terminal by hand-firing the engine.
The conveying and distributing systems are inde-
pendent of each other ; therefore the locomotive can be
fired by hand by placing coal on top of the vertical
housing just inside and in front of the fire door, from
which point the distribution of the coal is effected by the
manifold valves. The coal must be broken into
small lumps, so that the jets can distribute it
properly
In order to make stoker firing successful and econo-
mical, there must be close co-operation between the
driver and the fireman at all times. The regulator,
the cut-off, and injector should be handled with the
same regard for economy as in the case of hand-fired
locomotives.


REMOVING OBSTRUCTION.
If foreign matter is too large for the crusher to
handle, reverse the stoker to release it, remove the
coal above the crusher, and take out the obstruction.
Should the foreign matter be wedged so tightly
that the stoker cannot be reversed, remove the hand-
hole cover on the tender ball joint, and by the use of
a bar, the obstruction can usually be worked loose.
Should this method fail, open the tender ball joints
by removing the four |in. bolts that hold the two
halves of the outside rear ball socket in position; the
bowl can then be opened and the obstruction worked
loose and removed. If necessary, the crusher can be
taken out by removing two bolts which fasten it to
the tender trough front support plate.
When removing foreign substance from the
conveyor system, be certain that the turret, throttle
and booster steam valves are shut off tightly, and
that the reversing valve handle for the stoker
engine is in the Neutral position.
TAKING COAL.
Before taking coal at the Depot or en route,
all the tender trough slides shall be closed. They
must also be closed before arriving at a terminal station
at the end of a trip, and the stoker kept in operation
so that the conveyor is empty before the engine arrives
at the coal stage. (The conveyor system holds about
400 lbs. of coal.) Upon arrival at a terminal, the
stoker engine must be run in the reverse direction
so as to back the coal down in the vertical conduit.
Then place the reversing handle in the neutral position
and close the stoker engine throttle valve. The dis-
tributor jet and manifold valves should be left slightly
cracked. During the stabling of the locomotive at a
terminal, the stoker and distributor must be inspected
and tested by the driver, and any defects shall be
booked.


PULVERISED BROWN COAL FIRED
LOCOMOTIVES.
DESCRIPTION OF EQUIPMENT :
These locomotives are equipped with German designed
“ Stug ” combined drive brown coal firing equipments,
in which a single 24 H.P. steam turbine is used to drive
the coal conveyor screws and also the blower fans
which supply the primary air required for the con-
veyance and combustion of the coal. Reference to Figures
33, 34 and 35 will assist in clarifying the principles
of the system and equipment outlined hereafter.
In converting a grate fired locomotive to this form
of firing, the grate and ashpan are replaced with a
special firepan and firebox brickwork incorporating
dampers to admit secondary air into the bottom of the
firepan and underneath the brick arch. These dampers
are designed for progressive combustion of the fuel
and to prevent the intense heat of combustion from
burning away the brickwork in the arch. Both dampers
are interlinked and operated from the one control lever
situated in the cab in the normal manner.
Two conical burners, one on each side of the firepan
are installed beneath the cab floor with their finely
perforated burner plates extending into the back of the
firepan beneath the foundation ring of the boiler.
These burners are fitted with inspection covers, access-
ible from inside the cab so that any blockage can be
detected and cleared without difficulty.
A special firedoor fixed with clamps and fitted with
a small mica inspection door, replaces the normal
butterfly door. Secondary air ducts incorporated in
this door draw cool air into the firebox from beneath
the cab floor, assisting combustion, and, in its passage
to the firebox, the air keeps the door frame and firehole
ring reasonably protected against the intense heat of the
flame developed at this point.


ps f5 ® 5l
nwri
I ii t “Is-i
. |g|,
I?!: 1,
V -j
Ml|l: i ; * M
lliiiiiiin? iiii 4v
131
I-
z
ui
CL
rd
O'
LU
CD
z
cc
u_
_J o
< CJ
o o
CJ _J
Z CA)
° 3
or — 1
m c_)
S-* a
cc <
LU
> O
-J H
ZD
Q- o
% UJ
S =i
P O-
£ a-
* <
Li_
O
I—
z
LU
Ixl
CD
z
<
DC
ac
<


For the turbine steam supply, an internal pipe
leads from the dome to a stop valve fitted on the boiler
back plate. From this stop valve the steam is piped
through a steam regulating valve on the boiler back
plate, a flexible connection between engine and tender
and a turbine throttle valve on the tender, to the turbine
at the rear of the tender. For lighting up the engine
from cold by means of the turbine and burners, an
auxiliary turbine steam supply pipe line and valve
are provided at the back of the tender. This valve is
also used as a drain valve for condensate collecting
in the steam line to the turbine.
Only the running gear and underframe of the ordinary
locomotive tender are retained, the tank and bunker are
completely replaced. The enclosed coal bunker has
three dust-tight filling hatches fitted with fuel strainers
and tapers downwards to two longitudinal cast iron
troughs in which are housed the coal conveyor screws.
The combined maximum output of the two screws is
4850 pounds of coal per hour at the maximum turbine
working speed of 4,200 revs, per minute.
The coal bunker is also fitted with compressed air
turbulence jets, controllable from the cab, for use if
arching of the coal over the conveyor screws takes place.
A fuel level indicator is provided on the tender front
plate to indicate the level of the fuel in the bunker.
A bunker pressure gauge is provided on the front plate
of the tender to indicate whether pressure has built up
within the bunker due to the operation of the turbulence
pipes or any other reason, and should this occur, a
release valve has been provided adjacent to the gauge
to release this pressure.
The rectangular shaped water tank is built around
the fuel bunker and the turbine blower unit is mounted
on the top of the tank at the rear of the tender so that
the noise of its operation is not noticeable in the cab.
Two blower fans with a combined maximum output
of 330,000 cubic feet of air per hour, are mounted,
one on each side of the turbine on the turbine shaft


and these blow air through throttle valves and ducts
extending beneath the conveyor screw troughs to the
mixing chambers where it meets the coal being brought
forward by the conveyor screws. From this point the
coal-air mixture is propelled forward by the air velocity,
through pipes fitted with whirling devices, to the burners
where it is further divided into thin jets by the perfor-
ated burner plates before igniting within the firebox.
Flexibility of the coal-air mixture pipe between engine
and tender is provided by telescopic pipes and ball
joints. The ball points on both engine and tender are
lubricated through grease nipples situated on the fire-
door secondary air ducts and the front plate of the
tender respectively.
The fuel conveyor screws are driven by the turbine
through a worm and wormwheel drive, vertical drive
shaft, bevel wheels and a transfer gear box, which
divides the drive to the two separate screws. Between
the transfer box and the conveyor screw shafts are clutch
mechanisms, operated by levers on the front of the tender,
by means of which either, or both of the conveyor
screws can be engaged or disengaged at will.
These conveyor screw operating levers are operated
through quadrants having 5 notched positions. Move-
ment from the Ist to the 4th notch positions, progressively
opens a throttle valve in the air duct which increases
the amount of air supplied through the burners thus
purging the coal-air passages before engaging the con-
veyor screws. Movement from the 4th to the sth
notch or vertical position, operates the clutch mechanism,
engages the conveyor screw and opens the sealing
slide on the conveyor screw outlet.
An interlocking device is fitted between the conveyor
screw operating levers and the turbine throttle valve
which ensures that the turbine must be running and
that air is blowing through the fuel ducts both before the
conveyor screws can be engaged and after they have
been disengaged. This prevents any blockage of fuel
ducts with coal.


Regulation of the steaming rate is by engagement
of one or two conveyor screws as required, and the
adjustment of the steam supply to the turbine to control
the turbine speed. A revolution counter and turbine
steam supply pressure gauge are provided on the tender
front plate to respectively indicate the speed of the
turbine, and to show any abnormality in the steam
pressure required to attain this speed.
The turbine has pressure feed lubrication to all bear-
ings and an oil pressure gauge is provided on the front
plate of the tender to indicate whether the lubrication
system is functioning during running. An oil level
gauge is also provided on the turbine sump and the
level of oil is to be observed on this gauge before each
trip, and at stops en route should any irregularity in
oil pressure be detected.
The transfer gear box is splash lubricated from a deep
sump and the level of oil in this sump is indicated on an
oil level gauge built into the casing.
Lubrication of the front conveyor screw bearings
is by grease through nipples provided on the front plate
of the tender, and all other bearings are lubricated from
oil boxes and trimmings situated on the back plate of
the tender.
OPERATION OF THE EQUIPMENT.
LIGHTING UP.
Full instructions for lighting up pulverised brown
coal fired locomotives are contained in instruction
R.S. 49/9376 which describes the method to be used
when lighting up from cold with the turbine and burners.
This method requires a separate source of steam to
drive the turbine, an artificially created draught in
the smokebox, and close supervision of the turbine
steam supply pressure.


The engine can, however, be lit up with a wood fire
as for a grate fired engine, using small wood and waste
to start, and gradually building up a fire which fills
up the brick lined firepan. Air required for burning
the wood is drawn in through the burners and secondary
air dampers in the firepan.
Before the wood fire is lit up, it is essential to see
that the conveyor screw operating levers are in the fully
disengaged position and that the turbine steam stop,
regulating and throttle valves are closed.
Care must be taken to see that no large pieces of wood
are thrown into the firebox in such a manner as to
damage the brickwork. It is necessary to have a pressure
of 80 to 90 lbs. per square inch of steam in the boiler
from this wood fire, before a switch over to pulverised
fuel firing is undertaken.
PREPARATION.
The following preparation applies only to the special
equipment and in no way relieves the crew of the normal
preparation of the engine.
(1) By means of the fuel level indicator check the
fuel level in the bunker.
(2) See that the oil level on the turbine sump gauge
is showing approx. 1/2" in the glass before the
turbine is started and make sure that spare
turbine oil is available on the engine in the can
provided
(3) Check the oil level on the gauge on the transfer
gear box which should show at about 1/2 a
glass.
(4) Make sure that the oil boxes at the back of the
tender are filled and the trimmings inserted,
and that all grease pipes are filled through the
nipples located on the firedoor air ducts and
tender front plate in the cab, with the special
grease gun provided on the engine.


S STEAM STOP
VALVE
- * -V !steam regulating
VALVE
jFIREHOLE FnSP¥
1 BURNER IN5P N
4 COVERS RtLH J
\ <o* " f * ** , /.|Sf..i^
vipfS
(5) Remove the burner inspection covers and see
that there is no blockage at this location, then
firmly replace the covers.
Fig. 34
(6) When steam pressure of at least, 80 Ibs./sq. in
of steam is available in the boiler, open the
bottom firepan door, firedoor and damper, and
with the blower on, knock the wood fire out
with a fire-pricker, leaving some glowing embers
in the firepan to ignite the pulverised coal.
Close the firedoor, blower and firepan door.


TURBINE OIL I I TURBINE STEAM 1
PRESSURE GAUGE| [PRESSURE GAUGE]
(7) Open the turbine auxiliary steam supply valve
at the back of the tender to act as a drain, then
open the turbine steam valves in the following
order :
Steam stop valve (See Fig. 34) fully open.
Steam regulating valve (See Fig. 34) fully open.
Turbine throttle valve on
tender (See Fig. 35) ... slightly opened.
Fig. 35


this will remove all condensate from the pipes
to the turbine and when live steam escapes
through the opened turbine auxiliary steam
supply valve, close this valve, fully open the
turbine throttle valve and regulate the speed
of the turbine to about 1500 R.P.M. by means
of the steam regulating valve. Now make sure
that the oil gauge is showing pressure in the
turbine lubrication system and if not, immediately
stop the turbine and request fitters assistance
to remedy the defect.
Disengage the interlocking device on the conveyor
screw operating levers and with dampers open
and blower on, move both operating levers to
the 4th notch position to blow air through the
fuel ducts, clearing any possible blockage. After
a short interval, move one lever back to the Ist
notch position, and the other to the fully engaged
position when the fuel should ignite in the
firebox.
If the fuel does not ignite instantly, disengage
the burner and try again. If not successful
the second time, the kindling fire is apparently
not bright enough for ignition, and the firebox
must then be cleared of highly combustible
gases by a heavy application of the blower, before
the firedoor is opened, and the kindling fire
brightened with a lighted piece of oily waste.
Close the firedoor and again engage the burner
and the fuel should ignite. If the conveyor
screw is left engaged when the fire does not
instantly ignite, an explosion may result,
therefore too much care in this regard
cannot be taken.
When the fire has ignited, regulate the speed of
the turbine to about 1,500 R.P.M. and cut down
the blower to a minimum so that the draught
just eliminates the fumes from the firebox.


When the burner is operating smoothly, inspect
the secondary air ducts in the floor of the firepan
and if these are blocked, with slag, clear them
with the special rod provided.
One burner at this rate should be all that is
required to raise full pressure and take charge
of light engine demands until the engine is ready
to leave with the train. Should the engine
have full steam and water before the train is due
away, the conveyor screw may be disengaged
and the operating lever left in the 4th notch
position for a few minutes to blow the ducts
through with air, then moved to the Ist notch
position. If it is known that there will be no
steam demand for a short while, the turbine
should be shut down by applying the operating
lever interlocking device, shutting the turbine
throttle valve on the tender and closing the blower.
The damper should also be closed to exclude
cold air from the firepan.
The equipment may be shut down thus for
any length of time but, on restarting, care must
be exercised once again as indicated under (8)
above to see that either a bright kindling fire or
glowing brickwork is available in the firepan to
ignite the fuel.
ON THE ROAD.
The train should be started with full steam pressure
and one burner engaged, the second burner should not
be engaged until sufficient steam is being exhausted
from the engine to create the draught necessary to
clear the gases from the firebox.
When using one burner however, the speed of the
turbine should not exceed 2,500 R.P.M. and, to increase
the steaming rate, from there on, both burners should
be engaged, and the turbine speed reduced or increased
to give the desired steaming rate.


A red line is marked on the Turbine Revolution
Counter at 4,200 R.P.M. and on no account must this
speed be exceeded.
The correct use of the steam blower is most important,
and the following paragraphs indicate its best use with
this type of firing.
Always fully open the blower before engaging
the first burner and, after the burner has been
engaged, cut the blower back so that the draught
is just sufficient to clear the gases from the
firebox.
When steaming heavily with both burners
engaged, sufficient draught should be created by
the exhausting steam and it will be found that
the blower is unnecessary.
Good co-operation between driver and fireman
is essential and, when approaching the end of a
heavy steaming section, and the driver is about
to close the regulator, he should forewarn the
fireman who should then heavily apply the blower,
disengage one burner and again cut the blower
back to minimum requirements.
When firing this type of locomotive under any con-
ditions, the colour of the chimney exhaust is the best
guide to combustion. There should be no more than
a light brown haze of smoke in the exhaust, and this,
only at maximum steaming rate. Smoke from the
exhaust indicates that too much fuel is being fed to the
firebox and this will result in bad combustion, fumes
in the cab and poor steaming.
Over undulating country of light gradients it will be
found advantageous to fire continuously with one burner,
allowing boiler pressure to fall slightly on the rises and
build up again on the rolling sections, rather than be
continuously engaging and disengaging both burners.
In this way, the firebox is not subjected to fluctuations
in temperature which could lead to leaky tubes.


On long rolling sections, the equipment should be shut
down completely and the dampers closed after boiler
pressure and water have been built up to a satisfactory
level. The turbine and blower fans if left running
even at a low speed on such sections with the burners
disengaged, blow cold air into the firebox, setting up
undue strain on the boiler plates and tubes.
Dry sand should be applied to the tubeplate every 20
to 30 miles of running to avoid the build up of ash
on the tube ends. This sand should be applied when
steaming heavily so that the draught carries the sand
with maximum velocity to knock the formations clear.
STABLING.
On arrival at the stabling point, the equipment should
be shut down as follows :
(1) Place both conveyor screw levers into the 4th
notch position for a few minutes to clear the
coal-air pipes of any residual dust.
(2) Fully disengage both burners.
(3) Close the interlocking device on the turbine
throttle vale.
(4) Close the turbine throttle valve.
(5) Close the steam regulating valve.
(6) Close the steam stop valve
(7) Close the dampers.
(8) Open the auxiliary turbine steam supply valve
at the rear of the tender.
(9) Remove all wick trimmings from the oil boxes
at the rear of the tender.
(10) Store all special equipment and lock the tool
locker.


GENERAL.
Pulverised brown coal when freely mixed with air
is highly inflammable, therefore it is most important
that naked lights of any sort are not in the vicinity when
inspecting the burners or firepan, or when fuelling or
inspecting the interior of the bunker for any reason.
These duties should be performed with the aid of the
electric torch which is included in the engine kit.
Furthermore, compressed air must on no account be
used to blow out ash residue from the firebox as any
glowing embers left in the firepan may ignite the air
fuel mixture so formed and result in an explosion.
On no account must the bunker filling hatches be
opened whilst the burners are in operation.
If it is observed in running that although the burners
are engaged, there is no fire in the firepan, this may be
due to the following reasons :
(1) Either one or both the conveyor screws
may be jammed.
If this is so the turbine revolution counter
will show at zero. Disengage the burners,
one at a time and if only one is jammed, use the
other to continue and report the matter on
return to the shed. If both are jammed, treat
as a disabled engine.
(2) No fuel in bunker or fuel arching over
conveyor screws.
If the turbine revolution counter is working
and it is seen that air is stirring the ash residue
in the pan although there is no fire, check the
fuel level in the bunker by means of the fuel
level indicator in the cab. If this indicates that
there is fuel in the bunker, operate the turbulence
jets to break up the arching and the fire will
re-ignite.


If the fuel level indicator shows there is no
fuel in the bunker, still operate the turbulence
jets as by this means, sufficient fuel may be blown
from the walls of the bunker to continue to the
nearest siding where an inspection of the bunker
interior can be made.
If neither of the above remedies is effective,
close down the equipment, stop, and inspect the
bunker interior and if satisfied that there is no
fuel in the bunker, treat as a disabled engine.
Fuel-air ducts blocked.
If this is the trouble, the turbine will be
labouring, the fuel lever will indicate fuel in the
bunker, but no air will be seen blowing the ash
residue in the firebox. Close down the equipment
and inspect the burners through the inspection
covers, if these confirm the blockage, treat as a
disabled engine.
(4) Failure of the turbine or drive mechanism.
Either the turbine has stopped or is running
at excessive speed and there is no fire in the
firebox. Stop the engine and make an exami-
nation of the drive mechanism at the rear of the
tender and if this confirms a failure that cannot
be remedied on the track, treat as a disabled
engine.
If the flexible connection for the turbine steam supply
between engine and tender should fail, IMMEDIATELY
disengage the burners, then close the turbine steam stop
valve, regulating valve and throttle valve in that order.
Inspect the failure, and if beyond repair on the track,
treat as a disabled engine.


LOCOMOTIVE BREAK-DOWNS
GENERAL.
In all cases of engine failure which necessitate stopping
the train in the section, it is the driver’s first duty to
see that the train is properly secured and protected
in accordance with safe working. The next duty
is to take action to enable the section to be cleared as
quickly as possible.
Should anything occur to necessitate stopping a train
for inspection but not immediately, the driver must
consider his ability to re-start the train readily and should
avoid, if possible, stopping at places where it would be
difficult to re-start.
Before disconnecting in the case of any break-down,
determine how long it will take to put the locomotive in a
condition to move, what work it will then be able to do
and whether another locomotive is required to clear the
section or take the train on. Do not start to disconnect
if it will cause additional delay after the relief engine
arrives before the work of disconnecting can be com-
pleted.
In such cases only disconnect those parts necessary to
enable the engine to be hauled.
Owing to the robust construction of modern loco-
motives together with regular mileage examinations,
failure of heavy parts in service are rare and only the most
common will be dealt with.
If it is necessary to run the engine with only one
cylinder working, the power of the engine will be reduced
by at least one half, therefore the load shall also be reduced
to at least half of that tonnage for the grades on the section
of the line to be passed over. The maximum speed of
the engine in any such case must not exceed 20 miles per
hour.
The best position to stop is with the crank pin on the
good side, about an eighth of a revolution past the centre,
which position will enable the engine on starting to
acquire a maximum of momentum before the crank


reaches the next centre. If the engine should stop at or
near dead centre and will not start, the only remedy is to
use a pinch bar to move the engine until the crank on the
good side is in the position previously described. A
locomotive operating on one cylinder only must not be
brought into the suburban area during the hours of
suburban traffic.
STEPHENSON VALVE GEAR.
Irregular Exhaust.
Anything occurring to prevent the main valve from
admitting and exhausting steam from the cylinder at the
proper time will be indicated by irregular exhaust, in
which case the engine is said to be “ lame.” Common
causes of an engine being lame and the remedies to be
adopted are as follows :
Eccentrics out of adjustment on axle.
The engine should be worked to a Depot where the
condition can be corrected.
Eccentric rods or straps out of adjustment.
In the case of the eccentric rods or straps being out of
adjustment through the bolts being loose, tighten up the
bolts and book the repair on arrival at the Depot.
Broken Valve Ring.
The action to be taken depends on whether the engine
can be worked through without disconnecting the valve
gear or whether disconnecting is necessary.
If disconnecting is necessary, the eccentric straps and
rods must be taken down. The valve must be placed in
the central position to cover both steam ports as far as
possible. It must be secured by the set screw placed in
the spindle guide f r that purpose. The valve is in its
central position wnen the small hole in the intermediate
spindle is halved by the outer edge of the spindle guide.
The set screw must be removed and the washer taken
off. Then return the set screw and screw it right home
on the spindle to prevent any movement. The link, if
not taken down, i nust be secured in the vertical position.


The connecting rod'must be taken down and the piston
pulled right back to the end of the cylinder. The piston
must be secured in position by means of the plate and
clips kept in the engine tool box for that purpose. An
emergency collar which is kept in the tool box also is to
be placed on the crank pin to stop the coupling rod from
working out.
Broken eccentric strap or eccentric rod.
Both eccentric straps and rods on the disabled side
must be disconnected. The link, if not taken down, must
be secured in the vertical position. The valve must be
placed in the central position, and secured by the set
screw.
The release cocks on the defective side must be
disconnected and left in the open position and the steam
pipes to the bye pass valves must be blanked to prevent
the bye pass valves closing.
Broken link or quadrant block.
Proceed as for a broken eccentric strap.
Broken valve spindle.
If the break is such that the valve cannot be centred,
push all parts of the valve and intermediate valve spindle
to the forward position and use the set screw in the spindle
guide as a means of locking. The link, if not taken down,
must be secured in the vertical position. The connecting
rod must be removed and the piston secured as previously
described. The special clamp-clip must also be fitted.
Lack of lubrication.
Lack of lubrication makes the valve difficult to move
in the valve chamber. Refill lubricator if empty. If
lubricator defective remove indicator plugs on cylinders
and insert oil as required.


Reversing gear.
Should any part of the reversing gear fail, wooden
packing can be inserted in the link slot to suit the running
position required. The packing must be securely
fastened. No attempt must be made to alter the valve
travel, so that the engine can be run with the utmost
caution in one direction only.
WALSCHAERT VALVE GEAR.
Broken eccentric rod or eccentric crank.
Remove the broken parts, disconnect the radius rod
from the reversing shaft and with wood packing, block
the link block at the centre of the link. The com-
bination lever should not be disconnected as it will now
admit steam to each end of the cylinder by the amount of
lead and will assist in distributing lubrication and moving
the engine.
If it is impracticable to block the link block in the
manner stated, disconnect the combination lever and
radius rod. Place the valve in its central position and
lock with the set screw (Fig. 36). See that the cylinder
cocks are disconnected and left open and the steam pipes
to bye pass valve are blanked and proceed with only one
cylinder working.
The eccentric arm must not be removed from the crank
pin, as it is required to keep the connecting rod in
position, but if this cannot be done the connecting rod
must be taken down, the piston secured and the piston
valve centred (Fig. 37),
Broken radius rod, combination lever, link, link
block, combination link or crosshead arm.
Remove the broken parts, centre the valve and proceed
generally as above to operate engine on one cylinder only.
Broken valve ring or valve spindle.
Proceed as described for Stephenson valve gear.


" *
k f . JSB|
|..- ‘ V
;■■■
DISTANCE PIECE TAKEN
OUT u SETSCREW SCREWED \
TIGHT ON TO INTERMEDIATE \
VALVE SPINDLE . \
HOLE IN INTERMEDIATE VALVE
SPINDLE HALVED BY END OF
SPINDLE GUIDE ON BACK STEAM
CHEST COVER .
WALSCHAERT VALVE CENTRED
Fig. 36
Reversing gear
If the reversing or reach rod connecting the reverse
lever to the reversing arm shaft breaks, place wood
packing blocks on the top and bottom of one link block
securely fastening them and so located that the engine
will work at nearly full gear. Do not block both links.


■>>'' yX' ;i; ■■S^'
I; wtKKtttKk ' —■ <<aHWHMM|
; llmr
: »_ y^Ffe- 11 -- ,* •* - ,> m
S
W| apWpWF " ■€? * P * «wmS'
«;»x^shT
/PISTON CHOCK CUPPED TO
j BOTTOM WITH j
VALVE CENTRED
CONNECTING ROD.
ECCENTRIC ROD £.
COMBINATION LINK
TAKEN OFF.
PISTON CHOCKED BACK
Fig. 37


This is unnecessary, the link being supported by the
reverse shaft arm. The packing in one link will ensure
that the link block on the other side- is in the same
position and will also provide for the necessary slip of the
block on the unpacked side. No attempt must be made
to alter the valve travel, so that the engine can be run in
one direction only with the utmost caution.
Should a failure occur in any other part of the reversing
gear packing may be inserted in one or both links accord-
ing to circumstances.
MOTION GEAR.
Failure of connecting rod.
In the event of a failure of the connecting rod the
valve on that side must be disconnected, centred and
secured. The broken parts must be taken down and the
piston drawn to the back cover and secured by means of
the plate and clips provided.
The cylinder cocks must be disconnected and left
open and the steam pipes to the bye pass valves must be
blanked.
A crank-pin collar or bush (Fig. 38) kept in the engine
tool box is to be placed on the crank pin to stop the coupl-
ing rods from working out.
The crank pin screwed collar and split pin must be in
place on Stephenson engines or the eccentric crank on
Walschaert engines. The speed of the engine must not
exceed 20 miles per hour.
Failure of coupling rod.
With a six-wheeled coupled engine should the trailing
end be defective, the trailing end on the opposite side must
also be taken down. If the leading end is defective all
coupling rods must be removed. With an eight-wheeled
coupled engine, if either the leading or trailing side rods
break, it is only necessary to remove the broken rod and
the corresponding rod on the opposite side of the engine.
If the centre rod breaks then all coupling rods must be
removed.


mam
IHHpp * | #j^^H|||p|
.. ife- L, P^HHHnfi0Htafl|
■ ' ‘ ‘ V •' **
■■’•■ - .•• V- ■' i '-' ; '' ’''^ : '''i
|| ; | W,'' v.v "Vk ,»■
After replacing the connecting rods, the engine can be
worked to a Depot, but care must be taken in handling
the regulator as slipping of the driving wheels can occur
very easily. The speed of the engine must not exceed
20 miles per hour.
ECCENTRIC ROD £.
CONNECTING ROD
TAKEN OFF
EMERGENCY
COLLAR
ON CRANK PIN
Fig. 38


Broken piston rod.
Remove all the broken parts, take off the connecting
rod. Draw the crosshead out or secure it right back
(Fig. 37). Centre the valve and properly secure it.
Apply the emergency collar to the crank pin to stop the
side rods from working out (Fig. 38). Disconnect and
leave the cylinder release cocks open and blank the steam
pipes to the bye pass valves.
WHEELS.
Broken tyre.
If a tyre is fractured and has a small open gap the brake
blocks on that and the opposite wheel must be removed
and in the case of A and D class engines it will not be
necessary for the engine brake to be cut out. The engine
can then be worked in slowly but frequent stops must be
made for inspection of the tyre.
If the tyre has a large open gap or portion be broken off
arrangements should be made for assistance to be
obtained to effect temporary adjustment which work is
beyond the scope of the crew.
Broken axle.
If an axle breaks it is usually impossible to do anything
else but send for assistance.
SPRINGS.
Engine bogie spring.
In the event of the failure of an engine bogie spring or
hanger, check the clearance of the cow catcher over the
rails. If the clearance is sufficient to clear the level
crossings, the engine and train can be brought in at re-
duced speed. The driver should frequently check up
in the clearance as there is a possibility of the engine
settling down and consequent lowering of the cow catcher.
If the cow catcher is not clear, pack up on top of the
leading coupled wheel boxes and run these wheels up on
a wedge. Then place packing between the top of the
bogie axle box and the bogie frame.


N s 1
Bf
.** «<■ ® . I ;
i ft -
111(11
!- f** v \.*mm .X, , *2 . *
Fit _
!
.
mm
\ ■ tt ± |
r ~~' , - : .- ATC’ \A X r
1 W^wm
MKH
Hi.
[
r ”
PONY / 'lEWING 1NTE RM ED 1 ATE _ TRA 1 LING 1|
WHEEL ROD ’ SECTiON “ SECTION SECTION jj
1 LEADING - INTERMEDIATE - DRIVING - TRAILING 1
| COUPLED WHEELS |
Leading
TENDER
| BOGIE
LEADING TRA1
WHEEL WH
-ING
.EL
LEA
WH
t&m-
prT,pg
TRAILING
TENDER
BpGIE
)ING TRA
EEL WH
S’
LING
:el
<
1 ‘
-
- V : : . ■ ■■■■■ - :' V .. . .
S v -
WHEEL ARRANGEMENT 2-8-2 "X” CLASS LOCOMOTIVE
Fig. 39


Coupled wheel spring.
If the top leaf only is broken the leaf should, if possible,
be secured with the clips and wedges provided. If the
spring is completely broken or the buckle or hangers
broken, the engine must be lifted and packing placed on
top of the axle boxes. First pack up on top of the axle
boxes not affected then run the wheels up on a wedge,
place steel packing on top of the affected box and then let
engine down off the wedges. When the defective spring
is connected with another spring by a compensating beam,
this beam must be packed or packing must be placed on
top of this other box as well. If the engine is com-
pensated throughout packing must be placed on top of
all boxes.
Trailing truck springs and equaliser.
If a trailing truck spring, spring hanger or equaliser is
broken, examine the broken parts to determine whether
or not they will interfere in any way when the engine is
running and also whether there is any possibility of any
parts falling out of place when the engine is moving. If
not, proceed. Remember that the weight is not properly
distributed on all bearings and that overheating of the
truck and driving boxes may occur.
On engine equipped with the “ KW ” type trailing
truck. No. 400 to 418 N Class, the following procedure
is to be observed in the event of a failure of a trailing
truck spring or spring hanger:
(a) Suburban area.
If a spring or a spring hanger fails when working at a
station, place the engine in a siding and advise the nearest
Depot Foreman. If the failure occurs between stations
proceed to the nearest station at a speed not exceeding
15 miles per hour and place the engine in a siding. Do
not exceed 5 miles per hour over points and crossings.


When the engine is secured in the siding, advise the
nearest Depot. Tender first movements must be
avoided unless to clear running lines and every care must
be taken to avoid derailment.
(. b ) Country lines.
If the engine is running tender first it must be placed
in the nearest siding. If running funnel first, the train
may be taken to its destination but tender first movements
are prohibited. The speed of 15 miles per hour and 5
miles over points and crossings must not be exceeded.
In all cases of failure of this kind the nearest Depot
Foreman must be immediately advised.
BOILER.
Leaking tubes.
If the tubes are leaking where they are expanded into
the tube plate, a good bright fire should be maintained
and cold air kept from the tubes. The steam should be
kept as far as possible at the maximum authorised pres-
sure. The blower must be used as little as possible.
If procurable feed bran into the boiler per means of
the feed water hose.
Burst tube.
If a tube bursts, put on both injectors at once to
overcome the loss of water and reduce the boiler pressure.
If possible, get under the protection of fixed signals be-
fore stopping. The water will generally damp the fire
sufficiently, but if the fracture is near the smokebox, the
bulk of the water will go that way and the driver must
therefore be prepared to protect the boiler by dropping
the fire if necessary.
Fusible plug.
Should the water level of a boiler fall below the level
of the firebox crown, the lead in the fusible plug will
melt and steam will be discharged into the firebox.
The fusing of a lead plug indicates mismanagement by
the crew. If through adverse circumstances water


is getting low, it is far better to stop and effect a
boiler recovery rather than take an unnecessary
risk with the boiler. Should a lead plug fuse the fire
must be dropped immediately and the boiler pressure
reduced by putting on both injectors.
Leaking water gauge glass water valves.
Should a water gauge water valve be found to be
leaking badly on the road, no attempt should be made to
force the valve shut. The valve should be opened wide
several times to blow the obstruction clear. If this fails
to correct the trouble, leave the valve in the position
where the leak is least and run in that condition and
book it for repair at the Depot, if the leak is too great,
close the water and steam valves and run to the Depot
with one glass ; frequently testing this glass en route.
If one glass is leaking and the necessary repairs cannot
be effected the locomotive can be run in that condition
for one trip only, but if the valves of both gauges are
leaking the locomotive must not leave the Depot in that
condition.
The water gauges must not be blanked
Blow-off cock leaking.
Should the blow-off cock fail to close completely it
should not be forced shut, but should be re-opened fully
for a short period at least three times, and if such action
fails to dislodge the cause of the trouble, the driver must
decide by the volume of the leak, whether he is able to
continue the journey or whether the fire must be dropped.
If the leak is discovered during preparation of the engine
at a depot, the driver must book the leak and after failing
to dislodge the obstruction by opening the blow-off cock
fully as instructed, the Officer-in-Charge must decide
what corrective measures are to be taken.
Regulator valve jammed.
If the regulator valve jams or will not shut tightly,
apply the brakes and open the regulator wide, then close
it quickly. This will often remove scale or foreign
matter which may be obstructing the valve movement.


Regulator uncoupled.
If the regulator becomes uncoupled so that steam
cannot be shut off, the engine can be worked by use of the
reversing gear, putting it in mid gear or partly with back
gear when about to stop, but under such conditions the
boiler pressure should be reduced and the driver should
wire for a relief engine.
Bye pass valves.
If a bye pass valve sticks or breaks, the indications
of the trouble resemble those of a broken piston valve,
and care should be taken to properly locate the defect.
The bye pass valves can be blanked off by loosening
the nut on the setscrew at the bottom of the bye pass
valve and then screwing the set screw in until it forces
the valve on to its seat. The defect should be booked
on reaching the Depot. If the set screw is lost remove
the cover and place a nut under the valve and replace the
cover.
Three cylinder engines.
In general the practices laid down for two cylinder
engines apply to three cylinder engines.
However, the valve for the third cylinder, which is
between the frames, is worked by the relative movements
of the two outside valve gears. The “S ” class engines
have the Gresley type of gear worked by sway beams
ahead of the c}dinders while the “ H ” class engine has
conjugate shafts behind the cylinders. Should a failure
occur of any part of the centre valve, all broken parts
must be removed and the valve centred and secured and
disconnected from the outside valve gear. In the case
of the “ H ” class, the usual set screw locking device is
provided, but for the “ S ” class a special clip is provided
in the tool box to be attached to the valve spindle to hold
the valve central.
, The engine can now run on the two outside cylinders
and will have about two-thirds of its normal power.


Loose or broken front side bar bolts.
When both front bolts of a top or bottom bar are
broken or when either bar cannot be held firmly in
position because the bolts cannot be kept tight, the slide
bar clip must be put over the bars as close to the front
bolts as possible. When the clip has been firmly secured
in position (Fig. 40), the clearance between the crosshead
and the bars must be not less than 1/16-in. when the cross-
head is nearest the clip.
Valves and Pistons blowing through.
When valve and piston rings are worn or broken steam
blows through to the opposite side of the piston causing
heavy back pressure and sluggish working of the engine.
The condition of the valve and piston rings is indicated
by the sound of the exhaust beats and the inability of the
locomotive to haul the load to schedule time or even stall
on the grades and whilst the trouble can be located to the
particular side by watching the crank and noting the
beat, a more definite method is to test the valves and
pistons with the engine standing on the bottom quarter
with the hand and air brake applied, then :
Place the reversing lever in mid position with release
cocks open, then open regulator and after the bye pass
valves have seated, note if steam issues from the front
or back release cock, if so the valve rings on that par-
ticular end are defective. It should also be noted if
there is a strong blow up the chimney as this also will
denote defective valve rings.
After testing the valve rings, place the reverse lever in
the full forward position and open the regulator and if
steam issues from the release cock at the back end of the
cylinder the piston rings are blowing through. Having
located the defect enter a repair card accordingly.
Knock in axle boxes and moving parts.
As wear takes place in the moving parts, those parts
set up a knock as the direction of the movement is


•■'" ■ y ■■' • -' *V
I . ■■■
I ® yT * J
if | '■ & **» ’^bBHBHBP^J
SlPjkiiPI' S^ y ” *4 * 'I * K ■ IS 1*111
KmHHK: f ? <—* * - | jHJr
B
If a failure occurs in the outside valve or valve gear it
will be necessary to isolate and centre the centre valve as
well as the outside valve concerned. The engine can
now run on one side only, but will have about one-third
its normal power.
SLIDE BAR CLIP APPLIED AND
TIGHTLY CLAMPED ON BARS
SLIDE BAR FRONT BOLT BROKEN
Fig. 40


reversed which not only causes rough riding of the
engine but is disagreeable to the enginemen operating the
locomotive. From the cab of the engine it is not possible
to accurately determine where the knock is and tests must
be made to enable accurate repair bookings to be made.
Axle boxes.
To test knocks in the axle boxes, place the engine on
the bottom quarter and apply the air brake, the force
exerted by the brake block will push the box hard up
against the back horn. Insert a feeler made from a worn
table knife or hack-saw blade between the horn and the
box on the brake block side, if the feeler will go well down
the wedges require adjusting, if no feeler is available get
the fireman to admit steam and operate the reverse lever
from front to back several times and watch the action of
the boxes.
Big and little ends.
To test for knocks in the big and little ends, place the
engine on the side to be tested on the bottom quarter,
air and hand brakes hard on and slightly open the
regulator to admit steam, get the fireman to operate the
reverse lever backward and forward several times and
watch the movement.
Side rods.
To test for knocks in side rods place engine on bottom
quarter and with a bar resting on the spoke of the wheel
determine the amount of slack by lifting the side rod up
and down.
Boiler steaming badly.
The greatest number of train running debits are
attributed to the boiler not steaming, the cause of which,
though frequently attributed to poor quality coal is in
fact due to the fireman not being acquainted with even
elementary knowledge of combuston, his complete fail-
ure to grasp the fact that best results can only be obtained
by breaking the coal into small pieces and firing in small


quantities and constantly watching the chimney in-
dications as to when to fire, there are however, many
mechanical defects, which will cause bad steaming such
as steam and air leaks in the smoke box, defective brick,
arch and baffle plate, elements and tubes leaking and
other things quite obvious.
When an engine is booked steaming dull, the cause
should also be booked as without some indication the
mechanical staff are at a loss to know where to start and
with a view to assist in making an intelligent entry on the
repair card, the following tests should be made :
To test for steam leaks in the smoke box, put the
brakes on and get the fireman to open the regulator and
note steam pipe joints, move engine with brakes on and
note blast pipe joint, listen carefully for the noise of a
leak in the elements.
To test the smoke box for air leaks, shut off blower and
air compressor, add coal to the fire to make heavy black
smoke at the chimney then place a wet bag over chimney
and note where the smoke issues round the door joint,
chimney joint and through the floor to the bogies.
The above method should not be used on oil burning
locomotives. To test for air leaks on oil burning loco-
motives put the blower hard on to create a partial vacuum
in the smoke box and go round all joints with a lighted
slush lamp. The leaks will be indicated by the flame
being drawn in to the smoke box.


Chimney
Dome /Regulator Valve
Back Plates Steam Separator Crown Stay Bolts
Chimney Extension / steam Collector or Main Steam Pipe Dome ‘T / CoaleSaFety Valves
\ , / / / .Diagonal Stay J y*| Regulator Rod Diagonal Stays / / p/ Vlib) Washout Plugs
'Piston Valves
■ Cross Stays
Flexible Stays
.Rigid or
Water spate Stays
LOCOMOTIVE BOILER
“N ” CLASS
Fig. 1


Operating Star " ' **
/ StumKXtl ® N,
u~ (C rl»l Valve \\ B-Sauae i m Ifl W /Coal Spri.ikler Steam Vj;vf
TTfcdfimtef.lt | :: jgJ |U®1 | f ®06|qJ' ! i nGauje ij
I 11
ARRANGEMENT OF BOILER MOUNTINGS i FITTINGS INSIDE CAB
Pig. 3.


NATHAN MECHANICAL LUBRICATOR (e feed)
DIAGRAM NOT TO SCALE
r/ Lusgic*roR Parts
"j ] Body 21 Ratchet wheels
\, s COVER 22 Counter Pawl
4- I Pilling Plug ~' I 24-1 Ratchet Disc I
SFi r\ C*. L ’ r 1 jr Fego Regulating Jcrew 26 Ratchet duc Lubricator
J| f j / \ I I _ \ 7 " •• Lock Nut ?7 P*wl spring 4 Plug
j £) » ” CAP I ggj DRIVING UpfUSTivieNT I
/ jpj - / )& Vxx—i I II IT p" ~ 9 « •• Inokator Roo 29 On. Level. Gauge Glass
Y 1 i ij ~ * V/////////& V/7 y//P//ft2k Y///y . 1 . L 11 Pump Plunger 5l_ Felt Washer
1 CD * 1 K | /s/ / / > L [[ *2 « •• Ciamoer 52 Ratchet Shaft Lue r mole
N<| j j [ )L * 15 - " Lifting Spring 55 Brake Spring I
1 i y'fTTTSShS? / ’1 a5as^^^ SSS \ 7 (29) 15 Delivery-Ball Check Vas.vg 55 Oil delivery Pipes
| |t j j | \. 16 Strainer To Delivery Chamber 56 Drain Plug
., I} Z f | || j \ ‘ -5 ‘-j-v 17 Steam Heater Comnections 57 Ratchet Shaft Main Bearing
f • ZZl, S~\ — \ \ IS Main Siioinc A Occilwing Sh»ft 33 Felt Washer Retainer
— “ |_ * 19 Ratchet driving Shaft 59 Ratchet Main Bearing
® ' (S) _ o| ir-rj
!~ “
Fig, 13


\ PocA/'ng P<s/o/nc r~
f t IT t 7
\/ \\\' \)
- / y /
'toe A O,//rules' Coue/-.^^^^—/
Spr/ny Pe fo/ner.
So//d /VecA P/np
Sp/iA Body
Sp/d WecA P/ny.
Pis Aon Pod.
P n /j many
PocAiny.
Sp//A Po/ic u/ er P/ny.
Packing ring wit/i
c/rculor joint's.
PocA/'ny Co ven.
STUFFING BOX
SocA Cy//notes Coven
Fig. 16


EFFECT OF INJECTING TOO MUCH COLD WATER INTO A BOILER AT THE SAME
TIME —When water is injected into the boiler showing a rise of several inches in the gauge glass,
the injected water, being cooler and heavier than the water in the boiler, flows to the bottom of
the boiler and covers the lower tubes. This means that the tubes and plates in contact with the
cooler water contract and shorten, resulting in leaking tubes and broken stays.
■ ——————
00000000000000 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
00000000000000 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
= =c 000000000000000 00000
=====s== 00000000000000 0000 w
— 00000000 0000 000
■ ' ■ O O o o
o o o
i.- ■■ ■ O OO n
x o O O o
\ O O
N \ OO OO
\\ OO 0 o
\\°o o
TOP OF FOUNDATION RING
Fig. 17


" 6 vers/np /?oc/
Aerers/n# __ WeyAf. |-
«. £ccenfr/aSM>ors. '\
<9// £V-6. A I 1 , £C €<?/->/s-/c /?Oc/s. \ / JQ, JJ. /O /x A flF r A^^r~^ Q ri \
" on9 __ V\ ' 7
/r> /dVv>7 ec//<y /e l/o/re
Fig. 22
STEPHENSON VALVE GEAR


l/o/rs S/>/s)c//e. s/ / \
/ Int&rmecf/o/e j/cr/ue Rever<s/ng \\
/ ! /f 'ad/us /?oc/. I
i ~p l/n *'I
£omb/n ot/on £*eve>-/' \ j \ " X \ y
\ v y y/ ✓' Crb^SsAeoc/A/~sr . \ £cc<snt.-/c Arsn. /
WALSCHAERT VALVE GEAR
Fig. 23


3 3
4- 2 * Back of Cyl. Front of Cyl.
£ 0 ea d) Exhaust
I — — — -
7 7
© C.O. Back of Cyl. Front of Cyl.
Nv / / j ®£0 1 Steam (lead) Exhaust
2 Exhaust Shut
I 3 ,, Steam
r “g“ Shut Exhaust
7 Steam
" 11 J V" '" I 8 I I ..
\ /ttE.C
Adm.
E,a V/ \
CO. !
E.O.
/gf- 0 (Adm)
/ A Or I r
Back of Cyl.
(ID
Colour Key :
Lead I-.-.- ,1
Steam t tesxa
Expansion i 1
Exhaust f
EC.
Tj y/ \
6
E.O.
Back of Cyl. Front of Cyl.
1 Steam (lead) Exhaust
2 Shut ~
3 ,, Shut
4 Exhaust
5 ,, Steam (lead)
6 ,, Shut
7 Shut ~
8 Exhaust
CRANK POSITIONS & PORT OPENINGS.
2 CYLINDER ENGINES
Back of Cyl
Front of Cyl
FORE GEAR
Back of Cyl
Front of Cyl.
BACK GEAR
(CO.)Adi
Adm. (C O.) (Adm)C O.
Front of Cyl.
MID GEAR
Legend
Adm. admission
C.O. cut off
E.O. exhaust opens
E.C. exhaust closes


Back of Cyl. Front of Cyl.
1 Steam (lead) Exhaust
2 Steam „
Back of Cyl. Front of Cyl.
1 Exhaust Steam (lead)
2 ,, Exhaust
3 Steam ,,
7 “ “
~~5 “ “
~~6 “ "
7 ,, (lead)
8 Exhaust
9 ,, Steam
10 p p
11
12 |
I CO.
J> L0 -
z.c\' V
V. \ /
\\ Adm.
E.O.CT A W
C. 1
Back of Cyl. Front of Cyl.
1 Steam (lead) Exhaust
~2~ „ ~
3 Shut ,,
4 Exhaust ,,
5 ,, Shut
6 ,, Steam (lead)
7 .. (lead)
_8 „
9 ,, Shut
10 ,, Exhaust
TT Shut
12 Steam (lead) „
f ——
Back of Cyl.
Colour Key : -__
Lead L-—J
Steam S'T*~.?
Expansion L . J
Exhaust fc&£>-.3i
Compression HHB
CRANK POSITIONS & PORT OPENINGS
3 CYLINDER ENGINES
Back of Cyl
Front of Cyl.
FORE GEAR
Back of Cyl
Front of Cyl.
BACK GEAR
f.O.(Adm.) (C.O)Ad
>Adm.(C.O) (Adm)C.O.
Front of Cyl.
MID GEAR
Legend :
Adm
admission
cut off
C.O.
E.O.
exhaust opens
exhaust closes
FIG. 24 C


FILLER HOLE “tube' (P]] STEAM STOP COCK ~j
aa. ~ (S) thermometer koTtzlT
x _„(0 V 1 ' l T^
r n \ V j== : ; ———^=^=——
I OIL TANK \ *— i •• • i
/ _ \ n K .- —
STRAINER
BLOW THROUGH.
STEAM MANIFOLD
TANK HEAT
TANK HEATER
\ — — / PIPE HEAT
ATOMISER |
J OIL CONTROL !
SSHED LINE
OIL CHECK VALVE
I DRAIN COCK
SHUT OFF COCK |j A in— rnl
11 LT:- 1 * lT, " rn —•' "- ■■■■■■“ | OIL CONTROL 1 1
fi*"“ VALVE
m. . I . I I PIPE HEATER
o:l hose 1 pi m r' I I OIL
—* —— pil \ \ HOSE
[j - ' II I j BRICK ARCH
/// " AIR OPENINGS '''"
_
STEAM HOSE
OIL FIRED LOCOMOTIVES
DIAGRAMMATIC ARRANGEMENT
DIAGRAM ■■■ No. 24 D.


c 1
■ J
