

HARBOUR DEFENCES
[ The following letter to the “ Sydney Morning Herald ,” closed a
long correspondence on the Defences of Port Jackson, at the
time the “ Kearsage ” visited this Port.']
TO THE EDITOR OE THE REARED,
Sir, —The views of “ Quid,” on our defences, in this morning’s Herald ,
require a few remarks.
England does not fear an attack by land, and she possesses the finest
navy in the world ; yet she proposes to increase her army. Why has she so
many volunteers ? Why does she erect such tremendous forts at Spithead,
at Sheerness, and elsewhere ? These questions are not difficult to answer
with a little common good sense.
Would the Alabama have ventured to fight the Kearsage if she had
known that the latter had a chain plating over her sides ? Would not the
Austrians, with their magnificent troops have acted differently if they had
been aware of the effectiveness of the Prussian needle gun. Did the Italians
imagine that their ironclad Ee dTtalia, with her splendid armament, would
have been sunk in a few minutes by the old wooden Max, two-thirds of her
tonnage P Should we be safe with two or three monitors, without obstruct-
tions and batteries in the harbour, against an enemy of which we do not know
the strength as regards guns and armour, but who being well aware of our
means to resist an attack, will make the necessary preparations to come to
this port ?
The original cost of monitors and their armament, the expenses neces-
sary for their maintenance, as shown by the Committee on National De-
fences in England, are not within our financial means at present. We
ought also to be guided by the difficulties of Yictoria with the Nelson and
the Cerberus before procuring monitors.
In the Herald of 21st May, 1866, “Quid” will find a letter headed
“Ericsson Monitors and the Defences of Port Jackson,” in which is con-
veyed sufficient information to show that such vessels are not indispensable
for our defences, and will always require the support of land batteries.


Forts and torpedoes, also telegraphs, seem elaborate to people who do
not understand anything of them, but monitors are still more so with all
their details of construction, their boilers, engines, machinery, stores, am-
munitions, guns, and armour, &c., &c. The system of defence I proposed
in my pamphlet, also appears elaborate, and is often quoted against me,
although I have repeatedly stated since its publication, that the advance-
ment of offensive and defensive science has been so rapid during the last
few years, that I have partly modified my views for the protection of har-
bours against new and improved ordnance and ships of war. For instance,
the iron booms and dykes which I proposed in 1865 to obstruct the channels
at the entrance of the port, I would now replace by a system of electrical
torpedoes, as being cheaper and safer.
Before 1864 the result of the experiments wirh torpedoes generally, and
electrical torpedoes in particular, had not arrived at a stage that such com-
plete reliance could he placed on them as can he done now. Torpedoes
that could he proposed then only as accessories to booms, can now be used
with such certainty that they may he made the main obstruction to which
the booms would only he accessories if required at all. Most of the largest
torpedoes should he “ground torpedoes,” containing up to 500 lbs. of gun
cotton, or 1500 lbs. of gunpowder, and grouped principally near the shallow
parts of the channels on each side of the “ Sow and Pigs.”
The materials of which the torpedoes should he made, their shape, and
charge, must be determined by their intended position, and the effect they
are expected to produce. I have deduced, from the results of many experi-
ments, and from the official documents on the subject, during the late
American war, a formula to calculate the charge required and the probable
effect produced by a given torpedo, at a given depth, by finding the base
and the weight of the cone to be lifted and the approximate resistance of the
water cushion. A few local experiments would soon test the accuracy of
this formula, and determine its correctness, and by laying the torpedoes
en echelon , their effect on a given area could be known with certainty, and
the estimate of cost for obstructing the harbour in time of war easily
ascertained.
Whatever kind of electricity we use for testing and firing our torpedoes,
it must be certain in its effect, and we may rest assured, from the means at
Mr. Cracknell’s command and from his experience as electrical engineer,
that we should have no failure on that point. I wish, however, to remark, that
in the experiments at Toulon, it was decided, after many comparative trials,
to give the preference to the magneto-electric machine for testing and speak-
ing through the fuzes of the torpedoes (Abel’s fuzes and others constructed
on a similar plan), and to the induction coil machine for accumulated currents
for exploding the torpedoes, it was found that magnetic intensity currents
could be sent, without the slightest danger of ignition, through the fuze, when


provided with a fine platinum wire bridge ‘DOS-inch—for telegraphing, and
with a broken circuit or gulf, to prevent explosion by a divided current.
Yoltaic currents, of low tension, were found frequently less certain in
their action, on account of the terrestrial induced currents. The integrity of
the result, it seems to me, would not he less affected in Port Jackson from
the same cause.
I would nevertheless, recommend that galvanic currents be used for
telegraphing through the torpedoes or for testing them, and magnetic intensity
currents for firing them, [every fuze being provided with a fine platinum
wire bridge, and a broken circuit or “ gulf.”]
If the expenditure for materials for electrical torpedoes he sanctioned
by the Government, the different corps necessary to take charge of these
torpedoes ought to be formed and trained without delay. In 1863, I advo-
cated the formation of a corps of Volunteer Engineers, and I have referred
to it several times in your columns ; it also formed part of my original system
of defence. In addition to their other duties, our Volunteer Engineers would
he required to undertake the management of the torpedo defence and the
signalling. These duties in England devolve upon the Royal Engineers ; on
the continent they are performed by special brigades, which, however, are
formed of picked officers and men from the “ Genie.” It is to he hoped that
the Government will encourage the Volunteer Engineers as it has encouraged
the Naval Brigade, for their assistance would he equally valuable to keep an
enemy out of the harbour.
The idea I entertain of our defences, although shared by many others,
is not as “ Cave Oanem ” represents. I have always believed that it is essen-
tial to know exactly what we are going to do before we begin it. By beep-
ing this in view we may make use of the materials and guns at our disposal
to the best advantage. Our present 68-pounder guns might certainly he
placed in position until better guns are procured; hut there the difficulty
begins, ns the new works ought to form a part of our future plan of defence,
which is not yet decided upon. Many people point out positions in the har-
bour, and would not hesitate to begin at once the erection of batteries on
which some day the lives of many of our fellow citizens, if not the honour of
the colony may depend.
My idea is that the exact site for a battery requires much consideration.
Observations ought to he taken from the proposed positions separately and
collectively, and reciprocated from vessels entering the harbour, to determine
the safest sites from “defilade ” and the most reliable for batteries. The
height of the sites must be fixed to determine the best for “ enfilade ” and the
most effective kind of firing suited to each battery, also the power of the guns
required. Having so far ascertained the importance of each position de-
fensively and offensively combined, with other considerations of strategy,
and the distance within which vessels could approach the proposed batteries;


the number of guns required at each position can be decided, and whether
they should he mounted on elevating carriages (Moncrieff’s or others), or
protected by shields or “ blindage,” and placed singly in separate pits, or
“ en batteries.”
These practical details may seem elaborate, but they are absolutely
necessary to prevent wasteful expenditure, for it will be found much more
economical to erect our forts on the right place at once, than to have to make
alterations or additions to them afterwards.
The construction of military roads to the Heads and between the differ-
ent positions could be begun now, and as soon as a system of defence has
been fixed upon by the Government, our present forts and batteries may be
re-modelled or dismantled, and all our ordnance and ammunition re-dis-
tributed according to the comparative importance of the different positions.
I am,
Yours, &c.,
G. A. MORELL.
28th August, 1869.


TECHNICAL EDUCATION SERIES.
THE PRINCIPLES
THAT UNDERLIE THE
ART OE TEACHING:
SIX LECTURES, DELIVERED AT THE TECHNICAL COLLEGE
SYDNEY, UNDER THE AUSPICES OE THE BOARD
OE TECHNICAL EDUCATION.
W. WILKINS,
EX UNDER SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
“ The one great need of all our educational practice is to have it redeemed from its too prevalent
mechanical level, and illuminated by principle.” —Editor of Education : George Combe.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
in 29—8(i


