

•- 1 ' *; : 5 7777/ : • l : ;: •*;’'. .'? * « £j; V?rj» '-^
•• ■ *:.;.* ■•• • : • • ■; ■ ; -; v;.: ~, ;.rr;:;:i:~ 'K“ -**-*’ ££: ixeusf?: fir ~ frrt: y.?::*..zz. rsHP“&£ls - '
5 - - > :7;?7i-;5 F 5f :Mi!&IM : :M SSSSffliMlM7 7 7. IS ■ |Siifflf575i
' 7 * 7' :*:* r j , J.V;/; ;;'V :xrj :r^Kj£? f£r :HwS|r>£V;;
••■7 >; 7' ; -V:7:5: I*: 1;5; ?;
nSmVtS - :
':| 31 3Wa aB 'SR kS -








“Harking Back”
The Turf :
Its Men and Memories
BY
|AS. L. COLLINS [“Orion”]
Sporting Editor of the “ Daily Standard,” Brisbane
#
AND
GEO. H. THOMPSON
COPYRIGHT
[All Rights Reserved]
Registered by the Postmaster-General
for transmission through the post a*
a hook.
Wholly set up and printed at The Standard Press, Bowman House,
Brisbane, 1924.


Dedicated
to
My Infant Son
JAMES LEONARD COLLINS


CONTENTS:
Chapter I.—A Preliminary Survey—Early History of Bris-
bane —Castaway’s Discovery of “Great Stream Which
Pours Its Waters Into Moreton Bay”—From Penal Set-
tlement Grows Our Big and Flourishing Capital City—
The Queensland Turf in the Making—The Changes of
the Times.
Chapter ll.—The Days of Real Sport—Memories of the
Distant Past at Cooper’s Plains and New Farm—When
Parsons Were Tolerant—lnteresting Incidents and
Experiences—The Passing of Mr. Doodlem Buck and Go.
Chapter lll.—“Harking Back” Seeking Fresh Fields and
Pastures New—The Institution of the Q.T.G. and Racing
at Eagle Farm—Fortitude Valley Club and Racing at the
Hamilton—Weighing in on the Hotel Verandah—More
Early History.
Chapter IV.—Picturesque Eagle Farm To-day, From Primi-
tive Bush to Domain of Beauty—The Catastrophe of ’93
—Men who stuck to the Club and put it on the Road of
Progress Again—Big Increases in Prize Money Since
1900 —Pillars of the State’s Premier Club.
Chapter V.—“ The Course by the Greek,” and Other Racing
Clubs—Popular Racecourse Takes the Place of Marshy
Swamp—Trials and Tribulations of its Early Proprietor's
—Passing of the Switchback Railway and Other Side-
lines of Recreation—Brisbane’s First' Sensation of Bal-
looning —Enterprise Which Made Albion Park and
Reaped a Fortune—Progressive Tattersall’s Club—The
Rise of Unregistered Racing.
Chapter Vl.—lnauguration of Country Racing—lpswich
Conducts Australian Champion Stakes in ’6l—Gayndah
Institutes Queensland Derby in ’6B—lmportant Distance
Handicap of the Country Centres and Notable Winners.
“Harking Back”
THE TURF
ITS MEN and MEMORIES


Chapter VII. —Racing History of the Downs and West —
Interesting Sidelights and Incidents of the Early Days—
Notable Horses, Sportsmen and Clubmen Recalled.
Chapter VIII. —Foundations of breeding in Queensland —
Notable breeders, Sires, Dams and Progeny Prior to
the ’Bo’s —“Legs of Iron and Muscles of Steel” —Small
Fees for Leading Sires.
Chapter IX. —breeding Since the ’Bo’s —John Finnie Makes
History —The Coming and Passing of James McGill and
Charley McDougall —Their Successes as breeders and
Owners —Prominent Studs and the Breeders of To-day.
Chapter X.—The Wheel of Fortune —The Gamble of the
Yearling Sales —Good Looks and High-priced Failures
—A Word for the “Ugly Ducklings”—Modern Methods
of Selling in Brisbane.
Chapter XL —Megaphone (Queensland’s Greatest Racehorse)
—Bred by John Finnie and Sold for £90 —Record
Which Will “Take Some Beating”—As a Two-Year-Old
Wins W.F.A. Event Over a Mile and a Quarter following
on Earlier Win the Same Day—At Three Years Extend-
Carbine at W.F.A.—A Record of Big Achievements.
Chapter XIL- —More Champions of Other Days—Equine
Stars Recalled and Compared—Billy Ruddle of
Premier and Zanco Fame —John Finnie Gets Newhold
by Chance —Le Grand’s Rise to Fame —Wetherondale,
a'Buggy Horse, Which Made Turf History—And Other
Stories.
Chapter XIII. —Has the Racehorse Deteriorated?— Views of
Recognised Authorities —The Loss of Stamina for Speed
—Why So Much Lameness and Many Breakdowns ?
The Question From a Queensland Point of View —
Dearth of Distance and Middle Distance Performers —
Have the Stout Old Strains Been Neglected?
Chapter XIV. —Whip and Spur-; —Knights of the Pigskin, Past
and Present —The Old Style and the New —Are the Best
Results Achieved From the Grouch Seat ?
Chapter XV.—Some of the Sensations of Queensland Racing
The Ralston-Honest Ned Riot —Story of Trance Dis-
qualifications in Brisbane Gup of 1892—A Much Dis-
qualified Mare —Dead Heat of Tornado and Newhold in
Brisbane Cup of 1896 and Incidents Which Followed It
—The Xylite Ring-in and Other Happenings.
Chapter XVl.—“Over They Go”—The Days of the Hurdler
—Will They Gome Again?— Tests Which Develop Dis-
tance Champions From Flat Racing Squibs—Arguments
' in Support of a Movement.


Chapter XVll.—Horse Sense—lntelligence of the Horse —
Remarkable Instances of Gommonsense Ribuck,
Master of Gates and Barrages.
Chapter XVlll.—Strange, But True—A Budget of Interesting
and Amusing Stories Based on Fact.
Chapter XIX. —Fads and Fancies —“Flying Kate’s Foal”—
Superstitions and Dreams- —Infallible Systems and
Other Humorous Stories Based on Fact.
Chapter XX. —Watty Blacklock’s 50 Years on the Turf.
Chapter XXL —Notable Record of the Noud Family and
Memories of Gordonbrook.
Chapter XXll.—Successes of the Tucker Family of Horse-
ncien.
Chapter XXIII. —Jack Blacklock’s Eventful Career.
Chapter XXlV.—Jack Kahl’s Cheerful Yesterdays and Con-
fident To-morrows.
Chapter XXV. —Jack Booth and His Plunges.
Chapter XXVI. —Billy Booth’s Commemoration of “Musket.”
Chapter XXVll.—Charley McLaughlin’s Career—From
Lawyer’s Office to Pigskin.
Chapter XXVlll.—Charley McGrowdie, on Whom Fortune
Smiles.
Chapter XXIX. —Jack Morrison, of Sir Oliver and Wild Olive
Fame, and His Travels.
Chapter XXX.—The Conquests of the Conquests.
Chapter XXXI. —Mick Nailon and the Romance of Molly
Gyrus.
Chapter XXXII.—Tim Brosnan’s Show Bing Champions and
Successes, and Successful Start as Trainer.
Chapter XXXIII.—Pat. Byan and “Atholmore.”
Chapter XXXIV. —Charlie Smithson’s Stories of Lord Cardi-
gan’s Rise to Fame.
Chapter XXXV.—Aug. Wagner and the Queen’s Chocolate.
Chapter XXXVl.—Stepper Davis’ Humour.
Chapter XXXVII. —Other Personalities.


P' * -7y.-*a»«a8Agiaracw».i.i« -aipiiwimi twniw ■ inim mi 7WWtiH r >“-
'•■:• :^.-'y^:-y'y. ■:•;■:v: : X;‘•: :xx ; x
i x: : x~ x £
* :£x£££x£ * i
; •£
' I lip 4- liili ip
„ ' ■ X? ¥x •. . x| ■ \ , x-xx
Here is one of the oldest pictures of Brisbane extant. It probably dales between 1830 and 1835.
On the waterfront may be seen the old Colonial stores, now portion of the Government stores, whicn
lull ding was erected by convict labor. On the right is Mr. Thos. Bowse’s residence, and Pettigrew’s
old sawmill, the location of which is now occupied by the City Electric Light Company. On the h 11
to the left are the military barracks. The retaining wall beneath it can still be seen. At the bottom
of the picture is seen the prow of the punt ferry which used to ply across the river to where tl}e
Queen’s Wharf now stands.
A BIT OF EARLIEST BRISBANE.


PREFACE
The love of outdoor sport is a characteristic of the
English-speaking races, and it is only natural that it is
inherited by Australians, who are, in the main, the descend-
ants of English, Irish or Scotch parents.
That sport, properly regulated as a relaxation from the
worries and cares of business, is essential to our natural life
no one will deny, and in that respect the Australian is noted
for playing the game in its truest sense, no matter whether
lie be a follower of cricket, football, tennis, rowing, sailing,
track and field games, golf, or horse-racing.
None of our national sports has a stronger and more
■consistent following than has horse-racing—or, as it has so
long been termed, “the sport of kings”—and in that respect,
Queensland, in comparison to its population, has long held
its own with the older and more thickly populated southern
States.
The merits of racehorses —past and present—is always
an evergreen topic of conversation, and when a champion
arises from their ranks he becomes a national hero. Take
Carbine, Eurythmic, Heroic, Gloaming as particular in-
stances.
Gloaming’s recent victories at nine years of age against
the best of the younger horses of Australia and his ascent
to the position of Australia’s greatest prize winner, created
enthusiasm which knew no bounds throughout Australia and
New Zealand. He has been hailed as the wonder horse of
all time and will be spoken of and honoured by future
generations as was Carbine and other equine heroes of the
turf before him.
Australians all are lovers of a'good horse, and in that
respect Queenslanders have few equals. They, in the
majority, are keen lovers of racing, either in a direct or an
indirect way, and are heart and soul in the support of any
horse the State can produce to pit against the cracks ot the
southern States. In recent years, success in that direction
lias not been attained to any great extent, although Molly s
Robe. My Gavonni, and a few others of the Queensland
production gained southern honours, but there were days of
old and up to a couple* of decades back when we produced


champions year after year which tested the best of the
southern States, and came out on many occasions with flying-
colours.
From what can be gathered, a history of racing in
Queensland or any complete historical story of its progress
has never been written. Although its history dates back to
evrly ’4o’s, it was not until the 7 70 s that
even a racing calendar was commenced to record the results
of racing in the State, and even then it was tar trorn complete
owing to the inability of the compilers and publisher to get
the secretaries of some clubs to take any interest in supplying
information.
Unfortunately, the Q.T.G. lost most of its earliest records*
and calendars and guides in the big flood of 1893, and the
few calendars of Queensland racing in the ’7o’s and ’Bo’s in
existence to-day —and they are broken in continuity—belong
to old time sportsmen, with whom they are a treasured
possession.
When “Orion” (Mr. Collins) published a series of
articles entitled “Reminiscences of Prominent Racing Men,”
through the sporting columns of the Brisbane “Daily Stand-
ard” this year, the interest they created prompted him to
delve further in the search for historical facts, with a view
to establishing a complete anecdotal history of racing in
Queensland from its inception. We tackled the task together,
and from the memories of some of our oldest residents,
assisted by the few existing racing calendars of the ’TO’s and
’Bo’s have been successful in connecting the early days with,
the racing of our own time.
Of course, our work may be lacking in.some minor details,
but what is printed can be accepted as authentic, and has
been written so $s not to bore, but to interest and amuse
readers with its historical facts and incidents of old time
racing and the experiences of the old-timers who engaged
in the sport.
In “Harking Back —The Turf : Its Men and Memories,”
we present our efforts to the public, believing they will appeal
to the older as well as the younger generation of followers
of the sport, and we trust that the interest and pleasure its
compilation has given us will be shared by our readers.
With due acknowledgment of the kindly assistance we
have received from Mr. M. Baldwin (Secretary of the Q.T.G.),
the many old time owners, trainers and riders still with us,
and whose reminiscences are published, Mr. Tom. Whalley*


■Jke Quinn, and Messrs. Chapman and Snelling, and the
V. t-C. (for photographs), Mr. W. B. Groom (“Tjiu”) for
lacts concerning Northern and Downs racing, we introduce
Harking Back” :
“Go forth, little volume,
We leave thee to thy fate !
To memories and friendships
Thy leaves we dedicate.”
—The Authors.
Brisbane, November 1, 1924.
#


x x\\v>Xvx ; ; ; ;-x->>>x‘;Xvi;XvXv:;Xy>x ; : . . : ■ . X;X ; ::-X;X ■ ri• ir*;
I®
During the 1893 flood the first iron Victoria Bridge was washed away. The picture depicts
the North Brisbane entrance to the bridge in the ’seventies,
OLD VECTOR! A BRIDGE.


CHAPTER I. —A PRELIMINARY SURVEY.
Tarly History of Brisbane —Castaway’s Discovery of “Great
Stream Which Pours Its Waters Into Moreton Bay”—
From Penal Settlement Grows Our Big and Flourishing
Capital City—The Queensland Turf in the Making—
The Changes of the Times.
It was with some diffidence that we ventured to com-
anence the task of setting the foundation for a historical
-review of the birth and growth of racing in sunny Queensland.
The year in which we write is the centenary of the
of the Brisbane River, and here, perhaps, it will
not be out of place to make a brief reference to this historical
event, and incidents surrounding it.
Three castaways, when bound on a short journey in an
npen boat, of 50 miles from' Sydney to the Illawarra Islands,
south of Port Jackson, to obtain cedar, were driven far out
to sea by a gale of extraordinary violence, and for 11 days
were at the mercy of the elements. That was in the last
week of March. 1823. A fourth man, John Thompson, died
from the effects of exposure.
Twenty-five days after leaving Sydney and blown north
800 miles, though they thought it was south, the three
survivors landed in the vicinity of Moreton Bay. An out-
standing feature of their experiences was their hospitable
treatment by the blacks, who were more companionable than
the whites themselves were to each other. Indeed, Parsons
was quarrelsome to a marked degree.
The fact was that the burning hope that Sydney could
be regained and was only a few miles to the north spurred
.all three to desperate efforts and disagreements arose which
ended in Parsons going on his own and being absent when
Oxley arrived in the Mermaid.
For many weary months the castaways wandered around
the shores of Moreton Bay and up the Brisbane River country.
They were as much “at sea” in their belief that Sydney was
“Harking Back”
THE TURF:
ITS MEN and MEMORIES


to the north of where they landed as Oxley later, with much
better means of judging, that the sources of the Brisbane
River were to be looked for in some inland lake region not
unconnected with the swampy areas in which his earlier
explorations on the Lachlap River, N.S.W., had led him.
So much remained to be explored in 1823 that Brisbane’s*
first visitors, of all types, were badly bushed. They were
overjoyed on the Mermaid’s arrival, and it is not too much
to say that where previous explorers in Flinders and Bingle
had overlooked the big river in the southern end of the bay,
Oxley would probably have done likewise had he not had
Finnegan and Pamphlet at his elbow to point the way. No*
centenarial reference would be complete without due ac-
knowledgment to the services of the castaways.
Oxley’s mission, under instructions from Governor
Brisbane, 'was to find a suitable location for a fresh penal
settlement. First he located it at Redcliffe, its opening date
being September 24, 1824, but later, following his explora-
tion of “the great stream which poured its waters into
Moreton Bay,” and which he named Brisbane, after Governor
Brisbane, decided on a spot about 14 miles up the river,
between what are now known as Petrie Bight and Victoria
Bridge.
On this once penal settlement has been built the big and
growing city of Brisbane.
It is harking back a long time before we saw the light
of day. No doubt all of the earliest residents of Brisbane
have passed to the ‘ 'eat Beyond, and if there are any
residents of the 1830’s still among us, it is no easy task to
find them, and the question as to whether there was
racing of any description outside of military contests prior
to the “forties” of the eighteenth century will have to remain
undecided so far as our present undertaking is concerned.
From what data is available, it can be recorded that the
first race meeting of any importance in Brisbane took place-
at Cooper’s Plains on July 17, 1843. or three years prior to
the publication of the first paper—the “Moreton Bay
Courier”- —in what is now the city of Brisbane. This meeting
at Cooper’s Plains extended over three days, and the prize
money totalled £147, of which £3O was allotted to the
principal event —the Brisbane Town Plate (2 miles) widen
was run on the opening day and won by G. Hawkins’ Whig.
The results of the other events were: —
First Day.—Maiden Plate (twice round) : T. Bigge’s
Splinter; Welter Stakes (3 miles): Bigge’s Satelite.
Second Day.—Hurdle Race (2 miles) : G. Hawkins’
Billy; Hack Hurdles: W. Lester’s Buckfoot.
” Third Day.—Publicans’ Purse (once round) : Hunter’s
Conservative; Squatters’ Purse (once round): Bigge’s
Splinter; Tallv-Ho Stakes: C. Hawkins’ Whig.


The first printed record of the earliest racing in Brisbane
did not make its appearance till 1873, when two gentlemen
who adopted the nom-de-plumes of “Old Tom” (Moreton
Bay correspondent of the Sydney “Morning Herald”) and
“Yarraman” compiled a record of racing results covering the
period from 1843 to 1873 and published it in a “Queensland
Turf Register,” Volume 1, which was printed at the
“Courier” General Printing Office, George-street, in the
latter year.
The population of Brisbane in 1843 was small, as the
extensive districts around Brisbane had only been thrown
open to all-comers for settlement the previous year, and it is
recorded that these early settlers experienced bad season’s
and consequently very hard struggles to keep on with the
pioneering work which they had undertaken. But they were
men possessed of big hearts and courage, and were they
alive to-day they would no doubt be joyed to see the big and
prosperous and growing city of Brisbane, of which their
labours set the foundation.
To them also is due the credit of setting the foundation
of the Queensland turf with the formation of the Moreton
Bay Racing Club, which conducted the first meeting held at
Cooper’s Plains in 1843.
The record of the racing as contained in the first
“Queensland Turf Register” is rather incomplete, compared
with race chronicling of to-day, only the first horse being
catered for in prize money, with evidently one placement.
The distances, two and three miles, proved the stamina of
the horses engaged, though the times may have been slow,
as none were recorded, and the prize money—£3o for a race
of two miles —would not appeal to owners of to-day, unless
it was given as a prize for a donkey race.
But the sports then undoubtedly regarded racing more
in the light of a day’s recreation, and every horse which
started was a trier, and the owner of the winner surely got
just as much satisfaction out of it as the man who is lucky
enough to land the Brisbane Gup of to-day.
On all sides we now bear, “But the sport has advanced
beyond the most sanguine anticipations.”
There is no doubt that it has advanced with the times,
and prospered to a remarkable degree, despite some serious
setbacks, but the advancement has been mainly in a com-
mercial sense. It cannot be said that the true spirit of the
sport has even been maintained except by a few of the many
engaged in it.
In publishing the first “Queensland Turf Register” in
4 873, “Old Tom” and “Yarraman,” in a preface, penned the
following:—
“It will not perhaps be considered out of place to preface
the particulars of the first two race meetings in Moreton Bay


by a few introductory remarks, from the fact that in doing
so the sporting public will have placed before them the
names of gentlemen whose honour, probity, and gentlemanly
love of manly sport have made their names sound in the ears
of old colonists like household words.”
Gould the same be written of a great many of those
actively engaged in the racing of horses to-day ?
We say no, emphatically.
It is beyond any doubt that the sporting folk of the
’4o’s were imbued only with the spirit of the sport and the
keenest sense of friendly rivalry, and it was the sheer merit
and ability of the horse and rider which prevailed. Racing
was then free of the inimical influences which fortune
hunting exploiters have since introduced into it, more par-
ticularly during the last couple of decades—influences
which carried in their wake a great deal of sordidness and
cunning, and in many cases questionable methods.
From a small beginning, racing has grown to a big,
virile and flourishing institution in Queensland, extending
north, south, east and west, but the moral tone and
almost everything connected with the actual racing of horses
is in marked contrast to the days of its initiary stages.
Racing has become part of the national life in all the principal
townships, and many hundreds of thousands of pounds have
been spent in the laying out and beautification of racecourses
to meet the requirements of the times. The old bush courses
have given place to domains of beauty, laid out with specially
prepared tracks for racing and training, and appointed with
grandstands and sloping lawns, and all modern improve-
ments to give racing patrons the greatest amount of comfort
and pleasure possible.
In the earliest days there were only a few thousand people
to support racing, but to-day there are fully a hundred thou-
sand in Queensland who follow it, either in a direct o**
indirect way, and in Brisbane alone the average attendance
of even the minor week-end meetings runs into several
thousands. As compared with the old times, the consider-
able increase in fhe ranks of racehorses, owners, trainers,
riders, have been in keeping with the march of time.
There is no doubt that by fhe lime the ’7o’s were
reached, racing in Queensland had attained a very high
standard. The spirit of the early pioneers had been pre-
served, and in both the breeding and the racing of horses,
as well as in the riding, only men of honour and probity, and
possessed of the highest ideals of true sport were engaged.
The breeders had then built up an industry of high standard
They secured the best sires available, and in addition to
breeding on a fairly extensive scale themselves, gave the
services of their sires to the owners of brood mares for a few
guineas, generally £5/5/ for proved sires, and in very few


instances did the fee exceed £7/7/. As a result, Queensland
became famous throughout Australia through the high class
horses it produced.
It was probably in the late ’7o’s and throughout the
’Bo’s that Queensland attained its highest standard in the
breeding of the thoroughbred. They were stout hearted
horses with “legs of iron and muscles of steel” and stood up
lo long travelling and hard racing over journeys of two and
three miles for prizes considerably below those of to-day,
and they raced on to a good age/even many entires standing
up to it till they were nine and ten years old. Their achieve-
ments on the turf were not confined to Queensland, for year
after year saw many of the State’s best horses going south
and downing the best of the southern States in big handicaps,
as well as classic and w.f.a. races, numerous instances of
which are recorded as our story progresses.
Indeed, it can be said that the high standard of breeding
and racing in Queensland was also maintained throughout
the ’9o’s and into the early years of the present century also,
but for more than a quarter of a century the increase in the
ranks of those racing or training horses has been bringing
in a class of individual devoid of sporting principles and
whose one concern is the exploitation of the game, even
resorting to questionable practices for what he can get out
of it. And unfortunately to-day, with a big majority of
those actively engaged in it, racing is purely a business, and
a great many are not particular as to the practices they resort
to to control the running of their horses, and even other
owners’ horses to the best monetary advantage to themselves.
Let it be said that this state of affairs is not the fault of
the executives of the clubs, which are composed of men of
the highest standing and who have the best interest of the
sport at heart, for the prize money nowadays is very big even
at ordinary weekly meetings, and illustrations of the advance-
ment of the sport in that direction are afforded by the
programmes of the Q.T.G. for its Queensland Gup and
Brisbane Gup meetings, at each of which between £12,000
to £13,000 is distributed over three days’ racing—as against
£147 in 1843. In 1923, the prize money of all clubs con-
cerned in racing in the metropolitan area alone was well
over £IOO,OOO, of which the Q.T.G. provided £63,690.
Yet, despite the ever increasing inducements, the
standard of racing and racehorses of stamina in
Queensland and particularly Brisbane, has gone back during
the last 20 years. Of course, our leading breeders are still
producing good class horses and some of the wealthy owners
pay big prices to get the best blood from the southern States
as well as England, but many of our own best bred horses


are allowed to be absorbed by southern buyers, while a lot
of the undersized or weedy youngsters from the southern
studs are purchased for Queensland by men of small means.
Champions over all distances like we had in the ’7o’s,
'Bo’s and ’9o’s, are now conspicuous by their absence and
for some years the State has been very poorly off for stayers,
and even horses equal to middle distances, and except at the
most important meetings of the year at Eagle Farm the
entries for the principal race at the Q.T.G.’s meeting are
very few.
It is not the fault of the clubs or our principal breeders.
The club provide the greatest inducement and the breeders
spend freely in getting the best and stoutest blood for their
studs, and breed on the lines considered best from the ideas
gained by close study, but their efforts to improve the stand-
ard of breeding and racing generally in Queensland are
greatly hampered, not only by the limited support of Queens-
landers for the local product, but more particularly by a lot
of rubbish, which is bred by men engaged in the business in
a small way and who breed from horses, many of which
were absolute duds as racehorses, and further, by the flooding
of the ranks of Queensland’s racing stock with either southern
failures or the weeds of southern studs, which they secure
cheaply because the southerners do not want them.
Queensland still has a good class of handicap sprinters,
but a very big percentage of the horses racing in Brisbane
to-day are a very bad lot—and the ranks of our racehorses
are so big, that to-day eight and nine event programmes,
with big fields contesting each event, have become a regular
feature, and are necessary to meet the situation created by
the heavy nominations. However, the three-year-olds and
two-year-olds this season are a very promising lot, and the
future of our racing stock is, at time of writing, brighter than
it has been for some years.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the spirit of the sport
of the times from the ’4o’s to the ’Bo’s has dwindled to a
very small consideration. The class of sportsmen of the past
who made racing the flourishing institution it is are now
all too few. The game is flooded with exploiters, schemers,
and hangers-on, who find it an easier channel for getting a
living than having to work for it. However, with the intro-
duction of the stipendiary stewardship system, that class is
kept fairly well within bounds, and although questionable
tactics in the running of horses are still freely resorted to,
and in connection with which it is no easy task to catch
much less fit the offenders, such practices (which had
crept into the game) as “flying the pigeon,” “ringing-in,”
scale-faking, and foul riding, have been eliminated, and it
is very rarely they are attempted, even at country meetings.


The big professional punter is another menace to
present day racing. As a rule, he is possessed of little, if
any, principle or sporting spirit, and his tactics have a
demoralising effect generally on racing. His type has been
responsible for driving many honest men out of the game,
and has been the cause of ruination of the morals of many
promising riders. Indeed, it is the riders who are the prey
of the professional plunger, and when they become parties
to his advances—and there is no doubt that it happens—the
very foundations of racing are shaken. Still, the professional
punter is one of the evils most difficult to eradicate. In the
first place, it is almost impossible to trace any wrongdoing to
him, so secretly and cleverly does he do his graft, and he
goes on merrily.
And getting back.to the progress of racing and the
increase in prizes and attendances, the improvements in
courses, etc., let us not forget to mention that the cost to
the public has increased correspondingly. Nowadays racing
might be classified as a luxury for to spend an afternoon in
the saddling paddock even at an ordinary week-end meeting,
it costs the best part of fifteen shillings before one has a bet
at all, and with a limit on the amount the bookmakers will
accept for a bet, and tote tickets sold at 10/-, a man
working for a salary needs the whole of his week’s wages
to indulge in an afternoon’s sport.
Of course, he has the cheaper privileges of the St. Leger,
but still what a contrast there is between present day con-
ditions to those of the days of old when silver bettors and
the 2/6 tote were in vogue, and it cost only a few shillings
for admission. In the good old days the racegoer ‘could
count on a good afternoon’s sport, and a fair run for his
money, with a pound, or even less, in his pocket.
However, such conditions are practically impossible
now, for the remarkable growth in the attendances would
not permit of them, but nevertheless there is some justifica-
tion for the outcry against the present high charges of
admission at the minor suburban meetings.
The commercialisation of racing has naturally extended
to the breeding industry also, and the big prices which
breeders have to pay for first-class stallions nowadays are
necessarily passed on to the owner of brood mares and the
buyers of yearlings, and fabulous sums are paid in the sale
rings. Of course, prize money has increased in proportion
to the other increases and offers a wide field of fortune for
owners fortunate enough to secure a good colt or filly. How-
ever, those who are able to pay the big prices for the more
fashionably bred yearlings are few in comparison to the
number who have limited capital and pay small prices for the
poorer class of horses, in the hope of making them pay
their wav. In that connection, Queensland yearly gets a


good dump of the weeds of southern studs and naturally the
standard of our racing is affected. Still, in some instances,
the cheap horses provide a few of the front rank racehorses
of their time, but they are few and far between.
In the foregoing, we have dealt with the position of
racing from actual facts, and it is to be hoped that
our remarks will not be taken to mean that we are working
to knock racing in any way. Such an intention is far from
our minds, but a little outspoken criticism does no harm,
even if it does no good. And here it might be said that
racing in Queensland is no worse than in the other States,
nor is racing any worse than anything else in life, for even in
the business life of a city there is much that goes on which
is questionable, and yet is hard to eliminate. Life and the
world generally have changed with the times.
Reverting to our subject, let us say that in undertaking
the writing of this book our sole intention was to deal with
its history and growth of racing in Queensland, based on
historical facts and our own experiences, and to delineate
the characters of the many men associated with it in as life-
like a way as our brains and pens will permit.


CHAPTER II. —THE DAYS OF REAL SPORT.
Memories of the Distant Past at Cooper's Plains and New
Farm —When Parsons Were Tolerant —Interesting
Incidents and Experiences —Tne Passing of Mr. Dood-
lem Buck and Go.
What a crowd of memories would be revived if the
sports who took part in the initiary stages of the inception of
lacing in Queensland could only be Conan Doyled into re-
■counting their experiences. The exploits of some of our
present day racing men would be mediocre placed alongside
the yarns that could be spun, with a considerable amount of
truth, by a section who took part in u the sport of kings” on
the Cooper’s Plains, and later, the old New Farm racecourse,
where now is situated one of the most picturesque and up-
to-date parks in Australia.
Hark back and picture half-a-dozen horses racing
around a slush-covered course for supremacy, urged by
riders with jackets with more colors than the coat of Joseph,
some of them now and again wallowing in the slough—not
the “slough of despond”—for the more mud and the greater
number of spills enhanced the popularity of the participants.
And, let us breathe it gently, they had races on a Sunday
at. New Farm, many an admiring equestrian hacking his
“prad” against another to decide the question as to which
was the better.
Those were the “good old days” when men were just
as good citizens as those of to-day, yea, and were not averse
to handing over some of their money possessions, in reason
to, as they would term it, the “poor devil down on his luck.”
A good day’s sport, now and again enlivened by a resort to the
Marquis of Queensbury’s method, winding up with a dance,
not in the “wee sma’ hours,” but when old Sol was well out
of bed, was looked forward to as one of the “necessary
■evils” connected with a “day out.”
The parsons, in those good old times, were more tolerant
than the preachers of to-day, and overlooked any little
indiscretion by carrying out the Biblical recommendation,
“Forgive him not only seven times, but seventy times
seven,” and repeated the dose on almost every occasion.
Old-timers still with us boast of the pleasure it was to
the sporting folk of the 23,000 odd people who made up the
sum total of Queensland’s population in the late ’4o’s, and of
the 30,000 odd of the ’so’s to vie to the race track —some
fogged up in the heighth of fashion, but the majority in


flannel shirts, white moleskins that had undergone an extra
scrubbing for the occasion, half Wellington boots or elastic
sides, and a turban and Cummerbund to complete their adorn-
ment. There were others also —not so well groomed, but
out with the same determination to get all the enjoyment
out of the day that it was possible to squeeze—who could
only sport inferior but clean clothes, hob-nailed boots, and
howyangs. , , ~
Jack was as good as his master when they met on the
convincing ground and the utmost goodfellowship prevailed
between employer and employee, each and all recognising
that they were built of the same clay, and that when death
claimed them as its own there was no inequality. One or
two meetings in the year were looked upon as sufficient to
break life’s monotony. And what a day!
Up at cock-crow and everything in readiness for the
great event, and, after the equines had satisfied their desires,
away to the dance hall, which would not be vacated till the
following 1 Thorn when “old Sol had appeared in nil his
glory (with apologies to “Sirdar”) ; a wash, a hearty break-
fast, 1 and a return to the usual hum-drum till the next occa-
sion.
The Cooper’s Plains course, as with all bush courses,
was rather a primitive one, with the usual boughs and saplings
lor the grandstand, and young saplings staked at intervals to
denote the distance posts.
Records from the ’4o’s to the ’7o’s were very meagre,
and it was not till 1878 that racing could be considered to
have any claim to the term “established.”
South Brisbane, in the early days, boasted a course
which was located immediately across the river, taking in
portions of Melbourne, Stanley, Grey and Vulture Streets,
and some happy times were spent in that locality.
Then New Farm added its quota, and many tricks were
played by King Jupiter on both horses and jockeys in that
beautiful park of to-day, but wdiich then was really com-
posed of clay nans and quagmires.
From Mr? T. J. O’Shaughnessy, who landed in Brisbane
with his parents in 4 851 when he was 11 years old —Mr.
O’Shaughnessy is a centenary souvenir recipient —we learn
that the first racing at New Farm was held in 1852.
The best horse from 1 half a mile up to two miles in those
days was Newbold —there were other Newbolds of note
afterwards —owned by Micky Ford, a butcher of Ipswich,
and Tommy Taafe, his jockey, Was considered the best rider
in Queensland in his time —that was before Separation.
~ Larry Flannery, stockman at Mount Brisbane for Mr.
Briggs, and of Charley and Bill Flannery, so well
known in racing circles in recent years, owned and raced
Whalebone, both over the sticks and on the flat, and


another horse, Main Camp. The hurdle races comprised
fences and water jumps. Whalebone was one of the held
which contested the first hurdle race ever decided at New
Farm. He failed to negotiate the water jump with Larry
Flannery on top, and landed in the ditch. The remainder oi
the held cleared it and came to the water jump the second
time, when every one of them baulked.
Larry was doing a weep, and the crowd, taking com-
passion on him, “yanked” Whalebone out, legged Larry intn
the saddle and going on, Whalebone cleared all the jumps,
including the water, on the second round, and finishing alone
won the race —the others continuing to refuse to take the
water jump the second time.
A. Ball’s Boomerang and Bachelor were others which
won races. Ball bought Samford Station from Arthur Young,,
known as “Hungry Young.” G. B. Hedley, of Taabinga,
owned a little mare named Jeannette, and won the Gup with
her over two miles, the course being a mile once round.
One event, which proved the of bush
courses, happened in 1855. Six horses started in a mile
event, being led by a mare called Snowdrop. When they
reached the salt pan—where the cricket pitches now are —
which was rendered slippery on account of the tide going
ou t —the mare came down, bringing the rest of the field
with her. She managed to gain her feet first and eventually
won the race, though of a different color to what she appeared
in the nomination —as you couldn’t see her for mud.
Jim Bolger possessed a rather speedy hack called
Barney, and it took a pretty good one to beat him.
Boxing Day meeting of 1853 at New Farm saw a bit
of trouble, in which Black Perry, the boxer, was the central
figure; in fact, he had four policemen laid out and was
looking round for the next, when Chief Constable Sneyd
appeared on the scene and quelled the trouble by remarking,
“What are you doing here? Why he’ll kill every darn one
of you.”
The meetings were only arranged once a year, and
every “bob” that could be gathered was slipped into a tin
or some recess preparatory to losing same or winning more
—generally losing.
Continuing his story, Mr. O’Shaughnessy says that in
the first styled steeplechase decided at New Farm, he rode
Boko, who was owned by Cliff Hughes, then licensee of the
Waterloo Hotel, and trained by little George Harris. Boko
was well in the lead, but he (O’Shaughnessy) was over
anxious and putting Boko out of his stride, he hit a fence
and came down and gave the rider a nasty spill. It was the
veteran’s first and only exploit as a rider over the fences.


The racing in those days was different to nowadays,
for the best horse won —all being triers and no dead uns,
he added. _ _
Mr. O’Shaughnessy said that the Eagle Farm course in
its early days in the ’6o’s was just as bad as, if not worse
than New Farm, but one had the satisfaction of having a go
for his money. A dance generally completed the race day s
•enjoyment, many having just sufficient time next morning
to get a wash before starting work again.
“How many of the present generation could stand up
to it?”
“Very few,” he concluded.
Another of the old residents of Brisbane who has seen
the growth and progress of the city since the 50 s, and who
has vivid recollections of the early racing on the New Farm,
Hamilton, and Eagle Farm courses, is Mr. John Brightwell,
.tin elder brother of Fred. Brightwell, who, in the late ’7o’s
•end early ’Bo’s, was one of the State’s front rank riders, who
won the Brisbane Gup on Major in 1880, and the Queensland
Cup (then the Prince of Wales Gup) on Mirabeau in 1882.
Fred. Brightwell was attached to the racing stable of the late
Judge Lutwyche, at Lutwyche as a lad, and there he developed
into an accomplished rider, and he did a lot of riding for
the stable. He has been dead for some years.
Mr. John Brightwell has had a varied and interesting
•career, and his story, apart from his reminiscences of the
early racing in Brisbane, is worth repeating.
Soon after he came to Brisbane with his parents in the
‘'so’s, he was hired out for six months for work on a farm,
where what is now Bulimba. He was then 11 years of age.
After that, he worked for another six months on a German
station, which engaged in dairying, and from there he went
to Mrs. Kelly’s drapery shop, and after a short period there
he found employment at the Prince of Wales Hotel, then
kept by Mrs. Cameron. Later, he served six months in
learning the upholstery trade, but he did not care for it, so
gave it up and joined the crew of the small steamer Brodalbin,
which traded between Brisbane and Ipswich, but later trans-
ferred to the steamer Ipswich, which was engaged on the
same run. After two years’ service on the Ipswich, Mr.
Brightwell took a fancy for the watchmaking trade, and to
learn it joined up with Mr. Mandell, who kept a shop in
Queen-street. He was not long there when one of his
youthful mates persuaded him to give it up to learn plumber-
mg. To learn that trade he apprenticed himself to a Mr.
Wakefield, but after 18 months at it he tired of it, and left
his job—thus breaking his apprenticeship. He then took
on the job of driving a cab, and a remarkable coincidence
was that the first engagement he got in that capacity was to
drive a business man to the plumbering shop of Mr. Wake-


field. Mr. Brightwell was not too anxious to meet Mr.
Wakefield on account of leaving his job there without notice,.
but he accepted the fare and took his customer along. Mr.
Brightwell did not get away before Mr. Wakefield sighted
him, and coming out to him, inquired: “What are you doing
now, Brightwell?” “Driving this cab,” was the response.
Mr. Wakefield let it go at that, but he got square on
Brightwell a long time afterwards.
After 18 months of cab-driving, Brightwell decided to-
pack up and go to Gympi§. He started off, but got only as
far as Petrie, when a burly policeman intercepted him and
brought him back to Brisbane to complete his apprentice-
ship. He never had any regrets of the happening, as he
remained in the constant employ of Mr. Wakefield for 26
years afterwards, and has followed that trade ever since.
Of incidents in the ’GO’S, Mr. Brightwell recalls an out-
break of fire in the shingle roof of the old Supreme Court,
then situated in Queen-street, where Chapman’s drapery
emporium now is. The outbreak was caused by the fierce
rays of the sun. but was discovered and extinguished before
any serious damage was done. The first fire in the history
of Brisbane, he says, occurred in Paul’s workshop, where
the Treasury Hotel is now situated..
Lower down Queen-street, where the New Zealand
Insurance Company’s imposing building now stands, there
was an old wooden bridge over a creek which ran through
there, and in wet weather one would sink up to his knees in
mud and slush. Lower down in Eagle-street, on the banks
of the river, where Messrs. Thomas Brown and Son’s, and
other big business premises are now built, there were five
cottages in the ’6o’s, one of which was occupied by Judge
Lutwvche, and between where the Victoria Bridge is now
and the Hamilton there were only three hotels in those days.
Mr. Brightwell says that in the ’6o’s and ’7o's, the
aboriginals in and around Brisbane were very numerous, and
among them there was considerable fighting, and he has seen
as many as 200 engaged in a fight on what was then Hobbs’
Hill, but portion of which is now the site of St. John’s
Church of England Cathedral. When the blacks were hunted
from there they went to what was then called the Fishery
or York Hollow, and on which to-day stands the Museum
and Exhibition Buildings. Hunted again, the blacks went
to Lutwyche, but once more they were shifted, and for some
time afterwards they were camped at Spring Hill, near the
old windmill site, on which the Observatory stands to-day.
Later, the blacks were driven beyond One Tree Hill, and as
Brisbane grew they gradually disappeared.
Of the earliest racing in Brisbane, apart from Cooper's
Plains, the veteran says that the meetings were held in bush
paddocks at South Brisbane, where the Melbourne-street


Station now stands, before there was any racing at New
Farm. The South Brisbane meetings were a sort of im-
promptu affairs. The track was marked out by saplings
around waterholes and wild bush, and the prizes in many
instances consisted of a bag of flour or sugar. An occasional
meeting was held there each year for some years, and plenty
of good fun and sport was always got out of such gatherings.
One of the earliest sports grounds of Brisbane was
what was called the Green Hill, on which site to-day is built
the Roma-street Railway Station and Markets, and there
such pastimes as climbing the greasy pole and knuckle-
fighting were indulged in. Each year in the olden days the
male youth of New Farm, Fortitude Valley, Kangaroo Point,
Spring Hill, and the city would select thew best fist fighters,
and the representatives of one suburb would engage in
combat against the representatives of the other until two
were left to fight the final, the winner of which would gain
for his suburb the honor of being the champion fighting
district of the city of Brisbane. Some gruelling scraps were
seen in those days, and a big crowd gathered to witness them,
says Mr. Brightwell.
Below 7 Green Hill, between the present Helidon Spa
Water Company’s works and the old gaol at the corner of
Turbot-street on North Quay, was the cricket ground, and
many interesting games of the summer sport were played
there.
Of the racing on the old New Farm course, Mr. Bright-
well says the course, which was about a mile round, was
cleared of trees and mapped out by saplings. There were
no roads leading to it, only a small track through the bush,
but the occasional meetings there attracted most of the
residents in and around Brisbane, and from the country up
to Ipswich and Esk. The people from the latter towns’hips
were brought down by the small steamers, and many of the
Brisbane people also travelled by steam' boats or in rowing
punts and were landed on the banks of the river. There
was a creek through the course, over whdch a bridge was
built to complete the racing track, and every starter was a
fryer —the spirit of the owners then being to beat the other
fellow in friendly rivalry, and some great contents were
witnessed, and happy times spent then and afterwards in the
dance room. On one occasion in the ’6o’s, Mr. Brightwell
saw 7 a horse taken out of a spring cart, and it won easily in
a half-mile race.
Water was at a premium in New Farm in those days.
The- suburbs only had water that was stagnant and stinking,
nnd for the race meetings certain people traded in water
for boiling for tea, bringing it in casks from the springs in
Spring Hollow (near where the Jubilee Hotel now is), and
traded it at 3d. a pint. Of course, there was plenty of the


alcoholic beverage there for those who desired it, and an
amusing sight at the race meetings on the old New Farm
course was to see those who imbibed too Ireely-—sometimes
from 20 to 30—chained together. The drunks would be
arrested by the police and taken to a portion of the course
set apart for the purpose and chained up till the meeting
was concluded, when they would be set free. And while
on the subject of beer, Mr. Brightwell recalled that in the
early days on the occasions of the first two Parliamentary
elections in Queensland casks of beer, with pannikins
attached, wpre placed along the footpaths of the city, for
the electors. In these hard times there no doubt are many
who will wish that the old days would come, some more.
Tire veteran says that after Zoe had won the Aus-
tralian Champion Stakes at Ipswich in 1861, she was brought
to Brisbane to compete in a big race, which, if he remembers
rightly, carried £6OO in prize money. There was a good
entry for the event, but Zoe’s presence frightened all the
others out of it, and John Taifs mare was left to walk over
for the prize.
Another incident of the early days of New Farm which
Mr. Brightwell remembers was the murder of Pat. Honnett,
for which a man named Prendergast was hanged. Honnett
and Brightwell were working on the same job, and the latter
and Mr. O’Shaughnessy were in Honnett’s company early on
ihe night on which he met his death. When Honnett went
home, it is alleged that Prendergast called on him and induced
him to go with him to his home, and it was there he was
murdered and his body taken and thrown into the Fiver.
Mr. Brightwell is also one of the oldest firefighters still
alive in Brisbane. He was a member of the first volunteer
fire brigade as far back as 1865, and An 1867 was deputy
chief engine officer. An incident of the latter year he re-
members was the attempted assassination of the Duke of
Edinburgh at Glontarf, Sydney. The Duke, who was on a
visit to Australia, was shot by a young man, but recovered
from his injury. His assailant was hanged.
Mr. Brightwell and his good wife, despite their age, are
hale and hearty, and energetic and active, and recalls 60
years ago as if it was only yesterday. In fact, one would not
take Mr. Brightwell to be more than 50, and the keen and
retentive memory he has is simply wonderful. Mr. and Mrs.
Brightwell within a year of celebrating a 50 years’
continuous residence of their cosy little home in Barker-
street, New Farm.
The good old days of the racecourse, when one on
pleasure bent could wend his way to Eagle Farm for mixed
recreation as a side line to placing a few shillings on his
particular fancy, experience, thrills of a clinking good race,
while full of hopes of beating the “bookie,” have also dis-
appeared. 25


Decades since, there was always something to occupy
the mind between races at Eagle Farm. The shooting gallery
was looked forward to and well patronised, and many skilled
marksmen passed an enjoyable time —in some cases unprofit-
able.
There were many arguments concerning the skill of the
cne who handled the rifle as most of the good shots had their
barrackers, and it was no unusual thing to hear remarks such
as these —“Oh, the gun’s crook;” “Why, he could drill a hole
in a threepenny piece at 20 yards;” and “The wads are not
up to standard.”
These “by-the-ways” applied to the ammunition used —
some galleries using wads, peas, and other small cartridges
or darts. If the favored one happened to be using'the dart
and suffered defeat, it would not be his fault. “The dart is
lop-sided,” “It’s not a fair go,” or “It’s been hammered out,”
and “The winner’s a ‘cobber’ of the owner of the stall.” In
case it happened to he a cartridge that was being used, the
conclusions drawn by the barrackers of the beaten one would
he. “Oh, the blooming gun has a crook barrel,” “Can’t you
hear the ‘click’ before she goes off?” or “This bloke keeps
good cartridges for his buttoners and crookies for the ‘mug.’
And many other irresponsible and unfounded remarks could
be heard as the shooting progressed.
Then would loom up the “under and over.” “Gome on,
put your money on the lucky 7,” “Gome on, back the lucky
7.” and many other such like exhortations would flow from
a raucus-voiced owner of the “box,” added to every now and
then with a few unprintable quotations when a “country bird”
refused to be drawn and plucked.
“Three shots a penny, and a bob if you break the pipe”
would now and again fill the air, interspersed with a deep sigh
or an ejaculation as the wielder of the stick strikes the Aunt
Sally without reaching his object—breaking the new clay
pipe. (They smoked clay pipes in those days and it did not
cost much to purchase a gross at a time.) This source of
amusement, availed of by many who considered themselves
•experts at stick-throwing, generally caused the participant
not to forget the little relaxation for several days after by
the twitching muscle or the aching shoulder.
“Fifteen tickets at a bob, ten bob for the winner!’” This
emanated from a couple of worthies who ran a sweep on each
race (then allowed by law), and they had a good following,
some being lucky enough to show a good profit on the day—
hut the majority coming to the conclusion that it would have
paid them better to have put their losses for the day on an
u gqj_np” bet on some horse that had landed an event for
which they particularly fancied him; but the promoters (as
most promoters generally are), were on an excellent wicket
.-and showed considerable profit.


“A quid you can’t pick it!' 7 and a glance would reveal
the existence of the “thimble and the pea,” accompanied
by a hard-faced son of Adam and a soap-box or an umbrella.
The man who tried to pick it invariably failed, unless the
owner of the elusive pea thought it was good enough to
draw the “mug” along and let him win a few shillings, which
usually resulted in the winner’s undoing, and the further
proof of the old saying, “There are more fools out of the
lunatic asylum than in it.”
Another diversion in “Doodlem-buck” added to the
merriment of the onlookers and to the monetary advance-
ment of “Mr. Doodlem-buck.” The recalcitrant thruppeny
was placed on top of a small peg inside a six inch ring; half-
a-dozen short sticks were sold for a small amount, and, if
the thruppence was knocked off the peg and lodged outside
the ring, the prize was awarded —about 1/ and duplicate
throws given without extra charge. So the game went on,
the man sticking the longest being the lighter in pocket.
We must not forget the part poor old Jacko played in
the bygone days, and the merriment caused by his tricks, and
his agility to gather in the “dross,” for between his “duty”
to his employer (an Italian, you can bet), and the receipt of
a banana, biscuit, or a nut from an admiring audience, he
was often placed on the horns of a dilemna as to which
would pay best —pass the box for the pennies to be handed
to his “boss” or crack the nut and fill up his own vacuum.
Poor old Mother Goose must not be forgotten in the
part she played towards keeping an even temper in a crowd
of sports wearing a worried look and digging out the corners
of innumerable pockets and untying their last bob from
several knots in a once-white handkerchief, where it had
been placed for a rainy day, but where, like the “brown” in
the school boy’s pocket, it had been burning the proverbial
hole.
“A bob in, ten bob for the winner; the goose’ll pull the
marble!” There she was leisurely surveying the crowd,
while the lord of goosedom was selling his wares in the shape
of a card, which cost you a bob, and on which was a number.
When the fifteen cards were disposed of, Ma Goose would
receive orders to “pull one,” and she straight away dipped
her bill into a drum containing numbered marbles, with a
corresponding number to the ticket, and pulled out one
handing it to her lord. He would then sing out the number,
the lucky winner would shoulder his way through the crowd,
if he were not already longingly hanging on to the table, get
his “splosh,” and again the cry would continue, “a bob in.”
etc.
Needless to say. that goose was well fed, for, verily,,
she was the one that laid the “aolden egg.”


Passing along George-street, Brisbane, one day a very
amusing incident recurred to my mind, when referring to
the monkey and the organ. Jacko and his master, an Italian,
were regaling the public with sounds from an organ, which
the purveyor was pleased to term “music,” and asking the
passer-by to contribute their mite. A farmer —living not
1000 miles from Pullenvale —with two sons happened along,
lie pulled up to give the sons and heir the benefit of the
music, but more particularly to take stock of the monkey,
The lads were deeply interested, the younger one being the
first to break the silence with the query : “Dad, when that
boy grows up, will he get another one and do what his lather
is doing?” , ( , . ,
The farmer could not withhold the laughter with which
he was convulsed, and almost caused the monkey to fall on
his perch with the loud guffaw it produced, and considerable
annoyance to Italy’s product. 7
Must apologise for having diverted, but the probability
of missing the item at a later stage acted as a compelling
voice. . ,
All these sidelines of recreation —questionable or un-
questionable—have long since disappeared. Such sidelines,
however, are not necessary nowadays, as with eight and nine
event programmes, patrons of racing have their attention
fully occunied and the average racegoer is at his wit s end
to keep himself on the right side of the ledger.


v: *
. :< ; t #*.•• . - , , •
■■■■Kmnnnil
. ’.<■ ■■' f |:
!■■■■■— __1,
THE LATE MESSRS. E. (“TEDDY”) McSWEEENEY AND
C. GREVILLE-POUNTNEY.


CHAPTER 111. —HARKING BACK.
Seeking Fresh Fields and Pastures New —The Institution of
the Q.T.G. and Racing at Eagle Farm —Fortitude Valley
Club and Racing at Hamilton —Weighing in on the-
Hotel Verandah —More Early History.
With the dying days of New Farm as a racecourse,
racing in Brisbane really became established, when at a
meeting on August 3, 1863, 53 gentlemen formed themselves
into the Queensland Turf Club, and from the Government of
the dav got a grant of 322 acres of land at Eagle Farm, of
which' the Hons. Colonel O’Connell, J. F. McUougall, and
George Harris were gazetted as trustees.
The land was cleared and when the first meeting of the
Q.T.G. was held on August 14, 1865, the course was described
as follows: —“A grant of 322 acres, on which a stand capable
of holding 350 persons had been erected. The course is
right-handed oval, one mile and a half in length, with a
quarter of a mile straight run in. It is flat and nearly cleared
of timber. The running ground is wide, and in the season is
made use of for training without injuring the ground. There-
is a saddling paddock of about two acres, enclosed.”
The officials of the Q.T.G. on the occasion of its initial
race meeting were : —Patron: His Excellency the Governor
(Sir George F. Bowen), K.C., G.M.G.; President: Hon. Colonel
M. G. O’Connell, M.L.G.; Vice-President: Hon. J. F.
M Dougall; Stewards: Hon. R. G. W. Herbert, Captain Pitt,
Messrs D. T. Seymour, G. Edmondstone, and John Little ;
Judge: Hon. D. F. Roberts; Hon. Treasurer: Mr. A. Archer;
Starter: W. Duncan; Clerk of Course: A. Braysher ; Hon.
Secretary: Mr. W. H. Kent.
Later on, that grand old sportsman, Sir Joshua Peter
Bell, became president, and still later, Captain Richards
occupied the secretarial position, to be followed by Mr. G.
Greville Pountney, who was secretary, handicapper, and press
scribe all in one'. The latter gentlemian was no doubt the
most widely known man in the racing world of Queensland,
and considered to be an excellent judge of a good horse. He
will be remembered by many of the present day sportsmen.
Apparently there are no existing records of the early
racing at Eagle Farm —except in the cases of the Brisbane
Cup, Derby, Moreton Handicap—until 1880, when the first
volume of “Queensland Racing Calendar” was published
and dedicated by its editor.


“TO THE PRESIDENT, COMMITTEE, AND SECRE-
TARY OF THE QUEENSLAND TURF CLUB TO WHOSE
ENTERPRISE, LIBERALITY, COURAGE, AND EXAMPLE
THE TURF IN THIS COLONY IS SO DEEPLY INDEBTED.”
It contained the results of races for that and the two
previous years in about oO ol the principal centres throughout
■Queensland, and among the list of clubs mentioned is one
styled The Never Never Jockey Club.
It is from 1878 that the records of winners of the
Queensland Gup, Sandgate Handicap, Brisbane Handicap,
among other big Q.T.G. Handicaps, have been kept and
apparently, it was in that year they were instituted.
And while on the subject of racing in the ’7o’s, it might
lie remarked at this stage that it is not generally known that
the Hamilton boasted a racecourse in that decade. It com-
prised a couple of paddocks—mostly the paddock known as
Lancaster s on which are now built many homes as well
as severa! of our biggest racing stables, including those of
John Stone, Bill Noud, and Tom Wilson. The starting post
was almost abreast of where the turn off takes place to
Midgee. mence round towards the Eagle Farm course and
finishing in the vicinity of the Hamilton Hotel. Several
panels of fence had to be taken down to allow of sufficient,
ground to be made available for the various distances and
replaced after each meeting, though about two in the year
was the lull number of race meetings held.
When the horses had finished, the jockeys weighed in
on the Hamilton Hotel verandah, and those days were gala
ones for Mr. Hamilton, the then proprietor of The
hotel, whose name it bears, and the fact that it still retains
that name is remarkable, considering the number of licensees
who have since had it under control.
A club, called the Fortitude Valiev Club held its
periodical meetings there in the ’7o’s, but the first record of
a meeting under its auspices which we have been able
s°lß7 e q ar inrt W M chro “ cle( ? a s having taken place on January
1,1879, and old sporting identities—some of whom actually
took part in racing affairs at that time—give us the assur-
ance that with the exception of a £SO prize, won by Vice-Roy
a. one ot the meetings, the prizes never exceeded £ls
f ße t V f, rt ? g to Eagl ? F , arm ’ 11 mi S ht be of interest to state
the fact that owners, jockeys, trainers, hangers-on and the
Hot sain and jetsam of the sporting community at that time
all had a hand m mapping out and clearing the land to shape
it into a semblance of a racecourse. The course was
originally one and a-half miles, but later on reduced to one
mile and a few yards, and the lagoon, of which there is hardly
a vestige left, occupied a fair area in the centre, and, when
Jupiter Pluvius paid a visitation at the particular time the
races were held, the best mud horse always came out on top.


and the public —more particularly the judge had great
difficulty in distinguishing their various fancies when they
reached the winning post.
Although most of the old identities have passed over
the top long since, they have left theif footprints in the
sands of time,.there to remain as a guide to those who follow
in the calling, classed as “the sport of kings,” to carry on
and make the sport wholesome and as invigorating as at its
inception. If such is to be, a different route will have to be
taken by some, while it can truthfully be said ot others that
“they are doing their bit towards that end.”


ipgiM ' ’IiMBk?** •#■ - *~~■— ¥?S
PipP J w ■-• * *? jj^p^#*®®**
' s * 0 . %-Zt iffit MB
w v <* ••'• ■>■ ~3m». *#*■ ’ 'iiaaK»pS%* Je jk a i*'«F
l ” 1 * 1111 ' ■'■■hi ~ ■ i „ mu h i ,i, *m mi ■ ■■ g
THE PRESENT GRANDSTANDS IN THE MAIN PUBLIC ENCLOSURE AT EAGLE FARM


CHAPTER IV.—PICTURESQUE EAGLE FARM TO-DAY.
From Primitive Bush Course to Domain of Beauty—Football
• and Cricket in the ’Bo’s —The Catastrophe of 1893 —
Its Affect on Brisbane Racing—Big-hearted Men Who
Stuck to the Club and Put It on the Road to Progress
Again—Big Increases in Prize Money Since 1900 —
Pillars of the State’s Principal Club.
From the very primitive spot it was in the early ’6o’s,
the Eagle Farm reserve has been transformed into one of
the most up-to-date and most picturesque racecourses in
Australia.
Leading southern owners and trainers who have visited
Brisbane in recent years have publicly stated that the course
proper at Eagle Farm has no equal in Australia as a racing
track.
And what could be more picturesque or beautiful than
the general surroundings of Eagle Farm, more particularly
its saddling paddock.
Each year, for decades past, has seen thousands of
pounds spent on the Eagle Farm racecourse reserve towards
its beautification, and in the matter of its appointments, and
Nature has indeed smiled in her happiest mood in the accom-
plishment of what were the ideas and plans of members of
the committees. The general laying out of the course, with
its modern gates and entrances; its surrounding horse stalls
or iron fences, either retaining or trained to carry the masses
of beautiful flowers of various colors, and the verdant lawned
paddock, with its rows of yearly pruned and well trained
shade trees (each surrounded with its flower bed), presents
a sight that brightens the eye and gladdens the heart.
The grandstands and other buildings are complete with
the most modern appointments and conveniences, and are
more than capable of coping with present day requirements,
but the Q.T.G. Committee of the day is a progressive body,
and looking to the future has made arrangements for further
additions and improvements, which will add much to the
requirements of future generations.
Here again an interesting phase of “Harking Back”
presents itself, for it was the inner circle of Eagle Farm,
to-day commonly known as “the flat,” that the first cricket
matches between England and Queensland were played,
likewise the first Rugby football match between New South
Wales and Queensland in 1883.
We would have liked to have dealt generally with the
various committees of the Q.T.G., which, since the Club’s


inception, have devoted their time and energies in building
up the Q.T.G. as the principal racing club of the State and
making Eagle Farm what it is to-day, but, unfortunately,
these records were lost in Jhe ’93 flood and justice cannot
be done to the many of the noble workers the Club was
honored with before that.
To the committees of the 1893-4 and 1894-5 seasons
however, is due great praise and the admiration of all sports-
men for the way they stood shoulder to shoulder to the Club
in its hours of trial.
With the bank smashes which followed the disastrous
flood of 93, the Q.T.G. was rendered penniless, and was
laced with the difficulty of carrying out its Autumn Meeting
with no funds.
A suggestion that the meeting be abandoned was
promptly turned down. The committee was comprised of
stout-hearted men of courage, and they decided to carry
on with the meeting, and in the event of it not financing
itself to distribute what money was available pro rata to
winning owners, and allow the balance to stand over till
such time as the Glub could meet the whole of its obligations.
ser^ous effects of the flood and the bank smashes
had been felt generally, and, as fully expected, the revenue
of the Q.T.G. Autumn Meeting that year did not nearly meet
expenses, and for a long time afterwards the Glub was faced
with a big struggle to keep its head above water, and it
succeeded only through the loyalty of the big-hearted sports-
men of its committee, who dipped into their own private
resources to meet the Club’s obligations. Through {hem the
Q. kept going, and once it regained the road of progress
it never looked back.
The committee in 1893-4 was as follows:—President*
Hon. B. D. Morehead; Vice-President: Mr. Virgil Power •
Committee: Messrs. D. T. Seymour, B. G. Fenwick, W.
Flynn, R. Newton, J. Stevenson, W. H. Barker, De Burgh
Persse, Herbert Hunter, Captain Sandeman, G. R. Byrne,
R. G. Gasev, and J. F. O’Brien, and with the exception of
Messrs. 0 Brien and Casey the same gentlemen comprised
the committee of 1894-5. With few exceptions, they were
conimitteemen of the Q.T.G. of long standing, Mr. Seymour
being one of the members of the original committee, when
the Club held its first meeting at Eagle Farm in 1863, while
Mr. Virgil Power was Chairman of Committees in 1884-5,
and Vice-President in 1885-6, and as far as we can ascertain
held that position continuously for many years afterwards, at
least as far as 1895, but as the records are somewhat incom-
plete, we cannot give the length of services of the members
of the committees of the early ’9o’s, but others of the com-


XJnr>pf'nl St a k PS*
’91-2
... 300
’92-3
300
93-4
100
95-8
100
1900-1
370
1923-24
lOOOt
Sires’ •Prnrinr-p Stakes* . . .
... 300
300
300
300
180
1200
Stakes*
, ... 300
300
300
150
310
2000
St T.op’p.r Stakes*
. .. 300
300
300
150
- 270
1000
Brisbane Handicap ,
100
100
70
60
100
800
Stradbroke Handicap , .. .
200
100
60
60
100
800
Queensland Chip
500
500
300
200
500
1400tt
Brisbane Pup
500**
300
200
200
500
2000tt
Sandgate Handicap
300
300
150
100
250
1000
Aloreton Handicap
i300
200
100
100
250
1000
Royal Stakes
100
100
60
75
200
750
LO
LO
O
O
o
O
05
O
O
O
LO
LO
LO
O LO
LO
LO O
OO
00
o
t—
LO
05
o
t-
CO
o
03
O
03
O O
OO
OO 05
Th
rH
o
rH
rH
05
o
LO
rH
t'-
00
rH
CO
O
LO
00
O CO
LO
l>^
ob'
ci
of
00"
ob
05
o
05~
Ob'
o'
05
05
05
03 CO
rH
rH
iH
rH
03
03
03
CO
CO
rH
CO
CO
rH
rH
LO
LO
CO CO
m
• • •
• • •
• • •
• • •
• • •
• • •
• • •
• • •
• • •
VI
Cfi
Cf?
W
o
rH
03
CO
rH
LO
co
*
t-
*
OO
05 O
rH
<03
CO rH
00
05
tH
tH
rH
rH
T—1
T—
rH
rH
rH
rH
03
03
1
<03
i
03 03
1 1
co
ob
05
O
tH
03
CO
H
it;
co
L'b
ob
05
O
rH
03 OO
o
o
o
rH
rH
r—1
rH
tH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
03
03
03 03
W?
CD
rH
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
CD CD
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
tH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH
rH rH
mittee of 1893-4 and 1894-5, who were on the committee
as far back as 1885 were Messrs. J. Stevenson and G. R.
Byrne. 1
Some idea of the effects the flood and bank smashes ol
1893 had on the operations of the Q.T.G. will be gained from
the following figures representing the prize money of the
principal races in 1892 (the year bet ore the tlood), and
what it dropped to in the following years, and how it has
been increased from the time the Club recovered itsell, a
comparison of which can be made by the figures ol 1900
with the figures of 1924, the year in which our work was
written: —
*Prize money additional to sweepstakes. *
**Additional to 100 Guineas Cup.
tThis ytar Hopeful Stakes restricted to two-year-old colts and geldings
and C. E. McDougall Stakes of £lOOO established for two-year-old fillies.
tfAnd £lOO Cup.
We have not been able to secure the aggregate prize
money provided by the Q.T.G. for the season’s prior to 1906,
but from that year the figures reveal a march of magnificent
progress. The totals are as follow: —
*ln these years racing was affected by the depression caused by the
world war.
And in the improvement and beautification of Eagle
Farm during the last 20 years, one man, apart from the pre-
sent Q.T.G. Committee, who has claims to special mention
is the late Mr. L. E. (“Liney”) Walker. For 20 years until


failing health caused his retirement from the committee in
1923, he was chairman of the Works Sub-Committee of the
Q.T.G. and as such supported by his co-members played a
big part in the moulding and beautification of Eagle Farm.
As auctioneer (the man who wielded the hammer to the
il nods” of the bidders at the yearling sales for a great many
years), as owner of long years’ standing, as the owner of
that good horse, Had-I-Wist, “Liney' 7 Walker was a big and
popular man in Queensland racing in his day, and much of
the adornment of Eagle Farm stands as a monument to his
memory.
It was befitting of the Q.T.G. that on his retirement it
gave a complimentary meeting at Eagle Farm, at which one
of its happiest features was the success of his own bonny
two-year-old filly, Dusky Singer. Vale “Liney' 7 Walker.
Others outside the present members of the Committee
who did much in the service of the Club on its Committee,
earlier in the present century, were Messrs. W. W. Hood (for
some years chairman), Harry Baynes, G. W. Bundock, J. B.
Charlton, G. Eddington. J. Gadell Garrick, J. H. McConnell,
Deter Murphy, and F. I. Power.
While on the subject of Eagle Farm, let us
not forget the Club's caretakers and rangers,
the late Messrs. Wilson, Shea and Middleton,
and the present holder of the position, Mr.
Tommy Bice. To them and their staffs is due much of the
credit for the beautification of the public enclosures at Eagle
Farm. Mr. Rice lias been caretaker and ranger for 13
years, and the general upkeep of the reserves and garden
plots and the tracks does him the greatest credit. Whai
Tommy does not know about his business is not worth
knowing.
And in passing, some mention is due to past secretaries
of the Q.T.G., in Messrs. Hollander, Dyson-Holland, Abel Hyde,
E. McSweeney, J. Haygarth, W. W. Dawbarn, P. G. Ricardo,
L. J. Moody, and J. H. Greville Pountney, who, in that
capacity, did good and noble service.
The present Q.T.G. Committee, G. A. Morris
(chairman), J. H. S. Barnes, H. Brohkes, Jas. Clark, W.
Glasson, W. H. Hooper, I. J. Moore, H. G. Noble, P. J. O’Shea,
M. Ryan, E. L. Ramsay, and A. H. Whittingham, with Mr.
M. Baldwin as secretary, are mainly committeemen of long
standing. Mr. Morris has been chairman continuously for
the last 18 years, and Mr. P. J. O’Shea treasurer continuously
for a similar period.
Messrs. Brookes, Hooper, Moore, and Whittingham are
other very old members of the committee in point of service,
and the other gentlemen have been members for some years.
Most of them are owners of some of our best horses, and
many are breeders as well, and with men such as they, who


have the best interests of the Club, as well as racing and 1
breeding at heart, and who have long retained the confidence
of the members of the Club as well as the general public r
the “sport of kings” must continue to advance and prosper,
provided, of course, the fates are kind.
The present Secretary, Mr. Baldwin, has the
position for 14 years. Prior to taking over the post, “Morry
was a leading figure in football circles, and for many years-
was secretary of the old Queensland Rugby Union, in the
days when the Bowen Bridge quagmire was the principal
centre of the play of football matches in Brisbane. As
Secretary of the Q.T.C. he has proved himself the right mao
in the right place, and he has played a prominent role in our
premier club’s progress.
MR. M. BALDWIN
Sec. Q.T.C.
MR. C. A. MORRIS
Chairman Q.T.C.


CHAPTER V.—“THE COURSE BY THE GREEK.”
Popular Racecourse Takes the Place of Marshy Swamp—
Inals and Tribulations of Its Early Proprietors—
-1 assmg of the Switchback Railway and Other Sidelines
of Recreation—Brisbane’s First Sensation of Ballooning
—Enterprise Which Made Albion Park and Reaped I
Fortune for Mr. John Wren—A Word for Progressive
Tattersall’s Club—Rise of Unregistered Racing.
Outside of Eagle Farm, the only course in or around
Brisbane on which registered racing is conducted to-day is
Alluon Park, or as it is more familiarly called, “the’ old
breakfast Greek course,” or “the course by the creek.” It
is situated beyond the main bridge over Breakfast Greek,
about three miles from the city. The racing track is purely
of sand probably the only race track of its kind in Australia
and it has the reputation of being the safest wet weather
course in Australia.
Many years ago, Goorparoo, Hemmant, Strathpine, and
Gxley were among the suburbs, apart from those mentioned
in the preceding chapters, which had their racecourses, but
*Bey, with the exception of Strathpine, have long since gone
and been forgotten. In the ’Bo’s, even the present Exhibition
Grounds was a venue of pony racing, both on the flat and
over the jumps, and some of our present day trainers, as
well as many who have since gone into other walks of life,
raced horses or rode there.
Up to a few years ago, the Bundamba and Deagon race-
courses were for many, many years popular centres of
registered racing, and were the convincing grounds of many
fine equine struggles. Both are still in existence, but dead
as racing centres. The Bundamba course is nowadays used
by the Ipswich Amateur Turf Club (unregistered) ’ for its
monthly mid-week (or an occasional Saturday) meetings,
hut the attendances at these meetings are infinitesimal to
the days when Bundamba was in the racing booni. With
the exception of Ted Easton’s team very few registered horses
are even trained there.
The West Moreton District was once a strong centre of
racing enthusiasm, but it is now practically dead, and
football is and has been all the rage with its inhabitants for
many years.
The Deagon course, too, was, until a few years ago,
one of the principal centres of Brisbane racing. For many
years it was the venue of meetings of the Sandgate Jockey


Club, and later Tattersall's Club, and in more recent years, of
the Sandgate Jockey Club, of the John Wren proprietary,
but its popularity has long since waned, and to-day it is no
used except for the training of a few horses by trainers who
reside in the district, and for motor cycle speed contests
‘‘The course by the creek" —now called Albion ark
despite the many struggles and losses, it provided lor the
various syndicates which tried to make it %R^ yab x r P lu"
position as a racecourse from the middle 80s into t ■ -
present century, is still going strong. Since 1910, when Mr.
John Wren purchased it and provided big prize money, u
has been a popular racing centre with owners and trainers
and the public and a veritable gold mine to its owners, and
much money has been spent on its appointments and m the
beautification of its reserves.
When what is now known as Albion Park was established
as a racecourse in the late Ws, it was a swampy marsh
and there was a creek running through it, in the vicinity of
where the turn into the straight is to-day, and the swampy
portions of the flat inside the racing tracks now are evidences
of what the nature of the land was like.
\ svndicate of which Messrs. Andrew Petrie, M.L.A.,
D C Seymour (Commissioner of Police), and Mr. R. Cannon
were the directors, with Mr. Abel Hyde as secretary, spent
r big sum of money in constructing Albion Park as a race-
course with a racing track about three and a-half furlongs
round The creek was outside of it at the Gooksley-s reet
aide Prize money at its early meetings was small, something
about £IOO for a six event programme, but the venture was
not a payable proposition, and in subsequent years the
personnel of the directorates, as well as the syndicates,
underwent many changes, and among
nrwi hnqinpss men who were prominent in its management
were Messrs C. A. A. Martin, and the late Mr. Abel
Hyde. ,oq> s anc j ’9o’s, Albion Park, in addition to racing,
provided other sidelines in the ».y of
'io.ro onri whim rnoiim was in progress, football was piayea
in'the centre of the course, where the recently demolished
Gun Club house and ring afterwards stood for many yews.
There was a hall at the far end of what is now L g
rip eppvp where dances and concerts were held at night, ana
there also was a large switchback railway on that portion of
!hf course belween the present official enclosure sod the
lilind end. from where the 5i furlong races are started, and
on which are now built many horse stalls and the washing
'was o also from the “inner” of the Breakfast Greek
course that the first balloon was ever flown in Brisbane, and
with which event there was a tragic happening. To see a


leal balloon in those days was a great novelty and the
•announcement ot its ascent over Brisbane created wide-
spread interest.
In the course of the inflation of the huge balloon, it
was fastened down all round by strong cords to spikes driven
well into the ground, in addition to having a heavy post of
wood attached, to keep it in its place. The inflation'for its
iirst ascent and journey over -Brisbane naturally gathered a
keenly interested crowd. The process of inflation was
nearing completion when its buoyancy caused it to suddenly
rise, pulling the supporting spikes from the earth, and
carrying the heavy post of wood (which was attached to a
rope to the balloon) with it. All efforts to prevent its escape
were futile, and it went into space, with the heavy post
dangling from it.
The crowd gazed up in wonderment. Then suddenly
the weight of the post caused it to escape from the rope to
which it was attached, and down it came to earth, felling
beneath it and killing a young man named Webb, a’brother
ot Ginger ’ W ebb, who will be remembered by many as
one of the Valley’s best known rough diamonds of the time.
Before proceeding to deal further with Albion Park
racecourses, mention must be made of the old outer. In the
’?o’s, a big allotment outside the course, in the vicinity of
file straight, there was built a stand, from which many
hundreds got their afternoon sport for nothing. Numerous
bookmakers “stood up” there and done a thriving trade,
and several of the strongest of the paddock and St. Leger
bookmakers now registered by the Q.T.G. became wealthy
men through bookmaking on the 4 'outer,” W hen the course
fence was made higher, up went the “outer” stand to a
double decker, and for many years the congregation of
“dead-heads” there was nearly as big as in either the paddock
or St. Leger reserves.
With the passing of the “outer” stand to give place to
the erection of nice homes, the “ententes” shifted to a
paddock on. the hill, opposite to the home of the Palmers.
Later, the block of land below the home of the Palmers
and extending to the racecourse fence, and which overlooked
the course and provided a splendid view of the racing from
start to finish, became the “outer.”. It was leased by a
couple of well-known followers of racing at a big weekly
rental, but from the small charge they made for admission
and the fees paid by as many as 40 odd merchants for the
privilege of fielding, the lessees made a big profit. It
became a popular rendezvous, but a source of grave concern
to the proprietors of the course, and efforts, first to have it
wiped out and later to have it screened off to block the view
to the course, failed, and this “outer” grew in popularity and
prospered until, with the enforcement of the Act providing


for a big fee on bookmakers and the taxing of betting tickets r
the hill became non-est as a betting ground. And with no
betting there, the hill as a venue of racegoers is now deserted.
After its inception, the Breakfast Greek course under-
went many changes of ownership. In the ’93 and all later
floods, it was inundated by the waters, and its appointments
damaged, but they were built again, and in time the
racing track was increased to six furlongs. But the old
course never prospered till long afterwards, despite attempts
to popularise it by the holding of international tugs-o’-war
and other attractions. Unregistered racing, and then
trotting, shared no better fate.
Prizes were still small in the early years of the present
century, but as in the old days the smaller fields contained
few “dead ’uns” and splendid racing was witnessed. The
late Mr. Abel Hyde, afterwards secretary of the Q.T.G., later
Q.T.G. stipendiary steward, and later still chairman of the
A.J.G. (N.S.W.) stipendiary stewards, was probably longer
and more prominently connected with the Albion Park
venture than anyone else, up to the time Mr. Wesley Castle
secured it on a big deposit about 1909. Mr. Castle after-
wards so Id it to Mr. John Wren for, it is said, £35,000. Much
could be written of the men and horses associated with
racing at Albion Park up to the time of Mr. Wren’s purchase
of the course, but space will not permit of it.
With Mr. Wren’s purchase of it began a new era for
Albion Park. He electrified the Brisbane racing public
shortly afterwards by putting on a £2OOO race —the biggest
prize ever given in Queensland up to that time-—even the
amounts attached to the Brisbane Gup and Queensland Derby
then being below it, although now each carries £2OOO in
added money in addition to the sweepstakes of the Derby
and a £IOO Gup to the Brisbane Gup, and are again the two
richest races in Queensland.
Mr. Wren’s venture.of providing a £2OOO race, in addition
to £SOO for the minor events, was a great success.
The race —the Brisbane Two Thousand —attracted an
attendance which packed the stands and reserves to their
utmost capacity, and even the back fences and the roofs of
the horse stalls were requisitioned by many to witness the
memorable struggle between Bright Laddie (ridden by
“Deuce” McGrimmon) and Mischief (ridden by “Tara”
Mooney). Bright Laddie got the judge’s verdict, but it
astounded many thousands, who thought that if Mischief
did not win he was entitled to at least a dead heat.
From then on, prize money was increased, also the
price of admission, and money was spent freely improving
and beautifying Albion Park, and it became popular with
owners, trainers and the general public, and turned out a


yeritable gold mine for Mr. Wren. His enterprise in attract-
ing the best horse there made Albion Park, and deserved
(iie reward that followed in its wake.
fn the year following the “Two Thousand,” the man-
agement divided the amount into two events of £IOOO each
and established the Albion Thousand and Albion Gup and
later instituted the Albion Thousand and several £SOO
handicap races, all of which are still annual affairs.
With the success of Mr. Wren’s enterprise and its big
profits grew an agitation against proprietary racing, and it
■culminated in the old course changing hands once more,
less than two years ago. A body of prominent business men,
with Messrs. G. M. Dash, R. Joyce, and Alderman Oxlade at
Heir head, inaugurated the Brisbane Amateur Turf Club,
rind bought out Albion Park as a going concern for a figure
said to be something like £300,000 and interest, the arrange-
membemga deposit of £IO,OOO and a big monthly instalment.
the new Club, which adopted the title of the Brisbane
. .mateur Turf Club, retained Mr. Hocker as its secretary—a
position he has held for something like 20 years—and Mr.
bred. W Ready (“Lampus”) as its handicapper, a position
he has filled for some years not only to the Albion Park Club,
hut to fattersall’s Club, and seyeral country clubs also,, and
i. also retained all the big racing events instituted by Mr.
wren.
In its first year, the Brisbane Amateur Turf Club was
credited with paying £57,000 off its obligations, and the
disclosure that such profits could be made from racing
astounded the racing public and gave birth to an agitation
for increased prize money. The club has voluntarily in-
creased the prize money from £BOO to £IOOO for the ordinary
weekly meetings—and the division of races entailed more-
hut a resolution carried at the last annual meeting of the
Q.T.G. provided for not less than £ISOO prize money being
given for six races at any registered meeting in Brisbane
and the B.A.T.G. fought it on the ground that it was unable
to provide that amount, and at the same time meet the
obligations. Following legal advice being obtained, a special
meeting of the Q.T.G. was convened and held in October; it
decided that the minimum be £I2OO for six races.
Another venture acquired from the Wren Pronrietarv
by the B.A.T.G. is the Doomben racecourse, the racing
track of which, and some other important appointments have
been completed for some time. The building of the grand-
stand and the completion of Doomben for racing is to be
proceeded with shortly, and outside of Eagle Farm it looks
like being “the” racecourse of Brisbane of the future It
has a straight run of over six furlongs, and it is claimed that
when completed and its reserves beautified, it will be equal
to any racecourse in Queensland, if not Australia.


THE INTERIOR OF TATTERS ALL’S CLUB’S NEW CLUB ROOMS AS IT WILL APPEAR
WHEN COMPLETED, PROBABLY LATE IN 1925,


Another club which has long 1 been associated prom-
inently with racing in Brisbane, in addition to promoting
the social side of the sport for its followers is Tattersalhs
Club, and some of the grand old sportsmen, whose names
and deeds were so conspicuously associated with the highest
traditions of racing and breeding of the past, and which are
prominently identified with the memories in “Harking Back,”
were responsible for its institution.
tt x ! The minutes of a meeting of sportsmen at the Australian
Hotel on November 6, 1883, and presided over by Mr. J
Callaghan, record that on the motion of Mr. W. Mooney
seconded b\ Mr. James Williams, it was decided to form a
club, to be known as Brisbane Tattersalhs Club, and the
provisional committee appointed, with power to add, com-
prised Messrs. J. McLennan, James Williams William 4 ’Flynn
J. P. Jost, and J. Callaghan.
Space will not permit of a complete review of the club
since its formation, but that it has done much for racing as
well as providing the means and encouraging the social side
of the sportsmen’s life, thereby promoting good fellowship,
is generally admitted. Tattersalhs Club has always enjoyed
the greatest popularity. It has had its struggles, but 'for
many years has been an excellent institution of its kind, and
its popularity has built it up into a very strong and flourishing
institution. Unfortunately, the club has never had a course
ol its own, but nevertheless has played and is playing a
prominent part in promoting meetings and catering liberally
in the way of prize money. From the ’Bo’s until some 10 or
twelve years ago, Tattersalhs held its meetings on the
Deagon racecourse, and in the early years of the present
century it will be remembered by many that the club was
generally unfortunate in the matter of weather conditions.
Wet weather so often marred the club’s meetings that it was
once jocularly suggested that the committee should appoint
Jupiter Pluvius a life member in the hopes that he might
give the club more consideration. We well remember one
meeting which was carried through at Deagon, despite a
veritable deluge, for hundreds removed their boots and
socks, and tucked up their trousers, to obtain a greater
degree of comfort in moving about on the water-covered
saddling enclosure.
For some years past, the club has paid a big rental to
the O.T.G. for the privilege of holding its meetings, which
are now restricted to three or four a year, at Eagle Farm
Their meetings there are very popular, and it is to the credit
of the club that with the bulk of its profits, it is building up
the values of their programmes, thereby assisting to- en-
courage and maintain the highest standard of racing at
Eagle Farm. During the year in which we write, the club
instituted Tattersalhs Cup, a mile and a quarter handicap.


which carried £750 in prize money, and magnificent trophies,
valued at £IOO, which were donated by the bookmaking
members. Charlie McGrowdie, as both owner and trainer,
won all the trophies with Serelot, who scored nicely in a
highly interesting race, which was contested by a big and
good class field.
During the present century, the club has had a fine
body of men to direct its affairs, among them Mr. Jim Nesbit
and Mr. (now Mr. Justice) James Blair, and Messrs, the late
Teddy McSweeney and the late George Sherry did much in
their capacity as secretaries to make the club the popular
and prosperous institution it is. In Mr. Bob. Gillespie, the
club selected from its old employees a worthy successor to
the late Mr. Sherry. Bob i£ a live wire secretary, whose
genial personality and excellent managerial capacities have
gained him the respect and esteem of sportsmen generally
and the confidence of the club’s committee and members,
and in the few years he has been at his post he has seen the
club make splendid progress, and with such virile and pro-
gressive young sportsmen on its executive as—President :
R. P. Bauson, Esq.; Vice-President: W. J. Healy, Esq.; Com-
mittee: Messrs. W. H. Buchanan, T. J. P. Connolly, W.
Danaher, J. F. Donovan, J. J. Grayson, R. A Noonan, W. A.
McDonald, J. P. Murray; Hon. Treasurer: W. H. Buchanan;
the future of the club is assured. The present home of the
club is commodious and up-to-date, and provides all that
could be wished for by its members, but within a year or
two it will be housed in one of the most magnificent and
up-to-date club rooms to be found in Australia. Some time
ago the club purchased a property in Edward-street, and
when the existing leases expire the work of reconstructing
it for the purposes intended will be proceeded with. Some
idea of what the new club rooms will be like will be gained
from the photo published in this book.


m,,' ' ■
A FINE COLLECTION OF TROPHIES DONATED BY THE BOOKMAKING MEMBERS OF TATTER-
SALL’S CLUB FOR TATTERSALL’S CUP RACE OF £750 OF 1924, AND WON BY MR. C,
McGROWD! E WITH SERELOT, WHO LATER WON THE Q.T.C, DERBY.


Unregistered racing also has nourished in Brisbane for
many years. In the early part of the present century, it
was in a had way, especially as regards its conduct, but with
the coming of Mr. E. J. Lawrence to take over its manage-
ment about 15 years ago, it gradually improved, and for
some years past the general conduct of meetings at Kedron
Park has been equal to the standard of the registered meet-
ings, with the exception of Eagle Farm. Electric light night
pony racing of the past has long since gone, but in its place
have come in recent years the Goorparoo, SI rath pine and
Goodna Clubs, and under the conditions existing to-day
there are too many unregistered meetings, despite a curtail-
ment some months ago, to allow of the standard, which
unregistered racing had attained to be maintained in a
general way. When Mr. Lawrence came from Melbourne,
he was faced with a difficult task in cleansing unregistered
racing, but being a man of big brains and managerial
capacity he overcame the many obstacles and difficulties,
and succeeded in putting unregistered racing on a much
better footing. It became popular with the public and with
increases in the attendances and in prize money the ranks
of the unregistered forces, both of horses, trainers, and
riders increased and improved, and racing at Kedron Park
reached a high standard and enabled big handicaps, up to
£SOO, and the £IOOO Trot, to be established. As with
everything else, it received a set-back from the effects of
the world-war, but quickly recovered until within the last
12 months, the “whitewash” applied by the Q.T.G. to the
unregistered forces, took from it the best of its ranks in
horses, owners, trainers and riders. Since their return to
the registered ranks, the ex-unregistered brigade, especially
the horses, have had a most successful innings, and their
numerous successes and the good form they have displayed,
showed the high standard which unregistered racing had
attained. The depletion of the unregistered ranks was felt
for some time, but unregistered racing is recovering again
and is likely to be back to normal in the near future.
Mr. Lawrence, who has been mainly responsible for the
uplifting of unregistered racing, is one of the oldest racing
officials in Australia. Although in his 71st year, he is as
active and as energetic as a man of middle age. From his
youth he has been actively associated with racing and other
branches of sport, either as owner, handicapper, steward,


X'
Vf
\ 'iiyHi
sporting journalist, or manager, and has a wonderful memory
i" e A f ii rac^n ß reminiscences covering 50 years, and
o ic Melbourne Cups he has seen run he can discuss them
and Ihe running as well as incidents associated with them,
as it they were happenings of only recent date. A man of
yvonderlul energy and tact and pleasant personality, Mr
Lawrence, who is a native of Victoria, is deservedly popular
m foe sporting life of not only Brisbane, but also Sydney
and Melbourne. * ,y


CHAPTER VI. —INAUGURATION OF COUNTRY RACING.
Ipswich Conducts Australian Champion Stakes in bl —
Gayndah Institutes Queensland Derby in ’68 —Important
Long Distance Handicaps of the Country Centres in the
’7o’s, and Notable Winners —The North’s Breakaway.
While the honour of providing the first two racecourses
in Queensland falls to Cooper’s Plains and New Farm,
Ipswich, which comes next, has the additional honours o
Leins' the first centre outside of the metropolis to conduct
a meeting of any importance and of running under its
auspices the richest race ever decided in Queensland, up to
1910. when the Brisbane Two Thousand was decided at
Albion Park, since when the Q.T.G. Derby, Queensland Cup.
and Brisbane Gup have also attained a greater value.
The North Australian Jockey Club was formed in either
1859 or 1860, and in 1861 was decided under its
auspices the Australian Champion Stakes (3 miles), which
was established in 1859, and from that year till 1876 was a
handicap. The first two Champion Stakes were decided in
Melbourne and after running second to Flying Buck (6.5)
in ’59. John Tail’s Zoe won it the following year from Wild
Rake In ’6l, Zoe (who was by Sir Hercules, a noted sire
of the time, and the sire of Yattendon, The Barb, and many
other horses, which were champions on the race tracks and
afterwards distinguished themselves at the stud) was
brought from Melbourne to again win the Champion Stakes
on the old course at The Grange, Ipswich, which was the
headquarters of the North Australian Jockey Club. The
Champion Stakes was a sweepstakes of 100 sovereigns each
for starters, with 1000 guineas added, and Zoe, in winning
from Ben Bolt and Van Tromp, ran the three miles in 5.0/.
The following year the Champion Stakes reverted to Mel-
bourne, and since 1916 it has been known as the King s
Plate, and run over two miles.
In ’65, or two years after the Q.T.G. became established
at Eagle Farm, the' North Australian Jockey Club instituted
a Grand Handicap of two miles. This was a lucky race for
the late Mr. Billy Ruddle, as he captured it three years in
succession, viz.: ’66, ’67, and ’6B, with Premier (twice) and
Chancellor (by Sir Hercules), and again in ’74 with Zanco
(by Pioneer), he being also the rider on each occasion.
Other notable horses to win it were Mr. Scott’s Zenobia (by
Leopold) in 1873. John Finnie’s Nemo (by Kyogle) m 7b,
Jas. McGill’s Sunrise in ’77, Sir J. P. Bell’s Lilia in ’7B, and
A. Loder’s Black Eagle in ’79, in which year the distance


was reduced to a mile and three-quarters. The old Northern
Australian Jockey Club and The Grange racecourse are loner
since non-est.
Alter the N.A.J.G., the next important club to be
lormed appears to have been the Gayndah Jockey Club. In
the very early ’6o’s, it established its principal handicap
iace ol two miles, and it was run annually under various
names till 67 when it became known as the Gayndah Gup
end its distance increased to three miles. There are no
records prior to 67, in which year it was won by Mr. M.
Brown s Guiding Star. As the Gayndah Gup (3 miles), Mr
vioodm s Why Not won it in ’6B, but the following year
when its name was changed to the Gayndah J.G. H’can
and the distance reduced to 2i miles, Mr. Billy Ruddle won it
w h Premier Later, the distance was reduced to two miles
nut the race has long since become non-est. and Gayndah
to-day is a racing centre in only a very small way.
o the old Gayndah Jockey Club, however also falls
In®! B°i»° Ur . of h ying instituted the Queensland Derby Stakes
m 1868, when Mr. W. E. Parry Okeden (who will be re-
membered as a Commissioner of the Queensland Police)
won lf . Wlth Hermit. In the two following years the Derbies
«ncl Mr. Soil won Em S
Zambesi and Grafton, respectively. It is in the records that
Grafton won two Queensland Derbies in 1870, the first at
layndah and a second one at Toowoomba, when he raced
races 6 name ° f B ' Cowell. He was ridden by Powell in both
Apparently in 1871 and 1872, the Derbies were run
under the auspices of the Q.T.C., and they were won by
both owned by Mr. J. Tait. From 1872
w • ’ 116I 16 , rby was m abeyance, but it was revived in the
last-mentioned year, when Sir Joshua Peter Bell won it and
(tie next three successive Derbies with Elastic, Whisker
Waterloo, and Legerdemain. Since then the Derby has
grown to one of the two richest races, and the richest of the
classic races associated with the Queensland Turf.
B ™ s b ane Gup wa S f, rs t run in 1866 and f o u owin „
Ipswich and Gayndah, Gympie (Gympie Turf Club), Mary-
(Maryborough Jockey Club) .Rockhampton
6 7° WnS X llle Turf Glub ), Charters
J no 7 C.T.J.G.), on the northern route, and Toowoomba
(Dar mg Downs Jockey Club), Warwick (Warwick Jockey
'I 1 b), ; Halby (Northern Downs Jockey Club), became
established as important racing centres in the early ’7o’s
bince which up till the outbreak of the world war in 1914
were all included in the itinerary of the tour which most of
the leading Queensland owners and trainers, as well as many
southerners, with teams of horses, including their best, and
the leading riders undertook annually.


All the towns mentioned were prosperous centres of
racin°' in the ’7o’s, ’Bo’s, and ’9o’s, and into the present
century, but received a set-back from the
The Gvmnie Turf Club’s Handicap (2 miles), estan
lishedin 1870 P was won the first three years m succession
by B. Powell’s Grafton by Whalebone, and Ghiefta
“s t a
hampton Jockey Club Handicap, eac r Abraham’s
IS"*‘Vir'celffc hleftaim' J. Williams’ Melbourne were
notable winners of both races in the same year, viz..
records o^tfmNorthern Downs Jockey Glut. Handi-
Tnnwnnmba Turf Club’s Toowoomba Gup, and Warwick
Tuff Club Handicap, also JJDhf Klc.
f&SS TAJ .ml Ne- -£ ss
Ins name on its X Warwick Turf Club’s
Erin were the first two winner . j ohn pinnie
Handicap, and in the next i , • 175 an( j ’76 with
had a great run of luck in it, winning a nd the
hemm '77 with Newbolcl ™ ~«» SfSrlbed also
names of Zanco (.3) am ;/\ he Toowoomba Cup. In '76,
[he Toowoomba cTip had its name changed to the Darling
Downs Jockey Club Handicap (and after many changes
since it is the Toowoomba Cup again now). In 79
there was a sensational happening associated with the
Darling Downs J.C. Handicap. Mr. James Wll ams good
horse Melbourne, carrying 9.5, won it, but was o . 1
on the ground that his rider (Hughes) was guilty of foul
ridin terne" JdWortirprolpeJity of mcing in the ’7o’s and
’Bo’s will be gained from the following figures representing
the value of the principal races Aon°Tud 10 sovereigns
1077.8 • 0 T.C. Brisbane Gup, £SOO and 1 . ■
sweepstakes, ‘and trophy valued at.£so;
£3OO and 10 sovereigns sweepstakes, Sandgate gana cap,
C9OO and 7 sovereigns sweepstakes, Moreton ii<u P:
ftno’and 5 sovereigns sweepstakes; Northern Downs Jockey
n,?h Grand Handicap of £2OO and 7 sovereigns sweepstakes,
?id b loswich Cup, £2OO and 3 sovereigns sweepstakes; War-
wick Turf Club Handicap, £2OO and 10 sovereigns sweep
Makes; Maryborough Turf Club Hanto.D
sovereigns sweepstakes; Townsville Turt Club Handicap
£IOO aud 2 sovereigns sweepstakes; Gympie Turf Club
Handicap, £l5O and 2 sovereigns sweepstakes; Rockhampton


Jockey Club Handicap, £3OO and 5 sovereigns sweepstakes;
Toowoomba turf Glub’k Darling Downs Handicap, £IOO and
5 sovereigns sweepstakes.
Like everything else, country racing received a big set-
back trom the effects of the catastrophe of 1893, and also
the world war 1914-1918, and the war settled many of the
smaller clubs which had been links of the big circuit.
Some have passed out and others have gone over to the
unregistered code, but all the Downs clubs and Gayndah,
Rockhampton, Townsville, and Charters Towers are holding
their ground and are again prospering more or less. Each
year sees them adding prize money to the attractions of
their carnival meetings, and they bid fair to make the annual
Northern and Downs trips as popular again as they were in
years gone by.
At stage, it may be of interest to state that in the
70’s and early ’Bo’s, the many racing clubs worked under
the jurisdiction of the Q.T.G., and raced under the latter
body’s rules, which consisted of “Q.T.G. Rules” (12 in
number), "Rules of Horse-racing in General” (86 in
number), and "Rules of Betting” (19 in number).
In 1885. the Q.T.G. adopted a set of rules and regula-
tions on the lines of those of the English Jockey Club, and
instituted a system of registration of all clubs. This move
did not meet with favor with the Northern clubs. They
resented what they claimed was an attempt to force on them
a code of rules, which were not adapted to racing conditions
in the North.
The outcome of the trouble was that the Northern clubs
broke away and formed their own association, and it has
controlled Northern racing affairs ever since.
In latter years, the Central Queensland Racing Asso-
ciation was formed, and it took over the control of clubs and
racing affairs in the Central and Central West.
Of the circuit worked in the oast, which commenced
at Warwick, and included Dalby, Roma, Toowoomba, and
Ipswich to Rrisbane, and thence to Gympie, Maryborough.
Bundaberg, Mackay. Bowen. Townsville, Charters Towers
to Cairns —each of these centres providing good prize money
—the notable links that are missing to-day are Ipswich,
Gympie, Maryborough, Bundaberg, and Cairns, each of which
is now catering for the unregistered code of racing.
In all the other towns, the clubs have maintained the
status of registered racing.
From the late ’7(Ts. throughout the ’Bo’s and ’9o’s,
and in a small degree in the present century up to the out-
break of the war in 1914, the trip north for the annual
carnivals w r >s ponular with leading owners, trainers,
and riders from the southern parts of the State, as well as
with some sportsmen from the southern States, and on the


Charters Towers double —the Tovyers and Millchester Handi-
caps—as well as the principal events at the Townsville
4 'annual,” there always was spirited wagering both straight
nut and in doubles, and, therefore, it may be of interest to
many to publish the following review by Tjiu (Mr. W. B.
Groom), of the principal Northern races: —
In 1876, J. M. Carroll won the Towers Handicap with
Dan O’Rourke, and A. Huxley won the second leg with
Wanderer. This double in ’76 went to F. Willich with the
aid of Lord George. In ’77 E. Parker won the double with
Vanguard, and the same year J. M. Carroll was again suc-
cessful with Talleyrand. In 1878 the late Tom Lavis, of
Toowoomba, won with Wanderer, and Mr. Carroll took the
second leg with Talleyrand. In ’79 N. C. Brown and J.
Henderson won the double with Uncle Tom and King Gole,
respectively. In 1880 J. IVT. Carroll won the again
with Talleyrand, and in ’Bl A. Reid won two races with his
pair, Ace and Lupus.
In 1882 the distance of the Towers Handicap, hitherto
3 miles, was reduced to 2-| miles, and the Millchester Handi-
cap to If miles, which gives an idea to the up-to-date sport
how solid these past cracks were. F. Johnson’s Fair Jane
and J. H. Milson’s Minimbah won the double that year.
Subsequently the distance of the first leg was reduced to ~
miles. In 1883 it was won by M'Lennan’s Wheel of Fortune,
who was later bought by the late Mr. J. White. Wheel of
Fortune, a daughter of Goldsborough, went to the stud and
produced Warpaint (Adelaide Cup winner), who afterwards
did stud duty for the late John Finme and was a great
success. T. Moody’s Hippy won the second leg (reduced
to a miles). In ’B4 the late John Finnic won the double
with that fine stayer, Medusa (Kelpie—Modesty).
Eighteen hundred and eighty-five saw W. Strickland
win with Ben Bolt (Newbold —Lady Baldwin), bred by John
Finnic. This colt went south and won the Caulfield Gup and
other good races, and was sold for India. M. Day won next
dav with Speculation. R. Crothers, a well-known sport, won
the first leg in ’B6 with Minorah, and J. B. Thompson the
second leg'with Richmond Gem. In ’B7 R. Kelly won the
double with Petronel. This horse was previously owned by
the late J. S. Jost, who won the Q.T.C. Derby and Queensland
Cup with him. Mr. Jost at that time also had those good
horses, Elsinore and Legacy (Brisbane Cup). F. D. Garsten
won the first leg with Tragedian in 1888, and T. Downey
the second day with Goldstain (I fancy a Rosevale bred
horSe lhout this time there was another Newbold horse
racing, viz., Newbolt, whom northerners state was as good
as Ben Bolt’ but he fell on tide track and had to be destroyed.
’Eighty-nine saw P. Hannon’s Ralston and F. Johnson's


Gildus win the double. The latter was bred at Strathmore.
r p er S r W his b ™ ther there, but he was no
good. In 1890 IT Paradise won the double with Ronald and
Redfern. two good horses, and in ’9l Gildus won the Towers
Handicap this time for D. Symes. Afterwards he came
south, and did well. E. Lindsay won the Millchester that
year with Corsican a black by Marvellous—Catherine
1 !, ee ,- 4 Tbe , a t e G- . Gllbert afterwards had Corsican doing
stud duty, and he sired a few good horses from Rosevale
Stud mares, and eventually went to Rainsworth Station in
the Spnngsure district.
Tn ’92 E. Monahan won the double with Donizetti by
Marvellous, and in the late W. Forrester’s colors, Donizetti
t JA^ ar(^s won A.J.C. Doncaster Handicap at Randwick.
in 93 Beche-de-mer (by The Diver) won the double for B.
Lawson. This horse did well in the South, and eventually
was sold to an Indian owner, and was taken across by Mr.
Jim Rogers, the well-known horse buyer. In ’94 F. Peck’s
The Abbott and T. Bearup’s Monarch were winners.
Tn 4 895 John Finnie won the double with Newbold
■ Newb old——Lady Baldwin). This horse also won important
races in Brisbane, reference to which is made at later stages,
and eventually be went to West Australia, where he
developed temper, and bolted with a boy, and was killed.
Next year R. A. Markwell won the double with Black Harrv
(Bobby Burns—Mary Ann). He was bred out Quilpie way.
If I remember rightly he was first tested as a galloper by John
Gardner, chairman of Thargomindah Shire, who also raced
others. S. L. West won the first leg in 1897 with the
southern-bred Roseberry and A. Baxter the second leg with
Music, a Tasmanian-bred stallion, whom Dick Rlackjock
afterwards raced, and who, on retiring from the track, did
stud duty in the Wide Bay district.
J. B. Thompson’s Lancewood and J. D. O’Leary won the
double in ’9B, and next year B. Lawson and G. Burgess were
the winners with Sam and Tasman. Both these horses were
good ln 1900 J. M‘Ewan won the Towers
Handicap with Ohio, and this son of Gozo turned out one of
the best horses of bis year. Longford, a southerner, won
next dav for A. Willis. Tn 1901, R. Abel’s Little Joe and
J. D. O’Learv’s Ftnicum were the winners. B. Harbard won
the first leg in 1902 with Blunderer, and A. English won next
day with J.R., a useful mare, who won many races at Eagle
Farm. Nineteen hundred and three saw Mr. Harbard win
the Towers Handicap again with Bridegroom’, with whom
Watty Blacklock later the same year won an A.J.G. Summer
Cup and a Hawkesbury Handicap. Auburn won next day for
Tom Neylan.
Watty Blacklock trained Whitebait for Mr. M. F.
Ramsay, and the little Mostyn horse won the Towers Handi-


cap in 1904, and Mrs. G. Ferguson’s Carbine mare, Mane
Corelli, won next day. In 1905, in Mr Blacklock’s colors
Whitebait won the first leg again, and A. S. Gene won next
day. In 1906 W. R. Johnson made the mp from lamworth
with his Victorianpbred horse, Pooh Bah (Bloodshot Lai Y
Snurwell), and he won. and also won the w f.a. race Lord
Correll won the second leg for Mr. Purcell In 190/ J.
M‘Ewan won the Towers Handicap again w it i -A’
a very useful horse, and W. Steele scored nex day'with
Carlist, probably the Chester horse. Garhst won the lowers
with The Trustee, a southern-bred horse.
In 1909 the Towers Handicap distance was
one and a quarter miles, and it was won by t , ■
sportsman, H. Best, with his black mare Messenger and
also annexed the second leg over nine furlongs She was
good performer on metropolitan tracks. Nm e _ .
and ten saw H. Hulhert with the double with Ea a
full-brother to A. Godsall’s Plunder (Havoc —Beeswing),
and next year Earthquake won the MUlchester again PS.
Love won the Towers Handicap in 1911 with Pa e tte 'mP' ),
and in 1912 J. I). O’Leary, who had been previously success
ful in this double, won it again with Benefit. . hlp
In 1913, Electric Wire (by Maltster) won
and turned out a great gfomerm tbeNorth.Jn
nTnexTday Charlie M’Growdie won the second leg with
the New Zealand-bred mare Lotchen with
■ or. end won the Q.T.G. Metropolitan Handicap at nagie
lh in s i9i raw SS;
tt.tiSfSK “e Se
hundred ami sixteen winners, Yuma and Alarm, we
owned by W. H. Garter and W. Duncan, respective y. t lO
+1 • r 10 4 7 nnd tlie last year I have to record, but by
no means double of H. BarratFs Nojah a
good galloper and winner of many races, and G. H. Keyes
King s Scholai (imp.). .. Mni>ihpr , n riders
T ivnch and R. Scott were two of the Northern naers
T knpw well but there were many good riders who went
horsemen as S. !a\ s, • q ’«« wt q stp\s r arf G Parker
( Ai-TnviOi G Selbv Archie Scott, W. S. btewan, u. i anw ,
y[mmpv I stone M' Connell, Tucker, and in the Millchester,
Effi i, M Ryan,' A. Colley, B. Ooigh, Quigley, J. Rogers,
M Milne were successful. .
’ Even in those days, matters were occasionally fixed up,
i„n ns there were no stipes, the oracle worked within the
«e Hf ."™, A veteran remarked recently: “There
is no doubt we had better stayers, a better stamp of horses,


and I’ll say better riders in the ’Bo's to the end of the ’9o’s;
still I know that the arrangement of you win here 1 will win
there existed, and on one occasion, at the Towers Ben Bolt,
the crack three-year-old, upset a settled double.
My Townsville record of its principal race —now styled
the Townsville Cup —date from 1893. In this, the year of
the Hood, 1 was in Brisbane, en route to Meteor Downs, and
left that station with 1000 bullocks for Bayfield, Gippsland,
end just missed Tarcoola’s Cup. 1 mention this as the year
appealed to me. B. J. Blacklock won with Blythwood. Dick
still has Welcome Dan, and a share in Best Dan. Next year
G. Storer won with Rainbow, and '95 saw E. Monahan’s fine
horse Donizetti win, and J. Gard won in '96 with Lord Marion,
a Rosevale-hred horse, by Ormond. In 1897 S. Hobson
scored with Waterloo. Years before a chestnut, Waterloo,
raced in Toowoomba, but this horse will likely be the Dandine
Station (Dalhy) bred horse by Batallious I Warlike
Queensland) from, 1 fancy, Miss Newhold, as she and other
Rosevale mares were on this station. Next year the useful
Malua gelding won. In '9B Gome Again won, followed by
Longford. J. M'Ewan’s champion, Ohio (late Frisco) won
in 1901. Next came G. W. Clayton's Little Bernie horse
Araxes. Smith, the next winner, I know nothing of. In
1904, M. F. Ramsay scored with Whitebait. Of Colonel
Plumer, the next winner, I am not too clear, but His Lordship,
winner in 1906, reads like the Downs picnic horse. The
next winner, Rivulet, H. A. Hawthorn’s mare, was I fancy,
m late H. Hunter’s string. Gzerney won in 1908. The next
winner was Fondle, a useful horse. J. S. Love’s Palette
(imp) won in 1910 and in 1911. Bonner won with Com-
forter (by Cravat, a son of Castor, imp.)., who was well
known on the Downs and Brisbane tracks. E. Kingsbury
the next year with Mad Jack, also known in this city,
i he next two went to Electric Wire and Blunderer, and Yuma
followed. My last record gives Kenilic (by Kenilworth,
imp.) as the winner, and lie turned out a useful horse.
m A fe m years back Townsvi Ue put on a N.Q. Guineas, and
Charters lowers Derby, and these races are growing in
popularity with owners and breeders.
Outside of the Towers and Townsville, the North
Oueensland Association has a large list of clubs which are
doing well. In years past, many Northern, Central, and
Western horses came to Brisbane, and then went South, but
nowadays such instances are very rare.
After the Towers and Townsville, the next most
important fixture in the North is Hughenden, and, like the
WuPu 7 R A , - nracelet - the Hughenden Bracelet is a trophy
oked forward to, and the winner is generally looked upon
to win in better company. Mr. J. D. O’Leary’s Etnia did well
at the lowers after winning this event. The Hughenden


Handicap dates from 1890, when it was won by Jack Shep
herd, ridden by Webber, a boy who did good service for
Tom Lynch, of Toowoomba, who is now racing Miss Rosa-
mond In 1918 J. D. O’Leary won with Flashette but in
between such horses as Roseberry, The Guard, Colonel
Plumer, Garlist, Earthquake, Narana were among the winners.
Townsville I found a very sociable place, and judges
from the Downs speak highly of the show committee. Ihe
trip by boat is a good one and the scenery interesting, but
further North to Innisfail they say is better, and when the
line is completed, by Christmas, this town should go ahead
and improve the race club, and it may probably work in with
the big fixtures, giving owners an extra meeting.
This concludes the Northern racing centres —that is,
the big clubs. To carry on with Cloncurry, etc., would take
up too much space, but it gives sports here an idea of what
the North really is as a racing centre and the class ol horses
that race there.
They have a fine collection of stallions in the North, and
of recent years good mares have gone North, and we may
get more horses of the Scholarly class to race in Brisbane.
Beche de Mer, Gildus, Lucky Boy, Black Harry, Dark-
ness. Lucifer, Earlston, Bullawarra, Milkabah, Litmus,
Fascination, M ‘Mister, Daybreak were all good horses which
raced in the North in years gone by, and went South and
won on the flat or over hurdles —stayers, every one of them.
Everything is being done to advertise racing and breed-
ing in the North, and when more of the country is taken up
with a view to increasing the sheep and cattle industries,
the blood horse may become an important factor as well.
In this direction I might add that I have always advocated
cutting out inbreeding. It may be successful at times, but,
generally speaking, it is no good/ I have seen a lot of it,
and in certain lines that we have at present, it is hard to
breed away from it. Although some may argue against me,
I still-maintain that we still get the stayers of to-day tracing
to the stout strains of the past. There is a chance now for
the North to go ahead on these lines.
Breeding has much improved in the North, and should
go on improving, but let studmasters cut out early racing
and not race their stock till their limbs are well set and
able to stand training. What is 12 months, or even two
years, to wait? Take Wakeful. She did not race till four
years! but when she did she proved herself the best mare
ever foaled in Australia.
With the management of northern clubs working in
unitv and catering for support, they have gone ahead rapidly,
and being a sociable lot, the good time they give to south-


orncrs should take them North again. Let us hope we wilt
the Ot'p n c°K he r n / nen br ®f dm S Derby colts to take part at
! nv' ' G ' , blg D : fixtures. Now that the railway is through
p’nJ riSban ?u and °l her owners will be able 1o
hv water U d miSS the rougb Passage at times met with


CHAPTER VII.—RACING HISTORY OF THE DOWNS
AND FAR WEST.
Interesting Sidelights and Experiences of the Early Days—
Notable Horses, Clubmen and Other Sportsmen Recalled.
As far as can be ascertained, racing on the Downs was
started in a small way during the ’6o’s. The Downs then
was an immense sheep run the stations being owned y
such men as Hodgson and Ramsay (Eton Vale), Shanahan
and Jennings (Westbrook), Kings (Cowrie), Kent and
Weinholt (Jondaryan), Foote (Clifton), and in the southern
end by Marshall and Slade, the M'Dougalls, Donkin, and also
Jas. Taylor (of Cecil Plains). ,
At the annual race tixtures in 1 oowoomba from the
’TO’s" the four-in-hand teams came in, and the local people
were'there in full strength, and made it a big social gather-
ing Then came the sideshows, fruit stalls etc., and the
flat at lunch time resembled a huge picnic. In the paddock
bookmakers rolled up in force from Brisbane, while sweeps
were run bv the lady folk. It was at that time that the
great boxer, ° Peter Jackson, paid a visit to the course, and
so later did his rival, Paddy Slavin. Stewards were not so
particular then as they are nowadays, and lads ran sweep-
stakes from the six furlongs pole in between races. A pony
race hack race, and two six furlongs handicaps were the
only sprints—all other races ranged from seven furlongs to
two miles. Two-year-olds would win their maiden over
one and a half miles, and then travel to other fixtures. An
occasional welsher would break away, and be caught alter
a chase. There was no false spirit given to horses then.
There were gallops before daylight, the same as now, and
each trainer tried to catch the others; still, at the same time,
racing was relished, and always looked forward to, but
things are totally different to-day.
Before Separation the Clifford Park racecourse was
a grant of land by the New South Wales Government for a
racecourse and cricket ground. This information was given
by the then chairman of the Toowoomba Turf Club, the late
Mr. W. H. Groom, in December, 1882, when he also s.tated
that the property’ had drifted into the hands of a private
individual who could exercise his power and sell. It would
take up too much space to reproduce the full history, but
when the present club was formed in 1878, it was agreed
to lease the course of 160 acres. Eventually a portion of
the course was sold, and for the remainder an effort was
made by the late Mr. W. H. Groom to pay off the mortgage
and secure it for the council, but, according to records, this


was forestalled by Messrs. W. R. Robinson, James Williams,
J. Scully, and J. Taylor, jun., who paid off the mortgage and
vested the course in three trustees without the power to
alienate or mortgage. It remains the same to-day. There
is no doubt that the part James Williams played by paying
interest, etc., saved the course. Mr. W. R. Groom still holds
the full text of the origin and history of the club.
Although the Toowoomba Turf Club has had a big fight
since the ’Bo’s, it has never gone clean out, but held on,
and is now in a strong financial position. In the early days
cheques were paid over after a meeting at a settling, but as
these functions became rowdy, and fighting indulged in,
they were cut out, and owners had to call at the office for
their money.
According to records, racing on the Downs started in
the ’6o’s. This is rather too early for us to speak of, but
some of the stout old battlers were Zanco, Irish Stew, The
Dean, Zenobia, Sydney, Lord of the Downs, Nemo, Mel-
bourne, and Newbold. The latter pair on retiring to the
stud turned out noted sires, who made a success of the Tent
Hill and Rosevale Studs, owned by James Williams and
John Finnie, respectively.
In Toowoomba the owners who assisted racing in the
past included Mr. 11. Fox (who raced Sodawater, Nell Gwyne
Little Harry, Starlight, Serf, Star’ Phyllis, and Strife). From
Phyllis Mr. Fox bred Togo, who won the Q.T.G. Derby in J.
Taylors colours. Togo also won the Hawkesbury and A.J.G.
Doncaster Handicaps. The late Mr. Fox also raced many
others. Gilbert Rros. raced Satarist, but he was too old and
would not complete a run. Others raced by the Gilberts
were Despot, Rowler, Melody, Tempo, Stanthorpe, Alma Relle,
Stockton. In the North, George Gilbert raced with Dick
Rlacklock, Orange Skin, Merloolas (who won a Sydney Gup,
and was a good horse at w.f.a. in Sydney), Rar One, Popgun’
and Contest. Mr. A. M'Goldrick raced Saxon, Friendless’
etc., and the late W. Gentle Lady Darkie, Gapa-pie Minto’
Cupid, Decoy (killed at Randwick), and others. The late
J. Wonderley raced the chestnut Toowoomba, and his
late son, R. G. Wonderley, r cured Dolly, Lubra, and
Maniac, the latter with J. Herbert, G. JHorrison had Wee
Jim; and others to follow were: Dan Loch, W. R. Johnson
with Pooh Rah, Roonery, Desborough, etc. G. M‘Growdie
(now in Rrisbane) raced Pinkenba, Pillory, Lotchen Par-
doned, Noelmayne, etc.; P. Nagel, Metagraph, Javelin
Hazard, Recluse; G. A. Godsall, Plunder, Linnet. Ptarmigan
(sold for Japan), Omar, Hippon; and later D. and W. Shiels
raced War Star, Oak Grafton, and others.
I be sports ol early days who kept the game going in
Toowoomba were Mr. W. M. Groom, the late Mr. James
Taylor, sen., G. G. Gory, R. W. Scholefield, W. R. Robinson,


M Keefe E. Marwedel. J. Long, and the secretaries were
'Vi' Edwards, W. Clark, and the present one, Mr. G. A.
Leichney.
Prominent sportsmen Irom Brisbane and other centies
who also assisted Toowoomba and other centres in the past
included Billy Ruddle, B. Powell, Johnnie Fmme, H. Hunter,,
J. P. Jost, j. M'Gill. W. Mooney, James Williams, Geo.
Williams, A. Barrington, C. E. Brown, M. Sheehy, J. Allman,
W. G. Bundock, C. Burton, A. Court, and H. Fisher, and
among the horses they raced were \abba, Pirate, theorist,
Petronel, Lyndhurst, Fano. His Worship, Parody, Sailor,
Sir John’, and New Fashion. Toowoomba does not get such.
patronage to-day.
Good riders, outside the Downs riders, who iollowed
the Downs fixtures in the past, included Billy Ruddle, B.
Powell. H. Bailey, F. Woods, J. M’Alister, J. Verner, F.
Brightwell W. Bowers, A. Scott, “Tiny’’ Best, J. \ander-
warden. W. Leadbeater, R. Milne, T. Woodgate, B. Colley, R.
Gough, A. Colley, and “Snapper” Farrell.
An amusing story might be repeated re the latter. He
had a night out and was "pinched,” as they say, but bailed
out. At that time the “Figaro” was in print, and it published
a cartoon of a big policeman with a three-prong tork, on it
hooked a fish. It was titled “Harpooning ‘The Snapper’ at
Toowoomba.” Farrell was a great horseman.
When the old-time sports came to Toowoomba there
v ere hurdle races, and. prior to that, the steeplechase course-
was used. The horses had split rail fences and big gum logs,
to clear, and well they did it. In Sir A. Kennedy’s time he
bought a very fine pair of chestnut horses. Bosco and Chester,
from J. Scully, who owned Laurel (Melbourne —Lapwing).
It was through this mare Jimmy Connors composed the song,
“Laurel have it. Laurel have it. Lost.” From her he bred
and won with Sybil. Monitor, Tyre, Lady Primus. To get
back to Sir A. Kennedy, it might be mentioned that he drove
the pair out to the races, and, taking one out, won the hurdle
race, ridden by old Alex Mann.
On another occasion, H. Webb (alderman) took a load
of bread out to the course with a little grey, Doughboy, and
saddled him up for the hurdle race. This little horse went
away, just hopping over, with the riders .of Loafer and
Caledonian simply watching. At last they woke up, and,
although they were coming ten strides to the grey’s one,
could not get up, and the baker scrambled home a winner
amid laughter and cheers. As in Brisbane, hurdle racing
collapsed’ in later years, but there are many horses now
which are not good enough for the flat, but which would
probably do well over hurdles. John Finnie’s mare, Sweet-
heart, who won for him, went to England and won a steeple-
chase. Signet, like Friction and Yabba, went South and won.


Of this lot Friction was the best —a line, big fellow after
the cut of Batallion and a good horse on the flat. Blue Doll
bred at Dalby, also went South and won. Blue Streamer
was another.
In recent years, an effort was made to introduce un-
registered racing in Toowoomba. Tom' Lynch made a suc-
cess of it, but when he sold out the club drifted out. The
Downs Association then granted a permit for the club (Wer-
rmgton Park) to race registered, but it also collapsed and
now is practically out.
1 he d aylor tamily always stood staunchly to Toowoomba
Turf Club. The late bred, W. 8., and John also raced
Expert, friction, dabba, Tallboy, Grey Friar, while the only
remaining male member ol the tamily, James completes
his 2b years as president of the club this year and is also
president of the D. and W. Racing Association.’ In addition
to the others mentioned, Messrs. G. G. Gory, F. G. Broadribb
and Charles Nolan, were among the founders of racing* on
the Downs.
Dick Blacklock, from a kiddy, did most of the early
riding tor John binnie, and in later years raced Merloolas
and others with the late -G. Gilbert. Dick also raced Music
Agate, and Blue Light. His stables were at Hendra He
also had Bonny Belle, and trained War Cry, Omar and
I larmigan for G. A. Godsall. He now has Welcome’Dan
w° fi s^ re if 1 ® es t Dan. He has a nice farm property at
Westbrook Mr. A. B. Nagel, who raced Bright Laddie and
a number of other good horses some years ago, was a rider
in is younger days. At a Toowoomba meeting a fairly good
horse Horn Gharleville was looked upon as a sure thing, but
Bunny mounted on a chestnut called Silver, from Mill-
merran way, beat the favorite. Many of the Toowoomba
boys were good riders (not exactly Rodeo horsemen) but
wah e oft times better than professional
jockey boys, and won many matches at Clifford Park and at
country meetings. ’
C 1 old Dmers who kept racing going on the
Downs, the following are all who are left:—John Scully G.
Rolan, and Jaimes and George Williams. The former is in
Toowoomba J. Williams is at Wallumbilla, and G. Williams
m Pittsworth district. All three can still talk 50 years ago.
Warwdck, whose annual carnival held recently has
been a racing centre since the ’6o’s, when its first meeting
was held on Canning Downs, -where Mr. J. H. S. Barnes”
stud is now situated. At one time the Warwick Turf Club
went clean out, wdien their old sportsmen passed away, but
il, again, and men w ; ho kept the game going were
the late Charlie Baker, and his trainer wa! the Me Matin’
h A ■ v W '°- afterwards turned oMt a noted horseman over
big timber in Victoria. His team included Friction (a big


chestnut gelding by Melbourne), who won the 100 guinea
opal bracelet for the late Mrs. J. Taylor (Toowoomba),
ridden by G. Baker, sen. Friction was owned by the late
John Taylor, and did well in Brisbane. Mr. Groom was
present when W. Thorn, M.L.A., beat him at Toowoomba
with Hermit, by Westminster. Going south, Mr. Taylor’s-
big horse ran second or third in the Y.R.G. Grand National.
He also won the A.J.G. Grand Steeplechase, but was dis-
qualified. Felix, a filly hurdler, and the black Murrifig were
also raced by G. Baker, and ridden by little Tommy Ford.
The late Jerry Allman was another who kept racing
moving in Warwick. Sailor and Kate Kearney won races
for him. At the stud, when mated with Archie, Kate
Kearney threw numerous winners. The late Mr. Allman
also raced Dillon, Dan O’Connell, Davitt, Parnell, Narelle
(who won the Q.T.G. Hopeful Stakes, Derby, and St. Leger),
Wild Wave, Sing Song, Birdcage, etc., and later he formed
a stud, and bred from Archie, Martini Henri, and Antares.
Other notable Warwick sportsmen of long standing are
J. V. Chandler (who raced Richmond, etc.), F. Kates (Q.T.G.
Committeeman), and H. Brookes (who won the Hopeful
Stakes with Petalite, and the Derby and Sandgate Handicap
with Draw Laddie), and G. J. Collins.
The Warwick Turf Club, as mentioned before, passed
out. but was reconstructed, and soon got going to put on
£IOOO programmes. It is still going strong.
The late Mr. G. E. MTlougall, H. Robinson, Jack and
Dan Allman (sons of the late Jerry Allman) also took a
leading part in the building up of the Warwick club, and
Jack is still .a live worker in the club as its president.
Pittsworth was once a strong racing centre, where the
late Jack Barrett (who was drowned at the Tweed with Jim
Freeney, Perkins and Co.’s traveller), trained Philatel, War
Queen, Dalbassy, etc., and Jim Matthews, who is still going
had The Painter, Honiton, Midas, Inagh, Moi, Banzhead, etc.
Charlie Hartmann, of Pittsworth Gun, Needle Gun, and Ruby
Gun fame, and A. H. Muirhead, who, from old Asan, bred
La Nieve, Bachelor of Hearts, Penstimon, etc., and Walter
Neale, who had Hibernian, etc., are also still with us.
In the early days, the late Mr. J. T. Doneley had Raven,
a big black stallion, at Greenmount, and Barney M‘Govern
had a few horses, and bred Battle Bridge.
At Clifton, the late John Hurley had horses racing, and
his son later raced that good little horse Comforter.
From Warwick, across to Inglewood, and on to Goondi-
windi —where Mr. Smith, of the famous Tucka Tucka
slud, used to race his horses —racing is also prospering. Old
supporters of racing there, who can be recalled, are J.
Dallas, Mr. Lucas (who had a line of coaches in those days),.
J. Hensler, A’Court, Mr. Tomkins, and Mr. Billy Honey, who


brought Rinrleader over to Gallon, where he won the Trial
and paid a dividend of £75 on the tote. Tommy Ross was
another well-known racing man of the west, who had Bav
Sal, Mungyer, De Wet, etc., and at St. George the Richard-
sons and Gavanaghs were well-known sportsmen, who had
old Birch and good stock by Remus, who won w ; f.a. races
at Ragle Farm when Greygown and Leinster won Tattersall’s
oouhle. Ihe Lawtons, of Surat, kept things moving at this
little town.
Roma was often visited by the late John Finnie and
others. It was on this black soil track that Goldfinder
broke down. Horses in those days only had the railway up
to a point, and then had to travel by road, and then race
over one and a half and two miles. Some of the horses
to-day wouW knock up, and be left to be called for. It was
at Blythdale Station that Charlie M‘Growdie (of Kingslot and
Serelot fame), received his first kick off with the aid of Mr
W. 0. Scott, of Hornet Bank.
After the old timers, Czar, Darkie, Gertrude etc., the
best horses of Roma, were Arabi Bey, Faugh-a-Ballagh,
Statesman, Rainbow, Johnny Sam, and the principal owners
were J. R M‘Lenan, W. Murray. Tom Boyle, W. Jacobs.
Roma is a bigger town to-day, but still it is not the racing
centre it was in past years, when E. J. Easton won there with
Buttons, Studbook, and other prominent Downs and metro-
politan sportsmen also raced there.
-p the past owners also travelled to Gambooya, where
? r '~ ™? a Y now has his stud, then Pittsworth, Millmerran,
Cecil Plains, Meringandan, Crow’s Nest, and Jondaryan.
The last but not least of the Downs centres is Dalby.
which, with the assistance of Tom Lynch, has worked up its
cup meeting to become a success. In years gone by all the
old-timers raced there, and Dalby’s champion in the ’Bo’s
was A. Robertson’s black Friendless (who won a Queensland
Cup). Later on came the champion Batallion.
M r - ' Groom (“Tjiu”) was one who advocated
the Downs and South-Western Districts Association, but on
the lines of the North, with full control. It was established,
nut is still under the guidance of Q.T.G., and now the little
fixtures are coming to light again.
With the break-up of the drought there is a brighter
outlook for the Downs. The pleasant change must also
improve racing, as with any decent support at all the War-
wick Downs clubs will hold their own and go ahead, but one
would like to see better support from Goondiwindi, Ingle-
wood, Stanthorpe, Clifton, etc., and even more from Brisbane,
as the prize money of these clubs is liberal and warrants
better metropolitan support.
In this direction, Jack Allman, president of the War-
wick Club, is always busy in Brisbane soliciting support for


his club, and if members of other clubs would do the same
racing would be on a much better footing on the Downs than
what it is. Having known the history of Downs race clubs
for many years, Mr. Groom says that where there was failure
it was due to apathy on the part of big clubs to help the
little feeders outside. However, things look brighter, and it
is to be hoped that with reciprocity they will continue.
Just when the last of the foregoing chapter was about
to go into the Press, we secured some interesting
reminiscences of the past of the Wide Bay and Burnett
districts. It should have found a place in Chapter YL, but
as it was too late for inclusion there, we must take the
opportunity of submitting at this stage.
An old and well-known resident of Brisbane, who knows
the district from A to Z for 300 miles on any point of the
compass from Brisbane, gives a few incidents of the early
days of Queensland. When a lad he went to Maryborough
: then Wide Bay) with a bullock team. It was quite common
in those days for the blacks of Fraser’s Island to come across
in the night in canoes at Copenhagen Bend, on the Mary
River (this being a general camping ground for teamsters).
Th eir object was ever uppermost to steal rations and tobacco.
On one occasion they cut the bag of flour just over the
driver’s head, who slept under the dray. When the hole
was made in the bag the flour fell on the driver’s face, which
awoke him, and he gave the alarm to his mate, and the
blacks decamped without any gain. All provisions were
brought by bullock team to the many stations in the Wide
Bay and Burnett districts, notably Marianna Station, owned
by Mr. Graham; Gigumgan, owned by Mr. Mant; Teaba,
owned by Mr. Eaton; Boobigan, owned by Mr. Paul Lawless;
Boonara, owned by Mr. David Jones; and Barambah, owned
by Feriter and Jones, who lived in Sydney. Barambah Station
was managed by Mr. Butler, whose many sons are still
resident in Queensland. Messrs. Mant and Jones also have
numerous descendants in Queensland.
Barambah, in its initial stages, was a sheep station.
Catarrh broke out amongst the sheep and the Government
decided that the whole of the sheep on the station should be
destroyed—that was before Separation. There was no such
thing as a cooperage in Queensland then, and the sheep were
boiled down and the fat packed in the sheep’s paunches
after they were cleaned, tied up with string, and sent in that
manner to Wide Bay, from where they were commercialised.
The majority of the workers at that time were ticket-of-
leave men. Then came along immigration—about 70 years
ago. The owners of Boobigan Boonara, and Barambah,
being advised of the approaching landing of immigrants at


Ipswich, sent their bullock teams down, and went themselves
and engaged the immigrants as shepherds at £2O a year and
rations. The rations consisted of 81b. of flour, 21b. of sugar,
tlb. tea, and 161b. of meat. That consisted of the full ration,
extras being impossible to get. The new arrivals were
Germans and were deposited all over the runs at the various
sheep stations. The average size of the flock that they had
to look after averaged about 1200, and they were yarded in
a hurdle fold every night. As the men became colonised,
they pondered over the low wage and some absconded. When
brought back they were taken before the magistrate, who
would be the adjoining squatter, and tried, the verdict always
being that they had to go back and complete their agreement.
I here were no coaches in those days, all mails being carried
on horseback. The mails were taken from Nanango to
Gayndah by a man named Hood; afterwards by Pat M'Callum.
Gayndah was then one of the two principal towns in
(Queensland, Ipswich being the other. The most important
nice meetings were held in either of these towns, Gayndah
(>ndmg itself on holding the first Derby in Queensland, which
was won by Hermit.
There was great rivalry between Gayndah and Ipswich.
A man named Watson, a well-known trainer in the former
town, at the next meeting, raced a grey horse called Jim
Grow in the principal race, and was opposed by G. Cornwall’s
chestnut horse Playboy. The race was run in mile heats
idayboy winning one heat and Jim Grow the other. After
an hour s rest the two horses tried conclusions, and twice
aead-heated. Neither owner would agree to divide, and the
crowd made such a demonstration that they decided to run
it off the next day. The exertion was too much for Playboy
who went clean off his feed, but Jim Crow thrived on it and
defeated his opponent the next day rather easily. Boonara
Jones had two horses running at the same meeting, namely
toung Australia by Messenger (imp.), and Traveller, also
by Messenger. Both were trained at Boonara by Jack Win-
chester, and ridden by a lad named Pat Toohey. Mr. Haly
of Taabinga, had a mare named Minnie, by an Arab horse’
Beezah, who won the big race at Gayndah and Ipswich, g!
Clapperton, of Tarong, bred a horse named Murza, by Glen-
more (imp. Arab). This horse only sired a few foals on
Tarong before he passed out. Murza and Minnie and a
number of other horses met in this race. Great rivalry
existed between the two stations, and it finally resolved itself
into a desperate race between Murza and Minnie, the former
winning by about half a length. Murza was afterwards sold
and won everything he started for at Gayndah, then went to
Mount Perry meeting and landed everything in hollow fashion,
dropping dead about 20 yards after passing the winning post
in his last race. The big race at Nanango, which was run


on Steamer Lagoon Flat, was three miles. Those were the
days before MTherson, the bushranger (known as “The
Wild Scotchman) came into prominence. MTherson bailed
the mail up between Baramhah and Boonara, which was
always travelled at night time by Mailman M‘Gallum. The
bushranger forced the mailman to light a fire while he over-
hauled the mail. Whilst doing this he found a German paper
and took it to a German family named Frikke, who, not
knowing his occupation, had sheltered him the previous
night. The German racked his brains trying to discover
where MTherson had got the paper, but could not solve it.
When “The Wild Scotchman’" left the house of Frikke he
cleaned out his pockets and gave all the silver to the
youngsters, telling them not to be afraid if he came again
as he was “The Wild Scotchman.” When the German found
out who his guest was he nearly dropped dead.
On a later occasion, “The Wild Scotchman” waited at
the sliprails of the common (he being in hiding and minus
a horse) where M‘Gallum had to dismount to take down the
rails. After passing through and replacing the rails he found
the Scotchman standing beside him, just about 2 o’clock in
the day time. The Scotchman apologised, but told MTallum
he would have to take his horse, but he would leave it where
he could get it. He then took the mailihan some 200 yards
off the road towards the scrub, where he overhauled the
mails. When M‘Gallum walked back to town leading his
pack-horse, consternation filled the few people resident of
Nanango. There was only one pub, known as the Burnett
Inn, kept by John Bright, who passed away some years ago,
leaving two sons, who, it is understood, still reside in
Nanango, and one daughter, who married Dick Bushnell.
“The Wild Scotchman” was eventually captured by the
manager and stockmen on Mungeron Station, owned by Mr.
Mullett. Fortune played into the hands of the capturers as
the outlaw’s horse was hoppled out, his revolver was in his
tent, and he was returning to camp after having a wash in
the creek. When he found three men waiting for him, he
gave himself up without trouble. He got 25 years’ gaol, but
was liberated after undergoing a few years, and ultimately
became a good worker on a western cattle station, where
he died.
Mr. Walter Scott, of Taromeo, bred some excellent
stock from the infported horse Sailor, and Barnett (by the
Barb), with whom he mated some well-bred mares, but later
decided to sell the stud, which he did in one lot, getting a
very satisfactory price.
The first store opened in Nanango was owned by Men-
delsohn, then came another pub in the Star Hotel, run by
Hick Laherty. He passed away later and the pub was pur-
chased by the late Michael Collins, who left several children.


G. Glapperton, who owned Tarong, was originally book-
keeper at Taabinga Station. Mr. Bothwick, the owner of
Tarong, went for a trip to Scotland, and engaged Glapperton
to manage the station while he was absent. After reaching
Scotland he decided to remain there and to sell the station.
Glapperton arranged with a Sydney firm to finance him and
purchased the holding. He made a great success of it and
afterwards purchased Nanango Station. Then, later, he
bought Barambah Station. He did not live long after the
purchase, and left a wife and son, Mr. T. Glapperton, who
still owns the station. Mrs. Glapperton afterwards married
Mr. Wilson, a surveyor. Some time afterwards Barambah
<ind Nanango Stations were sold, Moore Bros, and Baynes
purchasing the former, and James Millis the latter.


CHAPTER VIII.—FOUNDATIONS OF BREEDING.
Notable Breeders, Sires, Dams, and Progeny Prior to the
'Bo’s—“Legs of Iron and Muscles of Steel”—Small Fees-
for Leading Sires.
In the ’7o’s and ’Bo’s it was not necessary for Queensland
sportsmen to go outside the State to obtain their blood stock,,
as brood mares were very numerous and sires of exceptional
quality were available at a small fee. In the late ’7o’s, such
sires were available for service as Talk of the Vale at £B/8/,
Westminster £7/7/, Newbold £7/7/, Epigram £5/5/, Sir
Hercules £4/4/, and Clarion (by Kelpie) £3/3/.
What a contrast there is between the terms of service
by those successful sires and what the fees for sires of
to-day are —generally from 30 guineas to 100 guineas for
stallions with any reputation, and in many cases for sires
who have yet to prove their worth. And how few of the
few sires beget so m'any such horses of stamina as the sires
of the ’7o’s and ’Bo’s, and even the ’9o’s did. In addition
to those named The Drummer, Lord of the Hills, Fenman,
Goldsbrough, Wilberforce, Melbourne, Laureate and Kyogle
were other eplendid sires of the distant past, who had a
goodly number of representatives competing in Queensland.
Nemo, by Kyogle—Fair Helen, was an exceptionally
good horse over any distance, and the same can be said of
the same owner’s horse Sydney, by Gemma di Vergy.
Laureate was also responsible for J. T. Bell’s Whisker and
Olivia, both winning over any distance. J. Williams’ Mel-
bourne (by Panic) also sired a number of first class horses,
and there was no doubt but that he was a good horse.
King Cole, Medusa and Verdict also placed Kelpie’s name
cn the list of fame. Dr. Power’s Potentate, by Drum Major,
brought that sire into prominence, as also did A. Coder’s The
Dean and Black Eagle, and J. Finnie’s My Love enhanced the
claims of Yattendon as a sire. But to enumerate the doings
of the various progeny would occupy too much space in this
volume, though, in passing, one sire we have mentioned
above —Gemma di Vergy—was considered the daddy of them


all in getting dependable stock, and the general opinion
advanced by those who had the good fortune to possess any,
and trainers in particular, was that they possessed “legs of
iron and muscles of steel,” and that it was a pleasure to train
them as liberties could be taken without fear of disastrous
consequences.
No doubt the palm is due to Sir Joshua Peter Bell for
the excellent blood stock that Queensland could boast of, as
he spared neither expense nor trouble in introducing the best
that money could buy.
Sir Joshua Peter Bell, who owned that pastoral paradise
Jimbour, on the Darling Downs, was the first man in Queens-
land to strike out in a big way as a breeder of thoroughbreds.
The late Alec. Hetherington—who was supposed to know
every thoroughbred between Cape York Peninsula and Beau-
desert—once said that there were not a dozen thoroughbred
mares in Queensland, outside the few owned by Chief Justice
Lutwyche at Kedron Brook, until Sir Joshua bought a few
mores in England and New South Wales to mate with his
colonial sires, Laureate and Bladensburg. After their arrival
he also purchased the English horse Epigram, from New
South Wales.
Sir Joshua had acquired a beautiful patch of limestone
country 25 miles from Brisbane, on the edge of the Ipswich
township, which the local people designated “Limestone”
on account of the great limestone deposits thereabouts. On
this place he established his stud, known as The Grange,
and the fences were built of pure limestone rock. The
management of The Grange stud was entrusted to Mr. W. H.
Kellett.
Joshua Peter Bell was born at Kildare, Ireland, but his
family came to Australia and settled near Sydney, when he
was about three years -of age. The Brisbane River country
at that time was, as mentioned in earlier chapters, known
as the Moreton Bay District, and was a Government convict
settlement. The Bell family came to the Moreton Bay Dis-
trict in 1847, and later went to the Darling Downs Plateau,
and took up Jimbour, which became one of the most valuable
sheep properties in Queensland. Joshua Peter Bell in time
became a member of the Legislative Council of the State
and President of the Queensland Turf Club, and raced on a
big scale up to the time he went to England on a health trip.
While in England he bought such mares as Olive, Legend,
Orlana, Wheatsheaf, Gadeau, and Caprice, all of which
played a prominent part in raising the standard of the State’s
bloodstock, and another mare he secured was the Aus-
tralian bred grey Esperence (by Yattendon), who estab-


Ushed a strong and stout-hearted family in Queensland, and
among her descendants were such notable performers as
GreysEin, Greygown, Greywing, Touchstone, and Dundonald.
After Sir Joshua Peter Bell’s death The Grange stud
became the property of Mr. Gordon, who bought heavily at
the break-up of the then biggest stud in Australia, Fernhill,
near Penrith, N.S.W., and one of the sires he secured was
Darebin, whom he afterwards sold to the Americans for
£l5OO. Darebin became a leading sire in the United States.
The Grange did not remain long in the possession of
Mr. Gordon, for he resold to Mr. W. H. Kent, a big dealer
and horse auctioneer in Brisbane, and there Mr. Kent bred
some great horses, including Le Grand, My Lord and Ormond,
During its comparatively short existence The Grange
stud turned out such noted racehorses as the following (some
of their principal successes being given in parentheses) :
Wheatear, by Epigram (A.J.G. Derby, Caulfield Guineas and
Melbourne Stakes) ; Le Grand, by Epigram, (Hawkesbury
Mares’ Produce Stakes, A.J.G. Derby, Graven Plate, Rand-
wick Plate, Royal Park Stakes, Champion Stakes, A.J.G.
St. Leger, A.J.G. Cumberland Stakes, and A.J.G. Plate) ; My
Lord, by Epigram (a good performer in Sydney; Ormond,,
by Epigram (a champion up to a mile in Brisbane and winner
of the Brisbane Handicap and numerous other races) ; Leger-
demain, by Epigram (Q.T.G. Derby and St. Leger and Sand-
gate Handicap) ; Waterloo, by Epigram (Q.T.G. Derby and St.
Leger) ; Legacy, by Epigram (Brisbane Gup) ; Cadmus, by
Epigram (Queensland Gup and Sandgate Handicap)
Canary, by Epigram (Queensland Gup) ; Rioter, by Epigram
(Sandgate Handicap); Fano, by Epigram (Q.T.G. Derby);.
Lord Glifden, by Lord of the Hill (Brisbane Gup and Q.T.G.
Moreton Handicap) ; Quicksilver, by Epigram (Brisbane
Cup) ; Whisker, by Laureate (Q.T.G. Derby) ; La Grange, by
Epigram (Q.T.G. St. Leger) ; The Australian Peer, by Darebin
( V.R.G. Derby and many other races) ; Grand Chester, by
Darebin (Q.T.G. Hopeful Stakes), and other good performers,
in Lothair, Othello, Childers, and Sir Oliver.
Fitzgrafton, a champion of later years, was a grandson
of Olive, one of the mares imported from England by Sir
Joshua Peter Bell, and My Lord, a noted performer in Sydney,
was a son of the same mare.
The following condensed list of sires and brood mare&
and their progeny in the early decades, up to 1878, should
afford our readers an excellent opportunity of comparing the
relative values of same with the pretensions of the sultans
and harems of the present day. The outstanding features of
the ancients were —reliability, stamina, and pace; all of
which features appear to the compilers to stand head and
shoulders above our thoroughbreds of the present decade,.


though some are the lineal descendants of the stock which
brought Queensland into prominence and upsides with other
States in Australia.
There is a possibility that we may have omitted some
others worthy of note, and if so, we sincerely trust that we
will be forgiven the duplicity as, if so, it is an oversight or
want of further knowledge in this connection. Suffice it to
say that we in Queensland can boast of descendants from
the most recherche stock produced in England or elsewhere,
and take pride of place with the best of them.
MR. JAS. WILLIAMS, TOOWOOMBA.
SIRES.
Melbourne, b. or br. horse, bred by Mr. H. Phillips, of Victoria, foaled
1871, by Panic (imp.), out of Myth, by Kelpie (imp.), her dam Miss Louey,
by Cossack.
David, br.h., bred by Mr. Dines, N.S.W., foaled 1871, by Lord of the
Hills (imp.), out of Amethyst (imp.), by Ambrose (son of Touchstone),
out of Heroine of Lucknow, by Nutwith out of Pocahontas, by Glencoe.
MARES.
First Plight, by Kelpie (imp.), dam by Delapre (imp.), g. dam by Peter
Fin, g.g. dam by Bolivar (imp.), out of Agnes, by Old Hector (imp.), out
of Spaewife (imp.); served in 1877 by a bay colt by Fireman, and in 1879
by Melbourne.
Daphne, b.m. by Lady Kirk (imp.), out of Jessy, by The Premier, out
of Debenture; served in 1878-79 by Melbourne.
Atalanta, by Attila (son of Yattendon), out of First Flight, by Kelpie
<imp.); produced a bay filly, by Melbourne, in 1878.
Louisiana, b.m. by Drum Major (imp), out of Beeswing, by Peter
’Possum, her dam Fanny, by Beza (Arab); produced ch.f., by Melbourne,
in 1878.
La Rose, by The Barb, dam Kedar, by Lawson’s Emigrant (imp.),
g. dam Kalyda, by Glendower (Arab), out of Kate, by Benilong.
Decay, by Gondolier, out of Kate, by Warhawk, out of Dinah; pro-
duced a br.f. to David in 1878.
Matilda, by Rattler (by Cossack), out of Prima Donna, by Sailor
(imp.), her dam Opera, by Operator (imp.); produced a filly to Torpedo
in 1877.
Mowerina, by Shingler (son of Oriflamme), out of Lightning, by
Jersey, her dam Miss Saxon, by Gohanna; produced a ch.c. by King of
Diamonds in 1877.
Yellena, by Oriflamme (son of Boiardo), dam Lightning—jersey,
Young Rose, by Fancy Boy (son of The Premier, out of Rose —Corn-
borough), g. dam by Peter Pin; and Explosion, by Fireworks, out of Lady
Mariner’s Sutton, by Pitsford (imp.), inheriting the blood of Birdcatcher
and Romeo.
MR. W. H. GADEN, MOLANGOOL, BURNETT DISTRICT.
BROOD MARES.
Phillis, by Pitsford (imp.), out of Zuleika, by Satellite (imp.),
M‘Arthur, Camden, bred Zuleika.
Ada, by Peter Fin, Glaucus (imp.), out of Phillis.
Rhoda, by Goshawk (son of Sledmere) (imp.), out of Matilda, out of
a mare owned by Mr. Allen, of Liverpool Plains.
Alice, by Royallieu (imp.), out of Laetitia, by Sledmere (imp.).
Kathleen, by Carwoola (bro. to Silver Pox), out of Phillis.
MR. A. LORD, WOOLOOGA, KILKIVAN.
SIRES.
Charlton, br.h., foaled in 1866, and bred by Cobcroft, N.S.W., by New
Warrior (imp.), out of Mary Leigh, by Planet —Lucy Long, by Zohrab,
her dam Miss Chilton, by Chilton —Flirt, by Canova (Aus. 5.8., rol. 1,
p. 203). ” V ■


BROOD MARES.
Lady Mary, blk., by Lord of the Hills.
Florence, b., by Lord of the Hills.
Nightshade, by Kyogle—Morning Star (imp.)
Tamarind, by Tamerlane, out of Snowdrop, bred by Judge Lutwyche.
MR. W. HARVEY HOLT, GLENPRAIRIE, ROCKHAMPTON.
SIRES.
Bedouin, br.h., foaled in 1873, and bred by James White, Hunter
River, N.S.W., got by Ameer (imp. Arab), dam by Little John. He had
the misfortune to lose him i n 1878.
Talavera, br.c., foaled 1876, bred by A. A. Hangar, Hunter River,.
N.S.W., got by Farhan (Arab), Miss Town, by Potentate (imp.).
St. Patrick, b.c., foaled 1876, bred by owner, got by Pyrrhus—
Acushla, by Sledmere (imp.), her dam Blonde, by Glaucus (imp. Arab),
out of Georgiana, by Jerry, g.g. dam Actaeon (Pyrrhus, by New Warrior
—Kidar), (Aus. 5.8., vol. 1, p. 162).
Tom Icely, b.c., foaled 1876, bred by owner, got by Marske —Incon-
stant, by Crab (Arab), out of Georgiana, by Jerry, out of a daughter of
Actaeon.
BROOD MARES.
Acushla, b.m., foaled 1864, bred at GJenprairie, and got by Sledmere
(imp., son of Daniel O’Rourke), out of Kathleen, by The Juggler (bred in
France and got by Physician), out of Blonde (see St. Patrick’s pedigree).
Mavourneen, ch.m., foaled in 1865, and full sister to Acushla.
The Jilt, d.b.m., foaled 1867, got by Sledmere (imp.), her dam Incon-
stant, by Crab (imp. Arab), out of Georgiana (imp.).
Heartless, d.b.m., foaled 1877, by Marske, her dam The Jilt.
Colleen, b.m., foaled 1877, by Pyrrhus, her dam Mavourneen.
Mr. W. G. MACARTNEY, BLOOMSBURY, BOWEN.
SIRES.
Tocal, b.c., foaled in 1875, bred by F. Reynolds, of Tocal, N.S.W.,
got by The Barb —Fairy Queen, by Peter Wilkins (imp.), son of Flying
Dutchman, her dam Ellen Tree, by Jersey (imp.)—Mirro (imp.), by Sir
Hercules —Prism, by Camel.
Speculation, b.h., foaled in 1870, and bred by J. Lee, N.S.W., got by
Kingston (imp.), his dam Bessy Bedlam, by Sir Charles, out of Young
Moonshine, by Rouse’s Emigrant, out of Old Moonshine, by Theorem
(imp.), out of Cornelia (imp.), by Grasshopper (Aus. 5.8., vol. 1, p. 29),.
did duty at Mr. R. Ross’, Taranganba.
MARES.
Gem, b.f., by Gemma di Vergy, her dam Young Emily, by Leopold
(imp.), from Empress by Cossack.
Queen of Night, b.m. (late Young Twin), bred by A. Towns, Richmond,
got by Tarragon, dam The Twin, by Sir Alfred—Candy, by Gratis (imp.)
—Duchess.
Mayflower, ch.m., bred by R. Wyndham, N.S.W., got by Foxhunter
(son of Kelpie, imp.), dam Queen of Sheba, by St. Giles (son of Sir
Hercules)— Queen of Beauty, by Dover (imp.), her dam Tossina, by Toss
(imp.), out of Penelope (imp.).
Lurline, b.m., bred by R. Wyndham, N.S.W., got by Chevalier, her
dam Quail, by Commissioner—Queen of Sheba.
MESSRS. SHANAHAN AND JENNINGS, WESTBROOK, DRAYTON
SIRES.
No Mistake (Arab), and M'Callum Mohr, b.h., bred by J. Tait, N.S.W.
foaled in 1869, got by New Warrior (imp.)—Rubina, by Warwick (imp.),
her dam St. John Queen, by St. John (imp.)— Queen Victoria, by Gratis
(imp.)— Lady Emily (imp.), did duty.
HON. M. H. MORETON, MUNGI, BURNETT.
SIRES.
Young Tim, b.c., foaled in 1874, bred by A. Towns, Richmond, got by
Tim Whiffler (8), Rose of Australia, by Flying Pieman (imp.), son of
Flying Dutchman—Days of Old (imp.), by Irish Birdcatcher, her dam
Days of Yore, by Old England.


T & e Colonel, b.h., bred by Mr. Cobcroft, N.S.W., foaled In 1869, got by
Volunteer-Brown Bess, by Vanguard, her dam Lily of the Valley, by
Phantom—Camel mare.
HON. THOMAS HOLT, SALISBURY PLAINS, BOWEN.
SIRE.
The Knave, br.c., foaled in 1874, got by Trump Ca>rd —Lucy, by
Molyneux, her dam Romp, by Theorem (imp.). Trump Card was by
Kelpie (imp.)— Turnip, by Dover (imp.), etc.
MR. A. MacDONALD, CHARLOTTE PLAINS, CUNNAMULLA.
BROOD MARES.
Recluse, br.m., bred by J. Purves, foaled in 1865, got by The Hermit
-—Miss Mary, by Conqueror, her dam by Sapio, out of a mare by Whalebone.
Adventure, b.m., bred by Mr. Austin in 1863, got by Boiardo (imp.),
her dam Vanish, by Romeo, g. dam Brunette, by Buffalo.
Moonbeam, b.m., bred by J. A. C. Hunter, got by Boiardo (imp.)
Moonlight, by Rembrandt, her dam Sunbeam.
Chrome, flea bitten grey, by The Premier —Chrome, by Delapre (imp.).
Minnie, b.m., by Warhawk, dam by the defunct The Premier.
Favorite, gr.m., by Leotard (imp.), by Voltigeur—Fancy, by Touch-
stone—Old Fancy.
F. W. HOLDEN'S STUD, GLENPRAIRIE, MARLBOROUGH.
BROOD MARES.
Rosewater, ch.m., bred in 1862, by Sledmere.
Nora Creina, ch.m., bred in 1869, by Sledmere, her dam Kathleen, by
The Juggler (imp.).
Coquette, b.m., bred in 1865, by Mr. Holt, got by Sledmere, her dam
Blonde.
Mignonette, b.m., bred by Mr. Holt, in 1861, got by Dobie's Satellite,
her dam Kathleen, by The Juggler (imp.).
Swiss Girl, by Sledmere, from Gazelle, by Glaucus (Arab).
Molly Asthore, b.m., by Sledmere, from Kathleen, by The Juggler
(imp.).
Dorcadis, b.f., by Rainsworth —Gazelle, by Glaucus (Arab).
Alexandra, by Sledmere, out of Princess, by Satellite, from Empress,
by British Yeoman —Emily.
The sire at the stud was Normanby, by Yattendon —Young Ludia, but
there appears to be a doubt about the dam.
MR. J. BELL, EAST HOWE, PORT CURTIS.
MARES.
Peri, b.m., foaled 1871, and got by Paganini, her dam Jessamine, by
Glory (son of .Ether) —Jessie, by Beza, out of a mare by Cap-a-pie, bred
by Mr. Scott, Glendon.
Nelly, b.m., foaled 1871, by Paginini, her dam Nelly, by Robin Hood.
Lexlip, b.m., foaled 1873, by Paginini, out of Lucy, by Cyrus, her dam
Beaver, by Prince —Bumble, by Bugle.
Leda, b.m., foaled 1872, by Paganini—Leonora, by Percy, her dam
Leda, by British Yeoman.
Lucy, b.m., owned by Mr. A. Muirhead and got by Nonplus, from
Duchess, by President.
Mr. D. Smith’s two mares Snowdrop, cream mare, foaled in 1872, by
Paginini—Nightingale, by Newbold’s Fisherman —Creamy, by Pig Slicker
(Arab), and Lastena, and another Creamy, foaled in 1873, by Lancet —
Nightingale, etc.
MR. W. M'WARDLY, INKERMAN.
SIRE.
Lisgar, d.b.h., bred in 1873 by E. E. Close, of Barabba, N.S.W., got
by Tarragon, out of Norah, by Hetman, her dam by Huntsman, out of a
daughter of Skeleton; bred by J. Blaxland; Hetman by Cossack, dam by
Gratis (imp.), out of mare by Toss (imp.), her dam by Steeltrap, out of
daughter of Hector.


MR. J. PURCELL, MARYBOROUGH.
SIRES.
Chieftain, gr.h., foaled in 1868, bred by Mr. C. Reynolds, got by
New Warrior, dam Creeping Jenny, by Gratis (imp.)— The Queen, by
Skeleton (imp.).
Euclid, br.c., foaled in 1876 and bred by E. K. Cox, N.S.W., got by
Yattendon- —Q.E.D. (imp.), by Blair Athol, her dam Q.E.D., by Kingston
—Exact, by Irish Birdcatcher —Equation, by Emilius, her dam Maria —
Euclid’s dam, by Whisker.
Viscount, b.c., foaled in 1874, bred by Mr. Tindal, N.S.W., got by
Gemma di Vergy (got in England but foaled in Australia), out of Countess*
by Warwick (imp.), her dam Amy Robsart, by Calendar (imp.)— Alice
Grey, by Rouses’s Emigrant—Gulnare (imp.).
A brown mare, Chickara, bred by Mr. Wyndham, N.S.W., got by
Chevalier —Cicely, by Snake, was owned by Mr. W. H. Dunlop.
HON. A. H. BROWN.
MARES.
Petunia, b.m., bred in 1864, by Sledmere, by Daniel O’Rourke (see
N.S.W. Stud Book, vol. 3, p. 148).
Jewess, b.m., bred by J. S. Smith in 1875, by Maribyrnong—Patti, by
William Tell (imp.).
Psyche, b.m., bred by A. Town, of Richmond, by Orlando, out of
28, by Sir Peter Teazle, etc.
Rosalind, b.m., bred by A. Town, by Loiterer —Medulla (1854), by
Jackey—Peri, etc.
Bay Petunia, b.m., bred by R. Wyndham, by Pride of England (imp.),
dam Plotina, by Plover, 2nd dam Priscilla, by Cap-a-pie, etc.
Truthful, b.m., bred by R. Wyndham, by Pride of England (imp.)*
dam Truth, by Snake, etc.
Light of the Harem, ch.m., by Barbarian, by Sir Hercules, from
Young Gulnare, her dam Paraguay, by Little John.
Jessica, b.m., bred 1863, by Happy Prince (imp.)— Jewess, by Lawson’s-
Emigrant (imp.), her dam Persiana (imp.), etc.
Lady Eliza, blk.m., by Liverpool (imp.), out of Portia, by Doctor (imp.).
MR. N. W. BROWN.
MARES.
Windermere, ch.m., bred by W. H. • Holt, by Sledmere (imp.)
Rachael, by Glaucus (imp.)—Georgina (imp.).
Lady Hercules, ch.m., by Royallieu (imp.)—Sabalet, by Sir Hercules*
sire of The Barb, out of a Vagrant mare.
Bonnie Blink, b.m., by Happy Prince (imp.)— Blink Bonny, by Leopold
(imp.).
Jessamine, ch.m., by Royallieu (imp.)—Japonica, by Sledmere (imp.)*
her dam Jewess, by Lawson’s Emigrant (imp.)—Persiana (imp.).
MR. C. CORY, CECIL PLAINS, DALBY.
MARE.
Miss Cotherstone, a bay mare imported from England by R. Dines*
bred at ‘ Althorp Park in 1861, by) Cotherstone, her dam Gussey, by
Plenipotentiary, out of Ninney, by Bedlamite, etc. Cotherstone was by
Touchstone, out of Emma, by Whisker.
MESSRS. PLANT AND JONES, POMONA, HERBERT.
SIRE.
Citizen, br.h., bred by Messrs. Scott Bros., Valley of Lagoons, by
Pioneer (imp.)—Danae, by Surplice (imp.)— Scabby.
MARES.
Jenny, b.m., by Tamerlane (by Hercules) —thoroughbred “0.C.” mare,.
Black Duck, ch.m., by Harkaway.
Brunette, ch.m., by Sir Hercules, bred by J. Casson, Clarence River.,
MESSRS. ARCHER & CO., MINNIE DOWNS, NEAR TAMBO.
SIRE.
Perseus, huh., foaled in October, 1870, and bred by J. Lee, Bylong*
N.S.W., by Kingston (imp.)— Persian, by Sir Hercules —Persiana (imp.)*


by The Colonel, dam by Reveller —Veil, by Reubens Kingston, by
Kingston—England’s Beauty.
MARES.
Juliet, b.m., foaled in 1866, by Phenomenon —Joanna by Scratch —
Jeanette, by Trumpeter (imp.)—Annie, by Model (imp. Arab).
Bridesmaid, ch.m., foaled 1869, by Circassian, her dam Balcony, by
Scratch.
Iceterg, b.m., foaled 1863, by Pride of England (imp.)—Icicle, by
Plover, her dam lanthe, by Cap-a-pie (imp.).
Baroness, b.m., foaled 1867, by Kelpie (imp.)—Balance, by Scratch—
Bennylass, by Benilong (imp.).
Perfume, b.m., foaled 1868, by Buckfoot—Pepsine, by Rinaldo— Plotina,
by Plover.
Tambourine, b.m., foaled 1866, by Phenomenon (son of Sir Hercules)
—Tulgiva (sic.), by Chevalier.
MR. M‘CORD’S STUD, COONAMBULAH, GAYNDAH.
MARES.
Cinderella, by Northern Squatter, from My Mary, by Lanercost—My
Martha, by Mentor—Lady Jane, by White’s Emigrant, out of mare imported
by Mr. Bettington.
Lurline, by Varo—Jessie, by Calender (imp.). This mare was bred
on Widgee Widgee, Wide Bay; her pedigree was lost, but she was thought
to be by Messenger (imp.). Ladybird and Mabel were similarly bred.
Lady Gray, by Artaxerxes —Alice Gray, by Abdool Ramond (Arab imp.),
her dam Mermaid, by Gratis (imp.), out of an imported mare by Whisker.
MESSRS. MACARTNEY & MAYNE'S WAVERLEY STUD, BROAD SOUND.
SIRES.
Sledmere (late Colsterdale Phantom), dark dapple bay, bred in England
by Sir Tatton Sykes in 1862, and imported to Victoria in .1863, got by
Colsterdale (son of Lanercost), out of a daughter of Sleight of Hand.
Hampden, ch.h,, bred in Victoria by T. Chirnside in 1871.
Bryan O’Lynn, b.h., by Panic, dam Grace Egerton, by Touchstone,
g. dam Judy, by Rory O’Moore.
Count, gr.h., bred in Victoria by Mr. G. Petty in 1873, by Manuka, his
dam Countess, a white mare bred in N.S.W., represented as a thoroughbred,
Ali Baba (imp. Arab).
Richard, b.c., bred in N.S.W. by W. Evans in 1875, by The Friar (son
of Maribyrnong and Juliet, imp.), by Stockwell.
Hooton, dk.b. or br.c., bred in N.S.W. by the Hon. E. K. Cox in 1876,
by Yattendon —Lady Hooton (imp.), by Stockwell.
MARES.
Pandora, b.m., bred in Victoria in 1864 by J. R. Harper, by The
Premier (imp.)—Jeanette, by Little John (imp.), g. dam Wilhelmina, by
Romeo (imp.).
Iota, b.m., bred in 1872 by R. J. Hunter in Victoria, by The Marquis
(imp.), her dam Alpha, by Dolo (imp.).
Baroness, gr.m., bred by Macartney and Mayne in 1874, by Fireworks
—Countess, dam of Count.
Lady Mary, d.g.f., bred by M. and M. Waverley in 1877, by Hampden
—Countess.
Iona, b.f., bred in Victoria by C. B. Fisher in 1877, by Fireworks —
Iota.
They also imported from Victoria the following sires:—Bladensburg,
Laureate, Neville (by Yelverton), Alarm (by Panic), and Saron (by
Weatherbit or Sir Peter Laurie from Adelgund).
MR. T. TULLEY’S MILTON STATION.
SIRE.
Captain Cook, ch.h., foaled in 1867, by New Warrior (imp.)— Miss
Langar.


MR. A. HETHERINGTON.
MARES.
Nereid, b.f., by Eli, dam by Calliope, by Sledmere (imp.).
Cremorne, by Captain Cook, dam Seagull, by Sir Walter.
Rose D’Amour, by Promised Land, dam Pattie, by Pitsford (imp.).
Maggie Lauder, by Royallieu (imp.)—Japonica, by Sledmere (imp).
Calliope, by Sledmere (imp.), dam Julia Matthews, by Beza.
Seagull, by Sir Walter, dam by Commissioner.
Lubra, by Kingfisher—Queanbeyan.
MESSRS. CHAUVEL, CANNING DOWNS.
SIRE.
Euston, b.h., foaled in 1879, by Sir Hercules —Gazelle, by Glaucus
(imp.), her dam Rakish Kit, by Rous’s Emigrant (imp.).
MR. F. G. COLLINS, THORNHILL.
SIRE.
Sinbad, bred by Messrs. Anderson, Leslie, and Mant, of Gigoomgan,
W ide Bay, in 1860. He was by Sailor (imp.)— Molly Bawn, by Lvcurgus—-
Kathleen O’Moore (imp.), by Langar.
MESSRS. ELLIOT, LETHBRIDGE & ELLIOT, FOREST VALE
SIRE.
Duke, bred by the squire of Drayton (Mr. J. Finnic). He was by
Lord of the Downs—Eva, by Sir Hercules.
SIR J. P. BELL’S GRANGE STUD; NEAR IPSWICH
SIRES.
Epigram, b.h., bred in England in 1872 and imported to N.S.W. in
1874, by Blair Athol —Ellermire, by Chanticleer —Ellerdale, by Lanercost
her dam by Tomboy—Tesane, by Whisker.
Laureate, b. or br.h., bred in 1871 by Mr. J. Evans, Victoria, by Ace
of Clubs (imp.)— Poetess, by Topsail—Ellen Thee, by Jersey Mirror
(imp.), by Sir Hercules.
Hills, br.h., bred in England in 1854 and imported in
1860, by touchstone —Fair Helen, by Pantaloon —Rebecca, by Lottery her
dam by Cervantes —Anticipation,
MARES
Olive , ch.m bred in England in 1868, by Orest, her dam Keepsake,
by Hesse Cassel, g. dam Rose Pompon, by Irish Birdcatcher.
Legend, b.m., bred in England in 1869, •by Cathedral —Sybil a by
Pompey (son of Emilius), her dam Hawise, by Jereed. This mare
mik UC im T 1 Lllla ’ S i lver Fox; 1876 : Lord - lifd en, by Lord of the
missed 3 in 77 iB7 l s othlan, Epigram ; 1878 : Le gerdemain, by Epigram ;
Wheatsheaf, b.m., bred in England in 1870, by Normanby, her dam
Greta, by Voltigeur, g. dam Mountain Flower, by Ithuriel fir a darn
Heather Bell, by Bay Middleton-Mald ot Lune, by Whisker 4^
Hills" 0 ™ 87 4,^‘ Sk ?’ by Laureate; 1876; Warhawk, by Lord of X
Hills, 1877. Waterloo, by Epigram; 1878: Wheatear, by Epigram
M .b.m h ed J n . England in 1565 - by Wild Dayrell, her dam
Miss Slick, by Muley Moloch, g. dam by Whisker, g.g. dam by Sam
Morel, by Sorcerer. She produced—lB74: Timekeeper, by Normanbv
1875: bay filly by Blandesburg; 1876: Skittles, by Lord of the Hills: 1877:
Selina, by Epigram; 1878: Sunflower, by Epigram.
Cassandra, b.m., bred in England, by Cambuscan—Cassiope, by
Voltigeur—Vanity, by Touchstone, her dam by Langar. In 1876 she fnnled
ch.f. Clara, by Lord of the Hills: following year died in foal to Epigram
rv„r?T IC ?.’ b- m -> bred in England in 1872, by Caractacus, her dam Mrs.
Cr ° f t- Pnme Master, g. dam The Mersey, by Birkenhead; produced
—1877: Canary, by Epigram.
Cadeau, b.m., bred in England in 1870, by Lord Lyon—The Gem by
Touchstone, g. dam Biddy, by Bran—ldalia (dam of Pantaloon) by Peruvian*
produced in 1874, Coquette, by Silver Fox; 1877: Childers ’by Eniffram-
-1878: Orient, by Epigram. ’ y y g am .


Emeute, b.m., by Panic —Miss Louey (dam of Myth, Melbourne’s dam),
by Cossack —Hipp’d Bessy, by St. John —Bessy Bedlam, by Rous’s Emigrant,
her dam Stella, by Peter Fin (imp.)—Spaewife (imp.). Produced—lB7s:
Emigrant, by Laureate; 1876: Elastic, by Lord of the Hills; 1878: Emula-
tion, by Epigram; missed to Epigram in 1877.
Greyskin, g. dam, by Leopold, her dam Experience, by Glaucus (Arab)
—Blue Bell, by by Mulatto Produced—lB74 :
Silverskin, by Silver Fox; 1875: Gazelle, by Laureate; 1876: Gamecock, by
Lord of the Hills; 1877: Gardenia, by Epigram; 1878: Greyhound, by
Epigram.
Adventuress, gr.m., by Kingston—Sappho (grand dam of Lecturer,
Kingsborough, Swanaka, Emily and Nellie), by Marquis, her dam by
Zohrab; produced —1874: Annette, by Silver Fox; 1875: Ada, by Laureate:
1877: Archer, by Epigram. . . .
Madeira, cb.m., by Chevalier, her dam Myrtle, by Scratch—Mississippi,
by Skeleton —Emancipation, her dam Trail, by Filho da Puta —Boadicea,
by Alexander— Brunette, by Amaranthus—Mayfly, by Matchem; produced
—1876: Mabel, by Lord of the Hills; 1877: chestnut coll, by Epigram;
1878: Maiden, by Epigram.
MESSRS. W. FRASER & CO., MANEROO, ARAMAC.
SIRE.
Leander, ch.h., foaled in 1871, bred by Messrs. Barnes and Smith,
N.S.W., by Kelpie—Juanita, by Pitsford.
MARE.
Lady Brownlow, b.m., bred in 1871 by J. Tait, N.S.W., by The Barb
-—Brown Duchess (dam of The Count, The Thorn, K.C.8., and Knight
Errant), by Whalebone —Clove (imp.), by Sweet Meat —Hibla (Kettle-
drum’s dam).
MESSRS. BARNES, SMITH & CO., LYNDHURST, VIA DALRYMPLE.
SIRE.
Adonis, ch.h., bred by Messrs. Barnes and Smith, Gordon Brook,
Clarence River, by Rainsworth —Adele, by Kelpie—Amber, by Glaucus
(Arab) —Splendora (imp.), by Emancipation.
MARES.
Vision, b.m., bred by Messrs. Bell and Sons, by Kelpie—Dolly Varden,
by Victor —Diana Vernon, by Cap-a-pie (imp.); produced—lB7B: br. colt,
by Young Trialbic; Young Trialbic was by Trialbic (son of Orville, by
New Warrior—Fleur de Lis, by Reviewer.
Coquette, b.m., bred by Messrs. Barnes and Smith, by Saracen, son
of Dover (imp.)— Sophy, by Skelhinder —Coquette, by Passano (imp.);
produced: 1877, br.c. (gelded), by Young Trialbic; 1878: ch. colt, by
Improver.
Actress, b.m., by Premier —Alice Brand, by Dover (imp.), g. dam Sophy,
by Skilhinda, etc.; in 1877, produced a bay colt to Young Trialbic.
Woebegone, b.m., by Saracen—Witch, by Glaucus (imp. Arab)—
Mermaid, by Satellite (imp. Arab) —Nightshade, by Old Beverley; served
by Adonis in 1879. x ~
Banyan, b.m., by Euston (son of Sir Hercules)—Bianca, by Gratis
(imp.), her dam Mariner’s Daughter, by Mariner (imp. Arab)— Jessie;
produced—lB77: b. filly, by Young Trialbic; 1878: b. colt, by Improver.
Necklace, b.m., by Counterfeit (by The Juggler, imp.)—Emmeline, by
Gratis (imp.), her dam Lady Emily (imp.)—Lucretia, by Waverley, her
dam Splendora; served by Adonis in 1879.
Mabel, b.m., by Magus (imp.)— Michaelmas, by Waverley. Gulnare.
b m bred by 1 Mylne Bros., on the Clarence River, N.S.W., by Pitsford
(imp.), dam Miami, by Goldfinder (imp. Arab)— Countess, by a thorough-
bred
Hussey, b.m., by Elfin, by Crab (Arab)— Flirtation, by Premier-
Levity, by Glaucus (Arab) Latona, by Satellite.


MESSRS. B. & S. MORETON, WETHERON STUD.
SI R ES
Lot hair, ch.h., by Dizzy (imp.)—Zoe, by Messenger (imp.) her dam
\ oung Australia, by Calendar (imp.)'—Australia ;(imp.), by ClavelineL
g.g. dam daughter of Don Cossack—Helen, by Whiskey—Brown Justice *
Chean hv°n *1 by C ° lonel H ' W ' Fieldin S> Dy Big Ben-Dirt
. i J _ orlando » her dam sister to Filius, by Venison—Birthday (dam
of Stockholm and g. dam of Panic), by Pantaloon—Honoria, by Camel.
Big Ben, by Ethelbert (son of Faugh-a-Ballagh, brother) to Irish
Birdcatcher—Phoebe, by Touchstone—Netherton Maid, by Sheet Anchor.
Messenger (imp.), bred by Cplonel Peel, ajid got by Orlando—Hurry
Scurry, by Pantaloon, her dam Confusionee, by Emilius—Young Maniac
by Tramp. 6 ivmuuu,.
Pharos, bred in N.S.W., by Livingstone (imp.)— Jenny Lind by
Whisked h6r dam Jonny Lind ’ by Tippo ° Sahib (Arab) —Betty 'Dee, by
MARES.
Zoe, b.m., by Messenger (imp.), dam Young Australia, by Calendar
ih^ P m g ’ Australia ( im P.), by Clavelino; produced—lB7B:
ch.c., Moorlad, by Fenman; 1879: Young Tim, by Young Tim hv Tim
Whiffler (s.) —Rose of Australia. S ’ y Tlm
Cashmere, ch.m., by Earl of Warwick, by Sir Hercules— Brilliant
her dam Circassian, by Cossack—Flora Mclvor, g. dam Katie by Aaron
Lo?hair g§ d&m daughter of Gr atis (imp.); produced in 1878 a ch. colt by
Corisande, ch.m., by Dizzy (imp.), her dam Circassian, by Cossack
h Fleopat . ra ’ cb - m -, by The Rake, by Kingston—Vixen by Little John
her dam Circassian, by Cossack. y Jonn ’
. nt f lss Leopold, b.m., by Leopold (imp.), by Phlegm—Marinella by
Soothsay her dam Miss Shortley, by Tamerlane, g. dam Red Rose
by Vagrant, g.g. dam by mare by Scratch. ’
bv by Drum Ma j° r (imp.), by Kettledrum—Amethyst
by Touchstone, her dam Zoe, by Messenger, g. dam Young Australia hi’
Calendar (imp.), g. dam “Old” Australia. g Australia >
MR. ROBERT ROSS’ STUD, TARANYANBA, NEAR ROCKHAMPTON.
SIRES
~ Ki A g cb ; h -’ Pitsford (imp.), out of Glitter by Goldflndcr
fr^ P ‘n Lia + b -~?/r eS^l ny ’ by Beza . (imp * Arab )—Splendora (imp.); purchased
from Captain McGhee, Eaton-swill, Clarence River in 1841
\anquish, by Sir Hercules—Vanish, by Comet—Fannv hv
bought from, C. G. Tin dale, Ramornie, N.S.W., in 1861. 7 gle ’
Promised Land, bred by Mr. Rose, Tasmania, by Bay Middleton fson
by cl r tton ) “ Falry QU6en ’ by M ° Zan (SOn ° f Wan y dere y )-Fairy °(lmp)
by pliiTaTooifb’ Cheddar ( im P)— l Gunilda (imp,), by Middlesex—Molly,
p. 255 nd y0l! y 9') by Priam ~ Aractine . by Filho da Perta (see Stud Book.
Challenger, by Stafford (imp.)— Miss Pitsford, by Pitsford fimn l—
(imp 1 ) 11101 ’ ty Glaucus ( lm P- Arab) —Blue Bell, by Gohanna —Quadroon
Perseus, by Kingston (imp.)— Persian!, by Sir Hercules
Prince Charley, by Yelverton (imp.)— Beatrice.
MARES
Gratis^—Fidget, C ° r ° ebUS (™P-)-Rose. by Phantom H son of
Glitter Uin etc° n ’ b ' m " by Promised Land—Relapse, by Pitsford (imp.)—
Chignon, b.m., by Rainsworth—Crinoline, by Cossack—Flirt bv Gratis
(imp.), etc.; produced in 1878 a ch.c. (Cavasco), by Speculation 7 "
Skitt, b.m., by Millionaire (imp.)— Sauciana, by Protector fimn 1—
Georgiana, by JEther (imp.); in 1878 produced a ch. filly to Speculation.
I


Satanella, ch m . by Rainsworth, her dam Sauciana, by Protector
(imp.), etc.; produced a ch.c. (Taromgaba) to Speculation in 1878.
Cora, b.m., by Lord of the Hills (imp.)— Cinderella, by The Arab —
Rhedecyna, by Sir Hercules, etc.
Linnet, b.m., by Premised Land —Leotina, by Orion (son of Cap-a-pie
—Lady Alice, by Scratch, etc.
Eyebright, b.m., by Challenger—Escape, etc.
Lalage, b.m., by Challenger—Leila, by Tramp (son of iEther) —Lula
<etc.
Desdemona, ch.m., by Challenger—Deception, by Coroebus (imp.)—
Rose, etc.
Clio, b.m., by Perseus (son of Kingston, imp.)— Crinoline, by Cossack
—Flirt, etc.
Ayacanora, ch.m., by Vanquish (son of Sir Hercules) —Annie Laurie,
etc.; 1878, ch. filly (Chesapeake), by Prince Charlie.
Oh-Me, ch.m., by Rainsworth —Our Nell, by William Tell, g. dam by
Little John; 1878, ch. filly (Oyerwing), by Speculation.
Ombra, ch.m., by Challenger—Our Nell; 1878, ch. coll (Trusty Joe)
by Speculation.
Maritana, blk.m., by Rainsworth —Fanny, by Laurel, etc.
Zambra, blk.m., by Vanquish (son of Sir Hercules) —Zingara, by
Doctor (imp.)—Blacktitsy, etc.
Maud, b.m., by Challenger—Modesty, by Promised Land —Woodbine,
etc.
Mystic, b.m., by Promised Land —Marchioness, etc.; 1878, b.t. (Brim-
hilda), by Speculation.
Keepsake, b.m., by Rainsworth —dam’s pedigree lost; 1878, b.c.
(Walpole), by Speculation.
Ziska, blk.m., by Challenger—Zambra, by Vanquish—Zingara, etc.
Asenath, b.m., by Rainsworth, out of a mare by Vanquish or Promised
Land, etc.; 1878, ch.f., by Prince Charlie.
Modesty, b.m., by Promised Land —Woodbine, by Surplus—Honey-
suckle, etc.; 1878, b.c., by Debonnair.
Madeline, b.m., by Challenger—Mincemeat, by Peregrine (son of
Herod, imp.).
Defamation, ch.m,, by Rainsworth —Delusion, by King Coil, etc.
Defiance, ch.m., by Challenger—Delusion.
Destiny, b.m., by Loyalty (son of Rainsworth) —Skit, etc.
Delilah, b.m., by Rainsworth —Marigold, by Vanquish (son of Sir
Hercules) —Woodbine, etc.
Climax, b.m., by Challenger—Crinoline, etc.; 1878, ch. /filly, by
Speculation.
SIR T. MMLWRAITH, GIN GIN.
SIRE.
Baronet, bred by J. Tait, in 1872, by The Barb —Brown Duchess
(dam of K.C.B. and Knight Errant), by Whalebone (son of Speculation,
imp.)— Clove (imp.), by Sweetmeat —Hybla (Kettledrum’s dam), by The
Provost —Otisina (sister to Lanercrost), by Liverpool—Otis.
MESSRS. G. E. FORBES & CO., COLINTON.
SIRE.
Biggareau, b.h., bred by Mr. T. Lee, N.S.W., in 1864, by Sir Hercules
—Kate Coventry, by New Chum —Eva, by Young Marquis.
MARES.
Bracelet, b.m., foaled in 1871, got by Oakwood —Barmaid, by Sailor
(imp.); produced, 1878, b.c. by Tocal.
> Agatha, ch.m., bred in 1871 by Wyndham Bros., by Buckfoot —C. B.
mare by Old Plover, her dam a thoroughbred mare owned by Mr. Lawson.
Queen, ch.m., bred in 1871 by Wyndham Bros., by Vain Hope, her
dam Selina, by Chevalier, g. dam Queen of Sheba, by St. Giles, etc.
Priscilla, ch.m., by Chevalier —Erythrina, by Kelpie, g. dam Priscilla,
by Chevalier, etc. -


SCOTT BROS/ VALLEY OF LAGOONS STUD.
MARES.
Clove, by Freetrader (imp.), dam Gitana, by Vagrant, g. dam Scabby t
1878, b.f. Picotee, by Vanquish.
Mace, by Vanquish—Clove.
Golden Dream, by Vanquish—Danae, by Surplice.
Grief, by Pitsford —Honeysuckle, a mare bred on Canning Downs ;
1878, ch.c., by Vanquish.
Pentheia, by Vanquish—Grief, etc.
Regret, sister to Pentheia.
Laura Bell, by Freetrader (imp.), dam Waterwitch, bred by €L
Davidson, Canning Downs; 1878, b.c., by Vanquish.
Imogene, by Vanquish—Laura Bell.
Aspasia, by Vanquish—Laura Bell.
Delia, by Vanquish—Latona, pedigree not known.
Ophelia, by Vanquish—Madcap, by Surplise—lnsanity.
Maraquita, by Freetrade (imp.)— Brilliant, by Leslie’s Arab —Honey-
suckle; dropped a b.f. by Vanquish in April, 1879.
Marah, by Vanquish—Maraquita.
Marathon, by Vanquish—Maraquita.
Missouri, by Vanquish—Miss Kay (unknown pedigree).
Oleander, by Vanquish—Miss Oliver, by Freetrader (imp.), her dam
Charity Girl, by Leslie’s Arab.
My Marianne, by Surplise—Charity Girl.
Myra, same breeding.
Herodias, by Vanquish—My Marianne.
Maritana by Freetrader (imp.)— Brilliant.
Tana, same breeding.
Big, by Vanquish—Asterope, by Pioneer (imp., son of Voltiguer and
Gurdham mare).
Antelope, full sister to Big.
Woodbine, by Pitsford (imp.)— Honeysuckle; 1878, b.c. by Vanquish.
Woodnymph,* by Vanquish— Woodbine.
Clematis, same breeding.
Peri, by Vanquish—Soiled Dove, by Pioneer (imp.), g. dam Laura BelL
by Freetrader.
Corinna, full sister to Peri.
Orpheline, by Vanquish —Woogaroo, by Pioneer —Madcap, by Surplise.
Mona, bred on the Clarence River, by S. Mylne, by Champion—Anna*
by Memnon —Miss Anne, by The Colonel (imp.)— Tib, etc.
Geraldine, bred by Barnes and Smith, N.S.W., by Eustace (son of
Sir Hercules) —Gossamer, by Dover (imp.), her dam Rowena, by Waverley
—Fleta, by Gratis (imp.).
Vanish, bred by Barnes and Smith, by Magus (imp.)— Vanity, by
Glaucus (imp. Arab), her dam Pride (by Gratis) —Silver Mane, by Young
Skeleton.
Vigil, bred by Barnes and Smith, by Kelpie (imp.)— Dolly Varden by
Victor —Diana Vernon, by Cap-a-pie—Vestria, by Emigrant—daughter of
Hector; foaled b.c. Vanquish, in April, 1879.
Colleen Bawn, by Exhibition —Lucy Glitter, by Leslie’s Arab —Alice
Gray.
Norah M'Shane, by Vanquish—Lucy Glitter.
Spot, by Leopold (imp.)— Brilliant; foaled 1878, ch.c. by Vanquish.
Nota, by Vanquish—Spot.
Queen of Sheba, by Pioneer (imp.)— Queen of Clubs, by Knave of
Clubs; 1878, b.f. by Vanquish.
Palmyra, by Vanquish—Queen of Sheba.
Rebecca, by Knave (brother to Queen of Sheba) —My Marianne, by
Surplise—Charity Girl, 1878, ch.f. by Vanquish.
Leah, by Vanquish—Rebecca.


MR. H. STONE, VALLEY OF LAGOONS.
SIRES.
Freetrader, b.h., bred in England in 189, got by The Sea (son of
Whalebone) —Miss Cobbin, by Stockport—a mare by Blacklock —Jerry’s
<lam, by Orville.
Pioneer, b.h., bred in England in 1855 and imported to Queensland in
1859, by Voltigeur—Skirmisher’s dam, by Gardham (son of Falcon) —a
mare by Langar—out of a sister to Busto, by Clinker —Bronze (sister to
-Selim).
Vanquish, bred in N.S.W. by Mr. Tyndal, by Sir Hercules —Vanish, by
Comet —Fanny, by Bugle.
Beauclerc (brother to First Lord), b.c., bred by E. K. Cox, by Yatten-
*don —First Lady (imp.), by St. Albans —Lady Patroness, by Orlando—
Lady Palmerston, by Melbourne.
MARES.
Cherry, by Freetrader (imp.).
Native Cherry, by Vanquish—Cherry.
Fetch, by Vanquish—Cherry.
Oeta, by Vanquish—Carry, by Freetrader.
Captive, by Vanquish—Brenda, by Freetrader.
MR. E. MONAHAN'S GATTON STUD.
SIRES.
Sir Hercules, br.h., by Maribyrnong—Rosebud, by Sir Hercules, her
-darn by Marquis, g. dam by Jackey (Rouse’s), bred by A. Town in 1875.
Wild Rake, by Maribyrnong —Princess (dam of Tone, King of the
West, Rookwood, and Rangatira), by Little John—Tomboy, by Marquis—
Camerton mare, bred in 1875.
Sir Arthur, b.c., by Maribyrnong—Attraction, by Tarragon, g. dam
Regina, by Potentate (imp.), g.g. dam Ludia, by Waverley—Peri, by
Gratis; foaled in 1875.
MARES.
Mignonette, g.m., by Shak,espearel (imp.)— fby Chatterbox
(imp.)—Marcia, by Calendar (imp.)— Ada, by Skeleton (imp.)— St.
Winifred (imp.).
Bay mare bred by W. P. Tozer. Warnambool, Vic., by Panic or
Smolensko.
Bay filly, by Grandmaster (imp.), son of Gladiateur and Celerrima, by
Stockwell.
Romola, b.f., bred by A. Town in 1875, by Maribyrnong—lllumination,
by Tarragon—Fairy, by Lieutenant (son of Cap-a-pie)— Alice Grey, by St.
John (imp.)— Alice, by Camel.
The above list of sires, brood mares, and foalings, completes the list
of blood stock located in Queensland up till the end of 1879, and their
progeny have since been responsible for some of our best horses.


CHAPTER IX. —BREEDING SINGE THE ’Bo’s.
John Finnie Makes History as Breeder and Owner —The
Coming and Passing of James McGill and Charley
McDougall —Their Successes as Breeders and Owners
—Prominent Studs and Breeders of To-day.
Within recent years there have passed away three men,
whose names will ever be prominently associated with the
breeding industry and racing of Queensland. They were
Messrs. James McGill, John Finnie and G. E. McDougall—
types of sportsmen and citizens ,who are much too rare
nowadays. They did much to maintain the highest standard
of breeding of the thoroughbred in Queensland —John Finnie
from the ’7o’s and Messrs. McDougall and McGill from the
’Bo’s—and as straight going and successful owners they
were known throughout Australia.
In the early ’7o’s, John Finnie, of Drayton, ran a mail
to Crow’s Nest. He took a keen interest in horses, and
among those he first raced were Eucalyptus and Sovereign.
Then he started a small stud —Rosevale —which, as years
went by, he kept on building up with money won by his
horses till it became one of the most famous breeding
establishments of cattle and thoroughbred horses in the
State. It was his splendid judgment of a horse that con-
tributed much to the success of John Finnie as an owner
and breeder. His racing successes of the ’7o’s and later
years are dealt with elsewhere, and suffice it to say that
Newbold did more than any of the other good horses he
owned to make the Rosevale stud famous for the racehorses
of size, quality and stamina it produced.
To Newbold, Mr. Finnie bred, among others, Ben Bolt
'Caulfield Gup), Bendigo, Goldenstone, Honest Ned, New-
bold, Mytnan, Master Walter, Miss Newbold, Refused, Gold-
finder (whom Mr. Finnie said was the best he ever bred,
but a trip west ended his racing too soon), Stambou], and
the greatest of them all, Megaphone.
To Ormond, he bred Pet Girl, Kemp, Odd Trick, Tele-
phone, Lady Marion, Gala, Goldenspray, etc., and to War-
paint (Chester —Wheel of Fortune), he bred War Whoop,
War Song, The General, War Dance, Blackpaint (Brisbane
Gup), Vanguard, Warstripe.


: Later on, Mr. Finnie raced Sayhome, Saynin, and
others. With horses he bought he also was successful, the
favorite being the handsome My Love fYattendon—My
Fancy), and Mr. Finnie won a bracelet on her, carrying 14.0.
She was the best mare racing in her day, and a popular
public idol. Medusa (Kelpie—Modesty) was a stout stayer
and a good one. Lurline (Guinea —Laputa),, a Brisbane
Gup winner, Rose (Piscator —Radiance), Hopeful Stakes
winner; the Maltster horse Gold Tie, Optimist, Mack, Ninyas,
Minyhammer, Danaus, and Modesto were others he bought
and won with. Danaus sired that truly good mare, Azure
Main.
At one stage the late Mr. Finnie turned his Rosevale
stud into a dairy, and kept it going for some time, but the
blood horse had been his friend too long, and he let the dairy
go and bred and raced horses up till some years ago.
He also took a keen interest in politics, and in days
gone by, when there were no telephones, he always had a
good horse and brought the news of the poll in first from
Drayton to Toowoomba. On one occasion he was beaten*
hut only by young fellows who did the trip in relays. In a
straightout go the veteran always won.
It is now on the cards that the once famous Rosevale
stud will be cut up for small farms.
There were some amusing incidents associated with the
meetings in the old days, in which John Finnie was a central
figure. Once when an amateur ran wide at the turn, and
through it Finnie’s mare Maritana was beaten, John re-
marked, “It wants the likes o’ me to show you young men
how to ride.” And John could, too.
He frequently had arguments with Jimmy Williams, of
Melbourne and Yabba fame, and after a win Jim would say,.
“You fluked, John.”
“Very well, we will start from here and run back to
where we started, and I’ll beat you again—same weight and
prize,” was Finnie’s response.
In another tussle after a race won by Sicily, with the
late Mr. J. P. Jost, the Rosevale squire said: “What rot you
talk. I could have left you at the half-mile if I had.liked.”
It was at that meeting that Mr. Finnie registered his
record of four wins in succession—the T.T.G.
with My Love, the Ladies’ Mile with Miss Newbold (New-
bold —Lady Baldwin), All Age Mile with Sicily (Gang For-
ward —Queen of Naples), and My Man (Newbold —Mabel).
When Honest Ned won in Toowoomba, Mr. Finnie was
told he was silly to sell at £lOO. “No; such horses as
Honest Ned are as thick as bees at Rosevale, and you can
have a pick at the same price.”


If a prospective buyer wanted to beat blm down on his
price he would turn and say, “Keep it till it grows.”
******
The late Mr. James McGill, too, was of that grand old
school of sportsmen, and he did all in his power to raise the
standard of the racehorse to the highest level, and bred or
bought the best available to race, mainly for the love of the
sport. He rarely ever bet on horses, and, like John Finnie,
he was widely known throughout the Gonfmonwealth be-
cause of the honoured name he gained as a sportsman and
owner and breeder of some of the best horses of the State.
Born in Enniskillen, County Fermanagh, Ireland, be-
tween 75 and 70 years ago, the late Mr. James McGill came
out to this country when about 18 years of age, arriving in
Moreton Bay in the sailing ship Montmorency, on October
16, 1860. He made Ipswich his home, and by steadiness
and close attention to his particular business in that city, he
quickly established a good name for himself, and, at all
times evinced a keen interest in horseracing. The first
meeting he attended subsequent to his arrival was that at
Ipswich, which was termed the ‘champion meeting’ of 1861,
the event being the Champion Sweepstakes of £lOO each,
with 1000 guineas added. It was held on May 29, 1861,
when the Champion Stakes was won by the late Mr. John
Tail’s mare, Zoe. From then, Mr. McGill never missed an
important meeting for 57 years. Subsequent to his
marriage (his wife, nee Wheeler, having predeceased him),
Mr. McGill became lessee of the Criterion Hotel, situated on
the corner of East and Roderick Streets, in the early part
of the ’seventies, and under the management of Mr. and
Mrs. James McGill this hotel was one of the principal
hostelries of the city; on account of its proximity to the
Land Court and the Court House it also became a popular
resort of niost of the turines from ‘’out West,” who visited
Ipswich during the annual meeting of the old North Aus-
tralian Jockey Club. It was during Mr. McGill’s lesseeship
of the Criterion Hotel that his name was prominently in-
scribed on the records of the N.A.J.G., as a successful owner
of racehorses. He won many races, always maintaining a
string of good horses.
At the disposal of the Thorn Estate, including some of
the principal and most valuable properties within the city
of Ipswich, on November 13, 1877, Mr. McGill purchased
the allotment situated at the corner of Brisbane and East
Streets, originally built as the family residence of the :ate
Mr. George Thorn, sen., in 1859, and now widely known as
the Palais Royal Hotel, which Mr. McGill opened nearly 40
years ago, and while proprietor of that hotel he increased
his interest in horseracing, owning some of the best horses
in this State.


Purchasing the imported stajlion Buckthorpe jin the
mid-eighties, and with a few first-class mares, he founded
the “Blaxlands” stud, situated not a great distance from the
old Grange racecourse which for years was under the care
of the late Mr. Tom Sowerby. As a racehorse owner, Mr.
McGill had, with the exception of the Queensland Gup, won
every race of note in the calendar of the Queensland Turf
Club, including eight Brisbane Gups. His most famous
horses were: Sunrise, Proctor, Pirate, Preston, Lancer, La
Grange, Truce, North Australian, Musician, Lyndhurst, and
Fitz-Grafton. During the latter part of the eighties, Mr.
McGill retired from the Palais Royal Hotel, subsequently
removing to Brisbane, where his wife died, and where he,
too, breathed his last. Thus departed one of Queensland’s
most notable sportsmen.
He was a trustee of the Bundanba racecourse for 21
vears. Three sons —Messrs. Frank W. McGill (chairman ot
the Q.T.G. Stipendiary Stewards’ and formerly a crack
amateur rider), James McGill, jun., and Abraham J. McGill
(tim'ekeeper at Eagle Farm and Albion Park) survive him
and are well known in racing circles throughout Queensland.
And writ big in the annals of Queensland racing and
breeding is the name of the late Mr. G. E. McDougall, and
what he did for both is still kept evergreen by the institution
by the Q.T.G. of the G. E. McDougall Stakes, a classic race
for two-year-old fillies, which was run for the first time at
the club’s Spring Meeting in November, 1924.
The late Mr. McDougall was only 17 years of age when
his father, a squatter in a big way, left him to carry on the-
affairs for the family. Reared in an atmosphere of expert
knowledge of breeding, the late Mr. McDougall struck out
to reach the highest goal of success, and he succeeded in
building up the Lyndhurst stud, Warwick, to one of the
greatest and most successful breeding establishments
Queensland has ever known, and which gained an Australian
fame.
Archie and Ardon were two of the earlier sires which
brought Lyndhurst into prominence. Ladurlad (imp.), Syce
(imp,), Seremond (imp.), and Ghantemerle (imp.) have
since built up its reputation throughout Australia.
Since 1909 (15 years) the principal classic and handi-
cap races of the Q.T.G. have been won by the following
Lyndhurst-bred horses: —
Hopeful Stakes (4) : Cowl, Syce Lad, Terentia, and
Ladomond.
G. E. McDougall Stakes (first run 1924) (1): Gay
Gal ah.


Sires’ Produce Stakes ’(formerly Autumn Stakes) :
Vibrator, Rolad, Lord Yindex, Star Robe, and Stable Girl.
Queensland Guineas (4) : Yeena Lad, Molly’s Robe,
Syceonelle, and Ladomond.
Derby Stakes (8) : Draw Laddie, Maritoria, Signal Lamp,
Symposium, Syce Lad, Roy Syce, Seremist, Serelot.
St. Leger Stakes (5) : Rarallan, Had-I-Wist, Roy Syce,
Grichka, Seremite.
Rrisbane Handicap (3) : Lord Lovat, Jemedah, Disaster.
Stradbroke Handicap (2) : Syce Lad and Syceonelle.
Queensland Gup (4) : Rarallan, Ardon, The Lad, Signal
Lamp.
Rrisbane Cup (2) : Grichka and Seremite.
Moreton Handicap (4) : The Rounce, Had-I-Wist, Syce-
onelle and Warwick Gun.
Southport Handicap (3) : Royal Ned, Glint Lad, Disaster.
Sandgate Handicap (5) : Draw Laddie, Draw Lady,
Laidley, Syce Lad, Jessyce.
Truly this is a remarkably fine record, apart from the
numerous successes in w.f.a. and minor events.
The tragic deaths of Ladurlad (imp.) and Syce (imp.)
when in the heyday of their fame were serious blows to Mr.
McDougall, and to" the thoroughbred industry of the State,
but his excellent judgment counted in all things and his
selection of Seremond (imp.) and Ghantemerle (imp.) as
successors proved the excellence of his judgment, for both
have since maintained the fame of Lyndhurst.
Since Mr. McDougalfs death, Lyndhurst stud has and
is being carried on by his brother, Mr. Jack McDougall, and
recently the stud and the breeding industry suffered another
misfortune on account of the untimely death of Ghante-
merle, but with Seremond (imp.) doing well, and Syce
Knight, a brilliant racehorse and son of Syce, bred and raced
by the late Charley McDougall, at the stud Lyndhurst is
likely to maintain its reputation for a long time to come.
In addition to being a successful breeder of the
thoroughbred horse, the late Mr. G. E. McDougall was a fine
sportsman, a successful owner at picnic as well as the big
metropolitan race meetings, an expert cattle judge, and
breeder of Shorthorns, and president of the Queensland
National Agricultural and Industrial Association.
There are others who, in the past, did much for breeding,
of whom it has been a! difficult task to get details to do them
full justice in a review, but names which claim special men-
tion' are Messrs. James and George Williams, and Frank
Darley. , r ;
Jim and George Williams, we understand, came from
the Warrego. Of the two Jim was most prominent. He
married Miss Huxley, a daughter of a well-known family in


the west, and was a very fine horseman in the bush and
on the track. Being a genuine sport, he took an active part
in the welfare of the clubs. At Toowoomba he stood out,
hut as his deeds at this centre have been mentioned pre-
viously, there is no need for repetition. One incident which
is recalled occurred in the last race of a two days’ meeting
at Toowoomba. The boys got beyond the control of the
starter, and with permission of the stewards, Mr. Williams
went out and talked to the boys, and eventually they got
away to a good start amidst applause. This was one of the
many incidents in which Jim Williams’ quiet manner and
tact won him' the esteem of his many friends by the way he
handled contentious matters.
Blazeaway was one of, his early horses, and another
Melbourne, who to Tent Hill stud was what Newbold was
to Rosevale, both gaining great distinction as sires. It was
stated once that Mr. J. Williams offered to take a pick of
J. Finnie’s mares and mate them with Melbourne and give Mr.
Finnie a pick of the Tent Hill mares to mate with Newbold
but nothing came of it. Mr. Williams won the Q.T.G. Sand-
gate Handicap with Melbourne as far back as 1878 and
other races. ’
Melbourne was by the famous Panic (imp.), sire of
Commotion, Wellington, Nightmare, etc. The latter was-
a great mare and the champion Wakeful traces to her
Myth, his dam, was by Kelpie (imp., Weatherbit—Child of
the Mist), who also was the sire of Newbold. Myth’s dam,
, fl? Louie, was by Cossack. Mr. Williams’ principal mares-
at Tent Hill were Yellina, Games, Lady Headington, Phoebe
explosion, Primula, Sarcasm, Emblem, Decoy, Madcap and
Angelina.
With Wheatmeat, Mr. Jas. Williams won the Q.T.C.
Derby, Queensland Cup, St. Leger, and other races ; with
Yabba, the St. Leger, Sandgate Handicap, and big events at
Toowoomba and Ascot. In other owners’ colors Yabba also
won and scored over hurdles in Victoria. Others he raced
were Whirlwind, the pony Wongongera, and many of less
note.
Horses bred at Tent Hill and got by Melbourne included
the hurdlers Loafer, Signet, Demy, Friction and Felix, but we
are not too sure whether their dams were owned by Mr.
Williams. Then came Orange Skin, Orange Bud, Vera,
Lottie, Maniac, General Gordon, Crab (who died early),
Tempe, Lady Headington (St. Leger), and Lord Headington
(Derby), a good one whose dam was by the Yattendon horse
Atilla, who ended his days at Blythdale Station, near Roma.
When Melbourne passed away. Wheatmeat took his
place and was a success. He was by Melbourne—Wheat-
sheaf (imp.), by Thormanby—Greta, by Yoltigeur. He was a


.great performer, and he sired good winners in Talkative,
Phyllis (who still holds the 14 mile record for Clifford Park),
Euroka, Governor, Cornflour, M.P., U.8.A., Imagination,
Strife, Gadfly, Angeline, Angelos, Wheatmeal, and Wheat-
belle, also Yowi, who was a sister to Yabba and won the
A.J.G. Metropolitan of 1891.
This gives an idea to present day sportsmen as to the
horses bred and raced by Mr. Williams. Up to 12 months
ago he was at Wallumbilla, hut had others played the game
with him, he would probably be here in Brisbane to-day.
Incidents which occurred at Eagle Farm were the cause of
him losing his horses, and the last time which can be
remembered of him being on a racecourse was at Eagle Farm,
when Greywing and Leinster won the double. He won a race
with My Dream (Ruigney, imp., from My Fancy, the dam
of My Love), hut when it came to settling, he collected little
or nothing. Then the bank stepped in and took over Tent
Hill, his old home, and his old studmaster, Jack Molen, re-
mained on with Dick Godsall (Alderman of Toowoomba City
Council and past Mayor).
Tent Hill was a fine property with a large house, stables,
etc., and water pumped up from the Lockyer, and many
merry days were spent at this stud. This, from memory,
is the turf history of one of the best sportsmen Queensland
ever had.
When My Love beat Yabba in the T.T.G. Handicap,
Clifford Park (Yabba had won the previous day), he re-
marked: “I could give anything in Queensland a stone with
this horse, except My Love,” to which one sport remarked,
‘‘Friction is not dead yet, Jim.”
“Well, I will take him on,” he replied.
His trainers were Ted Lenihen and Jack Greer, while
his riders were Jimmy Hughes, Ted Devaney, and B. Fox.
Then we come to his brother George, who also was
among stock and ran a few horses as well. He had a place
at Pittsworth and used Primus. The bank also stepped in
and he lost it with the home, Hursley, opposite the Too-
woomba racecourse.
It was unfortunate that these two sports should loose
all, still many to-day are in the same boat which drifted on
to the rocks.
It was at Dwin’s Toowoomba Gup Mr. W. B. Groom
met him after many years, and speaking to Mr. H. Gordon
(a committeeman), he brought him to the secretary’s rooms
and right pleased they were to meet the veteran. Among
the party was Watty Blacklock, and other old timers soon
came forward.
It was at Hursley Geo. Williams had his stables, and
the late Billy McCarthy was his trainer. The latter’s brother


Tnmmt’p put b ° ut 3 F* 6 in <? heS ’ is understood to be still alive.
X weStT'sjXer de '° r oeo ' Wil “ amS ' 6Vent -
George Williams’ horses were Lottie Primula Phvllis
SvpwT’ X olun t ee / (a grey) ’ M ’ P - and Silver, and he may
nave had others before them. y
Bdln Scully, C. Nolan (of Ipswich and late of Too-
woomba), and the Williams Bros., are the only old-timers
ififfie el h tv,p °h V ?i f ft! ° f , tlie William Bros - was not caused by
been het/er nff ? t £ ey be i en trea - fairl y, both would have
been better off to-day. An oversight of the Toowoomba T G
was tMt they did not make James Williams a life member
ot the club, a suggestion which Mr. W. B. Groom made to
™SSrk‘ed, n u^heVa7dea b d.” k - WhiCh the
is very^ at ner °' BeSl D “> ; “ h *
At that time, Mr. Groom had only received a letter from
Brisbane^ 6 breedmg of Madora > ra ced by Percy Nagel, now in
n +^ r * .^ r ? n k Parley of Nanango. throughout the ’orr*
lr px
SIH
follow d m the princi P al Q T.C. races were L
Stradbroke Handicap (6 furlongs) : Boreas
Curve 1 ane UP (2 mil6S) : Boreas IL > Dundonald, and
and jfaifour. er B^aPes miles) : Dundonald, Master Bernie,
and Iva°n. eton Handicap mile ) : Dundonald, Boreas 11.,
S aa !™ er , Gu P (If miles): Boreas 11., Balfour Milner
Cr„. g t U aSaS3l s h ( t U mile): B “ re “ S “«"■
sasSMsrd'.as;? : c B „;r- 8 “ ,,0ur ’ Ai “ is -
DeTbv I StofllliSiT 1 : Gorana I tion and Patrician.
and Alexis k M } : B ° reas ’ Master Bernie > Balfour,
Queensland Cup (2 miles) : Balfour.
There were numerous others by Little Bernie who
were good performers, and many of his daughters TTT
afterwards successful brood mares, and several of his Tons
y I


notably Master Bernie, Araxes, and Balfour, Dundonald,
sired some smart turf performers.
At Chari eville, Messrs. T. Gallagher, R. Garter, W.
Lloyd (with Cast Down, Gitrea, and the Q.T.C. Derby winner
Black Diamond), and the Paynes with Tragedian, were pro-
minent men in racing and breeding in the past, and tnen
there were the Lansdowne horses, Lucifer, Darkness, Day-
break, Davin, Paris, Earlston, who did well. At Lansdowne
they used Blondin, Earlymorn, Braemar (by Musket), Trelo
Yeroni, Metoura (by Light Artillery from Lady Augusta), and
the good-looking chaser, Matchlock, from Adelaide, as sires,
Out further there were the Mount Margaret and Norley
Stations, which bred Black Harry, Litmus, Bullawarra (the
noted steeplechaser), and the sires were Providore, Bobby
Burns, Strata Florida, Hopdance (N.Z.), and Sir Simon
(owned by Sir S. Kidman), who is now at Adelaide.
Queensland is still fortunate in having to-day the best
type of sportsmen prepared to carry on from where the
pioneers left off and spend their money in maintaining, and
if possible, improving the breeding of the thoroughbred
horse.
The most notable among them, in addition to the
executors of the McDougall estate, are Messrs. J. H. o.
Barnes, M. Ryan, E. L. Ramsay, W. Glasson, Jas. Glaxke,
I. J. Moore, A. H. Whittingham (all members of the Q.T.G.
Committee), J. H. S. Love (Townsville), Tom Jennings
(Cambooya), Lord and Sons (Esk), Mick Yore (Logan
Tillage), E. G. Blume (Longreach, Qld. . and Woodlands
(N.S.W.), S. A. Taylor (Bon Accord, Dalby), W. Livingstone
(Nobby), E. J. McConnell (Wondai), R. F. Tancred (Coo-
indah, Bell), L. B. Toomes (Junabee stud, Warwick),
W. Berton (Toowoomba), Fred. Jurgs (Cecil Plains), S. B.
Smith (Toowoomba), and T. A. Glapperton (North Coast),
•and B. Welsh (Warwick District).
Some years ago, Mr. J. H. S. Barnes established a stud
at Canning Downs, Warwick, and the first “lord of the
harem” there, the imported horse Highfield, has already
done well, and has been represented by winners in Lord
Highfield. Highland (Q.T.G. Hopeful Stakes), High Notions,
Fair Exchange, La Field (Warwick Cup), Elpenike, Lord
Babbie, and others. Lord Foote and Gold Tie (a great
sprinter and winner of two Q.T.G. Stradbroke Handicaps and
the Caulfield Futurity Stakes) are also at Canning Downs, and
Mr. Barnes’ Rivoli, one of the front rank performers in the
southern States in recent years and winner of the A.J.G.
Derby and numerous handicap and weight-for-age races, has
returned to Canning Downs (where he was bred by Mr.
Barnes) to take up stud duty there. The progeny of


Gold Tie have not yet raced, but Lord Foote, who so far has
had limited opportunities, has been represented by a winner
in Toe.
In addition to Mr. Barnes, Mrs. Barnes and their sons
and daughters are racing horses on their own account.
And while on the subject of Warwick’s fame as a centre
of breeding of the thoroughbred horse, it might be men-
tioned here that Realm (late Empire), by Archie from
Empress, was bred at Sandy Creek, near Warwick. This
horse won his maiden at Warwick, and afterwards was
bought by the late Hurtle Fisher, and went into the stable of
Mr. E. J. Easton, who had Buttons (Queensland Gup winner)
at the time. Realm won at Pittsworth, Toowoomba, arid
Rockhampton, and also landed the Queensland Cup of 1891,
Later he went south and won the Autumn Stakes and the
Sydney Gup. After doing stud duty for a while he was sold
for India.
Gozard, a Q.T.C. Summer Cup winner, and useful sire,
and also Orcus, the highest priced yearling ever sold in Aus-
tralia (at Mr. P. J. Symes’ small stud at Rosehill, near Lynd-
hurst), Wallensis, and King Marco (imp.) were in this dis-
trict also.
Mr. W. Glasson (Manapouri) is also a breeder of many
years standing, and has done much for breeding through his
purchases, particularly of Lilyveil (imp.), by whom he has
bred many horses of class and stamina, among them Lilypond
(winner of the Perth Cup and other races in Western Aus-
tralia and also Victoria).
Mr. Mick Ryan, who in recent years entered into breed-
ing, has and is still spending big money to get the best of
blood in horses and mares with the main aim of improving
and strengthening the breeding of the thoroughbred in
Queensland, and for his own racing purposes. Mr. Ryan has
already gained much success as a breeder of horses for his
own racing, notably Laneffe and Lanome, and the time is not
lar distant when his stud should gain greater prominence.
Messrs. Moore, Whittingham and the Ramsay Bros, are
also breeders of repute, who have done a lot for the State
™ t g ir ® ctlon of breeding the best type of horse, likewise
Mr. J. S. Love of Townsville. Mr. Love has, indeed, done a
great deal for the breeding industry of the State during his
long association with racing in North Queensland which
dates back to the seventies, spending money freely to secure
the best blood in the English market. Many stallions and
mares which have been successful on the turf and after-
wards at the stud have been imported by him and among
his importations of stallions in recent years were King’s
Scholar, Marble Arch, Ghantemerle, Virgin Gold Gnnmhp
Dick, and Golden Knight, King’s Scholar is making a name
for himself as a sire in the North, and three of his sons


Freshman, Scholarly, and Marcus have won good races in
Brisbane. Marble Arch (by Isinglass) went to New Zealand,,
where he proved one of the Dominion’s most successful sires,
Ghantemerle (by Polymelus) was a first class racehorse at
Eagle Farm and at Randwick, and after his retirement to tlm
Lyndhurst stud Warwick, he made a great name for himself
as a'sire up to’the time of his death recently. Virgin Gold
has already made good as a racehorse in Sydney, and Goombe
Dick and Golden Knight are two horses which Trainer Les>
Smith trained in Brisbane for Mr. Love until they were son
to Sydney recently. They have yet to make good, but both
promise well.
Mr S A Taylor, of Bon Accord, with Ahab (imp.),
Bluejacket Kaross (imp.), Lord Burnside (imp.), Lord,
Ambrose. Talkative, and Sydian (imp.) has bred hundreds
of winners. He races as “J. Bond,” and has won with Goarct
(Q.T.G. Leger and Brisbane Gup), The Book (Dalby Gup),
Garrus (Summer Gup), and no end of minor races and
picnic cups and bracelets. His horse Rossgun won the New-
market at Warwick recently, and was beaten by a head lor
the Gup next day. He has hundreds of horses and mares at
his stud. Blue Victor, bred by him, won big steeples in
Tasmania.
Tom Jennings has a compact little stud at Gambooya r
with that once great performer and weight carrier Amber-
down as his sire. He also has Warwick Gun and Frostbite,.
e!c., racing.
Messrs. Lord and Sons with Halberd (imp.), Mick Yore
with Polybius (imp.),W. Glasson with Bachelor’s Persse
(imp.), T. Glapperton with Mcllwraith and B. Welsh
with Wallensis are others whose studs are sto-day
turning out winners and horses of much promise, and Mr.
Blume’s Woodlands stud, N.S.W., is one of the biggest and
most successful institutions of its kind in Australia, while
at Longreach he is also breeding on a fairly big scale.
There are other Queenslanders engaged in the breeding
industry on a smaller scale, and many are doing their bit for
it. It behoves owners, and prospective owners, to assist
Queensland breeding by supporting the Queensland produc-
tion. In this way they can assist the breeders in their aim
to put the breeding industry on a plane with the southern
States.
And still “harking back” to the days gone by when
Queensland bred her own champions —and stout breasted
and strong constitutioned champions they were we ask :
“Cannot Queensland do it again ?”
Echo answers : “Yes; breeding in Queensland Ims a
bright future before it, provided it is carried on on the right
lines.”


*»gMM^r^ynr-rm-r-1 -«rn» i ■,,
. •••■ ; :' ."■■■■
♦
XW—m*" ————————— 8 ——— —rnn —m,—— !■—i—mim
CHAPTER X.—THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE.
-tx. JLJLJL.t_i U iIUJJU ui i Uil i Uii Hi*
The Gamble in Yearlings—Good Looks and High-priced
Failures—A Word for the “Ugly Ducklings”—Modern
Methods of Selling in Brisbane.
Without a doubt the “Goddess of Fortune” has played
a prominent part at yearling sales, not only in Australia, but
throughout the world, where thoroughbreds are placed on
the market in their first year to be knocked down to the
bidder who tops the reserve price placed on any equine which
takes his fancy, and many who have been dubbed “good
PROSPECTIVE BUYERS AND INTERESTED SPECTATORS
AT THE YEARLING SALES.
judges have been very wide of the mark in summing up
the possibilities regarding the one they particularly desired,
being obsessed with the idea that they were purchasing an
Ormond, Nemo, Megaphone, Eurythmic, a Beauford—even
a Gloaming.
An estimate of 90 medium out of the possible 100
would be well within the mark when past results have been
analysed. Amongst some of the highest-priced yearlings,
credited to Australia, which were failures, can be mentioned


Orcus, by Positano —Jacinth, 3050 guineas. As the saying
goes, “he wasn’t worth two bob,” for he was a failure even
in Queensland, although he sired a few winners.
Then there were Galaverite, by Grafton —Gold Dust,
2100 guineas; and Lord Randolph, by Newminster —Prim-
rose, 2300 guineas.
Havoc, by Nordenfeldt —Frailty, 2200 guineas, justified
the price paid for him; and Segenhoe, by Maribyrnong—The
Fawn, 2000 guineas; and Warwick, by the same sire and
out of the same dam, 2000 guineas, were fairly good pro-
positions; but neither Duke James, by Maltster —Lady Grafton,.
2100 guineas ; nor Mousquelaire, by Nordenfeldt —Frailty,
2025 guineas, proved their claim to be worth even one
hundred guineas.
Out of 15 colts sold in Sydney in 1920 at over £IOOO,
there was really only one which could be classed as a top-
notcher, that one being Braehead, by Mountain King—loli,
1450 guineas; and one other that could lay claim to being a
good performer in Otacre, by Linacre —Otira, 1000 guineas.
In 1921, eight yielded over 1000 guineas, and not one
of them could be classed as more than moderate.
In 1922, Linaway, by Linacre —Far Away, brought 1000
guineas, and proved a good speculation, but the others were
an inferior lot.
But when monied men get together in an auction ring,
the love of possession is just as strong in them as it is with
our women folk when they attend a well appointed house
sale, and very often double the value is paid for the horse or
the article that they have set their mind on, and lament their
impetuosity in a very short space of time.
Many instances of well bred but moderately priced
yearlings proving top-notchers of their year could be cited,
especially as far as the Queensland sales are concerned, and
a notable instance which comes to mind occurred in con-
nection with the sales in 1906. Three of the yearlings
which had few admirers and went cheaply were: Flaxen 90
guineas, Barallan 65 guineas, and King Falo 30 guineas.
Flaxen was a success as a two-year-old, winning among
other races, the Autumn Stakes (now the Sires’ Produce
Stakes), and as a three-year-old he included the Guineas,
Derby and Summer Gup in bis successes. Barallan was a
great performer whose performances are recorded in a later
chapter, and King Falo was more than useful.
One of the greatest bargains in the history of yearling
sales in Australia was David, who cost only 40 guineas, and
is now third to Gloaming and Eurythmic in the list of Aus-
tralia’s biggest prize winners, with over £30,000 to his credit.
Good looks play a big hand in the gamble in yearlings,
all eyes being centred on anything handsome being paraded
by the auctioneer with volumes of praise. “Isn’t he a


r T.nT —-— ,. I «■« » ri ■■m.1, t,:v-aj"ii nil T'l-amin itiht»iiim'i«w mmvnmm\i t.hhl.«»w !■■■■■■■ ■ — ■■ ■ ■■ 1
B
I «**, ■>••■■ ' ■;' ' " "'"' S&,
——————————————mm— a
iir
Views of Yearling
Sales Conducted
by Messrs. Chap-
man and Snelling
at Exhibition
Grounds, 1922.
(1) Big Gather-
ing Interested in
Parade of Young-
sters.
(2) Prom ine nt
Breeders in Con-
versation.
(3) Cheviotdale,
the highest
priced yearling
ever sold in
Queensland, be-
ing shown.


beauty?” “Look at his pasterns,” “Did you ever see a better?”
“Well ribbed up, beautiful carriage, short in the fetlock,
what a length from the hip to the hock? can you fault him?”
and such like, and he has the possible purchaser as well
charmed and under control for the final effort as any snake
its prey.
“Bought experience is the best” it is said, but it does
not appear to carry much weight with the man who has
money to burn, and, perhaps, it might be just as well, for the
“kink” enables the breeder to jog comfortably along in the
endeavor to produce something better on the next occasion,
which will add more shekels to those he already possesses,
snd it would not make any difference to the big speculator
or be more keenly felt by him than the loss of a “bob” to the
average sport.
Many deprecatory remarks are hurled about by some
who frequent yearling sales, and, by the way, who never
w r ere guilty of bidding a modest sovereign for anything put-
under the hammer, which often causes an auctioneer to be
sarcastic to a degree. Many such jests are unwarranted, as
the majority of those guilty of the practice would have to
think hard "before replying if one were to ask them which
was the near or off side of a horse, or which was the proper
side on which to milk a cow.
A very old adage and one still worth quoting is: “You
can never tell the book by the cover,” and some of those
who are loudest in their denunciation of some of the yearlings
which are passed in without a bid may be the first to regret
their hilarity and want of knowledge, when the despised are
put into work.
In the ’eighties there was a little pod-bellied brown
pony named Ascot racing at Eagle Farm. Had he been
turned out and allowed to roll in the mud, and placed in a
pound yard the probability is that the auctioneer would not
have reached a bid of 50/-, but there were hundreds who,
especially on a wet day, backed the ugly duckling and reaped
a good reward.
Then there was Ormond, a big, lanky chestnut,
which threw his near forefoot out in such a rdanner that a
newcomer on the course would have been chary of backing,
but he was, notwithstanding a very fast six furlongs horse,
and won many a sprint for John Finnie, who, on one occasion,
donned the silk, and landed the chestnut (carrying over 11
stone) a winner from all the crack jockies.
Then there was Boots, one of our best six furlongs
horses, and that horse had no pretensions to good looks,
for he was big enough and heavy enough to lump 30 cwt.
up Parish’s Hill.
Still further, White’s Granbrook was a great big up-
standing chestnut, with ears as long as a donkey, and no


beauty, but he was a splendid six furlongs horse. The Aus-
tralian Peer was anything but a beauty, but there was no
doubt about his ability to race.
Melos also had nothing on good looks. He had a barrel
as big as an ordinary bullock, but who will say that he was
e° galloper. There are many more one could mention,
but that should suffice to prove even to the “know-all” horsey
man that good looks in a yearling often turns out a sorry
jade to the person who pays a high price on account of
make and shape.
“He who laughs last laughs longest” is a good old
axiom, and it might prove an advantage to some if they would
only bear it in mind.
The disadvantages under which yearlings were
placed under the hammer in the past at the widely known
saleyards on the corner of Albert and Adelaide Streets in the
’eighties and ’nineties by A. J. Warby, and later by Lionel
Walker, were loudly proclaimed, the accommodation resolv-
ing itself into several yards of a few feet in area, and most of
the buyers having to perch on top of the fences like a lot of
crows round a slaughter yard, as the “sticky beaks”—mostly
non-buyers—generally occupied what little ground floor
space there was available.
These yards have long since been demolished, and the
advent of Messrs. Chapman and Snelling into the arena some
two years ago had a marked effect. They decided to procure
yards with plenty of space and where the youngsters could
be landed right on the spot from the train instead of having
to be unshipped or detrained and dragged /through the
streets to the saleyard. It was not long before they came to
the conclusion that Petty’s paddock at the show ground
offered the ideal conditions, and they set about it with such
determination that arrangements were made with the
National Agricultural and Industrial Association and the idea
was materialised in a very short space of time. The railway
runs right into the grounds, which practically eliminates the
possibility of accident to yearlings, after being despatched
from the stud paddock till they arrive at their destination.
There is a good area in the ring which enables the
yearling to show off its paces, thereby providing an incentive
to higher prices, as buyers desire to see what sort of action
the animal displays; and, if there are any faults either in
gait or general build they can be easily picked out. There
is excellent stall accommodation where the horses can be
comfortably housed, several water troughs which are kept
clean and wholesome by the caretaker, and, what is more
to the point, when young stock are taken from their natural
surroundings, a fair amount of succulent grass is growing
in the paddock where the animals can enjoy an hour or two
daily.


■
The whole of the surroundings, besides being pic-
turesque and handy by tram and train, is conducive to con-
tentment, which must have an effect on the temperament,
thereby allaying nervousness and many vices which often
require considerable attention where young stock are con-
cerned.
The first sale of yearlings, which was held by this enter-
prising and up-to-date firm in 1922 put the hall mark of
success on the venture, as at that sale the record price for a
yearling sold in Queensland —1300 guineas—was obtained
for a colt by Shepherd King out of Miss Muriel, and half-
brother to Amberdown, Mr. Terry Ahern being the pur-
chaser. The colt is now racing as Gheviotdale, and, though
only having won one race to date, gives exceptional promise.
The enterprise shown by Messrs. Chapman and Snelling
has deservedly resulted in a big volume of business, as
breeders have expressed every confidence in them by placing
their stock almost unreservedly in their hands, knowing full
well that they will get a fair deal, and that every care and
attention will" be paid to their consignments. Evidently the
buyers also appreciate the fact that every facility is afforded
them and every wish gratified, for they attend the sales in
large numbers. The last catalogue issued by Messrs. Chap-
man and Snelling contained 214 pages, replete with all in-
formation, concerning the pedigrees, etc., of the stock to be
offered.
Men who have visited other States in the Common-
wealth are loud in their praises of the facilities offered by
Messrs. Chapman and Snelling, and of the sterling qualities
of the firm as conscientious business men.


CHAPTER XL—MEGAPHONE, QUEENSLAND’S
GREATEST RACEHORSE.
Bred by John Finnie and Sold for £90 —A Record Which Will
Take Some Beating—As a Two-Year-Old Wins W.F.A.
Race Over Mile and a Quarter, Following a Win Earlier
the Same Day—At Three Years Extends Carbine at
W.F.A.—A Record of Big Achievements.
Until Gloaming, Eurythmic and David, within the last
three years eclipsed his record of 30 years’ standing as the
biggest prize winner on the Australian turf, Carbine was
generally recognised as the greatest of all Australian race-
horses. As champion after champion has loomed big in the
turf firmament since the days of Carbine, it has been fre-
quently compared with “Old Jack”—as Carbine was called
when sportsmen gathered together—but arguments generally
■ended in favor of Carbine as the greatest racehorse of all.
Even though Eurythmic and David have passed Carbine in
the list of prize winners, few are prepared to argue that
either was the equal of Carbine, either as an all-round race-
horse or as a stayer, and in fairness to Carbine, it must be
considered that of his many wins only in the case of his
Melbourne Gup was the prize money anything like the value
of big races of recent years, which sent Eurythmic and David
quickly up in the list.
There are many who rank Gloaming, whose record is
52 wins and 9 seconds for 62 starts, and who is now at the
head of the list of big prize winners with £40,366 (£3455
more than Eurythmic) to his credit, as the equal, if not the
superior, of Carbine, up to a mile and a half, and in his
case, like Carbine’s, many of his wins carried prize money
which was small in comparison to what Eurythmic and
David gained from many of their successes.
In these days of big prize money, Heroic, in less than a
■season and a quarter, as a two-year-old and three-year-old,
amassed over £21,000, and his prospects of beating Gloam-
ing’s record appeared to be well within his bounds until the
disqualification of his owner, Mr. J. R. Gorteen, in conjunc-
tion with Messrs. G. Tye, Cecil Godby (trainer), H. Cairns
(jockey), and Purser, for 12 months, over the running of
Purser in the V.R.G. Goongy Handicap, three days prior to
him winning the Caulfield Gup (which created a sensation
<on account of his connections supporting him to win over
.£40,000 on the day of the race, after it had been published


that he was a doubtful starter), jeopardised his chance. The
disqualification of Mr. Gorteen involved Heroic, who looked
to have a mortgage on the Y.R.G. Derby and a chance second
to none of winning the Melbourne Gup, and debarred him
from competing in those events, as well as other events at
the Y.R.G. Spring Meeting. The Y.R.G. Derby was worth £4691
and Melbourne Gup £9681 and £2OO trophy, and had Heroic
started and won them he would have been within a few
thousand pounds of Gloaming’s total, and with the best years
of his life before him he probably would have reached the
top of the list. Heroic had undoubtedly proved himself one
of the greatest three-year-old colts in the history of Aus-
tralian racing, and might have justified himself to a claim of
being classed as Australia’s greatest racehorse, but for the
unfortunate happening in the Purser case, which, on account
of its far reaching effects, created one of the greatest
sensations the Australian turf has ever known.
While the subject of Australia’s greatest racehorse is
so frequently discussed, it is rarely we hear Queenslanders
discuss the question of which was the greatest Queensland
racehorse of all time.
Having got the views of some of the old residents who
have followed racing in Queensland for from 50 to 60 years y
we have tackled the question, and after weighing the merits
of the equine lights of other days, supported by impressions
of horses we have seen in our own time, we have awarded the
palm to the Queensland bred gelding Megaphone (by New-
bold from Sound, by The Drummer), bred by John Finnie,.
who raced both his sire and dam with success.
Megaphone was purchased by Charlie Brown, a popular
Queensland sportsman of the ’Bo’s, in Warby’s sale yards,
Brisbane, for £9O, and raced by him. Megaphone boasted of a
record of 17 wins, 6 seconds, and 3 unplaced performances,
for 26 starts—a record which will take some beating—up to
the time Donald Wallace purchased him. As a two-year-old
his 21 races resulted in 15 wins, 4 seconds, and 2 unplaced,
and to prove what a smasher Megaphone was it might be
mentioned that after winning the Criterion Nursery Stakes
(7 furlongs) as a two-year-old at Eagle Farm, he saddled
up the same afternoon and beat Grey Gown (who afterwards
won the Q.T.G. St. Leger), and Lyndhurst (who later was a
Brisbane Gup winner), at w.f.a. over a mile and a quarter.
While still racing for Charlie Brown, Megaphone, as a
Hiree-year-old, recorded 2 wins, 2 seconds, and a fourth for
5 runs.
The last race in which Megaphone carried Charlie
Brown’s colours was the A.J.G. Graven Plate, run at Rand-
wick in 1891, and it was his excellent showing in that race
which resulted in him changing hands.


I! J
MEGAPHONE— THE GREATEST OF THE QUEENSLAND BRED EQUINE CHAMPIONS.


Bob Ramage, one of the best riders of that time, rode
Carbine, and Mark Ryan (who had the misfortune to be
possessed of only one eye) piloted Megaphone.
Donald Wallace thought the race was the best of good
things and odds on were laid on Carbine, hut Megaphone
gave him one of the hardest races of his career, being de-
feated by only a “knut” —to use a sporting phrase.
So impressed was Ramage that he immediately advised
Wallace to purchase Megaphone, adding to his persuasions,
“If I’d been on him he would have won.’'
Wallace took the jockey’s advice and bought Megaphone
for 3000 guineas, and he was shipped to Melbourne where
he became the trial horse for Carbine.
Several horses had been used to try Carbine out in his
training, but none were any use to “Old Jack” until Mega-
phone came on the scene. Carbine had met a foeman
worthy of his steel, and both Walter Hickenbotham and
Donald Wallace declared that in Megaphone they had found
the only horse who could ever extend Carbine in his training.
In Wallace’s colors, Megaphone won the Y.R.G. Flying
Stakes, Royal Park Stakes, Canterbury Plate, ran third in the
Australian Gup, won Loch Plate, won A.J.G. Spring Stakes,
won Randwick Plate, and ran fourth in the Melbourne Gup.
In the last mentioned race, Megaphone met with interference
and stumbled very badly, and many critics were of the opinion
that hut for that unfortunate happening Megaphone would
have won that Gup.
Megaphone, with age, naturally lost his form, and the
last heard of him was that he was sold at Forbes (N.S.W.)
for £2O. It was a great pity that Megaphone was ever
gelded, for a horse such as he was would, no doubt, have
been an acquisition to the breeding industry of Australia.
Appended is a record of Megaphone’s performances up
till the time he was sold by Charlie Brown to Donald
Wallace :
AS A TWO-YEAR-OLD.
Q.T.G. Meet, Nov., 1889, fell in Hopeful Stakes, 5 fur.,
won by The General; 2nd., Oxley Nursery Handicap, 5 fur.,
8.4, won by Garuda, 7.8, The General, 9.3, 3rd. Hunt Club,
Nov., 1889, won Tyro Stakes, 5 fur., 9st., after dead heat
with Elinor, 6.13, 1.84 secs. Tattersall’s Dec., 1889, 2nd.
in Jordan Stakes, 5 fur., 8.10, won by The General, 9.6, time,
1.74. 2nd in Fairfield Stakes, 7 fur., 6.8, won by Grey
Gown, 6.5, time 1.314. Sandgate, Dec., 1889, won Trial
Stakes, 1 mile, 6.5; Liberator, 8.2, 2nd.; Zinnia, 9st., 3rd;
time 1.484* Q.T.G., January. 1890, won Trial Plate, 7 fur.,
6.5; Grey Gown, 6.12, 2nd.; time 1.32 4-5. Won Goodwood
Handicap, 6 fur., 7.3; Garuda, 7.3, 2nd.; time 1.17 1-5.
Tattersall’s, April, 1890, won Champagne, 5 fur., 9st.; The
General, 9.6, 2nd.; Garuda, 8.10, 3rd.; time 1.l Of. Q.T.G. r


May, 1890. nowhere in Queen's Plate, w.f.a., 1 mile, won by
IKing William; time 1.46 1-5 secs. Won Sires 7 Produce,
I mile, 8.10; Refused, 8.8, 2nd.; Grey Gown, 8.10, 3rd. ;
time 1.48 1-5. Won Scarborough Stakes, 6 fur., w.f.a., King
William, 2nd.; Sir Anthony, 3rd.; time, 1.17 1-5. Won
'Criterion Nursery Handicap, 7 fur., 9.8; Left-On-Hand, 7.2,
2nd.; Musician, 7.7, 3rd.; time, 1.35 2-5. Won Royal Stakes,
II miles, Maryborough T.G. Meeting, June, 1890; walked
over for All Aged Stakes; won Grandstand Handicap, 7.13 ;
Stamboul, 7.6, 2nd; Hiawatha, 6.13, 3rd.; time 1.45. Second
in Town Plate, 7.12, won by Dumb Roy, 7.9; Fiction, 8.9,
3rd.; time, 2.14. Won Granville Handicap, 9.2; Ormonde,
Bst., 2nd.; Miss Newbold, 7.10, 3rd.; time 1.331-5. Rock-
hampton J.C. Annual Meeting, won Two and Three-Year-Old
Handicap, 9.8; Refused, 8.6, 2nd; time 1.38. Won Sires 7
Produce Stakes; Refused, 2nd.; time Won Five Fur-
longs Handicap, 8.8; Beckwith, 6.8, 2nd.; time 1.5.
AT THREE YEARS.
Hawkesbury Spring Meeting, County Purse, carried 7.8,
and ran second to Teksum, 7.6; time 1.42 J. Won Hawkes-
bury Grand Handicap, 7.3J; Little Bernie, 6.10, 2nd.; Yes-
pasia, Bst., 3rd.; time 2.35 i. A.J.C. Spring Meeting, carrying
8.4; ran second to Bungebah, 7.10, in Epsom Handicap; time
1.40. Won Squatters 7 Handicap, 8.12, in 2.10. Ran fourth in
Sydney Handicap, carrying 9.5, won by Little Bernie, 8.2 ;
lime, 2.38. A.J.C. Graven Plate, second to Carbine.


CHAPTER XII.—MORE CHAMPIONS OF OTHER DAYS.
Equine Stars Recalled and Compared—Billy Ruddle and
Premier and Zanco Fame —John Finnie Gets Newbold
by Chance —Le Grand’s Rise to Fame—Weiberondale,
a Buggy Horse, Which Made Turf History—And Other
Stories.
While we have awarded the honor of Queensland's
champion to Megaphone, let us not forget the many other
truly good horses of their time, which maintained the highest
standard of racing in Queensland and of which quite a
number did much to advertise our State by their splendid
performances in the southern States.
The horse most prominent in the racing world of
Queensland in the ’sixties was, without a doubt, Premier (by
Little John), owned by the late “Billy” Ruddle. Premier
was a great weight carrier, and both in sprints and over a
distance, he proved almost invincible. He was the winner
of 60 races, which included the Brisbane Gup (2 miles),
two Ipswich Grand Handicaps (2 miles), and Gayndah Cup
(2 miles).
Of course, “Billy” had the advantage over many others
in those days, in that he not only trained his own horses, but
rode them, and, being a capable rider, he gained considerably
on that account. He had a very warm spot in his" heart for
Premier, as he conceded that it was to him he owed hi&
success in the hostelry business which he controlled almost
till the time of his demise.
It was not till some time after Premier’s successes that
“Billy” paid New South Wales a visit and brought back with
him the grey horse Zanco and another named Greyskin.
These horses added further to his record of successes,,
particularly Zanco, who won two Brisbane Gups (2 miles) r
Ipswich Grand Handicap (2 miles), Toowoomba Gup (2
miles), Warwick Turf Club Handicap (2 miles), and several
other important races in Brisbane and on the Downs. Indeed
Zanco rarely ever failed to answer the question in the
affirmative when it was put to him. Greyskin also paid his
way.
The last ride “Billy” had at Eagle Farm proved rather
disastrous. He rode a horse named Challenger, and he
“wanted riding” as trainers and jockeys are heard to remark
when a horse is inclined to be cantankerous or “wooden.”


Ill
In using (he term .“wooden,” we do so advisedly, for
the man who has had anything to do with horses and has
taken particular notice of them, cannot dispute the fact that
there are intelligent horses, some possessing a certain amount
of intelligence, while others are simply dumb, or “wooden.”
Challenger possessed a smattering of all these traits,
and ran unkindly, eventually running into a dead tree, with
the result that his rider received most of the impact on his
knee-cap, which was broken.
A CHAMPION OF THE Ws.
PREMIER
Winner of over 60 races. (See letterpress.)
—Photo from a model.
“Billy” then decided to cut out riding and settled down
to training his horses and carrying on the lucrative business
which enabled him to enjoy his declining years. “Billy” had
a large circle of friends and often entwined the monotony by
recounting incidents of olden days, which afforded as much
pleasure to him as his audiences. He deservedly had the
name of being a shrewd business man—and, what is more
lo the point, a straight goer.


Other notable horses of the ’6o’s were Mr. T. E. Ryan’s
Forester, and Mr. Justice Pring’s North Australian (both
Brisbane Gup winners).
In the early ’7o’s, Zanco, B. Powell’s Grafton, Judge
Lutwyche’s Dandy, Abraham’s Erin, J. Stacey’sWWandererr r
and W. H. Kent’s Napper Tandy, were leading lights, and in
the later ’7o’s, John Finnie’s Nemo, Newbold, Sydney and
Sound, J. McGill’s Sunrise, T. A. Loder’s The Dean, Sir
Joshua Peter Bell’s Whisker and Elastic, J. Henderson’s King
Cole, and J. Williams’ Melbourne, were probably the best
of the many good horses of stamina, which Queensland
boasted. Probably Nemo, Newbold, King Cole and Mel-
bourne had the best claims to be regarded as the outstanding
champions of that decade, although Sound and Elastic were
wonderfully good two-year-olds.
It is not generally known how John Finnie became
possessed of Newbold, who was not only one of the best on
the racing track —all distances —in the South, and after-
wards Queensland, but proved his superiority at the stud.
Sir Joshua P. Bell commissioned Watty Blacklock to
purchase him a sire to do duty at his Queensland stud, and
Blacklock, who had the name of being a keen judge of a
good horse (and, by the way, has proved it more than once)*
decided to buy Newbold for Sir Joshua.
When Sir Joshua arrived in Brisbane Blacklock took
him along to hand the purchase over, but Sir Joshua would
not have the horse at any price, remarking: “Do you think
I would have such a big-headed thing as that to do duty at
my stud?’’
Newbold was by no means a beauty to look at as he
possessed an extraordinarily large head, and Blacklock felt
a bit uneasy at his selection being turned down, but John
Finnie came to the rescue with “I’ll take him;” and take
him he did.
And what a splendid proposition as both racehorse and
sire Newbold turned out to be —a veritable gold mine.
Newbold, who was by Kelpie from Dora, by Sir Her-
cules from old Dora, by Camel, had the distinction of having
beaten Imperial, a Sydney Gup winner, and Wollomai, a
Melbourne Gup winner. For Mr. Finnie he won many races,
and at his Rosevale stud he sired, among other notable per-
formers, Ben Bolt (winner of the Caulfield Gup), Newbold
(who dead-heated with Tornado in a Brisbane Gup, which
went to the credit of Tornado on a walkover, and won the
Moreton Handicap, and other races), Goldfinder (winner of
30 races), and Megaphone, the greatest Queensland cham-
pion of all time.
In the case of Newbold, it was once more demonstrated
that you cannot judge a book by its cover.


' f . . ■ .•■•■'__ • ;■ •■, ’,. a'. ■■ ;:/&i
;^w^-^ v '" , ■" v • . , <., v '/.'-' <■ „ j
laR*
4 ijf
mm m : I
|l||i fiM, - 'm&j, ' J|||||a|fe * ■
S’ -ill*./; & ~? wM§M
mt W&Mli
IK
||L fi •'(. ■ . imffwfii- j|iN4i^
- V v v. ; ;A* .'-'• : ''\'- ■ ■ ' ■ ; ‘ ' : ■
’X;~ : -' .; ••'•.• ;■■' •; I
* Sydney, another of the many good horses John t nme
raced in tlie ’7o’s, and the winner of the Brisbane Gup ot
’79 and the Sandgate Handicap ot 79 and 80 was by
Gemmi di Vergy, a noted racehorse and sire, about whom
there is a good story to be told.
In the late ’6o’s, Sir John Jamieson, who was in charge
of the Regentville House convict settlement on the Nepean
River, N.S.W., donated a 50 guinea cup for a race, to be
run in three mile heats, and a final at Penrith, on the Nepean.
The event created much interest in all the surrounding
districts, and attracted many entrants, including a horse
THE OLD GREY
ZANCO
A champion of the ’7o’s. (See letterpress.)
—Photo from a model
nominated by Sir John Jamieson to carry his own colours,
and Gemmi di Vergy, nominated by Andrew Towns, who
had imported him. The day of the race was a gala day for
the people of Penrith and all the surrounding districts.
There was a bullock roast and the “inner man” catered for
in liberal style, and liquid refreshments bowed freely.


.No one was more keen to win the Gup than Sir John
Jamieson himself, and his ambition might have been achieved
but for Gemmi di Vergy. Andrew Towns walked Gemmi di
Vergy from Bathurst to Penrith, a distance of over 100
miles, for the occasion, and was accompanied by many of the
free labourers he employed, in addition to other residents of
Bathurst, in drays, or other conveyances or on horseback.
The race duly eventuated and Gemmi di Vergy, after win-
ning his heat, downed Sir John’s nomination in the final.
That evening many of the gathering in Penrith were
‘‘merry,” including the visitors from Bathurst, who were
overjoyed with the success of their representative and
celebrated it in royal style.
That evening when the Bathurst party, headed by
Andrew Towns and Gemmi di Vergy, set out for the return
with the cup (wrapped up in chaff bags) on a dray, they
were unaware that Sir John Jamieson’s convict labourers
had planned a scheme to recover the cup. They, as well as
Sir John, were naturally disappointed over the defeat of the
latter’s horse, and many had indulged freely.
Whether Sir John realised the meaning of his labourers
when some of them asked, “Would you not like to have
your cup, Sir John?” cannot be answered by us, but the fact
that he did all in his power afterwards to rectify the action
taken by his labourers made it apparent that he was not a
party to what transpired.
That night when the Gemmi di Vergy party was some
miles out on the bush roads leading to Bathurst, they were
overtaken by a big contingent of labourers from the Regent-
ville House convict settlement, whose aim was to secure
possession of the cup. What followed can well be imagined.
Anyhow, they got the cup and brought it back to Sir John
Jamieson, When the latter realised what had happened, he
was upset and next day lost no time in setting out for
Bathurst, where, on arrival, he personally presented the cup
to Andrew Towns with congratulations and a full apology
for the incident for which his labourers were responsible.
Throughout the decade from 1880 to 1890, Queensland
was still rich in racehorses of class, quality and stamina,
the more prominent among them being Le Grand, Gold-
finder, Petronel, Lord Glifden, Ormond, Proctor, Touchstone,
My Love, Medusa, Pirate, Rioter, Honest Ned, Mozart,
Legacy, Legerdemain, Waterloo, Wetherondale,
Quicksilver, Lyndhurst, Fernando (who won the Q.T.G.
Derby, Queensland Gup and Sandgate Handicap treble in
the same year), and Bonny Bee was a good one which was
brought over from Sydney in 1886. My Lord and The Aus-
tralian Peer were two other Queensland bred horses which
gained fame in the south.


It is out of the question to go into the merits of aU of
them, but there are stories concerning some of them which
are too interesting to pass over, especially Le Grand, My
Love, Wetherondale, Pirate, Bonnie Bee and \abba.
Le Grand, who was by Epigram, proved himself a high
class colt in what little racing he did in Queensland, and a
top-notcher when he was taken south.
In 1880, Mr. W. H. Kent, of The Grange stud,
gave the late Mr. Jas. McGill the option of purchase of a filly
by Laureatejrom Olive for £230, a bay colt by Epigram from
Legend for £2OO, and a filly by Laureate for £2OO. He took
the highest priced one of the three, which afterwards raced
as Olivaria, but did little of note on the racecourse, whereas
the Epigram —Legend colt, who became known as Le Grand,
became one of the best of his year. In after years, Mr. McGill
owned Le Grand’s full brother La Grange, who won a Q.T.G.
St. Leger Stakes for him.
Just what happened after Mr. Jas. McGill let
Le Grand slip through his hands is not clear, beyond the
fact that Mr. J. P. Jost became possessed of, him, and
for him won the Q.T.G. Sires’ Produce Stakes at
Eagle Farm on May 24, 1883 —this, as far as we can ascer-
tain, being his first outing under silk. The race was a
sweepstakes of 10 sovereigns for starters, added to 100
sovereigns from the owners of subscribing sires, and 100
sovereigns given by the Q.T.G. Le Grand won easily from
Rutherford Bros.’ Gapitulator and Jas. Williams’ Wheatmeat
in 1.34 for the seven furlongs.
His next start was in the Sires’ Produce Stakes (1 mile)
at the Rockhampton annual meeting, held on July 12, 1883,
which he won in a canter from Gapitulator, with E. J.
Thompson’s The Roue third. Time, 1 min. 50 secs. On the
next day, at the same meeting, he annexed the Champagne
Stakes of 80 sovereigns, with a sweep of 3 sovereigns added;
for all two-year-olds; second horse, 15 sovereigns from the
prize; 1 mile. Ross’s Sarabanda (by Speculation —Skit)
was second, and Wheatmeat third.
There is no record of his having had any other engage-
ments in Queensland, and apparently his next run was in
the A.J.G. Derby of the same year, which he won, carrying
Mr. J. P. Jost’s colours.
The late Mr. Tom Willis (“Milroy”), of the “Sydney
Mail ” used to tell a good story concerning Le Grand. In
the spring of 1883 Mr. Jost displayed much cuteness in
hoodwinking the touts in connection with the training of
the colt. One fine day there was a pigeon match on at
Kedron Brook, which attracted all the sportsmen of Brisbane,
and Mr. Jost chose it as a suitable occasion to give Le Grand
a thorough try-out. Tom Willis and another young man,


|pi£3£' -I
|i I
SI * " I
who were on a visit to Brisbane, got wind of the proposed
trial, and they went to Eagle Farm and hid themselves in
the grandstand.
Tom Willis, telling his story, continued as follows: —
“About lunch-time, Mr. Jost came out with his smart selling
plater, Khedive, who won almost every time he was wanted
to, and he set Le Grand to give Khedive a furlong start in
seven. Le Grand beat Khedive as he liked in the last furlong.
It was a wonderful gallop and after it our plan in life was
to go wherever Le Grand went. He came to Sydney and
won the Hawkesbury Mares’ Produce Stakes and the Sydney
Derby, and we bo til had enough money to burn after he
THE LATE MR. J. P. JOST, ONE OF THE GRAND OLD RACING
SCHOOL, AND THE OWNER OF LE GRAND AND OTHER
NOTABLE HORSES OF THE PAST.
won those two races and tacked the A.,LG. Graven Plate and
Randwick Plate on to them. Mr. Jost then sold Le Grand to
Mr. Donald Wallace for 2500 guineas. Le Grand was not
in the V.R.G. Derby, and he fell in the Melbourne Gup,
after being beaten in the Melbourne Stakes, but he won
the Royal Park Stakes, and was beaten by Off Golour and
Commotion in the Ganterburv Plate.”


It was claimed for Le Grand that he was far from being
himself at that Melbourne Gup meeting, and that he was
mot forward enough when, in the following January, he was
beaten in the A.J.G. Anniversary Handicap in Sydney, but
he was shipped back to Melbourne to win a race at Geelong
five days later. At the following Y.R.G. Autumn Meeting,
Le Grand was stripped a very fit horse and carrying 31b.
more than the great Malua, ran him f a close run in the
Aewmarket Handicap in the then fastest time on record. In
the Australian Gup on the second day of the meeting Le
Grand was beaten by Morpeth and Sweet William, but on
the third day of the meeting he won the Champion Stakes
(3 miles) amidst a storm of applause, downing the 2 to 1 on
favorite, Martini-Henry, who had previously won the Y.R.G.
Sires’ Produce Stakes, Derby, St. Leger Stakes, and Mel-
bourne Gup in great style. At the Sydney Autumn Meeting,
Martini-Henry and Le Grand met again in the St. Leger.
They were the only runners and Le Grand won easily. With
Sardonyx and Pell Mell to see fair play, Martini-Henry and
Le Grand fought their battles over again in the Cumberland
Stakes, and Le Grand beat Martini-Henry by a neck. The
next meeting of the pair was in the A.J.G. Plate (3 miles),
in which Sardonyx and Sweet William also started, and
while Martini-Henry could only finish fourth Le Grand won
easily from Sardonyx.
How Le Grand ended his career we have not been able
to ascertain.
It was at the Q.T.G. Spring meeting of 1886 that Mr. A,
E. Cornwall brought 8.Y., Bonnie Bee and Folly over from
Sydney for the Moreton Handicap and Brisbane Gup, which
were then run in that order. Mr. James McGill had Pirate
in the Moreton Handicap and Pirate and Bonny Bee started
equal favorites. Gornwall’s horse won.
In connection with the Brisbane Gup it is said that there
was a lot of messing about between Cornwall’s pair, Bonny
Bee and Folly. The heaviest double money had been laid
•against the Bbnny Bee and Folly double, and it was rumored
that Folly would be the elect of the stable for the second leg
(the cup). Consequently, Folly started a2to 1 favorite for
the cup, a point in advance of Bonny Bee. Bonny Bee beat
Folly by a neck after a great race.
The pair had run on their merits and it subsequently
transpired that Cornwall had backed the two, both straight
out, as well as in doubles. Bonny Bee was ridden in both
races by the Sydney rider, Leadbeater.
There is another good story told against the Cornwall
party. It is said that they becam'e very cocky, after their
double victory, and during a visit to Toowoomba, B.Y. was


lucky to beat John Finnie’s crack, My Love, through the
latter being interfered with. They bragged over their success
so much so that it ired John Finnic, and he challenged Corn-
wall to match My Love against B.Y. and Medusa against
Bonnie Bee for as much money as he liked, and to what
distances he liked, and John said he would ride his own
horses and allow the Cornwall stable to have its own crack
jockey, Leadbeater.
Cornwall took up the challenge, and put in a deposit,
but shortly afterwards he forfeited and the matches, which
had aroused intense interest, never eventuated.
My Love was a handsome black mare bred by the late
E. K. Cox in 1879, and bought by the late J. Finnic. She
was by Yattendon (Sir Hercules —Cassandra), and her dam
My Fancy (imp.) was by Blair Athol from Miss Merryweather,
by Weatherbit —Merrywing, by Birdcatcher. She won a
Maiden Plate at Gambooya, and at Toowoomba won the
Publicans’ Purse (a walk over), the Turf Club Handicap,
Bracelet, etc., also the Queensland Gup, Central Queensland
Gup (Rockhampton), the Gympie Gup, the Warwick T.G.
Handicap, and also races at Maryborough and Dalby, and was
a champion at w.f.a. On one occasion, Watty Blacklock may
renlember at Eagle Farm that the connection of Ajax said
they would beat My Love, but only through interference with
My Love was it accomplished. On a protest, My Love got
the race, and in the heat of the mmnent J. Patterson (rider
of Ajax) struck Watty. The affair ended in Ajax and his
connections going out for two years. When My Love was
retired from the turf, Jimmy Connor, a veteran jockey, com-
posed in verse u My Love’s Farewell to the Turf,” and after-
wards, when it was set to music, it was frequently sung at
sporting gatherings. As the composition is sure to interest,
many, we are publishing it. It is as follows: —
MY LOVE’S FAREWELL TO THE TURF.
Farewell to the form of the bonny black steed,
No more on the turf shall be seen;
No more shall we witness her lightning-like speed,
As she flew o’er the turf, soft and green.
Along with her mate, old Medusa, she’s gone
I To do matron duties at stud;
Take my tip, between them they’ll get something warm,
For where can you find better blood.
CHORUS:
So fill up your glasses, both trainer and “jock,”
‘ And bookies, come rise from your chair,
4 And drink to the health and also the stock
Of My Love, the bonny black mare.
From post to the paddock she’s gone with her limbs
As sound as the best two-year-old;


For her stable she’s added a number of wins,
For her boss she’s won heaps or gold.
And oft were the times that her number went up,
No matter what company she’d meet;
With Watt in the saddle the best she would beat,
’Twas seldom that he’d cut her up.
CHORUS;
So fill up your glasses, both trainer and “jock,’
And bookies, come rise from your chair,
And drink to the health and also the stock
Of My Love, the bonny black mare.
I remember at Gympie she humped the top weight
That day in the race for the Cup;
At the fall of the flag to the front she went straight
With the others in a cluster close up.
She won at her ease after leading the way,
The pace that she made was too hot;
And Malta, the dark horse, could not get a say,
Though next day he upset the pot.
CHORUS:
So fill up your glasses, both trainer and “jock,”
And bookies, come rise from your chair,
And drink to the health and also the stock
Of My Love, the bonny black mare.
To sing all her praises I will not attempt,
And, at my song, you won’t laugh, of course.
But, now that we know from the turf she’s exempt,
I hope she will meet a good horse.
And in the long years of future, my boys,
No matter how oft, when, or where;
Though our cups may be filled and o’erflowing with joys,
We shall never forget the old mare.
CHORUS:
So fill up your glasses, both trainer and “jock,’
And bookies, come rise from your chair,
And drink to the health and also the stock
Of My Love, the bonny black mare.
Yabba (by Melbourne from Yellena), was a good look-
ing chestnut horse of the ’Bo’s, which distinguished himself
in handicap as well as w.f.a. races in Brisbane, and also won
races in the South. He was first raced by his breeder, Mr.
James Williams, for whom he won the Q.T.G. St. Leger
Stakes and Sandgate Handicap of 1886, and afterwards by
Mr. G. W. Murray and also Billy Mooney, for each of whom


he won races including his second Sandgate Handicap for
Mr Murray. When raced by Billy Mooney, Yabba was
trained by Bricky Colley and ridden in many of his races by
Albert Colley.
When Mr. Williams raced Yabba he regarded him as a
good thing to win the Sandgate Handicap and Queenslan
Gun double of 1886. Yabba duly won the Sandgate Handicap
from Friendless, but the latter turned the tables on him m
the Gup. It was in the following Brisbane Gup (1887) that
Yabba, starting an odds on favorite, was beaten into third
place by Wetherondale and Pirate.
Wetherondale was a buggy horse which made turf
history in the middle 80’s. He was owned by Dr. James
Puree'll, who used him in his buggy in doing his rounds in
the care of his patients.
One day a friend of the doctor’s remarked to him,.
“That’s a decent sort of horse you have got hold of, doctor.
“Just so, he is an ideal horse for my business,” replied
the doctor.
In the course of further discussion of the horse and his
breeding—he was by Stockdale —the friend suggested to
Dr. Purcell that he should have the horse trained to see if he
could gallop.
Dr. Purcell acted on the suggestion, and in due course
the horse, named Wetherondale, proved that he was a
galloper, with excellent results for the popular medico.
Wetherondale won several races, and in a mile and a
quarter event put up time which was a record for the period,
and he crowned his turf career by winning the Brisbane Gup.
The Derby and St. Leger Stakes of the 1886-7 season
were won, respectively, by Abe Barrington’s Fano and Jas.
McGill’s La Grange. Abe Barrington was a leading Brisbane
bookmaker, a great sportsman, and a truly fine fellow in
every respect, and many racegoers of to-day will remember
him well as the leader of the ring and a sportsman who was
ever ready to assist the man down on his luck, and all
movements in the cause of sweet charity.
Another good story is to be told of Ormond (by Epi-
gram), a champion sprinter of the ’Bo’s. As a two-year-old,
his owner, Mr. W. H. Kent, of The Grange stud, offered him
for sale for £2OO. He was engaged in the Produce Stakes
of the time, worth £2OO, and Mr. J. P. Jost offered Mr. Kent
£IOO down and half of the amount of his first win. Believing
the Produce Stakes would be his first run and that he would
win it, Mr. Kent accepted the offer, and he became Mr.
Jost’s property. Mr. Jost entered Ormond for a maiden race
at Dalby. It was the colt’s first outing, and he won it. The
race was worth £lO and Mr. Kent duly received his £5, half


of the amount of his first win. Mr. Jost thus secured
Ormond very cheaply, much to the surprise of Mr. Kent.
Ormond was a great sprint performer in subsequent years.
Of the many champions the ’Bo’s produced, Ormond,
Le Grand Goldfmder, Petronel, Proctor, Medusa, My Love,
Yabba and Fernando were probably the best, with the honors
favoring Le Grand and My Love.
With the coming of the ’9o’s and during that decade
the higher standard of racing in Queensland was maintained,
if not considerably strengthened, by the class of horses racing
here niany of which distinguished themselves in the south.
The most notable among them were' Megaphone (1889 and
1890), King Olaf, Ohio, Buttons and Realm (both raced by
E. J. ’Easton), Lurline, Tridentate, Boscobel, Yelverton,
Babel, North Australian, Narcissus, Splendide, Tornado,
Battalion, Ruby d’Or, Dundonald, and Master Bernie. They
all were horses of great class and stamina.
Megaphone’s achievements have already been covered.
Ohio was almost invincible at w.f.a. in Brisbane in his
day and afterwards distinguished himself in the south.
Splendide won two Queensland Gups and a Brisbane
Cup in addition to the Q.T.G. Derby and other races.
Realm, by Archie, won the Brisbane Gup in 1891 for
Ted Easton, who landed it the previous year with Buttons,
and Realm later went to Sydney, where he won the Sydney
Cup of 1893.
Battalion (by Battalions) commenced his racing career at
a small bush meeting at Ranges’ Bridge, on the Gondamine,
but after coming to Brisbane he won many races, includ-
ing the Queensland Gup, Sandgate -Handicap, Brisbane Gup
with 10.3, dead-heated (carrying 11.3) with Archie’s
Daughter in the Mor.eton Handicap (then run over a mile and
a half), and won the Summer Gup and Southport Handicap.
In Melbourne he won the Melbourne Stakes twice in suc-
cessive years, and Williamstown Gup with 9.4, and after-
wards went to England.
Babel was a great sprinter and middle distance per-
former. After winning the Sandgate Handicap as a three-
year-old in 1891 with 7.8 for Mr. Charley Brown (of Mega-
phone fame), Babel was bought by Captain Sandeman, and
in the following year he carried 8.10 and dead-heated with
Zingara in the Sandgate Handicap and won the Brisbane
Handicap with 9.3.
After Captain Sandeman gave Babel to Watty Blacklock
to train he won the Stradbroke Handicap twice in successive
years, 1895 and 1896, with 10.12 and 10.10, respectively,
ridden in both bv Albert Colley, and his 1.15 for six furlongs
when he beat 16 opponents under his 10.12 was the record
for the race at that time. Under such a crushing weight it


was a wonderful performance and remarkable time for those
days. Babel was later sold at Charters Towers for 700
guineas.
Babel afterwards went to Melbourne and distinguished
himself over the sticks, winning under very big weights.
Charlie Brown was considerably exercised about finding a
name for Babel, and the naming was eventually left to a
sporting critic and owner connected with the Q.T.G. The
name Babel was decided on the legends surrounding the
tower of Babel being supposed to be wrapped round the
quadruped singled out to carry that name. No doubt Babel
added lustre to the nomenclature, as he was a champion
both on the flat and over hurdles.
Dundonald’s most notable achievement in a brilliant
turf career was when, as a three-year-old, he landed the St.
Leger, the Brisbane Gup, and Moreton Handicap treble at
the Q.T.G. Autumn Meeting in 1889.
The horses of the 90 s were indeed a great lot, of which
Megaphone was undoubtedly the best of them all.
With the birth of the present century, there was no
deterioration of the standard of Queensland racing stock, at
any rate for the first decade, which claimed such high class
distance or middle distance performers as Master Bernie,
Boreas, Little Tartar, Bris de Nuits, Palmer, Drake, Boreas
11., Ardon, Balfour, Scorcher, Fitzgrafton, Plunder, Haidee,
Forge, Fightaway, St. Quentin, Curve, Barallan, Togo,
Lurcher, Gozard, Flaxen, and Royal Ned.
Since 1910 there has been an increasing decline in the
number of our really good horses, especially stayers, but
still there have been some good ones in the period referred
to, notably My Gavonni, Goard, Lord Yindex, Earl Kitchener,
Owen Hoe, The Bounce, Syce Lad, Golden Sunset, Demeran-
this, Ghantemerle (imp.), Jessyce, Gold Tie, Molly's Robe,
Had-I-Wist, Fairy Bob, Laneffe, Warwick Gun, Seremite,
Admetus and Ardglen, Mountain Song, Serelot, and Mem-
craft.
Of the lot named from 1900 to 1910, Fitzgrafton and
Barallan were the best.
Fitzgrafton, who was bred and raced by the late Mr.
James McGill, was undoubtedly one of the best horses ever
bred in Queensland. As a two-year-old he won the Strad-
broke Handicap (6 furlongs) of 1903 from a high class field
of 15 sprinters of all ages, and as a three-year-old he was
practically unbeatable, and his victories included the Queens-
land Guineas, Derby, St. Leger Stakes, Queensland Gup,
Sandgate Handicap, and w.f.a. events, but probably his
greatest performance of all in Queensland was that of a year
later in the Queensland Gup, when ridden by S. G. Thomas,
he carried 10.0 and led from start to finish over the two
miles.


The crowd at Eagle Farm that day went frantic with
delight, and hats and umbrellas were thrown into the air,
accompanied by deafening cheering as “Fitz” led his fifteen
opponents past the post.
In Sydney Fitzgrafton was unlucky to be beaten a
head by Emir in the Graven Plate, as his rider, the late
Archie Scott, was ill before the race and wished to get off
him, but Mr. McGill insisted on him riding the colt, and it
was only through Scott’s inability through illness to do Fitz-
grafton justice that he was beaten.
FITZGRAFTON
A Queensland champion of the early seasons of the present century.
Fitzgrafton was later sold for 2000 guineas and was
taken to India where he won the most important event of
the Indian turf —the Viceroy’s Gup—twice, and also the
King’s Plate.
W. (“Billy”) Evans, a leading Australian horseman in
his time, and the rider of Apologue when that horse won
the Melbourne Cup, and who also had experience in England,
rode Fitzgrafton in India, and on his return to Australia
declared that Fitzgrafton was the best horse he had ever
ridden.
From India Fitzgrafton went to England, but he did no
good there, and little has been heard of him since.
“Fitz” was a truly good horse, one of the best Queens-
landers ever knew.


Barallan, too, was a great racehorse and weight carrier,
end probably one of his greatest achievements was as a
three-year-old in 1909, when after a hard race in the Strad-
broke* Handicap, in which he missed a place, he was saddled
up a couple of hours later for the St. Leger Stakes. He was
left the best part of 100 yards in the latter race, but ridden
patiently by W. H. Playfbrd he gradually made up the lost
ground and overhauling his opponents in the straight, won
nicely. In later years Barallan won many handicap and
w.f.a. races, both over short as well as long distances, and
WEIGHT AND DISTANCE CHAMPION
BARALLAN
(See letterpress)
lie handled tremendous weights. When he won the Queens-
land Gup he carried 9.11 and in the Summer Gup (If miles)
of 1910 he carried 10.7, and on another occasion he won
a distance handicap with 11.0 odd on his back.
Master Bernie was another truly good horse of the late
~9o’s, and early years of the present century, but never had
the best of riding.
Of those horses mentioned for the period since 1910,
the best were Gold Tie (winner of two Stradbroke Handi-
caps and the Caulfield Futurity Stakes) among the sprinters;


Laneffe (Stradbroke Handicap, Brisbane Handicap, w.f.a*
races and A.J.G. Challenge Stakes) ; Molly’s Robe (V.A.T.G.
Oakleigh Plate and Newmarket Handicap, and many
Queensland events), Lyndhurst Lady, The Bounce and My
Gavonni, and Admetus up to middle distances; and Goard,.
Syce Lad, Olivaster, Had-I-Wist, Earl Kitchener, Lord Yindex,
Boy Syce, Ardglen, Kingslot and Seremite among the stayers;
hut it is doubtful if any of them were of the class of Fitz-
grafton, Barallan, Le Grand, or Megaphone, although My
Gavonni, too, was a wonderfully good horse up to a mile and
a half, both in handicaps under big weights and in w.f.a.
races for his owner, Mr. Harry Whiten, who is said to have
purchased him for £25 in a western saleyards.
Molly’s Rohe up to a mile and three furlongs was probably
one of, if not, the most brilliant mares Queensland has ever
produced. She was raced by Mrs. Reg. Hillcoat, and her
successes were always hailed with joy by Queenslanders.
Despite her Derby failure, Mountain Song also stands out.
If asked to name the best mare which ever raced ia
Queensland we would certainly award the honor to Molly’s.
Robe. That she was a truly wonderful little mare, the fol-
lowing record of her performances will show:—
At two years.—Won Two-Year-Old Handicap, 5 fur.,,
7.7; won Juvenile Handicap, 5 fur., 9.6; won
Two-Year-Old, 5 fur., 9.9; won Q.T.G. Flying, 6 fur., 7.10;
unplaced, 8.12, Brisbane “Thousand,” 7 fur.; second Q.T.G.
Sires’ Produce Stakes, 7 fur., 8.7; won Q.T.G. Flying, 6 fur..
8.13.
At three years.—Unplaced Ascot Handicap, 6 fur., 9.6;
second Denman Plate, 1 mile, 7.6; won Queensland Guineas’
1 mile, 8.5; unplaced Queensland Derby, ii miles; won
Q.T.G. King’s Plate, 1 mile 3 furlongs, 7.7; second V.A.T.G.
Oakleigh Plate, 5-J fur., 8.3; won V.R.G. Newmarket Handi-
cap, 6 fur., 7.8; second G. M. Lloyd Stakes, 1 mile, 8.3.
At four years.—Third Q.T.G. Ascot Handicap, 6 fur.,.
9.13; won Q.T.G. Denman Plate, 1 mile, 8.9; unplaced A.J.G.
Epsom Handicap, 1 mile, 8.12; unplaced A.J.G. Shorts Handi-
cap, 6 fur., 9.0; won V.A.T.G. Oakleigh Plate, 5i fur., 9.3;
unplaced V.R.G. Newmarket Handicap, 6 fur., 9.5; unplaced'
A.J.G. Doncaster Handicap, 1 mile, 9.0; second A.J.G. Flying
Handicap, 6 fur., 9.7; second A.J.G. All Aged Stakes, 1 mile,
8.12; unplaced Q.T.G. Stradbroke Handicap, 6 fur., 10.5;
second Q.T.G. Royal Stakes, 9 fur., 8.12; unplaced Q.T.G.
National Plate, 1J miles, 8.12; won Q.T.G. Denman Plate,
9 fur., 8.12.
At five years.—Unplaced Q.T.G. Spring Stakes, 9 fur.,
6.12; unplaced Q.T.G. Chesterfield Plate, 7 fur., 10.0; won
Q.T.G. King’s Plate, 1 mile and 3 fur., 8.12; second Q.T.G.


Flying Handicap, 6 fur., 10.2; third Q.T.C. Stanley Plate, 1
mile and 3 fur., 8.12; won Y.R.C. Lawn Handicap, 6 fur.,
0.10.
At six years.—Unplaced V.A.T.G. Memsie Stakes, 9
fur.; unplaced V.A.T.G. Toorak Handicap, 1 mile, 9.8, third
V.A.T.G. Phoenix Handicap, 1 mile, 9.6; third V.R.G. Gantala
Stakes, 1 mile, 8.13; second V.R.G. Linlithgow Stakes 1
mile: unplaced V.A.T.G. Rosstown Plate, 6 fur.; third V.R.G.
Leonard Stakes, 6 fur.; won V.A.T.G. South Yarra Handicap,
0 fur., 9.5; won Plenty Handicap (Moonee Valley), 6 fur.,
9.13; second V.A.T.G. Brighton Handicap, 6 fur., 10.7; won
Welter Handicap (Epsom, Vic.), 5 fur., 11.3, in 1.1.
Totals —45 starts, 16 wins, 10 seconds, 5 thirds, and
14 unplaced; prize money won, over £10,500.
Of the horses at present racing in Brisbane, Admetus,
Warwick Gun, Mountain Song, Serelot and Memcraft are the
best of a moderate lot. Up to middle, distances, Admetus
has proved himself a brilliant horse under big weights, and.
is undoubtedly a first class racehorse, although at time of
writing he had been out of form for some time. Warwick
Gun is a solid stayer, and the three three-year-olds men-
tioned are undoubtedly of a good class.
Mountain Song, about whom a romantic story of her
becoming the property of the Hemmings Bros, is told in the
chapter titled “Strange, but true,” has proved herself a great
lilly, who threatens to at least equal the fine record achieved
by Molly’s Robe, and her latest performance at time of
writing, was to win the Q.T.G. Stanley Plate in a canter and
lower the mile record for Queensland to 1.37f. At time of
writing Mountain Song’s record stood as follows:
At two years.—Unplaced Hopeful Stakes; won Nursery
Handicap, 8.5; second Two-Year-Old Handicap, 9.0; won
Ghampagne Stakes, 8.12; third Two-Year-Old Handicap,
9.12; first Nursery Handicap, 9.13; unplaced Flying Handi-
cap, 7.1; won Open Handicap, 7.0; won Sires’ Produce Stakes,
8.7.
At three years.—Won Ascot Handicap, 7.13; won
Denman Plate, 7.3; won Queensland Guineas; unplaced
Q.T.G. Derby; second Queensland Gup, 8.0; won Prince of
Wales Plate, 7.7; unplaced Q.T.G. Windsor Handicap 1£
miles, 9.0; won Q.T.G. Stanley Plate, 1 mile, 7.11.
Totals —17 starts, 10 wins, 2 seconds, 1 third, and 4
unplaced; prize money won, over £4500.
This season’s two-year-old forces are very strong
numerically as well as being a promising lot and the future
holds prospects of putting forth its champions to be com-
pared—possibly favorably—with the cracks of the past.


CHAPTER XIII.
HAS THE THOROUGHBRED DETERIORATED ?
Interesting Opinions of Recognised Authorities—Notable
“Cast-Iron’ Horses of ’78 —Stamina Gives Place to
Speed—Question From a Queensland Point of View—
Dearth ot Middle Distance and Distance Performers—
Why So Much Lameness and Many Breakdowns?—
Have the Stout Old Strains Been Neglected?
An interesting question which is very much discussed
in these days of sensational time-making is, “Has the Aus-
tralian thoroughbred deteriorated?”
Arguments in the negative are probably not as numerous
is in the affirmative, but yet it seems that the question must
remain unsettled.
Our experience of “listening in” when the subject has
been debated is that the older generation of racing men are
emphatic in their opinion that while the modern racehorse
is possessed of greater speed, and is assisted to produce it
by the vastly improved tracks, it is greatly inferior in con-
stitution, quality and stamina to the horses of thirty and more
years ago.
In those days speed was but a secondary consideration
to stamina in the test of the mettle of the horse over two,
and even three mile, journeys, and it was not uncommon
for a horse to be saddled up twice in an afternoon and race
three, and sometimes over four miles. And in addition, they
had to do a lot of travelling as well and yet they raced on
till good ages, even to eight and nine years in the case of
stallions.
From an old racing calendar we have compiled the
following list of performances of notable horses in Queens-
land during the 1878-9 season and the amount of racing
they did over long journeys (even the two-year-olds) will
show what wonderful constitutioned and cast-iron horses
they must have been: —
SOUND.
Two-year-old b.f., by The Drummer, owner J. Finnic.
Starts 16, wins 3, distance raced 17 miles.
May 24 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced All Aged Stakes
(1 mile).
May 26 (at Eagle Farm) —dead heat for third All
Stakes (1 i miles).
May 27 (Queensland Amateur T.G.) —second Open
Handicap (one mile and a distance), and second Final Han-
dicap (6 furlongs).


June 6 (at Ipswich) —third Maiden Plate (14 miles).
June 7 (at Ipswich) —unplaced Wind-Up Handicap (1
m 110 )
June 12 (at Warwick) —won Members’Gup (1J miles).
June 13 (at Warwick) —second Maiden Plate (li
m lies)
June 19 (at Dalby)—won Trial Stakes (6 furlongs),
second Free Selectors’ Plate (14 miles).
June 20 (at Dalby) —third Maiden Plate (14 iniles).
July 10 (at Rockhampton) —second Maiden Plate (14
miles)
July 11 (at Rockhampton) —second Publicans’ Purse
1 m lies)
4 July 2*4 (at Maryborough) —wpn Trial Stakes (over li
miles), third Flying Handicap (1 mile). , Diirieo ~
July 31 (at Maryborough) —second Publicans Purse (1
mile and a distance).
ELASTIC.
Two-year-old ch.c., by Lord of the Hills (imp)
i mente. owner Sir J. P. Bell, and later J. Henderson.
Starts 14, wins 10, distance raced oyer 16 miles
May 24 (at Eagle Farm)- —won All Aged Stakes (1
mlle MayT'6 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced w.f.a. Toombul
Stak May 2 Queensland Amateur Turf Club)— unplaced
Open Handicap (a mile and a distance).
June 6 (at Ipswich) —second Maiden Plate (1 4 raHes).
June 12 (at Warwick) —won Sires Produce Stakes
dISt June I*3 fat Warwick) —won Maiden Plate (14 miles).
June 20 (at Dalby) —won Maiden dlate (14 miles).
jiiiy 10 (at Rockhampton) —won Maiden Plate (14
•J '
m -jJ 0 g 4
July 11 (at Rockhampton) —won Nursery Handicap
(1 mile); won Publicans' Purse (about 14 miles).
July 24 (at Maryborough) —won Queensland Plate
Handicap (li miles). _.. , -n
July 31 (at Maryborough) —-won Publicans Purse
about 14 miles) ; won Forced Handicap (14 miles).
WHISKER.
Three-year-old ch.c., by Laureate Wheatsheaf , owner
Sir Joshua Peter Bell.
Starts 17. wins 7, distance raced 26 nines. ,
October 1 (at Eagle Farm)—won Queensland Derby
!li October 3 (at Eagle Farm)—won Ladies’ Welter Mile
with 10.5.


October 5 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced Sandgate Handi-
cap (14 miles).
October 10 (at Ipswich) —third Ipswich Gup (14 miles).
May 24 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced Brisbane Gup (2
miles).
May 26 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced Moreton Handicap
(1 4 miles) ; won Toombul Stakes (14 miles).
May 27 (Queensland Amateur Turf Club) —Won
Amateur Turf Club Plate (14 mile) with-11.4. A footnote
to this result reads: “WHISKER GAME IN 5 LB. SHORT
WEIGHT, BUT AS NO ONE PROTESTED THE STEWARDS
THOUGHT THE WEIGHT CARRIED WAS NO BUSINESS OF
THEIRS, AND AWARDED THE STAKES TO THE DE-
FAULTER.”
June 6 (at Ipswich)—won Ipswich (14 miles).
June 7 (at Ipswich)—third Grand Handicap (2 miles) ;
won Wind-Up Handicap (1 mile).
June 12 (at Warwick) —second Members’ Gup (14
miles) ; won easily Warwick Champion Race (3 miles).
June 13 (at Warwick) —unplaced Turf Club Handicap
(2 miles).
June 19 (at Dalby)—second Trial Stakes (6 furlongs) ;
w 7 on Free Selectors’ Plate (14 miles).
June 20 (at Dalby)—second Graven Plate (14 miles).
SYDNEY.
Four-year-old b.h., by Gemmi di Vergy, owner John
Finnie.
Starts 26, wins 10, distance raced 494 miles.
August 9 (at Toowoomba) —won Town Plate (1 mile
<md a half).
August 10 (at Toowoomba) —won Forced Handicap (1
mile and a distance) with 11.7.
August 17 (at Queensland Amateur Turf Club’s Meet-
ing)—won Shorts Handicap (7 furlongs) and Open Handi-
cap (1 mile and a distance).
October 1 (at Eagle Farm) —third Brisbane Handicap
fl4 miles).
October 3 (at Eagle Farm) —second to Premier in
Queensland Gup (2 miles).
October 5 (at Eagle Farm) —second to Melbourne in
Sandgate Handicap (14 miles).
October 10 (at Ipswich)—unplaced Ipswich Gup (14
miles).
October 11 (at Ipswich)—unplaced N.A. Jockey Club
Spring Handicap (2 miles).
May 15 (at Toowoomba) —third* Town Plate (14
miles).
May 16 (at Toowoomba) —won Clifford Plate (14
miles) and Forced Handicap (1 mile and a distance).


May 24 (at Eagle Farm) —won Brisbane Cup (2 miles)-
May 26 (at Eagle Farm) —third Moreton Handicap (14
miles).
May 27 (Queensland Amateur T.G.) —won Flying, Han -
dicap (7 furlongs).
June 6 (at Ipswich)—won Stanley Handicap (14
miles). .
June 7 (at Ipswich) —second Grand Handicap (2
miles). /1 i
June 12 (at Warwick) —third Warwick Handicap (14
miles).
June 13 (at Warwick) —won Turf Club Handicap (2
miles). /a _ .
June 19 (at Dalby)—third Flying Handicap (1 mile).
July 10 (at Rockhampton)—third Port Curtis Handicap
(14 miles).
July 20 (at Rockhampton)—second Town Plate (2
miles); second Rockhampton Handicap (2 miles).
July 24 (at Maryborough)—won Town Plate (14
miles).
July 31 (at Maryborough) —unplaced Turf Club Handi-
cap (2 miles).
KING COLE.
Seven-year-old br.h., by Kelpie —Elsie, owner J. Hen-
derson.
Starts 25, wins 13, distance raced 37 miles.
October 1 (at Eagle Farm) —won Trial Stakes (1 mile).
October 3 (at Eagle Farm) —won Moreton Stakes-
(w.f.a., 1 mile and a distance), with 9.3.
October 10 (at Ipswich) —wfon Ipswich Gup (14 miles)
and Flying Handicap (1 mile).
October 11 (at Ipswich)—won North Australian Jockey
Club’s Spring Handicap (2 miles) in 3.36.
October 22 (at Warwick) —won Flying Handicap (i
mile) ; second Spring Handicap (14 mile) to Melbourne.
October 23 (at Warwick) —won Corinthian Welter (14-
mile) ; second to Melbourne, Turf Club Handicap (2 miles).
May 16 (at Toowoomba) —fthird Clifford Plate (14
miles).
May 24 (at Eagle Farm) —second City Handicap (14
miles).
May 26 (at Eagle Farm) —won Shorts Handicap (1
mile).
May 27 (Queensland Amateur T.G.) —third Open
Handicap (1 mile and a distance).
June 6 (at Ipswich)—third Ipswich Gup (14 miles).
June 7 (at Ipswich)—unplaced Grand Handicap (2
miles).


June 12 (at Warwick) —third Members’ Gup (If
miles) ; unplaced Warwick Handicap [1 \ miles).
June 13 (at Warwick) —third Turf Club Handicap (2
miles). v
June 19 (at Dalby)—won Flying Handicap (1 mile).
miles) ne ( & t Dalby)—won Jockey Club Handicap (If
July 10 (at Rockhampton)—won Port Curtis Handicap
(14 miles). F
July 11 (at Rockhampton)—won Rockhampton Handi-
ca P K m ßes) ; second Flying Handicap (1 mile) after run
off of dead heat with The Rake.
miles J ) Uly 24 *' at Mar y borou g h ) —third Town Plate (14
(2 miles) 3 4,< a ‘ “ a n*orongh)-w<m Turf Club Handicap
MELBOURNE.
Whlliams en ' year k-k '’ Panic from Myth, owner Jas.
Starts 17, wins 5, distance raced over 254 miles
■n, x Aagust 9 ( at Toowoomba) — third with 9.3 in Town
Plate (12 miles) to Sydney and Premier.
August 10 (at Toowoomba—second with 9 0 to
Premier in Darling Downs Handicap (2 miles and a distance).
October 1 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced Rrisbane Handi-
cap (If mile).
October 5 (at Eagle Farm) —won Sandgate Handi-
with 9 4 mi 6S ) ’ Wlth 9-1 ’ won Forced Handicap (If miles)
October 10 (at Ipswich)—won Rremer Plate (If
iniles) with 9.3 and saddled up again for the following race
the Ipswich Gup (1-J miles), and ran unplaced with 9 8
October 11 (at Ipswich)— second with 9.6 to King
Cole in N.A.J.G. Spring Handicap (2 miles).
9 0 Warwick^ — won s P rin g Handicap (If
October 23 (at Warwick)—won Turf Club Handicap
(2 miles) with 8.12 from King Cole and Premier. Premier
was disqualified for third place for crossing Sir Hercules
and the latter was placed third. Lang (King Cole) and
Ratty (Premier) were disqualified for striking one another
during me race.
May 15 (at Toowoomba)— second with 9.5 Town Plate
(14 miles) to Rlack Eagle.
May 16 (at Toowoomba) —won Turf Club HanriiVnr>
(2 miles) from The Dean, but was disqualified and race
awarded to The Dean.
Cup Smiles) Eag ‘ e FVm >- thM *•«> 9-5 in Brisbane


Mav 26 (at Eagle Farm) —unplaced with 9.8 Moreton
handicap (1| miles) ; unplaced Toombul Stakes (1 4 miles
June 6 (at Ipswich) —unplaced Ipswich Cup ( 1 &
mileS june 7 (at Ipswich) —unplaced Grand Handicap [2
miles).
PREMIER.
Aged b.g., by Millionaire, from Miss Pittsford, owner
T. O’Dwyer. , jol ~
Starts 15, wins 3, distance raced 18* miles. _
August 9 (at Toowoomba) —second to Sydney in down,
Plate ( U miles) ; won Toowoomba Flying Handicap (1 mile).
August 10 (at Toowoomba) —won Darling Downs
Handicap (Toowoomba, 2 miles and a distance). _
October 1 (at Eagle Farm)— second Brisbane Handicap
(1 ” miles)
4 October 3 (at Eagle Farm) —won Queensland Cup 12'
m^6 October 10 [at Ipswich) —unplaced Ipswich Cup (li
October 11 Hit Ipswich) third N.A.J.C. Spring Handi-
cap (2 miles), and second Forced Handicap (I 4 miles),
8.13 to The Earl, 5.12. T/ .
October 22 (at Warwick); —second with 8.12 to King
Cole in Flying Handicap (1 mile), and third with 8.10 in
Spring Handicap (U miles), won by Melbourne
October 23 (at Warwick) —third disqualified) m TuH
Chib Handicap (2 miles); third In Forced • Handicap 'H
miles), * »
NEMO.
Seven-year-old br.h., by Kyogle —Fair Helen; owner
St-irfs 9 wins 5. distance raced abput IS miles.
August 9 (at Toowoomba) —won Clifford Plate H
mile and a distance) with 9.7. .
October 5 (at Eagle Farm)—second Flying Handicap
(7 furlongs), and third in the following race, the All Aged
Stake pctober ll 10 (at Ipswich)—unplaced with 9.0 in Flying
j a ( Ipswich) —third with 9.2 in Forced
llinidmap (1 4 md Qmba^ — seC ond with 8.10 in Turf
Club Handicap (2 miles). , 0 .
July 11 (at Rockhampton)—won Town Plate (2 miles) ;
won Hurry Scurry (1J miles).
July 24 (at Maryborough)—won Hurry Scurry.


(It will be noted that some horses won more than one
Maiden Event, but in those times the entries closed for the
meetings at the same time and were for horses which had not
won a race at time of entry.)
Fancy present day two-year-olds competing* in open
races up to a mile and a half!
It was a common thing in the 7 70’s, and two notable
instances given in the above table were Sound (who after-
wards was the dam of the great Megaphone) and Elastic. In
that season as a two-year-old Sound raced 17 miles in 16
starts, and in one afternoon won a mile and a quarter race,
and ran third in a mile event, and Elastic who raced 14
times as a two-year-old and covered over 16 miles, won
two one and a-half mile races at Maryborough the same
afternoon.
In the 7 80 7 s and ’9CTs the horses in the State did a lot of
racing, including the two-year-olds.
Megaphone, the greatest of all Queensland bred horses,
had 21 races as a two-year-old, for 15 wins, 4 seconds, and
2 unplaced performances, and one afternoon at Eagle Farm
he won the Criterion Nursery Stakes, 7 furlongs, and came
out a couple of hours later, and won the w.f.a. Royal Stakes
over a mile and a quarter, beating Grey Gown (who after-
wards won the Q.T.G. St. Leger), and Lyndhurst (after-
wards the winner of the Brisbane Gup), and as a three-year-
old he ran Carbine to a head in the Graven Plate, at Rand-
wick, and afterwards became a notable performer in both
Sydney and Melbourne, and raced on to a good age. As a
two-year-old alone he raced about 18 miles. He is only
one of the many iron constitutioned horses of the past, who
were not affected by early racing.
Nowadays races for two-year-olds do not exceed seven
furlongs, although an extra good one is sometimes started in
w.f.a. races over a mile or nine furlongs, and yet most of
our present day youngsters are knocked out after four or
five starts at five or six furlongs. This certainly is an
indication that the thoroughbreds of to-day are a long way
behind in the quality, constitution and stamina of past
decades.
An interesting opinion on the question under review
and one that carries much weight by reason of the fact that
it came from a recognised authority on breeding and the
thoroughbred horse generally, is that published in a
Victorian publication, “Turf Men and Memories,” some
years ago, and which undoubtedly has the same bearing now
as then. The spokesman was Mr. F. W. Purches, a veteran
Victorian sportsman and breeder, who won the Australian
Cun and Champion Stakes in 1893 with Portsea, and the


li
..-<■ t;
JWBy^ffif^
rf * 4S: k % | #i|ffi|Sk
sMMr ’■ftlv’ xM||
Jlswf Mxlll
f^WaBwBkk
-
- a-aja^
'■■ 'BhV
A STUDY IN HEADS
GLOAMING
CARBINE
HEROIC
BACKWOOD
EURYTHMIC


Melbourne Gup of 1894 with Patron. Mr. Purches gave his
opinion as follows: —“The Australian racehorses nowadays
are no better than those of from 20 to 40 years ago. There
is a lack of hardness or deficiency in quality. I speak of
quality in a different sense to what many other people do.
I use the word as an ironworker would in comparing
Bessemer steel with common iron, or a cabinet-maker would
in contrasting oak with ordinary deal. To me quality in a
racehorse represents density of bone. Given quality of bone
the tendons and muscles attached to it will have the same
character. By hardness I mean hardness of constitution.
“In the days of Carbine we were racing horses bred
more from the Australian strain than we are to-day. Through
generations of breeding the influence of climate has left its
effect. There is what I may temq for want of a better
phrase, the racing nature. This consists of co-ordination,
particularly in the direction of nervous force. The nervous
force that can be rhythmically applied must give very much
better results than that of a highly strung animal. It is
more lasting, not only on the racehorse, but in stamping
itself on the generations to come. If there is hardness of
hone, tendon, and muscle the performances of the horse will
show that its whole anatomy partook of that quality. That
is the clearest distinction that can be drawn between the
real Australian-bred horse and the English importation. Our
horses are stronger and tougher and capable of standing a
sounder preparation. The imported horses from which we
are breeding now, particularly the St. Simon strain, are
calculated to impart speed, not stamina.”
After touching on the St. Simon strain and making
comparisons, Mr. Purches concluded as follows:—“In the
breeding of the thoroughbred other interests than those of
mere racing ought to be borne in mind. Many years ago the
object of stud masters was to improve the breed of horses
generally, but that is not altogether kept sight of now.
Under existing peaceful conditions reform would be difficult,
but if we were compelled to defend our country for a period
of years against invasion we would look for a widely different
type of horse. Except that we are breeding too much
from ‘flashy’ blood there is not much danger in the present
condition of the horse-breeding industry in Australia, be-
cause our system of racing rather favors the development of
high qualities. It takes a horse of grit and courage to win
a Melbourne or Sydney Gup, and in generations to come the
new blood will acquire a little of the truly Australian strain.”
And a different opinion is that of Mr. H. A. Thompson,
a veteran southern sportsman, who claims to ha\e seen the
first A.J.G. Derby in 1865, and much of the racing since.
Mr. Thompson expressed the opinion that there had been no


deterioration in the Australian thoroughbreds, as so many
were prone to declare. On the contrary, he said there had
been a vast improvement in our racehorses, and Archer, who
won the Melbourne Gup in 1862 with lOst. 21b., could not
win the race as it is now run with 7st. 71b. on his back.
Racing was so much faster that he doubted if Archer would
win even a minor handicap. We have not only more horses
to choose from, he added, but they are much better bred
than those of 50 or 60 years ago, consequent upon the im-
portation of so many sires and mares.
Both Mr. Thompson and Mr. Purchase’s opinions are
based on a general Australian point of view, but there is no
doubt that Mr. Purchase’s authoritative opinion applies as
equally to Queensland as anywhere else.
Not many will agree with the views of Mr. Thompson,
except as regards the fact that the ranks of racehorses
throughout Australia have greatly increased. The smaller
ranks of 40 years ago and more, and even 80 years ago,
were comprised mainly of horses of stamina, even the
Maiden and Trial Handicappers, and they numbered a very
much bigger percentage of what might be classed as front
rank racehorses to what the huge forces of racehorses of
recent years could lay claim to. If we go seriously into
comparisons, and bring forth, among others, the claims of
Dividend, Wakeful, Poseidon, Trafalgar, Eurythmic, Poitrel,
David, Beauford, Gloaming, Rivoli and Heroic on behalf of
the horses of recent years it can be said that the Australian
racehorse has not deteriorated generally, but that the per-
centage of first class horses of stamina has decreased con-
siderably with the growth of the ranks of horses which are
now being raced from year to year.
In discussing the question from a Queensland point of
view, one thing certain is that our State was never worse off
in long distance, and even middle distance horses, than it
has been for some years past, whereas our racing
is now flooded with horses of the poorer class of the qualified
sprint handicapper. The cause to some extent may be that
the majority of breeders for some years have neglected the
lines tracing back to the stout blood of the good old stock,
and such an idea is supported by the fact that in the studs
of Mr. Frank Darley and the late Mr. Johnlfinnie, which bred
the best class of horses in the State till they were broken
up, retained the old blood, and the Lyndhurst stud, which
has been the most successful establishment in the breeding
of the thoroughbred in Queensland for the past 15 years,
still retains the old lines, and horses bred there are still
adding to its wonderful record by winning many of the
principal races of the Queensland turf.
Even those other big breeders who are not breeding
from the old lines have spent freely to secure the best of the
i on


imported blood available, but the results while successful iii
the production of speed have not done much to strengthen
the ranks of our distance handicappers.
Of course, lack of support for the best of the Queensland
product is the cause of many of our best bred youngsters
going south, and this, combined with the fact that there are
many small breeders in the State breeding from poor types
of sires, which were duffers on the racecourse, yearly
weakens the standard of our racing stock, and the weakness
in this direction is further greatly intensified by the big:
percentage of cheap and weedy sorts, purchased by men ol
moderate means, which are among the yearlings, brought
from the sister State year after year.
Stout-breasted and constitutioned Queensland-bred
long distance champions were numerous up to and into the
’OO’s, but comparatively speaking, they have been few since
the birth of the present century. Fitzgrafton, Haidee,
Rosard, Barallan, Signal Lamp, Togo, Owen Rowe, Royal Ned,
My Gavonni, The Painter, Jessyce, The Bounce, Had-I-Wist,
Lord Yindex, Demeranthis, Syce Lad, Molly’s Robe, Laneffe,
Seremite, Warwick Gun, and Serelot were good horses, which
were bred in Queensland since 1900, but with perhaps the
exception of Fitzgrafton, Barallan, Demeranthis and Serelot,
they were not what could be described as first class genuine
stayers. Still they were good horses at times when oppo-
sition was anything but strong.
Then, again, many who grew up with the stout thorough-
bred horses of the past also wonder why there are so many
horses lame nowadays.
When one looks back and notes how the sons and
daughters of Panic, Kelpie, Yattenden, Sir Hercules, Newbold,
Goldsborough, Splendor, and Grandmaster, raced on with age
and ran over long journeys, and to go further back, when
two and three mile heats were run, he asks: What is the
cause of the many breakdowns which are associated with the
training and racing of the horses of to-day?
Horses of the distant past accomplished their tasks
consistently, and not on well-kept tracks, such as are in use
to-day, but’on a variation of grass tracks, sand, and black
soil. Those horses stood up, and raced on for years, and
retired as sound as a bell.
Some put the causes of lameness and breakdowns
among horses of nowadays down to too much early racing,
but here again the argument presents itself that much
heavier racing did not affect the youngsters of bygone
decades, and that is in favor of those who contend that the
thoroughbred has deteriorated.
One instance of the advantage gained by not racing the
modern racehorse too early is the case of Wakeful, who did
not start her racing career until she was four years old. She


was then well grown and set, and on the track turned out
the best mare ever foaled in Australia. She started in
races, won 25, was second in 12, third in four, and unplaced
in three, and won £16,690. Prizes were much smaller then
than now, and her largest, the Sydney Gup, £2054, in which,
she carried 9.7, is worth over £5OOO to-day. She also ran
second in Melbourne Gup with 10.0. At the stud she was-
not so good, still she threw Blairgour, Bahanald, Baverstock
(who in turn sired David), and Night Watch (Melbourne*
Gup).
How many more of the horses of recent years might
have been the same as Wakeful as racers had they been
allowed to grow and set, instead of knocked out by too much
early racing? Take the western horses. Many do not race
till five, and then run on to 10 years and over.
Then there is the training part of the situation. Some
men are hard on horses, while others study their horses in
feeding and work, and the careful man knows how to race
his horse. Take Mason in the case of Gloaming. Gloaming
was not raced till he was a three-year-old, and now in his-
ninth year he is the winner of 52 races and nine seconds for
62 starts, and yet he is still going brilliant —simply because
his trainer knows when to ease him up and give him a rest.
When the big meetings come round nowadays, there is.
generally a list of lame horses, and here in Brisbane many
horses can be seen laced up to the knees. Of course some*
are used fairly hard on the roads, which are not lawns, with
the result they soon go.
Of late years race tracks have been improved consider-
ably, and made much faster and, why so many are under a
cloud, as they say, is hard to understand. Most of the
breeders have neglected to keep the old staying strains, and
have introduced new blood, and inbred to such an extent
that it is hard to breed away from it, and then again hereditary
weaknesses are not uncommon in some of the imported
English bred horses, and the fact of it being transmitted to
their stock no doubt has much to do with infirmities and'
breakdowns.
Is it that horses nowadays are too light in the bone to
stand longer than four or five years? Or is it their master’s
anxiety to get as much as they can out of them a cause of the
trouble?
Why is it that the horses cannot stand the strain? It
would be interesting to know the real reasons.
Thirty and forty years ago horses travelled hundreds of
miles by road, and then ran one and a-half and two miles to
win a double of, say, £2OO, and raced on with years, and yet
they say, speaking generally, that the racehorse is better
to-day. How many now could do what the old horses did?
1 * > i


False spirit and drugs are also given now and like the
human being when he takes too much, it gets him, and so it
does the horse, and many are made useless by it.
But the vexed question is: “Why do so many of our
good horses go lame on the eve of a big carnival?”
Echo answers the question: “Why”? and there it ends.
It is a fact nevertheless that horses nowadays do go wrong
when in their prime.
It may be that it is the business part. They are breeding
them to sell, and when one breaks up they get another, and
so on.
They niay breed the quantity now, but the quality, size,
bone, and stamina of the horses of bygone decades are
missing.
There are exceptions, but they are, comparatively
speaking, few and far between.
Still with such experienced racing as Messrs. J. G. Me-
Dougall, Ramsay Bros., M. Byan, J. H. S. Barnes, Lord and
Sons, M. Yore, Tom Jennings, E. G. Blume, W. Glasson, J. S.
Love now engaged in breeding, there is no reason why
Queensland-bred horses should not again build up the dis-
tance racing of the State to at least something near the
standard of the distant past. It will require the co-operation
of all concerned. Let owners of brood mares, as well as
the buyers of blood stock, give their whole-hearted support
to the genuine Queensland article, and pay less attention to
the poor and cheap types, not only of the southern States
but in our own State also, and in time we will have a belter
all-round class of horses racing in instead of the
huge forces which are racing here to-day, the big majority
of which are from poor to very moderate. Of course, it is
admitted that it will be a very difficult matter to achieve.
One pleasing feature of the racing of the present season
is that the form of the three-year-olds has been encouraging,
and their ranks contain a good percentage which gives
promise of giving a good fillip to our depleted ranks of
middle distance and long distance performers, while the
two-year-olds are strong numerically and also are a very
promising lot. It is to be hoped the promise they at present
.give will be realised.


CHAPTER XIV. —WHIP AND SPUR.
Knights of the Pigskin Past and Present —The Old Style and
the New —Are the Best Results Achieved From the
Grouch Seat?
There is considerable diversity of opinion concerning
the attitude, or method, of present day jockeys compared
with that of several decades back. Australians are world-
famed for their horsemanship and intrepidity, and are
credited with being able to ride anything with hair on it.
This is no doubt true in the main, but the methods are
numerous, though practically the same result is achieved. In
the past particular attention was paid in the training of
jockeys to the breaking in of horses —handling, leading,
mouthing, etc —and explicit instructions were given by the
head man to the horse breaker that those instructions were
to be carried out. Good results were obtained. The boys
employed in racing stables had to undergo a strict course of
instruction, included in which was not to be afraid, always
be watchful, to be kind, and to see that there was ample feed
and water, also —a very necessary thing in the care of horses
—not to lose their temper.
A bad tempered attendant was responsible for the
docility and tractability of the animal to a much greater
degree than objectionable traits handed down either through
the sire or dam. Many a good horse proved a failure on the
course through bad handling, occasioned by his master’s
erratic or uncontrollable temper. A horse has more sense
than people think, for, to the observant, it has been proved
beyond doubt that incompetency in the handling has been
equally as responsible for bad traits in the horse as bad
management by incompetent parents has been responsible
for wayward children. There is no doubt that considerable
laxity in this respect has been shown during late years by
those who should instil this doctrine into their employees. The
old system is worthy of emulation, and it would be to their
advantage if they “retraced their steps” in this direction.
Whether the difference in living and the expansion of more
freedom, “Jack’s as good as his master,” has had a bearing
on the subject is a moot point, but it might be found a payable
proposition.
The different attitude now adopted (the Tod Sloan
style) in the saddle does not appeal to many who have had
actual experience on the back of a horse. Fred. Archer, who
was rightly acknowledged the best jockey in England, as well


t .its,
y f|rf |n J||g&«
$| \ Wmk "^ v "" w ' '^^^^^H|(Pr
~ TljjjL "" '»s '.. ,
•,-i
JiPiF
i i|>
’’ ' ■■ <^%.;t
■ s< •' z WKs
;; ' v\
' ■ •
JWWwiiwiiiiMiiiwmiiM—i.wiiiinw—— m i % ■■ ■■nn.u.. 'lf
Pack Row.—F. Pollard, H. Walsh, G. Middleton, P. Nolen, Mick Walsh, Jimmy Steele, J. Shea, H, Middleton.
Second Row.—John Stone (snr.), H. Bragg, P. Byrne, Charley Gough, Ramsay, Jim Kennedy, Jack Blacklock,
Ken. Miller, Fred. Bailey. Geo. Burgess, Jimmy McCabe, and Dick Gough (jockey).
Third Row (jockeys).—W. Doyle, G. Vander-Warden, F. Mullen, J. Patterson, W. J. Tucker, P. Strickland, W.
Booth, D. Valentine, J. Guy, E. Bertinshaw, A. E. Colley, C. Jones, and T. Ryan.
Fourth Row.—P. Whelan, R. Bryant, N. Stone, A. B. Miers, G. M. Kirk (starter), E. McSweeney (assistant sec.,
Q.T.C.), W. Hopkinson, W. Stewart, J. Scanlan, J. Russell, J. Beale.
On Ground.—W. Bradshaw, A. Scott, Alf. Walsh, H. Walsh (jnr.).
Leading trainers And jockeys of the late '9os,


as some of Australia’s top-notchers, voiced their objection
in no uncertain manner against the crouch seat, pointing out
that under the new system there could be very little control
over the animal.
Leading present day Brisbane trainers, who were crack
riders in their early manhood, are strong opponents of the
crouch seat, but they have to put up with what has become
the fashion.
One prominent trainer, who was a successful rider in
the "eighties, when good riders were numerous, was asked
recently if the present style was as advantageous in getting
the most out of a horse in a race, and he gave an emphatic
“No” to the question, and added, “How can the riders now
do full justice to their mount with their knees almost stuck
into their mouths”?
Nature has built the horse on symmetrical lines and
never intended that the whole load should be placed on the
shoulders. The hind quarters, which are muscular, should
take their share, so as to give the necessary quick propelling
power and maintain the equilibrium of the animal, as is
recognised in the working of a boat which, if not on an even
keel, and the way is interfered with, cannot compete with a
rival more judiciously handled. How can one lift a load if
a grip cannot be got of it, and how can a horse be assisted
in his final effort in a race if you cannot grip the saddle with
your thighs and relieve him of a pound or two?
These questions persistently present themselves to the
old-timer, and, so far, he has never received a satisfactory
answer. The brilliant finishes of Tom Hales, “Paddy”
Piggott, Mick O’Brien, D. Robinson, Power, “Bricky” Colley,.
Bobby Lewis, the Gough Bros., the Blacklocks, “Archie”
Scott, W. Booth, W. Tucker, “Johnno” Stone, and innumer-
able others would never have been witnessed had they ridden
with their knees, heels, and stomachs in a jumbled mass r
and the present day jockey has more the appearance of a
tom-tit on a butcher’s block than a rider capable of doing
justice to the final finish of a good horse.
Many leading old-time riders are of the opinion that,
despite their better opportunities, the Queensland riders of
to-day, with few exceptions, are a long way behind in
the standard of race riding of 20 years or more ago, when
good riders were numerous. They are pretty well agreed
that since the introduction of the apprenticeship system the
conditions of the student jockey have beome so free and easy
that he has been spoilt, and his greatly increased opportunities
of making bigger and easier money have placed his idea of
the standard of race riding as but a secondary consideration
to his love of a good time and plenty of pleasure.
While these trainers offer no objection to the lads
getting as much pleasure and fun out of life as they caa


?ome of the old hands consider jockeys nowadays overdo It,
simply because the present day system of control or super-
vision is too lax, both in respect to apprentices as well as
riders, who are full-fledged jockeys. By official circles they
are allowed too much freedom and little notice taken of
what they do, and of the company they keep, and in many
instances the company of turf exploiters that some associate
with is the greatest menace to the boy’s progress in his pro-
fession.
The Brisbane trainer, Charley Smithson, who has had
31 years’ experience as stud groom, rider, and trainer, and
who was a good rider himself in his day, is among those who
are of the opinion that race riding in Queensland to-day is
rmich below the standard of 20 years and more ago, even of
1 5 years ago, and he thinks the want of greater control or
supervision of the apprentice riders has to a large extent
contributed to the decadence of the standard of the profession.
In the old days those who sought fame and fortune as
race riders gained it only by their ability, backed up by a
will to work hard for the men who had the horses. By dint
of effort and hard work, with but little time to themselves
till a day’s work had been completed, they kept fit and
brought "themtselves to proficiency, and then only did oppor-
tunity come their way.
Even when they gained prominence as riders they still
had to work hard, apart from their race riding, and to achieve
victory in the saddle, when good riders were numerous and
non-triers few, called for the best in the rider. In those
days the clubs did not collect either losing or winning rides
for the jockeys. Whether they got them not depended on
the owner, but it was not often that an owner overlooked
bis obligations. To-day the fees are collected dor the riders
—that is, apart from presents, and they are big as compared
with what the old-timers got, even allowing for the fact that
prizes are much bigger now.
Many leading jockeys nowadays command their own
terms in the event of winning, or they make sure of getting
a big cut from punters, and go as far as buying their mounts,
and it has come to be generally recognised that in a great
many instances “the boss” is the jockey and not the owner
or trainer. The coming of the professional big punters,
most of whom are not particular so much about the sport as
about their own interests, has done much to damage the
profession of the race rider, and through it bring what was
cnee one of the greatest of national sports to the basis of a
commercialised business.
Smithson, however, is of the opinion that there are not
nearly as many non-triers in races in Brisbane as the public
think. Bad riding on the part of some of the jockeys
wrongly gets them condemnation for being non-triers. They


will ride a few good races and get the public confidence,,
then several bad races earn them condemnation.
It is beyond our powers to discuss the merits of the-
riders of the v 6o’s and ’7o’s, but from the impressions gained
from old residents it would appear that the late Billy Ruddle
was undoubtedly the best horseman in Queensland in the
late ’6o’s and early ’7o’s. Later in the ’7o’s, “Bricky” Colley,
Greer, the Blacklocks (Watty and Dick), Harry Walsh, West-
brook, Burn, J. Hughes, Ridley Broom, and in the later ’7O s
and during the ’Bo’s, “Bricky” Colley, Fred. Brightwell, Dick
Lang, Mick Quirk, Christy Jones, Jacky Blacklock, Tommy
Woods, Tom Nerriker, Jimmy Patterson, M. Burke, Mark
Ryan, Vetters, Billy McCabe, and Billy Smith were regarded
as front rank and clever jockeys.
In the late ’9o’s, the State had first class young riders
in Tommy Flood, W. H. Smith. F. Selby, Dick Russell, and
among the older riders Dick Gough, W. J. Tucker, lom
Holmes, T. Nerriker, W. Bradshaw, F. Archer, G. Snell, Billy
Booth, A. Henkel. J. Osborne, and F. Mullen were probably
the best.
With the birth of the present century we had a big cron-
of splendid young riders, among them Paddy Byrne (who*
died while returning from the world war), the late Archie
Scott, Billy Stewart, Jimmy Rogers, and the late Jack Rogers,.
J. Mooney, Billy Best, Bob Mortleman, Bobby Williamson-
(killed at Albion Park), P. Coughlin, Johnno Stone, M. J.
Hayes, C. Bolton. W. Kaeson, F. Heffernan, F. (“Tiny )
Best, and P. S. O’Neill —good and clever riders every one of
them —and as with Tommy Flood, Watty Blacklock was thf
mentor of Archie Scott, Billy Stewart, J. ( Tara ) Mooney,
Bob Mortleman, and P. S. Q’Neill. Of those alive, not one
of that crop of good riders is engaged actively in the riding
business to-day, and few are even trainers, although some
of the earlier riders of note, including the Blacklocks,
Christy Jones, Albert Gclley were afterwards leading
trainers to within recent years. W. J. Tucker and Frank
Mullen are still going strong as successful trainers, and M.
J. Hayes—a brilliant light-weight of 15 or so years ago—is
training in Sydney and E. Heffernan is training in Brisbane.
Of all the Queensland productions of riders we never
saw a better rider and judge of pace over long distances than
Johnno Stone. He was also at home over short courses, but
in our opinion he was the best of all the riders of the present
century over long distances and his Brisbane Gup successes
on Jessie, Scorcher, Haidee, and Fightaway were classics-
in the judgment of pace, the timing of his runs, and his
vigor in the finishing effort.
The late P. S. ('“Parky”) O’Neill and A. E. (“Stumpy”)
Davis were probably the best and most accomplished of tbo-
nders produced in Queensland during the last twelve years.


“JOHNNO” STONE IN HIS PRIME.


Both were good and clever all-round horsemen, excellent
judges of pace, and vigorous riders in a finish. “Parky” died
a few years ago, and Davis has been lost to the game for
three years on account of disqualification through the
vagaries of that in and out gelding—Royal Howard, reference
to which is made under the chapter dealing with sensational
incidents.
G. (“Barney”) Page is another of the riders of long
standing, who has built up a reputation as a first class rider,
and of “Barney” it can be said that he is one of the best
dressed and most trusted riders the Queensland turf has ever
known. He is still going strong, and commands much of the
best riding in Brisbane and enjoys a good measure of success.
E. G. (“Puddin’ ”) Tucker is another of the older riders
of the present century, who to-day is riding as well as, if
not better than, ever, and of whom it can be said there has
been no more vigorous rider in Brisbane for many years past.
Page, Tucker, D. O’Connor, W. Hill, J. Booshand
(a recruit from the unregistered ranks), P. O’Sullivan, W.
Crockett, L. Tilbury, H. McFillen, and G. Northover are the
best of the older riders in Brisbane to-day, and among the
younger riders (the apprentices) J. J. Conquest and J.
Gorman at present stand out on their own. Both are clever
all-round riders, especially in distance events. Still there
are many apprentices of lesser experience who are coming
to the front, and among them R. Holt, P. Smith, W. Gross,
C. R. Ryan, W. Plumb, W. Douglas, M. Mannion, P. Eoley,
and D. Webb give much promise.


CHAPTER XV. —SOME SENSATIONS OF
QUEENSLAND RAGING.
The Ralston-Honest Ned Riot—Story of the Trance Dis-
qualifications in Brisbane Gup of 1892 —A Much Dis-
qualified Mare —Dead Heat of Stable Mates, Tornado
and Newbold, in Brisbane Gup of 1896, and Incidents
Which Followed It —The Xylite Ring-in, and Other
Happenings.
With a section of race-goers—and at times it js a very
noisy one —the starter and judge are considered “fair game”
when the occasion seems to them to warrant an attack on
either. Demonstrations against either of those officials have
been fairly numerous, even in recent years, although those
who level the most abuse at the judge are invariably in no
better position to determine the result of a race than are
others to tell why all the starters do not leave the mark
together.
Even though demonstrations against the starter’s effort
or against the judge’s placings are of fairly frequent occur-
rence nowadays one thing in favor of the present-day demon-
strator is that he confines himself to boo-hooing or hooting,
; and does not resort to acts of violence as was the case in
days gone by.
Before proceeding to relate the story of a riot which
occurred over a judge’s decision at Eagle Farm in the "80’s,
it is of interest to record an incident which took place about
25 years ago at the Lilly Bridge (now Epping, N.S.W.)
track, the report of which is from a southern paper:—
The late Albert Watson was starter, judge, stipendiary,
and anything else necessary to carry on the club. He was
the club. The “club” decided to race on Christmas Day. It
was probably the first, and undoubtedly the last time that a
race meeting was held on such a holiday. All went well
until “Cracker” Cornwell’s Yetonga got a break on the field
in the 13.0 hands handicap, and just managed to dead-heat
with Jack Peter’s Foam. That was where the fun began.
The crowd reckoned that the “club” had wilfully given
Yetonga a flying start, but as there was a shadow of doubt
about the wilfulness, it was decided that there should be a
run-off. When the pair saddled up later on, Foam was .3 to 1
on. At the barrier a difficulty arose. Several times the pair
got off together, but were always called back. Foam was
very quiet on the mark, while Yetonga was fractious and
had to be led up. Eventually Yetonga got away with half a


furlong start in a three furlong race. Foam chased it, but
just failed to get up, and Yetonga’s number was hoisted.
There was no hooting. With a wild roar, the “peace-on-
earth-good-will-towards-men” crowd scaled the fences,
pulled off the palings and rushed the course. The saddle was
torn off Yetonga, and the pony was thrown half way over the
rails. The “club” ran for shelter, and the Press reporters
rescued little Watson, Yetonga’s jockey, and locked him in
the Press room away from the infuriated mob. The police
managed to restore order, but it was a long time before the
“club” was brave enough to hoist the “weight” flag. Sport
was sport in those days.
There have been several hostile demonstrations at
Eagle Farm, hut none that reached such a limit as the Honest
Ned—Ralston affair in the ’Bo’s.
In a close finish of a race between Honest Ned and
Ralston, the judge declared a dead heat.
The decision was taken badly, many being of the
opinion that Honest Ned, who was trained and raced by
Watty Blacklock, had won.
A demonstration against the judge began with hooting
and boo-hooing, but a section of the crowd was in ugly mood,
and it developed into a serious riot, in which many hundreds
of the gathering joined.
Howling and yelling the rioters pulled the palings
from the fences in the reserve, and threatened to prevent
further racing that day.
The officials grappled with the situation with a strong
hand and decided otherwise, and the horses were sent to
the post* for the next race.
A section of the crowd, however, kept up the hostile
demonstration and continued to destroy the fences, and a
number of them, after the next race had been started, rushed
the track carrying palings or portions of the fences and other
material and placed barrages across the track of the on-
coming field. With others Watty Blacklock rushed out to
the angry horde and called out to them, but they took no
heed, and he, supported by many other helpers, rushed the
mob, and cleared the timber away in time to make sufficient
room for the field to pass through and finish the race without
mishap.
Watty’s brother, Jack, rode the winner of that race,
and it is a coincidence that Jack Blacklock was the trainer
of horses which were connected in some way or another
with two sensational happenings that were associated with
the Brisbane Gup races of 1892 and 1896.
It was in connection with the Gup of 1892 that that
good mare Trance, and her owner and rider were disqualified


for life, for what was alleged to have been a deliberate case
of foul riding and pulling.
Tattersall’s Consultations ran a big sweep on the Gup in
those days, and a remarkable thing about it was that the
Trance people, whose mare was one of the early favorites,
were among the very few owners interested in the race who
-did not get laid anything from the lucky drawers of that mare
in the sweep.
P. Nolan (of Ipswich) and Jack Blacklock, who had
■Splendide and Newbold, respectively, in the race were among
the more fortunate ones and were put on to a good cut to
nothing in the event of winning.
Blacklock says that a proposition put to him on the day
before the race was promptly turned down, but he offered
to save £3OO so far as Newbold and Trance were concerned,
hut that did not appeal to the person who had approached
him.
What happened afterwards is not known, but on the
day of the race Trance eased in the betting.
In the race she ran Newbold off, settling any chance the
latter might have possessed, and after leaving the straight
on the first time round was pulled up to a standstill, and was
cantered back to the weighing-in enclosure. A lengthy
inquiry followed, and the outcome was disqualification for
life for the mare and all concerned.
Trance afterwards was bought by a prominent owner-
trainer, who got the disqualification lifted from her and took
her to Victoria. This trainer had another bay mare not
unlike Trance racing at the same time, and when the latter
won a double for him at a meeting in Victoria a protest was
entered by the owners of each of the second horses, on the
grounds that the winner was identical with Trance. In-
quiries by the racing authorities revealed that such was not
the case—the winner was bona fide, and Trance, at the time,
was spelling—but that owner-trainer was somewhat pained
over the incident and got rid of Trance.
Trance was then taken overseas to become one of the
most disqualified mares the world has probably ever known.
In England she was outed with her connections for what
we understand was inconsistent running. One story has it
that the mare was then taken to America and retired to the
stud in America, and died there while foaling, but from a
reliable authority, who followed the history of this good but
ill-fated mare, we learn that from England she was quietly
shipped to America, and the story of her death was only part
of a scheme to ring her in under another name. And in that
connection it is alleged she and her connections earned
another life disqualification.
Still, if our informant is correct, that was not the end of
Trance’s history on the turf, under still another name her


next Held of conquest was France, but she also struck trouble
there, and was disqualified again.
It is said that eventually Trance was sold to go to a
stud in Germany, and that was the last ever heard of her.
She was a great mare, by Somnus, from a full sister to
Napper Tandy, and the great pity of it all was that she
should have fallen into hands which ruined what probably
would have been a brilliant turf and stud career.
Four years later another remarkable happening was
associated with the Brisbane Gup, which, in the records, is
credited to Tornado, but which really went to Tornado on a
walkover after a dead heat with Newbold.
Tornado, a son of Gadogan, was in the first place a
present to Paddy Grant from Mr. Frank Barley as a memento
of his success in winning a rich two-year-old race for him.
After having him for a time Grant did not think much of his
present as a racehorse, and sold him to the late Mr. W.
(“Billy”) Mooney, and for him he proved good.
Tornado was a four-year-old when Jack Blacklock pur-
chased him from Billy Mooney on behalf of' Tom Bearup, a
northern sportsman, who had requested him to buy a horse
for him with a view to winning one or the other, or both, of
the principal races at the Charters Towers annual. Jack
entered Tornado as well as Newbold for the Brisbane Gup
and Moreton Handicap, mainly with the idea of giving the
former a run to assist in his preparation for the Towers trip.
Despite an easy preparation, Tornado came on so quickly
that Jack soon realised that he was a better Brisbane Gup
proposition than Newbold. He wrote and told Mr. Bearup
that he thought he could win the Brisbane Gup with Tornado,
and the owner agreed to Jack’s wishes to run him. On his
subsequent advice he got Jack to hack Tornado and Newbold
for the Gup and Moreton Handicap double to win him £lOOO,
in addition to backing Tornado straight out for the Gup, and
Newbold for the Moreton Handicap.
In Tornado Jack Blacklock knew he had a genuine
stayer, and he decided to run Newbold, who was very fast, in
that Gup also, to ensure a genuinely run race. Gup time came
end Jack instructed the rider of Newbold to take him to the
front and to keep him going as long as he would last. The
rider fulfilled instructions to the letter, but he and Newbold
nearly upset the calculations of the stable, for so well did
they carry on their mission that if was only in the last stride
that Tornado got up to Newbold for the judge to declare a
dead heat.
It was the second of the two only dead heats in the
history of the Brisbane Gup, Strathearn and The Dean having
previously dead heated in 1878, when their owners divided.


While the rules provided for the owners either running
off or dividing the stake, Blacklock took advantage of the
fact that the rules did not provide any restriction against one
being scratched and the other being given a walk over. A
straight out win in the Gup for Tornado followed by New-
bold’s success in the Moreton Handicap meant much to the
owner of Tornado and other followers of the stable. The
difficulty of the situation had to be overcome, especially as a
run off in the Gup would probably knock Newbold out and
jeopardise his chance in the second leg of the double.
Jack acted promptly. He scratched Newbold for the
run-off and Tornado became the winner of the Brisbane Gup
of 1896, by being walked over the course.
Newbold thus escaped a penalty for the Moreton Handi-
cap, and he duly won and thus completed the double for the
stable.
. Then trouble began in real earnest. When Blacklock
went to the bookmakers to collect the straightout and double
money, the layers claimed that as Tornado and Newbold had
dead-heated in the Gup, and had not run-off, backers were
entitled to only half of the amounts about Tornado, straight-
out for the Gup, and half about the Tornado-Newbold double.
Jack was not having any, and as the bookmakers were just
as determined the matter was referred to the committee ol
Tattersall’s Club for a ruling. The committee ruled that the
full amounts had to be paid.
The bookmakers took the decision in a bad grace, and
for a few days held up payment of the wagers, but eventually
they decided to abide by the ruling of the committee of Tat-
tersall’s Club, and told Jack that they would pay him at the
meeting to be held at Albion Park on the following Saturday.
For himself and his patrons Jack had something like
£3OOO to collect, and believing it was dangerous to be in
possession of such a lot of money on a racecourse he made
arrangements with the manager of the Brisbane branch of
the Bank of New South Wales to keep one of its officers on
the premises to take over the money after he was paid it.
When the Saturday afternoon came Blacklock engaged a cab,
got a policeman to accompany him, and off they went to
Albion Park. With the wagers collected he and the man in
blue got into the cab again, were driven to town, and the
money safely deposited in the bank.
But that was not the only trouble that arose over the
Gup incidents. When Blacklock went to the Q.T.G. to collect
the prize money he found that no provision was made for
Newbold as far as the Gup was concerned. The late Mr.
Abel Hyde (then secretary of the Q.T.G.) told him that as
Newbold was scratched he was not entitled to any prize
money. Jack urged his claim that as he had scratched


Newbold only from the run-off he was entitled to second
prize for the Gup. It was not before he threatened to take
the matter to law that he was paid.
Afterwards Blacklock took Tornado to the Towers for
the annual, hut shortly after his arrival the horse trod on a
stone and went wrong in a back pastern, with the result that
he could not fulfil his engagements and the Towers double
was left to Black Harry to annex.
After six months’ spell Blacklock took Tornado to
Sydney with a view to winning the A.J.G. Metropolitan Handi-
cap, but in that race he would not stay on the course and
missed. As Jack had then to return to Brisbane to look
after the string of horses he had left behind Mr. Bearup told
him to sell Tornado, and for 350 guineas he passed into the
ownership of Bill Kelso, for whom he won the A.J.G. Summer
Gup and ran second in Sydney Tattersall’s Gup. Tornado
afterwards went to England, where he won steeplechases.
Many geniuses and experts in ‘‘the ways that are dark
and tricks that are vain” have tried, with varying success,
their prenticed hands to outwit the clerk of the scales and
make the chances of their particular fancies a certainty—
on paper, at any rate.
One of the most simple matured some three or four
decades since on the suburban course known as Deagon,
located within a short distance of Sandgate.
A horse named Billy was entered for a race there and
was allotted 12 stone—a real good welter weight:—and he
duly landed the goods to the accompaniment of numerous
wages. He appeared to be “genuine” and his owner and
all concerned returned home smiling.
Another meeting was held on the same course shortly
after and Billy was again nominated, receiving the steadying
impost of 12st. 101b. Billy once more proved his superiority
by winning as he liked, and was voted the “wonder horse.”
The Sandgate authorities had occasion, some months
later, to remove the scales to a more central position. When
they were lifted a nice little intrigue was unfolded, which
created a sensation at the time. A wire had been run up
through them, having been passed up through the fence, and
a 71b. weight was attached thereto. Then a peephole, about
an inch in diameter, had been bored through a paling. When
the different riders were being weighed the wire remained
quiescent, but as soon as Billy’s rider mounted the
scales the wire became operative, by being pulled up taut.
This had the effect of considerably reducing Billy’s
weight, and it is a moot point as to what weight he carried,
for the manipulation could reduce it by stones.


Whatever he carried will remain untold, but suffice it
to say that the connections had a nice little “wad” in their
possession after the two events mentioned, and the fraud
would not have been discovered had the tricksters carried
their ingenuity right through to finality—by removing the
wire and weight.
Many thrilling stories have been told of the powers of
the buccaneering women in the States of America with
imagination writ large, intermingled, and many a true
story could be told of Australian women who helped blaze
the track throughout Australia, and to whose zeal and un-
selfishness —coupled with innumerable privations —is mainly
due the advancement of sunny Australia. Taking into con-
sideration the “barbed wire fence” which envelopes the
rules of racing nowadays, one wonders how it was possible
for the “Black-veiled Lady” to engineer a coup in a minor
event on the smart, up-to-date Management Committee and
stewards of the Albion Park proprietary.
The nomination of the “ring-in” was the first procedure,
and Blacklock, a champion of the New South Wales pony
courses, was selected to finalise the venture. A new name
had to be given the horse, and Xylite was chosen.
Xylite is a yellow oil, having a geranium-like odor, pro-
duced by the action of hydrochloric acid on acetine, etc.
Sports are ever eager to get “the right oil,” and no
doubt those responsible for the “ring-in” had the right oil.
The lady with the black veil bided her time at the ringside
until the metallicians roared 10 and 12 to 1 Xylite (with
several different pronunciations), when she flitted airily
from one to the other until she had exhausted the commission,
then leisurely retired to the grandstand to watch the coup
come off, meanwhile throwing the tip broadcast to all and
sundry within earshot to “back this, it can’t be beat.”
Some of the knowing ones took the “office” and profited,
but many others concluded that she was a subject for the
doctor and ignored it.
The “oil” proved an excellent lubricator, for Xylite
had no difficulty in disposing of the field. The lady duly
collected and vamoosed. When the stewards woke up to
the fact that something had been put across them, they went
to the stall to interview the horse’s connections, but the bird
had flown. The fact that no one attempted to collect the
prize did not simplify matters.
Subsecmently the horse was found over the border of
New South Wales, and the fact established that it was Black-
lock, a noted champion on the pony courses in that State.


The “veiled lady” was located some time after, indicted
and brought back, but eventually went “scot free.” This
was, perhaps, the best thought-out, laid-out, and carried-out
plan that any Queensland Turf Committee or stewards had
had to deal with, and the finalising of the matter conclusively
proved their inability to cope with it.
The “lady with the black veil” is likely to maintain
her record for many decades to come.
A mild sensation of more recent years was the discovery,
■after he had won the Brisbane Thousand, and several other
well-endowed races, that Amberdown had not been regis-
tered by the Registrar of horses, and therefore was ineligible
for those races. Of course, betting which had been paid
could not be effected, but owners and trainers of horses
which had run second put in claim for the prize money, but
as Amberdown*s owner had been paid it, it actually became
a matter between the claimants and him.
There was talk of litigation, but it never came to any-
thing, and if the matter came to any settlement between the
parties concerned it is not known except in the case of
Barley Brae.
And very few were aware until it was published in the
that Mr. Lawton received the first prize money
of the “Five Hundred,” in which he ran second to Amber-
down, during show week in Brisbane.
It was some time after that race that Amberdown’s non-
registration and consequent ineligibility was discovered. Mr.
Lawton claimed the prize and negotiations between him and
Mr. Jennings resulted, the latter paying over the first prize
to Mr. Lawton.
This fact will, no doubt, be fresh news to many readers.
Although the disqualification of A. E. Davis for three
years was a Sydney affair, the fact that Royal Howard—the
cause of all the trouble —as well as Davis, were Queens-
landers, created even a bigger sensation in Queensland than
it did in New South Wales.
Royal Howard was bought as a yearling in Sydney by
the Brisbane sportsman, Mr. J. M‘Cormack, at the same time
as he purchased that good Colt, Malt Chimes, but Royal
Howard was turned out and was not trained till he was four
years old. He started racing as a picnicker, and as a five
year old cam'e to Brisbane, and after a few runs scored his
first metropolitan success in the Novice Handicap at Eagle
Farm at the Exhibition meeting in 1923, ridden by Davis.
A couple of months later in the same year, Royal Howard,
with Davis again in the saddle on both occasions, won the
Queensland Gup and Sandgate Handicap at the Q.T.G. Spring
Meeting.


Shortly before these wins Davis had been suspended
for two months for crossing in a race at Albion Park, and at
his appeal a photograph taken by Mr. Jim Webster, a member
of “The Daily Standard” editorial staff, played an important
part in the evidence of the appellant.
Davis’ appeal was successful and befitting of the occasion
of Davis’ win on Royal Howard in the Queensland Gup
“Orion” got his artist confrere—Mr. Jack Lang —to make a
drawing representing Davis as a jack-in-the-box (the
camera) springing from it on to Royal Howard’s back. A few
days later Royal Howard, with Davis on top, won the Sand-
gate Handicap. It was a rich double to pull off with a 55
guinea purchase —for that was all Royal Howard cost Mr.
M‘Gormack as a yearling —but it was scored at a Spring
Meeting that was spring in more ways than one for Davis.
And yet despite these successes what a disastrous mount
for Davis Royal Howard proved to be.
Sold for 1000 guineas afterwards to two well-known
bookmakers, Messrs. J. Matthews (Sydney) . and Bill
M 4 Donald (Rrisbane), Royal Howard went to Sydney to be
trained by Mark Poulsen, a successful and highly popular
public trainer, as well known in Rrisbane as in Sydney. In
his earlier races Royal Howard displayed poor form. Start-
ing at 33 to 1 he unexpectedly ran second to Note in the
Empire Day Handicap at Randwick on May 24, 1924. Davis
shortly before had decided to do most of his future riding in
the southern States, and on that particular day had another
ride on Royal Howard. The , gelding ran a race far above
what even his connections expected, much less the public.
The stewards took exception to Royal Howard’s running,
and Matthews and M‘Donald (owners), Mark Poulsen, as
well as Davis and Royal Howard, were disqualified for 12
months, even though the evidence disclosed that M‘Donald
was not present—being in Rrisbane —and his partner,
Matthews, who fielded on the race, had a £I7OO risk with
Note (the winner), and Royal Howard, if he defeated her,
would have given him “a skinner,” in addition to the prize
of about £SOO.
On appeal to the A.J.G. Committee all the parties and
the horse got out of it, except Davis. His sentence was
increased to three years’ disqualification. The reason for it
will remain one of the biggest mysteries the Australian turf
has ever known.
“Pat” Ryan, who trained Royal Howard in Rrisbane
before he was sold to go to Sydney, is one of the many people
who believe on the face of what evidence that became public,
and on his knowledge of Royal Howard, that the disqualifica-
tions were not justified in the first instance, and he was con-


founded by the subsequent extreme sentence imposed on
Davis. Since then Royal Howard has raced m'any times in
Sydney, and performed very poorly, and that has strengthened
the belief, which many Queenslanders have held all along,
that Davis took the blame for something in which there was
nothing in the way of wrong-doing.
With the disqualification for three years of Davis ended
the career of one of the brainiest, cleverest, and most suc-
cessful lightweight riders the Queensland turf has ever
known. Nature made Davis a lightweight. As he grew he
was still a midget, and although well into the thirties he
could still ride at under 7.0 when Fate played its false card
in an otherwise brilliant career. Race riding was a gift with
“Stumpy” Davis, and his likes will not be seen too often
again. Davis took the cruel stroke of Fate philosophically,
and in his retirement is mine host of an hotel in the fruit-
growing district of Redland Bay. He may return to the saddle
again, he may not, but for the racehorses and race-
courses are practically forgotten by him.


CHAPTER XVI.—“OVER THEY GO.”
The Days of the Hurdler —Will They Gome Again?— Tests
Which Develop Jumping Distance Champions From
Flat Racing Squibs—Arguments in Support of a Move-
ment.
From the earliest days of racing in Brisbane—in fact,
Queensland—hurdle races and steeplechases on some of the
courses were a popular feature of the afternoon’s sport up
to some 20 odd years ago, when the Q.T.G. discontinued
hurdle racing, and it has since become extinct so far as
registered racing in Queensland is concerned. There were
good fields for hurdle racing in Brisbane in the ’Bo’s and
’9o’s, and some of our best “leppers” distinguished them-
selves in the south. Recently there has been a move-
ment afoot in Brisbane, as well as in Rockhampton and
Toowoomba, to get the controlling bodies to cater for jump-
ing races, and because of the interest it is creating, the fol-
lowing, from a contributor, should be of interest:—
A hurdle race is generally a two miles race over light
batten hurdles, similar to “sheep yard hurdles.” Each panel
is a separate piece, with the end posts pointed and long
enough to be driven into the ground. These panels are
then lashed together to form the full “flight” or hurdle, and
with a short “wing” are generally erected on the “course
proper” or the flat race circle. After the race they are re-
moved and stacked handy.
The steeplechase country is generally a fenced in circle,
with stiff post and rail fences, and the last one brushed. On
“dowm the line courses” they have brush steeplechases over
all brushed fences, and hurdle race horses win many of these.
In fact, good hurdle race horses can usually jump safely
round all the steeplechase country except Flemington, where
the fences are a bit higher than elsewhere.
Many hurdle racers have won the Australian Steeple-
chase at Caulfield and came back to hurdle racing afterwards.
One Brisbane sporting writer recently mentioned
cruelty; but there is really less of that in hurdle racing than
on the flat. The horses travel slower, and in 50 per cent, of
the finishes the winner wins easily without any “riding out.”
Only occasionally is there a really “gruelling” set to.
Another false impression in Queensland is that hurdle
racers have to be of stouter build and have more stamina.


■ » ■■■■ I' ■■■■ m I "'- ■■■!!■ -■■■■—. ■■■■■■■n ■' mmmnmmm i !■■■ i ■■■«■ ■■ I ■»■ ■ i ■ ■■■ ;
A SENSATIONAL ACCIDENT.
The above photo is of a sensational accident in a Steeplechase at Moonee Valley in the ’po’s. The horse on the left, with the
rider still in the saddle, came down on its head and broke its neck, but both the horse and rider on the right escaped injury, and it is
said that the jockey quickly remounted and won the race, the remainder of the field being a long way behind at the time.


This is not so. Many of the best southern hurdlers are leggy
and lightly lleshed equines, and that brings me to the stock
suitable.
The bulk of hurdle race horses in the south are recruited
from the ranks of the second and third divisioners. And it
will be found that many which can’t stay out a fast-run six
lurlongs flat race will get two and three miles over hurdles,
in good time, and do it on comparatively light preparations.
One such that comes to mind was Nigel, a horse owned or
raced by Adam Skirving, which was not much good beyond
five furlongs. At six furlongs he would begin to u go up and
down in the one place,” yet he won big races over hurdles,
and later, steeplechase fences.
Of course, some very well bred horses are jumping
hurdles. Ihese are ones which don’t train on when tried at
two or three years old, but which show better form when
brought up at four and five years. A longer preparation i&
necessary for these "green” ones, whereas the flat race
recruits are often ready-made except for a bit of schooling.
A The batten hurdles do not bring many horses down.
Witha lot of pace on approaching the last they sometimes
I * 6 obstacle hard enough to lay it flat, but a rebounding
u die will sometimes topple a horse a complete somersault.
To come back to the origin of hurdlers—very few are
-nd C l a ni y b - 0d; m °i St ?^ them come fr om the flat race ranks,
and some come back and win in good flat race company
in the summer months when some southern clubs cut the
hurdle race out of their programmes. And just here it seems
necessary to mention that all jumpers in Victoria can qualify
or e jumpers flat races that are put on when some of the
tracks are a bit hard in midsummer. And early failures at
six lurlongs after a season over hurdles get a mile and a
quarter in good time, which seems to suggest that it makes
racehorses of sprinters which might have remained squibs
to the end of their careers. H
The old idea of training hurdle and steeplechase horses
with long strong work for some months is not now the rule.
Horses get the journeys on a preparation similar to that for
mile and a quarter handicaps. Schooling is done over
‘battens J es an( t later the ordinary unbrushed
One other phase is that hurdle races with their nine
stone minimum offer opportunities for jockeys who have got
or who are too heavy for flat race riding. And some southern
cross-country horsemen have “come back” among their flat
race fellow workers and held their own. Billy (Nigger)
Powell, who on Hymettus beat Wakeful a head in a Caulfield
Cup, was one, and Hughie Cairns, one of the best all-round
horsemen South, has won a lot of hurdle races.


If hurdle racing comes in Brisbane good cross-country
riders will get many rides in classical races where it is con-
sidered advisable to put up “live” weight instead of a light
hoy and lead, on a top weight or heavily-weighted horse.
Finally, hurdle racing in Brisbane should be a success.
With a little schooling any number of division horses would
soon be top notch hurdlers, and some would undoubtedly run
on to be decent racehorses. The races, as stated above can
be run on the course proper, and perhaps not the least attrac-
tive feature is that the punters get a longer run for their
money or more of the suspense that seems to he so
fascinating.


CHAPTER XVII.—HORSE SENSE.
Intelligence of the Horse—Some Remarkable Instances—
Ribuck, Master of Gates and Rarrages.
“Horse sense” is a term often used in a deprecatory
sense, but to the observant student of the equine it conveys
a different meaning.
Glass it as “horse sense” or “intelligence,” there is no
gainsaying the fact that the horse is possessed of a degree of
commonsense that it is not given credit for.
Take a polo pony, for instance. How many riders who
follow up this pastime owe their prestige to the work of his
mount? After a pony has had one or two seasons at the
game the rider has only to sit in the saddle and take the
opportunities to score which are presented by the intelligence
of his mount.
Then there is the camp horse; what more intelligence
■could be displayed than repeatedly happens on a cutting-out
camp. The horse props, wheels, turns, races at top speed
and slows down of its own accord, the rider taking a firm
grip of the saddle with his legs, and trusting more to his
mount to get the beast away than explicit faith in his own
horsemanship.
When the starting flag (a red one, at that) was used on
the racecourses throughout Australia, the owners and
trainers (particularly the latter) who took an interest in
their charges saw to it that they were properly coached in
this particular, and many of the horses were quicker at
getting the “knock down” than many of their pilots.
Starter Watson, of Victoria (and he had a wide experi-
ence), reckoned that some of the horses possessed more
brains than their riders. The quickest horse off the mark
by the flag process that the writer can call to mind was Dave
M Gullough’s Here’s Luck. Dave was a well-known publican
on the Castlereagh River, at Coonamble, and it would have
been practically impossible for a starter to cause that horse
to go unless the flag dropped. He had been well taught
and he was never left at the post. He won an important race
at the Hawkesbury in the early ’eighties.
And another instance of the commonsense of the horse
is illustrated in the case of the Queensland hunter and high
jumper, Donovan, At the home of his owner a tub was
always kept under the tap of the tank for the drinking
(purposes of Donovan, and it was a common occurrence for
1 tin


him to turn on the water and turn it off again, working the
key of the tank with his mouth and nose, when he required
a drink and it was not in the tub for him. Donovan was also
known to jump fences on his own account into paddocks in
which a good picking appealed to his taste.
But what is probably one of the most remarkable cases
of equine intelligence that has ever come under our notice
is that of the 17-year-old racehorse Ribuck, which was
recently trucked on a 300 miles journey to Rockton, Western.
Queensland, to spend his declining years in peace and con-
tentment in a well-grassed paddock.
One often hears a man pass the remark concerning
another of “What a character he is.” The remark can be
fittingly applied to Ribuck. He was a horse of unique
characteristics, which gained for him a notoriety that few
racehorses achieve outside the racecourse.
Bred in 1908 at Goomrith Station (not far from the
station to where he was sent to spend the last days of his-
life), by Mr. “Billy” Glasson, Ribuck spent his life in useful
service, even though he failed to gain anything more than
very ordinary success on the racecourse.
Bought cheaply as a yearling by Mr. J. D. (“Dug.”)
M‘Lean. a Queensland star of interstate and international
Rugby Union football fame, Ribuck immediately went under
the care of trainer “Pat” Ryan and except for a brief period
when he was raced on the unregistered courses, has been
under his care ever since. Ryan broke him in and trained
him, and also rode him in his earlier races in the south-
western districts. When he was riding as well as training.
Ryan had five rides on Ribuck and never suffered a defeat.
In those days Ryan resided at Roma, where Mr. M‘Lean kept
an hostelry. About 12 years ago, when Ryan visited Brisbane
with a team of Mr. horses, Ribuck was with them,
and he won a Trial Handicap at Albion Park, ridden by “Jock”
Riley.
Later when Ryan moved to Brisbane and settled here as
a public trainer, Ribuck came with him, but he never gained
much distinction on the racecourse afterwards. He had a
lot of pace, and in a qualified race at Eagle Farm led into the
straight by the proverbial “street,” but stopped to a walk at
the finish, and was beaten by Erungella. That was one of
his best performances, as a few days later Erungella won
the Q.T.G. Metropolitan Handicap over a mile and a half in
open company, in record time. Later Ribuck was tried on
the unregistered courses with but little success.
Ten years ago Ribuck was retired from the racecourse,
and from then “Pat” Ryan used him as a hack—the grey
carrying him to the tracks in the early mornings with his


racing team, and up and down the kennel tracks when he
was “clocking” gallops, and also on other errands—up to
within a few weeks of him being sent out west, when a severe
attack of strangles laid the old fellow out. His neck was
blistered, and on Ribuck’s recovery after a close call, Ryan
decided to pension him off, and arrangements were made
tor him to spend the last of his davs in comfort on a station
■close to where he was bred.
Ribuck (who was by Ruckmaster from Hannah) was
never known to indulge in play as other thoroughbreds do,
not even as a youngster. He always was a quiet, sleepy
horse, who gave little or no attention to, and cared less of,
what was going on about him; no matter how disturbing an
element it might be.
Jumping off his back “Pat” Ryan would throw the reins
over his neck, and leave him, and he would stand there for
hours, even in the street, where traffic was busy. In fact, Mr.
and Mrs. Ryan, and members of their stable staff, could do
practically anything with him, except in one respect. And
that one exception was that no one but “Pat” Ryan exercised
any influence on old Ribuck when he took it into his head to
invade the neighbors’ vegetable gardens.
There was not a gate in the Hendra district that Ribuck
could not open unless it was securely locked. Slip rail
barrages were just as easy to him. He would grip the cross
rails with his teeth and shift them to gain entrance if the
contents within took his fancy. He handled latches over
gates just as deftly. Once in,\old Ribuck made himself at
home in vegetable gardens, and refused to be shifted.
Womenfolk he treated with utter contempt, even when they
armed themselves with props. His was just an attitude of
1 m monarch of all I survey.” Yet he never terrorised the
womenfolk, nor displayed any nastiness even when props or
other weapons were brought to light, in launching an attack
to drive him off forbidden ground. Men folk were similarly
treated. As a “ziff” equine Ribuck had become “worldly”
wise, and he made laws for himself. To him possession was
nine of the law. The only master he recognised
was “Pat’ Ryan. “Pat” had to be brought on the scene
™ e ,T er on an invasion of the cabbage gardens.
Pat s call of Rluey (Ribuck’s nick-name) was suffi-
cient. It was the only law recognised by old Ribuck. He
would immediately leave the invaded ground and accomnanv
his master home. J
Ribuck’s depredations made it necessary for Ryan to
adopt methods —to keep Ribuck from leaving his own yard
hat would have been more befitting of a challenge to Hanco
the wizard of the handcuffs and locked boxes, than a horse!
straps around gates or rails of barriers were
nothing to old Ribuck. He cleverly unknotted the knotS


with his teeth. Even when the reins of the bridle were tied
in a knot round the palings a fence alongside of which ho
was photographed, they were unknotted when Pat Ryan
went out of sight, and the old fellow freed hirnself to ha\e
a pick at the luxuriantly green footpath below him.
Shortly after his retirement, Ribuck was selected for a
job on race days, but he lost it the first day he started on it
through exercising too much knowledge about the racing
business.
When the system of placing a non-competitive horse-
on the rails in fields of horses to be started for a race was
instituted some years ago Mr. Frank M'Gill (Q.T.C.
stipendiary steward) selected Ribuck as a likely horse to fill
the job. His master, “Pat” Ryan, was to get £1 a week for
the privilege of loaning his old pet for the purpose. Pat
agreed, but he forgot to whisper into the ears of intelligent
old Ribuck what was required of him, and his horse sense,
following the dictates of experience, got him the “sack,” and'
the loss of a £1 a week to “Pat.’
Mounted by a club official, Ribuck took his place on
the rails, for the express purpose of obviating crowding as
the barrier was released, but Ribuck was not told of the
arrangement, and when the starter released the barrier, and
said “Go,” Ribuck went too. If he had had his way he
would have made a bid to be with the leaders, but his rider
put the grip on his holt, and pulled him up. When they got
back Ribuck got the “sack.” “Pat” was a quid a week the
poorer, but he got its worth from the humor of the incident,
and old Ribuck got the greatest of kindness and the best of
tucker till the day he went to spend his last days in one of
the best pickings of the west.
Rut these were not’ the only respects in which Ribuck
showed himself a horse of knowledge. He knew for himself
when his shoes were getting old and worn out, and required
replacing. He could not tell his master, so when he con-
sidered new shoes were necessary he managed to aret out 0 f
the yard and then he went alone to Mr. Thurecht’s smithy,
some distance away. Ribuck has done such a thing
on many occasions during the last few years.
Mr. Thurecht in time got to know and under-
stand the intelligent ways of the old grey, and on
some of his visits fulfilled his requirements and sent him on
his way. Ribuck’s return home in new “irons” told “Pat”
of the wanderings of the old grey. He laughed and said
nothing, but paid Mr. Thurecht the “necessary.”
During the week preceding old Ribuck’s departure he
paid two visits to the smithy, but knowing the old fellow
was to be sent west he chased him home without shoeing
him. till he got Ryan’s sanction. “Pat” gave it. taking the
old grey with him. Old Ribuck went west in new boots.
A i i


Ribuck went west, never to return. “Pat'’ and Mrs.
Ryan felt keenly the absence after so many years of their
useful and intelligent old equine pet. The neighbors, too,
“missed” Ribuck, but at the same time were glad he was
gone. Still one lady said that she could speak on behalf of
the other neighbors and say that while they were glad the
old grey had departed for pastures new, they all loved him
for his horse sense, and were happy to know the old fellow
was to end his last days in ease and contentment.
The Australasian champion, Gloaming, is another horse
noted for his intelligence, as the following interesting story,
written hy Mrs. Helene Greenwood (wife of Mr. G. D. Green-
wood, owner of Gloaming) and published by the Melbourne
“Herald,” will show:—
“It is as common as it is exaggerated to say of any
admired person, Te is worth his weight in gold.’ Of
Gloaming, however, it may be said in sober truth that he
has earned for his owner and for his breeder, Mr. E. Clarke,
of Victoria, at least that, and possibly twice as much. The
actual weight in bullion of his winnings is 800 pounds.
“In Christchurch we do not think of him in terms of
money. Though he has been such a money-maker, it is for
his character and sense of humor that we all love him. Sense
of humor? I can hear my readers scoff, and ask each
other where a writer’s poetic license will lead next, but I
think I can show you before we finish the distance, if my
readers last so long, that the horse has intelligence far above
the ordinary.
“I recently read somewhere that there are very divided
opinions of experts on this matter of horse sense. I maintain
that the very use of the expression ‘horse sense’ indicates
that for many generations thinking people have been struck
with the ability of some horses at least to impress man with
his powers of reasoning.
“Gloaming is a person. He has as individual a character
as possible. It would be dangerous to make a generalisation
on horses, their habits, and customs, and expect Gloaming to
fall meekly into a given category. His likes and dislikes are
strong; he displays both affection and hatred; in at least one
instance I have known him to show a bored contempt. What
else can this mean?
“Once we had a boy who looked after the old horse—
oh, how he hates me to call him that, for he still feels as
frisky as a two-year-old—and this lad was not gifted with
the highest intelligence. He used to make mistakes which
irritated the lordly gentleman whose valet he was, and at
last we were forced by circumstances to let him go. ’ He got


another job, and sometime afterwards happened to return
to our stables on a visit. He went to Gloaming’s loose-box
and found the horse eating, his back turned to the visitor.
“ ’Ullo, Gloamin’, ’ow’s tricks?” the lad greeted cor-
dially. At the sound of the voice, associated with so many
annoyances, Gloaming looked round, and then deliberately
lay down at full length in his box, his back ostentatiously
turned to his unwelcome visitor. It was the method employed
in the best equine circles of saying ‘Not at home.’
“Many and many an hour I have talked to the dear old
chap, who apparently listened with the deepest intelligence.
He answers occasionally. I recall one occasion when his
absurd, almost human attitude made me and my husband
laugh aloud. He has moods of not wanting to enter into
human relationships, though his affection for four-footed
friends is such as to make him a sort of ‘clinging vine"
among animals. On this particular occasion he was turned
out in a paddock belonging to Mr. Mason, the trainer, who
has had him since the beginning of his career. We stopped
our car when we caught sight of him in the middle of the
paddock. My husband called out to him, but, instead of run-
ning up to pass the time of day or take the apples without
which we seldom visit him, he stood at gaze in the paddock
and called out something in reply we couldn’t catch. Every
day my husband called out he would reply, distant, reserved,
but polite, as became a horse of breeding. What was going
on in his queer mind we shall never know, but all he would
vouchsafe to us that day was to ‘speak when he was spoken
to.’
“He is very fond of his present boy—Bill Adams. I
don’t know whether it was before or after he won the Battle
of Waterloo that he came to us, but in some field of glory or
other Bill has learnt how to look after horses. Fond as he
is of Bill, however, I am certain that Gloaming chuckles now
over a trick he played the lad at Coogee. I can see a
reminiscent twinkle come into his eye when he looks at Bill.
It happened while Gloaming was having his sea-bath. Bill
in command. With dramatic suddenness the wicked old
horse put his head between his forelegs, and next second Bill
was doing a ‘sitting-standing-falling dive,’ coming up
spluttering with the surprise of it. Gloaming, having in this
fashion vindicated his youth and revenged himself for some
of the ‘old horse’ expressions he was forced to listen to, was
content to proceed with his bathe, having attended to Bill’s.
“When you mention ‘lndia’ to Gloaming he gets rest-
less. Thereby hangs a tale. He has heard of India, I believe,
and has good reasons for not wanting to go there. Some
time ago, when he had only just started to smash racing
records, Mr. Gove, who negotiated the sale of The Monk for
his brother in India on the day of the Caulfield Gup, and


GLOAMING AND HIG MATE,


thereby unwittingly made racing history and havoc with the
public simultaneously, was with us. A discussion was pro-
ceeding; it had reference to the sale of Gloaming, who at
that time had won only £20,000. We had no fixed intention
of selling him, but the mktter was in a conversational stage.
Gloaming was among those present, and was the most
interested listener. Presently talk ceased and the horse was
led away.
44 4 By George, there’s something wrong with him,’ some-
one exclaimed, and, sure enough, Gloaming was limping. It
knocked all talk of sale on the head. Mr. Gove may not have
felt very apprehensive of his prospective bargain, but we
were quite satisfied that a horse with the wit to 4 swing the
lead’ so cleverly and in so timely a fashion must reap the
reward of his brains. He had never limped before, and he
has never limped since. Isn’t that showing a decided sense
of humor?
44 Just before the race people in the grandstand noticed*
that Gloaming was 'playing up’ at the barrier. As it is his
custom to stand like a rock, we could not understand it,
until the explanation was made that he remembered his
former experience and feared a repetition.
44 We have proved that the old horse associates music
\*ith racing. He loves to come out and look round the
course and up to the grandstand while the band plays, and
he waits for the signal to start. Sometimes we take him to
the course when he is not going to race, so that he will not
excite himself the moment he comes to the paddock. We
are sure he knows race-days, perhaps because of the activity
about the stables. He is excited until 12 o'clock comes,
when he knows that racing is not for him that day. Im-
mediately he sobers down and becomes normal, accepting the
inevitable.
“Another thing. I am sure he knows he has won.
Perhaps, having made such a habit of it, winning 52 races
out of 62, or rather 61, since one was the unfortunate
Wellington non-starter, he takes winning for granted. Having
never in his life come worse than second, he cannot know
any of the pangs of disappointment the ordinary animal
-xperiences when it is among the “also-rans.”
“Much has been written about Gloaming’s friendships.
He abominates loneliness, and has a gift for affection. He
makes friends on his voyages, like many another traveller,
only to lose them on arrival. He postpones the inevitable
till the last moment, however, and is disconsolate at losing
his companions. Being such a seasoned voyager, he is
usually taken out first from the ship. Docilely he walks into
his box, nonchalantly settles himself for the hoist, and with
indifference finds his land legs on the pier. But woe to him
who leads him off without waiting for his pals. His docility


disappears. He whinnies and turns his head, protesting to
the universe that it isn’t fair.
“When he was a three-year-old he had a bad experience
■at Wellington in starting in the Challenge Stakes. They
were trying ropes at the barrier, instead of tapes, and owing
to carelessness the horse got entangled in them and could
not start. Indeed, his racing career might easily have been
finished before it had really begun, for he ran grave danger
of being strangled. He had then won a little less than
£12,000. Six years passed before he was asked to race from
that spot again.
“One ending to an Australian voyage recurs to me. He
had had sensational duels with Beauford, victory alternately
perching on his and Beauford’s banners. The New Zealand
public were intensely and patriotically interested and a crowd
■of over 2000 met the boat. Gloaming was landed first, and
led through the cheering people. He had travelled on that
occasion with Gupidon, and was annoyed at not being allowed
to say good-bye. He was aristocratically indifferent to the
demonstration in his honor, but amused the crowd greatly
by his shrill calls to his pal and his everlasting turning and
twisting to see if Gupidon was ashore. His language on that
occasion was unprintable.
“I wonder if he thinks, at the end of his nine years of
triumph, of the horses he has met, all of them with great
names. They have all been in the very brief spotlight that
falls upon winners, but where are most of them to-day ?
Poitrel, Getigne, Kennaquhair, Wollaroi, Greenstead, Sasanof,
Finland, Desert Gold, Beauford? Fine horses, darlings of
the public for a short year or so. No wonder we feel so
proud of our Gloaming, who still can meet the finest and give
a good account of himself. Of what other horse can it be
said, as of Gloaming, that he was absolutely stopped, while
the leader gained 20 lengths, and, despite that heartbreaking
handicap, that he ran into second place, breaking the record
for the distance, the winner, Razzle-Dazzle, breaking it also.
He has been described by competent men as one of the
speediest horses on record. ‘He is the perfect type,’ wrote
one expert, ‘built for speed and endurance. He stands nearly
16 hands, with marvellous power and intelligence. His
galloping is the perfection of rhythm and absolute regularity.’
“Gan anyone wonder that his appearance on a race-
course is the signal for an outburst of enthusiastic admiration
such as no horse can boast of? He loves applause like any
actor, and if he appears on Gup Day he will enjoy the fuss
thoroughly, as far as is consistent with his disappointment
at not being allowed to race once for the joint honor of
Victoria and New Zealand. For him I say a greeting to the
thousands of sporting, generous people who have shown such
pride and interest in the champion of champions.”


W, BOOTH’S MODERN HOME AND TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT AT ASCOT, BRISBANE.


CHAPTER XYIIL—STRANGE, RUT TRUE.
A Budget of Interesting Stories, Based on Fact.
Mr. W. Glasson, the well-known Queensland breeder
•and member of the Q.T.G. Committee recently wrote to the
* ‘Australasian” (Melbourne) as follows: —“Some time ago
J read with interest an article of yours regarding twin foals,
in which I think you said that Lady Bawn, the dam ol
Bachelor’s Double, was a twin. Personally I have never yet
reared a twin, but this year what seems to me to be a re-
markable instance has occurred among my mares. About
the end of May last the first heavy frost occurred at Mana-
pouri (on the Darling Downs), and Megine (a half-sister to
Stonemarten) slipped a foal; a few weeks ago she dropped
a fine filly foal that is doing well. These foals were by
Bachelor’s Persse, a grandson of Lady Bawn. Mr. Jack
McDougall tells me a similar case occurred in the Lyndhurst
stud, near Warwick, some years ago. Have you heard of
.any similar cases before? To me it seems an extraordinary
thing to happen, which is my reason for sending you particu-
lars of same.”
In reply, the “Australasian” turf scribe wrote as follows:
Abnormal births such as the above are extremely rare,
hut perhaps the most remarkable on record is that of a
hunter mare at Lord Middleton’s stud, Birdsall, Yorkshire.
This mare was on June 5, 1914, covered by Orzifs half
brother, Jovial, a son of Bay Ronald. On June 19 and 20
she was put to Grathorne by Donovan. On the following
January 9 she cast twins, and on May 23 produced a good
chestnut colt. This colt, judging from the date of birth,
could have been the result of either service. Jovial was a
bay and Grathorne a brown, but as each was an impure
dominant the colour of the foal does not help us at all in
determining the paternity. Another instance on record is
that at the late Leopold de Rothschild’s Southcourt stud, a
St. Friisquin mare prepared to foal in January or earlier,
making an ordinary preparation—running milk, etc. Then
all these symptoms passed away, and in April she foaled a
dead mummified foetus and a healthy filly foal, which was
afterwards trained. Another remarkable case was that of a
mare being covered, and then some time afterwards foaling
to her service of the previous year. At the Haras Punta Lara,
Argentina, Paid Up, an imported mare by St. Simon from
Settlement, by Bend Or, was covered on December 28 and


29, 1911, by Enero, a son of Old Man. The following June
her udder filled, and soon afterwards milk was running,
seemed a certainty that the mare would abort, but she was
kept very quiet and went her full time, although for more
than five months her udder was always more or less lull.
She foaled on November 27. First there came a healthy colt
(which later went into training), and then a dead, semi
rotten colt, about the size of a fox-terrier, but perfectly
formed in every way.
Coming nearer home, there was a very similar case in
New Zealand. Mr. J. G. Hay, of Bushy Park Hai Tin, New
Zealand, reported that the Trenton mare Ma Mie Rosette
was covered on September 17 and 18, 1914. In May 191o r
Mie came to milk and kept so until July. She foaled on
October 24, 1915, a dead colt, well grown, but in poor con-
dition. In taking away the afterbirth, Mr. Hay came across
another foal about the size of a terrier dog, in a very decayed
condition. The mare went 68 days over her time, and was
in splendid condition. She was at that time in her 20th
year and had slipped foals three times.
A good story is told of a happening in connection with
an important Q.T.C. meeting at Eagle Farm in 1886, and
which created much merriment in sporting circles when i
leaked out. It concerns some would-be “touts.”
A few hard-heads of the racing game of the time got
wind of a trial which was to take place on the track early
in the morning before the regular “touts” would arrive.
They made up their minds to be in the secrets of it, and
in the late hours of the night before they armed themselves
with a pack of cards and a couple of bottles of whisky, and
hied themselves off to Eagle Farm' to a sheltered spot in the
grandstand.
By the dim light of candles they played poker into the
wee sma’ hours of the morning, interspersing the game with
a nip of the best Scotch.
As the hours of the morning wore on first one and then
another dozed off, until they were all asleep.
One and all were dead to the world when, before the
dawn had really broken, the horses were despatched on
their trial.
The culies were aroused from their slumbers only by
the sounds of the horses galloping towards the finishing post..


Much to their disgust and amazement the trial had taken
place, and all they saw was the finish, and in their half-a-sleep
•state they were even unable to discern the identity of the
horses. They returned to town none the wiser, but tired
mid sadder men.
An occurrence at an unregistered meeting held in a
small farming district not far from Brisbane, less than two
years ago, provided a striking illustration of the lack ot
-control and supervision in the conduct of small bush meetings.
Prizes ranged from £1 to £5 and the local residents, who
promoted and conducted the meeting, regarded the fixture
•as a gala day for “Little Woopville,” and were overjoyed
when entries were received from various outside centres,
even Brisbane. With them it was a case of more the
merrier,” and the entrants were accepted irrespective of an
inquiry, and here it might be mentioned that among them
were a few fairly smart performers on the metropolitan
courses, which had been nominated under other names.
Under their new names the Woopville officials treated them
well, and they duly won, but with the prizes so small and
only’ a few pounds to be won from the two “imitation book-
makers” who fielded, the parties “in the know” of the
“ringtailers” got little out of their ramps, but it might be
■said that they perpetrated them more for the fun of it than
anything else. Those local race officials were too wrapt up
in the importance of getting their meeting through, and
dodging one another in their flurry and excitement of arrang-
ingminor details, to bother about “ringtails,” or any such
ramps, but the ringing-in of horses was but a small affair
to one joke which was put over on them, and which was
successfully carried out. Of six or seven entrants for one
of the races, only four went to the starting point. One of
the four was a “ring-in” and was backed for all the money—
a few pounds —that was available from the keystone odds
merchants. When the starter —with a flag—called on the
field to line up, a fifth horse, with a rider in colors, emerged
from the scrub, and walked in with the others. Much to the
surprise of the rider (a well-known Brisbane jockey) of the
“ringtail” which had been hacked, the horse which came
from the scrub led him all the way and won easily. The
parties behind the horse which had been backed had been
beaten at their own game, *nd lest they might cause trouble
for themselves if they opened their mouths they decided to
allow things to stand as they had panned out. The jockey
who rode the horse from the scrub went to the office and
collected the few pounds prize money, and it was handed
over without any questions. When the stories of all the


jokes which had been perpetrated on the Woopville officials*
were circulated afterwards they created much merriment,
and it was hinted that the controlling body of unregistered
racing might take action against owners or riders registered
by it for the parts they had played at the meeting, but as the
Woopville body was not affiliated, and its meeting was con-
ducted under Rafferty’s rules generally, no action was taken.
It was the last meeting this Woopville club ever held.
A great many devices were operated in the past to put
the public off backing a horse for a particular event —“or
getting in on the owner” before the stable money had been
invested. It was rather a common thing for a “smart’'
trainer to blindfold the public by causing the horse to go
lame, which is certainly the surest and quickest method of
lengthening a horse’s price, and the simple device of tying
strong black thread round the top of the hoof, immediately
under the overlapping hair, appealed as the most effective,
for, with the exception of causing the animal a certain amount
of discomfiture, no harm resulted other than causing the
horse to limp. One can easily imagine how it would feel to
have a tight bandage that would prevent the blood circulating
around the instep or calf, a procedure which would certainly
cause the one operated on thusly to do the “magpie hop,”
and so it was with the dumb animal, the animal’s feeling
being a secondary consideration with the trainer so long as
the desired end was achieved. Another rather risky pro-
cedure was resorted to when drastic methods to lengthen the
price were thought necessary. An interview took place with,
the blacksmith. The job of removing, refitting, replacing,
and shoeing horses for racing stables —a very lucrative
business in bygone times —and, by the same token, not to be
sneezed at now —was accepted by the “village smith” as a
mark of appreciation as to his ability and general competence.
It was often charged when a horse suddenly developed lame-
ness that “smithy could enlighten you,” etc. Whether
there was anything in the assertion must remain a moot
point, for it was marvellous how the “reported lame” horse
could come out and win. On one or two occasions artists
(some of them “bush”) were called in to obliterate natural
marks on horses to make their identification uncertain, and,,
with the judicious use of dyes, the necessary transformation
would be accomplished. Then, on other occasions—not
many—a red hot flat iron would do the trick to a nicety.
But all these arts have been discovered, and he would be
“a pretty fly customer who could ‘ring in’ a change nowa-
days.” Yes, old times have flown by, new ones have filtered
in;" old methods are worn out, and new ones have to be tried:
and there are some geniuses that for inventiveness could not


he surpassed, which keeps the various clubs, chairmen,
secretaries, and committees busy in endeavoring to circum-
vent them. And the world wags on.
The horse-owner, trainer, and punters for the stable
have many a time and oft been at their wits’ ends as to how
to circumvent punters “cruelling the market'’ before they
could get their money on, occasioning them to bring into
play all the arts and devices —and cunning—they were
possessed of. Several decades since, one horse-owner —who
was regarded as a “shrewdy” by the knowing ones —who
had “bottled up” his horse for the occasion, was anxious to
keep the fact that he was having a “go” quiet, so he decided
not to let the jockey know because he might give his mates
the office, and he hit upon what seemed to him a simple
plan, thus: “When you see me lift my hat and wipe my
forehead you are not to win,” he instructed the jockey.
“Right sir!” was the reply. But the owner had forgotten
that it was a hot day, and, having decided to go for a win,
got busy with the books and backed his horse for a large
amount at good odds. While thus engaged he had
temporarily forgotten the instructions to the jockey and had
lifted his hat to wipe the perspiration from his brow. The
jockey had watched and waited anxiously and had not missed
the performance, and then walked his horse up and down
preparatory to the start, quite assured that he was to ride
“dead.” A good start was effected and the owner anxiously
looked for his horse to be in a prominent position, but the
only thing he could see was that the jockey rode a particularly
had race, getting pocketed wherever possible, drawing back,
trying to get up on the inside, etc., and eventually finishing
well m the ruck. An explanation was sought as soon as the
rider was at liberty as to why he had ridden such a rotten
race, and the boss was flabbergasted when he received the
reply, “If you wanted me to win what the devil did you wipe
your forehead for?” He tried another idea on the next
occasion.
Fortune, or luck, or whatever term you care to apply,
plays some peculiar tricks, and often upsets many ingenious
plans that have the appearance of certainties. Here is a
ease in point. Over a decade since a horseowner went for
a coup on a fairly good performer which he had bottled up
for the occasion. The owner was considered one of the
most shrewd in the game, and had the name of not being
too particular in regard to methods employed to ensure
success in any venture he undertook. On the day the coup
w y as to come off he made assurance doubly sure that there
wmuld be no possibility of a miss-fire, and to that end
4 'deadened” every jockey to allow his nomination to win.


Everything in the garden appeared lovely and the purse-
strings were untied and the contents found their way inh>
the “bag” at a remunerative price, and, smiling to himselfi
he took up a position on the stand to witness the result. But
he had reckoned without the barrier tapes. The horses lined
up, the starter gave the necessary jerk, and away they went
to the word, “Go!’’ —all but one, and that one was his. It
had got tied up in the tapes and before it could be released
the rest of the field had got a move on to the tune of some
60 or 70 yards. But the owner took it philosophically,
recognising that it was “all in the game,” and found a con-
siderable amount of pleasure in watching the antics of the
jockeys who were one and all twisting round to see where
the “pea” was and to let it have a good run when the oppor-
tunity arrived. But the favorite did not come to light, and,
recognising that there was something wrong when the turn
had been reached, they sat down on their mounts and got
to business with a will, the race being one of the best and
most exciting finishes of the day. Though his losses were
heavy, the owner smilingly remarked as he retraced his
steps to the lawn: “Weil, it was worth a bit to watch those
hoys waiting for my horse to come up,” and he went on
whistling:—
“When I was a chicken,
As big as a hen,
0 then, 0 then!
My wife, she died,
And I laughed till I cried,
0 then, 0 then!
Because she’d never come back again.”
The term “flying the pigeon,” to those who are not
conversant with the ways of dabblers in racing, would have
no meaning, but to the initiated it brings back memories-
more of the long past than modern times, because, to a con-
siderable degree, this method of “taking the public down”
has almost become obsolete, not because of the difficulties
attaching to the successful carrying of it out, but because
of the newer methods of doping powders, hyperdermic
syringe, etc. It certainly is not on account of the man
biped’s’advancement, either, as it is contended that 75 per
cent, of the human race is ever anxious and always on the
alert to take the next man down if a chance of making a few
shillings presents itself. An incident, which occurred at
Eagle Farm many years ago, may serve to illustrate the fact
that the old adage, “The best laid plans of mice and men
gang off aglee,” has not lost any of its truism. To “fly the
pigeon” means that a horse may be weighted at, say, 9st. r
for a particular event. Prior to that event he is started in
a race similar in condition —same horses, approximately


same weights. He is not a “cutter” for the first event, hut
the jockey has his instructions to “try” the field, even to
running into a place. If reports are satisfactory the horse
will be a “trier” in the next race, and the stable goes for a
coup. A jockey is put up to the weight of about Bst., which
would compel the owner to make up the extra stone by dead
weight—lead generally being in use. The lead is put in a
convenient receptacle so that the jockey can handle it with
expedition. The horses do their preliminary which generally
consists of a couple of furlongs, but the “sure thing” covers
anything from one furlong to four. It is during this pre-
liminary that the “pigeon” takes flight. The “pigeon” is
represented in the extra stone. The jockey gets rid of the
weight by hanging it on a convenient rail or post, or, maybe,
some other means, and returns to the starting post 141bs.
lighter. When the race is finished he carries on till he
reaches the spot where the lead has to be picked up and
comes back to scale and weighs in all right. In the nineties,
a little brown horse, carrying 9st. odd, ran a good second
on the first day in a mile race, and he was meeting the
same horses, same weights, over a similar distance, on the
second day. Provided the “pigeon” could be successfully
flown it looked a certainty that the little brown horse would
win the next time. Everything went sweet, a prominent
racing man let into the joke, and a big coup was assured “if”
there was no accident. But, notwithstanding that the
pigeon was resting on a convenient post (where it shone
brightly), the “good thing” failed to even secure a place,
and owner, stable lads, and punter were left lamenting. They
bad not been cute enough to recollect that the course was
heavy on the first day, and that this particular brown horse
was good in heavy going, and that the track was in good
going order on the second day. Like many others, the
“flight” was a “dud.”
The individual who was responsible for the truism that
“racing is the sport of kings” must have had a taste of the
reverses that very often occur when the “certainty” is blown
out by an outsider which starts out on the 100 to 1 quote.
Publican Drouyn, of Sandgate, owned a half-draught horse
—at least everybody said he was half-bred—named Bowler
(described as by Banjaroo from Beautiful), and he started in a
City and Suburban handicap at Eagle Farm in the ’eighties.
A horse named Quicksilver was the favorite, and backers
had already allotted Bowler to the “also ran” division. But
the day before the race the weather took a peep in and by
the time the race started there was a considerable amount
of water on the course at the back, which certainly had not
been improved by the efforts of the horses competing in the
earlier events.


To make a long story short, the horses lined up, the
red and white flags were brought into requisition, and away
they went. “What’s that in front?” could be heard on all
sides, for that “in front” was leading the field at a merry
pace, sending up showers of muddy water at every stride,
and giving jockeys and horses in its wake a right royal time.
“He’ll win all the way!” was the confidently expressed
opinion given in no uncertain tone.
“Wait a bit till he rides Quicksilver!” would burst forth
from someone who had punted unwisely.
But Bowler —for it was Bowler, and many had not the
slightest idea that such a horse was in the race —increased
his lead and won in a canter. Result: very few happy faces,
but innumerable depleted pockets. Had the day been fine
no doubt Quicksilver would have justified the confidence
reposed in him, as he afterwards won both Tattersall’s and
Brisbane Gup. Such is the uncertainty of racing.
A well-known Queensland trainer, who does not want
his identity disclosed, and who, for the purpose of telling
our story we will call Dick, tells a good story against himsell
and his innocence of the wiles of racing affairs when he
started on his career as a rider. He was apprenticed to a
leading trainer in a country district, and was little more than
i i years of age when he got his first ride in a race. An
owner engaged him to ride a horse in a race, and little Dick
was- delighted because he considered all he had to do was to
go to the post and ride a good race and win easily. Dick's
boyish hopes and ambitions got a rude shock when :the
owner legged him into the saddle and told him that another
horse in the race —which we will call Jumbo —looked a good
thing, and that he (Dick) was not to win at any costs, if
he found that Jumbo was in a winning position when the
straight was reached. Well, Jumbo landed into the straight
just ahead of Dick’s mount, who was full of running and
gaining at every stride. Dick felt he must surely beat him
and a fear crept over him of what the consequences might
be. He knew the owner well, and not being anxious to fall
foul of him, he carried out his instructions. Jumbo won.
Dick, however, had overlooked the fact that there were
stewards watching the race. He had not got out of the saddle
before he and the owner got an invitation into the stewards’
room. The owner gave evidence that he had backed Jumbo
and saved on his own horse, because he thought he had little
chance of beating Jumbo. When the stewards asked “Dick”
if he had done his best to win he “let the cat out of tine
bag.” “I was trying to win till I saw Jumbo winning, and I
did not try then because Mr. told me not to beat
Jumbo,” he told the stewards quite innocently. Mr.


was a big man in that district and a personal friend of the
stewards, and no action was taken beyond one of the
stewards who considered “Dick’s” straightforwardness and
innocence a source of amusement hunting him out of the
room.
Many a sport has proved the materialistic fact about the
quotation, “Seek and ye shall find,” and one of Brisbane’s
real sports—a good one, both in name and actions —in the
person of the late “Did” Harris —had it unruly impressed on
him on one occasion. Jack Burke, the Irish pugilist, was
looking for someone’s scalp while on a visit to Brisbane many
years ago, and gave an exhibition in the theatre. “Did”
who, by the way, was no chicken, and easy going, was the
butt for several who liked to show off and were prepared to
have “a cut,” in sporting parlance, if exception were taken
to it. Jack Dowridge, known as “The Black Diamond,” gave
lessons and “Did” took a course, becoming fairly proficient
in the “manly art,” which acted as a curb on the ribald
spirits. He was rather impressed with he prowess and
willingly consented to a “friendly” spar with the redoubtable
Irish champion. It duly came off to an admiring audience.
The Irish lad was out to convince Brisbane fans that he
could deliver the goods, and deliver them'he did, very much
to “Bid’s” discomfiture, as the latter had to hawk a lovely
“blue plum” about for about a fortnight, the only consolation
that it gave him being the fact that he could truthfully state
that he had had a “go” with a real champion.
The Molong (N.S.W.) Racing Club held a meeting in
the late ’seventies, and nominations were advertised for in
the outlying districts. The prizes in those days were con-
sidered exceptional if £SO were allotted to the first horse in
the principal race of the day, and ,as Molong was a little
out-of-the-way and rather difficult of access to walk trained
horses on account of the mountainous country, the nomina-
tions were almost wholly confined to the immediate district.
There were two nominations which proved the exception—
a bay horse and a spotted chestnut—owned by Angus MThee.
Speculation was spirited on the “cup,” and local publican
Wynne’s nomination ruled the quotations. With two days to
go, MThee's nominations had not put in an appearance.
But just on sundown that afternoon a gaunt, unkempt, sandy-
bearded wayback rode a stumpy-tailed chestnut, and led a
bay packhorse up to the door of the pub (Wynne’s). With
apparent difficulty he succeeded in alighting from the saddle,
and immediately inquired if there was accommodation to be
had. He was obligingly met with an affirmative reply, and,
as is usual in countrv places, a conversation struck up, when


he vouchsafed the information that he happened along with
his two horses for the races, mentioning for which events
they had been nominated. The horses cut a sorry figure,
as they had been allowed to roll in the soft black soil which
abounded in the district, and no attempt had been made to
take it off. The chances of these two horses winning were
considered below par, Angus being subjected to considerable
banter, and several fair wagers were offered and accepted
about them. It is said “He who laughs last laughs longest”
and Angus must have had this in mind. Race day came, and
all Molong, the inhabitants of which consisted mostly of near
and dear relations, turned out to see the local horses scoop
the pool; but their calculations were rudely upset. Mac's
bay won the Maiden, in sporting parlance, in “a walk,” a
farmer remarking, “I don’t think he’s no maiden.” All
horses had saddled up for the Gup, and were about to do
their preliminaries, but there was no appearance of the
spotted chestnut, though the rider of the bay asserted that
he would be there and asked the committee "to delay a few
minutes. Just then a cloud of dust was seen approaching,
which was caused by Angus and his family all safely aboard
a spring cart, and the chestnut harnessed up in the shafts,
travelling for aIL he was worth. Angus pulled up with a
jerk opposite the scales, jumped out, yanked the half-dozen
youngsters out, the wife getting out on her own, and in less
time than it takes to tell, had the horse saddled and weighed
out, and the jockey up. Then he unhitched a lump of a grey
horse that had been tethered behind the cart and mounted
him. The horses lined up, and at the word “off,” The Gem
—for that was the horse’s name—went to the front with
wide open mouth, as the jockey had taken a double pull on
him. Angus meanwhile had made a bee-line for the nearest
point to warn the rider to “take hould of ’im!” This advice
was tendered at two other points which Angus succeeded in
reaching by a due application of the whip before the horses
bad passed. The instructions w T ere really wasted as the
jockey had maintained his two-double pull from the start
and had his head well back on the horses’ rump to try and
gain another ounce. The Gem won by a hundred yards, one
of the layers of odds being heard to remark, “If it had been
a 12 hours’ go he w T ould have had nine to spare.” Angus
and the family returned to town with a fair amount of the
superfluous cash of the Molongites, while the latter
unanimously came to the conclusion that there were more
tricks in the trade than they wot of.
Instances of horses, bought cheaply in guineas, turning
out fair performers are numerous, but it is not often we
hear of a horse bought for as cheaply as 35/- pulling off a


Petting coup. The well-known unregistered Brisbane trainer,
J. F. Stone, however, had such a happy experience last year.
About seven years ago there was running in a paddock
& yellow bay gelding, of whom his breeder had hopes
of gaining big honors on the turf and fixed his value at
200 guineas. As time went on the gelding, then six years
old, was an extra good looking sort still unbroken. A certain
Brisbane sportsman sent his trainer to buy a couple of horses
of the Ninyas breed, and he selected two, a gelding and a
mare, the gelding, which the late Mr. John Finnie had such
a good opinion of being one of them, and he offered Mr.
Finnie 70 guineas for him, and after a lot of misgiving on
the part of Mr. Finnie the gelding, by Ninyas from Molly
Fear, changed hands.
On his arrival in Brisbane, the gelding proved to be
rather an outlaw and bucked everybody that tried to ride
him, and finally jumped the gate to freedom and bolted along
the road, only to come to grief on the tram lines, and he
badly injured his shoulder. However, he was treated to a
spell of 15 months, and then given to a prominent horse-
trainer. After about six months’ training he was nominated
at a country meeting some 40 miles from Brisbane, and the
owner went down to see him run in a half mile race. He ran
so badly (a furlong last) that the owner decided the horse
was not worth his train fare home and left him to the trainer
to do what he liked with him. The trainer gave him to a
Coorparoo butcher to settle a “small” debt, and the butcher
promptly broke him into harness and used him in the
butcher’s cart for about eight or nine months. At about
this time the State butcheries started to operate, and the
Coorparoo butcher struck hard times and finally the horse
was sold by the Public Curator to a local horse-breaker. The
latter soon tired of him on account of his bad habits, as the
horse never settled down to the saddle and would buck almost
every time the saddle was put on him. He decided to get
rid of him at any price and so the yellow bay gelding was
put in James’ saleyards one Saturday morning looking very
much in need of a feed. “He has breeding in him,” an-
nounced the auctioneer, as the gelding was put under the
hammer. “He is by Ninyas from Molly Dear. Now what am
I offered?” “A quid,” called one of the gathering. Then in
small bids the call went to 35/-, and at that price Jack Stone
became the owner of the gelding.
The horse was left in the sale yards till the Sunday
morning, and when bringing him home he met the sportsman
who originally bought him from the breeder, and he re-
cognised the old horse, and being a friend of Stone’s said,
i rrr


“Whatever you do, don’t try to race him, because besides-
being about 12 years old, he is a cripple and has no idea of
galloping.”
But Stone said he only wanted him for a hack. After
he had about a week’s feed, Stone put the saddle on him to»
lead one of his racehorses walking exercise. The gelding
objected strongly and not only refused to go out of the yard,
but tried to get rid of him per medium of a couple of real
good bucks. Being unsuccessful in his efforts to get rid
of his rider, he eventually went on with his work and never
showed any more signs of his bad temper for a couple of
months, till one morning at the racecourse he threw a lad
practically over a fence.
After about three months’ exercise and good feed, the
gelding showed signs of pace and Stone decided to give him
a good try out, much to the amusement of his friends, and
he was nicknamed many times. However, Stone was not
to be denied, and when the gelding ran a couple of smart
gallops he decided to start him in a race.
Then came the time for nomination, and a name had
to be found for the gelding. Just about that time the dis-
covery of King Tutankhamen’s tomb was very much in the
public eye, and Stone thought Tutankhamen' a good name
for his steed. But when the handicapper (Mr. Lawrence)
saw the name on the nomination lorm his sympathy went
out to the racing public and the bookmakers, if they had
to pronounce such a name, and after a conference
Besurrected was the name decided on, and as such he raced.
Of course, the gelding’s reputation always gave Stone a bit
of trouble with the jockeys as they were always a bit shy of
him, and he was a great joke amongst the officials at Kedrom
One official, who has the job of inspecting the horses’ racing
plates before going on to the racing track, invariably called
out, “Whoa butcher” when Besurrected came along for in-
spection. His first fault was at the barrier and he wouldn't
leave until the other horses were well on their way, and
then one day he left with the field and ran a creditable race,
and then Stone had great hopes of his winning at least one
race with him.
In the meantime he had got very quiet and docile, and
one day a lady friend living out Belmont way lost her pony
and came to see if Stone could lend her a hack to look for
her pony, and was told the only horse he had to lend was
Resurrected, and he was not a reliable lady’s hack. The
lady’s reply was, “Oh, I can manage him all right;” so away
went Resurrected as a lady’s hack, but only for about five
minutes, for a little while afterwards the old horse came
cantering home riderless. The result was that the lady had


ten days in the hospital. Snip (as lie Is called) is particular;
and the stable boy had a way of coming off over his ears five
or six times a few months ago.
On Monday, September 8, there was a weak field in the
Maiden Handicap at Kedron Park, and Stone decided to back
Resurrected for a decent win and secured as much as 7 to 1
about his chance. Resurrected did the rest. He jumped
cut in front and won comfortably, and Stone landed a decent
coup—£4s prize money and a substantial amount in bets.
Although he may not win another race, Resurrected has
proved a great bargain and proves an old adage: “He who
laughs last, laughs longest.”
Another cheap horse was X.-Ray, the winner of
numerous races in the sister State, and who ran third in
Sydney Gup. Except to a few old timers it will be news to
followers of racing that X.-Ray was sold out of a pound yard
at Barcaldine (Queensland) for something under 30/-, and
Johnny McLaughlin was the auctioneer who was engaged to
carry out the selling of him. The highest bid he could raise,
it is understood, was 27/-, and he had to knock him down
to the bidder. X.-Ray proved a veritable gold mine.
Being “pigeon-toed” is a deformity in a thoroughbred
intended for racing, unforgivable by the majority of owners
and trainers. Yet there are on record instances of astute
judges persevering with horses of that description. One
actually named Pigeontoe showed the late “Jimmy” Wilson,
of Bonny Yale (Victoria), sufficiently encouraging track form
for him to start the horse in a Melbourne Gup, for which he
had considerable backing, but it didn’t get among the stake
money. About 16 years ago the now Sydney “pony” trainer,
J. Stewart, won a lot of races around Gootamundra, Wagga,
Wyalong, and Gowra, on a very pigeon-toed gelding, Heat
Wave, for *Mr. Duncan McGansh, a Young district squatter.
More recently, the late Mr. J. L. Gushing, of Gunnedah
(whose death occurred recently) raced a brown gelding,
Cobweb, by Nobleman—Spider, with success on northern
and north-western N.S.W. courses. Cobweb’s off foreleg
was badly twisted, but he could “sprint some.” He broke his
straight foreleg in an accident at Canterbury Park, and was
destroyed. The St. Simon sire, Charlemagne 11., who came
to N.S.W. via New Zealand, had a twisted near foreleg,
possibly the outcome of splitting his pastern in the first race,
the Coventry Stakes, won by Traquair. At Inglis’s in 1923*
buyers looked askance at the Sir Dighton—Lanceretto filly,
Princess Dighton, so pigeon-toed was she. Poultry-farmer-
trainer George Carr secured her for 60 guineas, and her
Gimcrack Stakes victory netted him a stake of £2089. Not


so long ago, the well-known Sydney trainer, Mr. Frank
Marsden took a chance and paid 190 guineas for a pigeon-
toed colt, by The Welkin from Tadanga, one of Adelaide’s
smartest sprinters. Marsden recalled that the walking-down-
hill action of his old favorite charge, the Queensland owned
horse, Gagou (Metropolitan and Brisbane Cup winner), was
seemingly pigeon-toed, but it was attributable to his being
a big-bodied and short-legged horse. Gagou walked “bandy”
to make sure of his footing, on every slope. In the trotting
world, one of the best performers in the stable of the young
Sydney trainer, J. McMillan, Honest Wood (by Honest Huon) r
is distinctly pigeon-toed.
Present day horsemen are, in the majority, of the
opinion that the “brumby” or wild horse, will not savage—
i.e, attack one. One writer, in giving his experiences to a
newspaper in Queensland, could instance only one case in
which he had seen a wild entire “savage,” and gives the
Bogun as the place of happening. So far as the experience
ot the writer goes, and it dates back to the early ’sixties, the
savage instinct is fairly well developed in the “brumby.” In
1868, when about 180 miles down the Lachlan River (New
South Wales), with tank-sinkers, the surrounding country
was over-run with wild horses, and good money was being
made by selling the hair from the mane and tails, besides
getting 2/6 per head for slaughtering them. Some beautiful
upstanding horses—both draught and saddle —met their
doom at the hands of crack marksmen, but no one in the
camp cared about riding a horse out unless accompanied by
a good rifle, for the wild ones made no bones about charging
you—most of them being entires —more particularly if you
were mounted on a mare, and several members of the camp
had close calls on more than one occasion, their various
mounts having too much pace for the opposing force. Then,
in the early ’seventies, in Gulgong (N.S.W.) we used to buy
“brumbies” for 2/6 at the sale yard, mainly got from the
Tallewang Scrub, Reedy Greek, and the intervening country
between there and Nudgee, and many a time and oft have I
had to climb a fence in haste to escape being savaged by the
horses thus purchased.
Later still —about ’7B—l purchased an aged pony mare
at Dubho, run in from Eulomogo, for 10/-, and she was a
“daisy.” I kept a clothes prop handy, and on two occasions
knocked her down when attempting to savage me. You could
ride her any time of the day and she would try to unseat you
until she found it impossible, then an enjoyable time could be
had, for she was a good hack; but jump off for ten minutes
and you would have to go through the first performance, and
it would be repeated several times in the day if you had to


vacate the saddle for a short space of time. On Goongoola
Station, Queensland, just before it was sold to Armstrong
to be turned into a sheep run, some stock of that good old
sire, Melbourne, were as savage as it would be possible to
dig up; in fact, I saw one colt which had just been handled
and hoppled, kick backwards from one side of the stockyard
to the other, at the blackboy who was breaking him in.
On the Two-Mile, just outside of Grenfell, I carted
washdirt to Campbell and Ned Gee’s puddling machines, and
drove a horse belonging to the latter, which was termed a
man-eater. That horse came from the bush in that quarter.
H broke away one day with some of the harness on, and two
men on horseback were asked to stop it. They tried to do so,
but were very pleased to desist without being told, for it
would have savaged both had they not got out of the way.
“Never trust a horse too far” is a good motto to paste in your
hat if you are employed amongst them, whether they come
from a first-class stud or of mongrel origin.
Innumerable are the names given to horses at small
race meetings, more especially a couple of decades since.
A hastily constructed sapling and bow-shed served as the
“grand-stand,” and the meagre accommodation thus pro-
vided was eagerly sought and paid for by the lads who gave
their girls a treat by a day’s outing at the races. Sweeps—
rarely ever more than a bob —were freely indulged in on
every race, and when the local hurry scurry (a bridle
generally being the prize) was run, practically all the prads
that could get a move on were nominated—and named. On
one of these occasions—and this was no exception—one of
the ladies drew a horse in the sweep on the “scurry,” which
was named “Hairy Legs.” Now, “Hairy Legs” was of a half-
draught breed, being big-boned with plenty of hair, thus
the name “Hairy Legs.” The stand was filled to over-flowing
with both sexes, and admirers were ready to urge on the
respective horses running in the interests of the gentler ones
of their choice. The horses lined up, and various were the
queries, “Oh, where’s my horse, I can’t see him?” and so
forth. Now, “Hairy Legs” was pretty slippery for about 300'
yards, and good at the take off. The young lady who was
interested in “Hairy Legs” to the extent of the sweep ticket,
and being aware of its speed, was naturally excited. At the
word “off” “Hairy Legs” got out in front and set the field a
merry pace. This added to the fair one’s excitement, and
she began jumping up and down, singing out with no un-
certain voice that sbe bad “Hairy Legs,” and she was so*
persistent in the assertion that her “young man” became
quite perturbed. Everybody was smiling broadly, and he
could not stand it any longer. Going up close to her he got


her to listen to these few words: “Ethel, for heaven’s sake
keep quiet. If you have ‘hairy legs’ don’t let everybody
know.” This, coupled with the fact that “Hairy had
fallen in the ruck, had the desired effect, and with a withering
look at her admirer, she hurriedly left the stand. “Hairy
Legs” did not win.
In 1859 three horses were shipped from Adelaide by
the steamer Admella, bound for Melbourne. The Barber
and Shamrock were owned by Mr. W. A. Filgate and Jupiter
by Messrs. Hurdle and George Fisher, who were passengers
by the vessel. Off the South Australian coast the Admella
struck a rock and broke in two, and among those who lost
their lives were Mr. Geo. Fisher and the horse Jupiter. The
Barber (who was being sent to Melbourne to run in the
Champion Stakes) and Shamrock both swam ashore, but
when Shamrock was found he had a leg broken and had to
be destroyed. After a ten days’ search The Barber was
found in the scrub near Mount Gambier. He was little the
worse for his experience and he was duly landed in Mel-
bourne to compete in the Champion Stakes, but he made no
show. The wreck of the Admella was the subject of one
of Adam Lindsay Gordon’s poems.
Many and peculiar are the happenings that befall most
rnckeys who follow the call of the turf. Jimmy Waddell,
who was under old Jimmy Steele, one of Queensland’s best
trainers in his day, for a considerable tim,e always
has a good word to say for “Old Jimmie” as he was termed.
A man who knew the horse and his ways, and who ministered
to them better than the average mother could her babe, a
good employer but who exacted obedience and work when
necessary, and one who began at the right end when tutoring
a lad to handle his mount. “Use your head, have confidence,
treat your horse kindly, watch for every opening but don’t
be too eager, and you will succeed,” was his advice to the
lad fortunate enough to be under his control, and they never
had occasion to regret taking the instructions so tendered to
their heart and carrying them out in their entirety. It was
due to this teaching that Jimmy Waddell, who now runs a
nice little mixed business in Ruthven Street, Toowoomba, is
enabled to recount his first adventure of any note. Over 20
years ago he was riding Mark Tapley in a race on the Dalby
course, seven or eight others starting. Just after leaving the
barrier the girth broke, causing the saddle to come and go
up and down the horse's back, but he gripped it tightly
between his thighs, and hung on to the cloth with his hand.
About three furlongs from home, he lost the saddle, which
dangled between the horse’s forelegs, being held by the


martingale. Jimmy kept his head and rode bareback for all
he was worth, winning a close race front Lithurgy, ridden by
Enie Enser, and great was the ovation he received when he
returned to the scale. On another occasion, at Roma, a
horse named New Chum, ridden by Charley M‘Growdie, came
down, and Waddell’s mount just missed toppling over and
unseating its rider, but ran third. At Ascot he rode Melody,
when he fell in a race which was won by Phillatus, Orange
Skin falling over him; the latter horse was owned by J.
Matthews. He was knocked unconscious for a while, but
received no other injury. The fall did not interfere with
his riding Brazen Girl in the next race, though he was a bit
dazed at the start, and landed the race after a good finish.
He also had the rare experience of riding Minster Belle in
the Flying Handicap at Clifford Park, Toowoomba, in which
four horses dead-heated for first place, the horses being
Cornet, Blucher, Lord Roseberry. and Minster Belle, but in
the run off Minster Belle proved the goods. He was also
engaged to ride a well-known black mare at the creek, about
two decades since, and she was owned by one who had
numerous business interests. His instructions were not to
push her, but to keep well up in the rear. He followed the
instructions to the letter, and they evidently suited the mare
to a “T,” as at the finish, to use a sporting phrase, “she went
through them like a dose of medicine.” But it was medicine
that the owner and connections did not like, and he did not
get another opportunity to ride “stiff” afterwards. The libel
law prevents our mentioning any names.
How often do we poor mortals bewail our fate and
consider ourselves harshly treated because we are unable to
dig ourselves out of the rut that we have been plodding along
intermittently? But there are always exceptions to the rule,
and the following incident is a case in point:—Some years
hack, when Sweet Nell won the Caulfield Gup, one of Mel-
bourne’s rising bookmakers was accosted by the mare’s
owner and asked whether he was doing any business on the
Cup. “Daylight,” we’ll give him that sobriquet, replied that
he had not yet commenced business but would try and
accommodate him. “Well,” said Sweet Nell’s owner, “my
trainer has told me that I ought to back the mare for the
Caulfield Cup.” Daylight replied, “All right, I will lay you
£20.000 to £IOOO if you will agree to say nothing about it
till the night before the race.” The bargain was made and
the bookmaker immediately got in touch with all his agents
in the different States, securing good prices about the mare’s
chances. The compact was strictly adhered to and “Day-
light.” besides paying the owner the £20,000, scooped in
£BO,OOO for himself, notwithstanding that he laid a con-


•siderahle amount against the mare at 8 to 1, ana the win
established him as one of the giant Leviathans of the Aus-
tralian turf.
Another case was that of a Brisbane bookmaker who
delved in but a small way. He happened to be at a political
meeting one night, arid one of the speakers, for whom he
had a great regard, made the remark, “A man’s a fool not
to take a chance.” The remark so impressed him that he
adopted it on the next fielding day. He now asserts that it
was the best thing he ever did as he went ahead rapidly and
has not since looked back.
Some years ago when the leading club of one ol the
principal country racing centres of Queensland was passing
through a bad time, not financially, but on account of lack
of support, its committee was taken to task on the ground
that it was not grappling with the situation in a manner
that would gain the support of horseowners. The turf
writer of the leading paper of the town took an active part
in the criticism of the club, alleged lackadaisical methods,
and created considerable annoyance to the committeemen
and the secretary, but much amusement for those who were
in agitation for the committee to bestir themselves, when
he wrote that the position of the club could be summed up
in three well-known songs :
“Out on the rocks when the tide is low,”
“Asleep in the deep,”
“When the sea gives up its dead.”
He pointed out that its position at the time was “out
■on the rocks when the tide was low,” and unless it livened
up its position months hence would he “asleep in the deep,”
and if it continued as it was going it would be a case of
“when the sea gives up its dead.”
When the secretary of the club met the writer in the
town shortly afterwards, he was indulging in a veritable
tongue-thrashing of the writer when a prominent local
sportsman interrupted him with “So it is on the rocks and
ail the dreadnoughts of England would not pull it off the
way it is going.”
That was enough for the secretary. The article was
enough to galvanise the committee into action, for it in-
creased the prize money, and that club to-day is again getting
goc d support and is in a flourishing condition.
There has been considerable money lost in wagers and
side bets on the Queensland turf in earlier days, causing
many heartburnings, and undoubtedly there will be much
“liquid asset” go the same way in the future. Probably the
most notable stake ever raced for in Queensland was that
when Finnegan, who was owned by Messrs. Smith and


Maines, and ridden by Mick Kane, was matched against Bally
for £4BOO, which was decided at Herberton, North Queens-
land, in 1885, and won by Finnegan. Another race in which
Finnegan was successful was when he beat Gadda in a
match in the same locality, for £5OO aside. Finnegan proved
a regular bonanza for his owners and was undoubtedly the
champion of the North in those days. But Herberton has
lost a considerable amount of the glamor that surrounded
it in the ’eighties, as it is now hut a mediocre tin-mining
centre, situate some 30 odd miles from Mareeba, on the
branch line off the Ghillagoe railway. Ye gods! one would
have a trying time endeavoring to get even 500 shillings
together to clinch a horse race there in the present decade,
and as for £4BO0 —why the old proverb about the camel and
the eye of a needle would have a better chance of being
exploded.
To the uninitiated the fact that a horse which was 15
hands 1 inch high was allowed to start in $ 14 ? Jiands
£ inches or under event, and eventually won the prize and
duly collected might present itself as a knotty paradox. But
the old adage, “Where there’s a will there’s a way” is a
very true one. The horse in question was nominated for the
event, a measurement stick fixed up, and it was taught to
bend itself to go under the stick without touching, thereby
fulfilling the conditions—l 4.2 or under. Of course, the
veriest mug could see that the horse had been trained to
bend, but the stewards were blind in one eye and evidently
closed the other when the measuring was done. Needless
to say, the owner was a “near” and “dear” friend of those
concerned in the race meeting.
Although many people are under the impression that
the Melbourne Gup, in addition to being the richest race
associated with* the Australian turf, is also the oldest of
Australia’s most important races, hut such is not the case.
The Victorian Derby was first run in 1855, the Australian
Champion Stakes and the Victorian St. Leger in 1859, the
South Australian Derby in 1860, and the Melbourne Gup in
1861. Then came the Australian Gup in 1863, the
Launceston Gup and A.J.C. Derby in 1865, and the A.J.G.
St. Leger, Sydney Gup, Metropolitan Handicap and
Champagne Stakes and Brisbane Gup in 1866, and Queens-
land Derby in 1868.
4
A notable happening that was associated with the well-
known Brisbane trainer Billy Booth’s apprenticeship with-
John Stone was his success in the late ’eighties on Justice
in a race at Albion Park when that horse returned a dividend;


-of £154/7/- for each 10/- invested. It still stands, we
believe, as the biggest dividend ever paid on a racecourse
in Brisbane.
One of the mementoes of his long and successful career
as a trainer, Mr. Walter Hickenbotham, who retired a few
years ago, retains is a locket made of hairs from the mighty
Oarbine, whom he trained and enclosed in it is a replica ol
a horseshoe won by another famous Melbourne Gup winner,
Newhaven, which he also trained. Mr. Hickenbotham also
has one of the original shoes worn by Newhaven in his races.
It is a somewhat remarkable coincidence that, although
Queensland has produced innumerable champions in most
classes of sport, the exception is in the boxing arena, the
only real champion in that sport being provided by Ipswich
(modern Athens), which boasts the greater number ol
adherents to the Christian faith, and the doctrine of “If a
man smite thee on the left cheek turn to him .'the rignt.
In the ’eighties, in the lightweight division, George
Dawson stood out on his own, having badly defeated
•“Little Georgie” Powell in Brisbane, and afterwards making
things merry for both Murphy and Griffo in Sydney. The
latter was the idol of fighting fans in Sydney, and even to
this day is considered to have had no equal at his weight
either in Australia or oversea. Those who knew both Les
Darcy and Griffo declared that they were born fighters.
Paddy Slavin was tried out, but failed in his match with
Fitzsimmons, though he was not born in Queensland. Dick
Barker, Queensland native, was thought to have a chance to
gain championship honors, but, notwithstanding his great
reach, weight, and length—for he touched the 6 feet 11 inches
mark in stockinged feet at the A.U.S.N. Wharf in ’93, and
weighed between 15 to 17 stone —he was unable to prove
his worth in the hempen ring. Fighters are not made; it is
horn in them, and all the tuition in the world will not
strengthen the backbone or make a man lion-hearted.
George Dawson still retains the honor of being the only
champion produced in Queensland, perhaps with the ex-
ception of Jerry Jerome, and, from appearances, is likely to
retain that honor for some considerable time.
Between 1872 and 1892, Tom Hales, one of the most
famous of Australian riders, had 1645 mounts for 490 wins,
826 second and 190 thirds, and £166,770 in prize money.
Racing at Eagle Farm during the 61 years the course
has been in existence appears’ to have been singularly free
from serious accidents involving loss of life, for as far as


we can ascertain, jockeys killed while riding ia
races number only eight. They were —White, ,1.
Gray, P. Strickland, Jack Rogers, L. Phillips, J.
Fleming, Jimmy Tucker, and A. McGrimmon, the last
named four all being promising young apprentices.
Of course, there were several minor accidents which it is
almost impossible to escape. The first serious one recorded
was when Sarabanda fell and her rider, Dick Lang, had a
close call on that occasion, necessitating a long confinement
in the hospital. He donned the breeches again but had lost
a considerable amount of nerve and was never the same
Dick as before the accident. Quite recently “Paddy 7 '
O’Sullivan had a miraculous escape. A pony bolted down the
course, with a pair of shafts swinging to him, and he met
the oncoming field on a square front. “Paddy 77 was in the
load and on the rails, which the bolting pony hugged. There
was no escape and “Paddy 77 had marvellous fortune in
escaping instantaneous death, though the result was dis-
astrous enough—and a broken arm and collar-bone kept him
in hospital for some months.
The Toowong Cemetery is the last resting place of
Percy Strickland, a well-known jockey, who rode with con-
siderable success here round about 1880 and 1890. Poor
Percy met his death as the result of a fall on the St. Jean
colt Wabash, in the Queensland Guineas on the first day of
the August meeting held on the 11th of that month in 1890.
There were only eight runners for the Guineas that year—
A raxes, Donald Bernie, Treachery, Oberon, Wabash, Nenagh,
Monkshood and Circe. Araxes, who was ridden by Billy
Stewart, started at 6 to 4 on and he won very easily by three
lengths from Donald Bernie and Treachery. During the
progress of the race Wabash and Monkshood fell, but little
hopes were entertained for Strickland, who ultimately suc-
cumbed to his injuries. Strickland was born at Orange, and
he was only 25 years of age at the time of his death. The
inscription on the memorial is a fitting tribute to the deceased
rider. It reads as follows: —
The turf which sorely needs
An honest race
Shall hold his memory
In a fond embrace.
A little further on from the entrance to the cemetery
on the left hand side is the grave of Bobbie Williamson who
met his death at Albion Park on May 11, 1912. Little Bobbie
had the mount on Vibrator, who fell in one of the big events
a short distance before reaching the home turn. “Purre”
Matthews, who has charge of the jockeys’ room on most of
the metropolitan courses, assisted Bobbie to put on his first
sel of racing colors, and it fell to the lot of Matthews to take


off his silken livery just before he breathed his last. William-
son was 26 years of age when he died, and his widow erected
■a very appropriate memorial to perpetuate his memory.
There is an interesting romance surrounding Mountain
Song, the champion two-year-old, of last season and winner
of the Sires’ Produce Stakes and Guineas of 1924. Her
owners, the Hemming Bros., sons of an old time trainer and
rider, went to Sydney on a holiday and decided to buy a
brood mare if they could secure one cheaply. They went to
a sale and one of the mares that went under the hammer
that day was Sweet Chimes, by Beragoon from Timbree
(imp.), by Amphion. She had been on a visit to Quantock
(imp.), but because it was believed that the mare was not in
foal she was put into the ring, to be sold without reserve.
Bids of 30 guineas came from one of the Hemmings, as well
as another man, but the auctioneer apparently missed the
former’s bid, for he knocked her down to the other man.
Toung Hemming challenged his action, and as any doubt
-about the bid of young Hemming being made was quickly
settled, she was submitted again, and going to 35 guineas
Hemming secured her on behalf of himself and his brother.
Tt was a lucky purchase. Sweet Chimes later was found to
he in foal, and in due course gave birth to the shapely little
hay filly, now known as Mountain Song. The early intentions
-of the Hemming Brothers were to race the filly when she
was old enough, in the country districts, but as time went
on she grew and furnished so well that they decided to allow
her to take her place among the best in the State. Accord-
ingly she was sent to Brisbane to Trainer W. J. Noud, and
under his care she has so far established herself as the best
of her age in Queensland. Mountain Song, at time of writing,
won over £4OOO in prize money, and is certain to win a
lot more.
In the Queensland Derby of 1878, which carried £l5O
prize money, added to a sweepstakes of £lO, only two owners
were represented—Sir Joshua Peter Bell by Whisker and
Ada, and W. H. Kent by Napper Tandy and Sir Andrew.
Napper Tandy was favorite at 100 to 15 “on”, but the best
he could do was to finish a poor third to Whisker and Sir
Andrew, the first-named winning a great race by half a
length. On the second day of the meeting, Napper Tandy
won the Maiden Stakes (1-J miles) from Sir Andrew and
Ada and saddled up an hour later, was made a 5 to 2 favorite
for the first Queensland Gup (2 miles), but failed to finish
among the first five, O’Dwyer’s Premier winning from Sydney
and Olivia. On the third day of the meeting odds of 6to 4


Avere laid on Napper Tandy to defeat his only opponents, Sir
Joshua Peter Bell’s Olivia and John Finnie’s Nemo in the
w.f.a. All Aged Stakes, but Olivia beat him by half a length.
At a race meeting at Mitchell in the ’Bo’s, an owner
nearly struck trouble through blackboys from Forest Vale
Station recognising one of his horses. Rainbow, the horse
in question, won easily, but during the running of the race
when Rainbow was leading, the boys started excitedly to yell,
“Patsy Boliver, Patsy wins.” A fielder said to them, “No,
that’s Rainbow.” “No fear, him Patsy Boliver, winner of
blackboys’ race.” However, the owner of the station put
matters right, with the result that the owner said he would
be careful when buying station horses in future.
At a fancy dress skating carnival held in Toowoomba
years back, a well-known youngster, afterwards a prominent
sports-writer, borrowed John Finnie’s colors from Watty
Blacklock, and went as a jockey. “Figaro,” in its report,
said “Starry Night looked pretty skating with a young man
wearing John Finnie’s colors—not whispering My Love, I
liope.” My Love was a popular racing idol at that time,
owned by J. Finnic, ridden by Watty Blacklock.
Of a Downs meeting a simple story is told. A book-
maker had a horse, which we will call Blank, running in a
race of three starters. A man up to him and said what
price Blank? Ten to one was proffered. “All right, £2OO
to £20.” Blank won, and when the party went to collect, the
bookmaker remarked, “That’s funny me laying you the
winner; he belongs to me.” “Yes,” said the other, “it is I
who owns the other two.”
A well-known sport at Springsure had a horse racing
and it was always among the other starters. Eventually it
won for the old man. “Hooray,” he said, “if I was lasht
before. I’m first at lasht.”
A story is told of Jimmy Kenniff who, mounted on
Cyclone, a well-known galloper, had a first run up the
Warrego. On reaching his destination, he remarked, “He’s
the best 50 mile horse I ever rode.”
This brings to memory that a blackboy mounted on one
of Meteor Downs’ best was sailing along merrily, when a
station hand blocked him. “You must not knock that horse
about like that,” he said. “Oh, it’s all right, I want to get
him home quick before he knocks up,” was the boy’s reply.


During the war a Downs writer commented on some of
our Queensland horses, and stated that to make room for
better horses they ought to be sent to the front. Brisbane
“Truth” picked him up and said, “Yes, but could they get
to the front?”
A la-di-dah sport in the South, giving instructions to
his boy who stuttered, said, “I want you to come away at
that brick house over there.” The horse ran last and the
rider was pounced upon by the angry owner, who said, “I
thought I told you to come away there,” pointing to the
brick house. “Yes,” the boy replied; “I know you did, but I
couldn’t come without the blooming horse.”
Some years back a number of Toowoomba boys (sports
who followed racing) were having a wad or two at an hotel
kept by an old time sport. They were discussing the merits
of the proprietor's mare, which they considered very
moderate, when the lady of the hotel stepped in: “Go on,”
she said, “what are you talking about? Didn’t she run third
to My Love and Elbe?” “Yes,” said one sport; “three
starters.” Exit sport amid laughter.
* * » *
The late J. Finnie was good to sports in past years,
nominating horses in their ladies’ names. For his generosity
to the Taylor family in this direction he was presented with
a gold-mounted whip.
■ * »
Since its inception, the Brisbane cricket ground ha&
passed through many vicissitudes, and the probability is that,
with a bit of luck, it will be on a sound footing in another
decade. When electric light racing at night was introduced
a goodly number turned up at the first few meetings, and
then it resolved itself into “the usual crowd.” The length
of the _ course—three furlongs—and the fact that the
continuity of the light was uncertain, lent itself to nefarious
practices. “Flying the pigeon” was said to be of nightly
occurrence, when the course had to be negotiated twice, the
“poultice,” or extra lead weight, being conveniently hung'
on a post the first time round and picked up on the second
journey. Some to this day assert that jockeys had on more
than one occasion dismounted to pick up the “pigeon.” Then,
there were “dummy” weights—the supposed lead simply
being made out of wood, in some cases altogether altering
the appearance of the rider, so bulky was it in its proportions.
The scales were placed inside a big open shed, to which the
public had access, and which also accommodated the horses
engaged in the races, so that every possible facility was given
to the “crook” to work things his own sweet way—and
many and devious are the “stunts” originated and operated
—sometimes successfully, but most times unsuccessfully—-


l>y the man who, either “naturally crook” or through adverse
■circumstances, endeavors to get even with the world at large
—especially the horseowner or bookmaker. On one
occasion a rank outsider—and one which had not exhibited
much pace, nor had it any pretensions to being ranked as a
“flier”—was selected by the riders to win and a coup in
the distance. The race was started, the lights “conveniently”
went out, and when they were turned on the outsider was
about 200 yards ahead of the field entering the straight for
home, and being ridden for his life with whip and spur. The
coup eventuated. The sport was added to by the assistance
of the Brisbane cabmen, who were catered for with a couple
of trotting and racing items, and as the horses were
invariably ridden by their owners, no end of amusement was
■created, as a number of the cab horses were cast-offs from
racing stables, and they rollicked in the fun. G. Earle, who
now drives a pair of ponies in a cab in Brisbane, won three
events with his horse, Paddy. If you ask any of them about
it they smile and, winking the other eye, exclaim, “Ah, them
were the good old days; none of yer blanky motor cars then
to take the bread out of a man’s mouth!” A “ring-in”—
Messenger Boy—created quite a stir at one time, he having
wvam three races before the “heads” woke up. So it was
said, but there are others who contend they were not quite
so simple. Several other rather smart practices could be
'recorded, but the least said is the soonest mended.
WORTH KNOWING—AND INEXPENSIVE
Horses are subject to many little ailments, and the
following remedies would be worth trying when occasion
'warrants:—
n horses do not care about being tied up and often
pull their neck out. If such a thing occurs catch hold of
the near ear with the right hand and grip the under jaw
firmly with the left, and gently push the head upward until
you hear the dislocated part fall into position. The remedy
is easy and effective. J
Should an eye develop a scum—generally caused by a
grass seed or some foreign substance—get a small lump' of
alum, powder up finely with a hammer, make a funnel out
of a piece of stiff paper, put the powdered alurri into it, and
mow it into the affected eye; one or two applications will
remove the obstruction.
Should a horse become griped (no matter from what
cause) and a vet. is not handy, one of the best and most
-effective remedies is to get a bottle of porter, or beer make
it hot (either by applying a hot iron or placing inside a pot
*of boiling water) and, when hot enough, open and add two-


WORTH KNOWING —AND INEXPENSIVE. —Continued
thirds of a bottle of chlorodyne, then administer the lot as a
drench. The dose will immediately deaden the pain and the
horse will soon be 0.K., as it is the pain that causes the
damage, for horses are awfully chicken-hearted.
A bad fistula can be overcome and cured by the applica-
tion of Venice turpentine. Thoroughly wash the part with
hot water and soap, then steep a portion of lint with the-
turpentine and apply. Let it remain for two days, then
remove by applying oil, and repeat the treatment until a cure
is effected, which should not take long.
Should a horse develop “greasy heel, the most effective-
and easily applied method is to wash the heels well with hot.
soapy water then thoroughly dry, and apply with a, piece ot
soft‘rag or’brush sulphurous acid in its pure state; one-
application is generally sufficient, but it will cure the worst
cases if persevered with. Make sure you purchase
“sulphurous” acid —not sulphuric as the latter will burn
anything. Sulphurous acid, diluted with two parts warm
water, will cure mange. ,
One of the easiest applied blisters for a wrench or sprain
in a horse is to mix up a small quantify of mustard, with.
vinegar, until it forms a paste, then ru b it well in. Nex
morning bathe well with warm water. The beauty of this-
blister is that it has not to be bound up, nor does it form an
unsightly blister. For strangles it is also an excellent
remedy/ Rub the glands well on the outside right up under
the neck and throat, and it will give relief within a couple ot
horns, besides curing the complaint,
Jockeys and attendants suffer considerably with chapped’
hands. Get a quarter of a pound of mutton fat, render it
down in a small jam tin, add one packet powdered sulphur
while the fat it hot, stirring it in gradually, then add three
toblespoonfuls of kerosene; stir well while adding. Put it
in a few small pots before it settles. One or two applications
will give great relief, if they do not cure. .
If a horse develops ringbone, clip the hair just over the
hoof eet a flat, fine file, and pare it as you would a corn
then rub sulphurous acid on. Under this treatment we killed!
a ringbone, and prevented it spreading.
Have horses any pride is an oft-debated question, and
has occasioned many hot arguments, and the contents
and “mal-contents” are no nearer a solution now as to-
rositive fact as when first the subject was mooted. Trainers-
have stated that they have had horses who wou d sulk all
dav and never touch a bite if they were not first attended to,,
and of the many yarns recounted we give two as being
vouched for by* a friend who actually had first-hand!
knowledge.


An old racehorse was monarch of all he surveyed for
several decades in a small country town in Victoria, hut one
day a stranger happened along and disputed the old one's
right to the honor. A great fight ensued, and, notwith-
standing that he was toothless, the old one put up a good
battle until the stranger landed him a double-barrelled one
under the ribs with his hind feet that toppled the veteran
over. They were then separated. It was not until the new
arrival was hunted from the held that the old chap regained
his self-esteem and ate his feed without having to be coaxed.
On another occasion this same friend witnessed a severe
contest between a bull and a stallion, the latter resenting the
bull purloining his harem’s feed. The tight was a mag-
nificent display of brute science and gameness, but it did not
lost long. The bull gored the stallion so that iiis entrails
were hanging out, while the latter had ripped the hide from
off the bacK to a width of about four inches from the
shoulder to the butt of the tail, and had almost broken the
bull’s back so ferociously did he bite. Their careers as
fighters were ended at one and the same time, both succumb-
ing to their injuries. Our friend says he never experienced
anything so gory as the above incident.
The writer witnessed a fight between two wild entires
about 180 miles down the Lachlan River (N.S.W.) in the
late ’sixties. They gave a masterly exhibition of crude
science, striking with accuracy and precision witn their
fore feet, and using marvellous judgment with the hind
ones, meeting each other’s effort with the precision of the
opening and shutting by a clam of his shell. How the fight
would have ended it is hard to tell, for as soon as they
became aware of our presence, they led their harems off at
a brisk pace, though one who had witnessed a battle to a
finish assured us that as soon as one had become “hors de
combat” the other would quickly finish him by kicking the
life out of him.
One little experience in connection with the different
methods adopted by animals conies to mind, and that was
a battle royal between a ram and a buck goat. The ram, as
our readers are no doubt aware, lowers the head and charges
with terrific force, the whole weight of its body being added
to the impetus. The billy-goat adopts a different method.
He shakes his head, sidles a little, then rears on his hind
legs and butts with every ounce of weight and strength. On
this occasion, Mr. Ram, without any “beg pardons” or “by
your leave,” took advantage of the goafs poise and met him
a little “below the belt.” Sir William landed on his back
several yards away, and, on regaining his equilibrium,
decided to retire from the contest, the ram waiting patiently
*o repeat the dose as soon as opportunity offered.


If is surprising the number of baslilul people one meets
who have had experiences worth recounting and who are
worse than a Hock of sheep, for the latter jump at a shadow
and the rest of the Hock follow and soon become a. jumping
mass. Talk about the gentler sex being ol a retiring dis-
position—why they cannot hold a candle to some of the
sporting lights of other days, for the mere mention ot
chronicling in a book something worth while in which they
played a major part almost sends them into violent con-
vulsions. Such an one we have in our mind just now. He
cannot lay claim to the whole of the adage—lair, tat, and
forty—because he is somewhat of a brunette, of medium
avoirdupois, and a “shade” over forty, and resides less than
a thousand miles from New Farm through which James
Street runs. He is a “blimy” good shot with a ritle yet, was
a regular Alec. Bannerman with the willow, and last, but
not least, could steer a gee-gee to victory with the best of
them. At a race meeting held at Gobble Greek some years
ago he landed the whole seven races, winning the last—a
hack race—on an outlaw, and so glad was the owner that he
presented Billy—yes, we’ll call him Billy—with the saddle,
valued at £5, which constituted the prize. On another
occasion he bought a crock for 32/6 and entered him for a
race, but was persuaded to ride another horse. Murray Prior
owned a horse called Tanto, supposed to have run
into a place in the Melbourne Gup, and it suffered defeat in
the race in question. Billy was rather disgusted at not
having ridden his own horse, with which he was quite certain
he could have won, and expressed his displeasure and re-
ceived a goodly amount of chaff for his presumption. The
chaff turned to seriousness and Billy had a bet with the
owner of the winning horse that he could beat him. A whole
fiver was put up and the match duly eventuated at Kedron
Park with the result that the thirty-two bobber won. On
another occasion he became possessed, or drove, we are
not quite certain, an old trotter about, and he became
enamored of the horse and thought he was a Dan Patch. At
this time Enoggera held a race meeting and a trotting event
appeared on the programme. Billy saw the programme and
made up his mind to win that trot with old Wedderburn.
This horse was not a beauty to look at, for he more resembled
a hat rack with innumerable pegs protruding. As no per-
formances were sent in Billy’s nag was well
looked after by the handickpper. When the
time arrived, Wedderburn and his mount ambled along,
and not much could be seen of the rider as lead was un-
procurable and the weight had to be made up with extra
saddle cloths, and old bags, etc., putting one in mind of a
Chinaman out on horseback vending his wares with a basket
hanging at either side. The crowd good-naturedly hailed


Billy with innumerable jests, some not too complimentary
to the horse. A start was effected and as soon as the old
horse got into his stride he mowed them down like an
American tornado would a forest, and old Wed. was soon
hopping along in the lead at an easy gait. It was twice
round and Billy won hy the proverbial street —in'fact, it was
about a furlong. Then he had not only the laugh on his
side, but the prize, and a few bits of paper with a figure 1
displayed in each corner. On another occasion he drove an
old bally horse down to Sandgate in a spring cart, and on his
way home met a well-known publican who owned what was
regarded as a champion trotting mare. The publican looked
rather disdainfully at Billy when he saw that worthy flicking
old Bally up preparatory to giving the chestnut mare a go.
The owner of the latter put the question to the mare and
away she went, and so did Bally; in fact, the latter answered
so splendidly to Billy’s call that he soon was up beside him.
eventually literally “wiping the floor' 7 with him. The pub-
lican endeavored to purchase Bally there and then, but the
owner declined to sell, and Bally ran for a number of years
after this delivering groceries in a spring cart round Brisbane
and suburbs. Billy tells a yarn about having shot an iguana
near the Tambourine Mountains, and he swears to this day
that he must have weighed in the vicinity of two ton—no,
we mean two hundred-weight. He has given up the gee-
gees, and is now an ardent follower of Isaac Walton, and
there is not a spot between the Queen’s Wharf to Galoundra
where he hasn’t thrown a line and hooked something or fed
a toad. He is quite an authority on the finny tribe and can
“reel off” yarns with the oldest lone fishernlan in the State
of Queensland.


CHAPTER XIX. —FADS AND FANCIES.
Flying Kate’s Foal —Are Sportsmen Superstitious? —A Dream
and Its Consequence—lnfallible Systems—And Other
Stories.
But for its far-fetched imagination, the story in verse
of “Flying Kate’s Foal” might have crept into the discussion
of the question, “Has the racehorse deteriorated?” The
origin of the verse, which is at least bristling with humor, is
unknown, hut it is credited to a bushman who became
possessed of a smart pony mare which won several races,
and which he came to regard as something far beyond what
she really was—just a good performer in moderate company.
It is believed that during a celebration of a win he con-
ceived the idea of the verse and put it into writing. It was
passed on, and a copy of it came into the possession of Mr.
G. E. Smith, a well-known trainer,', who passed it on to
“Orion.” The latter put what finishing touches he could to
the rhyme, and as it will no doubt create a good laugh we
pass it on:—
“It makes us old hands sick and tired to hear
Them talk of racing champions of to-day.
Why, their Eurythmics and Gloamings and others of their year
Are really only good hacks in their way.
“Now this happened out west before records were taken,
And it’s not to be found in the guide,
But it’s honest, gorstruth, and I can’t be mistaken,
For it happened that I had the ride.
“ ’Twas the ‘Hummers’ Creek Cup, and our mare, Flying Kate,
Was allotted eleven stone two.
The race was two miles, and you’ll agree with me, mates
’Twas asking her something to do.
“She was heavy in foal, but the owner and me
Decided to give her a spin.
We were right on the rocks; ’twas the end of a spree,
So we needed a bit of a win.
“I saddled her up, and went down with the rest,
Her movements were bulgy and slow.
The starter to get us in line did his best,
Then swishing his flag he said ‘Go.’
“The field jumped away, but my mare seemed asleep.
And I thought to myself, ‘we’ve been sold,’
Then I heard something queer, and I felt I could weep
For bless me if the mare hadn’t foaled.


'“The field by this time had gone half a mile,
But 1 knew what the old mare could do,
So I gave her a cut of the whip—you can smile.
And the game little beast simply flew.
“ Twas then that she showed them her wonderful speed,
And she mowed the field down one by one,
With a furlong to go she had taken the lead,
And was prepared for a final run.
“Then something came at us right on the outside,
And we only scratched past the pole,
When I had a good look, I thought I’d have died,
For I’m blowed if it wasn’t the foal.”
Are sportsmen superstitious is a question that has been
productive of very keen debate on more than one occasion,
and very few will be found to admit the correctness of the
soft impeachment, as the average sport prides himself on
the possession of a stiff backbone, and objects to any state-
ment that he is connected by the finest link to anything
bordering on the eerie. Such incidents as the following
would certainly lead the average reader to admit that if
superstition did not exist there was something very near
akin to it.
The case of a man, who we will call “Dick,” a well-
known identity on Brisbane racecourses until he was elected
to “go west,’* would never attend the races if, on his way
thither, he met a cross-eyed man or woman —more particu-
larly the latter.
If such a contretemps did occur he would assuredly
turn hack and spend the day at home calling down impreca-
tions on the head of the unfortunate one who happened to
have “the emerald stain” in the optic. If, however, he
happened to espy a black cat sitting sunning itself his heart
would he filled with joy and he would plunge on his fancy
for that day, hut should a cat run to the left of him he
would pass an anxious time, betting in small amounts, and
weighing up the chances well before speculating. If a cat
happened to cross his path and run to the right the fact
would drive dull care away, a satisfactory day being
anticipated.
Another frequenter might justly be termed “Coin-
cidence,” or, as he pronounced it with emphasis, uGo-in-
ci-dence.” If a horse’s name happened to be out of position
in the tabulated weights column that would be noted, and a
few shillings would find its way into the bookie’s bag on the
chance of the horse winning. If its name happened to be in
the wrong position —i.e., say, Bst. among the 7st. division,
that also would be noted for future reference; and, if the
name were left out, through a clerical or printer’s error, it


was taken for granted that it would be a sure winner and a
plunge on that .particular equine would result. It some
human oddity were met with during the route to the course
that would certainly be bailed as a “co-in-ci-dence, and
conducive of a heavy loss if it did not happen to turn up
trumps. . , i , it
Then, again, if two pigeons were sighted on a perch he
was always open to give you your choice tor a couple ot
bob as to which would he the first to tly.
‘‘Go-in-ci-dence’ and superstition would appear to go
hand-in-hand, and the average Australian sport has
evidently been allotted bis fair share ol the dope.
A sycophant, as far as dreams were concerned, they
did not appeal to the writer, and on many occasions had the
recounting of them by “dreamsters” afforded him much
amusement. But the old adage, “Every dog has his day,
was exemplified on at least two occasions when the writer
took the bait.
It was at the latter end of the ’seventies and tlie early
part of the 'eighties, when the big events in Sydney were
to he decided. A horse from Bourke, where he had per-
formed well, named Merlin, was one ol the popular fancies
for the two mile event, and the individual above referred to,
having had ocular demonstration of the horse’s capabilities,
went for a win. Old Poverty was also in the race, as also
was an outsider from Brisbane (Queensland), and very little
thought of, being at almost any price.
Merlin was considered to have an excellent chance, and
was well backed by those in the know. Though he had
plenty of time on hand the training course was not visited
by this scribe, therefore he was unaware even of the exist-
ence of the outsider, Velocipede.
The night before the race an £8 sweep was drawn by a
few sports and the writer drew Poverty, which fact must
have caused the brain to be more active, as “poverty’” and
he had (and still are) been companions from the swaddling
clothes era.
Anyhow that is beside the question.
He’had a dream that a yellow bay horse, with one white
hind foot, carrying a jockey wearing a yellow jacket, won
the race from end to end. The race was so vividly pictured
that it did not absent itself when on Randwick course.
Old Commotion, owned by a Melbourne sport, and a
champion on Flemington, where horses are run the re\ erse
way an eccentricity peculiar to Victoria —was a competitor
in the weight-for-age event, and Reginald, a three-year-old,
owned by White, of New South Wales racing fame, was also
cnc-affed Reginald was at the excellent price of Bto 1, and


he easily accounted for the favorite Commotion, who did not
appear to relish tne right-hand going. On this race the
writer landed a good stake.
Then the big race loomed up and the dream persistently
asserted itself. The last horse out to do its preliminary was
Velocipede, and the color, the white foot, and rider’s colors,
could not possibly have been better described or depicted
by an artist —for everything fitted in with the dream. That
appealed to the writer, and a plunge eventuated, he standing
to win £BOO.
A good start was effected, and Velocipede won from
end to —within one foot of the post. That is what the judge
decided, but it would have been tantamount to looking for a
needle in a haystack to try and discover one man amongst
a considerable number of people who would have coincided
with that opinion.
The race was adjudged to Poverty “by a nose.”
Velocipede’s jockey, like many lads before him and
since, had such a commanding lead coming into the straight
that he twisted round in the saddle to laugh at the field. Old
Poverty put in a great run with the result stated above,
leaving the writer the winner of the sweep and just missing
the big scoop by the proverbial “whisker.”
As is usual with losers, the judge and jockey were con-
signed to limbo and dreams were taboo.
But still another experience was in store, when Dunlop
won the Melbourne Gup in 1887.
The advent of the Caulfield and Melbourne Gups each
year gives rise to considerable speculation and immense
interest is taken by a majority of the populace as to which
horses will provide the winners.
The writer witnessed the Caulfield Gup, won by Oak-
lei gh, and Dunlop’s rather inglorious fourth position in that
race. But some uncanny spirit interested himself and
another dream resulted in which the finish of the Melbourne
Gup was unmistakably outlined. Recall was one of the most
fancied and this scribe certainly was prejudiced in that
horse’s favor —for had not Jockey Power given it as his
opinion that he would be first, and the rest —nowhere.
On the “hill” and on the “Hat” there were magnificent
costumes, prim matrons, effusive flappers (both of the
“huppa” and middle class), and layers of odds in various
attire —coats that would have done justice to Joseph of
biblical farrie, and head-gear that would have caused Stetson
to exhibit envy —were all there to make up the 200,000 that
were stated to have wended their way to Flemington on that
auspicious occasion.
The horses, trained to the minute, with their glossy
coats and gallant mein, were the cynosure of all eyes as they
were led round preparatory to going out for their preliminary.


Knowing Joe Thompson, who was dubbed ‘ The Leviathan, 7r
tiie writer conversed with him when the candidates
promenading, and Joe tried to persuade me to put £1 on
Dunlop, who was at 25 to 1, remarking, “He’s real well, and
must run a great horse; have £1 on him, il no more.”
“Not me, 1 wouldn’t back him at 50 to 1. I dreamt he;
won, and I fell in before over a dream. No, not for me,”
was my reply.
And yours truly didn’t.
But had Joe’s advice been taken it would have been a
welcome win.
The writer would be on the horns of a dilemna even
now, if he had the misfortune to dream that a certain horsa
had won some big event to come off shortly, as to whether
to back it, or religiously let it alone. And it is this un-
certainty that saves the “bookie.”
Many and various have been the ideas promulgated by
punters in the endeavor to stabilise a system of betting that
would ensure the betting fraternity always coming out on
the right side of the ledger. All attempts would appear, so
far, to have proved unsuccessful, and no doubt the layers of
odds gloat over that fact, for, if an “infallible” betting
system could be materialised there would soon be a few
wealthy punters and a multitude of insolvent bookies.
No better testimony could be provided as proof of the
failure to institute such a system than a visit to any of the
metropolitan courses on race days, for there you will find
the “bagman” shouting himself hoarse with “6 to 4” or “I’ll
take the odds!” and, when the numbers go up, with a child-
like and bland smile, calling out “I’ll pay.”
Yes, punting is a great game, but a very unprofitable
one, which usually “puts ’em up a tree” at the end.
As we have to admit the soft impeachment of being two
of the mugs, and who have been trying to make amends—
with a certain amount of success—we give the following
recipe, free gratis, to the average worker who tries to in-
crease his meagre earnings at the course : “Find out the
horse that is a trier, and put all the money you can afford
to lose on him’ in ‘one up, 7 whether his price is long or short,
and, if you get a win, it will be worth while collecting ;
don’t try to back the programme; keep off doubles; and don’t
listen to the other fellow who tries to put you off a horse
when you wish to back him.” Just take an old fool’s advice,
and give the suggestion a trial.
Putting the horse’s name in a hat and drawing one out
on the blind is not worth the trouble; the Chinese puzzle
fails at least nine times out of ten; and, according to a court


case recently, yarding up the ducks, labelling them with the
hiorses’ names, and shoving them to make them get a move
on, has not proved any more advantageous, so once more we
say—just give the tip a trial.
jjc jJi
To know too much, or to imagine it, is very often the
stumbling point to an otherwise keen intellect.
This account of a coup “readied up”—or supposed to be
readied up—was told an audience of several who were re-
counting incidents which had taken place on various race-
courses.
You will - invariably find the chap who has a mental kink
where horses are concerned and persistently ambng his
friends and acquaintances by asserting that such a horse is
sure to win. and to go half or a quarter of a ticket with him,
assuring them that he has either obtained “the oil” from the
stable or first-hand from the owner.
In recording the incident our informant is of the same
opinion as he was before —that imagination was at the
bottom of the whole thing—and does not think there was a
scintilla of truth in his friend’s statement. Here is the
incident. , ~ _ ,
“I was down at Ascot, which is better known as Eagle
Farm, in the ’eighties, and had a mixture of luck, accumu-
lating about £5 on the day up to the last race. The last race
is the climax to a good or a bad day, as losers empty their
pockets, if they contain anything, in the endeavor to recoup
their losses, while the man who has had a bit of luck
ventures considerably more than he otherwise would in the
endeavor to build on‘his wins. Between the two the layer of
the odds generally comes out on top. There were two
hurdle horses engaged in the one mile flat race, which would
wind up the meeting, and there are quite a number of
Brisbane racegoers who will call to mind the names with
more pleasure than anger for they had passed the winning
post first on many an occasion, appearing in the race book
as Friction and Drummer. The first named was our champion
over sticks being an excellent jumper as well as a speedy
customer on the flat, and the latter had given joy to many a
backer when he landed first over the last hurdle to romp home
an easv winner.
“In the race referred to Friction was quoted at b to 4,
while Drummer’s price was Bto 1. I was leisurely walking
across the lawn to hand £5 over to the late ‘Billy’ Mooney,
well-known in Brisbane as a bookmaker, when my friend
with ‘the knowledge straight from the owner or stable’
accosted me with ‘What are you doing?' ‘Going to put this
on Friction,’ displaying the £5. ’Don’t do that; back
Drummer; he’ll win—he’s the pea.’ ‘I think Friction will
have to fall down to lose,' I replied. ‘lt’s all right, don’t be


a fool- —he’ll win.* The adage says, Tie who hesitates is*
lost.’ I hesitated and was not only lost, but lost my fiver as
well, Friction winning with his mouth open, Drummer
second. And I am still one of the fool bettors —but only on
a small scale.’'
The absent-minded beggar is an infliction, mot only to
himself but to the whole household and his friends, and the
trait is not confined to any particular class of individual, as
all shades of society produce the oddity. The parson, even,
may be included, for how many times has the reverend
gentleman left his bob’s worth of printed sermons at home
and had perforce to dispense with the soul-inspiring ex-
hortation on that particular day and meander through a
lesson as substitute.
Then there is the “old man” —father—who is buzzing
round several times in the week looking for his pipe, and
giving every member of the household a particularly “good
time” until the youngest points out the fact to him that he
has it in his mouth; or mother, or granny, in a very bad
state of excitement and irritability, because their spectacles
have been taken away by somebody, turning the house upside
down and peering into every conceivable corner, only to find
tliat. they have been resting serenely amid the disturbance
on their forehead.
Yes, one could write a lot about the eccentricities of
the absent-minded beggar, but the following incident still
further proves the irresponsible individual exists even in
racing circles: —
It was in the early ’seventies when a hue and cry was
raised on the gold diggings at Gulgong that the racehorse
Goldfmder had been stolen from Publican Self.
Wires were sent indiscriminately to towns within 100
miles, and the police were despatched to all the outlying
fields to intercept the thief, but all to no purpose, as no
tidings of the horse or thief could be secured.
Sherlock Holmes’s were innumerable and Self's pub.
did an excellent trade during the day.
Self was having an anxious time as the day drew to a
close, but just as the sun was disappearing Goldfmder’s owner
had a brain-wave—it was to look into the two empty loose
boxes —and he summoned the groom to bring the keys. The
first box opened almost paralysed both of them, for there
was the handsome black calmly awaiting a drink and a feed
which had been denied him for some 24 hours.
Recriminations followed, but, neither the groom nor
the owner would admit having made the change. The
publican had to get busy once more calling in the wires and


the police, which involved considerable explanation, and
occasioned many a jest at the publican’s expense lor a long
time after.
Then there is the good friend who obliges you in taking
money down to back a certain horse and does not make a
note of it, and, when the day’s racing is over, he suddenly
recollects the commission. He wades feverishly through the
dividend list to see how he stands and to find out whether
the horse is among the placed ones. If the horse happens
to run in the “nowhere divisions, he thanks his lucky star,
but if it has paid a dividend he calls himself all the asses
that he can conjure, pays the dividend, and vows never again
to accept money to place on a horse.
Then there is the unprincipled scamp who deliberately
lays himself out to take his fellows down. He takes the
money not having the slightest intention ot backing it, trust-
ing to luck that it will not win, and pocketing the money.
Should the horse wan and he happens to be on it, he returns
the money invested with “I torgot all about that; here s your
money back; it was a pity that I was so forgetful, etc.
The world is full ot “sharps’” and flats, but the flats
predominate.
It was coming home in a train that Ginger unfolded his
tale of woe. A badly blackened eye had elicited the usual
inquiry.
‘dt was this way,” explained Ginger, “I was going out
to Woopville with Billy , to win the Town Plate with
old Speculator, and we were reckoning up what sort ot odds
we would get. The old horse had won two or three good
races on the way and his form was preUy well known.
‘What’s the next best?’ asked Billy, and after reckoning up
the weights, we mutually agreed upon klsie, a little local
mare, and we decided to back her, knowing, however, that
our horse was a terrible hard puller. I says to Billy that
he might get away with the boy and win, and so to be on
the safe side it would be better to have a fiver on him for a
saver. ‘No,' says Billy, hill duck or no dinner!’ Re duly
cautioned the boy that it he didn’t stop the old horse he
would skin him alive. W ell, alter a desperate struggle the
lad managed to pull him up right in front of the stand, and
Elsie struggled home by half a length. The crowd played
up terrible, and nearly roared the grandstand down. ‘We re
up against it now,’ 1 says; but Billy winks and says he will
make it all right. Rushing into the stewards’ room he


promptly enters a protest against the winner. Less than
three minutes after down comes the numbers and up goes
Ihe board, ‘Protest upheld!’ Yon see the flaming stewards
had all backed our horse.
“And then, concluded Ginger pensively, when I says to
Billy, ‘You should have taken my advice and put a fiver on
the old ’un,’ he gave me this black eye as a kind of present.”


CHAPTER XX.—WATTY BLACKCOCK’S 50 YEARS
ON THE TURF.
A Genius in the Education and Training* of Youngsters
A Front Rank Rider of Other Days —Interesting Experi-
ences Recalled —“Ormond” Lodge and Its Magic Well.
In “Frederick the Great” Carlyle describes genius as “an infinite
capacity for taking pains,” and Johnson defined true genius as “a man
of large general powers, accidentally determined to some particular
direction.”
If the word genius can be applied to men engaged in
the education and training of the thoroughbred horse for
racing, there was no man in Queensland who was more
entitled to come within the scope of its definitions men-
tioned above than the veteran trainer, Mr. Walter (“Watty”)
Blacklock, who, in September, 1924, retired after 50 years
honorable and distinguished association with the Queens-
land turf. For half a century, as either rider or trainer,
Watty achieved phenomenal success. He not only won every
principal race associated with racing in Brisbane, but also
the principal races in centres extending through Queensland
as far north as Charters Towers, and also in the southern
States.
It was his infinite capacity for taking pains that gained
for Watty Blacklock the high position he so long held in the
world of racing in Queensland. And Watty was always a
man of large general powers, inherited from grand old stock
that could be said to have been accidentally determined to
the particular direction of the education and racing of the
thoroughbred. His great ability as horseman and trainer
was not inherited from his parents. Neither had anything
to do with the thoroughbred horse nor did they have par-
ticular interest in racing matters, and his father, Walter
Blacklock, senior, who lived with Watty and his good wife
at their picturesquely situated home, Ormond Lodge.
Hendra, up to the time of his retirement and his sale of
Ormond Lodge to Mr. A. H. Whittingham, took but only a
passing interest in the doings of the horses or even the
horses themselves, which were sheltered at this famous
racing establishment.
Mr. Blacklock, senior, who is over 90 years old, is a
wonderful old man. He is still hale and hearty and takes an
interest in the world’s affairs, reading the newspapers for
himself, and doing plenty of walking exercise. He is one


MR. WATTY BLACKLOCK
whose reminiscences of 50 years’ association with the
Queensland Turf are published in this volume.


of the few remaining veterans of the Crimean War, and
retains a wonderful memory and is a most interesting old
chap to converse with. While on the subject of longevity
of life, it might be mentioned here that it is pronounced also
on Mrs. “Watty” Blacklock’s side. Her father, the late Mr.
W. J. Peak, one of the earliest pioneers of Drayton, and for
over 50 years continuously a councillor of the Drayton Shire
Council, attained his ninetieth birthday on the very day he
died —December 3, 1921 —while spending a holiday with
Mi, and Mrs. Blacklock at Hendra.
Walter Blacklock, senior, and the late Mrs. Blacklock,
senior, were early pioneers of Mount Brisbane, in the Esk
district, and there several members of their family of five
sons and three daughters were born, but later the family
settled in Drayton, where the late Mr. John Finnie, the veteran
“squire of Drayton,” and one of the most successful breeders
cf pedigree cattle and thoroughbred horses ever associated
with Queensland racing, of which he was a strong and keen
supporter as an owner, became a great friend of the Blacklock
family. It was his kindly interest in the boys, with the
influence he exercised in the moulding of their future, that
was subsequently responsible for three of them, Dick, Watty,
and Jack becoming roost accomplished and successful race
riders.
Press writers of the late ’seventies and early ’eighties
ranked Dick and Watty Blacklock as among the three best
riders in Australia at the time, and one leading writer of
the period said of Watty, who then could go to scale at
under 5.0: “He is the Archer of Queensland, and is two
stone better than any other light-weight, and 7 lb. better
than any professional.” In those days there were many
crack horsemen to compete against.
At the late John Finnie’s Roseville stud, Dick and Watty
Blacklock learnt to ride when they were old enough to sit
on a horse. At nine years Watty was riding morning work,
and he was only 11 when he won his first race on Queen
Bee. That was" at Toowoomba over 50 years ago. Queen
Bee won the first heat of a race that was run in two heats,
and as he followed it up by winning the second heat for the
same owner —there was no necessity for a run off. Later
the same day he won the principal handicap, and another
race and in scoring in four of the six races decided, Watty
then weighing a little more than 4.0 —certainly made an
auspicious start.
From then on he became the best lightweight rider in
the State, and was kept busy travelling and riding at all the
centres of the racing circuit, which commenced with
Warwick, and extended to Charters Towers, and embraced
Toowoomba, Dalby, Roma, Ipswich, Brisbane, Gympie,
Maryborough, Rockhampton, Townsville, in turn. A big


contingent of owners, trainers, horses, riders, and other
followers of racing did the circuit in those days, and they
were great meetings, and provided good prize money, and
ma^ y i riotable orses the Queensland turf were associated
with these trips. Watty enjoyed wonderful success in these
tours of the circuit of racing carnivals, and in one of the
trips he won 40 races, and was placed either second or third
in 45 others, out of a total of 100 mounts. On these tours
he won the Townsville Gup and the Charters Towers Handi-
cap each five times.
In the middle ’eighties “Watty” trained horses at
i oowoomba as well as rode them for Mr. Finnic, and had
such horses under his care as Rose (winner of the Q.T.G.
Jiopelul Stakes), My Love, and Medusa. My Love and
Medusa were champions over long journeys, and each had
iOng record ot victories. After breaking down My Love
was sold to Mr. James White, of New South Wales, one of
the most successful breeders in Australia at the time, for
>OO guineas and was retired to the stud. She produced a
foal after being transported to Sydney, but it was of little
account.
mention of Rose’s victory in the Hopeful Stakes in
1886 recalled to Watty that at that time he had put on
weight rapidly, and had to take off 30 lbs. to ride the filly
*' 8 - 5 . m that race. The methods of weight reduction in
those days were in marked contrast to those of to-day, when,
vuth iurkish or sweat baths, much superfluous fat and flesh
can he taken oil jockeys in a few hours, as a rule, on the day
before, or even on the morning of a race day. In the
eighties and earlier years it was the common practice of
jockeys who had to take off weight, to wrap themselves up
m woollens, and do a solid walk from Hamilton to Pinkenba
and hack, and on their return to put in hours of solid work
coonping wood, turning handles of crushing machines dig-
ging, or other such strenuous exercises. This often lasted
tor days. It also was necessary for them to restrict them-
selves to meagre and very light meals. It was by such
walking exercise, and hard work, that Watty got down to
8 5 to ride Rose to victory for Mr. Finnie in the Hopeful
Slakes of 86. r
, I* further recalled by “Watty” that prior to the
si art oi that particular race he was mulct in fines, amounting-
to £l3, by the starter. &
“There was a prettygood colt in. the Hopeful Stakes that
year said Watty, • and I knew that unless I got a good
start (which was then by the flag system) Rose had no


chance of . beating him. Naturally, I was anxious to get away
smartly, but in my over-anxiety, I beat the Hag several
tr m |l 3 - Wiat each cost a tine, and they came
•i “ T L was worth the risk, however,” he added, with a
smile, for eventually when the flag fell, I got a break of
Hall a dozen lengths, and that won Rose the race. The fines
were paid cheerfully.”
Another incident—one that has a touch of humor
c.ssociated w! h it—which Watty recalled was associated
with ins short experience as a hurdle rider. He was never
keen at taking on riding over the battens, but eventually
was induced to ride Maritana in her races. In his first ride
W«pmL h ° rSe ?i Uied Game1 ’ ridden by Martin Burke, a crack
Ff T r 10 Jl i mp ? at the time > wa s in the race. Camel
lenovlwir th f I ront and at the first jump he clouted
heavily and knocked part of the hurdle away. Watty took
Maritana through the gap, and kept in behind Camel after-
nihop t Fn a T n ßde g s p ® ii'rough clouting and dislodging
\ ffpn tv t i' 6 T. rd! r, S ’ u n j Mantana went through in comfort.
fnmpi the | lSt ,, U 'v‘ d * iad been cleared he sent Maritana after
f “ ’f' 1 she ,, beat bmi comfortably. In his second ride on
hv TpH Wr J the i batt l ns sbe was beaten hy Bos’un, ridden
. d nods, and in her third race she hit the first hurdle
heavily and fell, and Watty had his collarbone broken That
was enough for him. He never took the jumps on again.
in Rnkh!n!° U i aWy a!' e i ir J ed altogether as a rider, and came
.? ' , 'Uul settled down as a public trainer. It was
en that he built Ormond Lodge, which he named after a
f n th s ß r , mter ba b f d trained and ridden in previous years.
” Y? ars t ? at bave since clupsed up to his retirement,
many notable performers passed through his hands at Ormond
Lodge, and Prominent among his many patrons, in addition
lo the late John Finme, were Messrs. Hugh Mosman, D. S.
ivfn a w p’ R t a p Say< E \[- !!or , nsa y- R - G - Ramsay, Murray
I nor. W. H. Kent, Eugene Monaghan, D. T. Seymour Contain
Sandeman R Turnbull F. Kent. J. Archibald, R. G. Casey.
V tj James laylor, R. H. Edkms, I. Freedman, arid
A. H. Whittmgham.
Among other notable horses lie either rode or trained
in the olden days he recalled Ormond My Love Medusa
Coldfinder. Mozart, Wheel of Fortune, Rose,'Yately’, Glencoe!
batalhous, Galata, Prime Minister, Music, Boreas, Araxes
Beggar Roy, Babel, Yelverton, Brazen Face, Honest Ned’
Dividend, Corsican, Circle, Archlight, Whitebait, Dalliance
[ atncian, The Moulder, Optimist, Bachelor, Moya, Bris-de-
Nuits, Balfour, Harrow, Patentee. Inglewood, Snapshot, and
during the last 15 years Simla, Duninald, Steely, Lordacre
Togo, Roseacre, Bandon Lad, Gold Tie are a the most
distinguished ones he has trained.


There probably was not a better judge in Australia of a
yearling than ‘‘Watty” Blacklock, and for many years the
buying of yearlings was left entirely to his judgment by most
of his -patrons. He was told by them to go to the Sydney
sales, and to secure one, two, three or four youngsters, as a
patron might require, and the rest of the transaction was
left to Watty. His judgment was simply wonderful, and
few of his purchases turned out failures. His successes with
youngsters as two-year-olds was remarkable, and he landed
no fewer than ten Q.T.G. Hopeful Stakes, nine of which were
won between 1901 and 1914.
A good story is told concerning Watty’s purchase of
Dividend. Mr. J. B. Whitehead said something to Watty
about buying a horse, but nothing definite was arranged.
However, when he was in Sydney that year Watty went to
Chisholm’s sales, and taking a fancy to a big black colt,
afterwards named Dividend, Watty thought he would suit
Mr. Whitehead, and, bidding for him, secured him for 220
guineas. When Blacklock returned to Brisbane with the
yearlings he purchased at the sales, Mr. Whitehead was
not altogether pleased with the purchase made on his behalf,
but took him, paid up for him, and gave him to Blacklock.
As a two-year-old. Dividend was not a successful proposition,
but Blacklock’s judgment Vas vindicated when, as a three-
year-old Mr. Whitehead sent Dividend to Melbourne to be
trained by Walter Hickenbotham. for he won the Y.B.G. St.
Leger Stakes, the Champion Stakes twice, and other w.f.a.
races, and about £7OOO in prize money.
In addition to his Hopeful Stakes successes Blacklock,
as either rider or trainer, won the Q.T.G. Derby Stakes six
times, the Q.T.G. Stradbroke Handicap six times, St, Leger
Stakes five or six times, Queensland Gup four times, Queens-
land Guineas four times, and Brisbane Gup four times, and
every principal event in the Q.T.G. calender.
Horses which won in the southern States when trained
by Blacklock were Prime Minister (A.J.G. Squatters’ Handi-
cap), Inglewood (Sydney Handicap), Bridegroom (Hawkes-
bury Gold Gup), Barambah (A.J.G. Grantham Stakes and
Members Handicap), Togo (Hawkesbury Handicap and
A.J.G. Doncaster Handicap), Lordacre (A.J.G. Suburban
Handicap), and Gold Tie (Caulfield Futurity Stakes). A good
colt in Simla was killed in an A.J.G. Metropolitan, a race
which Lordacre also had a fall in, and another good colt in
Optimist (who dead-heated with Joyance in the Q.T.G.
Hopeful Stakes) of 1903. had his racing career cut short in
a smash at Bandwick, but he was saved for the stud. It was
in the fall on Optimist that E. (“Tiny”) Best, one of the best
lightweights in Queensland at the time, was seriously in-
iured. Best was unconscious in hospital for something like
01


a fortnight but rallied, and eventually recovered. The smash,
however, ended the riding career of the brilliant lightweight.
4k Tiny” is now in Brisbane and trains a horse or two.
This article would not be complete without a reference
lo Ormond Lodge, and the appointments of the training
'establishment as seen on the occasion of my visit.
C/
Prominent trainers from the southern States have openly
declared that the Ormond Lodge stables are the biggest, best
appointed, and equipped establishment of its kind in Aus-
tralia. Altogether it covers upwards of three acres of land,
and the beautiful old home surrounded by a lofty, well-kept
hedge, and well cared for flower beds, is a fine specimen of
a suburban home. In the adjoining wide area the stables
and the cottages for the employees—one for the foreman and
the apprentice jockeys, and the other for the stable hands —
are situated, and “thorough” is the keynote of the system
adopted for the fulfilment of the daily routine. Every build-
ing is ratproof. even the large feed store-room, and the loft
in the main stable, where the crushed grain and other delicate
foods, ready for the horses, are stored.
The roomy horse boxes are constructed with inch and
a half hardwood to prevent the horses from injuring them-
selves in the case of lashing out, and all the partitions are
capped with a fine batten, to prevent them bumping them-
selves.
A motor engine is utilised in both the working of the
crushing machine and the pumping of crystal, clear, spring
water, which is used in the home, as well as in the stables.
From the crushers the grain is taken to the loft in the main
stable, and stored there, as also is the oats and bran, and
from the loft it is let down to steel-lined and air-tight bins,
by means of pines, after the manner of the cash railings in
vogue in our big drapery establishments.
The well from which the spring water is pumped into a
2000 gallon overhead tank has a history. It has never been
known to he dry, and in years of drought, when water famines
raged in the suburbs of Brisbane, it supplied many hun-
dreds of residents of Hendra, Glayfield, and surrounding dis-
tricts with their water requirements, and in .that respect,
Mr. Blacklock’s generosity won the admiration of many
hundreds of people whom he otherwise would probably
never have known. In one big drought there was a regular
pilgrimage from the surrounding districts to the Ormond
Lodge well. Years ago, before the motor engine was in-
stalled, the water was pumped by a windmill. Its days of
usefulness are passed, hut the framework remains there still
as a monument to what proved one of nature's greatest gifts
to the district in the days when it was without its water
supply.


The living quarters of the employees are nicely fur-
nished, and equipped with every comfort, and the general
spick and span appearance of everything reflected the
greatest credit on those associated with the establishment.
Surrounding the main yard are live roomy paddocks tor
allowing the horses to run about in; also a large sand rolling
yard, and a large exercise yard, and the 6 feet fences are all
capped with a flat batten, to prevent the horses in any way
hurting themselves.
Upwards of 20 big camphor laurel trees bordering the
outskirts of the main yard served a double purpose. Whilst
they materially shaded the adjoining running yards, they
were also used in riding youngsters round in zig-zag fashion,
for the purpose of “mouthing” them and educating them.
As stated before, “thorough” was the keynote of the system
of everything associated with Watty’s stable, and was a
delightful object lesson to the visitor.
Not only as a rider and trainer was Watty Blacklock
successful, for he also was the mentor of several jockeys
who gained fame, including Tommy Flood (who is still in
Brisbane), Billy Stewart, the late Archie Scott, R. F.
(“Bundy”) Mortleman, A. E. Davis, the late P. S. (“Parky”)
O’Neill, the late little F. M‘Crimmon, and H. J. Suddaby.
The latter only recently completed his apprenticeship and
has struck out as a free-lance. And among present-day
trainers who learnt much in their profession under Watty
Blacklock are N. Conquest, senr., Fred. Henderson, Ike
Spiro, Tom O'Neill, F. Pollard, and Geo. Gush, and the latter,
is married to one of Mr. Blacklock’s daughters. Watty’s only
son, also Walter, takes practically no interest in racing. He
is a conveyancer attached to a city firm and in his spare time
cricket —of which he is no mean exponent with both bat
and ball —claims his attention.
Like most successful trainers, Watty Blacklock got
together a fine collection of photographs and paintings of
many of the notable horses he trained or rode, and among
them was an old photograph in frame of Beggar Boy, with
Albert Colley in the saddle. This gelding was in his racing
days owned by the then Commissioner of Queensland Police
(Mr. D. G. Seymour), who bought him at Warby’s sale
yards in Brisbane for £25. The gelding proved a veritable
goldmine, and, trained by Blacklock, won 17 hurdle races or
steeplechases. At Randwick he won a race, and on being
taken to Melbourne was only beaten into second place by
Busaco in the Caulfield Grand National through the superb
riding of the latter’s pilot, J. E. Brewer, who to-day is a
successful owner-trainer. After that race Beggar Boy was
submitted to auction at Kirk’s Bazaar, Melbourne, ’and
realised 550 guineas.


On his retirement Mr. Black lock. sold the Ormond Lodge
homestead and stables to one of his best patrons, Mr. A. H.
Whittingham, who has established Mr. W. G. Byrne there
as his private trainer.
“Billy” Byrne is a worthy successor to Watty Black]ock.
A son of Mr. P. Byrne, a successful Brisbane trainer of
years gone by, and now living in retirement, and brother of
those once good riders, the late P. (“Jock”) Byrne and
Percy Byrne, “Billy,” who is 34 years of age, is well known
in Brisbane, and throughout Western Queensland. As a
youth he served an apprenticeship as a jockey with his.
MR. W. C. BYRNE.
father, but he did little riding till about 15 years ago, when
lie went out west to train, as well as ride a team of horses
which Mr. Whittingham entrusted him with.
For upwards of six years he trained and rode with a
large measure of success at meetings in the Western and
Central Queensland racing centres, and then returned to
Brisbane, since when he has trained horses for Mr. E. J.
Watt and Mrs. Lumley Hill, as well as Mr. and Mrs.
Whittingham.
For upwards of ten years he has had a fair measure of
success as a trainer in Brisbane, and among other races he
landed were the Q.T.G. Metropolitan Handicap with Rameses,


.JBcohe#
\\</M A#%S [^Sr\
the Q.T.C. Ascot Handicap, with his own horse, Saynin, and
with that splendid little mare Yank, whom Mr. Whittingham
purchased cheaply, he won 19 races.
Mr Byrne is now training solely for Mr. and Mrs.
Whittingham, and has taken over all their horses previously
trained by Mr. Blacklock, and at time of this article going to
press he had won several races for Mr. Whittingham.


CHAPTER XXL—NOUD FAMILY’S NOTABLE RECORD.
Memories of Gordon Brook —Home of Notable Sires and
Racehorses —Bulginbaah’s Defeat of ‘‘The Black
Demon,” The Barb—When Marvel Downed Carbine-
Noud Bros/ Distinguished Careers as Riders and
Trainers—Bill, the Wizard of the Spiked Shoe—Jack’s
Caulfield Gup Coup with Lady Medallist.
If it were possible for one to have placed before him a
complete history of horse-racing in Australia, embracing all
its phases from' its inception in each of the States, many
instances would probably be found where the whole of the
male members of a family had followed in the footsteps of
the father, and engaged in it in some capacity or another
with varying success so far as the individual members were
concerned. It is doubtful, however, if he would find a family,
which, individually and collectively, achieved greater honors
in the breeding, riding, and training of horses than the Noud
family—the only two male survivors of which are Messrs.
Bill and Jack Noud, who rank among the most popular and
successful trainers in Brisbane at the present time. Both
earlier in their careers achieved much distinction as horse-
men, and Bill was one of the greatest pedestrians of his time.
The achievements of the Noud family—the late William
Noud, and his four sons, Arthur J., William J., Tom and
John W.—in their association with horses, first by the father
as manager and trainer of a distinguished stud of thorough-
breds, and carried on by the sons as successful riders and
trainers, and Bill as a champion pedestrian, would claim a
prominent place in the history of those sports in Australia,
if ever it were written up in a comprehensive way. The
successes of the Noud family embrace a wide range, covering
not only the famous Northern Rivers districts of New South
Wales, where the foundations of the careers of father and
sons were laid, but the metropolis of the same State, and also
Queensland and Victoria.
There are few, if any, racegoers who do not know Bill
and Jack Noud, either personally or by sight or reputation,
but how many of us are aware of the fact that Bill, one of
the mosh successful trainers Brisbane sportsmen have
known in the last two decades, was in the ’eighties, following
on a successful career as a jockey, one of the greatest
pedestrians in Australia, who was equal to covering 150
yards—his pet distance —at five yards inside even time. The


v/V.;.’; • I ''Xv/.’-l--; -\\\’y.
X*v.\*v;.v! v.\’v.\vX v.
performances of Bill Noud as a knight of the spiked shoe were
truly wonderful, but still they were but a part of the achieve-
ments of a family that made history in the annals of Aus-
tralian sport.
The founder of the notable racing and sporting family
under review, the late Mr. William Noud, came to Australia
as a boy with his parents in the ’forties. They were of that
good old Irish stock who came to our vast continent in the
early days and did much to assist in its development. The
family settled on the Northern Rivers, and there the late
William Noud grew into manhood to become associated with
the breeding and training of som'e notable horses, and to
rear a family which has done him and Australia credit. The
THE LATE MR. WiLLIAM NOUD
late William Noud and his good wife, whom he married
when in his early twenties, were both a grand type ol pioneer,
and they had much to be proud of in the four sons and five
daughters they reared at Gordon Brook, on the Clarence
River, and of the achievements of the sons in the realms of
sport. Both Mr. William Noud, senr., and his good wife
and helpmate have joined the great majority, the former
passing away in 1915 at Randwick at the ripe old age of 78,
and Airs. Noud died over three years ago after attaining her
80th year.
In his early manhood the late Mr. William Noud became
associated with the racing stud, at Gordon Brook, of Messrs.
Barnes and Smith, the former being the father of Messrs.
J. H S. Barnes (the present master of Canning Downs stud,


Warwick, and owner and breeder of Rivoli and other horses,
of note in recent years), Henry Barnes (of Dyraaba stud, on
the Northern Rivers), and Charley, Walter, and Robert
Barnes, all good sportsmen. For 11 years the late Mr. William
PMoud was manager of Messrs. Barnes and Smith’s stud, and
during that time many notable racehorses and sires, which
were either imported or purchased in Australia, and were
destined to make history in connection with the Australian
turf, were under his care and guidance.
Among them were Middlesex (imp.). Fusion (imp.),
Kelpie (imp.), Clayton (imp.), Warlike (imp.), and Anteros
(imp.). As sires of racehorses all gained more or less dis-
tinction, but the greatest of them all was Kelpie, whose
achievements as a sire are writ large in the annals of the
thoroughbred industry in Australia. Sunlight and Janitor
were two notable performers on the turf that w'ere sired
by Kelpie, and each was the winner of a Hawkesbury Handi-
cap. Another was Newbold, who afterwards became the sire
of that great Queensland performer, Megaphone, who later
distinguished himself in the southern States and won a
fortune for the late Charley Brown. Among other good per-
formers sired by Kelpie (imp.) wlere Judex, Atlanta (A.J.G.
Doncaster Handicap winner), Thyra (Glen Innes Thousand
winner), Macaroni (a successful w.f.a. performer at Rand-
wick), Miribeau (Brisbane Handicap winner), and North
Star. Subsequently Kelpie was sold to Mr. G. Reynolds,
founder of the famous Tocal stud, on the Hunter River, New
South Wales, and there he sired Tom Brown (winner of
Tattersalfs Gup), Secundus, and other good performers.
Kelpie’s achievements as a sire actually began before
Messrs. Barnes and Smith secured him for their stud, for
previously to going there he had sired Fireworks, who gained
the unique distinction of winning two V.R.G. Derbys—they
were run in the same year —as well as siring Goldsborough,
who as a sire produced mares who proved successful stud
matrons, and whose names are to be found in the pedigrees
of some of the most notable horses that ever graced the
Australian turf.
Another notable horse bred at the Gordon Brook stud,
while the late Mr. William Noud was manager, was Proctor,
by Warlike (imp.). Proctor was raced in Brisbane by the
late Mr. James M‘Gill, and after winning many races, in-
cluding the Brisbane Handicap, Brisbane Gup, and Moreton
Handicap, was sold at a big figure to Mr. John Eales, of New
South Wales.
In addition to his managerial duties, the late Mr.
William Noud trained horses for Messrs. Barnes and Smith
for upwards of 15 years of his association with them, and
one of his most notable achievements for his patrons was to
win the Clarence River Sires’ Produce Stakes for 12 years


in succession. It was an achievement to be proud of, but,
according to his son Bill, the proudest day in the late William
JNoud’s life was when he downed “Honest” John Tait’s “black
demon/ 1 The Barb, a Melbourne Gup winner, and a champion
in his day, at weight-for-age at Randwick, with Messrs.
Barnes and Smith’s Gordon Brook bred horse Bulginbaah (by
Pitsford from Banshee). Two notable horsemen of their
day, Sam Holmes and Jimmy Ashworth, rode Bulginbaah and
The Barb, respectively, and the Gordon Brook horse heat
“the black demon” after a great struggle. Ashworth was
subsequently killed at Randwick. Bulginbaah was a great
horse, and was the winner of the first Tattersall’s Gup in
Sydney in 1868.
In the early ’eighties the late Mr. William Noud started
out for himself as a public trainer, and for some years was
most successful in the racing centres on the Northern Rivers.
Pater in the ’eighties he moved to Randwick, and settled
there as a public trainer, and up to within a few years of
his death in 1915, when failing eyesight caused his retire-
ment, he enjoyed a large measure of success, and among
other notable horses that kept his name prominent as a
trainer or owner were Marvel, Rebel, Papua, Penz-a-Moi,
Fanfare, Naphro, Mango stein, and The Prize. He owned, as
well as trained, Marvel, when the latter as a two-year-old,
won six races either at Rosehill or Randwick, and later heat
Carbine in a w.f.a. race at Randwick.
The late Mr. William Noud reared his fine family of
sons and daughters at Gordon Brook. The sons all inherited
the love of the thoroughbred from their father, and with the
great opportunities that were available at Gordon Brook stud,
with its atmosphere of bush life among the most beautiful
and picturesque surroundings, it was little wonder that the
Noud hoys became accomplished riders in their early boy-
hood. With the exception *of Arthur, they all became suc-
cessful jockeys, and were riding in races at 11 years of age,
when still attending school, and, by the way, it might be
mentioned here that Bill Noud, whom we know so well
to-day, distinguished himself as a scholar as well as in the
paths he followed in later life.
Arthur, the eldest son, Was engaged in business pursuits
in his youthful and young manhood days before coming to
Brisbane, where for a great many years he was one of this
State’s most successful trainers until he joined the great
majority over six years ago. He won most of the principal
events in the Q.T.G. calendar, including no less than three
Brisbane Gups, with Haidee, Fightaway, and Curve, and the
Queensland Gup with All Green and Frasca. Tom Noud was
giving great promise as a rider when death claimed him.


Both Bill and Jack Noud were riding with success at 11
years ol* age, and Jack, the youngest boy of the family, was*
on Marvel in all his successes, including his defeat of Carbine
a I w.f.a.
* Bill,’ ’ as he is more familiarly known to racegoers,
was still attending school when he, at 11 years of age—so
years ago—and weighing 4.8, won’his first race on Equator
Jby Cossack) at Grafton. All he knew about riding then he
had been taught by his father, and, strengthened by his
experiences on horses at the stud farm at Gordon Brook.
Equator was both owned and trained by his father who, at
that time, had a big string of horses under his care, and little
Bill—as he was then—did most of the riding and gained a
good measure of success. When Bill was 14 years old,
Honest John Tait (who, by the way, won no less than four
Melbourne Cups) induced William Noud, senior, to allow
him to go to Sydney to do most of his (Tail’s) light riding.
Bill met with moderate success in Sydney and, to use his own
words, he got homesick and went hack to his home.
At 16 years “Bill” began to put on weight, but he con-
tinued to ride with a good deal of success in the country
until he was 18, and among his successes he included the
Clarence Biver Jockey Club’s Derby on Yately, and the Rich-
mond River Turf Club’s first St. Leger Stakes on Prairie
Bird, a daughter of Yattendon. Sold subsequently, Yately
was taken south, and he won races both at Randwick and
Flemington, and later was purchased by a Queensland
publican, Mr. Gordon, and he was raced here. Yately Lodge,
near Kedron, was named after this grey son of Warlike. In
five rides on Yately in the Northern Rivers districts “Bill”
Noud had an unbeaten record. Yately was bred at Ramornie
Station, a few miles from Gordon Brook, by Mr. G. Tindall,
who also bred Yattendon, one of the greatest colonial bred
sires the Australian turf has known, and who was the sire
of such celebrities as Chester and Grand Flaneur, in addition
to other horses of more or less note.
At 18 years Bill Noud had grown so heavy that he
decided to retire from the saddle. He was at that time
aware of the fact that he was possessed of tleetness of foot,
and decided to give pedestrianism (which was then in the
boom) a “go.” He trained assiduously for six months, and
so successful was he in his new venture that at the age of 19
lie was the recognised champion of the coast districts of
New South Wales, north of Sydney, having won in that short
period no less than 25 largely advertised matches, beating
amongst others, Reynolds, the Newcastle crack of the time
in a match for £2OO aside.


-.■■■■. •.-. .. ,.
V . • ' ; ' V • < ••.-•-.•;• - ‘ _ '* *.- '.* '
&
MR. W. J. NOUD


About that time, Donoghue, a Tenterfield runner,
loomed up largely with an unbeaten record, and Bill chal-
lenged him to a match, and it was clinched for £2OO aside
over 150 yards. It duly eventuated on the show grounds at
Casino, before an immense gathering, which included visitors
from all parts of New South Wales and Queensland. Bill
made short work of Donoghue, causing him to retire after
three-quarters of the distance had been covered, at which
stage Donoghue was well and truly beaten. Donoghue after-
wards complained of being unwell on the day of that race,
and Bill readily agreed to give him the satisfaction of
another match over 150 yards. It took place a month later
at Boorook, for a bigger side wager than in the previous
match, and Bill this time won by seven yards, running two
and a-half yards inside even time.
Jack Applett was the then recognised champion runner
of Australia, and Bill Noud's backers challenged him to a
match with Bill for the title. Bilks hopes and aspirations of
securing the title were frustrated, however, by Applett over-
looking him to accept a challenge issued by Tom Malone the
Irish champion. Malone beat Applett by 10 yards, and
afterwards offered to concede Bill Noud three yards in a
match over 150 yards for £SOO aside. The offer was jumped
at, and Bill beat the Irish crack by ft yard and a-quarter in
14 2-5 secs.
A year later Bill easily beat Clements, a noted aboriginal
runner, in a match for £2OO aside, over 150 yards at Botany,
and ran 5 yards inside even time. By this time he found it
difficult to make matches and as he was on a hopeless mark
in handicaps—for instance on one yard in a Sir Joseph Banks
Handicap, which Donald Blight won off 22 yards—he decided
to retire from pedestrianism. In six years in the spiked shoe
he cleaned up in stakes alone over £3OOO.
At the age of 24 Bill Noud turned his attention to horse-
training in a public capacity first at Hawkesbury and later at
Handwick. In 1900 he came to Brisbane and settled here,
and in the 24 years that have elapsed he has, as a public
trainer, upheld the great reputation he established in New
South Wales first as rider and later as runner. The races
won on the Queensland turf by horses trained by him run
into many hundreds —in fact, Bill has lost count of them but
th ey include most of the principal races in Brisbane.
Among the more notable of the horses and the races
they won when trained by him are Botha (a smart sprinter
and weight carrier), (winner Stradbroke Handicap
and w.f.a. races at Eagle Farm), Tbe Master (St. Leger and
Moreton Handicap), Petal Light (Autumn Stakes), Grattan
(Guineas), Flaxen (Champagne Stakes, Autumn Stakes,
Guineas, Derby, Summer Gup, and w.f.a. events), Plunder


(Toowoomba Bracelets, tbe Brisbane Cup, and May Bay Cup
and w.f.a. races), MTlwraith (Q.T.G. Hopeful Stakes and
Rosehill (N.S.W.) Juvenile Stakes), Bright Laddie ( Autumn
Stakes), Amberdown (Flying and Hopetoun Handicaps) r
Archives (Claret Stakes), My Gavonm (Brisbane thousand,
O.T.G. Metropolitan Handicap, Summer Gup, Rawson Stakes
(Sydney), and w.f.a. races at Eagle Farm); Belinacre
(Guineas), Sweet Colleen (Hopeful Stakes), Royal Merv
(Brisbane Thousand), The Bounce (Moreton Handicap and
Albion Gup), Koatanui (Guineas and dead heat in Derby),
Fred Foote (St. Leger and Southport Handicap), Prickles
(Brisbane Handicap, Moreton Handicap, and w.l.a. races at
Eagle Farm), and Mountain Song (Q.T.G. Sires Produce
Stakes, Queensland Guineas, several handicap and w.l.a.
races and second Queensland Cup, and also the holder ol
the mile record (1.37f) for Queensland), Persse s Double
(Brisbane Thousand, and other races).
Bill Noud has been a close student of other branches ot
sport besides horse-racing and foot-running, particularly
boxing and sculling. When I asked him if he had formed
any set opinions regarding the merits of the horses and men
he had seen in the various branches of sport he had followed
in his long career, he said he had, and because they are the
views of one so competent to express an opinion they are
passed on to readers, and no doubt will be read with interest.
In the different branches of sport concerned Bill gives bis
opinions of who were the best as follows:
Racehorses. —“Carbine, Malua, Abercorn, Poitrel, and
Sir Modred were the best horses over a journey, and Gloam-
intr Marvel, Beauford, and Bulginbaah up to a mile and a
quarter 7
j Jockeys. —“I think,” said Bill, “the jockeys of 25 and
30 years ago superior to those of the present day. Paddy
Pigott (who by the way, is still in Brisbane, and is em-
ployed by Trainer Albert Carr), Tom Hales, Bricky Colley,
Ted M'Grade, Ted Power, Alec Robertson, and Mick O’Brien
were all truly great horsemen, and of the light riders W.
Kelso and J. Fielder were splendid, but, in my opinion, the
oreatest of all the lightweights, was Donald Nicholson, who
unfortunately, when in his prime was killed in the terrible
smash in Grace Darling’s Caulfield Gup in 1885.”
Footrunners. —“I consider Harry Hutchins, Charley
Samuels, Tom Malone, Jim M'Garrigal, and A. J. Farrell the
best among the sprinters, and W. J. Byrne is an easy first
among tbe jumpers and hurdle runners.
Scullers. —“Of the scullers I have seen I think Harry
Searle was a marvel, and the best of them all. Bill Beach
comes next, follow ed by Elias cock and E. d lickett.
Hanlon was a scientific sculler, but Bill Beach was too good
for him.”
000


Boxers.—“Of the heavyweights I have seen I consider
Peter Jackson and Joe Goddard were in a class by them-
selves, and the best of the middleweights were Boh Fitz-
simmons, Les Darcy, and Jim Hall. Of the smaller men
Griffo stood out on his own.”
Despite his 61 years, Bill is still going strong, hut when
he does retire, his son Arthur —who is foreman of his big
stable —will carry on and with the excellent training he has
had will no doubt uphold the reputation established by his
bather.
Mr. Jack Noud was an accomplished race rider at 11
years of age. Between the ages of 11 and 17 years he won
numerous races, including the Gootamundra Gup and Alhury
Gup on Komisch, and was on Marvel when he won his six
races as a two-year-old, and again when the colt downed the
mighty Carbine in a w.f.a. race at Randwick.
The late Mr. William Noud, senr., originally owned
Marvel. The colt had not been nominated for any of the
"'classics,” hut as a three-year-old was weighted at 7.5 for
the Melbourne Gup which Bravo won. Jack Noud was to
have ridden him, hut in the meantime the colt passed into
other hands, and was scratched front the Gup. Jack did well
as a rider in the country, hut the nearest he got to riding the
winner of a big handicap race in Sydney was in 1889 when
he finished third on New Guinea (late" Papua) to Carbine
(first) and Melos (second), in the Sydney Gup. In subse-
quent years Jack remained with his parents, and was his
father’s right hand man until the latter’s retirement on
account of failing eyesight. He then took over his father’s
stables, and started on his own account as a public trainer.
In 1902 Jack spent seven months on a tour of Great
Britain and the Continent. After spending some time at New-
market, England, he went to Scotland, and thence on to The
Gurragh, County Kildare, Ireland, which is famous as a
jumping country. Accompanied by Mr. Nat Gould (the
author of many racing novels), he subsequently visited the
racing stables and racecourses of France, Switzerland, Spain,
Italy, Germany, and Ceylon, and picked up much knowledge
which has been useful to him ever since.
It was about 1906 that he started as a public trainer,
and success soon came his way, as in that year he carried off
such an important event as the V.B.G. Oaks Stakes with
5 abba Gahba, who was owned by Mr. T. Maples, a New
South Wales sportsman, but was raced in Noud’s name.
In 1907 he landed the Y.A.T.G. Debutant Stakes with
Miss Bass, who was ridden by Johnno Stone, a crack Brisbane
jockey at that time. Two years later Mr. R. W. Clancy, a
wealthy New South Wales pastoralist, became one of Jack
Noud’s patrons, the first horse trained by him for that


gentleman being The Reckoning, and in a couple of seasons*
the latter won nine races in addition to securing four seconds
c.nd two thirds. Later Mr. Clancy increased his team under
Jack Noud’s care to eight horses, and among them was that
good colt, Woolerina, who as a two-year-old won two of the
juvenile races at the Melbourne Gup meeting, and after-
wards won the Rosehill Guineas and the Caulfield Guineas.
Mr. E. G. Blume, the well-known Queensland sports-
man and breeder, also became one of Jack Noud’s patrons,
and for him he won the Caulfield Gup of 1911, the A.J.G.
Craven Plate, and other races with that grand mare, Lady
Medallist. Lady Medallist won that cup by the proverbial
street, end the stable connections cleaned up a fortune, Mr.
Blume being credited with having won £12,000 alone in
bets. Mr. Blume purchased the mare for £IOOO, and she
proved a goldmine. Jack did well during the ten years he
trained horses in Sydney, and for one season headed the list
of successful trainers, and for another season was second in
the list.
In 1916 he came to Brisbane and settled here as a public
trainer. Starting from scratch he soon made good for a
worthy patron in Mr. G. W. Dight, junior, of Yetman, N.S.W.
His first charge for Mr. Dight was that grand little mare,
Sydney Damsel, who, in her first success in a Fourth Division
Handicap at Albion Park, won by 15 lengths, in the record
time for the track of 1.9f, for five and a-half furlongs. Later,
Sydney Damsel won, among other races, the Q.T.G. Strad-
broke Handicap and Q.T.G. Easter Handicap (one and
a-quarter mile), carrying 10.5 in the latter event, and after-
wards went to Sydney where she won an A.J.G. Doncaster
Handicap. Noud also broke in and trained Golden Sunset
(imp.) for Mr. Dight, and the imported gelding won several
races before being sold to Mr. Mick Ryan, for whom he won
the Brisbane Gup and other races.
When Mr. Dight imported Ghipilly (by Spearmint from
Pretty Polly) to Australia, his ambition was to win with him
in the one and only race he was intended to have in Aus-
tralia, before taking up stud duty, and he entrusted the horse
to Jack Noud to train with that object in view. Noud suc-
ceeded in gratifying Mr. Dighf s ambition. He got the horse
fit and well, and placing him nicely Ghipilly duly scored a
meritorious win at Eagle Farm, and was then retired to the
stud, where he has since sired some very useful performers.
Mr. I. J. Moore, another well-known breeder and owner,
and a member of the Q.T.G. Committee, afterwards became
one of Noud’s patrons, and for Mr. Moore he won races with
Barfield, Bay Moon, Baralynd, Bronze Bar, Baristoria, Araby,
and Golden Opinions.
Two years ago, Mrs. J. 11. S. Barnes, a popular sports-
woman, and wife of Mr. J. H. S. Barnes (master of Canning


Downs stud), whose father was one of the.owners of the
famous Gordon Brook stud, so prominently mentioned in the
reminiscences of Mr. Bill Noud, and also their daughter, Miss
E. G. Barnes, and son, Mr. G. E. Barnes, became patrons of
’Jack Noud’s, and for the two lady owners he has won races,
the rich and much-coveted two-year-old classic, the Q.T.G.
Dopeful Stakes, and other races, for Mrs. Barnes with High-
land, and a Q.T.G. youngster’s race with Sucrapiel for Miss
Barnes.
“Mountain View,” the home of Mr. and Mrs: Jack Noud
and their little daughter, Kathleen, is named after the old
home of the family at Gordon Brook, and to it has recently
been added a new and modern training establishment.


CHAPTER XXII.
SUCCESSES OF THE TUCKER FAMILY OF HORSEMEN.
Old “Bill” a Knight of the Pigskin and King in the Art of
Angling —Notable Successes of Father and Sons.
Of the racing families at present associated with the
training and riding of racehorses in Brisbane to-day, no
name is more familiar to devotees of the sport or more
prominently associated with the records of winners of the
classic and principal handicap events of the Queensland turt
than that of Tucker. It is no exaggeration to say that there
is not a racegoer who does not know the veteran trainer,
William J. Tucker, either personally or by sight. “Billy,”
as he is familiarly called, has for something like 40 years
been one of the best-known identities of racing in Brisbane
through his splendid achievements, first as a rider, and for
some years past as a trainer.
In his day there was no better horseman in Queensland,
and perhaps not in Australia, not only as a race rider, but
all round. No crack circus rider had anything on “Billy”
Tucker in trick or acrobatic feats of horsemanship, and he
had no superior as a race rider, at a time when there were
a great many truly great horsemen.
Old “Bill” is also one of the greatest fishing enthusiasts
tr be found in the State, and his supply of tackle at his home
is typical of an angling department of a first-class sports
depot What he has is worth well over £lOO. And few
have anything on “Billy” Tucker in the art of angling.
An" Englishman by birth —born at Portsmouth —“Billy”
Tucker was brought to Australia with his mother, brother,
and sisters at an early age by his father, Captain Tucker,
who was master of the sailing ship which brought the family
to Australia. Billy was only a youth when his father died,
and he and his brothers started out to help their mother and
sisters. The love of horses took Billy to the field of racing.
There was no apprenticeship to be served in those days, and
it was his natural ability that soon put Billy Tucker in the
limelight as a rider. Success came his way quickly and
commanded for him a lot of the best riding in the late
’eighties, the 'nineties, and into the present century. He
rode on all the old time but now gone and forgotten courses,
including Oxley, Lytton, Goorparoo, and Breakfast Greek, the
latter course in those days being a much smaller track than
the present course at Albion Park.


MESSRS. W. J. TUCKER, Senior, a-nd W. J. TUCKER, Junior,
photographed some years ago when* both were riding together.


On one occasion after riding two winners at Goorparoo,
Billy Tucker left on bis hack to fulfil a couple of engage-
ments at the opposition meeting on the Breakfast Greek
course the same afternoon, and although the pony he was
riding reared and fell with him in the Valley, and was badly
cut about, he himself escaped injury, and got to the course
in time to ride either one or two more winners. Thus he
gained the distinction of riding winners on two different
courses in the same afternoon.
Billy was in some bad smashes in his day, and still bears
the marks of the serious injuries he suffered in two. In one
of the cup races when North Australian fell with him Tucker
received a nasty cut on the top of the head, which neces-
sitated several stitches, but for the last race of the day, for
which he had accepted an engagement he urged his claims
to be allowed to ride, and with his head bandaged he rode
in the race. Out of six rides in jumping races he won on
three, and came to grief in the other three.
Billy Tucker never kept any diary or record of his turf
achievements, and taking him unexpectedly as Mr. Gollins
did ; he naturally found it difficult to retrace the many
happenings and incidents of what has undoubtedly been an
interesting and eventful career. His successes either as
trainer or rider in the many Gup races—nowadays the title
of “Gup” is applied only to the Brisbane and Queensland
Gups and Tattersalfs Gup—of years gone by have been so
numerous that he long lost count of them, but he can recall
the many good performers that passed through his hands,
among the most notable being Little Tartar, Sea Breeze,
Heronry, Tetupha, Ardon, Guiding Star, St. Quentin. Diavolo,
Demeranthis, Jessyce, Mischief, Glenbern, Seremite, Ardglen,
and Wee Glen. Mischief he regards as the best horse he
ever trained or rode.
With the above horses which he trained and in most
instances also owned, or raced on lease, he scored many
important successes, apart from riding the winners of
several principal races. In addition to riding Narcissus to
victory in the Queensland Gup in 1898, Billy raced and
trained St. Quentin, Sea Breeze, and Tetupha, the respective
winners of the Queensland Gups of 1903, 1905, and 1907,
and Sea Breeze was piloted to victory by W. J. Tucker, jun.,
and Tetupha by W. M‘Gabe, who served his apprenticeship
with old Bill. With Demeranthis (which he raced on lease)",
he won the Brisbane Gup in 1916, and he also trained the
winners of the Brisbane Gups of 1919, 1922, and 1923. In
addition to riding Lotos to victory in the Hopeful Stakes in
1898, W. J., sen., raced and trained the winners Terentia, in
1918, and Wee Glen in 1924, and he trained Ardglen, the
winner of the Derby of 1923, and owned and trained the
winners of the Sandgate Handicaps of 1899 and 1919, viz.,
4*1410 1 7 '


Little Tartar* and Jessyce, in addition to riding Little Tartar
to victory, and also Irish Stew, the winner of that event in
1895. The race now known as the Windsor Handicap, but
was formerly the King’s Gup, and subsequently the Summer
Gup, he won with his horse Ardon (which he also trained),
in 1902, and previous to that he rode North Australian to
victory in the race for Mr. J. M‘Gill in 1899. He rode the
winners of three Queensland Guineas, including his own
horse Mischief, in 1909; and in addition to winning the
Sandgate Handicap on Bucolic for Mr. J. M‘Gill in 1900, he
also raced and trained the winner of the Sandgate Handicap
of 1903, St. Quentin, and of 1915 —Glint Lad, the latter
being ridden by A. E. Tucker, who to-day enjoys a fair
measure of success as a trainer. With Jemedah he won the
Brisbane Handicap for Mr. G. E. M‘Dougall in 1918, and with
Ship, Seremite, and Ardglen he has won the last three Q.T.G.
St. Leger Stakes for their owners.
His record for the Moreton is also a notable one, for,
in addition to owning and training three winners in Little
Tartar, St. Quentin, and Diavolo, he also trained the winner
(Ardglen) of the race in 1924, and, in addition to riding
Little Tartar when he won he also rode Archie’s Daughter
when she dead-heated with Battalion in 1897. As either
owner or trainer W. J. Tucker, sen., has also been asso-
ciated with several successes in the big races at Albion Park,
including the Brisbane and Albion Thousands and Albion
Gup. There are many other successes in the principal events
of the small meetings at Eagle Farm, but they are too
numerous to give in detail.
E. G. Tucker, who does the principal riding for the
stable, inherited the art of race-riding from his father, and
the latter developed it, and, in addition to those in the
Albion Park big events, he has won the Hopeful Stakes twice,
the Derby Stakes once, the Sandgate Handicap once, the
Sires’ Produce Stakes once, the Windsor Handicap once,
the Queensland Guineas three times, the Brisbane Handicap
once, the St. Leger Stakes once, the Moreton Handicap three
times, and Brisbane Gup once.
Both W. J. Tucker, junior, and A. E. Tucker, two more
of the sons, gained success in the saddle —W. J., junior,
riding Sea Breeze to victory in the Queensland Cup at the
uge of 14 —but both were forced to retire early on account
of increasing weight. The younger son, Jimmy, a pro-
mising young rider, was killed in an accident at Eagle Farm.
A. E. now training on his own account, W. J., junior, is
his father’s right-hand man at the Ardon stables, and is
quartered, with his young wife and family, at the “Ardon”
home so long occupied by W. J. and Mrs. Tucker, senior.
W. J. Tucker, senior, has recently built a new and modern


home alongside the old one, and while he still is master ot
the u Ardon” stables he leaves most of the work in the
stables to the charge of his son, W. J., junior.
The Ardon stables and training establishment are among
the most commodious in Queensland. They cover a very
wide area of ground. There are three separate stables, each
equipped with all modern appointments, and, in addition to
breaking-in yards, rolling sheds, and running yards, there
is a paddock for exercise work. To give in detail the many
up-to-date innovations in the establishment would take
more space than is available, but it can be said that it is an
education to be shown over the establishment and its appoint-
ments, which even include a chemistry (in which all
medicine, ointments, liniments, lotions, and powders for all
ailments are dispensed), and mending room (in which all
gear and harness are repaired). Indeed, the daily routine
from the time the horses leave the track in the early morning
till they are locked up for the night is an education in the
way of systematic working, and the maximum of work is
done in the minimum of time, to the satisfaction of all
associated with it.


CHAPTER XXIII.
JACK BLACKCOCK’S EVENTFUL CAREER.
Like his brothers, Dick and Watty, Jack Blacklock got
his early training from the late John Finnie at the Rosevale
Stud, Drayton, and has had a distinguished career in racing
in Queensland. He started riding at the early age of 11
years, and in his first ride in a race he won an important
handicap at Eagle Farm on E. Monaghan’s Tross. Since then
until he retired somfe time ago, he had been a conspicuous
figure as either rider or trainer in Queensland, and up to the
time of Mr. Finnie’s death trained for him. In his younger
days he did the northern circuit continuously for 20 suc-
cessive years, and won many races as either rider or trainer
(at times both) for the late Mr. Finnie and others, including
a 2i miles race at Bowen on Ben Bolt, who afterwards went
south and won the Caulfield Cup. Other good horses he
either trained or rode in some of their successes in both
Brisbane and the North were My Love, Medusa. Lurline, Pet
Girl, Golden Spray, Silver Spray, Lady Marion, and Newbold.
whom he trained and rode when he Won the Towers double
in 1895, the year prior to his dead heat with Tornado in the
Brisbane Gup. Incidents associated with the Brisbane Gup
of 1892 and 1896, in which Jack Blacklock was concerned,
have been referred to in a previous chapter. He also won
Brisbane Gups with Lurline and Black Paint (the latter in
1911). Another noted performer Jack trained for Mr.
Finnie was Sweetheart, who, as a two-year-old, carried 8.13
—or 291b. over Weight-for-age—and beat 18 opponents in
the Q.T.C. Stradbroke Handicap. Sweetheart was by Ormond
from Sylvana, and was bred by Finnie, and as a two-year-
old she suffered only one defeat. She was then sold for 500
guineas to go to Melbourne. There she won a Moonee
Talley Gup, and afterwards was sent to England, where she
won races over the jumps. Among other lesser lights, but
great winners in their day, which Blacklock trained, were
Bendigo, Kalmia, Palermo, Gala, Tottie (a 14.2 pony). J.R.,
and Nut Brown.
Tottie was a remarkable pony for her inches, and was
bred by Mr. Finnie. She was got by Ormond from Minerva,
a successful stud matron, about whom there is a history. Mr.'
Finnie bought Minerva in foal, and with another foal at foot
for £3O in a saleyard at Toowoomba, and afterwards sold
her foal at foot and the one which was subsequently born


i^QQQQQQQQQyQW!^-
XXfflW X X*X*X-X*X^'T’??yywS8ooo88®
II.
Ji|
: l|| p'
•■■••••■•■ ■ /X*!lvwX , Xv.\/. ■:•;•>!•..
;:;;: : ; ; ; ;;
;!v ;X;XvX;X
PROMINENT BRISBANE TRAINERS
MR. J. J. KAHL.
MR. W. BOOTH.
MR. J. BOOTH
MR. C. SMITHSON


both fillies—to Mr. Smith, of Tucka Tucka stud, and of Gozo
fame, and raced as After Ten and Bed Time they were fair
performers, and successful brood mares.
Some tune later it was discovered lhat Minerva was a
stolen mare, but she remained in John Finnie’s possession,
and from her he bred Tottie and other good performers. For
Jack Blacklock she raced eleven times and was never beaten.
So highly did Jack regard Tottie that one day when Charley
Brown, of Megaphone fame, was voicing the merits of Babel
(winner of the Stradbroke Handicaps of 1895 and 1896,
under 10.12 and 10.10 respectively), as a racehorse, Jack
offered to match Tottie against Babel for £5OO aside, Tottie
to receive 71b. from the bigger horse, but the challenge was
:not accepted. Tottie was eventually sold for £2OO to go to
Melbourne, and did well there, and her then owner issued a
challenge to race her against any pony of her height in
Australia for from £5OO to £lOOO aside. Someone accepted
the challenge and put in a deposit, but he later withdrew it,
and Tottie was never tackled in a match.
Of Gala Jack says he was one of the commonest looking
horses he ever saw. He looked more like an ungainly
■draught horse than a racehorse, and had hair on his legs long
enough to plait. Before Jack got him he did service as a
hack, and also in a butcher’s cart, but under Jack Blacklock’s
care he developed into a good racecourse performer and on
one occasion beat such a noted performer as Fortune Teller
at a difference of 31b.
Jack considers that the best horse he ever had under
his care was Kemp (by Ormond), but he was killed in the
second race he ran in. In his first race Kemp ran very green,
•and, after entering the straight, took fright at the people in
the reserves, with the result that he steered a zigzag course
under the efforts of his rider to control him, yet he won as
he liked. On the occasion of his next Tace Jack coupled
Realm with Kemp to win him £7OO in a double. Realm won,
hut Kemp in his race fell shortly after the start, and, breaking
his back, had to be destroyed. Jack considers Kemp was
the makings of the greatest horse Queensland ever knew.
Watty Blacklock, in his reminiscences, told of his ex-
periences over the hurdles on Maritana, when a spill and a
broken collar-bone caused him to give up riding over jumps.
Jack also tells an amusing story of a fall he had on the same
mare. He went with her to Rockhampton to ride her in a
hurdle race. The hurdles there were different to here, being
topped by a three by two rounded off batten. There were
four runners, which, in addition to Maritana, included Native
Bose (Ryan) and The Drummer (Mick Quirk), the latter
being one of the best hurdlers that ever raced in Queensland.
Maritana negotiated four of the jumps safely, but she hit the
f fib hard with her chest and toppled over the fence, throwing


Jack heavily to the ground. Both the mare and Jack escaped
serious injury, and a burly policeman, running oyer and
securing Maritana, said to Jack, “Jump on, you’ve still got a
chance.” “You jump on yourself and have a go. I’ve had
enough,” was Jack’s response.
Jack recalls another meeting at which he had a fall.
It was in Gympie, and a horse ridden in the hurdle race by
the late Harry Walsh came down and brought down Jack’s
mount and three others. Indeed, that particular meeting,
says Jack, was but a chapter of accidents, and when the last
race came on for decision brother Watty and a local butcher
were the only jockeys left to ride.
Jack, in his younger days, was also a crack pigeon shot,
and one of his notable performances was the winning of three
ladies’ bracelets shoots in succession at meetings of the
Brisbane Gun Club. He has retired from racing and nowa-
days is living quietly with his life’s helpmate and companion
at their old home at Hendra, his training stables being leased
to G. Jago.


CHAPTER XXIY.-—JACK KAHL IN REMINISCENT MOOD.
“Of Cheerful Yesterdays and Confident To-morrows” —Prize
Money for First Winning Ride —A Huge Horse —Mick
Ryan’s Purchase of La Neive.
“A man he seems of cheerful yesterdays
And confident to-morrows.”
—Wordsworth.
It would be hard to find more appropriate words than
those quoted above to introduce the well-known and suc-
cessful trainer, Mr. J. J. (“Jack’ 1 ) Kahl to readers.
For 35 years he has been prominently before the racing
public in various parts of Queensland, first as a rider and
latterly as a trainer, and his many notable successes as a
trainer since he settled in Rrisbane 14 years ago have kept
his name prominently before the sport-loving people ol
Queensland. As the trainer of such good performers of the
past as Destruction, Rachelor of Arts, La Neive, Lord Yindex,
■Sheila R., Symposium, Earl Kitchener, Golden Sunset, Roy
Syce, Laneffe and Lanome, he indeed has had many cheerful
yesterdays, and although his successes had been few during
the past 12 months up to the time this article was written,
he was looking forward with confidence to the to-morrows
to bring many more successes with the big team of young
horses he was preparing for their racing careers.
While he has enjoyed a big measure of success, Jack
has also had under his care some very costly horses that
were failures as racehorses, notably, St. Golwyne (who
cost 900 guineas’), and Captain Carlow (half brother to
Ulva’s Isle), and with a few exceptions his string had not
contained much of any note for about 12 months prior to
the writing of this article, but his long experience of racing
and racehorses had taught him to take such reverses and
disappointments in the same spirit as he enjoyed successes.
Of bright and genial disposition, Jack Kahl is a popular
man in club circles; at billiards he is a front rank and brainy
cueist; at horse training he is accomplished and successful,
and the successes of the colours of his patrons are always
popular with the racing public.
Like several other prominent riders and trainers, Kahl
comes of a family which was disinterested in racing. His
parents were engaged for a life-time in dairying pursuits at
Rockhampton, where they reared their family of four sons
and four daughters. On a dairy farm it Was only natural that


the youngsters learnt to ride at a very early age. In fact*
Jack claims that he could sit on a horse as early as he could
walk. As a schoolboy in the ’eighties he and an elder brother,
Harry, became acquainted with Dick Markwell, a prominent
Central District trainer, and in 1889, at the age of 10, he
was apprenticed to Markwell, while his brother Harry look
a job in Markwell’s stable, of which in later years he became
foreman.
At 11 years Jack had his first ride in a race and it was
not long afterwards when he had his victory on a horse
called Brimstone, at Tamho. In those days Tambo was no
small racing centre and its periodical meetings attracted
prominent horses, sportsmen, and riders from other centres.
Brimstone was regarded as possessing a chance second
to none for the race in which he was engaged, and with the
arrival of the visiting jockeys, there were numerous appli-
cants for the mount on the horse, and both Markwell (the
trainer) and Ford (the owner) were called fools and all
sorts of such things for entrusting the riding of the horse to-
what at least one visiting rider described as “a mug kid,
having his first ride.” Both Ford and Markwell treated the
remarks of the visiting riders with contempt. They had
confidence in little Kahl, and to one Ford remarked, “The
mug kid will do me, and take care he does not make mugs-
of you fellows.” Ford and Markwell further evidenced their
confidence in Jack Kahl by hacking Brimstone so well that
he started favorite in a spirited betting market.
Jack justified the confidence reposed in him. Befitting
of the occasion he rode Brimstone in masterly style, and
landed him a comfortable winner from a horse, on which a
visiting jockey, who had had most to say about the mug kid*
had subsequently secured the mount.
After the race Ford went and collected the first prize
money of the race —£60 —and with it grasped in his right
hand he went over to Kahl, gathered him bodily under his
left arm, and proceeded to where the visiting jockey, who
had ridden the second horse, Was standing. To the latter
he said, “Well, what do you think of the mug kid now?” at
the same time handing little Jack the bundle of notes he
had collected as the first prize. What the tantalised rider of
the second horse thought or said does not matter, but it was
one of Jack’s proudest and happiest experiences in his long
association with racing. Brimstone was afterwards brought
to Brisbane and won hurdle races here.
For 21 years afterwards Kahl rode with much success
in the Central, Central-west, and Western districts, and on
four occasions rode every winner on the programme—thrice
at Isisford and once at Barcaldine. At 14 years of age he
weighed 9.5 and then and from then on the days preceding
race days entailed strenuous exercises in reducing his weight*


Jv :
0 I
VAj *W|f j
.... 1
: ’ ■ : .1
V ■■■ „ v p / Ip-x
M ': ■&' ' ■£ #
.
Xv.-: : : ;- //jSiKv - ' .;.v
!
f
fBSf'
, I
■IA /# ,«
•:•... g
%.V? ; ;'?--5’. yV&U
" '" I • "r
WBKrt cA*s S*
U ■ ’: |bPV ■'
• l : 11?
PROMINENT BRISBANE TRAINERS OF TO-DAY
MR. P. J. RYAN
MR. T. J. BROSNAN
mr. c. McLaughlin
MR. J. W. NOUD


but unlike Watty Blacklock and some other old-time riders
Jack was not partial to hours of chopping wood or digging
on top of long distance walking. He confined himself to the
long distance walking in heavy flannels and on occasions
has “sweated” under long, sharp walking from 10 stone to
ride in the vicinity of 8 stone.
Kahl continued riding in the country till 1910, in which
year he came to Brisbane. He left Markwell in 1910, and,
in addition to riding, he afterwards trained horses for him-
self, and also for Mr. J. Turnbull and Mr. H. J, Whittingham,
a brother of Mr. A. H. Whittingham, of the Q.T.G. Com-
mittee and one of Queensland’s strongest supporters of racing
as an owner.
One horse that he raced in conjunction with his brother,
Harry, was Ironsides, which Jack says was the biggest horse
he ever saw, and probably the best grass-fed horse in the
world in his day. They bought Ironsides, who was over 18
hands high, from Markwell, and won numerous races for
grass-fed horses with him, carrying up to 15 stone. Ironsides
was afterwards sold for hurdle racing in Victoria to Mr.
Alec. Murphy, who in later years raced that good colt
Artilleryman in partnership with Sir Samuel Hordern. After
his arrival in Melbourne Ironsides had a bad fall when being
schooled over the hurdles, and was no good afterwards.
Another good horse wdiich Kahl trained and rode in the
country in the early years of the present century was Misty
Morn. Bred on Northampton Downs, Misty Morn was a
veritable outlaw, and he was eight years old before he was
broken in and trained by Kahl, who subsequently won
numerous races, including several doubles, with him.
When Mr. H. J. Whittingham visited Melbourne in
1906, he took Jack Kahl with him for a holiday trip. While
there Kahl took a fancy to a mare named Sunlight, and Mr.
Whittingham bought her. and gave her to Kahl to take to
Western Queensland. She proved a great investment,
winning (with Kahl as her rider), eleven of the twelve races
she was started in in the western districts. At one meeting
at Blackall she was saddled up for two successive races on
the programme, and won both.
In either 1909 or early in 1910, when Mr. H. J.
Whittingham married, and made up his mind to go on a
lengthy holiday trip to the Continent and England he per-
suaded Jack Kahl to make Brisbane his headquarters till his
return. Kahl came here with Sunlight and Miss Ayr, and
the former won two races after Mr. Whittingham had left
for England. Afterwards he bought Nypunha on Mr.
Whittingham’s behalf, and w r on several races with him. Mr.
Whittingham remained in England, and eventually dropped
cut of racing in Brisbane as an owner. Later Kahl won
races with Topman, but it was really Destruction who first


gained successes in the more important races in Brisbane
for him. She was a great performer in her day, and won
the Brisbane Thousand, w.f.a. events, and other races at
Eagle Farm and Albion Park for Kahl, who raced her on
lease. “Ducibella,” Kahl’s beautiful home, and up-to-date
and well-appointed training establishment at Hendra, is
named after the dam of Destruction. Since Destruction Kahl
has enjoyed continued success in the “big plums” up to a
couple of years ago, apart from the smaller events. After
Destruction he had many notable horses, among them being
the following with a list of the more important races they
won:—Bachelor of Arts (Queensland Gup, 1912), La Neive
(Brisbane Thousand), Sheila R. (Q.T.G. Hopeful Stakes),
Lord Vindex (Q.T.G. Sires’ Produce Stakes, 1916), Sym-
posium (Q.T.G. Derby, 1917), Earl Kitchener (Q.T.G. St.
Leger Stakes, 1918 and two Queensland Gups, 1918 and
1919) Boy Syce (Q.T.G. Derby, 1919, and St. Leger Stakes,
1920) Golden Sunset (Brisbane Gup, 1920), Red Maori
(Southport Handicap, 1920), Waitacre (Sandgate Handi-
cap, 1921), and Laneffe (Brisbane Handicap, 1921, and
Stradbroke Handicap, 1922).
When Mr. M. Ryan, for some years past a member of
the Q.T.G. Committee, and one of our most popular and
strongest supporters of racing as an owner in Queensland,
made his home in Brisbane in 1914, and settled here he
mentioned to Jack Kahl that he intended to go in for racing,
and asked him to keep his eye out for a decent horse and buy
it for him.
It so happened that at that time Mr. A. H. Muirhead,
for whom he was then training La Neive, and for whom the
mare had won several races, instructed Kahl to sell La Neive
if he could find a buyer. Kahl advised Mr. Ryan to buy the
mare, and the advice Was followed with happy results for
Messrs. Ryan and Kahl, as La Neive won many important
races afterwards, and since her retirement to the stud has
produced three good performers in Laneffe, Lineive, and
Lanome.
In connection with the sale of La Neive it is worth
recording that a few days after Kahl had advised Mr. Ryan
to buy La Neive they met Mr. Muirhead in Tattersall’s Club,
and seller and buyer were introduced.
Mr. Muirhead named his price—6oo guineas.
“I will give you a cheque now,” replied Mr, Ryan.
“Would you not like to have a look at her first,” asked
Mr. Muirhead.
“No. I’ll buy her first and look at her afterwards.
Kahl’s word is sufficient for me,” was Mr. Ryan’s reply.
The deal was completed there and then, and La Neive
gave Mr. Ryan’s racing ventures in Brisbane a happy start


by winning - tlie Brisbane Thousand for him shortly after-
wards, in her second start in his colors. It was Mr. Ryan s
first success as an owner in Brisbane.
La Neive won numerous other races, some under w.t.a.
conditions, before being retired to the stud. Of her Kahl
says that he never in his career trained anything better.
A remarkable thing about La Neive’s career at the stud
is that only to the imported Linacre has she produced race-
horses. Her first mating was with imported Brakespear,
to whom she produced a filly. That year Messrs. Ryan and
Kahl were in Sydney, and attended the yearling sales, at
which several yearlings by Brakespear were submitted, but
neither were impressed with them, and they decided to find
another mate for La Neive. After a conversation with one
of the Thompsons, of Widden Stud, N.S.W., they decided
to send her there to Linacre, and the result of that mating
was Laneffe. who became a good performer, both at Eagle
Farm and Randwick, and whose tragic death in a race at
Randwick some time ago was keenly regretted hy Queens-
landers.
Here it might be mentioned that the filly, La Neive,
produced to Brakespear, afterwards raced as Waving Plume,
but was no good as a racehorse, and was retired to the stud
early without winning a race.
On her second visit to Linacre, La Neive produced
Lineive, a great galloper, and the winner of several races.
The following season La Neive was sent to another
successful sire in Kenilworth, in the hope of breeding a
clayer from ber, but the experiment was a failure. The
result of the union was a filly, which, after racing for some
time as Lang Syne, was of no account as a racehorse, and
Kahl despaired of winning a race with her, and sent her
south to take up stud duties.
The following season La Neive was aerain mated with
Linacre, with another happy result. The produce was
Lanome, who gives promise of proving even a better race-
horse than Laneffe. Lanome, who is a three-year-old, and
has won in Brisbane, lias been sent to Sydney to be trained
at Randwick by Fred. Williams.
La Neive was afterwards sent to that brilliant English
grey horse Ghrysolaus, and missed to him, but she went to
him again a season later, and produced a fine colt foal, and
at time of writing she was in foal to Ghrysolaus again. Her
progeny by the brilliant Ghrysolaus will be watched with
interest.


Since La Neive raced Mr. Ryan has been one of the
state’s strongest supporters of racing, and, with Lord Vindex,
Sheila R., Rita R., Symposium, Roy Syce, Earl Kitchener,
Golden Sunset, Laneffe, Lineive, and Lanome, Kahl has won
nearly every principal race in the Q.T.G. calendar.
Since the above was written, Kahl’s confident to-
morrows have arrived. He has turned out one of the season’s
best two-year-olds in Taupo and two other of his charges,
Warrinilla and No Step, have won races.


CHAPTER XXV.—JACK BOOTH AND HIS PLUNGES.
Among Brisbane’s registered trainers none can boast »
more eventful career with the ups and downs of racing than
Mr. Jack Booth. As far as trainers are concerned he is in
Queensland racing what Eric Connolly and the Godbys are in
racing in the southern States —a bold and fearless bettor.
When Jack has a great liking for a horse he does not forget
to let the bookmakers know it, especially if his bank is
strong. But that fickle dame, Fortune, has not showered her
smiles on Jack Booth to anything like the extent it has on
Connolly and the Godbys. He has seen fortunes come and
go, but a happy-go-lucky fellow Jack takes his losses the
same as he takes his successes. It is interesting to sit and
listen to Jack Booth recall the coups that have either suc-
ceeded or failed for him, but one of the experiences he enjoys
most was in 1912, when Goard won the Q.T.G. St. Leger and
Brisbane Gup.
Jack had been having a long trot of bad luck, and had
reached the limit of his overdraft at his bank. Goard, whom
he trained as well as raced on half shares with Mr. J. Bond,
he regarded as a certainty for the St. Leger, and some weeks
before realised that the only way to get a “bank” to stake
on Goard was to back a winner or two. He had good mates
behind him, and Jack had several licks on horses that he
thought would win, but luck was against him, and they were
beaten, most of them by narrow) margins. Thus, St.
Leger Day arrived with Jack deeper in the mire than before.
He owed Mr. Abe Barrington, the leader of the “ring,” £60 r
and wondered if Abe would stand him for another £5O. He
put it to the test. “You are pretty hard, aren’t you?” said
Abe, as Jack popped the question. “Oh, no, you will get
paid sooner or later, and I want to have ‘fifty’ on Goard,
because I think he is unbeatable.” “All right,” says Abe,
“you are set for three fifties.” Goard won the race, and
with half of the prize money his bank was right again for
another attack on the bookmakers. Goard followed his St.
Leger success up with victory in the Gup, and generally Jack
did everything right, and came out a winner on the meeting
of over £5OOO.
At the Brisbane Gup meeting of 1921, when he trained
the winners of 10 of the 21 races decided at the meeting,
including five of the seven on Gup Day, when Impeyan won
the Cup, he backed Syce Lady to win him £2700 in the


Hamilton Handicap, but she left the rails and Pah King
dashed up on the inside and beat her by a head. She was
one of the five to score for him on the second day of the
meeting, and Jack says that if Syce Lady had won for him
the first day he would have cleaned up the bookmakers after-
wards, with the successes that came his way. As it was
he had to start the second day in a mild way, but he was
■a big winner over the meeting.
I reminded Jack that he was not doing much good with
his team lately. “No,” he replied, “I have done nothing
right for some" months, but it comes in cycles, and I have
learned to take the bad with the good,” he smilingly re-
marked.
There is no more painstaking and popular trainer in
Brisbane than genial little Jack. The successes of his horses
are always popular, and no one will begrudge him the turn
of the tide in his favor when it comes. Jack has been
associated with racehorses for 35 years. He served a three
years’ apprenticeship with Mick Quirk, a leading trainer and
cross country rider of his time, and Jack had the looking
after of The Drummer, one of a team of several good horses,
and accompanied Quirk to Melbourne in 1891, when Yabba,
one of Quirk’s team, ridden by Benny MHachlan, an uncle
of W. H. M‘Lachlan, won the Australian Hurdle Race, and a
big parcel in bets.
Increasing weight gave Jack very few opportunities as
a rider, and after completing his apprenticeship with Quirk
he joined trainer Billy Miller. Miller handled some great
horses in his day, but nowadays he is Sydney’s leading
veterinary surgeon. In 1894 Miller took a team of horses
south, consisting of Checkmate, Memah, Goodwyn, and
Comet, and Jack Booth accompanied them. Jack declares
that as a whole they were the best team of horses that any
one ever left Queensland with for the southern States,
but bad luck dogged their foot-steps. One thing after the
other went wrong, and the trip was an expensive one, but
some time later Checkmate won a Hawkesbury Handicap.
After 12 months in Sydney Jack returned to Brisbane,
but shortlv afterwards he went to Melbourne, where for
nine months he trained hunters. He then returned to Bris-
bane and settled down as a public trainer, and two of his
first charges, Ard-na-Ree and Guardsman, owned by Mr.
Mick Yore, proved more than useful. Ard-na-Ree won,
among many other races, the Southport Handicap, and
Guardsman was in his day one of the best heavyweight handi-
cap horses in Brisbane, and won one race at Eagle Farm
with close on 13.0 on his back. Since then he has nearly
always bad a big team, and his name as either owner or


trainer, and in some instances both, is prominently asso-
ciated with the classic and the principal handicap events of
the Queensland turf including the Hopeful Stakes with Syce
Lad and Loganius, Derby Stakes with Signal Lamp and Syce
Lad, Queensland Gup with Signal Lamp, Sandgate Handicap
with Syce Lad, Sires’ Produce Stakes with Stable Girl,
Southport Handicap with Ard-na-Ree, Queensland Guineas
with Molly’s Robe and Syceonelle, St. Leger Stakes, with
Goard, Rosard, and Grichka, Moreton Handicap with Syce-
onelle, Brisbane Gup with Goard, Rosard and Impeyan, and
Stradbroke Handicap with Syce Lad and Syceonelle, and
Ipswich Gup with Award. Truly it is a splendid record, and
but a few of the many races Booth has landed for his patrons.
The walls of the commodious dining room and the hall'
of Grafton Lodge, the home of Jack and Mrs. Booth, and
Jack, junior, at the corner of Pinkenba Road and Oxford
Street, Hamilton, carry beautifully framed paintings, by the
late Mr. Marcus Aitken, of all the notable horses that have
been trained by Jack Booth, and he looks on them with the
greatest pride and the happiest of recollections. The gold
Brisbane Cup, won by Impeyan, is another treasured posses-
sion of the Booth home; also a solid silver tray and a beautiful
dinner service, in connection with both Jack tells a good story.
Years ago, when the late Mr. Billy Mooney was alive, a
race run at Eagle Farm was called the Mooney Plate, but it
carried nothing but the prize money. One year Jack felt
confident he would win the event with Rosard. and, meeting
Billy Mooney some days before the race, Jack remarked to
him that although it was called the Mooney Plate it did not
carry a bit of plate. “I want a bit of plate if I win it, Billy, ,r
jocularly remarked Jack, “and you will have it, too, if you
win,” replied Mooney. Rosard duly won, and some days
later a heavy case arrived at Jack’s home, and, to his surprise,
it contained the china dinner service from' Billy Mooney, and
a miniature china plate, on which was written, “Your bit of
plate,” and which whs put in by Mr. Clements, of tonic fame.
Meeting Billy Mooney later, Jack expressed his thanks,
and said that the dinner service would not be used until
such time as he landed one of the principal events of the
Q.T.G. with Rosard, and gave a banquet, at which Mr.
Mooney would be present. Later, Rosard won the St. Leger
and Gup, and Billy Mooney was one of the several prominent
sportsmen who sat down to the duck and wine dinner at the
Booth home. The silver tray was given by Mr. Abe Bar-
rington as a trophy to the winner of the Mooney Memorial
Handicap.
Grafton Lodge, with its beautiful home and modern
training establishment and running yards, covers an area of
an acre and a quarter of land, and has a splendid outlook on


-■%
% 0
r HH
i 1
; |
LEADING ERIS3ANE JOCKEYG OF TO-DAY
W. HILL
E G. TUCKER
C. PAGE


.©ll sides, especially to the river. It was built by the late
Arthur Noud, many years ago one of Brisbane’s leading
trainers, but was purchased six years ago by Jack Booth,
and since then another £2OOO has been spent on it in im-
provements. The stables are commodious, and the living
quarters of the employees are provided with every comfort,
including a shower and a dining room for themselves in the
main home. The feed rooms are packed with over £3OO
worth of feed, and the spick and span condition speaks
volumes for the care that Jack and his staff give to everything
associated with the establishment. It Was an enjoyable
couple of hours I spent recording the happenings in the
career of Jack Booth, and his charming wife forgot nothing
in showing the prided relics of his many turf achievements.
A remarkable thing is that Mr. and Mrs. Booth’s only
child —Jack—takes no interest in horses at all. His hobbies
are sailing, bicycle racing, and pigeons, and of the latter he
has a very fine collection. He is a member of the Hamilton
Wheelers’ Club, and spends his Saturday afternoons com-
peting with his club, and he gives promise of developing into
a good race rider.
Of the many good horses Jack Booth has handled, he
regards Molly’s Bobe as the best of them all. ,Up to a
mile he thinks Syceonelle was just as speedy as her, but she
was a difficult mare to train. She was highly strung and
nervous, but Molly’s Robe had a beautiful temperament.
Nothing upset her, and she was always well. Jack still
declares that Molly won the Oakleigh Plate of 1919, which
the judge awarded to Cielo by a short head, and a framed
photograph of the finish in the dining room certainly mokes
it appear as if Molly is slightly in front. For that race
Molly’s Bobe was backed to win £25,000 by Booth and the
connections of the bonny mare. She later won the New-
market Handicap, and the following year the Oakleigh Plate.
Jack has a soft place in his heart for Molly’s Robe, and is
anxiously awaiting the day when her filly, by another
brilliant'galloper, Woorak, and colt by Ghantemerle, will be
placed in his charge to be prepared for their racing careers.


CHAPTER XXVI.
BILLY BOOTH’S COMMEMORATION OF MUSKET.
Few horses which gained distinction on the turf in
Ilrisbane have had their names perpetuated as has Musket,
the winner of the Q.T.G. Derby of 1900.
“Billy” Booth, who trained and rode him in the Q.T.G.
classic, gives the credit to Musket for him gaining the road
which led to happiness and prosperity, and to him the name
of “Musket” is an honored word, which has been per-
petuated in the naming of his homes.
Actions speak louder than words, and the transference
of the Musket nameplate from his old home on Racecourse-
road, which he gave it when he built it after his marriage in
1900, subsequent to Musket’s Derby victory, to the pic-
turesque and modern home at the corner of Vine Streep aim
I ( ancaster-road, which he moved into about a year ago, is in
itself an illustration of the happy memories Booth retains
of Musket’s success 24 years ago. Musket was owned by
Mr. J. B. Charlton, a popular sportsman, who, is still amongst
us to-day, and it was the double achievement of both training
and riding the horse for this coveted classic race that makes
Billy Booth speak of it with greater pride than any other
of his turf successes. And it was because it set the founda-
tion of his married life that inspired Booth to commemorate
the event and year by naming the first home of his and Mrs.
Booth, ‘TMusket.” And with the passing of the old home
of the Booths the name of Musket passed to the new.
Both before and since the year of 1900 Mr. Booth has
achieved many notable successes, but none are spoken of
with greater admiration and pride than his dual achievement
with Musket, (and the memory of Musket is kept green by
“Musket,” the m'odern home that Billy Booth has built for
his family, and the fine stables and appointments for his
equine charges and their attendants. To his good wife Billy
pays most of the credit, not only for the idea of its architec-
ture, but also for the tastefulness of its general furnishing.
B'very modern appointment and equipment is there. It would
take too much space to go into detail, but it is particularly
worthy of mention that Booth, in addition to his own family,
has given the fullest attention to the comfort of his employees
and his equine charges. At the rear of his red-tiled home,
with its beautiful gardens and lawns, the stables and sand
shed for rolling have been built in the same tone, and


jif*
.■„ ■»
i Ifigi
£ 4
.: .
PROMINENT BRISBANE TRAINERS
MR. A. J. WAGNER
MR. J. BLACKLOCK
MR. J. MORRISON
MR. A. COLLEY
2-18


probably no more up-to-date stables are to be found in
Australia, and the comfortable rooms, as well as all comforts,
including shower bath and wash basins for the employees,
and a nice dining roam, is evidence of what Booth thinks of
his employees’ comforts and welfare.
Billy Booth has not had any horse of note for some
years until he got Gay Galah from Mr. I. J. Moore, to train,
and with her gained the distinction of winning the first C. E.
McDougall Memorial Stakes. Still, in the past, “Billy” had
bandied and ridden and trained some splendid performers.
It was in 1885 that he apprenticed himself to John Stone,
and mention of the veteran brings to mind that this grand
old man of the Queensland turf, in his declining years, is
100 feeble to get out of doors nowadays. Old John Stone
trained many notable horses, and acted as mentor to many
apprentices who were subsequently successful riders, and
Billy Booth has happy recollections of his young days at the
home of the Stones. He was with John Stone for nine
years, and while there he broke in Grey Gown and rode him
in many of his successes, and another notable horse he had
under his care while with the veteran was Dundonald, who,
ridden by Dick Gough, won the treble, St. Leger, Brisbane
Cup, and Moreton Handicap, in 1899.
It was in 1893, the year of the big flood, that Booth
started out on his own account, and for some years as both
frainer and rider he had among his patrons such prominent
sportsmen as Messrs. George Cooper, Billy Isles, Dr. Hopkins,
Peter Murphy, J. B. Charlton, and F. I. Power, but shortly
after his marriage he retired as a jockey and has since given
his sole attention to training. At times he has had as many
as 21 horses in work, and among other good performers
he has trained can be recalled the names of Z.0.Z., Melodian,
Gozard, Ard Na Bee, and Bright Laddie, the latter the winner
of the Brisbane Two Thousand, Stradbroke Handicap, and
other races. Billy Booth always believed in putting by for
a rainy day, and to-day is in very comfortable circumstances.
Still he hopes to turn out many more winners.
One of the proudest possessions in “Billy” Booth’s home
is a sheet of prize ribbons won by his pony Billy, in the pony
classes in the Brisbane and other show rings. Billy, a grey,
is well-known to most patrons of the Brisbane Show, and
war, the winner of 385 ribbons.


CHAPTER XXYII.—CHARLEY McLAUGHLIN’S CAREER.
From Lawyer’s Office to the Pigskin—A Ghat With the
Master of “Gresham Lodge.”
If it had not been for a natural love of the horse,
inherited by him from his father, Charley McLaughlin, the
well-known trainer, might have been a leading light in the
legal world. It was for that profession that his father
intended him to be trained, and his general and bngh-
personality fitted him for it. Charley gave it a trial, but
the call of the horse was too great for f h ; n J n J^ v he ai
the lawyer’s office to become a successful jockey, and later
pubhc horseowner, bookmaker, and trainer.
Charley McLaughlin, who is most popular in racing
circles, is a son of Johnny McLaughlin a Longreach auction-
eer and estate agent, who was one of the best known and
most popular sportsmen the Central and Central West of
Queensland knew in the late ’seventies, the eighties, and
early ’nineties, and who owned a string of horses which
toured the Central and Central-west towns and made then-
presence felt wherever they visited. The old timers of
Western Queensland to-day well remember Johnny Mc-
Laughlin. They say he would walk ten miles lor the sake
of having his say in a friendly argument, and whether he
won or lost, it was the same with old Me. Charley is a
chip of the old block. He loves an argument and gets it in
plenty with the "touts ’ on the tracks.
Long before Charley was born his father had been one
of the most prominent business men as well as sportsmen
and racehorse owners in the Central West, and born and
reared in such an atmosphere of sportsdom it was only
natural that it was engendered into the son. From babyhood
Charley was among horses, and nothing pleased him more
than to be patting one or other of his father s favorite horses
or to be held up on their backs by one of the stable hands
and carried round. At the age of eight years Charley was
riding and exercising horses for his father, after school
hours and many a time the hands remarked to “Dad on the
capabilities of the youngster as a rider and the possibilities
of him developing into a crack jockey.
Johnnv McLaughlin, however, had different plans for
Ids son’s future, and when he reached the age of 14, his
dad’s plans were put into effect, and Charley started on his
first job as solicitor’s clerk, with Mr. C. B. Fitzgerald, who


\vill be best remembered as the Attorney-General in thfr
lirsi Labor Government of Queensland. For a time he took
kindly to his work, but the vocation was not there and,
naturally the seed of discontent was planted and grew and
twelve months later saw Charley tired of the job. His
natural inclination for horses pulled him away, and he said
good-bye to the job and took to a bush life. Fate plans its
own course, and once back in the bush among horses, the
capabilities of the youthful McLaughlin were quickly recog-
nised, and it fell to the lot of Billy Walsh to secure him
under an apprenticeship agreement. Thus Charley Mc-
Laughlin started on the career of his ambition, and with him
in the Walsh stable was another good rider of the time,
Charley Parker, who to-day is in the north.
With his natural ability as a rider, and being light,
Charley McLaughlin gained for himself unlimited oppor-
tunities, and for many years he was one of the most success-
ful riders at meetings in the Central West and far Western
Queensland, and for years he did all the principal riding for
Mr. E, G. Blume, owner of Bexley Station, outside Longreach,
end to-day and for many years past one of the State’s most
prominent owners. On one occasion at a two days’ meet-
ing at Jundah, Charley rode eleven winners of the twelve
races decided, and in the other event was beaten by a narrow
margin into second place. At about the same time Mr. Blume
had a great galloper in Marvelette, but she could not be
mduced to do her best until Charley McLaughlin was put on
her. For him she won nine or ten races, and the only other
rider to ever win a race on her was George Clayton.
Charley retired from the saddle in 1910, and since then
has owned or trained many good horses, and has mixed his
business at times with hotel-keeping and bookmaking. Be-
fore coming to Brisbane over four years ago ha either owned
or trained many smart performers of the western towns,
including Fisher Boy and Corntop. Fisher Boy won over 20
races for him, and Corntop won over 30 races, including 17
while in his charge; and another good horse in the country
which he owned was St. Elfred, who won many races for
him on the Rockhampton course. He came to Brisbane with
that good mare, Minnie Love, and brought the Victorian
jockey, W. (“Billy”) Smart with him to ride her. The mare
won several races. With the retirement of Minnie Love,
Charley turned his attention to punting, but like all other
racegoers, found it had its ups and downs, with a prepon-
derance of downs.
Thus when he got the chance of getting back to the
more active part of trainer in the business he readily accepted
it. Mr. Terry Ahern, mine host of the Gresham Hotel, gave
it to him. He sought Charley McLaughlin’s services as
private trainer. McLaughlin accepted, and Terry at a big
price purchased the spacious lucerne paddocks, running


(juTa°t d re b a a tST&V* S
stables at Hend U Cap tain Sandeman and so long
later years by Mr. Albert Colley. Mr. McLaughlin
Amberdown) was sent south. The colt was a iau
1 horg, jg
EE b pS
“aretooin as (Gresham Lodge.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
CHARLEY McGROWDIE, ON WHOM FORTUNE SMILES.
A home on Racecourse-road, Ascot, within a stone's
throw of the main entrance to the Eagle Farm Racecourse,
bears a nameplate of ‘‘Kingslot.” It is hardly necessary to
mention that the home is named after the Queensland-bred
: {\ eld A n S’ wh o, after winning, among other races,
the QM.G. Derby and Queensland Gup, was sold for over 2000
: guineas to the Sydney sportsmen, Sir Samuel Hordern and
the gentleman who races in partnership with him as “Mr
Constable.”
Like the homes of most successful trainers, “Kingslot”
is adorned with many beautifully-framed photographs ©f
finishes of races won by horses trained by McGrowdie, and
also of photographs of the winners and notable incidents
associated with the successes, but none are more treasured
than those connected with the achievements of Lotchen and
her two well-formed sons, Kingslot and Serelot. Instances
ot a mare producing two such good distance performers as
Kingslot and Serelot (both Q.T.G. Derby winners), in addi-
tion to another winner (Lozan), and all being trained by the
same trainer, are by no means common.
As a boy Mr. McGrowdie was among horses, and for
the past 36 years has been associated with the racing riding
•or training of horses. In 1888 he was with Tommy Mc-
Allister. a member of the McAllister family, of Wagga one
of whom was the late Mrs. J. Stone, wife of the veteran
Rnsbane trainer. In that year McGrowdie came to Queens-
land, bringing horses to Gubbie Station, in the St George
district. Afterwards he did a lot of riding at Walgett
iNarrabn, Maitland, and Newcastle (N.S.W.), and later!
Gubbie Station, he rode with success in
the Western Queensland districts, subsequently coming to
Rrisbane, where, in the jumping races at EagleFariri in the
nineties, he distinguished himself as a rider, especially on
Liberty, who was a splendid hurdler, and in addition to his
successes oyer the sticks also won races on the flat at Eagle
mrm and in the country. Liberty was both trained and
ridden in his races by McGrowdie.
About ten years ago McGrowdie retired from the saddle
and has since confined his attention to training, and for one
who has always restricted himself to a few horses at a time
nis Jiick has bean phenomenal. When at times his team
ocro


reached four or five, the majority of them, if not all, were
always able to win races, and generally there was one at
least above the ordinary, and even when the team got
down to one it was nearly always a good un. Lotchen was
one of the small, but select, string which first brought him
into prominence as a trainer, and, among other races, she
won the Q.T.C. Metropolitan Handicap. Since she was
retired to the stud McGrowdie has handled all her progeny
that have raced, and built up such a notable record for the
Queensland turf, and Serelot looks like adding greatly to
the already tine collection of prizes at Kmgslot, and to
which he, during the past year, added all the handsome
trophies valued at £lOO, which were donated by the book-
makers of Tattersall’s Club to Tattersall’s Gup race. Ihe
trophies consisted of a silver cup and case of cutlery tor the
winning owner and tantalus for the trainer of the winner.
As both the owner and trainer of Serelot, McGrowdie became
the owner of all those trophies.
In addition to those mentioned, other successful per-
formers McGrowdie trained in the past were Pinkenba,
Doch, Royal Lad, Finance, Middy, Blatherskite, Lady Pilgrim,
Noelamayne and Pardoned.


CHAPTER XXIX.
JACK MORRISON, OF SIR OLIVER AND WILD OLIVE
FAME, AND HIS TRAVELS.
Of the many prominent present day trainers of long
standing who have made their mark in Queensland racing
none has had such a roving career as Mr. Jack Morrison.
Morrison’s travels have extended through Queensland, north,
south, east and west, and back again, thence through many
parts of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and
Tasmania, and have been covered on numerous occasions.
England also would have been included in the itinerary had
Mr. Morrison’s health permitted him to take advantage of
the opportunities offered him to train for a prominent owner
in England.
Naturally, Jack Morrison is not of a roving disposition.
<»nd his wandering career was really forced on him by asthma’
to which he has been a victim for many years. Consequently,
he travels a lot with a team of horses, marking time with
the seasons to find the climatic conditions most suitable to
the complaint of which he is troubled.
Morrison got his earliest training among horses at the
age of 14 years at the stud farm of Mr. W, H. Kent, The
•Grange, Ipswich. He was there for some years, and in that
time broke in Fano (by Epigram), the Q.T.G. Derby winner
of 1886; the Australian Peer (by Darebin from Stockdove),
winner of many good races, including the V.R.G. Derby, and
My Lord (by Epigram). He also took My Lord to Sydney
after his purchase by Mr. Gannon, for 1000 guineas/ For
Mr. Gannon, My Lord won numerous races, and afterwards
went to South Australia.
After a stay in Sydney for a few months, Morrison
returned to Queensland, and joined Mr. W. H. Barker, of
Beaudesert, who owned Bosun and Grafton, two good
hurdlers, and other horses. He took Bosun and Grafton to
Sydney, and won hurdle and steeplechase races with each
of them.
In 1889 Morrison took charge of Mr. J. Tait’s team of
horses, consisting of Godolphin, Laurel, Laurel IT., Zinnia,
and Cooramin, and won races with each of them, and later
he won races with Bluebeard, Doubtful, Rose of York, Eric,
and Sir Joseph. Cooramin was sold to Billy Muggride and
went to Melbourne, where he won a number of races for him.


The early ’9o’s saw Morrison on his first trip to the
far north, and at the Towers he won races with Godolphm.
After his return he took in hand a young horse, which
afterwards raced as Sir Oliver, and made him famous as an
owner-trainer throughout Australia. Sir Oliver did a little
of his earliest racing in Brisbane, and then Morrison took
him to Bathurst (tf.S.W.). and they were there
when Morrison was induced to bring Sir Oliver and Marble
to the Towers to try and win a big wager for Mr. B. L.
Fenwick. „ . .
At the Towers annual in 1891 Mr. F. Silva, a prominent
bookmaker carrying on business in a big way, laid Mr.
Fenwick £lOOO to £5OO that he would not bring a horse to
Charters Towers and win the Shorts Handicap (seven fur-
longs) at the 1892 annual meeting. Mr. Fenwick accepted
that wager, and he also secured another £lOOO to £5OO from
Charlie Davis, and later £l2OO to £4OO (twice). Thus he
had £4400 to £lBOO going about accomplishing what Silva
wagered he could not do.
Then began the search for the horse that was to attempt
to land the wagers for him, and Jack Morrison was
approached, and he consented to bring Sir Oliver (a three-
vear-old brown colt by The Rake from Olivia) and Marble
"(a two-year-old chestnut colt by Marvellous from l.lsie)
along. Mr. Fenwick nominated both colts.
The local horses of that year, with the exception of a
three-year-old, thick-set, and rather podified little bay colt
named Little Bertie, were not much good, and as Silva and
others interested had failed to dig up anything likely to
topple the visitors over, it looked like them losing their
wagers, and they were in a state of much consternation.
Their only hope was Little Bertie. He had up to that
time won a Maiden Plate at Charters Towers, a Foal Stakes
at Townsville, and a nine furlongs Welter Handicap at
Charters Towers. His form was good, and he was doing
splendidly in his training. _ rm 4
But would he start in the Shorts Handicap? That was
the question that was troubling Silva, Davis, and the other
layers interested, and rumors that he was unlikely to run
caused them more concern.
Conferences between the layers of the wagers and the
owner of Little Bertie followed, and, after a lot of argument,
the owner of Little Bertie decided to allow the colt to tak.
his rdace in the field for the Shorts Handicap.
P Mr Fenwick had to declare his representative two days
before the race and he decided in favor of Sir Oliver, leaving
Marble to run for the prize. . _ _
The race was run, and Little Bertie, carrying 7.6, won
by a length from Sir Oliver, 9.0, with Marble, 8.2, third, m
1.34.


Mr. Fenwick was now well in the bag, but he was a
good sportsman, and a bold bettor, and, getting 4 to 1 about
Sir Oliver, for the Farewell Handicap, for which Little Bertie
was favorite at 2 to 1, on the second day of the meeting he
staked heavily.
Sir Oliver, carrying 8.12, and ridden by J. Murray, beat
Little Bertie, 8.0, ridden by George Snell, by a neck, and Mr.
Fenwick and others got back all their losses of the first day
and a lot more as well.
This was practically the end of such big ante post betting
in the north. Silva and Davis were not inclined to try the
experiment again, and other ringmen took fright at the
narrow escape their confreres had experienced.
Little Bertie, who was by Cheviot, from Guelder Rose,
by Kingston, from Camilla, by Yelverton, was raced by Mr.
E. Lindsay. He was undoubtedly a good colt, but the heavy
racing he had as a two-year-old told his tale. After his
races with Sir Oliver, he put up more good performances,
but the next season he went to pieces, after being saddled
up twice in one afternoon—the Christmas Handicap, with
9.0, and Wind Up Handicap, at the Towers—and died a few
days afterwards.
From the Towers, Morrison returned to Bathurst with
Sir Oliver and Marble, and won a race there with the first-
named. Then he came back to Brisbane again to win more
races with Sir Oliver. It was at this time that he took
Wild Olive in hand, and from Brisbane he went to Melbourne
where he won races with both Sir Oliver and Wild Olive.
Once more Morrison returned to Brisbane and in eleven
starts in and around Brisbane, Wild Olive was successful
on each occasion, and her eleventh successive win was in a
Flying Welter Handicap at Eagle Farm, in which she carried
11.4, and won from Goldenspray and Silverspray.^
Another trip to Sydney followed, and Sir Oliver won a
double at Warwick Farm, over which the big Sydney punter,
Theo. Marks, won a pot of money.
Morrison then returned to Brisbane to attempt to win
the Q.T.G. Stradbroke Handicap, with Sir Oliver, and he
was backed for a big stake. In that race the colt finished
under the judge’s box. Many people thought he had won,
and general surprise was occasioned when the judge did not
even place him. It transpired afterwards that Sir Oliver,
being so wide out near the outside fence, the judge had not
seen him. ,
Subsequently, Sir Oliver was sold to Mr. Collins, of
Tamrookum Station, Beaudesert, where he did stud duty,
and sired many useful performers.
With Wild Olive, Jack Morrison then packed up again
for the south, and oh the trip he added many more victories
to his already excellent record, winning the double at Junee,
the double at Cootamundra, the double at Wagga, the big


race at Benalla, the double at Albury, while in a handicap
at Rand wick on Commonwealth Day in 1900, when backed
to win a five figure amount, she was beaten by half a head
by Miss Melos.
In Victoria, Wild Olive won races at Moonee Valley,
Williamstown, Caulfield, and he beat that great horse,
Waitabit, at Caulfield. Victorians regarded Wild Olive as
one of the greatest horses of his time.
In addition to Wild Olive, Morrison also had Fortune
Teller in Melbourne, and after the latter had run fifth in
the Newmarket Handicap, he took the pair to Adelaide,
hoping to win the Goodwood Handicap with Fortune Teller.
Fortune Teller missed in that event but won the Totalisator
Handicap on the second day of the meeting. Fortune Teller
remained in Adelaide and raced there till he was 15 years
old, when he was retired.
With Wild Olive Morrison once more took up his
quarters in Melbourne.
Wild Olive won further races under big weights, and
Morrison eventually sold her to Messrs. Morgan and Walter
Hickenbotham, who retired her to the stud, and mated her
with Grafton. She died while foaling to Grafton, and the
filly foal she left behind was reared by hand. As Wild Holly
the filly did a little racing, but was of little account.
Afterwards Morrison trained Gonstans (by Lochiel),
in Melbourne, for Captain Payne, of the Dragoon Guards,
London, and it was the latter who offered him big induce-
ments to come to England to train there for him, but on
account of his health he had to turn the offer down.
Since then Morrison has done a lot of travelling, visiting
Brisbane, Rockhampton, Townsville, Charters Towers,
Sydney, Melbourne, and Hobart, and Launceston, in turn,
and among good winners he had the training of in one or
other of these cities were Song Bud, Steam (who won
numerous hurdle or steeplechase races in Tasmania), Rich-
mond, Fortitude, Philagree, Mimer’s Mimic, Chariot, Yellow
Aster, Twilight, Deceiver, Smarce, The Marker, Maid of
Venice, Alpini, Setebos, Lupino, and his principal patrons are
Messrs R. Allen and S. Crowe (of N.S.W.).
When he was here a few years back with Alpini, Mord-
kin, and Lupino, he won the last race he started a horse in
on the visit, viz.: with Lupino, at Albion Park, and it is a
coincidence that on his present visit —the first since Lupino's
win—he should register a win in the first race he contested
—a welter at Eagle Farm with The Wizard.
Prior to his return to Brisbane, Morrison did the tour
of the northern annuals with The Wizard, and experienced
tantalising luck, for in seven starts the horse registered one
win, five seconds, and a third. He ran second in the Rock-
hampton Cup, and Callaghan Park Handicap, third in the
Dawbarn Handicap, second in the Mackay Gup, and Mackay


"” P ■ v/v *■■
:|L $$$&
Jr%
■
|Pi'
■ >WW WTOK'.; •;•,■••■
xffiSx^x&cw
;
$Mwm * ,:■""
-#&&■ - '::-M%m£.
■/■■'■ .::: : : ; S:.^ : , %.-i'M: '•/''•"■■;'■■ '■■■
PROMINENT BRISBANE TRAINERS
MR. A. G. ANDERSON
MR. E. J. EASTON
MR. H. J. KIME
MR. A. E. SMART
259


Club Handicap, and second in the Townsville Gup, for all of
which he was heavily backed, and although he finished up
landing the Town Plate, of £5OO, a short price had to be
taken, and the returns from the win little more than covered
losses on the earlier failures and the expenses of the trip.
The Wizard, however, pulled off a good win for his
connections when he came to Brisbane, and won the Welter
Handicap at Eagle Farm at the Q.T.G. October Meeting. In
addition to The Wizard Morrison is also training a likely
looking sort in Omar.
Jack Morrison is a painstaking and very capable man
with horses, and the excellent references he holds from Joe
liurton, Walter Hickenbotham, the late Tom Willis
(“Milroy”), Sam Cook, W. Muggridge, Ewan Campbell, R.
H. Frew (now V.R.G. stipendiary steward), Jas. Redfern,
Paddy Nolan, Harry Chisholm, and Jim Nesbit, shows the
very high esteem in which he is held by some of the most
prominent sportsmen in the racing game in Australia.


CHAPTER XXX.—THE CONQUESTS OF THE CONQUESTS.
In the racing world the name of Conquest has been kept
prominently before the public for some time past by the
successful riding (especially in the principal races) of J. J.
Conquest, an apprentice rider.
Probably there is no trainer better or more popularly
known personally to the rank and file of Brisbane’s racegoers
than “Gonny” Conquest, whose association with racing dates
N. CONQUEST (Senr.) and his Son, the successful
Apprentice Lightweight, J. J. CONQUEST
back to the ’eighties. In his early youth he was employed
with the old horse tramway service, at New Farm.
“Gonny” did some riding over the hurdles in the early
’nineties, and therewith can be recalled an incident which is
worth re-telling. In those days the hurdles were supported
by spikes driven into the ground, and in one of the races in
which he rode his mount hit badly, and caused one of the
spikes to fly into the air. As “Gonny” came a cropper the
spike followed in his direction. As he fell it fell and got


!••, > l»*Mk»
i|y
foul of his cap, lifting it from his head, and lodged itself
with cap attached into the ground, but “Gonny” escaped
serious injury, but by a very narrow margin.
“Gonny,” as we all know him, worked in those days for
stables which sheltered, among other notable horses, BabeL
the winner of two Stradbroke Handicaps in successive years.
It was shortly after that he struck out on his own to take
over the training of Euroka, and it was that horse that
established him as a public trainer, winning for him nine
or ten races. He took Euroka to Sydney in 1894, and he
ran third in the A.J.G. Epsom Handicap, and going on to
Melbourne, was beaten by only a head by The Harvester in
the Caulfield Stakes. Since then Conquest has trained from
E. C. CONQUEST & N. CONQUEST (Junior)
time to time several good horses, including Hector, Nicotine,.
Adamant, The Trustee, and the last-named pair will be
remembered by many racegoers of to-day as having won
many races in and around Brisbane, and, more recently, he
has done well with Silastre (winner of the Albion Cup and'
Tattersall’s Handicap), who, for an eight-year-old stallion,,
is a wonderfully good horse.
Of Mr. Norman Conquest’s family of 12, three sons have
distinguished themselves as jockeys, viz.: Norman, junr. r
E. G. (“Broncho”), and J. J. (Uncle), and the latter who,
during the year, pulled oil the Brisbane Thousand and Albion
Gup Double and other important as well as minor races, i&
regarded as one of the best and most accomplished light-
weights developed in Queensland for many years.


CHAPTER XXXI.
MICK NAILON TELLS THE ROMANCE OF MOLLY GYRUS.
From Sheep Mustering, the Pony Mare Makes a Late Start at
Racing, and Gains Important Honors.
A golden chestnut in color, and every inch of her 14.3
height as good as gold-one of the most honest, gamest,
■and most stout-hearted ponies of her inches that ever graced
the Queensland turf.
Readers, take off your hats to Molly Gyrus, the winner
■cf the Stradbroke Handicap of 1924.
Thus “Orion” summed up Molly Gyrus following her
brilliant effort in winning the Q.T.G. Stradbroke Handicap
of 1924, after coming from a long way back. When “Orion”
wrote that, he did not expect to meet anyone who would
disagree with Ins opinion of the popular little mare. Well,
he didn’t, except the trainer, Mick Nailon—and he got the*
benefit of his argument that she, being a shade over 14.3,
she was worth that shade more of golden value.
Despite that she was an outsider, Molly Gyrus’s win in
the Stradbroke Handicap was a justly popular one, and was
greeted with salvos of applause and cheering, and it pleased
no one more than Mick Nailon, her trainer, who can also
claim to be the discoverer of her merits, which had been
crowmed with many meritorious wins during the previous
couple of years.
There is a touch of romance, associated with the turf
achievements of Molly Gyrus, and, in view of the fact that
Mick Nailon, her trainer, was actually associated with and re-
sponsible for the tutoring of her in her successes, it is little
to wonder at that he would not miss even a hair in a summing
up of her merits.
Thus we got down to the romantic part of the story
of Molly Cyrus, and as it was told by Mick Nailon in Molly’s
stable, with the bonny mare an interested and appreciative
listener to the story. She left her tucker and interested
herself in the interview, and looked all the time the docile,
intelligent, and yet the little gritted mare that she has always
proved herself to be.
Forgetting Molly for the time being, we will tell you
of Mick Nailon, who has so prominently been associated
with her turf achievements. He served his apprenticeship
with no less a celebrity of the Australian turf than the late
Ike Earnshaw. The apprenticeship was for three years, but
Mick stayed on for an additional year, and won a race on


Sir Foote for coal king “J. Baron,” otherwise John Brown.
He accompanied Sir Foote to Melbourne to win the Futurity
Stakes and Newmarket Handicap, and although he was not
given the ride on him, he had a couple of rides at the meeting.
Mick was not a fool. Opportunities were denied him. So
he transferred to “Bill” Kelso, who is well known to Queens-
landers, and who w 7 as the tutor of Jimmy Pike, one of the
greatest horsemen the Australian turf has ever known. And,
readers, we say that off our own bat advisedly. Circumstances,
however, alter cases. But Jimmy Pike is still one of the
foremost horsemen in the land.
For fourteen years Nailon remained with Bill Kelso,
having grown too heavy to be a jockey, and for the last four
of the fourteen years, he was foreman of the Kelso stable.
Those who were associated with him in that capacity have
the kindest regards for him.
“Mick” left “Bill” Kelso to bring Bunting to Brisbane
for brother “Pat” (G.P.), the gelding’s trainer, in 1917, the
year the son of All Black won the King’s Plate and Brisbane
Cup for Mr. E. J. Watt. Brother “Pat” was trainer and
“Mick” was strapper, and he said of the Nations no two
better men were ever associated with the turf in any part of
•Australia. How “Pat” made good here and then went to-
Sydney to take advantage of bigger opportunities is known
to us all, and successes which came his way in the sister
State are welcomed and appreciated by Queenslanders.
“Mick” went back to Sydney with “Pat,” and assisted
him with the preparation of Pershore for the A.J.G. Metro-
politan Handicap, which he won. For reasons best known
to himself, “Mick” Nailon afterwards struck out for Queens-
land once again. He went to work for Mr. Leslie Winten,
at Winton, and also at Hughenden. It was there he first
met Molly Gyrus. She was being used in the mustering of
sheep, but the main intention was to breed from her a foal
to Delinacre, the Brisbane Thousand winner of 1919. Molly
missed, and after “Mick” had been working for Leslie Winten
for four months he decided to strike out for himself once
again. Winten gave him a new job—to take Molly Cyrus
end Careless Pets to Townsville.
The job put “Mick” Nailon and Molly Gyrus “on the
map,” as trainer and racehorse, respectively. After his
arrival in Townsville, “Mick” Nailon picked up and took
into his care Pah King. With the trio he established his
reputation as a trainer. He won a race or two with Pah
King, but Molly, then five years old, of whom we cannot find
any record of her having previously raced, did the most
important part of the mission for Nailon, which subsequently
introduced to Brisbane not only himself, but the little chest-
nut mare who made his and her name so prominent in the-


big achievements of racing in Brisbane during the last
couple of years. At picnic racing in Townsville Molly dis-
played good form, and she went into open company in the
north to gain further honors, and in . the
north she won ten races, in addition to sharing
in two dead heats. Since she came to Brisbane she
has won eleven races, and among them the Q.T.G. Ascot and
Stradbroke Handicaps, the two greatest sprints of the year
at Eagle Farm. She has never run a bad race, and because
of her iron constitution and honest effort in every race, she
ranks as one of the most popular mares that ever graced the
Queensland turf. Is it any wonder “Mick” Nailon is so
Eroud of Molly Gyrus, and she evidences more like a human
eing than an equine the human treatment she has received
from the discoverer of her merits as a racehorse.


CHAPTER XXXII.
TIM. BROSNAN’S SHOW RING CHAMPIONS.
One of the proudest possessions of Mr. T. J. (“Tim”)
Brosnan and Mrs. Brosnan, in their home in Charlton Street,
is a collection of close on 500 ribbons, which, with
few exceptions, are blue or purple, representing first prizes
and championships won by them and their noted hacks and
hunters in the principal show rings of Southern Queensland,
including Brisbane.
It is only within the last few years that Mr. Brosnan
has settled in Brisbane and restricted his attention to the
education and training of the racehorse, but before that he
gained a big reputation with horses as his paternal grand-
father did before him. “Tim” Brosnan’s father was a son
of an Irish veterinary surgeon, who had as many as sixty
Irish hunters belonging to various owners who followed the
hounds under his charge and training at a time. Tim’s
fattier, who also was well trained in the education and
training of the horse, came to Queensland over 60 years ago,
and after working on various stations in the Warwick dis-
trict, including Maryvale, Glengallan, and Canning Downs,
he selected land for himself on the Gondamine, just outside
Warwick, and went in for stock raising and farming. Some
time later he disposed of that property, and eventually settled
at Greenmount, in grazing and farming pursuits. The home-
stead and farm he established at Greenmount are still going
strong, and being worked by one of his sons.
It was at Greenmount that Mr. and Mrs. Brosnan, senr’s,
family of five sons and three daughters were born and reared,
and taught everything that could be learned of stock farming.
Brosnan here always bred and kept the best class of draught
and saddle horses, in addition to a good class of Shorthorn
cattle for dairying purposes, and when his children learned
to ride in their tender years they were provided with their
own ponies and taught to look after and feed them properly.
The late Mr. Brosnan, senr,, was very strict in that direction.
In the rounding up of cows and riding to and from
school, the Brosnan youngsters got plenty of practice in the
saddle. When the elder boys were leaving the school the
late Mr. Brosnan selected a grazing property for them on
Headington Hill, and it was there they blossomed into first-
class horsemen and horse-breakers, and they often rode
miles to ride a horse that gained a reputation as a bucker.


Tim, the subject of my article, afterwards gained a big
reputation for castrating and branding, and he had many
thrilling experiences in the lassooing, throwing, and tying
of young horses, as a relaxation from the hard work on the
farm. In the polo season that game claimed his spare
attention, and he always kept a horse or two which could
gallop a bit, and with them he also scored some decent wins
at country race meetings. While engaged in farming, Tim
also either bred and trained, or was entrusted by others with
the education of some fine hacks and hunters, and produced
many champions in the show rings of the southern portion
of our State. One of his champion hacks was Sun Palm,
who, in 1917, won the valuable cup presented by the
Governor of the day, Sir Hamilton Goold Adams, for the best
cavalry horse, suitable for officers’ first charger, at Too-
woomba, and the same day Sun Palm won the first prizes
for gent’s hack and lady’s hack, and also the purple sash for
the champion hack of the show. He then was brought to
Brisbane, and beat all except Ben Arnold, the unbeaten
champion hack of the Brisbane show ring for seven years,
and got the reserve championship sash.
Exile was another splendid hack which previously won
many firsts and championships for him at the country shows
end first prizes in Brisbane, and later Melbourne and
Adelaide. Among other distinguished hacks he had were
Tarcoola (who was sold to go to India), Stage Girl, and
Spark.
Stage Girl (who was sired by that once good racehorse
Oak Grafton) was one of the best mannered mares one could
wish to see, and gained the distinction of being selected
by the National Agricultural and Industrial Association as a
hack for the Prince of Wales, during his visit to Brisbane in
1919. Spark (who is by Morocco and was bred by Mrs.
Elemmich at Gingindra on the Dawson) secured first and the
championship in the hack classes at the last Brisbane show,
and is a very fine horse. Mr. Brosnan still has Spark and
uses him as a hack to lead his team of racehorses to the
training tracks in the early mornings and to carry him about
in the timing of gallops.
Mrs. Brosnan also gained the highest honors as a driver
and also as the rider of hacks and jumpers in the country
and Brisbane show rings, and was never beaten in driving
or riding contests for ladies up to the time of her retirement
in 1915.
In 1913 Mr. Brosnan forsook the land and went in for
the training and racing of a few horses on his own account,
in addition to educating show horses, and one of the best he
raced was Groomsmantel, who won a few races in the
metropolitan area and beat the hot favorite, Delinacre, in
the New Handicap at Eagle Farm in 1914,


During the war “Tim” spent most of his time handling
and breaking-in military horses for many shippers as well
as for the Defence Department. At that time many big
undertakings had to be completed in a very short time, but
he fulfilled the task with the utmost satisfaction to all con-
cerned. Many thousands of horses were dealt with and it
was really surprising what could be done when required
urgently. Oft times he and others would start on a mob of
unbroken horses and, in the course of a few days would
have them tied up in their stalls on a boat eating feed and
ready for the trip abroad. The shippers, mostly a very fine
class of men, would at all times recognise when a job was
well done, and were very quick in their appreciation, and
the same applies to the military authorities with whom they
often came in contact. Tim has also had much to do in the
education of polo ponies for such an enthusiast as Mr.
Tompkins, of Inglewood, who was the referee at the recent
polo carnival at Toowoomba.
A few years ago Mr. Brosnan came to Brisbane with
Limpopo and Argive, and won races with both of them. He
settled in Brisbane as a public trainer, and, in addition to
Limpopo, has done well with Linwraith and Frostbite.


CHAPTER XXXIiI.—PAT RYAN AND “ATHOLMORE.”
Success Well Deserved —From Station Lad to Successful
Rider and Trainer.
’Tis not in mortals to command success,
Rut we ll do more —we ll deserve it.
—Addison.
It was to Sempronius in his work “Cato ’ that Addison
dedicated the above logic. Perhaps to no one is the
dedicated logic more fitting in our book than Mr. P. J.
( l 'Pat”) Ryan.
“Pat” and his good wife’s treatment of the old grey
aelding Ribuck, the story of whose departure for Noormdoo
Station, out west, to spend the remaining .days of a useful
equine life, first as racer, and later as hack, is told elsewhere,
is typical of their natural characteristics. Although only
moderately fair as a racehorse, the 17-year-old Ribuck was
a character because of his horse sense, and the reputation it
gained him in the opening of gates or slipping rails to gam
entrance to vegetable gardens, for “placing orders for new
shoes when he required, and his docility and obedience to
his master. When Ribuck went west, Pat and Mrs. Ryan
naturally felt the loss of an intelligent equine pet. Iheir
fondness and kindly treatment of the old fello J-and it
made even those whose garden plots he invaded feel kindly
disposed also to know that he was going to end his days m
peacefulness and contentment—are typical of Pat and
Mrs. Ryan in life generally. They are just ordinary people,
but possessed of personalities that breathe the sweetest
essences of human nature, not inherited through falls ot
lucky stars, but natured by perseverance and courage of the
man and his helpmate. From hard battling days Pat has
achieved his ambition. , j
The naming of Mr. and Mrs. Ryans new home and
“Pat’s” training establishment as Atholmore has a history.
Atholmore gots its name from a horse which Pat trained
and won races with on the Downs before he settled in
Rrisbane. Atholmore, the racehorse, ended his days by
falling and breaking his back in a race at Toowoomba, when
ridden by Charley West. West was then rendered un-
conscious, but recovered afterwards, none the worse for the
experience, beyond the shock of the fall he
Atholmore has long since gone. Charley West is still alive,
but badly damaged as the result of a bad smash in recent


years at Goorparoo. Charley was one of several riders who
came down, and he suffered serious injuries which ended
his career as a fairly successful trainer-rider on the un-
registered courses at the time. Charley West dodged Father
Time, but that was all.
Like many other successful metropolitan trainers, Pat
Ryan gained his success by hard and practical experience.
His parents were not racing people, but of that grand old
stock who start in the bush to help to build townships. Pat
was born at Mitchell, and his early experiences as a lad were
on stations. It was bush life, of which riding is an inherited
trait, that requires no teaching. Pat served no apprentice-
ship. Practical experience gave him his ability as a rider,
and at an early age he was riding in races at Dalby and Roma.
It was while working on a cattle station that Pat first
came in contact with the aboriginal, Jerry Jerome, after-
wards one of the greatest glove fighters the hempen square
of Queensland has ever known. Jerry and another aboriginal
lad, who boasted the rather “doubtful'’ name of Percy Query,
then worked on the same station as “Pat,” and “Pat” was
an eye-witness to one of the first scraps Jerry ever had.
When in a paddock at Warra he beat Bob Foran inside a
round. Pat says that occurred over 20 years ago, and the
assurance is of more than ordinary importance in view of
Jerry’s subsequent attainments.
At eighteen years of age Pat Ryan’s ability as a horse-
man claimed the attention of “Dug.” M‘Lean, of Queensland
and international football fame, and at the time mine host
of an hostelry at Roma. M‘Lean was a lover of racing and
the racehorse, and he gave “Pat” the job of being his trainer
and rider. With a small team, which included Traditioner,
Iloya, Sunday, Carrots, and Ribuck, “Pat” Ryan gained
success in the districts of the sou’-west, which established
him as a prominent identity in racing. He won with them
all, but he was more prouder of old Ribuck than any other,
because in five rides on him' he won every time.
It was with Ribuck that “Pat” paid his first visit to
Brisbane as a trainer, and as Ribuck’s efforts have already
been recalled, we will pass on to a later trip when Pat came
down with Le Moscow and Koatanui, who earlier in his
career gained note by winning the Queensland Guineas, and
later by dead-heating with King Cleo in the Q.T.G. (but was
beaten in the run off), and running second to Bachelor of
Arts in the Queensland Cup of 1942. Pat won races with
both Le Moscow ad Koatanui, the latter defeating Lotchen
(Q.T.G. Metropolitan Handicap winner at the time, and now
famous as the dam of Kingslot and Serelot) in a Tattersall’s
Handicap.
On another trip he brought Barley Brae to Brisbane,
and of Barley Brae and Pat’s record since he settled in
Brisbane as a public trainer about ten years ago, we will


deal with together. When he settled here two of the horses
he started with were but moderate performers, m.iGoToo
and Caimos. But Pat and his followers, shortly after he
settled here, landed a good betting coup with Caimos when,
after a dead-heal with Phast Step, he won a minor race at
Albion Park. ~ ~ n .
“We backed Caimos backwards, said Fat.
“How’s that?” he was asked.
“Well the more money we put on him that day tne
longer grew his odds,” he replied. “We put our commission
on at 7’s, and he started at 10’s.” . , , . ~ .
On the dead-heat Pat and his followers wished to divide
but the party behind Phast Step would hot hear °f Y
ran off. and Caimos won, and thus set the foundation of
what was to be a successful career in the metropolis of
yearg R y an trained such performers
several good and the others at least useful —as Eurodus,
Malt Chimes, Spicy Lass, The Spinner, Muguet, Royal
Howard, Flippanteen, Seradia, and Percyrus
Eurodus, who was owned by Mr A. H. Ferris, won the
first three races—for two-year-olds—he started in, and later
two Flying Handicaps at Eagle Farm, and a £5OO Handicap
at Albion Park. He was a good colt, and promised bigger
achievements, but he broke down, and after unsuccessful
efforts were made to train him, subsequently, he was retired.
Malt Chimes was another colt of great promise that went
wrong when on the threshold of his career. _ He had won
the Sires’ Produce Stakes, beating Admetus, in addition to
other events, when he broke down, and failed to stand up to
further attempts of preparation. ,
Barley Brae was a very useful performer who guined
earlv prominence for Ryan, and an interesting incident con-
cerning him is that his owner after Barley Brae had been
beaten by Amberdown in a £5OO Handicap at Albion Pa ,
got what other owners who shared a similar experience m
Amberdown’s march of successes failed to get the li £
prize m y men ti o ned that Amberdown, a great per-
former in 1910, 1917 and 1?1« after winning the Brisbane
Thousand and other races, including the £5OO Handicap at
Albion, referred to, was found to be not registered with
the Registrar of Racehorses. It was an oversight, hut it
made the great son of Downshire ineligible for the ™ c es he
had won prior to the “discovery.” There was lots of talk of
trouble—even litigation—following the discovery of Amber-
down’s non-registration, but it came to nothing, except
one of the last instances before the discovery of his no -
registration in which Barley Brae ran second to him in the
“Five Hundred” during a show week meeting at Albion Park.
It was some time after this that the discovery a


promised to create a lot of trouble was made. Nothing came
of it, beyond the fact that negotiations between Mr. Jennings
(owner of Amberdown) and Mr. Lawton (owner of Barley
Brae) resulted in the latter getting the amount of the first
prize. This is something that very few even to-day are
aware of.
On a corner block facing Manson Road, Hendra, he has
a new home and stables of his own, of which he is justly
proud. And as we looked it over “Pat,” full of pride of the
success of his ambition, remarked, “Jimmy, it’s the result
of ten years’ striving.” With up-to-date stables, providing
for the quartering of ten horses, apart from an equally
modern feed room and cottage for the stable employees, in
addition to a beautiful home, built on the most modern plans,
which, by the way, is in consonance with Queensland’s
glorious and health-giving climate. “Pat” Ryan has achieved
if by merit of honesty of purpose and hard striving for
success. H.e could not command it, but he did more —he
won it on merit and deserved it.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
CHARLIE SMITHSON’S STORIES OF LORD CARDIGAN’S
RISE TO FAME.
Like many other well-known and successful trainers of
to-day Smithson belongs to a family who took little interest
in racing affairs. He left home before he was twelve years
old and came to Queensland. He got a job on the late John
Finnie’s Rosevale Stud Farm, at Drayton, where Watty, Dick,
and Jack Blacklock were developed as riders in earlier years.
He had been there only six months when he started his riding
in races, and from that time on he did a lot of riding on the
Downs and in the south-western districts, and for many
years had charge of the Rosevale Stud, in addition
to training and riding horses for Mr. Finnie and other patrons.
In the late ’nineties in he did well, and among
other good horses he was associated with were Pericles,
Prince Consort, and Peep o’Day. Although he rode him in
only two of his races, he also gained some note as a rider in
connection with the training of Ohio, who at the end of the
’nineties and early in the present century was Queensland s
best racehorse, and was unbeatable in w.f.a, races, and
afterwards went south to distinguish himself by winning the
w.f.a. Melbourne Stakes. Ohio was a strong headed horse
and rider after rider failed to stop him from bolting in his
work, until Smithson put an end to it. A prominent sports-
man of the time offered to bet anyone £5 that Smithson
would not succeed where others had failed. Two or three
of that rider's admirers banked and took up the wager and
won it. For Smithson Ohio bowled along at half pace the
first morning he rode him, without making an attempt to
holt, and from then on Smithson was paid £1 a week to ride
Ohio in his work and the horse never gave him any trouble.
Early in the present century, Smithson went south to
gain more experience of training from leading southern
trainers. He was with J. Allsop when that trainer in 1905
pulled off the Newmarket Handicap and Australian Gun
double with Playaway and Lord Ullin’s Daughter, the latter,
after running second to her stable mate in the Newmarket
(six furlongs), beating an ex-Queenslander in Dividend in
the Australian Cup, two and a-quarter miles, a few days later.
Prior to that Smithson was working for “Cracker ’
Cornwall, and was with him when he won the Melbourne
Cup of 1903 and Sydney Cup of 1904, and later w.f.a. races


with Lord Cardigan. Concerning Lord Cardigan’s successes T
Smithson tells some good stories. Old John Mayo owned a
mare and her Positano foal at foot, which afterwards raced
as Lord Cardigan.
Mayo was “broke” at the time and wanted to sell mother
and foal to one of the Thompsons, of breeding fame, but
while agreeable to buy the mare the latter would not take
the foal, remarking: “I don’t want a Positano foal about the
place.”
Thompson bought the mare and left Mayo with the foal.
The Positano colt was still a little leggy fellow when
Mayo sent him to “Cracker” Cornwall to be trained. In time
Cornwall found that the colt —now called Lord Cardigan—
could gallop, and gave great promise of staying. In time,
the amount owing to him for training fees became sub-
stantial, so he decided that as old John was still up against
it the only way to get his money back was to let the colt get
properly seasoned and to go for a well endowed distance race
with him. He ran him in a few races over distances which
did not suit him, and from the colt’s showing in each Corn-
wall gained more and more confidence of the colt becoming
a good stayer.
He set his mind on winning a Melbourne Cup with him.
With his fees for training still amounting up, Cornwall
knew that if he told Mayo of the colt’s prospects the only
result would he that he would pass the news on to friends
and acquaintances, and then there would be no long odds
about Lord Cardigan.
What he knew of Lord Cardigan’s ability he decided to
keep to himself, until he put into effect a plan which he
conceived to clean up a fortune for himself and John Mayo.
“Cracker” mortgaged a farm at. Windsor which he
owned, and put the money on Lord Cardigan—then a three-
year-old—for the Melbourne Cup at long odds, shortly after
the weights were declared.
Shortly afterwards, Mayo came to Cornwall and said:
“I’m selling Lord Cardigan, I’ve got an offer of £5OO for him,
and he is not worth 500 shillings.”
“Don’t you touch the colt,” replied Cornwall sharply.
“Five hundred pounds would not pay me for the time and
expense I have spent on him.”
“Have you gone mad?” asked the now astonished John
Mayo, but more astonished was he when Cornwall com-
manded him “to go to town and get someone to back Lord
Cardigan for the Melbourne Cup for him.” “If he gets
beaten I will be a broken man,” added Cornwall.
Mayo followed the advice, and how Lord Cardigan later
downed that great mare Wakeful at w.f.a., over miles in
the Randwick Plate, and going on to Melbourne won the Mel-


bourne Cup (with 6.8, ridden by Norman Godby), from
Wakeful, 10.0, and Seaport, 7.2, is a matter of well-known
history.
Afterwards Lord Cardigan was brought back to Sydney,
where he won the Sydney Gup, and w.f.a. races, and made
John Mayo and “Cracker” Cornwall wealthy men.
Smithson tells another good story concerning Cornwall
and Mayo and Lord Cardigan’s Sydney Gup win. Mayo
backed the colt well for the Sydney Gup, and for days before
the race he persistently pestered Cornwall with the question,
“Do you think anything will beat him?” despite Cornwall's
as equally persistent assurance that he was confident of the
colt winning.
On the day of the race Mayo pestered him more than
ever. Cornwall got annoyed and took Mayo to a lavatory and,
getting him inside, locked the door on him from the outside,
and took the key away. After the horses for the Gup had
been saddled up be gave an attendant the key and sent him
to let Mayo out. If John Mayo ever intended to have it out
with Cornwall for “locking” him up, it was forgotten by him
in his joy in seeing Lord Cardigan win the Sydney Gup, and
a fortune in bets for him, and other rich races later.
Subsequently a very big offer was refused for Lord
Cardigan. Mayo' and Cornwall had hoped to win the next
Melbourne Gup with him. That Melbourne Gup was the last
race the colt ever ran in. With 9st. 61b. on his back he put
up a wonderful race in running second to Acrasia, 7.6, but
the effort killed He died a few days afterwards, and
a veterinary examination revealed that the heart of the stout-
hearted little “leggy colt” had burst with the strain of the
wonderful effort he put up.
Smithson, who, in recent years met with a fair measure
of success as a trainer on the Downs, is now settled in
Brisbane as a public trainer, with Mr. E. L. Ramsay as his
principal patron, and with bis team is doing well.


CHAPTER XXXV.
AUG. WAGNER AND THE QUEEN’S CHOCOLATE.
Preserved for Twenty-five Years —A Memento of the Boer
War with a History.
The more the reminiscences of the leading metropolitan
trainers are followed up the more one is struck by the big
percentage of them who got their earliest training among
horses on the land. Another such instance is that of Mr.
Aug. J. Wagner, trainer and part owner of Best Dan, winner
of the Brisbane Handicap at the Q.T.G. Spring Meeting of
\ 924
Mr. A. J. Wagner’s father, Mr. H. Wagner, was for
many years employed at by the late Mr. Jas.
Taylor, senr., and for years one of his duties was to drive
the latter’s son, Mr. Jas. Taylor (who has been president of
the Toowoomba Turf Club for the past 25 years) to and from
school. , . ,
When Mr. H. Wagner married he struck out on his own
account, and settled on the land at Toowoomba, where he
and Mrs. Wagner reared a big family.
With the exception of Mr. A. J. Wagner, the youngest
of the six, all the sons are also settled on the land around
Toowhomba. Reared on horseback, as it were, the horse
always has had a strong calling for Mr. A. J. Wagner, and
he was only a lad when he raced his first horse, Lampton,
at amateur and picnic meetings on the Downs.
As a youth he decided to take up printing as a trade,,
and was apprenticed at the office of the Toowoomba
“Chronicle,” and while there he still kept a horse for the
amateur and picnic meetings on the Downs and rode
himself. He had finished his apprenticeship and was still at
his trade at the “Chronicle” office when the South African
war broke out in 1899, and from there he enlisted with the
first contingent of the Queensland Mounted Infantry, and
took with him Matches, a horse which he owned and had
ridden at many amateur race meetings.
Mr. A. J.’ Wagner claims to have been the first non-
commissioned officer in the British Dominions to volunteer
for active service in South Africa. With the old Q.M.T.,
with which he had then been associated for some time, he
held the rank of corporal. When the news of the outbreak
of the Boer War reached Queensland the Dickson Govern-


merit, which was then in power, decided to offer troops to
the Home authorities. The first place Colonel Ricardo
visited to seek volunteers was Toowoomba, and A. J*
Wagner was the first man enlisted.
It was this first contingent of the Q.M.I. which made
history in South Africa, on New Year’s Day—achieving the
first clean cut victory for Great Britain in the war.
It was at an outpost at a place named Sunnyside, on
the main road to Magersfontein, where the Highland Brigade
was cut up a few weeks previously. The Queenslanders took
the laarger, or camp, and all in it, prisoners—43 all told
on New Year’s Day. These were all British subjects, con-
sequently rebels. They were taken to Capetown and tried
in a civil court, and were sentenced to from two to ten
years’ imprisonment. This put the fear of God into all those
who were inclined to rebel. It was not generally known at
the time that about 60,000 British subjects had signed a
petition to rebel against Britain if the Boers declared war
against Britain and got down to a certain point in British
territory. It is very safe to say that the little scrap at
Sunnyside was the turning point of the war and the salvation
of Great Britain. .
After a year’s service Mr. A. J. Wagner was invalided
home, with five bars to his service medals, and another
trophy of the Boer War, which he has since preserved and
treasured —the Queen’s chocolate. t
An interesting bit of history surrounds the Queen s
chocolate. The late Queen Victoria sent a present of a 1 lb.
block of Chocolate for each of her troops in South Africa on
New Year’s Day, 1900. The only contingent from the
Dominions to share in it was the first of the Q.M.I. and its
members. It was looked up to as having the same value as
a medal, and many of its members preserved it and treasured
it on that account.
On receiving his block Mr. Wagner packed it up and
sent it by registered post to his home in Toowoomba, and
although some 25 years have since elapsed he still has
most of the chocolate —and it is probably the only piece of
the Queen Victoria chocolate of 1900 in Australia to-day.
Small pieces of the block of chocolate have been given
away on occasions of important ceremonies. When Lord
Chelmsford (then State Governor) unveiled the South
African soldiers’ memorial monument at Gatton in 1906,
Mr. Wagner presented him with the first piece taken off his
Queen Victoria chocolate. When Earl Dudley (Governor-
General) visited Gatton in later years to see the troops from
the military encampment at Grantham to take part in a day’s
sports, and when Sir William Martin (president of the
Scottish Commission, which visited Australia in connection
with immigration matters) visited Gatton, both were pre-
sented by Mr. Wagner with a piece of the chocolate. The


Prince of Wales, on the occasion of his visit to Toowoomba
in 1922, and the State Governor, Sir Matthew Nathan, on
the occasion of him unveiling a monument to the memory
of the Toowoomba hoys who fell in the last world war, were
similarly treated to a piece of chocolate, and the Prince of
Wales on his way back to England wrote from Suva to Mr.
Wagner, thanking him for the gift.
A. J. has had the honor of receiving presents from three
Queens of England—the chocolate from Queen Victoria, and
an invalid walking stick from Queen Alexandra, while Queen
Mary personally presented him with his South African War
medal when, as Duchess of York, she visited Queensland.
He is also the owner of a peace jewel struck by the consent
ol the Duke of Connaught (brother to the late King Edward).
There are only a few' of these in Australia. “Peace, 1919.”
is engraved on it, besides other emblems.
On his return from South Africa, A. J. was offered his
old desk at the Toowoomba “Chronicle” office, but to his old
boss he smilingly replied, “I don’t think I’ll start work
again. The call of the horse has got me.”
And as soon as he was properly well again, Wagner
settled down to the training and racing of horses and has
remained at it ever since, and many a time he has, in the
past, ridden his ponies against those of Police Inspector J.
Warren White (afterwards Q.T.G. stipendiary steward and
later Y.R.G. stipendiary steward), and often beaten them.
He also had some good show horses, and one of them,
Laddie, ridden by himself, beat Wirth Bros.’ noted jumping
mare, Lady Moreton (ridden by P. Blake, well known here
as a jockey) in a high jump at Laidlcy, Laddie clearing 6 feet
3 inches.
Mr. Wagner after\Vards became the licensee of an
hotel, but finding that the life did not provide the amount of
physical exercise he had always been accustomed to, he
decided to go in for a racehorse also, to get the necessary
exercise by riding it and to enjoy the pleasure of racing it.
He secured Avoca (by Booroomooka from Avo), a gelding
which many present day racegoers will remember having
raced in Brisbane.
There is a ffood story associated with Avo. A Mr.
Ballinger, traveller for the Singer sewing machines, was
passing through the roads of the Helidon scrub, with an
eighteen months old filly, which he owned, tied behind his
van, when he met Mr. O’Brien, formerly chairman of the
Tarampa Council, and offered to sell him the filly for 10/-.
The exchange was made there and then.
“Well, I now want a bushel of corn for my horse in the
van and here’s 5/- for it.” said Mr. Ballinger.
“Oh, no, as I got the filly for 10/-, I will give you the
bushel of corn for nothing,” replied Mr. O’Brien, and he did.


The filly was afterwards given the name of Avo. She
was never raced, but when three years old Mr. O’Brien bred
Avoca from her, and in addition to the latter she produced
Asthore, He’s Here, A.G.J., T. 0.8., and Captain Hardie, all
smart performers and winners in Brisbane, and Avoca for a
time held the seven furlongs record at Albion Park. Avo
was by Shanghai, an Arab, imported by Mr. Dangar, of New
South Wales, from India, where he had an unbeaten record,
from a mare by Westminster, one of Sir Joshua Peter Bell’s
old sires. „ „ tl
After Avoca Wagner had Lord Nelson, and for that horse
he makes the claim that he had two Australian records for a
stallion—one for the number of races (163) he competed
in, and the other for the number of miles (140) he raced,
and Lord Nelson won his last race at Toowoomba when he
was eleven years old. In all, the old horse won about sixty
races on either registered or unregistered courses, between
Toowoomba and Brisbane. Once Lord Nelson was dis-
qualified for six months, and the week the disqualification
expired he put up a notable performance. The term
expired on the Thursday night, and on the preceding
Tuesday a veterinary certificate was secured for him for
show 7 purposes. On the following day (Wednesday) he took
the prize for best blood stallion at the Gatton Show. Next
day (Thursday) he took the championship for blood stallions
at the show, and on the following day (Friday) he was
entered for a five furlongs race (post entries) at the Gatton
Show races, held that day, and carrying 11.7, he won by six
lengths, running a record for the track.
On another occasion when Lord Nelson was brought
to Brisbane and was raced a dozen times in as many weeks,
and was never out of a piece, and his wins included a Flying
Handicap and two Park Handicaps at Albion Park; and it
was a coincidence that the same day as Lord Nelson won one
of his Park Handicaps, Trafalgar won the principal race at
the meeting in Melbourne.
Wagner pulled off a big coup with Lord Nelson at
Warwick in 1910. It Was in the Exhibition Handicap (now
termed the Toowoomba Cup). He had Lord Nelson saddled
up and in the enclosure when Ned Stibbard (a sport well
known for his daring punting) spoke to him over the fence.
He said, “Do you think he has a Aug?” Wagner
replied, “If you feel like backing him get in and don’t stop,
but leave the tote to me.”
Stibbard got £lOO to £lO off nearly every bookmaker
on the ground, and won over £2OOO.
The tote paid £5/19/6, and Wagner collected a nice
divvy from it.
There is another of Lord Nelson’s performances which
A. J. does not think has been excelled by any horse in the
metropolitan area. He took him to a Sandgate meeting. He


ran second in the Trial and won the Novice, and on the
following Wednesday he won the Trial and ran second in
the Novice at the Creek. The following Saturday he ran
second in the Park Handicap, and on the following Saturday
he won the Park Handicap, thus he won three races and was
second three times in fifteen days in the metropolitan area.
Lord Nelson died from snakebite a couple of years ago
at Emu Park Station, on the Gondamine.
Another good little mare he had was Nelson’s Lady.
She had won her Trial, Novice, and Graduation at the Greek.
She won a Flying Handicap at Eagle Farm. He then prepared
her for the first Brisbane “Thousand” the Albion Park Jockey
Club put on, mid it was in that race the big accident happened.
Lord Lovat broke his leg and fell, and Nelson’s Lady turned
a clean somersault over him and broke her back. Both were
destroyed. Lady Noble broke her tail, but Gowrie got off
with a severe shaking. Destruction won.
Later, Wagner got Captain Hardie, who, a twn-year-old,
with the colors up for the first time, won a double—Trial
and Novice Handicaps—at Albion Park, beating Prudent
Lady, who, some time later, won the first and only Sires’
Produce Stakes ever decided at Albion Park. Captain Hardie,
despite a dicky leg, was a good performer till a complete
breakdown brought about his retirement.
Mr. Wagner also had Lord Honiton, winner of a Bunda-
berg Gup and the last Ladies’ Bracelet Handicap (1914) that
was open to all comers, and not Q.T.G. members only, as it
is to-day. With Sir Gyrus he won the Warwick Newmarket
Handicap, after that colt had run third with 10.7 to Hygo
and Abgull in a Hack Pace on the first day of the meeting.
It will be remembered that Hygo started at 50 to 1 and paid
over £5O on the totalisator.
On another occasion Wagner pulled off a betting coup
at Toowoomba with Sir Cyrus ridden by Les Winters. He
looked a good thing on paper, and Wagner realised that if
ho attempted to back him' on the course Sir Gyrus would
quickly be at odds on. He, therefore, quietly distributed his
commission among starting' price bookmakers in and around
Toowoomba, and not a shilling of his money was put on on the
course. The plan worked well, as Sir Cyrus started at 5/2
amd won easily.
On another occasion when Sir Cyrus won ho got a price
about him. which he otherwise would not have got, hut for
the plans he made. It also was at Toowoomba, and going
into the jockeys’ l room. Wagner remarked, “Who is the
worst rider among you boys?”
There was no response.
“Well, who among you have not ridden on this course?”
be asked.
“I haven’t,” replied Mick Gray.
“Well, I want you to ride a horse for me,” said Wagner.


Gray was not much known as a rider, and, consequently,
a better price was on offer about Sir Gyrus than would have-
been Hie case bad a fashionable rider been on him.
Gray and Sir Gyrus duly delivered the goods.
Still another move that was successful was when
Wagner, realising Sir Gyrus would be odds on for a race if'
a good horseman was on him, secured a country licence for
a schoolboy, Kevin Hunter, a son of the well-known trainer.
Bob Hunter (who is now in Brisbane). At the last minute
he gave in the name of K. Hunter as the rider of Sir Gyrus.
There was consternation in the ranks of the intended backers
of Sir Gyrus. Nobody wanted to back him with the supposed
inexperienced schoolboy on him, and the bookmakers’ blew
his price out to 4’s.
Mr. Godsall, the steward, came to Wagner, and said :
“The bookmakers are complaining because there is no money
for your horse.”
“Yes, and they’ll have more reason to complain when
the race is over,” was Wagner’s reply.
“But surely you do not intend backing him with that,
little fellow on him?” queried Mr. Godsall.
“Oh, don’t I. You wait and see,” said Mr. Wagner.
“I think I will recall him and change the rider,” said
Mr. Godsall.
“Don’t do that, you will spoil my plans,” protested
Vagner, and at that he told Mr. Godsall to follow him into
the ring, and he would show him how confident he was of
the ability of the youngster to win on Sir Gyrus.
A. J. and his brother got to work in the ring backing the
horse with every bookmaker, and the last wager he made
was to lay £2O to £lO on.
Sir Gyrus won by three lengths, pulling up, and A. J.
won the best part of £5OO in bets.
Wagner’s next horse was Kenilbrook. This horse broke
down before he got a race out of him. However, after a spell
he got him right again, and won races with him at Too-
woomba, including a Clifford Park Plate. Some time after-
wards Wagner went to the Q.T.G, office to nominate a couple
of horses for the Q.T.G. Summer Meeting of 1921, but he
was not sure as to Whether Kenilbrook was eligible for the
Novice Handicap, for which he wished to nominate him. He
asked to be allowed to look up the turf register. It was in
use elsewhere, and after waiting for some time until he
could not wait any longer, he said, “put him in anything he is
eligible for—the Governor’s Gup will do.”
That was the race Kenilbrook was put in, and he won,
ridden by “Pixie” Northover, running the mile and three-
quarters in 3.3, and starting at any old price, is now a matter
of history.


Since then Wagner has raced Dwin, the winner ol two
Toowoomba Gups in succession, and the holder of the nine
furlongs record for the Clifford Park Racecourse, and he now
has Welcome Dan and Best Dan to carry on with it.
Mr. Wagner has held every position in a race club. At
the present time he is a trustee of the Gatton Racecourse, a
member of the Toowoomba Turf Club, and on the committee
of the Toowoomba Australian Native Association Race Club.
When he took over the secretaryship of the Gatton Race
Club about the year 1905, the club Was in very poor circum-
stances, and was about £7 in debt. He was on the com-
mittee of the Amateur Race Club which had a credit in the
bank of about £l3, and he had a meeting called and the
amateur club was abandoned, and the credit handed over to
the race club. There was practically the same management lor
both. He paid the race club’s debts, and set out with the
assurance of his committee with a free leg to run a race
meeting. He had the assistance of a good man in Mr. H. G.
Marlow and they canvassed for nominations in Brisbane
•and Toowoomba.'and got a good response. Special trams
were run from Brisbane, and one from Toowoomba. A. J.
raced three horses at the meeting, and he bought all the
privileges, the hotel booth, the committee luncheon, the
fruit stall, and the race books, and the club came out ot the
meeting with a credit of £54.
Mr. Wagner has always been a very firm supporter of
the stipendiary steward system. He was the first secretary
outside Brisbane in Queensland to inaugurate it. On one
occasion he nominated three horses for Helidon races, ana
at the foot of his nominations he added : “Subject to you
employing a stipendiary steward.”
When he got to Helidon on the morning of the races
they showed him a wire from the stipendiary steward in
Brisbane, announcing that he could not be present. He
said: “I will not take my horses on to the ground without
one,” and the officials ’phoned Toowoomba and secured the
services of that good and straight sport, Jim Boland, the
meeting was one of the most successful Helidon ever held.


CHAPTER XXXVI.
“STEPPER” DAVIS AND “SODA” KELLAWAY.
Of the big army of men who have followed the calling
of bookmakers since the inception of racing in Queensland
many were possessed of characteristics which brought them
into special prominence in sporting circles, and two such
instances which can be recalled to provide interesting reading
are those in respect to “Stepper” Davis and the late Mr.
Henry (“Soda”) Kellaway.
“Stepper” Davis was, in years gone by, one of the best
known identities in the sporting world throughout Queens-
land and New South Wales, being both witty and versatile.
Of medium height, wiry build, active, and with a large fund
of dry humor, he has helped a “forlorn push” to wdiile away
many hours that would otherwise have been irksome.
Through an accident when quite a lad he has a slight limp
and, now and again, a perceptible halt in his speech, and it
is the latter that adds weight and amusement to his various
caprices. Some of the following happenings with which he
was closely connected should give a fairly good idea of the
man. and bear out the appellative given him—“a dry stick”:
Years ago goat racing was a popular sport at Charters
Towers, and “Stepper” donned the satchell and fielded at one
of such meetings. For one of the races five goats went to
the starting point, and at “6 to 4 the field” “Stepper” found
no business forthcoming. “Two’s the field” he called, and
business was still dull.
“Well, three’s the field” roared “Stepper,” and in
rushed a couple of lads, who each accepted £l5 to £5 about
one of the competitors named “Stinker,” and others followed
until “Stepper” had stood . “Stinker” up for a goodly sum.
“Stepper” was left with the risk, for although he con-
tinuously extended the odds about the others, he enticed
little support for any of them. Backers wanted nothing but
“Stinker.”
With everything in his favor at the start, “Stinker”
went to the front, and the result was never in doubt. He
won by the proverbial street.
When the backers of the winner subsequently surged
round “Stepper,” he gave them all an icy stare, and address-
ing one of the holders of a ticket for £2O, he expostulated:
“There’s only two goats on this course, Meself and
‘Stinker’ ” —much to the amusement of all who heard it.


During a visit to a western township, “Stepper” went
to a restaurant for dinner and took a seat at a table by
himself. At a table just in front of him two men, who had
imbibed freely, were engaged in a heated argument. Sud-
denly the man with his back to Davis jumped taihis teet
and raised his chair, apparently to hit the other man.
"“Stepper” rushed up and got hold of the upraised chair.
“Put it down,” he said to the man; “use that cruet there,
with it you have got a6to 1 chance.” (It was a six bottle
cruet.)
On the occasion of another visit to a western township
ior a big meeting, “Stepper” stayed at a leading hotel, which
was a full house at the time. A number of the sports went
on a wild duck shooting expedition and did fairly well, and
the menu for dinner at the hotel on the following day in-
cluded wild duck. “Stepper” arrived back late for dinner
after the other boarders had finished their meal. the
waitress approached him for his order, and “Stepper, after
investigating the menu, ordered Duck. “Ducks on, Mr.
Davis,” said the waitress. “Stepper” gazed at her in sur-
prise for a moment or two, and then he thundered out :
“There’s only one way to get duck at this pub get in the pot
with it.”
The recent demise of “Soda” Kellaway recalls to
memory a man through whose body raced the gambling
spirit. We descendants of old Adam all possess peculiarities,
many of them being interspersed with greed and duplicity,
some compelling the possessor to go crooked, no matter
what the inclination, others carrying a mixture of good and
p a d —the former generally predominating.
“Soda” was what is termed “a born gambler,” but he
gambled in such a way that one could trust him to give a
fair deal, and, if he happened to make a big wager on a
horse, or on the turn of the pennies or the dice, and luck
did not favor him, no one ever heard him “squeal” or resort
to unprintable language. If anyone did him a good turn,
"Soda ' would return tue obligation len-ioid when oppor-
tunity arose. He would be worth thousands to-day and
to-morrow he would be on the “rocks,” but never a murmur,
mid ny a siignt accommodation, unasked lor on many an
occasion, he would try Fate once more, and he generally
made good. The bookmaker who made a bet with Soda
knew that it would be honored to the last penny, and none
could be found to say him “nay” if he wanted to book a
wager He was a line sportsman and clubman, and all-round
good fellow, and although a victim to acute rheumatism for
a great many years past his cheerful disposition and ready
wit endeared him to all with whom he came in contact.


The late Mr. Kellaway’s father owned a cordial factory
in Rockhampton decades since, and as a lank, raw-boned,
i)lue-eyed stripling the son got the appellation of “Soda,”
and it stuck to him until he died. The term rather suited
him (not in temperament) for he never got “down in the
dump”; but he continually effervesced, and went off pop
when anything unusual happened* before “rheumy”—or
rheumatism—got command of him “Soda” could use the
mits, Was a fair pigeon shot, and an all-round athlete.
After the death of Mr. Kellaway, senior, the cordial
business was carried on by Mrs. Kellaway, and as a young
man, “Soda” drove a soft drink delivery cart for his mother,
doing to a gambling school one night with a few pounds in
his pocket, he cleaned up the school, winning about £I2OO.
With it he went to Charters Towers and took out a book-
maker’s licence, and did fairly well at it, in addition to
racing horses. When he came to Brisbane about fifteen
years ago he made another big haul on a horse of his own,
and left the course with two portmanteaux chockful of notes.
About ten years ago “Soda” was about £13,000 strong,
£SOOO of which he put in the war loan, but later he had
heavy losses until only the war bonds remained. From then
on his nle as a nettor was one of ups and downs. He won
and lost fortunes.
Some years ago at Winton he had a run of bad luck,
and staked his last bob on “Sin Ki Loo”—needless to say, a
Chinese gamble. He mustered up about £175, and put the
lot on. The banker asked, “How much?” “We’ll count it
afterwards,” blandly replied “Soda.” The dice Were thrown
and luck was with “Soda” this time, and he got a handsome
divvy.
On another occasion at Lucinda Point, while awaiting
the steamer’s arrival, a game of “Two Up” was indulged in.,
and Kellaway was soon outed. Mr. J. H. S. Barnes lent him
a tenner, and that went the Way of the rest. Another fiver
was passed over and “Soda” once more “made good,” not-
withstanding the continued “toot-toot” of the boat as she
gradually approached; and not before it was imperative to
make a move did the continuity of “heads up and heads
down” discontinue, and “Soda” led the way with a con-
siderable amount of “liquid asset” and the rather lean
pockets of his followers.
He loved to own a good horse, and, among others, he
bought Rosolio, who was by Ladurlad. The horse had had
a lot of racing and turned rogue, though he possessed pace
If he could only be persuaded to exert himself. He had
performed indifferently at the Towers and Townsville, but
was taken on to Cairns. “Soda” neglected his own horse
and put some £BO on the favorite, at the same time instruct-
ing his jockey, Mason, to ride him right out. So well did


Mason carry out bis instructions (bands and leet, whip and
spurs being vigorously used) that Rosolio won all the wa Y?
and “Soda” did not have a bob on him, and all that he said
was by way of query: “Now, what do you think of that.
Many other happenings could be chronicled showing the
genial disposition of the man.
One other instance will bear recording, and that wa&
when he in the Brisbane Hospital. Don Jose, who will
be remembered as having been boosted here some time
back, was in a race at the Greek, and “Soda had the tip
from his trainer that he would most likely win. He backed
him, and, as the nurses had been particularly kind to him,
he “put them on to the good thing.” After the race nad
been run a phone message was despatched by the trainer
to “Soda” that Don Jose had run a dead-heat and what was
he to do. “Run it off,’' was ’phoned back without any
hesitation, and Don Jose won, much to “Soda’s” satisfaction
and the approbation of the nurses who had backed him.
“Soda” lost money in other ways than in actual gambles
and got it back. One night he was doing well at the card
table at Charters Towers, and had his money—a pile of
no tes —on the table, when an onlooker grabbed a fistful ol
notes and bolted. Some of the players were about to chase
him hut “Soda,” who never turned a hair, stopped them,,
remarking, “Let him go; he’ll come back again.”
months later, in the same club, a man came to “Soda,” and
handed him £7O, saying, “There’s the money I took from
you some time ago.” “Thank you,” said Soda, “I knew you
would come back again.”
In later vears in Brisbane, “Soda” was relieved ol £7OO.
the money (notes) being taken from his pocket. The matter
was put into the hands of the police, and a fortnight after
“Soda” received it back in a letter sent through the post
without any indication to whom it came from, but many
had a good idea who took it. .
And thus passed away, after years of excruciating pain
and suffering, one of the biggest and straightest born
gamblers that ever trod the Queensland firmament.


CHAPTER XXXVIL—-OTHER PERSONALITIES.
MR. ALBERT COLLEY.
Although he confines his attention nowadays to only
one or two horses, it is not many years since Mr. Albert E.
€olley occupied a prominent place among the public trainers
of Brisbane; and back in the late ’Bo’s he was one of the best
riders in the State, both over the jumps and in flat races.
When Mr. Collins called on Mr. Colley in search of
reminiscences, he made it his business to ask him a question,
which had often been asked in sporting circles, and which
had never been answered with any confidence one way or
the other.
“Is Albert Colley any relation to ‘Bricky’ Colley?”
At Kedron Park the day before, Albert Colley w&s inter-
viewed, some of the hands were discussing old-time racing
"when the name of Colley cropped up, and Mr. E. J.
Lawrence, who was passing by, inquired if Albert, of that
Bk, was related to the noted “Bricky,” who was one of the
best riders in Australia in the ’7o’s and ’8 # o’s, at a time when
such renowned horsemen as Tom Hales, Billy Yeomans, J.
Morrison, and O’Brien were in their prime. “Bricky” won
A.J.G. Derbies on Woodlands, Nellie, and Le Grand (a
■Queenslander), and many other important races.
There was a doubt in the minds of those of whom the
•question was asked.
Mr. Collins put it to Albert Colley as soon as he engaged
him in conversation.
“Oh, yes,” was Albert’s ready reply. “ ‘Bricky’ was
my father’s brother, and, therefore, my uncle, and it was
‘Bricky’ who first brought me to Brisbane in 1887, when he
came over to train and ride for the late Mr. Billy Mooney.”
With that question settled, Albert supplied some in-
teresting details of his association with the turf and his
experiences. At the age of 14 years he was apprenticed
for five years to the Sydney trainer, Joe Cook. During the
currency of his apprenticeship two notable horses the Cook
stable sheltered were Woodlands (on whom “Bricky” Colley
won the Sydney Derby of 1877 for Joe Silberberg, a leading
southern bookmaker of the time), and the Queenslander,
Ben Bolt, who, after running third in the Tattersall’s Gup,
won the Carrington Stakes, and afterwards was taken to
Melbourne, where he landed the Caulfield Gup. Although


lie was not on him in the big events mentioned, Albert Colley
rode Ben Bolt in a couple of minor races, and he says ot him
that he was one of the greatest of the many good horses he
was ever associated with.
A sad story of ill luck is recalled in regard to Mr.
Silberberg. He had a run ol luck for a time, Irom when his-
horse Woodlands beat the great Chester in the A.J.C. Derby
of 1877. His luck changed suddenly. For the Hawkesbury
Grand Handicap of 1878, as it was then called, he backed
Woodlands for nearly all the money he had. The books
did bet in those days.
It was a great race between Woodlands and The Dean,
and Woodlands got the verdict by a head. When Bricky
Gollev (the rider of Woodlands) got on the scale to weigh-
in he was found to be 41b. short weight. There was great
consternation, as Colley had wasted to ride him everybody
was dumbfounded; none more so than Colley and Silberberg,
as there was no lead carried; nothing- but a light saddle.
Many came to the conclusion that Colley must have weighed
out light, but that Was impossible.
The mystery was solved two years later.
Andrew Towns bet a friend a new hat at the Hawkes-
bury meeting that he was a certain weight. The bet was-
accepted, and Mr. Towns got on the same scales that Colley
weighed in on, and he was 41b. less weight than that he bet
he was.
“No,” says Towns, “I’ll bet anybody £SO I am the weight
I say I am.”
Nobody would bet him, and he said: “I know those
scales are wrong,” and as he said it he dropped into the
scales again and drew the weight.
The secret of it all was that if you sat well back you
were 41b. short. It was one of those beam scales, with a
chair.
When Silberberg heard of it it broke him up, and he
died a sad death at Bondi.
When the term of his apprenticeship had been com-
pleted, Albert Colley joined the stable of Daddy Baynes, who
was trainer for Bill Forrester, a successful owner in a big
way, who in later years achieved the distinction of winning
two Melbourne Cups in successive years, 1897 and 1898,
with Gaulus and The Grafter, respectively, the latter having
run second to Gaulus in ’97. The Grafter afterwards went
to England, where he won a City and Suburban Handicap.
After a term with Daddy Baynes, Albert put in twelve
months with the Goughs—Jim, a successful trainer and
Jack, the rider for the stable, and also the rider of The
Grafter when he won the Melbourne Gup.


In 1887, when his ancle “Bricky” accepted engage-
ment to come to Brisbane to train and ride for Mr. Billy
Mooney, Albert jumped at “Bricky’s” offer to take him with
him.
With such good horses as Yabba, Sleep, Glorie, Dijon,
and his own horse Strombold to work on “Bricky” soon
made good, but an accident on Yabba put him out of action
as a rider, and gave Albert an opportunity to do the riding
for the stable. He, too, made good, winning w.f.a. and
handicap races on Yabba and handicaps on Sleep.
Subsequently, Albert joined the stables presided over by
Watty Blacklock, who had then retired as a rider, and he
remained with the genial Watty for fourteen years, during
which time he gained a reputation as a brilliant jockey, both
on the flat and over the jumps—hurdles races at that time,
and for many years previously, being a popular feature of
the racing at Eagle Farm. Albert rode Babel to victory in
the Q.T.C. Stradbroke Handicaps of 1895 and 1896, the
gelding carrying 10.12 and 10.10, respectively, and he was
the rider of Beggar Boy in the seventeen hurdles and
steeplechase races he won, after the then Commissioner of
Queensland Police (Mr. D. T. Seymour) had purchased him
for £25, and he was also the rider of the gelding when he
ran second to Busaco in the Caulfield Grand National. It
was after the Caulfield Grand National that Beggar Boy was
sold for 550 guineas. Albert won many other races for
patrons of Watty Blacklock, including the Q.T.C. Prince of
Wales Cup and the Charters Towers Milchester Handicap
and Town Plate on Music in the late ’9o’s. •
In 1900, Captain A. G. Sandemian bought a large area
of ground at Hendra, abutting the railway line and the race-
course fence, and built on it large and commodious stables,
and a beautiful residence. There he installed Paddy Grant
as his private trainer, with a team of horses, which included
Babel, Governor, Clarence, Silver Shot, and Caledonian, and
Albert Colley came over to the Sandeman-Grant stables with
Babel. In later years he became the owner of this home and
training establishment, and his purchase will be dealt with
later in the course of my story.
Two years after establishing the private stables and
home, under the care of Paddy Grant, Captain Sandeman, on
account of failing health, went to England, where he died
some time later. The valuable property was then taken
over by the bank, of which Captain Sandeman had been a
patron, and which looked after his financial interests.


In 1902 Albert went to New Zealand, and trained
horses there for Mr. Hugh Mosman, the discoverer of the
Towers goldfield, and afterwards a member of the Q.T.G.
Committee and a successful Queensland racing man, and on
returning to Brisbane about twelve months later he bought
the residence and training establishment, built by the late
Captain Sandernan, and settled there as a public trainer.
Some of the more notable horses he had there under his
care in later years were: Robert Emmet, J. G., Olivaster (the
Q.T.G. St. Leger winner of 1908 for the late Mr. L. E.
Walker), Olga Ulida, and Soldier s March.
Within the last couple of years Mr. Colley sold the
original stables and a large area of the land attached thereto
to Mr. Terry Ahern, of the Gresham Hotel, and they are to-day
known as the “Gresham Lodge” stables, and are presided
over by Mr. Charley McLaughlin, whose career under the
caption of “From Lawyer’s Office to the Pigskin,” is pub-
lished in this volume.
Mr. Colley says of these stables that they are the best
constructed and most costly stables in Brisbane, if not in
Australia, and to build similar stables to-day would cost a
fortune.
“But money was no object to the late Captain Sande-
man,” he added." “His wish was for the best in everything,
and he got it, no matter what it cost him.”
Albert Colley and his good wife still occupy the home
Captain Sandernan built. Albert has practically retired as a
public trainer, but the old love of the racecourse and the
racehorse remains, and he likes to have one, or two, at the
most, to look after. Recently he has had built a twm-stall
stable on the land at the rear of his home, and under his
care and attention is no less a celebrity than Tangalooma, a
good horse in Victoria a year or so back.
If Tangalooma does not “come back” it will not be for
the want of the best care and attention, for his trainer and
attendant in one is rapt up in him.
Mr. Colley, in his riding days, was in a bad smash at
Eagle Farm on a horse called Hermit, and in addition to
having several teeth broken, he w r as otherwise knocked about.
Another painful experience he had was when Music lashed
out and kicked him in the face on the Townsville beach in the
late ’9o’s. His jawbone was badly smashed, and in the
course of an operation eleven pieces of broken bone were
removed.
MR. U. BERGSTROM.
Mr. U. (“Peter”) Bergstrom holds a record among
Queensland trainers for the number of horses he continuously
has in his stables and supervises the training of. He has
s)ad as many as thirty at a time —sufficient to provide a race


meeting of his own on his private exercise track, opposite
his home at Ascot —and at time of writing his team comprised
twenty-six horses. For some years past it had seldom been
less than a score.
“Peter” Bergstrom is fortunate in having a capable
lieutenant in his son, Victor (formerly a successful jockey),
and two younger sons in Ernie and Leslie (both of whom
are still riding) to assist him in his big undertaking. All
three had their opportunities limited on account of increasing
weight. However, their training and experience have stood
to them in assisting their father in the care and training of
the stable’s big team of borses and the stable employees.
controls everything, however, and it is interesting
for a visitor to see carried out, as well as the sons carrying
them out on their own parts, his instructions, and seeking of
his advice when circumstances might alter the arrangements.
Bergstrom has been one of our most successful trainers
for some years, and yet he was never intended or even trained
for the business. It can be said that he jumped himself into
prominence in the business of training horses. It would
appear as if it was a natural gift with him, for success
attended his effort from the outset. Although he is now well
on in years, it is only thirteen years ago since he came to
Brisbane, and really commenced his career as a horse trainer,
although he raced a few horses for a few years before that.
From a cabin boy on a windjammer “Peter” Bergstrom
has become one of Brisbane’s most successful horse-trainers;
l)iit sandwiched in between was a mixture of successes and
reverses in other ventures.
Born in Sweden, “Peter” at the age of sixteen decided
on a sea-faring career. He found a job on a Norwegian-
owned windjammer as cabin boy, and in two years’ service
became an able seaman. Then followed a trip to America.
It occupied nine months, and, in the course of it he worked
himself up to the post of third mate. On the ship’s return to
Norway all the crew, except “Peter” and the skipper and
the first mate, were paid off, and the ship went into dock to
be “rigged” out anew. Six months elapsed, and the ship
left on another trip to America with the same skipper and
first mate, but “Peter” was now the second mate, and it had
u new crew. Trips to Newark, thence Spain, followed, and a
return was made to Norway.
The next trip to America saw “Peter'' cafrying out the
first mate’s duties. The trip was fulfilled, and Newark
reached again. It was then that he joined up with the
“Lief-ericcon” (a windjammer), one of the fastest ships of
her time. He was the first mate on this vessel. A trip to
America followed, and from the land of Uncle Sam the


Lief-ericcon set sail for Australia, and did the trip in 93
days (a record time then) although the modern liner does ■ t
now in 19 days.
Brisbane was a port of call and “Peter” met a number
of Danish and Norwegian friends; they had a heart to heart
talk on things generally. As first mate “Peter 77 was getting
the “munificent 77 salary of £3 a month. His mates were
drawing from £l6 to £l7 a month at various occupations,
and they advised him to stay. •
Bergstrom and another member of the ship's crew.
August Hansen, decided to 'heat it, 77 and they made their
way out of the city and found jobs cutting wood for a Mv .
Christianson at a place on which now stands the Stone s-
Corner Hotel.
After the Lief-ericcon had departed from Brisbane,
“Peter 77 and his mate found employment with Barney
Svensson in cutting roads. Later he joined up at 8/- a day
with the Ithaca Board, and when the latter was disbanded
he was placed by Mr. Arch. Overend on the construction of
the Logan-Waterford railway. In 1893 he was employed by
Mr. James Overend on the construction of the privately-
oWned Bundaberg to Millaquin railway. It was while on
this job that “Peter” got hold of a mare named Blossom,
which he found was a good trotter. As foreman on the job
he did not have the time to take the mare to race meetings,
so he allowed a mate, Joe Needon, to race her, and she won.
When the railway job was completed he went to Bunda-
herg, taking the mare with him, and he threw out a challenge
to trot Blossom against any other trotter for any amount.
Messrs. Fred Brady (secretary of the Bundaberg Turf Club)
and Murphy (a Bundaberg business man) took up the
challenge, and offered to race Hallaballah against Blossom.
The match was arranged or £2O aside, over five miles. As*
the use of the racecourse could not he secured it was decided
to race on the road. It created considerable interest and
a very big crowd witnessed it, and there was spirited wager-
ing on it. Blossom won easily.
“Peter 77 then went to Childers, and was the first man to
get his tools out for the construction of the tramline for the
Colonial Sugar Defining Company to the Childers mill. Later
he worked for other contractors at various places, and
eventually started as a contractor on his own account at
Childers, and one of the jobs he completed was the con-
struction of the North Isis Central Mill dank
From Childers Bergstrom went to Gordalba as a con-
tractor, but things panned out badly for him, and, to use his
own expression, he “went broke. 77 His next start was as a
horse-dealer and contractor, combined, and he also went in
for a racehorse or two, and in 1897 he bought a cane farm
which he worked till 1907, when he sold out, and took over
the Grown Hotel, at Bundaberg, and again .went in for a.


few racehorses. Hotel-keeping and racing did not prove a
good combination for Bergstrom, for, as he put it himself: "i
again went broke racing horses and feeding canecutters.”
However, he stuck to the horses and got another start,
and in 1911 came to Brisbane with Phil 8., Malarkite, Wing,
and Dondi. He did well with them, especially Doncli, who
won numerous races. Since then Peter has never looked
back, and successful performers which he has had the train-
ing of, include Fairy Bob (winner of £BB6O in prize money).
Lawnmower (Q.T.G. Derby and Queensland Gup winner).
Lydd, Devona, Admetus, Glory Box, In Trouble, Lado, Bed
Bock, Humphrey Clinker, Braw Lady, Countess Acrasia
(holder of the nine furlongs record for Queensland),
Rosalad, Lady Mischief, Lochmayne, Kenilworth Lady,
Betrayer, Mown Hay, Lilyguard, Flying Wing, Bonnie Welkin,
and numerous others, apart from a number of good per-
formers in liis present team.
MR. W. H. PLAYFORD.
It is an old saying that “Patience is a virtue,” and the
saying concludes that it is never found in a man.
When one reflects on the career of W. H. (“Billy”)
Playford, he must credit him with having been possessed of
patience to a very great degree as a youth when he set his
mind on adopting race-riding as a means of livelihood.
His parents were very strongly opposed to his youthful
ideas, but “Billy” Playford, who, by the way, was born in
New South Wales, followed his own dictates, and made up
his mind that he would he a jockey, and he did, hut not before
he had experienced years of waiting and hard work among
horses for opportunity to come his way, and many dis-
appointments.
However, he took his disappointments philosophically
and, exercising great patience, he worked on, full of con-
fidence, and opportunity at last came his way. Queensland
provided it for him. He got his first kick-off as a rider here
in 1905, and from then he worked himself up the ladder
until he became one of the leading lights of his profession
in Queensland, and continued to ride with success until
about three years ago, when he retired and took out a Q.T.G.
licence as a public trainer.
Playford’s most notable successes were achieved on no
less a celebrity than Mr. P. J. Frawley’s Barallan, probably
one of the three best horses Queensland has ever produced,
and one of the greatest, if not the greatest, weight-carriers
in distance handicaps in Queensland of all time.
Barallan (by Ardon from Beryl) was bred at the famous
Lyndhurst stud, Warwick, by the late Mr. G. E. McDougall,


and as a yearling was a leggy colt, and, when ho went int(>
the sale ring, nobody wanted him except Mr. Frawley, and
he secured him for the modest outlay of 65 guineas.
And what a goldmine Barallan turned out to be. He
furnished well and, although he was only tair as a two-year-
old, he was a champion at three years and four years, and
won short as well as long distance handicap races under big
weights, as well as defeating the cracks of the day in many
w.f.a. races, and Playford was his rider in most of his
successes.
A truly wonderful performance of Barallan's was when,,
as a three-year-old, he won the Q.T.G. St. Leger Stakes after
0 hard race in the Stradbroke Handicap earlier the same
afternoon. Under 10.3 Barallan failed in the Stradbroke
Handicap, but a couple of hours later he was saddled up
again for the St. Leger Stakes. In this race Barallan lost
upwards of 100 yards at the start, but, ridden patiently by
Playford, the son of Ardon gradually made up leeway and
won in brilliant fashion amidst tumultuous cheering.
Barallan afterwards won the Queensland Gup (two
miles) under 9.11, riding by D. Gallinan, and in 1910 his
many successes included the Q.T.G. Summer Gup, If miles,,
with 10.7, and the Newmarket Handicap (14 miles), under
11.5, and W.f.a. races, ridden by Playford.
Playford regards Barallan as not only the best horse ho
ever rode, but the best all-round horse that ever stepped on
lo a Queensland course since he came to Brisbane in 1904,.
Fitzgrafton not excepted.
Playford got his early experience with racehorses with
Ted Balls, a well-known New South Wales trainer of the
time. He toured the New South Wales country with Balls,
and his team of horses without achieving his ambition of
being a jockey, and at Quirindi, when he met a trainer from
Rosehill named Inch, he went back with him to Rosehill and
worked in his stable. Inch wished Playford to bind himself
under an apprenticeship agreement to him, but this he de-
clined to do, with the result that when, after working for
Inch and doing a lot of riding on the training tracks for three 1
years, he applied to the A.J.G. for a jockey’s licence, he was
refused it because he had not served an apprenticeship.
Playford then came to Brisbane with Tom O’Brien, who
had Jessie and Madras. Shortly afterwards he went to
Nanango with Trainer A. G. Garr, and on his return he was
associated with the stable of Arthur Noud for twelve months T
but little in the way of opportunities to get riding came his
way.
A trip to Esk followed, and he worked for Tom Mc-
Namara, who was training horses there for Jack Williams.


Later Play ford returned to Brisbane and joined the stable
of Bill Wilson, who formerly was foreman at a stable at
which he (Playford) had worked in New South Wales. In
Wilson's stable Playford got the job of looking after Mr.
Martin Sheehy’s Little Bernie colt, Alexis, ancl getting a
chance of some riding from Wilson, Playford, who then had
secured a licence from the Q.T.G., won a minor race on
Alexis, who afterwards won the Queensland Guineas and
Derby, ridden in both by the late P. (Jock) Byrne.
Having got a kick-off, Playford made the best of any
opportunities which came his way, and soon proved his ability
as a rider, and on Count Grafton, and later Barallan, he rose
to the front rank of the profession in Brisbane.
He rode Count Grafton in many of the races which that
good horse won—in fact, he was on him in the first race he
won, as well as the last race he ever won. His successes on
Barallan Were numerous, and in later years, up till 1921,
he won a good share of minor races, including races on
Kenilis, Prince Flaneur, Ruinall (on whom he won six Flying
Handicaps at Eagle Farm), in addition to the St. Leger Stakes
cd‘ 1914 on Royal Risk, and he also did fairly well on trips
to the north, on one of which, at five meetings (Gordonvale,
Cairns, Herberton, Atherton, and Ghillagoe), his record was
fourteen wins.
Since he retired as a rider and took out a trainer's licence
Playford has not had the luck to. secure anything of much
account. Mr. Bob Noonan’s youngsters, Playtrix and Pats-
play, gave promise to giving him a good start last season,
especially'Playtrix, who was narrowly beaten by Highland in
the Hopeful Stakes, but she and Patsplay went off, and were
turned out for a spell. Both are fillies of promise, and
racegoers generally Will be.pleased if they fulfil expectations
of their owner and trainer, and give the latter a start, which
is so well deserved.
MR. T. J. McNAMARA.
Born in Ipswdch forty-four years ago, the well-knowm
and popular metropolitan trainer, T. J. (“Tommy”) Mc-
Namara, is one of a family of eight—three sons and five
daughters. His parents, who took but a passing interest in
racing, removed with their young family to Mount Brisbane
in the ’Bo’s, and settled on the land, there all the McNamara
youngsters learned to ride in the rounding up of cattle. In
later years Tommy and another brother did riding wmrk on
racehorses of the district, and as a lad the former came to
Brisbane and was apprenticed to the late Mr. H. A. Walsh
(a leading Brisbane trainer of long standing, up to about ten
years ago) for a term of four years. He rode at Albion
Park and Eagle Farm and other suburban meetings, winning
among other events a big race at Eagle Farm on Mr. Abel


Hyde’s Czarina. Increasing weight limited his opportunities,
and after riding in Brisbane for four years Tom went back
to the bush, where he worked on the land, and rode at the
country meetings. At twenty he had grown so heavy that
he had to retire as a rider and he turned his attentions to
droving till he was 25, when the call of the racehorse again
came to him, and he undertook the training of for
Messrs. Bigge and McGonnel and Mr. John Williams at Esk.
Two years later Mr. McNamara came to Brisbane and
settled here permanently. Success came his way quickly,
for in Motor and Glen Bernie (both by Little
Bernie), he had two useful horses, who won
numerous races. Then Reve d’Or, Ladysmith, Problem,
and other useful performers followed, and kept things moving
nicely until six years ago Tommy had the luck at last to get
hold of a really first-class horse. This was Mr. L. E. Walker’s
Had-I-Wist (by Syce, imp., from Haidee) who, in 1919 and
1920, was one of the best horses in the State, winning thirteen
races, including the St. Leger Stakes of 1919, the Moreton
Handicap of 1920, and five w.f.a. races. At the Q.T.G.
Autumn Meeting in 1920 Had-I-Wist won the w.f.a.
race on the first day, ran second to Golden Sunset, to whom
he conceded 181b., in the Brisbane Gup on the second day,
won the Moreton Handicap with 9.5 on the third day, and
saddled up a couple of hours later the same afternoon and
defeated Molly’s Robe in the Royal Stakes at w.f.a.
Subsequently Had-I-Wist was sold to the Defence De-
partment for the breeding of remounts.
Mr. McNamara’s foreman is Tom Wood, an old-time
prominent rider and trainer, for whom he (McNamara) did
some riding work when he was twelve years of age.
MR. H. J. KIME.
Although it is over a quarter of a century ago since he
entered the field of horseracing in search of fame and fortune,
it was not until Admetus was given into his care, about two
years ago, that Mr. H. Kime experienced anything near the
measure of success which he had hoped to attain. Indeed,
the fates were most fickle, if not absolutely unkind at times,
to him in his career as a rider or trainer, until the oppor-
tunity came his way for him to become the trainer of such
a notable Queensland racehorse as Admetus, and later his
owner as well. Admetus lifted him from his battling days
to comfort and contentment, and little wonder is that he is
so much wrapped up in the handsome son of Maltster and
Admeta, and particularly proud is he of the fact that Admetus
is such an idol with the racing public.


v^^pl ii|p
flW c
/ §>>✓.,
\
f ■
£ : ;: ; | Jp?; .
I /
/mm *yjf I £^mns^k
v : : , ’ '
- : ;; ; ' ■ . '■"■ ■ ' ■-■ ■ ; * ■ /
■ " : ”' . ; 'y
BRISBANE JOCKEYS OF THE PRESENT TIME
P. O’SULLIVAN
D. O’CONNOR
W.CROCKETT


Kime, who is about fifty years of age, came to Australia
with his parents at the age of four, and three years later
accompanied them to Rockhampton, where they settled. At
twenty-four he interested himself in a few horses, and
trained and rode them at meetings in the Central districts,
and at one meeting with two horses won five out of seven
races decided. Generally speaking, however, he found the
racing game in the country had more downs than ups lor
many of its followers, and he gave it best after six years’
experience.
Kime then took a job as driver for Headrick and G0.,.
Rockhampton, and keeping it for twelve years gave him the
opportunity of re-entering racing with stronger and alto-
gether brighter prospects of success. In 1917 Mr. Headrick
asked him if he would like to again start as a trainer, men-
tioning that if such was the case he would give him a brown
colt by Capernaum from Epionage to start off with. Kime
accepted the offer, and the colt, who afterwards became
known as Retrayer, gave him a good start, as, in addition to*
minor handicaps, he won the Central Queensland Guineas
and Derby Stakes at Rockhampton. Kime later brought
Betrayer to Brisbane, and won a Flying Handicap with him,
and on the way back to Rockhampton won a race at Bunda-
berg. After being spelled Betrayer won several
more races at Rockhampton, and was then sent to Brisbane
again to be trained by W. J. Tucker, under whose care he
won a Brisbane Thousand in 1920, and other races. Sub-
sequent to Betrayer, Kime got hold of useful performers in
Nyree, Erlena, Prudent Sam, King Helio, Gragside, less-
High ton, Tressady King, and Monolith, and enjoyed a fair
measure of success.
Prior to going under Kime’s care, Admetus had been
trained in Brisbane by W. J. Tucker and afterwards by U.
Bergstrom, and he won several races, including his first
Brisbane Thousand when trained by Bergstrom. In February,
1923. Mr. Headrick sent Kime to Brisbane to bring Admetus
hack to Rockhampton for a spell. A few weeks later, Mr,
Headrick asked of Kime: “Do you think you could Win a
Newmarket Handicap with him at the Rockhampton Carnival
Meeting?”
“I think I could,” replied Kime.
“Well, would you care to lease him?” asked Mr. Head-
rick. Kime jumped at the chance, and a lease of the hand-
some chestnut for twelve months as from March 31, 1923,
was duly drawn up and registered.
Kime put Admetus into work again, and in May of the
same year brought him to Brisbane with Erlena and Jess


Dighton, and at a Q.T.G. meeting went for a treble event
coup with them, first backing Erlena, and intending to play
up the winnings on Admetus and all up Jess Dighton, Erlena
and Admetus both won, but with all the winnings on Jess
Dighton she failed, and as a result he won only the prize
money attached to the two wins. Shortly afterwards AMmetus
won his second Brisbane Thousand and a big sum in bets,,
and later Kime returned with him to Rockhampton.
Shortly before his return to Rockhampton, Mr. Headrick
had died, and Kime Went to see Mrs. Headrick, and he learnt
from her that one of Mr. Headrick’s last wishes was that if
anyone wished to buy Admetus he (Kime) was to have first
chance. He decided to think the matter over, while con-
tinuing to race the horse on lease. After a short spell Kune
brought Admetus to Brisbane again in July, 1923, accom-
panied by King Helio and Erlena, and at the Exhibition
Meeting in August only minor placings came their way. Early
in September Kime completed his purchase of Admetus,
paying £9OO cash for him, and a few days after he paid the
money he and the horse and rider (g. Houseman) struck
trouble at the Q.T.G. September Meeting at Eagle Farm, all
of them being disqualified for twelve months, in connection
with the horse’s running. Kime still maintains that he was
innocent, or, to use his own words, 4 T did it cold.” With
nine of the twelve months’ disqualification served, the balance
was lifted from Kime and Admetus, and shortly afterwards
the horse won a First Division Handicap at Albion Park and
the Gentenary Plate (w.f.a.) at Eagle Farm, but finished
a bad last in the Denman Plate, in which he met with a lot ot
interference. Of late Admetus had been right out of form,
but it is generally hoped that he will regain his form as he is
a great favorite with the racing public.
MR. L. DAHL.
As with several others of our metropolitan trainers, Mr,
L. Dahl is a son of parents who were engaged on the land
and took but little interest in racing. On his parents’ farm
at Bingera, Mr. Dahl got plenty of riding at an early age, and
became a good horseman. As he grew' up he, in addition to
assisting on the farm, rode in races on the Sand Hills, outside,
of Bundaberg.
Later he went to Miriam Vale and got a couple of horses>
with which he toured Charters Towers, Townsville, Bock-
hampton, and Mount Morgan, and picked up a few races.
Later he got Deroine (by Darius from The Jilt), and to
that good horse he gives the credit of the start which
eventually established his reputation as a trainer. With


Heroine he won thirteen successive races at Gladstone,
Miriam Yale, Rockhampton, Mackay, Bowen, Townsville,
and Charters Towers, and on being brought to Brisbane
Heroine was unlucky, the bridle slipping out of his mouth
in one race When he appeared to have an excellent chance
of winning, and in another race at Eagle Farm; when he was
running in behind the leaders, he was brought down. Heroine
won many more races afterwards in the country centres. He
was raced from the time he was a three-year-old till he was
thirteen, and during that time served 300 mares.
With the retirement of Heroine, Dahl worked at the
mines at Many Peaks for a time, but the call of the horse got
him again, and once more he took up training, with Waninnie
(a son of Heroine from Cocoa) and Bomboyne under his care.
QUEENSLAND’S CHAMPION THREE
YEAR OLD FILLY MOUNTAIN SONG
Twelve years ago Dahl came to Brisbane, and has not
looked hack since.
With Waninnie he- won many good races, including a
Q.T.G. Southport Handicap and Albion Gup in 1912, and
since then he has trained and raced good horses in Dargirmie.
Lobomimmie (winner Albion Park Five Hundred and Albion
Thousand and numerous other races at Albion Park and
Eagle Farm), and Cheque Book, in addition to other winners
of lesser note.
Mr. Dahl's nice home and commodious training estab -
lishment at Hendra are named “Heroine.”


MR. G. GUSH.
Mr. George Gush has been training horses for less than
three years, but in that time he has gained a good measure
ol success, and firmly established his reputation in his calling.
A son ot Mr. John Gush, who, for a great many years
lias been one of the best known trainers of Tamworth,
New South W ales, Mr. Geo. Gush had an early experience
with horses. Among notable performers owned or trained
by his father were Nightingale (who won for him a Sydney
City 1 attersalfs Gup), The Pet (who won for him numerous
races before he passed into the hands of Mr. R. Wootton to
win an A.J.G. Challenge Stakes, ridden by W. H.
when the latter was an apprentice jockey).
As a youth, Mr. Geo. Gush worked in the stables of such
prominent Sydney owner-trainers as the late Tom Payten
and H. J. Robinson, of Poitrel fame. He first came to
Brisbane in 1911, when he brought Simla, Rarambah, and
Bronze King (then yearlings) over to trainer Watty Blacklock.
He attached himself to the stable of Mr. Blacklock, and had
the pleasure ot seeing the three colts he brought over make
good. He remained with Blacklock till towards the end of
1921, and for a greater part of his ten years’ association with
the successful Blacklock stable was foreman.
Mr. Gush married a daughter of Mr. Blacklock’s, and
towards the end of 1921 started out on his own account as
private trainer for Mr. H. G. Noble, a member of the Q.T.G.
Committee, and one of the straightest going and most popular
sportsmen in Brisbane. In that capacity Gush did well, and
in two years won nineteen races and £4500 in prize money
for Mr, Noble.
•ebv&y • W -
In February, 1924, Gush became a public trainer, and
settled down at his new and modern home and training
establishment in Newmarket Street, Hendra, at the back of
Eagle Farm Racecourse. The home and stables and
spacious fenced-off running yards embrace an area of three-
quarters of an acre of land, and everything has been con-
structed on the more modern ideas, and completed with
everything that is the latest in the way of appointments.
MR. J. GOULD.
From early childhood, Jack Gould, the well-known
metropolitan trainer, had a great fondness for horses, and
with the passing years his fondness for them developed into
an ambition to spend his days and earn livelihood with them.
That ambition was backed up by plenty of determination and
courage, and although he had limited opportunities as a boy


IfFy
Mm-
IgS®* Mir
i
' §*.S y « < 5? ' /x Sr^w^
y in
Wi
Vv At
Xo-
M V' *vHJv[fk
5 >w \ *F*li///jA
1 i I 1 ' 1 !
i ; v I
1 88888888888%» i /•.•’/. :>xvx : ! \
il IK% %*• M|i| I
W^fj^
••
gi$$:gg:i:: ■;■ '&ii ?; :: £. • £
X s8883S8»»^
PROMINENT BRISBANE TRAINERS
MR. A. COOK
MR. J. BOOTH
MR. W. J. TUCKER
MR. W. H. PLAYFORD


'lc get into the racing business, he engineered his own ideas
•and, backed by perseverance, he eventually got himself into
!he ranks of Brisbane’s registered jockeys.
Jack Gould never had the chance of serving an
apprenticeship. He could always ride fairly, and to make
himself proficient on a racehorse he made it a practice of
hurrying home from school and riding racehorses in exercise
for any trainer who would give him the chance. At 16 Jack
had become proficient and secured a jockey’s licence, and,
although he never got among the front-rankers of the riders
ol the day, he enjoyed a fair measure of success, especially
at Albion Park, where for many years he was regarded as
one of the best riders in Brisbane in jumping a horse away
smartly from the barrier.
A horse called Lucky Boy did much to establish Gould’s
ability as a rider and to give him a standing in the profession
he had adopted. On him he won seven out of the eight races
he rode him in at Albion Park. Lucky Boy was only one of
the many horses he won races on, but to him that horse
brings back the happiest recollections of his days as a rider.
About nine years ago Gould retired from the pigskin
and settled down as a public trainer, and since then has
proved a painstaking and capable mentor, deserving of any
success that came his way. Special Tax (with six wins out
of eleven starts while in his care), Rosard, Eatinule, Ardara
Laidley (winner of May Day Gup and other races) ami
Buranda, are sqme of the horses he won with, but the best
horse he ever had, according to his own story, was Karamu
(the Queensland Gup winner of 1920), after whom his home
and stable at Ascot are named.
When a horse named Karamu recently paid a huge
dividend in New Zealand, a southern writer confused him
with Gould’s Queensland’s winner. Karamu won races for
Gould as a two-year-old, and the Queensland Cup as a
three-year-old, but shortly after that he failed to stand up to
a preparation and was sold for stud duty to Bull Bros of
Yarrawonga Station, Gharleville, and he is still there. Gould
regarded Karamu as a great horse, and it was a pity
that infirmities cut short what promised to be a notable race-
course career.
M. E. J. LAWRENCE.
We made previous reference to Mr. E. J. Lawrence, and
a few other items may prove of interest. When Backwood
won the Melbourne Gup of 1924 from Stand By and Spearfelt,
it enabled Mr. Lawrence to boast of having witnessed 53
Cups. On the first occasion, when a lad of twelve, he wagged
.


from the old North Melbourne Grammar School to see
The Barb win in that year, and he has not missed many Gups
since then. Unless some happening, over which he will not
have any control, intervenes, he intends to see many more.
He has dabbed in football and journalism, but racing
appealed to him more directly, and has served his apprentice-
ship in every branch of the game —owner, breeder, handi-
capper, and "punter. At one time he filled the position ot
secretary and handicapper to the Richmond Trotting Club
'(Victoria). After Lord Nolan won the Melbourne Gup in
1908 Mr Lawrence migrated to Queensland to take charge
of the Woolloongabba electric light racing. During the three
or four years he occupied the position, E. J. made considerable
all round improvements, and in 1912 took over the control
of Kedron Park. He has continued in charge up to date,
and, although accounted a hard nail, he is generally spoken
of as being both fair and just, and when those terms can be
applied to a racing man, you can take it for granted that
be has given general satisfaction. Mr. Lawrence does not
oo nap on the Tod Sloane seat, and considers the old style
was far and away the better, and he is also of the opinion
that the horses of past decades —such as Carbine, Melos,
Marvel The Australian, Peer, Abercorn, and others —still
bold price of place as racehorses, either for stamina or pace.
MR. JAS. TAYLOR.
Mr James Taylor, who has been President of the
Toowoomba Turf Club and one of the Downs’ most prominent
sportsmen for many years, will have attained his jubilee as
a member of the Toowoomba Turf Club by the time this
appears in print.
In his younger days Mr. Taylor was a good horseman,
and figured prominently on the flat and over hurdles, with
Mr. J. F. O’Bryan (stock inspector, Toowoomba), and V. R.
Robinson, and others, who have passed away. On one occa-
sion he fought out a finish with the late John Finnic, Mr.
Taylor being on Sicily, and the late studmaster of Rosevale
on 'his champion, My Love. The latter won this race, which
was a bracelet of guineas—being the largest bracelet run
for till then. Later on, however, Mr. Taylor’s mother (since
deceased) won the 100 guinea opal bracelet (presented by
the late H. Bond, opal king), with her eldest son’s, the late
John Taylor’s horse, Friction, ridden by the late Charles
Baker, who raced Felix and Merry Jig.
Mr. Jas. Taylor was also at one time an active member
of the Toowoomba Polo Club, and did good service for it tilt


M. O’SULLIVAN
S. BENNETT
J. RYLATT
SUCCESSFUL REGISTERED JOCKEYS
Leading Riders on the Associated Clubs' Courses in Brisbane.


he retired from the saddle. He still retains his interest in
this line of sport, and at the last carnival at Toowoomba
presented cups for competition.
Mr. Taylor owned that fine mare Response, who came
from the Clarence River, and was a good performer. This
mare, when in his ownership, won over hurdles in Too-
woomba, ridden by T. Quilty. On retiring from the turf she
was sent to Darebin (who eventually went to America), but
she missed to the son of The Peer. Later, she was mated
with the late John Finnic’s Ormond, and produced a filly,
but she came to nothing near the form of her mother.
Response was then sent to Yabba (Melbourne-Yellena),
a great horse, who raced in J. Williams’ colors, who bred
him. Response threw Rejoinder and Retort, and both won
races, the former while in Ted Easton’s stable.
The best horse Mr. James Taylor owned was Togo
(Antares —Phyllis), bred by the late H. Fox. After winning
a few small races at Toowoomba, Togo went into Watty
Rlacklock’s stable in Rrisbane. He won the Q.T.G. Derby of
1906 for Mr. Taylor, and also the Sandgate Handicap. Watty
had another good one at this time, Inglewood, with whom he
won the Queensland Gup and St. Leger.
Togo afterwards was taken to the south, and Watty had
the pleasure of leading the tall black in winner of the
Hawkesbury Handicap and A.J.G. Doncaster Handicap, but in
the Sydney Gup he was badly knocked about, and had to be
put aside. Togo also was a good horse at wl.f.a.
On his retirement Togo did stud duty in Toowoomba,
but could not be classed as a success, although he sired Miss
Togo, Dinlock, Woodmarline, and a few other useful per-
formers. Some years ago he was eventually sold to go to
West Australia. Togo also won champion ribbons in the
show ring.
Mr. Taylor also raced Maygo and Gagill (a daughter of
Gagou), and the latter still carries his colors. He bought
Tun gun (by St. Swithin from Crusade), and won with that
horse also. Tungun was then sent to Cecil Plains to do stud
study, and there he sired Tongue Tied and Guntax, and other
useful horses.
Mr. Taylor lias been connected with sport from his
schooldays. In fact, the whole Taylor family were sports,
but the President of the T.T.G. is; the only son left. He has
practically carried on from where his late father left off, and
has held the position ever since. I have only dealt with his
career in sporting circles, and have been told his contribu-
tions were given in a quiet way. One turf club prize—the
Clifford Plate —is still in existence. He also took a keen
interest in public affairs, though not a prominent part like bis
late father.


Jas. Taylor’s record is a good one. Starting from a lad.
he worked his way up to the top, and has stuck to the old
club right through. It is worthy of note that in bad times
of the past other clubs went clean out, but the T.T.G. bustled
on and came good, and since the Cup was initiated has not
looked back. Mr. Taylor may be congratulated on his long
service to the club, which should be shown to him by the
members in a practical way.
Mr. Taylor was interested in stock, principally sheep,
on that fine property, Cecil Plains, which was sold for closer
settlement. In the past many a good time was spent on this
station, where the Taylor Estate put on a race meeting, which
attracted good horses. Sires represented were Napoleon,
Expert, Tungun, and outside of the gallopers Skylark, Mr. M.
Carrahy’s wonderful little black pony mare, which won
many pony and high jumps, was bred there.
As a prominent member of the Royal Agricultural
Society, Mr. Taylor took an active part in its progress from
when it was known as the Squatters’ Show. The farmers’
show was then held on the west swamp, Harris Street, but it
joined in with the R.A. Society, and the latter gradually
developed into a show society. Mr. Taylor has had the
pleasure of seeing his stock decorated with ribbons on this
show ground, and when you pick out the turf club, polo club,
and R.A. Society, it can be seen that Mr. Taylor holds a
unique long service record of an interesting trio of Downs
institutions.
CONCLUSION.
Ry way of conclusion, it should be mentioned that our
original intention was to include in this volume sketches and
reminiscences of all our long established trainers, but this
has been rendered impracticable through several reasons.
In the first place the size of our present volume has already
greatly exceeded what we had provided for; secondly, some
difficulty was experienced in making arrangements to inter-
view a few 7 of the long established trainers, and others were
bashful about seeing their reminiscences in print; and, lastly,
the fact that the list of trainers registered by the Q.T.G.
exceeds sixty, made it impossible to include them all in our
present volume. Messrs. E. J. Easton, Frank Mullen, and A. G.
Carr, to whom brief reference has already been made, and also
Messrs. T. F. Collins, F. Stanfield, T. Wilson, P. F. Corbett, Alf
Burgess, W. Prosser, J. Butler, J. B. Samwell, Ray O’Neill,


Alf Cook, P. Healy, and Joe Riddle are trainers of long and
honorable association with Queensland racing, who are still
prominently associated with the sport. All have ha,d some
notable performers under their care. In addition, there is
a big contingent of the young generation of trainers, many
of whom are fast gaining prominence in their profession,
and their views and reminiscences will make interesting
reading in years to come.
Old John Stone —Honest John, as he was more familiarly
known —is another of the very old school of Queensland
trainers who is still amongst us, but he has lived in retire-
ment for some years now. For a great many years old John
was in the forefront of Queensland trainers, and he bred, as
well as raced, many good performers. As either owner or
trainer, he won many of the principal races associated with
the Queensland turf, and was the mentor of several noted
horsemen of their day, including his sons, the late Billy
Stone and Johnno Stone (to whom reference is made in
‘ Whip and Spur”), Billy Booth, and M. J. Hayes.
Thus we conclude “Harking Back,” hoping that the
anecdotal history provided and the memories recalled have
interested, as well as given a fair m'easure of amusement,
to the reader.
FINIS.
1924
Printed by Geo. E. Searle for the Authors at Bowman House, Adelaide Street
Brisbane








