

•21 BRUNSWICK STREET,
riTZEOY.
T. BELCHER,
FAULT BFTCHEB,
159 BRUNSWICK STREET,
fitzeoy.
“ 0h tenelms being, give me bu’cher’s meat.”
“House that Jack Built.”
MR. G. GEORGE,
■-PRACTICAL EEISTTIST,
IN BOTH
SUE6ICAL MECHANICAI DEPARTMENTS,
SO GERTRUDE STRESt,
FITZEOT.
CORKSCREW~TRADE MARK
OTASaB DBPfflT & CO.’S ■
BRANDY
OH SALE
BY
DE PASS BROTHERS & CO.




HARLEQUIN
JACK SHEPPARD
OR,
T he Disrepatable Detective
THE CLEVER KLEPTOMANIAC,
AND
THE PLOT OF THE PIEBALD GOBLIN,
AN ENTIRELY
NEW AND ORIGINAL XMAS PANTOMIME,
BY
MR. W. M AKHURST
Author of "The Siege of Troy." 44 King Arthur ,"
(First Performed at the Haymarket Theatre Melbourne,
December 27th, 1869.)
THE COPYRIGHT OF THE AUTHOR.
MELBOURNE:
ABBOTT AND CO., PRINTERS, BACK OF THE POST-OFFICE.


DRAMATIS PERSONE
MYTHICAL.
Fanciful (a Fairy in considerable request by mortals at Christ-
mas; the boys’and girls’best friend) ... Miss BENISON
Primma (her favourite companion and foil Miss MASTELLE
Siveeti , Pretti , Nici Buti, A obbi, Natti , Mousi, dice, (other Fairies)
Misses FORDE, COATES, KNOX, CLARKE, BREN-
NEN, MASTELLE, GOLDING-.
Blakiswitamvitisblak (the Piebald Goblin, a new contrivance in
Fiends, not as black as the usual is painted, but
awfully vicious in spots ... Mr. CLAREMONT
Shikove, Snobz , Kadjerz, Kadz, Bufferz, Muph (his Slaves)
KEANE, THOMPSON, &c., Ac.
HISTORICAL.
Sir Rowland Trenchard (a gloomy Baronet, with criminal ante-
cedents, and a contempt for the verdict of posterity)
Mr. COUTTS
Mr. Ktieehone (a very shy adherent of the unfortunate Stuart
family, with expectations never to be realised of a peerage)
Mr. HUMPHREYS
Mr. Wood (“ Owen Wood, carpenter and joiner, Wych-street,
London ; funerals furnished, evening parties attended”)
Mr. ANDREWS
Thames jDam'eXl (apprenticed to Mr. Wood, but instructed only
in the aesthetics of carpentering —a youthful carpenter with-
out a vice)... ... ... ... .. Mrs. UREYILLE
Jack Sheppard (Mr. Wood’s junior apprentice, and the hero of
the felonious drama of Great Britain. As a felon, he is a
much better fellow than Fra Diavolo, Ernani, De Moor,
and other popular foreign thieves, but, unlike them, with
the charming consistency of his countrymen, he is pro-
hibited the British stage) ... Miss FRANCES BENTLEY
Jonathan Wild (a disreputable Detective, who goes through fire,
water and other trifles in the performance of his duty, an
adept in disguises, with no conscience but an extensive
wardrobe ... ... ... ... Mr. J. R. GREYILLE
JBlueskin (an ex-detective, who reforms, and becomes a very
becoming felon Miss MARGIE CHESTER
Quilt Arnold (a quasi Turnkey and Policeman) Mr. McCABE
Abraham Mendez (his deputy) ... ... ... Mr. DIAS
Mrs. Wood (the Carpenter’s better half, a thing of beauty that’s
a jaw for ever Mr. G, H. ROGERS
Winifred (a dear little thing, beloved by everybody)
Miss FLORENCE. NORMAN
The Fancy Fire Brigade ... By the Ladies of the Ballet and
Auxiliaries


SINGER&COs
SEWING MACHINES
SINGER’S NEW NOISELESS
THE BEST IN THE "WORLD.
The Singer Machine makes the lock-stitch with a new
improved shuttle; will cord, braid, tuck, gather, bind, and
quilt. Will embroider with six threads, or any less number, of
cotton or silk, and will do beautiful fancy work with wool; will
sew perfectly with linen, silk, or cotton thread—of the latter,
any number from 10 to 200.
STANFORD & CO.,
KEROSENE LAMP WITHOUT CHIMNEY
Cog-wheel Clothes Wringer,
CONDENSED MILK & COFFEE.
.A-GKEICTTS, MELBOUEHE ;
Also Agents for the New
THE TJTSrX'VEES^-X.
And (Jail Borden’s Eagle Brand


MAKE ALL
YOUR PURCHASES
EARLY
ON SATURDAY!
health is injured
AND LIFE IS SHORTENED
BT LATE HOLES OF BUSINESS !
WIVES & DAUGHTERS!
Tie Remedy for this GREAT EVIL is
with YOU!
NEVEB SHOP
AFTER SIX!
OR AFTER
TWO ON SATURDAY.
Fault Closing Association,
Mechanics’ Institute.


“THE WEEKLY TIMES.”
PERMANENTLY ENLARGED.
The Cheapest Paper in Australia.
THREEPENCE !
PER POST, 4s. 6d. per Quarter.
Published at the Office of the “Daily Telegraph,”
86 Collins Street East.
HARLEQUIN
JACK SHEPPARD
cm,
The Disreputable Detective, the Clever Kleptomaniac,
ATO
THE PLOT OF THE PIEBALD GOBLIN.
SCENIC I.—Hall of Novelty in Hie Palace of the Fairy Fanciful.
A day and month indicator, vrith three compartment-?,
occupies a conspicuous position, One of the outside
compartments shows the word “ Christmas/’ and the other,
1839-70. The central compartment has the word “ Jack,”
followed by a space practicable for change. Fanciful,
Primraa, and other fairies, di-covered as the Curtain rises.
Fan. Leave me, I’m fatigued.
Prim. Fatigued!
Fan. Oh bother !
One I am certain is as good as t’other.
Prim. Well Walker says fatigued*
Fan. Oh Walker blow !
The writers of burlesques much better know,
And they say fatigued, and so do I.
But after all, what does it signify ?
I know I’ll sicken if I'm bothered so.
Prim, and Fairies. Oh, awful pun !
Fan, If you don’t like it, go.
Here’s Christmas aid we’ve nothing done as yet,
Some nice novelty I should like to get.
Prim. Novelty, love.


Fan, Novelty I prefer,
But there is none with which to make a stir.
(pointing to the word on the indicator).
Jack, what ? Our heroes are all hackneyed.
Prim Very.
Try the legitimate and drop the merry.
Fan. At Christmas time nobody could do that.
Prim. You get Herr Bandmann dear to bell Ike cat.
Fan. Herr Bandmann’s gone to Ball a rat.
Prim. A grand man.
Fan. He'll probably return a Hand and Band man ,
While we shall go stone broke. Oh for a theme!
I’ll go to sleep, of one perchance i’ll dream,
Ay, there’s ihe rub, as they say who play whist—
At all events I’ll try.
Prim. And we’ll assist.
Fan. Here is a room where! can lie and rest,
And cover with a bossum rug my chest.
Music, Exit followed by Prim, and Faries. The character of
the music changes , and enter at opposite winy Shikaree,
Snobz, Ka joz. Kadz, Dufferz , Muph , and other slaves
of the Piebald Demon. They wa ch the retiring fairies,
express admiration , and rush to the fates, raising their
arms as though aho ,t to declaim in chorus. Enter the
Demon , the others fait back and crouch before him.
Song—Demon. Air — u Up in a Balloon* 9
Be quiet, don’t kick up a hullaballoo.
You rowdy, absurdly impossible crew ;
You’ll certainly spoil all my sport if you do.
And cover us over completely with shame.
To govern at Christmas you know I aspire.
But to do that Miss Fanciful’s wand I require,
So to prig it and gracefully then to retire,
Just for the present is ray little game.
Chorus. Horribly b-lue, horribly b-lue,
Won't she be when she awakes.
And finds its up a flue.
Horribly b lue, horribly b-lue.
There’ll be some awful jawing
And a loud hullaballoo.
Yes, that’s the programme, w r e’ve too long been fooled.
And by these fairy creatures overruled.
Dem. You s*e, yon stick ?
Shi. Shikove he do.
Dem. It is the fairy’s wand. I wand it too.
Shikove salaams and exit cautiously .


My time’s now come and high time ’tis say I,
To have a finger in the Christmas pie,
The pantomimic mince pie so admired
This vear to do that mince pie Vm in*pured.
Re-enter Shikove with wand.
In thanks, my Shikove, fancy me profuse.
Shi. Your Shikove fancies
X)em. ( ’wand in hand') .Now to test its use,
I’ve for a very long time, gents, suspected
That the true Britisu hero’s been neglected.
Shi. Shameful!
Kadz. Disgraceful!
Snobz. Shocking!
Kadz. It’s too had.
Dem. The Christmas hero’s always been some cad
Of nursery fame, some slow but virtuous kid,
Now of this nuisance, 1 mean to get rid.
points to indicator .
You see by that they meant to have some Jack
This year as hero, some small nursery hack,
Some giant killing humbug or another ;
But mark how speedily their plat s I’ll smother.
Jack shall remain {waving wand)
And now surname appear !
Change in the indicator . The vacant sp ice following the word Jack
isJUled by the word Sheppard ! Gong .
Demons. “ Jack Sheppard!”
Dem, He’s our subject for the year.
{Re-enter Fanciful and Fairies).
Fan. Never ! he is prohibited the stage.
Dem. That veto to remove ve do engage!
Jack’s a dear fellow, quite as good and pure
As any Fra dear Jellow I am sure.
Fan. ( ironically ) That is the latest news
pem. The latest news !
Your snooze my lady is the lady’s snooze I
Come, abdicate—
Fan. Although just now I’m quoered.
You shall repent you fiend , you've i/^-erfered.
Fairies away ! our state’s by no means cheery.
Reminding one of Paradise and the Peii.
Dem* Reminding one, excuse me if I bore
Of parodies and the peri- od much more.
Finale to Scene ! Air —" Galop La Grande Duchesse.”
Ne’er a Jack of the puck,
Is a patch upon Jack Sheppard!
He’s the chief, British thief,
And with him we fraternize.


Fan. Speak, vile elves for yourselves,
He’s as vicious as a leopard,
Bov and gal never shall,
With my leave, him patronize;
There’s Jack who the gaint kided dead,
And the Jack the house who builded.
Jack Sprat and Jack who sit still did,
In the corner picking: pies.
Pena. Pooh ! who’s Jack that giants haunted ?
Pooh ! who’s Jack that horsebeans planted ?
To Jack Sheppaid who undaunted,
Cracks his cribs and fakes his cli^s.
Chorus. Ne’er a Jack, &c.
SCENE ll.—Opens disclosing Workshop on the premises of Mr
Wood, Wych Street. The shop is fitted up in burlesque
imitation of the plate in the original edition of the
romance. Jack discovered cutting his name on a beam.
Wool watching him.
Jack. (tinging) J-a-c«k—that spells Jack !
S b-e p—that spells Shop!
P a-r- d that spells pard !
E-g-q—Esquire.
[ Chorus of Demons and Fairies and exeunt.
jumps down.
Song—Jack. Air —“ Nicodrmus Johnson .”
My name it is Jack Sheppard!
I’m known to all the nation,
As a warning to each youthful, good and fond son—
To idleness avoid, and to go in for education,
Ah! ah! ah 1 ah! and study Doctor Johnson.
dance.
One Mister Harrison Ainsworth wrote.
Of me a bi-o-graphy,
Which showed I was in prison born, a bond son!
And that when I grew up, I got uncommonly riff-raffy
Ah! ah! ah I ah! and hated Doctor Johnson,
dance.
In England the Lord Chamberlain,
Poor roe has prohi-bi-ted!
Cos I’m an English cad and not a don’s son—
While Fra Diavolo and Kruani always are admitted,
Ah! ah! ah! ah! they don’t talk Doctor Johnson.
dance.


But now, although, I prig a bit,
I deal too in pun making I
So don’t you shut me up, but say, u go on son!”
I only prove that making puns is close allied to faking,
Ah! ah! ah! ah! as said by Doctor Johnson.
dance•
When Claude Duval in Newgate gaol was thrown,
He carved his name upon the dungeon stone!
That prison stone was freestone , tough though free,
But Claude cared nothing for free masonry ,
He being an odd fello(w)n; he’d been shopped
This Claude Duval, because a coach he’d stopped
And c lowed a valuable watch—•
Wood lavghs loudly .
Ah! whence
Comes my appreciative audience.
Wood comes forward .
Wood ! the old fuel.
Wood, Jack show more respect,
Or else in quod you’!! be cross-burred and checked ,
Look at Thames Darrell, there’s a virtuous lad !
Jack. I do, but then I’m radically bad—
And takes in sin by the pores, I think.
Enter Thames .
Wood. Dear youth.
That’s something like a countenance, all truth!
Tha. ( rapturously ) Oh! thank you, sir, how exquisitely nke.
It is to be a youth with out a vice!
Jack. ( sneering ) It must be, lam sure the jolliest fun.
Wood. The trunk for Lady Trafford is it done ?
If not, your cranium, sirrah ! shall be fractured!
As I’m a man o' fact —
Jack. {producing band-box) It’s man a fidured.
Wood. Take the box home, and if you’ll eccentric
You’ll bring the money back.
Jack. I wouldn’t a friend trick !
Trio. Air. —“ Von Grogyenhcim
Wood. Yes, to say the truth,
You’re a dreadful youth !
Idle, noisy, anlul. vicious, rude ;
But our Thames displays.
In all sorts of ways,
The grace of virtue's atdtude.
Jack. (aside chokingly) My eyes, et cetera,
Oh! what a beauty!
Gushing and fruity!
Whoop! fal, lal, lal, lal, lu! whoop!
Chorus. My eyes, &c.


Tha. If you please no more,
Worthy Gov-er-norl
For you really put me to the blush—
Jack, That b ight crimson speck
On his nose and neck.
Is not fiom modesty but lush I
(aside) A rhe I’ll take, ah ! ah!
Out of you my beauty,
And like Te Kooti.
Whoop! fal, lal, lal, hil, la! who p!
Chorus, A rise, &c.
(Thames 2nd line) Out of me, the beauty.
Exit Jack,
Wood, You’re a good lad.
Tha. I fancy I am rather,
And now will you oblige me with a father ?
Enter Mrs, Wood, she watches them .
Parents, I had ?
Wood. You had,
Tha. Two ?
Wood Two.
Tha. No fewer ?
Wood {reflectively) Fewer than two ? I think not.
Tha. ( despairingly) Ah ! Not sure.
Mrs W. {coming forward) Two parents, millions ! ah, I might
say dozens.
This gentleman was one of your ma’s cousins.
Wood You are an orphan, Jack too ?
Mrs W. 01), 'tis good.
You try this on too orphan Mister Wood.
Wood Now my dear don’t, smile on your poor own buffer.
Mrs W. Oh, Owen if you knew the pa-in I suffer.
Dear ,Mr Kneebone here to day will dine.
Wood That fellow’s always here after my wi
(Mrs Wood looks round fiercely) ne.
Mrs W. There leave off* whining , if you’re very good,
I’ll bottle up my wrath.
Wood I wish you could.
And were’nt so fond of drawing the whine from Wood,
Exeunt.
Tha. Oh! if my lower limbs were like the fleas,
I’d vault aWay from this far o’er the trees,
But as I’ve only got—such is my notion
The ordinary means of locomotion,
I’ll stay and do the amiable to win
My little Winny,
Win. Sweet, may I come in
Tha. You may sweet maid.


Enter Winifred —she has a three-cornered tart in her hand.
[low beautiful thou art.
Win. Wilt have a bit o’ tart ?
Tha. I’m sick o’tart.
Duet —Thames and Winny. Air —“ Captain de Wellington
Boots”
Tha, You’re aware that I’m spoons on you, Winny,
You’re aware I am nothing but good,
You’re aware that I have’nt a guinea.
Win. But I know you would have if you could.
Tha. Now your dad
Win. He’s the best dad on two legs
Such a daddy don’t often occur
Tha. Wants a son in-law who's got spon-du legs,
As well as a good char ac-ter.
Your dear dada his pile made has,
And his son must have gorgeous suits,
High rank and name,
Cash, credit and fame,
And neat fitting Wellington Boots.
Be-enter Jack—he has a carie-de-Vuiie.
Jack My Winifred! oh, golly! heie’s a treat,
Behold your faithful J. S. at your feet.
Kneels and hands photo, to Win.
Tha. A rival do I see ? (taps Jack with a rule).
Nay then, this blow shall
Jack {squaring up).
Miscreant, for this you bleed, at least your nose shall.
Tha. A mill! I’m ill.
Jack Come on.
Win. And I’ll see fair.
(joyfully). I’m going to be fought for I declare.
Tha* 1 cannot strike you, Jack.
Enter Wood, Mrs Wood Wild, Blucskin, and Kneebone.
Wood. I can and will.
Jack. Y'ou’re always licking me, just you be still.
Wood. Where is the money for the trunk you limb ?
Jack. The trunk ? I trunk your health with it.
Wild. (aside to Blueskin), That’s him.
Knee. (to Mrs W.) Say that your Kneebone’s not obnoxious
dame,
Mrs W, My Kneebone really, fie sir, fie for shame.
Tha, (to Win. who is examining portrait). Wlut have you
there ?
Win. Your likeness, Thames.
Tha. Bah ! go to,
(sarcastically). And show it to my friend.
Jack. It is y out photo,
Tha. (‘xamining picture). My father’s likeness.


Jack. At Lady Trafford’s,
Oh, no doubt, I found it
Win. With those jewels round i: ?
it’s theft.
Jack. I should’nt wonder.
Tha. (look nj at photo.) What a guy !
But still that is my nose, my mouth -
Jack. My eye!
Wild. (taking picture from Thames.) What’s all this here
about ? allow me, child.
Tha. Insolent snob, who’re you f
Wild- Detective Wild, {chord.)
( Wild and Slueskin throw off their disguises.)
Blue. And I’m Detective Blueskiu. (chord.)
Knee. I’m undone.
Mrs W. How ? Where ?
Wood, (to Wild.) To what am 1 indebted ?
Wild. For my care ?
Some day I’ll tell you, now who stole that toy ?
Jack. It was’nt me. (points to Thames). It was that
other boy
Tha. You horrid storyteller; sir, ’twas not.
Wild. Well, to prevent mistakes I’ll take the lot.
{To Wood). You for compounding felony. (Slueskin
handcuffs him).
Wood. Oh lor.
Wild. (To Mrs W.) And you for uttering base thoughts.
(Blue, handcuffs her),
Mrs W. No more.
Wild. ( To Win. ) And you
Win- What do you take me for
Wild, A gal
Whose received stolen glances from a pal. ( Slueskin
handcuffi Win.)
(To Tha.) I’ll take you down a bit just out of spite.
(Handcuffs him),
(To Jack.) And Jack a bit, (Handcuffs him).
(To Knee ) And then you Jacobite. (Handcuffs him).
Jack. I’ve heard of sells, but this beats all such tales.
Wild. You’ve had a taste Jack Sheppard of Wild's ales.
Wild s, les, not bad for me, is it young feller ?
Though I myself prefer the Carlton cellar.
Air. —“ Five Little Dogs,"
Wild—
Like little dogs who roam the world
With unregistered paw,
You’ve fallen friends
Into the bands
Of the minions of the law.


Thames and Win—
We’re innocent and have no fear,
Base Bobby ycur worst do!
Wood, Mrs. W and knee —
If we were dogs we’d quickly bite
Some pieces out of you!
Jack
Bow! wow! wow!
Chorus—
Like little dogs whose ill-fated nobs
Are doomed to destruction for want of five bobs
We have got into terrible trouble just now.
And each has a chain like a bow I wow! wow !
Bow 1 wow! wow !
So we kick up a row like a bow ! wo w ! wow!
Air.—" Auld Lang Syne,*
Wood (to Wild)
For an acquittal I’ll fork out, ( Offers money.)
Kn ee-
l’ll shout when you are dry !
Wild (ferociously)—
I’ll hang the lot and get blind drunk
On the day when you all hangs high,
You all hangs high my friends,
You all hangs high,
I’ll tuck you up and blind drunk get
On the day when all hangs high.
Chorus—
We all hangs high my friends,
We all hangs high.
He’ll tuck us up and blind drunk get
On the day when we all hangs high.
dance.
SCENE lll.—Exterior of Willesden Cage, with a view of
surrounding country. Enter Wild and Blueakin, the latter
imitating the other in every particular.
Wild. Confound it, all but Thames and Jack discharged.
That I should live to see prisoners discharged !
I fear we’ve fallen on a ticklish day.
When beaks dont take in all Detectives say,
They don’t know who their beat friends are.


Blue. {Drawing knife). Yes ’tis hard,
Let me insert this in some J.P.’s. gizzard ;
’ Fwould make them guess hard p’raps ; Ihere’d be s
racket.
Wild. How ? cut aJ P ’s. throat and p’raps hack it, {thunder).
Thunder, {lightning). And lightning.
Blue. Tbe reverse of course.
Of nature’s order' Cart before the horse.
Wild. This elemental strife is very grand,
Portending that tbe heavy man’s at hand.
Music. Thunder and lightning. Wild motions BluesHn off the
stage. Enter Sir Rowland Trenchard carrying carpet-bag
and umbrella.
Now let me see what are ray deeds so far?
I killed my sister’s infant and its pa,
A cold bath in the Thames, them I provided,
Tobias and Biancas like, thev died-ed—
My sister dear her I put out of breath !
I bored her, I rejoice to say, to death ;
I’ve been a spy, a traitor to King George,
Have given proofs that I’ve the will to forge.
When there’s a will to forge —for a beginner
I fancy I’m a respectable sinner;
Sokg.— Sir Rowland Trenchard. Air —“ Up with the Lark.”
I’d like to be merry if only for a day.
And do a good action for once in a way,
D rink sodawater, and mildly be gay,
So jolly that-would be;
Bui villainy’s got such a hold
That I should have a coimh.
Or catch a kind cf moral cold,
Were I to leave it off;
For I’ve always drunk hard and lived too free,
I don’t go to bed until four, you see,
And when over night, I get on the spree,
I'm on with the lark in the morning.
Well I’ll reform.
Wild, {coming forward) Sir Rowland don’t be rash.
Sir R. What do you want?
Wild. Civility and cash.
Sir R. {calmly) You want—
Wild. Civility and cash.
Sir R. Together?
Or one at a time?
Wild. It matters not—fine weather.
Sir R. You say you want —
Wild. ( fiercely ) M<ust I repeat again ?
Cash and civility (politely), d’ye think it ’ll rain.
14


Sir R. You would extort —
Wild. I would.
Sir R. Then say no more,
Go and extort elsewhere my man; next door.
Wild. Next door , not I—receive this as a cautioner,
In every sense Sir R I’m a nex’ door shunner,
Sir R. Might I enquire without- you much distressing,
Who have 1 now the honor of addressing ?
Some rate-collector ? as Bill Shakspeare states
“ There be land-rates and there be water-rates.’’
Both in arrear— sirrah —say who you are.
Wild. Sirrah indeed ! Detective Wild Sir R. {chord.)
Sir R. That being the case, las an old offender
Have only to look pleasant and surrender.
Wild. {fiercely). Oblige me now with fifty thousand pound*.
Sir R. I will not swear—l*ll simply murmur, Zounds !
May I enquire what for ?
Wild. You’d like to know.
Sir R. Immensely.
Wild. Well then, fifteen years ago
Sir R. Enough ! I know the rest—the ThameS'inan drowned.
Ditto an infant boy—body not found.
There take the cash, {hands note to Wild),
And spare our ears a tale.
So fearfully and wonderfully stale.
Wild. The child still lives. {Jack climbs through the roof
of the cage y and looks over as in plate.)
Jack. An amiable pair.
Wild. At present they’re shut up.
Sir R. Shut up ?
Wild. (pointing to cage. Jack dodges) In !
Jack Sheppard too—if you’d heard my narration,
You’d know that he’s some sort of a relation.
Jack. What ! bred a swell and bom as welly as well born.
As swells who’re sixteen thousand miles from Melbourne.
Sir H. ( mysteriously ). Shut them up finally aa you know how.
And I will stand another fifty, thou——
Wild. Paid in advance ?
Sir R. Precisely !
Wild. Where’s the swag ?
Sir R. There's the exact sum in this carpet bag.
Wild. Consider these dear juveniles up a tree.
Up Tyburn tree, Jack Sheppard soon shall be !
Sir R, You’ll not forget our compact then ?
Wild. Nay, nay !
Referring significantly to the note . Vve made a note of it.
Sir R. {pointedly). Have you? good day, {exit—thunder).
Wild. I don’t much like the tone of what he’s muttered*
{examining the note).
Hallo ! I’m done ! It's a base note he uttered,
{examining bag).
15


The bullion too, is base as a bass trumpet.
The swag I don’t like—so of course Vll hump it ,
JExit carrying carpel bag .
Jack. Will somebody help me down ? (enter Blueskin).
Blue, The p’lite I’ll do.
(insists Jack to escape )
Place your boot here.
Jack, Ah! Blueskin is it shoe.
No w then assist me Master Thames to take out,
He is so virtuous he’ll never break out.
(They open the door of the cage and Thames enters.)
Tha. flow could you, and why would you?
Jack. Come now stop it.
Blue. He is so good—
Jack. Be so good as to drop it,
And come away.
Tha. You give me such uneasiness.
Blue. I’m tired of the detective line of business,
I'll join you if you like.
Tha. (agitated) With him you’ll go in ?
Unhappy boy don’t join.
Jack. Stop your yaw in\
Blue. We’ll make a trio.
Tha. No.
Jack. This trio yokel!
Is not equivocal but equi vocal.
Trio. —Walk round and dance off. Air —“ Popsy Wops,y."
Thames (to Jack) Ob, please reform, he virtuous
In future.
Jack. What is that?
Thames. A virtuous man in these sad days
Jack. Is every inch a jolly flat!
Thames, He wears straight hair, a white cravat,
And leads a spotless life.
His children call him Popsy,
Jack. And Popsy wops his wife,
Oh yes Popsy wops his wife with fist and stick,
Thames, (ironical y) Of course Popsy wops his wife with half
a brick.
Jack. Oh yes, Popsy wops her till of him she’s sick,
Then for some other happy girl
This Popsy swops her quick.
Chorus—Oh yes, &c, ( Thames singing ironically).
Thames Be moral and be modest too,
Be innocent and meek,
The good boy always sets his face
Against all sorts of cheek,
Jack. Well so do I the female cheek,
16


Thames, (ironically) Oh yes, of course.
Blue. I vows!
I can’t get over the idea
That Popay wops his spouse. :
Chorus as before and dance off.
SCENE IV—Tea Gardens lighted up for a ball al fresco. The
scene represents the principal avenue of the Gardens, the
Vista throughout illuminated by vari-oolored lamps and
lanterns, terminating in a perspective view of the rivet
Thames. An alcove of evergreens with table and seats,
R. B. and a similar one L. E. Winifred enters, her
gesticulations and movements suggest that she has missed
her fiiends. She seeks for them unsuccessfully amongst
the dancers, and as the dance concludes comes down stage
followed by a number of the company.
Enter Sir Rowland.
Duett —Winifred and Sir R. Air—" I fancy X can see her now."
Win. I’ve lost myself that’s very clear,
’Twas wrong from mi to stray,,
But when I saw the dance was on,
I couldn’t keep away.
Sir R. {criticising Win.)
A neatish ankle, pon ray life!
Figure isn’t bad—
As dairy maid she’d look to rights!
I’ll have her. yes, egad.
Sir R. I fancy that I see her now,
Among my sheds and pens;
Gathering the eggs from the new laid cow!
And milking the cocks and hens.
Win. I fancy that I see ma now,
And sundry other friends ;
Kicking up an extra-ordinary row!
Like a mob of wild cocks and hens.
Duett—
Sir R. I fancy that I see her now, &c.
Win. I fancy that I see ma now, &c.
17


At the conclusion, the dance is renewed. Winifred is about to go
off R., when Sir Rowland in the old roue fashion expresses
admiration for her. She repulses him, boxes his oars
and runs off.
Sir R, {speaking through the music)
Ha! stole away—into the maze —she’s gone!
I’d walk into the maze but for my corn ,
Softly I’ll tread for reasons not too slight;
The chief one being that my boots are tight.
Exit cautiously R. Music crescendo • Enter Mrs. Wood and
Kneehone.
Mrs W, Where can she be? the wicked little puss!
Knee. (rapturously ) What matter where she be?
Mrs W. Oh! you great goose,
But is this prudent?
Knee. Prudent! can you doubt ?
Mrs W. You’re an odd creature.
Knee. I’m the odd man out!
But nevertheless as innocent as milk.
Mrs W. ( enraptured ) As milk —oh! cream inny!
Knee. As soft as silk.
Mrs W. That I don’t doubt.
Knee. Yes, though a stout and tall cove ;
I’m quite as verdaut, as this verdant alcove.
( They enter the alcove and sit down.)
Enter Wild disguised as an elaborately got up barmaid —he comes
down.
Wild, ( soliloquises ) Alas ! what dodges one’s compelled to dare
So that society may be kept square!
To copy costumes, dialects and brogues,
And as a rank impostor, swindle rogues;
Because mankind is slightly given to thieve ;
Behold me as that radiant child of Eve,
The British barmaid in stupendous rig—
A child of Eve, 1 may say in full fig'
Song. — Air u Jolly tiose. 1 *
Jolly clothes I Jolly clothes ! *
Bought of Alston and Brown or of Moubray and Lush,
Or of Randell and Co. does’nt mutter.
You can raise a dress oft when you can’t raise a blush.
And the fellows will equally flatter.
Jolly clothes ! Jolly clothes !
Though the fashions are very absurd,
I’m not at all anxious to scout ’em,
For though ladies’ dresses get less every day.
We mus’nt just yet do without ’em,
18


Jolly clothes ! Jolly clothes!
Besides if hard up we can spout ’em,
Jolly clothes! Jolly clothes!
{aside) Old mother Wood, the harridan, I hale her,
Flirting with Kneebone, the light com’dy traitor ,
Knee. Eh! what was that?
Wild. You said?
Knee. Not I—but you.
Wild, (flourishing corkscrew) )
I said “ I wonder what he’ll trate her to
Knee, She’s awful bewchus.
Mrs W. Do you think so ? lawk !
Where do you come from child?
Knee. I’d say from Cork,
Mrs W. Unhappy one she’s Irish,
Wild. {indignantly') What d’ye mane ?
Ma bouehal, bochlish, whroo! I’m Aberdaae.
Mrs W. She’s Scotch, how fiery!
Knee. Fla’ es up like a torch,
Why so hot tempered dear.
Sure its’ the scorch .
(Wild, Kneebone and Mrs. Wood converse. Wild retire* as
though to execute an order. Enter Jack, Thames and
Blueskin, all sumptuously attired.
Tha. The eye is dazed with grandeur unmistakeable.
Blue. My eye is dazzled with so much that’s shakeable.
[Enter Wild
Jack. I’ve seen that face before, is it Cecilia,
Sophy, Amelin, it seems so-famUiarl
I’ll take a drink I think.
Wild. That genial mug
I’ll soon associate with the stone jug,
Tha. Come sit with us in this inviting nook.
Which intertwining gum trees overlook.
Come and be jolly.
Jack, Joy I can’t assume,
The gums you mention won’t dispel my gloo-m .
You’re very charming.
Wild. Garmin, not so mister,
I’m Boston raised, a regular easier,
Jack. You’re a sad flirt I’m much afraid.
Wild. You bet.
If not a sad flirt , I’m America-get,
Knee. When I’m a duke I’ll wed your lovely daughter,
The king has promised.
Mrs. W, The king ?
Knee, Over the water.
Mrs. W. I wish 1 had the king here, on the safe side,
Over the water sounds like over the left side.
Winny, a Duchess!
19


Knee. Madam, aint 1 sworn it I
Mrs, W, (exultingly) Won’t we just blow when Wiuny's got a
cor'net.
Blue. This is dry work,
Tba. It might I think be moister,
Come, an sesthetic liquor,
Blue. And an oyster,
The succulent, though humble Sydney rock,
Jack, ( drawing Wild towards him) Dear maid, come here,
Wild. Oh don’t, you’ll tear my frock.
Jack. To one in love, what is a frock or so.
Wild. Ha! ha! afrockl he would a wooing go*
Jack, Tell me about yourself!
Wild. You make me blush I
{referring to his dress)* May I suggest sir, Moubray ?
Blue. And I, l.ush!
Jack. (to the others) Is she not stunning every bit and section,
Figure, expression, carriage and complexion,
Stunning her make up, stunning boots and gown,
AH stunning colors too !
Wild ( complacently ) Alston an * Brown ?
Tha. That she is scrumptious cannot be denied,
(puts his arm round Wild's waist)
I feel myself inclined to take her side,
Jack. There that will do young chips,
Tha, After six, shop not.
Jack. How balmy is the bear’s grease on her topknot!
'1 ha. Sweet as the gentle odour of the spring !
Wild (aside) Spring onions.
(enter Win. followed by Sir It)
Win. Go you horrible old thing?
Sr R, Nay. you are cruel!
Win. (runs down and addresses the others , with Yankee twang)
Some of you I guess,
Will help a British female in distress.
Tha. It’s Winifred, oh crikey, what a bother!
Win. Lor, it’s my Thames a loving of another !
(to Tha.) What, did you think to find one that could
match me f
False one, I’ve caught thee, now then please
to catch me!
( faints , en er Wood. )
Wood. Hallo! what Witiif ed and Ma.W, ?
Tha. Sir, for your blessing I’ll just trouble you!
Wood. You have it Thames, as usual.
Blue. (to Jack who is leering W>h) While you sigh,
I'll see if 1 can’t pick up a stray cly, ( business)
Jack. (to Wild ) Why do you clasp me thus, d’ye love me true?
Wild. Immensely Jack—l mean to stick to you—
Jack. Why do you press my wrists?
20


Wild. ( excitedly ) My lad you’re bested.
Your wrists indeed ; Jack Sheppard you’re arrested.
Jack. What means this conduct you eccentric child ?
Wild. {pulling off his chignon) I'm the disreputable detective
Wild.
Finale to Scene. Air—“ Lucia di Lammermoor
Jack. Though you’ve nabbed Jack Sheppard once again,
If of common sense you have a grain,
You muf't know that choky can’t retain.
His cojp'»real fabric.
Wild. But we’ll try yet—on the quiet—
The effect of prison diet.
Jack. As for Newgete, I defy it.
Out of it I’ll make way quick.
Chorus. But he’ll try it, &c.
Thames. Of good boys you will not plenty see,
Yet I am pressed and sent to sea.
Blue. I’m quite as innocent as he.
Knee. And lam muchly more.
Wild. {ultra frantically) You shall wear oh ! the broad arrow,
On your clothes and wheel a wheelbarrow.
Jack, Thames, Blue. Any arrow, broad or narrow,
Is better than a bore.
Chorus—
We. (
He. < You shall wear oh, &c.
You. (
Air—ll Bacio
Wild. Come now, off to quod now,
Its no use to be a grumbling and growling.
Jack. {threatening) Tumbling and a towelling
I would like to administer.
Chorus. Come now, &c.
Wild, Come, objections I scout, assistance without
I’ll have in a jiffey, yes.
Wood. f Oh his heart’s made of stone,
< Instead ofbone—
Mrs. W. Knee ( As ours is.
Chorus as before. Hornpipe.
."Exeunt .
SCENE V. —Apartment in Wood’s cottage al Wiliesden.
Enter Mr and Mrs Wood and Winifred. Mrs Wood and
Winifred carrying each a flat candlestick.
Wood. You’d even suspect my shadow, if the sun.
Threw it alongside of a female one*
21


Mrs W That’s all extremely fine.
Wood. You know its true.
Mrs VV. (snappishly.) I don’t suspect your shadow.
Wood, Yes shadow.
Mib W. There’s Mrs Sheppard ; p'raps you will deny
You pay her rent— you think 1 don’t know why.
Wood, (confused) Ij pay her rent, because her son— ■
Mrs W. (triumphantly) Just bo;
You’ve been io him a pa-a-rent we know.
A chair and table , sir, you gave her—
Wood. Cracked.
I musn’t do a char-i-table act.
Mrs W. At home you’re glum and stingy, and a boor
To her you’re funny and gi vefurni-tu-re.
Wood. X never speak to you of Kneebone.
Mrs W. Churl!
He’s going to marry Winny; when he's Carl
Winny’il be a countess
Win. Rather not
What I a countess' 1 , that I count as rot.
I’ll only love my Thames and he is pressed.
Wood. The festive cup she’s drained with too much zest—
I’m off to bed —this Wood goes in for-rest.
Mrs W. (to Win) To-morrow, Miss, you toddle back to
school.
Oh, your a villi'n
Wood. Fillin' you are fall.
Exeunt. Music. Enter Wild up trap.
Wild. I might have got in by the door, or say
Come down the chimney in the regular way;
Hut from us folks expect something that’s new
So as the old contrivances won’t do
1 undermined the house, yes, cut a tunnel,
One worthy our Ohristopherson or Brunei.
Song.—Wild. Air —“ Show me the Girl .”
Le Sage’s devil on two sticks,
Although ‘ a deal ” he knew,
Could not discover half the tricks
That we detectives do.
We’re up to all the secret moves, •
And swindles small and great,
From little games of card sharpers
To dodges of the stale.
Chorus —We never make any mistake.
And from the truth never stray.
But p’rhaps with me, you don’t agree,
If so, I’ve no more to say.
22


In Collins street the wondrous swell,
Enormous as to hair,
By ordinary folks is thought
A crushing millionaire.
But once he flourished scissors,
And soft goods he did crop,
And though he walks the pavement now
He used to walk the shop.
Chorus as before.
The Royal Commission should employ
My head, and legs and hands,
For I could name the M.L.A.’s
Who’ve jumped the public lands.
Indeed it would be easier,
By a long way to spot
The members who have jumped the lands
Than point out those who’ve not. —Chorus.
The Flying Squadron’s been and gone,
Preceded by a storm.
Which I detected instantly
As out of nature’s form,
’Twas a mild hint to Britain’s fleet,
T’avoid Victoria’s shore,
If ever Higinbotham should
’Gainst England declare war.—Chorus.
Theatrical detectives like me here
No engineering difficulties fear.
Quilt and Mendez appear at the window.
Quilt Arnold and Abe Mendez—come in fools
What brings you here ? how now my trusty tools ?
Enter I say, don’t stand there in the rain.
Come iu my Quilt I
Quilt motions that the window is fast.
He can’t on ’ counto'pane.
Wild opens the door and admits Quilt and Mendez.
Wild. Now please inform me why you hither shaped.
Quilt. Jack Sheppard has
Wild. Muffs ! Noodles ! has escaped ?
This is your work, aye yours, yours—lsrael’s child!
Men. No, ’pen my honor no, dear Mr Wild.
Act on i be square whatever you may do,
That is the motto of this lowly Jew.
Wild. Be cautious gentlemen how you behave,
(to Men.) Or you shall die—
(to Quilt) And yon, young man, shall shave.
Quilt, Oh ! horwid thought,
Jack heard singing outside .
23


Wild. Ft’s Jack, he hastes this way,
His movements quickened by a round-elay.
If he escape us now—l’ll praise his capers,
And send particulars to ail the papers,
So come down here.
Men. Let him go, I should smother.
Wild Come both, one shan’t be downier than the other.
.'Exeunt down trap. Music. Enter Jack and Blueskin.
Jack. What ! crack my benefactor’s crib ?oh shame.
To no such act will Sheppard lend his name.
For know, oh Blueskin, that your John’s not low born,
But highly horn, heigho!
Blue. Come from Sigh Sol-horn.
Jack. 1 will not interpose in your affairs,
But take this little lot of mining shares,
And when you’ve cleared the bouse, leave them behind ;
Thus conscience will be squared—
Blue. You’re very kind !
But somehow I don’t see it,
Jack. Come, no bobbery.
Exchange my Blueskin’s not considered robbery-
Yes, leave this scrip before you leave this crib.
Enter Mrs Wood in her night costume , walking in her sleep,
dla Lady Macbeth. Music “La Sonnambula”
Mrs W. The Countess Kneebone
Jack. Kneebone! She's Wood’s rib.
Mrs W. Out vulgar spot! out, out Isay! One, two
Why then, ’tis time to do it—
Blue. The old shrew !
Mrs W. What need to know my father was a paviour
(disgusted toiih herself)
Not all the rich cosmetics of Belgravia
Can make this mutton fist a noble head,
What’s done, cannot be underdone —to bed.
To bed ! To bed !
Blue. Let go, I’ll break your head.
Mrs W. drags him off.
Jack. She had him there —she’s got him by the ear ,
Which now she tweaks ; well I shan’t interfere
And compromise myself—no though some think
My character as black as any ink ,
I’ll never give the world sufficient latitude
To charge me with an act of black ink-gratitude;
My benefactor’s wife to harm were hateful.
Though I were hung I’d never be hung-grateful.
{Surry). Enter Blueskin running .
Ah t is it thou ?
24


® lue » Quite out of time I’ve knocked her.
Jack. Run for a surgeon—
®'ue- She don’t want a doctor,
•Jack. Bead ?
Blue. Very much so,
Jack. Leave me vile assassin ;
Go, substitute the savage’s mocassin,
For civilization’s neatly fitting boot.
The black man’s blanket were a fitting suit
For such a monster really
® ue- When I go
I’ll rig out at the Monster Clothing Co. (Exit.)
Jack. Ah ! Wood is coming, what’s he got that flops.
Enter Wood hearing in his arms his ivife’s dead body.
That bit of dead Wood’s an unpleasant copse.
Jack. A load of Wood.
The joke produces pain
And falls quite tamely—
Music, “ Corsican Brothers.” Wild rises up trap, gildes across
the stage, a la Franchei, and taps Jach on the shoulder.
Mrs. Wood s body collapses, and Wood rushes out horrified,
, Ah ! ’tis Wild.
Wlld - Again !
Duett. Air —“ Nix my dolly.”
Wild. When a box in the stone jug you adorn.
You’ll be safe as an article in pawn.
Jack. For a day—
At the end of which I shall take myself out.
Wild. But how ?
Jack, Like that article down the spout.
Wild. ( faintly) It makes me dull—l shall faint away.
Ensemble—
Jack. ( This makes him, &c.
Wild. \ This makes me, &c.
Wild. With irons on your legs and wrists,
Yon wont have the use of your feet and fists,
Jack, For a dav—
But Jack no shackle much longer will wear,
So both of his fistes and footsis beware.
Wild. This makes me dull—l shall faint away.
Jack. It makes him dull—he will faint awayH
{Repeat Ensemble and dance off,)
25


SCENE VI. A cell in Newgate, Fire-place practicable, C.
door in flat. Enter Quilt, his face very much scarred,
and Mendez ushering in Wood and Winifred.
Quilt (to Wood) Five minutes and that’s all! ( points off L).
He is in there.
Men. Whatever you may do, act on the square.
Win. I will Sir to oblige you. (to Quilt ) Now the key.
Quilt. ( pointing to a letter on his collar)
A
Win. You mistake me, bobby !
Quilt. Oh, I see!
The door key!
Win. With less talkee, talkee.
Wood, his hands) Shame !
Win. ( having received the key from Quilt)
Bobby T love you. Robert toi qui j’aime.
Wood. ( giving gold) Gold for a glance at something that’s all
guilt.
Men. (holding his hand out to Quilt as the latter is retiring)
Ac: on the square whatever you do Quilt,
(Quilt and Mendez exeunt through door in F. Win.
opens supposed door L. Jack enters heavily fettered.
He runs to Wood who rushes to meet him, but both stop
half-way, the same business follows with Jack and Win.)
Jack, to Wood) My benefactor. (stops)
Wood. Jack, my son, no, sop boy— (stops)
Jack. (to Win.) My once loved sweetheart. (stops)
Win. Naughty, wicked, shop boy. (stops)
Jack. Shopboys, young lady, in these modern days,
Ate never termed shopboys, but employes,
Why didn’t you love me ? Well, you didn’t behave.
Win. I sent you back the presents that you gave.
Jack. No, one you still retain.
Win. I don’t discern.
Jack. The love I gave you—that you didn’t return.
Win- A melancholy fact; don’t think of me.
But marry some one else.
Wood. He is not free.
Jack. No other Miss for me, my first love, you,
Being in billiard parlance a miss cue,
I’ll be pro-mis-cu-ous in my loves in future.
Win. I think I know a lady that would suit you,
Miss Bessy Edgeworth, pretty, smart and dressy.
Jack. Bessy has sold me —l’m for celibacy.
Guilt. Time’s up!
Win. Oh no, these bolts, these fearful bars,
Release him, yes you will, those honored scars
Received in the performance of your duty
Ain’t spoiled ycur heart, if they have spoiled your beauty.
26


Quilt. My face all o’er is scarred
—by him.
Win. by you.
Jack. I qualified him for an o’erscarred blue.*
Quilt. Time’s up !
Wood. Tyburn on Wednesday.
Win. Mind you come.
Jack, Well if X do, I’ll have to bring a chum,
Who, I’ve no doubt, will try a point to stretch,
A nice young party of the name of Ketch.
Wood. Goodbye, I shall invite some friends to meet you.
Jack. Remember, I don’t promise.
Win. I beseech you.
Air —“ Temple Bar”
Wood. We’ll have something nice—a sole and a chop
I know a shop where they do it tip top.
Jack, But Mister Ketch wants me to take a drop,
On that day parti-cudar.
Win, Well bring him with you, we shan’t object—
Some handsome young fellow I suspect.
Jack. He makes rope neckties for a select
Few in Tyburnia,
If ever you go to Tyburnia,
—burnia, Tyburnia,
You’ll find Mr. Ketch’s shop aint very far
From the triple tree of Tyburnia.
Chorus—** If ever we go, &c.
Enter Wild-
Wild. How merrily the jail bird pipes his lay,
Quite in the regular Barry O'Neil way.
Jack. A mind at ease can make this gloomy wall
A palace, or a bar{i)on%al hall.
Well gloat away, I am no more that cad ;
A common carpenter’s apprentice lad,
No, I am noble and I’ll show you wretch up.
Wild. We'll get less sauce ivum you when we bring Ketch up t
Boy you are mine, both you and Thames 3’ve hated,
But both your mothers loved.
J a ck. It’s complicated—
Wild. I have been married.
Jack. Horrible.
Wild, Ay drat her.
However this don’t bear upon the matter,
Sir Rowland Trenchard. he with the carbuncle.
Is yours and Thames’s most unnatural uncle,
* Supposed to mean horse-guard (blue).


His sister’s niece and your first cousin’s mother,
Were both twin sisters of the latter’s brother ;
Yon follow me.
Jack. Of course.
Wild. Then at a glance
You’ll see that vou and Thames are really aunts.
Jack. And Thames is 'free and weds Wood’s lovely daughter—
I see him now over his gin and water.
Wild. Over his gin an’water! I’ll be bound
He’s over his chin in water, he is drowned !
You are safe here till Wednesday next and then
The gibbet.
Jack. What d'ye bet, shyest of men ?
Wild. When both are dead, for joy goes in this child.
And lovely Winifred is Mrs. Wild.
Duett. Air — “ Riding in thejiow.'’
Wild. Oh I shall tide down Rotten Row,
Ensemble. Rotten Row ! Rotten How !
Wild. Or Collins-street upon the day
When you to Tyburn go.
But first to learn to ride a bit
I’d not at all be loth.
Jack. Then watch the two prevailing styles.
Wild. I think I know them both
One of them is so ! ( imitating a well-known genius ./
Jack. And the other so 1 {imitating another).
Ensemble. Fascinating ladies fair
Riding in a row,
Just the way they go,
Oh they are a matchless pair!
Jack. To Tyburn when I’ve got to go !
Ensemble. Got to go! got to go !
Jack. No feats of equi-ta tion.
From me they’ll get I know.
Wild. A nice conveyance, government
Will, Jack, for you provide.
Jack. While chaffed to death, and out of breath,
Down Collins-street you ride,
Riding just like so.
Wild. Riding just like so.
Ensemble. Either attitude is rare
Ridinc in a row,
Just the way they go,
Ob it is a matchless pair!
Jack. No gaol that e’er was built however stout,
Can keep Jack Sheppard when he would go out;
First for the fetters —they’re mere trifles see,
When men like Jack strike in for liberty—
28


And now this wall to bore a passage through ;
Stay, I’ve no tools fpicks up a pin), a pin! ah that will do
When freedom is the stake, the pin, I swear,
Is tnighiier than the sword which, isn’t there.
An ironhar—whats ironf bah!
D’ye see
1 he funniment ? [looks; up) the firmament! I’m free.
SCENE VlT—The OM Bail ey, with view of exterior of Newgate
and Wild’s Douse.
Enter Blueskin, Wood, and Winifred.
Blue. I’ve set Wild’s bouse on fire and locked him in it,
lie’ll be asphyxiated in a minute!
Win. Asphyxiated ia a good word,
Wood. Son,
hi Suffolk, suffocated would ha’ done.
Blue. Now Jack I have avenged you.
Enter Jack.
Jack. Have you ? thanks!
Wood. Why, this hangs all.
Win. What, safe?
Jack. Safe as the banks.
Win. you’ve suffered haven’t you?
Jack. Yes I have suffered—
I suffer still!
Win. I wish you had recovered.
Wood. Nar, cease, have you forgotten this is arson ?
A capital crime,
Jack, That’s capital, a parson I
'I his isn’t Sunday, we can draw a full pit.
Without aid reverend sir, from any pulpit.
Wood. You know I’m not a parson?
Jack, Let’s be friends,
And then I’ll be your clerk and make amem .
Jack, Now B ueskin, where is Wild?
Blue. Fast locked in yonder.
Wood. He’s fired the house?
Blue. My time I didn’t squander.
Jack. Ha! fire away !
Oh, you may bring the engines,
My name is not Jack Sheppard, it is vengeance.
(Enter Thames and Fancy Fire Brigade.)
Blue The fancy fire brigade, a gorgeous lot,
Are as the papers say, “soon on the spot.”
29


Tha We’ve just arrived in time to quench the flames.
iV?’ J Who’s the arriver ?
' ’ lll ■ The ar-river ? Thames.
Tha.
Win Returned my own I
rp ha Returned your own —of course.
Jack, Wild told me you were drowned
rp. And so 1 was,
But not droton-ded, the trick was very scurvy.
Wood Everything’s topsy and uncommon turvey.
Jack. We’re pressed for « for a s?il or,
a ‘ And pitched me overboard during a gale o
Jack Wind, as a matter of course; don’t be so slow,
Tham Where I was floundering I dtdn t know,
And brackish water don’t agree with me,
c n as ’twas ebb tide, I went out to sea.
Wood, {weeps) Went out to sea he says, you hear my daughter,
j ao k. Surely that is no reason for eye water,
Suspend your sympathy.
r Wild’s trick was neat,
UC " To Newgate he sent J ack, Thames to the Fleet.
Enter Sir Rowland Trenchant.
Sir Rowland Trenchant.
■ R Yes, that very bad un,
* I must not think of it or I shall madden ;
Take my estates, my title and my purse,
My name, my scrip, my wardrobe and my curse.
(to Thames) And you take all the rest, it’s yours by right.
Enter Kneebone escorting Mrs. Wood.
Wood. My wife and that eternal Jacohite.
Blue. She ought to he defunct.
£ Your vdlain thumb
ne ’ Didn’t quite spiflicate her, she s but dumb.
Wood. She’s all the belter. It’s well understood.
It must be an ill wind that blows no good,
Mrs W. What, I dumb ! I dam ur to that you brute.
It I’m a she mute. I’ll make an emeule.
Wood. Don’t give yourself, my dear, the
Mrs W. I was to have no voice, sir, in this business,
But you’re mistaken, sir, yes sir, you v ■ failed,
I found you out, and now Wood, you are nailed.
Jack Well to the end, 1 think we must have got.
It seems quite cleat that we’ve worked out the plot.
Ml. How about Wild? , .
j“, k That man whom none admire,
a " ' Is baking tranquilly in yonder fire,
Which by the way, I have no room to doubt.
When you have finished here, you will put out
30


A few concluding sentences—the tag.
And then a chorus, and then down with the rag.
Wood. I’ll take her with all faults.
Tha. {to Win ,) And VU take you.
Win. And I’ll take care that you shall find me true.
Knee. To get ennobled, made an earl, you'll see
I’ll take an early opportunity,
Sir R. I’ll lake to drinking and defy all carping,
Blue. I’ll lake to honest courses and card sharping.
Jack. I’ll take my leave, but ere I’m a seceder
I’ll take.
What is the matter Mister Leader.
We take the liberty, do stop that noise?
Noise increases, and Wild disguised as the leader, is, after
a struggle with the musicians, thrust upon the stage.
Wild. I’ll take the liberty from you my boys.
Jack. Who have we here?
Tha. Sure nothing could be ruder.
Jack, He’s in his cups, who are you base w-trader?
Your business here ?
Blue. Come out with it my buck.
Win. What is your little game , dear sir.
Wild. Wild-duck .
All. Jonathan Wild again.
Blue. We are all booked.
Jack. It’s awkward certainly.
Wild. You thought me cooked f
That touched me on the raw , and so we meet.
Sir K. I think I’ll take a walk down the next street.
Wild. You fired my house.
Blue. I did it.
Wild. Spare your mirth,
I had insured it at three times its worth.
Pigeons, pugs, pups, I have you by the nose
You play on me I
Jack. Thames play on him the hose.
Outside yon door's a pump—
Wild. la there, what for ?
Jack. For Yon,
Wild. Never ! —that cussed pump-at-door.
Finale, dir — “ Ring the Bell”
Wild {to Jack and Blue )
Jack Ketch, for pilfering, takes you in hand.
Grasping the rope
Jack—
But we all understand,
That this catastrophe's only a ell—
Ring the bell prompter, ring, ring the bell.
31


Ring the bell, prompter, ring, ring, ring,
And on your next novelty now bring.
As for fo-nighl the truth I must tell,
Its all over with Jack Sheppard, ring, ring the bell.
Chorus—Ring the bell, &c.
jEnter Fanciful.
Fan. Although of course all this friends very nice is^
Yet things have come to such an awkward crisis,
Th u I must interfere as a police,
To save the public a breach of the piece.
And Mr Pitt a fierce attack of spleen,
By leading to the transformation scene ;
So Jack the metamorphosis begin,
Hev presto, change to agile Harlequin, [1 ransformation,
You Winifred in after scenes shall shine
As graceful, fascinating Columbine. [Transformation,
You Mistress Wood, preposterous old goblin,
A s Pantaloon perform eccentric hoblin’. [Transformation.
While you Detective Wild run up and down
The world as hereinafter shown, as Clown.
[Transformation.
Away to other regions anil beguile
The time in Glorious 01(1 Christmas Style.
TRANSFORMATION SCENE,
Abbott & Co , Printers, Melbourne.
32


157 BRUNSWICK STREET,
FITZROY.
Doth not Brutus footless kneel ? Shakspeaee.
CAFLISCH & PEARSON,
Wholesale and Retail
iwtrijifMis, &MUtttoum saA (HaUmt,
V COLLmS-ST. EAST.
Wedding Cakes and Christening Cakes. Dinners, Dejeuners.
Ball-Suppers Wedding Breakfasts, &c., supplied in the best and
recherche style at any notice, and on most reasonable
THE WAXWORKS!
bourse street east.
MAX L, KREITMEVER, Sole Proprietor.
NEW ADDITIONS
Since the return of the Branch Exhibition from Tasmania.
KE-EIST CS-A.CE-E AdIEISTT
OF THE CIETEB
JUVENILE LRAEGEE FAMILY
AFTERNOON PERFORMANCE EVERY SATURDAY.
ADMISSION, ONE SHILLING. Half-prioe.


a r*
BEDDING MANUFACTORY
AND FURNITURE WAREHOUSE,
3 LONSDALE STREET EAST,
Nest St. Francis’ Cathedral.
The Trade supplied with Palliasses and all descriptions of
Mattresses, Hair Wool, Fibre, and other materials at the
lowest prices.
Mattresses re-raade. Furniture supplied.
If you want to Refresh before you go in, or during
tlie interval, or when you come from the Pantomime,
GO TO THE GARRICK’S HEAD
(Nearly Opposite the Duke of Edinburgh Theatre.)
LIQUORS UNEXCEPTIONABLE
With civility and attention—sufficient guarantee for which is
the fact that J. J. MILLER is proprietor.
Try the OLD BRANDY !
Try the SPLENDID GLASS OE ALE !
Try the Magnificent COLONIAL WINES!
In fact there are no liquors in the establishment but what
J. J. M. can drink himself.
ITOTIGE.
JVIB. CHUCK,
The Proprietor of the London Portrait Gallery, now so long
established at No. 4 Collins Street, will Remove to the spacious
premises being erected for him in the
ROYAL ARCADE
As soon as they are ready for occupation.


CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS.
THEATRE RfIVA I .
BOUEKE STREET.
GK H. TIPPER,
PEOPEIETOB OF THE
CAFE DE PARIS, VESTIBULE BARS.
PROMENADE AND BILLIARD ROOMS,
Can offer to the public the finest, most comfortable Lounge and
Promenade in Melbourne.
Centrally situated, and in close proximity to all places ©f
amusement, his elegantly fitted and lighted Cafe Saloon affords
a luxurious lounge.
(£be (ftolcmial and English Ifapetjs.
Coffee, Vines, Spirits, Cigars, Liqueurs, and Mineral
Waters, of the finest quality.
The Billiard Saloon is handsome, spacious, well lighted, well
attended, and fitted with the Finest Tables by Alcock & Co.
PEIYATE BILLIAED EOOI,
WITH SUPERB TABLE AND LOUNGE.
GOLD SUPPERS.
Beef, Ham, Tongue, Pish, Sausages (Italian, German and
prankf'urth), Stewed Reis, Mashed Potatoes, Salad, Cheese, &c.,
ONE SHH.I.INGI,
P.S. —The only first-class Promenade or Rendezvous in
Melbourne, and where an old friend is likely to be met, to drink
the toast of the season, with
“ CEAD MILLE FAILTHE.”


Amusement pleasant & profitable,
and a difficulty solved, bow to obtain a FREEHOLD RESIDENCE*
FREEHOLD BUSINESS PREMISES, or a FREEHOLD FARM, by
those who have but a small amount, of cash at hand.
Example No. I.—lf you know or can find a Cottage Property for Sale
say for £2oo—and if Mr. J. H. KNIPE, of 06 Collins Street East, near
Swanston Street, considers it of good value, for that amount, he can obtain,
for you the sum of £175 towards paying for it and that amount can be
repaid—principal and interest—at £2 17s. 2d. per month, and all cleared
offin2years; therefore, by your providing the sura of £25, and paying
the Monthly Subscription, the Cottage will be worth for rent,the property
becomes youis ; but you may say—'“ Suppose Ido not keep up my Sub-
scription, am Ito lose the £25 1 paid 7” Mr. KNIPE answers—“ No!
the Society for whom he acts as Agent will allow the payments to stand
over for 6 months, if necessary, at the end of which lime, if you are still
unable to pay, the Society will undertake to manage the property in the
way of letting and receiving the rents until they pay themselves, and then
hand the property back to you.’’ You may say— 4 What security have I
that this will be carried out correctly?" Mr. KNIFE’S explanation is,
that when the property is purchased the deeds will be made out to you,
and registered at the Government Office in your name. You then, to pro-
tect the Society, enter into an arrangement to pay them according to the
scale, rules and regulations, and your property is simply subject to the
unpaid portion of the amount which has been advanced towards the pur-
chase. Thousands of persons are now enjoying the happiness and the
liberty of residing in their own freeholds by adopting this system,
Example No. 2.—Business Premises and Farms are identically the same
m proportion to the amount required.
Example No, 3.—lf you are the owner of a piece of unoccupied ground
sufficient for a residence or place of business, and wish to build at once,
money will be advanced for the erection of the premises, required to be
repaid in the same manner and condition.
Mr. J. H. KNIPE being able to make the above simple and easy
Arrangements for purchasers, has always a large number of persons ready
to buy any small properties legitimately worth the price asked by the
otvuer : therefore, bv instructing Mr. KNIPE to SELL, you are sure of
A QUICK SALE AND A FAIR PRICE.
VAUGHAN & WILD’S
Are Brewed on the same principle, and are as Pure
and Wholesome as “ Home Brewed A
Bottled and in Kilderkins, and Delivered Free in Melbourne
and the Suburbs, by the
Australian Ale, Porter, and Wine Bottling Co.,
116 COLLINS STREET WEST.


BBBWEEY-
BOUVERIE STREET, CARLTON.
EDWD. LATHAM & COMPANY.
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
CARLTON PRIZE ALE™ 1
FREE FROM ACIDITY!
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
UNADULTERATED’
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
REFRESHING-!
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
WHOLESOME!
CARLTON PRIZE ATT
STRENGTHENING!
PRIZE A T .T]
INVIGORATING
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
, nutritious
OAiRLTOaSF PRIZB ALE
UNDEVIATING in QUALITY'
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
UNDEYIATING IN CONDITION
CARLTON PRIZE ALE
GREAT DIETETIOAL POWERS'
OASLTOIT PRIZE ALE
CONDITION AND QUALITY UNSURPASSED
