

.
MARCHANT’S Stationers’ Hall,
i
to
I—i
ffl
(S
01
f—A
—(
•H
rfi
i—(
to
0
r i
to
(D
£
to
X
HARMLESS HOBBIES,
DAVID’S HARP.
WITH lI,LUSTRATIONS.
A New Year’s Address for 1896,
Sabbath School Children.
Rev. JOSEPH FULTON
Assistant Minister, St. John’s, Paddington.
Sydney.
Printed and Published by S. T. MARCHANT,
(I)
bJD
C
•tH
'O
c
•H
rn
H
r—*
CO
fl*
•fH
(/)
to
o
•r*
nn
h-i
to
r*
•1-a'
0
CO
to
H




A? S3iTs /Ff
Z6~577
HARMLESS HOBBIES; or David’s Harp.
By Rev. J. PULTON.
1 Samuel xvi, 17, 18. “ Saul said unto his
servants, Provide me now a man that can play
well, and bring him to me. Then answered one
of the young men, and said, Behold, I have seen a
son of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in
playing, and a mighty man of valour, and a man
of war, and prudent in speech, and a comely per-
son, and the Lord is with him."
We are going to have a talk about HOBBIES,
but more especially about David’s Hobby, which
was his Harp. The word Hobby, or at least the
compound form, Hobby-horse, is a nursery term
not requiring any explanation ; but my readers as
a rule have left the nursery, and seldom, I expect,
ride the nursery “ Dobbin ”of past days. T intend
to speak of Hobbies of a somewhat more advanced
kind. A Hobby may be defined as a favourite
subject of discourse, thought, or effort, or, a
favourite pursuit or pastime. I fancy that in very
many cases it is something different from our
everyday work or duty, but is often loved better.
We need no driving to our Hobby, and frequently
when we are too fatigued for anything else, we
follow up our hobby. Just as children who are too
tired to study or walk can ride the nursery hobby-
horse, so, their seniors when too wearied to do their
everyday work can find time and energy to pursue
their favourite pastime.
On page 2 we give an illustration of a very highly
developed hobby horse or merry-go-round. It is
at Earl’s Court, London, is 300 feet high and


A very highly developed hobby horse,


carries passengers in the buckets at the circum-
ference, from which daring a revolution you get a
good view of London, and have an unusual
experience.
In our consideration of David’s Hobby we shall
speak of I. Hindrances to, 11, Harmlessness of,
111. Helpfulness of, and IV. Holy use of his
Hobby, We have arranged our points allitera-
tively, all under the letter H, that you might with
the less effort and the better remember them
First —HINDRANCES TO HOBBY.
The materials at our disposal for understanding
the state of Ancient Music, both sacred and secu-
lar, are so limited and imperfect that we cannot
and do not profess to speak with full information,
and with absolute certainty. Our aim is not to
enter upon a learned or difficult discussion of the
subject. Readers who desire something more
difficult can find that in Kitto's Bib. Cycl. Yol. 111.,
under “ Musical Instruments," pp. 245-258. Pos-
sibly, the picture we are going to present is too
dark ; but I think the reasonable probabilities of
the case lead us to infer that the opportunities for
the pursuit of music as a hobby were not so
numerous and helpful as with us now. At every
turn David would meet difficulties.
1. No Teacher. There was a vast difference from
now-a-days when we have teachers of music in our
smallest towns and villages, with a musical Madam,
singing Seignior, and self-plumed Professors of
the Piano and Theory in almost every street;
some of these are genuine and some otherwise ;
some cheap and some dear at any price ; but many
of them are able to give great help to beginners in
music, both vocal and instrumental. Then we
have schools and colleges for music whe, e a helpful
and offer a high class of instruction in the art is
imparted. There is no evidence of anything of
this kind 5 David’s youth. What a contrast there


would be in the conditions under which you study
music and the conditions under which David did.
Your own conditions you know and can picture.
With these, contrast the shepherd lad minding his
father’s sheep on the hillsides of Bethlehem with-
out a guide or teacher, trying to find out for himself
something about the art of music. If he had any aid,
it was probably of a trifling and imperfect nature,
and in the greater part of his studies he had most
likely to be teacher and pupil—a very hard exper-
ience. Though you may not all love your teachers,
yet they make the acquisition of knowledge much
more pleasant; they set your tasks, revise your
work and explain difficulties, while the companion-
ship of, and competition with your class comrades
make the hours of study pass more agreeably, and
your progress more rapid and satisfactory,
2. No Music Book. With us, self-instructors
for the various instruments, and music books
of all sorts are sold everywhere, and at very
moderate prices. Where did David get his music
book ? He saved up and bought one in Bethlehem,
or sent with his brothers for one to some other
city, you say! I rather think that all his father’s
flock would not have purchased so good a one as
you could procure for a shilling. Indeed, I have
grave doubts if there was a music book for sale in
all Bethlehem. There is no evidence of any system
of musical notation of that, or of a former age that
we can lay our hands on. While there are a few
previous references they were, I think, to something
we would hardly now speak of as musical. The
pursuit of music, no doubt, had made some pro-
gress, but had there been books or any system of
notation, it would be strange that they should
have so completely disappeared as to leave not a
trace or record, on any of the many manuscripts and
monuments of antiquity. The history of music as
an art, commences only in the fourth century,
A.D. Certainly, I think, there must have been


some attempt at least by David and those under
him at musical notation, in training those vast
choirs for the service of praise ; but, m all proba-
bility, there was no uniform or largely used method
before his time ; and I rather think it must have
been some one * considerably later than David who
invented the common system of lines and notes
with black heads and white heads, and hatchets
turned to the right and to the left. How David
would have indicated a demisemiquaver I cannot
conceive. Though either the Tonic Sol-fa or
Staff notation may seem difficult for the beginner
to master, still David was, I believe, at a disadvan-
tage in his musical studies by the want of books
written in such a manner.
3. No Instrument. With us instruments of
music are sold new and second-hand with powers
and at prices to suit the wealthy, and yet some so
cheap as to be within reach of the working classes.
They can be purchased at prices ranging from a
penny to thousands of pounds. How did David
procure his instrument? Buy it in the city, you
say! I fear there were none for sale in all the land
of Palestine, The early musicians evidently had
to make their own instruments. Jubal (Gen. iv.,
21) had to make his own, and there is no evidence
that there had grown up a trade in the manufac-
ture and sale of musical instruments in David’s
time or indeed for long after. Kitto says “It
would seem that although music was much cul-
tivated the profession of the musician did not
exist; for if it did, some one of professional fame
would no doubt have been named.” )• Under
these circumstances it is most likely that David
had to construct his own harp, probably out of a
rod bent, or two rods bent in the form of a lyre,
with strings stretched across. \ Kitto thinks it
*So late as A.D. 990-1050 Guido of Arezzo improved system of
notation and added two lines to the stave, making four,
t Kitto Bib. Illn. iii., 209. t Eadie’s Bib. Diet. p. 228.


may have been a board with strings stretched
across it. At any rate David was at a considerable
disadvantage as to an instrument from what boys
are now-a-days. The day I first arranged this
address, I went in the afternoon to the Centen-
ary Hall, York Street, Sydney, to hear Dr. Joseph
Cook, and under the circumstances, as I had
heard him before, I was perhaps as much inter-
ested in hearing and seeing the boy who, only
fourteen years of age, in Eton suit, presided in an
accomplished and admirable manner at the organ.
That boy gave much promise as a musician, and
as a composer has since had the honour of having
one of his compositions rendered in St. Andrew’s
Cathedral; but then what an advantage he has
had over David, in having a father with musical
ability, an excellent musical training, and instru-
ments of great perfection and power, while of
Jesse’s musical ability, of David’s teachers and of
his instruments we are so far in the dark as to be
led to infer that he had all these obstacles to
overcome, so that in the fullest sense he was
a self-made musician. All the more honour
to him for overcoming stich obstacles and gaining
such fame! What was David’s best harp in
contrast to our Sydney Town Hall Organ} or
many modern harps ? yet by Jubal's organ and
David's harp we have risen to higher things.
Second. HARMLESSNESS OF HOBBY.
The Harp was a perfectly harmless hobby, and
that is more than can be said of many hobbies.
We note : 1, David's hobby did not hurt himself.
A bruised face or hurt arm has often been the
result of too vigorous exercise on the quietest
nursery hobby horse, while some of the hobbies of
the more advanced are more dangerous. Some
boys have a hobby for guns and pistols, and while
it is an exercise that cannot be altogether pro-
hibited, it is a pursuit where the greatest caution


is necessary, as is evidenced by the largo number
of serious accidents we read and hear of, in most
cases, occasioned by the careless use of firearms.
Even those who think themselves experienced
require to be cautious. The gold watch guard I
wear belonged to a very dear friend and com-
panion of mine, who met his death testing what
turned out to be a very dangerous kind of American
pistol, notwithstanding that he was no mere boy,,
and that he was well up in the use of firearms.
While there was hope in his death ; yet, boys,
let me enjoin caution, for you cannot be too care-
ful. My mother’s philosophy with regard to a
gun, that “ charged or no' charged she was danger-
ous ” —is safer than the practice of many with
regard to firearms.* I could multiply illustrations
and warnings. Even with Cricket, a legitimate
and excellent pastime, care is necesssary.
2. Hobbies may hurt others. We are bound to
think of others. You know the moral from the
fable of “ The Boys and the Frogs.” We must
take care when we play that our fun hurts no one.
In the interest and safety of others, under this
head, I must again repeat the warning in regard to
firearms. In the village near where I was reared,
one brother accidentally shot another with a pistol;
and a little girl that used to attend a Sabbath
School that I was superintendent of, lost her life
by some unexplained accident with a gun. I have
seen schoolboys, playing with guns, levelling them
at one another —a very dangerous and improper
practice, that I have warned several against.
Now in contrast with these, and many other dan-
gerous hobbies, David’s was perfectly safe. There
was no danger of his shooting himself when mak-
ing his harp, or practising upon it. Be cautious
with a gun or pistol, sailing or rowing boat; but
there is not the least danger of your shooting
yourself, or drowning yourself with a fiddle. All
*See Newspapers for Tuesday, 10th December, 1895


the advice that is here necessary is, Practice till
you become proficient; only do not bore us with
your earlier performances until you have gained
some skill. A young friend of mine—who resided
with me for a time—was then learning to play the
violin ; but I am glad he usually cht se for his
practices the evenings I was from home. On the
hillside, David’s harp would not cause much an-
no} r ance to anyone.
3. It did not make David a worse shepherd.
If it had, I dare say his father would have
grumbled, but we hear of no complaint on this
score. Though he loved his harp, he did not
neglect his sheep. Some think that the study of
music may tend to make young men effeminate.
It could hardly have been so in David’s case.
When a lion and a bear a ttacked his flock of sheep,
he smote and slew the lion and bear; * and when
the warriors of Israel trembled to accept the
challenge of Goliath, then David had courage
to attack the giant, and in the name of the
Lord, he slew Goliath. * His pursuit of music
had not lessened his faith or courage. Now
this is more than could be said of many habits
and hobbies. It can hardly be argued that
smoking will make a boy more faithful or cour-
ageous in the discharge of his duties. I have
known boys smoking when they were unable to
earn what would keep them in tobacco'. This was
not fostering a spirit of independence—a very
commendable quality in boys. Then if tobacco
does anything for boys it has rather an injurious
effect upon them bodily, while intoxicating drink
undoubtedly hinders them in the discharge of their
duties and prevents their safety and success in
life. There are also other boyish hobbies that
have a harmful influence, but music is helpful
rather than harmful. The cultivation of flowers
in your spare time I can also commend to you in
* 1 Sam. xvii., 34-51


the same way. They have a refining, ennobling
influence, they silently reward you for your trouble
w ith them, and they will, so far from harming,
rather help and sweeten life for you. A shrewd,
observant gentleman opening a Flower Show in a
former charge of mine said “ He had never known
a man passionatety fond of flowers a bad man in
any way whatever.” Bad language seems specially
incompatible w'ith the silent influence of flowers.
These statements have much truth in them,
and after years of observation I believe them
worthy of serious consideration. I am happy to
speak to you * with these representatives of one of
my hobbies — flowers —around; and I think the
effect they produce here is all for good; they
please, they refine, and they teach.
Third. —HELPFULNESS OF HOBBY.
Not only was David’s Hobby not harmful, but
it was on the contrary very helpful to him. We
do not propose to discuss the effect of music on
King Saul during his fits of madness. It seems to
have had a good effect upon him. Testimonies
have since been borne to its influence in such cases.
In the last century Farinelli’s singing had a simi-
lar influence over Phillip V. of Spain, and Farin-
elli rose to be Prime Minister.
But we deal with David and note that it helped
him :
1. To pass time pleasantly. Minding the sheep
on the lonely hills must have been dull work for
the youth. I dare say city youths would like it
for a little time, but I can fancy 1 would soon hear
them say “I am full up of it." Those of us who
have had a little experience of farm work, or have
seen something of the life of a shepherd, know
how dull such work soon becomes. In the “ Story
of an African Farm," Waldo’s hobby—the sheep
• Delivered at Flower Service, St. Jehu’s Hall, October 20, 1886-


shearing machine, serves to pass the time. David
did not always require to be after the sheep, and
working with them. While a certain amount of
oversight and watching was necessary, still all his
time and energy was not taken up with his sheep,
and, so his harp helped to make the unoccupied
minutes and hours and evenings pass much more
pleasantly on the hills and valleys around Bethle-
hem. When he was occupied with the ordinary
tedious and oft repeated duties of a shepherd, the
practice with his harp was something to look
forward to. I know some young people do not
look f. rward to their music practice with pleasure ;
but then they do not love music as David did, and
that makes a vast difference.
2. It was refining. Some habits are not of this
kind—they are of evil influence—debasing. Such
are Idleness, Gambling, and Intemperance ; but
the pursuit of Music draws out into prominence
the finer qualities of our nature. The study of
Literature, Science, and Art, and the pursuit of
amateur inventions have an improving, elevating
influence on the mind, and the time spent on them
is thus put to good account. Amongst the fore-
most of these, music is pre-eminent as a refining,
elevating study.
The study of Art in our National Picture
Gallery is very refining ; and some of you would
do well to follow the example of the girl, whose
picture we give on page 11.
3. His hohhy turned out to he more use than hi*
ordinary employment, xi became the means of
his introduction to the Court and to the King. He
had not been looked upon as important enough to
be at the Sacrifice, or the feast in his father’s
house afterwards, yet he was trustworthy enough
to have the sheep left in his charge. Now
it was not his bravery or faithfulness in his ordi
nary work as a shepherd that brought him mVe
the notice of Saul’s servants. One of the yomu


Studying the Pictures.
men had heard him playing, and had been im-
pressed with his skill and ability as a musician.
A.nd, just by the way, let us give this unknown
young man the credit of his action. (a) He


loved music, (b) He was a judge of music, thougn
m all probability he was not able to play well him-
self. (c) He was willing to help his king, (d)
He spoke a word on behalf of a worthy but absent
young man, whose abilities had not gained the
notice they deserved. In this respect let young
people learn a lesson. Try and help another, and
bring a worthy but obscure and modest friend to
the front. By so doing, you may serve him, your
fellow men, and God. Some have said evil about
absent friends. How many , by their words , have
helped to advance others ? But this is a digres-
sion and we return. David was brought into
notice by the words of the young man. It was not
that he had a certificate of musical ability from
some renowned professor, but it was a case of
merit becoming known. Now, if David was in a
short time to be king, it was of importance that he
should learn the ways of kings and courts. True,
his great-grandmother was probably a princess,
he was a gentleman born, and could soon win his
way to favour, (v. 22.) He would soon learn
what to do, but still the training, and what he saw
of courtly manners during his stay at the palace
of Saul, was of advantage to him. If you were
going to be presented to the Queen, you would like
to know something of the Court forms and man-
ners ; and still more so, if in a little time you were
going to preside over and direct those forms. By
refining him and obtaining admission for him to
the court his harp was of more use than the sheep.
Had Jesse been guided by some of the Utilitarian
principles of the present day, he would have
grumbled and told David if he minded the sheep
lie would obtain a livelihood by the sheep ; “ Keep
the sheep and the sheep will heep you; ” “ Fling
away those rods and strings, they waste your time.”
But, as matters turned out, his harp was more
helpful than his sheep in opening up to him the
way to fame.


Fourth. HOLY USE OF HOBBY.
The object we work for, and the use we make
of knowledge when we have gained it is of im-
portance. Some work simply for fame, and
some having gained knowledge, and with good
store of learning, often make no great or good use
of it. David’s hobby was :
1, Followed up. It is a sacred duty, hav-
ing attained to noted ability in any Science
or Art, to push on farther. Some hav-
ing attained just a little more than ordinary
note at their hobby, or in their sphere, are content
to remain there ; but they should try and improve.
The ability they already possess ought to be the
means to their further advancement. They ought
to endeavour to enlarge the sphere of Science, or
if their skill is in the domain of art or letters, they
ought to try and leave that department richer
than they found it. And this David did. Having
gained the notice of the highest in the kingdom,
he did not rest there. His studies were not lost
sight of, as is the case with some students, when
they leave school or college, having obtained the
position they sought after. When the oppor-
tunity came to him, he advanced his hobby.
Many having gained promotion, soon forget the
means by which they rose ; some even kick away
the ladder by which they have risen. David did
not do either, as we shall see.
2. Consecrated to holy uses. It had helped
him in worldly matters, and no doubt also
in his private worship of the Most High;
and afterwards he made music a means of
helping the worship of the Tabernacle of
of Jehovah, His talent, attainments, and power
were thus consecrated to the service of God. “He
regulated the manner of Psalmody, by arranging
for the first time, a full choral service.” * Vocal
• Smith O. T. Hist., p. 875.


ami Instrumental Music was combined, and 4,000
musicians divided into three families, and
twenty-four courses (1 Chron. xxiii.) were engaged
in the Praise part of the Service. To secure,
arrange, train, and furnish with instruments all
these, and to supervise this new movement, shows
considerable progress from the time he practised
as a shepherd lad. He had not lost sight of his
hobby, and he had not forgotten to consecrate his
attainments to the service of Jehovah. His harp
having raised him to fame, he employed it to make
the tabernacle service at Gibeon, and where the
ark of Jehovah was in Jerusalem—something
unique. No one before had evidently conceived
or elaborated such a praise service, and in thus
dedicating his attainments to the service of his
God, David was right, and his conduct is worthy
of imitation.
3 Progressive. He went further , and supplied
the matter of praise, as we have it in his
Psalms. The lyre (in fancy) we saw him
construct and play, was material; but his fingers
touched a figurative lyre, and he became the
Poet, the Psalmist, the sweet singer of Israel.
In a literal, and also in a figurative sense, his fingers
swept the harp-strings of Zion, and the strain of
praise is not yet silent. His talents and training
were used by the Spirit of Inspiration in compos-
ing many of the songs of Zion that we still sing,
and I fain would fancy in some instances, at least,
to Music modified only somewhat from the melody
of the Eoyal Psalmist. Let us learn from him
not to forget the matter, or spirit of praise, and
think only of the manner; and brighter and better
than we found them, let us try and leave the
praises of the Sanctuary.
In conclusion, we have seen how David’s Hobby
did more for him than his sheep, and how “ His
harp grew greater than his throne.” Let us learn
that a hobby may be very helpful to us. Let


parents and teachers not unduly repress this ten-
dency to follow up a certain hobby. Make up
your mind as to what your hobby is, and do not
have a dozen hobbies, in which case you would
likely not come to excellence in any of them.
While we do not advise giving all your time to
your hobby, yet if you have got a gift, if you
possess a talent, even though in your ordinary
duty, there does not seem to be an opening for
the employment of it, use it, exercise it, and no
doubt when you have attained to noted excellence
in the same, as with David, the way will open up
for you to employ your talent, or to advance
your hobby by consecrating it to the service of
man and God. Are not our Churches in need
of those possessed with musical talents, knowledge
and enthusiasm ? Are there no Davids now ? I have
not much reason to complain. In my ministry I have
been helped by several, all freely and cheerfully
employing their time and talents in the praise of
God. But note the last words of our text,
“ Jehovah was with him." He had the
blessing of God on his efforts. This won-
derfully helped David in battle, in governing
his kingdom, in his trials and troubles, in the
pursuit of his hobby, and in the elevation of that
hobby to a place of importance in the kingdom
and the Church. If we have accepted Christ, if
He is our Saviour, if we have made God our
guide then we have taken the most important step
in life, and though we may not achieve all that
David did, or that our youthful dreams fore-
shadowed our life shall not be a failure if at
last we can sing with the Psalmist.
‘‘ The treaties that afflict the just in numbi* many he;
‘‘ But yet at length out of them all the Lord doth set him free."
for “The blessing of the Lord maketh rich.’’
May the Lord he with you I AMEN,
The Manse, Paddington, 13th December, 1895,


Summary of Advertisements in previous editions.
CONFECTIONERY.
LION BRAND AIways the
Same,”
JAMES STEDMAN,
145 Clarence Street, Sydney.
Piano & Music Warehouse —
NICHOLSON & CO., George-st., Sydney,
and at Brisbane and Perth.
Drawer, thos. cooke, 440 *450 oxford-st.,
P ' Paddington.
Grocer, &c. « t anger, 440. 442 oxford-st
Paddington, & Avoca-st., llandwick
Ironmonger, harry grabs, m\ Oxford-st
° Paddington, also Wavevley and
Woollahra.
Photographer. crown studios, comer
& * * George & Market-sts., Sydney
Chemist. - park son, 152 pitt-st.,
Sydney.
Tailor. McKENZIE, 3 Spring-street,
Sydney.
Watchmaker & Jeweller, c. w. oakes, 456
Oxtord-street, Paddington.
The Australian College, wooiiahra, oppo-
-0 site Centennial
Park. Nicholas Shiels and John K.
McManamey, 8.A., Principals.
