





HART HOUSE
University of Toronto
First Edition, 1923
Second Edition, 1926
Published by order of the
Board of Stewards of Hart House
University of Toronto


HART HOUSE: South Front. To the right is
the south window of the Great Hall. Hart
House stands to the west of Queen’s Park between
University College and the Provincial Legislature
Building. Above the windows of the East Common
Room are carved the crest of H.R.H. the Prince of
Wales, one of the first of many distinguished vis-
itors, and the seal of the Massey Foundation. The
bay over the West Common Room bears the badges
of the military units that used Hart House during
the Great War. To the west of Hart House stand
the Soldiers’ Tower and the Memorial Cloister
erected by Graduates of the University and their
friends. The Tower commemorates approximately
6,000 members of the University who served in the
Great War, and in the Cloister are carved the names
of the 622 men who did not return.
Page Two


HART HOUSE
HART HOUSE is so called in memory of the
late Mr. Hart Massey, of Toronto. Begun
in 1911, it was completed in 1919 and pre-
sented, fully equipped to the University of Toronto
by the trustees of the Massey Foundation. To the
Hon. Vincent Massey is due the idea of the House,
the erection of which was carried out under his
personal supervision. The architects were Mr.
Sproatt and Mr. Rolph, of Toronto. During the
Great War hundreds of men were trained within its
walls for service overseas.
Hart House, which is for the use of men only and
is non-residential, is far more than a Students’
Club. In its widest interpretation it seeks to pro-
vide for all the activities of the undergraduate’s
life which lie outside the actual lecture room.
Architecturally of great beauty and built round
a quadrangle, Hart House is unique in that it
houses under one roof a finely proportioned Hall,
Common Rooms of every description, a Library,
Lecture Room, Music Room, a small Chapel, to-
gether with rooms for the use of the Student Chris-
tian Association, a Studio for painting and sketch-
ing, Photographic Rooms, a Billiard Room, Senior
Common Rooms for both Faculty and Graduate
Members, an upper and lower Gymnasium, both
admirably equipped, separate rooms for Boxing,
Fencing and Wrestling, an Indoor Running Track,
a large Swimming Pool, Racquet Courts, a room
for Rowing practice, an indoor Rifle Range, exten-
Page Three


sive Locker Rooms, offices for the Athletic and
Medical Staff, a few bedrooms for guests and the
office and private rooms of the Warden. Below the
Quadrangle is a fully-equipped Theatre with Foyer,
Green Room and Dressing Rooms.
Every male undergraduate of the University is
a member of Hart House, towards the upkeep of
which he pays a moderate fee. Hart House is en-
tirely dependent on these fees, supplemented by
a small revenue obtained from sources within the
House. There is no private endowment whatsoever.
To the Warden is entrusted the general super-
vision of the whole House. He is assisted by the
Comptroller who is responsible for the administra-
tion. The purely athletic activities are in the hands
of the Athletic Directorate. The Warden is re-
sponsible to the President and Board of Governors
of the University. He is assisted by a Board, of
which he is ex-officio Chairman, called the Stewards
of Hart House, on which sit Undergraduate, Grad-
uate and Faculty representatives. Six of these
undergraduate representatives are themselves the
Secretaries of the six Standing Committees —House,
Hall, Library, Music, Billiards and Sketch Room —
each of which consists of ten undergraduates, three
Senior members and the Warden. There are also
a Camera Committee and a Squash Racquets Com-
mittee. The undergraduates on all these Com-
mittees are elected annually by the whole under-
graduate membership of Hart House. Specially
appointed Committees manage Hart House De-
bates and the Sunday Evening “Songsters.” Thus,
in great measure, the care of the House and its
welfare are entrusted to the Students themselves.
Page Four


Hart House debates are held on the open parlia-
mentary system. They take place in the Lecture
Room, on the walls of which hang the photographs
of Graduates of the University who have become
Prime Ministers of the Dominion or of one of the
Provinces.
Exhibitions of pictures, changing every two
weeks, are held in the Sketch Room. Lectures and
discussions on Art and a series of Art Classes are
also held in this room. Hart House is attempting
to form a collection of pictures representative of
the best in Canadian Art, and with this end in view
the Sketch Committee makes two annual purchases
with funds provided by its members.
There are in Hart House well-equipped photo-
graphic darkrooms, and exhibitions of photographs
by members of the House are arranged from time to
time in the Sketch Room.
It is for the members of Hart House to work for
the realization of the ideals so nobly expressed in
the Prayer of the Founders, and thus to hand down
to succeeding generations a tradition worthy of the
House and the University.
Page Five


f I 'HE Great Hall. Above the High Table the
panels bear the arms of the Royal Family and
of fifty-one universities in the British Empire. The
Great Hall seats three hundred and fifty for the
serving of meals.
Page Six


NORTH end of the Great Hall. The panels bear
the arms of seventy-four universities of the
Allied Nations —-France and Belgium in the centre,
the United States of America on the left, Italy,
Russia and Japan on the right, Serbia and Rou-
mania lower left, and Portugal and Greece lower
right. The portraits from left to right are of the
following:
Sir William Meredith, Chancellor, 1900-1923; James Loudon,
President, 1892-1906; the Hon. Edward Blake, Chancellor,
1876-1900; Sir Daniel Wilson, President, 1880-1892; The
Rev. John McCaul, President (successively) of King’s Col-
lege, the University, and University College, 1849-1880.
Page Seven


The Quadrangle looking west and showing the
Soldiers’ Tower. Below the Quadrangle, on the
walls of which are displayed the arms of the four col-
leges in the University—St. Michaels, Trinity, Uni-
versity and Victoria —is the theatre. The Soldiers’
Tower was built by the architects of Hart House.
Page Eight


THE Library, which is one of the most beautiful
rooms in the House, contains books of general
literature. It is used as a private library where a
man can take the book he desires from the shelves
himself and spend a leisure hour reading. There
is no provision for the taking of books out of the
room. The window in the alcove is a memorial
to Capt. Edward Kylie, a member of the Univer-
sity staff, who died in the Great War.
Page Nine


THE Chapel is for the use of all members of
Hart House. It is open daily for private prayer
and meditation, and services are held weekly under
the auspices of the Student Christian Association.
Holy Communion is also celebrated twice a month.
The glass in the windows of the Chapel was col-
lected from the devastated areas of France, Flan-
ders and Italy. On the altar is a crucifix carved
by Mr. Eric Gill, the well-known English sculptor.
Page Ten


f I 'HE Music Room. Throughout the academic
year the Music Committee arrange afternoon
recitals in this room, which is extremely well
adapted for Chamber Music. A series of “Song-
sters” are also held in the Music Room, when
members gather to sing Folk Songs under the
direction of a well-known musician. The Sunday
Evening Concerts, which take place in the Great
Hall at 9.00 p.m. on certain Sundays during the
winter, are a distinguished feature in the life of
Hart House and are becoming widely known.
Page Eleven


THE main or lower Gymnasium. Physical
training is included in the curriculum of the
University and this section of the building has been
equipped to accommodate large classes. The appa-
ratus is all moveable so that the Gymnasium may
be occasionally used as a ball room. The Running
Track, which passes into the upper Gymnasium,
is one-eleventh of a mile long. Under the upper
Gymnasium are separate rooms for Boxing, Fenc-
ing and Wrestling. There is also a Rowing Room.
Locker Rooms and Shower Baths are on the base-
ment level. There is locker accommodation for
three thousand members.
Page Twelve


THE Swimming Pool and Galleries where the
Inter-Collegiate and Inter-Faculty Polo
Matches are played. Here also an undergraduate
may attend life-saving classes as part of his physical
training course. The Pool is seventy-five feet long
and thirty-five feet wide. The depth varies from
six feet to seven and a-half feet.
Page Thirteen


SETTING for “Paolo and Francesca.” Hart
House Theatre, which seats five hundred people
is under the Quadrangle, and is reached through
separate outside entrances and a Foyer which con-
tains portraits of well-known actors and photo-
graphs of past productions. The theatre, which is
self-supporting, is complete with dressing rooms,
wardrobe and Green Room. The lighting and
mechanical equipment is probably unequalled in
any theatre of this size. The Director of Hart
House Theatre is responsible for the production of
all plays, a different play being acted throughout
one week in each month of the academic year.
The management of the Theatre is under the Board
of Syndics of Hart House Theatre, a body responsi-
ble to the Board of Governors of the University.
Page Fourteen


HE prayer of the Founders is that Hart
/ House, under the guidance of its Warden,
may serve, in the generations to come, the
highest interests of this University by drawing
into a common fellowship the members of
the several Colleges and Faculties, and by
gathering into a true society, the teacher
and the student, the graduate and the
undergraduate; further, that the members
of Hart House may discover within its walls
the true education that is to be found in
good'fellowship, in friendly disputation and
debate, in the conversation of wise and earnest
men, in music, pictures and the play, in the
casual hoo\, in sports and games and the
mastery of the body; and lastly, that just as
in the days of war, this House was devoted
to the training in arms of the young soldier,
so in the time of peace its halls may be dedi'
cated to the tas\ of arming youth with
strength and suppleness of limb, with clarity
of mind and depth of understanding, and
with a spirit of true religion and high
endeavour.


ROUS
MANN
PRINTERS
TORONTO
