

Has Christianity Failed?
By a" Protestant Layman.
" **
Who Shall Control Australia^ s^^estiay—
PROTESTANTISM ? " == "]^V > \
ROMAN CATHOLICISM?
or
PAGANISM?
A Challenge to the Church
Dedicated to the Australian Dig-
ger. A belated contribution in
recognition of his imperishable
sacrifice on the shores of Galli-
po!i, in the blood-soaked fields of
France, Palestine and Mesopo-
tamia.
Any Profits Accruing from the Sale of these Books will be devoted
to a Fund for the Relief of Indigent Diggers.
A. W. PATTERSON, Summer Street, Orange, Distributing Agent


C
(if J'ERGUSON COLLECT ION3LW
|i|I RATIONAL LIBRARY" JjJJ


Has Christianity Failed?
a Protestant Layman
Jy^U
Who Shall Control Australia's Destiny—
PROTESTANTISM?
ROMAN CATHOLICISM?
or
PAGANISM?
A Challenge to the Church
| Dedicated to the Australian Dig- I
| ger. A belated contribution in |
f recognition of his imperishable |
I sacrifice on the shores of Galli- $
| poli, in the blood-soaked fields of |
| France, Palestine and Mesopo- |
• taiiiia. 1
I j
Any Profits Accruing from the Sale of these Books will be devoted
to a Fund for the Relief of Indigent Diggers.
A. W. PATTERSON, Summer Street, Orange, Distributing Agent


Table of Contents.
Article Page
My Personal Testimony 3
Has Protestantism Largely Become a Spent Force? 5
If Protestantism has Failed, Who Shall: Lead? 8
Who Shall Control the Traffic—Rome? 12f
Who Shall Control the Traffic—Antichrist? 18
Who are the Chosen People? 21
The Enemy at the Gates —Australia's Greatest Menace 24
The New Birth —Roman Catholicism versus the Bible 26 ,
The Immaculate Conception and Adoration of the Virgin Mary
—ls it Scriptural? 29
The Place of the Confessional in the Christian Ministry ... 31
Purgatory—Where is it? ... ... 33
Lopsided Religion 35
The Mass versus the Lord's Supper 37
Has the Church Reached a Dead End? 39
Concerning the Collection 42
Am I My Brother's Keeper? 43
Woman—Man's Helpmate or Competitor—Which? 45
The Ministry of Healing in Relation to Medical Science 48
Divine Healing Testimonies— ~
Organs Not Functioning, Writer Healed 50
Immediate Healing 51
Ruptured Heart Healed ... ... ... 52
Varicose Ulcer Healed 54
Life After Death—ls Jesus Coming Again? . 55
Spiritual Power, or This is That 57
Scrapped! 60
The Conversion and Baptism of a Dinkum Digger 62
Spiritual Gifts or Spiritualism—a Challenge Examined (by Pastor
Donald Gee, of Edinburgh, Scotland) 64
Paul's Vision, and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. (By Evan-
gelist Smith Wigglesworth) 69
Christianity Not Failed—The Message of Pentecost-
Apostolic .7". 7V." 74
Modern 76
Giace. (By Pere Caussade, a writer of the 17th century) 79
The Marriage of the Lamb 84
Conclusion g.j
2.


My Personal Testimony
CONVERSION AND BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT
Conversion and Baptism with the Holy Spirit,
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to-day, and forever. —Heb.
13:8.
The writer is astounded, as he reads from time to time the
opinions of prominent men and women in the religious world, ques-
tioning and endeavouring to refute the arguments of St. Paul and
other inspired writers of Holy Writ. Unconsciously or otherwise,
they claim to know more about the word of God than those who 1
were on the spot, and Avho lived, moved, and had their being in the
very presence of God, manifested in His Son, Jesus Christ. Is it
not' presumptious folly? For in what other way can the things of
the Spirit be revealed, other than by a complete submission to that
Spirit, the Divine Will of God? Great intellectual gifts can easily
become a barrier, heaping up, as it were, a wall of opposition to
God's Holy Will, expressed through the Old and New Testaments.
The writer's experience, therefore, may be helpful, not because
of any intellectual capacity, but because of his inability, naturally, to
intellectually grasp even small details: what a wondrous prospect
must, therefore, lie in the pathway of intellectual genius, when
wholly surrendered to the Almighty.
Leaving school at 14 years' of age, aftef a very spasmodic and
intermittent attendance, without natural ability, he was unable to
qualify for admission into the Civil Service, failing to pass a most
rudimentary test. His assets were a modicum of common sense,
combined with an inherent desire to do the right, counterbalanced
by a weak and vacillating will, with a shyness of disposition painful
in the extreme. His literary tastes were confined mostly to novels
of a light nature, read more for pastime than profit.
About 23 years ago, he was induced to accept the position of
secretary of the church, of which he was an adherent. His spiritual
qualifications were absolutely nil. The Bible was rarely read, and


its spiritual significance was not grasped, he neither rejecting 01
accepting its teaching. The Church, at this time, was spiritually
and financially at a very low ebb, necessitating considerable energy
in raising the necessary funds, by means of concerts and othei
functions of a worldly nature.
Two years later, the charge became vacant, and a layman was
installed temporarily. Fortunately for the writer, he was an earnest
Christian, with a very definite message on salvation, and m per-
sonal conversation discussed spiritual matters in such a matte* ot
course manner that went right home, his emphasis on the atoning
power of the blood and the efficacy of prayer proved catching, and
one evening, about a fortnight after his arrival, I sought God on my
knees, a posture that was unknown to me for many years, yielding
my will to His, and, from that moment, a glorious realisation of the
Power and Presence of God in my life has never been absent.
The Bible became the only book worth while, and any literature
that would not help me to understand its contents, was discarded,
with the result that this publication goes out to the world, an elo-
quent testimony to the wonderful working Power of God in a life
wholly yielded to Him.
Entering wholeheartedly into every phase of Church work, the
wilderness blossomed as the rose, and to-day the prospect was never
more pleasing, having entered a field of service which in my wildest
dreams 1 never imagined possible.
About seven years ago, I became convinced that the message of
the earlv Apostolic Church was never abrogated, and that the Bap-
tism with the Holy Spirit, and the accompanying gifts, enumerated
in 1 Cor., 12ch., were for believers to-day, and, not wishing to
embarrass my minister and fellow church officers, I resigned from
all offices held in the church, which was effected without friction,
because of the Christlike spirit of the minister. And neither then,
nor at any time since, have I been debarred from having fellow-
ship with' my old associations. About two years subsequent to
the events above recorded, I received the Baptism of the Holy
Spirit in like manner recorded in Acts 2:4 and 10:44, 48, speaking
in tongues as the Spirit gave utterance. Knowing that this experience
was not accepted by the Church as Scriptural, my resignation as a
member was the next step, and, shortly afterwards, I linked up with
the Pentecostal Church of Australia, believing that through this body
expression of my new found experience would have a wider field' of
acceptance. But, unfortunately, this was not so, and, becoming dis-
satisfied with the methods of church government adopted by that
Church, I severed my connection therewith, early this year.
I at once stepped into a deeper and more wonderful spiritual
experience than had previously been my lot. Shortly afterwards,
my occupancy of the pulpit of my old Church was permitted, con-
ditionally, on my part, that the minister, with whom I had had no
intercourse, should understand where I stood doctrinally, no objec-
tion was offered. The -address was along the lines of the opening-
article. Believing that the message was worthy of wider publicity,
the local press was approached for space, which was readily granted,
but when I endeavoured to express my thoughts in the restricted
space at my disposal, such a flood of matter overwhelmed me, that
several columns would not suffice, and the outcome is this publica-
tion, for which the writer can claim no credit whatever, other
than that of being an empty channel, permitting the Holy Spirit to
operate, as effectively as the weak human vessel would allow. Such
is my testimony, which is given with the object of glorifying my
Redeemer, Jesus Christ, Who has blessed above all that I could
expect, or ask, or think.


Has Protestantism Largely Become
a Spent Force ?
AND !S SHE LOSING THAT PLACE OF POWER AND
IT WAS ONCE HER PRIVILEGE TO ENJOY?
The primary thought of this article will be found in Jeremiah,
18-4-—"And the vessel that He made of clay was marred in the
hands of the potter; so He made it again another vessel, as it seemed
good to the potter to make it." And the connecting passages ot
Scripture will be found in Genesis 1:26, 27 and 31, and 2.3 And
God said let us make man in our own image, after our own likeness.
.... so God created man in His own image, in the im&ge of
God created he him. And God saw everything that He had made,
and behold, it was very good," also Rev. 22:7, 18 and 19, "Behold,
I come quickly; blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the pro-
phecy, of this book. For I testify unto every man that heareth the
words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
book; 'and if any man shall take away from the words of the book
of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which are written
in this book." . ,
There are many obscure and difficult passages in the word of
God, but the above quotations are so clear and simple, "that wayfar-
ing men, though fools, shall not err therein."
The writer of this article (who can make no claim whatever to
academic learning), prior to his conversion twenty-three years ago, had
imbibed literature mostly of a light nature, which naturally left no
abiding impression on the mind, but it had this advantage his
study of the Bible afterwards was not befogged by theories pro-
pounded by writers of an atheistic, agnostic, or free-thought tendency,
the absorption of which so clouds the spiritual perception, for the
word declares that "the natural man receiveth not the things of
the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can
he know them because they are spiritually discerned." The Bible
is the inspired word of God. If this were not so, the arguments
adduced in these articles would be absolutely of no value, for
every statement made therein is based upon the conviction that
the scriptures are divinely inspired and its authority indisputable.
How may we know this to be so?, By the inspired utterances
of the men who were used of the Holy Spirit to write them. One
of the outstanding figures for scholarship and learning, in the world's
history, was the Apostle Paul, wdho to add to his equipment, became
so impregnated with divine life, that it was impossible to keep him
earth-tethered, for "he was caught up into paradise and heard
unspeakable words, which is not lawful for a man to utter."
What is his testimony? "All scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto ail good works."
Peter, whose close relationship with his Lord surely entitles him
to speak with authority, says that "no prophecy of the scriptures
is of any private interpretation, for the prophecy came not in olden
times by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost." As God breathed into man, the breath


of life which made him a living soul, so he has breathed into this
hook that which makes it the living Word. Who were> these holy
men of God, and whence came their powei and mspnatioi .
us glance down the corridors of time, and gaze for a moment upon
these spiritual giants whose portraiture is so indeslibly' f
Holy Writ. Moses, meek in spirit, mighty in action the S r ®&-
leader of men in modern or ancient history; David shepherd
king, the sweet psalmist of Israel, whose songs are evei on the
lios of God's children; Isaiah, the silver-tongued prophet, r\ho so
accurately foreshadowed the coming of the world's Redeemer; Jere-
miah, whose stern denunciation ot the sin and wickedness <'< ■
own peope, is ever a warning to the nations who toiget God, Dane,
the exile, pure and undefiled, a statesman without parallel m human
history These are some of the heroes of bygone years, whom
the evolutionist and intellectual pigmies of to-day have
arrogantly enthroning themselves as the final authority upon
immutable and unchangeable word of God. moMo A
How did these men of old catjfir the vision which enabled them
to become the mouthpiece of Almighty God, not only for then
own day and generation, but for each succeeding generation, until
time shall be no more? Just in the samq place, and in the same
way as any child of God can reach out and come m contact with
divine power to-day. Isaiah was no different from any other man
—his experience can be our experience, if we will pay the price.
He was in the temple worshipping and praising his God, and became
so abandoned to the divine spirit, that suddenly he was overwhelmed
by the power and glory of the Most High, which so revealed his
own unworthiness, that he could only cry, "Woe is me, for I am a
man of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of Hosts." And when men and women catch that vision, the problems
which confront mankind in this, or any other age, will be for ever
solved.
Man, declares God's Word, was created m His own image,
and after His own likeness, and if this statement means anything at
all, it surely implies that the first man, Adam, possessed in the
highest degree those attributes of his Creator, which unquestionably
must have included holiness, knowledge and righteousness.
God has uever coerced man, forcing him to obey, but has be-
stow r ed upon him the agency of a free will, giving him the power
to choose between right and wrong. Man, the highest and noblest
of God's creations, chose wrongly, and became so marred and
disfigured by sin. so steeped in iniquity, that nothing less than a
deluge could appease the wrath of Almighty God, whose justice
and holiness had been so outraged. The inspired historian, in a
brief sentence, Genesis 6:5, reveals man, God's masterpiece, the
crown and glory of His creation, descending to a plane lower than
the brute beast, and it is here that tlie evolutionist must look for a
missing link; but what will it profit liim when he finds it? "Man is
not a product of evolution, which teaches that somewhere in the
dim and distant past, life began in the form of a microcosm, and
from this evolved the lower forms of life until the monkey was
reached, from which they tell us we have sprung. I am not quite
ready, at any rate, to admit the ape as my ancestor."
God, true to His promise, Genesis 3:15, by the call of Abraham,
introduces the first step in a new method in the training of men,
and in the history of the Jewish race we are brought face to face
with the fact of God. From this nation there emerged in the
fulness of time, that Bright and Morning Star, the Prince of Peace,
the Altogether Lovely One, Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the world.
Here we tread on holy ground. Let us take the shoes from off


our feet, and walk softly, for there are those to-day who can read
into this sacred narrative of redeeming love, the sordid and revolting
thought that the Virgin Mary, the purest and holiest of her sex,
was an immoral woman. This base suggestion emanates, not from
without but from within, from among those who claim to be followers
of the lowly Nazarene. If, with pen and ink, we could score out
of the- Bible every reference of which we have had spoken or puDiished
denial of accuracy and authenticity, what would we have left.
Absolutely nothing but the covers. And the tragedy of it is that
what Voltaire, Ingersoll, and others of that ilk failed to do m days
gone by is to-day being effectively accomplished by the modern
theologian and evolutionist, who, making God a liar, has so emascu-
lated the Bible, that to multitudes it has become a powerless and
lifeless book, a tangled skein, leading to so much conjecture and
doubt that the enemy of souls, ever like a roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour, has made havoc of the church, and reduced her to
such a state of impotence, that Protestantism to-day has largely
become a spent force, and is fast losing that place of power and
authority it was once her privilege to enjoy. I hold no brief for
the Roman Catholic Church, but nowhere can be traced her denial
ot the Biblical story of creation, the fall and the flood. One of the
most logical and convincing arguments supporting the doctrine of
everlasting punishment, published in recent days, was from the
pen of one of her laymen, and, to her eternal credit, she hus never let
down on that foundational truth of scripture that Jesus is the Christ,
the very Son of God. Her attitude towards divorce, and her rebuke
of the wanton display of immodesty revealed in the slavish adherence
to the fashion of the day, especially in regard to its shameless
invasion of the sanctuary, merits the approval of every right thinking
person, and is surely something to thank God for. I firmly believe
that the time is ripe to protest, and protest most emphatically,
not so much against a Christian Church, from whose doctrines we
differ, but against those within our own ranks, who under the
guise of modern thought and scholarship, are Bible Bolsheviks,
wolves in sheep's clothing, promulgating theories which are but the
reasonings of man, dethroning God and making intellect the final
authority. „ ,
Paul, in his epistle to the Ephesians, in a beautiful analogy,
illustrates the relationship between Christ the Bridegroom, and
the Church the Bride, in which is depicted the presentation of the
Bride to the Bridegroom, clothed in wedding garments of purest
white, not having spot or wrinkle, holy and without blemish. But,
oh, how sad the sight which meets our gaze to-day—the Bride, with
garments soiled and rent by division, worldliness, and a poverty
of faith, with cap in hand, a veritable mendicant begging for coppers
to maintain her existence, as if the Lord God was bankrupt, and
unable to redeem His precious promise, "Whatsoever ye shall ask
in My name, that will I do," and with the prophetic imprint of
scripture plainly emblazoned in her whole appearance, "having a
form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof," and bearing
striking resemblance to the church of the Laodiceans, so vividly
pictured by John in his vision on Patmos, "I know thy works, that
thou art neither cold nor hot! I would thou wert cold or hot, so then
because thou are lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew
thee out of my mouth." With shorn locks, her glory and power
departed, she faces the coming storm, almost impotent.
Earnest students of the Word declare that this age is nearing
its end, and a great catastrophe is imminent, but physicians of no
value, in pulpit and press, are keeping from the dying race the
truth of the impending danger, prophesying unto it smooth things,


and talking of peace and safety. But God's word declares, "When
they shall say, 'Peace and safety,' then cometh sudden destruc-
tion upon them, as travail upon a woman with child. They shall
not escape." . . , n . , ~,
The night is dark and gloomy; the distant rumblings herald
the approach of a terrific storm, widespread in its awful intensity,
which will sooner or later overwhelm this world, fast ripening foi
judgment, for God, enthroned where purity and holiness reign, again
beholds "that the wickedness of man is great in the earth." And
Christ, in His solemn warnings relating to these latter days, said,
"For there shall be great tribulation such as was not since the
beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.
If Protestantism has Failed, Who Shall
Lead —Roman Catholicism or ?
"That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being
rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and
to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye might
be filled with all the fulness of God." Eph. 3:17-19.
It is in the spirit of this passage of Scripture, that the writer
endeavours to answer the question propounded above. The problem
is not an easy one, but where the heart is void of offence, surely
something helpful will result therefrom.
"There are a number of thinking men of the earth to-day,
who are gravely apprehensive of impending trouble, and they are
calling out in different lands for a* national preparedness. How do
they suggest that the nations should prepare for the future? By
days of national humiliation and prayer? Oh, no. The cry of most
of them, is, 'Let us multiply munitions and build more submarines,
dreadnoughts and airplanes for national defence.' Their confidence
in God is small; their trust in munitions great."
David Lloyd George, formerly Prime Minister of England, recently
addressed a meeting of the League of Nations Union in London,
and predicted another war, even more terrible than the last, unless
the nations speedily disarm. He said, "Anyone who contemplates
seriously the existing state of Europe must feel that the world is
under a shadow of dark apprehension, and that, unless some na-
tional steps are taken in time to avoid the catastrophe, the san-
guinary struggle of 1914 may yet be renewed, on an even more
terrible scale." He suggested that the League of Nations should
compel the limitation of armaments.
Thomas Edison, the famous inventor, stated recently, in an
article in "Popular Science Monthly," that the fear of war is hanging-
over his grey head, and is driving him frantic. Similar statements,
which could be multiplied, emanating from leaders in world affairs,
reveal the chaotic condition, which is so widespread, and from which
there appears to be no escape. What is the root cause? The
writer will have many supporters when he affirms that it is the
national forgetfulness of God. "God is not mocked; whatsoever a
man soweth, that also shall he reap," is applicable to both nation
and individual alike. Mighty revolutions and catastrophes, involv-
ing thousands of lives, do not happen by chance in a universe


controlled and upheld by the mighty hand of God. Where theie
an effect, there must be a cause, and where there is spiritual declen-
sion moral declension follows as night follows day.
In the previous article, it was demonstrated that a great religious
organisation, which based her claim for recognition upon her belief
that the Bible was the inspired word of God, and the final source
of authority, had fallen from grace and had lost sight of her'
commission. In further support of her retrogression, the following
extract from a religious journal reveals how widespread this bacK-
ward movement has become: — , .
"Modern theology is largely responsible for the theories of evo-
lution and the origin of that far reaching American Association for
the advancement of atheism. Modern theology tells us God is not
a Person. Principal and its idea are one, and this One is God.
that the doctrine of the Godhead well suited the dark ages which
it helped to produce; that Christ is the impersonal Saviour; that
Christ was not divine; that Christ was the master-product of evolu-
tion; that man is under a process of evolution; that man is incap-
able of sin; that every man must atone for his own soul; that the
slaughter-house religion belongs to the dark ages; that there is
110 far-off Judgment Day, and that the Bible is not the word of
authority. What better material could the evolutionist and the
atheist want than that which the modernist is handing out in the
classroom and over the secred altars in many sanctuaries.
When a minister of the gospel, or a teacher in a Christian school,
can no longer accept the Bible as the inspired word of God, can no
longer believe in the virgin birth, the blood atonement, salvation by
regeneration, the resurrection of the body, and the personal return
of Christ, he should immediately separate himself from every Christ-
ian organisation, for he is unworthy of the fellowship of such a body.
The baneful result of such unscriptural teaching is revealed, by a
startling statement made at a meeting of the Men's Church League,
held recently in New York, at which it was reported that 32 per
cent, of Presbyterian, Methodist, and Baptist Churches in that coun-
try had failed to secure a single addition upon profession of faith
during 1927. That was no haphazard guess; the League had taken
great pains to be exact. If this proposition holds true for other
denominations, and doubtless it does, 64,000 out of a total of 200,000
Protestant churches in U.S.A. failed to secure a single convert in
1927. Of the remaining churches, it was found that many had only
one or two additions.
It would seem hardly necessary to further belabour the question,
but one more striking exemplification of the failure of Protestantism
will suffice. Would it have been possible, say, twenty or thirty years
ago, for members of the Roman Catholic Church to have paraded the
streets of Sydney as they propose to do shortly? Will not the
general reply be No? Why? Because of the power and influence
of Protestantism then prevailing. This naturally leads up to the
question, if Protestantism has failed, who shall lead the Com-
monwealth of Australia in spiritual realities? The main argument
used against the invasion of the rights of Protestantism is that a
religious body, consisting of only 25 per cent, of the population, is
imposing her will upon the remaining 75 per cent. This certainly
requires some explanation, for it would seem almost impossible for
such a large percentage to be coerced into a position of which they
wholly disapprove.
It must, therefore, be very apparent, that the percentage of
Protestantism is very much less than is generally supposed. Whilst,
nominally, the above figures may be correct, yet in actual fact it is
doubtful whether more than 25 per cent, can truly claim to he


Protestant, that is, men and women who believe the Word of crod
to be the standard regulating their daily lives. The remaining 50
per cent, are, to all intents and purposes, if not heathen then prac-
tically indifferent to the claim of God upon their lives If this sup-
position is correct, then the action of the Roman Catholic Church,
in regard to the Eucharistic procession, must be viewed from an-
other standpoint, for they as a Christian body must be concerned,
and deeply concerned, too, at the drift of so many towards a Christ-
less eternity. Who can say they are not actuated by the highest
of motives, in emphasising a doctrine which we Protestants claim
to have no scriptural warrant. And let me say, right that
I would rather a thousand times see my own children devout Roman
Catholics than living in the spiritual darkness which has enveloped
multitudes of so-called Protestants to-day, whose Bible is either
the "Financial News," the sporting columns of the daily press, the
flaming poster of the picture palace, or the journal of fashion, whose
enslaved victims are bowing down to idols equally repulsive to
Almighty God, as were the idols of wood and stone for whose wor-
ship the Children of Israel were banished from the Promised Land.
These living unto the flesh, with the cry ever on their lips, "on
with the dance; let us eat, drink and be merry, for to-morrow we
die," are ostrich-like, ignoring that arresting and solemn warning ot
Scripture, "It is appointed unto man, once to die, and after this the
view of this position, is it possible for the Roman Catholic
Church to so capture the imagination of the thoughtless and indif-
ferent masses, and so enable them to win their hearts, and even-
tually gather them into the fold as members of what is claimed to
be the only true Church, and thereby become the determining factor
as to who shall lead the Commonwealth in the realm of spiritual
truth?
The writer respectfully submits three reasons, which he believes
will prove an insurmountable obstacle to the consummation of this
ideal. . .
The first is purely on the surface, and is inherent in the mind
of non-conformist Protestantism, and especially to that large body
which practically conforms to nothing, and who have nothing in com-
mon with that which life's usage has made so dear to the Roman
Catholic temperament. Ritualism, with its form and ceremony, as
practised by the Roman Catholic Church, combined with its various
orders of priesthood, can only make its appeal to those who from
infancy have been nurtured in its atmosphere. One cannot but
admire the loyalty and devotion of her followers to church and priest-
hood alike, which is so sadly lacking in Protestants; and yet, deep
down in the heart of the most careless and indifferent Protestant,
lies a devotion, which would unmistakably express itself, if there
was a united body that could speak with authority. But he has no
time for ecclesiasticism, Roman Catholic or otherwise, and will tell
you frankly that the church is only a social organisation where
decent and respectable people meet, and where the poor outcast would
receive very short shrift. Whether this be correct or not, there is
the underlying kernel of truth, that ecclesiasticism has raised a bar-
rier, hiding the humble and lowly Nazarene, with His glorious love
and power, from thousands who otherwise might be in full enjoy-
ment of the soul-satisfying privilege of communion and fellowship
with the Most High.
The second reason is far deeper, and to my mind is unques-
tionably the root cause for the age-long feud between Romanism
and Protestantism. Side by side with the great spiritual forces
which hold the Roman Catholic Church in such a compact mass, is


another strong and powerful combination, generally believed by
non-Catholics to have for its objective the regaining of worldwide
temporal power, and that she will use every possible means, political
and otherwise, to gain her objective. Most Protestants fear, an
this fear is very real, that if this objective is gained, then that
power would be misused, and juggernaut-like, crush Protestantism
and all who oppose her out of existence. This is no figment of the
imagination, but is a true expression of the reason of so much antag-
onism, which is so persistent, especially at the present moment
because of the proposed Eucharistic procession, which indicates a
decided step forward in the above direction. There are many sin-
cere and earnest Protestants who really believe that the anti-Christ
that man of sin, so graphically described in II Tness, 11, and whom
many prominent Bible students affirm is already on the horizon,
will be incarnated in one of the Popes of Rome. Where fear exists,
love and unity can find no abiding place.
The third reason is deeper still, and is based upon the assump-
tion that the leprosy of sin, so deeply-rooted, has so eaten into
the very vitals of this Godless generation, that nothing less than
the operation of the Holy Spirit, in apostolic power, convicting and
convincing of sin, will eradicate this soul-destroying disease. But,
in the meantime, it is possible to pave the way for a better under-
standing between the contending forces, and thereby enable them
more effectively to combat the powers of darkness which overshadow
the world to-day. The scripture with which this article opens
is an antidote to all fear, and its adoption by the parties in the
present conflict, would speedily remove those disturbing elements
which are such a reproach to Christianity, for, declares the word,
"There is no fear in love, perfect love castetli out fear." What,
an expression of divine love would be manifested, if Protestants, to
remove any fear from the hearts of their Roman Catholic brethren
that a powerful Protestantism would do them an injustice, were to
adopt such a course that all possibility of doubt in this respect
would be removed, and thus break down those barriers which have
for so long kept them from fellowship one with another, and which
has so tragically hindered the proclamation of the gospel message
of salvation.
The writer suggests two ways in which this could effectively
operate. First, encourage the State to recognise, in some tangible
manner, the noble work accomplished by the Sisters of Mercy, con-
nected with the Roman Catholic Church, insomuch that through their
dovotion and zeal, an army of boys and girls are yearly going out
into the world having a very definite knowledge of God. One trem-
bles to think what would happen if this large proportion of the future
citizens of the Commonwealth were let loose on society without
the restraining influences inculcated during the plastic years of
their lives.
Secondly, that the Protestant community should emphatically
repudiate those base and ignoble charges, made from time to time,
by certain sections of Protestants, against the virtue of a body of
women, whose love and loyalty to the cause they represent are
worthy of the highest commendation. Thus would be removed a
stigma, not from them alone, but also from the womanhood of our
nation, who have made it possible for these self-sacrificing women
to reflect the beauty and purity upon which our national greatness
must for ever stand. The writer, some twenty years ago, for a few
hours, was privileged to be the guest of the Mother Superior of a
convent in a small country centre, and never can he forget the cour-
tesy and hospitality extended by these representatives of the bul-
wark of Roman Catholicism, and manifested in such an undoubted,


sanctified spiritual atmosphere that the perfume of its sweet frag-
rance lingers still.
If, in that great day when time shall be 110 more, there shall
stand before the throne of Almighty God a redeemed host from
every clime, nation and tongue, united in perfect love to Chiist
their Lord, then it must commence right down here, for some day,
and who knows how soon, the trumpet of the Lord shall sound, when
all who are washed in the blood of the Lamb shall receive their
reward for the things done in the body, whether it be good or had.
And when that heart-searching question is asked, "Where is thy
brother?" I, for one, want to answer, "If he is not here, Lord, it is
because he would not heed the warning note, and has chosen the
way of destruction rather than the way of life."
Who Shall Control the Traffic—Rome?
"And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach
the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptised shall
be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these
signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast
out devils;: they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take
up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."
Mk 16:15,18.
The above title was suggested as a result of the effective power
and control, exercised by the officer controlling the traffic in our
busy city streets. How prompt the obedience to the outstretched
hand. Perfect harmony and order! Contrast the confusion and
disorder were this control inefficient or disregarded. What a strik-
ing illustration is here presented, denoting the commanding influence
so apparent in Roman Catholic leadership, compared with its Pro-
testant counterpart.
If the statement in the previous article is approximately cor-
rect, viz., that only 25 per cent, of Australia is Protestant, in the
true sense of the word, then we are faced with the indisputable fact
that the contending parties for spiritual supremacy are practically
equal, in so far as numbers are concerned, but, when the divisions
existing among Protestants are considered, unprejudiced minds will
concur that her relative position is much weaker, and, unless there
is a vital change, Protestantism must go to the wall.
Mr. G. K. Chesterton, a famous England journalist, tells in
"The Outline," "Why I am a Catholic." His contribution is a
timely one, and probably reflects the view point of many nominal
Protestants. The latter portion of his article is as follows:
"Mr. Chesterton argued that Protestantism is either a negative
01* a positive thing; 'if Protestantism is a positive thing, there is
no doubt whatever that it is dead.' He gave reasons, and dealt with
traditional religion and also the Reformation. Protestantism, he
said, 'tells a different story every day.' He concluded by saying that
'was the situation I found myself facing when I began to think of
these things.'
"But as a fact my family, having become Liberal, was no longer
Protestant. I was brought up a sort of Universalist sffd Unitarian,
at the feet of that admirable man, Stopford Brooke. It was not Pro-
testantism save in a very negative sense. Often it was the flat


contrary of Protestantism even in that sense. For instance, the
Universalist did not believe in hell; and he was emphatic in saying
that heaven was a happy state of mind; 'a temper.' But he had the
sense to see that most men do not live or die in a state of mmd
so happy that it will alone ensure them a heaven. If heaven is
a temper, it is certainly not a universal temper; and a good many
people pass through this life in a devil of a temper. If all these
were to have heaven, solely through happiness, it seemed clear
that something must happen to them first. The Universalist there-
fore believed in a progress after death, at once punishment and
enlightenment. In other words, he believed in Purgatory; though
he did not believe in Hell. Right or wrong, he obviously and flatly
contradicted the Protestant, who believed in Hell but not in Pur-
gatory. Protestantism, through its whole history, had waged cease-
less war on this one idea of Purgatory or Progress beyond the grave.
I have come to see in the complete Catholic view much deeper truths
on all three ideas; truths concerned with will and creation, and
God's most glorious love of liberty. But even at the start, though
I had no thought of Catholicism, I could not see why I should have
any concern with Protestantism; which had always said the very
opposite of what a Liberal is now expected to say.
"I found, in plain words, that there was no longer any question
of clinging to the Protestant faith; it was simply a question of
whether I should cling to the Protestant feud. And to my enor-
ous astonishment, I found a large number of my fellow Liberals
eager to go on with the Protestant feud, though they no longer held
the Protestant faith. 1 have no title to judge them; but to me,
I confess, it seemed like a rather ugly breach of honor. To find
out that you have been slandering somebody about something, to
refuse to apologise, and to make up another more plausible story
against him so that you can carry on the spirit of the slander, seem-
ed to me at the start a rather poor way of behaving. I resolved at
least to consider the original slandered institution on its own merits,
and the first and most obvious question was: Why were Liberals
so very illiberal about it? What was the meaning of the feud, so
constant and so inconsistent? That question took a long time to
answer, and would now take much too long a time to record. But
it led me at last to the only logical answer which every fact of life
now confirms, that the thing is hated as nothing else is hated,
simply because it is, in the exact sense of the popular phrase, like
nothing on earth.
"There is barely space here to indicate this one thing out
of the thousand things that confirm the same fact and confirm each
other. I would undertake to pick up any topic at random, from
pork to pyrotechnics, and show that it illustrates the truth of the
only true philosophy; so realistic is the remark that, all roads lead
to Rome. Out of all these I have here only taken one fact; that
the thing is pursued age after age by the unreasonable hatred
that is perpetually changing its reason.
"Now of nearly all the dead heresies it may be said that they
are not only dead but damned; that is, they are condemned or
would be condemned by commonsense even outside the Church,
when once the mood and mania of them is passed. Nobody now
wants to revive the Divine Right of Kings which the first Anglicans
advanced against the Pope. Nobody now wants to revive the Cal-
vinism which the first Puritans advanced against the King. Nobody
now is sorry that the Iconoclasts were prevented from smashing all
the statues of Italy. Nobody now is sorry that the Jansenists fail-
ed to destroy all the dramas of France. Nobody who knows any-
thing about the Albigensians regrets that they did not convert the


world to pessimism and perversion. Nobody who really'
fhl insie of the Lollards (a much more sympathetic set ot people)
really wishes tliat they had succeeded in taking away all poht.cal
rights and privileges from everybody who was not m
grace Dominion founded on Grace,' was a devout ideal; but con-
sidered as a plan for disregarding an Irish policeman conao.l ,
lit traffic in Piccadilly, until we have discovered whether he as
confessed recently to his Irish priest, it is wanting m actuality.
In nine cases out of ten the Church simply stood for sanity and
social balance against heretics who were sometimes very like luna-
tics Yet at each separate moment the pressure of the prevalent
error was very strong; the exaggerated error of a vvsude gcneraaon
like the strength of the Manchester School m the fifties 01 of
Fabian Socialism as a fashion mmy own youth A o the
true historical cases commonly shows us the spirit ot the a & e going
wrong, and the Catholics at least relatively going right.
mind surviving a hundred moods.
"As I say, this is only one aspect; but it was the first that
affected me and it leads 011 to others. When a hammer has hit the
right nail on the head a hundred times, there comes a time whe
we think it was not altogether by accident. But these historical
proofs would be nothing without the human and personal pi oofs,
which would need quite a different sort of description. It is enough
to say that those who know the Catholic practice find it not
only right but always right when everything else is wrong; makin«
the confessional the very throne of candour where the world outside
talks nonsense about it as a sort of conspiracy; upholding humi ly
when everybody is praising pride; charged with sentimental charity
when the world is talking a brutal utilitarianism; charged with dog-
matic harshness when the world is loud and loose with vulgar sen-
timentalism; as it is to-day. At the place where the roads meet
there is no doubt of the convergence. A man may think all soits-
of things, most of them honest and many of them true, about the
right way to turn in the maze at Hampton Court. But he does not
think he is in the centre; he knov r s."
Is Mr. Chesterton rejoicing because of his conversion to Roman
Catholicism, or because he has found in that Church Jesus, the
Saviour of the world? If he has discovered the pearl of great
price surely no one will begrudge him his priceless gift, which 111
his case Protestantism was unable to supply. The man who thinks,
the man who wants to know the reason why, is finding it incieciS-
ingly difficult to lay hold on eternal life. He is puzzled and con-
fused, because of the shibboleth of tongues so prevalent in Protest-
antism; consequently, many are drifting downstream, and letting go
altogether those spiritual realities which alone can save them, or
are finding in the Roman Catholic Church a refuge where there is
authority. Unfortunately, the last named are in the minority, for,
as already stated, the larger proportion ot Protestants lament-
ably retrogressed, and are more concerned with time and sense
than the salvation of their souls, so precious in God's sight.
Does Mr. Chesterton exaggerate the position? Do we not find
in our limited experience many who are for ever railing against
the Roman Catholic Church, and yet whose spiritual attainments
are seemingly negligible? Has not bigotry and prejudice so blinded
the vision of many that the Roman Catholic perspective lias become
woefully distorted? One hears on all sides protests against the
action of the authorities in permitting the Eucharistic procession.
Whilst there are many couched in a truly Christian spirit, some, on
the other hand, are expressed in language that can only engender
strife and bitterness.


How futile are mere protests, when unaccompanied th e
author" y to make them effective. Brethren ot the Protes ant Favt^.
XX I'ZXZV,
SITES- people" when their'
and the need £Ol 111 rich contrition and humility of heart. May God
heio us as a neople to get hack to the old time religion, when the
power of God* was unmistakably manifest, and when I rotestantism
WaS Cr S peop?e e hav k e on but W fVague conception of the wonderful
organisation of the Roman Catholic Church, therefore the following
article from "The Outline," a British literary journal of a very high
standard, which is so appropriate to the discussion in which w
are now engaged, is presented, and will justify niani. o t d
ments already made regarding her supremacy m Chnstian leadei
ship to-day. .
"Of all the institutions in which an idea has taken visib e,
concrete farm, there is none more formidable and none more mys-
terious and fascinating, than the Roman Catholic Chuic . Ttalian
"In a splendid room in the Vatican there sits an aged Italia .
the son of a silk manufacturer, whose name is Achille Ratti. ne
first attained fame as a mountaineer (in 1889 he made a
ascent of Monte Roxe from a side which had never betoie been a
tempted) and as a paleographist; while librarian of the Ambrosian
Library in Milan, he taught the catechism to the poor little chimney-
sweeps who make seasonal descents from the Tyrol. Now, under
the name of Pius XI, he is two hundred and sixty-second m the
dynasty of Popes, and supreme spiritual ruler of 300,000,000 human
beings
"Considered historically, the Church of Rome is revealed as a
great spiritual force and, at the same time, a powerful political in-
stitution It was the second as a natural consequence of being the
first The first epoch of the Church saw it growing from the fond
but unofficial mother of the Christian community into its recognised
and authoritative head. Constantine's Edict of Milan ended the lite
of the Church as an illegal society; the Donation of Pepin, by which
the Pope became a territorial prince in Italy, gave the Church free-
dom from secular domination and made the Popes temporal as well
as spiritual rulers.
"The second phase was that of the great conflict, lasting ser en
centuries, between the Church and the Empire, the spiritual and
the temporal powers. To understand its nature we must appreciate
the mediaeval conception of society which regarded Church and
State as simply the same thing seen under different aspects. The
State w r as the temporal side of the Christian Commonwealth, and
membership of the Church the first and chief mark of citizenship.
Fundamentally, there was no duality, but, in practice, it was impos-
sible to reconcile the claims of religion and the State in a world
where the princes of the Church were also great landowners and
feudal vassals and where the Papacy was a secular as well as a
spiritual power.
"The struggle did not so much end as became an anachronism
when the rise of nationality gave men new loyalties and shattered
the mediaeval dream of unity in a Christian society. All this time
however, the Church had been strengthening its organisation and
adapting itself to the changing conditions of tlie world. When
Europe was mainly agricultural, the monks, chief among whom was


the order founded by St. Benedict, had been the great teachers and
civilisers. They lived in self-supporting farming communities. With
the growth of the trading and manufacturing towns came the mobil-
izing of the friars, Franciscans and Dominicans, who were monxs
taken out of their cells and moving freely among the people.
"On the eve of the Reformation, which is the crucial epoch in
the history of the Church, the Papacy had to a great, extent lost caste
with the people owing to its long subservience to the French king©
and to the heavy demands which its magnificence made on the
impoverished people from whom its revenues were drawn. But the
lesson of the Reformation was quickly learnt. Abuses were removed,
doctrines stated, with a new force and precision, and in the Jesuits,
constituted in 1540, the re-awakened Roman Catholic Church found
its most powerful as well as its newest weapon. Not only did this
new order act as the spear-head of the counter-Reformation in
Europe, providing the finest educational system then in existence,
and giving the doctrines of the Church a new charm and peisuasive-
ness, but in the continents of the New World they gained an empire
for the Church greater than that which she had lost.
"The most outstanding incident in the modern history of the
Papacy took place in 1870, when the troops of King Victor and the
Papal States were annexed by Italy. By this act the temporal
power of the Pope was ended, and Pius IX withdrew, a self-made
prisoner, into the Vatican, from which no Pope has emeiged since.
All attempts to regularise the relations of the Italian State and
the Papacy have failed. To Italians it is unthinkable that their
capital city should be in the possession of an international potentate;:
to Catholics it is equally intolerable that a ruler with 300,000,0011
spiritual subjects should be conceded the right to own his palace-
by the grace of a temporal power.
"But the loss of temporal power has coincided with a remark-
able spiritual efflorescence which has, since the removal of the
laws against the Catholic hierarchy in England, Scotland, and Holland
led to a vast increase in the influence of the Church in Northern
Europe, as well as in the United States, where to-day there are
25,000,000 Roman Catholics.
"The central doctrine of the Catholic Church may be stated
thus: Christ, who was alike God and Man, after atoning to God
on Calvary for the sins of mankind, did not intend His recorded
acts and sayings on earth to be the sole and final guide to Christians;
He passed on His authority to His disciples and to the Church which
they founded. The Church is His living body and His voice still
speaks through it. As it is a living thing, its doctrines are capable
of growth and development. As it is the body of Christ made
visible, it is the only vehicle by which Christ brings life to men.
This life does not come haphazard, but through appointed channels,
the sacraments —Baptism, a rite signifying a new birth; the Euchar-
ist, the gift of the flesh and blood of Christ as food for the members
of His Church; and Penance, by which the soul's life is renewed
after sinning.
"In the Pope, as heir of the promise made to Peter, dwells
supreme authority over the Church. On questions of doctrine the
pronouncements of the Pope, when made in the name of the Church,
are infallible, because he then speaks as the mouthpice of Christ.
This is the doctrine of infallibility, as defined by the Vatican Coun-
cil of 1870.
"Not only is the Roman Catholic Church the repository of a
belief about God and man; it is also an organisation perfected
throughout the ages and the admiration of its enemies as well as
its friends. How does it work, this mighty engine?


"The Government of the Church is carried on , thr ° ug k *
ber of departments of State. This is the Roman Curia, the Whitehall
of the Papacy. In charge of each of these departments is a mem
of the Sacred College of Cardinals, the body which chooses a new
PoDe. The Curia consists of twelve Congregations, three Tribu a ,
and four Offices of Curia. There are, in addition, various commissions
appointed for specific purposes. H ,
"The twelve Congregations are: Ihe Congregation of the H ol>
Office originally the Roman Inquisition, whose duty is to guard trie
faith and the faithful from the perils of heresy; the Congregation
of Consistory, which appoints bishops and supervises dioceses through-
out the world; the Congregation of the Sacraments; the Congrega-
tion of Ceremonial; the Congregation of Rites, which deals with
processes for the canonization of saints; the Congregation for the
fabric of St. Peter's; the Congregation for Seminaries, Universities,
and Studies; the Congregation of Religious Orders; the Congregation
of Propaganda, concerned with the organisation and control of mis-
sionary work; the Congregation of the Oriental Church, founded m
1917 to deal with all matters concerning the Uniate Churches, i.e.,
the Eastern Churches united to Rome, but preserving their own
liturgy and such customs as the marriage of their clergy.
"The three tribunals of the Curia are: The Apostolic Penitentiary,
which, under the Cardinal Penitentiary, is a secret court before which
come all questions of conscience that are sent for judgment to
Rome; the Sacred Roman Rota, existing to try all cases which need
a full' judicial hearing; the Apostolic Signatura, the supreme court
of appeal of the Church. Then there are the four Offices of Curia
which consist of: The Apostolic Chancery and the Dataria, which
send out all bulls and briefs issued by the Pope or by any of the
twelve Congregations; the Camera, which has the stewardship ot
the temporal possessions of the Papacy; the Secretary of States
office, whose chief is the foreign minister of the Pope. Cardinal
Gasparri has held this supremely important office since 1914.
"Such, in brief outline, is the machinery which regulates and
governs the vast organisation of the Roman Catholic Chuich. Not
a single tiny chapel is built in a Clydeside mining village, not one
lonely and courageous priest ventures into the wilds of Africa, but
these facts are noted and supervised by one office or another of
the Curia.
"In the future this superbly managed, smooth-running machine
which is the Roman Catholic Church, will certainly play as decisive
a part, as ever in her history. There are various reasons for be-
lieving this.
"Her tremendous claim to authority seems likely to recommend
her to a certain type of a modern mind, disillusioned by the discov-
ery that science cannot provide an ultimate explanation of the
mystery of existence. Her dogma, based as it is on the view that
doctrine is something which develops and becomes more fully defined
as the human mind grows more able to understand it, seems (again
to a certain type of mind) at least as easily adaptable to new
scientific discoveries as a dogma whose foundation is the written
word of the Bible. Her ritual, too, is likely to make no less wide
an appeal to some minds now that the importance of the sub-
conscious mind is better understood, and the value of symbol and
sensuous stimulus as expressing the subconscious is better appre-
ciated. Finally, in a world sick of wars and schism, the unity of
the Church stands, for some, as a refuge. Not only are the mem-
bers of the Catholic Church more numerous than ever before, but
she is attracting some of the best brains among the young men, not
only in France and the Continent but in Britain also. She is now


speaking with a greater intellectual assurance than at any time since
the dawn of the eighteenth century, and as the makers of oP mio £
become increasingly Catholic, so will the interventions of the Churck
in the affairs of the world grow more effective.
"Meanwhile, the most important task facing the Papacy is the
winning back to the fold of the millions of members of the Greek
Churches whose organisation was fatally wounded by the Russian
Revolution. Already the Pope has drawn the attention of Latin
Christians to the beauty of the Slavic rite."
This word picture, revealing the power and influence of Roman
Catholicism and her wonderful organisation, will explain in some
measure her effectiveness in dominating, to a large extent, world
affairs. But, in view of the statistics furnished in the succeeding
article, one is amazed that with such perfect machinery and organi-
sations, so little, comparatively, has been achieved in world evan-
gelism.
Who Shall Control the Traffic —Antichrist?
"Let no man deceive you by any means; but that day shall not
come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin
be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth him-
self aboA r e all that is called God. or that is worshipped; so that he
is as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is
God." . . . "And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the
Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming; even Him, whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying
wonders." 2 Th. 4, 8, 9.
Three public institutions which unmistakably express to a large
extent the mind of the people, clearly reflecting their ideals, are
Parliament, the Press and the stage. Possibly no other institution
provides a more effective looking-glass than the Press. There we
see ourselves as Ave really are.
The function of the Press has been defined as follows:—1, To
give local and general news of utility and interest to readers; 2,
to A'oiee the opinions of the people in the promotion of the good
and the suppression of evils of the community; 3, to educate the
people towards higher ideals, in their social relationship, and in
their standard of living, and toAvards higher ideals in their social
institutions, more especially those of government and industry.
Is this high ideal being maintained? Has present day journal-
ism lowered the standard in her efforts to cater for the need of
a decadent generation?
Perhaps the writer's experience in seeking for press publicity,
in order to express higher ideals, may enable his readers to form
an opinion. Residing in an important country centre, he has from
time to time written paragraphs and brief articles, relating to religious
subjects, for publication in the local Press, for which space was
invariably found. This, no doubt, encouraged him to believe that
something along similar lines would be acceptable to journals pub-
lished in the metropolitan area. He Avas, however, soon disillusioned
in this respect.
Some eighteen months ago he had occasion to visit the metropolis,
Avhere an evangelist of Avorld-Avide repute Avas conducting a mission


but'unfortunately who had not the support of the churches, nor
had he the financial backing enabling him to generously advertise.
Being of a somewhat optimistic temperament, it was thought that
a personal appeal to a large city daily would meet with a favorable
response, but, having no point of contact, sought the advice o
a iournalistic friend, who for many years had been on the stall
of a big daily newspaper. After explaining his mission, my friend
said "I am now out of touch with journalistic life, but I can assure
you' that you have not the slightest hope. Newspapers nowadays
are run absolutely on a commercial basis, and it matters not how
worthy your object may be, unless you are prepared with the
quid pro quo, you cannot gain publicity."
Thinking my friend had become cynical, and had lost laitu
in human nature, I decided to have a try, and, accompanied b>
a friend, interviewed an editor of a paper in which the mission
was advertised, a prominent member of the staff, known to my
friend, introducing us. A paragraph for insertion was supplied but
possibly owing to other demands on space, it was not published.
Encouraged by our seeming success, the editor of another city daily
was approached, and to him it was explained how we were situated,
and suggested that a reporter be detailed to report some of the
meetings. Our reception was not discouraging, and we left, under
the impression that our desires would be acceded to. But, to cut
a long story short, there was nothing doing. It was not due to
any want of persistency on my part. The unjust judge of
had a soft heart in comparison with that editor. However, it was
good experience. I learnt afterwards that the advertising department
had approached the mission secretary, requesting an advertisement,
but, in justice to the editor, it must be stated that he repudiated
that any such sordid motive had anything to do with my lack
of success.
Faced with the problem of how these articles might gain pub-
licity, the advice of a friend who controls a large provincial enter-
prise,' was sought, whose publications circulate amongst a population
of upwards of 50,000. Enclosing the first article, "Has Protestant-
ism Failed," I intimated that if it was of any use, he could publish
it. His reply probably explains my previous failures. He said, "I
can candidly say that, from a newspaper point of view, it is value-
less. . . . In regard to publishing it in pamphlet form, I cannot
conceive of any great sale for such a publication. There are some
beautiful works on religious topics for which there is no sale. They
are a drug on the market to-day. . . . They will not sell. This is
an age of jazz, and in my opinion even a great catastrophe would not
arouse the people. How, then, can you expect to move them witn
a series of articles? In the time of the Romans, prior to the death
of Christ, religion—pagan religion—had become more of a philosophy
than a religion, and with many to-day, clergymen included, religion
is becoming a philosophy. ... My candid opinion is that, from a
newspaper point of view, such articles are of no use. They may
be excellent and convincing from a religious standpoint, and if so
should command a ready acceptance from religious papers."
Here are eloquent testimonies which could, no doubt, be multi-
plied the world over, bearing witness to the decay of true religion.
Great daily newspapers circulating among hundreds of thousands
of people, could not be induced to grant publicity to an evangelist
with an unsullied reputation, and who, for many years, has been in
the public eye of other lands, where his definite message of full
salvation, so needed to-day, always commanded crowded audiences,,
and yet, possibly because of prejudice, or ignorance, his message in
Australia, from a newspaper point of view, was valueless. In the
other instance quoted, the article which was not condemned for


lack of literary merit, or because of the truth of the statements
contained therein, but because it dealt with religious topics —it did
not, in the editor's opinion, contain sufficient matter of genuine inter-
est to warrant its publication from a commercial standpoint.
Truly, the Press reflects the mind of the people, and when
reputable journals cannot find space for the Word of God, or teaching
emanating from that Word, then is it any cause for surprise that
there are publications read by countless thousands, to-day, which
no decent-minded man would allow in his home, and yet withal,
so truly depict the spirit of the age? When we reflect upon the
passage of scripture with which this article opens, we must be
constrained to admit that the advent of anti-Christ is drawing nigh,
for there are already, on the horizon, sombre clouds that herald
the approach of an overwhelming storm. Scripture is emphatic on
this point. See 2 Ti. 3: 1, 5. 2 Pe. 3: 3, 7.
World conditions are alarming. Men with vision and experience
sound a warning note. Rev. J. Oswald Smith, in his book, "When
Anti-Christ Reigns," says, "Perhaps no one is better qualified to
pass judgment than Dr. R. Mott, international secretary of the
Y.M.C.A. While he heralds the dawn of a better day, and com-
pares the sickness of the world to the sickness associated with new
birth, at the same time he sounds a warning note that cannot be
disregarded. Following is his statement in part:—"l confess to
you, as I come back from somewhat recent contact with five of the
six continents of the world, and with myriads of the islands of the
sea, that I am burdened with a sense of solicitude with respect to
the international outlook. 1 have never known of so much misun-
derstanding between nations, as I find now, and moreover, in the
recent past, and it obtains emphatically right now, an ominous
weakening of the influences of our Western nations upon the non-
European peoples. That is surely evident in the case of China, now.
It is equally true of myriads of the people of India, and of the
fringes of Africa, and it can be said of the Moslem world as a
whole. I repeat, this is ominous.
"The air is surcharged with suspicion. Show me the country
which to-day trusts in all the elements within its own borders,
still less its neighbours near and far. In Asia, there are between
three and four times as many men under arms as before the
World War. I think the world is in danger. I am not a pessi-
mist, and yet I would be an untruthful observer and an untruthful
witness and reporter, if I did not share with you my anxiety when
I say that the world is in danger.
"In my judgment, nineteen-twentieths of Bolshevism should
be regarded by us as a malignant disease, judged by visible results.
1 am most solicitous with reference to that cardinal plank in the
Soviet Government's platform, namely, religion, which they term
"the opiate of the people"—-that which drugs the people, incapacitates
them, and puts them to sleep.
"No man, unless he is drunk with optimism, can deny that the
world is very sick, and it may be a sickness unto death," So says
Sir Phillip Gibbs. The history of the early church reveals this fact;
wherever the gospel of Jesus Christ penetrated, and that was the
then known world, there was a response most wonderful in its
effect, multitudes embracing the Christian faith. The message was
delivered by men most of whom lacked scholastic equipment, but
they had been in close contact with their Lord, which, therefore,
filled them with a passion for souls, making their message irresis-
tible. Notwithstanding the machinery and organisation of the church,
combined with its rich scholarship, its history for the past 100 years
pales into insignificance, compared with a like period at the begin-
ning of the Christian era.


"The population of the world in 1792, when the founder of
Protestant Missionary enterprise, William Carey, sailed for India,
was 731,000,000, made up as follows: —Heathen, 420,000,000; Mahom-
medan, 130,000,000; Roman Catholic, 100,000,000; Protestant,
44 000,000; Greek, 30,000,000; Jews, 7,000,000
"The population of the world, from reliable statistics, was in
2915 Heathen, 875,00,000; Mahommedans, 225,000,000; Roman Catho-
lic, 280,000,000; Protestant, 200,000,000; Greek, 110,000,000, Jews,
10,000,000. , +1
"After 123 years of foreign missionary work, there aie to-uay,
in round numbers, only about 4,000,000 professing Christians in hea-
then lands, which include China, India and Africa. Only one-thm.
of the world's population is nominally Christian. If, m 123 years,
from A.D. 1792 to A.D. 1915, heathenism has increased from 420,000,000
to 875 000,000, and converts from Heathenism have only increased in
the same time from the first convert to 4,000,000, is it not evident
.that there are one hundred times as many persons born into the
world each year than there are "NEW BORN"? How many cen-
turies at this rate will it take the world, NOT TO BECOME CON-
VERTED, but to BECOME HEATHEN?" ("The Second Coming ot
Christ," by Clarence Larkin).
And if we consider the millions throughout the world nominally
Christian, but actually pagan, then the comparison becomes infinitely
worse. The problem facing the church to-day, is not so much as to
which organisation is to assume spiritual control, but "How is the
Christian Church going to prevent heathenism, with its allied forces
of anarchy and Bolshevism, from assuming contiol?
What avail would be the League of Nations if Russia and the
teeming millions of India, China and adjacent nations, were to set
themselves in battle array? The situation is indeed alarming, and
calls for prompt action on the part of Christian leaders, if the world
is to be delivered from the awful menace which threatens her.
Unchristian hordes, led by men incarnated by the very demons ot
hell, is more than a remote possibility. Should we not cease trom
s f rife and division, and so marshal the forces of Christianity that
we who claim to be followers of the lowly Nazarene, might be pre-
pared to meet him when he comes for his own. Protestants, espe-
cially, need to break down many of the denominational barriers
which so effectively separate one from another, and which so weaken
her influence as a corporate body, and, upon a common platform -ot
love and unity, assault the gates of heaven with the artillery of
prayer, and bring down upon this cold, heartless world, the spiiit
of Divine Love, and thus weld together those forces which are at
present so needing His Spirit. May God help us to unite in
Christian fellowship, one with another, and bring down upon this
fair land His richest and most glorious blessings.
Who are the Chosen People ?
Righteousness exaltetli a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.
Pr. 14.34.
Many and varied have been the methods, whereby a grateful
nation has sought to honor the brave aeeds of her valiant sons,
who so nobly responded to the call of duty, and by their many
sacrifices upon the shores of Gallopili, the blood-soaked fields of


France and the Holy Land, have made their nation a debtor, which
no tangible gift can ever repay. Australia occupies a most unique
position amongst the nations of the world, insomuch that her soil
has never been soaked by the blood of combatants, spilt in the
awful carnage of war.
What, then, must be her standing in the sight of Almighty God.
Where must we look for an example so that she can with confidence
appeal to the Creator of the universe, for His benediction and bless-
ing? To whom was granted the privilege of building the temple
of Jerusalem, so long ago, when Israel, in the height of her power
and glory, sought to honor their God?
It was in the heart of King David to render this act of homage,
but because his hands were so stained with blood, he had to stand
aside; and to Solomon, his son, was relegated the unspeakable,
privilege of erecting this magnificent tribute of a nation's devotion
to their Creator. And if, in these days, there is to be erected a
temple, magnificent in its splendour, glorious in its conception, and
one that will excite the envy and admiration of the world, then upon
whose soil should it be built? The Temple of Jerusalem, with all
its wondrous beauty, has passed away, and there remain but a
few blocks of granite, to indicate what was once the centre of
religious activity, expressing the spiritual life of the people.
If Australia is to* erect a Temple tnat will worthily express
her gratitude to the Master Architect of the universe for his won-
derful provision in creating such a paradise in which to dwell, God s
own country, then what form should it take ?
Surely not of wood and stone, or marble or precious gems, or
any exquisite enrichment of human design, which sooner or later
would crumble into dust. No, should it not rather be a Temple
not made with hands, but a Temple of flesh and blood, wherein
dwelleth Righteousness; where the Holy Spirit Himself may find
an everlasting abiding place. Can we justly offer God anything
less than ourselves? Ah, no. This is the Temple He desires, one
that He might flood to overflowing, with all His fullness and
power. Can we claim to have fulfilled the conditions whereby God
can pour out upon us His wondrous Love in such a soul-satisfying
manner? Unfortunately, we cannot, and must confess we are un-
worthy; that, notwithstanding the liberty and freedom, and the purity
of race our isolation has made possible, we have, to our shame,
be it said, largely failed God.
To whom does Australia owe her immunity from foreign aggres-
sion, as viewed from the human standpoint? Who is entitled to
the greatest measure of a nation's gratitude, for preserving the
sanctity of her home life, from tlie ruthlessness of a cruel and
despotic foe? However much credit is due to all who defended
the world from a common enemy, it is questionable whether Austra-
lia, to-aay, wou d be in possession of that continued liberty and
.freedom, if the "Digger" had failed her. But, God bless him, the
"Digger" did not fail, and, by the Grace of God, he never will, but
will continue to hold inviolate all that his supreme sacrifice entailed.
Would it not be an unspeakable tragedy, if the precious gift
won at such a cost was to slip from our grasp? And yet, are
there not elements of discord in our midst, and throughout the
world, sufficiently pronounced to cause anxiety, and to raise within
our breasts a fear that, after all, this holocaust of war has been in
vain? Have the people of Australia yet sufficiently honored her
brave sons, for their noble response to the call of duty? Can
the Digger say with any certainty, as he gazes into the dim and
misty future, that all is well with the world, and that those who
succeed him will have nothing to fear? Must not the answer be


emphatically, No! ? There is yet a contribution to be made, the
greatest of all, which, if withheld, may possibly plunge this fair land
into absolute spiritual bankruptcy.
You are no doubt somewhat perplexed in mind, "Digger," re-
garding the controversy now taking place between the leaders of
Protestantism and Roman Catholicism, relative to the forthcoming
Eucharistic Procession, and what is termed the elevation of the
Host —we will leave that question for discussion later. But what
I would like to suggest is, that no one can blame the leaders of
the Roman Catholic Church for the action she is taking, for it must
be apparent to every thinking person that, spiritually, Australia
is rapidly drifting. The Roman Catholic Church would be neglect-
ing her commission, as she understands it, if she did not endeavour
in some way to stem the tide of decay.
We all do not believe as she does, but that is beside the point.
She accurately reads the scriptural barometer, and knows the psycho-
logical moment to step in, and direct Australia into what she sin-
cerely believes to be the truth.
But the question, Digger, is not, are we Roman Catholics or
Protestants, but are we members of the Church of Jesus Christ, to
whom we all owe allegiance, irrespective of creed or denomination?
What was your experience at the front in regard to denominational
barriers? Were they not all swept away in the face of a common
foe? And whilst each distinctive church was recognised, yet, was
there not a harmonious whole? Why should it be any different here
and now? Enemies more diabolical than your then foes are striving
for the mastery. Unity was never more essential.
The fact that the Eucharistic Procession is inevitable, has
exposed the weakness of Protestantism. Sectarian bitterness has
raised its ugly head, and it is up to some body to say, thus far and
no further.
And what body of citizens are entitled more than any other to
suggest what should be the right policy to pursue, in any grave
crisis in the history of a nation? With the exception of the early
pioneers, who blazed the track, the Australian "Digger" stands alone
in this respect. His wishes have a right to be respected, and, if
in his opinion these elements of discord are inimical to the
welfare of the nation, then it is up to him to protest. There is
no suggestion, however, that any suasion, other than moral, should
be used. The only weapon recommended is the Sword of the Spirit,
and if you, Digger, are prepared to use that weapon, as you used
the cold steel when you went over the top for King George, then
no power on earth can prevent you going over the top for King
Jesus, and winning a glorious victory for him.
This brings us to the point at issue. Has the Australian nation
made its final contribution, that will for ever satisfy you that your
sacrifice has not been in vain?
"Digger," that final contribution cannot be made until you are
again in the firing line. On the previous occasion, it was only the
physically fit who were able to respond, but in this call to arms,
all who will may come; and if you are prepared to face a foe
more deadly and powerful than the Hun or Turk, then you will
have for comrades the cream of the land, for every element with a
spark of gratitude will surely enlist. Then, and not till then, will
the nation have done her duty, and satisfied you that all has been
laid on the altar. For then God will honor the nation, and place
her in such a position of power, exercising such benign influence
making her veritably a beacon light, illuminating world-wide the
pathway to eternity, where Christ reigns supreme.
May God help you catch the vision, Digger, for when you do, no


power exerted by man or demon will keep you from your o^ e^J e '
Australia for Jesus, within whose borders purity and righteousness
shall prevail!
The Enemy at the Gates, or Australia s
Greatest Menace.
"What profit shall this, Birthright do to me?" . . and lie sold his
birthright unto Jacob. . . . Thus Esau despised his birthright. Be.
25:32,33,34.
The story of Jacob and Esau is familiar to every boy and girl
who has been nourished within the precincts of a Godly home, and
you no doubt, remember, Digger, when you were a little curly-headed
chap, the darling of your mother's heart, how you loved to clambei
around her knees, and listen to these stories of bygone days, when
human nature was much the same as we And it to-day. For is
not Esau but a type of multitudes, who are despising their birth-
right in no less a degree than did he with whose lost opportunity
we are so familiar? What did it mean? In what way did lie despise
his birthright? , „ u „ ..
The first born of the seed of Abraham, the Jather of the race,
was no mean personage, for, as head of his tribe, he reigned as
King, not only in regard to worldly authority, but also as priest in
the spiritual realm. He was the link between man and God. So you
can understand what a great possession Esau relinquished, when, to
appease his uncontrollable desire for a dainty morsel, he let every-
thing that was worth while go.
And possibly, Digger, as the story was explained to you, there
was a resolution formed in your youthful soul, that nevei would
you be guilty of selling your birthright for such a paltry recom-
pense, or, in other words, would you forego God's best gift for
the desire of the moment, that you would never let go the sub-
stance for the shadow. Digger, have these youthful resolutions
made good, made around the knee of one who loves you, more than
any other being on earth? For, remember, if you are going to miss
heaven and spend eternity separated from God —which is hell in its
most intensified form —then you will need to scale the dizzy heights
erected by a mother's prayers, before you can take the fatal plunge
into an abyss from which you can never return.
Digger, you are judge and jury in this enquiry, and certain state-
ments have already been made, adversely reflecting upon the trend
of true religion, and it is desired, at this stage, to place another
witness in the box, whose testimony cannot be refuted by friend or
foe.
You can almost discern the handwriting on the wall, like those
fateful words, which so startled King Belthazar, which sealed the
doom of his kingdom, "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin." "Thou are
weighed in the balances and found wanting." This witness is the
Christian Sabbath, otherwise known as the Lord's Day. It is truly
His day, for the old Jewish Sabbath was changed from Saturday
to Sunday, not at the behest of any particular denomination, as
some people would lead you believe, for we learn in the day of the
Apostles, before any man-made organisation marred the beauty and
power of the early Apostolic Church, that, "on the first day of the


week (Sunday) when the Disciples came together to break bread,
Paul preached unto them." Acts 20:7. And thus, by an act of wor-
ship and love to Him who died, and 011 the first day of the week
rose from the dead, was this priceless gift to mankind changed from
Saturday to Sunday.
The Old Testament has many strict injunctions regarding Sab-
bath observance, which, of course, are not binding upon Christians,
for in Jesus Christ the law was abolished, and we now live under
grace. But the spirit of the law was never abolished, and the proper
observance of the Lord's Day, as a means of grace, is as essential
to-day as at any other period, when rest and worship meant so much
for the strength and purity of the race.
What do we find to-day in this respect? To multitudes, it is
merely a day set aside for the more intense pursuit of pleasure,
and to ever increasing numbers, but another day when that soul
destroying octopus—the love of material gain—endeavours to assuage
its unquenchable appetite. These are not idle words, for the pleas-
ure loving community is not confined to happy and vigorous youth,
whose obsession of sport has so broken down the hedge of home
and church influence, launching many young lives 011 the down-
ward path that leads to a lost eternity. Unfortunately, this is not
so, for we find the rich and leisured class, whose influence might
well be directed in another direction, dishonoring their God, and put-
ting a stumbling block in the way of their weaker brother, by
engaging in those sports and pastimes in which only the idle rich
can indulge. But, if this were not sufficient, numbers of the
most influential section of the community are devoting the sacred
day merely for the purpose of heaping up those riches which canker
the soul, sear the conscience, thus incurring the displeasure of Almighty
God, whose righteous judgments must sooner or later be satisfied
to the full. Reference is particularly made to that large and im-
portant section of the community, who, in ever increasing numbers,
are using the day of rest for trafficking—buying and selling—bargain-
ing and dealing—in those industries which are the backbone of the
State. lou hear much about heedless youth, whose noisy games
mar the sanctity of the sacred day, but mighty little about those
who use the day for their own aggrandisement and gain.
But, to return to Sunday sport—what church, more than any
other, smiles indulgently upon what she terms innocent and harm-
less amusements? To her shame, be it said, the Roman Catholic
Church, openly and avowedly, encourages the desecration of the
Lord's Day in this respect. How sad that such a powerful and
influential church should deem it necessary to compromise with
the weakness of Australian youth.
In the writer's opinion, 110 greater disservice is rendered Pro-
testantism b> the Roman Catholic Church, than her weak attitude
towards Sabbath observance, for this reason:—The Roman Catholic
Chui chinan is freed from any restraint, in regard to games and
pastimes indulged in 011 the Sabbath, provided he has participated in
the ordinances prescribed by the law of the Church. Their con-
sciences have not become seared thereby. Not so his Protestant
brother; you, yourself know, Digger, that you did not enter upon
Sunday sport without an uneasy conscience. You could not forget
the example and influence of Godly parents, and many a debate took
place between you and your God, before you plunged into the vortex
which separated you from those influences of which your formative
youth was so much in need. You know as well as I do, the deaden-
ing spiritual effect of Sabbath desecration, which ultimately casts
church and religion to the winds.
The Roman Catholic Church encourages these pastimes, seem-


ingly without much spiritual loss to her members, for their attend-
ance at mass is not endangered thereby, but the final result is that
the increasing power and influence of the Roman Catholic Churc ,
with her looseness in regard to Sabbath observance, whether she
realises it or not, is putting a fearful stumbling block in the way
of her weaker Protestant brother. And, furthermore, if the ban of
Sabbath observance were in like manner lifted by all the Protestant
churches, how long would it be before this fair land became abso-
lutely Pagan? For is not the impact of Roman Catholicism, with
her toleration of Sunday sport, having a most disastrous effect upon
a decadent Protestantism, which, if not checked, must in the end
raise such a monster that it would surely turn and rend her to
pieces? ,
God is calling for a man big enough to become little enough
to be nothing. Digger, you are the man., The seriousness of the
position calls for men of courage and vision; For men who are
prepared to face overwhelming odds, and overcoming them,
the very armament of the nation; this is your privilege and duty,
and no true Digger ever failed in this respect. See to it, Digger,
that Australia is made safe for the unborn generations.
The New Birth, Roman Catholicism
Versus the Bible.
"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God."
Jn 3- 3. "Verily, I say unto you, Except you be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven." Matt. 18:3. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from
the dead, thou shalt be saved." Rom. 10:9.
"Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said believe on
the Lord' Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved and thy house."
Acts. 16: 30, 31. "Neither is there salvation in any other; for there
is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved." Acts 12: 4.
In any court of law, three witnesses making the same testimony
would gain the verdict in their favor. In the scriptures quoted above,
we have the witness of Jesus, Peter, and Paul, all speaking with
one voice a truth which is re-echoed by every child of God, who
has experienced the wondrous and glorious change of life; that to
have fellowship and communion with God, and to enjoy His pres-
ence for ever, "ye must be born again." There are many things,
Digger, that cling to you—habits, some good, some evil. You
need practise them in order that they may leave any lasting impres-
sion. You cannot grow in character, and develop the very best
within you without cultivating a close acquaintance with Jesus
Christ, who is the source of everything that is worth while.
You have acquired many habits during your wanderings through
life, but before you can thoroughly cultivate the habit of righteous-
ness, you need a good working knowledge of the Book of Books,
the Bible, and before you can discern spiritual realities, you must
possess spiritual insight which can only be acquired by "The New
Birth," usually termed conversion, otherwise the Bible will remain
a dead book. It would be impossible, with the brief space at my


disposal, to give more than an outline, of the many differences m
doctrines between Protestantism and Roman Catholicism. Thls
difficulty becomes more pronounced when an endeavour is made to
reconcile the many voices of Protestantism with the actual wor
of God. For instance, take the sacrament or rite of Baptism. The
Roman Catholic Church teaches that infant baptism is essential
to salvation. The Church of England and Nonconformist churches
are not in perfect agreement, while the Baptist Church stands ng
out on its own, holding that immersion after salvation is necessary.
How are we to reach uniformity in belief? Only by accepting
what is taught in the word of God. There is not a single record
in the Bible of infant baptism. All who came to John the Baptist,
the forerunner of Christ, who introduced the rite, were apparently
adults, and there is every reason to believe all were immersed in
water. Christ Himself, in whom there was 110 sin, insisted that he
too should be baptised, setting an example that every believer might
well follow. Peter, after preaching his great sermon, immediately
following his baptism in the Holy Ghost, in answer to the multi-
tude who cried, "What must we do?" said, "Repent, and be bap-
tised, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost." And throughout the
New Testament the order is the same —Repentance, Salvation,
Baptism. , , . .
The Roman Catholic Church reverses the order, and says, be
baptised, and then repent, or do penance. _ . ,
Which is correct? The word "repent, in the authorised version
of the New Testament, which Protestants use, is in the Roman Catho-
lic Testament translated "Penance," and by this one word a clear
line of demarcation is established between Protestantism and Roman
Catholicism. The meaning is totally different, and why scholars
who have access to all the old manuscripts from which we obtained
our Bible are in disagreement over this single word, fraught with
so much meaning, is difficult to understand. A person could do
penance all their life, and yet never repent, and it would be possible,
in a sense, to do penance for ever afterwards in this life, whilst
the memory of some hideous sin refused to become obliterated.
The Roman Catholic doctrine, in effect, says, You cannot get right
with God, until you do penance, that is by works. But the Bible
say" "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should
boast" Eph. 2: 8, 9. Referring again to the sacrament of baptism,
it is recorded in the "History of the Church," by G. P. Fisher, D.D.,
LL D "The ordinary mode of baptism was by immersion." He is
speaking of the early church. "The first distinct reference to bap-
tism by affusion is in the early writing called "The Teaching of the
Twelve," written, perhaps, about 120, where the direction is given,
in case there is not a sufficiency of water, to pour water on the
head thrice. When Iranaeus wrote (about 180), it was an established
custom; but he is the first author whose recognition of it can with
certainty be inferred." When Christ commissioned His apostles
"Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature,"
He said, "He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved"; another
contradiction to the Roman Catholic belief, "Be baptised and ye
shall be saved," for it would be impossible for an infant to believe
one way or another. Christ taught it was essential to become a
believer before being baptised. The Baptist Church would have
no justification for its existence as a separate organisation, did
she not emphasise her belief in believers of baptism by immersion,
and it is submitted that such a large and influential church must
have some definite truth to reveal along the lines of baptism.
Before leaving the subject of baptism, it may be noted in passing
that St. Peter's injunction, "Repent and be baptised," was followed


by a very definite promise, that can in no way apply to infants
baptism "Ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost;," which,
in the case of Cornelius, Acts 10: 44, 48, was received before bap-
tism, but administered immediately after, which would appear to
have been the early church order, when the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost was received prior to baptism.
It must be remembered that the Roman Catholic Church c.oes
not rely upon the Bible as the final authority for the confirmation
of her doctrines, but emphasises, and very much so, tradition, and
the early teachings of the father's, so, though these statements may
convince you, they will probably have very little effect upon the
mind of the Roman Catholic, for, although he is not debarred from
reading the Bible, as many Protestants erroneously believe, he cannot
accept its teaching unless in complete accord with tradition and
the early father's. You see, then, the difficulty of the position. Pro-
testantism, with voices innumerable, and Roman Catholicism, with
not so many, but still sufficient to make the word of God subsei-
vient to them. If, therefore, you are to steer a clear course, keep
right on the Word itself, and you are certain, then, to reach a
finality which will lead you to the true Church, which is comprised
of all who believe on the Lord Jesus, irrespective of creed or
denomination. You must be extremely puzzled by the multitude of
sects and denominations, all claiming to stand for the truth, as it
is in the word of God pointing to the Scriptures as their justifica-
tion for existence. Somebody or some Church must have slipped
somewhere, and, if error has crept in through the dissemination of
the various beliefs, what church is primarily responsible? Can
the Roman Catholic escape that responsibility? Her great power
and influence and her marvellous organisation are unquestioned.
She claims to be the Apostolic Church, but can that claim be
justified if she does not possess Apostolic power? For in the final
adjustment of balances, it is the Church with Apostolic power that
is going to count; whether in Apostolic Succession or not. And the
church which does not conform to the early Apostolic message, with
its wonder working power, cannot justify her claim to Apostolic
succession, unless those manifestations of the Holy Spirit-—His gifts
to the church —are in evidence. Or, if she can rightly claim Apos-
tolic Succession, her right to hold that position must be effectively
challenged by the church or churches who obey the commands of
their Divine Master, outlined in the closing verses of Mark 16, espe-
cially in regard to the closing verse, "And they went forth, and
preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming
the word with signs following."
The writer has no desire in any way to belittle this great church,
God forbid, which has so faithfully throughout the ages been true to
the foundational truth of scripture, that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of the living God. But he cannot accept her claim- that she
is the only true church. The 14th chapter of St. John is emphatic
in its teaching that the true church is comprised of those who
believe in the Lord Jesus as their Saviour and Redeemer. The prom-
ise, "Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he that believeth in me the
works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall
he do, because I go unto my Father." Jn. 15: 12, is to any child
of God or any congregation of true believers, no matter how small
and obscure they may be. Are not these churches away over in
the heart of Central Africa, claiming no particular denomination
as their head, as truly His church as the greatest and most influ-
ential body of believers in any other part of the world, no matter
under what demonational name they may worship God? It is in
this belief that these articles are written, and if anything therein
has wounded the susceptibilities of any particular body of Christians.


their forgiveness is sought, for if there is any statement denoting
personal bias or prejudice, he is unconscious of it. It is my honest
conviction that any individual or any church who will humble him-
self or themselves, and permit the power of God to flood their souiS,
will be more acceptable and more effectively used of Him than
.the individual or church who has allowed worldly ambition 01 any
other hindrance to mar the beauty and power of their testimony.
The Immaculate Conception and Adoration
of the Virgin Mary—ls it Scriptural?
For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Ro 3: 23.
The doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, and the exalted
position ascribed to the Virgin Mary, are barriers that will never
permit of any union between Protestantism and Roman Catholicism.
For the Bible must forever stand as the final authority, if Protest-
antism is to remain a spiritual force in the world. And in speak-
ing of Protestantism, the word itself is misleading, while she cer-
tainly came into existence as a protest against Roman Catholic
doctrines, her true function is to stand true to the Bible in its
beautiful simplicity and power. When she fails to do this, she can
no longer be termed Protestant in the true sense of the word, and
if this standard is lowered, and her followers let go those funda-
mental essentials which John Knox and others of his calibre lived
and died for, then she occupies a place where Roman Catholic doc-
trines can be more readily assimilated. And the present activity
of that Church in Australia unmistakably emphasises the fact that
multitudes of professing Protestants have reached a stage of unbe-
lief that has encouraged the Roman Catholic Church to believe that
propaganda on a large scale, relating to the teaching of the Church,
will meet with some measure of success. Whatever argument is
.adduced against the claims of Roman Catholicism to infallibility
of her doctrinal beliefs, is based on the assumption that the Word
God is unassailable, and cannot take second place. But as stated
in the previous article, that Church does not accept the Word of
God as the final authority, and when doctrines based upon tradition
and teachings of the early; fathers incorporated in Roman Catholic-
ism conflict with God's Word, then the Word has to stand aside.
This statement is clearly confirmed in regard to the doctrine of the
Immaculate Conception, which claims that Mary the Mother of
Jesus was born without sin, at once placing her on an equality with
her wondrous and glorious Son. The Roman Catholic Church ac-
cepts the Bible teaching regarding sin, i.e., that sin is inherent
in the human race, because of the fall of man, and therefore recog-
nises the fact that there are none righteous, no, not one. Yet,
Mary is excepted.
Her writers candidly admit that there is no scriptural warrant
for her exaltation in this, respect. The following quotation from a
pamphlet recently circulated, "The Immaculate Conception," by J.
B. Jagger, S.J., leaves no room for doubt upon that point. "The
Immaculate Conception of our Lady is not formally or expressly
taught in scripture, nor can it be proved from scripture alone; but
this can offer no difficulty, unless it is held that every dogma of
our faith is contained in the scriptures. The Catholic Church teaches
it is sufficient if tradition clearly witnesses to any truth as part of


the deposit of faith; in other words, God's revelation is known not
bv scripture only, but also by tradition, i.e., if found in the authori-
tative writers in the Eastern and Western Church, who are called
the 'fathers.'" In the same pamphlet appears the following declara-
tion: —"On the Bth December, 1854, Pius IX defined that the doctrine
which declares that the most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first in-
stant of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege of Almighty
God, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the human
race, was preserved exempt from all stain of original sin, is a
doctrine revealed by God, and, therefore, must be believed fiimly and
constantly by all the faithful." True Protestantism can never, there-
fore, compromise with Biblical truth, and accept a doctiine which is
not formally or expressly taught therein.
What do Protestants believe and teach regarding the virgin
Mary? That she was of woman the most that her pure
and holy life made her a channel for the overshadowing of the most
High; that she was the most perfect and sinless woman who ever
lived; but that she was born without sin is in direct opposition to
the word of God, and, therefore, cannot be accepted, because tradi-
tion or any other reasoning of man implies anything else.
In a pamphlet entitled, "The Virgin Mother," by Rev. Michael
J. Watson, S.J., the following appeal is made: "IS IT HONEST to
accuse Catholics of paying Divine worship to images or pictures as
the heathens do —when every Catholic indignantly repudiates any
idea of the kind, and when the Council of Trent distinctly declares
the doctrine of the Catholic Church in regard to them to be, 'that
there is no divinity or virtue in them which may claim the tribute
of one's veneration'; but that 'all the honor which is paid to them
shall be referred to the originals, whom they are designed to rep-
resent.' " Whilst this disclaimer is accepted, still a grave danger
exists that these images may in some measure detract from the
worship of Him who alone should be the centre of all our thoughts,
even Jesus the Christ, our Blessed Lord. Jeroboam, when he
erected the golden calves at Dan and Bethel, had no intention that
they should become idols to be worshipped. But they were largely
the means whereby the nation of Israel was led into absolute ido-
latry, which ultimately led to their rejection by God.
The following incident, narrated by a friend, may prove helpful.
He was related by marriage to a Roman Catholic family, devoted
to their Church, and very sincere in their religious beliefs. He was
always a welcome visitor to their home, but after his conversion
there arose another point of view which somewhat dimmed their
previous intimacy, and his visits became less and less regular, until
they practically ceased. When leaving the locality in which they
lived, not desiring to part without a word of farewell, his visit was
so arranged that only a word or two would be possible, so he
thought. But their proverbial hospitality would not permit of such
a cold and formal farewell, insisting that he should remain for supper,
and also sleep there that night. Their kindness could not be re-
fused, and during supper his curiosity was aroused by expressions
occasionally dropped that he would be shown something of absorb-
ing interest, and that would surely merit his admiration. After
supper was finished, one of the young ladies went to her bedroom,
and returned with a most exquisite image of the Virgin Mary. It
was, indeed, a most chaste work of art. But inadvertently, without
realising the purport of his remarks, the visitor blurted out, "Why,
it is an idol." There could be no recall. The atmosphere was at
once changed to an icy reserve, which necessitated his immediate
departure. They never met again. Anything that obtrudes itself
and detracts from the spiritual worship of Jesus is dangerous, no
matter how helpful and suggestive it may be. For the Word de-


Clares "But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father
seeketh such to worship Him. God is a spirit: and they that wor-
ship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth.
Protestants and Roman Catholics alike are recommended to a
close study of a literary gem, extracted from the writing of Pere
Caussade, S.J., who lived in the 17th century, entitled, "Grace.'
"Thy grace is enough for me," which appears in the closing chap-
ters of this publication. It emanates from a mind wholly sur-
rendered to God, which, if put into practical effort by members of
every denomination, would for all time solve the problem of how
to live in unity one with another.
The Place of the Confessional in the
Christian Ministry.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say
that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not
in us. 1 John, 1; 9,10.
I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, "Father,
I have sinned against heaven, and before thee." Luke 15: 18.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray for one another,
that ye may be healed. Jas. 5; 16.
It is generally believed by Protestants that,, however genu-
ine a Roman Catholic's repentance may be, his sins cannot be
forgiven by God until he has confessed them to a priest.
There appears to be some confusion regarding the actual posi-
tion, but probably the truth will centre around the Scriptural state-
ment, that, unless the repentance is real, there can be no forgive-
ness, and that the priest cannot give absolution unless he is satis-
fied in this respect. What effect could absolution have if the
sinner seeking pardon still maintained a root of bitterness in the
heart, or continued to hug the darling sin, which was such a sweet
morsel in the mouth? '
If the Roman Catholic Church deems it necessary to discipline
its members by means of the confessional, that is surely their
business, and if the system is essential to the proper development
of the spiritual life of the Church, then what right have other
denominations to interfere? Scripture certainly implies that we
should confess our faults one to another.
But unfortunately in instituting the confessional, and also the
doctrine of extreme unction, i.e., anointing the dying, she uses
Scripture for the foundation of these beliefs, which are absolutely
contrary to the plain teaching of the Word. For in James V. we
read, from verse 13: "Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray.
Is any merry? Let him sing Psalms. Is any sick among you? Let
him call for the eiders of the church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer
of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess
your faults one to another, and pray for one another, that ye may
be healed. The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man avail-
eth much." This is the Scripture upon which these beliefs are


founded but a very superficial study of the Word will convince any
impartial critic, that the Roman Catholic Church has failed to lay
hold of the truth in regard to the ministry of healing which its so
clearly defined in this portion of the Word.
If this be so, can her claim to infallibility hold good. 01
will notice, Digger, that the whole passage which has its confirma-
tion in Mark 16: 18, "They shall lay hands 011 the sick, ana they
shall recover," relates to people who are sick, and what they shou c
do for their recovery, call for the elders of the church, presumab y
the priest, pastor, or whoever the church should delegate tor such
ministry, and their prayer of faith, combined with the sick ones
faith, would raise them up. But to ensure perfect deliverance the
seeking one is enjoined to get right with God. Any malice or hatred
should be confessed; if wrong done, restitution should oe made, and
any known sin freely acknowledged, and then, and then only, can
the prayer of faith be effective.
That this gracious ministry of healing was tne usual practice
amongst the disciples of the early Apostolic Church is unquestioned,
and why it has been discarded as obsolete and out ot date will
need a lot of explanation, especially from a church which claims
to be in Apostolic succession. . . „
But, irrespective of the misuse of this particular portion ot
Scripture, the confessional, if rightly availed of, must be of
timable value to the Christian Church; not exactly along the lines
instituted by the Roman Catholic Church, nor by any act ot com-
pulsion, but by the spontaneous outpouring of hearts, won by the
love and sympathy of those whom God has called to be oveiseeis
of the flock.
Let me illustrate mv meaning by a typical case. A lady well
known to the writer, afflicted with deafness, a sincere ana devoted
Christian, is, owing to her affliction, unable to participate 111 the
spiritual exercises she so dearly loves, other than in silent prayei
during the services. Her loss in this respect is, of course, very
great, and feeling that a conversation with her minister woula be
helpful, a personal invitation was extended to visit the home, so
that she might discuss with him topics of spiritual interest, un-
fortunately, however, owing to the many engagements which crowd
into a minister's life, that visit has not yet been paid, altlioug
several months have since elapsed. The minister is not condemned,
as he is a most energetic worker, keenly interested in the welfare
of the! young, and sick visitation is not neglected. But this is the
point. A system which absorbs so much of a minister s time, pie-
venting him from regularly visiting his flock, whether ill or not
is a source of weakness that must cripple any ministry. For if
Protestantism is to maintain an effectual confessional, where should
it be located? Right in the hearts of their people in their homes.
What spiritual gains must result from such visitations, when in a
spirit of love, combined with tact and wisdom, the pastor strives
to lead his people along those lines which will gain their confidence
in him, creating an atmosphere that would speedily make him the
repository of all their trials and difficulties, temporally and spirit-
ually, which sooner or later would be reflected in the Sunday mes-
sage where all the varied needs of the flock are to be met.
An old ministerial friend, now gone home to glory, used to
say that the foundation of his services was obtained by his visi-
tation of his flock during the previous week.
People in glass houses should not throw stones, and before sit-
ting in condemnation of the Roman Catholic Confessional, it behoves
Protestants generally to see to it that the confessional box at
their disposal is more frequently made use of, for once the hearts


of the people are won, the ministry becomes a JoUgMful and
glorious calling, unsurpassed by anything the world has to ofte .
Purgatory — is it ?
And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentois,
till he paid all that was due to him. So, likewise, shall my heavenly
Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not everj
one his brother their trespasses. Mt. 18: 34, 35.
To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
1 Cor 3 * 3
As the Bible does not in any way enlighten us regarding the
location or purpose of the Roman Catholic doctrine of puigatory,
we must look elsewhere for its meaning, and in the English dictionary
it is defined as "a place in which souls after death are purified
from venial sin, and suffer punishment for mortal sins riot atoned
for, colloquially any place of irritating temporary suffering.
The doctrine of purgatory is peculiarly a Roman Catholic pos-
session. No definite passage of scripture can be quoted to support
such a theory, the outcome of man's reasoning, which implies that
nothing we do or receive in life can fit us for our Heavenly king-
dom Jesus, in His statement regarding the fate of the wicked,
was very emphatic. "These shall go away into everlasting punish-
ment; but the righteous into life eternal." Matt, 25; 46/\ he . r r e
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. Mark 9; 44.
And numerous passages of a like nature. But nowhere does he
imply that after death the unrepentent sinner can have communion
and fellowship with a just and Holy God.
The Scriptural reference to the abiding place of the departed
soul is very clear. "Verily I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be
with me in paradise." Lk. 23; 43. "Then we which are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: so shall we ever be with the Lord.
1. Th. 4: 17. n . .
"And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried
by the angels into Abraham's bosom." Lk. 16, 22.
These and other similar passages all indicate the same truth,
absent from the body, present with the Lord.
Mr. G. K. Chesterton, in his article (see Cli. 3), "Why lam
a Catholic," infers that Protestants believe that life after death is
stagnation, but he is under some misapprehension here, for any child
of God knows that death is merely a transition; and as heaven
commences upon earth, progressing ever upward and onward. So
in the next world the some rule must certainly apply, otherwise it
could not be heaven or paradise. The Roman Catholic Church claims
to be the repository of all truth, but admits that Protestants can be
saved under certain conditions. But behind this admission there
must exist considerable reservation, probably not expressed in so
many words.
If purgatory is a reality, then all Protestant belief that the blood
of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin, will not avail, therefore the
souls of untold millions of Protestants must at the present time be
confined in purgatory. The Roman Catholic theologian maintains
that a process of purging and cleansing is needed from which no


relief can be obtained until certain masses, which must be Pahl ior
are offered up on their behalf by the priests ot the Roman Catholic
Church This being admitted, what possible hope is there lor tne
release of the souls of Protestants? Must they for ever remain m
purgatory? What is the alternative? The only logical conclusion
that can be reached is that Protestants now on earth must change
their religious beliefs, and become Roman Catholics, because, whi s
they remain Protestant, they will not believe in the doctrine o
pureatory, therefore, no prayer is being offered up for their deliv-
erance There seems to be no reasonable doubt that this assump-
tion is correct. So you see, Digger, before you can be sure ot
complete salvation, from the Roman Catholic point of view, it is
imperative to become a baptised believer in that church.
Protestants, of course, cannot accept this doctrine, and hold
fast to the immutable Word of God, that, "If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness." 1 Jno, 1; 9.
A member of the Roman Catholic Church, who has suffered
much from a painful bodily complaint, expressed the opinion that
purgatory was the Christian's experience before death and not after, a
statement that most sufferers will readily endorse, and possibly many
Roman Catholics themselves will question a doctrine, which inde-
finitely perpetuates their suffering after dea,th.
The Scriptures with which this article opens, certainly indicates
that this view is correct; they both refer to punishment for griev-
ous sins imposed whilst in this life, the experience of the Corinthian
Church member being most pronounced; his fleshly lusts being so
purified and cleansed in order that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus.
And what of the great multitude of God's own children who
endure so much torment in this life. Does not John 15, and Hebrews
12, clearly reveal a process whereby they are being made perfect,
bringing them into a position of holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord? How beautiful, comforting, and satisfying is
the Word of God. "Come, now, and let us reason together," saith
the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool."
Is. 1: 18.
And all without price. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye
to the waters, and he that hath no money, come, ye, buy and eat;
vea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price."
Is. 55; 1.
Seek ye the Lord while He may be found; call ye upon Him
while He is near; let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and He
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for He will abundantly
pardon. Is. 1; 6, 7.
"Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out." Jn. 6: 37.
Submit to the will of God, and then, Hallelujah, you are on the
high road to glory, and all the powers of darkness, however great,
cannot keep you. from your destination, Heaven and Jesus. For,
after all, what is holiness but submission to the Will of God. Prac-
tice it, and in every trial and cross which comes 1 to you, endeavour
to ascertain what God's purpose is in permitting something which
you deem contrary to His compassionate, loving heart. "For, if
we would judge ourselves, we would not be judged. But, when we
are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world." 1 Cor., 11; 31, 32.


Lopsided Religion.
Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pe. 5; 8.
Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand,
against the wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against flesh,
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness
in high places. Bph. 6; 11, 12.
Beware, lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain
deceit, after the tradition of men after the rudiments of the world,,
and not after Christ. Col. 2; 8.
It is somewhat out of fashion to-day to emphasise the reality
of a personal Devil, and the fact of eternal punishment; but the
Bible leaves no room for doubt regarding the power and influence of
Satan and his ultimate destination, where he will have for company
all who reject the Lord Jesus Christ as their personal Saviour. One
of his most effective methods for destroying and crippling spirit-
ual life is to cause division in the Church. And when w r e contem-
plate the hundred and one different religious organisations, claim-
ing the Bible as their guide, existing throughout the world, then we
must admit that his efforts in this direction have met with the
most pronounced success. And the good old ship, Protestantism,
is being fearfully handicapped and impeded because of these numer-
ous sects, which, barnacle like, have attached themselves to her.
The hungry multitudes are crying for food, and she is unable to
reach port and discharge her valuable cargo, because of these encum-
brances, mainly the product of man's reasoning. The old ship needs
dry-docking, and under the influence of a mighty spiritual revival,
take drastic action to remove the obstacles retarding spiritual pro-
gress. Many of the organisations which have become separate from
the recognised Christian Churches, as we know them to-day, will be
found on examination to have become sidetracked by some non-es-
sential doctrine, or if essential, have become over emphasised at
the expense of the central truth of Christianity—-Christ and Him
Crucified—whose shed blood alone can atone for sin. For instance,
in their insistence for keeping the Jewish Sabbath as the day for
public worship and rest, Seventh Day Adventists have separated
themselves from all other religious bodies, and have imposed a
yoke of bondage upon themselves, from which Christ gave absolute
freedom. When you remember that the punishment for any work
done on the Sabbath day was death, the absurdity of adhering to
this doctrine becomes very manifest. The Plymouth Brethren, a
most learned body of Christians, generally recognised as Biblical
students of an exceptionally high standard, have separated from
other denominations, because of the spirit of worldliness in the
church, justifying their withdrawal mainly from the scriptural in-
junction, "Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separ-
ate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will
receive you." 2 Cor, 6; 17. So extreme are certain sections of
this organisation, that they are unable to enter any other house of
worship, and have fellow r ship with other Christians, no matter how
pure the gospel message may be. Can their separation from the
world be classed as equal to the principles laid down by the Salva-
tion Army in their consecration to the service of God? Or that
clear cut separation entailed by entering the Sisterhood of the
Roman Catholic Church? And does not this standard of religious life
make the position more difficult for the man in the street? One


of the most unscriptural organisations, which claim thes Bibie.as'their
guide, is known as Russelism, or The International Bible Students.
Whilst not numerically strong in Australia, their literature has pene-
trated most Christian homes. Their doctrines are out of harmony
with orthodox Christianity; their central belief implies that attei
death there is a second chance for the unrepentent sinner the
gospel will again be preached to him, which, if rejected, will entail
immediate annihilation. The doctrine of everlasting punishment is
rejected, although Revelation ch. 20, is so clear and emphatic on
that point, particularly verse 10. Their antagonism fo
all other religious bodies is most pronounced, for, according to
Russelism, they comprise the modern Babylon, which some day is
to incur the wrath of Almighty God in their complete destruction.
Digger, should you have any of this literature, believing it to be
a help to understand the scriptures, you would be well advised to
consign it to the flames, for your spiritual growth cannot develope
under the misleading teaching of Russelism. •
Possibly the most subtle and false doctrine which has fastened
itself on to credulous humanity in these last days is that introduced
by Mrs. Baker Eddy, known as Christian Science. Its central truth
is mind over matter, which denies the efficacy of the blood of Jesus
Christ to cleanse from all sin. For, however it may be camou-
flaged, the central doctrine of Christian faith —the very foundation
of Christianity—is thrown overboard, for her teaching in the key to
the scriptures emphatically reveals the fact that there was no
more efficacy in the blood of Jesus after death than when it flowed
through His veins in life. In plain English, the tragedy of the
Cross, according to Mrs. Baker Eddy, was an absolute farce. Fui-
ther reference to this false cult will be made when dealing with
the ministry of healing.
Spiritualism, which of late has attracted such an influential fol-
lowing, will be dealt with by an article contributed by Pastor Donald
Gee, of Edinburgh, Scotland, in which its right to recognition is
definitely challenged, and so clearly and logically presented that it
also becomes a challenge to every denial of the Word of God.
For this article stands four square on the Word, and claims that
the manifestations of the spirit, as witnessed in the early Apos-
tolic Church, are for to-day.
The failure of Protestantism to emphasise these doctrinal truths
'so clearly taught in scripture, can only account for the multiplicity
of religious organisations, endeavouring in some way to express
Biblical truth. It is possible to proclaim the full Gospel message on
the lines of the early Church, and yet become side tracked, by over-
emphasising some particular doctrine. The Message of Pentecost
embodied in what is known as the modern Pentecostal movement,
which is unquestionably true to the Word of God, has suffered giiev-
ously in this respect, fanatical followers seizing hold of one phase
of truth —Divine healing, for instance —at the expense of salvation,
have caused havoc in the church, and much spiiitual loss to them-
selves. . ,
The Roman Catholic Church, which has also lost sight of the
Message of Pentecost, seems, from the Biblical point of view, to have
over-emphasised the doctrine of the Mass, making it her central
doctrine in preference to salvation, which view is justifiable, because
of her belief that salvation is received at infant baptism.
Further discussion regarding the doctrine of the Mass will
be reserved for a separate article.


The Mass Versus the Lord's Supper.
This do in remembrance of me. Lk. 22; 19.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lord's death till he come. 1 Cor. 11; 26.
It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing;
the word that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they aie life.
Jno. 6; 63. The great distinctive difference dividing Protestant-
ism and Roman Catholicism is to be found in the central doctrine
of the Church of Rome, called the Sacrament of the Blessed Euch-
arist, or the Sacrament of the Mass. Every Roman Catholic priest
will tell you that all the claims of the Roman Catholic Church stand
or fall with the doctrine of the real presence of Christ in the
Mass. The bread and wine used in the Sacrament of the Mass,
when consecrated by the priest, are changed in some mysterious
way into the body, blood, soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, so that the communicant receiving the bread actually takes
into his mouth and eats and digests the body, blood, and soul and
divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Bible teaches that the Loid s
Supper was instituted on the night on which Christ was betrayed,
the record will be found in Matt. 26; 26, 29. Mk. 14; 22, 25. Lk. 22;
19, 20. 1 Cor. 11: 23, 24. Whereby bread and wine, symbols of
Hi's broken body and shed blood, were to be partaken of in re-
membrance of Him; a memorial to show forth His death till He
come. There is no hint given in scripture that these elements
were by any means to be changed into the actual body and blood
of our Lord. Protestants partake of the Lord's Supper in a spirit-
ual sense, believing that Christ is present in spirit. "For where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them." The deeper the love and faith exhibited in this
act of adoration and worship, the more real are the spiritual and
physical blessings to the communicant. Neither is there any record
in the Word of God, that the bread only should be partaken of by the
congregation, and the wine only by the priest or officiating elder.
There is, therefore, a wide chasm between the Roman Catholic
doctrine of the Mass, and the Bible doctrine of the Lord's Supper.
"Christian members of the body of Christ, come together to remem-
ber the one who died for them, and put away their sins, and do
this because their sins have been put away." The writer's experi-
ence in this connection will prove helpful. Prior to my conversion,
23 years ago, it would have been impossible for me to have par-
taken of the Lord's Supper. Such an act would have been worse
than hypocrisy. My way of approach was barred whilst an unre-
pentant sinner, but immediately after conversion, a longing desire
arose in my heart to partake of this memorial feast. It at once
became my privilege and duty, and such is the experience of every
born again child of God. You will understand, therefore, Digger, the
reason for so much controversy and debate regarding the forth-
coming Eucharistic Procession next September, in which the Euchar-
ist —the Host —the consecrated bread —believed to have become
the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, will be elevated and
carried through the streets of the city.
The devout Roman Catholic will bend the knee in loving hom-
age and adoration, his worship will be real in the sense that he
sincerely believes that Jesus Christ is passing by, for whatever
his critics may affirm to the contrary, there is a genuine spirit of
love manifested by devout Roman Catholics in their worship, which
finds expression in many tangible acts of charity, notably by their


support of the many institutions for the betterment of humanity,
which must surely emanate from hearts in which love predominates.
The curious multitude will gaze in wonderment upon a scene
of such splendour and magnificence, so different to what one wou
expect the lowly Nazarene to grace by his bodily presence. Many,
no doubt will deride, and mock, and sneer, again putting our Lord
to open shame. But to the devoted Protestant, whose heart glows
with love dTvine, the procession can be nothing less than a
caricature of the second coming of our Blessed Lord, when evem
knee w iH bow and every tongue shall confess him Lord.
The opposition to the procession does not find ex^* v
from the bigoted and sectarian, but is composed of many faithful
Protestants who have no bitterness or enmity in their hearts against
their Roman Catholic brethren, but who have a profound conviction
that the Roman Catholic doctrine is contrary to the
of God and 110 Protestant who believes the Bible to be the o
standard of truth, could remain silent, and thus acquiesce m what
he is convinced is diametrically opposed to the scriptuies.
"Everv Roman Catholic who has come to the use of reason is
bound under the pain of mortal sin to hear Mass Sundays
and holv days of obligation, unless excused by some lawful leason.
It is impossible to insist too strongly on the truth mat 111 the
Rfe of a Catholic IT IS THE MASS THAT MATTERS It is a
spiritual barometer, his appreciation of it, and his attendance a.
it—opportunity always supposed—is a fair indication of a Calho-
lic's spiritual state. Does he attend regularly and devoutlyon
Sundays and holy days, he will the average Roman Catholic
who if he so perseveres, will by God's mercy save his soul. It
the Mass that matters to us. To pay our debt of adoration and
thanksgiving, to make a fitting return for all God has given us,
all He has prepared for us in a happy eternity, we have one
means and one only—the Mass. ... Let us not wait till we get
to purgatory to learn the value of Holy Mass, but show by our
lives that we truly prize God's unspeakable gift. We should not
need reminders from without, or to be told by one not of the house-
hold of faith, that to the life of the Church, and to vigorous
spiritual life of every one of her children, IT IS THE MASS
THAT MATTERS." ,
These extracts from a booklet circulated by the Roman Catho-
lic Church are verv emphatic, and leave no room for doubt as to
what is the central doctrine of the Church, and unmistakably reveal
how great is the divergence between that Church and Protestantism,
for no where does the Bible indicate that absence from the Lord s
Supper is so serious as to warrant the absent one being termed
a mortal sinner. It is not Biblical, and is purely a doctrine of
the Church, which gives her such wonderful control and powei
'over her people. .
Digger, you have repeatedly stated that ot all the religious
bodies who ministered to the boys at the front in the great war,
none compared more favorably than that of the Salvation Aimy.
Is this not so? And in your general estimate, the Army, notwith-
standing the prevalence of your pet aversion the collection box
are doing more practical Christian work than any othei organisa-
tion of a like nature. The Salvation Army unquestionably occupies
a foremost place amongst those Christian bodies who are engaged
in lifting fallen humanity to a higher plane, and yet, for some
inexplicable reason, with the exception of an occasional bi eaking
of bread," their members do not partake of the Lord's Supper in
the manner prescribed by the Bible. This fact being admitted,
would you for one moment suggest that members of the Army
had forfeited their right to their heavenly inheritance, because their


method of church government omits their regular and systematic
observance of the Lord's Supper? Spiritual loss must necessarily
follow neglect to obey Christ's last request: "Do this in remem-
brance of me," especially if that neglect is caused by unconfessed
sin, but for any church or individual to condemn the non-participant
as meriting separation from God, by merely absenting himself fiom
certain church services, is surely contrary to the spirit of a loving
and merciful God, and entails a bondage the very antithesis of
scripture, which declares, "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty." For when the third person of the Godhead —the Holy
Spirit —is allowed to have right of way, his energising, inspiring-
personality will so illuminate the soul that Jesus, the rightful claim-
ant for all our adoration and worship, will so dominate the life that
He, and He only, will reign supreme, captivating the will by His
matchless love, and draw with magnetic power all who will sur-
render wholly to Him. It is the Church thus empowered that can
only effectively protest against any intrusion of doctrines that do
not square with the Word of God. For we have in Jesus the Christ,
the solution of every problem, and if we would but take Him at His
Word, all the clamor and discord engendered by party strife and
religious contention would speedily disappear. It is up to Protest-
ants, who claim the open Bible as their Magna Charter, to get
busy along these lines, and by a spirit of unity and love, so yield
to the strivings of the Holy Spirit, that Christians of whatever
denomination might co-operate in loving sympathy for the upbuild-
ing of God's Kingdom, which is so sadly needed in these days of
moral and spiritual declension.
May I close this article with the words of Earl Balfour, in
language expressive of real devotion and love: "Christ is a rare
jewel, but men know not His value. A sun which ever shines,
but men perceive not His brightness, nor walk in His light. He is
a garden full of sweets; a hive full of honey; a sun without a
spot; a star ever bright; a fountain ever full; a brook which ever
flows; a rose which ever blooms; a foundation which never yields;
a guide who never errs; a friend who never forsakes. No mind
can fully grasj) His glory; His beauty, His worth, His importance,
no tongue can fully declare. He is the source of all good; the
foundation of all excellency; the mirror of perfection; the light of
heaven; the wonder of the earth; time's masterpiece, eternity's glory,
.the sun of all bliss, the way of life and life's fair way."
Has the Church Reached a Dead End ?
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith to the
churches. Rev 3; 13.
When the original article of these series was contemplated, the
thought predominant in the mind of the writer was, how power-
less and impotent Protestantism had become; and as the theme was
developed, irrefutable evidence was furnished that the statements
made in the opening chapters were in no way exaggerated. Further
confirmation is supplied by the deputation from the Council of
Churches, which recently waited upon the Premier of N.S.W.,
protesting against the forthcoming Eucharistic procession being per-
mitted to march through the streets of the City. Here we have the
sorry spectacle of representatives of the most High God, appealing


to temporal power for relief from spiritual aggression -what an
anomaly— and couched in language which could only appeal to
base in human nature. „ niintpr nrn .
Were they correctly reported m suggesting that a counter
cession might be inaugurated, which would probably cause much
disorder ™ And that some taking part in the .Eucharistic Procession
would be of German and Austrian nationality? What is
ference 9 Does it spell peace? How are the mighty fallen.
In a book recently published, "When Anti-Christ reigns," by
Rev. Oswald J. Smith, of Toronto, Canada, the question is asked,
"To what is the failure of Protestantism due?" He says there can
be but one true explanation, and, strange to say, it has been given
by a Roman Catholic priest. I quote it verbatim. ~
"There was a time when Protestantism believed something
and taught something. That time has gone by, except for the Luth-
erans and a few others. Protestant churches are mainly social
organisations, with all sorts of clubs and activities, recreational and
pleasure programmes, with a little spiritual seasoning in the form
of a denatured church service, and a haphazard Sunday School me.®t-
ing thrown in. The heart of the church service is the music, with
an exhortation to goodness or moral conduct, or a discussion ot
some social problem or economic situation, in the form of a sermon.
What is the result? Protestant people are spiritually starved, Ninety-
nine out of a hundred cannot tell you even the most elementary
things which they believe are distinctly Protestant. They are not
being taught anything. The result is that the only hold upon them
is loyalty to an organisation, not religious conviction. On tlie
other hand, our church teaches the Catholic religion all the way
from childhood up, and our people know what they believe. Most of
them stick. Protestants see that we believe something, and, being
hungry they are susceptible to our appeals. Then, too, we main-
tain an order of the Paulist Fathers, devoted exclusively to the
conversion of non-Catholics. They do not threaten or browbeat
people emotionally into the Roman Church. If Protestantism is
wise, it will make religious teaching its main theme, and all these
other things secondary."
Mr. Smith says this is a true explanation of Protestant failure.
He is, of course, referring to conditions existing in Canada, U.S.A..
and the United Kingdom. Do these strictures also apply to Aus-
tralia? Local conditions certainly afford some evidence that Austra-
lia is also lagging behind spiritually. One of the most influential
churches, recently in session at their annual assembly, has, by
one of her accredited representatives, made this startling statement:
"We want 40 additional ministers, all of whom could be placed im-
mediately. It is not a question of money, but of men, and it is
sad to think that the Presbyterian Church has lost its grip on the
State. If the present conditions continue, the church will be out
of business. Even if men were obtained immediately, an improve-
ment could not be made for ten years; and if this is the only
outlook, the position is very black indeed." The report of the
committee stated that 28 charges were without settled ministers,,
unable to maintain their former status as fully sanctioned charges.
"Are we dying of inanition?" was asked in the report.
Now, Digger, when a church with such a magnificent past is in
such a bad plight, it is very evident that there is a screw loose
somewhere. Why, there was a certain John Knox, who lived many
years ago. You may have heard of him; he was a Presbyterian
reformer, famous also for his reverence and trust in Almighty God.
It was the fear of God within his soul that made him the mighty
man he was. We have the record in the Bible of a man of some
standing, who feared neither God nor man. He was in a most peril-


ous position, but it is recorded of John Knox that he feared neither
man nor devil—an entirely different proposition —for he lived and
moved and had his being encircled by the arms of a loving God
whom he implicitly trusted. And when John Knox spoke, there
was something doing. The crowned heads or any other earthly
potentate had no terror for him, and his name to-day is reverenced
because of his allegiance to the only thing worth while —the Sword
of the Spirit—otherwise the Word of God. And with that weapon
in his hand, nothing could resist his mighty onslaughts. Presby"
terianism became synonymous for all that stood for righteousness,
and resulted in the upbuilding of a church that throughout its history
has been in the forefront in the formation of what, after all, is the
true test of religion—character. Digger, if John Knox could have
heard that report read, I fancy he must have turned in his grave.
Someone has said of John Knox that he "was truly the armament
of Scotland against the bloody intrigues of Mary, Queen of Scot-
land. Singlehanded at the throne of God he defeated her, and caused
her to say, "I am more afraid of the prayers of John Knox than
the armies of Scotland." He surely was the armament of Scot-
land, for in him lay the safety of the land."
What has gone wrong with this Church? Has her intellectual
capacity failed? No, she is mightier than ever in this respect.
My goodness, Digger, read the academic record of some of her
famous professors and leaders. Intellectualism! Why, it is oozing
out of every pore! And yet, it is asked, Is she dying of inanition?
Digger, is there such a thing as intellectual pride, and can intellec-
tualism become an idol? We have been speaking in a previous
article of the central truths emphasised by a church at the expense
of salvation, indicating when that occurs there is lopsidedness,
which gives an opening for error to creep in.
Has Presbyterianism become lopsided on intellectualism, and
is it possible that she is searching diligently for what man says
about the Word, instead of searching diligently the Word itself?
In other words, is intellectualism the idol upon which Presbyterian-
ism has crashed ?
If so, which idol is more offensive to God? The idol eman-
ating from the head, or from the heart? For whatever may
be the unseripturalness of the doctrine of transubstantiation, the
devout Roman Catholic is sincere in his belief that he is worship-
ping Jesus Christ. There is an expression of love which surely has
some merit, and will possibly be more acceptable to God, than the
worship of the intellect, which can with some truthfulness be laid
to the charge of Protestantism in a more or less degree. This is no
idle statement, for Avhen you And organised Protestantism —which,
mind you, claims the open Bible as its foundation —ruling out certain
passages of scripture as being out of date, because of the unbelief
of her scholars, then one is justified in charging her with intellec-
tual worship, for there are portions of the scriptures which, if faith-
fully adhered to, would be the means of restoring that church to
her lost position as leader in the spiritual realms in a country
which claims to be Protestant, but which at the present moment
has to acknowledge Roman Catholic supremacy.
Will the Protestant Church accept the challenge, and put God's
Word to the test, and not only again become clothed with her lost
spiritual power, but be the means of bringing countless blessings
to multitudes who to-day are deep down in sin, wretchedness and
misery?


Concerning the Collection.
Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God hath prospered him. 1 Cor. 16:2.
You will notice by the text, Digger, that the "lay by systo" is
not of recent origin, and applies equally to spiritual as well as to
material things. For there can be no question that he who bai
in heaven will enjoy such prosperity that the very choicest
shall be his, not only during time, but throughout eternity. S
will understand, Digger, that there are big issues at stake in coii
nection with a matter in which you often express yourself by
language more forcible than polite. I know you aie te p .
the continual rattling of the collection box. You have come to be-
lieve somehow, that religion begins and ends and centres around
£s d' And yet when you are led to attend a church service, cann
imagine you for one moment searching diligently tor a three-penny
hit when the collection plate comes round, whilst you had a largei
coin in your pocket. Forgive me if I am doing you an injustice
but of this I am certain, that when you go over the top tor the Doid
Jesus you will never dodge the collection box. For when you make
that 'great decision there will be something doing, for genuine
love to Him who did so much for us will open up a new outlook
where money will be regarded as but a means to add to His glory.
What does the Bible teach us about giving?
The Jew under tire old law was compelled to give a tent 1
of his income for the upkeep of the sanctuary, and on stated occa-
sions offerings over and above this amount were demanded of him.
If the Jew under the law gave a tenth to God, should the Christian
under grace give less? If the members of the Christian Church were
true to God, the collection plate would become obsolete.
I remember some years ago hearing a Christian gentleman, a
most charitable man, whose gifts to his church and religious activi-
ties generally were on a most liberal scale, relate how he was
enabled to at all times support any worthy cause. He said irom
the day he began to earn his living, on the receipt of his weekly
wages he put aside, into a chamois bag, God's portion (and T guess
it was not less than a tenth). Therefore, when an appeal was made
for funds for missions, or any other purpose in connection with the
work of the church, the money was available. Giving became a
wonderful privilege, for he was handling God's money, not his
own and the joy of giving under these conditions far excelled any
other distribution of his world possessions. His contributions to
charity along these lines during his lifetime must have amounted
to an enormous sum. _
God is never in debt to anyone; put it to the test, and prove it.
How emphatic is the Word: "Give, and it shall be given unto
you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your bosom, for ivith the same measure
that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again." Lk. 6:38.
There is certainly some excuse for your cynical attitude towards
much of the religious life of to-day, especially in regard to the
various methods adopted in raising church funds.
Tell me, Digger, what is the difference between the money chang-
ers whom Christ drove out of the temple at Jerusalem long ago, and
the money changers of to-day, who adopt such questionable schemes
for financing the modern church?
For are not many of the devices used by the various denomina-
tions in many of their efforts in raising church funds gambling pure


and simple, pandering as tliey do to what is undoubtedly the nation s
national sin?
How, then, is this festering sore which has become so putrid-
confronting politicians with one of their most difficult pi oblems so
intricate that the safety of present political leaders is challenged by
it—to be effectively dealt with, whilst the fountain head is corrupt:
And many pastimes, innocent enough in their right place the side-
show — are lamentably misplaced, when used to augment the church
treasury. . .
If our blessed Lord were to again appear m the flesh, and visit
the modern church function, do you think He would be less toler-
.ant, when on that memorable occasion he overthrew the tables of
the money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves?
And cannot we imagine His sorrow of heart and anguish of soul
:as He looks upon these scenes so common to-day. How sad to
realise that His redeemed children purchased at such a price—His
own precious blood —should so dishonor His own Word! For has
He not declared that the cattle on a thousand hills are His, and
"whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do." Do not these
.sinful and paltry methods indicate a denial of His power and willing-
ness to supply the need of anything that is asked in faith, according
to His will? Even in its most legitimate form we have
the sorry spectacle of professing Christians giving with one
hand, and with the other possibly getting more in return than
could be purchased in the ordinary course of business. The whole
thing is absolutely wrong, and dishonoring to God, especially in view
of the clear cut instructions in the Word. I wonder how many
young men and women took their first downward step to a. life of
! shame and ignominy by participating in some of the devilish schemes
which the modern church deems necessary to provide for the up-
keep and maintenance of its clergy.
The position is a most serious one, and no church can expect
.to enjoy the influence and power and presence of the Holy Spirit
in their various activities if these vicious and worldly methods are
permitted to continue in place of the God appointed manner, "Bring
ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in
my house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord sof Hosts,
if I will not open thy windows of heaven, and pour out you a
blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." Mai. 3:10.
Am I my Brother's Keeper ?
None of us liveth to himself. Ro. 14.7.
Digger, you often hear the question asked, Can you show me
; anywhere in the Bible where such and such a thing is prohibited,
enumerating many of the indulgences so dear to the heart? And
when your contention cannot be gainsaid, claim that you have perfect
liberty to live and move just as you please, in regard to those habits
. and customs which you consider are perfectly harmless and innocent,
when kept in their proper place? I am reminded of a rather clever
home thrust given by a noted evangelist on one occasion, when the
question was put to him, "Can you indicate any passage in the Bible
where smoking is prohibited?" To the questioner's great surprise, he
answered, "No; but I can quote one where smoking is commended."
referring him to that passage in Rev 22:11, "He which is filthy,
let him be filthy still."


But that is not the line of argument which I to convince you
that the Bible has a definite answer to such questions, and that is .
vetoing the fact that you are your brother's keeper Viewed m
this light not one doubtful indulgence could be permitted. Allow
me to illustrate my point by a personal experience. For manyr y ears
prior to and for a short period after my conversion, the fragrant weed
was part and parcel of my daily life, and, in f Telt cen-
Uine Shortly after the event recorded above took place, 1 felt con
strained to undertake some definite Christian work, and offered my-
self as a Sunday School teacher, and was, of course, willingly
accepted But a very short time elapsed when the question arose in
my mind How can you consistently warn these young lads under
your charge against the dangers of cigarette smoking, whilst yoi
yOUr it e was m a° k p e retty knotty problem, and it had to be faced, so, after
some debate the decision was made to give up the pipe for a month
in order to test my will power, which had unmistakably develope
since my conversion. So it was laid aside. A. few days afterwards,
whilst passing a tobacconist's shop, the odor of tobacco was over-
nnwerina and soothing my conscience that it was the pipe and n
ctears which were prohibited, I succumbed and tor several day*
thoroughly enjoyed my old friend in another guise. But not
long for a small voice would persist in accusing me ot inconsistency,
and ' in the end, the cigar, too, had to go, and from that day I have
not indulged in the weed in any shape or form, and must admit
that I am all the better for it, from every point of view. Do you
set me Digger? You can't live to yourself.
Your influence is either for good or evil, and practices and
pastimes which you can safely indulge in, might lead your best friend
to the depths of hell. It turned out that my decision to forego
tobacco proved to my advantage in more ways than one, for late
discovered, after meeting my future wife, that her pet a ™-Bion v
tobacco and she has since frequently remarked hei inability to
comprehend how ministers of the gospel,_ in whose temple Presum-
ably the Holy Ghost dwelleth, can administer the sacrament ot the
Lord's Supper with the foul odor of nicotine upon their lips. e
brethren of the ministry, who are slaves to the fragrant weed, put
that into your pipes and smoke it.
And now, Digger, there is another phase of the above subject
which cannot be side tracked, however difficult it may be. It intro-
duces another addition to the lengthy list of witnesses proclaiming
the impotence of the church, and this witness I am afraid will have
to be treated as hostile. As representing a large proportion
of her sex, she has been placed in the dock and charged with 1
nersonation This, of course, refers to the invasion of woman into
man's domain, for has she not discarded her crowning glory, and
thus paved the way for imitating her brother all along the line, tot
I am told she drinks your wine and smokes your cigarettes, and
wears your riding breeches and other apparel pertaining only to
man It is becoming difficult, at times, to distinguish the diffei-
ence but there is one thing, Digger, in which, unfortunately, she
did not strive to imitate you when you made the change over, and
that is your modesty, for with all your roughness with very few
exceptions, your manner of dress would bring no blush of shame
to your sister's face. Digger, is it not the prerogative of woman
to be the custodian of that tender bloom of modesty, so delicate
and sweet in its perfume that it keeps at bay every improper thought.
What is more beautiful in the sight of man, than to gaze on his
sister adorned with this charm of grace which so endears her to
all who love purity and chastity; she is a priceless treasure. u
when she apes the man, and by her immodest manner of dress tram-


Dies her sacred heritage under foot, she releases a monster that
is awful to contemplate, ravenous in its lustful desires, culminating
in the tragic happenings that are becoming so prevalent in our midst.
May God help her to realise the seriousness of the position, and the
fact that she is her brother's keeper, and that it is the virtue of
modesty that will at all times place a protecting hedge ai-ound hei
shielding her from the human monsters incarnated with the demon
of lust. Digger, it is up to you to save your sister You see where
she is drifting, for it is only the religion of Jesus Christ, in all its
fullness and power, that can restore the lost fragrance which a
foul world so sadly needs. ....
May I close this illustration, which I recall having read m one o
the gospel messengers of love, proclaiming that in Jesus Christ is t e
consummation of everything worth while.
A beautiful young maiden, possessing much giace and charm
of manner, had one grievous defect-an inordinate love of jewellery.
Not having the means to purchase the real, adorned heiselt with
brummagem A gentleman friend, who admired her very much,
grieved at her stupid vanity, and questioned her regarding the
matter. She replied, "I love jewellery, and cannot afford to bu>
better" "Oh is that it?" he exclaimed, and without any furthei
comment parted from her. A few evening later, he again visited
her and from his pocket was bulking a parcel tied up with brown
paper Her curiosity was aroused, and, quickly cutting the stung.
he revealed to her gaze the most beautiful and exquisite collection
of jewels the heart of any fair maiden could desire. She gasped
for breath. "Oh," she exclaimed. "Who are these tor. He
replied, "They are yours, on one condition." "Oh, what is it? Tell me
ciuick!" "Take off all the rubbish you are wearing, and throw it
into the fire," was the answer. Did she hesitate? Not for one
moment. In an instant they were consigned to the flames, and
the beautiful gems, so rare and rich, looked even more beautiful
than ever, when worn by one so qualified by nature s gifts to weai
them.
Digger, will you and your sister ponder over this little story,
and endeavour to put it into practical effect?
Woman —Man's Helpmate or
Competitor, Which ?
Suffer not a woman to teach. 1 Ti. 2, 12.
I will pour out of my spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy. Ac. 2:17.
Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also.,
and he praisetli her. Pr. 31:28.
No passage of scripture has probably raised more controversy
than Paul's injunction, "suffer not a woman to teach. So literallj
has it been taken in some religious organisations, that women are
debarred from any public manifestation of their spiritual aspira-
tions What Paul really did mean, is a debatable question. We
would require to be familiar with the time and place and conditions
extant at the moment. That he meant that woman whs to take
no part in the exercises of public worship and prayer, and that
she should simply be a hearer of the Word of God, and not a doer,


does not conform to scripture, which declares "Where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is Liberty." Other portions of scripture conhim
this notably Ex, 15:20, Lk. 2:36, 37; Ac. 21:9, which indicate a very
prominent position assigned to them in praise and preaching.
The purpose of this article, however, is not to emphasise hei
undoubted prerogative of telling out the story of Jesus and His love,
but in passing, it might be asked, what would the Roman Catholic
Church and the Salvation Army be to-day, if it were not for the large
Dronortion of devoted women, who exercise such an influence tor good
in their respective spheres of labor? And, further, if the Roman
Catholic Church were to accept and preach the full gospel message
of Pentecost, having only for her objective the world for Jesus, then
with her clock like machinery so perfectly organised, plus that army
of consecrated women, moulding and guiding the young lives impaited
to their care, her influence and power would be irresistible. Woman
to-day is undoubtedly becoming more and more man s competitoi in
many avenues of employment, due in a large measure to man s
selfishness and greed; firstly by nis refusal in many cases to face
his obligations in regard to the establishment of a nation s greatest
asset—the home—which is the sphere of woman's most potential
influence, especially when Christian ideals dominate her life. Sec-
ondly by the laws he frames, compelling woman to work at a less
wage' in those avenues of employment, which would otherwise be
filled by men Both of these considerations force women into occu-
pations which do not qualify them for their rightful sphere in life.
Christ's command, "What, therefore, God hath joined together,
let no man put asunder," is being flagrantly disregarded in these
days and, judging by the congested state of the divorce courts, many
united in the holy bonds of matrimony would appear to be nothing
less than companionate marriages, unmistakable evidence of national
decay for such marriages strike right at the foundation, which,
sooner or later, will bring down the whole structure in confusion and
,chaos, unless a remedy can be devised. . .
jesus Christ is thG only FGiriGdy, and until HG is installed in His
rightful place, the white-anting process will continue.
The Biblical injunction so frequently emphasised that woman
should be in subjection to man, surely does not mean that she
should be his slave. But is not the meaning, rather, that man, being
the stronger, and the God ordained leader, woman should accept
her position as the weaker vessel, and submit to his loidship in
respect to those inherent qualifications which are exercised by man,
namely, leadership and those faculties of control which pre-eminent-
ly are his? , „ ,
The relationship between man and woman is beautifully expressed
by Matthew Henry, thus: "Woman was of a rib out of the
side of Adam; not made out of his head to rule over him, nor out
of his feet to be trampled upon by him, but out of his side to oe
equal with him, under his arm to be protected, and near his heart
to be beloved." , . , . , *
"That wife that is of God's making by special grace, and of
.God's bringing by special providence, is likely to prove a help-meet
for man." That woman is invading the sphere of man is becoming
more pronounced as the days go by, and the question arises, What
is to be the limit? If she continues to assert her authority, and per-
sists in qualifying for politics, law, medicine, etc., why not the army
and navy likewise? It would seem to be the only logical outcome
of her unsatiable desire in many quarters to be on an equality with
man, and if, by perseverance, she secured a post of command in
the niiiitary,'what is to prevent the future generations of the rank and
file of womanhood taking their place in the ranks of the combatants
in future wars Godless nations will impose upon a sin-stricken world?


One shudders in horror from such a thought, but it women
her claim for equality to the extreme, then her occupancy ot the
trenches if in the next war they are not obsolete, is not beyond t
bounds of impossibility, for every inch of progress along th es
lines will be paid for by a far greater loss m her rightful and God
ordained sphere—the home, with the consequential weakening
*%?£££ women, who have and
will from a true sense of their duty and love continue to occupy
that nosition where she reigns supreme, queen ot the home, w nat
Mgher more exalted position could she more worthily adorn
What vast potentialities for good are hers! When permitting God
to guide her in moulding and controlling those young lives, com
mitfed to her care, no one else can more effectively perform them.
No one else, unless due to untowards circumstances, has the right.
And when that God-given sphere is neglected tor woik toi
man was created, then the nation must suffer loss.
The homes that have installed the family altar are uiiquestion-
ablv the centres which produce men and women who f°™ the
foundation upon which great and mighty natmns are builf
it bv participating in the fierce aggressiveness ot present day party
conflicts which are building up a dividing wall between class and
cC Which, if not checked, must seriously impede our progress
nationally, and in the end make us a prey to nations who will soonei
or later resent their inclusion amongst what are termed the intel 101
iaC6 \Vhat a beautiful illustration have we of the influence of God-
fearing parents in the life of Timothy, Paul's spiritual son: When
I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which
dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and
am persuaded is in thee also." It was his Godly parentage that
made him a pattern for any young man or woman to imitate. How
privileged are young people who can claim a line ot Godly women
fm- their ancestors. For what does the Word say? "Train up a
child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart
The writer has been singularly fortunate in this respect. Hon
well 1 remember during the night watches my aged grandmother,
in an adjoining room, interceding at the throne of grace for those
whom she loved. I did not understand it all then, but when about
ten years later, as an erring sinner, I sought God for Pardon, I was
tailgiit in a very practical manner that there is no effect without
a cause, for at that same beside God met me, and washed me and
cleansed me from all my sin —praise His Holy name! Yes, Halle-
lujah! The other life dropped off there and then, and has been
under the precious blood ever since. And my dear mother, what
of her? If spared for a few weeks, now in her 82nd year, she will
have the joy of reading these pages, written by her first-born, which
will surely make her heart rejoice, and as she looks back upon the
past years with all their cares and anxieties, and the many sacrifices
entailed in rearing a large -family (twelve), of whom ten can
"arise up and call her blessed," and "her husband also (86), and
he praiseth her," will not have been in vain. Thank God for God-
fearing mothers— they are the nation's greatest asset. It has been
said of my mother that the moments spent in her companionship
were as the breath of heaven.
These few thoughts, expressive of womanhood, would not he
complete without a reference to the one who has proved such a
faithful and devoted help-mate —my dear wife —whose sterling Chris-
tian character, has and is still, exerting such an influence for good
upon the children whom God has been pleased to so graciously bless


us with, and also upon all who come within the circle of her home
life.
Oh, mothers everywhere, will you realise the wonderful privilege
the Almighty has bestowed upon you in the blessing of children,
and regard them as a sacred trust, for which you must answer some
day ? For what you are, and how you live, will largely depend
upon what'they are and how they live. And you prospective mothers,
above all, whatever else you may neglect, never let go the family
altar, for it is there all the family problems can be settled, and
in all your gettings be sure you get Jesus, for, if He is the most
welcome guest, then the atmosphere of that home will be elevating,
pure and holy.
The Ministry of Healing in Relation
to Medical Science.
Render, therefore, to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is
due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. Ro. 13, 7.
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake. 1 Pe. 2, 13.
The object of this article is not to emphasise the doctrine of
Divine Healing, for that truth has become so firmly established in
many Christian organisations throughout the world, that to deny
it a place in the Christian ministry indicates a mind obscured by
prejudice and unbelief. For, if we believe the Word of God to be
Divinely inspired, then the gifts of the Holy Spirit enumerated in
1 Cor. 12, cannot be ignored. Included in the list are gifts of
healing. How is this gift to be used by the Christian ministry?
Does not Ja. 5: 13, 10, "Are there any sick among you," etc.,
Christ's own words, "Go ye . . . lay hands on the sick." Mk. 16, 15, 18,
coupled with the fulfilment of Isaiah's prophecy, 53: 4, "Himself took
our infirmities and bare our sicknesses." Mt. 8: I<, clearly lay
down the method, and unmistakably prove that Jesus was manifested
to destroy the works of the Devil, who is unquestionably the author
of sickness and disease. To exclude Divine healing as a gift from
God is to place man on a higher level than his Creator.
But the question for consideration is, having accepted God as
the great Physician, is medical science and skill, with all its know-
ledge and helpfulness, to be at once divorced? The doctrine of
Divine Healing in the past has suffered many setbacks, because of
the fanaticism of some of its exponents in this respect. Doctors
and surgeons have at once become anathema! The Church of God
has suffered much reproach, and the ministry of healing often re-
jected, because of the fanatic attitude of the believers becoming
obsessed with this particular doctrine. He will refer you to the
death of King Asa, 2 Ch. 16:12, who sought the physicians instead
of God for healing, as an argument in favor of eliminating medical
advice, forgetting that Asa looked back to generations who had
trusted God for deliverance from sickness, whilst the spiritual babe
of to-day, just opening its eyes, can only look back to generations
who absolutely trusted in man. Such a sudden transition is the privi-
lege of the few.
The fanatic will tell you that, immediately the doctrine of


Divine Healing is placed before you, and its truth accepted, you
must for ever renounce the aid of man. The writer, with seveial
vears' experience amongst people who trust God for knows
of 110 family, however great their faith, who have not had to \esoit
in some way or another, to the skill of the surgeon and physician
The function of medical science, as any mescal practitioner w
admit, is to interfere as little as possible. But, by a policy ot sug
eestion to gain the confidence of the patient that his faith in the
physician becomes so effective that very frequent y, 1i erne les& 1
not necessary, or, if used, have 110 medicinal virtue. It this holds
good in the human sphere, then what vast potentialities are Possib
in the spiritual realm? When the mighty dynamic power of God
is released in answer to the faith of His believing children this truth
surely cannot be questioned. Admitting all this, is the family p>-
sician to be excluded from the home, because you have accepted the
doctrine of Divine Healing? Certainly not, for his wisdom and
knowledge must prove of the utmost value, even it no lemedies
are used Much sickness is largely the result of the sufferer s ignoi-
.ance of natural laws, possibly needing only skilled advice to rectify.
But there is another very important factor 111 relation to the
necessity of medical advice, and that is in connection with contagious
disease, of which neglect to notify is in direct antagonism to the
laws of the land, and the Word of God is emphatic on its insistence
in this respect; the need for faithful adherence along these lines
is very obvious. „ ..
These observations, of course, in no way limit the act ot fa
of a trusting child of God, who in his daily walk, and close rela-
tionship to his Divine Redeemer, is living on a much higher plane,
and has at his command spiritual forces which must respond to the
nraver of faith. For with God all things are possible.
But generally speaking, the Ministry of healing is retarded,
rather than helped, if the earthly physician is to be immediately
discarded as not being in the plan of God for a race lost and ruined
by sin This exposition of Biblical truth also exposes the lallacv
•of Christian Science, falsely so called, for having laid down the
principles that sin and evil are but errors of the mind, and sick-
ness and disease are not real, they would deny the doctrine ot its
founder, Mrs. Eddy, if aid of a physician was sought, because it
would at once be an admission that sickness and pain were a
reality. The writer, whilst not denying the claim of Christian Science
to lieal disease, cannot accept it as Divine Healing as in the Word of
God. For instance, there is no record whatever that any payment
should be made to the elder of the church when praying for the
sick. Christian Science practitioners demand certain fees before
their treatment can be effective. No pay, no treatment.
The Christian who accepts the Word of God as authoritative,
believes that the blood of Jesus Christ, shed on Calvary's tree,
cleanses from all sin, provided we walk in the light as He is in the
light; but, according to Mrs. Eddy, since sin is only an error of
the mind, then there can be no Redeemer, and Christ s sacrifice
was all in vain. Dr. A. B. Simpson, so well and favorably known
in the ministry of healing, says of Christian Science: "I would rather
be sick all my life, with every form of physical torture, than be
healed by such a lie." If sin and sickness are but a dream, how
.do Christian Scientists reconcile their teaching with scripture, which
declares, "If we say we have 110 sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us." I Jn. 1, 8. If the ministry of healing had been
placed in its rightful position in the Church, such a monstrous
travesty of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as revealed in the false
philosophy of Christian Science, could have never come into exist-
ence. It is the very negation of Christianity, and its whole-hearted


acceptance must lead to a Christless eternity. The testimonies 01
Divine Healing, narrated in another chapter, should convince any
unbiassed mind the efficacy and scripturalness of a ministry that
should never have been lost to the church.
CHRISTIANS OF ALL DENOMINATIONS should demand a true-
statement of Biblical truth regarding the gifts of healing, and thus
prevent multitudes from becoming enslaved in a cult which in the
end must lead to spiritual bankruptcy.
These solemn warnings are not the outcome of blind prejudice
or ignorance, but from the conviction uiat no born again child of
God can have anything in common with this misleading and danger-
ous philosophy.
Divine Healing Testimonies.
ORGANS NOT FUNCTIONING —WRITER HEALED.
The compiler of this publication is 61 years of age, and, with the
exception of the ills peculiar to childhood and early youth, he can-
not call to mind any accident or illness, other than of
a trifling nature, freedom from pain and suffering being a most
remarkable experience, for which he can thank God alone. This
being so, the question would naturally arise, "Can you give a testi-
mony regarding Divine healing?"
During the latter part of my life, I suffered more or less
from that common complaint, peculiar to those who follow seden-
tary occupations, and which, in later years, became so chronic, that
the use of remedies had to be continually resorted to, the organs
refusing to function in a natural manner, and were practically lifeless.
About 16 months ago, Evangelist Smith Wiggleworth, of Brad-
ford, England, much used of God in the ministry of healing, con-
ducted a mission along these lines at Orange, N.S.W. His message
was always based upon Faith, endeavouring to lift his audience from
thoughts of self to a higher conception, that with God all things
were possible, and at one particular meeting the writer, believing that
God did answer the prayer of Faith, stepped out in answer to the Evan-
gelist's appeal for any who desired prayer for bodily healing. I
was prayed for, and anointed with oil in the name of Jesus, according
to James, 5:14, who alone has power to heal, and whilst no miracle
can be recorded, I desire to testify to the Glory of God,, that since
that night, not one single remedy of any kind has since been used
for the complaint for which I was for so many years a sufferer.
A few weeks afterwards, my medical adviser readily granted
me a medical certificate for nerve strain, induced by my occupation
as a telegraphist. A few weeks ago, after these articles were
commenced, my mind became so overwhelmed by the magnitude of
the task confronting me, that for a fortnight my nightly rest did
not exceed three hours. Feeling that a few days' respite were
necessary, I again sought for a medical certificate, but to my sur-
prise it was refused, because of my perfect freedom from any
organic trouble, all that was necessary being a sedative nerve tonic.
Shortly after this experience, a troublesome tooth necessitated atten
tion from the dentist, who, after examination, said that all my teeth
should be extracted, as there were evident traces of pyorrhoea,
but, as my bodily condition was so perfect, he consented to patch


.them up, while under other conditions, their removal would have
been absolutely imperative. Never in my life am I enjoying such
perfect health as at present. These articles are being written in
the early hours of the morning, usually from about 3 a.m., followed
by the daily tasks entailing considerable nerve strain, which surely
indicates a power in operation that can only be Divine. This
testimony is made, believing my deliverance from a long standing,
•chronic complaint, to be in direct answer to the prayer of Faith
asked in the name of Jesus, to whom be all the glory.
IMMEDIATE HEALING.
Whilst engaged in my occupation as nurse in Sydney I met
with a serious accident, fracturing the knee cap, and displacing the
internal cartileges, which resulted in synovitis and arthritis (chronic).
I had the best medical skill both in Sydney and Orange, without any
permanent relief, but just up for a while and then back to bed
again, and so on for eighteen months, and long, weary months
they were, especially when, after about fourteen months, I had the
misfortune to rupture the fibre of the muscles of the other leg,
which resulted in having to lay up for six weeks, and then keep
it tightly bandaged, as the pain at times was most severe. I was
a real invalid, with no prospect of ever being able to follow my
profession again, being otherwise perfectly healthy, it was hard to
look into the future with both legs crippled, to be dependent upon
others to look after and keep me.
How blind I was, for since being invalided to Orange, I had lived
and moved amongst folk who believed and tried to get me to listen
to the scriptural teaching of Divine healing, but I thought differ-
ently. Truly the Bible did tell of wonderful things in bygone days,
but to me those days were gone, and things were different now.
There was great talk of Evangelist Smith Wigglesworth, but I was
not interested, though he was expected to come here. It was no-
thing to me. But God is able to do all things according to the
council of His Own will, and how completely He turned me round.
After the Evangelist had begun his mission, which only lasted five
days, my brother, together with others, spoke most convincingly to
me about the reality of the teaching of the scripture on Divine healing,
and though I was right up till then adverse to it, I went to my Bible
again, and, being like the prodigal son, at the end of myself, I, too,
was led to say, "I will arise and go to my Father," and, praise the
dear Lord, what blessings He had waiting to bestow upon me. I
had been a Christian many years, but I had to be awakened before
I could hear His voice and have Him anoint mine eyes, but as I
read I was arrested by the scripture telling of the blind man upon
whose eyes the Lord put the clay, and sent him to the pool of Siloam
to wash, and he came seeing. On being questioned as to how he
received his sight, and having told them many times, he finally said,
"One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see." (read John
ix.). This kept running through my mind all day Friday and Sat-
urday, also the words of God, "I am the Lord. I change not." So
persistently did these scriptures keep coming to me that I made up
my mind to go that night to the mission, for prayer and the laying
on of hands.
On one leg I had a steel and leather apparatus to keep the
knee joint from locking and pinching, which caused intense pain, and
the other in tight bandages. With the aid of a pair of crutches I got
to the car to be taken to meeting, and though suffering intensely, I
believed I would be healed. After the address I joined with those
who were to be ministered to, and as the Evangelist laid his hands
on me and prayed, I had a strange yet beautiful experience, as


though cold water with great force was being sprayed in jets upon
both my afflicted members where they were injured. So strong seem-
ed to be the force that it even hurt me, and I knew it was the Lord,
but on turning to go away I did not feel any better, and expiessed
disappointment to two or three.
All the way home I wept copiously, and poured out my heart to
God, and continued to say, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.
Arriving home, I was helped out of the car, and after walking a fev
steps, said that I thought I could walk alone. Just as I reached tne
threshold of the door a wall of bright shining light confronted me
so exceedingly bright, that it almost staggered me, and instantly I
cried out, "Glory to God, I'm healed." And truly I was. I went
through the house praising the Lord, and up and down the verandah,
glorifying God and walking as I did before meeting with the acci-
dent. Seeing the crutches, I said, "Take those back to the kind
friend that loaned them to me. I shall not want them any more.
So the crutches were returned just before midnight. Hallelujah.
Old things pass away, behold all things become new. On rising
next morning I discarded the steel and leather support and the
bandages, and have never touched them since, for I was made every
whit whole.
Two days later I was sweetly baptised in the Holy Spirit accord-
ing to Acts ii: 4. My Bible means more to me now than ever. 1
now see my Lord and Saviour as my saviour from sin, the Gieat
Physician, the One who baptises with the Holy Ghost, and the One
who is coining for His bride very soon. I can not praise Him enough
for the great things He has done for me, whereof I am glad. In
giving this testimony my prayer is that some poor suffering one
might be led to see the truth that makes free as it was revealed to
me through the Blessed One who will guide you into all truth.
Anyone desiring fuller particulars or help along these lines, are
kindly invited to write or call on me at the following address—
MISS H. TODD,
43 Grafton Avenue, Naremburn, N.S.W.
RUPTURED HEART HEALED.
Genesis XXiv.: 27. —"I being in the way, the Lord led me- —
seems to be the best explanation of God's wondrous blessings to me
five weeks ago. How I did want to go home! My poor heart was in
such a state, past all human aid, even the casing was ruptured, so
that the least move would cause a lump to protrude like an egg.
For sixteen weeks I just lay prostrate, and how lovely it was to
feel so near home, so often almost through the pearly gates, how
real the dawning of that eternal day was to me, and how I just
longed to enter right in, knowing that if the "earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens." (2 Cor. v.: 1). Truly, I
thought, my labors here in this life were ended, and I was so oent
on going "home to glory," that when asked if I would like to ha\ e
Evangelist Wigglesworth to pray for me, if I should be here when
he came, that 1 said an emphatic "No," and I certainly meant it..
Such a band of dear friends were praying for me everywhere that i
just felt I wanted no more; my mind and my hopes were ail centred
on things above and not on things here below. How little did 1
know that wondrous blessings there were here below that I had not
even tasted of, that my dear loving Saviour wanted me to experience-
before I should pass through those pearly gates, and how graciously
did He work to bring it to pass. Bro. Wigglesworth was not expected
here for nearly two months, when suddenly dates were altered, and


he arrived almost without warning. Of course, this did not concern
me, for my fellow invalid (Sister Todd) and I had made up oui
minds that we weren't going to have anything to do with the
mission or the Evangelist. How true are the Lord's words, 'My
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways,
saith the Lord" (Isa. Ixv:. 8-11). As the mission went on my friend,
who was averse to the teaching of divine healing, began to seaicli
the scriptures afresh to see if these things that were being taught,
and which were confidently affirmed by numbers around who believed,
were so; became so convinced of the truth of God, who said, "I am
the Lord; I change not," that she came into my room saying she
intended going to the mission to have the laying on of hands and
prayer. How wonderfully and sweetly does our precious Lord turn
our feet into His paths, and lead us in a way we know not.
That night I saw her making her way out on her crutches to the
car in great agony, but somehow felt in myself she would be healed.
Praise the Lord! After her return she came skipping down the
steps to my room like the man of old leaping and praising God, and
saying, "Sister, I'm healed, I'm healed," and she was, peifectlj and
completely. Hallelujah! It was wonderful.
All that night I prayed and sought the Lord, and then came the
thought—How could I face my dear Lord, whom I loved with all my
heart, if I just slipped home, having refused the test to prove if He
wanted me to do any more "little corner filling," for Him, when
before my eyes He had wrought such a miracle?" "O, how sweet
to trust in Jesus, just to take Him at His word." In the morning,
the closing day of the mission, the Sabbath Day, and what turned
out to be my day of opportunity, I was waiting for someone to
come down to my room to ask them if they would take a message
to Brother Wrigglesworth, and see if he would come and pray for
me after the morning service. After breakfast I could hear the dear
ones of the house holding a prayer meeting, but as they had closed
the door I could not hear just what was taking place, but how I
was longing for someone to come in to take my message, but 110,
time was getting away, and how I pleaded with the Lord, I must
get someone to be my messenger, and could it be that they were all
too much occupied with their own blessings and were unmindful
of me? Ah no, they were busy praying that the dear Lord would
put it in my heart to call for prayer, and because I had said "No"
so decisively they would not ask me again, but were all asking the
Lord to constrain me to ask for prayer.
Presently they came out, and different ones came into my room,
but did not loek at me or give me the usual smile and kind word,
and I asked each if they would take my message, and not until I
had made the request five times did I get a promise that they would.
I had said "No" once, but had to say "Yes" five times. How long
it seemed before that morning service was over, but at last in came
matron, face beaming, and said, "He's come," and I remember faintly
seeing a man step into the room, and after that saw no man
but Jesus only. How sweetly does the dear Lord manifest Himself.
The Evangelist told his daughter (Mrs. Salter) to put her hands
on my knees, and he put his on my head, and prayed a wonderful
prayer (wonderful to me, because I was right in glory). Then he
laid his hands 011 my heart, and prayed for my healing, at the
same time rebuking death, and commanding it to be dashed away
in Jesus' name. When he first came in he said, "Are you ready to
get up?" I said, "Yes, I am," and now he said, "Get up," and I got up.
My inability to even move just a few minutes before was entirely
forgotten. One thought only seemed to possess me, and that was
to get dressed as quickly as possible. I rushed across the floor, and
lifted down two heavy suit cases filled with books in order to get to


where I could find some clothing. I was in such a hurry, I wanted to
he dressed ready to greet "my girls" of my Bible class, who used to
flock in after church to have a peep at me, sometimes not allowed to
speak to me; and the afternoon befoi'e I had lain semi-conscious
for hours, and those who saw me then thought perhaps it was the
last look, and here I am trying to find my clothes, and let them
see me every whit whole. I was just ready when the door opened,
and a number of them were admitted, and what a shock they got.
Some wept, some laughed, then wept; they hugged me, then would
think of my heart, and let go; but it was all right. I was healed
perfectly and completely, and I felt no weakness after my sixteen
weeks in bed, where I had eaten scarcely anything. All the while
that 1 laid there I was neither hungry nor thirsty, and would take
little sips just to oblige those who brought it to me. Now I wanted
my dinner, and a good dinner I had. 1 was changed, a new cieation,
just filled with God, Divinely healed, raised up in a moment from
the shadow of death to abounding life, saved to serve.
What a wonderful word Faith is! It seems I never knew its
real meaning before. By faith we conquer, we overcome, we enter
into our inheritance. The scriptures declare that all things are pos-
sible to him that believeth.
Some are waiting to see if it will last, but, praise the dear Lord,
this is the fifth week and I am perfectly well and whole, have walked
long distances to visit others, and find that He not only saves but
keeps. The day following my healing I was gloriously baptized in
the Holy Ghost according to Acts ii and 4, and daily and hourly
He fills me with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
I commend the teaching of the Foursquare Gospel to one and
a ll—Jesus Christ our Lord, the Saviour from sin, the Divine Healer,
the One who baptizes with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and our
soon coming King.
Mrs. M. LEGATE POPLE,
"Epworth," 82 Anson Street, Orange.
Fifteen months afterwards, Mrs. Pople actively engaged in
Christian work, can run to catch a train, and has gained over a
stone in weight.
VARICOSE ULCER HEALED.
About 14 years ago I received a knock on the shin at a point
where varicose veins were prominent, later resulting in the formation
of a varicose ulcer. It continued downward, covering ankle bone
and instep. After two years of much suffering, it healed temporar-
ily, but was always very tender and sore. It remained in this con-
dition for some time, when it again broke out, this time accom-
panied with eczema, and from that period, 11 years ago until Febru-
ary, 1927, I was never free from pain. Medical skill was of no
avail. Seventeen months ago Bro. Smith Wigglesworth, an English
Evangelist, much used of God in the Ministry of Healing, held a
mission in Orange. His addresses were very inspiring, and when, at
the close of his address, he called upon anyone in pain to stand,
and he would pray for them, I immediately did so, also believing I
would be healed. During his prayer, I experienced a sensation as
if warm blood was trickling down my leg, the soreness and pain
immediately ceasing. After prayer he asked me to stamp my foot,
which I did, and felt no pain whatever. On the following day, the
bandages were removed, and to my great joy, I discovered that
the ulcer had almost healed, and, in less than a week, all that re-
mained to indicate the spot was a discoloration of the skin. I do
thank God for this wonderful deliverance, for during that period of


11 years, I never enjoyed a proper night's rest, so continuous was
the pain and soreness.—A. M. DEVINE, 101 Anson Street, Orange.
21/7/28.
The mission which resulted in the above irrefutable testimonies
of God's willingness to heal disease and sickness was supported
by probably no more than i per cent, of the population of Orange
and district. Christians generally were prominent by their absence,
either being hostile, unbelieving believers, or indifferent.. Given a
united body of, say, 2'5 per cent, of the Christian community, what
amazing results would be possible where faith was untrammelled
by the above hindrances.
Life After Death —Is Jesus Coming Again
It is appointed unto man once to die, but after this the judg-
ment. Heb. 9:27. And whosoever was not found written in the
book of life was cast into the lake of fire. Rev. 20:15. And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into
life eternal. Mat. 25:46.
Life after death has always been a topic of absorbing interest
to Christians and others alike. The most ignorant races have a very
definite conception of a future state. Present day preachers, how-
ever, say very little regarding future punishment, and, in fact, it
would appear that the modern preacher has grave doubts about the
reality of such a place as hell, or the abode of the wicked and
Christ-rejecting sinner
It is refreshing, therefore, to turn away from those who seem
to pin more faith in what men believe about this subject rather
than what Christ and His inspired disciples have recorded in the
word of God, and listen to what the unlearned and ignorant can
teach. Some years ago, this subject was being discussed with an
officer of the police force, who expressed the opinion that the Biblical
record was unassailable, because of its cerification by an Australian
aboriginal. He had heard that this aged abo. had a wonderful grip
of Biblical truth upon the subject of life after death, and so inter-
ested had he become, that he rode a day's journey into the moun-
tainous country where the old man lived, in order to obtain a first
hand knowledge of his belief.
He found him to be a typical son of the soil, unable to read
or write, and possessing no knowledge whatever of the Bible. In
reply to his Question as to what became of his countrymen after
death, he said that if he had been faithful to the law of his tribe
(which was very strict, especially the moral code) he immediately
after death was met by a pack of dogs who gave him a very friendly
welcome, and escorted him to a near-by forest, abounding with game
of every description, and with running streams of pure water sug-
gesting a never failing supply. Oh, with what ecstacy of delight,
with what rapture, he gazes upon this scene of eternal bliss —no
drought, no devastating fires; Glory, it is heaven! But what about
the member who breaks loose from tribal restrictions, and lives as
he pleases? "Oh," replied the old man, "after death he is met by
the same pack of dogs, but their reception of him is entirely different,
and to escape their hostility, he flees in terror to a rocky hill in
the distance, which, to his horror, he finds infested with venomous
reptiles of all descriptions, and in desperation seeks refuge in the


ot limitless desert, there to wander to and tro,
wretched, tormented." Hell In all its
separated from all that appertains to holiness, punt/ and sooilness
This was the story as my friend understood it, a e iaphiC p ; ic _ ,
and one which surely must have been implanted by the si
of the living God. How true to the Biblical narrative which so
clearly reveals the place and company of the unrepentant sinner
"For without are dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and mur-
derers, and idolators, and whosoever loveth anct maketh a lie.
Dp 09'ltj
' But, you may ask, does not the Bible teach that t^ ei '® I ®,^ n
intermediate state, where the departed soul awaits the lesune-
tion of Gie body? Yes. The dying thief confessed and sought paidon
at the last moment, and Christ said unto him "To-day Shalt thou
be with me in Paradise." The story of the rich man and Lazaius
indicate such a state, where the righteous are in conscious enjoy-
ment and the wicked in conscious torment, sepai ated by an im
Bible scholars say that the word Hell, m many instances, lias
been wrongly translated. As a matter ot fact, none of the wmked
dead are vet in hell. The abode of disembodied spirits is euhei
Paradise or Hades. The righteous dead await the first resurrec-
tion described in ITh. 5:16,17, "For the Lord Himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and
with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together w ltli
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
ever be with the Lord." .
You Will note that it is only the dead in Christ who shall use
in this resurrection. The wicked dead in Hades and Sheol await
the second resurrection, which takes place after the millenium
of 1000 years. At the first resurrection, those who are alive and
are looking for the second coming of our Lord, will also be caught
up in the air, and will reign with Christ during the millennium.
The world is not destroyed at the second coming of Christ but the
living nations who were not caught up will be judged, (see Mt.
25:31, 46). Some of these will go away into everlasting punish-
ment, whilst others will go into life eternal.
Space will not permit of a lengthy discussion regarding the
second coming of Christ, but there are many helpful books published
which you are recommended to study. Bible students are not in one
accord concerning many aspects of this great event. Many believe
that world conditions will gradually improve until all nations ack-
nowledge Christ as Lord, and then will come the millennium. Pres-
ent conditions, nor the Bible itself, do not favor this view. Many
students of the Word believe that Christ's coming is imminent, and
that a period of time will intervene between the first resurrection
and the judgment of the nations already referred to, and that,
during this period, the great tribulation mentioned by Christ in
Mt 24:21, will take place when anti-Christ, the man of sin, will
be revealed and will rule the world with a rod of iron. (See 2nd
Th Ch 2.)•
"And that no man might buy or sell, save be that had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name." Re.
13-17'. At the end of the tribulation, Christ will visibly appear and
reign for one thousand years. Satan will be bound until the thousand
years expire, when he will again be loosed for a season, again
deceiving the nations, but is finally cast into the lake of fire,
where the beast and false prophet are. The second resurrection will
then take place, when all the dead, great and small, who had no
part in the first resurrection, will be judged. (Read carefully


Re. Ch. 20). And whosoever was not found written in the book
of life was cast into the lake of fire." Re. 20:15. Those who take
part in this resurrection will be judged according to Re 20:12. "And
I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books
were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of
life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the book, according to their works."
There is nothing to indicate, in this plain statement of scripture,
that prayer by the living for the dead can be of any av|iil. "We
have the same personality after death as before; the solemn thing
is to live, as it is LIFE that changes us —not death."
This is but a brief summary of what the Bible teaches regarding
future life. The return of the Jews to Palestine, made possible
by the victory of the allies, ana in absolute fulfilment of prophecy
(see Ezk. ch. 37)., merits thoughtful consideration, because around
the Jew, and in the Promised Land, are to culminate the great events
which lead up to the second coming of our Lord.
The conditions which exist throughout the world to-day demand
our attention. Whether it be the second coming or not, a calamity
terrific in its scope is inevitable. For God is not mocked; for
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. "For he that
.soweth to his flesh, will of the flesh reap corruption." Ga. 6: 7, 8.
We may escape the second resurrection and the second death, by
repentance towards God and faith in Jesus Christ.
Remember the story of the flood. For many long years, Noah
was engaged in building the ark, and every blow of the hammer
was a warning of impending danger; yet they only laughed him
to scorn. The flood came, and only eight were saved; they had
.accepted the refuge offered by the ark. Conditions are exactly
the same to-day; the same warning note is being proclaimed, but
the multitudes heed it not, and the flood is sure to come, but, thank
God, we have the ark, Jesus Christ, in the ocean of whose matchless
love we have a refuge that will keep up safe here and through
out the ages of eternity. Digger; I beseech you, if you have not
made the great adventure, make it now. May God help you to
do so. Amen.
Spiritual Power, or This is That.
Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord
of Hosts. Ze, 4.6.
But ye shall receive power, after the Holy Ghost is come upon
you. Ac. 1:8.
This is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; and it shall
come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh. Ac. 2:17.
Digger, away back in the days when you knelt at your mother's
knee, and lisped those simple prayers which came from your heart,
there welled up within your soul a desire to be good, to be true.
And, as you older grew, you determined that you would not permit
those passions which damn the soul to become your master. Have
you made good along these lines? Has that early vision of Jesus
been retained? And are you experiencing that inward joy and peace
which is the rightful inheritance of every child of God? Or, in the
pursuit of happiness, have you found it more often just a "will o'


thp wisn " so elusive, to-day in your grasp, to-morrow so much dead
iTXSSM destiny
that eternity where holiness and purity reign supreme.
Have you sought, by the accumulation of wealth, to heap up
riches in heaven? For what saith the Word, "The love of money m
the root of all evil." Have corroding cares crowded m upon youi
dailv round and has life become a continual strain, ever dreadi g
what the morrow will bring forth? Has the word of God an antidote
for these vague fears and doubts, which so mar the oj:
life's realities. Truly the Word "Is a lamp unto my feet andL a liight
~nt n mv nath " Yes Digger, for therein we also lead, beek y
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness; all these things,
shall be added unto you."_ For He will surely withhold 110 good thing
from those who walk uprightly.
Has some besetting sin sapped your will? And are you (lll " ni "
down stream? If so, let me point you to Him Whom you promised
to follow, ere launching out on the tempestuous voyage ot .
Has some uncharted rock wrecked the frail craft, which nov,
maybe, lies stranded on the shores of time? And, hopeless and help-
less, you feel life is all in vain.
Digger, I repeat, lay hold of Jesus, who alone can again launch
that battered hulk, and when you let down your anchor of Faith
and Hope upon the rock of His unfathomable love, He will hold >ou
fast, no matter how tierce the gale. And then make sail once more
for the distant port; but, before recommencing your voyage, Tarij
ye awhile," for that is just where you failed at the commencement.
" Let me take you to a scene enacted nearly 2000 years ago. A
company of people, 120 to be exact, met in an upper room, amongst
the number being Mary, the mother of Jesus, for she was human
enougS to need 1 touch from on high. And Peter you remember
how he failed his Master, but a few weeks before. What a coward
he proved himself to be—yes, he was there, too weak, impulsive Petei .
Why had they gathered there? What were they waiting foi . -J
days, we are told, day after day, praising and blessing God 1 hey
were all converted men and women. Jesus was very rea, to them,
but there was something more needed. But why wait ten days, you
may well enquire. Well, you see, Digger, the Holy Spirit cannot
take possession and indwell this tabernacle of clay, whilst pride,
worldly ambition, bitterness, and selfishness and unbelief hold sa ay,
for these characteristics are most marked in many of Christ s disci-
ples as they are to-day, and these evil propensities had to be laid
bare and confession made unto God, Who alone is able to forgive,
and then what happened, whilst in a spirit of loving unity wit 1
heart and voice in one accord?
Suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as a migluy rushing
wind .... and they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to
speak in other tongues as the spirit gave them utterance. This is
what they were waiting for, enduement of power from on high,
equipping for service that they might go out to the uttermost parts
of the earth and proclaim the unsearchable riches, the gospel ot
Jesus Christ. .
What was the result? Did this power manifest itself imme-
diately 7 Yes; for w r e learn that Peter, who had so dismally failed
his Master on that fateful morning when twitted by the damsel, as
being one of His disciples, stood up, and, with a bold fearlessness
that brooked no opposition, declared that Jesus, whom they had
crucified, was indeed the Christ, and so effective was the message
that they were pricked in their heart, and cried out, What shall


we do 7 " Then Peter said unto them (notice the clear and defined
order of spiritual growth) "Repent, and be baptised, every one of
SOU in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of « andlye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. And the result ot that
first sermon preached under the power of the Holy bpirit was
the conversion of 3000 souls. And in less than a generation, almost
the Uien known world was won for Christ, and that by men who
were mostly ignorant and unlearned, from a worldly point o view
q av Digger are you a regular churchgoer? What impression
is made S your heart as you listen to the expounding of the
Word. Is your conscience disturbed? Has the preacher cut d p
nnfi laid bare the innermost recesses of your soul. And aie you
impelled to cry out from the very depths of your heart, What must
Tdoso be saved 7 Or do you voice the expressions usuahy heard
when a pleasing discourse has been delivered, "Beautiful service;
eloquent preached, (cultured speaker."? And to-morrow, Diggei,
what about it? The same old enemy, the same old failuie, no
no conviction of sin. Pleasing discourses won't save souls, unless the
dynamic power of the Holy Ghost is behind the message. The
Prea^tiid° n jLu\ ea w weret'he conditions which should exist to
merit an entrance into His Kingdom? "Except ye be converted
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven " Now this is a very plain statement, and one that can
Sot be gainsaid. But what do we flnd to-day? Is the Proclamation
of the Word so heart searching that multitudes aie crying out, A 1 i
must we do?" One sermon 3000 converts! One thousand thousan
sermons how many converts? Read the statement m an eailiei
chapter,'relating to the appalling conditions existing m three ot tlie
great Protestant churches in America. Not a single convert in 1927.
If the same test was applied to Australia, would results be ai
better? You are conversant with the topics of the day, have y u
heard'of many people being born again which miracle ot grace
is absolutely imperative if we are to see the Kingdom ot God. Has
some mighty power so revolutionised lives that you heai it said
that men and women have repented of their sins, and are joytu y
proclaiming Jesus as Lord and Master? For I tell you. Digger, when
the power of God gets you, there will be a shout m the camp. o
the soul ever reaching out for the infinite can never rest oonte
until God, in His wonderful fullness, has taken control, and t en
the world will know that something has happened, however small
that Digger "you 'will never experience true joy and happiness until
you are linked to the Most High, through Jesus Christ, in glad
surrender and abandonment to Him. For then, out ot your inner-
most being, will flow those rivers of living water which Jesus
promised to those who were baptised with the Holy Ghost.
This is your rightful inheritance, and nothing less should satisfy
you for in His word He has declared, "Whatsoever ye shall ask in
my'name that will I do." Put his promise to the test; get out ot
the rut; aim high, and who knows, "to what star you may hitch your
Peter was just an ordinary fisherman, without any special
aualifications, but when he allowed God to take control, he could
sway the multitude, and by his impassioned zeal and fervency ot
spirit, countless thousands were won for Christ.
If all around us is failure and spiritual dearth, must we not come
to the conclusion that the men and women whom God has called
to his ministry have not yet "tarried at Jerusalem"? The locomotive,
however well equipped, has no power until steam is generated.
When that takes place, the dead, inert mass of iron and steel


becomes a pulsating, throbbing thing of life, whose potentialities for
effective service are only limited by curtailment of its driving power,
steam There is 110 reason whatever to doubt that, if ministers of
the gospel and church leaders generally would take Gou at His Word,
this present world would be evangelised within a generation This
is no idle statement; conditions are no worse than they were twenty
centuries ago; the need is equally as great; facilities for travel and
spread of the gospel are incomparably more favorable, education
and knowledge are widespread; church organisation and machinery
are far superior. But, "This is not That," and until "This is 1 hat,
failure and defeat will prevail.
Scrapped ! ! !
Covet earnestly the best gifts. 1 Cor. 12: 31.
It is enough for the disciple that he is as His Master, and the
servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household.
Mt. 10:25.
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation. Because Ihej
said, he hath an unclean spirit. Mk. 3: 29, 30.
Scrapped. There is nothing inspiring about the word. Your
thoughts at once revert to the rubbish heap, where useless and
worn out articles are cast aside, to be burnt or carted to the runbisn
tip. When you gaze upon some graphic illustratiorr m winch is
depicted a mighty engine of death, obsolete, charged with explosives,
an electric button is touched, a heel and a lurch, and v, hat v, as >nce
the pride of a nation topples over and disappears into the depths
of the sea, is there not a pang of regret that man's handiwork, rep-
resenting hundreds of thousands of pounds, should meet with such
an ignominious end? Or perhaps the busy housewife, putting in
order her household treasures, comes in contact with some forgotten
trinket, not now the fashion; but, oh, what sweet memories are
associated with it. A glance of the eye, a handclasp, and with
a heart sob, it is reverently replaced. Though out of date, its
fragrant memories can never die.
And does not the scrap heap remind you of some one in days
gone by, when the world was very beautiful, becoming sidetracked
by the powers of evil, bereft of his will, unable to walk the stiaignt
and narrow path of duty, who has ended his life a derelict, despised,
forgotten, with no one to love or care for him?
Has he been entirely forsaken? Ah, no. There is one who has
never let the memory of his boyish face fade into forgetfulness; for
in some sad and lonely home there is a broken hearted mothei,
who, on bended knees, lifts up her soul to God, and as the blinding
tears fall, pleads in mercy for him who was once the darling of
her heart'. Are those prayers answered? Yes. The lowest depths
of hell, be they ever so deep, must yield to the prayers of a Godly
motner claiming her boy in the name of Jesus. And in that great
day, when time shall be no more, when the books are opened, surely
his name will be there. <(
But I have somewhat digressed, Digger. Our text says, covet
earnestly the best gifts." What does this mean? If you will read
12th chapter of Ist Cor., you will learn that God planted certain


gifts in the church, of most wonderful power and value; without
them the church could not progress. They were given for a very
specific purpose. Let us enumerate them—Wisdom, Knowledge,
Faith Healing, Miracles, Prophecy, Discerning of Spirits, divers kinds
of Tongues, 'interpretation of Tongues. The richest and choicest
gems with which a loving bridegroom could adorn his bride, are not
to be compared with the glory and splendour of these precious
gifts given by the Holy Spirit to equip and prepare the Church, the
Bride of Christ the Bridegroom, for that glorious day when will
take place the marriage of the Lamb; when the Bride, arrayed in
garments spotless and white, will be presented to God the Father
What would you think of the earthly bride appearing at the
altar, with garments all stained and torn, with the precious jewels,
which had cost the bridegroom so much, discarded, cast aside, just
as so much rubbish? Would it not break your heart if you were
in the unhappy position of being the bridegroom? Digger, the
Church of Jesus Christ, His Bride, has done this thing exactly, and
not only has she done this, but accuses His faithful children who are
endeavouring to be true to Him, who have claimed that the gifts
of the Holy Spirit are their rightful adornment, as being possessed
bv the powers of darkness. To what greater depths could ingratitude,
descend? And how must the Holy Spirit be grieved? Can you won-
der that the Church is dead, and that the power of God is not being
manifested in our midst? Iniquity abounds as never before in this
fair land, where evil stalks unabashed in our midst, shedding around
the vilest of odours, emanating from minds devoid of any semblance
of holiness and purity. And the pity of it is that the Church has
at her disposal such power that she could, in less than a generation
make this beautiful Australia the cleanest, the purest, the holiest,
the most God blessed nation in the universe. You are probably
amazed at these statements, but, alas, they are only too true, for,,
without one scrap of scripture to justify themselves, theologians
and scholars assert, and have been assenting for hundreds of years,
that the gifts of the Holy Spirit were only placed in the church to
be used in the early Apostolic days. If the early church needed these
gifts to combat the overwhelming forces of evil, then so preva-
lent, how much more does the church to-day need them, when the
powers of darkness were never so arrogant, never so presumptions,
as in the daily Press, revealed so clearly the whole world over.
The Church of Jesus Christ has scrapped the gifts of the
Holy Spirit. This is a definite and clear statement, and the church
is challenged by the truths in these articles, which emanate from
one who, while he cannot claim to possess any one of the gifts
mentioned, does positively assert that he has received the Giver of
the gifts, in the manner prescribed by the Word of God —to prove
when and where the gifts were withdrawn. If the Church of God
is to make good, and deliver Australia from the hands of the
oppressor, then she, too, must also seek to be endued with the powei
from on High, so that God might bestow these gifts as seemeth good
to Him.
Like the traveller to a far country, so has the church, by her
attitude of.unbelief, labelled her equipment, needed every moment
of the day, "Not wanted on the voyage." And how we do need
especially the gifts of wisdom and knowledge to-day, is emphasised
bv the arrogance of man's wisdom. For we have the spectacle of
one endowed by God with wonderful intellectual powers, with much
knowledge begotten by scientific research, making the astounding
assertion that there is no life after death. Having the presumptuous
audacity in so many words, if not direct, to call God a liar; for,
in the Gospel of John, it is recorded that Jesus, the Son of God,
said, "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall


lie live; and whosoever LIVETH and believetli in me shall never
die." Jn. 11, 21-26.
What colossal ignorance, and to what depths of shame will the
ivcrship of the intellect lead its victims. Almost as these lines are
being written, an aged man, nearing the end of life's journey, disturbed
by doubts arising from the publicity of these unwise and foolish
statements, says that many will end in a lost eternity because of
the confirmation of their theories regarding future life, propounded
by such a scholar and scientist, who, if the gifts of the Holy
Spirit were in the church, could have never reached the place of
spiritual poverty in which he has, by his utterances, unmistakably
revealed himself to be. And what of the gift of healing? Think of
the countless thousands who have endured many years of agony
because they believed it was God's will that they should suffer. Dig-
ger, can you imagine a loving parent continuing to punish his
child after the child has humbly acknowledged its fault and pleaded
for forgiveness? No; would not the father bestow upon the child all
the best gifts at his disposal, permissable for its welfare? And should
we place God on a lower plane than the earthly father?
In the gift of healing, He has placed in the church a means where-
by his sinning, repentant people might be completely- restored. Thou-
sands the world over are proving, by their renewed bodies, that this
is so. Why should you and those whom you love be deprived of
this gracious gift, which means so much to poor sin-sick humanity?
Oh, let us not be misled any longer by the vain theories of man,
but get right back to the Word of God, and believe what it says,
so simple, yet so true.
You will probably ask, Why have these precious gifts been
scrapped? Echo answers, Why! All the satisfaction you will get
from the theologian and those who have followed his teaching, is
that it is "not for to-day," so that ends the matter. Man has spoken,
he apparently knows more than God. And, unfortunately, all these
years men, or nearly all of them, have gone on believing man in
preference to the Word of God. Can you wonder, then, that Chris-
tianity has in many respects been such a failure? But, given the
opportunity, nothing can withhold the mighty power of God. And that
time will come, when ministers of the gospel are prepared to take
God at His word. Tarry ye until endued with power, and going out
in His name, then the powers of darkness must be overcome, and
the name of Jesus exalted and honored.
This is our rightful privilege, and you will have the opportunity
(D.V.), before many months elapse, of having the gospel preached in
Australia by one of God's servants, who has, in England, been might-
ily used in breaking down the strongholds of Satan. Pray much that
God will prepare the way, so that the standard of Jesus Christ will
for ever be set on high, never again to be lowered in compromise
to the teaching of theories propounded by man.
The Conversion and Baptism of a Dinkum
Digger.
A little child shall lead them. Is. 11; 6.
Let him know that he which converteth the sinner from the
-error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins. Ja. 5; 20.


Some twenty years ago the writer, in order to piosecute
zeal for aggressive evangelism, resigned from his PO® 11 ' 011 '" 11
Postal Department. Offering my services to the church of which I
was a member, was accepted and appointed as an assistant to a
minister—one of God's own gentlemen—who for over 21 years had
ministered to the spiritual needs of a flock embraced m a parish
of such an extent that a month was needed to encircle its circum-
ference per horse and sulky, the usual method of locomotion in
This itinerating ministry suited me admirably, tor my
of sermons was naturally very limited. My capacity of expression
in this direction was fully taxed by two sermons a month The work
progressed splendidly, and I was congratulating myself that my new
found vocation was likely to become permanent. Unfortunately, how-
ever my desire for doing things outweighed my wisdom, which in the
end necessitated a departure for "fields afresh and pastures new,
eventually leading me back whence I started.
It was in this country centre that I first became acquainted
with "Digger Bill," then a young man not out of his teens. His
cheery smile and happy disposition were assets which ever made
him a favorite among his fellows.
When war broke out, "Digger" was not unmindful ot his duty.
Enlisted and served his nation, you may be sure with distinction,
although, like most "Dinkum Diggers," he is very silent regarding his
exploits at the front. His experience along certain lines, it not
profitable, were certainly most interesting, for his complex mind
was —well, perhaps that had better be left unsaid. He may tel
you the story himself some day. His sense of humor is verj, keen,
and anything he has to say is well worth listening to.
Although he was reared in a religious atmosphere, Diggei, at
this period, had not developed the spiritual complex, which now so
dominates his whole being. Returning from the war somewhat
broken in body, he shortly afterwards, which was probably the
wisest step in his career to date, married, and chose for his pait-
ner a most estimable Christian lady, indicating that wisdom was
not lacking in his mental equipment. Up to this period, and for
some years afterwards, his interest in spiritual realities were very
negligible. But some four years after his marriage, a chain of cir-
cumstances arose which changed the whole tenor of his life, and
to-day, in "Digger Bill," the Church of Jesus Christ possesses a
follower whose manner of life is worthy of the closest imitation.
When his daughter, Nancy, was about three years of age, it
became necessary for his wife to enter a hospital for medical
treatment, and during her absence it devolved upon Digger to
mother the little girlie. Amongst the duties assigned him was to
hear her evening prayer—quite a new role for him but the outcome
has been stupendous, both in his own life and the life of everyone
whom his genial warm-hearted personality touches. For when she
lifted up her little soul in prayer, concluding with, "God bless
daddy, and make him a good man," it became as the heating of a
mighty hammer upon a rock of granite, which had to give way under
its repeated and persistent blows, for when his wife returned some
three weeks later, "Digger" had made the "great adventure," and
discovered, like untold millions, that Jesus Christ is the altogether
lovely one', the chiefest of ten thousand to his soul. He who had
in the past continuously turned a deaf ear to the voice of con-
science, and whose heavenly vision had become obscured by a life of
materialism, was won for Jesus by the prayers of his little girl.
God bless her. How realistic is the text, "A little child shall lead
them." From that moment he has not looked back, and to-day
there is no more esteemed or respected citizen in the town in


which he resides than "Digger Bill." Everything he touches turns
to gold. He is a veritable encyclopaedia. When in doubt, ask
"Digger." His companionship is a privilege, and his fellow officers
love him to a man. By the providence of God, our friend a few
years ago was transferred to the same town in which the writei
resides, much to our mutual profit.
"Digger" became very responsive to religious truth, and as
scripture was unfolded to him regarding the continuity of the gifts
of the Holy Spirit in the church, he being an "Israelite indeed, in whom
is no guile," readily embraced them. Some two and a-half years ago he
accepted an invitation to a meeting where believers were seeking
the Baptism of the Holy Spirit. He had never before attended a
meeting of a like nature, it was all new to him, and those who have
any experience of Pentecostal evangelism know what a contrast
there is in the methods of prayer and praise to that of the ordinary
churches. There is some noise and fire in a Pentecostal prayer
meeting. .
After an address had been given upon the Baptism of the Holy
Spirit, an invitation was extended to any who desired to seek for
this blessing to step forward for prayer. To my surprise, "Digger"
was among the first to respond, and kneeling in entire abandonment
to the most High God, hands were laid on in the name of Jesus,
and immediately he was overwhelmed by the power of the Holy
Spirit. In a few moments he commenced to speak in another tongue
as the Spirit gave him utterance. Staggering back like a man filled
with new wine, he was bubbling over with joy and gratitude, which
has since found expression in a deeper and more devoted service
to his Master than ever before.
He is a most capable Sunday School teacher, and as secretary of
the local Sunday Schools' Union, is exerting an influence amongst
the young people of the community which will bear much fruit in
the days to come. Dr. Poole, the president of the world's Combined
Sunday Schools' Union, in response to the welcome extended to
him during his visit to the town in which "Digger" resides, publicly
stated that the meetings held there, considering their limited organ-
ising facilities as compared with city centres, surpassed any other
meeting in which he had participated since his arrival in Australia,
which reflected much credit upon the committee of which "Digger"
was the organising secretary. I believe "Digger" could be induced
to relate his life's story to the men to whom this book is dedicated,
and such a reunion would be most profitable to all concerned, and
if the writer can be of any assistance in this direction, then his time
and services are placed unreservedly at the disposal of the men
who so nobly stood by the world in her hour of need.
Spiritual Gifts, or Spiritualism—A
Challenge Examined.
(By Pastor Donald Gee, Edinburgh, Scotland.)
A new challenge has come to the Church, in the last few years,
a challenge that is still growing in measure, weight, and audacity.
It is the challenge of spiritualism.
Spiritualists can no longer be reckoned among! those who prac-
tise a cult but little above the fortune-teller or the conjuror; the


coarser elements may still remain in measure, but spiritualism has
made such advances 'that scientists and theeiogians aiike have been
comnelled to take notice and m some cases even to be appare 1 y
converted to a belief in the reality of its claims to the genuinely
stocere antl thoughtful people has been
aroused from far more balanced motives than those which acduat
the bereaved ones who merely seek supposed intercourse with die
dead to allay the pangs of sorrow and loss. rhur-
Spiritualism has become religious; there aie Spintualist Chur
ches" now; and the claim is boldly made that the supernatural ele-
ments of Apostolic Christianity are now at last being rightly inter-
preted and reproduced. The challenge has been put to a church that
is manifestly lacking to-day in these things that unless the supe -
natural elements of the spiritualistic seance become accepted and
incorporated into normal Church life, the results will be fatal to
Vital The audacity of this may sound almost like sheer impudence, but
we that it is an issue worth pondering.
TheJ spiritualists have evidently found m the protessedlj supei
natural a powerful attraction to increasing multitudes of men and
women to-day, and it is a disquieting fact surely that many of these
were one time church members.
It is a thoroughly accepted, fact of history with most of us that
the earthly ministry of Jesus Christ and the early experience and
testimony of the Christian Church possessed striking elements ot
the supernatural.
It is an equally obvious fact that the Church as a whole to-daj
no longer possesses this supernatural element in its midst, and, what
is more, goes considerably farther—emphatically teaching that these
things are not now to be expected or countenanced.
But the churches have been compelled to take notice of the
claims of spiritualism all the same, even to the length of setting up
■official committees of enquiry. A very significant suggestion made by
a, minister on one of these committees was that the psychic gifts of
the seance should be recognised as identical with the spiritual
gifts which Paul enumerates in 1. Cor. 12, 8-11.
Others, of course, of a sturdier allegiance to the old paths and
the Word of God, have taken up the cudgels—in some cases very
effectively—by writing against spiritualism on the lines of it following
practices definitely forbidden and cursed by the Bible; of its obvious
fallacies in some directions; and of its disastrous results personally
in so many who have taken it up.
This has all been to the good, but unfortunately has only been
on an almost entirely negative line.
Our present purpose is not so much to presume to make yet
another attempt to prove the error and danger of spiritualism as
to endeavour to draw attention to the necessity and provision foi
.a. POSITIVE answer to its claims; a path not so well trodden, but
whose value and necessity we trust must be apparent to all. The
thirsty traveller in the desert is little helped by proof that the mirage
is a deception, his great need is guidance to a genuine fountain of
water.
Is it not a fact that so often popular errors have found their
opportunity in the failure of the Church to present Truth that should
legitimately be expected?
The denial that healing for the body has any place now in the
ministry of the Gospel of Jesus Christ has given what is called
■Christian Science its great opportunity: the silence from so many
pulpits of clear and forceful exposition of the revelation of the


Bible concerning human destiny has given "Russellism" a ful
chance to offer its apparent satisfaction to hungry and enqui g
'"'"'in like manner the denial of the supernatural in present experi-
ence by the vast majority ot even evangelical churches and ministers
has only played into the hands of the spiritualists. ~,
We do not think that human desire for some measure of the
supernatural and manifestation of the spiritual world is inherent y
wrong in itself; it is a natural outcome of the universal religious
instinct. Like all other perfectly natural and legitimate desires, it
can be wrongly and illegitimately satisfied. The results will he t
same as oil other lines —ruin of the very powers thus abused. Heie
lies, we believe, the principle that must make spiritualistic practices
ruinous to those who pursue them regularly. , ,
But the question naturally follows: Is there not a legitimate
satisfaction possible for human longing after spiritual manifestation
Has God provided true and ennobling means ot gratifying all otl e
natural desires and left this unprovided for?
It is not too much to affirm that the rvhole story and revela-
tion of the Bible emphatically denies such a thought. G° ( l 1S con "
sistently revealed as granting varying manifestations of the s uP® r "
natural from the opening chapter of Genesis to the last page ot the
New Testament history. The manifestations vary in form and fre-
quency; they are always traceable to a pure source ot Divine
wisdom and love; but they are always there.
Neither, be it noted, is this in any conflict at all with lives
governed by 7 the principle of faith; witness the supreme examples
quoted in Heb. 11. Faith does not imply a silent heaven, it is
rather the life consistently lived to a heaven that in great crises
is sufficiently vocal. .
Let us boldly affirm at least that in the great Divine relations
contained and recorded in our Old and New Testaments the super-
natural element is distinctly planted and firmly rooted by the veiy
hand of God Himself, and that this very supernatural element con-
tributed and contributes in a very large measure towards making
those revelations so eminently satisfying to the human soul.
Our interest is particularly in the New Testament, and it is
granted by practically all the ministry of Jesus Christ and His
early Apostles was Divinely attested by the supernatural, and also
that the early Christian Church was endowed with supernatural gifth
of the Spirit.
Unfortunately, it is almost equally universally taught that these
supernatural elements in Christianity should no longei be expected,
that they ceased, and ceased finally, long centuries ago, about the
close of the Apostolic age.
It is always difficult to find really convincing reasons advanced
for this position. The most competent expositors we have examined
give one the impression that they are excusing an obvious short-
coming in the Church, and in their own experience to-day, rather
than really expounding the Divine purpose revealed in the Word
of God.
It is the attempt to place the responsibility on God of arbitrar-
ily withdrawing certain gifts from the Church at a certain period,
whereas the truer and more honest interpretation of the double
witness of Scripture and History would seem to be that the respon-
sibility was and "is" with an unbelieving and luke-warm Church.
The question, rightly understood, appears to be not of a Divine
withdrawal, but of a human losing.
John Wesley, at any rate, appreciated this with rare insight
We quote from his sermon, "A more excellent way":


"It does r .ot, appear that 'fteae extraordinary gifts, of the Hi /
Ghost were common in the Church for more than two 01 three
centuries. We seldom hear of them after that fatal period when the
Emperor Constantine called himself a Christian, and, from
imagination of promoting the Christian cause thereby, heaped inches
and power and honor upon the Christians in general, but in particular
upon the Christian clergy. From this time they almost totally ceased,
very few instances 1 of the kind are found. The cause of this was
not (as has been vulgarly supposed) because there was no mme oc-
casion for them, because all the world was become Christian. 1
is a miserable mistake; not a twentieth part of it was nominally
Christian. The real cause was that 'the love ot m{any, almost,
all Christians, so called, was 'waxed cold.' The Christians hau
no more of the Spirit' of Christ than the other heathen Hie Son
of Man, when He came to examine His Church, could hardly line,
'faith upon earth'; this was the real cause why the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost were no longer to be found in the Christian
Church; because the Christians were turned heathen again, and had
only a dead form left."
Such a testimony, from such a witness, is well worth ponder-
ing. God honored Wesley's faitli by many instances of downright
supernatural experience, as his "Journals abundantly testify.
Present-day orthodox Christian denial of the supernatural in the
normal life of the Church is now definitely challenged—and it
cannot be denied—by the spiritualists. Neither is the challenge
merely doctrinal and theoretical; remarkable manifestations of some
sort of presumably supernatural power are advanced as actual
examples of the gifts of the Spirit possessed by the early Church.
It is not surprising that among those with a truer conception
of the character and purpose of the spiritual gifts of the N.T. and
of their place as essentially concerned with the uplifting of Jesus
Christ as Lord (1 Cor. 12, 3), such a suggestion is revolting and
blasphemous.
But the mere denial of the claim of spiritualism, the mere
exposure of the false is not sufficient to fully meet the case: after
ail it is only negative and something positive is still demanded. Let
us therefore hasten to a positive statement.
AVe submit the following:—THAT GOD HAS PROATDED AND
WILL PROVIDE A POSITPVE ANSAVER TO THE CLAIMS OF
SPIRITUALISM; AND THAT ANSAVER IS A CHURCH POSSESS-
ING AND EXERCISING IN FULL MEASURE ALL THE SPIRIT-
UAL GIFTS ENUMERATED IN 1 COR. 12, 8-11.
This would provide a complete, a positive answer to the counter-
feit claims of spiritualism; would ensure the Divinely provided and
legitimate place of the supernatural in Christian experience; and
last, though not least, would bring a revival and influx of Holy
Ghost power into the Church not experienced since Apostolic days.
It only remains for us, as briefly as possible, to examine this
ground from a practical point of view, and approach the question
from the experimental standpoint.
AVe believe we can truthfully set forth the whole issue as one
of the genuine spiritual battlefields of the hour.
For let it once be understood that in Spiritualism (so called)
we have a great uprising of supernatural manifestation from beneath;
but that the purpose of God to-day is to again have the Divinely
supernatural established in His Church; and it becomes clear that
we have the elements of a great spiritual conflict. Satan will resist
the purpose of God with all the subtlety of hell.
Unfortunately he finds all too powerful an ally in human unbelief
.and weakness. The persistent teaching that these things are "not


for to-day"—utterly groundless as it is from Scripture has so perme-
ated most of us that we desperately need, like Peter s congrega-
tion on that first day of Pentecostal manifestation of the Spmts
power, to save ourselves, "from this untoward generation."
Where any present personal experience of the supernatural is
concerned it is not too mucn to say that we have been trained in
systematised unbelief and unexpectancy since our earliest Sunday
School days. The wonder is not that God has'done so little on
these lines, but that He has graciously been able to do so much.
The ruts of formality that bind most Church services, often
falsely labelled "reverence," and the denominational traditions that
stamp the conventional almost with the authority of truth, make
very effectual barriers against any manifestations of the Spirit to-
day, unless they are blown on one side temporarily by the dynamite
of some sweeping revival.
Coupled with this there is the fear and hesitancy that is natural
whenever we touch the unfamiliar, and especially in the spiritual
sphere. We do not write thus to "throw stones." It has all been
real enough in personal experience. Our purpose is to make a little
more clear some of the things that hinder manifestations of the
Spirit.
Where, at last, God has had His way and has been allowed
to work freely, human weakness —urged by Satanic subt.'ety behind
it —has gone to the very opposite extreme and has marred and hin-
dered the work of the Holy Ghost by folly and fanaticism, by asso-
ciation with erroneous doctrine, and by genuine gifts of the Spirit's-
exercised unwisely and not according to the only safe order and
precedent revealed in the New Testament.
A clearer vision of the fact that all this, in its final analysis,,
is only the working of Satan to hinder God's purpose being fulfilled
may help some to pause and reconsider their attitude iir every way.
' But the truth is there all the time; unspeakably precious to all
who apprehend it. God is marching on to victory. Assembles are
growing up steadily where spiritual gifts are constantly exercised
in perfectly Scriptural order and blessing. Leaders are being raised
up with experience to direct and deal with those hitherto unfamiliar
and unexpected situations which such manifestations produce.
Yet the joy of seeing the Lord restore the gifts to His Church
is deeper even than simply recognising a return to New Testa-
ment Christianity; it is with a deep appreciation of the wisdom
and power of our God that we now more and clearly trace the
Divine purpose to THUS provide the perfect answer to the Divinely
foreseen revival of the devil's counterfeit of spiritualism.
Spiritual movements are often judged by their externals and
excrescences —the cranks, the faddists, the unusual elements —to
the great danger of completely losing the truth embodied in the
movement.
The great Pentecostal Movement, or "Tongues" Movement, as
it has sometimes been called by the unsympathetic, seems badly
needing to be rescued from friends and foes alike in this matter of
recalling to a just appreciation of the particular truth at the heart
of its special testimony.
Its friends need to appreciate with even greater zest the fact
that its special testimony to spiritual gifts for to-day is most seas-
onable and opportune: there is certainly no occasion for it to be
obscured with that splendid evangelical and missionary activity
which marks their efforts increasingly. There can he no real con-
flict between proper manifestations of the Spirit and true soul-
saving work, such as we have sometimes heard implied: the Early
Church being our witness.
And the vision must never get narrowed down to simply the


production of yet another denomination; in spite of opposition let
Ft bum "villi conviction, purity and large-heartcdneaa until it touches
with truly Pentecostal and Apostolic experience the whole Chinch
01 G Those who have actively opposed the Movement have nearly
always focussed their criticism upon the externals, not without just
reason at times it may be freely admitted.
But the truth at the centre, the genuine operation ot the
Holv Spirit at the heart, should be the true focussing point, \/e
trust that the value and need of a testimony just now to the present
possession and exercise of the Gifts of the Spirit will appear with
new force through what we have written regarding the challenge
of spiritualism. ~ , ,
Appreciation of the fact that the whole field represents a real
spiritual battleground should make for more sympathetic co-opera-
tion with and among those who are sincerely, prayerfully and thought-
fully striving together with the Spirit of God to the accomplishment
of this glorious vision of a Church, returning, ere the Lord comes
to a full enjoyment of those supernatural gifts and qualities which
the New Testament has faithfully portrayed as a constant pattern
and inspiration for all succeeding generations of believeis.
May we close by repeating our positive statement, '"God has
provided and will provide a positive answer to the claims of Spirit-
ualism, and that answer is a Church possessing and exercising in full
measure all the spiritual gifts enumerated in 1 Cor. 12, 8-11.
Paul's Vision, and the Baptism of
the Holy Ghost.
(By Evangelist Smith Wigglesworth).
"Whereupon, O King Agrippa, 1 was not disobedient unto the
heavenly vision." Acts 26:19
I want to speak of Pentecost and the fullness of the Spirit,
and of what God is able to do with any man who is yielded to Him.
We need to kindle in one another a holier zeal than we have ever
possessed before. No man can meet the need of to-day but the
man filled with God. God has promised to fill us. You may be
filled with the mighty power of God, and yet in a way not rea-
lise it; be used by a power apart from yourself, a power that keeps
you from self-exhibition. Just as the sun by its mighty power
brings certain resources to nature, so I believe the power of God
in the human soul is capable, as we exercise living faith, of bring-
ing about things which otherwise could never be accomplished.
If you will read the twenty-sixth chapter of Acts you will see
Paul testifying to his conversion, to the commission given him to
go to the Gentiles to turn them from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan to God, and to the fact that he "was not disobe-
dient unto the heavenly vision." In Acts 9, we read that for three
days he was brought to a state of broken-heartedness. And then
God had him. It is a wonderful thing when God gets you. You
are not much good for anything until God gets you. When God gets
you, you are loosened, you are free, but you act only as He wills
you to act. And when you act only for Him and are living in


the Spirit, some things that are worth while will be accomplished
a " TheLteve that in those three days Paul was brought to a place
of weeping, contrition, heart-meltedness, yieldedness It is when * e
are brought to a place of real repentance, of broken-heartedness,
of contrition, that is possible for God's likeness to be stamped
en us It is then that the water ot lite begins to fill us, and . .
are open to the floods of the Spirit which come in the Baptism m
the Holy Ghost, we will find that the Holy Ghost will not only
ise our'own life, but rivers of life will flow from us, n\eis that
will touch many others. No one can tell what a river can do when
it is set flowing by God. The ever deeping river that
speaks of, brought abundance of life everywhere it flowed. So it is
with the life in the Holy Ghost.
A life in the Holy Ghost is one of selflessness. You will re-
member that our Lord Jesus, after He was filled with the■ S pi ri l ,
refused to make bread for Himself at the suggestion of Satan but
we find that He reached a place where He could make bread toi
thousands. And when I come to the place where I letuse to live
for my own selfish interests, then God will do something toi me,
and by His grace 1 will gladly do anything for Him that He may
desire me to do. . ...
In his helpless and brokenness, Paul cried: Lord, what wilt
Thou have me do?" That cry reached to heaven, and as a result
there came to him a holy man touched with the same fire and zeal
that filled his Master and he laid his hands upon Paul and said, Re-
ceive thy sight and be filled with the Holy Ghost." And with that
word of' power a celestial glory came into the life of Paul. lhat
was for Paul the beginning of a life in the Holy Ghost. It is endent
from Paul's testimony that God gave him a vision, a vision to wmch
he was not disobedient. There should always be a vision in the
Baptism in the Spirit. Be sure and get the vision of God s plan
and purpose for your life. But visions are no good except we
make them real, except we claim them as they come and make them
our own, and the purpose of our life is to carry out what the Spirit
reveals by vision.
' Many people lack the power because they do not keep the
vision, because they do not allow the fire which has come to
continue to burn. There must be a continuous burning on the altar.
Holy Ghost power in a man is meant to be an increasing force, an
enlargement. When Ezekiel saw the vision of the river that came
out from the threshold under the altar, that river did not grow smaller
and smaller, but larger and larger. That is God's plan always. God
has never anything of a diminishing type.
The Lord took particular care of Paul, and did not rush him
through the business. He gave him time to study the Word. He
gave him time to get a revelation of His wonderful grace. There
are some people who think that everything ought to be done in
a tremendous hurry. With God it is not so. God takes plenty
of time, and He has a wonderful way of developing things as He
goes along. Trust him as He takes time to work in you to will
and to do His own pleasure.
A man baptised in the Holy Ghost is no longer a natural man;
he is transformed by the Spirit and changed into another man.
Joshua and Caleb as they were filled with faith, were different from
all the men around them, and so they encouraged all the others by
saying, "God who has taken us into the land and let us see it, will
surely give us the land." They had got the vision of God's plan and
purpose, and they were true to the vision. Is God the Holy
Ghost arranging things for you, or, are you arranging things accord-


ins to your own plan? Catch the heavenly vision and enter into a
place of rest where you can stand still and see the salvation ot
th A °man who is dependent upon the Holy Ghost from
conlidence in his own ability. He will rely only upon the ommpotent
power of the Most High. The man who lives m the Spirit will always
keep in touch with his Master, in the passing crowds or wherevei
he may be. He should have 110 room for anything that steps hiwer
than the unction that was 011 his Master, or for anything that
hinders him from being about his Master's business. It you are tilled,
with the Holy Ghost, you will long for the spiritual food that you
find in the Word of God and you will have 110 resources out those
that are heavenly. You have been "planted" with Christ and have
"risen with Him," and you are "seated with Him in heavenly places ;
your language is the heavenly language, your source of inspiration
is the will of the Lord; God is enthroned in your whole lite and
you see things from above and not from below.
The revelation of Jesus to my soul by the Holy Ghost brings
me to the place where I am willing, if need be, to die on what
the Word savs. The three Hebrew children said to the king, We
are not careful to answer thee in this matter," and when a man
of God is quickened by the Spirit, he does not fear the threatenings
of men. The furnace seven times heated is of 110 consequence to
the man who has heard the voice of God; the lions' den has no ter-
rors for the man who opens his window and talks to the E ather.
The people who live in the unction of the Spirit are taken out of the
world in the sense that they are kept in the world without being
defiiled by the evil of the world.
The Lord said to Paul, "I have appeared unto thee . . . to
make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which
thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear
unto thee." Paul was given the vision as far as he could take it
in, then the Lord said, "There are other things in which I shall
again appear to thee." Did he ever appear unto Paul after that?
Certainly He did.
At a later date Paul said, "When it pleased God, who separated
me from my mother's womb, and called me by His grace to reveal
His Son in me, that I might preach Him among the heathen; imme-
diately I conferred not with flesh and blood." There is no man
who can be clothed with the Spirit and catch the fire and zeal of
the Master every day and many times a day, without ceasing in every
way to be connected with the "arm of flesh" which would draw
him aside from the power of God. Many men have lost the glory
because they have been taken up with the natural. If we are going
to accomplish in the Spirit the things that God has purposed for us,
we must never turn again to the flesh. If we are Spirit-filled, God
has brought us into relationship with Himself, and now He is all
in all to us. Nehemiah stood before the king, and when the king,
seeing his countenance, said to him, "For what dost thou make re-
quest?" he immediately communed with the God of Heaven. If
we keep in continuous communion with the Lord of heaven we
should be ready for every emergency.
When Paul was preaching to the saints in Troas (Acts 20) the
holy, radiant glory tha't was filling Paul's soul was so great that
the people became eager for it, so that until midnight they drank
in at the fountain of his life, and as the rivers of water were pouring
forth from him a young man fell down from the third loft. Paul
went down and embraced him and the life of the Lord given to
Paul was imparted to the young man and he was brought back to
life. There was always an equipment for every emergency, a


blessed, holy equipment given by God. It is wonderful to tlnnk that
we too, can be partakers of the divine nature just as Paul was and
can enter into the fellowship of the Lord Jesus Christ even as he
did, for the same Holy Ghost that was imparted to Paul, our Lord
is willing to impart to us.
It was necessary that Jesus live with His disciples tor three
years, and walk in and out among them and show forth His glory
from day to day. The Lord had continually day by day to bring
Himself into their vision, into their mind, into their very natuie.
He had to press Himself into their life, to make them a success
after He had ascended to heaven. He had to show them how won-
derfully and gracefully and peacefully He could move the crowd.
He had to bring Himself so into the minds and hearts of the disci-
ples as to convince them that He was really and truly the Son
of God. They could never accomplish what they had to accomplish
until he had proved that to them. They could only manifest Him
to others when He had imparted His life into the very core of then-
nature. He told them that it was expedient that He go away. After
His death and resurrection the Holy Spirit would come and He Him-
self would come unto them and manifest His life and power through
them. Just as He was clothed with the Spirit Himself, He wanted
them'to be clothed with the Spirit. And there was a wonderful con-
tinuance of His ministry through these yielded men when they
were filled with the Spirit. And to-day there will be a mighty con-
tinuance of the glorious ministry of our risen Lord through men
and women filled with the Spirit who refuse to live for their own
purposes and plans, who are eager to fulfil the vision given them
by our ascended Lord.
Some people have a wrong notion concerning the Baptism in
the Holy Ghost. The Baptism is nothing less than the Third Person
of the Blessed Trinity coming down from the Glory, the Executive
Spirit of the Triune God, indwelling your body, revealing the truth
to you, causing your bowels to yearn with compassion for the lost,
just as Jesus yearned, to travail as He travailed, to mourn as He
mourned, to groan as He groaned. Oh, that God might bring from
our hearts the cry for a deluge of the Spirit so that we may be
prepared for Him to fulfil all His purposes in us and for us. What
a blessing it is when you are at witsend corner to be able to
throw yourself on the Omnipotent power of God, and what a won-
derful transformation He can bring in a moment.
Last week I went into a house where they were very much dis-
tressed. A young woman was there who, they told me, had not
been able to drink for six years. Her body had gone down, but the
Lord had inspired her with faith, and she said to her father, "O,
Father, I ought to have relief to-day. Somehow I feel this whole
trouble ought to go to-day." I knew what it was. It was a demon
in the throat. I believe that the devil is at the bottom of practically
every evil in human lives. It was a serious thing to see that beau-
tiful young woman, who, because of this one thing in her life,
was so disorganised in her mind and body. I knew it was the
power of Satan. How did I know? Because it attacked her at a
vital point, and the thing had preyed on her mind and she was filled
with fear so that she said, "I dare not drink, for if I do I shaJl
choke."
I asked the father and mother to go out of the room, and then
I said to the young woman, "You will be free and drink as much as
you want when I have done with you if you will only believe. As
sure as you are there you will drink as much as you want." I said
further, "Our brethren are going out in the streets to preach to-
night and I shall be among them, and in our preaching we will say


definitely, 'Everyone that will believe on the Lord Jesus can he
saved.' We will also tell them that everyone who believes can be
healed. The Word of God shows us plainly that the Son of God
bore our sins and our sicknesses on Calvary. 1 he> will emphasise
it over and over again. It is just as true to say, Himseif took oui
infirmities and bare our sicknesses,' as it is to say, 'He was wounded
for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities.'" So I
said to her, "Now do you believe?" She said, "Yes, I believe that in
the name of Jesus you can cast the evil power out." I then laid
my hands on her in the name of Jesus. "It is done; you drink."
She went out laughingly, and drew the first glass of water and
drank. She cried out, "Mother! Father! Brother! I have drunk one
glass!" There was joy in the house. What did it? It was the liv-
ing faith of the Son of God. Oh, if we only knew how rich we are,
and how near we are to the Fountain of Life. "All things are pos-
sible to him that believeth." Aeneas, who had kept his bed for
eight years, was told by Peter, "Jesus Christ maketh thee whole;
arise, make thy bed," and he arose immediately. What did it? A
life clothed with the Spirit.
When I was baptised in the Holy Ghost there was the unfold-
ing of a new era of my life and I passed into that and rejoiced in
the fact of it, and others with me. But the moment I reached that,
God has been ready with another ministry for me. Jesus said in
substance, "If you honor Me here, I will honor you yonder." What-
ever it may be that you are working at for God here, He is working
out a far greater and a divine glory for you. You have no need
to be constantly talking of what you are going to appear like in
glory. The chief thing is that you realise in yourself a deeper mani-
festation of the power of God to-day than yesterday, and that you
have something more clear to-day of the mind of the Spirit than
you had the day before; that nothing comes between you and God
to cloud your mind. You are to have more of a vision of the glory
of God to-day than yesterday, and to be living in such a state of
bliss that it is heavenly to live. Paul got to the place where the
Holy Ghost could enlarge him more and more. I find that if I con-
tinually keep my mind upon God He unfolds things to me; and
if I obediently walk before God and keep my heart pure and clean
and holy and right, He will always be lifting me higher than I
have ever expected to be.
In Romans, 12:1, Paul speaks about a certain place being reached.
He speaks about an altar upon which he has lain himself. When he
had experienced the mercies of the Lord he could do no other than
make a presentation of his body on the altar. It was to be always
on the altar, never to be taken off. And he beseeches us to be in
this place of continual sacrifice. It is at this place the Holy Ghost
will bring forth things new and old for us. Paul so lived in the
Spirit that He brought His mind to Paul's mind so that the apos-
tle could write and speak as the oracle of the Holy Ghost, things
that portrayed the mind of God, and as we read these things to-
day they come to us as the river flowing from the throne of God
Himself.
God wants us, also, to be oracles through whom He can cause
the water of life to flow. How does it come? It comes when we are
in a place low enough for God to pour in, pour in, pour in. God
wants to do the same for us as He did for Paul. Shall we stop
short of what He says we ought to be? Shall we cease to come
into line with the Mind that is always thinking for our best? Shall
we cease to humble ourselves before Him, who took the way of
the cross for us? Shall we withhold ourselves from Him, who
could weep over the doomed city, from the Lord Jesus Christ who


"trod the winepress alone"? Shall we cease to give Him our all J
To what profit will it be if we hold back anything from Him who
gives us a thousand times more than ever He asks Horn us. in
Hebrews 2, He says He is going to bring man s sons to gtor./ H
means that He is going to clothe them with His glory. Let that
be vour vision. If you have lost the vision, He is tender to those
who cry to Him. He never turns away from the broken heart, and
those that seek Him with a whole heart will always find Him.
The people in the days of the apostles took joyfmly the spo
ing of their goods, and I know there is a like measure of grace
given to the man who says, "I will go all the way with Jesus What
is that measure of grace? It is the grace which enables us to pi ess
forward to the goal that God will have us reach. We should need
those words, "Let 110 man take thy crown." We have only touched
the very fringe of this outpouring of the Spirit. We must go in
for all that God has for us. If we do not fall into line with the
will of God, there will be somebody else who will, God is able
to raise up men who will carry out His behests. At the triumphal
entry when the multitude cried out in praise, and the Pharisees
objected, Jesus said, "If these should hold their peace, the stones
would immediately cry out."
I have a Jesus like that, who can speak the word and the
thing is done. I have a Jesus indwelling me and vitalising me with
a faith that believes that all His promises are true; 1 have a
Jesus within me who has never let me get faint-hearted. Let
us press 011 in faith along the line of God's will, and the outpouring
which we have longed to see will come. Cheer up, hold on, never
let go the vision. Be sure it is as much for you as anybody else, and
God will surely bring it to pass. All blessings come from above;
therefore, keep your eyes 011 Jesus. Never weary. He will be with
you to strengthen you in the way. Hallelujah!
Christianity Has Not Failed ; The Message
of Pentecost.
APOSTOLIC
And they went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord work-
ing with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Mk.
16: 20. The most tragic event in the history of the world was
enacted 1900 years ago, when Jesus Christ the world's Saviour was
nailed to the cross of Calvary, by the Roman soldiers, at the behest,
of those whom He specially came to save —the Jews. Crucifixion in
these days was on all fours with the punishment meted out to
offenders by hanging to-day, being the penalty imposed upon those
guilty of the most dastardly and wicked crimes. A death of shame
and ignominy. Christ and His message became intolerable to those
whom God had called as His chosen people. Steeped in hypocrisy
and Godlessness, His offers of mercy couched in language of love and
humility were spurned, just as it is being spurned by multi-
tudes who are living under the shadow of His protecting love to-
day. Nothing less than the ignominious cross would satisfy the
hatred and envy of those whose eyes, blinded by prejudice and
pride, had lost the heavenly vision. His disciples were panic strick-
en; all seemed lost. He whom they so depended on, their arm


of strength crucified, a common felon. But they were aroused by
their despair by the glad tidings of His resurrection, and later 500
of His disciples witnessed His ascension. And 120 of them, obeying
his command to "Tarry ye in Jerusalem," for enduement of power
from on high, awaited the promise of the Father, the Baptism of
the Holy Spirit, so graphically described in Acts Ch. 2. For some
time subsequent the church was at rest, but the mighty doings of
His apostles soon aroused the antagonism of the Jewish leaders,
who had hoped that His crucifixion would have for all times settled
His claims to have been the long promised Messiah. Saul, afterwards
Paul the Apostle, zealous as he thought for God, persecuted the
church, believing he was doing God a service by exterminating this
allegedly misguided and fanatical sect. Jerusalem became unsafe,
and Christ's disciples were compelled to seek safety, by fleeing
to other parts. Amongst the number was Phillip the Evangelist,
whose name is first mentioned in connection with the choice of
six deacons to minister to the poor widows. He went down to
Samaria and preached Christ to them. And in this record we have
a brief outline of the first evangelistic campaign of the newly-
formed church, and which I firmly believe was included in the Bible
as a pattern for all similar enterprises. You will find the narrative
in Acts ch. 8. Note what happened. Phillip spoke with power
and conviction, for he, no doubt, was one of the 120 who had recently
received the Baptism of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost.
He knew it was of God, and had probably witnessed the healing
of the impotent man by Peter and John, by faith in the name of
Jesus. There were no critics ever dinning into the ears of the
people that this thing was not for to-day. He had an open door,
for had not Jesus Himself passed that way during His ministry.
There were no suggestions hampering His ministry along the lines
so prevalent to-day, that these supernatural manifestations of the
Spirit were intended for a bygone age, when the people needed
something drastic to arouse them from their sleep of death.
Neither was He faced with the disturbing element expressed by
prominent religious leaders to-day, that these manifestations were
of Satanic origin. May God forgive them, for they surely know not
what they do. No, He had an audience responsive to His message
of love for man's triune need, body, soul and spirit, for we are told
the whole city was stirred, multitudes were converted, and healed of
all manner of disease and sickness, and as a result (again note
the order of spiritual growth), they were baptised, that is, immersed
in water.
Had they yet received all God had for them? tVere there
any more blessings that God's obedient children might be expected to
receive? We are told by those who reject the plain teaching of scrip-
ture that we receive the fullness of the Spirit at conversion. This
record, an example for all time, does not say so, for we learn that
when the apostles in Jerusalem heard of the revival, that they
sent down Peter and John, who, "when they came down, prayed for
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost (for as yet he was
fallen upon none of them, only they were baptised in the name of
the Lord Jesus). Then laid they their hands on them, and they
received the Holy Grost." That there was an unmistakable change
wrought in their lives when this happened is evident, for one, Simon,
a sorcerer, who had posed as some great one, wanted to purchase
the great blessing which can only come upon lives wholly surrender-
ed to God. This, is but a brief outline of what happened during
the first evangelistic campaign on record. Digger, if you wish to
see your fair country delivered from the enthralment of sin, so
apparent wherever you turn, then insist that the Gospel message in
all its fullness be proclaimed to the people with such manifestations


of Spiritual power that the Lord working with them will confirm,
the Word with signs following. May it be so, for His name s sake..
Amen.
MODERN.
On the first day of July, 1915, there stepped on to Congo soil
two English missionaries, W. F. P. Burton and James Salter. There
was no big organisation behind them, and they only represented
just a handful of God's people, who really believed that Jesus Christ
was the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever. Their faith in
God was great, for, stepping out in the name of Jesus, they penetrated
into the very heart of the Congo jungle, and there established a
work which must go down into history as one of the most thrilling
and successful missionary enterprises launched in modern or any-
other time. ...
These men trusted God for every need, for, in proclaiming the
gospel of full salvation, they cut every bridge behind them, and
standing on His promises, have proved beyond the shadow of a
doubt that Elijah's God still lives, and is just as able and willing
to answer the prayer of faith as during any other period of religious
history. They ' commenced operations at Mwanza, in the Belgian
Congo, having for a parish a vast area with a radius of 200 miles,
and 400 miles to the North West, in a region where the name of
Jesus had practically never previously been heard
Pastor Donald Gee says of Congo mission, "Of ail the romances
of Pentecostal Missions, I think perhaps there is nothing in the
whole world to touch the Congo Evangelistic Mission. It is one of
the most beautiful works of God I have ever heard of. The growth
of Ihe mission has been simply marvellous. To-day there are at
least 24 white missionaries in that mission. There are 120 native
preachers, and every Sunday there are over 300 NATIVE ASSEM-
BLIES OF GOD GATHERED TOGETHER AND BREAKING BREAD.
Each day the gospel is preached in 500 different villages, and last
year they put up 35 new churches."
Here God is worshipped as sincerely, and possibly more
so than in lands which have called themselves Christian for
generations. Thirteen years ago sin in its most hideous form was
rampant, and disease, malaria, and fever have been fought and
conquered solely in the mighty name of Jesus.
Mr. Burton, in a publication, "Missionary Pioneering in Congo
Forests," tells the story of this romance of missions. The difficulties
and dangers which these pioneers encountered before the great
victory for Jesus was won, proclaim them to be men of whom any
nation might be proud. The language he found to be different from
the nearest written languages, and he decided very soon after his
arrival in Mwanza to formulate the grammar and translate the scrip-
tures; and, in 1921, the cases of books printed in Luban by the
British and Foreign Bible Society were sent out to young Christian
churches in Lubaland, which in 1915 were not yet born. The suffer-
ings and hardships endured by these true soldiers of the cross
beggars description, and the world will never know the full story of
what their love and loyalty to their Divine Master entailed.
"We are up against sin in its vilest and most hideous forms.
The name, 'Baluba,' means the lost people; and one may say a more
fitting title could not have been adopted; lost morally and spirit-
ually. Naturally speaking, especially to one who knows their inner
life, there is nothing to attract one to them, but rather an inclination
to avoid them. Yet, with a love which is heaven born, we are
willing to spend and be spent for them, daily yielding ourselves a
sacrifice on their behalf." To understand rainy season travel,


imagine travelling in a ditch nine inches wide, with grass anything
up to twelve feet high, sending down drenching sprays at every
step This until 10 a.m., after which add a scorching tropical sun
to raise the standing water to uncomfortably near boiling point, and
to blister the bare arms and legs of the traveller. M hen you
thoroughly gripped the above description, I trust that when you
again mount a street car, or sit comfortably in a railway carriage,
you will spend a few minutes asking God's blessing on His Afncan
missionaries on the tramp. . T . imv
"As I was too weak with fever to take so long a journey, Jimmy
set off ahout three weeks ago to follow up the work which I had
started. I heard nothing further for about a fortnight, when Jimmy
himself came staggering in, in an awful condition. . . . He was pale
and haggard, with eyes sunken, cheek bones standing out, face drawn
and white, and limbs like sticks—a living skeleton. He had been
too dazed to write, but had been lying semi-conscious at Ngoimani
for five days with blackwater fever. This is a most deadly African
fever, and more than half the people who get it in this part of the
world die within 48 hours. . t ,
"Jimmy writes: 'After leaving Kikondja I was going barelegged
for two days, the roads being flooded, with the exception of a
few yards here and there. The vile, evil smelling mud, oftentimes
up to one's middle, was a sore trial. My legs are scorched with the
sun Yesterday evening, when turning in, my socks were stuck to
the raw, inflamed sores on my feet.' However, he was rewarded, 011
reaching his destination, by finding a company of people waiting
for his message, and he already reports some definite conversions.
"At one time or another, some of our carriers and boys accom-
panying have been healed by the laying on of hands in the name
of Jesus. Thus, when we proclaim Christ, the great Physician, they
readily and spontaneously testify, and also take us to others who are
sick. I believe it will not be long now before we have a band of
Christian natives equally ready to testify to this so great salvation.
"Our evangelist, Shalumbo, went to the village of Lubembei,
and found there a man, taken by an evil spirit. This man, in
paroxysms of frenzy, had clawed and dug with his finger nails a deep
pit and cave right beside our little chapel. In this he would sit,
trembling under the power of the demon that possessed him, while
people came from long distances to consult him and seek his aid in
the dispelling of disease. Our evangelist, seeing that the cave was
likely to endanger our chapel walls, took a hoe, and with the help
of a fellow Christian, filled in the hole. The people stood awe-
struck, and the chief begged him to desist, declaring that by so
exciting the demon, the village would incur his wrath in all sorts
of misfortune and calamity. Presently, poor Sani himself appeared,
and looked the picture of misery, his hair matted, his nails like
birds' talons, and his body caked in mud and filth. Shalumbo told
him of God's love, and the delivering power of the name of Jesus.
Then, upon Sani's request, he commanded the demons to depart into
the beasts of the forest. Sani went off and washed at the river, and
then returned to accept Christ. Later when our chapel was demol-
ished by a tornado, he was one of the first to offer to rephir it,
and since then has visited us with six others from the same village
seeking salvation.
One of the most fearful features of heathenism is its heartless
cruelty, knowing no bounds, and not even hesitating at torture and
lingering death. Thus, only a few years ago a regular trade wtas
carried on with little boys. They were taken northward ana sold
for salt or grass cloth. Their purchasers tightly bound every joint
and every limb to make them swell, as the flesh was then considered
better for eating. Then, after two days, if they were not already dead,


scalding water was poured over them, preparatory to eating them.
The above extracts reveal the awful conditions these two men
had to face, and a gospel that could win out, under these circum-
stances, in less than five years, is one that might be very well
tried in lands nominally Christian, but which are fast drifting into
paganism. Mr. Burton, in describing the break which brought about
the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, says: "On the fourth day or uie
convention, Thursday, in our morning meeting, there were about lbO
present, to whom we spoke on Mark 16: 16 to 18. ' These signs shall
follow them that believe." There was a solemn, heart-searching
time, and God's power was wonderfully felt as those present frank-
ly acknowledged that they did not bear the hall mark of scripture,
in that these signs did not accompany their ministry Then at the
invitation to come forward to pray for and to receive tne HoH Spirit,
almost all the congregation came forward. Even the most saibooin
opnosers were ashamed to hold back.
~ At once, the whole of the front of the chapel was a tightly wedged
mass of earnest natives, with their woolly heads down and tneir
shining backs heaving with the emotion of prayer. It was not
many minutes after we started praying that the first few were filled
with the Spirit. . . . Oh, how they cried and groaned, and grovelled
in the dust, as they wrestled their way to victory. The noise o, this
great visitation was heard a mile and a half away. Truly tne
mountains of pride and self esteem were broken down, and the
valleys of fear and mistrust were filled up, the crooked places ot
schism, quarrels, suspicions, and party spirit were made straight,
and the result is the same is an John Baptist's time, that all flesh
is .seeing God's salvation. Luke 3; 5, 6. That first wonderful
meeting lasted from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. For three hours, the whole
place was swayed by God's Spirit. Many fell as though dead, am
these who had no room to fall on the floor fell on each othe.r.
"At least two cases occurred of those who praised God in oeau-
tiful English, and I also heard snatches of French and Dutch or
German. And almost all who spoke in tongues and languages with
beautiful clear 'r' sounds, which is significant, since m the natural
state the Luban cannot properly pronounce this sound. Then when
all was quiet, of course I had to explain it all from Acts 2, that
"This is That," and that Christ Jesus, 'being by the right hand or
God exalted . . . hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear.'
The hours between the meetings were fully occupied in answering
questions, giving advice and encouragement, and in listening to con-
fessions of sin. This last is all the more wonderful, since hitherto
horses could not drag confessions from a Luban. All their lives long
they have lived in such deception and hypocrisy, that to confess a
sin when they had not been caught red handed, would appear to
the'm the height of absurdity. But when He (the Spirit of Truth)
is come He shall convince the world of sin. Jn. 16:8. And during
this convention, the burdened ones have forced themselves upon me
whether I would or no.
"And oh, what fearful pages of crime were unfolded. But
against the hideous background of crime and disgrace and shame,
the Cross of the Lord Jesus is all the more resplendent. How pre-
cious it was to kneel with these stricken, guilty lads, pour out
their hearts' burden to God, and see them go away humbly, grate-
fully rejoicing, yet still amazed at the stupendous fact that 'the
blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanseth from all sin.' "
In the light of this unmistakable confirmation of the Word of
God amongst a people who, less than five years before, were steeped
in the vilest iniquity, will Christians who have ignorancly grieved
the Holy Spirit by asserting that these manifestations of the Holy
Spirit were from the pit, in future refrain from what must be tanta-


mount to blasphemv, for whoever reads these pages cannot, with
impunity, proclaim as has been so prevalent in certain religious
circles, that those in whom the Holy Spirit manifests His giacious
presence by speaking in a strange tongue, are possessed by a
deceiving spirit, especially when Holy Writ so plainly declaies,
"Forbid not to speak with tongues." 1 Cor. 14:39.
Note: The "Jimmy" referred to is Mr. James Salter, husband of
Mrs. J. Salter, who so ably assisted her father, Evangelist Smith Wig-
glesworth, during his visit to Australia last year.
Grace.
(By Pere Caussade, S.J., a writer of the 17th Century)
"Thy Grace is enough for me."
Grace, the will of God, the order of God, are all the same thing.
It is the work of God in our soul. Perfection is but the faithful co-
operation with it. Thus the work goes on unceasingly, growing and
increasing within us in silence. Theology is full of expressions
which explain in detail these wonders worked out in each individual
soul. This grace of God, this Divine will received with simplicity,
works a cure in the faithful soul, just as a physical remedy brings
health to the body withou any scientific knowledge of it on our
part; just as it is the fire which warms us, and not the philoso-
phical knowledge of its causes and effects. If one is thirsty, one
must drink. The wisest dissertation on the cause of our thirst
would not quench it. So in the Spiritual thirst, the thirst after
holiness, we must leave alone speculation, and drink with simplicity
all the Will of God offers us in the way of action or suffering. What-
ever comes before us to do, in the way of duty, it is the best and
most holy for us. All our spiritual science must consist in recog-
nising this order of God for the moments as they come, one by
one, laden with His message to our souls. Without this our actions
may be harmful to us; void of the vivifying virtue of God's will, they
only serve to empty the heart in proportion as they fill the mind.
It is not, indeed, this, or that, which affects us, but doing whatever
we do, for God, and as He sends it. What was the best thing in the
moment just past is the best no longer, because the Will of God
has already flowed on to other things, which are, in their turn, sent
to sanctify our souls. In fulfilling these duties we are always sure
of possessing the "better part," for God's will is in itself the better
part, and we have only to follow it blindly and with perfect confidence.
It is infinitely wise, infinitely powerful, infinitely holy. It is the
reality, the essence of all things. Without it all is empty, false, and
vain; the letter without the spirit. The Will of God is salvation.
It is the life of the soul and of the body, and it gives to all things,
whatsoever they may be, the efficacy to form Jesus Christ in the
depths of our hearts. There is no law to be given to this Will, no
limits to be put to it, for it is all powerful. Whatever ideas
the mind may have, whatever feelings of pain, trouble, or distrac-
tion, however much we may suffer bodily, or in the deep recesses
of our heart, the Divine Will, the Grace of God, being there, we
need fear nothing; for it is the life and health of the soul and
body, and we shall be supported by it alone. Bread without it


would be a poison, but with it what would otherwise be a hurtful
bane becomes a healing remedy.
Divine Grace is the whole good, the whole truth m all things.
It gives God in all, and God is the infinite good, the infinite Being
whom to possess is to possess all things.
The mind, with all its powers, claims the first rank as the means
of knowing God; but it must be reduced to the last, as a dangerous
slave. It may be a help to the simple and docile heart, but it will
only prove our ruin unless reduced to subjection. When the soul
sigh overmuch for created means, for human help, giace whispeis
that it alone sufficeth; but if, on the other hand, the soul, self
opinionated, wishes to renounce all aid and guidance, gi ace again
speaks, and points out that there are instruments which we must
not take or leave at pleasure, but which we must receive with
simplicity when God sends them, using them, however as not using
them, is as being deprived of all things, and yet lacking nothing.
Divine Grace, being boundless, must, in order to possess a soul
entirely, find it empty and free from self-confidence; for this shows,
in a subtle, hidden way, a self occupied heart, and excludes the
action of God. It is an obstacle which, existing in the soul itself,
is more likely to impede Divine grace than any thing which
it can change by its power from an obstacle to an aid; for it can
work with all things, even those that are in themselves useless. All
things are indeed nothing without grace, and with it, nothing may
be all. Thus, seeing God alone in every event, in every cross,
in every joy, the soul has but to live on from day to day, from
hour to hour, from moment to moment, according to His Will.
"Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? I do not ask for this, or that,
but, Lord, I desire Thy will alone."
The presence of God, which sanctifies our souls, dwells in the
centre of our hearts when we submit entirely to His Divine Will.
If what God Himself chooses for us does not suffice to us, what
other hands can serve us? What can we wish more, than to rest, in
the fullness of His gifts? The soul which cannot find peace in
doing His holy will is justly punished by finding no contentment
elsewhere. If holy books, spiritual aids, our daily duties, do not
bring peace, if they fill the mind without satisfying the heart, it
is a mark that we are not entirely docile to the Divine Will, but
that we are filled with them through self will. This very fullness
thus shuts the entrance to God, and we must free ourselves from
it, as from an obstacle to the Divine action in our souls. But when
these things are accepted straight from God, the soul, by her faith-
fulness, takes them as they are, and at their true worth; and, as
soon as their hour is past, she leaves them through the same faith-
fulness, and calmly contents herself with what next comes before her
in the order of God's providence. Grace has no bounds to its
power, no limits to its working. It turns to gold all that it touches,
and makes all things Divine. That one may not wander aimlessly
on, turning from right to left, being allured first to one side, then to
the other, the soul must feel assured that no inspiration that calls
her from the duties of her state can come from God, as these
duties are the manifestations of the Will of God, and nothing must
be preferred to them. In this straight path there is nothing to
fear, nothing to avoid, nothing to perplex. The time given to the
accomplishment of its duties are the soul's most precious moments,
as they are then filled with the complete assurance of God's Will.
God makes saints in His own way. Fidelity to the duties of their
state is common to all the saints. Some lead hidden lives, and pass
their days in obscurity. Others shine like stars in the firmament;
but it is neither in the one nor the other of these things that
their sincerity consists. It is entirely in their submission to the


•good pleasure of God. Their perfection consists in the love they
have for this Divine Will. I think that if those who aspire to holiness
could understand how straightforward is their path, they would be
spared much anxiety and pain. I speak both of those who live in
the world and of those who are consecrated to God. If the former
knew the merit hidden in what each instant of the day brings to
them to do, in the way of their ordinary duties, and if the latter
could be persuaded that holiness consists in the fulfilment of things
of which they oftentimes take but little heed, both would under-
stand that, to attain to the highest degree of perfection, the crosses
sent by Providence with which their state of life furnishes them, open
to them a path much surer and shorter than any acts or works out
of their ordinary way could do; and that the true philosopher's
stone is submission to God's Will, which changes into pure gold all
their occupations, sorrows, and sufferings. What consolation and
courage they would take from the thought that to gain heaven there
is nothing more to do than they are doing, nothing more to suffer
than they are suffering, and that what they lose and count for nothing
would suffice to make them saints.
Oh, how I burn to make them comprehend that there is nothing
on earth so easy as holiness. Even as the good and the bad thief
had the same death to suffer, so one soul may acquire eternal
felicity by doing with submission to God's will the same thing by
which another, doing it from self love, may perish everlastingly.
The one suffers with patience and consolation, the; other with mur-
murs and rebellion. It is the heart alone which is different.
O, dear souls who read this, let me repeat to you, that it will
not cost you more. Do what you are doing, suffer what you are
suffering. There is only the heart to change. Yes, the holiness of
the heart is a simple Fiat; a simple disposition of conformity to the
Will of God. What can be easier? For who would fail to love so
adorable and blessed a Will? Love it, then, and through that love
alone, all within you will become holy.
The Marriage of the Lamb.
We have now reached the climax of our story. In most works
of fiction we find the hero and heroine are delivered from all their
enemies, and in the last chapter is the record of their happy union,
and live ever afterwards a life of peace and joy. The Bible is a
wonderful old book, but blessed be God, it is not fiction. We have
all the elements of the ordinary novel —wickedness, powerful ene-
mies, ever endeavouring to overthrow the Hero, Jesus Christ, and
entice his bride, the Church, to sever her allegiance and place
her confidence in her arch enemy, Satan, who, as an angel of
light, seeks to entrap her with his artful wiles. Many times she
has been on the verge of defeat, almost succumbing to the blan-
dishments of the destroyer, but again and again Jesus has come
to her rescue by some mighty spiritual revival. True children of
God have stood shoulder to shoulder, and again turned the tide of
defeat into victory. We are at present witnessing the entangle-
ment of the Bride as she permits the world to walk hand in hand
with her, which furnishes the enemy with such a powerful weapon
•of attack. Her vulnerable positions are being pierced here and


there all along the line, and disaster is staring her in the face.
But, God be praised, the wireless message has been broadcasted,
the S.O.S. signal has been heard; it has been relayed and trans-
mitted to distant lands, and before the enemy can launch his final
attack, reinforcements will have arrived, and victory is assured.
Pastor Stephen Jeffreys, one of England's greatest revivalists, has
heard the call, and God willing, will visit Australia in 1929. Then
may we expect the dawning of better days, when the Bride again
clothed in her spotless apparel, and wearing the precious gifts of
the Bridegroom, will longingly and expectantly look forward to that
great event, the coming of the Bridegroom, and then will take place
the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.
A Bible student of no mean calibre has kindly furnished the
concluding thoughts of this article, which beautifully express the
joy and delight of the waiting Bride, which with the final act of
this drama is the consummation of all her years of travail and
sorrow.
"Re. 19.5, 9. And a voice came out of the throne, saying,
Praise our God, all ye His servants, and ye that fear Him, both
small and great. And I heard as it were the voice of a great
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and the voice of
mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent
reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him;
for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife hath made
herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed
in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the righteousness
of saints. And He saith unto me, Write, blessed are they which are
called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And He saith unto,
me, These are the true sayings of God.
1. Jn. 3: 1, 3. Behold what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God; there-
fore the world knoweth us not, because it knew Him not. Beloved
now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we
shall be, but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be
like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. And every man that
hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
1 Th. 4: 13, 18. But I would not have you be ignorant, breth-
ren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even
as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died
and rose again, even so them which sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him. For this we say unto you by the Word, of the Lord,
that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord
shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel,
and the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these
words."
The glorious hope of the true church has, right down through
the ages, been centred in her Blessed Lord, who has been spoken
of as Him who is, who was, and who is to come. Truly He spake
of the glory which He had with the Father before the world was,
the angels spake unto the gazing disciples, who watched Him ascend
into heaven, saying, "This same Jesus which was taken up from
you into heaven shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen
Him go into heaven." Jesus also said, "I go to prepare a place for
you, and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto myself, that where I am there ye may be also.'"
In order that a spirit of expectancy might be established and main-
tained, our Lord, in speaking of His coming again, gave the exhor-


tation to "watch, therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord
doth come." When the gospel was first preached to the Gentiles,
the apostles of Jerusalem declared "that God had from them
began to take out a people for His name from among the Gentiles,"
and there is much evidence on through the Epistles that this has
continued down through the ages, and will do until our Lord's
promise is fulfilled, viz., "I will come again, and receive you unto
myself, that where I am there ye may be also." John 14:3. Also
in John 12:- 26. "If any man serve me, let him follow me, and
where I am, there shall also my servant be." Eph. 5-: 25, 27.
. . . "Christ also loved the church and gave Himself for it, that He
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word, that He might present it to Himself a glorious church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blemish." If the true church or individual mem-
ber has any outstanding qualifications, it is holiness and righteous-
ness, and these qualifications cannot have fellowship with unrigh-
teousness, for does not- scripture say, "What fellowship hath righ-
teousness with unrighteousness, or what communion hath light with
darkness?" "Wherefore, come out from among them and be ye
separate, saitli the Lord, and touch not the unclean thin.g and 1 will
receive and will be a Father unto you. and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." How wonderful are all
these sayings of God, seeing they are applied, not to particular de-
nominations, but to whosoever will hear and obey. These scrip-
tural qualifications will be sought for at that critical moment,
"when the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout
with the voice of the Archangel and the trump of God, and the
dead in Christ will rise first and we which are alive and remain
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air, so shall we ever be with the Lord; sought for
among the then living and those who have passed away right down
through the ages, to the Lord's bride was granted that she should
be clothed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the
righteousness of the saints. "Blessed are they who are called to
the Marriage Supper of the Lamb," "Whe fore beloved, seeing ye
look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of Him in
peace, without spot and blameless." "He that hath this hope in
him purifieth himself even as He (Jesus) is pure. "Take heed, watch
and pray, for ye know not when the time is."
Conclusion.
A new commandment I give unto you: That ye love one another,
as 1 have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall
all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to an-
other. Jn. 13: 34, 35.
The compiler of these ai'ticles makes no apology for enter-
ing a realm where angels might fear to tread, and for their pre-
sentation, as they are the outcome of a whole-hearted desire to
witness unity and peace manifested in our midst. It is an unspeak-
able tragedy that many in the community claiming the Blessed Lord
Jesus as their Saviour should stand in battle array. The writer,
whose circle of Roman Catholic friends is but limited, has found in
most of them a trust and belief in God foreign to multitudes of so-
called Protestants. During his lifetime he formed a close friend-
ship with two members of the Catholic priesthood. One
has now gone to be with the Lord, the other is still living, and


ministering to his people where he first met him aaran> >eais ago.
Both of tiiem, by tii'eirdeeds of love, have proved themselves to
he true disciples of the Lord Jesus. Many of us have relatives
amongst the Roman "Catholic persuasion, and included m their ranks
are many whom we are on terms of the warmest ' friendship Sure-
ly we should be allowed to live in peace and harmony witli >aem.
It can, and should,-be • done, if we are willing to . obey our- Lord*
command as laid down in the scripture quoted above. As already
stated in another article, my standing in the world as a man of
letters or any public qualification gives me no right to claim any
recognition from the public of tliis State. But as a native born
Australian. Who loves his country> and whose forefathers on both
sides were amongst those early pioneers who blazed the track tor
future generations, I can claim the right to speak on then behalf,
whose sacrifices surely can never be forgotten, and who are mainly
responsible for the ease and comfort we now enjoy. My lather s
mother was a native of this State; his father and grandfather were
amongst the earliest of Australia's pioneers, landing in Australia
in iSIS shortly afterwards settling in the western districts. My
mother's parents trekked the Blue Mountains in 1839, travelling
by bullock dray, the journey taking six months to accomplish.
But it is as a member of that great army of the Lord Jesus
Christ, whose sacrifice on Calvary immeasurably outweighs anv
human sacrifice, that I claim an equality which entitles me to plead
for the utmost consideration and sympathy for this booklet, which
goes out to the world having, I ani convinced, His seal and approval.
May His Blessing enrich every soul who reads these articles, is my
earnest prayer. . . ' x Y '
Digger, the inquiry has concluded —what is the verdict; has the
plaintiff proved his case? If so, what penalty is to be imposed? Shall
we be judged by man or God? Had we not better leave ourselves
in His merciful hands, and, by prayer and supplication, intercede
for His intervention from a debacle which is beyond the power of
man to avert? . „ ,
Should we not, at this juncture especially, apply the "Golden
Rule"? For instance, if Protestantism became powerful enough to
invade a Roman Catholic country, and sought by her methods to
reflect the Spirit of a loving and Gracious God throughout the land
and its people, would we not desire perfect freedom and liberty to
express our convictions of truth, to enable us to obtain an impaitial
hearing? Can we honestly do less than this to our Roman Catholic
brethren, who, from their point of view, are endeavouring to edu-
cate Australia spiritually? The fact that Protestant invasion of a
Roman Catholic country would not be tolerated, does not weaken
the application of the rule, but rather enhances it. After all, what
is going to be the result of this great congregation of peoples from
all over the world, representing the very cream of Roman Catho-
licism? The effect upon her own people must deepen and widen
their spiritual outlook, with its consequential uplift generally. And
what of Protestantism? The outcome will probably result in a great
discovery, the discovery that she is almost naked and bare, and,
when her shame is revealed, then may we not expect that great
spiritual revival, not by man's efforts, but because the people, by
an act of true repentence, have so opened their hearts, making pos-
sible the outpouring of the Spirit of God, in quickening and re-
viving power? If this be the ultimate result, shall we not be
enabled to thank God for turning what seemed complete defeat
into a stupendous, overwhelming victory? May it be so, for the
sake of Him who so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believetj? in Him should not perish, but have
everlasting life." Amen.
Printed at the "Leader" Office, Orange.


- ' ' . ' - :: v
-"; * --- - < * . • " ■ - • . •
.
&
.W
\
W$#PKJ- " ' u^C r >>
-
'
/ ' . ■.: - • • . ,


I
" - ■ . :J
J
1
V.
,
I
-J
1
'
v'- ■
j
-
.'V • • '
, I
■
■ |
■
,
\ ■ :.'"a
' . . ,-•:!
;
i
1
I
"A v/V"'
■' ; ' ■ ' ' ■? ■' & I
: ■ 1 —" ' v - ■ " '■ :■■ ■ ■" ■' . ■•■'"
, . . ■ , - . • • ' '• - • - -
• - : '
. . •: . , , , . > - -
'
• ■ ■ ■ ' • :■ A' .
: ' A A v -
~
