

b^'




HE MAHARATANGA


.
life*
HE MAHARATANGA
(In Memory of)
I if
: THE NEW ZEALANDERS
Who fought and died in the Gallipoli campaign
of the Great War
“AN EPIC OF HEROISM ”
From the Despatches of Sir lan Hamilton,
and Poetry of Rupert Brooke and others, d? J c.
Compiled by BETTY RHIND
Profits to go to the New Zealand Disabled and Wounded
SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON
KENT & CO. LTD. 4 STATIONERS’
HALL COURT : : LONDON, E.C.




HE MAHARATANGA
THE DEAD
BLOW out, you bugles, over the rich
Dead !
There’s none of these so lonely and poor
of old.
But, dying, has made us rarer gifts than
gold.
These laid the world away; poured out the
red
Sweet wine of youth; gave up the years
to be
Of work and joy, and that unhoped serene,
That men call age; and those who would
have been.
Their sons, they gave, their immortality.
Blow, bugles, blow ! They brought us, for
our dearth,
Holiness, lacked so long, and Love, and
Pain.
Honour has come back, as a king, to earth,
And paid his subjects with a royal wage;
And Nobleness walks in pur ways again;
And we have come into our heritage.
Rupert Brooke,


HE MAHARATANGA
SAFETY
Dear ! of all happy in the hour, most blest
He who has found our hid security,
Assured in the dark tides of the world
that rest,
And heard our word, 6 Who is so safe
as we
We have found safety with all things
undying,
The winds, and morning, tears of men
and mirth,
The deep night, and birds singing, and
clouds flying.
And sleep, and freedom, and the autumnal
earth.
We have built a house that is not for Time's
throwing.
We have gained a peace unshaken by pain
for ever.
War knows no power. Safe shall be my
going,
Secretly armed against all death’s endea-
vour ;
Safe though all safety’s lost ; safe where
men fall;
And if these poor limbs die, safest of all.
Rupert Brooke,
By kind permission of the Literary Executor , and
Sidowick & Jackson Ltd. , from “ igip. and Other Poems, ” 2/6 net.


HE MMiARATAHGA
THE LANDING
zApril 19 th. C£ The whole of the Expe-
ditionary Force is now assembled in Mudros
Bay, waiting for the order to start on this
historic expedition, on which the eyes and
the hopes of so many different nations are
concentrated ... As a spectacle also it is
superb . . . such an assembly of different
types of warships, transports, and smaller
crafts as has never been brought together
before. Their number is too great to count.
It would seem as if every type of warship
and every type of transport which can
possibly be spared from the other theatres of
war have been collected here in Mudros Bay
for this, probably the last crusade the
Christian world will ever make against the
Ottoman Turks. This is an experiment on
a huge scale previously unknown in the
annals of this or any other nation.
“ What can I say about the Army ? It is
no ordinary body of men. It is essentially
Imperial in its composition, and only the
British Empire could have brought together


JL XiL>4 JS JU“»JL'W*. JL i
such a force from all comers of the earth.
Also the majority of the men are volunteers
and Colonials. Nevertheless, we have a
seasoning of our regular Army, which will
fight side by side with the lads from “down
under.” I don’t suppose that any country
in its palmiest days ever sent forth to the
field of battle a finer body of men than these
Australian, New Zealand and Tasmanian
troops. Physically, they are the finest lot
of men I have ever seen in any part of the
world. In fact, I had no idea that such a
race of giants existed in the twentieth
century . . . and every man seems to be a
trained athlete. The flood of volunteers to
the colours was so great that thousands had
to be rejected and only the most perfect
selected.
“ Above all else, you feel you are in the
presence of a body of men who are abso-
lutely sincere and absolutely determined to
carry through the great and honourable
task which has been assigned to them.
“ They are spoiling for a fight in order to
prove they are worthy to fight side by side


HE MAHARAI^GA
V ; OHWA RO t ■ -J
with the heroes of Mons, Ypres and Neuve
Chapelle.
“ Whatever happens in the future, nothing
can ever eliminate from the mind the
majestic splendour of the scene in Mudros
Bay.”
cApril 24 th. “The great venture has been
launched ... As the huge liners steamed
through the Fleet, their decks yellow with
khaki, the crews of the warships cheered
them on to victory whilst the bands played
them out with an unending variety of
popular airs. The soldiers on the transports
answered this last salutation from the Navy
with deafening cheers, and no more inspiring
spectacle has ever been seen than this of the
last great crusade setting forth for better or
for worse ... At dusk all lights were
extinguished, and very shortly afterwards
the troops retired for a last rest before their
ordeal at dawn ... A visit to the mess
decks showed these Australasians, the
majority of whom were about to go into
action for the first time under the most


II
I HE MAHARATANGA
trying circumstances, which require that
four-o’clock-in-the-morning courage, to be
cheerful, quiet, and confident.
“The troops fell into their assigned places
on the quarter-deck, and the last rays of the
waning moon lit up a scene which will ever
be memorable in our history. On the
quarter-deck, backed by the great twelve-
inch guns, this splendid body of Colonial
troops were drawn up in serried ranks, fully
equipped, and receiving their last instructions
from their officers, who, six months ago,
like their men, were leading peaceful civilian
lives thousands of miles away ... At
4.5.3 a.m. there suddenly came a very sharp
burst of rifle-fire from the beach, and we
knew our men were at last at grips with the
enemy.
“The Australians waited neither for
orders nor for the boats to reach the beach, >
I but, springing out into the sea, they waded
ashore, and forming some sort of rough line,
rushed straight on the flashes of the enemy’s
rifles. Their magazines were not even
charged, so they went in with cold steel.”
10


I MAHARATANGA
8 p.m, “T could see our Infantry pre-
paring to climb up the cliff. The Turks
had then got the range and were dropping
shrapnel over them. I was very anxious for
them, but had no idea what they were going
into, until later. Aeroplanes were flying
about and the whole thing was a wonderful
sight, and it was hard to realise that it was
a real battle going on—but I did later,’
(Extract from letter of a New Zealander.)
“ It is an ideal country for irregular war-
fare. The Australians and New Zealanders
have proved themselves adepts at this form
of warfare, which requires the display of
great endurance in climbing over the cliffs,
and offers scope for a display of that indi-
viduality which you find highly developed
in these Colonial volunteers.”
“ Tt’s simply wonderful how calm every
man seems to have been ; one lot of men on
a destroyer got twenty shot down before
they landed, and the rest sang “Tipperary”
and landed quite calmly . . . Some of the
bravery I have seen is too pathetic for
words.’ (Extract from letter.)


HE MAHARATANGA
- I
“ I have never seen the like of these
wounded soldiers in war before, for as they
were towed amongst the ships whilst
accommodation was being found for them,
although many were shot to bits and without
hope of recovery, their cheers resounded
through the night, and you could just see,
amidst a mass of suffering humanity, arms
being waved in greeting to the crews of the
warships.
“ They had been told to occupy the
heights and hold on, and this they had done
for fifteen mortal hours, under an incessant
shell-fire without the moral and material
support of a single gun ashore.
“No finer feat of arms has been per-
formed during the war than this sudden
landing in the dark, this storming of the
heights, and, above all, the holding on to
the position thus won whilst reinforcements
were being poured from the transports.
These raw Colonial troops in those desperate
hours proved themselves worthy to fight
side by side with the heroes of Mons and the
Aisne, Ypres and Neuve Chapelle.”


HE MAHARATANGA
aAprtl zyth. “ ‘The magnificent gallantry
and splendid achievement of the Colonials.’
(London Paper.)
“Generals and Staff Officers fare no better
than their men. General Birdword is high
in his opinion of his troops. He told me
that he could not praise the courage,
endurance and soldierly qualities of his
Colonials enough, and said the manner in
which they hung on to the position the first
day and night was a magnificent feat, which
has seldom, if ever, been surpassed, con-
sidering their very heavy losses, the shortage
of water, and the incessant shrapnel fire to
which they were exposed without cover,
not to mention the unceasing attacks of the
enemy’s infantry.
“Many are the stories of the individual
gallantry of officers and men which will
probably remain for ever untold, and many
a hero who deserves the Victoria Cross now
lies beneath the soil.
' ..I
i'l
“There is no finer tale in our history than
that of the deeds which were performed on
Sunday, April 25th, by Australian, New


fiiSUiifev jSH%i
HE MAHARATANGA
Zealand and British troops, supported with
equal gallantry by the officers and men of
the warships.”
May jth. “ ‘The determined valour shown
by these two Brigades (the New Zealand
Brigade and the 2nd Australian Infantry
Brigade) are worthy of particular praise.
Their losses were correspondingly heavy, but
in spite of fierce counter attacks by numerous
fresh troops, they stuck to what they had
won with admirable tenacity.' ( lan Hamilton .)
“At this stage of the operations Anzac
was cast to play second fiddle to Cape Helles,
a part out of harmony with the dare-devil
spirit animating these warriors from the
South, and so it has come about that the
defensive of the Australians and New
Zealanders has always tended to take on the
character of an attack.
“ Lieut.-General Birdwood has been the
soul of Anzac. Not for one single day has
he ever quitted his post. Cheery and full of
human sympathy, he has spent many hours


HE MAHARATANGA
of each twenty-four inspiring the defenders
of the front trenches.”
“ ‘lf my despatch is in any way to reflect
the feelings of the force, I must refer to the
shadow cast over the whole of our adven-
ture by the loss of so many of our gallant
and true-hearted comrades. Some of them
we shall never see again; some have had the
mark of the Dardanelles set upon them for
life, but others, and thank God, by far the
greater proportion, will be back in due
course at the front/ ” (lan Hamilton.)
May 10th. “The New Zealanders hurled
themselves forward in a solid phalanx,
passing through the 88 th Brigade, and many
of the gallant men of those regiments,
refusing to yield any right of way to them,
joined their ranks and rushed forward in a
thin, mad charge . .. . The manner in
which these Dominion troops went forward
will never be forgotten by those who
witnessed it.”


jmm®.
HE MAHARATANGA
July \th. “ Whatever happens, they never
seem to lose their spirits, although con-
stantly exposed to danger and every kind of
hardship ... To hear them speak you
would tremble for the fate of any of the
enemy who fell into their hands, and yet the
moment a trench is taken, and the enemy
holds up his hands, those who are not killed
in the heat of action are treated with the
utmost kindness, and our men will share
their precious water and their rations with
them. 5 ’
“ c A man was carrying water to the firing
line, and on Walker’s Ridge was hit through
both legs with shrapnel, and one of the
bullets made a hole in_ the water-tin. The
wounded man was found lying down with
his fingers stopping the hole in the tin,
while at the same time he was shouting
loudly for someone to bring another tin to
save the water.’ ” (Malcolm Ross.)


-"7
ANZAC
a prouder name than Anzac will ever
warrior hear A
Anzac was struck from the red flare of
battle,
On the anvils of war, these heroes were
forged.
Midst the glitter of bayonets, shrieking of
cannon,
A warrior race leaped exultant to birth.
No victor could down them, these Heroes
of Anzac !
No foe could expel them, those eagles of
war ;
Bucklers of England or outpost of Empire,
Their glory’s untouched though Gallipoli
fall
lan * Lady Hamilton.


HE MAHARATANGA
BATTLE FOR THE CREST
OF SARI BAIR
e August . “ The Anzac Corps fought like
lions and accomplished a feat of arms in
climbing these heights almost without
parallel, but all through they were handi-
capped by the failure of a corp to make
good its position on the Anarfarta Hills
further north.
“ It was a combat of giants in a giant
country, and if one point stands out more
than another it is the marvellous hardihood,
tenacity and reckless courage shown by the
Australians and New Zealanders.
“In spite of immense Turk reinforce-
ments and their most determined courage,
the Australians held the ground thus
won.
“No finer feat has ever been accomplished
in the course of the war than the manner in
which the troops destined for the main
movement against Sari Bair Ridge were
deployed for the attack.


HE MAHARATANGA
u No words can do justice to the achieve-
ment of Brigadier-General Russell and his
New Zealanders.
“ The New Zealand Canterbury Battalion
got to the top of Rhododendron Spur, and a
quarter of a mile short of Chunuk Bair,
of victory—-but the help we had hoped for
from Suvla had not been forthcoming.
“ The joyous alacrity with which the
troops faced danger, wounds and death, as if
they were some new form of exciting rec-
reation, has astonished me.
“ Just as faith moves mountains, so valour
can carry them.
“The Turks fought bravely. The angle
of Table Top’s ascent is recognised in our
regulations as ‘ impracticable for infantry.’
But neither Turks nor angles of ascent were
destined to stop Russell or his New
Zealanders that night. There are moments
in battle when life becomes intensified, when
men become superhuman, when the im-
possible becomes simple, and this was one of
the moments. The scarped heights were
scaled, the plateau was carried by midnight.”


JBu
HE MAHARATANGA
I . •'
9 th. “ c At the first faint glimmer
of dawn, observers saw figures moving
against the sky-line of Chunuk Bair. Were
they our own men or were they the Turks ?
.. . They were our own fellows—=the top-
most summit was ours 1
ct Headed by the Wellington Battalion
and supported by several British regiments,
and the Auckland Mounted Rifles and the
Maori contingent, the whole most gallantly
led by the Lieut.-Colonel W. G. Malone,
had raced one another up the steep. Nothing
could check them. On they went, until,
with a last determined rush, they fixed
themselves firmly on the south-western slopes
and crest of the main knoll known as the
height of Chunuk Baird (lan Hamilton.)
“Throughout a day and night the New
Zealanders succeeded in maintaining their
hold on Chunuk Bair, although they were
thoroughly exhausted ... I saw an over-
sea soldier, an Englishman, a Maori, and a
Gurkha all lying dead, side by side, marking
the highest point yet reached by the
Imperial Forces in the peninsula.


jl
~ i
HE MAHARATANGA
“ Thus closed for the time being, amid
these blood-stained hills, the most ferocious
and sustained soldiers’ battle since Inkerman,
But Inkerman was over in a few hours,
whereas Englishmen, Australians, New
Zealanders, Gurkhas, Sikhs and Maoris kept
up this terrible combat with the Turks for
four consecutive days and nights amid hills,
dongas and ravines, 900 feet above the sea,
to which point all water, rations, and
ammunition had to be borne along paths
which do not exist except on the maps, and
down which every man who fell wounded
had to be borne in the almost tropical heat
of August in the Mediterranean.”


HE MAHARATANGA
. . ■ - ■ . ' ■ ■ ... - ' ■■ 7 s i :
Y ONWARD r ■'SI
ANZACS’ EVERLASTING FAME
SUVLA
Dead are the gods that loved this bitter
sea,
Dead are the men that held the walls of
Troy,
There is no life within the lips of joy,
And no sleep on the lids of Memory.
Winter still holds our dead, remember
me,
In silent cements of unbroken snow.
Our dead—~our dead—ours by what proven
claim ?
Ours is not yet the grim hill of their
sleep;
To them to win, but not to us to keep
The fatal summit of a fated aim.
They went in honour who in honour came,
And God has given what man could not
deny.


HE MAHARATANGA
Ours, the vain splendour of a high emprise.
And the despair of valour vainly spent;
Theirs the fulfilment and the long content
Of triumph, and otherwhere and otherwise;
And theirs to see afar, with happy eyes
Foam blanching on the verge of Victory.
D. M. Stuart.
THE EVACUATION
December. “It is over at last—every man,
every animal, every luggage cart, and of the
guns all but six, have been embarked from
Suvla and Anzac under the very nose of the
unsuspecting Turk.
“Whatever the fruits of this Dardanelles
campaign may prove to have been, it will
always stand out in military record for two
things—the gallantry of the first landings
and the skilfulness of this evacuation.
“The only ‘fighting’ that took place in
connection with the embarkation was that


spaa:
HE MAHARATANGA
which occurred in these Australian brigades
to decide who should have the privilege of
staying to the last.”
“It was from beginning to end a lighting
adventure surpassing the Homeric legend of
Troy over the Straits. It marks an epoch
in the human estimate of the courage and
fibre of modern men among the English-
speaking peoples. It will live for ever in
the history of our race and thrill posterity
as long as Britain and her sea-spread breed
endure.” ( Observer , Dec. 10th.)
Message to the New Zealanders,
Christmas, 1915
“Our enemies declare that nothing is
now left of New Zealand’s perilous achieve-
ment save the graves of the New Zealand’s
dead, and the multitude of New Zealand’s
wounded. Never believe it. Apart from


HE MAHARATANGA
imperishable honour, the services rendered
to the Allied Cause by our attacks against
Constantinople cannot yet be gauged, but it
is certain they were far-reaching and vital”
Clan Hamilton.)
IMPERISHABLE GLORY.
“But their acts outshone our expectations.
The world who knew them not, nor aught
of the environment in which they had been
bred, nor of the breed of men from which
they had sprung, stood thrilled in wonder at
the men of Anzac.
“ Soldiers, your deeds have won you a
place in the Temple of Immortals. The
world has hailed you as heroes . . . But
to your Australian and New Zealand fellow-
citizens, to your mothers, fathers, brothers,
and friends who know and love you, your
glorious valour meant much more than to


HE MAHARATANGA
all others. On its shining we were lifted up
to heights we had never seen ; you taught
us truths we never knew; you inspired us,
to a newer and better and nobler concept of
life. Soldiers, you have covered yourselves
with glory that does not fade ; your names
will be handed down in your own native
lands and be household words. The deathless
story of the Gallipoli campaign will yet be
sung in immortal verse, inspiring us and
generations of Australians and New
Zealanders yet unborn with pride of race,
courage, tenacity of purpose, endurance, and
that casting out of fear, without which men,
though boasting themselves free, are but
wretched slaves. Above all these things
lacking which, no nation can be either free
or great, your deeds have taught us that
through self-sacrifice alone can men or
nations be saved.
“Not contempt of death, even in its most
awful forms, nor endurance, nor dash, nor
resource-—not all these things would have
sufficed the men of Anzac had the divine
spirit of self-sacrifice been lacking.


HE MAHARATANGA
IStfSl
“ And since it has evoked this pure and
noble spirit, who shall say that this dreadful
war is wholly an evil ? Into a world
saturated with a lust of material things,
which has made wealth the standard of
greatness, comes the sweet purifying breath
of self-sacrifice.
“ When I remember how many of your
gallant comrades are missing, their poor
bodies lying in a foreign soil, many in
unnamed graves, I feel myself struggling
between grief for the fallen, sympathy for
those who have suffered, and pride at your
glorious actions.
“We mourn the valiant dead, but they
died gloriously, gladly, giving up their lives
for their country and their liberties. Their
deathless deeds will yet be sung in sagas to
generations of Australians to the end of
time A ir n „ tz/ -h/r \
(Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes,)




CUTTINGS


CUTTINGS


Printed by S. Clarke Limited,
41, Granby Row, Manchester.
