

HERDIN' SOUTH
JOURNAL OF H.M.A.T. "CHENMITZ" BOUND FOR RUSTRALIA
50th Quota Australian Imperial Forces.
HOMEWARD BOUND


THE EDITOR wishes to thank contributors of prose, poetry -humorous and serious-ani
artist work, thus enabling the production of this paper- :: ' ;;
Headin'
South
JOURNAL OF
50th QUOTA, A.I.F.
H.M.A.T. “CHEMNITZ” 6th August, 1919
tpagy O ends the great adventure! The curtain falls on the
Wygfjjr rj closing pageant of the most exciting act of the drama of
W In the fateful days of August, 1914, the clarion call
Ilf to service overseas rang throughout Australia. The rally-
. wing tocsin found Australians at the plow, in the office, in
I the workshop, in the store, at the,desk, in the halls of
legislature, or the cloistered seclusion of the seminary.
The answer flew back “ Australia will be there.” It was
obeyed because the safety and future destiny of our fair
\oLJu/ Austral Land were one with, and inseparable from, those
Cn*9 of the Motherland, and all freedom loving peoples of the
globe. Their conflict was ours, just as truly as though it
was being waged on Australian soil. The right of demo-
cratic nations to work out their destiny, each in their own way, was being
challenged by the Teutonic hosts as they had done over and over again through
the ages, from the time of Chalons (where they suffered defeat at the hands of the
Franks), to " Der Tag” in July, 1914. They neither slumbered nor slept that
they might gain.world domination. The Prussian Juggernaut bearing the Hohen-
zollern lord, thundered on to the accompaniment of. the repugnant doctrines of
militarism, materialism, religion stripped of its soul, and lack of chivalry towards
womenkind. Once again they have been defeated.
2


The duty is finished, the conflict past, and we turn in gladness to the land
that gave us birth. In the words of Frances McCrae :
“ O, land of gold and burning blue,
I’m crying like a child for you.”
Yet Australians are not unmindful of the happy days spent among the historic
and beautiful scenes of Old England, Bonnie Scotland and Green Erin, of the
hospitality received at the hands of our kinsmen who before the war were but
visions. They have become living realities, and their memory will ever be
pleasant to us. A lump arose in the throats of nearly all as the strains of Auld
Lang Syne were wafted from, the Naval Band ashore to our transport as it swung
in Plymouth Sound for its long voyage to Australia. It was then that we began
to realize that there existed between the Motherland and ourselves a subtle some-
thing —a common sympathy. The same British blood courses in our veins, ours
perhaps a little lustier because of vmuth and transplantation to a warmer clime.
We think at this time, on leaving behind the scenes of conflict, of the com-
rades who are gone, whose lonely graves dot the fields of Flanders and France.
The joy of our own return will be dimmed by the thought of those who are not.
Some hearts though full of pride will be saddened as our home-coming reminds
them of a son, a brother, a husband, or a father who alas will return no more.
Patriot Australians! What of the future? It largely depends upon ourselves.
With self-reliance, a reasoning national pride, and a legislature which readily
responds to the popular will, we can assist, each in his own way, to make Aus-
tralia great, powerful, and a blessing beneath the Southern Cross amid the
Southern Seas.
4
WOES OF THE WIVES.
(Extracts from letters of soldiers’ wives to the Paymaster).
“ When I received your letter I was ill in bed with Happendicitics and it will
be satisfactory.”
0 0
“ My husband has been away from Chrystal Palace and got for days furlong
and is now gone to mind sweepers.”
0 0
“We have received your letters. I am his grandfather and grandmother.
He was born in this house and brought up in answer to your letter.”
0 0
“ You changed my little girl into a little boy, will it make any difference.”
0 0
“ In answer to your letter I have been presented with twins, hoping this will
be satisfactory.”
3
Headin’ South


Wit and Humour
One of the onlopking “ heads ”as Padre enters Church Parade circle—“ Heh,
Joe, the Spinner's in ! ”
& * # *
Indignant Digger to Babbling Brook ;
“ Tea ! Tea ! D’yer call this tea ? It’s nothing but innocent water scalded
to death ! ”
* * * #
After Bullecourt —
Mounted M.P. to walking, wounded Digger toiling painfully to C.C.S.: —
“ Some fight, Dig.! ”
Dig.—“ Yes, and SOME don’t! ”
Heard on the Ship—
The Digger looked studiously at the gangway on the ship’s side as she lay in
Plymouth Sound. The water almost touched the bottom step. The digger’s
contemplation eventually found vent in a remark to his cobber —“ Do they raise
that gangway as the tide rises ? ”
”°* * * *
Dancing is very popular on the promenade deck —News Item.
“ Grim visaged War hath smoothed his wrinkled front,
‘ And he that mounted barbed steeds
“ To fright the souls of feared adversaries
“ Now capers nimbly in the jazz and fox trot
“ To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.” —Shakespeare (slightly adapted).
* * * O
Late one night a half-screwed Billjim presented himself to the R.T.0.,
Aveluy on the Somme—an English Officer —with what was palpably a faked
order for beer- Please give bearer a petrol tin of beer. Lieut. H. S. Wank.”
The R.T.O. said, “ Do you think I came down in the last shorver? Even if
you did have an Officer named Wank he would sign ‘ Lieut.’ after his name not
before it.”
Billjim “ Well, Sir, you see it’s this way, our Officers ain’t nothing like ai
well educated as you Tommies.”
# * * *
An event worth looking out for:
A digger going ashore at Port Melbourne attired solely in the raiment set
out as per his Qi form: —
“ One hat, 2 collar badges, bootlaces, and a pair of Puttees.”
4
Headin' South


The men of Stralia Return Homewards.
1. And lo! there was a sound of great jubilation in the camp for a boat roll had
appeared. And when the fact had been noised abroad, the men of Stralia
rushed hither and thither saying unto one another, “Is my name written
there ? ”
2. Now it came to pass that few were taken but many left. And the many
spoke unto the few saying, “Lucky blighters ! Tell ’em I’m comin!”
3. Then the elect came before the Chief Payer of the camp, and falling on their
knees besought him saying, “ Pray give us of .the wherewithal to buy
lemonade and coffin-nails, lest we faint by the way.” And he answered
them in these words; “Ye have done well to kneel before me, for am I
not a King ? But rise up, and extend your right hands.” And he gave
unto each one penny.
4. Then they were exceeding wrath and said, “These-many years have-we
fought the men of Hunk, whilst thou has held the Blighty front; and now
thou rewardest us with a paltry penny. Thou mayest—— : —it. Verily!
thou art a .” Nevertheless each received his penny, which when
one cons ders the state of Paibuk was a truly liberal allowance.
5. Aiid it came to pass that on a certain day, being the ninth day of the month,
they each passed before an officer gorgeously arrayed in red facings, who
said unto each, “ Go aboard, and there thou shall find thy palatial apart-
ments.” And each did as he was bid Nevertheless the customs on the
ship of the sea were strange unto him, for was he not compelled to sleep in
the manner of a fly hanging from the ceiling?
6. Now many were greatly affeared that the food they should eat it should
not do them good, but that it should go to fill the bellies of the fishes.
Yet it was not so, and the fishes which followed the vessel for several days
and nights without ceasing were compelled by fatigue to desist from the
pursuit, saying as they did so, “ Behold, a cargo of Quarter-blokes, who
would not give away a kind smile.” But all the men of Stralia were in high
glee because what food they ate they retamed.
7. The men on the vessel busied themselves some in one way and some in
another. Some said from morning even until evening, “ 00l avaCard
others cried “Deanery edzem,” whilst those who stood round replied
“ Ilavadeaner”; still others called to those who passed by, “ What abaht
the ole club? Upickum art’ Ipayum.”
5
Headin' South


8. Now Sportzpff went forth amongst the . fighters and he called upon them to
strike each other with their fists which were cased in leather. And they
did so. And behold ! the blood did flow from the nostrils of some of them,
and those who stood round lifted up their voices saying, “ Goodohski! give
’im another.” But oft-times the anger of the man whose'blood was shed
was kindled and he smote his adversary with the words “ Take that! ” so
that he lay upon the boards even until the referee might count ten.
9. And Edjoff went from place to place and exhorted the men saying “Nowyou
you are going to your homes. Behold! now is the day of salvation. Pre-
pare now to keep the wolf from the door by joining our poker school.”
And some did so,
10. And it came to pass that some said, “ Let us have a Parliament like unto
the other civilized communities of the earth.” And they chose them their
representatives and said unto them, “ You shall rule over us.”
11. Now Priminister was a great man and puffed up in. his own conceit. And
he called together his associates and said unto them, “ Let us make it im-
possible for those who made us rulers to look upon the
wine when it is red. Let the land of Stralia be dry.”
And the indignation of all the host waxed strong
against them because they intended to do this thing.
So they were humbled in the dust; and the thousand
pieces of gold that they should have received they re-
ceived it not.
Now the other doings of the fighters on board the ship,
behold they are written in the pages of this chronicle.
The observations of the scribe they are concluded.
Notelets.
THE Southern Cross came into view on the evening of July 14th when the
“ Chemnitz” wafe in the vicinity of Teneriffe. Tropic of Caricer was entered
at 8.30 a.m. 15th July. Equator was crossed at 1 i .30 p.m. 20th July, and
Capricorn 8.45 p.m. on 27th July.
Weather conditions have been remarkably favourable, smooth seas; fine
overhead conditions, and mild temperatures.
6
Headin' South


Ship Activities.
SPORT.
Athletics, parlour games and dancing on the promenade deck are playing an
important part in whiling away the days of the voyage. Boxing bouts including
a six round contest for £5 aside took place. Tugs of war, quoits, deck tennis
and cricket are popular. Indoor pastimes including chess, cards and dominoes,
wall quoits and archery, pass pleasantly the evening hours.
EDUCATION.
The enrolment is excellent and a competent staff of 16 instructors has suc-
ceeded in sustaining the interest of the various classes. In addition to tuition in
literary subjects, practical demonstrations in boot making, carpentry and sign
writing are given.
MUSIC.
To the Brass and Jazz Bands (the former of which is representative of 24
Australian bands) and the Concert Party our appreciation is due for many enjoy-
able entertainments supplied. We do not always realize the hours spent in re-
hearsals in order to present even a single performance.
DIGGERS’ PARLIAMENT.
, The weekly Diggers’ Parliament has proved a marked success. The
speeches have been of good quality and best of all the subjects discussed have
been essentially Australian. It was customary for the Government to be defeated.
LECTURES.
The series of Monday evening lectures have been both entertaining and in-
structive.
FARMERS’ CONFERENCE.
An excellent scheme! Papers and discussions on subjects of interest to those
on the land take place each Friday.
LIBRARY.
A thousand volume library of the Y.M.C.A. aboard is much availed of. The
games, equipment and trophies provided by this organization are greatly ap-
preciated.
RED CROSS AND A.C.F.
These departments are efficiently catering for the sick and hearty respectively
aboard the “ Chemnitz.”
THE PULPIT.
The padresjhave regularly administered to the spiritual needs of the troops
on the voyage. In addition, they have taken part in the other activities—social
and educational.
7
Headin’ South


Cape Down.
CAPE TOWN is the most important city and the metropolis of
SOUTH AFRICA. It was here that over two and a half
centuries ago civilization drove in the thin edge of the wedge which
opened the country to European immigration. To PORTUGAL
belongs the honor of having first explored the Southern Seas and
doubled the Cape of Good Hope. This feat was accomplished by the Portuguese
navigator Bartholomew Diaz in i 486. He landed at Angra Pequeha, and also at
Algoa Bay in each of which places he erected a marble cross; the cross erected by
him at Angra Pequena is now to be seen at the South African Museum, Cape
Town.
The 16th Century saw, DUTCH vessels in Cape Town on their way to India.
DRAKE sighted the Cape of Good Hope as early as 1580, and vessels flying the
British flag anchored in Table Bay in 1591. The first regular European settlement
was made here by the Dutch under JAN VAN RIEBECK in 1651., A fine bronze
statue of JAN VAN RIEBECK was presented to Cape Town by Cecil Rhodes
and is to be seen opposite the entrance to the Promenade Pier. The place was
taken by the British in 1795. Restored to the Dutch by the Treaty of Amiens in
1802, it was taken again in 1806 and finally ceded to us in 1815.
It is generally admitted that Cape Town ranks with Naples, Rio Janeiro, San
Francisco and Sydney as being one of the most beautifully situated seaports in the
world. The most characteristic feature of the landscape is the famous Table
Mountain which rises abruptly just behind the Town and attains the height of
3580 feet. On either side and in advance of Table Mountain are two lesser peaks
forming the horseshoe valley in which Cape Town is situated.
Those who have visited the South of France will remark that the situation
and general aspect of the town remind one of NICE. But the grandiose background
afforded by Table Mountain is more imposing than anything to be seen in the
Riveira,
Adderley Street is the finest thoroughfare in Cape Town, it abuts on the New
Pier and Esplanade; the pier is built of ferro concrete, and is 1500 feet long, while
the Esplanade extends for 1000 yards along the sea front to the East of the Pier.
Adderley Street ends at the foot of Government Avenue which is three quarters of
a mile long and well shaded with oak trees, some of which are 200 years old. On
the left immediately on entering the Avenue are the Houses of Parliament, a
handsome pile, the base being of Paar! granite and the remainder of red brick. A
new wing was added in 1910 lor the Union Parliament.
Adjoining the Houses of Parliament is Government House the town residence
of the Governor General of South Africa, and opposite are the Botanical Gardens.
Though comparatively small these gardens are laid out with great taste, the
variety of the semi-tropical foilage and the magnificent view of Table Mountain
8
Headiri South


and the adjacent peaks render these gardens one of the greatest attractions of
Cape Town.
Not far from the Botanical Gardens is situated a handsome building of modern
design with a stone facade 160 feet in length; this is the South African Museum.
Those interested in the history, minerals or fauna of South Africa are well repaid
by a visit. The treasures it contains are too numerous to enumerate here.
The Collection of the South African Art Gallery is housed in an annexe of the
Museum, it comprises a magnificent collection of Flemish and Dutch masters.
An article however short on Cape Town would be incomplete if we neglected
to mention the name of the late Rt. Hon. CECIL J. RHODES, evidence of whose
genius and activity are to be seen everywhere in South Africa. A very interesting
visit may be made to the home of Cecil Rhodes at Groote Schuurnear Rondebosch,
about five or six miles from Cape Town. The house is a fine building in which
many features of the best era of Dutch architecture have been preserved. The
building is historical, being mentioned in Van Riebeck’s journal. It is now the
residence of the Premier of the Union of South Africa, being left for this purpose
by Cecil Rhodes. In the grounds are to be seen practically every species of
South African animals.
The Rhodes Memorial well deserves a visit- —the simplicity and dignity of the
white granite structure amid surroundings of unequalled beauty make it one of the
noblest monuments of modern times. The inscription runs thus “To the spirit
and Life Work of Cecil John Rhodes who loved and served South Africa.”
WE WANT TO KNOW.
What the Digger meant when he said that the steamer we passed on the 27th
was one of those ” Sensidised” ships.
If the Pay Staff get into a MUDDLE, could we BALE them out ?
Do the Diggers benefit from the experiments carried out each evening at
No. 4 hatch, in sheep, beef, and rabbit raising?
TRICKED.
Last night I held a little hand,
So dainty and so neat,
Methought my heart would burst with joy,
So wildly did it beat.
No other hand unto my soul
Could greater solace bring,
Than that I held last night, which was
Four aces and a King.
9
Headin’ South


The German Ships.
(A Soliloquy)
(Many steamers carrying Australian troops home belong to the Hamburg-
Amerika and Nord-Deutscher Lloyd (N.D.L.) Companies. These two German
owned lines ranked in 1914 among the five greatest shipping companies in the
world.
From BUENOS AYRES to HAMBURG DOCKS, from ’VOSTOCK
eastward to far DUNDEE,
In every port were our houseflags known, crowding competitors off the sea
And cutting the rate, on a line of freight, with the help of our Govern-
ment subsidy.
In the Treaty ports on the China Coast, loading from boats in a Gold
Coast swell
The proudest lines of a nation proud, HAMBURG-AMERIKA —N.D.L.,
It was all the same, just a waiting game, till the WAR LORD lifted the
lid from Hell.
Then the Wireless chattered “ The Day has dawned,” so we altered course
and for safety ran,
And swung at a neutral buoy to watch, how the Kaiser’s High Sea Fleet
began
To curb this might, of the Ensign white, and free the seas from the British
ban.
We rusted and swung at our moorings safe, and waited and watched for
the word to go,
But the High Seas Fleet, which was built to fight, like ourselves played
safe and for years lay low
Till they haled each keel, like a dog to heel, to a Navy’s graveyard at
Scapa Flow.
But now they took to the Dockyard ports, t UNDERLAND, HULL and
the filthy CLYDE,
And fitted us out into Transports there, to ferry our enemies far and wide.
With never a gun and their victory won, the conquering men came over
the side.
An Englishman walks on our flying bridge, an Aberdeen flag droops limp
at the main,
And the men on the plates in the engine-room, will answer to Sandy or
Jock Mcßain,
And the stokehold crew, and the trimmers too, are a Liverpool-Irish or
Cockney strain.
HAMBURG-AMERIKA, N.D.L., the might of our past can never return —
As the tramps slide by on their way to. sea, the hardest thing we have
got to learn,
Is to three times dip, to each passing ship with the mongrel flag we fly
at the stern.
10
Headin’ South


They Say:
That the only onerous restriction on board is the prohibition- of
That the men sadly miss the little flutter to which they were accustomed.
a 0
That the afternoon practices of the Jazz Band are most popular with all
ranks, and their rendition of “How'reyou goin’ to keep |em down on the farm"
is unique. That when the cornet player begins, a shout goes up-“ Is there no
limit to this man’s cleverness ” ?
0 0
That Lieut. “Joe” is very versatile. With the concert party he tells
sparkling stories of dugouts and ladies’ shoes, and on Sunday morning is the
padre’s right hand man.
0.0
That many men are asking themselves the question set out in the latest ditty
“ Will you tell your little Miss,
“How the French girls kiss”?
0 0
That No. 1 Company’s kit inspection was a splendid success, but that a little
more care is necessary to prevent the mad rush up the gangway.
0 0
That optimistic gentlemen who expect to make a living in Australia with a
dice box, three farthings and a tin of meta'l polish are likely to come a proverbial
“cadorna.”
0 0
That the Sergeants’ mess is to be shortly presided over by liveried waiters,
and that a service of plate is to adorn the tables, and think of it, dainty menu
cards and real serviettes. But wait, what about serviette rings.
0 0 .
That the Diggers’ Parliament has been a great success, and that the speech
of Driver Burns on Prohibition was the feature of the evening, and that as a
result he has been elevated to cabinet rank.
11
Headiri South


The Mercantile Marine.
HOMEWARD bound at last! For some it is nearly five years since they
left Australia, for others not so long. Not a single soldier would have
been able to quit Australian shores and contribute his little bit to win the
great war but for the courage, skill and perseverance of our
British sailors, and now the war is happily over, it is they who
are taking us home.
God alone knows what a strenuous and anxious time they
have had during the past five years. In fair weather and foul,
always in danger of Submarine attack or of striking one of the
numerous mines a dastardly foe [spread broadcast on the seas,
our sailors carried on their work, silently arid efficient!}'- upholding
the best traditions of the British Navy. The spirit of Drake
and Nelson is still alive ! Our Mercantile Marine has not been
in the limelight like the R.N. or the Army.' They wear few
or no war honours or decorations, no D S.O.’s or M.C.’s nor
D.C.M.’s and M.M.’s, not even a 1914-15 ribbon though they have
served the Empire since the first days of the war.
We all have absolute and unquestioned confidence in our
mariners, knowing full well that in peace or war they will do all
that human power can do for our safety and comfort. Life on
board ship has inevitably its little drawbacks
[and inconveniences as we all know. For us
they do not last long; we soon set ashore, and
for most of us it will be good-bye to the sea for ever. When we are comfortable
and cosy in our homes our sailors will still be ploughing the mighty ocean and
linking up Australia with the Home country arid the rest of the civilised world.
For their sterling good qualities and solid, silent work in war and in peace we
take off our hats to the British Mercantile Marine.
Nature Notes.
THE graceful gulls presented a fine sight in Plymouth Sound. Marine nature
seemed to be at play as our transport came south through the North
Atlantic. After passing the Canary Islands, with Teneriffe and its Peak,
schools of dolphins were to be seen at leap-frog. -Flying fish, glistening in. the
sun, scurried at the approach of the steamer. Portuguese men-o’-war spread
their pink serrated sails to catch the gentle breeze. Mother Carey’s chickens
accompanied us for a day before reaching the equator. Soon the great albatross
of the Southern Hemisphere will be our companion. We shall likewise see an
occasional whale.
12
Headin’ South


“Really, You’d Hardly Believe It”
or
A Problem for Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
aS the Wide World magazine once remarked “Truth is
stranger than Fiction.” So said the good folk of Nulla
Nulla when the news reached them that Diggers Dot and
, Dash of the Xth. General Reinforcements had at last
arrived in Belgium.
So too, I am sure, the readers of this story will say when they
peruse it. Dot, who told it to me, swore a great oath, as to its verac-
ity and his own sobriety at the time.
It is a hair-raising narrative, ghastly and devoid of humour.
Dot and Dash joined their battalion one evening at seven. It
was billeted in a Belgian town, but neither the name of the unit nor
that of the town must be disclosed. The time, is 1919. They
remained exactly 15 hours. At 9 a.m. on the following morning
they were . detailed for attachment to the Army Safety Corps then
holding the line in a village, some 15 kilos away. The Adjutant’s
last thought of them was “Thank Heaven we’re, rid of two more rain-
bows.” At 8 p.m. Dot and Dash reached their new unit, worn out,
weary and weak at the knees. At 9 p.m; they were sleeping soundly
in an empty maison.
Dot was careful to tell me that in the house were a double bed, a
sideboard, many empty bottles and dirty glasses. From its general
appearance it was evident that the late occupants had made a hurried
departure—staying only long enough to empty the bottles. A further
fact must be stated. As our heroes entered, a strange looking woman
confronted them and uttered this warning “ Maison no bon; civiles
parti toute de suite.”
It was not for men of the Xth. General Reinforcements to show
the white feather. They entered and they slept.
At midnight the dirty work began. Dot and Dash awoke simul-
13
Headin’ South


taneously. They were chilled, yet the bed clothes-and a sense of
impending disaster hung heavy upon them.
In the passage outside their room could be heard heavy footsteps,
so; Plonk-Plonk. The room too was suddenly illuminated with an
unnatural phosphorescent light. In the
doorway stood a dreadful, unearthly looking
old woman. Around her head were strange
flames. Not a word did she speak. She
asked not for a piece of “ pain ” or “ bully
beef and bisquit.” She did not even
approach the bottles ; perhaps she knew they
Were empty. Instead, with arms uplifted
she drew near the terrified pair. A merciful
unconsciousness came over them, and it
seemed hours before they recovered. Dot
was not sure who “ came to ” first. All was
dark and silent, and afraid to speak, they lay
still, thinking of home and mother and the
long nights they they had never spent in the
outpost line. A further ordeal was before
them. Once more came the footsteps and the dreadful light. Once
more the hag advanced, this time even to the sideboard which crashed
to the floor, its bottles and glasses smashing to fragments. It was
daylight before Dot; emerging from his own faintness, revived the
still unconscious Dash. The room was normal, the sideboard in place,
the bottles and glasses intact, In fifteen minutes Dot and Dash had
dressed and, like the “civiles, ” parted. The end is as the
beginning—“ Truth is stranger than Fiction ”.
I have no theory. I offer no explanation. Dot swears by the
flag his reinforcements brought from Australia that both he and his
cobber were sober, and that the glasses were dirty and the bottles
empty when they entered.
A military policeman to whom I told'the story said, a Perhaps
some of Broncho’s gang lived there and scared visitors away. They d
get the light effect with phosporous ” Maybe, but what of the falling
sideboard?
I leave it to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle who knows quite a lot
about the antics of the spirits.
14
Headin South


Half=Day Ashore at Cape Down.
AFTER three weeks of life on the Atlantic without variation the prospect of
a few hours ashore at Cape Town was a pleasant anticipation. The
“Chemnitz” had hardly moored before the “cribbed, cabined and con-
fined” diggers overflowed on to the dock. Peace celebrations were about to
begin at the Cape city, and everything was gay with bunting and electric instal-
lations. By a happy circumstance the celebration of victory was contemporary
with the return home of those doughty warriors, Generals Botha and Smuts.
Like. Gaesar'of old they were' returning fresh from the foreign fields with their
victorious legions. The laurel wreaths were absent, but the triumphal arches
were there.
Oriental scenes with their touches of colour always appeal to an Australian
The flower-sellers, fruit vendors, and fez-capped Indians and Assyrians together
made up a picture worthy of an Arabian bazaar or a Cairo market.
The strike on the trams rather militated against thepo-sibility of taking the
many fine trips from the centre of the town. The automobile, however, was
much availed of. Some tripped to Hout’s Bay, others to Rondebosch, famous
because of its fine memorial to the great Imperialist, the late Right Hon. Cecil
J. Rhodes. The beautiful watering place, Muizenberg, attracted also its share of
visitors. Local institutions, including the Y.M.C.A. rooms, were all centres of
attraction. One rejoiced to* see once more the familiar Australian eucalyptus,
which do not appear to have suffered from exile from their native land.
, The theatres, the promenades, on pier and foreshore rounded off a pleasant
half-day spent ashore at Cape Town.
Durban.
WHEN we heard that our homeward journey was to be lengthened and again
broken by a detour taking us via Durban we were naturally a little
impatient at the delay. No sooner had we gone ashore and commenced
to inhale the festive atmosphere of the town, however, than all misgivings were
swept away. Durban’s peace celebrations had reached their fourth, last, and most
brilliant day. Bunting fluttered everywhere. Both buildings and, residents were
in holiday attire.
One of the most interesting features to us as strangers was a demonstration
on the racecourse by the natives in their pecular native dress —or, rather, undress.
Their war dances and the march, of the dark-skinned’ representatives of the
various Christian Churches chanting as they marched their not inharmonious
hymns, were sights to be remembered.
At night bonfires and fire-works displays on the beach attracted a vast
concourse of people who sat or strolled in the glorious moonlight.
Durban’s reputation for its kindly reception of Australians was fully sustained
on this visit. One cannot fail to note the intensely patriotic spirit that pervades
this beautiful city.
15
Headin’ South


ON DECK.
There can be had a motor car,
A mansion or a ’plane,
Wealth enough to lie at ease
There surely is to gam;
Just speculate a “Bradbury”
On the Crown and Anchor board,
There’s someone sure to score a win -
Have “beacoup” cash to hoard.
You'll find that such is really true,
Ask him, whose lusty vim
Scoops in all your ready cash,
You are buying these for him.
Ship's Movements.
Transport “Chemnitz” sailed from Devonport, England, on 9th July ; arrived
at Cape Town 31st July. Left Cape Town 2nd August and arrived at Durban
sth August, 1919. •
16
Headin' South


Memoranda.
17
Headin’ South


PRINTED by
Commercial
Printing
Company,
Durban, Natal,
South Africa.
