

A.H.I.R.S
Australian Health Information and Research Service
HEALTH IN AUSTRALIA
THE POLIO STORY




HEALTH IN AUSTRALIA
THE POLIO STORY
Prepared and published as a tribute to Australia's national
"Health Team" by the Australian Health
Information and Research Service.


Ten years ago polio was killing or paralysing an
increasing number of victims throughout the
world. Today the disease is under control and
in a few years may be virtually eliminated. This
ranks as one of the greatest achievements
in Man's battle against disease.
Australian parents obtain protection
for their children from polio.


Polio may have existed at the time of the Pharaohs thirteen centuries before
Christ. An ancient Egyptian grave-stone, now in a Copenhagen museum,
shows a carving of a man with a deformed foot which looks remarkably like
the after-effects of polio. But it was not until 1789 that the disease was
accurately described in modern terms by the British physician Dr. Michael
Underwood, and its full impact was probably not felt until 1881 when 20
children were crippled by polio in Umea, Sweden.
Another epidemic followed in Stockholm six years later, and by the early
1900's increasingly severe epidemics were being reported from all over
Europe and the Americas. The most famous of the early victims was the
U. S. President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, who was crippled by polio in 1921,
A DISEASE OF SOCIAL PROGRESS
Polio has been called a disease of social progress. In the past, in commun-
ities living under insanitary slum conditions, the entire population was pro-
bably exposed to polio at a very early age when permanent ill effects are
rare. The infection caused no more than a mild two or three day fever, and
as a result of this early exposure the population became immune to the
disease.
But as living conditions improved, the chances of becoming immune at an
age when paralytic effects are rare, were reduced. The result was that the
number of people in the community who were immune was also reduced.
This in turn meant that the chances of a major epidemic breaking outwith all
the tragic consequences of polio, including paralyses and death, was greatly
increased.
Before vaccination became possible, polio had the unhappy distinction of
being practically the only major contagious disease, especially in its para-
lytic form, with an overall increasing rate of incidence throughout the world.
In those early years, and for a long time afterwards, doctors were helpless
against polio. They had no weapon against the disease and onlj general
nursing care could be given to patients.
There seemed to be no reason in its course, no pattern. Some people es-
caped permanent ill effects, others were permanently paralysed, many died.
Isolation did little to limit the contagion. It was many years before these
puzzles began to be unravelled.
Meanwhile the pattern of polio was changing. Forty or fifty years ago the
maximum attack-rates were nearly always recorded in the 0 to 4 years age
group. Since then they have shifted to higher age groups. In Sweden, for
example, the children now most affected by polio are in the 7 to 15 years


age group (in some yearly records even in the 15 to 25 years group). Polio
has not only been affecting a wider range of the population in countries where
it has long been recognised, but it has also been appearing in epidemic form
for the first time in more and more parts of the world, including econom-
ically less developed countries.
HOW POLIO STRIKES
Polio is contracted by swallowing the virus, and the first symptoms are
vague. They include sore throat, headache and fever which is often hardly
noticeable. After multiplying in the gut, the viruses reach the cells of the
spinal cord, or even brain, either via the blood stream or by travelling
directly along nerve paths. They destroy the cells concerned with initiating
movements (motor cells), thus causing paralysis of muscles. Parts
affected may vary from one limb to almost the whole body. The paralysed
muscles waste, leaving the victim crippled. Even breathing muscles may
be paralysed, so that only an artificial respirator - an "iron lung" - can
keep the patient alive. There is still no way of curing the disease once
paralysis has set in.
Despite the severe effects which polio can have, it now appears that for
every victim who is paralysed, there may be up to 100 people - some have
even suggested 1,000 - who carry and can spread the viruses without ill
effects to themselves. These people are called "healthy carriers".
DEVELOPING THE FIRST VACCINE
The first person to show that permanent immunity against polio was a poss-
ibility was scientist Karl Landsteiner. hi 1909 he injected diseased cells,
taken from the spinal cord of a four-year old boy who had died of polio, into
monkeys. Some of the monkeys died, others were paralysed. Further tests
showed that those monkeys surviving the disease could not be affected a
second time. The first injection had made them immune.
But Landsteiner never succeeded in isolating the virus. This is not sur-
prising because we now know, thanks to the electron microscope, that polio
viruses measure only 8-23 millionths of a millimeter in size. Using this
type of microscope, scientists of a large pharmaceutical company succeeded
in photographing the virus for the first time only in 1950.
A year earlier, without being able to 'see' what they were producing, three
Harvard Medical School scientists in America succeeded in growing polio
viruses in test-tube cultures of living monkey kidney cells - the first step
towards producing a vaccine. This break-through coincided with the worst
epidemic the United States had known, with 43,000 cases of polio being re-
ported. The achievement won the scientists, Drs. John F. Enders, Thomas
Wheller and Frederick Robins, the Nobel Prize.


It was soon found that there were in fact three different types of polio virus
and that immunity to one did not necessarily give full immunity to the other
two. Each type was originally named after the patient from whom it was
isolated. - Brunhilde, Lansing and Leon - but they are now knowm more
simply as types I, II and 111.
With the ability to isolate and grow these viruses, research now went into
full gear, and in 1955, at the University of Pittsburgh, Dr. Jonas Salk
developed the first vaccine. One of Dr. Salk's co-workers was an Australian,
Dr. P. L. Bazeley. Dr. Salk conceived the idea of growing all three types
of viruses, inactivating them with formaldehyde, and then combining them
into a complete vaccine. This is basically the method of production today.
In the U. S. A. , 441,131 children were given the first doses of Salk vaccine,
and the trial, which involved 1,020,000 children altogether, provided con-
vincing proof of the ability of the vaccine to immunise.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY
Discovery of the vaccine was only the beginning of the story. It was up to
the pharmaceutical industry to produce it on a large scale. This involved an
enormous amount of research and development, and vast capital outlay.
The part which the pharmaceutical industry has played in the polio story is
shown by the example of one company which began work in the field in 1946,
long before polio viruses had even been isolated. The director of viral
research for this company, Dr. Harold R. Cox, is acknowledged as a lead-
ing world authority whose contribution was of great importance. He was the
first to develop a practical vaccine which could be taken by mouth and give
protection against all three types of polio virus at the same time.
Other pharmaceutical companies have made contributions of comparable
importance.
Today the picture of polio has completely changed, and the achievement
must rank among the greatest in man's challenge to disease.
In America alone it has been estimated that in five years Salk vaccine saved
30.000 people from becoming victims of polio with the prevention of about
2.000 deaths, and a saving in patient care costs of £37 million.
POLIO IN AUSTRALIA
In Australia there were two severe outbreaks of polio in 1931-32 andl937-38.
The second outbreak was particularly severe (1,500 cases reported in three
months). After the war there were outbreaks every year, and peaks in in-
cidence occurred more frequently. A particularly bad outbreak occurred in
1951.


Large scale immunisation with Salk vaccine commenced in June 1956 after
the success of the U. S. field trials. Although the incidence of the disease
in Australia at this period had been falling, the effects of the vaccination
campaign of 1956-58 could be seen by comparing the incidence of polio in
vaccinated and unvaccinated cases. This comparison revealed a very high
protection rate (about 83 per cent). Three injections were recommended,
and this was justified by later studies which showed a higher protection rate
for those with three injections than for those who had two or one. By 1962-63
it was estimated that the protection rate was even higher (98 per cent).
Soon after the vaccination campaign was begun the incidence of polio fell to
its lowest level for thirteen years. In the second half of 1956, before the
courses of three injections could be completed, 157 cases were reported.
But in 1957, when the full effects of the vaccine could be observed, only 92
cases occurred in the whole year.
Despite this success, Queensland and New South Wales both experienced
severe epidemics in 1961-62, None the less, the numbers of cases were
much lower than in any of the outbreaks that had occurred in the eight years
before the vaccine was available. Of the 450 cases reported in Australia in
1961, most were among unvaccinated people, and it was calculated that in
the absence of vaccination, 2,000 more cases would have occurred.
For example, in Tasmania in 1960-61 the polio attack rate among the
vaccinated was only 3.76 cases for every 100,000 of the population, com-
pared with 52. 8 among the unvaccinated. Furthermore, the handful of fully
vaccinated people who did get polio suffered only mild effects.
The changing pattern of polio in Australia since 1931 is shown in the graph
on page 9. This overall picture is made up of slightly different patterns
in each State.
The Queensland and New South Wales outbreaks of 1961-62 shook public
apathy and the demand for vaccination became intense. In New South Wales
(where 359 cases occurred between September 1961 and March 1962) it be-
came necessary to institute a daily vaccination clinic,in place ofthe previous
weekly clinic. On one day 1,100 injections were given at the rate of 3 a
minute. With greater public awareness of the importance of vaccination the
number of cases reported in Australia in the first six months of 1963 dropped
to 17.
There has been only one fatal case of polio in Australia in a fully vaccinated
person since the commencement of Salk vaccination in 1956, and because of
a suggestion that an excess of sedatives had been taken by that person a
coroner's enquiry was held.


AUSTRALIAN VACCINE PRODUCTION
Salk vaccine is made in Australia, and monkeys play a very large part in
production. They are flown direct from India or Malaya to Australia and
held in quarantine until required.
The first step in the production process is to remove the kidneys from the
monkeys by an operation performed as carefully as a surgeon would operate
on a human. The kidneys are then very carefully chopped and the pieces
treated with a substance known as trypsin. This enzyme has the power to
separate the kidney pieces into the individual cells of which they are
composed.
These cells, together with a special nutrient solution, are then placed in
bottles which have a large flat side. The nutrient solution is a very com-
plex one, containing over sixty components, and it must be very carefully
prepared. Its purpose is to reproduce artificially the fluids which bathed
and nourished the cells in the living monkey.
The bottles containing the living kidney cells and nutrient fluid are laid on
their side in a room where the temperature is maintained at body heat (37 C).
The cells settle to the bottom of the fluid layer in the bottle, become attached
to the glass surface, and commence to multiply actively. Within six to eight
days the cells have formed a complete layer of tissue on the glass surface
of the bottle.
At this stage, the liquid in the bottles is removed, its nutrient content having
been largely used up by the development of new cells. A further lot of liq-
uid is added, and at the same time a small amount of living poliovirus.
Each virus particle invades a cell almost immediately, and multiplies with-
in the cell. In doing this the virus completely destroys the cell, and con-
sequently the 500-1,000 virus particles which have developed in the cell,
are released into the liquid. Each virus again invades another cell, and so
on, until all the cells have been destroyed. Finally the fluid in the bottle
contains at least one thousand times more virus than the amount which was
added to it.
The purpose of growing the cells was to support the growth of a large amount
of poliovirus. This having been achieved, the fluid containing the virus is
removed from the bottles and stored in a refrigerator.
To convert the virus fluid to vaccine, it is necessary to inactivate the virus.
This means treating the fluid containing the virus in such a way that the
virus is killed without destroying its ability to stimulate the human body to
produce polio antibodies. Firstly the fluid is passed through filters which


are so fine they will remove everything in the fluid except the virus. Then
the fluid is warmed and a very accurately measured amount of formalin is
added. The fluid is now left in a room in which the temperature is kept at
37 C. for at least 10 days. During this time samples are taken regularly
from the fluid. The purpose of these is to ensure that the virus is being in-
activated (or killed) at the correct rate, and that no living virus is left in
the fluid.
The Salk Vaccine must protect against all three types of polio virus. To
achieve this, each virus is grown and converted to vaccine separately, and
the three vaccines are then pooled to give the final product. This is sub-
jected to many tests in animals and tissue culture to ensure that it is safe
to inject into humans and that it is of the correct strength to give them
protection against polio.
It is then bottled into small containers for despatch to doctors throughout
Australia, given further tests, and finally distributed by air to the various
depots throughout all States.
Each batch of Salk Vaccine takes at least six months to make and test be-
fore it is ready for use.
The cost to the Commonwealth Government of polio vaccine supplied to the
States and also used by the Commonwealth itself since 1956 is £3,867,000
(see table on page 9). To the end of 1964 about 23 million doses of Salk
vaccine had been produced and made available to States free of charge.
THE IMPORTANCE OF VACCINATION
By last year it was estimated that 80% of children under 15 years
had had three doses of Salk vaccine, but among those aged 15 - 45
years only about 45 to 50% are protected. This fact still worries health
authorities who recommend that everyone from the age of 6 months to 40
years, or even older, should be vaccinated against polio.
As no one is yet sure of how long Salk vaccine protects fully, and because
there were some break-through cases in 1961-62 among the vaccinated,
some States have advocated a fourth dose.
Immunisation is usually given free of charge at State immunisation centres
and clinics arranged by local councils. Immunisation may also be given by
the family doctor. Some medical authorities believe this to be an advantage,
because it gives the family doctor, who may look after the patient for many
years of his life, the chance to have a general look at his charge, and to spot
any early signs of departure from normal good health.


As long as some people are not immunised the risk of a polio outbreak is
never really absent, and health authorities often take special action if a
particular community appears to have a low vaccination rate. For instance,
in New South Wales a comprehensive campaign in two "danger zones" was
organised. This included advertising to migrants on foreign language radio
programmes to bring home to them the importance of vaccination.
The Director of State Health Services in New South Wales, Dr. E. S, A.
Myers, was recently reported as saying that only two confirmed cases of
polio had been reported in Australia in the previous 12 months - "a tribute
to the astonishing advances of modern preventive medicine". However, he
warned that a current steady fall in issues of vaccine indicated that the
proportion of unvaccinated people must be rising. This foreshadowed polio
outbreaks in a few years unless the trend was reversed.
"LIVE" VACCINE IN TASMANIA
Partly as an alternative to the fourth dose of Salk vaccine, one State adopted
a different method of protecting the community. Tasmania, which had had
no polio since 1961, asked the Commonwealth Health Department for per-
mission to use a different kind of polio vaccine - Sabin oral vaccine. Per-
mission was granted to use the vaccine as a booster dose for children who
had previously had three doses of Salk.
The main difference between Sabin and Salk vaccine is that Sabin vaccine is
made from live polio viruses which have been weakened and rendered vir-
tually harmless (attenuated), whereas Salk vaccine is made from killed polio
viruses and contains no living particles.
Two advantages of the live vaccine are that it can be taken by mouth with a
lump of sugar or syrup - no injection is necessary - and it produces im-
munity to polio within a few days, thus making it valuable for use in emer-
gencies for countering epidemics.
Because it is made of living virus particles, it can also produce immunity
in those who are in close contact with persons immunised. The virus germs
multiply in the gut of those immunised, pass out of their bodies and can be
picked up unawares by other members of the family, who will also become
immune, (This method of picking up immunisation "second hand" is not
reliable, and is not recommended as a substitute for proper vaccination.)
Professor Albert Sabin, of Cincinatti University, U. S. A. , who developed the
live vaccine, claims that it could be used to eliminate polio completely from
large communities. He claims that the live vaccine not only immunises
against the paralysis of polio, it also ensures that the person immunised
cannot harbor dangerous polio virus in his gut and thus act as a carrier to
others possibly not immunised.


While the killed vaccine protects the individual against paralysis, it has a
much lesser effect in preventing people being carriers dangerous to others.
Theoretically, if 80% of a community were immunised with the live vaccine,
there would be very few polio carriers and the chances of polio spreading
would be much reduced, if not eliminated; the chain of transmission would
be cut.
The campaign with live Sabin vaccine in Tasmania was conducted to stringent
requirements, and included a special virus evaluation project. The
Commonwealth Minister for Health, Mr. R. W. Swartz, announced that it
was a great success. 97% of those eligible consented to swallowthe vaccine.
In a very short space of time about 60,000 children received two doses and
about 11,000 received one dose. No cases of polio among those vaccinated
or among their contacts were noted, despite rigorous precautions to make
sure that any illness was notified, and it would seem that this vaccine
has been proved safe in Tasmania. This is not surprising because in
different parts of the world more than 500 million doses of Sabin vaccine
have been given without a single case of polio having been proven as being
due to the vaccine (though some cases have been suspected).
Because it is taken by mouth, the live vaccine is very easy to administer.
In Tasmania two people were easily able to dose 1,000 children a day. The
cost of giving 126,000 doses, excluding the scientific evaluation of the
results, was about £2,800 - less than half what a similar amount of killed
Salk vaccine would have cost to give by injection. Tasmanians associated
with the live Sabin vaccination campaign are enthusiastic about it.
Despite the fact that killed Salk vaccine has been available virtually free of
charge in either State centres or Local Council clinics for several years,
still not enough people have availed themselves of it, and the advocates of
Sabin believe that a form of vaccine that can be easily swallowed, instead of
having to be injected, may be the answer to the apathy of those who have so
far shown indifference to the hazards of this deadly disease. However, not
all doctors hold this view. Some argue that Salk vaccine has been such a
tremendous success (only 2 cases of polio in Australia in the last 12 months),
that taking everything into account a change is unnecessary. Meanwhile The
National Health and Medical Research Council keeps the position under
constant review, and Mr. Swartz, the Minister for Health, has said the
Commonwealth is prepared to make either or both Salk and Sabin vaccines
available to the States.


COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON POLIO VACCINE
1956 £ 250,000
1957 £ 652,000
1958 £ 537,000
1959 £ 404,000
1960 £ 241,000
1961 £ 475,000
1962 £ 256,000
1963 £ 600,000
1964 £ 452,000
£3,867,000
The annual variations in the above figures are in part due to fluctuating costs
and stocks in hand, and do not indicate the incidence of polio from year to
year.


CASES OF POLIO IN AUSTRALIA FROM 1931 to 1963,
(Graph line is plotted according to the number of cases
notified in each period of two months.)


A. H. I. R. S. wishes to acknowledge the valuable advice and assistance given
in preparing this document by Dr. John J. Graydon of C. S. L. , a member
of the Poliomyelitis Sub-Committee of the National Health and Medical
Research Council, Dr. A. D, Ross, Department of Health, Tasmania, and
a number of other authorities. Information was also obtained from a report
of the National Poliomyelitis Sub-Committee of the National Health and
Medical Research Council published in the Medical Journal of Australia, 1964.


M.J, SEYMOUR & ASSOCIATES. SYDNEY.
