

Health of Hem Jlouth Males.
SALUS PoPULI SUPREMA Lex EsTO.
HEALTH:
LECTURE DELIVERED BEFORE THE HEALTH
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
On the 23RD July, 1877,
AT THE
FREEMASONS’ HALL. YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
HENRY BURTON BRADLEY,
Hon. Secretary of the Society.
Tpie Hon. Sir W. M. Manning in the Chair.
FEINTED FOR THE HEALTH SOCIETY,
JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET.




No. 4.]
[Dec., 1877.
Health J&oeictij of |tnu Smith Males
Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto.
HEALTH:
A LECTURE DELIVERED BEFORE THE HEALTH
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
On the 23RD July, 1877,
AT THE
FREEMASONS’ HALL, YORK STREET, SYDNEY,
HENRY BURTON BRADLEY,
Hon. Secretary of the Society.
The Hon. Sir W. M. Manning in the Chair.
PRINTED FOR THE HEALTH SOCIETY,
JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET.


THE HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM MONTAGU MANNING.
THE HONORABLE THOMAS HOLT, M.L.C.
A. T. HOLROYD, M.A., M.B.
£©rm«wr;
CLEMENTS LESTER, Australian Club,
jßitauararg .iS'ea.etartj:
HENRY BURTON BRADLEY, 64 Margaret Street.
OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY.
1, The diffusion among all classes of plain information on
the subjects of Health and Disease, particularly as these are
connected with cleanliness, ventilation, and infection.
2 The prevention of adulteration of food and liquors.
3. The removal of noxious influences by means of legisla-
tion, and by a legitimate pressure upon the executive authorities.
“Prevention is better than Cure.”


n-tr -ns
Jfeite |apli Jfajnpima la flfeto.
The following lecture, delivered on Monday evening last, July
23, by Mr. Burton Bradley, in the Masonic Hall, is the first
of a series of lectures in connection with the Health Society of
New South Wales: —
Mr. Burton Bradley said: Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentle-
men, —
Health, or wholeness, may be defined as a condition of
harmony with the laws of our organization, in which all the
energies, faculties, and powers of our spiritual, intellectual, and
physical nature, in their proper subordination and relations, con-
stitute the perfect man. It is my purpose to-night to confine
myself as much as possible to the treatment of physical health,
illustrating the manner in which it is lost, and suggesting a better
way —conscious that among those who hear me there must be
many at whose hands the subject would be more ably treated.
That the health of the people, as a most important part of the
good of the people, should be the highest law, might well be
argued from the consideration that without health all other earthly
good offers little enjoyment to man, and that the views which we
take of all subjects are largely dependent upon the state of personal
health from which we regard them. Every one is familiar with the
different aspect which the same circumstances have assumed when
regarded at the end of a fatiguing day of toil and anxiety, and by


the bright light of the following morning; yet the circumstances
remained the same; the only difference was in ourselves; fatigue
had depressed the vital powers, temporarily lowered the health,
and the spirit and the intelligence sympathized with them, sleep
restored the life forces, and, with their return, came a more perfect
perception and unbiassed judgment. That these are no inaccurate
statements, I may refer not more to individual experience than to
the common phrase, “ a sickly view/ 5 to convince all who hear me
of the importance to the right performance of the duties of in-
telligence, of a sound state of health; while the obligation to
labour, of a manual or mixed nature, imposed upon all men, is
conclusive as to the value of health as well to the labourer as to
those interested in his work. We are not, however, driven to
reasoning of this nature on a subject of such vital consequence;
the earliest records which we have, inform us that at the creation
the Divine voice proclaimed all the Creator’s works “ very good;”
every condition of the relations of man was then perfectly adapted
to man’s organization, man was in harmony with his Maker, and
in harmony with the conditions of his physical being—these
harmonies being interrupted, lost, it became necessary (I speak
only of physical health) that the life conditions (whose infraction
had resulted in multiform disease—“all the diseases of Egypt
which thou wast afraid of”) should be laid down as laws to the
people chosen out of the nations as the depositaries of Divine
light, and as the objects of Divine promise; and, accordingly, the
records inform us that the same Voice which, in Eden, pronounced
all to be “very good,” condescended to point out, and enforced
with the obligation of a religious command, that wonderful system
of sanitary injunctions which we read in the Law of Moses, a
system which seems to me to have fallen under the disregard of
Christian people, from some idea that the Laws of Moses are
matters of indifference, or at best the subject of learned curiosity
only to them —that, because we are freed from the burden of the
Ceremonial Law, therefore the wise directions of the inspired
legislator for the health of his people, are, in like manner, matter of
no concern to us. And yet compare the principles of the system


of Moses with our own, and see what answer we can make to his
question— “What nation is there so great, that has statutes and
judgments so righteous, as all this law which I set before you?”
Speaking for myself, I will freely admit that, except for a long
summer day’s ride in the mountains of this colony with a learned
Jew, the advantage of which I have never forgotten, my own
understanding might not have been opened to the consideration
that the advice of Moses, given in a country whose climate
appears, by its productions, to be much like our own, might be
very good advice for us (without any reference to its obligation
upon us, as a command, in which character it was enforced upon
the Jews). For twelve hours or more I rode by the side of an
apparently humble person, happily for me, filled with the know-
ledge of his law, and possessed of the faculty of illustrating its
application to a people lately released from long and degrading
bondage, and needing instruction in the most ordinary particulars
of personal cleanliness, diet, and conduct.
What my Hebrew companion then sowed in my mind (I fear
but little congenial soil) gave little evidence of fruit for many
years; but it was not lost, and during the last eighteen months,
since circumstances have dragged me out of the privacy which I
love, I have again and again recurred in my readings to the first
health law, which was delivered to man by his Maker. I have
read many books on sanitary science, the works of the great and
wise physicians of the old country; have read much of sickness,
and of the suffering whose name is Legion; much of remedial
agents, vaunted, discarded; of vain searches for the tree whose
leaves might be “for the healing of the nations;” much of systems
and their followers, at variance always with each other, and often
with themselves, and I have arrived at the conclusion, which I
earnestly offer to all to-night, that whereas sickness is multiform,
often obscure; prescribed remedies endless, uncertain, ever vary-
ing, unsatisfactory, expensive; health is simple, plain, the gift of
God—that the words of the preacher, “ God hath made man
upright, but they have sought out many inventions,” are in fact
applicable to man’s original and to his impaired physical health,


as much as to his original spiritual nature and to his fallen state.
Under this impression, I have examined the Mosaic law relating
to personal cleanliness, to the purifying of infected persons,
apparel, domestic vessels, and dwellings, to the use of food, to the
marriages of near relations, and to kindred subjects, to the removal
of the dead and of all offensive matters outside the city, and to
the separation of unclean persons, and I have compared these
injunctions, which Christendom has habitually conceived to have,
with slight exception, no concern for us, with our practices and
with their consequences, and I confess I have been astonished —
astonished because with the light so plain before us, Europe has
persisted in walking in darkness. Is it not a fact that, until the
last fifty years, personal ablutions were of the most limited
character; the dead buried under the churches? Have not our
hospitals been frequently pestilent from the most plainly avoidable
causes, and do we not, to this day, behave ourselves with respect
to the matter of sewage, just as though Moses had never written
that such matter should be placed in the earth; and are not all
our engineering and chemical science taxed to the uttermost to
see, whereas Moses said, “put it into the earth,” if we can’t find
some much better way, to put it in the water. Hence, and from
the infraction of all sanitary laws, has arisen a condition in which
the spirit of invention has endeavoured to find remedies for our
self-imposed punishments; thousands of volumes have been
written, ten thousand drugs prepared, and an army of physicians
levied to combat disease which, chiefly generated by ignorance
and dirt, assumes as many forms as Proteus, and, like Proteus, too
often eludes the grasp of those who would overcome it.
I do not intend to deny the fact that, as recorded, sickness has
been sometimes sent as a punishment for sin; but I do very
firmly express my belief, that the mass of sickness under which
mankind labour, is only a punishment in this way, viz., that it is
the direct consequence of an infraction of the conditions
impressed upon their constitution by their Maker, and that it is,
therefore, preventable by a return to first principles. I ask an
examination of the health laws of Deuteronomy; as suggested


rules of life, these laws lay down a system which modem science
has accepted as the perfection of human reason—“the rain to the
river, the sewage to the soil,” is accepted as an axiom, which only
the inconveniences of our modern form of civilization, and the
enormous aggregation of population in small centres, render
difficult of literal compliance; but probably millions of lives have
been sacrificed in England to the disregard of this rule —the
polluted rivers, the middens which, in some parts, breed or
disseminate wide-spreading disease, are evidences of a fatal
infringement of the Mosaic law. We learn from the Talmudic
statements that the injunction to remove all uncleanness without
the camp was amply carried out in the City of Jerusalem, and
that a sanitary police allowed no offensive matters to be retained
within the city, but required them to be removed outside the
bounds, and there to be buried in the earth.
It has been said, and I believe with much truth, that “ Great
Britain pays an annual toll of between eight and nine thousand
deaths from typhoid fever alone, to the neglect of this one Mosaic
ordinance.” The eminent sanitarian, Mr. J. Simon, calls cholera
and typhoid “ filth diseases.”
Allied to the regulation to which I have alluded, was the
Mosaic provision for isolation of infectors and infectants, in
humble imitation of which the British health laws prescribe a
penalty of five pounds for placing a fever or small-pox patient in
a public conveyance, and of twenty pounds for taking a glandered
horse to market, a forcible but unhappy illustration of the different
values set by our “nation of shopkeepers,” upon their fellow
creatures, and upon their worldly goods!
We have long said—would that the saying had been acted
upon!—that “cleanliness is next to godliness;” under the Mosaic
law cleanliness was a part of godliness.
There can be no doubt that a strict observance of the Mosaic
laws of purification would render almost impossible, and would
certainly check the spread of that terrible disease, which some
eighteen months or two years ago, threatened to sweep the mothers
of Australia out of the land.


The young Society, under whose auspices I have the honour to
address you to-night, owes its birth to the impression which that
season of suffering and death made upon a few thinking men.
This Society reasserts, by her motto, the old adage that “ prevention
is better than cure.” I have long contended for the principle that
all remedies for, or attempts to cure diseases, must be secondary
in our regard to the laws which prevent their origin or their
dissemination. And it is a part of ray object on this occasion to
show how many are interested in this “prevention” —for how
many it is better than “cure”—aye, and more —to how many there
may be prevention, for whom cure would be sought in vain.
The great physicians of the age have recognised in relation to
this scourge of maternity, the fact that it is to little purpose that
they seek means of cure, that to the avoidance of the causation of
the disease their best efforts must be addressed, and among these
is the duty of isolation from infectants and infectors.
I am reminded by my long disgression-—-(I promised you a few
words upon health, and I have dragged you through a sea of
sickness) —through how much discouragement we must proceed in
our search for health—-and I have not done yet. Ignorance, in-
dolence, dirt, and cupidity, with vested interests of many kmds ?
are arrayed against health, and yet it would not be difficult to show
ail, that a very largely improved condition of health would consist
with a largely improved pecuniary return to those now sinning
against the plain laws of their being. There is not a person in the
community, beginning with the landlord and ending with the
undertaker, who is not interested in the prolongation of life. The
great wealth of a nation is in its people. What were this colony
without the energies of the white man ? shall we cripple these
energies, dwarf the powers, shrink the arm of labour, or cramp the
spirit and intelligence of the thinker ? Ought we not rather to in-
vestigate the plain rules of life, which, liberally translated, mean
little more than cleanliness, and moderation, and having mastered
these, to make their acquisition the primary lessons of every one
of our children. If it be then, as we are told by high authority,
that the law of life for man is to be read in his organization, it


follows that his organization should be studied by those who would
make his conduct and practice conformable to that law. Many
believe that a simple statement of that law is to be found in great
part in the Old Testament. The researches of learned men in the
path of life, afford valuable testimony to the soundness of a legisla-
tion which should be based upon life conditions, which conditions
we read more plainly nowhere than in the Bible. By way of instance,
M. Bertillon, in his inquiries into the influence of the conjugal
relation, found that in men from twenty-five to thirty years, the
married furnish 6, the celibate 10, and the widowers 22 deaths per
1000 deaths; from thirty to thirty-five years, the deaths are respec-
tively 7, ix, and 19 per 1000; and from thirty-five to forty years,
7h ■ I 3» and I 7i per 1000, and so on for all other ages the married
man continues to have greater powers of vitality, and dies less
easily, than the celibate; a like principle was found to prevail with
slight modifications among women. It was also found that
criminal statistics were in like manner favourable evidence for the
married; for 100 criminal celibates, there were but 49 married, as
regards crimes against the person; and only 45 in crimes against
property. What said the Book ? “It is not good that the man
should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him.”
Since I obtruded my ideas on the subject of education towards
health, I have been glad to hear that the study of physiology has
been added to the curriculum of the University; and while it is too
much to hope that my poor efforts have recommended this obvious
course to the great men who sit in the Senate, it is satisfactory to
me to observe, that ideas similar to my own are floating in this
community; but while physiology and other ologies are very good
for University students, we want plain life lessons for the common
schools, 500 of which, in this colony, annually teach our children
various accomplishments, more or less useful, or useless, to their
stations in life, but not one word of their own relation to the sources
of health, and the causes of disease and death in and around them
is to be found in their books —though I acknowledge with thank-
fulness that the teacher is expected to give oral instruction in the
laws of health to the sth or highest class. I will enumerate the


subjects of information supplied at one of the best of our National
schools, which will, I am sure, make every one of my hearers regret,
with me, that we are too old to take a course of it. These are, by
books: —Reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar (including acci-
dence, parsing, analysis of sentences, derivation, and composition),
geography (physical and political), scripture history, Old and New
Testament (an excellent selection—l have inspected them),
drawing, singing, Euclid—-book 1., algebra—to simple equations,
Latin —Principia Latina, part I. Then come the oral lessons: —
Domestic animals, common objects, common minerals, vegetables,
and animals, arts and manufactures, elementary mechanics, the
mechanical powers, science of common things, laws of health,
social economy, duties of a citizen—the laws, experimental physics,
which have been enjoined to be imparted by the teachers under
the regulations of the Council of Education, of November, 1875,
and which in the school of which I speak have had the following
deliverance, viz.: —Seaweeds, forest trees of New South Wales,
perfumes—their manufacture, manufacture of steel, the pump, the
lever, the air—its properties and chemical constitution, ventilation,
impurities of water—-and the means of removing them, taxes, wages
and strikes, needlework to the girls, and drill and calisthenics to all.
But while we must all recognise the excellence of what is taught,
and while difference of opinion may be allowed as to the usefulness
of the attempt to impose such a curriculum upon young children
who, in the majority of cases, must leave school before they can
have attained proficiency in any branch of study, to get their bread
by some form of manual labour, I may be excused for expressing
individual regret that the law of life for man is not laid down in
one of the first reading books —that what concerns life and health
is left to be taught orally, that is unsystematically, and only in a
class to which the majority of the children taught probably never
attain • that while Bible history is taught, Bible cleanliness is not
taught; and yet is it not plain that in comparison, Singing, Algebra,
Euclid, and Analysis of sentences, fade into insignificance? But
what says the Book of the Life Lessons ?—“ Teach them thy sons,
and thy sons’ sons.”


I do not need to be reminded that it is one thing to know what
is right, and quite another thing to do what it is right; but for
every such objection to my proposed teaching,—an objection which
applies with equal force to all laws, —I have this ready answer,
viz.,—that our best efforts can only attain an approximation: so,
while I allow that man’s sins, his appetites, his cupidity, will, with
hereditary diseases, not entirely to be eliminated, continue to
furnish their quota of suffering, sorrow, and premature death, I
maintain that a due observance by the greater number, of the
conditions of our being, imposed by Providence, and inevitable by
our utmost contrivance, will lead to the reduction of disease to a
minimum.
The conditions to which I allude are so few and so simple that
an apology were due to this intelligent assembly for gravely putting
them forward, but from the consideration that the application of
generally admitted principles is by no means a consequence of their
acknowledgment, and that I hope by placing familiar facts in a
view perhaps different from that previously presented to the minds
of some of my hearers, to enlist attention to the simplicity of the
demands of Providence, as contrasted with the complexities of
man’s contrivances, firstly to create disease, and next of his ingenious
inventions for laying the foul spirit which these contrivances have
summoned up.
The laws of our physical being, then, of an existence whose
conditions, in a more or less modified form, we share with the
entire animal kingdom, involve the continual reception and the
frequent excretion of the various kinds of aliment supplied by the
Creator. With every inspiration we take in a supply of air food,
and with every respiration we cast out a portion of foul, spoiled,
used-up air, while our skins are continually giving off, in sensible
and in insensible perspiration, matter which is poisonous to be
reabsorbed, and which, therefore, should be put away from us by
daily ablution, and frequent change of clothing. The purity of
our food, of bread, and of meat, of fruits and of vegetables, of
water, of milk, or other fluids, is not more important to our
immediate health than is the purity of our air food to our present


comfort, to our ultimate health, to our eventual life. In order to
the maintenance of this purity it is necessary that a continual
supply of clean air be provided, and that immediate means of
removal of our spoiled used-up air be also secured. It need not
now be insisted upon that pure, clean air cannot be had in the
midst of decomposing matter, in crowded buildings, crowded
streets, or in the cities which pour their sewage all around their
boundaries, and infect the shores of their water girdle with the
abominations which should be carried out and buried “ without
the camp ” “ For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy
camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee,
therefore shall thy camp be holy, that He see no unclean thing in
thee and turn away from thee.” Uncleanness in the Jew was an
offence to his Maker —is the filthiness of the Christian a recom-
mendation to His favour ? The purity of our food of every other
kind, forming, as it does, matter of watchful care in the inspection
of animals slaughtered, and in the prevention of adulterations
(another condition of health) is the subject of interference by the
noxious gases given off by decomposing substances which are
rapidly absorbed by all animal and many vegetable matters used
as food. It is evident that the purity of what we take in must be
guarded by the absolute removal of everything that we throw off;
the body must not reabsorb what it has parted with, and this
suggests that the filthy places in which much of our food is kept
for sale, and, in the cases of the poor, in shops adjoining sleeping
apartments, or perhaps, in rooms actually occupied as such, con-
tribute in no small degree to the gradual lowering of the high
health with which persons from the open country enter upon city
life, and, breathing foul air, consuming unwholesome provisions
tainted by like air, gradually fall into the sickly ranks of those who,
depressed, not knowing how, seek to build up flagging energies by
stimulants, try to combat the consequences instead of the causes
of their ailments, and finally subside into the condition in which
haustus ter die capiendus seems to become, like daily bread, a
daily necessity, and the visits of the family physician as inevitable
as those of the butcher.


An eminent physician writes: —“ Every community living in bad
sanitary conditions and habits tends to its own extermination.
All large towns are peopled by a constant immigration from the
country districts.”
There can, I think, be no doubt that all this is wrong—no
difficulty in admitting that “ The Lord made the country and man
made the town;” with the aid of what spirit, or how many forms
of spirits the latter was made we need not stop to enquire; it is
plain that all men, and particularly men dwelling in cities, are
sinning against the conditions of their physical (as well as moral)
constitutions, and are reaping the punishments of their disobedi-
ence of the laws of their being; and our principal concern to-
night is to see how many of us, and how far any of us, may be
delivered from the mistakes, which, begun by our ancestors, have
been handed down to ourselves, and adopted with all their conse-
quences, without inquiry whether sickness really be the normal
condition of man, a condition to be patiently submitted to with-
out a struggle !
The history of the world shows us that originally the assembling
of mankind in cities arose in a great degree from a desire for the
protection which numbers afforded against aggression of hostile
tribes, from the feeling, “ Multi societate tutiores and the same
history tells how, in the middle ages, the most desolating plagues
punished the dwellers in these walled towns for their infraction of
life laws. Gathered thus together under circumstances which
precluded the practice of agriculture by large numbers, the various
real and artificial wants called forth the ingenious arts, and men
found the convenience of settled homes and near neighbourhood,
for the purposes of manufactures and of trade, and hence the
form of life adopted for the preservation of life from violence, was
continued as a means of living. The necessity of guarding the
walls drew all the dwellings as close together as possible, in order
to keep the extent of wall within the compass of the means of
defence, and streets were left so narrow, that in many a packhorse
was the only means of carriage between houses, which with
projecting balconies nearly met overhead and excluded light and


air alike. It is true that we have remedied much that in their
case was amiss, but a comparison of our own death-rate in city
and country —in Sydney and in London—shows us that we are
still far from that condition with which thinking men should rest
satisfied. It is a terrible penalty for city life to incur a death-rate
double that of the country !
In addressing ourselves to the consideration of amendment we
have the advantage of the labours of the noble spirits of Europe,
who, statesmen and physicians, and notably among the first,
Benjamin Disraeli (now the Earl of Beaconsfield), have laboured
to deliver their countries from insanitary conditions. It is re-
markable, and I notice it here, because compelled by natural
truth to acknowledge the first recorded health law to have been
written by Hebrew hands, I am in like verity bound to acknow-
ledge that the great sanitary legislation of our mother country
embraced in no less than twenty-two statutes passed between 1848
and 1875, and in the latter year codified by one general measure
comprising more than 340 clauses—is also in a large degree due
to Hebrew hands, to the same Benjamin Disraeli.
These statesmen, physicians, and the philanthropists who have
rallied round them, have realised this fact—a fact which we do
well to bear in mind, viz., that individual knowledge, individual
cleanliness, individual moderation, individual obedience—even
if these could, by increased knowledge, be obtained in a much
larger proportion than our present knowledge of ourselves, and of
our fellows renders hopeful—will be insufficient to ensure public
health; there always have been, and probably always will be, sins
against knowledge, and transgressors of every precept, and these
must be restrained, guided, punished, by a law to which all must
submit, because, firstly, all are not instructed, and, secondly, many
who know better will not act up to their knowledge. A conviction
of this fact leads to two necessary consequences, viz.:—Firstly,
the instruction of all the rising generation in the great facts of
their being on this globe, their relations to their Maker, that they
may obey His laws, which underlie the whole stratum of health
conditions, —their relation to their fellows, that they may “ help


one another to make the best of their conditions of existence;”
“ then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health
shall spring forth speedily,” and their relation to physical objects,
that they may keep themselves “ in harmony, if possible, with that
part of God’s universe that environs and maintains them.” And,
secondly, a sound legislation aimed at the rendering nuisances
impossible, at the provision of pure air and pure water, of whole-
some, unadulterated food, at preventing over-crowding, which in
factories, lodging-houses, and the dwellings of the poor, is a fruitful
cause of sickness—a legislation which shall stamp out infection,
and control the cupidity of landlords, by declaring dens unfit for
the lower animals to be unlawful as dwellings for man! Are we
prepared to supply this instruction to our children, to submit to
this legislation for ourselves ? If not, the interest which has brought
me to write, and you to listen to these words is, indeed, ephemeral.
A captain of free lances, in the middle ages, replied to a friar’s
benediction, “ Pax vobiscum ”: “Le diable t’ enlkve ton aumone,
ne sais tu pas que je vis par la guerre?” (The Devil take your
charity; don’t you know that I live by war.) It cannot be that so
many of us live by this warfare of ours with our physical relations,
but that peaceful means of employment of their capital and ener-
gies may be found for our free lances!
To return for a moment to the subject of physical education, I
find Dr. Edwin Lankester expressing, in 1870, his opinion of the
want of teaching health laws in schools as follows: —“As long as
this subject is slighted and neglected in all our plans and systems
of education, so long will the miseries that arise from premature
disease and death occur, and so long will poverty and physical
debility obstruct the progress of mankind in the path to wealth
and happiness.”
I have already written, but take leave to repeat here, as what I
am now saying would be incomplete without the assertion, that
the animal races, living in a state of nature, have been observed
commonly to live out their days without suffering disease; that
this results from their obedience, instinctive obedience, to the laws
of their being; for that, domesticated by man, pampered, poisoned


by foul air, over-crowding, injudicious feeding, and other unnatural
means, they become, like ourselves, the sufferers from the sins of
our invention—and that the corollary is, to say no more, plausible,
—viz,, that if we would live in obedience, as the wild animals do,
to the laws of our being, our sufferings from disease would be limited
within much narrower bounds than at present As my warrant
for this, hear what the Right Hon. Dr. Lyon Playfair says:—
“Just as in war, while 20 per cent, of its victims perish on the
field or die of wounds, 80 per cent, die of diseases which follow a
camp life; so, in peaceful occupations, the preventable deaths by
violence are small in comparison with the preventable deaths
which follow as infringements of sanitary laws. They (the
sanitary laws) are as definite and inexorable as any law in physics.
You go to the top of a precipice and topple over it, and the law
of gravitation most surely pulls you down with increasing swiftness
till it dashes you to pieces on the ground. You brought yourself
under the law of gravitation, and never dreamt that it would alter
its action by a hair- breadth to save you from your folly or ignor-
ance. So it is with sanitary laws—swift, stern, inexorable, and
invariable in their action, they punish all violations, yet man was
not born into the world that he might pine and die, but that he
might grow in vigour and live his allotted period. Health is the
normal state of obedience to law —disease the penalty of its
infringement. In consequence of this disobedience our kingdom
has 110,000 lives ruthlessly sacrificed every year, while 220,000
people are needlessly sick all the year round. And why 1 Because
neither our rulers nor our people will become acquainted with and
obey simple sanitary laws!” I enquire “If the Prophet had bid
thee do some great thing, would’st not thou have done it ? how
much rather when he saith to thee, wash and be clean?” The
classes principally most interested in the improvement of insanitary
conditions—those for whom not much concern is felt, unless on
the eve of an election, ’comprise doubtless many who will not
easily be persuaded that fresh air and cleanliness are better
remedies for the depression under which they suffer, than gin and
brandy, and the interest of a large number of persons lies in


maintaining the contrary. The landlords of worn-out tenements,
the thousands who prey upon and foster the vices and the intem-
perance of our people, laugh to scorn the idea of our disturbing
the administration of the various kinds of sickness, and forms of
death, in which they deal, and by which they thrive.
A restless, an insatiable cupidity, inimical to health, pervades
society: remarkably has it pervaded our responsible government,
for I call you to witness that whoever has been in office, the per-
manent sanitary concerns, the life interests of the people, have
ever given way to the financial occasions of the hour. Those who
remember the filling-up of the head of Woolloomooloo Bay with
the filth dredged out of the deposits of the sewers and all sorts of
nastiness, and after the spreading over it of a little sand, the sale
of the area in allotments, may not know, but I can tell them, that
only one member of that day’s administration lifted up his voice
against locating the people upon that unwholesome spot. My
friend’s voice, however, was overruled. The Government wanted
the proceeds of the land sale: and so the land was sold, and a
hotbed of fever prepared for all time. Later on, the same policy,
or impolicy, prevailed to establish a succession hotbed at the head
of Darling Harbour; and under the statute 36 Vic., No. 10, the
Government have just filled up thirty-six acres of Blackwattle
Swamp and Bay with like matter, and are actually empowered by
our legislature to sell three-fourths of this large area for dwelling
places for our people—though I am happy in saying that our
present intelligent Administration have no intention of selling. It
is easy to see how by following up the filthy practice of emptying
all our sewage matters into the water round our city’s shores, large
tracts of what some of us remember as deep water will become
silted up and pestilential. If it be thought that our harbour is too
large, and that we had better spoil as much as we can of it—by all
means fill it up-—cover over the filth, but do not plant men upon
it. Hear what Dr. Miller, of New York, writing of yellow fever,
says: —“ Yellow fever is generated by the impure air or vapour
which issues from the new made earth, or ground raised on the
muddy and filthy bottoms of rivers, and which deteriorates the air


above it, consequently this fever is found to rage chiefly where
large quantities of new ground have been made by banking out
the rivers for the purpose of constructing wharfs, and that its great
prevalence in New York and Philadelphia, is owing to the shores
of their several rivers having undergone great and rapid alteration
for this purpose.”
Are we desirous of experimenting what kind of fever we can
raise here, or, according to Professor Tindall’s theory, how good a
hot-bed or propagating pit we can prepare for disease germs ? Will
not the money obtained by the sale of these allotments be really,
and without any figure of speech, “the price of blood!” Shall it
be “lawful to put it into the Treasury?” Count Von Moltke, one
of the first men of our day, says: “To buy material wealth with
human life can never be a profitable transaction!”
We have made some investments of this kind, shall we take
some more shares in the death venture 1 And yet experience has
shown that if Governments want money they will sell, and people
will buy, and will build dwellings for man in places and under
conditions in which we should shudder to think of depositing the
dead!
Hear the lengths to which cupidity carries men. It was
mentioned by Dr. Whitmore, the medical officer of Marylebone,
that “upon a new sewer being constructed, it appeared that twenty-
eight or thirty houses in Harley-street were entirely without any
connection with the main sewer, and consequently the whole of
the sewage from these houses, for years, must have been choked
up. Under these circumstances it was not surprising if typhoid
and scarlet fevers prevailed.” There can be little doubt but the
proprietor paid for the proper connection of his house drains,
but those engaged in their construction pocketed the difference
between an honest job and a spurious one.
In a city, not a thousand miles from where I stand, a rich man
built twelve houses in a row, without one closet among them; ten
of the twelve were soon let to persons of bad repute, and the
rents, at the time of my hearing the history, were collected by the
officer of a Christian church. Some will exclaim, with pride, that


our laws do not permit such things in Sydney; nevertheless, very
similar things have been done here.
I hold in my hand the supplement to the “Chemist and
Druggist” paper, of the 15th of January last, in which I read that
compounds for the manufacture of the various kind of tipple in
which our connoisseurs delight, may be purchased by the pound—
chemicals to simulate rum, gin, cognac brandy, sherry, Amontillado
sherry, champagne—anything desired, at from ss. per pound for
Dutch bitters, up, through 10s. for your fine old crusted port, to
iBs. for Dublin whisky!
I have often, as a lawyer, smiled at the sarcasm quietly conveyed
in the legal maxim “ Caveat emptor ” (let the buyer beware) —a
terrible satire upon our commercial morality, the occasional perusal
of the “ Chemist and Druggist ” will not lead to a neglect of the
caution conveyed by the legal adage ! But enough ! Let us turn
from such pictures to the consideration of what may be done to
ensure to this people the blessings which our fine climate places
within our reach, where neither inclement weather, nor sharper
grinding poverty, nor the lash of the taskmaster, interposes to
check the tide of health and happiness which may be the posses-
sion of every one in this fair land, and I shall have occupied your
attention to-night to small purpose if I have failed to show that—
1, with universal instruction in the plain conditions of health —2,
a legislation as to dwellings, nuisances, sewage, infection, and
adulteration— 3, the removal of the inhabitants of over-crowded
localities into heathful suburbs —and 4, a restriction of inmates,
proportioned to space, in all common lodging-houses—we may
regain our health and our healthful character among the nations—
we may yet realise what Benjamin Disraeli, in his celebrated
paraphrase, styled Sanitas sanitatum , omnia sanitas !


■
V
