

HEALTH,
EXERCISE, AND AMUSEMENT.
Athletic Sports and Pastimes, and How to Train for Them.
With Reminiscences of the World’s Athletes.
By PROF. W. MILLER
Retired Champion Athlete of the World.
Edited by
“ANDRO”
of
“THE SPORTSMAN.”
Price:
ONE
SHLLING.


TO REMEMBER THAT
THE MELBOURNE
A
92 & 94 ELIZABETH STREET, j
Is the Establishment to visit for all descriptions of
SPORTING MATERIAL OF THE HIGHEST CL
.ASS,
Cricket.
Football.
Tennis.
Golf.
fg
Fishing Tackle.
Lawn Bowls.
Sporting Guns.
Ammunition,
NEWEST PATTERN
SAFETY BICYCLES.
PRICE LISTS SENT FREE ON APPLICATION.
Why Pay Cash ?
WHEN YOU CAN OBTAIN
Furniture for Drawing-room, Dining-room, Bedroom,
AND EYERY REQUISITE FOR FURNISHING,
AT LESS THAN AUCTION PRICES ON TIME PAYMENT,
From 2s. 6d. per required.
S. In
for particularly
JLJST,
THE ORIGINAL TIME PAYMENT FURNITURE WAREHOUSE,
ELIZABETH STREET
( Opposite General 1
( Post Office j j
MELBOURNE,
Late of Swanston Street.
GOODS FORWARDED TO ANY PART OF THE COLONY.


THOS. W. SHERRIN,
Champion Athletic Requisite Maker of Australasia,
32 & 34 WELLINGTON STREET, COLLINGWOOD.
BOXING GLOYBS.
Recommended by the Cham-
pions of the World.
John L. Sullivan says
“Thos. Sherrin's gloves are PATENTED
the best I have used.”
CRICKET BALLS AND
FOOTBALLS.
Used by all the Leading
Clubs.
Patentee of the Well-known
Self-acting
PUNCHING BALL.
TESTIMONIALS FROM ALL THE CHAMPIONS OF THE WORLD.
T. W. SHERRIN,
32 & 34 WELLINGTON STREET, COLLINGWOOD
CANTOR 8c CO.
(Established Quarter of a Century),
Merchant Tailors,
140 ELIZABETH STREET
(Near Colonial Bank).
Frock Coat Suits, Dress Coat Suits, and Clerical Suits,
from 4| guineas.
Suits to Order from 42/-. Trousers to Order from 12 6.
BEST QUALITY YLTTIO WORKMANSHIP.
Patterns and Directions for Self-measurement Post Free.
J. A. CANTOR, Manager.


BOOTS, SHOES, AND SLIPPERS.
JOHN COUTIE,
217 Elizabeth Street and 286 Bourke Street.
• ' /
RUNNING AND ATHLETIC SHOES. DANCING CLOGS. Splendid Wear. Excellent Value.
HOTELS, FREEHOLD & LEASEHOLD
(In City, Suburbs, Country, and Adjoining Colonies).
JOSEPH SYMONDS,
VALUATOR .A. NT ID ABBITBATOR,
NORWICH UNION CHAMBERS, 34 QUEEN ST.
BOEDER INN,
BACCHUS MAESH.
The Leading Commercial Hotel in Bacchus Marsh.
TRAVELLERS’ SAMPLE ROOM. BILLIARD ROOM.
Best Brand of Liquors always on hand. Cobb’s Cabs meet every train,
Large Sale Yards on premises, in occupation by Messrs. M‘Phail Brothers, of
Bourke Street.
Charges Moderate. Special Charges for Families.
Good Shooting, Fishing, etc. E . G JONES, Proprietor.
BEDDOME’S DOG MEDICINES
Distemper Powders.
Worm Powders.
Tonic Condition Balls.
Mange Specific.
W! 5..
.1. ‘A l: [-7-
, ,/%4;;f£/dm;¢.
[(5% , ,«w/ ,/ 1/ ,. ...
, . .. ‘. . _.,;.;.;.,f;.','y ”’g‘I’éﬁ‘ly mm"... '1 ~ ,‘I, . ‘ “I": "
.h.... _ Eggggfrw "Mania“: ; ”ﬁfty: 1' . n:
75!: «H ‘ 77—"— =~—=—:;::- »‘:‘ ; ::—.7. 7; 2i :5-
. ’;:::f..—..~.'—_r_——“=‘ .2.;¢;{//'”41':4Zﬁ//7W;7,//m=~12=éfg=j -._
g;~_.‘_=::.—1§ '/ ' W4, /. 3:52.
;;:=:;:’ =7: M - WWW/KM" /~
4:qu , . 1,. . 7A:13:3;::£.3;;_.i ,W‘H’ly" .H‘KQ‘CHH‘ «,1 ‘ my» ..V 1" ”9:55:
57:”; _=:7g..—_% {31m ' In .- ,
[2,. «araé’fﬁmuﬁlzﬁ; f :4. 7‘27”;
guy—M. -, ‘, a . ' - ~ ‘ -__ -' . '
47 f’ géWg’xgz/t;,gg7xr,__ ""/ 7“
-_ 1,,, u- ,.,- _ , < " ; “‘,;—__ '=;
'4“ //a «» W- e-
. . , ,. N;
Canker Lotion.
Alterative Mixture.
Sure Cure for Husk.
Sole Australian Agents for Rackham’s English Dog Medicines.
R. W. BEDDOME & CO,, 254 Bourke Street
j Opposite ")
\ Opeiia. House ) j
Melbourne.
C. E. KEAYS, M.P.S.,
pharmaceutical anb Chemist,
Late of H. Francis & Co., and W. Ford & Co.,
149 SWANSTON STREET,
MELBOURNE.
Telephone No, 264, Telephone No. 264


STEWART & M'DONALD’S
CELEBRATED COLONIAL WINES,
CONSISTING OF
Burgundy, Claret, Chablis,
Port, Muscat, Shiraz.
1 MARKET SQUARE, WESTERN MARKET,
MELBOURNE,
F, B. MORRIS Practical Gunmaker.
Extensive London Expe-
rience. Nine years with
J. W. Rosier.
Guns, Rifles, and Revol-
vers Bought, Sold, or
Exchanged.
Repairs in all Branches
effected.
Charges Moderate.
1
All kinds of Ammunition
in Stock.
Country Orders promptly
attended to.
Pigeon Cartridges to
Order.
Reliable Rabbit Cartridges
to Order, from 7s. 6d.
per ioo.
Note Address—
-363 LITTLE BOURKE STREET W, 363
[OPPOSITE BUSH ITUST HOTEL).
BRITISH LION HOTEL
Miek Nathan’s
( Late ]
(flickin' sj
Athletie Hall.
MICK NATHAN, late of the Redleap, the Harp of Erin, the Lounge Hotels, and the
Apollo Hall, wishes to notify to his old patrons and the sporting and general public that he
has taken the above COMMODIOUS HOTEL and ATHLETIC HALL, LITTLE BOURKE
STREET (two doors from Swanston-street). Contests every Saturday Evening.
MICK NATHAN wishes to particularly impress on all followers of Athletic Sports that
ALL BOXING CONTESTS and other exhibitions taking place at his new premises must be
STRICTLY ON THEIR MERITS. The Hall to be let for all descriptions of Athletic Feats
on reasonable terms. Boxing Lessons at times to suit intending pupils. All arrangements
strictly under the management of JMLXCK NATHAN
HOTEL DE FRANCE,
PANTON HILL.
HEALTHY, AAIDR,.
TWENTY-FOUR MILES FROM MELBOURNE.
COACH LEAVE S HEIDELBERG DAILY.
First-class Accommodation for Visitors. Terms Moderate.


BULL AND MOUTH HOTEL,
MARYBOROUGH, VICTORIA.
LEIGH C. MILLER
Begs to notify Commercial Travellers and the Public generally that he has
TAKEN AND THOROUGHLY RENOVATED
The above commodious Hotel,
Where he solicits the patronage of those who have hitherto favored
him, and also that of the General Public.
T. C3-JLTTITT <&c CO.
(Established. 1853),
CORNER ROYAL ARCADE & BOURKE STREET,
Timekeepers to V.R.C., V.A.T.C., Melb. Bicycle Club, Trotting Club,
Royal Agricultural Society, etc.,
Racing Chronographs,
SPLIT SECONDS
AND
MINUTE RECORDERS.
23 Gold and other
Medals.
>2
Gaunt’s English Lever,
American,
And Other Watches.
DIAMOND JEWELLER?
Made to Order,
Or Re-mounted in the Latest
and Prettiest Designs.
SPECIAL DESIGNS GIVEN FOR MEDALS & OTHER TROPHIES.
Note. —The OPTICAL DEPARTMENT is replete with the most modern appliances for Sight-
testing, for which no charge is made.
ST. KILDA AUCTION MART & TOWN HALL AGENCY,
345, 347, 349 HIGH STREET
(Below Post Office).
FREDK. TULLET T,
AUCTIONEER,
House, Land, Insurance, Financial and General Agent, Valuer, etc.
Advances Made on Furniture and Merchandise sent in for Sale.
Auction Sales held every Wednesday at 2 p.m.
Sale Yards, off High Street—Horses, Cattle, Vehicles every Friday at 2 p.m.


“Follow the Footsteps of the Wise,”
AND SAVE MONEY BY PURCHASING
HIGH CLASS CLOTHING & BOOTS
TO MEASURE, OR READY FOR WEAR, FROM
LINCOLN, STUART & CO., LTD.,
At VERY LOW PRICES.
238 FLINDERS STREET (OPPOSITE STATION).
BAYLEB & CO.
(JOHN A. GOURLAY),
Auctioneers and Estate Agents,
325 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
Daily Sales held at the Rooms. Out-dour Sales a Specialty.
Valuations Made for Probate and Mortgages
CASH ADVANCES MADE AGAINST FURNITURE & ALL CLASSES OF MERCHANDISE.
Account Sales, ■when required, Paid Day After Sale.
Nothing Better when Training than Good, Wholesome Beer.
D« WAGKEfJ’S MS
AUSTRALIA BITTER, EMU, AND
SPARKLING BRANDS.
CHAMBERS & SEYMOUR,
Corner Collins and Swanston Streets, Melbourne.
DOWD’S HOME EXERCISER,
FOR PHYSICAL CULTURE.
Fitted up in ten minutes in Bedroom or Office. £2 25., with Chart and Book of Instructions.
TRIADO’S ROYAL ARCADE HOTEL,
301 & 303 Little Collins St. (between Swanston and Elizabeth Sts.), Melbourne.
WI3STES SPIRITS OF THE BEST ZBT^-AJSriDS.
Superior Accommodation for Boarders. Terms —255. per week, or Meals is., and
Bedrooms is. 6d. per night. Special Terms for Families.
JAMES TRIADO, Proprietor.


WATSON'S»» WHISKY.
FINEST
IMPORTED.
r\\ •"
•V’V
r -i\
\.h
To be
" obtained at
all
the leading
Hotels.
l\v,
\\
MV \
’. Y 5 >
Each Bottle bears the Trade Mark—“ Putting the Stone.”
NICHOLSON'S »■ DRY GIN
y
%
ai
m
\
FINEST GIN
UNSWEETENED
LONDON
✓
THE FINEST UNSWEETENED GIN IN THE COLONY.
Wholesale Agents: FRANCIS FORREST & CO., 484 Collins St., Melb.


HEALTH, EXERCISE,
AND
AMUSEMENT.
Athletic Sports, and How to Train for Them,
WITH
Reminiscences of the World’s Athletes.
BY
PROFESSOR MILLER.
(EDITED BY “ ANDRO,” OF “THE SPORTSMAN.”)
TABLE OF PORTRAITS.
PAGFt
Professor Miller - - - - 8
Mr. Alf. Joseph - - - - 10
W. G. George * - - - - 16
Marquis of Queenseerry - - 18
Frank P. Slavin - - - - 24
Clarence Whistler - - - - 26
“Joe ” Goddard - - - - - 3 2
“Alice” Dick ----- 34
James J. Corbett - - - - 40
PAGE
A. T. Kenney - - - - - 4 2
John L. Sullivan - - - - 48
George Giffen ----- 49
“Bob” Fitzsimmons- - - - 54
James Stanbury 55
Donald Dinnie - - - - - 60
Peter Jackson - - - - - 62
Laurence Foley - - - -63
JMbmtritt:
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
Howey Street, between Collins and Little Collins Streets.
1895


PROFESSOR WILLIAM MILLER.


PROFESSOR WILLIAM MILLER,
RETIRED CHAMPION ATHLETE OF THE WORLD.
The Professor was born at Liecard, Cheshire, on the 16th December, 1846.
He arrived in Australia when five years old. When sixteen he entered the
employ of the M. and H.B. Railway Coy., in which he remained seven years, rising
to the position of relieving stationmaster and telegraph instructor. In 1867, as
an amateur, he defeated all comers at wrestling in deep water, gaining a hand-
some medal for his defeat of the champions. In foil-fencing, single-stick, boxing,
and gymnastics he showed singular proficiency. In 1872, with the small sword
and broadsword, he defeated Sergeant Stevens, of the Light Hussars, for the
Australian Championship. In 1874 he went to America, where, as instructor to
the Olympic Club, he defeated at boxing W. Davis, Champion of the Pacific
Slope, and others. At wrestling defeated Leopold Vanderveken, the Belgian
Champion, and others of lesser note. Then travelled East, where he met and
defeated, in different boxing contests, Steve Taylor, T. Denny (Champion of Boston),
John Dwyer (Champion of America), Paddy Ryan (Champion of America), Joe
Goss, La Bossiere (Champion of Canada). In wrestling met and defeated
Thiebaud Bauer (Champion of France), Andre Christol, William Muldoon,
Colonel McLaughlin, Captain Daly, and John M'Mahon. In all wrestled 72
matches, winning 55, losing six, and making draws in eleven. Defeated Duncan
C. Ross in two walking matches in 1879, covering 102 miles in 24 hours. Made
a draw at dumb-bell lifting with Richard A. Pennell, the theh champion. Raised
with one hand a 1001 b. dumb-bell twenty times at Cincinnati. Raised a 2011 b.
bell once, 1651 b. bell twice, and 1501 b. bell three times. Raised in each hand
two dumb-bells weighing in the aggregate 2501 b. Lifted with both hands 15501 b.
solid iron. At foil-fencing met and defeated some noted men. On returning to
Victoria in 1880 boxed a draw with L. Foley, of Sydney, after 40 rounds.
Defeated Mons. Victor at fencing, conceding 10 points in 21. At the Exhibition
defeated Donald Dinnie, Champion of the Caledonian Games, at heavy dumb-bell
lifting. In wrestling beat Ned Blackburn in a mixed style match. Made a draw
against Blackburn and Thomas combined. Made a draw, owing to breaking his
leg, with Donald Dinnie. Afterwards defeated Dinnie at the Bijou. Threw Mons.
Victor at Graeco-Roman five times in an hour in Sydney. Defeated all comers
at a tournament on the East Melbourne Cricket Ground. Defeated Sali and
Christol combined. Defeated Sali in a combined wrestling and heavy-weight
lifting match. Defeated Duncan C. Ross three times at Graeco-Roman. The
Professor has had a challenge for boxing, Graeco-Roman wrestling, heavy dumb-
bell lifting, foil and single-stick fencing, accompanied by a substantial deposit, in
the offices of “The Sportsman,” “New York Clipper,” “Police Gazette,”
and “ Sporting Life,” London, to any two athletes combined. He is the only
athlete who has ever held the separate championships for boxing, fencing,
wrestling, and heavy dumb-bell lifting. The Professor’s dimensions are—Height,’
sft. in.; weight, 14st.; biceps, 17i0.; calf, 17in.; chest, 46in.; forearm, 13iin.


MR. ALFRED JOSEPH,
THE RECOGNISED LEADER OF THE RING OF AUSTRALASIA.
Though born in London in 1850, Mr. Joseph may well lay claim to being an
Australian, as he came here with his parents in the following year. Educated at
the Model School, Mr. Joseph was a prizetaker in elocution, composition, and
Euclid. He fairly started in life as a commercial traveller for one of the largest
softgoods warehouses in Melbourne. In 1869 we find him in Bendigo, in the
combined business of stock and share broker, and turf commission agent.
In connection with his turf transactions one instance, out of many, will serve
to show the manner in which he transacted his business —a manner, too, that has
placed him in the position of one of the leading and most trusted members of the
Australian Bing.
When Zulu won the Melbourne Cup, “ The Sportsman ” contained the follow-
ing paragraph:—“A gentleman in New South Wales had a double standing with
Mr. Joseph of TlOOO Zulu for the Melbourne Cup, and wired, 1 Lay off my Zulu
money.’ After the news of the race had reached him, he wired, ‘ How much did
you lay off for me, Zulu?’ to which Mr. Joseph replied, ‘Nothing; where will a
draft find you ?’ The gentleman was so delighted that, on the receipt of the
draft, he forwarded Mr. Joseph a valuable diamond ring as a present.”
Mr. Joseph, in company with Mr. “Joe” Thompson, took an active part in
forming the Victorian Club, an institution to the committee of which are remitted
important betting transactions, involving the destination yearly of many thousands
of pounds.


The subject of our picture filled numerous important public positions in
Bendigo during the many years he made that golden city his head-quarters.
He was an active member, and was three times elected President, of the Bendiga
Gold District Hospital Board of Management, and was enabled to effect many
reforms in the interests of the patients.
In 1881 he was elected to the Municipal Council in opposition to one of the
oldest councillors, and was returned by a large majority, which position he held
for nine years. He was also warmly pressed to allow himself to be nominated
as a candidate for Parliamentary honors, but declined.
In 1890 Mr. Joseph decided to pay the Old Country a visit. Prior to this
he had been elected three times in succession as President of the Bendigo
Hospital.
Before leaving for England it was the unanimous wish of the Council that
he should accept the position of Mayor of Bendigo, but he declined the offer, to
the regret of many of his friends. He was, however, entertained at one of the
largest banquets, presided over by the Mayor, ever given in Bendigo. He was
also made the recipient of a silver epergne sft. high, presented by the citizens.
At the same banquet Mrs. Joseph was presented with a valuable travelling bag.
The City Council handed Mr. Joseph an illuminated address, while the poor
patients of the hospital tendered him a slip of blue paper, on which was
inscribed “ God-speed.” The Hospital Board also presented him with an
illuminated address.
In Melbourne the Victorian Club banqueted Mr. Joseph in the Athenaeum Hall.
On reaching London he was taken in hand by Messrs. R. Fry, Robert
Topping, J. Atherton, Dick Dunn, Charley White, and Schlesinger, all Leviathans
of the English Ring. '
At the hands of Mr. Barney Thompson, Mr. Innes, of the “ Sporting Times,”
and Mr. Smith, of the “ Sportsman,” he received every kindness.
Mr. Joseph was interviewed on behalf of all the principal papers, notably
“ Galignani,” the leading Paris journal, to whom he expressed the opinion that
Australia could compare favorably with any country he had yet seen.
Mr. Joseph describes his stay in England as “ one vast round of pleasure
and gratification.”
On crossing over to New York twelve or fifteen representatives of the
American Press met the steamer at Sandy Hook and interviewed him, and the
same day published his statements under the heading of “ Arrival of an Australian
Sport.”
Messrs. Charley Reed, A. Towns, and other influential gentlemen did him
honor. He was banqueted at Delmonico’s.
At Saratoga he was present at the Thirty Days’ Race meeting, and wae
entertained with profuse hospitality.
At Chicago he was equally well treated. In this city Mr. Joseph had positive
proof of the wonderful time made by American trotting horses. They brought
cut Sunol and others, and Mr. Joseph timed them himself, and saw them break
2min. Bsec. for the mile.
Crossing over to the Pacific Slope, Mr. Joseph found a repetition of the same-
kind attentions. To Mr. Mose Gunst he expresses himself as especially indebted>
and he describes Mr. Gunst in the following words: —“ No finer man ever
breathed.”
Messrs. Kingsley, Asher, and John Spreckels were equally attentive.
On his return to Australia he published a very readable resume of his travels,
entitled “ A Bendigonian Abroad.”
During his turf career Mr. Joseph has conducted some very heavy betting
transactions, notably in Chester’s Cup year, when the Ring lost heavily, but has
always worthily sustained his reputation.


HEALTH, EXERCISE, AND AMUSEMENT.
Presenting His Credentials.
For many years past the want of a
thoroughly comprehensive work on Aus-
tralian Sports and Pastimes and How
to Train for Them has been keenly felt.
It is true that from time to time
Methods of Training have been pub-
lished and circulated in the colonies.
But as these in the large majority of
cases emanated from British sources,
it naturally followed that the “ Hints,”
the “ Advice,” and the schemes of
training generally were based on
British data.
Now, I need hardly point out that
the climatic and living conditions of
Great Britain and Australia are so
markedly different as to render that
which would be suitable advice for
the one in many points unsuit-
able for the other. Under the in-
fluenced the bright, ardent Australian
sun, the constitution undergoes changes
that are unknown in the colder and
more bracing atmospheres of the Old
Country—that country which has pro-
duced so many superb specimens of
physical manhood.
In the work I have undertaken in
these columns, however, I shall be able
to bring to bear the experience person-
ally gained in all branches of athletics
during a period ranging over fourteen
years in Australia and eight years in
the Uhited States, Canada, and Cuba.
In Australia, in 1572, I gained the
Fencing (foils and singlestick) Cham-
pionship from Sergeant Stevens, of the
Light Hussars. In America, in 1878,
I won the Boxing Championship from
Joe Goss. In 1879, the Wrestling Cham-
pionship from Theobaud Bauer. In
1877, I made a d’-aw with Richard
A. Pennell, the champion heavy-weight
lifter of America. I also walked, in
1879, 102 miles in 24h. 6min. on a 21-
lap track. In addition, in both coun-
tries, I have been instructor to the
foremost athletic clubs—such, for in-
stance, as the Olympic Club, San Fran-
cisco, which had a membership roll of
nearly 2000. In the intervals I was
also engaged in hundreds of matches —
some of these with startling experi-
ences, which I hope to detail later on
—>n most branches of athletics, and
for which I had to undergo many
weeks, aye, months, of careful, arduous
training. How necessary this training
is to the development of an athlete’s
fullest physical powers I hope to make
clear to my readers before the conclu-
sion of these articles.
I have mentioned a few of my per-
formances, not in the mere spirit
of vainglory, but as a means of pre-
senting my credentials to a public than
whom I can confidently say thex*e are
no more ardent admirers of athletic
sports and pastimes on the face of the
globe.
Ladies and gentlemen, for the sub-
ject is of equal value to both sexes, I
propose to begin my task by pointing
out the advantages of
Physical Culture.
The study of physical education,
though recognised as a valuable auxi-
liary to the present and future gene-
rations, from the fact that health and
strength of parents generally descend
to their children, is only practised
by a small portion of different nationali-
ties, when their immense populations
are considered.
The buildihg up of the human frame
requires a gradual process in order to
develop and strengthen, not only all
the muscles, but also other parts of the
physique. Violent exercise without


preparation should be avoided, many
persons having met with serious in-
juries through this neglect.
The proper place of instruction for
beginners is the gymnasium, under
skilled instructors. I cannot be too
emphatic on the point that gymnastic
novices should not be allowed to engage
in any exercise when the instructors
are not present. Beginners are too
apt to take liberties with the apparatus,
with the danger of straining or other-
wise seriously injuring themselves. Let
it be an unalterable rule of the gym-
nasium that certain exercises are
only to be taken when the instructors
are present.
I am earnest on this point because
I have known so much injury accrue
from its non-observance.
No exact period ean be fixed as that
which should be spent in the gymna-
sium before exercise can be taken at
his own home by the student. From
six to twelve months, however, should
be sufficient.
He may then exercise on portable
gymnastic appliances, or with clubs
and dumb-bells. With regard to the
first of these, I would recommend
parallel bars and horizontal bar.
Either of these can be obtained in Mel-
bourne, and have the advantage of
being readily portable—the up-tordate
horizontal bar being a marked instance
of this.
The clubs and dumb-bells should
vary in weight—from lib each for a
boy 10 years old, 2 1 /olb each for a youth
of 17 or 18 years, and for an adult of,
say, 23 or 24 the weight should be 41b
each.
But here let me utter a word of
caution. In the matter of all exercises
the constitution must be carefully
studied, as what might perfectly suit
the robust might, on the contrary, be
productive of serious injury to the
weaker constitution. Before entering
the gymnasium, or commencing any
exercise, the safer plan is to consult
some eminent surgeon—a piece of ad-
vice applicable equally to the youth
and the adult. So, also, the length of
continuance of the exercise is a matter
of constitution—with this addendum,
that the student should always finish
before he feels tired.
At the start this system of private
exercise may seem monotonous and
tiring ; indeed, where possible, it is
a better plan to have a friend or two
present while the exercise is going on.
But this monotony soon wears off.
Gradually the muscles develop, the
chest expands, the eye brightens, every
sinew grows strong and elastic, the
blood courses freely through the veins,
and life becomes a pleasure instead of
a wearisome burden. I would that I
could induce thousands who pass their
time as invalids to take a little gentle
exercise. I feel certain they would
derive much greater benefit therefrom
than from the absorption of innumer-
able pills and boluses.
About Bathing.
The matter of bathing after the
various exercises also requires careful
consideration. Here, again, the state
of the constitution must be studied.
The general practice is to take a
cold shower bath aftep the exercise.
But this does not suit everyone. Some
it proves beneficial to, producing, after
rubbing, a delightful glowing feeling,
owing to the blood circulating freely.
On others it has a most depressing,
and, therefore, injurious effect.
A marked instance of this came under
my notice in Virginia City, Nevada,
in 1875. I was then training Joe
Farnsworth for his match with Emil
Regnier for the Middle-weight Graeco-
Roman Wrestling Championship of
Nevada—which, by-the-bye, he won.
Farnsworth was a strong, wiry miner—
a man capable of taking a large amount
of exercise, and who was perfectly
honest in his training, never shirking
his work. Just such another man in
that respect as Frank Slavin was in
his best day in Australia. And yet
Farnsworth had an unconquerable re-


pugnance to a cold shower. More than
once I tried to coax him to take one,
led him even to the edge of the bath,
but all to no purpose. And yet he was
scrupulously careful to take lukewarm
—not hot, mind—baths.
Thus, then, it will be seen, as I have
said, that the taking of a cold shower
bath is a matter of constitution and
personal feeling. If the exercisee finds
that it suits him, by all means let him
continue it. On the contrary, should
it disagree with him, I would counsel
him not to continue it merely because
the old-fashioned regime prescribed it—
a regime full of what has since been
proved to be barbarous customs and
restrictions.
Value to Youths and Children.
I shall now allude to the great value
of physical culture in saving the lives
of weak and sickly youths and children.
One special instance of this came under
my personal observation.
Mr. Charles Bennett, whose acquaint-
ance I made in California, was a
member of the Olympic Club, San
Francisco, during my instructorship of
that institution in 1874. While in his
fourteenth year he was consumptively
inclined. His life being despaired of,
young Bennett was recommended by
his medical advisers to undergo a
systematic course of exercise. This he
did, with the result that he not only
acquired health, but also exhibited
extraordinary athletic abilities, which
made him famous on reaching man-
hood. At the time of which I speak
(1874) he was the acknowledged cham-
pion amateur athlete of the Pacific
Slope.
Mr. Bennett, who by-the-bye, once
boxed a capital exhibition with Jem
Mace, I may mention, was a chemist
and druggist—an occupation that, as
a rule, does not afford much oppor-
tunity for physical exercise.
Walking a Capital Exercise.
In connection with these sedentary
occupations, I would advise those who
are precluded from other methods of
exercise to do as much ■walking as
possible. Walking not only regulates
the whole of the system, but also exer-
cises every muscle in a greater or
lesser degree. In addition, it has the
advantage of enabling the walker to
inhale pure air—an inestimable boon
after being cooped up for hours in the
close atmosphere of office, warehouse,
or shop.
Walking is Nature’s exercise, but,
nevertheless, must be undertaken with
certain restrictions. The walk must
neither be too long nor at too fast a
pace, otherwise injury and not benefit
will result. It must be remembered
that I am writing now for the ordinary
citizen, not the professional—his turn
will come later on. What I want to
point out is the easiest road to health
by means of physical culture.
Marked Instances of the Effect
of Training.
During my instructorship of the New
York police—who are physically a mag-
nificent body of men—l found the
majority, although strong in the lower
limbs, defective in chest development.
Most of them suffered fi*om dyspepsia,
their digestive organs, owing to insuffi-
cient exercise, being weak. The con-
sequences were that a great number
of them were afflicted with a sluggish
liver ; some with pains in the head and
chest; and others with general de-
bility. These symptoms, after a course
of exercise, disappeared altogether. A
x’emarkable improvement was also per-
ceivable in the physique of the men.
Their chests, biceps, and other muscles
gradually expanded in a way that
enabled them, after only twelve
months’ tuition, to perform feats of
strength and skill in a very creditable
manner. A number of their athletic
performances stood prominently for-
ward. Several of them became cham-
pions in the amateur and professional
classes.


A noteworthy performance was that
of the Broadway squad. A team
picked from this body defeated the
pi’incipal athletic clubs in America at
a tug-of-war tournament.
William Muldoon, champion Graeco-
Roman wrestler of America, was a
patrolman on the Twenty-ninth Pre-
cinct, New York City, when he first
commenced a course of instruction at
the Police Gymnasium. He was 22 years
of age, and weighed, in his police uni-
form, 18st 81b. Although then carry-
ing far too much flesh, he was a well-
proportioned man. Muldoon, through
insufficient exercise, was slow in his
movements. I timed his first attempt
to walk a mile on the gymnasium track,
and it took him twelve and a half
minutes. Eighteen months afterwards,
at a benefit in Madison-square Gardens
for the New York Police Widows and
Orphans’ Fund, he accomplished the
task in nine minutes nine and three-
quarter seconds.
Muldoon, through his veins being
overloaded with blood, while prac-
tising suffered considerably, but by
hard work and determination reduced
himself to such an extent that he was
considered by artists and others to
have one of the best proportioned
physiques in America.
During Muldoon’s police career he
defeated all the best wrestlers in the
amateur division.
No better illustration of the value of
physical culture can be advanced than
that furnished by the members of the
Gymnasium Calle del Prado, Havana,
Cuba, in the year 1878. At that time
the Cubans were in revolt against the
Spanish Government. The island was
in consequence placed under Martial
Law.
The exciting times were the means
of crowding the gymnasium with
Spaniards and Cubans.
The latter, though small men, averag-
ing from about Bst 71b to list, exhibited
extraordinary power in elevating heavy
dumb-bells.
A favorite exercise of theirs, too, was
what is known as Turning Arms. Two
persons place their elbows on a table
opposite one another in a directly
straight line. Each arm must be on a
slight slant. The hands are then
clasped palm to palm with the thumbs
interlaced. At a given word each tries
to lower the other’s arm—of course in
opposite directions—to the level of the
table. During this exercise neither
elbow must be lifted from the table.
The advantages of such an exercise
will be obvious. It strengthens the
biceps, the forearm, the wrist, the grip,
the fingers—in short, all the muscles of
the arm. How eminently suited this
was to the belligerent forces, all of
whom were anxious to be expert
swordsmen, can be readily imagined.
Here, again, however, care must be
taken not to overdo the exercise, other-
wise, instead of the muscles being
strengthened and hardened they will
become stiff.
This practice should not be indulged
in more frequently than twice a week,
nor should it be continued beyond that
point at which either competitor begins
to find his arm tiring.
But to return to our Cubans. Signor
Alberto Orrin, a son of Dr. Orrin, of
Havana, although weighing less than
list, could elevate a dumb-bell weigh-
ing 1501 b. This he pushed slowly to
arm’s-length above his head twice in
succession without lowering it below
the shoulder. The dumb-bell, in the
first instance, was lifted with both arms
to the shoulder, after which only one
arm was used.
Though excelling in the feats men-
tioned, besides various exercises on the
gymnastic apparatus, it was perceptible
that, as a rule, among the Cubans, the
waist, loins, hips, and lower limbs were
not developed proportionately. These
were in marked contrast to the chest,
shoulders, and back muscles, which
were strong and properly developed.
The explanation is easy. They had
neglected to exercise the former por-


W. G. GEORGE.


W. G. GEORGE.
. N ° lllustrated work on athletics would be complete without the portrait and
"cXbrld" 0 ; r°L ?' \ GeotB6 ’ Who may be “d - the
celebrated English Long Distance Runner. Well built, good looking, and with
a gentiemanly manner he was for years the beau ideal of an amateur athlete.
In he period between 1884 and 1887 his performances included the making of
tT miJr exa “P le ’ on the 7th April, 1884, he put up the record for
urthTr lowZd’b r m ' ’ th ° Ugh in the lowing year it was still
further lowered by Cummings to 51min. 6 3-sth sec., it was received at the time
as a remarkable feat. On the 23rd August, 1886, he altered the world’s record
for a mile running the distance in 4min. 12|sec., and to the present day that
eclipses all other performances over a mile by fully ssec. In that race, with
Cummings, George forfeited his amateur status. George’s record includes, in
addition to those given Three-quarters of a mile, 3min. Bisec.; one mile and a
Qmin' r 44aeC ' ; onemile and three-quarters, Bmin. 8 l-sth sec.; two miles,
la sec.; seven miles, 35min. 37sec.; eight miles, 40min. 57 2-sth sec.;
nine miles, 46mm. 12sec.; eleven miles, 57min. 9 3-sth sec. In 1887 he paid
Australia a short visit, during which he stayed a few days in Melbourne. On the
Apnl °* that year he ran Lou Myers, the American Champion, 1000yds. in
y ey, and was defeated. They also ran a series of matches in Melbourne, but
tr S %Z Ie t f k ®V enoUSly by the Bporting public< match was made
for £2OO a-side, but George forfeited. On his return to England he permanently
retired from the “ cinder track.” " y


THE MARQUIS OF QUEENSBERRY.


THE MARQUIS OF QUEENSBERRY.
The Marquis of Queenssberry, while a patron of all-round sport, is best known
in Australia in connection with the boxing rules bearing his name. The
“Marquis of Queensberry Eules ” were compiled by the Marquis and John
Chambers in 1865. From time to time attempts have been made to alter and
vary them, but the principles contained therein are the same, with minor
deviations, as those which left the hands of the compilers thirty years ago. The
Marquis paid a visit to Melbourne in 1888, and on the 16th July of that year
officiated as referee in the eight-round contest between Frank P. Slavin and Jack
Burke, the “Irish Lad.”


tions of the body, while giving every
attention to the last-named.
What Amateurs Can
Accomplish.
How continued and scientific exercise
may transform the amateur into the
skilled Professional is exhibited in the
history of Messrs. Moulton and Dash-
way, whose really marvellous perform-
ances on the horizontal bar will be
remembered by Melbourne playgoers
in connection with the appearance of
the Silbon Troupe of Gymnasts.
In 1874 Moulton and Dashway were
amateur members of the Eureka Turn
Yerein, in San Francisco. A few years
after they were ranking among the
world’s best professionals.
A gymnastic performance that created
much discussion in the various athletic
clubs throughout America was a sen-
sational one. It was known as a
Backward Forward Somersault. This
was performed by Mr. Hammersmith,
of the Olympic Club, San Francisco,
who was then not more than 20 years
old.
After executing some difficult exer-
cises on the horizontal bar he finished
the act by revolving twice in the air-
first a backward somersault, then a
forward one—before reaching a stand-
ing attitude on the floor.
The extraordinary positions assumed
by Mr. Hammersmith and other gym-
nasts in performing unusual feats may
seem to the spectator to border on the
miraculous, but they really only serve
to show what can be accomplished
by the athlete who has acquired flexi-
bility of frame by constant exercise.
The beginner, however, must be
warned not to attempt any “ revolving
in the air,” any “ backward or forward
somersaults,” or he may find that
instead of “ landing in a standing atti-
tude on the floor” he will most probably
land on his neck—the muscles of
which are not always flexible enough
to prevent it breaking—to the serious
inconvenience of the beginner and the
sudden stoppage of his exercise in
other than “ Spook” form.
At What Age Should Exercise
be Taken P
The question is repeatedly asked, up
to what age, or at what age should
exercise be taken ? Here, again, much
must be left to the discretion of the
adult exercisee. The juvenile will, I
an presuming, be under the care of
an instructor, who will—if he do his
duty conscientiously—have ascertained
all matters in connection with his
pupil’s constitution, and will derive
therefrom the knowledge of the exer-
cise best suited to him.
It is, however, a mistake to imagine
that attendance at a gymnasium exer-
cise of any kind is for muscular de-
velopment only. On the contrary, the
human frame may be exercised by the
boy of three or four years of age up
to the man of seventy—aye, and far
beyond that.
Indeed, there is no limit to the
age at which exercise in a greater
or lesser degree may be taken with
berefit. The late Very Reverend Dean
Macartney, who lived so far beyond
the span of life allotted to most men,
attributed, at a very advanced age,
much of his well-being to the walking
exercise he took. That worthy gentle-
man was, then, for many years a living
embodiment of the principle I have
endeavored at all times to inculcate,
namely, the inestimable value of
Physical Culture properly conducted.
Two Classes of Strength.
Physical strength is divided into two-
classes—Momentary Strength and
Strength with Endurance.
For example, a man is more likely to
excel when fleshy than he would be
if he trained to take off as much of that
flesh as it would be absolutely neces-
sary to do for a contest of endurance.
For this reason : When an athlete
trains scientifically the exercises he
takes are for the express purpose of
removing all spare flesh, improving his
wind, and securing elasticity to the
muscles, and general quickness to hi*
movements—all of which are essential


to success in Running, Walking, Box-
ing, Jumping, and kindred exercises.
On the contrary, in Heavy-weight
Lifting competitions, the flesh covering
the muscles forms a strengthening
agent, and so helps to minimise the
chance of injury to those muscles by
straining.
It will thus be seen that the two divi-
sions of strength are entirely distinct,
and that the athlete who attempts to
excel in both at one time will be mak-
ing a grievous mistake.
Many years of experience in compe-
titions in both have convinced me of
this fact—that the athlete who culti-
vates momentary strength exclusively
never excels in feats of elasticity,
quickness, and endurance in the arena,
owing to his becoming slow in his
movements, and what is technically
known as muscle-bound.
Just here it will be as well to quote,
in confirmation of what I have written,
instances of noted athletes who have
excelled in one or the other division,
but never in both.
In 1875 I had the pleasure of making
the acquaintance, at Woods’ Gymna-
sium, New York City, of Mr. Richard
A. Pennell, who was then, and had
been for some time previously, book-
keeper to the Manhattan Gas Company.
Mr. Pennell’s father, by-the-bye, was
a respected clergyman.
From his boyhood up Mr. Pennell
had been devoted to athletics, the par-
ticular branch that captivated his fancy
being heavy dumb-bell lifting.
Putting Up a Record.
.So assiduous had been his practice
in this that on the 31st January, 1874,
he put up the record of 2011 b. soz.
The dumb-bell was tossed up with
both hands from floor to right shoulder.
The left hand was instantly dropped
to the left thigh to brace the body.
The right leg was straightened ; the
left knee bent; and the feet separated
about 2ft. 6in., forming a species of
strong heart, and, further, balancing
the body. The right arm, the hand of
which carried the bell, immediately
started slowly from the shoulder at
au outward angle, the body dropping
in perfect time with the arm movement
to the left, thus throwing the weight
of the body on to the left arm, the latter
being braced by the open palm, which
was clasping the left thigh. As the
bell was lifted the wrist was turned
outward, the object of this being to
prevent the leverage of the weight
carrying the athlete violently over to
the left side should he fail to drop the
bell.
A marked illustration of this acci-
dent occurred at the same gymnasium.
Dr. Flint, junr., Surgeon-General of
Ivew York State, and one of the prin-
cipal lecturers at the University, while
attempting to raise a 1801 b dumb-bell,
dropped the heavy mass of iron. This
went clean through one of the gratings
employed for heating the gymnasium
during the winter months into the
livery stable below. *
I shall not easily forget the doctor’s
consternation or the curiosity of those
in the gymnasium as to what damage
had been done to the buggies or other
valuable carriages of New York society.
Yet, more than once I have seen Dr.
Flint raise a dumb-bell weighing 1651 b
and hold it extended at arm’s length.
Another instance occurred to myself
personally.
In 1882 the Mace and Miller combina-
tion—of which Jem Mace and myself
were the proprietors—was showing at
the theatre, on the Thames, New
Zealand.
This theatre extends, or rather the
stage portion does, over the sea. On
the night in question I had undertaken
to raise the 1821 b dumb-bell from
shoulder to arm’s length. At the first
attempt I had just got it half up.
Then, owing to the arm not being quite
stiff at the elbow, and my not using
sufficient power in forcing the bell
with the forearm and the wrist out-
ward, the bell came towards me. The
consequence was that to prevent it


falling on my head I had to make a
quick movement and throw it over the
left shoulder so as to keep tjje body
clear.
The bell fell with such force that it
penetrated the stage, and I had only
just time to catch hold of one ball or
it would have disappeared in the sea—
two-thirds of the bell being already
between the stage and the water.
On the second attempt I had no diffi-
culty in raising the bell in the orthodox
manner.
Some Great Lifting Feats.
Now, let us return to Mr. Pennell.
Here we had a gentleman athlete
trained to such perfection in one par-
ticular exercise that he attained cham-
pion honors in a country noted for the
number of athletes practising dumb-
bell raising at that time. In fact,
there was a perfect dumb-bell “ boom”
on. And yet Mr. Pennell attained per-
fection in no other exercise.
Before I leave Mr. Pennell I desire to
pay his memory (for he is since de-
ceased) a personal tribute. It was from
him that I first learned to “push” a
heavy dumb-bell—that is, raise it with-
out jumping or jerking.
Previous to my acquaintanceship
with Mr. Pennell I had frequently
“jumped up” a bell weighing 1651 b.
At the same time, when the bell was
up. I had had a 901 b bell placed in ihe
left hand, which I slowly raised to
arm’s length, holding the two bells in
the air at the same time.
At this period, however, I could not
“push up” slowly a bell weighing 1501 b.
As “ jumping ” w 7 as not recognised as
a performance, Mr. Pennell very kindly
gave me such valuable instruction that
in about twelve months I was able to
raise 1651 b. This weight was gradually
increased till, some two or three years
later, in the New York Rink, I suc-
ceeded in raising 2001 b.
Still later, namely, the 16th Novem-
ber, 1888, on my second visit to San
Francisco, at the Grand Opera House,
I put up a world’s record, namely, 1501 b
dumb-bell three times.
Another instance of Momentary
Strength Athletes is Louis Cyr, who,
in Montreal, Canada, on the 21st No-
vember, 1890, raised, with one hand,
a 1091 b dumb-bell 27 times ; in London,
on the 19th February, 1892, raised a
1741 b ’bell with either hand in one
sweep from the floor to full arm’s
length above the shoulder ; on the 2nd
November, 1889, raised a 2651 b dumb-
bell with one hand from ground to
shoulder, then pushed it up from
shoulder to arm’s length above
shoulder ; in London, on the 18th Feb-
ruary, 1892, raised a 3011 b bar bell with
both hands to the chest, then pushed
it to arm’s length above the shoulder ;
on the 2nd November, 1889, in Canada,
lifted with one finger 4401 b (two dumb-
bells attached to a cord about 3ft.
long) ; and, on the 21st November,
1890, in Canada, raised a dumb-bell
weighing 103141 b to his shoulder with
one hand, then straightened his arm
at a square angle with his body, hold-
ing the arm’s length horizontally and
bringing it back to his shoulder.
Then we have Guilio Sali> who will
be remembered in Victoria some five
years ago. On the 18th June, 1887, at
the Exhibition Building, he raised the
1091 b dumb-bell 13 times ; while at the
Hawthorn Town Hall, on the 19th July
of the same year, he succeeded in rais-
ing the 1041 b bell 15 times.
I have quoted these latter at length
because they occur to me as the aptest
illustrations of the “ fleshy” order of
athletes I had previously alluded to,
and as furnishing, in conjunction with
Mr. Pennell, still further proof of the
statement I had made that Momentary
Strength Athletes have never excelled
in feats of endurance. Neither Mr.
Pennell, Cyr, nor Sali ever distin-
guished himself in anything but heavy-
weight lifting.
This fact had been forced home on
me so strongly—l had noted how
markedly disadvantageous to ai*


I athlete it was to devote himself entirely
to the practice of one exercise to the
total exclusion of all others —that early
in my athletic career I turned aside
from the shoals and quicksands of such
a proceeding, to find myself later on
in the smooth water of general
athletics. For years I merely used the
bells when about to give an exhibition
or engage in a contest. Otherwise I
never touched heavy weights.
The Dangers of Heavy-weight
Lifting.
To sum up. Light dumb-bells, as I
have previously stated, may be used
with great benefit by the amateur. For
public exhibitions, too, by classes, they
ire capable of being employed in so
many graceful movements as to com-
mend themselves greatly to the senses
>f the spectators.
With regard to Heavy Dumb-bell
lifting, I cannot recommend it as ap
exercise. The time and labor spent in
leveloping skill and strength enough
o raise a bell sufficiently heavy to
-ttract public notice might much more
irofitably be spent in other exercises
a the gymnasium.
In addition, dangers to the unskilled
re attendant on the practice. In an
istant a severe strain may be sus-
sed or an artery of the heart frac-
lred.
Not so very long since, at a well-
nown Melbourne gymnasium, a young
thlete, while attempting to raise a
121 b dumb-bell, injured one of the
Series of his heart, and had to be
Lrried home in a fainting condition.
And here—before leaving this subject
heavy-weight lifting— I would like to
und a note of warning. It is not
ily in the gymnasium that these
rains may occur. In every-day life it
ust happen to my readers that they
e repeatedly called on to raise heavy
fights. When this is so, let them
member to use their strength gradm
y- A tong, slow lift, so that the
ascles get set, and gradually used to
e weight, is what is required.
Always avoid a sudden jerk.
I have had a painful personal expe-
rience this. About 1884 I had
signed articles for a weight-lifting
match at the Exhibition with Donald
Dinnie.
II have said that I never touched the
weights except immediately prior to
training for a match. But this match
was made to take place inside a very
short period, in order to secure the ad-
vantage of appearing in conjunction
with the Wine Exhibition.
The consequence was that I had not
sufficient time to practise. The penalty
was that in practising with the IGOlb
dumb-bell with one hand I sustained
a severe rick in the left side.
This was 48 hours previous to the
match, and so severe was it that I ex-
pressed my fears to the Athletic Editor
>f “ The Sportsman” that I should have
.0 abandon the contest. However,
i good porous plaster, that covered
ne from hip to hip, round the
mall of the back, so strength-
ened the injured muscles and held
hem in their proper place that I
pas able to successfully perform
nough feats to win me the match
without feeling the slightest ill-effecta
rom the strain.
We have now arrived at a phase of
liysical Culture that undoubtedly is
f great importance to the Human
ace.
The Aboriginal Athlete.
Strength and Endurance were incon-
sstably the qualities absolutely essen-
al to the well-being—aye, the very
ristence—of the aboriginal.
It does not come within my province
1 tlle se articles to trace step by step
ie various grades through which
iman kind degenerated in the matter
physical endurance—for degenerated
merally it undoubtedly has in my
linion. There have been, of course,
ace the world became what is called
ivilised,” noted exceptions—instances
really surprising feats accomplished
• athletes of modern days. But these
ve been the result of careful and


FRANK P. SLAVIN.


FRANK P. SLAVIN.
Frank P. Slavin was born at Maitland, N.S.W., on the sth January, 1862.
He stands 6ft. and weighs 13st. 61b. In 1885 he defeated Martin Power,
London Prize Ring Rules, in thirteen minutes. Then knocked out Tom Burke,
Champion of Queensland, in four rounds, for £4OO, and Jim Fogarty, in three
rounds, for £lOO. His first match of note was with Martin Costello, in Sydney,
when he made a 32-round draw. Met Costello again at Albury, and won in
nine rounds. Defeated Mick Dooley in one round. Made an eight-round draw
with Jack Burke, the “Irish Lad.” On 4th February, 1889, beat Jack Burke in
three rounds. Beat Harry Laing for the New Zealand Championship in five and a
half rounds. Beat “ Chesterfield ” Goode in five rounds. Made a draw, L.P.R.
Rules, the Birmingham roughs interfering, with Jem Smith in fourteen rounds.
Beat Joe M'Auliffe in two rounds. Went to America in 1891. On the 16th
June beat Jake Kilrain in nine rounds. On the 30th May, 1892, was beaten by
Peter Jackson, in ten rounds, after one of the most desperate and plucky boxing
contests ever witnessed. On 29th May, 1893, was beaten by Jim Hall in seven
rounds. Beat Frank Craig (the colored American boxer) in less than one round.
Slavin has now put up a forfeit for another match with Peter Jackson, or one
with Corbett. During his stay in England he has been a licensed victualler, and
was present at the last English Derby as a bookmaker.


THE LATE CLARENCE WHISTLER.


THE LATE CLARENCE WHISTLER,
CHAMPION GRAECO-ROMAN WRESTLER.
Coun^lndUna^uTa‘ Tfhe liTOd b ° r “ “ Jannar * 1836 ' at Mphi, Carroll
His first match’as a iT *“ ™ 2B * 6MS °ld-
ilOO a-side, Gratco-Roman, and Whistler won’two straislTfalls ““‘S Mar °
second match, which was against w ,i, ghfc f ’ He won his
His next match was with Andre * d’ S T r6d the first two falls-
decided a draw. Subsequently he met and df*\ T j/° Ur hours ’ Btru ggle it was
contest, at Omaha, in hours*
a draw, but he beat Bibbv on tho y ’ , the first meetm g was
Whistler ever wrestled was a»ainst Mold '? a ' Perha P 3 «>e greatest match
tory draw after seven I Ls aTd a T*"’ 1 "■ tod “ ■ ™>* unsatisfac
turning out the gas In “ary it mT T B ,, “" ld °“' e aa PP°«<*s
partners with an athletic combination and’ r IS , r and Muldoon started out as
They toured the "T*”* ***
close on 200, during the trip, and neveT ol nTwl ZZ’ "££ *““
matches m 1882, and the following year he h fln t r> H several
Bauer (for the second time) and Donald TV b , D ™ c * n EoB8 > Tom Cannon,
Roman match with the l“,ter“, res“t d fnT d“ ‘ S °°‘ oh “ d Gr «°-
Whistler. The latter won the first“ .Ve ‘°
aays ’ and the champi °“ “A
tut in a five i ::y,: r r h a a a : b6 ;h b: : r w m r h T r wi,h ■—*
After that Whistler decidedontakinga^^ tl tl\ T** latter
1885. In matches with Jack Thomas TV Aust^ ia > where he arrived in
the same day, one three styles and the’ other five styles) for _ ma ‘ ches «*»
Miller for ,6100 a-side, the champion was victorious in all of th n Pl ? fessor
of November, 1885, poor Whistler who hod h -n t° f t^em ’ 0n tlle 6 *h
Her Majesty’s Hotel, Sw.nston-st'reet, WtotTer's’remainsT’ "‘’tt 8 ' £ Pi ' ed “*
England portion of the Melbourne Cemeterv u• l6 m tlle Churcll o{
some stone, erected with funds obtained f ?!f k Wng ma . rked b y a hand-
*nd managed by the Athletic Editor of “ The Sportsman.' t , entertainment P romoted


systematic training ; of rigorous self-
denial ; of a Spartan-like determina-
tion to “ sliun days and niglits of soft
delights a course of preparation the
aboriginal athlete would have rejected
with scorn, even had he known of its
existence.
In one respect, the latter had a
marked advantage over his modern
“civilised” brother. There were no
luxurious habits, no hours of dissipa-
tion, to weaken his constitution and
impair his strength. On the contrary,
all his methods of life were calculated
to enhance his physical powers. He
lived for the greater portion of the
time in the open air ; his diet was
of the plainest; and his drink that
to be obtained only from Nature s
Brewery.
Under these conditions aboriginal
nations —of which, for direct purposes
of illustration, I have selected the most
warlike tribes of Red Indians of
America —have from time to time liter-
ally startled the world with their ex-
hibitions of endurance.
All the best writers of early American
history have borne testimony to the
fact that the runners belonging to the
tribes, when despatched on urgent
messages —such, for example, as diplo-
matic negotiations, prior to “ digging
up the hatchet,” that is, declaring u ar
—have run day after day, covering
hundreds of miles, subsisting on a diet
sparse to a degree, and taking a
modicum of rest, the smallness of
which would appal the effete un-
trained world.
More than one instance has come
under my notice in which an Indian
runner has journeyed day and night—
and has for 24 hours on a stretch been
without either food or water.
All this points to the direct value of
training up a youth in the physical
way he should go.
Until civilisation, with its many ener-
vating influences, reached America,
the “Red Man” was indeed “noble”
from the coign of vantage sought to be
set up by these articles.
|)irectly he could toddle he was taken
his father into the woods. He was
lght the use of how and spear. He
LS compelled by the severest,, aye,
dimes most cruel, parental discipline
walk, to run, to wrestle, to plunge
: o the rivers, no matter how great
eir flood, to suffer pain without a
jrmur-to, in short, undergo every
ivation and hardship.
Sot until he had thoroughly proved
s manhood was he permitted to go
. the warpath, or to take part in the
uncils of his nation. It was the
irning aim and ambition of the
young bucks,” as the Indian youths
ere termed, to excel in all manly exer-
ses.
“ Dusky Beauty’s” smiles were the
■ward of that youth who carried off
ie palm at their periodical games,
roe be to that young Indian who de-
layed the slightest physical or moral
eakness ! He was jeered at by the
latrons and maids, and dubbed with
ie Indian equivalent for “ old woman.’
These, then, were the powerful in-
entives that made so strongly towards
lie building up of a nation noted in
ts early years for the intensity of its
’hysical Culture —in the truest sense
f the word.
The Modern Athlete.
It is not to be expected of the modern
ithlete who aims to excel in Strength
md Endurance that he can, or, indeed,
&vill, adopt in their entirety the methods
of his Red brother. The different
conditions of life preclude the possi-
bility of this.
But let him not be dismayed. The
history of athletic games makes it
plain that where the white man has
gone heart and soul into his work,
where he has sternly devoted himself
to systematic and scientific training,
he has been enabled to accomplish feats
of endurance not only equal to, but in
many cases superior to, those of the
aboriginal.
It will be as well, perhaps, at this
point—despite Mrs. Malaprop’s asser-


tion as to their being “ odorous”—to
make a few comparisons.
The Indian, “ Deerfoot,” holds the
record for 11 miles, namely, 56min.
52sec., run in London on the 3rd April,
1863. He also has the 12 miles record,
namely, lh. 2min. 2%sec., accomplished
in the same race.
Both these are, of course, great per-
formances, but do not excel in point
of elasticity and endurance that of W.
Cummings, the Scottish Champion. He,
in London, on the 18th September,
1885, ran 10 miles in 51min. 6 3-osec.
This left him smin. 45 l-ssec. to cover
the extra mile, and, to be absolutely
exact, lOmin. 55 9-10 sec. to make up
“ Deerfoot’s” 12 miles. It is true that
“ Deerfoot’s” last mile was run in smin.
but Cummings’ performance
will none the less bear comparison.
At the shorter distances the figures
are equally interesting, though almost
solely in favor of the “ civilised”
athlete.
For a long time George Seward, the
American sprinter, was given a record
of for a race run at Hammer-
smith, England, on the 30th September,
1544. But, in 1890, the “New York
Clipper” almanac—an almanac, by-
the-bye, replete with valuable records
—contained the following in respect
to Seward’s alleged record:—“ Although
the time was phenomenal, the runner
was yards faster than any sprinter of
his day, and the record remained
virtually undisputed until after the
lapse of many years, the few who at
the time presumed to question it being
silenced by a standing offer by Seward,
through ‘ Bell’s Life,’ to repeat the
performance for a good-sized stake.
In those days, howevei*, record-making
was not hedged about with the safe-
guards of later years, and the failure
of the fleetest runners of modern times,
with all the advantages of superior
paths, equipment, and training, to
nearly equal Seward’s figures, strength-
ened the conviction of those who dis-
credited the performance. Their argu-
ments were directed mainly against the
watch with which the race was timed,
which, of course, was hardly as worthy
of dependence as the stop-watch of
the present day. That fact alone, how-
ever, was not conclusive proof that the
race was not run in the time stated,
and w T e allowed the performance to
remain among the records. Now, how-
ever, we are in possession of the
evidence of an eye-witness that not
only was the race run from a flying
start, but the piece of turnpike on
which it took place was downhill—facts
which warrant us in expunging it from
the record.”
It will matter little for the purpose
of my argument whether Seward’s per-
formance was or was not a record.
What we are more intimately concerned
with here is the circumstance that that
runner brought himself into such a con-
dition of endurance as to have accom-
plished a feat sufficiently noteworthy
to have raised considerable controversy.
That, indeed, is the main reason why
the records that are to follow are re-
ferred to at all.
Records that are accepted all the
world over are —100 yards, 9}4sec., by
A. Pulley, in America, on the ISth
April, 1893 ; and 9%sec., by Frank
Hewitt, in Australia, in 1870. 120
yards : G. Seward, London,
3rd May, 1847 ; and T. M. Malone,
Australia, 12th April, 1884. 130 yards :
12i4sec., W. Johnson, 9th February,
1807, England ; and T. M.
Malone, 12th April, 1884, Australia.
The record for 130 yards is especially
interesting, and pertinent to our pre-
sent argument from the fact that it
was put up by an Australian aboriginal.
In 1887 Samuels ran the distance in
13 l-ssec., or four yards better than
even time.
Samuels was a veritable flyer, of
whom great things were predicted. At
one time a proposal was on foot to send
him to England to compete against the
world’s best runners. It is to be re-
gretted that, owing to a combination of
circumstances, that proposal was never
carried into effect I feel assured that


Samuels would have more than held
his own with English or American
champion sprinters.
But “ civilisation” again proved too
potent for the son of Nature. As time
went on Samuels took less and less
care with his training, and at length
declined to train at all. Then com-
menced his downfall.
A few more records at intermediate
distances and I have done with this
branch of my subject.
The 300 yards record is held by H.
Hutchens, with 30sec. ; the 440 yards,
by W. Baker, with 47%sec. ; the 880
yards, by F. Hewitt, with lmin.
53%sec. ; and the mile, by W. G.
George, with 4min. 12%sec., in England,
and by J. O’Brien, with 4min. 18%sec.,
in Australia.
They Were Specially Trained.
Now, let me call marked attention to
the bodily condition of the athletes
whose performances we have just given
as compared with those who came
within the “ Fleshy” category.
For a running contest over any dis-
tance from 100 yards to 12 miles the
training must be of a severe nature.
I must not, however, be understood
to advocate the same methods of train-
ing for all the distances alike. On the
contrary, this should vary as gi*eatly as
the distances themselves do. But of
this more anon. The central fact re-
mains that the one condition that domi-
nates all species of training for
these particular exercises is that super-
abundant flesh must come off.
W. G. George, F. Hewitt, L. Myers,
T. Malone, all of whom I knew per-
sonally, and have seen frequently on
the track, were men who, in condition,
carried not an ounce of superfluous
flesh. Their lengthened experience had
taught them that unnecessary adipose
tissue not only constituted a serious
handicap in the matter of weight, but
also tended to injure the wind and
destroy the elasticity of their muscles,
and the consequent quickness of theii
movements.
I think I have now sufficiently ex-
plained the main factors in, and the
differences between the necessary quali-
fications for Momentary Strength and
Physical Endurance.
Just as I have given illustrations of
actual performances resulting from
Momentary Strength, so I now propose
to furnish a few personal reminiscences
of contests in which Endurance formed
the most prominent factor.
My Walk with Ross.
On 7th February, 1879, at the
Academy of Music, Baltimore, I entered
on a 26-hour Fair Heel and Toe Walk
with Duncan C. Boss, a then prominent
exponent of the Caledonian Games.
Perhaps I had better here shortly ex-
plain the meaning of the expression
“ Fair Heel and Toe,” especially as
there has been during the last few
years so much controversy over this
very matter.
The lower limbs are thrown well out
from the hips. In walking, the heel
must touch the ground first—the toe
afterward. The knee must be straight-
ened at every stride. One foot must
be on the ground before the other has
left it.
The arms are brought from the hips
alternately across and close to the
chest. This causes a swinging gait,
which gives the necessary impetus for
fast walking. The chest should be
well expanded, and the chiu slightly
dropped towards the chest.
If referees determined that these
“ points” were carefully observed,
there would be little difficulty in judg-
ing walking contests.
I had previously walked Ross a 50-
hour match for a gold medal sub-
scribed for by the Young Men's
Christian Association Gymnasium, of
which Ross was the teacher, and the
Wallis Club, to which I was instructor.
I was victorious on that occasion,
beating Ross by 30 miles. At the con-
clusion he pleaded indisposition, and
asked for another match. He got it,
and within a few days.


Previous to appearing on the track
for the 50-hour match I had weighed
14st 41b, while Ross scaled 13st 21b.
For the 26-hour match my weight was
33st 111 b, and Ross’ 12st 91b.
These figures are interesting, as
showing the loss of tissue the body
sustains in contests for Endurance,
and the consequent necessity for
careful training.
After the 26-hour walk, on being
scaled it was found that I had lost 81b
in weight.
At 8 o’clock on Friday night, the 7th
February, we were sent off by the
leferee. lat once took the lead, trust-
ing to my superior muscular develop
ment and tried endurance—for l had
carefully prepared for this contest,
among other exercises walking as
many as 20 miles before breakfast—to
wear my opponent down.
We were on a certificated track,
measuring 21 laps to the mile.
At the tenth lap I had gained one lap.
The first mile I completed in 9min.
lOsec., while Ross took lOmin. ssec.
The second mile occupied 9min. 59sec.
and lOmin. 30sec. respectively. The
fifth mile was accomplished in 9min.
29sec. and lOmin. 29sec. ; the sixth
mile in 9min. 26sec. and lOmin. 6sec.
the scoring-board then showing that
I had covered exactly six miles in the
hour.
Ross stuck to the track till 40 miles
had been covered, though he was fall-
ing farther and farther in the rear.
Shortly after this he left the track
altogether, abandoning the contest. I,
too, could have gone off—as I had a
strong lead—and waited for Ross to
resume. But a large amount of money
had been wagered against my covering
100 miles in 24 hours.
I was asked if I would allow Johnson,
Ross’ trainer, to keep me company on
the track. I consented, and he walked
50 miles with me.
Throughout the whole time I walked
at a good average pace, feeling certain
all through the journey that I should
accomplish the task I had set myself.
The walk was to conclude at 10 o’clock
on Saturday night, the Bth February ;
but long before that hour the Academy
was crowded with ladies and gentle-
men, by whom I was accorded a flatter-
ing ovation.
My condition was still perfect, and
I stepped out to the strains of a good
band as blithely and strongly as at the
commencement.
All the wagers against my covering
100 miles in 24 hours had been lost, my
total for that time being 101 miles 16
laps.
When the latter announcement was
made, I went off the track for a rest
On resuming I put on an extra six
miles ; so that when the clock struck,
and the 26 hours were concluded, I
had covered 107 miles 16 laps, the last
mile of which had only occupied 9min.
or lOsec. less than the first mile of
the journey.
I feel certain that had I been pushed
I could have walked eight miles more
within the allotted time.
The time taken for rest and refresh-
ment during the first 24 hours was
15min. Though I left the track, I
never sat down for an instant, taking
my meals and the attentions of my
medical man and trainer in a stand-
ing position.
While on the track, my drink con-
sisted of good sherry, well dashed with
water, while my food off the track was
raw oysters, strong beef tea, celery,
calf’s-foot jelly, and a small portion of
boiled chicken.
How I Trained.
My main work was done in the morn-
ing. I rose at about 4 o’clock, nibbled
a biscuit to keep out the raw morning
air, and commenced my exercise by
walking about 10 miles through the
snow and over the hills. This distance
I gradually increased to 20 miles. Re-
turning home, I was rubbed down
briskly by my trainer ; after which I
had a cold shower bath, remaining
under the shower not more than lOsec.
On leaving the bath I was first dried


JOE GODDARD.


JOE GODDARD.
Joe Goddard was born at Turon, N.S.W., on the ‘2sth November, 1861. He
otands 6ft., and weighs, in best condition, 13st. 61b. He first came into note in
Melbourne in his match with Ned Byan, whom he beat in three rounds. He
subsequently defeated Harry Mullins in one round, Jim Fogarty in four rounds,
Bill Buck in three rounds, Charley Dunn in fourteen rounds, Owen Sullivan in
eleven rounds (earning the title of the Barrier Champion). Afterwards boxed a
ten-round draw with Sullivan. Defeated Luke Keegan in eight rounds, and
Mick Dooley in 21 rounds. Boxed an eight-round draw with Peter Jackson.
Defeated Mick Dooley again in seven rounds, and W. Curran in three rounds.
Knocked Joe Choynski out in four rounds. Beat Billy M'Carthy in six rounds,
and Tom Lees in nine rounds. On the 20r,h July, 1891, in Melbourne, drew with
Tom Lees in eight rounds. Beat Jack Ashton in similar time. Beat Ned Byan in
five rounds. Beached San Francisco on the 12th May, 1892. On 30th June
knocked Joe M'Auliffe out in fifteen rounds for £lOOO. Defeated Australian
Billy Smith in eight rounds. On Bth December defeated Peter Maher in three
rounds for £l5OO. Lost to Ed. Smith in eighteen rounds for £2OOO. Defeated
Willis Kennedy in two rounds. Beturning to Melbourne, was, on the Ist
January, 1894, defeated by Harry Laing in twelve rounds. Beat Jim Quigley
in two rounds. Undertook to stop “ Felix ”in ten rounds, but failed. Made a
15-round draw with Tut Byan. Defeated Dan Keely in two rounds, W. Curran
in three rounds, and “ Starlight ”in four rounds. Sailed on the 27th June for
South Africa. Goddard, while not claiming to be an expert boxer, is, never-
theless, a born fighter.


“ALICK” DICK.


“ALICK” DICK.
There are few footballers better known than “Alick” Dick. For many years
he worthily filled the position of captain to victorious Essendon, a club that for
three consecutive years has held the proud position of Champion Team
ol Victoria’s National Game. At seventeen years of age he began football
as a member of the Brighton club. He played with them two or three seasons
then cast in his lot with the Brunswick club. From Brunswick he graduated to
the Essendon senior team, with which he speedily became identified as one of
e ablest exponents of the game. For two seasons he acted as vice-captain, and
when W. Fleming retired from the post of captain, “ Alick ” was promoted to
' at position.. How he filled it footballers, whose name is legion, require no
telling. “ Alick,” who is 29 years old, retired from active football at the
beginning of the 1895 season, but that the game will always have his warmest
sympathy and heartiest support every footballer readily believes.


with coarse, thick towels, then
vigorously hand-rubbed again.
When dressed and cooled down I was
ready for my breakfast. This con-
sisted of stale bread, with a scraping
of butter, chop or steak underdone,
two cups of tea, with very little milk
or sugar.
Another rest; after which a pleasant
social walk round the town.
For lunch I was not too strict. The
main dishes would be roast beef or
roast mutton, with vegetables to taste ;
light pudding, made of tapioca, sago,
or rice, without milk ; stewed fruit.
For drink, a bottle of good sound lager
or Bass’ ale.
A couple of hours’ rest was taken
after dinner.
The afternoon’s work comprised more
walking, of which exercise there is no
warmer advocate than I am.
Home was reached again about 5
o’clock, when I had tea, consisting of
boiled chicken or turkey, with celery,
stale bread, carrying a little butter,
a couple of boiled eggs, or cold meat
in fact, any good, plain, substantial
diet.
Soups or “ slops” of any kind I
studiously avoided.
Bed was sought regularly at 9.30.
How to Treat the Feet.
For the 50-hour match the system of
training described occupied six weeks.
I have said that I finished the 20-
hour contest in good condition, showing
the benefit to be derived from careful
training.
At the outset of this, however, I was
troubled with blisters on the soles of
my feet, while the muscles of my logs
stiffened so with the walking exercise
that on setting out in the morning it
was as much as I could do to “ put one
leg before the other.” But persever-
ance had its reward, for, after going
a mile or two, the blood began to circu-
late, and I was enabled to march along
in my heavy overcoat at a fast pace.
All my quick work, indeed, was done in
the morning.
A preparation I found efficacious for
my feet was a small quantity of tannic
acid put in a hip-bath full of cold
water. When thoroughly dissolved,
the feet were well soaked in the mix-
ture. This tended to harden the skin
without cracking it.
Another excellent prescription for
feet inflamed by excessive walking is
rock salt dissolved in warm water.
When the latter has become lukewarm,
bathe the v feet well in it, dry them
with a soft towel, then rub well in a
mixture of whisky and camphor.
Examples of Development.
A marked instance of the highest
development of Physical Endurance
was Edward P. Weston, the Long-dis-
tance Pedestrian.
An American by birth, Weston was
a young man when he first took the
track. He had previously been a
journalist in New York City.
Long-distance pedestrianism was
always a hobby of Weston’s, and so
much public interest did he create in
it that he may justly be termed its
“ Father.” It must be over 25 years
since he entered on his first contest.
He was an eccentric pedestrian, and
was accustomed to indulge in all kinds
of antics on the track. On one occa-
sion, during a Go-as-you-please Tourna-
ment in Madison Square Gardens, I
saw him halt on his journey, strike a
theatrical position, and remain in it
for some moments. At intervals, too,
he would indulge in grimaces at the
crowd, and similar acts of buffoonery.
A man of slight, wiry build, of quick,
nervous movements, yet trained to the
hour, Weston, despite his eccentricities,
put up performances that for years
stood as records.
He was the first to cover 550 miles,
in a Six Days and Nights’ Go-as-you
please. This was done at the Agricul-
tural Hall, London.
On the 18th January, 1879, Weston,
starting from the Mansion House,
London, accomplished miles in
1000 consecutive hours, over country


roads, resting on Sundays. This was
done during an attempt to walk 2000
miles in 1000 hours.
Another noteworthy feat of endur-
ance was that of William Gale, at Brad-
ford, England, on the 14th May, 1879.
He had covered 2280 miles in 912 con-
secutive hours, walking 1100 yards
each and every consecutive fifteen
minutes (two miles and a half each
hour).
From 20th October to 17th November,
Gale also walked 4000 quarter-miles in
4000 consecutive periods of ten minutes
each.
Returning to Weston, we find that
from 21st November, 1888, to 15tli
March, 1884, he, using only temperance
drinks, walked 5000 miles in 100 days ;
Sundays excluded, 50 miles daily;
1699% miles on high-roads and 3300%
in halls and enclosures.
Again, C. A. Harriman, on April 6th
and 7th, in America, walked, without
a rest, 121 miles 385 yards—a record
that has never been beaten.
The performances of these three
athletes speak trumpet-tongued as to
the value of a strict physical training.
They afford the strongest evidence of
the high state of development of which
the human body is capable, when
treated on scientific principles ; and
furnish special illustrations of my argu-
ment as to the difference of prepara-
tion required for feats of Physical
Endurance as opposed to those of
Momentary Strength.
Weston’s physical appearance I have
descx-ibed. Harriman was tall, thin,
and wiry—a typical Yankee. Gale was
not so tall, but bore the same lean
and unencumbered with flesn appear-
ance.
W. Edwards, who was at one time
Australian Long-distance Champion,
and who three times defeated O’Leary,
in Six Days and Nights’ Walking con-
tests—twice in Sydney and once in
Melbourne—was, in his best day, one
of the firmest believers in careful train-
ing that I had ever come in contact
with.
For liis principal matches in Aus-
tralia, Edwards was trained by John
0. Seymour, who afterwards met such
a tragic fate in San Francisco Bay.
More than once I have heard Seymour
declare that Edwards would, after
training hard all day, wake up in the
middle of the night to announce that
he had struck a fresh idea for the next
day’s work. While he was preparing,
his heart and soul were in the business,
as must be those of the athlete whose
ambition is only satisfied when the
■very best of which he is capable is
accomplished.
Another athlete who occurs to me
as a striking illustration of what may
be arrived at in the way of Physical
development by careful training is
Frank P. Slavin.
When preparing for his first boxing
match with Jack Burke, in the Hiber-
nian Hall, in 188 S, Slavin, with Jack
Barnett as his trainer, took up his
quarters at South Melbourne. He had
a punching-ball fixed up in the Albert
Park boat-sheds, and here he worked
unceasingly.
For his second match he trained at
St. Kilda. In a corner shed at Kenny’s
baths he had his punching-ball hung.
He would work at this for fully ten
minutes as hard and fast as he could
manage. Then, when he had exer-
cised so freely that he was covered
with perspiration, he would plunge
head foremost into the sea.
On one occasion that I remember a
strong wind had brought up a rough
sea, so that when Slavin appeared
after his dive, Barnett—as, indeed,
were all the spectators—was somewhat
doubtful as to Slavin’s strength, after
his violent punching exercise, to cope
with the heavy waves that were rolling
in.
But careful exefcise had developed
the boxer’s muscles, had cleared his
lungs, and, in short, so brought every
portion of his physical being into
healthy harmony that he scarcely
seemed to know what fatigue was.


To our surprise, instead of heading
for the shore, he swam seaward to the
fence, then turned and swam back
quietly, but strongly, and without ex-
hibiting the slightest effect from the
buffetings of the really huge waves
that were by this time being driven in
by the angry southerly blast.
While Slavin was being rubbed down
and dried by his trainer, the bystanders
were loud in their admiration of his
condition.
Mr. “ Joe ” Thompson, Australia’s
then Leviathan Bookmaker, who was
among those present, and who was
himself a keen judge of condition,
created considerable amusement by
dropping on his knees in one corner
of the shed and raising his hands in a
prayerful attitude. When questioned
as to the nature of his prayer, Mr.
Thompson replied that he was petition-
ing for a second period of early man-
hood as lusty as that of Slavin.
A Few More Records.
George Littlewood holds the record
for 24 hours, having covered 162 miles
704 yards, in England, on the 25th
November, 1884 ; and for 48 hours,
with 296 miles 1056 yards, done in the
same match.
In this connection must not be for-
gotten the performance of J. Clifford,
the Geelong athlete. In 1881, on a
small track, he accomplished, in 24
hours, the respectable distance of 120%
miles.
I mention Clifford more particularly
as furnishing the exception to my rule
to the effect that long-distance pedes-
trians have been far removed from the
“ fleshy” category.
Clifford was a comparatively short,
stout, “ stockily”-built young fellow, by
wo means a graceful performer on the
track, but possessed of pluck and de-
termination.
I shall not readily forget the circum-
stances surrounding that tournament
in the Exhibition Building, Geelong, in
which Clifford, Edwards, and Swan
were engaged. Every effort —and some
of these not of the fairest, I regret to
say—was made to defeat Clifford, but
without avail, till at last, as the time
drew near on the Saturday night for
the tournament to close, Edwards, who
was “ running the show,” was in a state
of such anxious despair that he could
neither w T alk nor run. On that occa-
sion Edwards was taught the whole-
some lesson that it is never wise to
underrate an adversary.
C. Rowell holds the record for 72
hours with 430 miles, made in England
in 1885, from the 27th April to 2nd May,
1885.
In Australia the 72 hours record is
held by J. Raynor, with 365 miles 14
laps, accomplished from 4th to 9th
June, ISBS.
Raynor was another illustration of
the powers of endurance exhibited by
thin, wiry men. In his prime, Raynor
had a graceful, easy style, and gave
every promise of accomplishing note-
worthy feats on the track.
Treating the Feet and Muscles.
The few hints I gave in the chapter
with regard to treating inflamed and
blistered feed had resulted in inquiries
from “ Sportsman ” readers for the
purpose of obtaining more general
information.
I had intended to reserve this branch
of the subject for dilation on when
the training for each exercise was
entered on.
However, in deference to the wishes
of my correspondents, I append what
I hold to be the latest and best informa-
tion on the subject, and for /which I
am indebted in the main to that excel-
lent work, the “ Badminton Library,” a
work, I regret to say, that is not avail-
able to the large majority of my
readers. Any alterations I have made
have been suggested by the difference
between English and Australian
climatic conditions.
We will take running first.
Before a runner puts on his first pair
of running shoes he should pare his toe-
rMls close down to the flesh, or the


pounding on the toes will result in the
nails being pushed up at each stride.
In a few days after this the nails will
probably turn black, and in a week or
two the runner may find himself minus
one or two of them. All danger of this,
however, is obviated by not allowing
the nail to obtrude in the slightest
degree beyond the end of the toe.
Occasionally the feet get tender from
the exercise, and when this happens
the athlete will do well to give up the
cinder track for the grass for a day
or two.
Soaking the feet in alum and water
is also much recommended as a cure
for tender feet, though personally I
prefer the two prescriptions I gave in
a previous chapter.
Prevention, however, is better than
cure, and the best preventative is a soft
wash-leather sock, coming oyer the ball
of the foot. This is also comfortable,
and acts as a safeguard against blisters.
With blisters, the best thing is to
prick them with a needle as soon as
the water has collected in them. After
this has been squeezed out, the old
skin should be left on to protect the
new skin growing underneath.
* If there are blisters on the foot half
formed, and the athlete is liable to
them, the skin is best toughened and
rendered least liable to them by taking
rock salt and water foot-bath in the
evening.
The light shoes w T hich are necessarily
used by runners are also apt to create
corns ; but for the removal of these
there are a score of means fully known
in every household.
The best means, however, to avoid
blisters, corns, etc., is to take every
care in selecting a perfectly-fitting pair
of shoes. Neglect to do this has more
than once, to my own personal know-
ledge, both in America and Australia,
brought about a pitiable state of affairs
during Long-distance contests. After
a couple of days’ journey, I have seen
a contestant’s feet one mass of hideous
sores—a condition of matters brought
About by ignorance or carelessness, or
the two combined, on the part of him-
self or his trainer.
In a previous chapter, in concluding
my remarks, I mentioned that my next
chapter would treat of the Muscles.
It has occurred to me, however, that
at a season of the year, when so many
sports gatherings are shortly to be
held, I cannot do better than extend
my advice to runners, jumpers, etc. I
am strengthened in this resolve by the
kindly encouragement with which my
work in the same direction has always
been received.
Without further preamble, therefore,
I will at once enter on what my own
track experience, and that of an
authority I have previously mentioned,
has proved to be
The Best Outfit
for pedestrians.
“The apparatus of an athlete is
simple. His shoe should be of thin,
good leather, which cannot possibly
stretch, so that when once it fits the
foot it may never wear loose. A shoe
which slips on the foot in the slightest
degree may not only impede the runner,
but will assuredly blister the foot. The
athlete, therefore, should get a pair of
shoes to fit him like gloves, and then
he will have all that mechanical skill
can do for him.”
I have pointed out previously the
value of a chamois leather sock over
the ball of the foot and toes.
“ The ordinary running shoe has only
a single thickness of leather over the
beel, and, of course, no spike there.
“ The hurdler and jumper, however,
who have to take every precaution
against slipping, have two spikes in
the heel of their shoes, in addition to
those in the toe; while the walker has
a similar shoe, with double thickness
at heel and toe, without any spikes.
“ Another point is the length of the
spikes. Obviously, the harder the track
is, the shorter the spikes should be, so




JAMES CORBETT,
CHAMPION OF AMERICA.
Jim Corbett, known as “Pompadour” Corbett, from the way in which he
wears his hair, was born in San Francisco on the Ist September, 1866. He is
6ft. lin. in height, and weighs, in condition, 12st. 101 b. He started life as a
bank clerk in the Bank of Nevada, San Francisco. In 1886 he started his
boxing career by meeting Welch, the Champion Amateur Middle-weight, by
whom he was defeated, for a gold medal. Subsequently, however, he beat
Welch. During the time he has been before the public as a professional boxer
he has made an eight-round draw with Jack Burke, the “Irish Lad;” has
defeated Joe Choynski twice—once in four rounds and once in 27 rounds; Jake
Kilrain, on points, in six rounds; Dominick M'Caffrey in four rounds; boxed
61-round “no contest ” with Jackson; defeated John L. Sullivan in 21 rounds for
£‘4ooo, and Charlie Mitchell in three rounds for £4OOO purse and £lOOO a-side.
On 11th July, 1893, he posted ,£2OOO for another contest with Peter Jackson, but
the match fell through. He is now matched to box Bob Fitzsimmons in
October for £2OOO a-side. Corbett is also known as a successful actor, his
favorite part being “ Gentleman Jack,” into which a boxing scene is specially
introduced. Corbett is admitted to be one of the world’s cleverest boxers, and is
noted for being specially quick with both feet and head.


A. T. KENNEY.


A. T. KENNEY.
Mr. A. T. Kenney is a son of Captain Kenney, of the Ship Baths, St. Kilda.
From a very early age he has been noted as an expert swimmer, and though for
the last three or four years he has been hard at work at the University,
Philadelphia, taking the degrees in dentistry necessary to the holding of the
highest position in that profession, he has not lost his love of the sport, and his
fame as an Australian athlete has been enhanced by his performances in American
waters. After his defeat of Ernest Cavill at Geelong on the 21st March, 1891,
for the Championship of Australia and .£lOO, Mr. Kenney, through “ The
Sportsman,” issued a challenge to any swimmer in the world for a large stake, the
only proviso being that the match should be contested in Australian waters. Mr.
Kenney’s performances include the following:—looyds., lmin. 9fsec.; 440yds„
6min. 24 2-sch sec.; 880yds., 13min. 12 4-sth sec.; one mile, 28min. 45 2-sth sec.
In the course of his career in Australia and America he has won innumerable
trophies. Born at St. Kilda, he is 28 years old; stands sft. B^in.; and weighs in
.best swimming condition lOst.


that upon a grass track longer spikes
are needed than upon cinders.”
For well-laid-down tracks, spikes of
less than half an inch in length will
suffice, if they be sharp ; but the
hurdler or a sprinter, who may be
called upon to run over heavy grass,
wants a shoe with at least half an inch
or three-quarter inch spikes.
“ Most cracks have, therefore, several
pairs of shoes, with spikes of different
lengths, and make their choice accord-
ing to the state of the track over which
they have to travel.
“In races over very long distances,
shoes with very short spikes, and some-
times without spikes at all, are used,
as the jar and concussion of travelling
so far with a thin spiked sole may make
the feet so blistered or tender as to
drive the runner off the path or knock
him to pieces before the end of the
race.”
The rest of the athlete’s outfit may
be described in a few words.
“ The knickerbockers or drawers,
whether they be made of silk, merino,
or thin flannel, are just knickerbockers,
and nothing more.
“They should be roomy enough not
to interfere with the movement of the
thighs, and should be short enough not
to hamper the knee.”
I can recall to mind more than one
instance where a keenly-contested race
has been lost solely through the hamper-
ing nature of the dress worn by one of
the contestants. Only those who have
had experience of the cinder path know
the great value of easy, well-fitting
jerseys or knickerbockers.
In connection with the jersey, there
has been considerable controversy over
the question as to whether or not
sleeves should be worn. My own
opinion is strongly to the contrary. I
contend that the more freedom there
is given to the athlete, the better it is
for the muscles.
It may be urged that the absence of
sleeves altogether might prove urn
sightly, and be certain to be received
w'ith disfavor by large assemblages of
spectators. To obviate this, I would re-
commend that a very short, loose sleeve*
to just cover the biceps, should be used.
No one is more impressed than I am
myself with the necessity for insisting
on the athlete, whether engaged indoor
or outdoor, being decorously costumed,
and I ceuld wish that all sports com-
mittees would make this one of their
cardinal conditions of entry. This, in-
deed, is a matter that might very well
engage the attention of the conference
of delegates from the Victorian Athletic
Association to be held in Melbourne
in September.
It is to be regretted that this question
of proper dress cannot be left, to the
runners themselves ; but when it is
found that quite a number of these
come on the track wearing the absolute
minimum of dress allowed even by the
law, it must be manifest to all the best
patrons of athletics that the time for
legislation on the subject has arrived.
What England and America
Require.
In England if a runner were to come-
on the track dressed otherwise than in,
the prescribed jersey and knicker-
bockers he would be at once removed
therefrom, and warned not to present
himself again till “ properly dressed.”
In America the majority of clubs:
permit the sleeveless jersey, but are
very stringent on all other points of,
dress.
The following extract from a report
of my 50-hour walk with Duncan C.
Ross will give an idea of the dress
then worn on the track “ Both wore
white knitted silk suits, with red and
blue trimmings, and red trunks, and.
tights to the knee.”
Treating the Muscles.
It frequently happens, in training for-
running, that the muscles become stiff
and. sore in the early work. The prin-
cipal essential for the cure of this is
hand-rubbing, than which nothing can
be more valuable.
In many instances the veins become
overcharged with blood, owing to dy«*


fective circulation. As a natural con-
tingency, if this is not at once seen to,
the muscles become affected in various
ways. In some instances either cramps
are the result, a stitch in the side is
felt, or varicose veins make their ap-
pearance. In addition, even when these
afflictions are not present, the muscles
tose their elasticity.
Massage, or hand-rubbing, is the chief
panacea for these evils. This may often
be employed without lotions. On the
other hand, many of these are valuable
supplementary agents.
My own experience is that alcohol is
the most powerful basis of all these
lotions. For one thing, it is more easily
absorbed than any other preparation,
and is better calculated to keep cold
from entering in at the pores—no slight
consideration in the case of an athlete
who, more often than not, when entered
for a number of events on the same
day, is compelled to undergo his mas-
sage treatment either in the open air
or in a draughty dressing-room.
In America bay rum is freely used
by athletes. A favorite lotion of the
late Clarence Whistler was compounded
of alcohol, camphor, and sassafras.
I have also had strongly recommended
camphorated oil, while the reputation
of our own eucalyptus is spreading
wider and wider every year.
Strains of the muscles are serious
matters, and are sometimes very hard
to cure. There is always, too, a danger
that a slight strain of a muscle may
get worse if rest be not taken. Expe-
rience shows that there is very little
risk of the muscles giving way from
anything but overwork in warm
weather, but in cold weather muscles
strain or snap without any warning :
indeed, so many accidents of +his kind
happened at Oxford that notices were
posted in the dressing-room at the old
Marston ground warning runners not
to go out into the cold without first
rubbing their legs with a horsehair
glove or with the hands, and not to
undergo any violent exercise ’without
taking a short trot to warm the muscles.
“ This precaution should certainly
never be neglected at any time when
the weather is at all chilly, and, in the
winter especially, it is foolhardy to dis-
pense with it.
“ Slight strains of muscles are best
treated by partial rest, and the use of
opodeldoc, or a mixture of arnica and
opodeldoc, as an embrocation. A com-
position still frequently used by pedes-
trians is as follows: —Spirits of wine, %
pint; spirits of turpentine, % pint; white
spirits of turpentine, % pint; white
vinegar, *4 pint. Mix these with a
fresh egg, beaten up, and give the
bottle a good shake before using the
mixture.
“ If the strain on the muscles be very
severe, something else besides an em-
brocation is required. Complete rest
must be the rule, and a swelling
should be reduced by bathing in hot
water. People frequently make the
mistake of putting a sprained ankle
immediately under a stream of cold
water. Cold water is valuable to
strengthen the muscle after the inflam-
mation has gone down, but a hot
fomentation is what is required to re-
duce the swelling. When the swelling
has gone down, the cold tap and em-
brocations are useful. In addition, the
outside of the ankle is often painted
with iodine.”
It will be seen that the foregoing was
mainly written for athletes in the old
country. However, by the fitting in
of common sense to our different, and,
I regret to say, frequently variable,
climatic conditions, so much of it is
equally valuable to Australian athletes,
that I have thought it advisable to re-
print the hints and advice in extenso.
Some Pedestrian Reminis-
cences.
In looking over my note-book, I have
had recalled to mind a series @f pedes-
trian matches in which two gentlemen,
still amongst us, and still holding in-
fluential social positions in Melbourne,
were the prncipals. I allude to Messrs.
L. L. Mount and H. C. A. Harrison, who


in their day did incalculable service to
pedestrianism, both by the strictness of
their training and their personal con-
duct generally.
Their first series of matches took
place on the Melbourne Cricket Ground
on the 15th June, 1861.
Mr. Harrison, who was then 24 years
old, and was a native of New South
Wales, was engaged in H.M. Customs.
Mr. Mount, who was born in Canada
in 1837, and was the son of a well-
known medical practitioner of Ballarat,
was a cashier in the Oriental Bank of
the “ Golden City.”
The conditions of the match were
that they should run three events, for
a trophy of £6O, subscribed by the
Ballarat people, who, even in those
early days were enthusiastic patrons of
all kinds of sports.
The first was a sprint of 100 yards ;
the next, a flat race of 440 yards ; and
the third, a hurdle race of 440 yards.
The winner of two events to be en-
titled to the trophy and to the title
of Champion Amateur Pedestrian of
Victoria.
I well remember the thousands of
spectators who assembled to witness
the contests, a large proportion of
whom were ladies, and the enthusiasm
displayed by all classes.
During his training, Mr. Mount ran
some remarkable trials under the most
rigid surveillance, when the quarter
was more than once run inside 50sec.
The consequence was that he was made
a favorite with the Ballaratians. One
of these, indeed, offered to back Mr.
Mount to run a straight half-mile
against anyone in Australia for £IOOO.
As the time drew near for the first
of the events, the excitement increased
in intensity, and culminated in a
rousing cheer when the men appeared
on the track for the 100 Yards Race.
On the pistol being fired, Mr. Mount
shot to the front, and led for about
half the distance. Mr. Harrison got
on equal terms with him, and after a
most determined struggle, won by half
a yard. Time, lO^sec.
The hopes of the Ballarat folks were
somewhat damped by this reverse.
Still, they received their representative
warmly when he appeared for the
Quarter-mile event.
Both went off at a good pace, Mr.
Mount making the running for 300
yards. Mr. Harrison then put on
steam, and as his opponent saw him
gaining on him, he increased the pace,
but was caught by Mr. Harrison in less
than 20 yards. For 10 yards more they
struggled shoulder to shoulder, when
Mr. Harrison was seen to leave Mr.
Mount. A desperate race home ended
in a victory for Mr. Harrison by two
yards. The time was a tick under
51sec.
Though Mr. Harrison, under the
terms of the articles, was not con-
strained to run the third event, consist-
ing of 440 yards, over eight hurdles,
each 3ft. 6in. high, he consented to
do so.
They got off to a fair start, both men
taking the first hurdle together. The
position was the same at the jump at
the back stretch. Then Mr. Harrison
took a slight lead, which he increased
as he went on, winning with much less
trouble than in the previous races.
Both took all the jumps without a mis-
take, but Mr. Harrison’s was the easier
style.
The same evening we all dined at
Tom Nunn’s Hummums Hotel, on the
corner of Bourke and Russell streets.
And a right good “ time” we had.
Subsequently, Mr. Mount was pre-
sented with a valuable gold watch as
a souvenir.
In September of the same year an-
other series of matches was agreed tor
this time to take place on Copenhagen
Grounds, Ballarat—the scene of so
many notable athletic contests.
The events this time were to consist
of a 100 yards Flat Race, 440 yards
Hurdles, and Half a Mile over 16
hurdles, 3ft. 6in. high each.
Mr. Mount, soon after the Melbourne
matches, was removed from the
Oriental Bank at Ballarat to the Ben-


digo branch, where he remained till
within three weeks of the match, which
came off on the 17th December, 1861.
Just before leaving Bendigo, Mr.
Mount was suffering from dysentery;
nor had the illness left him when he
gained his old quarters in Ballarat.
Commencing to train while suffering
in this manner, the malady took just
the opposite turn, and for more than a
fortnight the strongest remedies had
to be applied; nor was it till the close
of the week immediately prior to the
match that Mr. Mount found himself
again in form. On the day, however,
he said he never felt better, although
from his running in the Quarter-mile
Race he must have been a little weak.
Mr. Harrison in the meantime had
done his training at Metzger’s Gymna-
sium, Melbourne.
On the Tuesday fully 5000 people
were present on the old Copenhagen
Grounds, which was one mass of flutter-
ing bunting of all descriptions. Bal-
larat had literally made it a Fete Day,
and when I recall the incidents of that
meeting, I cannot but deplore that the
glories of pedestrianism should have
been so greatly dimmed.
Punctually to time the men “ toed
the scratch” for the 100 yards event.
Both men were the very picture of
health and activity—living embodi-
ments. in fact, of the careful training
I have all through these articles in-
sisted on with an iteration that I hope
my readers will not dub as “damnable.”
A marked change had come over the
wagering as compared with that on the
first series in Melbourne. There it will
be remembered that Mr. Mount was the
favorite at 3 to 2.
On this occasion even money was
freely offered that he did hot
win a race; while for the trophy Mr.
Harrison was the favorite at 5 to 2 on,
and 2 to 1 on him was laid for the
first race.
When they were sent off, Mr. Mount
had nearly a yard the best of the start.
This lead he kept for 60 yards, despite
Mr. Harrison’s desperate struggle to
decrease it. At 80 yards, however, he
had all but drawn up. The race for the
last 20 yards was of such a determined
and sensational character as to tell
severely on both men. About 15 yards
from the tape, Mr. Mount’s right arm
struck Mr. Harrison’s left, but without
any appreciable effect. With wonder-
ful gameness, Mr. Mount struggled on,
and eventually won one of the most,
if not the most, sensational races ever
seen in Australia, by ten inches. The
time was lO^sec—the same as that for
the like distance in Melbourne.
Great excitement was manifested at
the unexpected result of this race, and
the supporters of Mr. Mount were in
high glee at his grand performance.
Still, they did not underrate the Mel-
bournite, whose determination to con-
test every inch of the ground against
his adversary was well known, not only
by his own friends, but also by Mr.
Mount’s. Therefore, it was not sur-
prising that, although Mr. Mount had
drawn “ first blood,” his friends were
not “ death on him” for the quarter of
a mile, and the metropolitan division
found it hard work to lay even money
that their man won the second heat,
whilst they willingly offered the same
terms that he would come out best by
placing two out of the three to his
credit.
Good judges and followers of pedes-
trianism, whose faces were to be seen
at all athletic meetings, did not fail to
notice that Mr. Harrison had the worst
of the start in the hundred-yard sprint,
and many of them pinned their faith
on his well-known endurance, which
they thought would enable him to re-
tain the championship.
On the report of the pistol, both went
away on equal terms, and for 80 yards
they ran along shoulder to shoulder.
Mr. Harrison then gained on his oppo-
nent, and finally passed him. He con-
tinued to increase the gap, until at
about 40 yards from home Mr. Mount
discontinued running, after finding it
impossible to recover his lost ground.
Time, 54 seconds.


JOHN L. SULLIVAN.
John L. Sullivan was born in the “ Highlands,” Boston, on the
15th October, 1858. He stands sft. and weighed, in best con-
dition, 14st 61b. His boxing career commenced in 1878, when he
“bested” all comers. On the 6th April, 1880, he virtually commenced
his career by beating Joe Goss in three rounds, George Rooke in
two rounds, and Prof. John Donaldson in ten rounds. Subsequently beat
Steve Taylor in two rounds, and John Flood in eight rounds. On the 7th
February, 1882, beat Paddy Ryan, under London Prize Ring Rules, in nine
rounds. Among his other victories are—Jim Elliot, in three rounds; Charlie
Mitchell, in three rounds; John M. Laflin, in three rounds; Alf. Greenfield, in
two rounds and again in four rounds; Dominick M'Caffrey, in six rounds;
Paddy Ryan, in three rounds; Patsy Cardiff, in six rounds (in which Sullivan
broke his arm). Fought a 39-round draw with Charlie Mitchell, L.P.R. Rules, for
j? 500 a-side, on the 10th March, 1888. On Bth July, 1889, beat Jake Kilrain,
L.P.R. Rules, in 72 rounds, for £2OOO a-side. In July, 1891, paid Australia a
theatrical visit. An end was, however, put to Sullivan’s long victorious career
on the 7th September, 1892, when he was defeated by Jim Corbett in 21 rounds
for a £5OOO purse and £2OOO a-side. Since that occasion Sullivan has confined
his attention to theatrical work. It may be fairly written of the ex-Champion
that no man ever did more, or as much, to bring boxing into prominence. It
is computed that, in the aggregate, he must have earned fully £60,000 by his
matches and exhibitions.


GEORGE GIFFEN.
George Giffen, Australia’s Champion, and admitted by the highest English
authorities to be in the world’s front rank of all-round cricketers, was born at
Adelaide, South Australia, on the 27th March, 1859. He stands sft. 9£in., and
weighs, in best playing condition, 12st. 71b. He first became prominent in
connection with the Norwood Club, for which he made 95 against Shaw’s
English team. Subsequently, as a member of the Australian Eleven, in England,
he took seven wickets of the Oxford team for 79 runs. With the next Australian
Eleven he bowled brilliantly, Lord Sheffield’s team being defeated in one innings.
In a match against Lancashire, though opposed to such deadly bowling as that of
A. G. Steel, Barlow, Watson, and Crossland, he scored 113. Four times he has
been a member of Australian Elevens that have visited England, viz., in 1882,
1884, 1886, and 1893, In the 1886 tour he gained great distinction by carrying
off the batting and bowling averages. Against Lord Hawke’s (M.C.C.) team he
scored 203. In December, 1894, in the test match against Stoddart’s team, played
in Sydney, Giffen put together, by sensational cricket, 161 in the first innings*
In the five test matches played during the stay of that team in Australia Giffen’s
record was —9 innings, 475 runs; average, 52*7 runs. He bowled 2126 balls for
827 runs; 107 maidens, 34 wickets; average, 24*2 per wicket. So thoroughly
identified with Australian cricket has Giffen become, that to omit his name
from any team visiting England would be akin to “playing Hamlet without the
‘ melancholy Dane.’ ”


After this event the championship
was looked upon as a foregone conclu-
sion.
Mr. Harrison’s abilities as a hurdle
jumper were known to be equal, if not
superior, to those of any other athlete
in the country, and the easy way in
which he defeated Mr. Mount in their
former meeting was well remembered.
The backers of Mr. Harrison shouted
out almost any odds, and were so en-
thusiastic and certain of his pulling
off the final bout that they seemed to
forget that two men had to contest.
As much as 15 to 1 was laid that Mr.
Harrison would win.
On both men facing the starting
mark the betting came to a fairer
basis, 4 to 1 then being laid on Mr.
Harrison, whilst I heard £5OO to £lOO
offered on the Melbournite, without a
taker.
A fair start was effected, Mr. Harri-
son at once making play, and leading
his opponent over the first hurdle, which
was beautifully cleared by both. Mr.
Mount’s style of jumping and getting
away had greatly improved since
his matches on the Melbourne Cricket
Ground.
For 500 yards Mr. Harrison seemed to
have the race in his own hands, but
before another hundred yards had been
traversed Mr. Mount began to decrease
the gap. Both men continued to jump
fearlessly, and with plenty of steam
in them.
Great was the enthusiasm all over
the ground as Mr. Mount continued
to creep up to the metropolitan. At
the last hurdle but one he overhauled
him, Mr. Harrison by this time being
dead beat. The crowd now rushed in
and fairly surrounded Mr. Mount whilst,
he ran the last hundred yards. Mr.
Harrison could not have passed him
had he been able, but he candidly ad-
mitted himself beaten.
Mr. Harrison Wins the Final
Series.
Naturally, the merits of the r'val
champions were freely discussed by
their supporters. Each having proved
a victor in a series of contests, a final
meeting in the near future was looked
upon as certain.
After considerable discussion as to
whether the contests would take place
on the Melbourne Cricket Ground, or
at the Copenhagen Ground. Ballarat,
it was finally arranged that the latter
ground should be the place of meeting.
From what I can learn. Mr. Mount
positively refused to run at all unless
the convincing ground was at Ballarat,
and had not Mr. Harrison given in on
this point the championship would have
been resigned without a struggle.
The two celebrated amateurs under-
went a strict course of training for the
convincing series.
This took place on Tuesday, 2nd De-
cember, 1862.
Mr. Mount did liis “ breathing’s ” in
the neighborhood of Ballarat, while
Mr. Harrison trained at Geelong.
The matches were at the time the all-
absorbing topic of conversation in Bal-
larat, Geelong, and Melbourne. In fact,,
the whole colony was infused with a
spirit of pedestrianism that I could
wish possessed it now.
The attendance was again large,
numbering between four and five thou-
sand, and the receipts £3OO, which was
divided among the charities—one-half
going to the Ballarat Hospital, and one-
fourth each to the Melbourne and Gee-
long Hospitals, after all expenses were
paid.
It will thus be seen that the matches
were run in the true spirit of amateur-
ism. Beyond the £6O trophy, neither
Mr. Mount nor Mr. Harrison appears
to have benefited one penny.
Excitement was at fever heat when
they came out for the first of the three
events, which was to decide who really
was the Champion Amateur of Victoria.
The official positions were filled by
gentlemen who were “ without fear and
tvithout reproach.” Mr. Clissold, after-
wards the well-known P.M.. was the
starter, and Mr. William Levey, the
editor of “ Bell’s Life.” and who was
a keen sport, was the judge. Of
Mr. Levey’s connection with sport I
shall have one or two interesting anec-
dotes to relate later on in my Reminis-
cences.
This time, in order to preclude the
possibility of an accident similar to that
in the former race over the same dis-
tance, the course was roped and staked,
in manner similar to that now adopted
on our Sheffield tracks, and a plan in
which lam a strong believer. In fact,
I fail to see how four or five men on the
same track can be prevented from inter-
fering or colliding with one another,
particularly in the hurry and scurry
of a close finish, unless such means are
used.
Directly the pistol was fired the con-
testants went off abreast, and ran so
for 20 yards. Then Mr. Harrison shot
to the front, and, despite Mr. Mount’s
determined efforts, won by a yard.
The time was lO^sec.—just as it was
in the two previous hundred yards races
—again proving how equally the men
were matched.
ilr. Mount’s friends once more took
3 to J about his winning both the long
distance events.
A capital start was effected for the
Quarter-mile. They had only gone a
few yards when Mr. Mount took the
lead, and. going at a rattling pace, was
in front for half the distance. He put
on an extra spurt, but could not alto-
gether shake Mr. Harrison off. The
latter, with a determined effort, de-
creased the gap between them, and in.


less than 50 yards was on equal terms
with his opponent. From that out he
had Mr. Mount beaten, and coming
away, won by four yards.
Mr. Harrison must have won in rather
easy style, if we may judge from the
time occupied, namely, 53%5ec., or a
tick more than 2i£sec. slower than their
first Quarter.
Mr. Harrison had thus won the cham-
pionship without cavil. Still, as on a
previous occasion, he displayed a most
sportsmanlike spirit in consenting to
contest the 660 yards over twelve
hurdles—no slight task, when the pre-
vious races were taken into considera-
tion.
For this event Mr. Mount's friends
took 2 to 1 about his chance.
The starter again sent them oft on
even terms. At the end of a quarter
of a mile Mr. Mount was a few yards
in front. Both had been jumping in
good style. When three parts of the
distance had been covered, Mr. Mount
improved the pace, but ineffectually, so
far as shaking off Mr. Harrison was
concerned. On the contrary, Mr. Harri-
son, with a strong effort, wrested the
lead from Mr. Mount before the final
jump was reached. In negotiating this,
however, he struck it slightly. Still,
once over, he established a lead of half a
dozen yards before Mr. Mount had
landed. The latter, however, with a
splendid spurt, got up in the last 10
yards and made a dead heat of it.
The cheering was now tremendous,
both contestants being warmly con-
gratulated. Opinions were divided,
but for myself T had no doubt, and
never have had, that the judge’s deci-
sion was a correct one.
Mr. Mount wished to run it off, but
as Mr. Harrison refused to do so, Mr.
Mount went over the course again.
In after years Mr. Harrison worthily
maintained his reputation as Champion
Amateur of Victoria.
Both Mr. Mount and Mr. Harrison
are at the present day in capital health,
much of which may be attributed, I
strongly believe, to the fact that their
early manhood was spent in training
for those very out-door exercises the
value of which it has been the object
of these articles to call special attention
to.
Long-distance Running.
In America, in the year 1547, a
man named Martin was matched
against over 70 Indians from various
tribes to run 20 miles. At 15 miles
the pace was so hot that not one Indian
was left. Martin went on, and com-
pleted the journey under two hours.
Not the least pleasant feature of the
work I had entered on in “ The Sports-
man ” columns was the number of
letters I continued to receive’ from
correspondents, thanking me for the
“ valuable advice ” I had tendered
them.
From these enclosures I have
selected, as most pertinent to my re-
cent chapters on Pedestrianism. the
following. It is from the pen of Mr.
W. M'Oombie Smith, a well-known
writer on Athletics:—
“ Even for long races, sprinting for
speed must not be neglected, as a turn
of speed at the finish not infrequently
wins a mile or a ten miles race as well
as a hundred yards.
“ The most important point in run-
ning races in which stamina and wind
are as important as speed is to learn
to regulate the pace from s'tart to finish,
so that there is just sufficient reserve
of strength and wind to enable the
runner to increase his speed in the last
100 yards, and finish all out at the win-
ning post. If a runner runs too fast
at the beginning, he may run himself
to a standstill before the finish. If too
slow*, he may find that, w T hile rapidly
diminishing the lead of his opponents
at the finish, they yet manage to win
before he can get up to them.
“ With unknown competitors, it is
not safe to run a waiting race—that is,
to regulate the speed by another until
the finish—unless one has a rare turn
of speed for the finish. A mile runner
who can do the mile in 4min. 30sec.,
with a pace, calculated from start to
finish for 4min. 30sec., by jogging along
at a smin. pace for most of the distance,
may be left at the finish by a fast
quarter or half mile runner, who, if
taken along at a 4min. 30sec. pace
throughout, would never have been in
the finish.
“ A long-distance runner should ac-
custom himself to finish hard and fast,
even in private practice. There is
nothing in the whole range of athletic
sports that tests a man’s pluck and de-
termination better than the finish in a
hard-run race at or over a quarter of a
mile. It is a mistake to think that the
longer a race is, the harder it is on the
runner. The most distressing finishes
are at and under a mile—probably from
600 to 1000 yards. After a runner has
got his second wind, as it is called, and
begins to perspire freely, the worst of
the distress is over. Only those who
have experienced it know how acute
is the feeling of distress when legs and
breath are both failing near the finish
of a hard-run half-mile, and only the
best trained and pluckiest know how
fast and how far invincible courage will
carry them after they feel completely
pumped out.
“ Many a runner collapses and loses
a race, not because he cannot run
further, but because he has not the
courage to stand out longer against the
distress he feels.


*• But is not this excessive standing
out against the feeling of distress
dangerous? Undoubtedly, unless it is
worked up gradually, and attempted
only when an atniete has been care-
fully trained up to the time of the
race.”
“ Without practice and special pre-
paration, however, it is impossible for
an athlete not to experience the distress
felt in finishing a quarter of a mile in
50sec., a half-mile in lmin. 58see., or a
mile under 4min. 20sec.
“An untrained man, if attempting
to keep pace with a Hindle-trained for
a half-mile, would simply be run to a
standstill before half the distance was
covered, sicken and vomit, and have
but one thought in his mind—that he
would never try the like again.
“ The trained runner is like a. steam
engine made of the finest tempered
steel. The untrained runner is like
a steam engine made of unwrought
iron. The latter will burst under an
amount of pressure that will leave the
former unimpaired.
“ It is often objected to training alto-
gether that it ruins the health, and a
great number of pugilists, oarsmen,
and runnel’s, who die not long after
they become famous, is pointed to as
proof of this.
“ That a great number of famous
Athletes do break down prematurely Is
a fact; but it is not the training that
breaks them down, but the licentious
excesses that too often follow a period
of strict training.
“ A writer in the ‘ Referee ’ (London),
commenting on the defeat of Ivilrain
by Slavin in June, 1891, said:—‘lf an
evil spirit might wreak his wicked will
in sending a big, powerful, plucky,
well-built, loose-limbed, very decent
inan indeed to physical ruin, such a
demon could not run an athlete faster
on the downward path to perdition
than Kilrain raced himself after he
achieved in England celebrity.’
“ In training, a man accumulates and
stores up physical strength by a regi-
men laid down according to the laws
that regulate health. To follow this
by excesses certain to undermine health
is like, after having accumulated fuel
on a steam engine calculated with pru-
dent management to send it a long
journev while doing hard work all the
way, to imprudently saturate the store
of fuel with highly inflammable liquids,
and then set fire to the whole at once.
The powers of the engine are wasted,
uot in performing useful work, but in
resisting the tendency to burst, which,
if it does not do, it is left overstrained
and weakened, incapable of ever stand-
ing severe work again.
“ Training of itself brings a man into
perfect health. So long as he continues
in training, so long will he be as
healthy as possible, and as happy as
good health can make him.
“ It is as absurd to say that training
undermines the health and shortens
life because an athlete ceases to train
and lives a life totally opposed to his
life while training, as it would *>e to
say that temperance is prejudicial to
health and longevity because some
men, after living a temperate life for
a time, break out into habitual
drunkards. Such a result sometimes
happens; but there is no necessity that
it should happen.
'• In fact, those who want to lead
healthy and happy lives must, in a
measure, be in partial training through
life. The attention to diet, to exercise,
to bathing, and keeping the pores of
the skin open, which form the essential
parts of training, are as necessary to
the ordinary man of business, and
those engaged in sedentary occupa-
tions, as to the professional athlete. In
the one case it fits men for going
through their daily work with compara-
tive ease and comfort; in the other, it
enables those who are exceptionally
endowed by nature physically to show
what the human body is capable of
performing.”
It will be seen that Mr. M‘Combie
Smith’s closing remarks might be read
side by side with those I have made
more than once in these columns.
Skilled Opinions.
In order that my readers may be
put in possession of all obtainable in-
formation of value on the subjects of
which I have treated, I have considered
it advisable to obtain the opinions—
medical and lay—of local gentlemen
who have been for many years in-
timately connected with various
branches of athletics.
I append two of the most prominent
of these
Sir. —I take considerable pleasure in
complying with your request, “ to sup-
plement by my own experiences” the
able articles by you on “ Health, Exer-
cise. and Amusement,” now appearing
in “ The Sportsman.”
I do so with the more pleasure, as
you have quoted Mr. H. C. A. Har-
rison’s and my name in laudatory terms
iu support of your statements, and as
those who had for an unusually long
time enjoyed vigorous health and a
Singular immunity from “ the thousand
ills that flesh is heir to.”
This happy condition I attribute to
a rigorous adherence to the rational
regimen of physical training.
I may be pardoned if my “ Experi-
ences” appear somewhat egotistical;
but I trust they will be of interest and
value to your readers.
Many people think that an exag-
gerated importance is given to athletics.


But. when we consider that, when
judiciously taken, they build up and
permanently strengthen the system to
resist disease and attain a healthy
longevity, the wisdom of constant exer-
cise is demonstrated.
No better example can be given than
our own Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone,
who has during his long and healthy
life ceaselessly and vigorously exer-
cised, and even now, at 84 years, con-
tinues so to exercise, his body as well
as his mind
The national sports of England, Scot-
land, and Ireland have enabled Great
Britain to maintain her supremacy on
the battle-fields of Europe, although
numerically she is one of the smallest
of the first nations.
Her stalwart sons, by their early
physical training and vigorous outdoor
pastimes, whether on land or water,
develop fine constitutions and dauntless
spirits. They dread no enterprise, and
shirk no hardship. They become in-
trepid explorers, and are the best colo-
nisers, developing boundless sources of
production and avenues of commerce
and wealth to their country.
Unfortunately, there are many who
relapse from the discipline of training,
regimen, and temperance, fall into ex-
cesses, and soon “ go to the wall.”
Others, who have never trained, but
from effeminacy and oscitant supine-
ness, coupled with gross indulgences,
drift into imbecile inertness, become
miserable masses of inflated corporeal
corruption and premature decay, and
soon hurry their uncomfortable bodies
into the grave to rot.
These latter are the parasites and
clogs to a nation, while her other sons,
the vigorous, industrious, and healthy,
are the leaven that raises her up.
It is to conduce to the latter state
that I advocate the practice of exercise
and temperance.
I therefore think that too much en-
couragement cannot be given to our
national sports and pastimes, and to
physical discipline and regimen gene-
rally.
On the preservation of health depends
the wealth of the people and of their
nation.
Life with imperfect health is intoler-
able. The best physician is “ God’s
glorious oxygen,” as A. L. Gordon says;
and the best mental tonic is the exhila-
rating sense of “ joyous motion,” taken
with “ the vigor with which the air is
rife”—Gordon’s also.
Why “joyous?” Because by early
and judicious regimen and exercise,
and constant practice of it afterwards,
you produce and retain a sound frame
and healthy body, giving strength to
buffet the billows of life, and “ joy” in
the partaking of free and exhilarant
exercise. For when you are well, every
hour of your life and every exertion of
your body is an enjoyment, and you
feel irresistibly impelled by tbe exuber-
ance of physical energy to take exer-
cise—“to work off steam”—as I have
done on many thousand occasions.
Of course, volumes could be written
advocating exercise as conducive to
health, but, briefly. I recommend—
-Ist. Temperance in all things. This
is self-evident.
2nd. Regularity; for “ Custom noth
breed a habit in a man.”
3rd Plain diet. Let your food be
well masticated and slowly eaten. I
think a great deal lies in the imagina-
tion as to what to eat and what to
drink. I found everything but spirits
agreed with me, because “ hunger is
the best sauce,” and by eating frugally
and taking plenty of exercise I always
was in good form for my meals.
My favorite food is fish, vegetables,
and fruit ; not much beef or mutton.
Fresh bread is bad; it ferments, gene-
rating flatulency. As beverages, weak
tea, newly made, or weak coffee, cocoa,
or chocolate, or light lager beer. Spring
water is the best of all, however.
Excessive eating and drinking make
a beastly fermenting vat of one’s
stomach, generating disease and early
collapse.
4th. Never eat or drink between
meals. Avoid suppers. Never eat
or drink unless naturally hungry or
thirsty, and not artificially so. “ Man
who would be man must the dominion
of himself control, erecting his throne
on conquered will.”
sth. Thorough ablution of the whole
body at least once a day. Morning
is the usual custom; but just before
going to bed is preferable, as you get
rid of the dust of the day, and have a
delightful sleep afterwards, particu-
larly if you rub yourself well and
vigorously down before and after the
bath.
Should you take your bath or swim
in the morning, get your blood and
system roused up and well heated
beforehand, so as to properly fortify
it against the shock of the cold water.
Otherwise the cold bath may be dele-
terious rather than beneficial.
A vigorous walk, dumb-bells, Indian
clubs, a bout with the foils, single-
sticks. or gloves—any of the above —
and, finally, a good rubbing with flesh
gloves and backstrap, until you get into
a warm glow, is the proper condition to
face the cold shower, and not when
your blood is in a passive state.
If you have conveniences for a warm
bath or warm shower, commence with
that, and end with the cold shower.
Finally, well dry, rub, and massage
yourself for some minutes afterwards
This will bring on a fine glow, and is
excellent exercise in itself. Remember
that the pores of the skin are the escape
valves of the system, and they should
not be clogged up with decomposed


JAMES STANBURY.
James Stanbury, Aquatic Champion of the World, was born in the Hawkes-
bury Eiver District, N.S.W., in February, 1868. He stands sft. llin.; measures
42£in. round the chest, and weighs in best rowing condition 12st 31b. In June, 1890,
he rowed W. O'Connor, of Toronto, Canada, over the Parramatta Eiver Champion-
ship course for P'soo a-side, and won easily by four lengths in 20min. 28sec. On
the 15th December, 1890, was defeated by John M‘Lean. Met M'Lean again on
the 28th April, and defeated him easily by eight lengths in 22min. 15|sec. Since
then Stanbury has remained undisputed champion.


cuticle, which should be removed by
baths, massage, and friction.
6th. Plenty of fresh air at all times;
not omitting your bedroom, providing
you are out of the draughts. With all
due respect to some of the architects,
few of the bedrooms are properly venti-
lated. They should all be tobinated.
But. if imperfectly ventilated, a
good plan is to raise the bottom
sash about an inch, to let your friend
fresh air in, and lpwer the top sash
down, say, three inches, to let your
enemy foul air out.
Many a time have I gone into a
friend’s room to rouse him up for a
walk in the morning, when I had to
throw open the window, as I found
the air most pestiferous, while he, all
unconscious, had been inhaling poi-
sonous carbonic acid gas—his exhaled
breath—most of the night. Nothing
gives so sallow a complexion as that.
This is a hint to the ladies.
Why do so many of the females of
the working classes have such bad
complexions, notwithstanding they for
the most part take good exercise? Be-
cause they generally sleep in such ill-
ventilated and stuffy little rooms, and
seem afraid of fresh air.
7th. Eschew tobacco and spirits.
Smoking encourages unnecessary
drinking, which is bad, even if of spring
water. In addition, the nicotine of the
tobacco, if swallowed, is poisonous,
and if expectorated the stomach is
robbed of its saliva, one of the com-
ponents of the gastric juices.
Spirits are the concentrated essence
of grain, fruit, or vegetable matter,
which is the wrong form in which they
should be taken into the stomach.
Spirits being stronger than the gastric
juices, destroy them.
Sugar is an essence or strong extract,
and too strong for the stomach, if taken
singly. Even the populations of un-
civilised countries pound up the taste-
less and innutritions bark of trees to
mix with and dilute the wild honey,
having learnt that weak but solid food
is best.
Weak spirits and water may stimu-
late the feeble to momentary exertion,
but let them go back to the proper form
of food—solids—when their failing
minds and bodies will be restored.
Mild beers and wines in moderation
no one should object to.
Bth. Sleep.—Don’t go to bed unless
you are “ dog-tired”—i.e., so tired that
you could lie down like a dog on the
floor and go to sleep; and in order to
get sufficiently tired, take a good brisk
walk or a burst of a few T miles. You
can then come in. have your bath, and
go to bed, to enjoy an elysian sleep,
awakening fresh and strong.
If it is raining, or too muddy or in-
clement to go out. use your dumb-bells
or clubs, or horizontal bar. skipping-
rope, or any other form of exercise
sufficiently prolonged to make you so
thoroughly fatigued as to enjoy your
bed.
I read lately that Gladstone, though
over 84 years of age, dismissed his
carriage and elected to walk home. 2*4
miles distant, at 1 o’clock in the morn-
ing, so as to get properly tired for bed.
9th. Breathe through your nostrils.
The moist hairs therein catch the dust
and filter the air, so to speak, whilst
the channels of the nostrils leading to
below the throat warm the air pro-
perly for the lungs, precluding colds on
tne chest.
Keep your mouth shut to save your
teeth for mastication, without the aid
of me dentist.
10th. Swimming is a glorious and
raluable exercise, and should be made
oy law a compulsory part of our educa-
tion. It can hardly be indulged in too
much. Every muscle in the body is
fully exercised—the lungs especially so.
vVhat a luxury a fine swimmer enjoyi
m the consciousness of his prowess,
that in the event of danger on the
water, and if there is a prospect of
being saved, or of saving the lives of
others, he lias the best chance. Just so
must my friend, Dr. Jack Hamilton,
M.P. for Cook, Queensland —the re-
nowned swimmer and boxer, and
record revolver shot of the world —feel.
11th. Self-protection. Accomplish-
ments such as boxing, fencing, single-
stick exercise, and wrestling are also
fine adjuncts to a physical education,
the possession of which gives a man
an easy confidence in his walks through
life, in the knowledge that he can suc-
cessfully defend himself against moles-
tation; or—when a good runner—
“ If I have not arms for a fray,
I have legs to run away.”
12th. Training for Contests.—Row-
ing, running, walking, boxing, wrest-
ling, football, cricket, or any other
physical feat requires strict observance
of the foregoing recommendations for
the attainment of perfect health, and
then specral exercise for the special
feat to be undertaken.
Sprint running up to 200 yards does
not necessitate much prolonged work
or walking. But I recommend getting
light by abstemious diet and sweating,
Then take short sprints, moderate at
first, extending to top speed after a
few weeks’ training. The arms are a
natural auxiliary to the legs in running
and walking, and more use should be
made of them than generally is. I re-
commend the practice of swinging them
violently for some time to the action
of both running and walking after
your bath or before going to bed; it
gets the muscles up strong.
Quarter-mile running and upwards
requires much exercise and resolution
I recommend running your trials at
the same hour of the day upon which


the race is proposed to be run. A good
strong cup of tea or coffee just before
a race is a fine stimulant. This applies
to any contest.
Walking is a fine and useful exercise.
To attain a speed of over seven miles
an Lour, much practice and determina-
tion are necessary.
Begin moderately at first, and then
gradually extend your speed and dis-
tances. Work the arms well, with the
elbows bent and the fists sent up in
front of the chest, and lift the hips
with a sort of lilt, which gives the
w alker a fine swinging stride.
Rowing and bicycling have their
special exercises, of which I know but
little,beyond recommending the making
of the entire system and muscles of the
body as strong as possible, for all are
called more or less into requisition
during any physical contest, and he
who is strong all over has the best
chance of winning.
The gymnasium is a fine tiling, and
cannot be too highly recommended. In
a well-appointed one, nearly every
variety of exercise can be partaken of.
13th. Walk whenever you can.—
Don’t be a feather-bed man. dreading
a little mud or rain, but walk when-
ever time is no object. Remember, “ if
you don’t make use of your legs, your
legs will be of very little use to you.”
The same admonition applies to all
our other faculties, whether of mind
or limb, the regular and constant exer-
cise of which maintains them iu the
highest degree of efficiency, and pre-
serves them and your health well past
three score years, if the preceding le-
commendations are observed.
I recommend exercise that generates
active respiration and sends the blood
coursing vigorously through the system,
scouring out the veins and arteries and
clearing the lungs. The system wants
fresh blood, and the more often it is
renewed by being first exhausted by
exercise and again restored by judi-
cious feeding, the healthier and better
one feels. Vegetable life exemplifies
that—shedding its fruit, leaves, and
bark regularly, and having them re-
newed again.
I cannot conclude without drawing
attention to you (Professor William
Miller), who are a grand example of
judicious training, and who. without
any very special advantages of physical
inheritance, have, by the observance of
hygiean rules and regimen, been for
years the champion all-round athlete
of the world, have elevated yourself to
the top of your profession, and have no
peer in the gladiatorial arena.—Yours
faithfully,
LAMBTON L. MOUNT.
So much for the lay opinion. Now
for the medical view of the question :
To obtain the finest object lesson in
the results of exercise, and its influence
upon our fellow-men, one should travel
from the East or City end of London
to its more fashionable relative, the
West End, and compare the conforma-
tion of the habitues of the former with
those of the latter locality—say between
the ages of 30 and 60 years.
The portly alderman, whose daily
exercise possibly never exceeds a mile
walk, puffs and blows on the least
exertion, as he labors under the burden
of unnecessary fat, which impedes his
movements and embarrasses his res-
piration. His pale, pasty face tells of
long hours in artificially lighted and ill-
ventilated rooms where the rays of
God’s sunlight never penetrate.
Now, look at the West End man, the
country gentleman, or the soldier,
who spends half his time in the saddle
or at drill, who takes his exercise as
he does his daily bread.
His neat, muscular figure, elastic
gait, and fresh face make it evident
that he never loses an opportunity of
inhaling the proper amount of oxygen
to sustain life under its most favorable
conditions.
To come nearer home for an example,
how easy it is to pick out the well-
bronzed and athletic bushman from the
city man on the Flemington Racecourse
at Cup time.
Exercise is muscular movement of
force sufficient to engage the ener-
getic contraction of the muscles em-
ployed.
I now refer to the voluntary muscles,
i.e., those under the control of the will.
By the judicious working of these
muscles the involuntary muscles, i.e.,
those employed in the processes of
respiration, digestion, and circulation,
etc., are stimulated to do their share
of work.
Exercise quickens the respiration,
hence more oxygen is taken into the
lungs, and a larger quantity of blood is
thus oxygenated or cleansed of the
impurities it has taken up in its course
through the body.
About the age of thirty years every
well-nourished man has a tendency to
an enlargement of the abdomen.
This unsightly condition is, of course,
more pronounced in some than in
others.
The muscles covering the abdomen
now tend to become fatty and relaxed,
and, in a short time,what had been a
good support to the intestines is
nothing more than a large, loose bag,
composed of fatty material and
thinned muscular fibre, giving little
support to its contents.
When the pendulous condition of
the abdomen is fairly established, the
internal organs begin to degenerate.
The intestines lose their muscularity,
and constipation and dyspepsia, with
all their horrible consequences, result.
The veins in the lower bowel of
the rectum lose their support, and piles


make their appearance, and possibly
also varicose veins in the legs and
other places.
With such a lesson ought it not be
the ambition of every man to keep
himself in health and comfort by tak-
ing sufficient exercise to gain that
end ?
I am constantly asked, “ What form
of exercise do you advise ?”
Now, given a fairly healthy man,
whose heart has not become weakened
by fatty infiltration, I most unhesitat-
ingly recommend the gymnasium .
But the gymnastic exercises must be
taken under the direction of a pro-
fessor of the art, otherwise this enthu-
siastic amateur may do himself more
harm than good.
An experienced teacher can see at a
glance what exercises will suit each
particular case, and will commence
gently, for, believe me, the dangers
of taking a large amount of violent
exercise by a man unaccustomed to
it are many. And not the least for-
midable Is dilatation of the heart.
Walking, boxing, dumb-bells, and
swimming are, to my mind, the best
exercises, as they are all easily ob-
tained.
Horse exercise is invaluable in some
cases; but this is, of course, a more ex-
pensive method of exercise.
I advise the beginner to do his work
in the gymnasium in the morning be-
fore breakfast.
He can have a cup of weak tea and a
slice of bread and butter before begin-
ning work.
He should be clad from head to foot
in flannel.
Half-a-mile walk round the gymna-
sium will get the joints quite supple.
Then ten minutes with the gloves.
Then vary the exercise by using the
dumb-bells for five or six minutes.
Now another half-mile walk or jog,
and he is fit for a rub down and
shower bath.
He should then dress in fresh clothes
and get to breakfast.
Any man taking this amount of exer-
cise regularly will (with ordinary care-
ful living—that is to say, abstinence in
alcohol and tobacco, to be in bed by 11
p.m., and up at 7) keep himself in good
health and enjoy his meals.
H. O’HARA, F.R.C.S.I.
Collins-street.
The spirit of the age is in the direc-
tion of condensation. No one cares
now-a-days to wade through masses of
matter, natheless how replete those
“ masses” may be with information.
What is required of an author in these
“ rapid” days is that he shall present
his readers with the very kernel of
his subject; that he shall, in short, con-
vey the maximum of advice and infor-
mation in the minimum of space, so
that “ lie who runs may read”—and
read plainly, too.
I, therefore, propose In this chapter
to present a few short rules as a per-
tinent summing up to my previous re-
marks, and as being easily applicable
to those who intend to take exercise
in a moderate degree or without an
instructor.
This course I have adopted, too, as
I intend shortly to issue the first of a
series of Handbooks on How to Train
for various exercises.
But to my task.
1. A Thorough Medical Examination.
—ln every case a certificate should be
obtained from a legally qualified
medical practitioner, and in it should
be set forth diet and exercise to be
taken.
2. Food.—There is no necessity for a
strict regime. Everyone should study
what food agrees with him or her, and
eat and drink moderately thereof.
Four and a half to five hours should
be allowed to elapse after each meal
before the other is partaken of.
Do not eat between meals.
The plainer the food, the better.
Avoid suppers.
3. Walking Exercise.—A brisk walk
of from two to three miles before
breakfast will be found an excellent
appetiser.
4. Bathing.—Cold shower baths, to
those accustomed to taking them, will
be found exhilarating after returning
from the morning walk. Lukewarm
plunge baths should be indulged in by
those unaccustomed to cold water. Hot
sea baths are an excellent strengthen-
ing remedy for the weak.
5. Amount of Exercise.—The “ every-
day” man cannot always choose his
time for exercising, but it is necessary
for him to walk from five to six miles
a day for health.
6. Violent Exercises.—The human
frame requires gradual training and
development before attempting any
exercise which requires a severe strain.
7. Running.—This is a recognised
exercise for health. Be careful not to
take too long a stride. Stop before
feeling tired. The pace should be a
medium one, or a jog-trot. This helps
to regulate the system.
8. Swimming—This is a capital exer-
cise. It promotes the elasticity of the
various muscular portions, and
strengthens the respiratory powers,
besides being one of the most healthy
of exercises. Learning to swim should
be made a compulsory part of our boys’
and girls’ education.
9. Retire to rest at 1# or 11 o’clock.
Rise at 6 in the morning in Summer;
7 in Winter.
10. Indian Clubs.—This exercise is
most graceful,enjoyable,and beneficial.
The various movements can soon be
accomplished after receiving a course


of instruction. For beginners, the
clubs should weigh from to 21b.
11. Dumb-bells.—This is one of the
cheapest, besides being one of the best
and most easily acquired of all exer-
cises. Always have a pair at home,
and practice every day, using light
bells at first, and increasing the weight
with custom.
12. Arm Exercises.—Place both arms
down to the sides, straightened at the
elbows. Close the hands tightly, and
bring them to the shoulders. Then ex-
tend them to the utmost above the
head. Returning to shoulders, extend
frontwards. Bring the hands to the
shoulders again and extend down-
wards close to the hips.
Another exercise is to keep the palms
of the hands open and bring them from
the sides on a level with the shoulders
and then extend sidewards. The
palms of the hands should be turned
upwards. Bring them quickly to fullest
extent above the head, touching each
other. Swing rapidly frontwards,
circling backwards, without changing
the motion. The finish of each move-
ment is when the hands meet together
above the head.
This exercise can also be executed
vice versa. In all extension movements
straighten the arms at the elbows.
Discontinue exercising before feeling
tired.
13. Lower Limbs.—Stand on the toes,
bend the knees, and sit slowly down
as near the heels as possible. Continue
this exercise for a number of times.
On resuming an upright position,
always straighten the knees previous
to performing the sitting posture.
14. Back and Loins.—Stand erect,
chest expanded, arms extended above
the head. Breathe freely. Bend the
body slowly forward, bringing the
arms down at the same time, and en-
deavor to touch the toes without bend-
ing the knees. The elbows must be
straightened during the exercise.
15. Curling.—This exercise is spe-
cially devised for developing the grip,
wrists, forearms, and biceps. As yet
it is not practised in Australia. It can
be easily performed at home. Study
the position of the body. Stand erect,
chest expanded, and breathe freely.
The right or left arm—one only being
used at a time—hang straight down at
the side. The hand is closed with a
tight grip, holding the dumb-bell,
which is brought to the exercising
shoulder with a very, very slow move-
ment. The elbow is bent, the forearm
to the hand only moving. The remain-
ing part of the arm is stationary. The
slower the exercise is done, the better
for development—say from 8 to 12
seconds from starting to arrival to
shoulder, which ends the exercise. The
dumb-bell must be lowered to the first
position, taking the same length of
time as raising to the “ second or final
position.”
It is often noticeable that either the
biceps or forearm, or perhaps both, are
not properly developed.
Curling may be practised by the
weak as well as the strong, a light
wooden dumb-bell in some cases being
all that is necessary.
The following is the proper classifica-
tion of ages and weights to be used: —
Boy of 10, lib.; girl of 10, light wooden
dumb-bell; boy of 12, iy 2 1b. ; girl of 12,
%lb.; youth of IG, 31b. to 51b.; girl of IG,
; adults—men, 71b. to 101 b.;
women. 21b. to 41b.
The beginner commences gradually,
and with practice increases the number
—say, in the first instance, from three
to six times, with each arm alternately.
Afterwards, judgment requires to be
used.
The exercise must always stop before
tiring the muscles.
Curling can be done with both arms
at the same time, but practising alter-
nately with each hand is the best, as
the muscles of one or other of the arms
that is not working are allowed to rest,
thus preventing an unnecessary strain
on those muscles.
16. The Gymnasium.—Every gymna-
sium should be under the care of a
qualified instructor.


ROBERT FITZSIMMONS.
“ Bob ” Fitzsimmons was born at Elson, Cornwall, on the 4th June, 1862.
He stands sft. llfin., and at his best weight scales under 12st. He made his
first boxing appearance at Timaru, N.Z., in 1882, in Jem Mace’s competition, in
which he defeated four men, winning the Amateur Championship of New Zealand.
Among his Australian performances he is credited with having beaten Bill Slavin
in seven rounds, ‘‘Starlight” in nine rounds, Dick Sandall in four rounds, Pablo
Fanque in two rounds, Dick Ellis in three rounds, and Jim Hall in four rounds.
On the 17th May, 1889, he was “tried out” at the California Athletic Club,
San Francisco, with Frank Allen, whose wrist he broke. Subsequently he
defeated Billy M'Carthy in nine rounds, Arthur O. Upham in five rounds, Jack
Dempsey in thirteen rounds for a purse, the “Black Pearl” in four
rounds, Peter Maher in twelve rounds, Joe Godfrey in one round, Jim Hall in
four rounds, drew with Joe Choynski in five rounds, beat Dan Creedon in two
rounds. He is now matched to box Jim Corbett for the Championship, and,
though there must necessarily be a considerable difference in the weights, Fitz-
simmons never yet having scaled 12st. in any match.


DONALD DINNIE.


DONALD DINNIE.
This magnificent specimen of health and thoroughly developed manhood was
born at Aboyne, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, on the 10th July, 1837. He stands 6ft.
lin. in his shoes, weighed in best form 15st. 71b., and measured round the chest
47in.; biceps, 16Jin.; thigh, 26Jin.; calf, 17 Jin. During his career he is credited
with having won over 7500 money prizes, and over 100 champion medals, cups,
etc. His early records include—lB7l—Threw the lGlb. hammer, fair stand, 138 ft.
Bin.; 221 b. hammer, fair stand, 104 ft. 6in. 1868—Put the 161 b. stone 49ft. 6in.;
181 b. stone, 44ft. Bin.; 221 b. stone, 39ft. 9in. At Aberdeen, in 1868, he threw a
561 b. weight by ring, fair stand, 28ft. 4in. He has several times cleared sft. llin.
at running high leap; 20ft. lin. at running long leap; and 44ft. at hop, step, and
jump. He has run 100yds. in 10 2-sth sec. He has lifted from the ground to
stretch at arms above head two dumb-bells, one weighing 1281 b., the other 1121 b.,
and a two-handed dumb-bell weighing 2501 b. On the 22nd March, 1884, Dinnie
arrived in Melbourne, after a successful tour of America. He at once issued a
challenge through "The Sportsman,” offering to any athlete the concession of
10ft. in throwing the hammer; 2ft. in putting the stone; Ift. in tossing the 561 b.
weight; and in tossing the caber, Ift. cut off the caber. He made a match at
heavy dumb-bell lifting with Professor Miller. Each won five feats, and Dinnie
lost the toss for the deciding feat and the match. He subsequently wrestled a
draw with Miller in Graeco-Roman and Scotch styles—three falls each ; lost a
match to the Professor in the Bijou Theatre; and won one from him in the
Victoria Hall. Was defeated by Clarence Whistler in the same hall, but made a
draw with Tom Cannon in the Alexandra Theatre. Defeated Mons. Victor in
the Victoria Hall. At the Caledonian games all round the country Donald
Dinnie was a conspicuous figure, his presence recalling to the minds of many of
his countrymen the years when, in Scotland, Dinnie’s arrival on the sports
ground was hailed with acclamation. He is now in New Zealand travelling with
a variety company.


PETER JACKSON.
Peter Jackson was born near Porto Rico, West Indies, on the 3rd July, 1861.
He stands 6ft. o|in., and weighs, in best condition, 14st. 21b. He first became
known as a boxer in Sydney in 1882, where he made a draw with Jack
Hayes, whom he afterwards beat in seven rounds. He also defeated Sam Britton
in twenty minutes, and Mick Dooley in three rounds. In 1884 he was beaten by
Farnan, in Melbourne, in three rounds, and afterwards made a draw in Sydney
with the same boxer in six rounds, the ring being rushed. Defeated Tom Lees
in thirty rounds for .£2OO a-side and the championship. Went to California in
1888. There beat George Godfrey in 19 rounds, Joe M'Auliffe in 24 rounds,
Patsy Cardiff in ten rounds, Mike Lynch in two rounds, Jack Fallon in four
rounds. In England, in 1889, defeated Jem Smith in two rounds. Beturning
to America, defeated, among others, Ed. Smith (Joe Goddard’s victor). Paid
Australia a visit in 1890, where he made an eight-round draw with Joe Goddard.
Returning to San Francisco in 1891, boxed sixty-one rounds with Jim Corbett,
which the referee declared “no contest.” On the 30th May, 1892, defeated Frank
Slavin in ten rounds for £2OOO. On the 20th February, 1893, made his dihut
as an actor in “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” Jackson has been earnest in his endeavors
to procure another match with Corbett, and the National Sporting Club, London,
at one time offered a big purse for such a contest; but the articles have [not
hitherto been completed.


LAURENCE FOLEY.
Laurence Foley was born on the Turon River, near Bathurst, in 1851. He
stands sft. Bin., and weighed, in best condition, lOst. 71b. For years he was the
central figure in New South Wales boxing circles, and from his “ Academy ”
issued those boxers who have made Australia’s name famous all the world over.
Included in those who were first pupils, then instructors, at “Foley’s” may be
named Peter Jackson, Frank P. Slavin, Mick Dooley, and Albert Griffiths
(“Griffo”). Foley himself has the record of having beaten Sandy Ross (twice),
F. Jackson, C. Kelly, Hughes, Hogan, Johnson, Dick Briley, Ben Woods, Corbett,
Fagan. He also defeated Abe Hickin, London Prize Ring Rules, for the
Championship of Australia. His 40-round draw with Prof. Miller was noted [for
the gameness and endurance he displayed. His last appearance in the “ roped
arena” was when he boxed a 6-round draw with Jack Burke, the “Irish Lad.
For some years past the subject of our illustration has confined his attention to
building contracts, with remunerative results.


Telephone 58,
Windsor.
NEILI/S
Telephone 58,
Windsor.
CORNER HOTEL
AND
LIVERY STABLES,
JUNCTION, ST. K1LDA.
Wines, Spirits, and Cigars of the Best Brands.
Vehicles of all descriptions on Hire or for Sale.
One of the Greatest Attractions in the City are the Rare Bargains
RICHARDS & COMPANY
ARE NOW OFFERING IN
Gents’ Underwear, Hosiery, Ties, Gloves, etc.
All New Goods that must be turned into Cash,
Men’s Sanitary Shirts and Pants, 1/6, 1/11,
2/11; cheap at 1/11, 2/6, 3/9.
Men’s Pure Wool Shirts and Pants, 4/11, 5/11;
ordinary price, 6/-, 7/6.
Men’s Lamb’s-wool Shirts and Pants, 2/6, 2/11,
3/11, 4/11.
Men’s Coloured Merino Shirts and Pants, 2/11;
worth 3/11.
Men’s All-wool Sanitary A-Hose, worth 1/6,
now 1/- pair.
Fine Cotton A-Hose, double heels and toes,
4|d. per pair.
Men’s Cashmere Sox, 11/6 ; usual price, 1/6,.
1/11.
Gents’ Sanitary Black £-Hose, fast dye, 3d. y
4£d., 6|d. per pair.
Light and Dark Silk Ties, 6£d., 9d., 1/-, 1/6 —
half prices.
White Shirts, 2/11, 3/11, 4 6, 5/11 ; English
made.
Braces, 6d., 9d., 1/-, 1/C, 1/11 ; a splendid
variety.
Gents’ Gloves, 2/11, 3/9; sold elsewhere at
4/6, 5/6.
CLOTHING MADE TO ORDER, AT VERY LOW PRICES.
All other Lines at equally Low Prices.
RICHARDS & COMPANY,
238 to 244 Bourke Street, Melbourne.


Established 1878,
i Jt i £ev/ V V/|
1/7; m
33‘ 1' i i
\M 1“ iii/’2
‘5‘ . ’//
\‘x .
Manufacturer of all kinds of Gymnastic Apparatus
ON THE LATEST APPROVED PRINCIPLES.
Ladies’ Gymnasiums, Kindergarten and Calisthemc Clubs
Supplied with Every Requisite.
Indian Clubs, all weights and sizes, in stock.
Fancy Clubs, for Professionals, a Specialty.
Horizontal & Parallel Bars, Fixed and Telescopic.
Dumb-bells, Bar-bells, Calisthenic Rods, Rings, &c.
Skittle Pins, Cheeses and Balls Turned accurately
to size and weight.
Billiard Balls Re-turned.
'1
}
V:
‘ ‘i‘u‘m
:31; ‘.
W}:
“NW "
Ml“, V
\W‘H “
‘\ 39V»! 5“
\‘53‘ L’ I
Wood Turning in all its branches, Band and Fret Sawing, Carving, &c„ &c.
Spiral Turning to any design.
GENERAL WOOD TURNER
jR FURNITURE .MANUFACTURER
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinimiiinii
/OOP TURNING >|
Fancy Tables and Furniture of every description manufactured.
Cornice Poles of all Sizes.
Note the Address:
C. EOJO,
453 to 457 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
ALL
LY executed


AAVrNAB &-C?
-EITH c-LONDON
w _ lancet* i 3
tke Medicai
Journal in. ike world
Gan© it
LLEy
IREJinD
WHIfKy
“ij a tkorougkjy well-
“mature© excep-
tionally mellow to tke
“ia.ste.and notwithjtan©-
“ino ltj excellent rick
“colour, tkere i 5 no re 3 i-
“dcie.and mineral matter
“and fa 3 el oil are aJyol-
“uietyM/ Athoroudhly'
“keaitky jtimolant.”
OBTAINABLE EVERYWHERE.
<J>
