



3?EXOE TEBEBPESOB.
HEBREW COOKERY.
{From the English and Australian Cookery ißook, New Edition,
No. OIX.J
AN AUSTRALIAN.
“ For s;hou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be-
a peculiar people unto Himself, above all the nations that are upon the earth.
“Thou shaft not eat any abominable thing. ■ . ~ ,
“ Those are the beasts that ye shall eat; the ox, the sheep, and the goat. Dbut. *i», a, 3, 4.
LONDON; LOW & CO,
MELBOURNE; GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
And all Booksellers & Railway Stalls in England, Australia, & New Zealand.
WAMCBB, HAT AND 00., PRINTERS, 09 ROURKB STREET WEST, MKEBOUBH*.
ISO 1 ?.


V Tke English and Australian Cookery Book is a work highly eulogized by the
Reviewers and the Newspaper Press; containing upwards of isoo Receipts and xooo
Authors quoted, may be ordered of any Booksellers, price ss.
#T The next Hand-Book published will be “Dinner according to Count
D’Orsay. ” No. XXXIV. Price Threepence.


HEBREW COOKERY.
“Forthon art a fiuJy people unto the Lord thy God, and fcbe Lord hath ehosea
thee to be a peouHar people unto Himself, above all the nations that are upon
tho earth.
” Thou Shalt not cat any abominable thing;,
“These are tho beasts that ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and the goat.
“ And whatsoever hath not ilns and scales ye may not cat; His unclean unto
you. I *— BmUtonomy xlv. 'i, 8, 4,10.
PALESTINE SOUP.
Stow a knuckle of real, a calf’s foot, one pound of
chorissa, and a largo fowl, in four quarts of water; add a
piece-of fresh lemon-pool, six Jerusalem artichokes, a bunch
of sweet herbs, a little salt and white pepper, a nutmeg,
and a blade of maco. "When tho fowl is thoroughly done
remove the white parts to preserve for thickening, and let
the rest continue stewing till the stock is sufficiently strong.
The white parts of the fowl must bo pounded and sprinkled
with flour or ground rice, and stirred in the soup after it
has been strained, until it thickens.
MATSO SOUP.
Boil down half a shin of beef, four pounds of gravy beef—
and a calf’s foot may bo added if approved—in four quarts
of water, season with celery, carrots, turnips, popper, and
salt, and a bunch of sweet herbs. Lot the whole stow
gently for eight hours, then strain, and let it stand to get
cdld, when the fat must be removed; then return it to Si©
saucepan to warm up. Ten minutes before serving throw
in’the balls from which tho soup takes its name, and which
ore made in the following manner Take half a pound of


mafso flour, two ounces of chopped suet, season with a little
pepper, salt, ginger, and nutmeg; mix with this four beaten
eggs, and make it into a paste; a small onion shred and
browned in a desert-spoonful of oil. The paste should bo
made into rather largo balls, and care should bo taken to-
make them very light.
ALMOUDIGrOS SOUP.
Put a knuckle of veal and a calf’s foot into two quarts-
of water, with a blade of mace and a bunch of sweet herbs,
a turnip, a little white pepper, and salt. When sufficiently
done, strain and skim it, and add balls of forced meat and
egg-balls. A quarter of an hour before serving beat up
the yolks of four eggs, with a desert-spoonful of lemon-
juice, and three ounces of sweet almonds, blanched, and
with a spoonful of powdered white sugar. This mixture
is to beaten into the soup until it thickens, taking care to-
prevent its curdling.
A Ohisesb Meax.. —lt is certain, however, that a real OMnoso
dinner would be a very odd thing- in tho oyea of a stranger, especially
If ha were one of those who think, as somo people do, that there is but
one way of dining. To begin dinner with tho dessert, and end it with
tho soup; to drink tho wine smoking hot out of little ohinn onps, and
have yonr food ready out into small pieces, and to ho presented with a
couplo of sticks, instead of a knifo and folk to oat with; to have instead
of napkins, a provision of little bits of coloured silk paper by the side
of your plate, which as you uso, tho attendants carry off; to leavo
your place between tho courses to smoko or nmuso yourself, and to
raise yonr chopsticks to your forehead, and then plaoo them horizon-
tally upon your cup to signify that you have finished your dinner, —all
these things would doubtless Boom very odd and oreata tho curiosity of
Europeans.— 'Sue’s China.
SAUCE A LA TARTARS.
Mix the yolk of an egg with oil, vinegar, chopped
parsley, mustard, pepper, and salt. A spoonM of pati
do Mdble , or Trench mustard, renders the sauce more
piquant.
EGO- SAUCE.
A fine white sauce for boiled fowls, turkeys, or white-
fricassees: —Beat up the yolks of four eggs with the juice
of a lemon, a tea-spoonful of flour, and a little cold water j:
mix well together, and set it on the fire to thicken, stirring
it to prevent curdling. This sauce will be found excellent.


•if not superior) in many cases where English cooks use
melted butter. If capers are substituted for the lemon-
juice, this sauce will be found good both for boiled lamb or
•mutton.
A PISH SATTOE WITHOUT BUTTER.
Put on in a small saucepan a cup of water well flavoured
with vinegar, an onion chopped fine, a little rasped horse-
radish, _ pepper, and two or three cloves, and a couple of
anchovies cut small. When it has boiled, stir carefully
in the beaten yolks of two eggs, and let it thicken until of
•the consistency of melted butter.
PISH STEWED WHITE,
_ Put an onion, finely chopped, into a stewpan, with a
little oil, till the onion becomes brown; then add half a
pint of water, and place the fish in the stewpan, seasoning
•with pepper, salt, and mace, ground allspice, nutmeg, and
ginger; let it stew gently until the fish is done, then
prepare the beaten yolks of four eggs, with the juice of two
lemons, a tea-spoonful of flour, a table-spoonful of cold
water, and a little saffron ; mix well in a cup, and pour it
■into the stewpan, stirring it carefully one way until it
thickens. Balia should be thrown in about twenty minutes
before serving. They are made in the following way
010,110 a little of the fish, the liver and the roe, if there is
.any, beat it up finely with chopped parsley, and spread
warm butter, crumbs of bread, and seasoning according to
taste. Porm this into a paste with eggs, and make it into
balls of a moderate size. This is a very nice dish when
cold. Q-arnish with sliced lemon and parsley.
pish soup.
Mate a good stock, by simmering a eod’s-head in water,
enough to cover the fish; season it with pepper and salt,
mace, celery, parsley, and a few sweet herbs, with two or
three onions; when sufficiently done strain it, and add
cutlets of fish prepared in the following manner: —Cut
very small, well trimmed cutlets from any fish—sole or
brill are, perhaps, best; stew them in equal quantities of
water and wine, but not more than will cover them, with a
large lump of butter, and the juice of a lemon; when they
.have stewed gently for about fifteen or twenty minutes.


add' them to the soup, which thicken with cream and flour.
Berra the soup with the cutlets in a tureen. Forcemeat
balls of cod’s liver are sometimes added.
“ These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: wlmtsoovor hath
fins and scales in the waters, in. tho seas, and in ilia rivers, them shall
ye eat,
“ And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in tho rivers,
and of all that move in tho waters, and of every living thing that is
In tho waters, they shall be an abomination unto yon.”—Lev. xL
8, 10.
Abakan Hospitality, a.b. 976. — In tho months of November, De-
cember, and January it was tho custom of Ahmed Bon Said to receive
his visitors in a large hall, the pavement of which was covered with
carpets of silk and woollen stuff; tho cushions being made of mate-
rials equally warm, and the walls having tho hangings of carpets and
embroidered linen. In the midst of the hall was a largo tube, tho
height of a man, filled with lighted charcoal, and around this all tho
guests took their places, each at such distance as host suited him, A
HMm or section of the Koran was then rend, and, cadi giving his
Judgment respecting it, a profitable discussion arose. Porfumba of
mmk and other grateful aromatics wore diffused throughout the apart-
ment, which was furthormoro besprinkled with sweat waters. After
this had endured some time a repast was served, composed of excellent
meats in rich abundance, young kids, for example, and the flesh of
rams, with other dishes prepared in oil; then followed milk in curds
and other forms; after which came a variety of sweet dishoa, with
butter, dates, and choice fruits of various kinds.— Coiuk’s History of
Uto Arabs in Spain.
FISH FRIED IN OIL.
Soles, plaice, or salmon are the best kind of fish to dress
in this manner, although other sorts are used. ’When
prepared by salting or drying, have a dish ready with
Deaton eggs, turn the fish well over in them, and sprinkle
it freely with flour, so that tho fish may ho covered entirely
with it; then place it in a pan, with a quantity of tho best
frying-oil, at boiling heat. Iky tho fish in it gently till of
a fine, equal, brown colour. When dons it should ho
placed before the fire for tho oil to drain off. Great care
should he taken that the oil should have ceased to bubble
when the fish is put in, otherwise it will he greasy; tho
oil will servo again if strained off and poured into a Jar.
Pish preserved in this way is usually served cold, gamiahed
with parsley.
ESOOBEOHE.
Take some cold fried fish, and place it in a deep pan; thou


Ijoil half a pint of vinegar with two table-spoonfuls of
water, a little grated ginger, allspice, cayenne pepper, two
hay-leaves, a little salt, and a table-spoonful of lemon-juice,
With sliced onions. When boiling, pour it over the fish;
cover the pan, and let it stand twenty-four hours before
serving.
The poet's luxurious dishes.
Wo will oat such a meal;
The heads of parrots, tongues of nightingales,
The bruins of peacocks and of ostriches
Shall ho our food; and could wo eat the phoenix.
Though Nature lost her kind, she woro our dish.
—Men Jonson.
KUGEL AND OOKNMEAN.
Seale a pint of Spanish peas and one pint of Spanish
beans all night in three pints of water ; take two marrow-
bones, and tie thorn together, to prevent the marrow from
escaping, and put nil together in a pan; then take one
pound of flour, half a pound of shred snot, a little grated
nutmeg and ground ginger, cloves, and allspice, one pound
of coarse brown sugar, and the crumb of a slice of bread,
first soaked in water, and pressed dry. Mix all these
ingredients into a paste; grease a quart basin, and put it
in, covering the basin with a plate ; sot it in the middle of
the pan, with the beans, moat, Cover the pan tightly
down with coarse brown paper, and let it remain all the
night and the next day (until required) in a baker’s oven ;
when done, take out the basin containing the pudding, and
skim the fat from the gravy, which must bo served with
soup. The moat, Ac., is extremely savoury and nutritious,
but it is nob a very seemly dish for table. The pudding
must bo turned out of the basin; and a sweet sauce,
flavoured with lemon and brandy, is a fine addition.
SALMON PIE.
Cut two pounds of fine fresh salmon in slices, about
three-quarters of an inch thick, and sot them aside on a
dish j clean and scrape five or six anchovies, and halve
them ; then chop a small pottle of mushrooms, a handful
of fresh parsley, a couple of shalots, and a little green
tbymo. Put those together into a saucepan, with three
ounces of butter, a little popper, salt and nutmeg, and
tarragon; add the juice of a lemon, and half a pint of


good brown gravy; and let the whole simmer, stirring it
gently all the time ; also slice sis eggs boiled bard ; then,
line a pie dish with short paste, and fill it with alternate
layers of the slices of salmon, hard eggs, and fillets of
anchovies, spreading between each layer the herb sauce;
then cover the dish with the paste, and bake in, a
moderately-heated oven.
SOUE-KROUT.
Boil about seven or eight pounds of beef, either brisket
or a fillet off the shoulder, in enough of water to cover it.
When it has boiled for an hour, add ns much eour-kroufc
aa may be approved; it should then stew gently for four
hours, and be served in a deep dish. The Germans are
not very particular in removing the fat, but it is more
delicate to do so.
SCALLOPED PISH.
Break the fish into pieces; pour over the beaten yolk of
an egg; sprinkle with pepper and salt; strew with bread
crumbs, chopped parsley, and grated lemon-peel; and
squeeze in the juice of a lemon. Drop over a little warmed
butter, and brown before the fire.
SMOKED BEEP.
As there are seldom conveniences in private kitchens for
smoking meats, it will generally bo the boat and chofipowt
plan to have them ready prepared for cooking. All kinds
of meat, smoked and salted, are to bo had in groat perfec-
tion at all the Hebrew butchers.
OHORISSA,
That most refined and savoury of all sausages is to bo
procured at the same places. It is not only excellent fried
in slices with poached eggs, or stewed with rice, but im-
parts a delicious flavour to stows, soups, and sauces, and is
one of the most useful resources of the Jewish kitohon.
To Make Choejssas.—Take of almonds or nuts Jib., chopped or
bruised p scrape tho insides of two apples; add 2 oza. of moist augur,
ioz. of cinnamon, and two tablespoonfuls of raisin wino. Mix tlio
whole well together, and servo up in glass dishes, on tlio table, during
the first two days of the Passover.
*»* The above recipe was obtained from Mr, Barnett, pastrycook,
Melbourne; and Mrs. Isaacs, of the London Tavern, in that city,
certifies as to its being " first chop.”


IMP AN AD A.
Out in small pieces, halibut, plaice, or soles ; place them
in a deep dish, in alternate layers, with slices of potatoes
and dumplings made of short crust paste, sweetened with
brown sugar, seasoned well with small pickles, pepper,
gherkins, or "West India pickles ; throw over a little water
or butter, warmed, and bake it thoroughly.
“And whatsovcr hath not Ixna and scales ye may not eat, it is unclean
unto you.”—Dent. xiy. 10.
KINSMIL MEAT.
Place a small piece of the rump of beef, or the under-
cut of a sirloin, in a deep pan, with three pints of Vinegar,
two ounces of carraway-seeds tied in a muslin bag, salt,
pepper, and spices; cover it down tight, and bake
thoroughly in a slow oven.
TO HASH BEEP.
The meat should be put on the lire in a little broth or
gravy, with a little fried onion, pepper, salt, and a spoonful
of ketchup, or any other sauce at hand; let it simmer for
about ton minutes, then mix hi a cup a little flour with a
little of the gravy, and pour it into the stewpan to thicken
the rest; sippets of toast should be served with hashes ; a
little port wine, a pinch of saffron, or a piece of ohomm,
may bo considered great improvements.
A-LA-MODE BEEF, OE SOUK MEAT.
Cover a piece of the ribs of beef, boned and filleted, or a
piece of the round, with vinegar diluted with water ; season
with onions, pepper, salt, whole allspice, and three or four
bayloaves ; add a cupful of raspings, and let the whole
stow gently for throe or four hours, according to the weight
of the meat; this dish is excellent when cold. A rump-
stalk stewed in the same way will be found exceedingly
fine.
BEEF AND BEANS.
Take a piece of brisket of beef, cover it with water;
when boiling, skim off the fat; add one quartern of fresh
beans cut small; two onions, out in quarters; season with
pepper and salt, and when nearly done, take, a desert-spoon-
ful of flour, one of coarse brown sugar’, and a large' tea-


cupful of vinegar; mix them together, and stir in with
the beans, and continue stirring for about half an
hour longer.
Assyrian BANdtiETS, —Prom casual notices in tie Bible and in
ancient history, -we learn that the Assyrians as well as those who
succeeded them in the Empire of Asia, wore fond of public entertain-
ments and festivities, and that they displayed on such occasions the
greatest luxury and magnificence. The Assyrian Wng, called
Nabuekodonoser in the Book of Judith, on returning from ius victo-
rious expedition against Arphaxad, feasted with his whole army for
one hundred and twenty days. The same is related by the Greek
authors of Sardanapalus, after his groat victory over the combined
armies of Modes. The Book of Esther describes the splendour of the
festivals given by the Babylonian king. The princes and nobles of
his vast dominions were feasted for one hundred and eighty days ; and
for ono week all the people of Susa assembled in the gardens of his
palace, and were served in vessels of gold. The richest tapestries
adorned the halls and tents, and the most costly conchas were prepared,
for the guests, wine was served in abundance, and women, including
even the wives and concubines of the monarch, were frequently
present to add to the magnificence of the scene. According to Quin-
tus Ourtiua, not only did hired female performers exhibit on these
occasions, but the wives and daughters of the nobles, forgetting their
modesty, danced before the guests, divesting themselves even of their
garments. Wine was drunk immoderately. Wlien Babylon was
taken by the Persians, the inhabitants were celebrating one of their
great festivals, and oven tho guards were intoxicated, —Zamrifs
" tfitieveh.”
FKICOI'IDELLE.
Prepare cold veal or poultry, add a I’reueh roll soaked in
white gravy, with sweet herbs, pepper, salt, parsley, and
essence of lemon ; mix all well with two or three eggs, and
form it into shapes; sprinkle with crumbs of bread, and
place in a frying-pan as deep as a shallow saucepan ; when
they have fried enough to become set, pour enough white
gravy in the pan to cover the fricondelles, and let them
stew in it gently; place them both in the same dish, and
pour over any woU-thiekened sauce that may he selected.
MUTTON STEWED WITH GELEEY.
'Take the end of a nock of mutton, or a fillet taken from
the leg or shoulder, place it in a stewpau, with enough
water to cover it; throw in a carrot and a turnip, and
season, but not too highly; when nearly done, remove the
meat and strain off the gravy; then return both to the stew-
pan, with forcemeat halls, and some fine celery cut in


small pieces; let all stew together till perfectly done, then
stir in the yolks of two eggs, a little flour, and the juice
of half a lemon, which must be mixed with a little ot the
gravy before pouring into the stewpan, and care 'must be
taken, to prevent its curdling.
AMNASTIOH.
_ Stew gently one pint of rice in one quart of strong gravy
till it begins to swell, then add an onion stuck with cloves,
a bunch of sweet herbs, and a chicken stuffed with force-
meat ; let it stew with the rice till thoroughly done, then
take it up, and stir in the rice the yolks of four eggs and
the juice of a ler ion ; serve the fowl in the same dish with
the rice, which should be coloured to a fine yellow with
saffron
FOWLS STEWED WITH RICE AND CHORISSA.
Boil a fowl in sufficient water* or gravy to cover it.
When boiling for ten minutes, slum off the fat, and add
half a pound of rice and one pound of chorism cut in about
four pieces; season with a little white pepper, salt, and a
pinch of saffron to colour it, and then stew till the rice is
thoroughly tender. There should be no gravy when served,
but the rice should be perfectly moist.
CHICKEN PUDDING.
Line a basin with a good beef-suet paste, and fill it with
chicken prepared in the following maimer:—Out up a
chicken, lightly fry the pieces, then place them in a stew-
pan, with thin slices of ohorism, or, if at hand, slices of
smoked veal. Add enough good beef gravy to cover them,
season with mushroom essence or powder, pepper, salt,
and a, very small quantity of nutmeg and mace. Simmer
gently for a quarter of an hour, and fill the pudding. Pour
over part of the gravy, and keep the rest to be poured over
the pudding when served in the dish. The pudding, when
filled, must be covered closely with the paste, the end of
which should bo wetted with a paste-brush, to make it
adhere closely.
SPICED BEEP.
Take a line thick piece of brisket of beefj not fat; let it
lay three days in pickle, take it out and.mb in a mixture of


spices, consisting of equal quantities of ground allspice,
black pepper, cloves, ginger, and nutmegs, and a little
brown sugar. Eepeat this daily for a week, then cover
it with, pounded dry sweet herbs, roll or tic it tightly, put
it into a pan with a little water, and bake slowly for eight
hours ; then take it out, untie it, and put a heavy weight
upon it. This is a fine relish when eaten cold.
Swedish Oookbky. —The art of cookery in Sweden, as a national
one, is not in ii very advanced state, hut the manner in which they
dross game, though very unlike our own, is, I think, preferable, Tho
flesh is first perforated, and little hits of lard inserted, and tha birds
ara served in a quantity of white sauce, having quite a different
appearance to our half-roasted game. All that is implied by roasting
is, of course, done in ovens; and ren sieJi, or roasted roindoor, is served,
in the same maimer, with sauce. There are three descriptions of
cookery here—French, Gorman, and purely Swedish. Soma of the
pure national dishes, as lut-Jkk , on Christmas Eve, are most extraor-
dinary things, lut-flsk being' tho stock-fish steeped in solution of
potash, until, in fact, decomposition has. taken place. On Christmas
Bvc, tho groat evening of Sweden, this thing is boiled and eaten with
oil sauce; and this, together with grot, which is simply boiled rice,
form tha Christmas dishes of Sweden, just as roast beef and plum-
pudding do of England. Tha smell of tha lut-flsk is terrific, hut a
tine Swede clings to his national dish on Jul-afton as much as any
beef-eating Englishman does to Ms. Tho poor often substitute boiled
corn for rice ; and at all times rye-porridge, made in milk, not waiter,
is their common food. The number of meals might seem to make
amends for their quality. Pish is almost tho staple food; quantities
are salted in tho autumn; and oven, in winter fish are taken in. a
most ingenious manner from Under ice. —A Simmer in MoHltern
JEurope, by Sulim Buuhury.
A WHITE FEIOANDEAU OF VEAL.
Take four or five pounds of breast of veal, or ffllef, from
the shoulder; stuff it with a fine-flavoured veal stuffing,
and put it into a stewpan, with water sufficient to cover it;
a calf’s foot cut in pieces is sometimes added. Season with
one onion, a blade of mace, white pepper and salt, and a
sprig of parsley. Stew the whole gently until the meat is
quite tender, then skim and strain the gravy, and stir in
the beaten yolks of four eggs and the juice of two lemons,
previously mixed smoothly with a portion of the gravy.
Button mushrooms or pieces of celery, stewed with tho
veal, are sometimes added by way of varying the flavour.
Egg and forcemeat halls garnish the dish, when required
to look elegant it should lie pique.


DESOAIDES.
Take the livers of chickens or any other poultry ; Blew
thorn gently in a little good gravy,‘seasoned with a little
onion, mushroom essence, popper and salt. When tender
remove the livers, place them on a pasteboard, and mince
them; return them to the saucepan, and stir iu the yolks
of ouo or two eggs, according to tho quantity of liver, until
the gravy becomes thick. Have a round of toast ready on
a hot plate, and servo it on the toast. This is a very nice
luncheon or supper dish.
POTATO SHAVING-S.
Take four lino large potatoes, and having pooled thorn,
continue to cut them up as if in ribbons, of equal width ;
then throw the shavings into a fryiug-pan, and fry of a
light brown; they must be constantly moved with a silver
fork to keep tho pieces separate. They should bo laid on a
glass to drain, and placed in tho dish lightly.
PEAS STEWED WITH OIL.
Put half a pint of peas into a stewpan, half a lottueo
chopped small, a little mint, a small onion, cut up, two
table-spoonfuls of oil, and a desert-spoonful of powdered
sugar, with witter sulllcierit to cover the peas, watching
from time to time that they tio not become too dry; lot
them stew gently, taking enro that they do not burn, till
they are perfectly soft. When done they should look of a
yellowish brown, .french beans, brocoli, and greens, stowed
m tho above manner, will bo found excellent.
STEWED GIBLETS.
Scald ouo or more wots of giblets ; sot them on tho fire
with a little veal or chicken, or both, in a good gravy;
season to taste, thicken tho gravy, and colour it with
browning, flavour with mushroom powder and lemon-juice,
and one glass of white wine; forcemeat balls should
bo added a few moments before serving, and garnish with
thin slices of hard-boiled eggs.
Tub Waoanda Mode or Ooiikino.—Wo had a cow killed to-day.
Although nil its “joints” wore at my disposal., tho Boodww nut thorn bo
email, and into ouch cviuw-gminod looking phioos, that when served up
thoy worn very uninviting ; thorn was no curving about thorn, hocausn
tho moat was cut up while warm, Tho Waganda, on tho contrary, out


ioints as wo do at homo, the Seedees oaffing their cooking
“ioUw' or, •• i I’Anglais,” meaning- that solid joints «e always
When hoilod they are sm-rounded with. plantain, leaf; a layer
ijeeled plantain is put in a bundle .at the top, and all placed m an
earthen pot, which is covered- with leaves as a lid. I took to
this cookery, and found it answered admirably.— Grant's Walk Aereu
Jfrk '\o STEW SPANISH BEANS AND PEAS.
Soak the beans over night in cold water; they must bo
stewed in only sufficient water to cover them, with two
table-spoonfuls of oil, a little pepper and salt, and white
sugar. When done they should be perfectly soft and
‘hfiUCi.Gl*
CHORISSA OMELETTE.
Add to the eggs, after they are well beaten, half a lea-
cupful of finely-minced chorissa ; this omelette must be
lightly fried on both sides, or the salamander held over long
enough to dress the olorissa.
HELENA PIE,
Mince finely cold veal or chicken, with smoked beef or
tongue, season well, add lemon juice, ami a little nutmeg ;
let it simmer in a small quantity of good beef or voal
gravy ; while on the fire, stir in tho j oiks of four eggs, put
ft in a dish to cool, and cover it with a rich pastry and
bake it.
SOLA d'AMOR.
The recipe for this much celebrated and exquisite con-
fection is simpler than may be supposed from its elaborate
appearance; it requires chiefly care, precision, and atten-
tion, Clarify two pounds ’of white sugar ; to ascertain,
when it is of proper consistency, drop a spoonful in cold
water, form it into a ball, and try if it sounds when struck
against a glass ; when it is thus tested, take the yolka of
twenty eggs, mix them up gently, and pass them through a
sieve; then have ready a funnel, the whole of which must
be about the size of a vermicelli; hold the funnel over the
sugar while it is boiling over a charcoal fire, pour the egg
through, stirring the sugar all the time, arid taking- care
to hold the funnel at such a distance from the sugar as
to admit of the egg dripping into it. When the egg has
been a fevy minutes in the sugar, it will be hard enough to
take out with a silver fork, and must then be placed on a


drainer; continue adding egg to the boiling sugar till
enough, is obtained. There should he previously prepared
one pound of sweet almonds finely pounded and 'boiled in
sugar, clarified with orange rose-water only; place in a
dish a layer of this paste, over which place a layer of citrons
cut in thin slices, and then a thick layer of the egg pre-
pared as above ; continue working thus in alternate layers
till high enough to look handsome. It should ho piled in
the form of a cone, and the egg should form the last layer.
It must then he placed in a gentle oven till it becomes a
little set, and the last layer slightly crisp ; a few minutes
will effect this. It must ho served in the dish in which
it is baked, and is generally ornamented with myrtle and
gold and silver leaf.
SUPERIOR RECIPE POR ALMOND PUDDING.
Beat up the yolks of ten eggs, and the whites of seven,
add half a pound of sweet almonds pounded finely, half a
pound of white sugar, half an ounce of hitter almonds,
and a tableapoonful of orange-flower water; when tho-
roughly mixed, grease a dish, put in the pudding, and bake
in a brisk oven; when done, strew powdered sugar over the
top, or, which is exceedingly fine, pour over clarified sugar
with orange-flower water.
SOPA D’ORO; OR, GOLDEN SOUP.
Clarify a pound of sugar in a quarter of a pint of water,
aud the same quantity of orange-flower water; cut into
pieces the size of dice, a thin slice of toasted bread, or cut:
it into shapes with a paste-cutter; throw it, while hot, into
the sugar, with an ounce of sweet almonds pounded very
finely; then take the beaten yolks of four eggs, pour over
the sugar and bread, stir gently, and lot it simmer a few
minutes. Servo in a deep glass dish, sprinkled over with
pounded cinnamon.
Tub Meals ox* the Javanese. —The Javans have usually two
meals in tlio day ; emo just before noon, and one between seven and
sight o’clock in the evening; the former, which is the principal meal,
corresponding with the European dinner, and distinguished hy the
town fadngdn andn, or, the day meal; the latter termed miwjdM ndnyi,
or evening meal. They have no regular meal corroßjHmtlmg with
Km-opoan breakfast,' but those who go abroad early in the morning
usually partake of a basin of colibo, and mmo Hoe ookos, before they


quit their homes, or purchase something of the kind ut one ol tlui
numerous ndronys, or stalls, ’which lino the public romls, and tiro to
the common people as so many coffee or eating-houses would lie to tlui
Europeans; rice, coffee, cakes, boiled rice, soups, ready-dressed vege-
tables being at all times exposed on them. What is thus taken try
the Javans in tho morning, to break the last, is oansidorud as a whot,
and termed sump. — Java, by Sir Thomas JiuJ/h's,
BOLA TOLEDO.
Take a pound of 'butter, and warm it over tho fire, with
a little milk; then put it into a pan with a pound of flour,
six beaten eggs, a quarter of a pound of beaten sweet
almonds, and two tablespoonfuls of yeast. Make these
ingredients into a light paste, and set it before the tiro to
rise; thou grease a deep dish, and place in a layer of tho
paste; then some egg prepared as for bola tVmnor; then
slices of citron, and a layer of egg marmalade ; sprinkle
each layer with cinnamon, and fill the dish with alternate
layers. A rich puff paste should line the dish, which
ought to be baked in a brisk oven; after which sugar clari-
fied with orange-flower water must ho poured over till tins
syrup has thoroughly penetrated the bola.
A LUOTION, OK A EACHAIL.
Make thin nouillos paste, cut into strips of about two
inches wide; leave it to dry; then boil flic strips in a little
water, and drain it through a colander; when the water
is strained off, mix it with beaten eggs, white sugar, a little
fresh butter, and grated lemon-peel; hake or boil in a
shape lined with preserved cherries ; when turned out,
pour over a fine custard, or cream, flavoured -with brandy,
and sweetened to taste.
PEENESAS.
Take one pint of milk, stir In as much Hour us will bring:
it to the consistency of hasty pudding; boil it till it Ins-
cornea thick, let it cool, and beat it up with ton eggs; when
smooth, take a spoonful at a time, and drop it into a frying-
pan in which there is a good quantity of boiling clarified
butter; fry of a light brown, and servo with clarified sugar
flavoured with lemon essence.
OHEJADOS.
Clarify a pound of sugar in half a pint of water, peel and
grate a moderately-sized cocoa-nut, add it to the syrup,


and let it simmer till perfectly soft, putting rose-water
occasionally to prevent its 'becoming too dry; stir it to
prevent burning. Let it cool, and mix it with the beaten
yolks of six eggs. Make a thin nouillcs pastry, cut it into
rounds the size of a teacup, pinch up the edges deep enough
to form a shape, fill them with the sweetmeat, and bake of
a light brown. A rich puff paste may be substituted for
the nouilles pastry if preferred.
MAOEOTES.
Take a pound of .'French roll dough, six ounces of fresh
butter, two eggs, as much flour ns will be requisite to knead
together; roll it in the form of a long French roll, and cut
it in thin long ’slices; set them at a short distance from
the Are to rise, and then fry them in the best Florence
oil. When nearly cold, dip them in clarified sugar,
flavoured with essence of lemon.
TAM BE MOY.
Soak three-quarters of a pound of savoury biscuits in a
quart of milk; add six ounces of fresh butter, four eggs,
one ounce of candied orange-peel, the same quantity of
lemon-peel, and one ounce of citron; mix all well together.
Sweeten with white sugar, and bake in a quick oven; when
nearly done, spread over the top the whites of tho egga
well whisked, and return it to the oven.
Mmxs or to;e Siamese, —Tho tables of tho opulent are covered
with a guoeoesion of dishes. In our intercourse with tho high autho-
rities, it was their purpose to entertain us in European stylo, and
wonderfully well did thoy succeed. On ono occasion, however, I
requested th oKromHhmng (King'sßrother) to givo us a genuine Siamoao
repast. On arriving wo found the tahlo spread in tho accustomed and
approvod.lfnropcnn-Oriontal stylo, with nn abundance of plate, glasses,
wines, soups, fish) roasted and boiled meet, hors d’auvres, with a
variety of pastry, jollies, &o.; but, apart, tho Prince had provided
what he called a Siamese dinner for one, and I imagine tho succession
of dishes could have been scarcely loss than sixty or seventy. Ho
said he wished to gratify my curiosity, but that courtesy required him
to entertain mo.according to tho usages of my country, anti not of
Siam. * * * Dined with Prince Krom liluang ’Wongsa.
An excellent dinner: tho soup highly spicod; birds' nests, sharks’
fins, and soa-slugs woro excellent. There was roasted pig, game,
delicious fruits, the most remarkable of which was tho durian, pre-
pared with cocoa-nut milk, which ovon tho impugnors of the durian.
(1 am not one) declared unoxooptionably excellent, A Siamese dinner,


consisting of nearly one hundred email dishes, was laid on the floor,
and not Being touched, was sent me in the evening. —Sir John Bow-
ring at Bmgholc.
GREEN STICK.
Make into a stiff paste one pint of biscuit-powder, a
little brown sugar, grated lemon-peel, six eggs, and three-
quarters of a pound of warmed fresh butter; then prepare
four apples chopped finely, a quarter of a pound of sweet
almonds blanched and chopped, half a pound of stoned
raisins, a little nutmeg grated, half a pound of coarse brown
sugar, and a glass of white wine, or a little brandy.
Mix the above ingredients together, and put them on
a slow fire to simmer for half an hour, and place in
.a dish to cool. Make the paste into the form of small
dumplings, fill them with fruit, and bake them. When put
in the oven, pour over a syrup of brown sugar-and-wator,
flavoured with lemon-juice.
HAMAN’S FRITTERS,
Take two spoonfuls of the best Florence oil, scald it,
and, when hot, mix with it one pound of flour; add- four
beaten eggs, and make it into a paste; roll it out thin, and
out it into pieces about four inches square; let them dry,
and fry them in oil. The moment the pieces arc put into
the frying-pan they must be drawn up with silver skeweo
into different forms, according to fancy. A few minutes
is sufficient to fry them; they should be crisp when
done.
EcmmsoN Ciiusoe at Dinner. —It would have made a stoic Simla
to have seen me and my little family sit down to dinner; there was my
majesty the Prince and Lord of the Island; I had 'the lives of all my
subjects at my absolute command; I could hang-, draw, give liberty
and take it away; and no rebels among all my subjects. Then, to boc
liow like a Icing I dined too, all alono, attended by my servants. Poll,
as if lie had been my favourite, was the only person permitted to talk
to me. My dog, who was now grown very old and crazy, and had
found no species to multiply hid kind after, sat always at my right
hand; and two cats, one on one side of the table, and one on the
other, expecting now and then a hit from my hand, aa a mark of special
■favour,— Defoe.
WAFLERS.
Mix a cup and a half of thick yeast with a little
warm .milk, and set it, with two pounds of flour, before
the fire to rise; then mix with them one pound of fresh


butter, ten eggs, a grated nutmeg, a quarter of a pint
of orange-flower water, a little powdered cinnamon, and
three pints of warm milk. When the batter is perfectly
smooth, butter the irons, fill them with it, close them down
tightly, and put them between the bars of a Might eloar
fire; -when sufficiently done, they will slip easily out of the
irons.
WaUor irons can be obtained from any ironmonger of the Hebrew
persuasion, or, indeed, of others.
LAMPLIOH.
Take a pound of currants, the same quantity of raisins
and sugar, a little citron, ground cloves and cinnamon, with
eight apples, finely chopped. Mix all together. Then have
ready a rich paste; cut into small triangles ; fill them with
the fruit, like puffs, and lay them in a deep dish; let the
pieces be placed closely, and, when the dish is full, pour
over one ounce of fresh butter, melted in a tea-cupful of
clarified sugar, flavoured with essence of lemon, and bate
•in an oven, not too brisk.
It is said that tlio Jews consider Mount Moriah, upon which tho
Mohammedan Mooune of Omar is now standing, to bo tho only proper
place for the offering' of their sacrifices, in virtue of its having boon
the consecrated site of bolomon’s temple ; and tlia fact of its being in
the hands of tho nnoiroumciaed constitutes tho main, impediment to 'the
reinstitathm of thoir sacrificial rites.— Biatcr'a Trophmy, ns to
Napoleon and tho Coming Hattie of Armageddon.
STAirm,
This is composed of the limit, &c., prepared as above; but
the dish is lined with the paste, and tho fruit is laid with
alternate layers of paste till the dish is filled. The pas to
must form the top layer; clarified sugar is poured over
before it is put in the oven.
Amesucan' Cookbiiy. —When wo comp to Mir. Hamilton’s inoro
.practicalremarks; [“A New Atmosphere,” by Sail Mtmiltmi, Bouton]
it appears that tho groat source of tho misery and ruin of American
women is cooking. One generation after another, of tender and
beautiful, is destroyed by tho gigantic demon of the hitchon. “Wo
are pre-eminently an eating people. Our women are cooking tliom-
solyob to death, and cooking tho nation into a materialism worses than
death.” So degraded is human nature on tho American continent
that, if any one asks you of a given family whether they live well, you
may be sure ho is no£ inquiring if they are honourable, if they conduct
thoir lives on Christian principles, if they are courteous, and soli-


respectful, and golf-controlled, but whether thoy have highly-spicod
and numerous moats, much cake and pie, many sauces and jmwsrvoa.’'
It is all very well to revel in dainties, hut ho w horrible if “ it is a soul
that flakes in the pastry, if it is a heart that is embrowned in tllo
gravies, if leisure and ‘freshness and breath of sympathy and keen
enjoyment have been frittered away in the fritters, and simmered
away in the sweetmeats, and battered away in the puddings.”—.
Saturday Itwmv.
PASSOVER PUDDING-,
Mix equal quantities of biscuit-powder and sirred suet,
half the quantity of currants and raisins, a little spice and
sugar, with an ounce of candied peels, and five well-
beaten eggs ; make these into a stiff batter, and boil well,
and serve with a sweet sauce. This pudding is excellent
baked in a pudding-tin ; it must be turned out when
served.
PASSOVER FRITTERS.
Mix into a smooth batter a tea-cupful of biscuit-powder,
with beaten eggs, and sweeten with white sifted sugar; add
grated lemon-peel, and a spoonful of orange-flower water,
and fry of a light brown. The flavour may bo- varied by
substituting a few beaten almonds, with one or two bitter,
instead of the orange-flower water.
In thn first month, on the fourtonnth day of the month, at oven, ya
shall oat unleavened broad until the ouo-and-twontiofli day of tho
month at even. Seven days shall there bo no leaven found in your
homos; for whosoever oatoth that which is leavened, even that soul
shall bo out off from, the congregation of Israel, whether ho bo a
stranger or bom in the land. Yo shall oat nothing- leavened; in all
your haUtaiions shall yo cat unleavened broad. —Mxatlus xii. 18, 19, 20,
Note.—-There ore said to be about five millions of lows scattered
throughout the world.
PASSOVER FRITTERS (Superior).
Mix into a smooth batter a toa-cup of passovor biscuit-
powder, with beaten eggs, and sweeten with white-sifted
sugar; add grated lemon-peel, and a spoonful of orange-
flower water, and fry of a light brown. The flavour may be
varied by substituting a few beaten almonds, with one or
two bitter instead of tho orange-flower water.
SIESTA CAKE.
_ Tate one pound of butter, warm it over the fire with a
little milk, pour it into a pan with a pound of flour, six


eggs, a quarter of a pound of sweet almonds, finely pow-
dered, and two table-spoonfuls of yeast; beat these ingre-
dients well together into a light paste, and set it before the
fire to rise. 'Butter the inside of the pan, and fill it with
alternate layers of the paste, and of porinded almonds,
sugar, citron, and cinnamon. When baked and while hot,
make holes through the siesta with a small silver skewer,
taking care not to break it, and pour over clarified sugar
until it is perfectly soaked through.
BUTTER OAKES.
Take equal quantities of butter and sugar, say half a
pound of each, grate the rind of a lemon, add a little cin-
namon, and as much flour as will form it into a paste, with
spice and eggs; roll it out, cut it into small cakes, and
bake, A piece of candied orange or lemon peel may bo put
on the top of each cake.
Good Livmo ron Fevers.—Dr. Graves, to whom medicine is
umoli indebted for tlio introduction of a rational dietary in the treat-
ment of lovers, when going round his convalescent ward one morn-
ing, and expatiating on tho healthy appearance of some who had
recovered from severe typhus, remarked to tho students who nooom-
S anted him, that it was all tho effect of good feeding, “ .And Jest,”- add
e, " whoa 1 am gone, you may bo at a logs for an epitaph for mo, lot
mo give you ono in throo words—‘Ho fed fevers,’ "Scrap-
A JUDITHA.
Put some gooseberries into a saucepan with a little
water; when they are soft, pulp them through a sieve, and
add several well-boaten yolks of eggs, and sweeten with
white sugar; have ready a shape of biscuit ice, or any other
cream ice that may be preferred; take off a thick slice of
the ice from the top carefully, and without breaking, so
that it may bo replaced on the ice. Scoop out a large por-
tion of the ice, which may bo mixed with the gooseberry
cream, and fill up the hollow with it. Cover the shape
with the piece that was removed and servo. This is an
elegant dish. The ice should be prepared in a sound
mould. Brown bread ice is particularly well adapted to a
Juditha.
A PLAIN BOLA.
Take three-quarters of a pound of white sugar, three-
quarters of a pound of fresh butter, two eggs, one pound


and. a half-of flour, three spoonfuls of yeast, a little milk,,
and two ounces of citron, cut thin, and mix into a light,
paste; bake in a tin, and strew powdered sugar and cinna-
mon over it before bating. The above ingredients are often
baked in small tins or cups.
OIL TWIST.
Take half a quartern of dough, one gill of the best
Horence oil, half a pound of currants, the same of moist
sugar, and a little cinnamon ; mix all well together, make it
up in the form of a twist, and bake it.
“ And if thy oblation he a meat offering taken, in the frying-pan, it
shall he made of fine flour with oil."—Jew. ii. 7.
MATSO OAKES.
Make a stiff paste with biscuit-powder and milk and
water; add a little butter, the yolk of an egg, and a little
white sugar; cut into pieces, and mould with the hand,
and bake in a brisk oven. These cakes should not be too
thin.
Advbktmskbnt in Memo-tone “ Aucras.”—Motzas.—The Associa-
tion are now ready to deliver. Price BM. per lb. J. Marks, 223
Blizahoth-straot.
PRIED MATSOS.
Soak some of the thickest matsoa in milk, taking care
they do not break, then fry in boiling fresh butter. This
is a very nice method of preparing thorn for breakfast or
tea.
Eatdju and Diunkino. —Our great historian, Lord Macaulay,
dosorihes an Admiral and First Lord of tho Admiralty in tho roign of
William and Maty, as always eating and imbibing claret. “ There
was scarcely an hour of tho day or tho night when he was not under
the influence of, olarot;” and tho Prinoo Goorgo of Denmark is
marked as “ a dull man,'whoso ohiof pleasure was derived from his
dinner and his hottlo.” Charles tho Second remarked, “ I have tried
Prinoo Goorgo and I have tried him drunk, and drunk or sober,
there is nothing in him.”
AN EXCELLENT RECIPE FOR A FRUIT
CHARLOTTE.
lino a jelly-mould with fine picked strawberries, which
must be first dipped into some liquid jelly, to make them
adhere closely; then fill tho mould with some strawberry
cream, as follows; —Take a pottle of strawberries, mix them


with half a pound of white sugar; rub this through a sieve,
and add to it a pint of whipped cream and one ounce and a
half of dissolved isinglass; pour it into the mould, which
must he immersed in ice until ready to serve, and then
carefully turned out on the dish, and garnished according
to fancy.
A CAKE WITHOUT BUTTER.
Beat well five eggs, to which add six ounces of flour;
flavour with beaten almonds, and add, if liked, thin slices of
citron; bake in a mould in a moderate oven.
Tlie old saying of “ Dining -with Duke Humphrey,” was in allusion
to persona who used to walk in St. Paul's Church during dinner time,
Humphrey Duke of Gloucester being a man of great hospitality, and
supposed to have boon buried in St. Paul’s in 144-7.— Scrap,
MATSO DIET BREAD.
Simmer one pound of white sugar in a quarter of a pint
of water, which pour hot upon eight well-beaten eggs; heat
till cold, when add one pound of matso flour, a little grated
lemon-peel, and hake in a prepared tin, or in small tins.
The cako must bo removed while hut.
Jaws’ BtwAi). —ln tho Tlantamm of Cowley wo find it noted that
“in old time, ths wad of tho white poppy, parched, was served up as
.a dessert.” By this wo arc reminded that white pappy goods arc oaten
to this day upon bread made exclusively for Jews. The “ twist"
bread is generally so prepared, by brushing over the outside upper
■crust with og‘g, and sprinkling on it tho seeds.—“ Things not Qemrally
Known.”
BREAKFAST CAKE.
Make a paste of half a pound of flour, one ounce of
butter, a very little salt, two eggs, and a table-spoonful of
milk ; roll it out, but first set it to rise before the fire ; cut
it into cakes tho size of a small cheese-plate, sprinkle with
flour, and bake in a tin in a brisk oven, or on a girdle.
They should be buttered hot, and served quickly.
Many of tho preceding rocipos arc from tho pen of a lady, who,
several yours since, edited the “ Jewish Manual,” a useful work, now-
out of print. And although written for the peculiar people to which,
she belonged, wo do not see why others should not use them occasion-
ally as a change, mure especially as they arc easy to make, and of a
good practical quality. Nay, wo will go further and attest that tho
Jewish otiisim is unexceptionable in flavour, and more wholesome than
the generality of Christian dishes, from the acid mvariably used in
their composition, Chemists inform us that acids arc a corrective to


putrefaction. If the reader is sceptical aa to the Jewish cookery, let
lin. taste and try. The authoress of the -work alluded to, ms said to
have been a female of rank, of the tribe of Israel
“ A gracious woman retalneth lionour.*’— Proverbs xi. 10.
The earliest mention of the lewa in the annals of Great Britain, is
in the “ Cmumiml Exceptions,” published by Bgbright, Archbishop of
Tort, in 740.
Golden Sentences. —A good wife is Heaven's noblest gift, A
housewife never allows herself to bo disturbed from her work. Even
while conversing she is busy spinning. An old, experienced woman,
in a household is an ornament to it like a pearl. Ha who lives in an
unmarried state knows no joys, none of tho blessings of home, and is
without support, Tha man who stands at the death-hod of Ms wife,
feels like those who saw tho temple of Jerusalem reduced to ashes;
for the wife is tha tomplo in which each man finds repose and, quiet;
whore ho rests after tho labour of the day, and where ha con. give
expression to hia feelings, joyful and mournful. God has given to
woman more ability of judging correctly than to man.—Me Jewish
Talmud.
Mosaic Law. —Tho ecclesiastical precautions always adopted to ensure the
purity of the Passover diet, and that It should ho composed of the best and
simplest materials, are conducted with tile severest scrutiny, in obedience to a
written code, and are extremely minute and rigorous, Tho Passover food con-
sists of » mixture of tho finest flour with the purest water, to form biscuit or
unleavened bread ; and it is cotcu In reference to the Divine cciamnnd to
observe the Passover, in commemoration of the deliverance from the land of
Egypt .—Bxtmet from the “ Aernmit of the Pemieutton of the Jem at Dam mem,"
ip A Solomom, Mtq., Lord Mayor of London in J 865.
HWSTJSD BT WALKER, MAT AND CO., 99 BOUEICE STIUSB3D TTBBT.
