

HEDLEY VICARS:
DELIVERED BEFORE THE MEMBERS OF THE ft
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION, R
W
Sydney, July, 1858.
THE HON. H. PRINCE, M.L.C., IN THE CHAIR.
MR. THOMAS SMITH,
Of Providence Chapel, Parramattastreet.
PUBLISHED BT SPECIAL REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
. H. BANCROFT, 39, PARRAMATTA-STREET;
F CODNER, NEWS AGENT, &c , BRICKFIELD-HILL;
AND ALL BOOKSELLER?.
V T V A' »
Price One Shilling.




FL’5%
/
HEDLEY VICARS:
% ftd a r t
DELIVERED BEFORE THE MEMBERS OF THE
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION,
Sydney, July, 1858.
THE HON. H. PRINCE, M L.C., IN THE CHAIR.
MR. THOMAS SMITH,
Of Providence Chapel, Parramatta-street.
PUBLISHED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
H. BANCROFT, 39, PARRAMATTA-STREET;
F CODNER, NEWS AGENT, &c., BRICKFIELD-HILL;
AND AXL BOOKSELLERS.




HEDLEY YICARS.
When the year 1850 dawned, the world was wrapt in the
garment of universal peace. The sword rested in its
scabbard; the political cry was retrenchment in our
army and navy; economists, as legislators, were popular men.
1851 came—that year of wonders —when a stupendous glass
palace held the chief products of the nations of the world :
when all mankind seemed bent upon uniting in a peaceful
compact to forward industry, and to weave the web of firm
attachment; but it was destined that the clear blue sky of
peace should ere long be over-shadowed by the dark clouds of
oppression and ambition: for in the North the restless Czar
rose, and, like the hawk, stood quivering o er the timid bird,
whose scream for help woke the nations from their dream
of quiet: meek-eyed Peace wrapt herself in sable garments,
and War, with all her dark attendants, rushed upon the scene.
The thoughts of men are changed. The quiet of the little
village is broken in upon, and men with fife and drum, and
willing volunteers, fill the air with martial music. The plough-
boy dreams of glory, drops his reins, and leaves his work for
other hands to do. All speak of war. Governments are busy ;
reviews take place on land and sea j our royal Sovereign in
her Fairy yacht glides proudly midst her noble sons, as they
pass through their evolutions upon the bosom of the placid
deep. From one end of the land to the other the theme is
—War.
At yonder ale-house door, in that sequestered spot, the men
of note are met, anxiously discussing the stirring nature of the
M33SSI FtSSfoS


times; when lo ! a horn is sounded ; all eyes are turned in the
direction from which the sound proceeds—the mail has arrived
at the Blue Bell, in Stroud ; the papers are soon handed from
the bag ; and the great reader of the village, after adjusting his
glasses, and mounting a four-foot elevation, declares with his
stentorian voice, from the third edition of the “ Times,” that
the Czar will have the Holy Places.
What scenes of bloodshed and misery has this fair world
witnessed since 1853 ! events have rapidly passed by like the
scene-shifting of a drama. There was Sinope, a second murder
of the Innocents —where cowardly assassins stole in the morn-
ing mist upon their unsuspecting victims, and foully murdered
them.—Scutari, with its deadly climate, where the flower of the
English army was wasted neath a pestilence more dreadful
than the battle-field. —Bomarsund, blown to atoms. >—Kalafat,
where Russians retreated before the sick man.—Silistria, where
the young Butler and Nasmith, names dear to Englishmen,
inspired a devoted confidence in downcast and dispirited men :
so that they defeated Gortschakoff with his unnumbered host.
The landing in the Crimea of our noble army. Then Alma—
who can forget Alma?—where our brave fellows rushed
through sheets of fire, leaving the dead lane, which the
Muscovite bullets had made, and drove proud Menschikoff
from the heights where lie had assembled the pride of Russia,
“ when the ancient fire of English chivalry was rekindled, and
burnt as brightly as in days of yoreand the conquerors
marched through paths of blood to victory. The master flank
march. The announcement that Sebastopol was taken, when
ivy’d towers rang out the joyful sound. Then came the
bitter disappointment —the commencement of the attack—the
trenches—the wreck of the Tiger—the unsuccessful attack by
sea, when granite proved harder than oak—the sparing of
Odessa, that bright page in the history of the war—the death-
charge of Balaclava, where our modern Paladins performed
deeds of valor which made Europe stand aghast, and utter the
exclamation, are these men ? the time when each noble
homestead in our dear old country furnished a son to heap the


funeral pile; when mothers freely gave their sons, and wept
because they had no more to give; for in giving them they felt
that they would win unfading laurels in their country’s cause.
We had the repulse of the Russian sortie by Sir De Lacy Evans
—the crowded, yet neglected hospital; our noble fellows dying
from the short-sighted vacillation of a paralyzed and dis-
organized administration; —when Red-Tape strangled more
men than fell by sword or bullet. The noble effort of
the women of our land to help the suffering men; when a
Nightingale’s sweet voice warbled through fevered wards,
dispelling gloom from many a heart, and cheering the pathway
to the soldier’s grave.
“TO FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.
Lady! in our England’s story there are names we proudly say,
Names of women writ in Heaven, with us still and passed away ;
But in all the shining record which the angels love to read,
Few can claim the earnest homage by our hearts to thee decreed
Lady! when to weeping households word of thy devotion came,
High and lowly called thee angel, wives and mothers blessed thy name;
Where the rectory roses cluster, where the peasant’s cottage peers,.
In the old manorial mansion, eyes were filled with thankful tears
Lady ! when the wounded soldier lifts his head and looks on thee,
Hope will come and softly whisper, he may yet recross the sea ;
Yet return his mother’s kisses, as she shudders at his scars,
Yet behold a face still dearer, seen in dreams beneath the stars.
Lady ! thou hast left for duty all that gives to life its charm ;
And we pray that God may keep thee now and ever free from harm.
Ever shall thy name and story cause the heart a blissful thrill,
When our warfare long is over, and we all are lying still ”
The historian says, “ who can forget that winter, with its wet
and cold, the perplexed and effete commissariat, our men
harassed by the enemy, no covering but a thin canvass tent,
no flooring but mud, no fuel but roots grubbed from the damp
earth, to cook their rations of raw pork, or to roast and grind
green coffee ? Some, it is said, devoured their pork raw, and


trampled the berries indignantly in the mud; others, more
patient, strove to roast their berries in the lids of their canteens,
over the smouldering embers of rotten stick, and to pound
them with cannon ball, and then with foul water produced a
beverage officially called coffee, but from which a pig of refine-
ment would have turned with disgust.” No wonder that
disease was prevalent, and that each sun as it rose saw our
brave fellows borne to their last resting place, consecrated by
a nation’s tears. Then there was Inkerman, that soldier’s fight,
when fifty or sixty thousand Russians, made mad by drink,
attacked in the fog and drizzling rain, the British position;
when British pluck was proved, and when the half clothed, half
starved sons of Britain’s isle sent reeling back the hordes of
Muscovy, when the “ Bear-skinned warriors,” scattered, like
chaff before the wind, “ the choicest legions of the Czar.”
The 14th of November—when the fearful hurricane swept
over the suffering army, destroying its tents, and hurling in the
common ruin the ships that had arrived with clothing for the
men. Then came the indignation of the British public—the
motion of Mr. Roebuck—the resignation of the Aberdeen
government, and the assumption of power by Palmerston, the
saviour of the army, then, the enemy of continental des-
potism, but who since that has descended from the pinnacle of
fame, pulled down by the menaces of filibustering French
colonels—the changed aspect —the Crimean railway—the
victory of the Ovens and Mamelon—the death of the re-
nowned, though calumniated and broken-hearted Raglan —the
taking of Kertch—the tragedy of Traktir bridge, where
Sardinians smote attacking Russians with a power which
quickly made them show another front—the final assault on
the Malakoff by the French—the defeat at the Redan—the
night retreat of the Russians—the entry of the victorious
armies into the city, now a "mass of blood-besprinkled ruins—
and finally, the raising of the Patriotic Fund, in which young
Australia played so prominent a part.
These were stirring times—times for the production of great
men; and the men were there who excelled in the contempt of


death, and the power of endurance, the warriors of Greece
or Rome. Yes! Britain, though not emphatically a warlike
nation, produced men that braved death and fought nobly in. a
righteous cause. Where is the man that bears upon his front
the mark of the Anglo-Saxon who does not feel his bosom throb
with deep emotion when he thinks of a Raglan and Strangeways,
Cathcart and Brown, Napier and Lyons, Cardigan and Penne-
father, Cambridge and Evans, Torrens and Windham, Markham
and Yea, Peel and Sullivan, Burgoyne and Adams, Chewton
and Lucan, Newman and Tylden, Macgregor and Douglas,
with thousands of others whose names are engraved upon the
imperishable monument of the Nation’s heart; and last, though
not least, the hero of my lecture—Hedley Shafto Vicars.
It may be asked by some, why are so many men passed by,
and this one brought before us so prominently ? It is with a
hope that his short, yet eventful career may prove a blessing to
Australia’s sons. To declare, with a loud and emphatic voice,
that Christianity does not unfit a man for the active duties ot
life, and for the purpose of diffusing sweet recollections con-
cerning one, who though cut down in the flower of his youth,
left such an admirable and elevating example to those who
should come after him. *' Hedley Vicars was born m the
Mauritius, on the 7th December, 1826. His father, an officer
in the Royal Engineers, was the representative of the family of
Don Vicaro, a Spanish Cavalier, who came to England in the
suite of Catherine of Arragon, and settled in Ireland early in
the sixteenth century, on the marriage of his eldest grandson
with the heiress of the Lalor family: the family estate was
Levally, in Queen’s County.”
“ There was nothing peculiar by which you could distinguish
young Vicars from other boys. Active and fearless, he was
foremost among his schoolfellows wherever fun or frolic was to
be found. Open-hearted and generous, quick to resent an
injury, ready to forgive, he was a universal favorite with them,
whilst his sweetness of temper and kind unselfish nature
especially endeared him to his friends at home. Faults he had,
and who has not? His were those of an energetic and


wayward disposition, and those legends which are apt to be
preserved in families record occasional instances of his odd,
yet amusing perversity.” When the lengthening shadows of the
setting sun told the departure of the day, the children were all
assembled around the domestic hearth, the old familiar and well-
thumbed book was brought forth, and each, in rotation, read
some portion of Scripture. We may expect a garden tilled like
this to bring forth goodly fruit; “ but Hedley, self-willed, could
not be got to enter into the spirit of the little meeting, and never
would contribute anything but ‘ Kemember Lot’s wife.’ Oft
times he would provoke a smile when the family had assembled
to invoke the presence and the blessing of Almighty God; on
one of these occasions young Hedley, reproved by his mother,
walked off during prayer, and entering into a little cave in the
garden, barricaded it with the determination of spending the
night there, but from this he was dissuaded by the plaintive
entreaties of his sisters. He emerged from his hiding-place to
ask and to obtain forgiveness.” Like most boys, he did not like
Black Monday, that day on which, the holidays being over,
boys must return to the form and desk, when bat and ball
are put aside for slate and book. “ Once his mother told him to
pack his box for school, but he wishing to put off the evil day,
pretended not to hear his mother’s injunctions until they became
positive commands; then, with an air of offended dignity, he
walked out of the room, and soon called out, * Mother, my box
is packed.’ On opening the door of the room she found the box
placed there and loosely corded, and packed indeed, but with a
collection of old boots, shells, stones, the housemaid’s dust-pan
and brushes, with which a few of Mrs. Vicars’ favourite books
were irreverently jumbled together; the boy meanwhile hanging
on the banisters of the stairs humming a careless tune, calmly
viewed a displeasure, the dignity of which it was not easy to
preserve. His mother was for many years the only guardian
of his youth—loss of health had compelled her to return with
her family to England, whilst her husband was detained in the
Mauritius by military duties; he came home in 1837 and
obtained an appointment at Mullingar, Westmeath.”


u How the hero of our tale is twelve years old; his father is
taken ill; stretched upon his bed, aware of his approaching
dissolution, and like the aged patriarch he calls for the lad, who
is brought to his bedside. The father placed his dying hand
upon the fair-haired youth, and then from the inmost recesses
of his being sent up a prayer to the God of Heaven that his
dear boy may be a good soldier of t|je Cross, and fight manfully
under Christ’s banner, so as to glorify His name. It does seem
that faith had given to the departing Christian, as it did to
the aged Jacob, the voice of prophecy. Knows he not now, and
will he not more perfectly know, in a day for which a groaning
creation looketh, how fully a faithful God granted to him this,
his last request?”
Having had an aversion to a life of study he gave himself up
to wild adventures ; but m 1843 he obtained a commission in
the line; and shortly after sailed for Corfu, where he became
reckless, and indulged in those baneful excesses, the remem-
brance of which was in after life a source of so much pain.
We must now pass over three years, the greater part of which
was spent by him in the gaieties of life and in following the cus-
toms of the world; yet in this time of darkness an occasional ray
of light would break in upon his soul, and for a time, his passions
would be restrained, but alas ! only to break out again with
greater vigor. While living in sin his conscience often smote him,
and the thought that he was wounding his dearest parent mixed
bitterness in his draughts of pleasure. He remarks in one of his
letters written at this time to his mother, “ My darling Mother,
I do love you, and that fondly, although I have often (and may
(xod Almighty forgive me) rebelled against your wishes. Mother,
I ask your forgiveness for what has passed ; you know not what
real anguish some of your letters have caused me, and although
I have tried to drown the voice of conscience after reading them,
a still small voice has always been whispering in my ear and
kept me from committing many a sin.” His religious convic-
tions at times would have a great effect upon him; he would
give himself up to prayer and the reading of God's word. Under
temptation he would again relapse until all the impressions wore


away, and he became as wild and reckless as ever. After many
struggles, in which the world seemed to gain the advantage, he
was removed with his regiment to Canada; where the old leaven
of an unregenerate heart developed itself in a corresponding
debauched life. In the autumn of the same year he visited
the Falls of Niagara; and it is recorded, that when gazing upon
their beauty he was awed by the majestic grandeur of the
scene; and the spirit of God spoke louder to him than
the rushing current; for here often did he wander and review
his past life, and offer up the solemn prayer that Almighty
God would enable him to break the tempter’s spell, and to avow
himself a disciple of the Lamb.
Up to this time he had only been awakened to his condition,
and his religion had been like the fitful flashes of a disturbed
sleep; in later days, when he looked back upon this period of
his existence, he says, “ I was not then converted to God.”
But he had asked for forgiveness; he had sought for mercy; and
thank God, we know from the lips of inspiration, “ they who
seek shall find.”
There is a period in the life of the Christian, the turning
point in his history, that decisive time when the spirit hurls off
its hated bondage, and when the mind rejoices in the glorious
liberty of the gospel salvation, when the scales of ignorance
fall from the eyes, when men are no longer seen like “ trees
walking,” but when upon the vision is poured a flood of Heaven’s
own light, when the sinner has dragged his burden to the Cross
and transferred it to his substitute. To this was he approaching.
There are some in this age of refinement who would put away
conversion from their vocabulary, deeming it as unsuited to
these advanced times: say they, there was a time when the
dark veil of ignorance blinded the perceptions of mankind, when
science was in leading strings, when the intellect was warped by
priestcraft: such things would pass off then, but now, we are
grown wise; and as for this term conversion, we have shelved
that with the old wives’ fables of departed days; and as for the
Bible, who (say they) can credit all its statements ? we are in
advance #f that book; it suited the dark ages, but now philoso*


phers have proved that the life of Jesus was a myth; that the
spread of Christianity is not more wonderful than the rapid de-
velopment of Mahomedanism; that which is called the spirit’s
work is a kind of electro-biology; and that our most suc-
cessful preachers are only powerful mesmerists ; the inspiration
of the prophets is but clairvoyance, and miracles the effect o
sleight of hand, or highly-finished legerdemain; Shakespere
and Milton as much inspired as Paul or John. The atonemen
is termed a delight in blood; Christ is reduced to the level of
contaminated humanity; and the pure abiding principles of
ever-living orthodoxy sneered at as being too puritanical or
sentimental, and.as belonging, and only fit for, bearded hermits,
and grovelling ascetics. . ,
But why do men speak great swelling words against the tenth
of God * they are like Herod with John the Baptist; they object
to the searching of the heart. If the Bible pandered to their
depraved and vitiated taste, they would claim it as their teac ter,
but they hate its humbling doctrines, and fly from its withering
reproof. It did for our antiquated and superstitious ancestors ,
but we dislike its stern morality. Among the class who reject
the doctrine of a change of heart, and treat wit is am
necessity of a being born again, is the presumptuous bear ess
youth, who lives within the atmosphere of tobacco-smoke, whose
only aim in life seems to be the colouring of the pipe he smokes,
and the young lady that pokes old time to death with a crochet
needle, or frightens him with the noise she can make at her
piano, or yet more exasperating, will cut him up, and leave
infinitessimal parts at the residences of her friends m yonder
square, and designate this most inhuman way of killing time }
the exceedingly polished phraseology of morning calls. Yes,
these are the persons who, with many others, have ascended t e
ladder of their own importance, and who, elevated upon the
pinnacle of their own self-conceit, sneer at the credulity of those
who profess to believe the Bible, and pity the unfortunate
aberration of a Paley, Butler, Newton, Owen, Charnock, Calvin,
Edwards and Locke. There are some now, and there always
have been men, who have denied every doctrine of that precious


Book; —but shall the puny hand of rebellious man tear from the
great archives of the Christian the record of his Saviour’s pardon?
Shall the Heaven-born doctrine of a new and regenerated heart
be stifled to please a Christ-denying age ? Shall the great doc-
trine vindicated at the day of Pentecost, brought down to us
hallowed by the remembrance of the fathers of the faith, be now
by men denied ? and by men who, because they have not felt
within themselves the power of the world to come, reduce the
standard of God’s truth to such a dwarfish height, erase to
please the creature the truth enforced by the Creator ? To this
we give the bold emphatic No! Conversion is a real thing, a
God-like change, an evidential fact, a truth, apparent to the
world, a truth which never can be hid. No conversion, no
Heaven!—no conversion, no glorious inheritance!—no conver-
sion, no sanctifying peace! But to this had Hedley Vicars come.
I say, may all here (without one solitary exception) come to it.
Extracted from his life is the following“ It was in the month
of November, 1851, that whilst waiting the return of a brother
officer to his room, he idly turned over the leaves of a Bible
which lay on the table. Those glorious words, glossed with a
divinity of power, met his eye— ‘ The Blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanseth us from all sin.’ Closing the book, with a holy
determination he said, ‘ If this be true, I will live henceforth as
a man who has been washed in the blood of Jesus.’ ” The Spirit
had begun his work; —the sins of the past were dancing now in
horrid shape before his mind; —his eyes were inward turned,
“and there he saw such black and grained spots as would not lose
their tint. He spent the greater part of the night in prayer.
This man arrested the bright intelligences of the celestial world;
for he arose in the morning with the clear and satisfactory evi-
dence that for the sake of the life and death of Christ his sins
had been forgiven. And not only in Vicars is this change to
be remarked, —but look at the great Apostle of the Gentiles.
We are told in our Bibles that when Saul of Tarsus was nearing
Damascus with letters from the High Priest, to persecute and
imprison all the followers of Jesus, that suddenly a light
from Heaven broke upon him as he journeyed, and a voice


which shook the heart of the relentless enemy of Christ fell
upon his ear with ‘ Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me ?’ We
find this dauntless, haughty man, helpless as a new-born child.
‘He can create and He destroy.’ He is led to Damascus,
where he betakes himself to prayer ; and opening heavens hear
the wondrous proclamation from their King, ‘ Behold he pray-
eth !’ After three days of fasting and entreaty the veil begins
to ascend, unbelief is gone, and Heaven’s own beauties
burst upon his astonished sight. Hedley Vicars prayed, and
the same Divine hand that removed the bandage of ignorance
from the eyes of Paul did the same for him, and is ever ready
and waiting to do the same for all those who shall seek salva-
tion in the self-same way.”
The next point I wish to draw your atiention to is the bold and
resolute stand he made for God. He had now grasped with firm
hand the standard of the Cross, and he hid it not; he thrust it in
no hole or corner, but manfully displayed it, and declared him-
self determined to fight under his new Master. He avowed him-
self the enemy of all unrighteousness. On the morning succeed-
ing his memorable spiritual birthnight—that on which he
received not knighthood from an earthly monarch, but the night
on which the King of glory gazetted him as one of Heaven’s
patented nobility, a citizen of the commonwealth of God, a
co-heir with the exalted Saviour—on that morning he bought
a large Bible, and placed it open on the table in his sitting-
room, determined that an open Bible for the future should be
his colours, “It was to speak for me,” said he, “ until I was
strong enough to speak for myself.” His friends came as
usual to his rooms, but did not altogether like his new colours.
Well they might not—who likes a deserter ? not the army, be
assured, from which the man deserts. This was the signal for
attack; they turned their artillery upon him, and poured in
broadside after broadside with astonishing precision; but he
did not capitulate. One remarked “ that he had turned
Methodist,” and retreated with a shrug. This 1 consider
complimentary. Another ventured on the bolder measure of
warning him not to become an hypocrite. “ Bad as you were,


I never thought you would come to this, old fellow !” Kind
friend! I have no doubt he was extremely solicitous for his
welfare! what pains he took to admonish him ! But hot as the
battle was, it was soon over, at least as regards the first attack ;
for, says he, “my quarters were soon deserted.” The
bombardment was kept up at the mess table for six months ;
but, he says, “ I was enabled to stand my ground.”
About 1729, when Mr. Charles Wesley, Mr. John Wesley,
Mr. Morgan, Mr. Hervey, and Mr. Whitfield, began in Oxford
to seek earnestly the conversion of their souls, and to take an
interest in the souls of others, they were designated by the
name of Methodist, and an excellent method they had—pity it
is not followed more. They encountered a bitter opposition, but
they made a bold stand and triumphed.
Now, young men, learn from this conduct of Hedley Vicars
not to be frightened out of your religion; if you are a teeto-
taler, don’t hesitate when asked to drink; but if you believe
in your principles stick to them; let the world see in your
daily life your principles tested; “a double-minded man is
unstable in all his ways.” If you have religion, don’t be
ashamed of it; you used not to be ashamed of sin; don’t then
be ashamed of Christ, of right motives and holy duties; declare
yourself on God’s side; lift your standard high ; wave it with all
strength; and in whatsoever holy cause you are enlisted,
summon all your energies to its accomplishment; let not
successive trials bar your road and stay your progress;
but follow the advice of the great Napoleon, but in
another and a better warfare, “ Onward! onward !” and
remember, that as you set your hand firmly to the
Gospel plough, attend to words of inspiration, “and what-
soever thine hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might;” the
good will love you, the wicked will respect you. Your con-
sistency of life will endear you to those that differ from you ;
you will advance the cause you advocate; converts will be
gained to your opinions, for a consistent life is worth a thousand
volumes of sermons. Remember, that you are designated the
lights of the world. Now, we put the candle in the lantern to


keep it from being blown out; but many Christians are like
a lantern with a candle inside, but nobody can tell whether the
candle is in or out. Why? Because the glass of the lantern
is covered with filth and dirt, so much so that the light is
obscured. Now, get your lantern cleaned ; let not your light
be dimmed by sin ; keep it cleansed continually at the fountain
of a Saviour’s righteousness.
And now we will take a glance at the inner and outer life of
this devoted man. We have all the inner and outer life—our
transactions with ourselves and with the world. For the
revelation of his inner life, I must refer you to his Diary.
" July 26th.— I begin to see more clearly every day the depravity of
my heart, and my own utter inability to turn to God of myself. At the
class, in the evening, about fifteen. I went to Dr. Twining’s afterwards.
Spoke ill-naturedly of one or two. I would that I could do two things
—never speak about myself, and never speak evil of any one.
“ September llth.— Remained in bed till nearly eight o’clock. Oh,
how hard it is to do what I know to be right! Prayed to-day for help
from above to enable me to strive more against a growing desire to save
myself. O God. enable me to look to the finished work of Jesus!
“ November sth. Arose at seven, o’clock. Would that I could keep my
waking thoughts on Jesus! How few are the moments I think of Him
to those in which I forget Him ! Walked with Desmond and Nash.
“ 15th. Arose at seven. A few thoughts of Jesus whilst dressing.
I would that I had a heart more entirely set on things above! Received
the reports of the Mic-mac Missionary Society -rather proud at seeing
my name in the list of subscribers. When shall I conquer this detestable
pride ? When shall I look upon myself as the vilest of sinners, as indeed
I am ?
« x have got over some rough ground since I was first led to seek after
happiness, where alone it can be found, in the religion of Jesus. I have
had to battle much against the temptations of the world, the flesh, and
the devil; but though often on the point of giving up the struggle in
despair, the goodness, the long-suffering, the wondrous loving-kindness
of my God has guarded and watched over me, and kept me from falling
utterly away from Him. Oh, what cause have I to give Him most
humble and hearty thanks for all His goodness towards me! When 1
look back upon my past life, nearly six and twenty years, I see nothing
but an accumulation of transgression and sin. Oh, my soul, let me
remember with disgust and horror that for nearly five and twenty years
I was a willing servant of Satan. What aggravates my wickedness is,


that it has been all committed in spite of the advice and warning of a
truly Christian mother, and how often 1 have silenced the voice of con-
science. But why dwell any more on a life that has been wasted 9 Why
bring up the remembrance of sins each one of which would have
murdered my soul had I died In the act of commission ? Ido it that they
may humble and prostrate me in the dust before that holy God who has
said, ‘ The soul that sinneth it shall die.’ I acknowledge, Omy God,
that hell is only my desert—that were I ever consigned to its abode it
would be but a just recompense for my transgressions Let me ever
keep in mind that if I am saved it must be entirely and solely through
Divine mercy in Christ Jesus. Were Ito be judged according to my
works, I should be justly condemned. But thanks be to God for the gift
of His precious Word, which reveals His wondrous love in sending His
only begotten Son into the world to die for sinners. There I read that
Jesus Christ was crucified for me, that He bore in His own body all my
sins—that His blood cleanseth from all sin—that He has paid the
penalty due to sin—that He has satisfied God’s intense hatred towards
sin. Had my salvation depended upon keeping the law, I should be
without hope, for I have broken it thousands of times. But through
this man, the Lord Jesus, is preached the forgiveness of sins, and they
that believe are justified from all things. Oh, then, let me close with
God’s free offer of salvation to all, ‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shalt be saved.’ Let me look to Christ as my righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. Let me lay aside every weight g,nd the
sin that doth so easily beset me, and let me run with patience the race
set before me, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of my faith,
working out my own salvation with fear and trembling, remembering
that it is God that worketh in me to will and to do of His own good
pleasure. I would from this day give up the remainder of my life to the
service of my God. I will keep on this diary that I may be able to trace
the progress I make in the Christian life, and I will faithfully put down
everything. I will draw up some rules to enable me the better to
devote some portion of each day to God’s service. By these I will be
guided while 1 lemain in Halifax."
We see here a continual struggle between Satan and Jesus—
the son of the bond woman struggling for mastery over the
son of the free woman. Here we see the development of
grace, not sudden but progressive, not fitful but continual.
We behold the tender plant outliving the blasts of winter and
entering upon the spring ; watered by distilling dews we see
its opening flower, and inhale the fragrance of its balmy
breath. Here in the inner life we perceive how vile were his


thoughts about himself, how deep and effective his repentance;
at times his vision was beclouded by the remembrance
of past sins, but like the vine he clung to his support and
entwined himself by frequent coils around it. The Bible
reveals the inner life of all its mighty heroes ; —who that has
attentively read it has not noticed the inner life of Solomon
and Daniel, Paul and John ? That man knows little of
the Christian warfare that cannot in his own experience
recognise the two.
We see the king reclining on his throne, dressed in his royal
robes; his brow surmounted by a glittering crown; his hand a
sceptre wields; flattering courtiers surround him; armies wait
his nod; millions of subjects do homage to the man; he dwells
within the richly-blazoned hall; but who can tell his inner life!
His heart may be racked by contending passions ; —lust and
ambition are not quiet occupants, which cause no anxiety. No !
This very king may sigh within for the rest possessed by the
lean pauper that sips his porridge at yonder workhouse board.
The festering wounds'' of rank corruption may spread their
leprosy within. Ofttimes the countenance bears witness to
the inner life; —for in the deep channels graven there run down
the streams of bitterness and care. His outer life :
Pie kept himself fully employed. Is he at home, in the
bosom of his beloved family, in the precincts of that place
wherein he was fondly nurtured ?—does he gaze upon the
scenes familiar to him in his boyish days?—does he look again
upon the beauteous landscape, and see the happy faces he was
wont to feast his eyes upon ?—does he hear the familiar voices
sounding sweetest music in his ear?—does he sit beside the
well-known stream, and watch it as it ripples o’er its stony
ford? And do none of these things distract his mind, and
keep him from his work for God ?—does he idle his time ?
find relaxation from his arduous task ?—sheath his sword ?—doff
his armour ?—and retire from the fight ? Oh, no! from the
moment he enlists till the bugle sounds his return Home, he
must not, cannot rest.
When with his family in England, near Sydenham, we find


him holding cottage meetings, preaching the Gospel with a
simplicity of manner to the poor, that commended it to them;
he held meetings for the navvies, and had the satisfaction of
seeing the seed he cast into the ground bring forth an hundred-
fold. At one time he is a Sabbath School teacher, instructing
the infant mind the way to happiness, to Heaven, to God ;
the conductor of a Bible class, digging in the mine of God for
Gospel gold. He was a warm supporter of the Army Prayer
Union, an active member of the Naval and Military Bible
Society, City Missions, and laboured hard while abroad in
connection with a society for supplying the Mic-mac Indians
with the Bible in their vernacular tongue. “ His life was hid
with Christ in God;” he was a district visitor, and a tract
distributor. Bagged Schools lay near his heart, and whilst m
London he was a teacher in them. He was the frequent com-
panion of the City Missionary on his errand of mercy to the
degraded outcast;-to work for Christ on earth seemed to be
Lis meat and drink. But we must bid adieu to these scenes
at Lome. War is proclaimed, and with his regiment he is
ordered to the fatal field;-on board the ship which bears him
to his destination, he establishes a prayer meeting and a bible
class;—he lands in the Pirseus, and preaches the Gospel of
a crucified Bedeemer! Whilst here the cholera broke out
among the soldiers; death threw his icy arms around our men,
and day after day witnessed the death of some of England’s
bravest sons. At first, the chaplain of the English legation at
Athens went among them, but as soon as the disease became
virulent he was not allowed to visit. Hedley Vicars buried
vast quantities of dead, using words of exhortation at the
grave • and when the fever raged, and the glazed eye, and
prostrate form told that Death, with decimating hand, was
seizing young and old, he was the companion of their dying
hours Day after day, night after night, week after week,
month after month, he read-he prayed-he toiled-he wept.
The disease in its most malignant form was no barrier to his
presence: “he was immortal till his work was done. And do
we visit him upon the battle-field, death standing at his right


hand; —War sending forth her pestilential blasts of desolating
breath ; —does he lie here ?—no ! the bleeding sufferer on the
battle-field receives his only consolation from this saintly
youth. But the day is over ; the occasional gun fired tells
that night is come, and the combatants are resting from their
deadly strife. The bivouac-fires gleam in the darkness; see
by one of them is a form wrapped in the deep folds of a
soldier’s mantle intently reading some book. Draw a little
nearer, with a noiseless step. Can you discern the features ?
yes, it is the kind, the sympathizing, the beloved Vicars; the
bivouac-fire is the light by which he reads the Word of Life.
Young men! let it be your delight to be employed; Satan
tempts you most when unemployed; he always “ finds some
work for idle hands to do“ when the measure is full of corn
there is no room for the chaff.” Christ and Satan cannot hold
possession at the self-same time. Mind and have no idle hours.
When Satan meets you in life’s highway, let him always find
you well employed. God’s richest servants have been most
laborious. Is it our great Exemplar ? we find Him healing the
sick, clothing the naked, giving sight to the blind, teaching the
ignorant, warning the wicked, cheering the timid; whilst others
sleep he prays; there is no break in all His hallowed pil-
grimage; from the manger to the Cross His life is one unbroken
chain of mercy. A Paul is either preaching the Gospel, making
tents, writing epistles, suffering in bonds, braving dangers,
steeped in prayer. A Wesley and a Whitfield, a Howard and
a Moffat, a M‘Cheyne and a Fletcher, a Bunyan and a Newton,
have all been men who made the most of time; and the man
for whom all Sydney mourns was remarkable for this—l mean
the venerable Archdeacon Cowper, who has just been called
away. At one time he was the secretary of six different
societies; he “ was in labours oft; ” visiting the sick and
dying; pouring the balm of Gospel-love into the wounded
heart; opening up the truth to dying sinners; threading his
way into the condemned cell with the language, “ He is able to
save to the uttermost;” standing in the pulpit unawed before the
pride of birth, of intellect, or wealth, and faithfully declaring


to assembled multitudes the value of a Saviour's death; re-
buking sin where’er he met it. “He was a man from whom
God-fear had banished man-fear.” “He thought what others
only dreamed about, and did what others did but think about,
and gloried in what others dared but do.”
Such was he.
In the wisdom of creation’s natural laws he spelt Jehovah’s
name. The thunder was to him as God’s going forth—the wind
the rustling of his garments as he passed along. He fought
amid the stern realities of life! for fifty years his battle-axe
was wielded in this southern clime, and when the Saviour
called him home he found it yet unblunted. The stone on
which he sharpened it was prayer.
He saw in every moving thing the great Creator’s name,
In the rushing of the mighty storm, and in the quelling of the wind;
He felt in every rustling leaf the influence of ITis power,
In the rippling of the graceful stream, and in each fading flower.
These, young men, are the jewels in a Mediator’s crown —
stars in the firmament of God, whose light never wavers, but
who shall shed their burnished lustre upon the New Jerusalem,
and be the unfading constellations in God’s eternal sky.
Although Vicars found time to do so much for God, he did no
less for man: he had learnt Christianity from the purest source,
and we find him as willing to “render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar’s, as unto God the things that are God’s.”
He retired to no monastery to wile away his hours, and scold
a world he dared not fight; he was the soldier as
well as the Christian; he was never found absent from his duty;
he never shrank away when danger stared him in the face; he
felt that to fulfil his duty to his sovereign was part of his life’s
work; when summoned to the Crimea he willingly obeyed;
and although a fond widowed mother would, perhaps, have
solicited him to stay and cheer her declining years, yet the
voice of duty is one he must obey. While in the Crimea, many
made excuses for returning home; but he was not the milk and
water, feather-bed soldier, who, when danger like a hungry


vulture hovered o’er our noble army, basely betrayed their
trust, and like cowards ran away. He would not debase him-
self by such an act as this ; his principles were cast in a much
more honorable mould ; he condemns it with his voice and
pen. Young men of this association! remember, the eyes of
the world are on you; and none less than those of your em-
ployers. Learn that you are the servant of an earthly as well
as of an Heavenly master, and if you appropriate the time for
which they pay you, even to a good and holy work, you will
never hear ‘‘Well done.” Remember, also, if your master has
a claim upon your time, —the Lord has, also. One day in seven
he has bestowed upon you for holy purposes ; pollute it notto
godless ends; frustrate the purpose for which it was ordained ;
and He who maketh inquisition for blood will require it at your
hands. That man who appropriates to his own use his master’s
time, appropriates his money, for time to him is such:—and I
can see no marked difference between the man who squanders
his master’s time and him who filches from his till.
Another prominent trait is, his self-denial. Had he studied
his own comfort when he was at home, he would have spent his
time with his family, instead of going from house to house, and
street to street; —when in the camp, disease being prevalent, he
would have remained in the seclusion of his own quarters,
rather than have faced danger in its fiercest form; —when his
duties in the trenches were over, he would have retired to rest
his weary and fatigued body, rather than have taken the Bible
in his hand, and wandered miles in fog and drizzling rain, to
cheer the dying and to soothe the comfortless.
One of the most sublime features in the life of our dear
Redeemer is His self-denial : “ Foxes have holes, and the
birds of the air have n Q sts, but the Son of Man hath not where
to lay His head.” Let His example inspire in you a holy
imitation; let your life exhibit self-denial. The young man
whom Jesus loved, when he was told what he must sacrifice,
“ went away sorrowing, for he had great possessions.”
Christianity without self-denial is as great an impossibility as a
creation without a Creator. The self-denial of Hedley Vicars


is brought beautifully out in one little incident. At a hospital
six miles from Kensington, where he was stationed, was a poor
old man, whom he visited twice a week; and upon the day he
left England for the seat of war, he snatched time, although
very much pressed with numerous duties, to go and see his poor
old friend. “Go thou, and do likewise.”
He learnt the lesson of serving God in the vocation in which
he was placed. How often is the vain excuse made, I would
have served God if I had been in that man’s circumstances.
The boy puts it off till he leaves school; then till he is out of
his apprenticeship ; then till he becomes his own master; then
till he is out of the turmoil of business; —but, like Felix, he
never finds the convenient season. “ Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be required of thee,” breaks in upon him; his thread
of life is snapped asunder; and his way down to the gloomy
realms of anguish and despair has been paved with intentions
and resolvings. Procrastination has been the slippery path
down which he has insensibly glided.
How much better is it when a man draws lessons from his
very occupation—which lessons, well-digested, form incentives
to his spiritual life. Let us stand by our dear Redeemer, and
hear Him giving forth His instruction—rich feasts for hungry
s«uls. When the sheep browse upon the hills before Him, He
reminds His hearers that He is the Good Shepherd; as He
breaks the bread, He points to Himself as the. Bread of
Life which cometh down from Heaven; at the Pharisee’s house,
He unfolds the plan of salvation under the similitude of a
Great Supper; when He sits at the well, He reminds the woman
of Samaria that He is the living water, of which, if any man
drink he shall live for ever; when He views the unyielding
fig-tree, He points to Israel’s barrenness.
David makes his shepherd-life illustrate with beauty
and with force, the great watchful care and providence
of God. “ The Lord is my Shepherd, and I shall not
want.”
The Husbandman, when he sows the seed in the earth, and
looketh in faith unto the harvest, should not fail to note, “ That


God is not deceived; for whatsoever a man sowe'th that shall
he also reap.”
The Clerk in the office, as he posts up his books, and keeps
balanced his accounts, so that his master can see at any
moment how he stands, should look within and see how his
accounts stand there, calling to mind that at a moment s notice
he may have to render up his stewardship.
The Servant, as she sweeps the house, and puts all in order
for the reception of her mistress, should so live as to be ready
for the “ glorious appearing of the great God and Saviour
Jesus Christ.”
The Shoeblack, as he scrapes the dirt from the boot, and
puts a polish upon it with Day and Martin’s best, until he can
make the boot act the double part of a covering for the foot
and looking-glass, should pray that his heart and mind be so
cleansed as to “ mirror forth a Saviour’s grace.”
The Draper, as he puts by last season’s goods as unsaleable,
should learn that “ the world passeth away and the lust
thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.
The Shoemaker, should pray that “ his feet should be shod
with the preparation of the Gospel.”
The Carpenter, when smoothing down a knotty plank, should
not forget that he has knots in his temper and heart, and should
seek to get these planed down by the teaching of the Holy
(jhost.
The Mason, while building the perishable mansion, should
prepare for occupying that one which is eternal, whose “Builder
and Maker is God.”
The Sailor, when mounting the crested wave, on the bosom
of the fickle deep, should not forget that his barque is launched
upon life’s stormy sea; that gales and hurricanes will meet
him on his voyage; and that he should provide that Pilot for
his vessel who has voyaged over the selfsame journey—one
who knows each shoal and the location of each breaker, and
who is ready and willing gratuitously to guide his ship safe
through every storm unto the blessed haven of eternal rest.
From his own vocation, Hedley Yicars drew deep and


spiritual instruction. The bugle-note said to him, “Let us not
sleep as do others.” When he girds upon him his sword, he is
reminded of the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
When he puts on his back the red garb of Britain, he remembers
rt the Lord our Righteousness;” having taken to himself the
whole armour of God, his mess-table has spiritual reflections
for there he communes with, and feasts upon the bread of life;
and thus equipped in this panoply divine, he goes forth with a
giant’s might upon the battle-field of this great world to
contend with “the prince of the power of the air;” he enters
the arena as one of Heaven’s gladiators to “ wrestle with the
principalities of darkness and spiritual wickedness in high
places.”
One more conspicuous trait is found in his outer life. His
faith shone bright in difficulties; —pictures look best when
framed. God’s richest saints are framed sometimes in fire,
wreathed in the dark festoons of tribulation. The noble
martyrs of the Cross of Jesus stand out in bold relief when
encircled with the faggot and the fire. The tree of Faith
grows best when watered by the rain of difficulty.
Job never loses confidence in God, though smitten in the
sorest way. “ The loss of property, and dearest children,
beils and blains, a poor diseased body, make up the knotty
frame in which this diamond of God is set.”
Abraham exemplifies it when standing upon Mount Moriah :
see him holding in his hand the knife; bare before him the
breast ©f his loved Isaac, the child of promise; the eye of
the Patriarch dimmed by scalding tears rests upon the lad;
love and duty struggle in the deeps of his inner being.
Faith in the Eternal surmounts all difficulties. God must be
obeyed; his hand is raised; determination settles on his
brow; —and now what ? death ! No! life. For God provides
the lamb. Young men, the law with its unsheathed blade
hung over you, and on you would have fallen, but Christ the
heavenly Lamb became your substitute, and when vengeance
hovered over you, He to save emerged from the thicket.
Goliath of Gath defies the army of the living God, and


boastfully hurls down the gauntlet in the front of Israel’s host.
No man is there to vindicate God’s honour. When on the
scene, a fair-haired boy appears, fresh from the sheep-fold;
he comes with no pretensions of his own, despised by those
who should have loved him; he accepts the challenge, and
cheerfully confronts the man of Gath; no cuirass shields his
breast; dressed in the simple shepherd-garb, he gathers him
together a few smooth stones, and with his sling—that sling
which he had often used to wile away the hours when on the
lonely mountain he tended the flocks of Jesse; —undismayed
he stands before the sneering giant; the contending armies
are gathered round; the Philistines they loudly mock—
what chance has that weak boy; the shrill blast of the
trumpet announces the beginning of the fight; in the name of
the God of Israel, David puts the smooth pebble in the sling;
Faith smiles triumphantly upon the forehead of the heroic
boy; his arm is raised, and straight at the monster’s head the
stone is hurled, winged with its dread commission ; and lo!
Goliath’s dead!
When fetters press the galled wrists of Paul, his lacerated
back sends out the crimson tide: his feet fast bound in stocks,
within the precincts of the inner prison, amidst these difficulties
his faith enables him to triumph, no murmuring escapes his
lips, his stocks become his throne; and now begins a glorious
chaunt of praise—the very walls affected shake and tremble;
the chains that bind the other prisoners fall upon the dungeon-
floor ; the Jailor throws himself upon his knees, a suppliant at
his prisoner’s feet, when another trophy is added to a Saviour’s
love, one that shall deck a throne in glory—the Jailor from
the town of Philippi.
Macduff has well explained it, when he says, “ And every
martyr at the stake, and every missionary in his gigantic task,
has to bear the same testimony that it was when the tempest
was highest and the battle loudest; —‘ they were strong in
faith, giving glory to God.’ The oak is rooted firmest and
fastest that has been nurtured not amid quiet climes, and in
the sheltering valley, but high on the mountain side, where it


has had to wrestle with the storm. That is not vigorous train-
ing for the rower, when resting on his oar, his boat is borne
down the descending stream; but his is the hardened sinew
and brawny arm whose barque has to face the fiercest current,
and struggle with contending wind and tide.
“The great man and master-mind wasonce the boy at school,
who bravely encountered difficulty and disadvantage—who
wept hot tears over his baffling task, and dried them not till he
conquered impediments, gaining mental and moral courage
every step in his ascending way. So it is in the higher spiritual
struggle.”
Without difficulty God’s valiant warriors would not be
known. See Livingstone treading the unexplored interior of
Africa ; Havelock with his Lucknow march; ’tis Williams
dying on the shores of Erromanga.
’Tis upon the battle-field in the deadly trench; —in the
fevered hospital;—in the presence of difficulties almost unsur-
mountable;—that the faith of Hedley Vicars shines forth. No
combination of circumstances, however formidable in them-
selves, can stay him—his pathway to glory is tracked by
devotedness of life and honesty of purpose. The traveller
sees the huge mountain before him, and longs to ascend it,
believing it will bring him nearer to his destination; he strives
to gain the summit; when there, other mountains stretch before
him in the distance, his heart turns sick within him—he knows
not whether to go on, or to turn back. Not so with Vicars :
he scales them one by one, tired, wan, fatigued, but not dis-
heartened, ever-working, ever-toiling, ever-hoping, on he
goes, until he scales the last, and with his eyes undimmed,
his ardour unabated, he gains the Pisgah of his hope, and
sleeps with God.
Be not dismayed by difficulties, by bitter disappointment;
let these be goads to spur you on your way. Put on your
mettle; learn to say in the conflict what the British soldier means
in his, “We never yield.” The great Napoleon said once of
British hearts, “ they never know when they are beaten let
your purpose be a holy one; brace up determination to the


culminating point, and ON, young men, against the powers ot
darkness. Go to the lazarettoes, where the lepers herd ; —go
to the mean, neglected hovels; go where sin holds its inmates in
chains, forged by the powers of darkness ; go where, in the con-
cealed lair, the wicked wait with keen appetite the coming of
their unsuspecting prey; go where misery, desolation, and woe
sigh in bitterest and mournful accents ; go where the mind of
youth is prostrated; go where dark deeds of evil sigh their
mournful requiem; go where the slime of the deceiver can be
traced in the sunken eye and visage grim; go where poor
humanity covered with a thousand ills groans out its bitterness ;
where hell has commenced its work on earth; go where the load
of Satan’s chains press heavily upon the wretched victims;
go, young men, and “ win the spurs of your spiritual knight-
hood there!”
« Young men, arise ! for the day is passing, while you lie dreaming on ;
Your brothers are cased in armour and forth to the fight are gone.
Your place in the ranks awaits you, each man has a part to play ;
The past and the future are nothing, in the face of the stern to-day.
« Arise ! if the past detain you, her sunshine and sorrow forget,
No chains so unworthy to hold you, as those of a vain regret.
Sad or bright, she is lifeless ever, cast her phantom arms away,
Nor look back, save to learn the lesson of a nobler strife to-day.
“ Arise! for the hour is passing ; the sound that you dimly hear
Is your enemy marching to battle. Rise! rise! for the foe is here!
Stav not to brighten your weapons, or the hour will strike at last,
And from the dreams of a coming battle, you will waken and find it past."
We have now contemplated the life of this devoted man;
but we have another duty left us, namely, to chronicle
his death. We think it hard for one so good to die
so soon. We would like to have welcomed him back from that
scene of slaughter and of blood; we had hoped his work for
Jesus had just begun ; we cannot understand the hidden pur-
poses of God. But “knowing He doeth all things well,” we will
meekly bow our heads, whilst the utterance of our lips shall


be, “ Even so, Father, for it seemed good in Thy sight. 5 ’ The
extract concerning his death is from his Memoirs.
The night of the 22nd of March was dark and dreary. The wind
rose high, and swept in stormy gusts across the Crimea. There was for a
time a stillness over the three armies, like the calm before a tempest.
At the advanced post of the British forces, on the side nearest the
rench, was a detachment of the 97th Regiment, commanded by Captain
icars. No watch-fire on that post of danger might cast its red light,
as a oretime, upon the Book of God. Yet was that place of peril holy
ground. Once more the night-breeze bore away the hallowed sounds of
prayer. Once more the deep, earnest eyes of Hedley Vicars looked
upward to that Heaven in which his place was now prepared. Perhaps
in t at dark night he pictured a return to his country, to his home, to the
c osen o his heart, and thought of all the loving welcomes which awaited
k Ut t * lere are better things than these, dear as they are, which
o ath prepared for them that love Him. Perhaps his spirit took a
o tier flight, and imagined the yet more joyful welcomes upon the eternal
shores.
One stern duty more, O soldier and Christian! and realities more
ovely and glorious than it has entered into the heart of man to conceive
shall satisfy thy soul. Fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore at
os right hand. Around thee, in a few moments, may be a host of foes,
ut the air is filled with chariots and horses of fire to carry thee home, to
be numbered with God’s saints in glory everlasting.”
“ ® OOH after ten o’clock that night a loud firing commenced, and was
sustained in the direction of the Victoria Redoubt, opposite the Malakhoff
Tower. Taking advantage of the darknes of the night, a Russian
force of 15,000 men issued from Sebastopol. Preserving a sullen
silence, they approached from the Mamelon under cover of the fire of
their ambuscades, and effected an entrance into the French advanced
parallel, before any alarm could be given by the sentries After a short
but desperate struggle, the French were obliged to fall back on their
reserves.
“ The columns of the enemy then marched along the parallel, and came
up the ravine on the right of the British lines, for the purpose of taking
them in flank and rear. On their approach being observed, they were
lupposed to be the French, as the ravines separated the Allied armies.
Hedley Vicars was the first to discover that they were Russians.
“ With a coolness of judgment which seems to have called for
admiration from all quarters, he ordered his men to lie down until the
Russians came within twenty paces. Then, with his first war-shout,
* Now 97th, on your pins, and charge!’ himself foremost in the conflict-


he led on his gallant men to victory, charging two thousand with a fore*
of barely two hundred. A bayonet wound in the breast only fired his
courage the more; and again his voice rose high, ‘ Men of the 97th,
fellow me!’ as he leaped that parapet he had so well defended, and
charged the enemy down the ravine.
“ One moment a struggling moonbeam fell upon his flashing sword, as
he waved it through the air, with his last cheer fur his men— * This way,
97th !’ The next, the strong arm which had been uplifted, hung powerless
by bis side, and he fell amidst his enemies. But friends followed fast.
His men fought their way through the ranks of the Russians, to defend
the parting life of the leader they loved. Noble brave men! to whom
all who loved Hedley Vicars owe an unforgotten debt of gratitude and
honour.
“In their arms they bore him back, amidst shouts of victory, so
dearly bought.
“ An officer of the Royal Engineers stopped them on their way, to ask
whom they carried. The name brought back to him the days of his
boyhood. The early playmate, since unseen, who now Jay dying before
him, was one whose father’s deathbed had been attended and comforted
by his own father as minister and friend *
“ Captain Browne found a stretcher, and placing his friend upon it,
cooled his fevered lips with a draught of water. That ‘ cup of cold
water shall in wise lose its reward.’
“ To each inquiry, Hedley Vicars answered cheerfully that he believed
his wound was slight. But a main artery had been severed, and the life-
blood flowed fast.
“ A few paces onward, and he faintly said, ‘ Cover my face; cover my
face!’ What need for covering under the shadows of that dark night?
Was it not a sudden consciousness that he was entering into the presence
of the Holy God, before whom the cherubims veiled their faces ?
“ As the soldiers laid him down at the door of his tent, a welcome from
the armies of the sky sounded in his hearing. « He had fallen asleep in
Jesus, to wake up after His likeness, and be satisfied with it.’
“We * asked life of Thee, and Thou gavest it him, even length of
days for ever and ever.’ ”
And now, Young Men of the Christian Association, I have
faintly traced before you, (vaguely and imperfectly, I feel,)
the character of one who loved his country and his God. Let
the lesson of his life be one of use to you—copy him. You
fighters and you sweaters on the battle-field of life, gird up
the loins of your mind,take to you “thewhole armour of God.”
The Dean of Lismore.


Your Saviour mans each breach—follow Him. Remember
Vicars’ last words, “ This way!” You are encompassed
with a glorious cloud of witnesses, who all cry out, “This way !’
Hark! louder than the cannon’s roar, or clashing sword, or
prancing steed, the voice of Jesus sounding on your ear, repeats
the word “This way!” From pearly thrones the myriad
angels beckon vou “ This way !” The army of martyrs, that
blood-besprinkled phalanx, unite to cry “ This way!” The
innumerable multitude which computation fails to number, all
cry out “ This way !” The serpent cannot harm you, if steadily
you keep vour eye upon Him ; —in the thick of this world s
fight, keep your eye upon the Saviour, —no harm shall then
befall you. The fight will soon be hushed ; the night of sin
will soon be past; the morning already breaks with beauteous
glow along yon eastern hills : unfolding beauties meet each
warrior’s eye; the things of darkness flee before the light of
day; the warriors have piled their arms; the trumpet sounds ;
the mighty dead are summoned forth in resurrection garments:
there they stand, they move; and now commences the grand
triumphant progress of the redeemed. On ! on ! they go, up
through the untenanted ether ; they pass the stars, and planets
in their wake are left behind: the harpers, with their golden
harps, begin the Hallelujah, which is caught up by the
innumerable company, The morning stars once sang together
in Creation’s infancy ; and now that all things are developed,
they burst forth again ; and the subject of the song which
rose from this harmonious whole is, “Unto Him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and hath
made us kings and priests unto God and His Father : to Him
be glory and dominion for ever and ever.” Amen.
Sydney: h. Bancroft, printer, parramatta-street.




TAFp
6I QUO
+ls^3-




