



/
)A
r
* "T\r-


V9
7- K//- /3




HEIRS IN EXILE.


vO
0)
cx
ct
-
OJ
"5
CL
v*-T
s
CO
u
3
O
»
fcC
c
o
'c
OJ
3
0
»
a;
<
JU
H
<D
O
c 3


HEIRS IN EXILE
CONSTANCE MARY LE PLASTRIER.
MELBOURNE ;
WILLIAM P. LINEMAN, Publisher,
309-11 Little Collins Street,


Dedicated
to the Memory of
My Beloved Mother.


NOV 13 '59
CONTENTS,
Proem 9
I. A Fallen Idol ------ 13
11. The Letter ------ 73
111. Sir Galahad ------ 30
IV. A Bolt From The Blue - 36
V. The Valley of Humiliation - 46
VI. The Making of a Man - 51
VII. Weighed in The Balance - 68
VIII. Falling Into Line ----- 79
IX, Breast Forward ----- 90
X. Peter - - - 100
XL Uphill m
XII. Honor ------- 122
XIII. Upward and Onward - 135
XIV. A Faithful Heart - 147
XV. Hopes and Fears ----- i 6O
XVI. "is It Well With The Child” - 171




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER
XVII. In The Shadows -
XVIII. Peter's Dream Comes True - . 189
XIX. The Awakening ----- 204
XX. Eureka 214
XXI. A Birthday Party 221
XXII. Daly’s Patent
XXIII. The Day of Reckoning - . . 236
XXIV. Stephen Comes Home - - - - 252
XXV The Final Reward .... 2 64




HEIRS IN EXILE.
PROEM.
HE room was but dimly lighted,
and in the half shadows familiar
shapes seemed strangely unreal,
mocking dim eyes that vainly
sought to trace the well-known
outlines. Nothing clear, nothing
distinct, save the small bright
circle on the ceiling cast upward from the night light,
all else shadowy and confusing like the dreaded
future.
“Nurse, Nurse.”
The voice was scarcely more than a whisper, yet
almost immediately the attendant was beside her,
soft, cool hands smoothed the uneasy pillow, and
brushed back the short fair curls from the fevered
brow.
“This will never do, Mrs. Daly; you are making
yourself worse by this restlessness. Try and com-
pose yourself, and you will fall asleep.”
“Sleep! Oh, not for me. Sleep is for a mind at
rest, and mine is in turmoil, for I know what awaits
me. \ es, yes I do; for to-day, when they were
a 9


speaking, I was not asleep, or, rather, I was asleep
when they began, and I woke up at the end, or appar-
ently the end, I only heard the closing sentences, but
they were enough to show me my danger, and how
unlikely it is that the operation will be successful.”
“You are wandering, dear lady.”
No, no; you are not kind to put me off like that.
Besides, if there were no danger, why should Father
Collins come this evening as he did. Listen now,
3 r ou must help me. I ask you in the name of God’s
blessed Mother.”
“You must try and sleep, or I shall have to give
you the draught the doctor left,”
“There will be no need. I shall sleep when you
have done what I ask of you.”
“And that is?”
“Give me pencil and paper, for I must write a
letter; and then bring me my darling boy for the
last time.”
“For the last time, indeed!” returned the nurse in
her brisk voice. “You will live to see him a man
yet, I do not know if lam wise in yielding to your
requests, but I think it will do you less harm than
this feverish tossing about. See here, I was just
going to write a note myself when you called, and
3'ou may have my block and my fountain pen. Wait
till I arrange the pillows and draw 3 r ou higher. Now
—here is all 3'ou want, but you must be quick, for I
cannot allow 3 r ou to remain long in that position.
The kindty nurse then withdrew to her seat behind
the screen, and took up her book, but the story had
lost its interest, for, after all, it was only fiction, and
here, in this room, was real tragedy; for well she
knew that the patient to whom she had spoken so
cheerfully had but the barest of chances. True, the
surgeons were skilled and careful, but, even were


the operation successful, would the enfeebled frame
bear the consequent exhaustion? Pushing aside the
book, she drew out her rosary, and, offering her
prayers for her poor, frail charge, shook off all sense
of care and foreboding in the contemplation of the
divine mysteries. Oh, blessed rosary, sweet crown
of roses—roses of joy, blushing and fragrant, roses
white with the dews of agony and death, roses
flushed with the crimson of love and bright with the
gold of glory! sorrow loses its sting, the sordid cares
of life have no power to oppress, since we can gather
while yet here on earth the blossoms of heaven.
For some time there was no sound in the room
but the murmured prayer and the steady scratching
of the pen on the paper, until at last the latter
ceased, and a long, low sigh bespoke the greatness
of the effort. Nurse Joyce was beside her at once,
and looked anxiously at the flushed face and trem-
bling hands.
No, Nurse, don't look concerned; I am greatly
relieved now, since I have written the letters, and
if you bring me in my boy I shall sleep, I know I
shall.”
The nurse left the room, and soon returned with
the boy, whose eyes, dewy with sleep, looked round
in wondering fear, his baby lips curved in protest-
ing grief, but the whimper died at the touch of
mother hands and the sound of a loved voice - and
soon the nurse had the satisfaction of seeing the
success of her experiment, for ere long the heavy
ids drooped over the fever-bright eyes, and the long
lashes lay on the sunken cheeks. She stood for
some little w-hile looking dowm on the touching pic-
ture; the baby head with its clustering curls, the
velvet cheek of health, the chubby arm laid lovingly
on the wasted neck, the sturdy little form held


closely in the frail arms, and she turned away with
a strange ache at her heart, though long experience
had shown her many sad and pitiful sights. Through
tear-dimmed eyes she looked at the two letters she
held in her hands; one was addressed to Mr. Daly,
the other bore this inscription; ‘‘To my son,
Stephen; to be given to him on the day of his First
Communion.” Laying them down almost reverently,
she moved quietly about the room, making prepara-
tions for the morning. Once feeling the need of a
moment outside she stepped on to the verandah, and
was startled to see a shadowy figure draw back into
the darkness of the trees. Though she tried to dis-
miss the thought of this, it recurred again and again,
and she was almost tempted to rouse someone else
to search the garden: but on second thoughts she
determined otherwise, for the whole household
would have a trying time on the morrow. It must
have been her imagination, and yet it seemed as
though the house were being watched, for two or
three times after she went to look, and in the dark-
ness could just make out a dim form, but so motion-
less that she concluded that it was only a shadow,
and dismissed all fear. And truly she had quite
enough to do without troubling about anything out-
side the house.
Morning came at last; heralded by a storm of
rain which left myriads of drops on branch and
spray for the sun to turn to flashing diamonds.
When the low chirp of wakening birds came from
the camphor-laurels outside the darkened window,
Nurse Joyce gently drew the sleeping boy from the
wasted arms and took him back to the nursery.


CHAPTER I.
A FALLEN IDOL.
“But yet I know, where’r I go?
That there hath passed away a glory from the earth.”
Wordsworth.
DAY of perfect beauty, cloudless
skies, and just enough of the
south breeze to temper the
warmth of the sun. Certainly an
ideal day for a fete, especially
when held in such a garden as
this, Xo scanted enclosure where
the landscape gardener’s art
makes the most of the space at its disposal, but one
that, though falling short of Bacon’s ideal of thirty
acres, yet was large enough for lawn, pleasaunce,
an pei go a, foi brilliant flower beds, for masses of
semi-tropic shrubs, and last, but by no means least
or the true garden-lover, for groups of trees, here
the slender poplars, there the spreading oaks, whose
tender green was almost equalled by the rustling
camphor-laurels. A garden to wander in, to dream
m the world forgetting by the world forgot. But
o-day the world is very much in evidence, lawns,
erraces and walks are thronged by guests, mostly
ladies whose gay dresses rival the hues of the


flowers, and whose voices, laughing, mocking, eager,
have silenced the birds that haunt the garden spaces.
Not that the sterner sex is entirely absent, but John
Daly, the wealthy ironfounder, has his friends
among the money-making class, and a whole after-
noon is too much to be wasted in mere pleasure.
Therefore the male guests are but few, and repre-
sent rather Mrs. Daly’s friends, for she was of good
family, though, fallen on evil days, her parents were
pleased enough to persuade her to marry the demi-
millionaire. And, contrary to the prognostications
of well-meaning friends, the marriage seemed to
have turned out very well, in spite of disparity in
age, birth and tastes, and to see her now the centre
of a gay group, herself the gayest one could imagine
that she had not a care in the world.
“Your fete is perfect, Estelle,” said her cousin,
Mrs. Mainwaring, sinking lazily into a luxurious
chair, “but then your entertainments always are for
you have such taste, and then your resources are
simply—well, simply inexhaustible!” and she sighed
in conclusion, for Clare Mainwaring was as am-
bitious as she was pleasure-loving, and her modest
income forbade any excess in either direction.
Mrs. Daly laughed softly. “You are a sad flat-
terer, Clare. But lam glad it has been such a suc-
cess to-day. You see I want to launch Stephen.”
“If you can.”
“What do you mean, Clare?”
“What should I mean, Estelle? \ou will never
make a society man out of Stephen, I feel sure. He
is refined, well-educated, well-mannered, but he is
not the stuff that a social success is made of. Too
much of the preux chevalier about him for the hun-
dred and one nothings that go to make up modern
society.


There was a general laugh, but Mrs. Daly inter-
posed quickly: “You are always ready to laugh at
Stephen, Clare; but to me he is as dear as my own
Cecil, and I know him better than any in the house
does. What you call his gaucherie is only shyness;
he is fresh from College, remember, and has not had
much experience of society. Hush, here he comes.”
And leaving the others rather astonished at her
warmth, she went swiftly over the lawn to meet her
step-son. “Where have you been, Stephen?” she
asked when they met. “I do believe you’ve been
hiding with a book somewhere, and I taking all this
trouble to give you a start in society.”
“No,” laughed the young man, “I haven’t been out
of the grounds, nor even out of the throng, though
I should have liked to, for, as you know this is little
to my taste. But how beautiful you look; there’s no
one here like you.”
Silly boy, flattering your old step-mother. But,”
dropping her light banter, and speaking in an earnest
undertone, there are some people here to-day whom
I am anxious should be made welcome, for they are
old friends of your father s. Ah, that rouses you;
\ ou are a tiue hero worshipper, Stephen, and your
hero is your father. Now, for these friends of his;
I do not see them about, and am particularly anxious
that they should not feel slighted in any way. So,
do you go, like a good boy and find them out, and see
it they have had any refreshments, and show them
all the attention you can. You know them, for I
introduced you to them early in the afternoon; Mr.
Keene and Mr. Cronin. Would you remember
them?
“Of course. I’ll hunt them out, and see they get
all they want. I was looking for Mrs. Dare.”


“Or Helena? Ah, your looks betray you. Well,
Mrs. Dare, and, incidentally, her daughter, will not
be here till late, so that you’ll have plenty of time
to entertain the two gentlemen first.”
And with a kindly touch of her jewelled fingers,
she turned back to her guests, whilst Stephen, his
face still flushed from the allusion to Miss Dare,
went on over the lawns, scanning every group
eagerly. In his anxiety to find and honour his
father’s friends, his step-mother’s jest was soon for-
gotten, and his only care was to find the two quiet-
looking men to whom he had been introduced earlier
in the afternoon. But his search was vain, though
he looked through the crowds in the marquees, on
the lawns, and on the tennis courts. He came to
the conclusion that they must have left, but still he
decided to try the less frequented parts of the
grounds, and sauntered along shady walks that were
almost deserted till he came to a favourite nook
among the trees, and could not resist the temptation
to rest awhile. The thick screen of the cypress trees
hid him on three sides, in front a trellis covered with
wistaria formed a fragrant wall. Here he could sit
and weave the day-dreams that youth loves. It had
been his favourite haunt in the few vacations he had
spent at home, and though he had neglected it of
late, its spell fell on him once more as he sat on the
rustic bench. The air was heavy with the scent of
the wistaria, whose delicate blooms drifted down on
him with every faint gust of wind, and this fragrance
blent with the resinous sweetness of the cypress, was
conducive to the conjuring up of hopes and dreams,
and so yielding to the influence of the place, he for-
got errand and fete alike, lost in those airy ca sties
the building of which is so sweet. \ oices aroused


him, and one sentence, bitter and stern, brought all
his unsubstantial towers and pinnacles toppling
about him.
“Aye, yes; all very fine and splendid, but its only
the thirty pieces of silver after all,”
“Don’t be too hard on him, Keene. It must be a
big temptation, and how do we know that we’d
come off any better out of it?”
“That may be or not, but you are begging the
question. Treachery is treachery, no matter what
the temptation; and apostacy is hideous, gild it as
you will. Whether or no I’d have yielded as he did
is too unlikely to speculate upon. But one thing I
do know, I’d not change places with him for all his
wealth.”
“Nor I. But I cannot understand, Keene, how it
all came about; he was a staunch Catholic when I
saw him last, how long ago, about twenty years, or
more.
“It’s all that. He was lukewarm for years before
he fell altogether. As long as she was alive she kept
him to his duty, for she was a woman in a thousand.
But she died, and then he met Munro, and the daily
intercourse with such a man completed what love of
money had begun. The} r became partners, and
though rich before together they amassed an enor-
mous fortune; the three of them, I should say, for
you know that Mackenzie is really a partner,”
"Is he, indeed? And Munro is dead, you say.”
‘A es, long ago, and all the money has come to
these two, for Munro had no one of his own to in-
herit. I never seek intercourse with him; we meet
in business, that’s all. I came here to-day because I
wanted you to see the home bought with the silver
of betrayal, the Judas.”


‘'Don’t be too bitter; he’ll have to pay the penalty
to the uttermost farthing. A harder judgment than
that of any mere fellow-man awaits him. Tell me,
wasn’t there a son by the first marriage?”
‘‘Yes, indeed, a fine young fellow. Brought up in
the Faith too, marvellous as it may seem. I suppose
he promised her that before she died; and he’d keep
his word if he did, for he’s straight enough in all
other things except the one. Poor Stephen, I pity
him; how is he to keep the faith in this atmosphere—
worldliness, money-making, pleasure seeking?”
The voices ceased, and soon the sound of steps on
the gravelled walk announced the departure of the
speakers, but Stephen sat still erect, motionless, with
eyes that, staring intently, saw nothing, with ears
deaf to all but the terrible words, ‘‘thirty pieces of
silver,” ‘‘the Judas.” His father, for he did not doubt
to whom they had been referring, his father, his
hero, his ideal man of power and strength. True, he
had seen little of him after all, for he had not spent
many vacations at home ; and though he had been
living in the same house for the last few months, he
had been almost timid in seeking any closer inti-
macy, waiting for him to make the first advances.
And now—now —oh, it was too horrible! Not noble,
not loyal, not a man to be looked up to and copied,
but a renegade, an apostate, one who, like Judas of
old, had sold his God for money. He tried to think,
but his brain refused to act, it seemed like his body
bereft of power; but by degrees this numbness
passed, and he was able to face the position. It was
characteristic of him that a rush of shame and re-
morse swept away his doubts and fears. These men
were surely jealous, envious enemies, who grudged
his father the wealth and position he had won, or
they were repeating mere idle rumours, the ugly


shadows always cast by the sun of prosperity; in
any case, he should be the last to believe ill of the
man who had always seemed to him the type of a
true hero, quiet, unostentatious, though he owed his
proud position entirely to his own efforts.
“Stephen! Stephen !” The fresh young voice rang
out clear and sweet. There was a sound of hurried
steps, and a beautiful girl of twelve broke in on
his reverie.
“I knew you’d be here. Mother wants you to see
someone up on the rose terrace, and you’d better
hurry, because nearly everyone’s gone. You do look
white, Stevie. It’s those horrid books you’re always
poring over. Did you have any tea? No? Oh, and
there was such delicious ice-cream, strawberry, and
pine-apple. Come round by the marquee, and we’ll
see if there is any left.”
“No, thank you, Elaine,” he said, trying to force a
smile, as he looked down on the bright young face;
you may have my share. Have you had a happy
day ?’’ he continued, as they walked along together.
“You look as though you’ve had.”
“Just glorious, Stevie. I wish we could have one
like it every week. But I don’t think you’ve enjoyed
it one bit; you look so tired and miserable.”
“Nonsense,” he rejoined lightly. But he took the
hint, nevertheless, and braced himself to assume his
usual manner with such success that even the criti-
cal eyes of Mrs. Mainwaring detected no sign of his
late agitation as he came towards them up the steps,
Elaine clinging to his hand.
Ah, here you are, Stephen, exclaimed his step-
mother. I was just beginning to think Elaine could
not find you, you have a genius for hiding, and Miss
Joyce cannot wait any longer. Do you recognise


him?'" she added, turning to the white-haired lady
beside her.
“He was three years old when I saw him last,”
was the laughing rejoinder, “and I think there have
been a few changes since then. But he is like his
mother.”
“Did you know my mother?” asked Stephen,
eagerly. “I often try and remember something
about her; but there is only a confused recollection
of being awakened in the night, and being horribly
afraid until I found that she was holding me in her
arms.”
“It might be the very night I took you to her; I
was her nurse. lam sorry I did not see you sooner,
but you must come and have a long talk with me; I
am at my sister’s, Mrs. Neale. Now I must really
be going.”
“At least you must let me go with you as far as
the gate,” said Stephen, and you will tell me about
her as we go along. I am hungry for news of her.”
“What a beautiful home this is,” remarked Miss
Joyce, as they moved across the lawns upon which
the setting sun was throwing long shadows. “Your
mother was a beautiful woman,” she went on as
soon as they were clear of the few remaining guests,
“and as good as she was beautiful. Her death was
very sad, and, oh, she did want to live for your
sake!”
“And father’s, too,” put in Stephen, quickly.
“Douotless, but her fears were for you. Weak as
she was, she wrote two letters the night before she
died. How you must have been touched by the one
to you!”
“A letter to me!” he exclaimed; “but surely you
are mistaken?”


“I am not,” was the quick reply. “It was addressed
to you, to be given to you on the day of your First
Communion. She gave them both to me, and I
handed them to your father myself.”
A hand of ice seemed laid on Stephen’s heart.
Again an accusation against his father. But this one
at least could soon be proved or disproved; and not
even to this kindly woman beside him would he
show how deeply the shaft had gone home. He
murmured some incoherent explanation, but she in-
terrupted him, and laid her hand on his arm.
“Tell me only one thing,” she said, earnestly,
"have you been brought up in your mother’s faith?”
“I am a Catholic, if that is what you mean. But
why do you say my mother’s faith, it was not then
my father’s?”
“It was; you know better than I what it is now.
I fear this has wounded you deeply, but I do not
regret my mention of the letter, if it will enable you
to get it and read what cost her so much suffering
to write. You must go back now, you have come
far enough, but come and see me soon; you will be
welcome for your mother’s sake; and for your own
also,” she added in a lower tone.
Torn by conflicting emotions, Stephen hastened
to the house, taking the side paths to avoid meeting
the departing guests. Entering his own room, he
sat for a long time, trying to find a line of action
which would set the torturing doubts at rest, and
}et not wound his father too deeply, or make himself
seem to be wanting in filial duty. The two revela-
tions coming so soon one after the other had not
only crushed him, but thrown him into such a tur-
moil of spirit that he w*as unable to concentrate his
mind. At last, abandoning his own weak efforts to
find a solution, he fell on his knees before the crucifix


which had been his mother’s, and implored help in
this bitter need. Without the twittering and chirp-
ing of the birds died away in silence with the last
glimmer of light, and the hush of evening fell on
all. Deeper silence within the room where the soft
moonlight fell through the open window on a form
bowed in that agony of soul from which one can
come out only as victor or vanquished.


CHAPTER 11.
THE LETTER.
"Oh, who can dare complain,
W hen God sends a new duty,
To comfort each new pain.”
A. A. Procter,
Come in!” said Mr. Daly, peremptorily, in
answer to the timid knock. “Ah, Stephen, it’s you,
is it. Well, you're just in time, for I was making
out your monthly cheque. It’s the last I shall make,
for you’re of age next month, and then the property
will be made over to you. But whatever is the mat-
ter, lad; you look white and strange. Are you ill,
or has your entrance into the fashionable world been
too much for you ?”
Neither, father, though I must admit that amon< T
the guests to-day were three whose coming has
brought me great trouble. I have fought it out with
myself, and have determined to come straight to
you, and ask you to disprove these terrible charges;
no, I don t mean disprove, I mean deny; your word
is enough for me against them all. Father, say it is
not true: I can’t bear to think it of you.”
w J 1 very well den - v what lam ignorant of
W hat do you mean, Stephen, who has been slander-
ing me to my son?”
N ° one ’ father - I overheard portion of a con-
0n between two m en who knew you long
"Cronin and Keene?”
Stephen made a motion of assent.
I expect they gave me a nice character, narrow-


minded bigots. And who was the third witness
against me?” The voice was curiously hard.
“A Miss Joyce; she was the nurse who was with
my mother at the last. But why beat about the
bush? The conversation I overheard implied that
you were a renegade, an apostate. Oh, father, tell
me that mother’s faith was never yours.”
“You talk like a child, Stephen, when you are a
man in years; but I suppose that is partly my own
fault, for you have been educated on such absurdly
narrow lines that you could hardly think otherwise
than that I am a monster of iniquity, because I have
discarded a worn-out superstition. What have mere
forms of belief to do with me, or with anyone else
endowed with common sense for that matter. A good
name in business, a sound policy, a substantial bank
balance, these things count, they are solid and indis-
pensable; but that myth of religion, do you think
anyone really believes it in these enlightened days?
Bless the boy, he looks as horrified as if I was talk-
ing of murder, instead of giving him a little sound
common sense. Well, if you will have the whole
truth; I was a Catholic once, but in the race of life
we must drop all that hampers and impedes our pro-
gress, and so I discarded it as soon as I could. Well,
sir, are you answered?”
He looked for argument or expostulation, but
Stephen merely bowed his head, and for a few
minutes there was silence, Mr. Daly had risen and
stood confronting his son, whose eyes were bent on
the floor. Never had his boy seemed to him so hand-
some, so noble, a son to be proud of; and a kind of
rage filled him that he should feel so shamed before
his own child. He began to turn over the papers on
his desk, as if intimating that the interview had
better end; but Stephen took no notice of this.


“Father,” he said at last, and his voice was even
though very low, “there is one more question that I
must ask you. Nurse Joyce spoke of a letter that
my dear mother wrote to me the night before she
died. Why was it never given to me?”
“Ah,” the exclamation was almost a groan, “she
told you that, did she? I did not give you the letter
because I guessed at its contents, and I did not want
you to be made miserable. I have kept my promise
to her and brought you up as a Catholic, much
against my will. Have I not done enough and more
than enough?”
“Have you the letter still, or is it destroyed?”
“No, I have it. Do you want it?”
“More than anything else in the world.”
Mr. Daly fitted a key into a drawer of his desk,
and turned it sharply; in all he did there was a
marked irritation and impatience. Turning over
several papers, he drew out a } r ellowed envelope and
handed it to Stephen, who, although there was a
mist before his eyes, could distinguish the faint in-
scription.
“Here is your cheque also,” said his father,
harshly, you may as well take it with you at the
same time. And I hope, Stephen, that you will take
a sensible and honest view of this unhappy incident.
I do not consider that I am accountable to my son
for my religious views; please bear that in mind in
future.”
Stephen mechanically took the pink slip
handed to him, and withdrew without a
word in reply to the bitterness of that last
speech, and the mortified man, left to himself,
tried in vain to give his attention to the papers be-
fore him. Between him and the written words came
those grey eyes so like the mother’s long sealed in
B 25


death, and there was the same look in them too,
reproach even through love. To no purpose he bent
his mind on business matters; he was torn by con-
flicting passions, remorse, shame, and, above all,
anger that he should be so humbled before the son
who had always looked up to him.
And Stephen? Alone in his room, he read and re-
read the few lines traced so long ago, and to his
excited imagination it seemed that his mother’s voice
sounded in his ears, and that he heard, not read, the
broken sentences.
“My darling Son,
To-day is the greatest day in your life, and if
you are only faithful, the memory of it will be a joy
in the deepest sorrows, a light in the darkest night.
Only be faithful, never forsake Him Who loves even
unto the end. Believe me, my son, for I stand at the
entrance to the Valley of the Shadow, there is
nothing worth having but the love and friendship of
God, and no sacrifice is too great if the making of it
keeps that for yourself and those you love. Never
relax you devotion to the Sacred Heart—that anchor
holds in the worst storm. I can write no more, my
strength is gone. Your father, Stephen, help him if
you can—and if he fall from the faith, count no
sacrifice too hard to win him back. I charge you—
I cannot —God’s Blessed Mother keep my boy, so
soon to be motherless.”
No more than this, and the last line was all but
illegible. His eyes filled with tears as he thought of
the heroic effort made to leave him these words of
loving counsel. A tapping at the door roused him
from his reverie, and, putting the letter away hur-
riedly, he turned the key and admitted his half-bro-
ther, Cecil.


“Wherever have you been, Stephen, all the even-
ing? I thought you had gone home with some of
the crowd who have been here, especially when you
didn’t turn up to dinner. Have you been out, for I
came up here a short time ago, and you were not
here?”
“No, I was down in the library for a short time.
Did you want me, Cecil?”
“Want you? Not I: and yet perhaps I did, for I
don’t know what I want. I’m in an awful hole,” he
groaned, “and I don’t know what I’m to do at all.”
“Cecil, have you been out again with those Faver-
shams ?”
“I have, unfortunately. I never meant to go
again, but Jim met me last Saturday and persuaded
me. I’m afraid I’m terribly weak, Stephen.”
“How much is it this time?” asked Stephen, drily.
More than I dare tell you. I think I’d better go
away altogether and make a fresh start somewhere
else.’’
Don t talk like that, \ou know it would break
your mother’s heart if you did such a thing. I can’t
understand how you let such unprincipled men as
those have any influence over you. Now, don’t get
restive, I’m not going to lecture you. What can I
do?”
“Have you any money?”
Not much. Stay, here is the cheque father has
just gi\ en me. Nine pounds; is that any good to
you?”
“It must do, if I can't get any more, I thought
you had your own property now, you’re of age "
“Next month, father said. But I don’t see how
that would help. I’ve no intention of letting mv
mother’s money go to card-playing, horse-racing


idlers. Why don’t you go to father and tell him
all? It’s the best plan, Cecil, take my word for it.”
“I’m not going to do it, best plan or not. He has
no idea I'm in debt, and he would be furious, and he
can be furious, though you little suspect it, and he’s
as hard as nails when he gets a set on one. Well,
thanks for the cheque, Steve, I wish I didn’t have
to take it; I seem to get all your money from you.
I wish my luck would turn.”
‘The best possible luck is to leave the cards alone,
Cecil. You must stop this terrible practice; please
do try; you are only preparing misery for yourself
and all of us. I sometimes think I ought to tell
father, for you are too young to be in the company
of those men. You know you did promise me ”
“Tell if you dare,” broke in Cecil, hotly. “We
can’t all be saints like you. Only the day you tell,
I’ll be off; you can bear that in mind.”
“I only want to save you, Cecil. But promise if I
stand by you in this promise, that it’ll be the last
time you’ll yield to their solicitations. They are
preying on your youth and inexperience.”
“Oh, I promise,” said he, bitterly. “Yes,” he
added, slowly, “if I get clear of this, I’ll never
gamble again.”
And with a wild laugh he left the room, and later
the house. For some time after he had gone,
Stephen thought deeply over all the circumstances.
He had been troubled about Cecil ever since he had
come home to live, for he was not long in finding out
that something was very wrong with him; and he
had tried to get the boy away from his bad com-
panions, but hitherto without success. What was
to be done about the foolish lad? Vainly he sought
a solution of the trouble, and then his own recent
sorrow asserted itself, and he drew forth the letter


again. Doubts, cares and a terrible foreboding op-
pressed him as he reviewed the events of the day,
but he had early learned where to seek for help and
strength; and soon, as he prayed, the stormy
thoughts were stilled, and peace such as the world
can never give fell on him. With the peace came
strength and courage, and a firm purpose took shape
in his mind:
“Dear Lord,” he prayed, “my father has strayed
far from Y ou; give me the grace to win him back,
though it be at the cost of my very life.”


CHAPTER 111.
SIR GALAHAD.
“My strength is as the strength of ten
Because my heart is pure.”
Tennyson.
“Give me but a moment, Stephen,” cried Mrs.
Daly, as she saw her step-son passing rapidly across
the marble-flagged hall. “I know where you are
going, and what spirit moves you, yet grant me a
minute before you fly to the mountain of inspira-
tion.”
Stephen laughed as he came to where she stood,
surrounded by choicest blossoms which she was ar-
ranging with exquisite effect; for she was too great
a lover of flowers to leave this work, as many do,
to the servants; to her it was a labour of love, and
every morning found her busied at it in this cool
corner of the great hall.
He watched her for some minutes in admiring
silence, as quickly and accurately she was arranging
the deep blue of the delphiniums with the pale green
fern sprays, then he said with a smile:
“And what is it you want of me so important that
you call me to intrude on this great work?”
“I admit that I like to work uninterruptedly, and
in any case I'll not detain you a moment; I only
want to know if you will go to “Brenchley” with me
this afternoon.”
Stephen’s smile died away; he looked troubled
and uneasy. “I would rather not,” he said, hesitat-
ingly. “You know that it is not that I do not want


to oblige you, but I dislike going there because, be-
cause ’’
“You disapprove of the card-playing, I know; but,
Stephen, dear, we cannot all be like you, and in
society we must do as society does, more’s the pity.
I do not care about cards myself, but to refuse to
play would seem odd,”
“I cannot see that,” rejoined Stephen. “Surely
one may be true to one's principles even in society.”
“Do you know, Stephen,” said Mrs. Daly, holding
up a vase to note the effect of her arranging, “that
you would be ever so much nicer if you were not so
uncomfortably conscientious. Even in the vacation,
as now, you will persist in studying so many hours a
day, and I don't think it has ever entered your head
to omit your morning practice. I’m afraid that Clare
was right, and that you will never do for a society
man, you are too inflexible when you think prin-
ciples are at stake. I wonder will you continue like
that all your life. Xot that I doubt your courage,”
she added hastily, “but it's one thing to be loyal in
the time of peace, and quite another to stand firm
in the heat of the conflict. And surely the hardest
foe of all is ridicule. Still I think you would hold
out, once you had made a stand.”
( “I trust so, though it is, as you say, very easy to
theorise and very hard to practise. Then you will
excuse my non-attendance this afternoon?”
Why, of course; I was quite prepared for a re-
fusal. But tell me, Stephen, do vou never play
cards?”
That branch of my education has been neglected,
I am happy to say; though I am not so silly and
narrow -minded as to think ill of those who do. It is
doubtless an excellent pastime for those who like it,
and who have spare time to while away; but I have


so many hobbies that I never have any spare time to
speak of; and if I did, I’d rather play ”
“Your beloved Amati. Go, then, I’ll keep you
from it no longer. I wonder you could stoop to such
a sternly practical profession as engineering; you
should have been a musician.”
“I might not have loved music so well then; now
it is my delight and recreation. Besides, you know,
father set his heart on my being an engineer, and
how could I disappoint him? It is better as it is;
my art is mine only, and I shall never have to parade
it to all sorts and conditions of men; never have to
drag it down to the market place and force it to earn
my bread; ah, I should find that bread very bitter,
should feel it too dearly bought.”
“Ah, Stephen, don’t fix your ideal too high. Has
it not been said that ‘A lantern in the hand is worth
a dozen stars?’ It is a good thing on the whole that
you have so matter-of-fact a profession, it will coun-
teract your idealism. When will you be finished at
the University?”
“Only another year. I’ve been longer there than
most, because I went through the Arts course first;
otherwise I should have just finished when I crme
of age.”
“At twenty-three. Most come of age two years
earlier, but that was your mother’s wish, and doubt-
less for a wise reason. How proud she would have
been of you, Stephen,” she added with a sigh. “I
am as it is, and you are not my own son. Ah, if
Cecil were like you I should be happier; his thought-
less extravagance costs me many an anxious hour.
Try and steady him for my sake, and as you think
your own, dear mother would have wished some one
to help you had you been so foolish. Ah, what an
impossible case. Now, go; I’ll keep you from your


music no longer. And yet, before you go, I should
like to ask you a question or two, that is if you will
pardon me if I seem impertinent.”
“As if you could be. Ask as many as you like.”
“Are you always on the heights? \ou seem of
finer clay than we ordinary mortals; or is it that
the good Fathers who trained you have refined the
grosser element out? I used to be quite in awe of
you, until I saw you on the football field; you were
very human there. But have you never gambled at
all, in any way?”
Stephen shook his head.
“Nor betted at races?”
Again dissent.
“Nor been tempted to ?”
She stopped short, abashed by the fearless purity
of the clear eyes, and gathering from the fragrant
masses beside her a single snowy stephanotis, she
fastened it in his coat.
“Go, Sir Galahad,” she said with a half laugh,
though her eyes were misty, “God keep you as you
are, and I only wish there were more like you. Go
now to your music and aspirations.”
She bent again to her task, and Stephen, bewil-
dered by the bitter sadness of her look, went slowly
down the hall. Through the luxurious drawing-
room he passed with eyes downcast, for though he
had before always delighted in the exquisite taste
of his step-mother as shown in the furnishing of
these rooms, yet of late the profusion and extrava-
gant luxury always brought with them the sting of
recollection “thirty pieces of silver.” In the music
room it was different, for though in no room was
Mrs. Daly s artistic power more displayed, and
though its very simplicity was more costly than any
profusion, to Stephen’s unsophisticated eyes it was


not so; the parquet of rare woods was to him only
a cool, bare floor; beautiful, but simple, the panes
of rich stained glass, whose colours glowed in the
sunlight, were but uncurtained windows; and this
absence of ornamentation appealed to him more than
usual to-day, when the strange questioning had so
jarred on him. Naturally simple minded, his almost
cloistral life had accentuated his distaste for what-
ever clashed with his ideals, and his step-mother's
genuine surprise at his horror of self-indulgence was
a revelation to him. But here in this artistic room
was beauty, coolness, and peace. He drew his violin
from its case, and though at first he practised tech-
nical studies with that conscientiousness which
Estelle Daly found so uncomfortable, he soon laid
aside the written music and glided from one
favourite theme to another, until the troubles and
perplexities that had beset him of late faded away;
the crooked was all made straight, the wrongs
righted, and the future stretched before him beauti-
ful, rose-crowned.
Going up to his room an hour or two later, he
encountered Cecil just coming out of his door.
“Were you looking for me?” he asked, absently,
his mind still full of dreamy beauties; “I was in the
music-room.”
“No,” was the rough answer; “why should I want
you? \ou and I are not in the same world.”
“Cecil," was the astonished cry. But before he
could say more the lad was gone, leaving Stephen
strangely perturbed— not only by the wild words,
but still more by the wilder looks. Much as he
wished to help him, he judged the time most unsuit-
able; the boy was evidently in no fit state to be
reasoned with; later he might be more amenable.
So trusting to have a long talk with him later, he


SIR GALAHAD.
went out to pay a visit that was becoming almost a
daily one, to Miss Joyce, who was, however, never
tired of talking to him about the mother he scarcely
remembered.


CHAPTER IV.
A BOLT FROM THE BLUE.
“Then you shall give, and I will take,
This crown of fire for love’s dear sake.”
A. A. Procter.
Oh, are you home at last? I’ve been waiting to
tell you that you are wanted in the library, Stevie,”
cried Elaine, as she rapped at his door. “And you’d
better hurry, too, for father is real cross.” She
caught at his hand as he came out, and tripped along
beside him. “I know he is by the way he speaks;
you know how, but no, of course you don’t; you’re
the good one of the family; and it’s only we naughty
ones who understand just what it means when he
speaks slowly and is extra polite. Stoop down,
Stevie, till I whisper. Do you think it is Cecil in
trouble; he’s been so strange lately? Oh, I know
you do, so don’t protest. Help him because he’s so
silly, won't you, like a darling.” And she ran off
to hide the coming tears.
Although he had tried on many previous occasions
to find out the cause of Cecil’s strange behaviour,
nothing had come of it except the unpleasant cer-
tainty that something very serious was troubling the
unhappy boy. Had anything come to the father’s
knowledge, and was this summons connected with
that discovery ? It was with no slight perturbation
that he entered the library. He had had no private
intercourse with his father since that night, the
memory of which was still so bitter, so he shrank
from an interview with him, and was greatly re-
lieved to see that his step-mother and Cecil were


both present. Elaine was right, then, and her bro-
ther was in trouble. Had he had the courage to go
to his father and tell him all? But, no; for in such
a confession there must have been relief, and Cecil’s
misery seemed despairing. He looked to the mother,
and his heart sank, not because her face was white
and set, for he knew how she dreaded her husband’s
angry outbursts, and her son s attitude of hopeless-
ness would have wrung any mother’s heart; but
there was in her eyes a look of reproachful sorrow
that pierced him, for he was evidently the object of
it. What had he done, except lend money to the
erring one? He turned to his father, who stood grim
and silent by the table, several papers spread out
before him and a letter in his hand. Ihe silence was
oppressive, and in spite of himself he felt a thrill of
foreboding, and his face grew pale.
“Well, sir,” said Mr. Daly at length, and his slow
speech brought back Elaine’s warning, “what have
you to say to this?”
“To what?” asked Stephen, his heart sinking be-
fore an unknown terror. “Why do you look at me
like that?”
“If you had died when your mother did, I should
have been a happier man to-day.”
Stephen reeled as from a blow, then recovering
himself, he walked over to the table.
“You must speak plainly; I want to know what
my offence is.”
For all answer his father handed him a letter, and
as he took it he heard a strangled sob from Cecil.
But to his increasing wonder the letter threw no
light on the mystery; it was from the manager of
the Bank of , asking Mr. Daly to call on him at
once, as a cheque over his signature seemed to have
been tampered with.


“I don t understand/’ he said, handing back the
missive. “W hat have Ito do with this?”
"Oh, you are well skilled in dissimulation; so calm
in speech, so calm in look, even when confronted
with the proofs of }'our villany.”
There was colour enough in the erstwhile pale
cheeks —the grey eyes were flashing. He strode
nearer to the speaker.
‘‘That is a hard word, father; you must take it
back,”
“I must, must I,” almost shrieked the angry man,
throwing off his unnatural restraint. “1 think I am
the one to dictate terms. Who had a cheque from
me a fortnight ago, on this very date, for nine
pounds ?”
ell, I did for one," answered Stephen, wonder-
ing if his father had suddenly gone mad.
'Oh, you admit that. Well then, did you pre-
sent it in person?”
X no. Not exactly,’’ was the stammering an-
swer.
1 hat touches you. Now look at this. No, you
don't handle it you’d like to destroy it of course,
such a strong proof of your guilt. See, I hold your
hands thus. Now, read the cheque that lies on the
table there. Read your own accusation, forger and
thief.”
Bew ildeied Stephen read and re-read. At first it
conveyed absolutely no meaning to his dazed mind.
What did his father mean by a cheque for nine
pounds. This one was for nine hundred.
Nine pounds, nine hundred pounds. His
eyes wandered from the slip of white and
pink paper before him to the angry face so close
to his own, to Cecil’s bowed head and quivering
body, and in an instant all was clear. Cruel and


hard was the grip of those hands on his wrists, but
cruder and harder the band of iion that seemed
closing round his heart. For he understood only too
well now; the cheque he had given to Cecil had
been for nine pounds, and the unhappy boy had
altered it, or let others alter it. , The words he had
heard only a few hours ago recurred to his memory:
“As your own dear mother would have wished
some one to help you.” And just then Cecil raised
his head and looked at him. There was no mistak-
ing that despairing appeal.
“Have you nothing to say?” stormed his father,
shaking him angrily. “Your motive no one can
know. Had you waited only a few weeks it would
have all been yours. What evil spirit tempted you
to this senseless crime?’’
“I do not admit that I did it,” replied Stephen,
vainly endeavouring to steady his voice; “nor do
I deny it. he added hastily, noting the ghastly pallor
that overspread Cecil’s face. “If I altered the amount
I should have been, as you said, only forestalling
the money due to me in a short time. All you have
to do then, is to deduct the sum from the principal
before making it over; or, if that is impossible, I
can give it back to you afterwards.” He spoke
almost hopefully, for Cecil’s eyes had lost the look
of strained anguish; the other two he dared not look
at. But if he thought all was to be so easily
arranged he was to be soon undeceived.
“Brazen,” said Mr. Daly, fiercely. “Brazen. Quite
a usual thing I suppose for sons to tamper with
cheques and use their father’s name to obtain money
for their extravagant follies. Bah, your hypocrisy
sickens me.” And loosening his hold on Stephen’s
hands, he pushed him so violently that he would


have fallen had not Cecil rushed to steady him. It
was but an instant, but there was time for an
agonised whisper.
“Stephen, save me. I was desperate when I did
it. I’ll shoot myself if } r ou won’t; I’ve the pistol
here in m} r pocket. He’d turn me out, and he can’t
really touch you.”
“Stand back Cecil,” commanded the elder man.
“Do yen think }~our poor persuasions can avail when
mine are mocked at. You think to carry it off with
a high hand,” he went on turning to his eldest son;
“but I’ll have you know that you shall pay to the
uttermost farthing. You to preach to me, yourself a
whited sepulchre. So loyal to your mother's memory
and your mother’s faith, while all the time you
were wasting her money in gambling, aye, and
worse.”
“Stop, broke in Stephen fiercely. “What you have
to say to me about myself I’ll hear; what you exact
from me I'll fall in with if possible; but my mother’s
name is not to be mentioned.”
“Still dictating,” stormed his father, “still posing.
Your true character known, your hidden vices re-
vealed, 3'ourself a criminal, and still you talk of
“must not,” though you condescend to consider my
terms of repayment.” Here he laid aside his bluster
and spoke with a calm more terrible than any wrath.
“This is a matter that puts you within the reach of
the law,” Stephen started. “Ah, you never thought
of that. I put the manager off when I saw him
this morning in response to his note; I said that I
wished to look up my cheque book, and that I would
ring him up if he was to take proceedings. Now, I
have only to go to the telephone and tell him the
truth, and you will be arrested as soon as the neces-
sary" formalities have been complied with.”


“But I am not guilty,” cried Stephen, all else for-
gotten in the horror of disgrace and imprisonment.
Then as Cecil started to his feet and put his hand to
his pocket, he added hastily, “but I cannot explain;
I will not explain,”
“Then my course is clear,” was the cold reply.
And torn by conflicting passions, the young man
could only look on in amazed entreaty as his father
gathered up the papers before and read out their
contents. Letters from money-lenders which
showed that Mr. Stephen Daly had raised money on
his expectations, receipts for debt paid, and lastly
a threatening letter from a bookmaker demanding
full payment for a debt. “And this letter,” said
Mr. Daly, “is dated the very day you took me to
task; and where did I find all these? Why in your
own room, about an hour ago.”
“In my room.” There was no mistaking the
genuine astonishment of the tone. His father laid
the papers and looked at him steadily.
“I own that I cannot reconcile all this with what
you have always seemed to me.” He spoke sadly,
wistfully. “Of course you have been very little at
home until the last few months, and my knowledge
of you is not what it is of Cecil. He has shown
himself weak and foolish for a long time; I’ve had
to pay debts until I’ve refused to give him another
penny, and since then he’s never bothered me. A
firm stand was all that was needed with him; with
you Ido not know how to act. It is true that I may
hand you over to justice, but I cannot do that for
my own name’s sake, and also for the sake of one
whom you are not worthy to hear mentioned; and
because of her, also, I cannot allow the money, her
money, go so unworthily; the principal she left you
must be intact, and not one penny of it go on such
G 41


vices as long as I can help it. Stephen, confess to
me now, you were tempted, you fell; we are all as
weak as water in the hour of trial. My own follies,
too, forbid that I should be unduly hard on my sons;
only hypocrisy I cannot bear; it is the unforgivable
sin. Cecil fell, and when I taxed him with it he
acknowledged his fault, and I re-instated him on the
sole condition that he should give up his vice; I shall
not forgive a second time. To you, Stephen, I offer
the same terms; you confess, I forgive, and the past
shall be past for ever. Tell me all you owe, the full
extent of your obligations, and then there shall be
an end of the matter.”
Stephen shook his head; he dared not trust him-
self to speak. If his father’s anger stirred him, how
much more his pleadings. Cecil made him an en-
couraging sign, but he turned away.
“I am awaiting your answer, my son.” The
words were very wistful, and Stephen’s eyes stung
with hot tears.
“I cannot give any explanation,” he said hoarsely.
“Oh, father cannot you see that prison and punish-
ment have small terrors for me compared with your
belief in my vileness. You are mistaken; I owe it
to my dear mother’s memory to tell you that there
is some hideous mistake, but—l cannot give you
any explanation.”
“Then I shall make full enquiries and find out
from others what I should hear from yourself.”
Cecil made a hasty movement, and Stephen’s voice
rang out clearly, “Father, no; I beg not that. Lay
on me whatever punishment you will, but let the
matter remain in obscurity. Oh, you don’t know
what it would mean,” he went on with increasing
earnestness; “it would bring miser}’- on so many,
and I would rather be the only one to suffer.”


“That is tantamount to a confession of guilt,” was
the stern reply, “and what if I took you at your
word and laid on you a sentence of exile and dis-
grace?”
Stephen was silent; all his being rose in revolt
against the injustice of it; his heart cried out against
Cecil’s cowardice; and he grieved that his step-
mother spoke no word on his behalf. Then, in the
tumult of thought and cruel anxiety came the re-
membrance of some words spoken long ago by lips
since sealed in death. Walking in the picturesque
grounds of the College, the kindly old priest who
prepared him for his First Communion had spoken
to him of the beauty of holiness and the grandeur
of sacrifice. “Our highest act, dear child; the daily
Sacrifice of the Altar, is the life of the Church; and
sacrifice of self, with the help of Heaven, is the life
of the soul. Nothing is great without it, nothing is
noble, and when we would win from our dear Lord
some great grace, let us beg it with the prayer of
sacrifice; it was, it is, His own prayer for ever”
The prayer of sacrifice. What if he could shelter
Cecil, save these dear people from sorrow and
shame, and, grace of graces, bring his father back
to God by the one sacrifice of himself. They would
not miss him from the household, for he had been
practically absent from home since his father’s
second marriage; he was, or seemed, scarcely one
ct them, and his disgrace would afifect them im-
measurably less than Cecil’s. A few moments of re-
flection and prayer and his choice was made. He
turned to his father.
“I accept your punishment, be it what it may if
only you will not enquire into the matter. Let all
the penalty fall on me.” His voice was almost tri-
umphant, and such a light shone on his face that


Cecil bowed his head in shame, and his father in
amazed silence, turned and looked at a picture he
had bought long, long ago of the martyrdom of St.
Stephen, the first to win the fiery crown. He had
bought it to please Stephen’s mother, and though he
had long since forsaken the Church which honours
the proto-martyr, he had kept the picture still in his
library, and turning to it to-day he thought the look
on the pictured face was not less rapt than that of
his son. For the first time a doubt crept into his
mind, only to be dismissed; for, if innocent why did
he fear enquiry as it was only too evident that he
did. Yet his voice had no sternness, only a sad
finality as he spoke:
“You leave this house to-morrow morning with
me, until which time I expect }mu to remain in your
own room, and hold no communication with airyone.
When you leave, }'OU leave until I give permission
to return; nor are }'on to hold any communication
whatever with any one in the house without my
special leave. You may take such of your possessions
as are suitable for a working man, as you will be
henceforth until the debt is paid. To-morrow you
are to report yourself to Mackenzie as desirous of
entering the foundry as a fitter. You have had
some experience there and your University know-
ledge, so 3 r ou are worth a fair salary—let us say, two
pounds a week to start with. This you must pay
back immediately to Mackenzie in trust for me, and
as your salary increases I expect the payments to
increase; any infringement of this will be considered
as going back on your agreement, and I shall be
at liberty to investigate the whole of your doings
of late. You will have the amount of your legacy
intact, and you must live on the interest of that as
best you can. When you have repaid a thousand


pounds (the full amount I make out to be nearer
three thousand), earned by your own labours, you
shall be reinstated as my son and heir.” Then he
added with great emphasis: “Provided only that
your life during this time of probation can bear
scrutiny, and that you will not ask me again to for-
bear enquiries. Do you accept?”
Cecil cried out in protest, but Stephen put him
aside. The glow had faded from his face, only his
eyes were full of light and his voice was low and
steady. “I accept.”
“Then to your room until to-morrow, when you
shall sign to these terms and leave us.”
Cecil caught his brothers hand in a passion of
gratitude, his weak face aglow with relief, but the
father dragged him away.
“Such an exhibition does more credit to your
heart than to your head, Cecil. Have you nothing
to say ?” he added, turning to his wife.
\\ hat can I say to one who has so grossly de-
ceived me?’ she returned. Then stepping forward
she faced Stephen, her eyes full of burning scorn,
and with shaking finger she pointed to the
stephanotis she had placed in his coat only a few
hours before. Alas, its beauty was gone, and in
place of the snowy fragrant blossom there were only
a few brown unlovely leaves; these she plucked
fiercely out, and holding them on her outstretched
palm, Sir Galahad,” she cried in a accusing voice
and flung the dead flower at his feet.
As she left the room, Stephen heard the first
breaking sob of grief; then with numbing misery in
Ins heart, he turned and looked into his father’s face


CHAPTER V.
THE VALLEY OF HUMILIATION.
“I must unlearn the pleasant ways I went,
Must learn another hope, another love,
And sigh indeed for home in banishment.”
C. Rossetti.
“Out of the way there. Do you think I’m goin’
to pull up for the likes of you?”
Stephen stepped aside hurriedly among some old
machinery, as the heavy lorry with its load passed
him; another succeeded, and yet another, and, as in
a dream, he watched the skill with which the driver
negotiated the entrance, guided the great horses
over the cobbled yard, and finally, with a clever
sweep, brought their lorries to a standstill by the
wide door, where men hot and grimy, unloaded the
short thick ingots on to trucks, and wheeled them
into the interior, whence came the clang and clash
of the great foundry. Though it was a familiar
enough scene to him, to-day it held a new signifi-
cance, and ever}' sight and sound was a turning of
the knife in the wound. The ring of metal on metal,
the whirr of machinery were as sounds of some
Titanic anvil on which his fetters were being forged;
the indistinct, though loud voices seemed full of
menace, and his heart was heavy within him. Still
the depression was not so much for the life of exile
and labour before him, not because this long iron
building, with its smoke-stack belching flame, must
take the place of the lofty luxurious rooms and fair
garden spaces of Oakhurst, and the cool halls and
sunny quadrangle of the University; these things


weighed not with him as yet, for he was far from
realising the stupendous nature of the change in his
life; moreover, the glow of the sacrifice was still
upon him, and not the future saddened him, but the
immediate past. The sleepless night spent in the
room, henceforth his no longer, where he had laid
away all his treasures, and packed only his more
serviceable clothing and his books; hearing all that
time the unceasing tread outside the door, and
knowing it was his father pacing up and down the
corridor; the silent departure from the home he had
learned to love, not a hand stretched out to clasp
his in parting, not a voice to whisper “God-speed,”
only the stern white-faced man beside him in the
carriage, and the trying silence of that long drive.
Then had come the ordeal in the lawyer’s office,
v here the documents had been signed, and the cour-
teous solicitor had congratulated him on his accession
to his mother’s estate.
“Only a small one,” he said blandly, “but your
fathei s son will not let it remain long unfruitful.
See the great fortune he has built up on a small
capital.”
This perhaps was the hardest part, the hiding
trom the keen legal eyes of the painful breach be-
tween them, and both father and son were glad to be
alone once more, though Stephen felt the burden too
heavy to bear when, in the seclusion of his private
office, his father placed another document before
him, without a word of comment. He read, with
sinking heart and whitening lips, the cruel terms-
not to return home till summoned by his father - to
remain m the foundry and work as a mechanic until
he had repaid a thousand pounds; to make no at-
tempt to see any member of the family; not to corre-
spond with them or invite any visit or letter from


them; through all these bitter clauses he read slowly
and steadily, a smile of scorn on his lips at the stipu-
lation of giving up his evil ways and bad com-
panions, but the hardness died out of his face and
heart as he read the conclusion: “If all these con-
ditions are faithfully observed, I, John Patrick Daly,
pledge myself to receive the above-mentioned
Stephen John Dal} r back into my house as my son
and heir, and to let the past be forgotten, as well as
forgiven.” There was almost a smile on his face as
he looked.
“I accept,” he said simply. “Shall I sign it now?”
“One moment, please; this is a legal document,
and we require witnesses.”
He touched a hand-bell, which was evidently a
signal agreed on beforehand, for the confiden-
tial clerk and the accountant appeared at once.
“My son and myself are entering on an agreement,
and we desire your signatures as witnesses.”
He drew the papers to him and wrote his name
quickly; his hand never faltered; it might have been
an ordinary business paper he was signing; but
poor Stephen had not his father's self-control; it was
some time before he could steady his hand to hold
the pen, and the signature, though clear, lacked its
usual boldness. Y\ hen the others had signed and
withdrawn, Mr. Daly folded up one copy and placed
it in the safe ; the other he pushed towards Stephen.
That is your copy. You see I have made it safe
and binding enough on both sides. Now as you did
not take any breakfast, you must come to lunch
with me before going to the bank.”
Stephen tried in vain to escape this ordeal; his
incoherent words were passed over.
“I did not ask you what you wanted,” was the
cold reply; “I said you were to come. You are


twenty-three years old, and behave like a spoilt
child.”
Of the meal that followed he shuddered to think.
His father had met some business friends, and every
now and again endeavoured to draw his son into
the conversation, which, as far as he could remem-
ber, was about some impending industrial crisis, but
of the actual words he was as uncertain as he was
certain that the food he was forcing himself to eat
was bitter and nauseous. Afterwards, when the last
business was accomplished, and they emerged from
the cool, spacious banking chamber into the hot,
noisy street, Mr. Daly had stopped and looked
squarely at his son.
‘’This is the parting of the ways,” he said, as coolly
as if to a mere casual acquaintance; “I have busi-
ness elsewhere, and you are going down to Mac-
kenzie to sign on. Good-day.”
He was moving off, when Stephen, forgetting the
throng around, remembering only that it was un-
bearable to part like this, caught his father’s arm.
“Father.”
He could say no more, but there was no mistaking
the entreaty of his eyes.
“You have had ample opportunity of speaking,
Stephen, last night and up till now, but you have
maintained a most obstinate silence, and now you
are going to make a scene in the street.”
“I do not want to make a scene!” Stephen’s
voice, though low, was vibrant with emotion, “nor
do I want to shirk any of the cruel conditions you
have laid on me; time will show that. But, oh,
father, cannot you see that the money, the disgrace,
the exile are as nothing to your hardness and mis-
trust. Only show that you trust me ever so little
and make your terms even harder.”


’’When } r ou show yourself worthy of trust, I shall
be only too glad to give you mine."
These were his last words, and the memory of
them, as of the morning’s trials, was bitter in
Stephen's mind as he stood there in the blazing
November sunshine, staring with unseeing eyes at
the busy scene before him. A look of impertinent
curiosity from one of the lorry-drivers roused him
from his painful meditations, and bracing himself
for an interview that he foresaw would be disagree-
able, he made his way to the office.
It was a small brick building in an extreme corner
of the yard, the windows grimed with dirt, the wood-
work blistered by scorching suns and darkened by
smoke and coal-dust. Under the words, "Private
Office,” some wag had written “Mac’s Den,” and
Stephen, noting this, remembered the many stories
he had heard of the manager’s severity and morose-
ness ; yet the stern Scotchman had always been kind
to him, had manifested an interest in him, and given
him many a tip in his school days, though it had
been a continual source of wonder to him that his
father’s lifelong friend should never come to the
house, nor take any interest in any other of the chil-
dren. Whatever doubts he might have had as to his
reception w'ere soon dispelled on his entrance, for
the steely blue eyes under the bushy brows held no
friendly light for him, and the voice was harsh and
repellant.
"Weel—whet’s yir beesiness?”
"I’ve come to report myself to you, Mr. Mac-
kenzie, and to sign on,” was Stephen’s faltering re-
ply to the abrupt question.
“Ye have. Weel, here’s yir voucher; ye can sign
in the outer offeece, Mitchell has the sheet, and then
report yirsel’ tae Clintock, the foreman. An’ ye


needna' gie yirsel’ airs, for a’ ye’re John Daly’s son,
for the maist o’ oor hands are clean-leevin’ men an’
no wastrels. Ony o’ yir cantrips here an’ oot ye go,
mind thet.” “Bide,” as Stephen, wrathful and indig-
nant, turned to the door, “we pey the Satterday, an’
when ye’ve drawn frae Mitchell ye com ben here an’
pey in tae yir feyther. Thet’s a’ ”
He turned to the papers before him, and Stephen,
humiliated beyond measure, had no alternative but
to withdraw and present the slip to the clerk, who
looked at him with undisguised curiosity, and put
questions which he found difficult to fence, and shel-
tered himself in silence so stubborn that the man
soon released him. Still it was with no great relief
that he crossed the yard to the shed; his experience
with Mackenzie, his oldest friend, prepared him for
all sorts of unpleasantness; still he had always been
on good terms with the foreman, and he thought,
moreover, that he, at least, would not have been told
the circumstances of the case. Again, however, he
was doomed to disappointment—Clintock, in the act
of superintending a repair, was surrounded by work-
men, and Stephen, diffident and ill at ease, waited
for him to come in his direction, for he did not like
to speak to him before all those men. However, the
work was either too important to be left, or he was
too unimportant to be attended to, for he could not
help feeling that his presence was noticed, and that
he was being kept waiting purposely; so, taking
the bull by the horns, he went up to the group.
“Mr. Mackenzie told me to report to you,” he be-
gan, as genially as he could; but the foreman merely
glanced up from his work, and said in a most casual
tone:


“You’re on in the fitting room. Eight o'clock
sharp. Your tools are here. Now, men, don’t keep
me waiting all day. We’re late as it is.”
Stephen was dismissed, and there was nothing for
him to do but to withdraw with as good a grace as
possible, though he was acutely conscious that all
were staring at him, and not a few tittered at his
rebuff.
It was now three o’clock, and he had yet to seek
lodgings; and, as he knew his income would not ad-
mit of even the smallest excess, he determined to
seek accommodation in the neighbourhood of the
foundry, and thus avoid travelling expenses. With
this view he wandered in the vicinity, scrutinising
the various places; but though there were notices
in many of the windows, the aspect of the houses
repelled him. It was not an inviting locality from a
residential point of view; dirty children played on
the narrow, uneven pavements, slatternl}'- women
gossiped at the doorways, and the glimpses thus
afforded of the interiors of their homes were not of
a kind to tempt a fastidious nature like his. Five
o’clock found him still searching and almost
hopeless, when, in a quieter street, he came upon
a house which, judged from the outside, was the
best he had seen; for the curtains at the narrow
windows were fairly clean, and pot plants stood on
the sills. The girl who opened the door was a
revelation to him; he had not thought any human
being could be so untidy and so unkempt, and the
room she showed him into was an unknown terri-
tory, also, with the crotchet antimacassers spread
over the horsehair chairs, and the wax flowers under
the glass shade.
“Mrs. Menger ’ll be. down in a minnit,” the girl
said, as she left him in this cheerful room; but her


idea of time must have been as hazy as her notion
of neatness, for Stephen spent a full quarter of an
hour examining the family portraits (there were no
other pictures), and wondering first if any one in
their sober senses would lie on that uninviting
couch, and, secondly, whether the people of the
house lived on mutton stew and cabbage, for these
odours prevailed over even the mustiness of the
room. At last, when Stephen was beginning to think
the girl had forgotten to mention his presence, and
wondering whether he could venture out unob-
served, the landlady appeared, breathless and apolo-
getic ; but when she saw who was awaiting her,
she broke oft* the torrent of her excuses, and said,
in quite a different tone:
“The gel made a mistake, of course. She said you
was about a room; these is first-rate lodgings, but I
only take in working men.”
Her astonishment increased when he said that he
was employed at the engineering works down by the
Harbour, and if she had a vacant room he would
take it. She made no reply, but her scrutiny was
enlightening, and Stephen became conscious that his
clothes, though not new, were too well cut, that his
hands were too white, and that, in short, he was an
object of suspicion. So he hastened to say that he
could refer her to the manager and foreman of the
Pioneer Foundry; then only she consented to take
him, and though evidently far from satisfied, led the
way up the uncarpeted stairs.
“The balcony room is the best, and there is a
vacant bed there, how’ll that suit you?”
“Not at all; I must have a room to myself.”
“It’ll come dearer, but if you will you will. This
is the only one with one bed in it,” she said as she
flung open a door. “ Tis quiet, too, bein’ at the back,


and the terms is"—she shot a keen look at Stephen’s
guileless face —“a pound a week, and dirt cheap at
that”
Whatever doubts she had had as to his honesty,
she had none now as to his simplicity, as he agreed
to the exorbitant terms for the wretched room, and
even paid a week in advance; and when he had gone
for his box she communicated her views to the over-
worked maid.
“Mark my words, Eliza Ann; there’s something
queer about him, either he’s keeping out of the way
of someone, or he's gone through his money and
has to work. He'll give us no trouble, and you
needn’t be particiler about his room, for he’s not
one of the complainin’ sort, and, like as not careless
in leavin’ things about, so we’ll have a chance.”
But that unkind design came to nothing for Eliza
Ann, won by the new lodger’s unheard-of politeness
and consideration for the little drudge, took good
care that whatever was left about never come into
Mrs. Menger’s greedy hands, and far from neglect-
ing his room she even went to the unusual trouble of
cleaning it out once a week.
It was just six o’clock when Stephen returned
with his box, and he had barely got it into the cup-
board, dignified by the name of room, when the bell
rang for dinner, and his landlady called out to him
to hurry down if he wanted a good place. That
awful dinner! Stephen never forgot it; the coarse,
ill-cooked food, the wretched table appointments
were repugnant to his fastidious taste, and }*et they
were the least of evils. The close, hot room, the
rough talk and rougher jests, the unbridled profanity
of the other lodgers, were unspeakable torments;
and it was clear, also, from their manner that they
looked on him as an interloper. He was glad to


escape to his miserable room, only to find that there
was no gas jet and but a meagre allowance of can-
dle. He sat by the window heartsick and miserable,
his head ached sadly, and though it was a hot night
he was shivering as if with cold. Hard work he
had expected, but not these sordid surroundings, and
he asked himself bitterly whether, after all, he had
not been reckless and foolish to throw away so much
for such a shadowy gain. But better feelings pre-
vailed, and he reproached himself for his cowardice,
for this shrinking at the very beginning of the battle ;
and, shaking off dismal thoughts, he went out for a
brisk walk. Remembering on Whose strength he
was relying in the part he had undertaken to play,
he went first to the nearest church and spent a quiet
hour in prayer, and then walked far beyond the
crowded streets and gleaming lights of the city. So
far did he go that it was late when he returned, and
he was so tired that, in spite of the uncomfortable
bed, he was soon fast asleep.
He awoke early, and at first stared uncomprehend-
ingly at the unfamiliar surroundings, the scanty bat-
tered furniture and dirty walls; then the full know r-
ledge of his altered fortunes came to him, and he
smiled grimly.
“I think I’ll get up and go to Mass,” he said to
himself; “I’d better, for I expect I’ll have a few
things to try my temper to-day, and I’m not so sure
of myself as I used to be.”
Truly it was a wise thought, for the day brought
much to irritate and annoy, apart from the actual
hardships. Clintock’s peremptory orders nettled
him. and the half-jesting, half-antagonistic attitude
of the men was very galling; the more so as he knew
this was mainly through his own fault, for they had
been friendly enough at first, only he, smarting


under the foreman’s insolence, met their advances
with haughtiness, and though he instantly regretted
it the mischief was done. He was not one of them —
he gave himself airs—so they addressed him by all
sorts of ridiculous names, and when one of their
number dubbed him the “duke,” the name stuck; and
finding that any show of resentment only increased
their mirth, he lapsed into silence, and responded to
his mocking title as cheerfully as he could.
That was Wednesday, and as he sat in the hot
back room at night too tired to go out, too heartsick
to do an} r thing but stare out into the darkness, he
wondered how he was going to live such a life for
weeks and months and years. Then he remembered
a wise counsel given him long ago by a priest who
used to urge him to curb his impatience and readi-
ness to chafe under any restraint or hardship.
“Never let yourself be hindered by that weakling
thought that you can’t put up with it, because it’s
for too long a time. Remember this rather that it’s
for only one day at a time. An} r one can bear a bur-
den for one day; so say to yourself every morning,
‘only for to-day,’ and you’ll find yourself bearing
it for months without feeling it too heavy,” Good
advice and suitable to his present condition far more
than when he used to give way under petty troubles,
and he took heart again. Besides, as he argued with
himself, the harder the battle the greater the victory;
and what pleasure is there to equal the victor’s?
“I took up this, with my eyes open, and I ought to
be ashamed of being so soon discouraged. It will
be easier, too, when I get used to it”; though he
shuddered to think of the necessary hardening.
Certainly the work seemed less laborious the next
days, though he could not help thinking that Clin-


tock gave him all the hardest and certainly the
dirtiest tasks. Still he was by no means a workman
to be kept long in the background, and he deter-
mined to show the hard taskmaster that he could do
better than most of the others, lhat, however, was
a matter for time to prove, and for the present he
was at the beck and call of everyone in the shed,
and they, taking their cue from the foreman, did not
spare him. He was quite glad when Saturday came,
for there would be some little respite for him, and
Sunday he would spend away on the Harbour, and
thus escape the uncongenial surroundings of Mrs.
Menger’s establishment. He passed in with the
others to receive his pay, and went on at once to
Mackenzie’s office. Not having seen the old man
since the Tuesday, he expected a rough reception;
but to his surprise the manager took the money and
handed him a receipt without a word; a silence more
galling than any abuse. As he went to the gate, he
fell in with the crowd of men, and not being in the
mood for any of their pleasantries, he tried to slip
out unnoticed, but one of them caught him by the
arm.
“Not so fast, Duke; it’s the custom for a new man
to pay his footing.”
“What do you mean?”
“Well of all the softies! Pay your footing means
‘shout’ for us at the Pioneer Arms; so come along,
and we’ll do as much for you.”
Stephen stood silent and undecided. It was a
critical moment, for perhaps this was the chance to
redeem the comradeship he had missed in the begin-
ning ; and he did want some one to give him a kindly
word occasionally. But it was only a momentary
temptation.
n 57


“I’m very sorry,” he said, as quietly as he could,
“that I cannot conform to your custom; but it is
quite impossible.”
“Why?”
“You must allow me to keep my reasons to my-
self. I’ll tell you this, however: I don’t think it’s a
very wise or kind custom, and it’s time it was
stopped. I don’t want any of you to buy drink for
me, and certainly I shall not buy any for you. I’m
sorry if you think me rude or unsociable. Let me
pay my footing some other way. I cannot do what
you ask.”
“Or will not?”
“Will not; if you prefer to put it like that.”
There was an ominous silence, and his heart sank
at their lowering and contemptuous looks.
“Oh, don’t tease the child,” cried a burly boiler-
maker; “he’s been told at Sunday school that it’s
very wrong for little to drink beer.”
There was a general laugh at this sally, and an
apprentice called out, “Hear, hear,” which seemed
an excellent joke to judge by the mirth it excited.
“Now, that’s where you misjudge the Duke,” said
another, gravely; “he don’t want to spend his
money, that’s what it is; he’s saving up to buy a
new coronet against the next Guvment ’Ouse ball.”
This jest caused great hilarity, and various kind
suggestions were made as to the best designs of
ducal adornments, and the proper shop to patronise.
Thus Stephen stood at bay amid his tormentors; his
very silence excited many to fresh taunts; though,
after all, it was poor fun baiting such an unrespon-
sive victim. But their estimate of him was to receive
a sudden shock, for one of them, taking his quietness
for cowardice, hurled at him a gibe that made most
of them stare. The vile phrase was never finished.


for Stephen’s arm shot out like a battering-ram; all
the misery, the irritation, the wrath of the past four
days found vent in that blow, and Will Carson fell
like a log. A chuckle of amusement in the back-
ground was drowned in the laughter and shouts of
the men, which, in their turn, were lost in astonish-
ment, when, adopting a favourite tactic of his in the
football field, Stephen scattered them in all direc-
tions, and before they could recover from their sur-
prise, he was at the gate. But he was not to escape
so easily; their interest in him was quickened, and
for a new reason.
‘‘A ring, a ring,” they shouted, delighted at the
prospect of a fight. But they were doomed to dis-
appointment, for Will Carson evidently thought one
taste of Stephen’s quality was enough, and though
trembling with rage, he was by no means anxious to
face the angry young man before him.
“I don’t fight with boys,'' he said sneeringly; ‘‘be-
sides, can't you see it’s impossible. He’s Daly’s son,
though he’s been kicked out.” And with this Par-
thian shot, he slouched oflf, accompanied by the
others, many of whom, however, as they moved gave
a friendly nod to Stephen, who stood with flushed
face and flashing eyes.
They 11 think none the waur of ye for that blow.
Ye’ve paid your footing in a way o’ yir ain, and it’s
n°’ a had way. I’m dead against that shouting. But
ye ve lost no time beginning yir brawling.”
The tone was not unkindly, but Stephen was too
exasperated to notice that. He swung round with
such violence that Mackenzie involuntarily recoiled.
"Of course you must come and have a thrust at
me,” he stormed. “Oh, it’s rare sport, isn’t it, kick-
ing me when I’m down and can’t help myself? The
others I forgive; they know no better, and I brought


it on myself in a way; but what excuse have you,
who have known me all my life? W hat have I
ever done to you that you should play the tyrant
like this?”
He flung himself out of the yard, and was well up
the hill before his anger subsided and shame super-
vened.
“There I go again. I who was going to be so
strong and determined, raging like an hysterical
girl. Am I a weakling, then, after all? And I’ve
only given Mackenzie another handle against me;
and he’s bitter enough now in all conscience.”
But in the seclusion of his office, Mackenzie in-
terrupted his calculations with many a dry chuckle.
“And John thinkin’ him a saftie. I misdoot me
we’re wrangin’ the laddie. But certes, ’twas a fine
knock-down he gied him. I couldna’ hae done better
masel’.”


CHAPTER VI.
THE MAKING OF A MAN.
“We cannot dream ourselves into character; we
must hammer and forge ourselves into one.”—
Fronde.
Shaded lights shed a soft glow through the richly-
furnished room, revealing its treasures of art; inlaid
woods, priceless carvings, spoils of pencil and loom;
here a statue flashed white amid graceful palms—
and there stood huge jars of curious design, whereon
the sacred dragon of China writhed in fantastic coils.
Only perfect taste, backed by great wealth, could
have produced such a room, and yet the designer
and owner stirred wearily in her luxurious chair, a
fold of discontent on her white brow, her jewelled
fingers restlessly folding and unfolding a costly fan,
whereon W atteau shepherds and shepherdesses dis-
ported themselves in the most approved fashion. A
beautiful woman, but not a happy one, and yet, up
to a few weeks ago, life had seemed very fair to
Estelle Daly, before this cloud had arisen, which
was hiding the sunshine and making dark the
hitherto bright places.
“At last,” she said impatiently, as the door opened
iO admit her husband. I thoug'ht you were never
coming, John.”
Perhaps I have been a little longer than usual
o\ er my smoke, but I had much to think about, and
have been making plans for you, Estelle. Why did
you not have your coffee by yourself, instead of
waiting for me? Are you not going out, then?”


“I am due at the Faversham’s to-night, but I want
to speak to you particularly, and somehow I never
seem to get any opportunity; you seldom honour
me with your compaii}q nowadays. You needn’t
wait, Jane; I’ll pour out the coffee myself if we want
any more.” And when the maid had withdrawn, she
rose from her lounging attitude and spoke with
earnestness.
“John, when are you going to end this farce about
Stephen?”
“I don’t think Stephen is finding it much of a
farce,” said Mr. Daly, thoughtfully, as he stirred his
coffee; “I caught a glimpse of him to-day, and he
looks pretty miserable on it. Another lump of
sugar, if you please, Estelle. Never mind, I’ll help
myself.”
“You are positively heartless. How can you make
a jest of it? It is scandalous. I never thought you
were in earnest. Why, it’s a perfectly impossible
position, you a millionaire, and your eldest son work-
ing like a labourer. Surely you only meant to give
him a fright, and now* that Christmas is drawing
near you’ll bring him home again; won’t you, John?”
John Daly put down his empty cup, and looked
steadily at his wife.
“We’ve been married nineteen years, Estelle, and
yet you know me so little that you can ask such a
question. When I take a thing up Igo through with
it at all costs, and that’s why I am what I am to-day.
Stephen comes home when he has fulfilled the con-
ditions, by which time he’ll have learned a lesson
that’ll be the making of him.”
“But it’s monstrous, cruel, we in luxury, and he
in misery. And I can’t help blaming myself, John,
for I urged you to let him be at home with us instead
of remaining at College until he had taken his de-


gree. I loved him as my own son, his companion-
ship was sweet and helpful to me; and it seems that
I brought him to his destruction, poor boy.”
“You have nothing to reproach yourself with; the
badness was in him, or he’d never have deceived us
all as he did.”
“But think of the wretched life you’re condemning
him to, and he so refined, so sensitive, the real artist
nature. Don’t look so incredulous; I understand
him better than you do.”
“Do you think you love him better, too,” was the
startling rejoinder; “he is my own, my first-born,
and doubly dear to me; but I want a man for my
son—not a hyper-sensitive artist. Life is a pretty
rough-and-tumble game, for most of us, dear, and a
man’s got to take his share of knocks and blows,
got to give as well as take, and though the
battle is not always to the strong, it’s pretty sure
to be against the weakling. I seem hard to you, but
we don’t set about the making of a man with white
kid gloves on. Stephen’s got to find himself, as we
used to say at sea; and though you may think he’s
doing it in a hard way, let me tell you it’s a bed of
roses to what I had to go through before I was
anything like his age. How should vou know or
even guess, what kind of life it was at sea when I
put in my time, and I’m none the worse for it now *
rat ler better, for I can hold my own with anyone
And he has good in him that son of mine; but he’s
got too dreamy and unpractical, no fit successor of
myself who have built up my name and fortune
unaided. I think you were spoiling him, too, with
all this jargon of art and music. So when I found
o what depths of infamy he was stooping, I’ve had
to be hard for his own sake. He must learn the
' a Lle of money, and one or two other lessons that


he’d never learn in the midst of this luxury; and,
moreover, his hypocrisy deserved a far greater
punishment than he’s got. Why, even you were dis-
gusted with him for that. So careful about hearing
Mass nearly every morning, and nothing must be
allowed to interfere with his religious duties, while
all the time —faugh. ‘A goodly apple rotten at tie
core ’ Facing the grim realities of life and working
off that heavy debt will soon rid him of that love ot
shams. Ah, there’s nothing like work for steadying
the wildest. I went the pace myself in my young
days, and the only thing that pulled me up was hard
work and responsibility; and I'm hoping it will do
the same for him.”
“But,” objected his wife, “I’m sure you were
like him ever. I never knew anyone like him in my
life. The hard work and poverty that you are put-
ting him to will only break his heart and cow his
spirit.”
Her husband gave a short laugh.
“ He’s knocked one man down, had three fights,
thrashed the bully of the yard, and stormed at poor
old Mackenzie, and all in a month. You needn’t
worry over his spirit, Estelle, that’s all right; he s
not my son for nothing.”
“ You were less hard on Cecil.”
“True; but Cecil is different. He, at least, was
not a hypocrite over it, besides he was younger;
and, forgive me for saying it, Estelle, Cecil wouldn’t
stand such treatment, he’s not the nature. When
we want to work iron we make it red hot in the
fire and then hammer, hammer and forge it into
shape; but you can’t treat wood like that; it only
breaks and burns. When Stephen was a little boy
they told me it was impossible to teach him to
swim, he was too nervous. But I just took him


out into the deep water and threw him in; it was
sink or swim, and he swam all right. He 11 do
as much now.”
“Don’t you see the difference? Then he knew
you were by to helo him if need be, now you ha\ e
cut him off utterly, and even I may not write to
him, or, rather, he will not receive my letters.
“What do you mean?” the voice was very stern.
“I know you forbade it, but I could not let him
think we had all deserted him, so I wrote to him
twice. My letters were returned to-day unopened,
and written across the envelopes—“ Stephen refuses
to receive any letters from home except through his
father. C.M. Who is CM.”?
“Colin Mackenzie. I’m glad to hear this, though
lam vexed you should disobey me. He must fight
his own battles, Estelle; and as to your saying there
is no one to help him, you forget Mackenzie loves
him as though he were his own son. Don’t make any
mistake, though,” as he saw the relief on his wife’s
face, “ Colin won’t pamper him; he’s too disgusted
with him for one thing, and then he has promised me
to hold off for a year unless anything serious hap-
pens. Now, I think we’ve had enough of Stephen;
I want to speak of ourselves and our plans. You
are not looking at all well.”
“How can I, when I’m so worried? Every day
I am pestered with questions about Stephen; Clare
Mainwaring alone is curious enough to madden me.
She never liked him, you know.”
“ I don’t think any the worse of my son on that
account,” said her husband drily, “for your cousin
is a heartless, worldly woman. Still, it would be
a relief for you to get away from all this, and Cecil
has been begging me to let him go somewhere else
to finish. He has been working hard this last


month; the fright with Stephen did him good. He’s
looking pulled down, though, just as you are, so
I have determined to take the trip we had arranged
for next year. I booked our passages to-day.”
To Europe! Oh, no, John, not without Ste-
phen! He was looking forward so to that trip, and
we had made so many plans together.”
“ You forget yourself,” was the cold reply. “We
leave that young man out of our calculations for
some time to come. If he had his deserts he’d be
in prison. We leave by the first boat after Christ-
mas. I'll make arrangements about a care-
taker for the house, for we’ll be away for
three years at least. It will take you all your time
to get yourself and Elaine ready, so I tell you now.
Shall I ring for the carriage?”
“ No, no, I couldn’t go out after this. I think
} ou are cruel and heartless, and if I were a religious
woman, I d say you were calling a judgment down
on yourself.”
Her husband shrugged his shoulders and went
off without another word to his study. He had
expected some resistance, but knew he would get
his own way as usual; and events proved him right,
for after a few days of opposition, his wife aban-
doned her attitude of resistance and busied herself
in preparations for the journey.
Thus it was that one weary day, the last in all
the } ear, vhen the hot westerly wind was flinging
blinding dust over the panting city, Stephen, going
for some specifications, was about to enter the office
v hen he heard the clerk say to an enquirer;—
Hr. Mackenzie is out, but expected in any
minute. You could not possibly see Mr. Daly, for
he left for Europe yesterday with his family, and
is likely to be away some years.”


Stunned by this intelligence the unhappy young
man withdrew, a mist before his eyes, the sound
of many waters in his ears. He could scarcely be-
lieve what he had heard. Gone! Without a word
to him! The trip they had planned with him taken
without him! Deserted, deserted! And Cecil
could let it be so.
He staggered on a few steps, when a hand was
laid on his shoulder.
“ Hae ye been drinkin’?” was the rough query.
“Aye,” cried Stephen wildly; “a bitter cup, and
I’m likely to drain it to the dregs.”
The rough voice softened.
“ Dinna tak’ it too hard, Steenie. We maun a’
drink oor bitter draught, an’ he’s brave thet can
tak’ it doon wi’ a smilin’ face. Come ben the ofteece
an’ sit a wee whiley.”
But Stephen shook off the detaining hand; and
though white faced and trembling went back for
the plans. Not till, amid the heat and clangour
of his work, he had gripped and mastered his agony,
did he realise how very gently Mackenzie had
spoken to him, and how he had called him Steenie
as of old.


CHAPTER VII.
WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE.
“ Four things come not back to man or
woman: the sped arrow, the spoken word,
the past life, and the neglected oppor-
tunity.” Omar el Khuttub.
Deep blue of the Pacific, broken only in feathery
foam as the light touched the curling wave
summits; far in the west the dim line of
land, and above the sunset sky, whose splen-
dours, evanescent as beautiful, glowed only to
fade before the on-coming of the tropic
darkness that, swift as thought, swept down upon
the scene, blotted out the dim coast line, gathered
the picturesque islands one by one under its sombre
mantle, and quenching the fading sunset glory
brought out at a flash the myriad stars above.
Leaning over the rail of the great vessel that
clove her way with such apparent ease through the
league-long rollers sweeping from the very heart
of the Pacific, Elaine gave a little sigh as the dark-
ness fell. She was still under the influence of the
scene that had been blotted out so rapidly, and
started as a hand was laid on hers.
“Are you enjo}*ing it, my pet?”
Before giving any answer, she slipped her arm
into his with a little caressing movement very sweet
to the strong, quiet man, who, whatever might be
his sternness to his sons, was all love and gentle-
ness to his only daughter.


“ It’S just splendid, dad,” was the response, “ or
rather,” she checked herself with a little sigh, “ it
would be but for one thing.”
“How’s that?” asked Mr. Daly lightly. “Has
the princess actually found a crumpled rose-leaf in
her luxurious couch, or
He checked his badinage as the wistful eyes up-
turned to him showed traces of tears, and resumed
in gentler tones, “What ails my little girl? Can
father help her at all?”
The answer was low, but very clear.
“ Stephen, I want him. Why did we leave him
behind? Oh, you don’t know how I miss him.”
He withdrew from her hold abruptly and took
a few turns up and down on the deck. Coming
back to where she stood he made no attempt to
resume their old position, but stood at some little
distance from her.
“ I do not understand your outburst, Elaine,” he
said, almost coldly. “You have the love and care
of your parents and of your own brother, and yet
you treat me to this display because of someone
you have seen very little of until this last year.
What has infatuated you, or what charm has this
half-brother that his loss outweighs all else?”
“I don’t know what you mean, father. You
know that I love you and mother best in the
world. But, oh, I do love Stephen, too, far more
than Cecil.”
“ Elaine.”
“ I don’t care, I do. Cecil is horrid to me often
and teases me, but Stevie never did. Even when
I interrupted his work, he wasn’t really cross; and
he never, never was rude to me or laughed at me;
but called me his ‘ lily maid.’ You needn’t frown,
father, I’m not afraid to say it to you. Mother


said I musn’t mention Stephen’s name, because he
had been very wicked and given you great trouble;
but I’m too fond of you to be frightened to tell
you what I feel, and I’ll never believe it, never,
never.”
“Never believe what, pet?” asked Mr. Daly,
looking lovingly at the flushed face and shining
eyes.
“ That my Stevie was wicked. If it had been
Cecil now? I’d believe anything. And stoop
down, till I tell you something: Cecil was jealous
of Stephen.”
“ Nonsense.”
“ Oh, yes, he was. I’m only a little girl, but I
can see more than you think. I heard him talking
angrily to him many a time, and once I caught
him telling Joe Faversham that Stephen was so
soft it was easy to take him in.”
“You are a fearless partisan, Elaine. I'm glad
I haven’t you for an enem}C’
“Please don’t laugh at me. It’s going to spoil
all the fun to think dear Stevie is left behind in
Sydney while we are in all sorts of delightful
places. Isn’t he coming to join us anywhere?”
Mr. Daly shook his head.
“You do not understand, pet; for you are only
a child. I am vexed that you should have heard
anything about this wretched affair.”
“ I’m not really a child, I’m twelve years old,
nearly thirteen. And mother only told me because
I asked her. It was horrid Cecil who teased me
and told my hero was in prison. Yes he did,”
noting his incredulous look. “ Don’t you believe
him if he told you anything against Stephen. He
was always taking his things and using them; and


he was up to his tricks that day; you know the
day I mean, the last time I ever saw my dear
Stevie.”
“ Explain yourself. Who was up to tricks as
you call it?”
“ Cecil, of course, I was reading up on the land-
ing, where the cosy corner is, right behind the
curtains, and no one could see me. Really I didn’t
want anyone to see me, for I was hiding because
I'd be made go and practise and I had the loveliest
book, and of course I didn’t want to go and play
horrid scales. I heard someone coming up the
stairs so quietly that I peeped out to see if it was
Miss Moore coming to look for me; but it was
Cecil, and wasn’t his face white. I thought he Avas
ill. and he had a jug of hot water and some letters.”
“ Rather a mixture, wasn’t it, pet, letters and hot
water?”
“ He went into his room,” continued Elaine, tak-
ing no notice of the interruption, “ and was there
ever so long, and when he came out he looked
awful, and stood on the landing as if listening. I
wondered at that, for everything was so quiet; I
could hear Stephen playing in the music room, and
there was not another sound. What do you think
he did next?”
“ 1 can>t guess at all, girlie,” he spoke listlessly,
but the next words roused him.
He went into Stephen’s room and was there
such a long time I was just going to have a peep
at what he was doing when I saw Stevie coming-
up the stairs. ‘ Now, my lord,’ I thought, ‘ you’ll
be caught.’ But he came out just as Stephen got
to the door, and I didn’t hear what he said but
Cecil shouted rudely to him and rushed down stairs.
1 ran and peeped at him and saAv him putting let-


ters back on the hall table, where Jane puts them
when she has opened the letter box.”
“What!”
“That’s all,” finished Elaine calmly, “but I be-
lieve he had been reading Stevie’s letters. \ou can
open a letter, you know, if you put it over hot
water.”
“ Indeed. You seem to know all about it.”
“Oh, I know plenty, though I’m only twelve.
And do you know, dad, you’ve never given me my
Christmas present yet?”
“ Didn’t I now,” said her father lightly, relieved
at the change of subject. “Well, I’ll promise to
make good the fault at the next port we come to,
though I can’t promise you much from Thursday
Island. Better wait till we get to Japan.”
“May I have whatever I want?”
“If it’s procurable and not too expensive.”
“ Then give it to me now, promise.”
“Oh, I’ll promise, you persistent puss; that is,
if I have it here to give.
“ Then it’s mine, for you always keep your pro-
mises. Let me write to Stephen. That’s what I
want; and mother says you won’t let me.”
She looked up half afraid into the darkening face
above her.
“You promised?” she said timidly.
“ And I always keep my promises, you say, so
you are sure of what you want. But I must think
over this, dear, and I’ll let you know in the morn-
ing. Now I think you ought to go below to your
mother; I’m going to have a smoke. Good-night.
Don’t look so sad, pet; do I ever refuse you what
I can give?”
She skipped away, cheered by his last words,
and he, left alone, walked slowly and thoughtfully


“Man ye’re makin’ grand progress.”
Page [93].
Face page 72.




to the smoking-room. It was almost in darkness
when he entered, and loud were the complaints
against the light that had failed. I- nheeding the
other occupants he settled in a quiet corner and
was soon deep in thought, for though he tried not
to attach to what Elaine had told him, he found
himself dwelling on her artless talk. Had Cecil
been concerned in the matter, too, and, if so, why
had not his complicity been revealed? These
troubled thoughts held him fast when a name
aroused him.
“ Come on, Daly, we’ll give you your revenge
all right. Oh, no lights! What a nuisance!”
“It will be all right in a minute, sir,” said a steward
hurrying up to the speaker, “ we’ve sent for the
electrician, and he’ll be here directly.”
“ I hope so,” was the insolent reply. “ Here’s
a bit of light, anyway, and we’ll manage with this
till the other’s fixed up. Now, what shall it be?
Poker? Right; but perhaps we’d better wait for
a decent light.”
John Daly, leaning forward, bent a searching look
on the group, on Cecil’s excited face and the sinis-
ter aspect of his two companions. “Sharpers” was
his unspoken comment, “ and Master Cecil seems
too eager about the game to please me.” He was
about to make his presence known when a half
derisive cheer announced the entrance of the elec-
trician. A few moments of suspense and the lights
flashed out to the satisfaction of all, but, watching
his son, Mr. Daly saw the glow of excitement fade
and a greyish pallor overspread his face, while the
cards fell from his nerveless hand.
“ I’m not going to play,” he said dully, rising
as he spoke.
e 73


“ Oh, nonsense. Sit down, man, what are you
staring at? Did you never see a man in greasy
blue before? One would think you were looking
at a ghost.”
A ghost! no, rather, an accusing spirit. For the
sight of the deft-handed engineer recalled what he
wanted above all to forget. The day before sail-
ing, urged by a miserable, remorseful curiosity,
he had gone down to the works, and standing hid-
den by a doorway, had looked eagerly for the bro-
ther he had wronged. Not seeing him at first, he
was turning away, when his eyes fell on the object
of his search, so close at hand that he almost be-
trayed himself; but Stephen, busied with his work,
had never looked up. The sunlight, streaming in
through the doorway, touched the close-cropped hair
to tiny rings of gold, and brought out into strong
relief, also, the pallor, the dark shadows under the
eyes, the hard set lines on the young face, whose
very outline seemed altered and sharpened. It
was only a momentary glance, for he dared not
linger, but not one bitter detail escaped him, even
to the grease marks on the coarse blue clothes, and
a half-healed burn on the soiled hands; and as
he hurried away he knew that as long as he lived
he would never be safe from that torturing memory.
No wonder then, that, disregarding the sneers of
his companions, he staggered out into the dark-
ness ; but quickly as he went, some one was beside
him, a grip of iron was on his arm, and turning
he faced his father.
“What is the matter with you?” was the stern
question.
“ Nothing,” he stammered. “ Tin not used to the
sea, you know, and I felt ill. I’ll be better out
here.”


“ I hope that is all, Cecil. But, coupled with
some information that has just come to me, your
agitation has roused a terrible suspicion. No, you
must not go away; I’m going to have this out once
for all. You ought to know me better than to
think you can evade my determination. I have
learned that you went into Stephen’s room that
day, you know the day I mean, and that you were
evidently anxious that no one should see you. It
was implied that you were tampering with his let-
ters. What were you doing?”
“ How can I remember. I often went into his
room to put back w'hat I borrowed. I used his
tennis things, and sometimes ”
“ You went in apparently empty-handed and came
out the same. What did you go in there for?”
“I can’t remember. Why do you ask me?”
“ Because I found very incriminating documents
in his room, as you know, and I remember now
that it struck me at the time that he seemed
genuinely astonished when I told him so. This
seems a trivial matter, but it may imply a great
deal. Again, I was watching you to-night, Cecil,
and do you know how you looked when that elec-
trician stood near you?”
“ How?” the word was almost inaudible.
“ Conscience-stricken! I’ve seen that look before
now, in my knocking about the world. I remember
when I was on the Pacific coast a man of our
crew used to collapse, very much as you did to-
night, whenever he saw a half-caste; and it came
out afterwards that he had killed his mate, way
up on the Klondyke, and that mate had been a
half-caste.”
“ I tell you that I am only ill.”


“I hope so, as I said before. But see now, Cecil,
let us look at the matter squarely. Perhaps I was
wrong that time to threaten that I wouldn’t give you
another chance; it may have frightened you
into deceit and worse. If this is so, if
you are making a scape-goat of your bro-
ther, tell me now. I'll give you another chance,
aye, a dozen for that matter; but don’t let us both
do such a wrong to Stephen if he is not really to
blame.”
“Another chance?”
“ Yes. We’ll be at Thursday Island in a few days
and I can wire from there, and if there is any place
to leave your mother and Elaine, we’ll go back by
the next boat.”
“ Go back?”
“Of course; you and Stephen change places,
that’s all; or if both are equally guilty you can
share the debt between you.”
But Cecil’s moment of relenting had passed, gone
in selfish fears. Change places, indeed! Was it
likely that he would give up this pleasant trip, give
up a life of luxury for hard work, obscurity and
disgrace. He spoke sullenly.
“ I don’t know what you’re aiming at. Wasn’t
Stephen’s name on those bills? How could I have
anything to do with it?”
“He may have done it for you. He’s just the
quixotic fool to do a thing like that.”
“He did not, then. There’s no love lost between
“Speak for yourself. Is this, then, your final
answer? Will you give me your word that you
are innocent in this matter? Remember, this is
your last chance of undoing a wrong, if you are
guilty.”


“Of course I am innocent,” broke in Cecil hotly.
“ I swear that I ”
“ Stop,” said his father imperiously, and after a
moment of silence, “ an oath is surely not needed
between father and son. There should be affection
and confidence.”
He broke off as a bitter memory rushed in on
him; the agonised entreaty of the grey eyes, so
like those long closed in death, the low imploring
tone, ‘ only trust me a little ’; and he had refused
to listen, even. His voice was very stern as he
resumed:
“Be it so then, Cecil. Do you swear that you
are innocent, that to the best of your belief Stephen
is guilty?”
“ I swear it.”
“ Go then,” said his father, pushing him roughly
away. “ Truly I have no blessing on me, for,
whatever be the truth, one of my sons is a scoun-
drel.”
Long after the other passengers had retired he
was still pacing the deck, torn by conflicting emo-
tions. At last, pausing by the stern, he leaned
over and watched the swirling waters gleam white
in the starlight. Even to those who bar the door
most securely comes the hour when conscience
knocks and will not be denied, when the most self-
loving must be to himself a pitiless judge. Such
a moment had come to him now, and it was charac-
teristic of the man that he made no effort to evade
it, but face the struggle bravely. Why had he
been so hard on his elder son? Why had it been
almost a pleasure to think of him as vile and de-
graded? Was it because he himself had been
humbled before him in the knowledge of his apos-
tacy, because he had seen, or fancied that he saw,


a contemptuous attitude towards himself, because
he had felt the mere presence of his son a reproach
to the renegade? He blanched at the thought, and
yet he knew that it had been a relief to have his
son out of the house; a relief not to have to avoid
the look he feared to see in the steady eyes, the
look he had seen long ago in eyes he would never
look into again. Like mother, like son: they would
not let him go his own way in peace. Whose
business was it but his own if he chose to run the
risk of judgment hereafter? And yet, and yet,
somehow here, under the stars, with the dark
waters all round him, with the memory of his early
love strongly before him, when he weighed them in
the balance the good things of the world seemed
paltry and mean in comparison to the tremendous
consequences he was risking; and a thought like
a finger of fire was laid on his heart, “ You shrunk
from her reproach, you shrink from that of her
son, how will you face the anger of the God you
have denied and forsaken?”


CHAPTER VIII.
FALLING INTO LINE.
“ Hardest of all tasks, to keep heights
which the soul is competent to gain.”
Wordsworth.
If Stephen had flattered himself that the
manager’s unwonted gentleness was to be the fore-
cast of easier times, he was soon undeceived, for
Mackenzie seemed rather to avoid him afterwards,
and never addressed him unless it was absolutely
necessary. The foreman’s attitude was hard to
bear, for had Clintock asserted his authority, Ste-
phen would have been spared much of the petty
persecution that fell to him every day. All these
annoyances, added to the strain of the hard work,
the coarse food, comfortless lodgings, and trying
summer heat, began to tell on him, and he thought
he was going to break down, and be forced to
abandon his purpose. Cut oft* from his former
friends (for though there were some who would
have welcomed him, he was too proud to seek out
any of them), there was no one now with whom
he could spend his scanty leisure, and the want of
companionship was the hardest of all to bear. True,
he had won for himself a place in the shed, and
there were many who showed him friendliness, but
he wanted some one of his own tastes and train-
ing. With a good friend, he thought, he could bear
twice what he had now, though he had to admit
that it made him more self-reliant and there was
no one to take his part or show any interest in him


at all. The hardness of the struggle showed on his
face, from which all the softer lines seemed gone,
as all the softer lines had gone out of his life.
Still he hoped on, though hope seemed idle; in
prayer he sought for strength and courage, and he
clung with all the might of unfaltering faith to Him
Who has said: “ I will never leave you or forsake
you.” Remembering the injunction in his mothers
letter, he sought by every means to deepen and
strengthen his devotion to the Sacred Heart, and
indeed his only hours of peace and happiness were
those he spent before the Blessed Sacrament.
One day early in February he thought he had
reached the limit of endurance. After a restless
night he had risen with a bad head-ache, which the
noise and heat of the shed were not likely to im-
prove. The foreman also was in a particularly try-
ing mood, for several of the men were away, work
was behind, and contracts had to be filled. The
climax came when he peremptorily called Stephen
to go over a calculation; the tone was bad enough,
but the profanity of the speech roused Stephen’s
ire.
“ I’ll come whenever you call me, and do what-
ever you ask if I can, but I’ll not be sworn at. I
told you that once before, and I mean it. Please
remember that.”
There was such a ring of authority in the voice
that the foreman only stared, and the matter might
have ended there; but at a half-caught phrase from
one of the men, “Clintock’s down this time,” he
flushed and turned angrily to where Stephen stood
at the desk trying to steady himself to the compu-
tation.
“You’ll keep a civil tongue in your head; I take
no impudence from anyone under me. I mean it.


Remember that in future. I’ve enough to put up
with without you’re impertinence, seeing four of
my best men are away drinking; and for the matter
of that, you look a bit cheap, too; are you on the
same game?”
Exasperated beyond endurance Stephen would
have flung himself at his tormentor, but a firm
grasp was laid on his arm, and he turned to face
the manager. #
“ The day’s ower warm for such diversions, he
said drily; “ but I’m no blamin’ the lad, it wesna a
fair speech, I'd have ye all mind that Air. Stephen
Daly is the son of the head of the works, and like
to be head himsel’ before long. It’s a matter ye’re
all forgettin’, I’m thinkin’. There’s someone to see
you in the offeece,” he continued, turning to Ste-
phen. “ But what’s come to ye that ye look sae
puirly?”
“ It’s only a bad headache, the weather, I sup-
pose.” And as they crossed the yard together, he
went on rather timidly, it must be confessed, “I’m
very grateful to you, Air. Alackenzie. I don’t know
why they should have such a set on me. Clintock’s
as bad as anyone. But perhaps they’ll be better
in future since } t ou have spoken up for me.
The manager’s reply was seemingly irrelevant.
“Ye’re lookin’ gey like yer mither the day, wi’
yir white face and meeserable e’en? Keep up, lad;
it’s no for a man to be whinin’. Here, noo, see
who’s come after ye.”
Stephen gave one swift glance and then sprang
forward. “ Father Petrie,” he cried. “ How good
of you to come and see me.”
“ Could I stay away if I thought you were in
trouble?” was the swift response. “Turn to the
light, so; I want a good look at you. Whiter and


thinner, but the same steady eyes. See, my boy.
I’ve heard all sorts of tales about my old pupil —
no, don’t interrupt me—but I don’t believe one word
of it.”
“ Thank you,” said Stephen simply, “ You’re the
first who has said that, and it means a great deal
to me.”
“ I thought it was impossible when I heard it,
and face to face the last shred of doubt is gone.
There has been a terrible mistake somewhere, and
you —No don’t go, Mr. Mackenzie. I must not
stay. I want a good talk with my boy, but this
is neither the time or the place. And yet I leave
Sydney to-night.”
“ To-night.”
“ Yes, I’ve been here more than a week, and I’d
have hunted you up before, but I heard the whole
family was away in Europe; and only this morning
did I learn the truth, or let us say, the supposed
truth. Now what is the soonest you can get away?”
“ This verra moment,” interjected the manager,
and Stephen gave him a grateful look.
“ Thank you, Mackenzie, I'll remember this. So,
Stephen, the rest of the day is ours,” he continued,
as they moved away together. “ Shall I go with
you while } r ou change, or wait for you somewhere?”
“ Father, I want above all to go to confession
to you, but perhaps ”
“ And so you shall. Let me see, St. Colman’s
is the nearest, I think. I'll wait for you there, and
don’t keep me waiting too long; you know me of
old.”
There was no need to urge expedition, for in an
incredibly short time Stephen was at the appointed
place, and soon his full heart was eased of its
burden.


Then followed a delightful hour or two in the
Gardens, and what with the gay chat, reminiscences
of school days, and many a word of good counsel,
it was more like the old Stephen who sat down to
dinner with his kindly friend and guide.
“Ah, this is good,” he said, with a sigh of relief.
“What?”
“The nice smooth, clean cloth, the flowers, _ the
dainty table appointments; oh, all that Ive missed
lately.”
“Poor Stephen, your fastidiousness must make
rough life harder. But why do you stay in those
wretched lodgings?”
Stephen flushed. “Well, Father, ’ he pleaded ,
“thought I ought as a mortification, don’t you see?”
“No,” returned Father Petrie drily, “I don’t see
at all. You must remember, Stephen, that health
is a gift of God, and we have no more right to
abuse it than any other of His gifts. The burdens
you've taken on yourself are penance enough; and,
moreover, the laborious life you are leading is a
drain on the system. You are showing that in your
appearance, and you are too sensible not to see how
utterly foolish it is to run any risk of breaking down.
You need good nourishing food, and a certain
amount of comfort in your surroundings. I take it
this is entirely absent in your present abode?”
Stephen nodded.
“Then you must seek it elsewhere. You would
not like, perhaps, even if you could afford it, to go
where you could have the refinement, and I quite
agree with you about keeping the spirit, as well as
the letter of your agreement, with your father; but
there is no reason why you should not have a room
with nice, quiet people, and get your meals, or at
least your principal meal, outside. This would


obviate mixing with uncongenial spirits; and you
would have at the same time more privacy, and cer-
tainly more comfort. Why not try it? Here’s our
dinner, and I expect you to do full justice to it, for
it seems to me you are really in need of appetising
food.”
There certainly had been great truth in this re-
mark, for Stephen looked better afterwards, and
even the throbbing headache had eased under the
influence of a good cup of tea.
“If I had tea like that always,” he said, ‘T’d never
have a headache.”
“Well, you may have it when you are your own
housekeeper. Now the time is short, and there are
three or four points I must touch on. First of all,
here comes in the schoolmaster, what about your
degree. Did you get your pass last year?”
“Yes, I got through all right; but I’ve another
year to do, and so my degree seems lost, for I won’t
be free for years.”
“That would be a pity, after so much Hard work;
and I know how you can work, Stephen; and yet
you must stick to the foundry. Do you think you
could stand work and study together?”
“To keep up my subjects? I’m trying to do that;
but it’s pretty stiff work, as I have no gas jet in my
room, and the old dame made a fuss when I got a
lamp.”
“Studying by candlelight! No wonder your eyes
look tired. But I don’t mean only to keep up your
subjects; I’d like you to go on and pass your final,
this year if possible.”
“Oh, that would be grand. But it’s impossible,
isn’t it? I can’t attend lectures; they’re all In the
mornings.”


“Of course you couldn’t do that; but I think you
can get exemption for proper reasons, and all that
will be required of you is to pass the examinations
at the end of the year. If you would like to try
I’ll do what I can for you. If I’d not been going to-
night I’d have been able to see about it personally,
but I'm sure Dillon will arrange it for us; you re-
member Dillon? He’s a big man at the University
now, and can fix it up for us without much difficulty.
I’ll write to him as soon as I get back to Melbourne,
and ask him to put it through. You think it over.
“I don’t need any time to think it over, Father.
I know that I want to finish my course for more
reasons than one; and the thought that I d lost my
chance of doing so has just got me down.
“Then all you have to do is to talk it over with
Mackenzie now.
Stephen gave him a rueful look.
“And that just brings me to my second point.
You are making a great mistake about him, let me
tell you that. You are young, and even with my
years and experience I am slow to judge from ap-
parent motives. A mere show of hostility has em-
bittered you, and you forget the long years of kind-
ness ; he has rendered you many a service you know
nothing about; for one thing, do you know that you
owe your Catholic education to him?
“To him? I don’t understand.”
“There’s no need to understand, the fact is
enough. Besides you have found out for yourself
that your father would have brought you up differ-
ently, had he considered himself free to do so. Any-
way, Mackenzie brought you to us, and he paid all
your fees until almost the last year at school, when,
for some reason or other, your father took it over.
Believe me, even counting your own father, I am


sure there is no one in the whole world who has
your welfare more at heart than Colin Mackenzie.
Don’t be deceived by his gruff exterior; ‘sweetest
fruit has sourest rind’; and, besides, you have some-
how hurt him very much, I saw that: perhaps your
presumed wrongdoing is responsible for his harsh-
ness ; but his is not a nature to change lightly; he
is a sterling friend. The same caution may apply
to the foreman, though, of course, I can’t speak
with the same degree of certainty, as I don’t know
him at all. In any case, my dear Stephen, you can’t
rush through life knocking down everyone who dis-
agrees with you or annoys you. You have a big
struggle before you, but don’t be downcast. There’s
strength to be had for the asking, as you know; and
if at any time you feel disheartened, try and lighten
some one else’s burden, and you will find your own
grow easier. Time’s up. You’ll come to the station
of course.”
“I don’t know how to thank you, Father,” said
Stephen later, as he stood on the platform by the
carriage window”; you’ve been such a help to me.
I felt as if I had got on to a bit of firm ground again;
before, I seemed to be in a sort of quagmire or
quicksand, and at every struggle I slipped farther
in. It is as if a terrible tension were lightened, and
I could plan and hope again. And you’ve promised
to write to me too; and that’ll be a great help. When
you have time I wish you would give me those lines
of Browning’s you quoted this afternoon.”
“I’ll do it now. Here you are, scribbled on a leaf
of my note book. If you can’t make it out, I’ll re-
write it. You were always my favourite pupil,
Stephen; I was proud of you always, and I’m going
to be so to the end. Steadfast and true, remember,
and march ‘breast forward.’ Bear in mind the mean-


ing of your name, and the crown that awaits us all.
There’s the bell. Remember the little prayer. God
bless you.”
The train moved slowly out, and with the last
glimpse of the kindly face, Stephen felt his heart
sink; but, remembering the promise he had given,
he refused to yield to the sadness, fixing his mind
rather on all he had to do and arrange. Before
leaving the station, he read over the lines hurriedly
traced for him:—
“One who never turned his back but marched breast
forward.
Never doubted clouds would break,
Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong
would triumph;
Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
Sleep to wake.”
“Baffled to fight better,” he repeated to himself.
“Yes, that just does for me.” And as he walked
home through the city he began to map out a time-
table of studies, and squared his shoulders at the
very thought of obstacles.
Nor did he forget the little prayer recommended
to him; but on his way to work on the next morn-
ing, he repeated it again and again: “Lord, keep
Thine arms about me to-day, or I shall betray Thee.”
Full of the resolution to make good his mistakes,
he approached the foreman at once.
“I’m sorry I lost my temper with you yesterday,
Mr. Clintock,” he said, “and I apologise for my rude-
ness.”
“Shouldn’t it be the other way about?” There
was certainly a twinkle in his eyes. “I thought Mac-
kenzie put us all in our places, and I’ll not say he


wasn’t right. However, your hand on it. I’ve given
you a pretty bad time of it the last three months,
and it’s good for you not to bear any malice. I had
my instructions, you see, and I carried them out.
Yesterday I was worried, too, over the absence of
some of my best workers.”
“Are they back to-day?”
“That they’re not, and there’s poor Mrs. Nolan
been here breaking her heart for her son Joe. The
others are seasoned rascals, and he’s but a lad;
they’ve led him away all right. You might do some-
thing with him, for he seemed to take a liking to
you; that is, if he comes back at all. Now, we’ll all
have to do double work if our contracts are to be
met. Will you look after that electrical order; it
wants careful handling.”
“Certainly, I’ll be only too glad to do something
decent; I’ve had more than enough job work. I
hate to detain you when you are so busy, but will
you tell me what you meant by saying just now
that you had your instructions? May I ask?”
“You may ask, but that’s not to say that I’ll tell
you. Stay,” as Stephen turned to go, “I may as well
let you know. It was like this; you came here with
a bad record. Your —I mean, I was rung up that
morning, and heard a shocking story, and also that
you were coming here; and I was particularly re-
quested to —well, take the nonsense out of you.”
Thus saying the foreman moved away quickly
that he might not seem to see the sudden whitening
of the face before him; but he heard the quickly-
drawn breath, and knew how deeply the shaft had
gone home.
In spite at his heartache at this new proof of im-
placable determination to humble him to the dust,
Stephen found more pleasure in his work that day


than he had known before; and not the least reason
was the attitude of the men to him. The mockery
had dropped, and they treated him as one of them-
selves, or even with a certain deference; there was
no doubt Mackenzie’s warning had been taken to
heart, for some who had been the foremost in annoy-
ing him now showed an evident desire to Avin his
approval. He took very little notice of these,
howeA r er; they were too surely fair-Aveather friends;
the others he was glad to meet on an even footing;
moreover, the important Avork entrusted to him was
a source of real pleasure, not only from the thought
that it raised his status in the shed, but also because
it ga\'e full play to his knoAvledge and skill.


CHAPTER IX.
BREAST FORWARD.
“To climb steep hills requires slow pace at first.”
Shakespeare.
As Stephen was passing into the shed the next
morning he saw the foreman engaged in what was
evidently an unpleasant interview to judge by his
uneasy manner and the eagerness with which he
turned to him.
“Good morning, Mr. Stephen. I really don’t know
what to do in this matter. Here’s poor Mrs. Nolan
brought her son back, but I can’t take him on with-
out Mr. Mackenzie’s permission. He’s not here yet,
but he was very emphatic on the point last night;
he wouldn’t have one of them back, he said, on any
account, and we’ve arranged to take others on in
their places. Yet I don't want to turn the young
fellow away, not only for your sake, Mrs. Nolan, but
for his own too; for if he’s out of work and desperate
he’ll go from bad to worse. He looks pretty well
ashamed of himself this morning,” he added, glanc-
ing at the white face and downcast looks of the
young man, “as well he may be; breaking your
heart, and ruining his life with a pack of idle rascals.
Ah, there’s Mr. Mackenzie! Would you mind ask-
ing him to come here, Mr. Stephen? Never mind,
he’s coming.”
The poor woman, whose eyes were red and
swollen with long crying, looked piteously at the
manager’s stern face; but she spoke up bravely for
her son.


“I said I wadna gie them anither chance,” he be-
gan, when Stephen, whose heart ached for the miser-
able culprit no less than for the pleading mother,
broke in on the slow harsh words.
“Ah, don’t refuse,” he entreated, but broke off
suddenly, for the old man wheeled round and glared
at him/ He expected at the least a stinging repri-
mand, but after a few seconds of breathless suspense
for the four, the manager turned again to the mother
and son.
“And anither chance I wadna gie them?” he went
on with the same harsh earnestness, “only I d fain
obleege young Air, Daly; and ye may be thankfu’
that he’s put in a word for the likes of ye. Tak him
on again for this week, Clintock, but oot wi’ him at
the first sign of misbehavin.’ This is yir verra last
chance, no matter who interferes for ye.”
With this Parthian shot he retreated, and Clin-
tock. shrugging his shoulders, turned back to the
shed.
“Make up for lost time, Joe,” he said with a short
laugh, “and keep straight if you want to be on after
this week. He’s with you, Stephen; come along.”
They were moving away when Mrs. Nolan, smil-
ing through her tears, addressed Stephen:
“God bless you, sir; you’ve taken a load off a poor
mother’s heart; and may 3'our own be lightened
when your time of trouble comes. You’ll remember
your promise, won’t you, Joe? And if you’re under
Mr. Daly, he’ll give you a word of help at times,
Ij
m sure.
She dropped a curtsey to Stephen, gave her son a
loving look of warning, and left them.
There was no doubt that Joe was a good work-
man ; even to-day with hand and eyes unsteady after
his dissipation, he showed skill, and Stephen was


glad of his help in the press of work. Moreover,
the quiet gratitude showing in a score of helpful
actions, impressed him more than any voluble pro-
testations. Only when the day’s work was over he
said in a low tone:
“I’ll not forget your kindness, sir. I didn’t de-
serve it, but I’ll try and never disgrace it.”
Stephen gave him a smile of encouragement, but
in his heart he was far from feeling gay, for he
had determined to speak to Mackenzie about his
plans, and surely by his interference in the morning
he had involved himself in a fresh misunderstanding
with the stern old man. As he was passing through
the shed, Clintock called to him:
“Wait a minute; I want to speak to you, and
I’m going your way.”
And when Stephen explained whither he was
bound, he added with a laugh: “That’s where I
meant anyway. He’s sent down word that he wants
to see you, and I was just trying to break it to
you gently. I suppose you think you put your foot
in it this morning, but take my word for it, he was
glad of the opening you gave him. He wanted to
help the poor woman, to say nothing of getting a
good hand like Joe back, and he hates going back on
his word. Oh, I know. I haven’t worked with Mac
for nigh on twenty years without coming to under-
stand him a bit. His bark’s a long way worse than
his bite. Not that he isn’t a hard man, for he is, and
a dour one too; yet he’s done more good turns to
us all here than you’d think possible. The more he’s
upset the broader his speech gets, until even I find
it hard to understand him, and I’m good old Scotch
myself. Didn’t he just perform the morning you
were coming here. He was in and out of the shed
like a whirlwind, and the air was thick with stormy


language and good Perthshire. But he s at the
office now and don’t keep him waiting; he 11 let oft
steam a bit, I daresay; but you mustn’t mind that.”
In spite of this encouragement, it was with some
trepidation he entered the office, whose door stood
invitingly open. The manager was going over some
accounts with his clerk. Stephen hesitated on the
threshold.
“Come richt in,” was the encouraging growl. “Did
ye no get ma message?” And as Stephen entering,
stood by the window, affecting to look through the
dirt-grimed glass, he thundered at him: “What’s up
wi’ ye that ye canna sit doon instead of danderin’
roun’ like that!”
Stephen looked straight into the keen blue eyes.
“To tell the truth,” he said with more spirit than
he meant to show, “I didn’t know that it was quite
the thing for a workman to sit down in the mana-
ger’s office.”
The harsh features relaxed in a grim smile.
“So; ye ken yir place at last. Man, ye’re makin’
grand progress. Weel, the manager will be verra
much obleeged if the workman ’ill sit doon and read
these letters, until he can attend to a little matter
that’s got to be fixed up between them. Now,
Mitchell.”
Stephen took the letters eagerly; one was from
Father Petrie, and no short one either, judging
from the thickness of the enclosure. He was about
to open it, when the sight of the writing on the
other envelope set all his pulses bounding—it was
his father’s. He opened it with a hand that trembled
in spite of himself. He hardly knew what he ex-
pected, but the sight of the half-dozen lines on the
sheet struck him like a blow.


“Elaine has begged to be allowed to write to you,
and I have granted her request. \ou asked me the
last time we met to trust you a little; I am doing
so now in relying on your sense of honour not to
abuse her childish confidence, nor to make this cor-
respondence a vent for your grievances.—F.J.D.”
He forgot Elaine’s letter at first, in the rush of
joy at this evidence of some little trust in him,
though the written words were far from kind; then
unfolding her note, he read in the sprawlin’, half-
formed writing:
Dearest Stephen,—l asked to write to you instead
of having a Christmas present. Father says I may
write once a month. I wish you were here and
going with us, for everything is lovely but that. I
wanted to write you a long letter, but we don’t stay
long at Thursday Island, where I am writing. Oh,
Stevie, it’s the funniest place I ever did see. Mr.
Sayers, one of our passengers, says it is one of the
world’s glory-holes. Miss Moore used to say my
shelf in the schoolroom was a glory-hole, so I know
what it means. It is funny; black men, white men,
brown men, and ever so many Chinamen. I mean
to write you a long letter from Japan, and please
write to me at Vancouver. Father says Mr. Mac-
kenzie knows where to send the letters. Here is
father to take my letter and I haven’t told you half.
But, oh, Stevie; I don’t care what anyone says or
tells me ; you are not bad; I will never, never believe
it, and I love you ever so much.
Your loving sister,
ELAINE.
He read the little note through two or three
times, with a wonderful lightening of heart; one of


his own, at least, had not condemned and forgotten
him. Raising his eyes from the last perusal, he met
the keen scrutiny of the manager, who, with arms
folded on the desk, was surveying him with surpris-
ing interest. Putting away the letter, he plunged
at once into the subject he had to introduce.
“You sent for me, Mr. Mackenzie; but in any case
I was coming to see you. I want to ask your
advice.”
The merciless blue eyes never wavered.
“Ye’d have dune weel to have askit ma advice lang
syne; it’s a bit late the day.”
' This was distinctly discouraging, but there was
nothing to be gained by beating about the bush.
“You see it’s like this. In one more year I’d have
had my degree, and I thought when I let —I mean
when I came here—that I’d have to give up all
thoughts of it for many a year; for it’ll take me a
long time to pay a thousand pounds.”
“Aye, thet it will; it’s easier spendin’ than gettin’.”
‘‘But Father Petrie thinks I ought to try and go
on,” continued Stephen as steadily as he could,
though he winced at the bitterness of the rough
tone and the implied scorn of the spendthrift; “he
says I can get an exemption from attending lec-
tures, study by myself, in the evenings, of course,
and sit for examination at the end of the year; or
else try a post. He told me to talk it over with you,
and ask you what you think, and whether I can do
this without detriment to or contravention of the
agreement with my father.” In spite of his
courage he stopped here, disheartened at the other’s
unresponsiveness, and as the silence became oppres-
sive, he resumed with a sigh: “I’m sorry you dis-
approve; it’s a big disappointment to me. I’ll keep
up my studies anyway, and hope even against hope.


You sent for me, did you not? Was it only to give
the letters, or have you anything to say to me?”
“I’m no that by-ordinair clever that I can do two
things at once. I thocht ye were askin’ my opeenion
on }dr studies?”
“So I was, but as you didn’t seem to take any
interest, I concluded that it wasn’t any use going
on.”
“Ye’re over hasty, Stephen; ’tis a great fault, and
spoils much guid wark. And I never saw the like
of ye Australians —ane, two, three, dune; ye’re all
the same; no time for thocht, for conseederation at
a’. I canna dae the like. I like tae think ower and
ower afore I commit masel’. Ye’ll study the even-
ings, ye say?”
“Yes, that will not interfere with my work at all,
then.”
“Can ye stand it? Ye’re no lookin’ that grand, and
to work the hands all day and the brain the night
is no the easy thing ye may think it. And what’s
a bit degree, an’ a miseerable twa letters ahint yir
name if ye’ve no health.”
“If I find it too hard I can spread it over two
years. I won’t break down? I’m stronger than
you think. Besides, if the study did nothing else, K
would take my thoughts off other things. Would
it be in any way contrary to the agreement?”
“In no way.”
“Then you think I might try it?”
“I think none the waur of ye for tryin’ to pu’
yirself oot o’ the mire. It beats me how you ever
came to fa’ so low as to make licht of yir feyther’s
name and yir mother’s bit money? But it’s no
use cryin’ for what’s gone; you have baked yir cake,
as we used to say in the old land, and ye’ll have
to eat it yirsel’. But if ye’ll be studyin’ the evenings


ye'll no be able to do what yir feyther was writin’
aboot.”
“My letter was from Elaine; there were only a
few words from my father, and he said nothing of
my doing anything for him. What does he want?
I’ll put that first of course.”
“Here’s the letter. Read it for yirsel’.”
Stephen took the sheet and read the paragraph
pointed out to him.
“I think we ought to be able to do it. Get the
specifications and plans ready at once; and I think
it will be best to let Stephen do these for two rea-
sons. For one thing, it will keep it quieter, and I
don’t want anyone to jump our claim; and for
another, it will help him a bit, either for his own
wants or to put to the other. He must do it after
hours, of course, and you can pay him what is usual
—neither more or less. I think there’s money in it
for us if we get it out first, but we’ll have to be
quick and quiet, and get the thing put together and
shipped up here before any one else gets wind of
the matter. I’m pretty sure we can trust Stephen,
because, but for that one thing, he’s given me the
impression of being straight as a die; but you must
use your own judgment.”
“Ye’ll no be able for it, will ye?” asked Mackenzie,
as he took back the letter from Stephen. But the
latter looked up to him with shining eyes.
“Why not? It put new heart in me to think you
both trust me to that extent; for if you didn’t, you
wouldn’t have mentioned the matter at all to me.
The money will help me to pay off the debt; and
as I have to practice such things for the exam., why
not real plans instead of imaginary ones?”
Mackenzie’s hand fell on his shoulder, the keen
eyes looked very kindly, but the words, trembling


on his lips, were not to be said, for at that moment
a peremptory knock came at the door, and before
any invitation was given, it was opened to admit
a man of about fifty, well dressed —too well dressed
in fact—who looked strangely out of place in the
little, and treated the two occupants to a critical
stare.
“Mr. Mackenzie,” he said, finally advancing to the
elder man. “Your own appointment you’ll remem-
ber —my name’s Hart. But I trust I’m not inter-
rupting a technical discussion.”
The manager looked at the intruder frostily, then
as if struck by a sudden thought, he looked keenly
first at Stephen, and then at the man who was sur-
veying them both with such an insolent stare.
“We’ll consider it settled then, Stephen,” he said
at last, in a low tone. “Come the mornin’s morn
and we’ll go into it.”
When Stephen had withdrawn he turned to his
visitor.
“Didn’t ye recognise the young man? Is it the
claes that makes the difference?”
“I don’t understand you; is it a riddle you’re ask-
ing me?” was the cool reply. “I never saw that
young man in my life to my knowledge. A fine
looking fellow, in spite of that awful garb.”
“But,” persisted Mackenzie, “did ye get a good
look at him? Hev ye had any dealings wi’ him?”
“My good sir,” said the man with, emphasis,
“that’s not the sort that keeps me going. No, no,
the hard-working artisan doesn’t come my way; the
idlers, the extravagant sons of rich fathers, —these
are my clients; not the horny-handed son of toil.
But why do you ask?”
“Juist a bit rumour,” replied the manager, whose
eyes were lit by some strange fire. “Weel as to oor


ainbeesiness. Did ye bring the papers? Guid! Is
that a’ve hev?”
-You mean have I any more bearing that young
man’s signature? No I haven’t, worse luck, seeing
you and his father have taken them all up so grandly.
X have a few letters from him on these matters.
Here they are; you can have them for another n\er.
Right. Mr. Mackenzie, you’re my man every time.
It’s a pleasure to do business with you.”
“Will ye have a cheque or notes?’ queried Mac-
kenzie, after he had driven the other almost to
desperation, by going through every letter and paper
with great deliberation at least twice. “A cheque.
That’s soon settled; here ye are. Noo, get oot, man,
till I open up and let in some fresh air, for the place
wants purifyin’ after the like of ye.
No sooner had the unwelcome visitor gone than
he bade Mitchell bring in the last pay-sheet.
“Ye’d better be off, Mitchell. I’ll lock up masel’,”
he said, as the man brought in what he had asked
for. When he was sure that the clerk had gone, he
spread the pay-sheet out on a table and looked dou n
the list till he came to a signature which he com-
pared carefully with everyone on the letters and
papers which had just come into his possession. The
rugged face was lit by a wonderful tenderness as he
folded up the papers at last,
“Thank God,” he said, “it’s no the same. There’s
been some dukery-packery, and I’ll no rest till I’ve
cleared it up. Kathie,” his voice was almost caress-
ing, “I’m a happy man the day that there’s some-
thing I can do for ye again. I’ll clear yir laddie,
yir ain dear laddie, from the fause charge that’s
been made against him.”


CHAPTER X.
PETER.
“God uses us to help each other, so
Lending our lives out.”
Browning.
The evening light fell softly through the stained
glass of the windows in the old church, and the
sanctuary lamp flickered in the wild gusts that
swept in at intervals. Still here was comfort, peace
and help, and Stephen rose from his knees refreshed
and strengthened. Only then was he aware of a
child standing beside him and looking at him wist-
fully.
“What is it, my boy,” he asked gently, for the
shrunken body and twisted limbs appealed to his
sympathy.
“Would you put this flower up there for me?”
pointing to our Lady’s altar. “I can’t reach.”
“Of course 111 do it for you. But wouldn’t you
like to do it yourself?”
“I can’t reach,” was the pathetic reiteration,
es you can. See here; put your arm round my
neck, so. ’ And, stooping, he took the frail body
in his arms and went towards the shrine. “There
now, put it in the vase; it will live longer in the
water.”
He held him carefully while he placed to his
satisfaction the red geranium, half-withered already
by being tightly clasped in a hot hand.
“Lift me a little nearer, please,” pleaded the child,
“till I kiss the gold roses on her feet.”


Stephen complied, and caught the low entreaty as
the child looked up to the fair face above him, Dear
Mother, please send us a lodger very soon.
He was so interested in the little fellow that he
followed him out of the church, and when the child
looked up at him at the door he gave an answering
smile. . ,
“Have you very far to go?” he asked, for you
don’t look able for a long walk.”
“Not far, thank you,” was the grave answer.
“Good-bye.”
“Good-bye,” Stephen replied cheerily, and was
turning away, when moved by a sudden impulse, he
hastened after the child, who was plodding along
on his crutches. “Tell me, what did you mean by
asking our Lady to send you a lodger?”
“Just that. There’s only mum and myself. Mr.
Nimbs has the front room for a shop, and we used
to have a lodger in our big room upstairs; it was
nice then, for we always had enough money. But
he’s gone a long time, and mum can’t get much sew-
ing, and I’m no good lor work, or anything.”
The tone was very wistful, and Stephen noticed
how threadbare were the neat clothes, how white the
thin face.
“I know someone who is wanting a room,” he said
slowly, “and perhaps yours might do; only perhaps,
you know. Could I come and look at it now?”
“Oh, yes. Please do. I’ll take you; it’s not easy
to find unless you know the way.”
“Well, I’ll come, but only on one condition. You
look so very tired that you must let me carry you.
What is your name?”
“Peter Mayne. lam very tired. I can’t walk nor
do anything like other boys. Mum didn’t want me
to come to-day, but I’m making a novena, you see.”


“And so am I, and I hope we both get what we’re
asking for. Now, here’s a seat and we’ll fix up. I’ll
carry your crutches like this, and you like this. Is
that better than walking?”
‘‘You are so grand and strong,” with a sigh of
content as he rested against Stephen’s broad shoul-
ders. "If only I was big like you mum wouldn’t
have to work, would she?”
‘‘l should hope not? Now, you must tell me how
to go, for I don’t know the way.”
They passed along through the streets, where
many turned to look at the stalwart young man and
his frail burden, but Stephen cared little for their
curious looks. With the touch of the little hot hand
on his neck, the weary heartache of months seemed
to grow less, the feeling of loneliness diminish. So
on the}" went, past highways blocked with heavy
lorries and carts going to and from the wharves,
until at last they turned into a quieter street of no
great length, ending, as is not uncommon in Syd-
ney, in a sheer wall of rock in which steps had been
hewn. One side of the way was taken up by the
wall of a big warehouse, on the other was a smaller
store, and squeezed in between this last and the
rock}" wall were three small dwelling houses, relics
of the time when this had been a favourite water-
side district. One of the houses, whose front door
stood wide open, had nailed across the window, a
board on which was roughly painted—T. Nimbs,
bootmaker and as, under Peter’s direction, he
passed down the narrow passage Stephen had a
view of an old man seated on a cobbler’s stool, peg-
ging and hammering away right earnestly. When
they reached the end of the passage the boy begged
to be put down.


“You see she might think I was hurt if I was
being carried, but I did like it.” And, holding
Stephen's hand, he entered a fairly large apartment,
which was evidently the living room.
“Mum,” he called, “I’ve brought a gentleman to
see the room. I told you our Lady would send some-
one.” .
A decent-looking woman came hurriedly down the
stairs, which took up one side of the room, her look
of anxiety was pitiable, and Stephen’s heart ached
for her. Already he was learning that, hard as he
thought his lot, it was nothing to that of many
others.
The room she showed him was upstairs, over the
living room. It was certainly large, spacious as
compared to the cupboard he was in at Mrs. Men-
ger’s; moreover, it was light and airy; but it was
bare of all furniture.
“I’m afraid I wanted a furnished room,” he began,
but hearing the woman’s sigh, seeing Peter’s eyes
fill with tears, and moreover in obedience, as it
were, to an impulse, he added hastily, “But if it
didn’t cost too much I could furnish it myself. Now
I come to think of it, I would rather have my own
things,” with a swift remembrance of the appoint-
ments at Mrs. Menger’s, “and it certainly is the best
room I have seen yet. How much would it cost
to make it habitable, only what is absolutely neces-
sary ?”
“You could get all you really want, sir, for under
two pounds—that is, if you didn’t mind the things
being secondhand.”
“I think I’d rather have new. How about the
rent?”
“Five shillings a week, sir, I used to get; but I’d
take four, for it’s been empty a powerful long time.


Many’s been to see it, but it’s too out of the way,
they say, or too quiet, and some don’t like the stairs
going through our room, and again, some object
to the smell of the leathers.”
Certainly it was a penetrating odour that was
wafted up from Mr. Nimb’s workshop, but the room
looked so clean, and was such an improvement of
all he had seen that he decided to try it. Besides,
he felt attracted to this neat, respectful woman, so
different from loud-voiced, rough Mrs. Menger, and
Peter had quite won his heart.”
“I want quiet,” he said, “so I won’t object on that
score, and as to the smell of the leather, it is very
healthy, if we may believe the doctors. I’ll take it,
if you can give me some little assistance in getting
the furniture. Five shillings is little enough, for
it’s a good size. I’d better give you a week in ad-
vance to make sure of it. Now about the furniture.
But,” drawing out his watch, “I had not idea it was
so late. I’ll miss my tea.”
“I’d like to offer you the meal here, sir, but I’ve
nothing I could give you.”
“But you’d cook it for me, if I got it?”
“Why, certainly—but
“I’ve rather a fancy to have tea in that homely
room downstairs, so if Peter will show me where the
shops are, I’ll get what I want in no time.”
He caught her whispered instructions to the little
fellow, and saw her put in his hand some of the
money he had just given her. Evidently things had
been bad with them of late, and he determined that
the shopping should be strictly his affair.
Peter was wildly delighted with the whole
arrangement, and his excitement increased as he saw
all the good things his new friend bought at the
shops. When they returned Mrs. Mayne had set the


—— ; —- —■
' i
I<)I0
Stephen lifted him into the big chair where he lay
happy and charmed by the music. [Page 113.]
Face page 104,


w


cloth in readiness and built up the fire? She has-
tened to relieve Stephen of his parcels, and pointed
to a capacious arm chair in the corner.
“You might like a rest in that, sir, while I am
getting your tea. My husband used to say that
nothing rested him after a day’s work like a spell
in that chair. Yes, he’s gone,” she added, in answer
to Stephen’s enquiring look. “Times was bad with
him, and he took a billet on a coaster, and one dark,
rough night he and two others were washed over-
board.” s
“How sad for you.”
“It might have been worse, sir, for there’s many
a one goes like that and isn’t ready, but Mayne
he’d been to his duty regular all his life.”
Certainly Stephen thought, as he reclined in that
restful chair, the late Mr. Ma}'ne was no bad judge
of what was good for a tired man. He felt strangely
at home there with Peter close beside him, and it
was very pleasant to lean back and watch the pre-
parations for what promised to be a most appetising
meal. Mrs. Mayne was quite amazed, when he said
that he expected them to share the repast, and for
some time she held out, but she yielded at last, and
soon all three were very much at home together?
Indeed, with the exception of the dinner with Father
Petrie, Stephen had not enjoyed a meal like that
since he had left home, and Peter’s undisguised
admiration and shy advances were very pleasant
after the isolation of the last three months. Only
once was his equanimity tried at a question from
Mrs. Mayne.
“Shall I season your tea, sir?”
“Oh, er, why yes, of course,” he replied, wondering
what decoction he was to be treated to, but her next
words dispelled his fears.
G 105


“I didn’t know but what you mightn’t like sugar.”
“Not any sugar, thank you, and very little milk,”
he added hastily, remembering the size of the jug.
In spite of the latter deprivation, the tea was in-
finitely better than the liquid honoured by that name
at Mrs. Menger’s, and he decided to let Mrs. Mayne
do his marketing.
He had another taste of comfort too, after tea,
when seated in the famous chair he had enjoyed the
luxury of a leisurely smoke, while Mrs. Mayne made
out a list of what he would need for the room.
“See, here,” he said suddenly, “I’d be no good to
go buying these things, even if I had the time, which
I haven’t. I think you said work was rather slack
with you just now; so I propose that you do the
shopping for me, and I pay you what you usually
get for a day’s work. What is it?”
5 “Three shillings,” she faltered, “but I couldn’t let
you give that. It wouldn’t take me the whole day,
and, besides, I’d be only too pleased.”
“I wouldn’t hear of it. Either that or nothing.
I’ll give you three pounds; it’s all I can spare this
month. Get new things if possible. I don’t care
how few or how plain.”
“Do you mean, sir,” said the woman, tremulously,
“that you are leaving this money,” touching the
three sovereigns laid on the table for me to get what
you want?”
“That’s about it.”
“But you don’t know anything about me. I might
not be honest.”
“That’s my risk, isn’t it? But you are honest
enough, I feel confident of that; besides, Peter is
my surety, are you not?” he added, turning to the
boy to avoid seeing the tears in the mother’s eyes.


“I’ll do my best by you, sir; and I’ll not forget
your confidence; it’s rare enough in these days.”
“True enough more’s the pity. But it’s growing
late, and Peter looks as sleepy as an owl. You’ll
let me know to this address when the room is ready,
and I’ll come at once. I’m so uncomfortable where
I am that I’ll pay up and leave as soon as I can.
Oh, by the way, I must have a table to write at;
will you have enough for that?” “Yes.” “Then
good-night; don’t forget to keep out your own three
shillings. Good-bye, Peter.” He stooped to shake
hands, but the boy threw his arms round his neck
and gave him a timid kiss.
“I’m so glad our Lady sent you,” he whispered.
And the memory of the caress and the words were
very sweet to the lonely young man.
That was Tuesday, and on Thursday he was sum-
moned to the office, where he found Peter in col-
loquy with the manager himself.
“Here’s a wee mannie has given you a cry (visit),
Stephen. I’ll leave ye to have yir crack.”
“I’ve only come to tell him that the room is quite
ready if he’d like to come to-night.”
“I’ve taken a room in his mother’s house,” said
Stephen in answer to the manager’s enquiring look.
“I want quiet and a place where I can study.”
“That’s a richt step. Then ye’ll take yir bukes,”
he pointed to a box in the corner, “and there’s
anither that came the year end. Ye’d best take
baith.”
“Books,” broke in Peter. “Oh, yes; there’s a place
for shelves, but the other man took them all away.
Couldn’t you make some more?”
“I could indeed, Peter,” said Stephen, smiling at
the boy’s eagerness. “Do you like books?”
“I just love them: only I haven’t many.”


“Gin ye’ll be makin’ shelves ye can have some of
the timber yonder; ’twill save ye a bit, and ye can
take the lot together. I mind there’s a carrier due
here about five, and gin ye re ready he can take yer-
sel’ too. Would you like to bide and go in the
cairt?” he said to Peter.
“Oh yes, sir, please,” was the eager response.
“If he’d be in your road," began Stephen, but the
manager cut him short.
“He’ll no be in my road, so ye needn’ fash yer-
sel’. Ye’ll find him here at five.”
So he did, and there were indications of a most un-
usual feast in “Mac’s Den,” cakes, fruit and lemon-
ade; and Peter and the ogre seemed on the best ot
terms. The cart, too, stood ready at the door, and
Stephen was surprised to see the boxes and planks
already in it. He felt he owed this to Mackenzie,
but the latter would have none of his thanks.
“’Twas the laddie’s thocht,” he asserted. “Ye’d
best take the bit goodies with ye”, he added, turning
to Peter, who, nothing loth, gathered up the rem-
nants of fruit and cake carefully.
That was a proud moment for him, seated between
Stephen and the driver in the very front of the cart,
though it did bump dreadfully over the rough streets.
It was quite a long ride too, for Stephen went to
get his belongings, and right glad he was to turn
his back on that cheerless house.
It was wonderful what a difference the furniture
made, and Mrs. Mayne had done marvels with the
money; there was a strip of carpet on the floor, and
a snowy cloth on the table, on which she had set
his tea in readiness. It looked quite homelike, and
when he shut the door and sat down to his meal
he enjoyed the first real privacy he had known, for
months. There was a certain pleasureable novelty,


too, in attending to his own wants, and he felt quite
domesticated as he washed up his cup and saucer
and plate, and put them away in the little cupboard
by the fireplace, where he noticed Mrs. Mayne had
put the things he had asked her to get for him.
Afterwards, as it was still early, and there was
sufficient light, he set to work on the book shelves.
Peter looked on in admiration as the rough was
planed and shaped; he begged to be allowed to carry
some of them upstairs; this of course could not be
allowed; but to make up for the disappointment he
was permitted to help by holding the nails and ham-
mer, and handing them to Stephen as they were
wanted. In an incredibly short time the recess was
filled with neat shelves, and then came an exciting
moment for the little boy, for the books were un-
packed, and he hastened to seize one and examine
it, but he made a wry face at its contents.
“Are they all like this one?” he asked. “I don’t
like this a bit; it s all figures and funny little things ;
and not a single picture.”
“I’m afraid most of them won’t interest you at all;
but I think there are one or two at the bottom of
the box that may suit you. You must see them to-
morrow, for I hear your mother calling you now.”
Y hen he had finished the unpacking and arrang-
ing, he sat down to rest and contemplate his handi-
work. It was a good rest, too, for Mrs. Mayne had
put the big chair in his room.
\on see, sir, she had said when he expostulated
with her; ‘it’s really too big for my room, and neither
I nor Peter care about it. It seems made for a
man, and I’ll take it kindly if you will let it stay
here and use it.”
He was very grateful for her thoughtfulness, and
quite enjoyed the novelty of leaning back in corn-


fort; it was pleasant to sit there smoking and con-
templating the neat rows of books, and he began to
build airy castles once more. But they awakened
memories bitter, as well as sweet, those seiried
volumes, and to shake off the gloomy thoughts
creeping over him he turned to the other box, which
he had not yet unpacked. He expected to find more
books, but a low cry broke from him, as he saw the
piles of music and his beloved violin. Who had sent
them? Surely his stepmother, for his father had re-
fused to let him take his music. This last thought
damped all the joy of anticipation, for if his father
had not allowed him to have the music, would it be
right to have it now without his consent? As if in
answer to his doubt, his eyes rested on a card on the
top of the violin case. It was one of his father’s
visiting cards, and that it was there b} r design, and
not by accident, was evident from the fact that it
was fastened to the case by a drawing-pin. He could
avail himself of the pleasure and recreation offered
without any scruples since his father must have sent
the music to him; and there was an added pleasure
in the thought that he must have relented somewhat
to the son he believed guilty. He touched the case
lovingly.
“My Amati, come to comfort me in my exile and
help me in my struggle. We shall have many happy
hours together, but I cannot trust myself to play
to-night.”


CHAPTER XL
UPHILL.
“Difficulties are the stones out of which all
God's houses are built.” —F. W. Faber.
Stephen soon grew accustomed to his new mode
of life, and in spite of minor drawbacks, began to
find a certain amount of enjoyment in it. However,
there would have been no time for grumbling, even
had he been so inclined, for every moment was pre-
cious and had to be utilised. Rising early, he got
an hour’s study before going to assist at Holy Mass;
breakfast he had reduced to such a simple meal that
its preparation involved no loss of time, and he was
scrupulously punctual at the w r orks. He had
acquitted himself so well of that first piece of work
entrusted to him that Clintock left more and more
to him, and not only was the responsibility gratify-
ing, but the increased wage made the amounts paid
into his father’s account look quite imposing; and
that, united to what he was earning already as a
draughtsman, and hoped to earn when he had gained
his degree, roused the hope that his exile would not
be so very long after all. Four hours of close study
in the evenings, and a good eight hours on Satur-
days, helped him over the ground wonderfully, and
the daily, hourly need of independent thought and
action brought out unguessed-at stores of self-re-
liance, and power of concentration, which, when ap-
plied to his studies, enabled him to run where he
had formerly stumbled along under the guidance of
the lecturer or demonstrator.


He was learning - many other things, too, besides
those he found in books; the value of money, the
necessity of self-denial, and, best of all, to under-
stand and prize the many services, small in them-
selves, that yet money cannot buy, and which are
the outcome of love and gratitude. Joe's eagerness
to serve was no mere ephemeral display, but grew
deeper daily; and in his surroundings he had come
to appreciate the thoughtful endeavours of Mrs,
Mayne to repay his unfailing courtesy to her, and,
above all, his interest in and affection for her afflicted
child. His room was always so clean and neat that
he was sure either she or Peter attended to it every
day, and his clothes no longer worried him by gap-
ing rents and missing buttons, and his apprentice-
ship at Mrs. Menger’s had taught him that this was
not the usual thing. Many a day, when he had been
detained at the works and came in late and tired,
he found the table ready set for his tea, so that he
was spared the trouble of preparing it, and more
than once when he was working late, she brought
him in a cup of coffee, making the excuse that she
had made some for herself.
So, if the road was hard and rough, at least there
were some flowers by the wayside, and though it was
an uphill path, it was not a dark one. Moreover, he
had two additional helps in the weekly letters from
Father Petrie, and in his music, for he always man-
aged to get half-an-hour’s practice daily. The first
evening he played, he heard a slight noise on the
landing, and on looking, found Peter crouched close
against the door, his eyes full of tears, his face
quivering with excitement.
“I couldn’t stay in bed; it seemed to call me. Oh,
don’t send me away, sir, and I’ll not make a noise,”
was his timid petition; but his fears were changed


to delight when Stephen, bringing his rug, rolled
him in it and lifted him into the big chair, where
he lay happy and charmed by the music until the
striking of the hour.
“Ten o’clock. Time for me to leave off, and for
you to be in bed. But if you like, and your mother
doesn’t object, you may come in to-morrow night.
Only remember, you are not to stay outside like
that again; you might get a cold. Just open the
door and come right in.”
It was a happy little boy who lay down to sleep
that night, and as his mother bent over him, he
threw his thin arm round her neck to draw her
nearer.
“Wasn't that beautiful music, mum? It made me
think of such happy things, and that I’d never have
the pain any more, but grow up a big, strong boy
to work for you.”
With characteristic thoughtfulness, Stephen
changed the half-hour for his practice to early in the
evening, so that Peter could enjoy it to the full and
go to bed happy? Ihe strength of his affection for
the crippled child astonished himself, and as it in-
creased, so also did his desire to help him and his
overworked mother. One of his plans for the next
year was to find some means of assisting them both;
but for the present all his energies were bent to the
one goal. Though the strain was severe, it was not
unbearable, and in the healthy atmosphere of
hard work, mental and bodily; the ugly shadows
v Inch had lain on his heart and darkened his mind
for that first three months, faded away, and he was
able to see things in a truer light and value them
more fairly. Still, it was a hard struggle, and not the
least difficult part of it was the necessity of putting
by every month out of his small income some money


to meet the heavy expenses that he knew his exam-
ination would entail. Books, too, were costly, so
he found himself obliged to deny himself every-
thing except the bare necessaries of life, and it was
a surprise for him, as well as a useful lesson, to
find how little was absolutely necessary after all.
There were times, however, when he felt the cry-
ing need of some recreation in the open air, and one
Sunday in May, as he walked back from the early
Mass, Peter as usual by his side, the beauty of the
day tempted him to incur a little expense, and take
a trip on the Harbour.
“Peter,” he said suddenly, “I think 111 have a day
on the water. Have you ever been in a boat? But
of course you have, scores of times t
Peter shook his head with great emphasis. “No;
I never did that I can remember. Oh, yes; I went
in the horse-ferry wonst.”
“That must have been exciting,” laughed Stephen,
“the only trouble "would be that the trip is so short.
Would you let me take him with me this afternoon?”
he asked, turning to Mrs. Mayne, who flushed with
pleasure, while Peter was speechless with delight at
the thought.
“I thank you kindly, sir. But wouldn’t he be a
trouble to you?”
“Not at all; only a pleasure.”
“Then I’ll give you your dinners early, and you
can get the good of the day.” For soon after set-
tling in his room, Stephen had arranged that she
should provide his dinner on Sundays.
She was as good as her word, and one o’clock
found them on the river boat, which later in the day
would be crowded, but at that hour carried only a
few passengers, so that they were able to get a good
seat. It was a real pleasure to watch Peter’s de-


light as they passed the various points of interest on
the trip; the picturesque waterside residences, with
tastefully laid out grounds stretching to the river;
the boats that rocked lightly at their moorings in
the wash of the steamer; and as they went farther
up the stream, the stretches of bush land and the
great rocks that seemed to peer over at their own
shadows in the still water, until at last they reached
the long white bridge under whose arches the river
shone alluringly. The boy drew a deep sigh of
mingled delight and regret.
"Isn’t it beautiful. But, oh, must we stop? Does
everybody have to get off here? Must we?”
“Well, yes; unless we want to go back to Sydney
at once, and that would be to cut our trip too short.
Come along.”
Peter followed slowly, almost reluctantly; walk-
ing was always a difficulty to him. How much
nicer to sit on the steamer and watch the beautiful
river. But his disappointment changed to almost
frantic delight as Stephen paused by the boatshed,
and after a few words to the man in charge, stepped
into a light skiff, and held out his arms for Peter.
“In a little boat,” he gasped. “Oh, oh, but —.”
Further speech was impossible, for the man
picked him up and handed him over to Stephen with
no more ceremony than if he had been a bale of
goods; only he was too delighted to feel hurt at
being treated in such a summary fashion. As the
boat was pushed out, and Stephen, with long, steady
strokes, shot under the white bridge and out into
the shining reach beyond, he clasped his thin hands
in a very ecstasy of joy. New sights here, new
wonders to charm him; now the flash of a leaping
fish, the stretches of mangroves with the water lap-
ping their dark stems, and now high rocky banks


that threw their shadows almost across the stream.
What a delight to lean over the side, peering into
the clear water, now passing through myriads of
medusae, their long tentacles waving in the tide,
and now seeing the fish swim past with silvery
gleam, like moonbeams imprisoned in the watery
depths.
“Are you enjoying yourself, Peter?” was Stephen's
rather needless question, for the flushed face and
shining e} r es told their own tale. “Is it better than
the big boat?”
“It’s better than anything I ever had in my life,”
was the breathless answer. “But won’t you be tired
soon?”
“Tired.” Stephen’s laugh was good to hear.
“Many’s the time I’ve pulled to the top and back,
and in a heavier boat than this. We won’t get right
up to-day, for the tide is not full enough. Look
at this prett}'- launch coming, Peter.”
Peter studied the advancing boat with absorbing
interest; it was so white and pretty, and rushed
through the water so quickly. It was full of people,
too; ladies in yachting dresses and men in flannel,
with caps, white caps. He glanced to see if his
admiration was shared, and shrank back amazed and
miserable at the sight of his friend’s face. For
Stephen, enjoying the child’s delight, had rested on
his oars to let the launch pass them; but as it drew
nearer the name “Thelma” roused him to painful
attention. Could it be the “Thelma” in which he
had been so often, and if so would she be on board?
The question was soon to be answered, for as the
launch drew abreast he saw Helena Dare among the
merry crew. Would she see him? She did. One
moment her blue eyes rested on him, and so near was
the launch to his boat that he saw the look of star-


tied recognition, followed instantly by cold contempt
as she looked at him and passed him in studied in-
solence. No wonder Peter sat still and miserable,
for the white, set face and blazing eyes were not
like those of his kind friend. The throb of the
engines, like heart-beats, died away in the distance,
before Stephen, recovering his self-possession, bent
again to the oars, and then first his eyes fell on the
shocked, frightened face of the little boy. A wave
of shame swept over him, that he should have been
so weak as to make such a parade of his feelings
and frighten this poor child. There was a new note
of tenderness in his voice as he bent forward and
took the cold hand in his.
“Are you ill, Peter? Shall I turn back?”
“Oh, no, please. Unless you want to,” he added
hastily.
“No, I don’t want to; but if you are ill ”
“But I’m not, not a bit,” interrupted Peter
bravely, “only—only I was frightened; you looked
so terribly angry.”
"Not with you, Peter, never with you. Forget it
like a good boy, and I’ll promise not to do it again.
Look, now, at that big bird over there on the old
tree. Just listen till you hear him laugh. There
now; did you ever hear better? And see that other
bird on the post, isn’t he restless; and look at his
tail, it’s never still a second.”
“What does he say? It sounds like words.”
“ ‘Look at the sweet, pretty creature,’ that’s what
he says, but he won t stay still long enough to let
you have a good look. I used to know all the birds
on this river once, and many’s the afternoon I’ve
spent watching them and hunting for their nests.”
thus ..tephen chatted on, relieved to see the colour
come back to the thin cheeks, and the bright light to


the eyes. Soothing' and amusing, Peter was helpful,
too, in calming his own tumultuous feelings; and he
had quite recovered his equanimity by the time they
had come to the narrower reaches of the river.
“See, now,” he said, as he pulled to the shore, “this
is an orange garden; and we re going to see how
many they’ll give us for sixpence. They’ll go well
with the cakes we brought.”
Whether oranges were really so cheap, or the
woman who picked them was touched by Peter s
shrunken body and wistful e} r es, the result was that
when they tied up the boat under a slanting tree
far up the river, they had a great feast, and Peter’s
fright was quite forgotten as he nestled close to
Stephen on the big rock.
“This is just lovely,” he said lazily, “and all I want
now is a nice story, Mr. Stephen.”
“You’re insatiable for stories; I don’t think I’ve
one left.”
“Make one up then for me. You can, you know.
It’s very easy.”
“Oh, is it,” laughed Stephen, “that’s all you know
about it. Did you ever try?”
“Yes, when I’ve been all alone, and I’ve had no
books I’ve made up silly stories; but I’m not like
you; you’re very clever.”
“Ami? That’s news. I only hope the examiners
will think so. You will have to be content with an
old story, Peterkin; I haven’t the gift of imagina-
tion.” But later when King Arthur and the Nibelun-
gen Lied had had their turn, and Peter’s eyes were
still fixed hungrily on him, he went on in a lower
tone. And once there was a knight, not a brave
one at all, who asked for a quest, and when he got it
his heart failed because it was harder and more un-
pleasant than he had expected, and he was only a


coward after all. So lie grumbled and sulked, and
let his armour get rusty and his sword and spear
quite blunt; his shield was so stained that no one
would have known that he was a knight at all. And
while he was going along, thinking only of him-
self and not of the quest at all, whom should he
meet but a holy hermit who scolded him and made
him polish his armour and put an edge on his sword.
And then he told him he didn’t deserve help, but
if he’d only try to be brave, he might have a page
to carry his shield and keep it bright. And so it
happened one day as he rode along with this dear
little page who was helping him so much” (Peter
was sure that Stephen’s arm drew him more closely
to him at this point) “he saw coming along the road
the princess he had chosen as his own lady. But
she turned away and wouldn't look at him, though
she had often smiled on him in the palace; but now
it was very different, for he was travel-worn and
his armour looked dull, and she thought the quest
a disgrace. If he had been a brave knight, he
wouldn’t have minded this very much, but he was
a coward, and only got angry, and frightened his
dear little page; and he began to think that the quest
was too hard, and he had better give it up.”
Stephen’s voice was very low as he finished, but
he knew by the look in Peter’s eyes that he under-
stood the end of the story at least.
“But you haven’t finished,” he said earnestly, nest-
ling happily in the strong clasp. “I know the end
better than you do. He wasn’t really a coward,
that knight; he only thought he was, and he didn’t
git e up, but fought and fought, and forgot all about
the cruel lady. And then afterwards he met the
true princess, who gave him a beautiful rose to wear
m his helmet; so he went into battle again and


fought harder than ever, and he won, and the trum-
pets blew, and everyone shouted that he was the
bravest knight of all; and when the quest was over
he married the true princess, and they lived in the
palace. And, oh; they were happy, and so was the
page because he loved the knight and knew he was
brave, braver than Lancelot, and better than Arthur,
and ”
Stephen laughed as he laid his fingers on the eager
lips.
"Dear little page. lam glad he understands; but
I’m afraid he doesn’t know much about the end of
the story; still he’s a great help to the knight. Now
I’m going to pick you some of those pretty berries,
and perhaps some wattle too, if you are very good.”
The boat was gay with their spoils as they rowed
home, and when the same launch swept past them,
Stephen never even glanced towards it, but looked
smilingly into Peter’s anxious face. The boy’s quaint
ending to his story touched him deeply; and when
he came in after Vespers that same evening, and
Mrs. Mayne told him that Peter wouldn’t go to sleep
till he had seen him, he went in at once and bent
over the boy who was lying wide awake waiting
for him.
“What is it, Peterkin, dreaming of sharks?”
he asked as the thin arm slipped round his neck.
“I only want to whisper that I’m going to pray
hard that the true princess may come to you very
soon. Good-night, and thank you for the lovely
day.”
Stephen laughed as he returned the caress, but for
some time after he returned to his own room he
sat in deep thought, not all pleasurable, till with
a half sigh, “Ah, Peter, the true princess.” He


dismissed all idle repining, and soon deep in the
latest authority on hydraulics.
But Peter had not forgotten. Cut off by his
infirmity from all boyish sports, and raised by suffer-
ing to an understanding beyond his years, he had
caught at the sense, at least, of the story Stephen
had told him; and, moreover, he had not forgotten
the look of hurt and outraged feeling he had seen in
the eyes of his hero, and if he was to uphold his
character of page to his valiant knight, he ought
to obtain some help for him. Whom should he ask
but the loving Mother to whom he had early been
taught to look for help and sympathy in every trial
and suffering? So, unknown to anyone, Stephen
least of all, he began again to make a novena,
digging his frail body and feeble limbs every day
to the old church on the hill where he had first met
the man who had brought so much pleasure and
comfort into his weary little life.


CHAPTER XII.
HONOR.
“All life is music if one touches the notes rightly
and in tune.” —Ruskin.
It had been raining all da}', not the swift inter-
mittent shower that goes before the wind, nor the
light half mist that drenches imperceptibly, but a
steady down-pour that had flooded low levels, made
the water-courses raging torrents, and had so soaked
everything that the very houses seemed cold and
damp.
Mrs. Blake looked anxiously out on the street
where the very lamps seemed dull, and the worn
pavement was a series of miniature lakes; but as
far as she could see from the window, no one was
in sight, and she went back to the low chair by the
fire. There was no need to light the lamp yet,
and, besides the firelight was kinder to the old
room, for it touched the threadbare carpet and worn
furniture but lightly, but drew warm glowing
colours out of the rosewood piano, and repeating
its cheerful image in pictures, glass and mirror,
encircled the dingy walls with brightness. But
always it seemed to the widow, the firelight fell
gentlest on the picture of the Sacred Heart which
hung where she could see it from her low chair.
In fact, she had put it there on purpose, so that
in lonely hours and when the burden seemed
too much for her strength, she had but to lift her
eyes to the dear pictured Face, and hard things
lost their power to depress, and poverty its sting.


She sighed to-night, looking up at It, for the
mother’s heart ached that her only child should be
forced to be out in such weather as this. It was
a far different life she had planned for her daughter,
and at times—A brisk step sounded on the pave-
ment, and the little iron gate creaked on its rusty
hinges, and she hastened to light the lamp, that
warmth and light might greet the girl who was
coming in. She hurried out into the narrow passage
to meet her, and smiled at the eager face under the
shabby hat.
"Oh, mother dearest, I’ve had such an adventure.”
Have you, Honor? Oh, my child, how wet you
are! Run away and get off those soaking things
or you 11 get a cold; I’ll hear the story later.”
She had the tea all read}' by the time that Honor
appeared. The cold wet air had brought an un-
wonted colour to her face, and her brown eyes were
full of brightness as she began.
"Such an adventure; quite romantic. But what
do I see? Tea-cakes. Oh, you extravagant little
mother.”
"It’s such a miserable night, dear I thought you’d
like something hot when you came in tired and
cold; and I had time to prepare them after I got
home, this is my early day, as you know. Have
your tea, and tell me the adventure afterwards.”
11l c l° k ot h together,” said Honor, with a happy
laugh. “First and foremost, as old Hannah used
to say, I ve a new pupil,”
“That’s good news.”
"Isnt it? And she lives quite close to Mrs.
Anderson s sc there will be no extra expense in
going to her. And what do you think? Mrs.
Anderson s cousin, the violinist was there to-day
and we had a great talk, so now you know why f


was late. Well this cousin came to see me especially,
because her accompanist is going away from Sydney,
and of course she must have someone to play for
her when she practices, and also at concerts. She
liked my playing so much, and said she would like
to have me if only I could get some practice with a
violinist. There’s plenty of time because Miss
James isn’t going away until September. Wasn’t
it good of them to think of me, and I do wish I
could get the practice as she plays so well, and we
do want a little more money, don’t we, mother? ’
“Unfortunately we do, dear; but we must not be
despondent, we have always been helped hitherto
and lam sure we will be until the end. But I am
delighted at the idea of your getting a position
like that. Is this the adventure?”
“Of course not. That began in the Balmain
tram, when I was coming home. Pouring with
rain and the tram crowded. I’d have had to stand,
only some one got up and gave me his seat? Guess
who it was.”
Mrs. Blake shook her head, and Honor, too eager
to wait until she got an answer, went on quickly:
“It was that young man we often see at church,
with the little lame bo}q you know. He was in front
of us last Sunday night, and you said how nicely he
sang. Don’t you remember? Of course you do.
Well I thanked him, of course; but that’s not all,
for when I opened my bag to get the fare, I had
a terrible shock; my purse was gone.”
“Honor.”
“You may well say ‘Honor.’ I was in a state. I
remember getting it out at Mrs. Anderson’s to put
Miss Lane’s address in it, and I must have left it
there on the table. I was so upset that I couldn’t
help crying out that I had lost it, and a horrid girl


opposite me laughed and said something about ‘the
old story.’ I was just going to ask the conductor
to let me off as I hadn’t the fare, when a coin was
slipped into my bag so neatly that no one saw it
done, and when I heard the whisper: ‘You can put
it back into the poor-box, if you wish’ I knew who
had come to my aid so splendidly, I turned to thank
him, and then for the first time I got a good look
at him, and I saw how he was dressed. Oh, mother
dear, he’s only a common workman.”
‘‘Honor,’' was the reproachful answer, “it grieves
me to hear you speak like that. ‘Only a common
workman.' I think it very wrong of any one to use
such a term, but for Catholics it is far, far worse.
I suppose St. Joseph would be only a common
workman, and didn t our dear one Himself work
in a carpenter’s shop?”
Honor’s brown eyes were full of tears, and her
voice was not quite steady as she went on:
"I know you are shocked, and it was thoughtless
of me to say it. But you know I’ve always insisted
that he Avas some one of importance, he looks so
distinguished, and then to see him in horrid dirty
blue clothes with his hands all over grease. At
least I don’t mean that exactly, but they looked as
if they had been doing something that was greasy.
And now the worst part is to come; for I’m
afraid I showed my surprise and dismay in my
face, and and he saw it. He drew himself up
so quickly and turned away, and every time I looked
his face was so stern that I was frightened to say
anything. I did try once, but though I’m sure he
heard, he never took any notice of me. Some
people got out, and I asked him whether he would
not sit down, but he simply made a sign of negation
and never even looked at me. At the Railway


where I change he went right away, and I was so
ashamed and upset that when my tram came I got
confused as I was crossing the line. I don’t know
what might not have happened for I was quite
dazed, and it's such a dangerous place; but just then
some one took hold of my arm and almost literally
carried me across and put me in the tram. \ es, yes ;
it was the same one. I never got a chance to thank
him, for when I recovered my senses he was at the
other end of the crowded car and he got off before
I noticed it. He didn’t speak a bit like an unedu-
cated man,” she added slowly, “and I can’t forgive
myself for my thoughtless rudeness.”
Mrs. Blake made no immediate answer, and after
a little the conversation drifted into other channels,
but she noticed that Honor often lapsed into silence
and sighed every now and again, a most unusual
thing for her sunny-natured daughter. Xor did the
sadness pass off the next day, nor the next, so she
determined to see what she could do to repair the
mischief and restore Honor to her usual light-
heartedness.
So on the next Sunday, while Stephen was dis-
cussing with Peter, as they were returning from
the early Mass, the arrangements for another outing,
he was surprised at being addressed by a sweet-
faced lady, whose musical voice charmed him.
“I want to thank you for your kindness to my
daughter last Thursday,” she said, and noticed how
his manner changed and stiffened at the mention of
the incident. “I don’t know what she would have
done but for you; it was such a wet night and she
was so far from home.”
“I did very little,” began Stephen coldly, but Mrs.
Blake was not to be put off.”


“It was not a little; and it was done with such
thoughtful regard for her feelings, that it enhanced
the service a hundred-fold. “I am afraid,” she went
on bravely, determined not to be stayed by his cold
and distant manner, “that she did not show the
same consideration, but it was quite unintentional,
and she was sorry immediately after, and is anxious
to repair her fault. I trust you will forgive her—it
was wrong, but she had some excuse. You see,
we’ve both noticed you for some months now; she
had imagined some romantic mystery about you as
girls will, and and ”
“It was disappointing to find I was only a
mechanic,” finished Stephen.
But Mrs. Blake was not deceived for all the cool
tone.
“We both think you give an edifying example
to everyone, and your devotion to your little
brother ”
Here Peter, who was regarding the speaker with
unfriendly eyes, broke in scornfully in his shrill
voice:
Me, his brother. Why I'm nobody. Dad was
only a deck hand, and mum sews for a living; but
he s a gentleman, none of your make-believes or
stuck-up ones. He s good to me because he’s good
to everyone. I knew something made him miser-
able on Thursday, I can always tell, and now I
know someone w r as rude to him. Come away, Mr,
Stephen, we ”
Stop Peter, said Stephen, smiling down on his
valiant champion, whose outburst he had vainly
tried to stem. “You must pardon him,” he con-
tinued, turning to Mrs. Blake, “he’s a loyal friend
and speaks out from his heart.”


“And I trust that you will pardon Honor, also/’
she replied quietly. “I’ll not detain you now, but
I hope we shall meet again very soon.”
She held out her hand, with such a frank gesture
that Stephen could not refuse an answering smile,
as he took it; and thus peace'was made.
On succeeding Sundays he nearly always ex-
changed greetings with Mrs. Blake and her daughter,
and whatever resentment he had felt against the
latter died away before the appeal in her soft brown
eyes. One Sunday evening Mrs. Blake was by her-
self, and as it was a dark night, he walked home
with her. She stumbled on the uneven pavement,
and he immediately offered her the support of his
arm. This act of courtesy and the tenor of their
conversation deepened her mystification how one
who acted and spoke with the utmost refinement
could come to occupy such a position in life. But
she was soon to be enlightened.
One blustering July evening he walked with
them both; for it had come to be a settled thing
that he should escort them home after evening devo-
tions. It had been raining nearly all the day, and
though it was clear and fine again, a cold wind had
sprung up, and made those who were out hasten
to the shelter of their homes. When they reached
the house and he held open the gate for them to
pass in, as he always did, Mrs. Blake paused:
“It’s such a cold night,” she said, “won’t you come
in and have a cup of coffee. Honor will give us
some music after.”
“It is very kind of you,” replied Stephen; he spoke
with difficulty, and by the light of the street lamp
she saw that he looked distressed, but I do not
know whether I ought to accept—l mean whether


you would care to ask me if you knew that I am
I am supposed to be in disgrace, under a cloud.
“We do know,” said Mrs. Blake, simply.
“You know?” Astonishment and pain rang in the
exclamation.
“When we were speaking to you after Mass last
Sunday, someone who knew of the matter saw' us,
and being one of those well-meaning people who
do so much mischief in the world, she came the
next day to tell us a highly coloured story, which,
I may as well tell you, I am sure is not true, and
as for Honor, she was so indignant that she lost
patience and not only refused to hear any more, but
gave the tale-bearer a very bad quarter of an hour.
Now, since, in spite of these revelations, I made the
request, you can have no excuse for refusing. Run
in first, Honor, and light the lamp; w f e can’t ask Mr.
Daly to go into a dark house.”
She spoke lightly to bridge over any awkwardness,
but Stephen laid his hand on hers.
“Thank you, Mrs. Blake. I wish I could explain
what your kindness means to me. Nor am I free
to speak of the truth or falsehood of any such accus-
ations against me ; only this I must say, that if I con-
sidered myself unfit for the society of yourself and
your daughter I should not have allowed myself the
barest acquaintance.”
“And I believe you,” she answ-ered, looking
straight into the honest eyes. “Welcome to our
little home.”
“Now, Honor,” she said, as they entered the
lamplit room, “you run and make the coffee while
I stir the fire to a blaze; we are all very cold.”
She moved about, chatting lightly to put
Stephen at his ease; and though she did not seem to
be observing him, she noticed the comprehensive


glance round the room, and the half sigh, as if at
finding something long missed. And indeed the
subtle air of refinement, the flowers, the well-worn
books all appealed to him, but in particular his gaze
wandered to the piano and rested there, and, seeing
this she observed:
“You like music, do you not? Honor will play
to us soon. She is very clever,” she added with
motherly pride, “ and has won ever so many medals.
Perhaps you play yourself, do you?
“Yes, I do, but I haven’t touched a piano for
months. I haven’t one now.”
“Oh, you poor boy,” she said impulsively,” how
you must have missed it! Play something now, I
promise that I won’t criticise.”
“I’m afraid that I’m very out of practice,” was
the reply; but all the same he went quickly to the
piano, while Mrs. Blake settled herself in her
favourite chair, prepared for the usual amateur per-
formance. But at the first few chords she sat up
alert, and wondering. Honor played well, very
well, but nothing like this ; and in all her daughter’s
repertoire there was nothing like this stately
measure, full of melodious rhythm, broken at
intervals into tremulous passages, and rising at
last to such grandeur, that when the last chord died
away, she remained as if spellbound, and Honor, who
had rushed in to listen, could only stammer:
“What is it? I never heard music like that be-
fore.”
Stephen looked at her with a smile, his diffidence
was all gone, vanished with the first touch on the
keys he loved. “That’s Handel’s Water Music. I
am very partial to it; it is so out of the common.”
“Play it again,” she insisted; and he complied,
instantly.


“Please don’t stop,” she said as he finished. “I’ll
leave the door open so that I can hear while I make
the coffee. You play better than any one I ever
heard. Doesn’t he, mother."
Stephen, only too delighted to play on at
his will, took her at her word and drifted
into dreamy barcarolles and dreamier noc-
turnes till the arrival of the coffee. The
meeting on the common ground of music had
banished all formality, and Stephen had forgotten
for a time his altered position, and his manners lost
the strain so noticeable before, so they were a merry
party at supper though the fare was frugal
enough. But after a time Honor lapsed into silence
and left the talking to the others, such an unusual
proceeding that her mother rallied her on her
thoughtfulness.
“I’ll tell you what I was thinking about, if you
like; certainly I owe Mr. Daly some reparation for
an act of mine. Mother knows,” she said, turning
to him, “that I always declare I can tell a person’s
character by the way they play, and I was wondering
how anyone could even think evil of you when you
pla} r like that. lam sure ,” She stopped short,
with crimsoning cheeks, recalling what were the
tales the kind friend had thought necessary to tell
them; and Mrs. Blake, divining the cause of her
confusion, came to the rescue.
“Certainly Honor is generally right in her esti-
mation of character, and in any case, you have
undoubted talent; you should have made music your
profession.”
He winced at this remark, remembering the .last
time he had been told the same thing; but he
answered lightly:


“I don’t think there is any mistake about my pro-
fession. I should not like to be anything but an
engineer; but, I admit that I am passionately fond of
music. It is very good of you both to praise me,
however, for I am very out of practice, and besides
the piano is not my instrument after all.”
“Do you mean to say,” exclaimed Honor, her eyes
big with wonder, “that you play another instrument
better than you do the piano.”
“I hope so,” replied Stephen, smiling into the
eager face. “At least I am vain enough to think
that I can do very much better with the violin."
“The violin,” cried Honor, impulsively. “Oh,
I’ve been longing to find someone to practice with,
haven’t I, mother? You see,” with a wistful look,
“I could get an engagement as accompanist if I
only had the practice.”
“Honor, Honor,” expostulated her mother, who
was not quite sure she liked the way things were
shaping, “It is not fair to trouble Mr. Daly like
that.”
“But it would be no trouble at all," he said
eagerly. “I’d love to help if I can; but I have very
little time. lam studying for an examination and
have to utilise every moment; evenings and all
are taken up. I could manage an hour or two on
Saturdays, if that would be any good to you.''
“And Sunday? Oh, I wish you had your violin
now, what a practice we could have. Never mind,
you will play to us again. But first I’m going to
play; I think I am very brave to try after your
beautiful music.”
So she played the exquisite Moonlight Sonata,
and when he begged for more, gave him the
Appassionata, with such fire and feeling that he
cried “bravo,” and even her mother was astonished


at her performance. Then Stephen had to play
again; Mrs. Blake sang, and finally Honor unearthed
some part songs and they enjoyed themselves so
thoroughly that the flight of time was unnoticed, and
the striking of the Post Office clock amazed them
all.
“Pm afraid that my visit has developed into a
visitation,” said Stephen, as he rose to go. “But
I am always greedy over music.”
“You have given us very great pleasure,” was
Mrs. Blake’s reply.
“It is rare, even in the days of musical develop-
ment to find so accomplished a performer as you.”
She hesitated a little, disregarding his out-stretched
hand; then she said slowly: “We always say the
rosary the last thing at night, would you care to
join usr
She did not wait for a reply; Stephen’s face was
answer enough, and she asked Honor to light the
candles before the statue of our Lady, which stood
on a bracket beneath the picture of the Sacred
Heart.
Later, when she went to the door with him, he
tried to express his thanks for her more than
kindness; but she would not listen.
“My instinct is rarely wrong. I felt from the
first that you were worthy of all trust, and I am
sure that you have been shamefully mis-represented.
There was no need for that busybody to tell me
that your own mother was dead; for had she been
living you would not have been wronged like this;
mothers understand. Saturday night remember; we
shall be looking out for you. Good-night.”
“Well,” said Honor, as her mother returned to
the sitting-room. “Whatever will Mr. Daly think of


us? I never knew you to ask any one to stay for
the rosary before. I was surprised. ’
“I couldn’t help it; I felt I must do it. I don’t
know that I ever met any one who attracted me so
strongly; and I’m sure lies as good as he seems.
I only hope that he won’t think it strange that I
asked him to stay. No, I’m sure he won’t, for from
what he said to" me at the door I know he quite
understood why I did it.”
Stephen, striding home through the quiet streets
had no thoughts but those of pleasure, a new joy
seemed to have come into his life, a new hope stirred
in his heart. Mrs. Blake’s sympathy and genuine
interest and Honor’s acceptance of him as a musical
comrade gave promise of filling up all the vacant
places in his life, and he. was very thankful for it;
nor did he forget the great Giver of every good
gift.
In the succeeding days, Joe Nolan often wondered
why Mr. Stephen was always whistling softly the
same tune. If he had been told it was the melody of
Handel’s Water Music, would he have been any
the wiser?


CHAPTER XIII.
UPWARD AND ONWARD,
“But what if I fail of my purpose here?
It is but to keep the nerves at a strain,
To dry one’s eyes and laugh at a fall,
And, baffled, get up and begin again.”
Browning.
A wild night, the rain fell in heavy showers that
beat with such force on the roof that they seemed
determined to break a way in; and in the strange
silent intervals, came a low sobbing wind pushing
at every door and casement as persistently as if it
were a bitter memory and they, fast closed, human
hearts. It shook the panes of Stephen’s window like
a ghostly hand, but he had no thought of anything
so morbid, for deep in study of a most practical
kind, the vagaries of the weather affected him not
at all, in spite of his artistic temperament, which is
sometimes supposed to be so much the creature of
environment; as if a healthy nature was not proof
against all such trivial things. The room was partly
in shadow, for the lamp threw all its light on the
leading-table, and outside that circle everything
looked dim and uncertain; symbolic of his own life,
had he but known it or noticed it; nothing clear or
well-defined but the determination of the resolute
young face in the circle of light.
He lifted his head sharply at a sound at the
door. “Imagination,” he said to himself, “no one
likely to come to see me;” but before he could
settle to his work again the sound was renewed,
and there could be no doubt this time that some


one was outside on the landing. Peter came and
went at his pleasure, so this must be Mrs. Mayne;
but his astonishment was great on opening the
door to see Joe, and Joe in his working clothes.
That circumstance alone would have showed some-
thing was amiss, without the half-miserable half-
defiant air of the young man. .
“Come in,” said Stephen cheerily, “this is a
pleasant surprise. I didn’t know you had any idea
where I lived. How wet you are, Joe. Get off that
coat, and your boots too, I think. The fire is all
ready and I’ve only to put a match to it, and we can
dry your things in no time. That’s right, 111 take
the coat and hang it up, and you sit down there,
I can recommend that chair, its comfort itself.
Stephen rattled on like this to put the other at
his ease, and cover the awkwardness of the position,
but Joe gave no sign that he had heard anything of
what was said to him, except that he sat down in
the chair pointed out to him, and sat staring at tre
fire as it crackled and sputtered, and finally settled
into a steady blaze. After a time, as the warmth
reached him, he roused himself a little and stretched
out his cold hands to the friendly glow.
“Come on, Joe; off with those wet boots, and we 11
have a smoke and a talk together.
Joe turned his dull eyes from the fire to the
sympathetic face.
“It’s getting me down again. What’s the use of
trying? It pulls and pulls, and what is a man to do?
“Fight, Joe.” Stephen’s voice was clear and sharp.
“A man must always do that, if he’s worthy of the
name. Odds too heavy? What of that? Nothing
matters but the one thing, fight.”
“I met them again lately, they’ve been at me all
the week; to-day I promised to meet them at the


£


.


old corner at eight.” He paused so long that it
almost seemed as if he had no more to say; but
Stephen knew better, so refrained from asking any
questions, instead, he put on the kettle and got out
the cups.
“We’ll have a cup of tea, Joe; it’ll do us both
good, this cold night.”
“I’d have met them right enough,” Joe went on in
the same toneless voice; “mother is away nursing
her sick sister, so I didn’t go home. I went to the
meeting place, and sat there to wait. Drinks? Of
course I had them. I forget how many, and I'd have
sat there drinking till the others came, but—but
someone came in and he had a look of you; and I
remember what I’d promised—that I wouldn’t
disgrace you, and I’ve done it. But I wouldn’t stay
for them, I couldn’t. I came to you. Yes, I thought
—But you are studying and I'm only in the wav:
I’d better go.”
“No, no, you must not do that. You are not in
m\ wa\ at all and I want you to stay with me.”
Stephen spoke earnestly, though he was by no
means hopeful that his words would have any effect,
as the face never lost its sullen look. But quite
.''iiddenly, Joe stooped down and began slowly and
laboriously to unlace his sodden boots. Not by a
word did Stephen show his satisfaction, he feared
that no matter how well chosen, the slightest ex-
pression of approbation might turn the scale in the
opposite way. So he busied himself in preparing
the tea, and gave Joe a good, strong cup, which was
taken eagerly, for he was cold in bodv as well as cold
at heart. The warm beverage acted as a tonic and
when he spoke again it was more in his usual voice.
I. 1)6 £ lad to sta y> Mr, Stephen, if so be as I’m
not m your way, for I feel safe here and it’s real
1 137


warm and cosy; but I can’t and won’t, unless you go
on with what you were doing. I’d rather not talk,
just yet, and it’ll be enough to sit here and watch
you.”
Anxious to fall in with any plan which would
keep the young fellow out of the temptation which
was proving too strong for him, Stephen settled to
his work again, glancing from time to time at the
reclining figure in the chair, and though he made
great show of being absorbed in calculations, it was
not until the deep and regular breathing told him
that the other was asleep that he set to work in
earnest, and so tough was the problem with which
he was wrestling that he was quite surprised to
find, when he had mastered it, that Peter was stand-
ing close beside, looking with undisguised indig-
nation at the visitor seated in his own particular
chair, for he always sat there when Stephen played
to him in the evenings.
“Want your music Peterkin? Would you be very
disappointed if we didn’t have any to-night. I want
my friend to have a good sleep.”
“But he’s not asleep,” said Peter, almost querul-
ously, “he’s just sitting there staring at us.”
“So I am, sonny,” was Joe’s comment, “but if Mr.
Stephen doesn’t want me I’m ready to go at once.”
“Nonsense, Joe,” was the laughing response, for
Stephen was relieved to hear the familiar ring in
the voice. “I don’t want you to go, and you know it;
but Peter always comes in about this time and we
have a little music together; so if you don’t object,
we’ll have it as usual, unless you dislike it.”
“Not me, you go ahead Mr. Stephen, and you’ll
have two to listen to-night.” And Joe settled him-
self back again in the comfortable chair, much to
Peter’s increased wrath and dismay. He was somc-


what mollified however when Stephen made him
a nest on the hearth with a rug and pillow, and he
snuggled into it with delight, generously sharing the
cosiness with the little black kitten which Stephen
had rescued from its tormentors some weeks
before, and brought home for him. Joe looked on in
uonder, this was a new side of Stephen’s character,
and he was taken aback at it; his amazement in-
creased when the Amati was produced, and after
the preliminary tuning, (which it may be mentioned
aroused great consternation in the breast of the
kitten, although she had heard it every night since
her rescue from a watery grave) the skilful player
drew from the instrument such music as he had
heard in his life; gay gavottes, swinging
waltzes, and merry roundelays, till even Peter was
astonished that Stephen should play only such
lively music.
“Now, Peterkin, that’s enough for to-night, and
it s time you were in bed. I’d leave kitty if I were
you, she sso comfortable where she is. Good-night.”
And when Peter had gone and the violin been put
away, he drew his chair up to the fire, and addressed
Joe, who had not spoken one word during the
performance. “Now, for our smoke and the talk
we promised ourselves. Load up, Joe.”
Joe obeyed in silence, and after k while, asked with
Mn^sfephen?” 6 ' P ' 3y
1 , keep “ p m y music and please Peter at
the same time; he hasn’t much brightness in his
life, poor little fellow.”
™^‘, gh LL c , ome f S0 . me °*. her and hear y° u
d "eAi;nr bequiteconrenientfor


“I shall be delighted to have you here”; Stephen
spoke with hearty emphasis, stroking, meanwhile,
the kitten which had clambered up on to his knee,
and was purring lustily under his caressing han
He was trying to see a way of helping Joe to fight
his battle against the temptation, and though man)
schemes rose to his mind, he dismissed them all as
impracticable. The solution of the difficulty wa s to
come from Joe himself. . , ■>
“Don’t you ever study after the music? he asked
“Well I generally do, but that s not to say I m
bound to it. I’d rather talk to you to-night, Joe
“Yes, I know why. But I haven t the shghtes
wish to go there now. It’s done me good to be here
with you and to hear that beautiful music. IH be
quite content to sit by the fire and smoke, for I m
not in a talking mood to-night. I’d rather you did
what you always do; just give me a book and ill
be as happy as Larry.” .
Stephen laughed, but hastened to comply, lor he
was rather behind in his work, and the loss oi even
an hour meant much to him. He had tried to make
up by studying late, but he found that after midnight
he seldom did any good, besides being disinclined
for the next day’s work. He gave Joe a recent work
on electric traction, and a volume of his favourite
author Dickens, and settled himself down to the
task before him, only saying, with a laugh;
“Say when you’ve had enough, or want to go, and
I’ll talk to you or show you out, whichever is
wanted.” . T
He was soon absorbed in his work, and Joe on
his part, after a cursory glance at the novel, opened
the other book, and was soon as deeply interested
in it as Stephen in his computations. After a time,


kitty, tired of the place to which she had been rele-
gated on the rug, climbed on his knee, and meeting
no repulse, coiled herself round to sleep, purring
noisily. The book was interesting to him, and yet
from time to time he could not help letting his
thoughts stray a little to the contrast between the
evening’s occupation as planned for him by his bad
companions, and this quiet, really enjoyable time
he was having; the comfortable chair, the warm
fire, even the kitten on his knee, tended to make a
man feel at peace with all, himself included; the book
interested, to say nothing of the avenues of thought
and tne suggestions it offered to a practical mind
like his, suggestions which the sight of that earnest
student at the table made him long to follow up,
and show that he, too, could do something to prove
his own worth, and justify the other’s interest in
him. So the time slipped by, and he was quite sur-
prised to hear Stephen say :
“Nearly midnight, Joe. I think it’s up to us to
lea\e off now. Has Pickwick amused you? Oh,
you le oeep in Sewing’s book. W hat do you think
of it; rather too theoretical, isn’t it?”
“Maybe; I’ve not your knowledge, Mr. Stephen,
bm it seems to me that there is nothing - very im-
probable in his theory. In a few y r ears maybe we’ll
see electricity doing all the traction of the world.
But I m ashamed to have stayed so long; you ought
to have turned me out long ago. I’m going to keep
you to your promise, to let me come another even-
mg. Tins is Thursday; may I come on Saturday—
that is if you don’t go out yourself?”
Saturday makes very r little difference to me ex-
cept that I get all the afternoon for study, as well
as the evening? Come by all means; to-morrow,
too, if you like.


Joe looked at him wistfully. “It would be impos-
ing on you,” he said; “but I’d like to do that if I
might. Mr. Stephen, it’s a hard fight I’ve before
me, and it would help me ever so much if you’d
let me come here every evening for a bit. 111 pro-
mise not to interrupt. I’d like to read that book
again and any others you have on those things, and
the music will help me, too. But I won tbe offended
in the least if you say that it would be asking too
much of you.”
“It’s not asking too much at all. I’ll be only too
glad to have you here, and,” he added in a lower
tone, “if I can help you, Joe, in your fight, tell me
how; I’ll forgive anything except your not asking.
Come to-morrow then, and if you like come straight
from the works; we’ll have tea together here or
somewhere in the city and spend the evening by the
fireside. Sunday now, will your mother be home?”
Joe shook his head.
“Well, why not come with Peter and me up Middle
Harbour? We’re going to make an early start and
have dinner up by Clontarf, or higher up if we can
get so far. Of course it’ll depend on the weather;
if it’s like to-night we can’t go. Think it over, and
tell me later. I’ll come down with you and let you
out.”
“Stephen,” said Joe, forgetting in his earnestness
to give the prefix he generally honoured him with.
“I’m going to make a big fight and I mean to win.
They were standing at the street door as he spoke,
so it was too dark for Stephen to see his face; but
there was a ring of determination in his voice that
pleased the listener; he laid his hand on Joes shoul-
der, and said softly:
“And win you will, with the help of God; don’t


forget to ask Him to help you, and you’ll come out
the winner every time.”
So it happened that Joe came the very next even-
ing, and was welcomed by Stephen, as he expected,
and also by Peter, which he did not expect at all;
for, judging from the boy’s attitude towards him
the night before, he was little inclined to be friendly.
He would have understood the change in the child’s
manner if he had heard a conversation which took
place the morning after his first visit. Stephen was
a little later coming from Mass, and was glad to
find that Peter had prepared his breakfast for him,
as well as he could have done it himself.
“You are a true friend, Peter,” he said, picking
the little fellow up and putting him on his knee;
“it’s not every one who finds himself waited on like
this. And I think you were a little disappointed
last night that I didn’t play what you like best,
weren’t you ?”
A ell, I was, and he had my big chair, too. But
never mind; we’ll make up for it to-night, when
we’ll be by ourselves.”
“W ould you mind very much if he was here to-
night, too, Peterkin?” And as he saw the boy’s
rueful look, he continued in the half-serious, half-
playful tone with which he always touched on the
allegory, that had so pleased Peter that day up the
river; ‘ that knight and his page once met a poor
man who was very unhappy because a cruel, wicked
giant was trying to catch him and put him in prison
to torture him. They went to his help, and he
fought the giant and drove him away for a little
time; but he is sure to come back and try to hurt
mm again, so he asked the knight and his page to
et him stay close to them for a little time, until
the giant should be tired of trying to catch him and


let him alone. They said nothing would please
them better, because that's what knights have to do
in this world, help those who are being cruelly
treated; isn’t that so, little page ?
Peter nodded, a bright light came into his eyes,
and he stroked Stephen's face with his thin hand.
“Yes,” he whispered, “I know. We were to help
someone else first. I’m not going to tell you what
I mean, because it’s a secret. But have your break-
fast now and leave the things for me to clear away,
vou’re late you know, and, besides, I just love to
do whatever I can for you.”
“Very well, Peterkin. lam late, as you say; and
if I’m not in time to sign my name in the book at
the works, I d have to pay a fine on Saturday .
“Would you? I wouldn’t if I were you; I'd go
straight to "that nice Mr. Mackenzie and tell him to
let me off because I was only late through being at
Mass.”
Stephen laughed, but there was a note of bitter-
ness in it; Peter little knew how ready the manager
was to find fault with him on the smallest provoca-
tion, and often, it seemed to him, on no provoca-
tion at all; but he only said;
“Men mustn’t make excuses for being late at their
work; they must just pay the fine or lose their pay
for that hour. I’ll let you tidy up for me, if you
will, and remember to give Kitty her drink of milk;
she did her part in helping last night.”
This, then, was the cause of Peter’s sudden in-
terest in Joe and his evident desire to render little
services to him. At first the young man took very
little notice of the boy, but after the day on the
water together he felt interested in him —the more
so that he saw that Stephen was so fond of him.
So as time went by, and Joe still came in every


evening, the three became fast friends, and whenever
the man was late he was sure to find Peter waiting
for him at the door that they might go in together.
In a few weeks, however, Joe began to come on
alternate evenings only, and then once a week; not
that he had lost interest in his studies, but he had
quite lost the unwholesome craving that had
obsessed him before, and then his mother was home
again and wanted his society; so he decided to pur-
sue his readings in his own home, the more so that
he could see that Stephen was straining every nerve
to be ready for the examination at the end of the
year, and he was sure he would be better able to
study if he had the room to himself. Every Wednes-
day night he came, generally bringing some offer-
ing for Peter in the shape of books or fruit, and
sometimes his mother would accompany him and
chat with Mrs. Mayne. She was delighted with the
change in her son, and was eager to do some little
thing to show her gratitude to Stephen, but Mrs.
Mayne was jealous of letting anyone render the
little services that w T ere her especial charge, and the
other woman, recognising that, soon ceased to ask
to be allowed to share them.
The alteration in Joe was apparent to others be-
sides his mother, and the foreman more than once
praised him openly, and even went so far as to speak
of it to the manager.
“It’s a pity Mr. Stephen doesn’t take up with a
few more of the hands. Joe Nolan is worth ten
times what he was since he’s been so friendly with
him. I suppose there could not have been a mis-
take about that money business, could there? It
seems almost impossible to think of Stephen and
such vices together, and I think ”


“Man,” was the angry interruption, literally
roared at him? “Ye’re paid to be foreman, an’ no
tae think aboot yir employer’s private beesiness.”
“All right, Mac, don’t waste your wrath on me;
keep it for those it frightens”; and with a shrug of
the shoulders Clintock went back to the shed.


“I knew thee strong and quiet like the hills;
I knew thee apt to pity, brave to endure.”
R. L. Stevenson.
The end of a close day in November, and all who
could, had been glad to leave the city for homes by
riverside and harbour foreshore, or in the midst of
gardens “up the line.” Even in these it was still
hot and trying, though there were broad, open
spaces of water, or spreading lawns; what was it,
then, in narrow streets and closely-packed houses?
Stephen had opened his window as widely as he
could, and yet the room seemed stifling, and to add
to his discomfort the lamp would not burn up, but
smoked sulkily. He was half tempted to put away
the books and go out on the water somewhere in
search of coolness and fresh air, but the examina-
tion was so close at hand that he had no time to
lose. Moreover, he knew it was better he should
be too occupied to have time for thought, since it
was the anniversary of the day on which he had
made his sacrifice for those who were now wander-
ing over Europe, among the scenes he had always
longed to visit, and surrounded by all the comfort
money could procure them. The strain of working
day and night was telling on him heavily; he felt
nervous, irritable and inclined to regret the step
which he had taken, and which had, for all he could
see, brought him no nearer to the result he desired.
A year ago to-night he had sat in his room trying
to face the new life that lay before him, but un-
daunted, strong in hope for the accomplishment of


his aim, and full of confidence in the means by which
he was to bring it about. To-night, only a year
later, he was still as far from anything definite as
he had been at the beginning, and he had spent
months now in severe study to fit himself for an
examination he felt he would not succeed in pass-
ing; his strength was lessened by the unceasing
work, and also by the privations which had been
necessary to enable him to save the money for his
fees. It was in vain that he tried again and again
to bend his mind to the book before him—his
thoughts would stray to those others on the opposite
side of the world. 'Elaine’s letters came regularly
every month, and he answered them at once; but
from the others came no sign. Cecil, for whom he
had done so much, never even sent him a message;
and with the exception of that curt note, his father
had not written, and though he had taken great
pains with the plans and specifications entrusted to
him, and the whole thing had been a great success,
no word of praise had been vouchsafed to him. Even
Mackenzie had never mentioned the plan he had
discussed with him, nor troubled to ask how he was
getting on with his studies; rather, he grew more
and more morose every day, and only spoke to find
fault. Had it not been for his faithful Peter, and
the one night a week he spent with the Blakes, he
would have been unable to hold up under the strain
of work and loneliness. He made one more attempt
to dismiss these gloomy thoughts when there was
a light tap at the door.
“Come in, Peterkin. Just get into the big chair
and wait for a bit. I’ll be ready for you in a minute.”
“It’s no Peter,” was the unexpected response, and
he started up in amazement to see the manager
standing in the doorway. He looked so stern, too,


that Stephen’s heart fell. What was wrong now;
what new trial awaited him ?
“You must pardon my surprise, Mr. [Mackenzie,
he said, recovering himself a little; “I never thought
to see you here. Won’t you sit down?
The old man crossed the room rapidly, and laid
on his arm a hand that trembled.
“Steenie, ye’ll hae been thinkin’ hard thochts of
me, and richtly, but I couldn’t help it; I’d gi’ed ma
promise.”
And as Stephen looked at him in amazement, he
went on slowly and with many breaks:
“Twal’ months syne this very nicht, yir feyther
came to me; he was in great trouble, and when I
heard the story, I was no surprised, for it was a
tale to break the heart of ony feyther. I said I
couldna believe it; but he told me he’d a’ the
proofs, an’ that you’d confessed. How could ye do
that, for weel I ken noo that ye never did ony o’
the things he told me of.”
“I never said I had done them,” Stephen an-
swered in a low voice, “but I wouldn’t deny it; there
were reasons why I couldn’t, and because I begged
father not to look into the matter he took it that I
was really guilty, and so condemned me.”
“If I’d known that I’d have been suspeecious; but
he must have been sure of yir guilt. He told what
he’d laid on ye, and he said it was yir only chance;
to wark oot the debt and learn a man’s lesson. He
begged me to help by not interferin’; I was just to
stand by for the year unless ye broke doon. So I
gied him ma word, and many’s the day I’d hae fain
had it back, for it’s been no lichtsome. Twice I
most forgot; ye’ll mind the times, when ye’d heard
that they’d gone off an’ left ye, and when Clintock
was bullying you.”


“You spoke up well for me that day at any rate;
and things were easier afterwards.”
“I couldna help it, ye looked gey like yir—l mean
like someone I kennt lang S} r ne. I've said hard
things to ye masel’, but I had use ma nippy tongue
tae hide ma hert. But noo I’m as free as air, so gie
me yir hand, lad, and say ye’ll forgive puir auld
Mac.”
There was no resisting this straightforward ap-
peal, and Stephen clasped with warmth the hand
held out to him.
“I must admit I couldn’t understand you at all,”
he said, “one day almost friendly and the next
thundering at me for nothing at all. You used to be
so kind to me when I was a little boy, as far back
as I can remember. But the last five or six years
you seemed to lose interest in me.”
“Ye were that taken oop wi’ yir step-mither’s
fine friends, that I thocht ye’d no need of me.”
“Was I so snobbish as that? If so it’s a good
thing I’ve had to come down a bit. Father was
right; I needed a man’s lesson, though I’ve chafed
over it often enough.”
“Ye mustn’t misjudge }dr feyther? Steenie. He's
gey hard, harder than I for a’ I’m sae nippy, and he
sae fairspoken and pleasant, but he did what he
thocht was for yir good; and he’s no far oot. ‘Let
him make a spoon or spoil a horn,’ were his verra
words, an' I’m thinkin’ the spoon’ll be very useful.”
“So you think I’ve not spoiled the horn. That
remains to be seen; it’s a question for time to settle.
But do sit down Mr. Mackenzie. It’s not a very
grand room I have to receive you in, but I wouldn’t
mind that if it was only a cool one; that big store
keeps off th-e air from us. And so you put all that


roughness on? It was splendidly done. I thought
it was very real.”
“Aye, ye were no far wrong, it was real enough
at first. I’d no need to dissemble, for I had ye
fair set.”
“Why, what had I done to you? Of course you
are father’s oldest friend, and doubtless felt for his
disappointment; but why should you be bitter to
me? You had no cause.”
“I most hated ye,” was the slow answer, “an’ it
was no for yir feyther’s sake at all. Why,” with
sudden animation, “I had a richt an’ a greater one
than anyone. But when I found oot the truth I
was fair ashamed to have been so easily deceived,
an’ I just set to work to get to the bottom of it. So
I have all the proofs by me, to send off to yir
feyther by the next mail.”
“Proofs, of what?”
“Of Cecil’s false heart and wicked ways,” was
the vehement answer? ‘Twas he that did it all in
your name, I’ve all the proofs and ye lettin’ him
go free, and takin it on yersel. But I'm goin’ to
make it all richt for ye. I’ll send ”
Xo, broke in Stephen, “You must not. At
least, I beg you not to do it. I had a very special
i eason for acting as I did, and if I pay the price I
may have what I want, surely.”
“Aye, he that pays the piper, calls the tune,
that’s fair eno’. But it beats all what ye’re after'
I’m no sure I can keep silent; it’s no fair to to
yir mither’s memory, aye to her, that the finger of
scorn should be pointed at her lad, and he be called
a wastrel.”
My mother, did you know her?” asked Stephen,
eagerly. But he was astounded at the passion in
the reply.


“Did A’ ken bonnie Kathie Stewart? Thet ever
A’ sud be askit thet?” Stephen knew by the lapse
into the speech of his home land, that the old man
was moved beyond measure, and he regretted his
question; what memories might not his words have
evoked. But after a pause, he too was questioned.
“Did yir feyther never tell you?” A’ thocht he’d hae
done thet when ye came to man’s estate?”
“Tell me what? He never mentioned her to me,
and every time I questioned him he gave me very
little satisfaction, and let me see he did not like any
reference to her. It was only by the merest chance
that I learned from the nurse who was with her
at the last that she had written a letter to me,
which I should have had on the first day of my
Communion.”
“Did ye no get it?” The tone was fierce.
“I asked for it; but that was only a short time
before I left home. Of course it was given to me at
once; I suppose he’d forgotten it.”
“Gin I’d known thet, ye’d have had it lang syne.”
The voice was quieter, and the whole manner
calmer, but it was rather the calmness of repression
than of composure. He spoke slowly and deliber-
ately. “I wes her auldest friend, her —maist like
her brither.”
“Really. Why didn’t you tell me that before?
I have been longing to know all about her; and to
think you could tell me so much. Still, I must
confess, this makes your attitude the more puzzling.
If you were her friend, you might have been kinder
to her son, even if you did think he d gone wrong.
“I’m thinkin’ we’ll have a storm sune. The clouds
were gathering fine as I came along. Aye, ther s the
first lichtnin’.”


“Mr, Mackenzie,” said Stephen earnestly, “don’t
think me prying and inquisitive, but I do so want to
know something about my mother. I have only the
dimmest of memories, and one letter, and that so
short. All that Nurse Joyce could tell me was of
a suffering, sorrowful woman, old before her time;
and yet the picture I have, or rather I had, is of a
bright-faced girl. You could tell me so much, and
even if you dislike to speak of the past, you owe
something for the hard year you’ve given me. If
you only understand how I long to know.” His
voice was so unsteady that he broke off; he dreaded
showing any emotion before this sharp-tongued man.
“Oh,” he exclaimed, “you’ve put the lamp out.
Did }'ou want to turn it up?”
Let be, laddie, let be; we dinna want it; forbye
the skies will be makin’ licht eno’ sune. Ye’re
wantin’ tae hear o' yir mither, and I’d gledly tell
ye; but it s no easy to speak of what gaes deep. A
man disna find the words readily when he wad tell
the secret o’ his life. Gin I tell 'ye, Steenie, wull ye
bury it deep as I hae dune these lang years.”
I will, indeed,” was the ready reply, for Stephen
w as touched by the pathos of the slow, heavy tone.
Though he found it hard at times to follow the
speech, he showed no impatience, for not only did
the broad dialect fit the story he was hearing, but
the depth of passion, all the stronger for being re-
pressed, went to his heart. Moreover he was certain
that the speaker often forgot his presence, and was
rather recalling the memories to himself than relat-
mg them to a listener.
“It began lang syne in the auld land. There were
but few of us m the Glen who held tae the atild
Raith, an the Sundays we went the ’gither tae the
Castle tae Mass. Disna a’ the warld ken how
K 153


faithfu’ the Castle wes through all the bitter years
o’ persecution. The Renwicks and we foregathered
fine and she wes with them. Kathie, Kathie. They
had no bairns of their ain, but she wes Jane Ren-
wick’s sister’s child, feyther and mither baith dead.
I can see her noo, as I saw her first, wi’ her hair
like the sun on the corn-field, and her een, no blue
like those of the maist o’ us, but grey like our ain
true northern seas, or the mists on oor bonnie hills.
A shy lassie, but sweet as the primroses we gathered
the’gether in the spring time, when I’d be hame.
Whet wes the nurse tellin’ ye, lad, ‘old before her
time an’ sorrowfu’? No, she was the lightest heart,
the brightest nature, an’ I —l lo’ed her with a’ ma
heart.”
There was a long pause, while the lightning
flashes lit up the room, and the thunder rumbled in
the distance.
“But Jamie Renwick fell sick and went the wey
o’ all flesh, an’ his widow wes hard put to it tae keep
the farm; so when her brither, in Australia wrote
for her tae gae oot tae him, she was glad to take
the chance. I wes makin’ ma first trip in the very
boat they came in, an’ before we reached Australia
I’d spoken. Kind she wes an’ gentle; she wesna
sure of hersel’ but there was no one she likit better.
I wes tae wait for a year; I’d have waited twenty.
I wes always carefu’ wi ma mone} r , but when I
saved mair nor ever, for every bit I put by meant
something for the hame I'd get for Kathie. She
begged that I’d gie oop the sea, if possible; aye,
I’d gie oop mair nor thet. I wes sae prood o’ her
that when I met John, yir feyther, here in Sydney,
I took him oot tae see her, and begged him tae
look weel aifter her whiles I’d be away; ma last trip


it wes to be, aye, the very last. Did ye hear how I
met yir feyther first?”
“Many’s the time he’s told us all that. It was
in ’Frisco, and he was going back to his ship one
night when he heard a cry for help, and he ran in the
direction of the cry, and found you with your back
to the wall and half a dozen roughs at you.”
“Aye, we beat them; he wes a grand fechter, (his
son’s no bad at it either), and he saved ma life richt
eno’; but mony’s the time sin I’ve thoct it would
have been better for me if he had left me there in
the ’Frisco slum.” He was silent for some time, and
then sighing heavily, spoke again. “We had a fine
run back to Sydney, an’ it wes the gloaming as I
left the ship; full of joy I wes, for we were no
expected till the morning, and I wes going to sur-
prise Kathie, so I went very gently on tae the
verandah tae the open door. I heard voices, and
stayed, the words I heard tellt me I wesna awantit.
“No, no,” as Stephen started up, “he wasna false,
John, he was as true a friend as ever man hed; they
were pairting, an he speaking bravely tae her, to
cheer her, but I cudna thole her greeting (weeping)
an' I went recht in. They cried oot as if I were a
ghaist; but I didna say muckle, I took ma puir bit
ring frae her, and I put their hands the ’gether, and,
and—the morn’s morn I went back tae the boat tae
see would they take me on again; and I went.”
Stephen stretched out his hand and took that of
the old man in a strong clasp, and bowed his head
on them so linked together, he felt no shame in the
tears with which he wet them.
After a pause, Mackenzie went on, but in quite
his natural voice.
“I didn’t come back for two years, just at the
New Year. John came abroad. He said he was


ashamed to face me, but Kathie wished him to tell
me that the peacemaker was come to bring us the
’gether again. So I went to the house, and John
left me for a while, and when he came back he
brought a wee bairnie an’ laid him in my airms.
’Twes ye, Steenie, an’ aye, ye were red, red as a
port licht, an’ I thocht mickle of ye, till ye opened
yir een an’ they were grey like Kathie’s. Ye looked
straucht at me, and I just gave in, an’ when John
held oot his hand I took it an’ we were friends again.
An’ mair nor that, when he asked me to join him
and Munro, I did, an’ we’ve been friends ever since.”
“Will you forgive me if I ask you one question,
but a sudden thought has come to me, and I’d
rather hear the truth, be it ever so unpleasant.
Where did that legacy of my mother’s come from;
for you speak as if her people were quite poor?”
“Dinna ask, lad. There's many a thing that’s the
better for not knowing.”
“I dare say, but I want to know' particularly,
for I’ve a suspicion of the truth. Was it your
money?”
“I’d rather ye’d not asked, Steenie, but since ye
will have it, I’ll tell ye. When she was so bad that
yir feyther had given oop his faith to please that
juitlin’ (cheating) body, Munro. I knew weel that
she feared for ye, when she’d be gone; for Jane
Renwick was near her end, and there’d be no one
to keep him oop to acting rechtly to ye; and, of
course, she couldn’t verra weel ask me. And I
would fain have helped her, but I didn’t see how
till one day she said that if she’d only had a bit
of money to leave you, he'd have to bring you oop
in the Faith. Then I had a grand thocht, for I
minded the money I’d put by for the home that never
was; an’, an’—Jane Renwick de’ed an’ left fower


thoosand pounds to Kathie and Kathies bairn, gin
he was broucht up in the Faith.”
“I understand,’’ cried Stephen; “you gave that
money to the dying woman that she might leave it
to my mother, and to me. No wonder you hated
me when you thought I had been spending it in
vice. I’m almost sorry you've found out the truth
yourself; it would have been a pleasure to have been
able to tell you; but one thing at least is left for me
to let you know, my motive.”
The storm had burst at last, the lightning flashes
lit up the room where they sat hand in hand, but
embarrassed in the awkward silence that follows
such bursts of confidence. The younger man was
the first to speak.
V\ hat a wild night.” His voice was not quite
steady, in spite of his efforts, “and the rain has made
it quite cold. Now I’m going to remember that
I m your host, and give you a cup of coffee of my
own brewing.”
He lit the lamp, and made his preparations so
deftly that the other could not repress his astonish-
ment.
“Don't praise me,” laughed Stephen, “I’ve only
acquired this dexterity at the cost of many a burn,
and more failures. That’s the proper way to learn
though.”
That s richt; we must a’ learn by makin’ mis-
takes. 111 have a bit smoke whiles ye’re crettin’
ready; and ye’d be the better for the same. Is this
■ Ir j ar ; man > T’s empty, and yir pooch as
veeJ. ieve no given oop yir smoke?”
Stephen tried to evade the question, but under
the scrutiny of the keen eyes, his excuses came to
naught.
“Well, if you will have the truth,” he said, half


laughing, half vexed, ‘’that big book I was pretend-
ing to study, when you came in, represents my
smoke for many a day.”
“Man, I’d raither go withoot ma dinner than ma
pipe,” was the terse comment, as the capacious
pouch was disgorged into the empty jar, J'But
maybe,” with a keen look at the white face, “ye’re
doing baith. I’ll sune stop that, he went on un-
conscious of a sudden tightening of Stephen’s lips,
“and many other things as week How’s the smatchit
(little fellow), I braucht him a bit o’ cake and such
like?”
“He : s far from well, poor little boy; he suffers
terribly at times. I am very fond of him, and no
one can know what his love and companionship
have been to me, Mr. Mackenzie.”
“Gin ye could say ‘Mac,’ I’d be glad. I’m lookin
for happy comradeship with ye, Steenie.”
“Well then Mac, here’s your coffee, and I’ve
nothing to give you with it but a dry biscuit.’
“That’s all I want, lad. At least there’s one
thing I’d like I’ve never heard you play since ye
were at school; and if ye’d play a wee whiley, it
would be grand.”
“Of course I will, and with the greatest pleasure
in the world. No one has a better right, for didn’t
you give me the violin?”
“Isn’t that one broken yet? I didna think it would
last that long.”
“An Amati isn’t knocked about like that,” was the
laughing rejoinder, as Stephen drew out the instru-
ment. He was rather nervous at first, but by
degrees he became absorbed in the music; and as
his thoughts strayed to the story he had just heard,
it was impossible for him to refrain from expressing
his sympathy in the music; and so sweet, and


thrilling were the tones he drew from the Amati
that the old man soon laid aside his pipe, and sat
with one hand shading his eyes till the last note
died away.
“Yon music’s michty. She’d have been gey prood
of ye, Steenie,
There were other things I’d to speak on but we’ll
leave them till the morn.”
As he parted from Stephen at the street door, he
looked him squarely in the face.
“Gin ye’d been ma son,” he said slowly, “I’d
have believed ye against all the warld.”


CHAPTER XV.
HOPES AND FEARS.
“God gives each man one life, like a lamp,
then gives That lamp due measured oil:
lamp lighted,—hold high,—wave wid.”
-Browning.
“What is it, Joe? I know you’ve something to say
to me; out with it.’’
“It’s just this, Mr. Stephen. My cousin has offered
me two places in the Flora for next Saturday;
they’re going up to Broken Bay I think, and back
on Sunday night. The blow will do you good, for
you are not looking well at all. You’ll come, won’t
you?’’
“Not for so long. A Saturday afternoon, now,
I’d like very much, as I’ve not had a sail for a long
time. No, I can’t go; thanks, all the same.”
“Why, Mr. Stephen? They are all decent fellows,
and ”
“I'm not questioning that, Joe; but tell me this
yourself; what about Mass on Sunday, if we went?”
“Mass. Oh, we’d miss of course that’s all. What
does one more or less matter? You don’t mean to
say that it would keep you from going, when you
want a change so much; such a little thing as that?”
“There are no little things when it’s a question of
right and wrong. You know that as well as I do.
“That may be. But you can’t be in real earnest,
you that’s so clever. These things are all very
well for women and children, but men are not
expected to trouble about them.”


“What do you mean?”
Stephen’s voice was so stern that Joe dropped his
tone of mockery, though he still spoke lightly.
“No offence, sir. Look at all the men in this shed,
and how many of them, do you think, care a rap
for church or religion, and why should they? So
long as a man pays his way, and is a good citizen—”
“You don’t know what you’re talking about. They
don't make a parade of their feeling, men don’t as
a rule; but all the same, I am sure, the majority
here care a great deal about their duties to God. ‘So
long as a man pays his way.’ How is he doing
that if he neglects the greatest debt of all; ‘good
citizen,’ the man who fails in the highest and
noblest of duties can never be that. Such talk only
shows a shallow mind or a wicked heart, and neither
of those are yours; you are only aping the speech
of someone else. Hand me that file, please.”
Joe obeyed sullenly, and for the rest of the week
was morose or quarrelsome by turns. Stephen
feared the foolish young man was being led astray
again, in spite of his good resolutions; and yet it
was evident that he was leading a sober life, and he
came regularly every Wednesday evening, though
to be sure, he never stayed long, and left as soon
as Stephen put away his violin. Much as he wished
to help, he did not see what could be done, except
to ignore his rudeness and maintain his usual
attitude towards him. Besides, he had other
sources of anxiety; Peter was growing no stronger
as time went on, and in the hot days seemed to be
withering away like a gathered flower; and then
again the examination results would be out soon, and
he was nervously uncertain as to his success, though
he knew that he had done good work in some ways.
Father Petrie, to be sure, seemed to attach very


little importance to his passing or failing. “Ihe
main point, my dear bo} r ,” he wrote, “was to keep
your mind occupied. With all your good resolutions,
you were too much alone with your trials to escape
altogether from morbidity, and the only remedy was
to give you so much work that there would be
neither room nor leisure for brooding over your
troubles. That only engenders self-pity, which
although the weakest and most despicable of our
emotions, can sour the sweetest nature, and under-
mine the soundest only too soon. Hence I urged you
to persist in your studies in spite of overwhelming
difficulties ; and from my intimate knowledge of you,
I was not sure whether it would not be better to
run the risk of a physical break-down, than court
a mental one. Whether you pass this time or not
is almost immaterial; the main point is that you
have not only shaken off your moody thoughts, but
you are to-day ten times the man you were a year
ago.”
That was true enough, and he knew it; yet all
the same he was anxious about the results, and
dreaded failure. Every morning he scanned the
paper eagerly for the results, but Christmas was at
hand and they were not out yet. Peter’s anxiety
was quite as great as his, and though Mrs. Blake and
her daughter said very little, he guessed that they
were longing for his success. A letter from Elaine
made a welcome diversion; she wrote a graphic
description of their journey to the Riviera, and of
their stay in that delightful land, where they
intended to remain until the winter was over, shrink-
ing like all Australians, from the rigours of a winter
in northern Europe. One passage in the letter he
read, and re-read:—“ Dad and I are such chums;
it seems funny he should choose me when he has


Cecil; but I don’t think they get on a bit, and so
it’s Cecil and mother and dad and me (I suppose
I ought to say I, but I never could understand
grammar). A lady here was telling me about
Lourdes, and I’ve asked dad to take me. I
hope he will; he’s nearly promised, and you know
he never breaks a promise. He looked at me so
when I asked, and wanted to know w r hat you had
been telling me in your letters about it; so I just
gave him all you’ve sent me, and told him to read
for himself. 1 didn’t think he’d take them, but he
did, and I had to ask him two or three times before
I could get them back. I'm sure he’s sorry that you
are not here. I used to think that he loved you best
of us all.”
He read portions of this letter to his friends at
“The Hall,” as Honor merrily called their little
home, and Mrs. Blake, who had spent some time at
Nice, revived so many memories of the district that
Honor begged her to forget a few or they w T ould
never have any music that evening.
“And you’re not playing w r ell, either,” she said
later, calmly critical. “I think the Riviera has been
too much for you.”
“I’m horribly anxious about several things,”
said Stephen, apologetically. “The results are so
late in coming out, and I heard to-day they might
not be out till after Christmas. And Peter has been
very ill lately; he was suffering greatly last night.”
“And you, I suppose, sat up with him,” said Mrs,
Blake. “No wonder you are tired and unable to
concentrate your mind on the music. Have a good
rest to-night and to-morrow, you’ll do better.”
However, he did not appear on the next evening,
and they feared Peter was -worse. But the truth
was that Stephen was too unsettled for steady


practice, and knew he would only incur Miss Blake's
just resentment. Peter was much better, and as
he fell into an easy sleep about eight o’clock, his
friend and nurse took a long walk in the cool night
air, returning at eleven; then, finding the little
patient still asleep, he himself had a quiet night.
The next morning, on his way to Mass he bought
a paper, though he did not expect to see the results
for two or three days yet. Still there was no harm
in looking; and, they were there. He stood still,
and with hands that trembled in spite of himself,
unfolded the sheet. It was some little time before
he could trust himself to look at the list; then he
glanced rapidly down it until he came to what he
sought; “Engineering, Fourth Year; Passed:” there
were only six names, and, alas, his was not among
them; he had gone down. He had worked so hard
and hoped against hope that the blow was all the
more severe. Mechanically he folded up the paper
and walked on slowly, trying to master his chagrin
and disappointment. Suddenly he remembered his
rival, Arthur Wood; every year he had beaten him,
but this AA ood had it all his own way, first on
the distinction list without a doubt. He unfolded
the paper again to look for the name. One glance,
and street, houses and pedestrians were blotted out
as in a mist; the blood raced through his veins in
the sudden revulsion of feeling. As the first rush
of emotion passed off, he picked up the paper which
had dropped from his hand in his excitement, and
looked at the list again, perhaps he had made a
mistake; but no, there it was: “Passed with high
distinction; in order of merit, Stephen John Daly,
Arthur Henry Mood.” There was no mistake; he
had beaten him again.
“Thanks be to God,’ was his fervent ejaculation.


“And to His Blessed Mother,” added old Mary
Byrne, who was passing on her way to the church,
and had overheard his aspiration.
“True to you, Mary,” he said with a happy laugh.
“And since Christmas is so near, I want to get
yourself a little present with this from me. Just
say a ‘Hail Mary’ in thanksgiving for me, will
you ?”
He hurried on, leaving Mary gazing in bewilder-
ment at the half-sovereign he had pressed into her
hand. He could see in the distance two others who
were awaiting him at the corner, waiting to con-
gratulate him on his success. At least Mrs. Blake
spoke words of praise and pleasure; Honor only
looked her shy admiration, but he found that more
eloquent than speech, as also the warm clasp of the
hand which he was so loth to let go. There were
four thankful hearts that morning in the old stone
church on the hill, and not the least thankful was
that of poor old Mary Byrne, into whose hard, dull
life so little pleasure came, and who, on her way to
Mass had been building up an airy castle with that
shining yellow coin as a foundation.
“You’ll be sure to come to-night, won’t you?”
were Honor’s last words as they parted at the corner,
and they and the look which accompanied them
made his heart bound in a bewildering manner, and
as often as he thought of the expression on her
face he felt his own grow hot and red.
He was anxious to tell Mackenzie of his success,
but the office door was closed as he passed into
the yard, though the manager was often there before
eight, and, promising himself to tell him at the
dinner hour, he went on into the shed, and was soon
too busy to think of anything but the work on
hand.


“I’d rather make two new things than mend one
old one,” he said, bending over a damaged oil
engine, “especially when an amateur has been tinker-
ing at it himself. Give me the wrench, Joe.”
Without turning, he took the tool held out to
him, and not only that one but others in succession
as he called for them, till a titter from Joe made
him look up from his uncomfortable position to
see that young man vainly trying to suppress his
merriment, while the manager himself was in the
act of handing him another tool.
“Mr. Mackenzie,” cried Stephen in astonishment,
“do you mean to say, that is, is it possible that I’ve
been ordering about for the last ten minutes?”
“Dinna apologise. ’Tisna often I get the chance
to be mate to a Batchelor of Engineering, an’ a high
distinction one at that. But, man, what a muckle
tool for that bit engine. I’m thinkin’ the auld steam
ones were the best after all. I’m verra sorr} r I
canna bide to give } r e a hand richt through, but I
have ma ain trokes. I juist came to sa} r how prood
lam of ye, Steenie, and I’m expecting } r e to have
dinner with me the day.”
Stephen assented, laughing at the vehemence of
the tone; for it was one of the disputed points
between them that he would not accept any pecuni-
ar assistance from his old friend. On the da}’ - after
that November evening, when he had learned the
secret of Mackenzie’s love and sacrifice, they had
had a great talk at the office. The old man wanted
him to leave his poor lodgings and go and live with
him; and at first he could not understand Stephen’s
refusal.
“It’s impossible, Mac; you }’Ourself should be
the first to see it. I know the agreement only sa> r s
‘work as a mechanic,’ but I take it to mean to live


as one also; anyway that’s what 1 mean to do. I m
going to keep that bond in spirit as well as in letter,
my self-respect demands that. So you must forgive
me if I cannot do as you ask. As to } oui other
proposal that you should make me an allowance,
I cannot let you do that either. I know the money
I am living on is really yours, but that s different,
and anyway, you tell me my father does not know
where it came from. Let me keep my independence,
and live on my little income my mother left me. Of
course I’d rather live on my own earnings, but that
cannot be yet awhile. When I really want money
I promise I'll let you know; until then let it not
be mentioned between us, please.”
“At least ye’ll take yir dinner with me, for I’m
sure ye’ve no been having proper food an’ ”
“I’ll come with you with great pleasure, that is
if the place is not too expensive, but —I pay for
myself.”
Mackenzie groaned, but gave in; and that was
why he laid such stress on the dining with him that
day. He had one bit of revenge however, for as
they were walking back to the works, he said
whimsically:
“Thet wes no a bad lunch, Steenie; but we’ll better
it the nicht wi’ the dinner.”
“Now, Mac, that’s not fair; but I’ll give in to you
to-day. Only,” he hesitated awhile, and then went
on, but with an accession of colour in his face, “I had
an engagement for this evening, so I’ll have to run
away directly after. Couldn’t we postpone the
dinner? Or,” as he remembered how Airs. Blake
had asked him to bring Air. Alackenzie to see
them, “would you come to? They are anxious to
meet you, and have ask me to say that you will be
welcome if you’d care to come.”


“I’d like it fine, but, Steenie, I’m but a rough old
Scotchman, a maybe I’m no presentable.”
“Presentable,” Stephen stopped and laid his hand
on the other’s shoulder; “the house that would be
too grand for you, would be too grand for me, and
where you were not welcome I’d never go. But these
ladies are not like that, Mac; they’ll be only too glad
to see you.”
They certainly welcomed him warmly, and he and
Mrs. Blake were soon chatting together, while the
two others revelled in music to their heart’s content.
But though he never w'avered in his attention to
her, Mrs. Blake saw how often his gaze wandered
to Honor, seated at the piano, where the lamplight
fell on her simple white dress, and the waves of
bright brown hair. Stephen stood near, tall and erect,
drawing such depth of tone from his violin that the
listeners fell under the spell of his magic and lapsed
into silence that they might enjoy it to the full.
“They play very well together,” remarked Mrs.
Blake, when Honor had gone to see about the
supper, and Stephen, seating himself at the piano,
was playing softly as if to himself. “Don’t you
think so, Mr. Mackenzie?”
“They do indeed,” he assented, “I never heard
better. But he does maist things weel, and his
mither was gifted in music afore him. Yir dochter
plays fine, she teaches ye say?”
“We both teach, she music and I painting, so you
may imagine how we enjoy the holida} r s. I was
trained at South Kensington, and then in France,
but once I went with others on a sketching tour in
Scotland, and have some sketches in my portfolios.
Would you care to see them?”
“I ivould thet. Wes it in Perthshire ye were?
’Tis the bonniest pairt of a bonnie land.”


H H symor\iS
J iqiu
“ It’s no’ Peter.”
[Page 148.]
Face page 168


1
,


The appearance of the supper put an end to the
conversation, and as it was a special feast in
Stephen’s honour, Mrs. Blake had made some dainty
cakes, to which they all did justice, and altogether
it was a merry meal. Afterwards the sketches were
produced, and the two elder people were so absorbed
in them that Honor and Stephen went back to their
music, and it was only when the portfolio was
finished that they noticed how late it was. Mrs.
Blake looked enquiringly at Stephen, who answered
her unspoken question.
“Mr. Mackenzie is one of us, and I know he would
like to join with us in this. I told him you always
let me stay to say the rosary with you, and he was
so pleased, and hoped that if he came you would
grant him the same privilege.”
“We’ll say it in thanksgiving for your success, Mr.
Daly. The more we think over it, Honor and I, the
more we wonder that you should have done so very
well with so very little time for study.”
“I think there must be a special blessing on your
work,” said Honor softly; and then growing con-
fused under Stephen’s steady gaze, she hastened to
light the candles.
“I hope you will come again, Mr. Mackenzie?”
said Mrs. Blake, in parting.
“I’ll be richt glad to do so; I’ll come when the
lad does.”
“That will be nearly every evening,” laughed
Honor; “for Mr. Daly is very good in practising
with me; and I’ve got on so well under his tuition
that I have been able to take a position as accom-
panist.”
“Twa guid women,” commented Mackenzie, as
Stephen walked with him to the ferry, “an’ to think
of ye there every even.”
L 169


“Only since the examination,” replied Stephen
hastily; “you see she asked me to practise with her,
as that would enable her to gain the position she
spoke of. I knew the fees would be a great help to
them, as they are quite dependent on their own earn-
ings.”
‘‘Quite so. I understand. It’s verra kind of ye to
help, and to keep on helpin’ aifter the poseetion’s
gained. But,” dropping his bantering tone as he
saw Stephen’s flushed face, and noted his uneasiness,
“gin she’s as guid as she’s bonnie, ye micht do
muckle waur. Steenie, I cudna thole the thoct of
ye mairryin’ thet warldly dochter of Dare’s. Yir
feyther wes sayin’ a year syne thet yir step-mither
wes eager for it.”
“Miss Dare has dropped the acquaintance now,
and I'm not sorry all things considered. You must
be right in your estimate of her character, for it
was evidently my position and not myself that had
any attraction far her. I think I told you how
she cut me that day Peter and I met them up the
river. Speaking of Peter, you ought to have seen
him this morning, when he heard of my success; he
was wild with delight, and that after a bad night, too.
He forgot his own pain to rejoice with me.”
“Puir laddie. I’m glad he’s a bit better. Ye’re
entitled to twa weeks the year, an’ as ye’ve had one
for yir examination there’s but one left. I’m thinkin’
ye should take a holiday, for ye’ve had a peck of
anxiety latterly. Come oop to the mountains wi’
me, laddie, an’ ye’ll take the wee mannie too. Gin
yir independence is in danger, he continued hastily,
seeing the firm set of Stephen’s lips, “ye can pey
for yersel and I’ll be content wi’ peyin’ for the
laddie. It’ll be michty for him?” he added slyly.
And Stephen consented.


CHAPTER XVI.
“IS IT WELL WITH THE CHILD?”
“Glory to God—to God,” he saith;
“Knowledge by suffering entereth,
And Life is perfected by Death.”
E. B. Browning.
The mountain trip was a great success from one
point of view—namely, the thorough enjoyment of
it for all three. There was no doubt, too, that it
set Stephen up, and he delighted in long rambles
on the cool heights. But Peter, though he seemed
to rally a little, was still weak, and suffered a great
deal. Yet for him, too, every day was the beginning
of new pleasures; first of all he had his dear Mr.
Stephen with him all the time, and then they were
sure to have a drive in a comfortable phaeton drawn
by the cream-coloured ponies he had admired so
much the first day. Lot that his admiration grew
less, for he was never tired of looking at their
smooth sleek sides and beautiful long tails, but he
came to look on it as a right that he should be drawn
about by them, and them alone, and his whim was
gratified. He could not go very far, however; for
he tired very soon, and was always glad to get back
to the house, where he would He on a couch by the
window. The drive he liked best of all was down
to Echo Point, where he could look out over the
beautiful valley; and often Stephen would lift him in
his strong arms, and carry him to the look-out to
show him all the wonderful sights; the masses of


rock that seemed tottering to a fall, the sheer cliffs,
and the lovely waterfalls with the light mists rising
from them like a veil. He never tired of these
strange and beautiful sights; yet often Stephen,
turning from a survey of the marvellous panorama
to look at the thin face resting against his arm,
would find the eyes fixed intently on him.
“Don’t waste your time looking at me, Peter,'’ he
said once. “Look at that beautiful mist coming up
out of the valley, or the sunlight on ‘the Castle’ over
there. You can see me at any time.”
“I’m always thanking our Lady for sending you
that time,” was the unexpected answer, “because
everything has been so different since you came.
And" I can’t help looking at you, because I do love
you, Mr. Stephen.”
Mackenzie, who was sitting beside them on the
rock, suddenl}' got up and walked away as if to
find a better point of view, but in reality to hide his
emotion; for a mist seemed to e blotted
all the wonderful valley at those few pathetic
words, at the sight of the wasted figure in
Stephen’s strong young arms, and the lovelight in
the fever-bright eyes. W hen, after a short interval
he returned, the eyes were closed, and Stephen said
in a low tone:
“I think he’s asleep, Mac.”
“No, I’m not,” was the unexpected rejoinder;
“I was only thinking how good everyone is to me,
and I’ve done nothing to deserve it. 111 never be
able to thank you enough, Mr. Mackenzie, for
bringing me to this beautiful place.”
“Would ye like to bide here, laddie?”
“Not without Mr. Stephen,” was the quick reply.
“I want to go back when he does.”


And so they had journeyed down together to
Sydney, and Mrs. Mayne had declared that # he
looked worlds better for his change. He did seem
much brighter at first, but as the days became hotter
and closer he failed visibly, and in his restlessness,
often begged to be taken back again to those cool
places among the mountains that he was never
to see again; for even had Stephen been able to
get away, he was too weak to be moved, and every
day brought the end nearer. He rarely complained
however, and even when the cruel pain racked the
wasted frame, his sobbing would cease if only his
beloved Mr. Stephen would hold him in his arms.
The days were the hardest to bear, not only because
it was so hot and close and the noises in the
street worried him, but chiefly because he had do
without his strong, patient nurse. Stephen had
hung his watch up on the wall beside the bed so that
the little sufferer might be able to know exactly
when he would be coming, and to please him also,
he had made out a time-table of what he would be
likely to be doing each hour of the day, so that
Peter might be able to imagine his surroundings.
Every device to amuse and ease the child was
welcomed, and his own weariness was never allowed
to interfere with his loving service. He tried to
persuade Mrs. Mayne to allow his removal to a
hospital, pointing out that Mr. Mackenzie would
arrange for every comfort; but she was adamant on
that point, and so he determined on the next best
thing.
“Mac," he said, entering the office one morning
in March, “I promised to ask you for money when
I wanted it.”
Without a word of comment the old man drew out


his cheque-book, but Stephen laid a detaining hand
on his arm.
“No, no, not that, at least not yet. I want Dr.
Elden to see Peter, he’s the specialist in these
cases. He’s worth a big fee, and is moreover so
busy that a nobody like myself mightn’t be able
to induce him to come. He’d say at once we should
send the child to the hospital, and that his mother
won't hear of. Repute makes you out a wealthy
man, and the doctor is a countryman of yours, so
if you’d see him ”
“I'll be off at once. But, Steenie, why not take a
week off? Ye’re lookin’ fair done.”
“Not now, Mac, later I’ll want to do so. But
do get Elden.”
The great man came that same afternoon, to the
wonder and delight of the neighbourhood, whose
excitement was roused when the news spread,
that there was a grand carriage at Mrs. Mayne’s
door. All the children gathered to stare at the
smart brougham and champing bays, with a kind of
fascination; but many a mother who had brought her
little one to see the unwonted sight, clasped her
child more closely to her at the thought of what
had brought the great man there.'
The examination was long and painful, and
Stephen looked on anxiously; when it was ended,
he took the doctor into his own room where Mac-
kenzie awaited them.
“Any hope, Doctor?”
The great man shook his head slowly.
“None whatever; and it is better so; life only
means suffering to the poor child. If I’d had him
in hand as a baby, I might have done much; but
now death is the greatest mercy. Ah, thank you
Mr. Mackenzie. No, it would be no use for me to


come again. I can do no more that what Dr, Lindsay
is doing. Still, if you wish it? Yes. Well, I’ll
call again, but I think a few days more will see the
end.”
When this news was communicated to Mrs.
Mayne, her grief was pitiable.
“He’s all I have,” she wailed, “and he’s being
taken from me.” But when Stephen explained all
she grew calmer; and though her dread of the
parting was not lessened, she could be thankful for
her child’s sake that the suffering was to be brief.
“Mr. Stephen,” said Peter the next day, “aren’t
you going to work?”
“No; I’ve a few days' holiday, and I’m going to
spend them with } r ou; that is if you want me.”
“I alwa}'s want you. Father Martin asked me
the other day why I loved you so much, when I’d
only known you a little time.”
“Yes? And what did you tell him?”
I said it was because you were, you, and he
laughed and said that was a grand answer. I love
dear Father Martin too; he is so good coming every
day; and I like to hear how the dear Lord
Jesus loved little children when He was on earth,
and loves them always. W hen I said I wished I
could do something for Him before I died, what do
you think he said?”
“What?”
“That I was doing the greatest thing of all, be-
cause I was bearing pain. I love to think of that, it
makes it easier to bear.”
And what about what you ve done for me?”
For } on? \V hy it s you that does everything for
me.”
011 did a great work, little Peter; for when I


met you first I was unhappy and lonely, and you
saved me from getting hard and bitter.”
“But I didn’t do anything.”
“You loved me; and that was what I wanted
more than anything, just them.”
“I see. Our Lady sent you because it was to be
good for us both. And, Mr. Stephen, I want to tell
you something else. I’m so afraid of the dark, I
always have been, and mum keeps a light all night
so that when I wake up frightened I can see her
face, and then it’s all right. I’m dying, I know, and
I don’t mind only for leaving mum and you; but
won’t it be dark Mr, Stephen? It says so in the
hymn for the Holy Souls; ‘ln death’s dark arms,’
you know the words; and I’m afraid.”
"Don’t be afraid, Peter. When you wake up at
night and see your mother’s face close beside you,
you are not afraid then, are you? And though it
may seem dark when you —when you leave us,
Peter there’ll be the most beautiful Face of all so
close to you, and you won’t have any need to fear
anything, } r ou couldn’t.”
“Ah.” The long drawn sigh of content was the
only response, but in the night when Stephen had
taken Mrs. Mayne’s place so that the wearied mother
might get some rest, a little hot hand slipped into
his, and the weak voice whispered:
“I’m thinking of the beautiful Face in the dark-
ness, and it helps me to bear the pain. You see, now
I’ll be able to be brave.”
And brave he was too, all through the succeeding
days of suffering, and through that last hot March
night; when the stars were paling to the dawn he
looked at his hero with loving eyes though F
pupils were dilated with pain.


“Air. Stephen,” the voice was only a whisper, 1 m
not going to be frightened, but would you help me?
“In all I can, Peter.”
“Hold me in your arms, till —till He comes. Ah,
that’s right. I want to tell you my dream, Air.
Stephen. Last night, or to-night, I don't know
which, I dreamed of my knight, and he was very
lonely because his poor little page had gone, and he
had to fight a big battle.”
“Don’t try and talk, dear Peter, it exhausts you.”
“I must say this—my dear knight—fought bravely
—he won, but he was bleeding —and wounded —and
so the princess—came —and —it was —sunshine —and
—the Sacred —Heart ”
The broken words died away; he lay exhausted
in Stephen’s arms, and spoke no more; only the
rosary slipping through his wasted fingers showed
how the brave child was strengthening himself for
the last sharp battle. When he spoke again it was
to comfort his mother.
“Don’t cry, mum. I don’t mind leaving you now
because Air. Alackenzie has promised—Ah, hold me
tightly, Air. Stephen.”
The paroxysm passed, and he lay white and ex-
hausted ; so long was he motionless that they
thought the end had come, but suddenly a smile
curved his lips, his opened eyes shone with delight.
“You were right, Air. Stephen—and—and you
needn’t hold me now. It’s all light—Jesus—Alary
—Joseph ’’
The smile still irradiating the worn face, made it
so life-like that Stephen could not believe it was the
end until the wail of the heart-broken mother told
him all was over.
“Go forth, oh Christian soul, in the name of God
the Father Who created thee, of God the Son, Who


redeemed thee, of God the Holy Ghost, Who sancti-
fied thee.”
His voice never wavered till, with the ‘Amen’ he
laid the lifeless little body on the bed, and went
away into his own room. He shut the door; the
key jarred in the lock; he was alone with his sor-
row.


CHAPTER XVII.
IN THE SHADOWS.
“In the rash lustihood of my young powers,
I shook the pillaring hours
And pulled my life upon me.”
Francis Thompson.
It was pleasant there in the shaded corner of the
balcony, where one could have the full benefit of
the sun, and be sheltered from the wind. The luxuri-
ous chairs too were all that could be desired, yet
Estelle Daly seemed to derive very little pleasure
from any of these material comforts. She
tossed aside the book she had been trying
to read, and gazed out on the Mediterranean
waters, vividly blue in the afternoon sun-
light. But it was not the sparkling waves
nor the gay esplanade, gay with a thousand promen-
aders, that drew her attention; in fact she hardly
saw them. A passage in the book just tossed aside
recalled unpleasantly an ugly shadow that she tried
in vain to banish. She had told herself again and
again that it was ridiculous that Stephen’s fall
should have made such a difference in her life; but
all the same she knew that there was more than
the shadow of her step-son’s disgrace that lay across
her life.
Brought up in a worldly household, she had often
rebelled in secret against the petty ends and narrow
views of society, and her starved soul had in vain
sought nourishment in her love of artistic beauty.
What was lacking in her life she could not say; but
she did know that there was something that would


alone make life complete and beautiful. Her
marriage with John Daly had not brought the happi-
ness she looked for; and as one by one her illusions
faded she realised all the more the mockery of life
as an end in itself. Not that she had any illusions
about her husband. He was very kind and exceed-
ingly generous to her, but she knew well that she
was never admitted to any knowledge of his real
self, of his deepest feelings.
It was only when she came into daily and hourly
contact with Stephen that she began to perceive that
he had in his life a fullness and completeness that
she was ignorant of. It was a revelation to her to
find one, and he doubtless, one of many, who
evidently regulated his life by another standard than
that of the money market or the canons of polite
society. At times too, she had had glimpses of
a power more than natural, a force above mere
human nature, in one or two examples she had seen
of a resistance to pleasant evil; and that last con-
versation in the hall had touched her, and roused a
desire to find from what source he drew such sweet-
ness and strength. So the finding that he was not
only no better than the many young men she had
known, but even far worse, had struck at her very
soul, and her loss was greater than she could
estimate.
The distraction of travel, satisfying at first, was
now beginning to pall, and she desired above all
companionship, intercourse with a sympathetic
nature, and as a matter of fact, she was very much
alone. Her husband seemed to prefer to go out with
Elaine, leaving her to Cecil, who, however gave her
very little of his society, and apart from her own
desire for his companionship, she was anxious on his
account, for that her son was greatly changed was


evident to any one who had known him year or
two before. He was thinner and paler, and instead
of being always eager for amusement and society, he
seemed now to prefer to be as much alone as
possible. Of course much of this might be due to
his fathers altered demeanour, for although provid-
ing liberally for his studies and residence in Edin-
burgh, he seemed to take very little interest in his
son, and devoted himself more to his daughter.
What ailed Cecil? This question worried her, the
more so that all her efforts to win his confidence
were in vain; nothing she had done could break
down the barrier that was reared between them,
and to the mother’s heart this was a most bitter
trial.
Wearied of her own society, she went down on
to the broad and beautiful parade that skirted the
sea-front, and strolled listlessly along, unheeding
of any glances of admiration and curiosity directed
at the handsome, stately woman who wore her costly
attire with such a careless grace. Meeting some of
her friends, she sat down with them, and though
she was conscious of an animated discussion
between them she took no part in it, but sat looking
out to sea with a weary light in the beautiful dark
eyes. Suddenly her face lit up with a flash of
welcome as she saw Cecil coming towards them,
and there was no trace of listlessness in her manner,
as she made place for him on the seat beside her.
“We shall appeal to Monsieur Cecil,” said Madame
Dupont, a charming French lady of the old school,
whom Mrs. Daly had met in Egypt at the beginning
of the winter, and was pleased to see again at Nice.
“He is young, but he looks so alarmingly clever,
and besides, as a student of medicine, he is sure to


have some experiences of these things. Do you not
think so?” she added, turning to Airs. Daly.
“I am ashamed to confess that I have not heard
on what the discussion was,” said Estelle, with her
own charming grace. “Will you pardon me? I was
thinking of many other things.”
“But, interposed the other member of the party, a
scholarly looking notary, “I do not think Alonsieur
Daly can have any experience in these matters.
They are not for the young; it is only when we get
to the bottom of the cup of life that we begin to taste
the dregs. We were speaking about a very extra-
ordinary case which came to light the other day.
You may remember it. A man who had lived in
the utmost penury, was found at his death to have
been really very wealthy, and had chosen to live in
the miserable surroundings in which he was found,
as a sort of expiation of a crime to which he con-
fessed on his deathbed. As a young man, he and
another of his own rank in life, visited a low quarter
of the city, and in a riot, at a gambling house, a
man was killed, and the friend was convicted on his
evidence mainly, and was sentenced to death at first;
but after further evidence was obtained, it trans-
pired that the unhappy young man was too intoxi-
cated at the time to be aware of the terrible nature
of his own actions, and the sentence was commuted
to imprisonment for life. He died in prison, after
serving about twelve years, and the matter seemed
at an end, when, by this man’s confession, the truth
was learned at last; for he and not his friend had
struck the fatal blow, and he had taken advantage of
the other’s condition to lay the blame on him. He
seemed to think that by voluntarily condemning
himself to the strange mode of life, which he adopted
for many years, that he was making full satis-


faction for the wrong done. Indeed, I have heard it
said that many think it required great courage to
live so miserably when he had vast wealth at his
command.”
“Conscience doth make cowards of us all,” quoted
Cecil, with an attempt to appear unconcerned at the
story he had just heard.
“Ah,” said the notary, flourishing his pince-nez,
“As I have said, Monsieur is young, he does not see
the point. What would he know of the torment of
a burdened conscience? Now, I who speak to you,
I have seen much in my professional career that
would ,” he stopped short, for he caught a look
in the sullen dark eyes that staggered him; it was
as if a door had opened and he had seen into a place
of torment. Shocked and bewildered, he made no
effort to continue his reminiscences, but busied him-
self in polishing his glasses, with almost feverish
energy. The silence was broken by Madame
Dupont.
“But, pray do not keep us so long in suspense,
monsieur. W e are eager to hear your own
experiences.”
The notary shook his head, gravely.
“It was wrong of me to mention such a subject;
it is out of harmony with this beautiful day, and the
scene before us. Is madame going to grace the
ball with her presence next week? I refer to the
one to be given by these so rich Americans. “He
addressed himself to Mrs. Daly, who shook her
head, smilingly.”
“We shall be far away next week, for we have
only waited for the Carnival, and besides, my son
must be back at his studies, and we shall all go
together. Mr. Daly speaks of spending the summer


in Norway, so we must get back to England as
soon as possible.” , t A
“Mother,” said Cecil, as they walked back to the
hotel together, “is it quite true that you are going
to Norway?”
“As far as I know it is settled. \our lather said
last night, he should like us to see that part of
Europe.” , .
“Then you’re not going back to Australia this
year?”
“Certainly not. We were to be away three years
at least, and from something I heard yesterday, it
seems likely that we shall be away longer than
that. In any case, I think it probable that we shall
wait until you have finished at Edinburgh.
“You needn’t wait for me,” said Cecil, irritably.
“I can surely go out to Australia by myself, if I go
at all. I’m thinking that I should like to go in for
some special work, bacteriology, and in that case
I’d have to spend years in France and Germany. I
asked father would he give me the opportunity, and
though he did not exactly consent, I think he will.”
“But Cecil, dear, that would mean that I should
be parted from you for such a long time. And what
guarantee should I have that you would come back
to Australia at all? ’
Cecil smiled grimly; the same thought was in
the back of his own mind, but he was not going to
let her know that. So he answered lightly enough :
“Could an Australian stay away from his beloved
land for an indefinite time? You’ll have me home
soon enough; and meantime,” he added, with a
touch of bitterness, “you’ll have your perfect
Stephen, he’ll be out of gaol by the time you get
back.”
“Cecil, how dare you speak like that. I only


wish I could feel sure that you had nothing to do
with that miserable business.”
“I gave you my word that I hadn’t.”
His mother only sighed, and the subject was
dropped. But, had she seen him that night, in the
quiet of his own room, her fears would have re-
turned in double force. Such despair, such utter
misery was surely never on any innocent face. The
story he had heard that day had revived the
poignancy of his remorse, and still he resolutely shut
his eyes to the only means of alleviating his own
suffering, and undoing the great wrong.
“Oh,” he thought, “if only I had had the courage
to tell father that night on the boat. I should have
done it if he hadn't been so hard; if he had shown
one sign of sympathy, I’m sure I could have spoken;
but no, that’s not his way; he has no pity for those
who go wrong. And to think I must have this
burden all my life, for I’m sure now that Stephen
will never speak. I feel as if I hated him more than
e\ er, how dare he be so superior, to be able to do so
easily what I daren’t do to save my life.”
Hour after hour, he sat in misery, tossed by con-
flicting passions, and when he did at last go to bed,
sleep would not come to him, and he lay feverish
and wakeful until dawn. Rising, unrefreshed and
wretched, he determined to take a walk in the cool
morning air, so as to be able to appear before the
others without showing traces of his misery. After
a long and refreshing ramble, he was returning to
the hotel when he saw before him the man who had
been greatly in his thoughts, and almost involun-
tarily he quickened his steps to catch up to him. Yet,
when they were walking along together he could not
bring himself to speak of what he wished; he felt
tongue-tied in the presence of this elderly stranger,
M 185


who had looked yesterday into his face with such a
look of comprehension. At last, he summoned up
courage, and interrupting the other’s rambling ac-
count of a certain old ruin in the neighbourhood;
“In the case of the man of whom we were speaking
yesterday, would you not consider that he had atoned
fully for ’his fault? What,” as the notary shook
his head decidedly, “you think that a life of penury
and discomfort would not make up for the other
man’s years of prison?”
“That is not the point, monsieur,” was the quiet
reply. “He was guilty, and should have faced the
consequences of his crime. Doubtless he struck the
blow in a moment of anger, and had no intention
of taking life, and, doubtless, the full
knowledge of what he had done rushed in on him,
his impulse to screen himself even at the expense
of his friend, was after all, human, though, certainly
unworthy of a man; still he acted then no doubt
on a wild impulse, but the fault lay in the fact that
when he had had time for thought and consideration,
he should still persist in his cowardly course. Thave
no doubt he suffered, he deserved to do so, but he
did not have to face the public shame and the loss
of all a man holds dear.”
“But if he had no one to advise him, or tell him
what he ought to do?” There was such a note of
entreaty in the young man’s voice that the notai}
spoke very gently.
“There is always the means given by the good
God; ah, pardon, perhaps monsieur is a
Catholic? No? Then to put it from your point
of view, there is the voice of conscience, and the
certain knowledge that such a course of action was
contemptible to the last degree.


“What do you mean by the means given by God?
The dictates of conscience?”
“No. I refer to the comfort and help of the con-
fessional, quite apart from its supernatural aspect.
To be able to pour out a full heart, to relieve the
soul of a burden it can bear no longer, is this not
an inestimable blessing, apart from the magnificent
certainty of pardon and release? We have reached
our destination, monsieur, and as you are leaving
here in a few days, I am not likely to see you again,
but I implore you, if I was not mistaken yesterday,
to bear no longer the weight of the burden that is
crushing all the brightness out of your life, aye, and
will crush it until you are free. You have not the
priceless privileges that are at the command of us
Catholics, but you have a good father, a good
mother, and let them be your helpers. You owe it
to them and, and you owe it to your God.”
He had gone before Cecil could find a word to say
in refutation or exoneration of himself.
That same afternoon, as he was reading in his
room, his mother came in to ask him a question
about his packing, for they were to leave the next
day; and seeing the new softened look on his face,
she sat down beside him, and took his hand in hers.
“Cecil, my only son, do not shut your heart to me.
Let me at least share your sorrow if I cannot
relieve it.”
He threw his arms round her neck, and leaning
against her as he had often done as a child, began
in a low voice :
“Yes, mother, I will tell you all. I cannot keep it
to myself any longer. I 1 ”
“Estelle, Estelle, where are you?” John Daly’s
voice had the peremptory ring it always had when
he was vexed, and Cecil drew himself up; the soft-


ness had gone out of his voice, his voice was as
hard as his father’s, as he said:
“You had better see what he wants, mother.
And you needn’t worry about me; I have a bad
headache and have been studying too hard. The
journey back will set me up again.”
The moment of confidences and loving appeal had
passed; and with a heavy heart, Estelle Daly went
to where her husband awaited her, a frown on his
handsome face, and a packet of letters in his hand.


CHAPTER XVIII.
PETER’S DREAM COMES TRUE.
“For him who aspires, and for him who loves, life
may lead through the thorns, but it never stops in
the desert.”—Anon.
The wind shook the window, washed clean now
by the rain that fell ceaselessly, not a steady down-
pour however, but a torrent that the fierce wind
drove into every crack and chink. A cheerless day,
and one that even the pleasantest surroundings could
not brighten ; but it was not of the discomforts of his
office that Mackenzie was thinking, nor of the dreary
day, though he was staring through the blurred
window panes at the uninviting prospect. The shrill
whistle that told the working day was over roused
him from his cogitations, and slipping on his oilskin
coat, he crossed the yard strewn with ashes, into
which his feet sank as into a quick-sand. Through
the groups of men he passed until he reached the
electric shed, at the far end of the yard, where he
knew he would find the man he sought.
“A word with ye, lad,” he said; and Stephen, who
was putting away his tools, nodded assentingly.
Waiting until the others should pass Out and leave
them alone, he watched the young man closely,
noting the lines on the face, the shadows under the
eyes, the whole listless air.
“Ye’re sairly changed, Steenie,” he said when the
last straggler had gone out, “An’ I’m thinkin’ ken
weel the reason. It’s no for the puir laddie ye’re
frettin’, though ye must miss him terribly; he’s done


his wark and rests the noo; but we are in the
thick of the fecht, an’ maun quit us like men. Ye
were all richt no lang syne, but these three months
ye’ve been miserable. Will ye no tell old Mac?”
‘‘Don’t ask me.”
“I dinna need to, lad, it’s plain eno’ to me. It’s
aboot the lassie ye’re trachled; ye needna deny it;
an’ I ken weel it’s no lichtsome to be so placed. I’ve
been over the books the day, an' ye’ve peyed three
hundred pounds, an’ gin ye keep on at sic guid wark
yir pey’ll rise an’ ye’ll have all peyed in aboot three
year main But thet’s gey lang to expect a lass to
wait; an’ even then ye maun make some headway in
yir profession afore ye could hope to mairry.”
“Don’t I know it? Haven’t I gone over and over
it, and not a gleam of hope can I see anywhere.
How could I foresee this when I signed that agree-
ment? And here I am tied hand and foot, and—
and Mac, it’s hard to bear. I must keep away from
them lest I should be tempted beyond my strength.”
“Ye mean ye’ll no go there. Laddie, ye canna
keep away.”
“Can’t I?” Stephen’s voice was low, but very
steady.” I say I can, because I must.”
“Need it be. She’s all ye could ask for, so guid, so
bonnie an’ so winsome; an’ how can ye tell it wadna
be cruel to her; she’s no that strong, an’ ye mind
she’s aye boasting (coughing) this weather, an’ gin
ye turn ”
“Mac, Mac, why do you torture me like this?’’
The tone was heart-rending, but the old man kept his
eyes averted from the despairing face, and went
on eagerly.
“Because, lad, I want } r e to see that it’s no needfu’
to be so hard on her an’ yirsel. Have I no the proofs
safe lockit in the strong room, and one of them


enough to set ye free. Ye mind the day that ower-
dressed, ill-looking body came to the oft'eece whiles
ye were speaking aboot yir studies? That w r es
Hart, the money-lender, an’ he didn’t ken ye. It
gared ma heart loup, Steenie, to hear him say thet
for then I first saw the light. I saw him again, and
got from him a signed declaration that he didn’t a
know ye, and mair nor that; I’ve his w'riting on the
back of a photo, that it is the portrait of the Stephen
Daly, with whom he had transactions, an’ ye ken
it’s Cecil all the time. An’ I have the eevidence of
experts that the writing on the promeessory notes
is no the same as that on the pey sheets. Let me
send these to yir feyther, an’ he maun release ye at
once. An’ think, think, laddie, what it would mean
to bonnie Honor. No, I’ll no take an answer noo;
ye were over rash in entering on the cruel agree-
ment, ye shall have time to think afore ye refuse to
escape from it. Gin ye tell me yir answer in time
for the mail I’ll be content.”
He hurried away, leaving Stephen heartsick and
torn by conflicting emotions. How easy a way out
of all his difficulties, and yet —and yet. Well, he
had time to think it over, nearly a week in which
to decide whether he would put happiness from him
or forsake his quest. Both thoughts were bitter,
both ways hard; and he could only pray for light
and guidance and act accordingly.
That same night he wrote to Father Petrie, and
laid the whole case before him; the very act of
writing eased his heart and cheered him. Yet every
day found him further from a decision, rather more
troubled, more uncertain. On the Thursday he was
passing outside the shed where the men were
gathered for the dinner hour, when his own name,
falling on his ears roused his attention.


“Yes, young Daly. You didn’t use to be such a
milk-sop, Joe, till you took up with him; and now
no one else is worth listening to.”
“You can laugh as you like,” was Joe’s steady
answer. “I’m not going to join you, now or at any
time. And if I do swear by Mr. Stephen, I’m safe
enough, for he’s one to trust to. When he thinks a
thing is right he does it in spite of everyone and
everything.”
“Bah,” was the rough rejoinder; “your hero, that
Johnny Raw, he’s not all you think him, I can tell
you a thing or ”
“That’ll do,” put in a deeper voice. “Young
Daly’s all right, he's not my sort; besides being a
long way too short in the grain; but he’s a white
man for all that.”
What followed Stephen did not know, for
suddenly realising that the conversation was not
meant for his ears, he withdrew; but every word had
sunk into his heart. “When he thinks a thing’s
right, he does it,” Joe had said, and he knew he was
contemplating an action he could not think right;
he was going back on his word, breaking his agree-
ment. Aye, and more than that. It was no excuse
that Mackenzie had discovered his innocence and
Cecil’s guilt; he had been quite aware of that when
he had accepted the position, and it was only now
when love and inclination called that he wanted to
shirk the carrying of his self-imposed burden. And
there was only one more day to decide in.
“Mr. Stephen,” said Joe that night, as they were
putting up, “I’ve been wanting to tell you something
for a long time, but I haven’t liked to; you’ve
seemed so—l don’t know how to put it —but as
if you didn’t care much about anything here.”


“I'm sorry that I’ve given you that impression,
Joe. My interest is as keen as ever, and I felt very
proud of you to-day when I accidentally overheard
you refusing to join in some folly. ’
“Did you hear that? I’m glad, for it’ll show you
something of what you have done for me. And this
is what I’ve been wanting to tell you for a long
time. You know when you refused to go with us
in the boat last year; well, I didn’t enjoy the trip
a bit, for I couldn’t forget what you’d said. And
the next Sunday I went to Mass with mother.”
“That’s the best news I’ve heard for some time.
You’re all the better for it, aren’t you?”
“That I am. At first I was a bit irregular; it’s
hard to get over a bad habit, though it’s easy enough
to get into one. This five months I haven’t missed a
Sunday; and last Easter, I—l went to my duty.”
“You’re a good fellow, Joe, I knew it, and was
sure that your own heart would tell you the truth
if you’d only listen to it. I thank you for telling me
this, for it’s going to help me in a hard matter.”
“I wish I could help you, Mr. Stephen, for I owe
to you my peace of mind, my present good position
here, and my hopes of the future. I haven’t told you
all yet, but if you’re in a hurry ”
“Not I. I am only going home; and even if I
was going elsewhere I’d wait to hear what you have
to say.”
“Thanks. It won’t take me long to tell you
though it means a great deal to me. I’ve joined the
sodality of the Sacred Heart, and hope to be loyal
to it always; and—and I’m going to be married to
as good a Catholic girl as you’d find in Sydney. And
mother likes her very much too,” he added, in a tone
of conscious triumph, as if that fact clinched the
matter. “And when I think of what I’d have been


but for you, Mr. Stephen, is it any wonder I’d like
to be able to help you in some way.”
“You have helped me already, for what you tell
me has put new heart into me. And, Joe, if you’d
like to help me still more, say a little prayer for
me to-night, and ask your mother to say one too, for
I’ve got something hard to do.”
“You’ll do it Mr. Stephen, no matter how hard
it is.”
These words haunted him all through the dreary
evening, when he sat in his cold room, hearing the
swish of the rain and the bluster of the wind that
seemed to harmonise with the conflict in his soul. It
was an evening too on which he generally went to
see the Blakes, but he dared not trust himself there
until he had decided what he should do.
The next morning at Mass, he opened his book
listlessly. To-day his decision must be made, and as
yet no light had come to him. It was always his
custom to read a few verses from the New Testa-
ment before Mass, and meditate on them while
assisting at the Hol} r Sacrifice; and as he glanced
at the open page this morning the words that met
his eye seemed to burn into his very heart. “The
Lord Jesus, the night in which he was betrayed, took
bread, and giving thanks, broke, and said, ‘Take ye
and eat. This is My Body which shall be delivered
for you.’ The Gift of gifts on the night on which
He was betrayed! Oh, generous Love, that, know-
ing the treachery and baseness of human nature, yet
didst not withold the supreme gift of Thyself!
Stephen bowed his head upon his hands, and wave
after wave of shame and love swept over his soul.
‘The night in which He was betrayed.’ Everything
given, everything poured out freely and gladly till,
God though He was, He could give no more. How


mean the noblest human gift —how pitifully small
the greatest human sacrifice! And, what then when
these is rapine in the holocaust, when we snatch back
with greedy hands the offering so grudgingly made?
Only He Who gives the grace to make the sacrifice
can also give the strength to carry it out. The
tumult of emotion died away, but the abiding peace
remained, doubts and anxieties faded, and when the
bell announced the Elevation, with eyes full of the
light of resolution, Stephen looked, and looking,
worshipped; the decision was made.
“I’ll leave no loophole,” he thought, as he went
slowly home through the rain-drenched streets, “so
I’ll not speak to Mac until Eve burnt my boats.”
So he avoided the office, and on pretext of press
of work, did not go out to dinner at all, but got Joe
to have it sent in to him. This also gave him an
extra half-hour’s work at mid-day, and so he claimed
to leave at half-past four instead of five; a conces-
sion that he easily obtained from Clintock.
. “I say, Stephen,” he said with a laugh, “if you go
on working like this I’ll have to discharge some of
the hands. Don’t kill yourself, man; you’ll be a
long time dead.”
The cheerless day was drawing to a close, and
Mrs. Blake, peering through the window to see if
there was any cessation of the heavy rain was sur-
prised to see Stephen coming in the gate. She hur-
ried to admit him.
“What a day it’s been, or rather a week. It cer-
tainly knows how to rain in Sydney. You must be
drenched, I’m sure. No? Then come to the fire and
get warm for your hands are as cold as ice.”
Even when seated before the cheery blaze, he
found it hard to begin, and looked wistfully round
the room he was to see no more. How


cosy it looked, and how homelike, and
alas, how he had grown to love it as the set-
ting of the fairest picture in the world to him; the
slight, graceful form, the masses of soft brown hair,
and the true, true heart that looked out of the sweet
brown eyes. It was going to be harder than he had
thought to leave all this, and yet honour called him
away. Mrs. Blake broke the long silence.
“I’m sorry Honor won’t be in for some time yet;
you must have forgotten that Friday is always her
late night. Is there any message I can give her, or,
perhaps you’ll stay to tea with us?”
“I knew she wouldn’t be at home, and that is why
I came,” said Stephen slowly. “I wanted to see you
by yourself, and tell you that—l—l must not come
here any more.”
Mrs. Blake drew herself up quickly.
"Indeed,” she began stiffly, “may I know what is
your reason for such a decision?” but something
in Stephen’s attitude, and the white set face, the
eyes dark with misery, touched her deephq and her
own hurt was forgotten in her desire to help. “Is
there any fresh trouble? Can we, can I, help you in
any way?”
“No, no one can help me; but please, don’t mis-
judge me; it’s hard enough for me without that. I
owe it to your kindness to me this past year to give
you all the explanation I can. As you knew when
you asked me to come in that Sunday night, I am
in disgrace. True, as I told you then, I was not
guilty of what I was accused; but what I did not
tell you was that I, for certain reasons, which I
cannot give you, let myself stand in the place of
the real offender, and incurred a heavy liability,
which I must discharge by my earnings as a
mechanic; that is the condition of restoration to my


former position. In two years nearly Ive only paid
about three hundred pounds, and I cannot hope to
pay the rest in less than another three years. Even
then that is not the full debt, and I did want to
pay it all; still, supposing I let that go, in three years
or more I’ll have to begin to make my way in my
profession, and I have not any certainty that my
name will be cleared even then ; perhaps it will never
be. And —and in these last few months I have found
out that —I love Honor. There is only one course
open to an honourable man.”
The fire crackled and blazed cheerfully, as though
there were no such things as sorrow and bitterness,
or as though its glow could dispel the icy cold that
settled on Stephen’s heart in the silence that fol-
lowed.
“I am only too conscious,” he continued, speaking
with evident effort, “that this story of mine must
seem very improbable, and you would be perfectly
justified in disbelieving it. I’ll just collect my
music,” he added dully, as she made no comment,
“and then I needn’t trouble you again. If, when I
have something to offer, she should still be free —
but, no, it’s not likely.”
“One moment, Stephen,” said Mrs. Blake, as he
rose to get the many sheets and books of music that
loaded the piano; in her emotion she was unaware
that she had called him by his first name. “You
have no right to say that I think your story improb-
able, for from the very first I have shown that I
had the greatest trust in you. And you must not
think that I am unsympathetic; I feel for you with
all my heart. But you must forgive me if I tell you
that I do not see things as you do. Forgive Ine if
I am impertinent, but is there no other way?”
“Yes, Mr. Mackenzie, unknown to me had long


ago collected proofs of my innocence, and he wants
me to use them now; but I can’t. I wish I could
explain, but it’s impossible. I accepted the position
for a definite purpose, and to abandon it would be
cowardly.”
“And is there no third way?”
“ Strangely enough Father Petrie puts the same
question. I laid the matter before him, and he
writes that it is entirely for my own decision, though
he wouldn’t like to think I gave up my purpose. He
said there was a third way and my heart ought to
show it to me. I cannot see it, can you?”
“ I do indeed; but it’s not for me to decide.”
“ Who, then, should?”
“ Stephen,” she laid her hand on his arm, “ if you
love Honor—”
“ Ah, you say ‘ if’.”
“ Then because } r ou love Honor, there is a third
way. There is no need to abandon your purpose,
nor yet to condemn yourself to loneliness and sad-
ness. You may work and wait, —but not alone.
Still,” as he started and looked at her in wonder-
ment, “ the decision, remember, does not rest with
me, nor even with you, but with Honor. Even if
I knew her mind on the question, I should not betray
her, but I haven’t any idea whether she regards }’Ou
as anything else than a fellow musician. But I will
risk even seeming bold to 3'ou, and I urge you to
let her be the judge. You owe it to your own
happiness, and if she does love you, you owe it to
my only child.”
“But, Mrs. Blake, it’s impossible. It would be
dishonourable to speak when I have nothing to
offer.”
“ There speaks the man. Unless he has what he
considers the fit thing to bestow he will not offer


the only thing a woman wants, his love. Must man
be always King Cophetua and woman the beggar
maid? Can you not see that when a woman loves,
she looks upon the sharing of every burden as an
honour; all the other things, house, money, and all
are secondary matters.”
“Yes,” said Stephen wistfully, “I see that. But
I also see that the sharing of poverty is one thing,
the sharing of disgrace another. If I had a clean
name to offer —”
“ And it is clean enough. What a few people may
believe is of no consequence you know; we know.”
“If I only dared. But it seems —”
“ I’d very much like to know what conspiracy you
two are hatching there in the firelight,” cried a
merry voice at the door, “ whispering and plotting
there; you never heard me come in.”
They both started as Honor advanced into the
room, her face aglow with merriment; the smile
faded, however, as she saw their evident emotion,
and she looked at each in turn for a solution of the
situation, but Stephen was staring moodily at the
floor, and her mother, with a hasty excuse, left the
room.
“Have you been here long?” Honor asked, to
break the trying silence.
“ I don’t know. Yes, I think so. I didn’t notice
the time.”
“ You must have been busy talking. Mother was
contradicting you I’m sure, by her tone.”
“ She was; and I rather liked it,”
” That’s unusual. You are generally rather fond
of your own way, Mr. Daly.”
“I don’t want it this time, and I hope you will
side with her against me.” He didn’t speak very


hopefully, poor Stephen, and she was quick to notice
it.
“You don’t seem very enthusiastic about it,” she
said, moving towards the fire. “ Isn’t it nice and
warm here? It’s so wet and dark and miserable
outside.”
“It is in more ways than one, for me. And yet
I must go out and not come back.”
“Why?” The monosyllable was scarcely aud-
ible, and had he been looking at her instead of into
the fire, he would have seen the colour die out of
her face.
“ It’s not a nice story, nor pleasant in the tell-
ing. You know what your kind friend told you of
me last year?”
“ I didn’t believe it then when I didn’t know you,
still less now when I do.”
“ And yet there was some truth in it. Listen till
you hear all, Honor.” He told her the whole miser-
able story, concealing only the name of the real
offender, and his motive for action, though he longed
to tell her that too. She would scarcely let him
finish.
“ How brave of you; how grand,” she began
eagerly, but he interrupted the glowing words.
“ Not brave, but the veriest coward, for I wanted
to shirk it lately, because it has destroyed my pros-
pects and cast a slur on my name. Of course it did
that in the beginning, but I never realised it until
now.” “And why?” He looked up from the glowing
coals in the sweet bright face that had colour enough
in it now. “ Because I love you, Honor. I have
no right even to tell you this, for I ought to go away
and keep away until I have a clean, or at least a
cleared, name to offer you. And as I have to pay
off all that money, it must be years, years, before I'll


be able to think of a home of my own. I wanted
to go away before you came in, but your mother
said I ought to tell you and ask you to de-
cide whether I—l wait alone. I am glad I
waited, Honor, for, after all, it is something
to have spoken, although I dare not ask
you to make such a sacrifice for me; years
of waiting, and even at the end a tarnished name.
But,” he went on after a moment of deep silence,
“ I shall ask one thing, can you give me any hope,
Honor? If you are still free —no, I mean if I were
free to offer you my love, would you accept it?”
“ Do you know,” said Honor tremulously, “ why
mother loves that picture of the Sacred Heart so
much; why it is hung where she can always see it?
It used to be in her old home, and she and father
plighted their troth before it.”
“Honor!" Wonder, hope, appealing love rang
out in that exclamation, and he stretched out his
hands to her.
“ Shall we do the same, Stephen?” she whispered,
as she laid her hands in his.
Mrs. Blake had arranged and re-arranged the tea
tray a dozen times at least; and a dozen times had
started at a fancied sound.
The moments seemed to drag, and yet she knew
it was only a short time since she had left the room;
it was her anxiety that made it seem so long.
The clear full notes of the piano dispelled her
fears; that was not Honor’s touch, and surely Han-
del’s majestic Water Music had never flowed with
such an undertone of joy. She paused at the door,
for the sight was one that brought the glad tears
to her eyes. Stephen seated at the piano and Honor
beside him, her hand on his shoulder, and both the
young faces lit up with “the light that never was on
N 201


sea or land.” She was about to withdraw as
quietly as she had entered, but Stephen looked round
and saw her. He started up, and, crossing the room
quickly, laid his hands on her shoulders. “A son's
privilege,” he said as he stooped down and kissed
her.
“ I’d rather she waited for you all her life,” she
said brokenly, “ than be the wife of any one else.”
“ That’s exactly my sentiment,” put in Honor
quickly, “ but whatever you do, don’t let him know
it, for he’s conceited enough as it is.”
What a merry meal that tea was! Though, to be
sure, Mrs. Blake was the only one who did justice
to the food. And afterwards, when they sat before
the fire and made plans for the future, was there
ever such a happy trio? What matter if the storm
raged outside. Here was comfort and peace, and
Stephen, sitting between the two loving women, felt
as though the past two months, and especially the
last week, had been some hideous nightmare from
which he had now awakened.
“ I want to tell you something before you light
the candles, Honor, or rather before I light them for
s’ou. I’ve not spoken of it till now when we’re
going to say the rosary. It’s about Peter. He told
me the night he died that he had had a dream about
me, his ‘dear knight,’ he used to call me. He saw me
very lonely when he went; and there was a great
battle, and then the princess came and all was bright.
Was it only a coincidence, or was it sent to comfort
him and me too in our parting. Any way, it has
come true; I don’t care how hard I’ll have to fight,
for I have the princess; she is mine.”
He held Honor’s hands in a loving clasp, and, in
spite of his assertion, it was Mrs. Blake who lit the
candles after all.


The next morning was bright and sunny, and
Stephen, hastening to the yard, felt the change in
the weather was nothing in comparison to the
change in his life. The office door was open, and
he could see the white head bent over some papers.
He entered quietly, but not so quietly as to escape
notice.
“Good news, laddie? I see it in your face. I’ll
write the morn.”
“ Glorious news, Mac. But you needn’t write, for
even if I wanted to, Honor wouldn’t let me go back
on my word.”
“ Honor.”
“ Yes. I’ve spoken; and she’s actually going to
wait for me; for, incredible as it seems, and it is so
to me, she loves me, Mac.”
“ Weel ye’re a lad” was the old man’s comment;
but after a pause he added sadly, “ Ye’ll no be
wantin’ auld Mac noo.”
" How dare you say that. It’s two now to want
you instead of one, that’s all. I’ve promised to take
you there to-night, so please don’t forget and go off
home. It s my turn to give the dinner, so you
needn’t say what you’re thinking of. Now I must
be off, or I’ll be late to sign the book, and I can’t
afford fines.”
With a happy laug'h he ran off, and the manager
luined back to his papers; but between him and the
v ritten sheet came the vision of a sweet shy face,
with its clear grey eyes misty with hope, its crown
P c de gold hair like an aureole of joy. It was
Saturday morning and the manager had much to do,
but he still sat there idle, the old wound aching as
he never thought it would ache again.


CHAPTER XIX.
THE AWAKENING.
When the fight begins within himself,
The man’s worth something.”
Browning.
“ Do put that book away, Dad, and come for a
walk.”
“ What a girl you are for walking; why avc went
miles yesterday.”
“Yesterday is not to-day; and, besides, I want to
have a good talk with you, all by ourselves. Please
come; I get so cold sitting still in this climate. ’
“ I suppose I’ll have to come. You generally get
your own way with me, girlie. Just tell your mother
we are going out when you go upstairs; and don tbe
too long beautifying yourself,” he added as Elaine
hurried away.
She flung him back a merry answer, and in in-
credibly short time returned read} r for the walk.
“Now, which way?” he asked as they went out
into the keen spring air.
“Not to the esplanade; it’s too fashionable, and
there are always too many people. Perhaps to-day
there mightn’t be so many; but I want to take you
to a nice place I found along the beach away from
this horrid east wind.”
As they walked along chatting, John Daly looked
with pride at the graceful girl by his side; the rich
dark hair, the delicate beauty of the face, and most
of all the frank, open look invested Elaine with a
peculiar charm, and attracted attention wherever
they went, and he was justly proud of her.


“Now isn't this a comfy place, Dad?” she asked,
as she piloted him to a sheltered nook among the
rocks. “No one seems to come here, and we can
have a good talk. First of all, when are we going
back to dear Australia?”
“You won’t find anything like this in Australia.”
He waved his hand to where the beautiful watering
place lay bathed in the soft spring sunshine.
“ I don’t want anything like it. Fd rather have
our own lovely South Coast any day. And call
that a sea . J she pointed out to the tumbling waters
of the Channel. “What about our beautiful blue
Pacific? Oh, Dad, Fm tired of travelling and sight-
seeing. 1 long for the home feeling of sunny New
South Y ales, for a sight of the dear old gums and
golden wattle.”
“ And the brown grass, dried-up creeks, flies, bull-
ants, and all the rest of the charming picture.”
"You are laughing at me now, but I don’t care.
I m an Australian, and I love my own country best
of all; and why shouldn’t I? When are we goin°-
back?” ‘ b
“ Xot yet awhile, girlie; I thought we’d wait till
Cecil was ready. He’s doing well at Edinburgh.”
Oh, Dad, Eiaine s voice shook, "that'll be years
and years.”
" Hardly so long. Two or three years at the
most.”
" But we’ve been away nearly three now, and I do
want to go back soon.”
I m sorry for } r ou, dear; but it’s not possible.
Would you like to go on the Continent again?”
But Elaine put the question by, her mind was bent
on another thought. “ And do you mean,” she made
no attempt to conceal her tears. “ that poor Stephen
is to be left by himself till then?”


“ He’s not by himself; he’s got plenty of friends
of his own choosing. And, besides,’ as he saw her
pained look, “ the debt won’t be paid much before
that. • So you see, dear, even for your hero’s sake
it is better that we should stay away. If we were
home and he not back with us again, it would cause
even more talk.”
“ Perhaps you are right.' Elaine looked wistfully
over the rough waters, and was silent so long that
her father spoke at last, very firmly though very
gently also:
“ You take this all too much to heart, girlie. The
wrong things of life won’t come right for all our
worrying. And you will learn as }'OU grow older
that we need all our strength to carry our own bur-
dens without trying to bear the weight of other
people’s misdeeds. Stephen did wrong and he is pay-
ing the penalty. A e all have to pay for our faults
and follies, all of us, each one for himself. So your
fretting will neither help Stephen, who, b} r the way,
doesn’t deserve help, nor do yourself any good. Be
a sensible little girl; and allow me to manage my
own household. If I did not love you very much
Ed be annoyed at your interference. But was this
all you had to say to me?"
Elaine, who sat sad and dispirited, made a ges-
ture of dissent, but it was some little time before she
spoke.
“We all have to pay, you say; then I must also,
for I have been doing what I think you may not be
pleased at. Please don’t be too angry w-ith me.”
“It can’t be anything very dreadful.” He took her
hand in his and stroked it gently, smiling at her
downcast face; but he was by no means prepared for
what came.


" For some time, whenever I could get out by my-
self, I’ve been going to the Catholic Church.”
“ What for?” The question was put in the sharp
authoritative tone that she w r as unused to, and it
brought the blood surging into her pale face.
“ Because I can’t help it, Dad. There is some-
thing there that draws me, and it is so beautiful, so
peaceful.”
” Ay, by the way, I didn’t see Stephen’s last letter
to you. I must see it please.”
I have it here. I brought it because I made sure
you would think he had been saying something to
me. Well, he did, but not what you think. I told him
in my last letter, to which this is the answer, about
what Airs. Orr said to me, and that I had been going
to the church whenever I could, and how I loved it,
and he said—But here’s the letter, read it for your-
self.” J
It was wonderful all Stephen found to say in a
letter he kept so impersonal, but towards the end
came this paragraph“ As to what you tell me
about going to church and }’our longing to know
more of Catholic teachings, I am sorry to seem un-
kind, but I cannot answer your questions unless
father knows you are asking them and consents to
my replying. In any case, dear, I think—no, lam
sure—you ought to tell him; it is not fair to keep
him in the dark, and he deserves your confidence
apart from the question of duty.”
He handed the letter back without a word of com-
ment, but aiter a pause, he asked: “ Do you always
show me all the letters; is there never an extra pae-e
that I don’t see?”
“Father.” Elaine’s tone was so indignant, and the
direct gaze she bent on him was so like Stephen’s
that he felt quite uncomfortable, still he said bit-


terly: “You see, I don’t trust that young man much.
He deceived me once cruelly, and I never forget or
forgive.”
“ I’d be afraid to say that,” she spoke in a low,
earnest tone, “ about never forgetting or forgiving,
because of what we say in the Lord’s Prayer. I
know you don’t trust Stephen, but I’ve shown you
every word he ever wrote to me. Perhaps you don’t
trust me, when you ask that?”
“ My little girl, you mustn’t take it like that,” for
he saw the quivering lips and the tears in her eyes.
“I never thought of doubting you, not even now,
when you have just told me you have been doing in
secret what you knew I should disapprove of. But
I must confess I cannot understand what attraction
you can find in Catholic churches. W hat made you
think of going there?”
“When you took me to Lourdes, and I saw all
those thousands of people, and heard of the wonder-
miracles that were done there, I wondered why, if
the Mother of Jesus were so beautiful and so power-
ful, we never took any notice of her in our churches.
Mrs. Orr told me ever so much about her and gave
me a rosary. And when I asked her why Catholics
were so fond of going to the churches, not only
when there was a service, but at all times, she told
me it was because Our Lord was there really and
truly, just as He used to be in the home at Naza-
reth, or among the sick and poor He loved to help.
And if that’s true, why shouldn't I want to go?
Where He is it must be all right, and I never heard
an} r one say He was in our churches. I wish I un-
derstood properly how it is, but we left Lourdes so
soon I hadn't time to find out any more. So Igo to
the church when I can and ask Him to let me know


so that I can be quite sure. Are you very angry
with me, Dad?" **■
She put the question timidly, for his face was
stern and she trembled at the look in his eyes. But
he answered very quietly; “l am very vexed you
did not deal openly with me in this lou
are not to go again. Remember that.
“ Ah, don’t say that. And I was going to ask you
to take me this morning.”
«I take you?” The vehemence of his tone
frightened her. But after a pause he said more
gently: “You are at an impressionable age, and
being naturally romantic, the ceremonies, music, and
all the rest have bewitched you. And the very best
thing for you perhaps would be to have this glamour
dispelled.' So I'll take you this morning for the
last time. Then afterwards I'll point out the ab-
surdity of it all and the utter falseness; and you’ll
have to give me your promise to put the whole thing
out of your mind, or I must send you to the school
your mother is always talking of.”
It was a sad and subdued Elaine who sat beside
her father in the crowded church. “ The last time,
the last time,” she kept repeating to herself, and in
spite of all her efforts the tears would rise. She
feared lest her father should see them and be still
more angry, but he was staring straight in front of
him, and never looked at her once. Only when the
priest mounted the pulpit he made a movement of
impatience. It was a very short instruction, how-
ever, but full of interest to Elaine, who had been
wondering at the changed aspect of the church, the
absence of all decoration, and the statues shrouded
in purple cloth. And yet some words thrilled her
with holy fear.
“ In thus covering all that would distract the mind,


even the crucifix itself,” the priest was saying, “ holy
Church wishes not only to draw us to consider
more earnestly the Passion of our Blessed Lord, to
be alone, as it were, with Him in His sufferings,
but also to remind us that a day is coming to every
one of us when we must stand alone before Him,
our Judge, alone, utterly alone, before the dread
Tribunal where excuses are of no avail, where our
specious arguments are seen in their pitiful hollow-
ness, and where we shall at last understand the utter
worthlessness of all for which we bartered our price-
less birthright, the emptiness of the aims in pur-
suit of which we risk the losing of our very souls.”
Elaine had never heard such speech before, such
momentous consequences stated with no attempt to
palliate the stern truth, and her heart was full of
fear, till, remembering that the Judge before whom
all were to stand was the loving Saviour, she be-
came calm, for if we love Him, what a joy to be
judged by Him. Fear gave place to jo} r ; but her
heart sank again at the thought that it was “ the
last time.”
She expected her father to begin his explanations
as soon as they were outside the church, but he
never uttered a word all the way home; only just
before entering the house he said hurriedly: a Per-
haps it would be as well, girlie, not to mention to
your mother where we have been. I shall explain
to her myself.”
It was a long and weary afternoon, for he re-
mained in his room all the time, and her mother was
not inclined to go out. So she had to content her-
self with sitting by the window and watching the
gay crowd on the sea-front. Her heart was heavy,
for she had expected so much to come of her con-
a ersation with her father, and she had gained noth-


ing, and been denied the pleasure she had grown to
love. And he had not kept faith with her, for had he
not promised to explain everything to her, and he
had not said one word. Was he too angry to speak
to her, or what had upset him so that he had gone
into the room he had for his study and locked the
door? She knew the door was locked, for she had
tried it very gently, and though she had listened for
quite a long time outside she had not heard a sound.
She would have been little comforted if she had
seen him tossing aside the unread book, and sitting
hour after hour with moody eyes and frowning-
brow; still less comforted had she known the wild
tumult of his soul.
Since that evening in the library when, undei
Stephen's look of pained reproach, the deadened con-
science had stirred to life, he had been ever on the
guard, dreading the moment when it would rise
strong and resistless and break like so many straws
the fetters wherewith he had bound it. And to-day,
in the presence of the once-familiar Sacrifice oi the
Mass, old associations, hopes, fears, and memories
sprang to life, an armed band, beat down his care-
fully prepared defences, and opened a way to his
heart for those words of solemn warning which
haunted him. Judgment, strict justice, what a pros-
pect. And yet surely he had heard somewhere of
mercy, of forgiveness. Elaine’s timid speech flashed
to his mind: “ Because of what we say in the Lord's
Prayer;” forgiveness asked for as we forgive others.
If he were to be tried by that standard there was
small hope for him; he, too, like the unforgiving
servant in the parable, would have to pay to the
uttermost farthing. No sooner had he thrust that
bitter thought from his mind than another rose, re-
lentless and clear: Stephen, the refined, high-


spirited son, whose career he had spoilt, whom he
had condemned to a laborious life amidst sordid sur-
soundings until he should have repaid a sum which
he himself would unhesitatingly spend on anything
that pleased his fancy ; had not these years of travel-
ling cost ten times that sum. He had been too
hard, and, cruellest of all thoughts, he had known
it at the time and shut his heart against his son
and his mind to the truth. “ God deal with you as
you deal with my son, the poor dying mother had
v\ ritten to him in her last appeal. He hadn’t read
that letter for years, but that phrase rose to his
mind with startling vividness. The mother of his
first-born! A\ ith a despairing cry he tried to shut
out the remembrance of her, but the memories would
not be denied, and he had to endure their revenge
for his years of forgetfulness. Kathie, as he saw
her first, her sweet face downcast and blushing, her
little white hand resting on dear old Mac’s rough
serge slee\e; Mac, whose honest face was aglow
v ith pride and love; Kathie, in the agony of that
moment when she knew her own heart at last;
Kathie, as she had knelt with him at the altar robed
in her simple white frock, even in her happiness
v ith the shadow on her face, the shadow of the
wrong to the great-hearted man who had given her
up so nobly; and bitterest remembrance of all, Kathie
as lie saw her that last time of all, robed in w'hite
once moie, but with all the shadows gone from her
face, and only the mark of perfect peace left. The
keen blue eyes stung with the unaccustomed tears,
the strong man’s reserve was broken down, and in
that moment when the barriers were all swept away
came back to him word for the letter she had
written the last night of her life, the appeal to him
to be true to his better nature, loyal to the Church


of his boyhood, faithful to his promise to her that
her son should not be deprived of the blessing of
a Catholic training, and that last solemn sentence in
which she begged him to return to the God he had
denied and forsaken. Oh, if there were only a
fountain whence might be obtained the waters of
oblivion, and money could buy them he would have
given all his wealth for one deep draught.
3 The day was over, the shadows gathered in the
room, but deeper were the shadows around that
storm-tossed soul.


CHAPTER XX.
EUREKA.
“ The conditions of conquest are easy. We have
but to toil awhile, endure awhile, believe always, and
never turn back.”
R. L. Stevenson.
“ y o« see it’s like this, Mac. The idea is en-
tirely Joe s, I am only helping him to carry it out.
Certainly I am able to do more than many can be-
cause I have the music. Joe knows by his own sad
experience than many a 3 r oung fellow goes wrong
because he has no means of employing his spare
time well, and his idea is to expand what we have
been doing, he and I for the last year. You know
we got a small room and furnished it very simpl}'.
Then we got all the books, magazines, and such
like as we possibly could, and induced those we could
to come there in the evenings instead of loitering at
the street corners or doing worse. I used to play
to them once or twice a week, and some of the others
sang. Of course it was a very simple undertaking
at first, but it has grown so that I am going to ask
y °ur help. It s a good work, Mac, for men
will have amusement, and the best thing to do is
to gi\ e them all the} 7- want in a sensible helpful man-
ner. Many of those who attend regularly give a
little subscription, but this is not expected at all.
A\ hat v e w ant is that they should use the room, or
rather rooms, for we have three now. What do I
want }ou to do? If I did not know your good-
ness of heart I should hesitate to ask you, for Pm


going to be very greedy. Honor wants to organise
regular concerts, and the idea has caught on with
them splendidly, but you see we have no piano.”
Stephen paused to let the sense of this indirect ap-
peal sink into the mind of the hearer, and when he
saw a gleam of amusement in the keen blue eyes he
reddened slightly, but went on with his proposal.
“ It need be only a loan, as by and by when our glee
club gets on, we’ll give concerts and by degrees be
able to repay —"
“ Hoots, man,” was the indignant interruption,
“ do ye think ye’re to have all the good warks to
yirsef. I’ll ask Honor to choose what would be the
best. But I thocht ye were like to ask for some-
thing mair nor that. Joe was tellin me aboot it
afore ye came in, an’ I should think ye wantit a big
hall, or at least mair room before ye thocht o’ a
piano. I’ll go into this anither time, Steenie, for
I’ve something to settle wi’ ye. What aboot the wee
machine ?”
“ I was going to speak of that to you anyway. It
is all ready as far as I can go without exciting com-
ment; but I must have the opportunity of making
several parts before I can say whether it will be
any good at all.”
“ Canna ye make them here?”
“ I have, that is all I can; but there are some that
I want the forge for, and when I went there one
day, they all came round and wanted to know what
I was doing. It would be heart-breaking to have
anyone jump my claim. You know all it means to
me.”
“Do it the nicht when the men are awa’. Lose
no time, lad, it’s wonderful how these things leak
oot.”
“ May I? Right. I’ll begin to-night.”


“ Ye'll be wantin’ some one to gie ye a hand.”
‘ Yes. I thought of Joe, he would never—”
“ Steenie, whet hev I done?”
“You?”
" A}'e. Am I no as good a hand at the bellows
as Joe? Take it from me, auld Mac hasna forgotten
his way with the tools. So ye'll juist put oop with
me as mate, an’ we’ll begin the nicht.”
It was a weird sight—had either of them be*en at
leisure to observe it—the long shed in darkness ex-
cept where they were at work, and the flame of
the forge, as well as the lights they had, cast their
shadows in gigantic exaggeration on the walls and
roof. 1 hey looked like two Titans forging a thun-
derbolt, and yet when their work was done the re-
sult tvas so small that it lay on Stephen's hand.
Night after night they Avorked like that, and it
Avould have been a surprise to the employees had
they come in to find their manager acting as general
assistant to one of his hands, for Mackenzie Avas as
eagei as Stephen and AA’orked avith a Avill, AA'hether
it AA'as at the belloAvs or Awith hammer and file. At
last came the night Avhen the perfect model rested
on the board before them, and tired and hot they
contemplated it in silence for some time.
Tr}’ it, lad, try it, AA’hispered the old man.
I can t. I daren t, Mac,’ replied Stephen in the
same tone. “So much depends on it that I am
afraid to put it to the test. Do it for me, please,”
and as the other hesitated, he repeated “ tn r it
try it.”
" Steady, lad, don’t let yourself go like thet. I’ll
do it for the lad I loa'c and for bonnie Honor.”
Thus saying he touched a shining knob, and in-
stantly a strange Avhirring sound filled the great
shed.” 5


“ Eureka,” cried Stephen, forgetting in his excite-
ment the need for caution. Then reco\ ering him-
self, he stretched out his hand and instantly the
humming was silenced. “It s all right, Mac, he
said, “now we’ll put it back in the strongroom, and
to-morrow we’ll get the patent out. If it only finds
a buyer” —he stopped struck by a sudden thought,
and added, “I’ve got an idea which if I can carry out
will set me free before very long; but it needs look-
ing into, and as we are both tired we 11 defer it till
to-morrow.”
“Have ye told them audit?” asked Mackenzie,
when, the precious model safe in the strong-room,
they were on their way to “ The Hall.”
“ Well, no, I haven’t, because I was not at all sure
I could do anything with the idea, and even now I’m
not going to speak till I’m sure it will do all I want
it to do. At least, I mean I’ll not tell all, only
enough to let her understand that I hope to claim
her sooner than we expected.”
So while they were turning over the music in
search of a piece that Mrs. Blake was anxious to
hear, Stephen whispered to Honor;
“ You asked me when I came in why I looked so
jubilant; well, I can’t tell all yet, for it is in a very
crude state, but I believe I have devised a means to
end our waiting, and clear my name at the same
time. If it was a question of these two, Honor,
w r ould you rather wait a few months longer and let
me take a step that would place me above any re-
proach that my father might make otherwise?”
“You have no need to ask, and you know it,
Stephen. Put yourself where you ought to have
been all the time, where you can show that you have
no fear of airy investigation or searching out of
O 217


motives. I will wait as long as you like; you know
your honour is as dear to me as it is to you.”
“ I know that. One question more, Will you
mind if I have a secret from you for a little time?
There is no reason why I should not tell you now,
but I would rather not. Will you trust me a little
longer?”
“ I don’t believe } t ou two are even looking for the
music” was Mrs. Blake's reproachful interruption.
“ We poor old people are out of it,” she continued
turning to Mackenzie, who only laughed at her as-
sumed indignation. But her speech led to the im-
mediate finding of the missing piece, and Honor only
had time to whisper that he could have as many
secrets as he liked, so long as he didn’t keep them
too long.
And she meant what she said, for when she and
her mother were asked to go to the works, she made
no comment; to her mother’s questions she only
answered that she had no idea why they were asked
there. Still it was with some trepidation that she
entered the big shed under the guidance of the mana-
ger; the noise was certainly most alarming to any-
one unused to it, and she wondered how the men
could go on so steadily with their work in the midst
of so much clanging and clashing, whirring of
wheels, and hissing of escaping steam. It seemed
impossible to imagine Stephen, the dreamy musician,
in such surroundings, yet there he was in the midst
of it all, and as unconcerned as if he had been in
their little room. It was a new side of his character,
and a new respect crept into her heart for the stal-
wart young man who was so busy with that great
mass of metal.
‘‘ I can’t offer to shake hands,” he said, or rather
shouted, as he came up to them, “ I’m not fit to be


touched by such dainty ladies. I won’t keep you in
this din long, as you’ll soon have a headache, but
I want my Honor to do something for me.”
“ Something for you, here?” was her exclamation
of surprise.
“ Come and I'll show you. Mac, you bring Mrs.
Blake. Now, here we are. You know you pro-
mised not to ask questions, so just do as I tell you,
will you?”
Honor made a sign of assent. Not only did she
despair of making herself heard in that uproar, but
the fact that all the men had flocked in their direc-
tion and were looking curiously, as she thought
at her, made her very ill at ease. But when Stephen
showed her what he wanted her to do, she did not
hesitate, but fearlessly grasped the shining lever and
moved it as he directed, though she almost shrieked
as the strange looking machine in front of her be-
gan to emit the most extraordinary whirring sound.
It must be all right, she thought, for there was a
great shout of applause, and she could gather that
in some way Stephen was connected with the de-
monstration. Still it was a great relief to be out in
the air again, and away from those whirling wheels
and belts.
“ I’m sorry I can’t come up the town with you,”
laughed Stephen. “ Wouldn’t vou be proud of me,
Honor?”
“ I would. As a matter of fact you look quite
nice; that shade of blue suits } r our particular style of
beauty.”
“ One to ye, Steenie. But be off to yir precious
dynamo, and leave the ladies to me.”
He and Mrs. Blake had to do all the talking dur-
ing the afternoon tea, to which he took them, for
Honor was strangely silent, so deep in thought that


she started when she found she was being addressed
by Mr. Mackenzie.
“ I beg your pardon, I’m afraid I wasn’t listening,”
she said. “ Whatever must you think of me?”
“ I’m no goin’ to say, sin the lad’s no here to de-
fend ye. But I was only sayin’ that yir mither had
promised to come to a little pairty I’m giving on my
birthday, next Thursday. May I look for ye also?
There’ll be but the fower of us.”


CHAPTER XXL
Now can I face the world with my new life,
With my new crown ;
How soon a smile of God can change the world
How we are made for happiness, how w'ork
Grows pla} r , adversity a winning fight.”
Browning.
“ It’s really too funny,” said Honor with a little
laugh, as she vainly tried to get a good view of her-
self in the small mirror, “ the idea of Mr. Mackenzie
having a birthday party. At least, it would be if
he really meant it; but I’m sure it’s only a ruse to
give us some enjoyment. It’s going to be a real
pleasure to me anyway, for I’ve never before had
the excitement of a dinner in town and a concert to
follow. Its no use, mother; I can’t see how my
skirt hangs. We made it in such a hurry that I’m
afraid it is all wrong.”
" You look very nice, dear,” replied Mrs. Blake,
her eyes resting lovingly on the flushed face. “ Ah,
Honor, happiness is a great beautifier.”
“ Don’t be flattering me. Listen. There’s the
cab. Now for the banquet.”
Mr. Mackenzie advanced to meet them as the at-
tendant ushered them into the pretty room, but
Honor glanced apprehensively at another guest, who
stood with his back to them.
“You promised there’d be only the four of us; no
strangers,” she whispered, and was startled at’his
amused chuckle.


“ Wed, wed, an’ who’ll deny aifter this diet oor
puir Carlyle wesna richt, an’ it’s the clothes diet
make the man. She disna ken ye, Steenie lad.”
“Stephen!” Honor’s embarrassed amazement
made him join in Mackenzie’s laugh as he crossed
the room to them. “ But,” she continued, “ you do
look nice. It’s no wonder I didn’t know you at
first; I didn’t see your face, and anyway I’ve never
seen you in evening dress before.”
“Is that why you didn’t know me? Do I look
better than I did in those blues you admired so much
on Monday?”
“ Ever so much,” she said critically. “ You look
quite passable now. I think you might have let us
see you like this before.”
“Aye, scold him for never makin’ himsel’
nice like that for you till now. I could
no bend his stubborn will. So lang as he
thocht he wes bound by diet agreement, he’d
no be audit but the mechanic. But the
nicht, ye ken, the nicht —he’s Stephen John Daly,
Esquire, B.A. and 8.E., and all the rest. For why?”
the old man’s voice shook. “ The debt is peyed in
full; there’s an end to all yir waitin’.”
“ But how?” cried Mrs. Blake, while Honor found
no words; bewildered and trembling, she clung to
Stephen’s arm and looked up at him wistfully.
“ The secret, Honor. I just happened—” he be-
gan, but was not allowed to continue.
“ No, no. I’ll no have ye botherin’ them with yir
technicalities. It’s a graund invention of his, my
bonnie lassie,” beaming at Honor, “ diet he could
have got thousands for; but no sooner lied he got
the patent and the thing was assured (ye mind ye
started it yirsel’) than he offers it to me, as his
father’s representative, ye mind, in full discharge of


the debt. ’Twas a shame to tek advantage of a silly
lad’s high-flown whimsies, but he said thet ’twas
yir wish too, lassie, so I cabled home. I didna say
’twas the lad’s invention, ye mind, I’m Scotch, but
I’m no thet fulish. The reply wes to secure it at
best terms, and so it’s all done. He micht have
hed money from it, yet he’s a puir man the nicht,
aye, but a free one. Greetin’ are ye, dear Honor?
Mrs. Blake, there’s a bit picture at this end of the
room will interest us baith.” And without any more
ado he led her away to a far corner, where forget-
ting the picture he had spoken of, they sat down and
talked the matter over calmly.
“ I hope you won’t think me mercenary, Mr. Mac-
kenzie, but it was a great pleasure to me to see on
Monday what a very different man Stephen was at
his work. I’ve feared sometimes that he was dreamy
and unpractical, and I dreaded the future for them
both, if such were the case. But even without this
invention, he impressed me that day as being well
able to hold his own in the battle of life.” She
sighed as she spoke, for the memory of her own
bitter struggle in that hard battle was due to the
fact that her husband was a musician of far too high
an order to succeed without influence, and his failure
to provide adequately for his wife and child had
broken his spirit and hastened his death.
Aye, he s practical enough. Look at this scheme
of his for helpin' puir lads thet are exposed to the
temptations of the city? He tries to make oot thet
it’s Joe’s, but I’m not deceived.”
How good you have been in helping them.
Stephen told us last night that you had not only
ghen the piano, but had rented a more suitable
building, and, to his surprise, had crowned your
kindness by giving them a billiard table.”


“Why should he be surprised? Whet should I
do with ma money but help those I can? And
thet’s such a grand and practical way thet I’m hopin'
to do mair nor thet afore I’m done. Do you think,"
he added with mock gravity, “We could tell them
thet it’s a full ten minutes later than I ordered the
dinner for?"
The dinner was a great success, and Mackenzie
surprised even Stephen by his undisguised hilariU.
True he was as grave as a judge whene\ er the at-
tendants were in the room, but as soon as tney weiL
out he was full of mirth and jests, but when the
dessert was placed on the table and they were left
alone altogether, he suddenly became very grave.
“I think,” he said in an injured tone, “it’s gey
cruel thet a puir auld carl hes nane to wish him w eel
on his birthday, an’ he givin a pairty too.
They all laughed, and Honor said merrily, I
don’t believe it is your birthday at all.”
“ Look at thet. I canna have even thet.’
“ But I’ll wish you well if that is what you want.”
And she rose quickly from her chair, and went to
him; then putting her arms round his neck, i m laid
her flushed face against his. "The kindest,
friend, who ever hid a warm heart under a gruff
pretence.”
“ See thet,” cried the old man delightedly, clasp-
ing her hands in his. “ I’ll no let you go till you
promise to keep the same thocht of me yir life-
lane. And there’s something else,” rising from his
chatr, but keeping her beside him. " I all
to give me what I’m going to ask. W ill ) er
“I should think so, Mac,” Stephen stood at the
other side of him and laid his hand affectionately on
his shoulder. “I, for one, could never refuse you, and


I think I can answer for the others. What do you
want?” „, . ,
“ Ye see,” he said whimsically, “ I ken’t weel no
one of ye would think of a birthday present, so I
had to get them masel’. This for ye ma bonnie
lassie, an’ this for yir guid mither. Steenie, refuse
this if ye daur.”
J i i * _ r 4. u
He watched Honor unfold the wrappings of the
little box, and smiled at her cry of delight when she
saw the necklet of stones like drops of golden light.
“ Weel, gin thet Steenie hed any use for his fin-
gers forbye meddlin’ with dynamos, and sic like,
he’d fasten it on for ye. Oh, he’s no so cloomsy as
I thocht. It looks real bonnie, dear.”
Honor glancing shyly into the long mirror agreed
with him. Her thanks were interrupted by her
mother’s exclamation of pleasure: “ How good and
thoughtful of you, Mr. Mackenzie. It’s just like
the one I lost last Christmas.”
“ Now I understand,” cried Honor, “ why I was
asked all about the lost ring. You think of every-
thing,” she added turning to him. “ You are good. ’
“Gin ye’re gratefu’ to me. Ye micht mak
peace with yon young man who’s glowerin’ at me.”
“ I can’t take it, Mac. I can’t.”
“What is it Stephen? Oh!” Honor looked
amazed.
“Hear reason, ye camsteary body. Ye’ve given
away yir grand patent, and it’ll take some time to
make head in yir profession, an’ why should ye wait.
Youth goes only too fast frae us all, and these are
yir gowden hours. All thet I have will be yirs one
day, Steenie, an’ so this is juist an advance. Ye’ve
refused me these three years but this is verra differ-
ent. Am Ino richt? Mrs. Blake.”
“ I don’t understand,” she faltered.


" This,” said Stephen, holding out a slip of paper,
“ is a credit slip, and it shows that five thousand
pounds have been paid into my credit. I cannot
take it.”
Stephen, said Honor, softly. ‘‘l think you ought
to take it, though I know you hate the thought of
taking money? Still remember how he deserves it.”
“Weel spoken, dear. Ye’ll manage him in the
} ears to come. Put it oot of sicht, Steenie, an’ hear
the last surprise of all. Twes I had it first an’
now I’ll share with ye all. Mr. John Daly and
family will be here before the month’s oot. I think
he 11 come by P. and 0., but he's no told me the
route, nor the exact time. I wesn’t expectin’ him
for anither three years. Gin ye ladies will put on
yir cloaks we’ll be off to the concert. Ye’ll hear
pi ay in the nicht, Miss Honor, will put yir grand
musician here in the shade.”
The gi eat hall was crowded, there was not a spare
seat to be had, and Mrs. Dare, looking listlessly r
lound to see such of her acquaintances as might be
present, suddenly espied one who roused her to
animation. She turned to her daughter.
Look, Lena, isn t that young Daly coming in
there: \es it is, and that old bear Mackenzie with
him. Ia e seen them about together several times
lately, so there can be no truth in that absurd story
}ou heard from the Favershams. I think you were
very foolish to drop him as you did, for even if it’s
true, he’s evidently well in with Mackenzie, and
he s what his countrymen call a Avarm man. I do
believe they’re coming to these seats in front of us,
>o you 11 haA’e a chance to reneA\ r the acquaintance.
But Avhoever are these with them? I didn’t know
-Mackenzie Ayas married. DoAvdy, both of them;
quite impossible people. But, oh look at that girl’s


necklace ; golden sapphires, Ido believe. Now Lena,
watch your opportunity.’’
But to Helena’s mortification, Stephen never even
glanced in her direction. The only member of the
party who looked at her was the elder man and his
was no friendly glance.
“Whatever is the joke, Mac?" said Stephen, bend-
ing towards him. “You’re chuckling away there to
yourself as if it was something very good.”
“I’m only thinkin’ of the auld sayin’: ‘A miss is
better nor a mile.’ ”
“Incomprehensible," laughed Stephen, and the
other two joined in the merriment.
Only the angry listener connected the words in
some way with herself, and she was soon to be fur-
ther enlightened, by a few whispered words she
heard after the great maestro had finished his first
solo.
“I’d rather listen to you, Stephen; you play bet-
ter than he does.”
“Little flatterer,” was the low reply; and the ten-
der tone would have enlightened the mortified
beauty, even if she had not seen the smile that
accompanied it. The airy castle she had been build-
ing toppled down in sudden ruin; and for her the
rest of the concert was a discordant misery.


CHAPTER XXII.
DALY’S PATENT.
“Mark, how a plain tale shall set you down.”
•Shakespeare.
“What’ll this her" commented the manager, turn-
ing over a package which he had found on his desk;
and, when on removing the first wrapping, he saw
written, “A birthday present from N. Blake,” he
smiled at the remembrance of the party of the fort-
night before. W hen the last wrapping was re-
moved, he drew a deep breath of satisfaction at the
sight of a striking portrait of Stephen. Mrs. Blake
had caught the steady, direct look that was so char-
acteristic, and though, in repose, the face was some-
what too stern, that look softened it. He put the
canvas before him on his desk, and was indulging in
a pleasurable scrutiny, when there came a light tap
on the door, which was opened almost immediately.
He rose with a cry of astonishment.
“John.”
“I thought I’d give you a surprise. But you knew
I was coming?”
Aye, but no so sune. I looked in the paper this
morning, an’ yir name wes no among the passen-
gers of the incomin’ steamer.”
Came by way of America. Didn’t you notice I
answered cable from New York?”
Aye I did; but man, ye’ve been there mair nor
once sin ye settled in England.”
That’s true. But I didn’t go back to Europe this
time. I had the others with me, for Cecil has had


an illness of some kind, a nervous breakdown the
doctors said —such rubbish at his age.
But anyway they said a sea-trip would set him
up, so we ran across to America, but still he was
very little better, and as we were so near home, and
Elaine has been wild to get back, I thought we’d
better come on here. I was going to cable you, but
on second thoughts I wanted to give you a surprise.”
“Ye did.”
“We got in very early this morning, and after I’d
seen Elaine and her mother home, I came straight
in here, for to tell the truth, Mac, I was as anxious
as Elaine to get back. I wanted to see Stephen.
Perhaps, after all, I was too severe; so I’m going
to let him off the rest of the payments, and he can
go back to the University next year.”
“Aye.”
“Yes, I was too hard on him, I own it? It was
his first fall, and I ought to have been gentler.”
“Aye.”
“Can’t you say anything else but that? But there
I won’t begin to quarrel as soon as we’re back,
though I can see you’re in one of your exasperating
moods. Send across for my boy, Mac, and I’ll make
it up with him.”
“I'm sorry,” was the slow reply, “but I canna.”
“What do you mean?” The tone was peremptory,
but there was a ring of fear in it.
“Pie’s awa’ tae Newcastle ”
“What’s he doing there? I stipulated that he was
to stay here and work, not go gadding about the
country.”
“Wi’ sax ithcrs tae fix oop a big installation,”
finished Mackenzie as calmly as though as if there
had been no angry interruption.


“Oh, is that it? Then wire for him to come home
at once.”
“He'll be back the nicht. They’re feenishing
aboot fewer; they are there sin Wednesda} r . ’Tis
ane o’ the new accumulators.”
He spoke with great deliberation, and with
greater deliberation still drew out a bunch of keys,
selecting one after due consideration, he opened a
drawer, while John Daly looked on amusedly. Old
Mac was as slow as ever, he thought, slow and sure;
but something surely had offended him very much,
for they had not been so long connected with each
other, without the younger man learning that slower
speech even than usual and an emphasising of the
Scottish accent were sure and undoubted proofs of
a deep-seated anger which might break forth at any
moment. So he made no comment on the protracted
nature of the proceedings, but waited with as good
a grace as he could till his partner should think fit
to enlighten him.
“Why, what’s this?” he asked, as a book was
placed before him, but one glance told him what it
was, and a dark flush rose to his face.
“Not to-day. Man alive, do you think I want this
thrust in my face the moment I arrive? Don’t be
so unreasonable, Mac; put it away till some other
day. It’ll be unpleasant enough any time, for—
for I’m not sure I was right after all.”
He spoke hurriedly, nervously; but the other
shook his head.
*T’m desirous tae be free o’ it; for it’s no been
sae lichtsome. An’ ye can tek this; ’tis the last time
I’ll dae yir onpleasant beesiness.”
John Daly, stared in amazement at the unsmiling
face, and a sudden misgiving crept into his mind.


He made no more demur, however, but turned to the
book before him.
“There wes ae week afif the first year an’ twa the
second, but nane since. Thet’ll account for three
weeks’ blank sin he wadna draw pey gin he didna
wark.”
“But I said ”
“Aye, you,” was the cool interruption. “But dae
ye think ye're the only ane wi’ a wull of yir ain.”
“Pretty high pay for this last year, isn’t it?” He
tried to speak lightly, but he felt far from comfort-
able.
“It’s no thet. Gordon an’ Peyser gie their electric
foreman sax poonds the week, and St , he’s only
drawin’ five.”
“I see. Over six hundred pounds; it’s very credit-
able, and shows he’s kept his part of the agreement.
I suppose he’s kept pretty straight, no ?” he
stopped short, literally aghast at the blazing indig-
nation of the eyes fixed on him, and after an awk-
ward pause went on.” He’s come out of the trial
well, and I 11 make up to him for any hardships.”
“Aye.”
"Oh, you’re beginning again. I might have known
you’d side with him sooner or later, though you’ve
said very little in your letters about him. Don’t
look as if you'd like to eat me. Haven’t I come
from the other side of the world to set it all right?
Well, if you will look so dour, we’ll change the sub-
ject. What about that new patent you’ve got hold
of? It seems likely to be a good investment, and I
was glad to get your cable saying you’d secured it
on good terms? There was no need to cable, Mac.
It’s your business as well as mine.”
“Aye.”
■'You’d try the patience of Job. I seem to have


come in at a wrong time. What did } T ou give for
it? Baxter, of New York, was saying that there’d
be plenty of money in it, if it was really any good, as
the market was practically waiting for a thing like
that. I expect you had to pay pretty heavily for it.”
“I ped verra little considerin’. You’d better come
across and see it. We’ve a fair number ready for
sale, and maist of them taken already.”
7 - 41 M
“Ah, there’s nothing like being at home, after all,”
said John Daly, as he crossed the yard with his part-
ner. “I shan’t be in a hurry to go away again. Is
that the new shed? Ah, good day Clintock; Ive
got back, you see."
It was quite a relief to exchange greetings with
the foreman and men after the moroseness of his
companion; and a still greater relief when Mac-
kenzie himself proposed that Clintock should show
the new patent.
“Runs as easy as silk,’ said the foreman, in con-
clusion, after pointing out the merits of the new
accumulator, “and a child could manage it. There's
no need to tell you, Mr. Daly, that its chief point
is its size, most of them are so cumbersome. We
have orders already, and I m sure it’s going to be
a big thing.”
“Grand,” was the senior partner's comment, as
he w r atched the powerful machinery in motion; "the
w'hole thing is as simple as it’s effective, and that
accumulator is a great improvement. That’s the
thing to bring in money. Cheap at ten thousand,
I’d say, judging from what I’ve seen of prices paid
in the old country. But what’s this?” He stooped
to get a better view of the stamp on the side, then
turned with a puzzled air to Mackenzie, who w r as
looking on grimly. “‘Daly’s Patent’? You bought
right out then, and got the patent in my name?”


r - u
- c
|. \X *0
S\^V-
P% |
iS||l
W s
&C
J C
|||j J
-c
to
c
JS
CO
4-J
7)
E
o
c
7)
(0
£
0)
u
0)
jC
~ CM
rn
CM
0)
tc
cO
a


■* : ' j
. -
, OvvSr • - "'4 V ' :*A


“I didna
“But ” began the other, then stopped short,
and, stooping down, read again, and yet again, the
full wording on the stamp. There could be no mis-
take; “Patd.—Aug. 12th, 18 —S. J. Daly.” He
moistened his lips, for they had grown suddenly
very dry, and turned to Mackenzie. “This is
Stephen’s?” he asked in a low voice.
“Aye. Gin ye come to the oflfeece I'll let ye see
the deed of sale.”
John Daly followed him mechanically. All his
airy castles were in ruins; for since Stephen had in-
vented this and sold it for a large sum, it would be
less easy to enact the part of generous forgiveness
he had decided on. He took the document handed
to him, but after the first few words looked up.
“This is ridiculous,” he said irritably; “what’s the
good of a faulty deed, giving wrong qualifications ?”
and he pointed a passage.
“What is it?” queried Mackenzie, quietly.
“Bachelor of Engineering; thet’s all richt.”
“But he hasn’t his degree.”
“He’s had it nigh on twa years.”
“Then there's been trickery somewhere. You’ve
played me false, Mac. I might have known he’d
wheedle you to his way. I thought he was working
here and all the time he’s been at the University.”
“You’re too suspeecious, John. Gin ye’d been
mair open to reason thet first time, we’d have been
saved all this? Yir son missed ae week of his
first year here, an’ that wes to go to the examina-
tion. He juist studied the evenings.”
“\\ orked here all day and took his final on night
study. Impossible. He couldn’t do it.”
"He wes first in his year,” was the dogged an-
P 233


swer. “And as for pleyin’ ye fause, John, when did
I ever go back on my word to ye?”
“Never, Mac, never. You’re the best friend a man
ever had. But you must forgive me for saying that;
I’m upset about this.”
“Why? Ye should be prood of yir son, and no
upset because he's proved so clever.”
John Daly sighed and resumed the reading of the
paper, but he did not get much further.
“I won’t have it,” he cried; his face was ashen,
the hands that held the paper trembled. “It’s ridicu-
lous, it’s awful. Mac, why did you allow it?”
“I cudna help it. He wad have his ain wey. He’s
got an awfu’ strong will, John.”
“But the thing’s monstrous. ‘ln consideration of
monies due and owing—all right, title and interest.’
Why, the invention is worth thousands, and I only
stipulated for the repayment of a thousand, besides
the book you gave me, showed over six hundred
paid in wages alone. Why don't you say something,
suggest something?”
“Ye left me yir power of attorney, an' I’ve signed
for ye. There’s no wey oot of it. Ye maun juist
thole it.”
“Oh, don’t you see how it’s humiliating,” groaned
the other; but if he looked for sympathy he was to
be undeceived.
“Humeeliation is it? An’ was it no humeeliation
for the lad to be taken from his studies and set here
as an ordinair hand. No a humeeliation to be bul-
lied an’ badgered by ilka man in the place, masel’ an’
Clintock included. Man”—the voice rose strong and
clear, like a trumpet —“there’s naething ye could
ever feel wad match the humeeliations of the puir
lad thet first year, thet first fower months above all.”
“You’ve turned against me, Mac, have you? And


turned Stephen, too, I suppose; he was always pliant
and tractable.”
“Wes he? I’m thinkin’ ye ken mickle of him. He’s
one of the maist camsteary bodies I ever hed to deal
with. And I turned him? Man, I couldna turn him
to take a penny piece from me all these three years,
an’ he wantin’, many’s the day. He’s no yir son for
nothing, ye ken yir ain strong will. An’ ye’ve no
richt to say I’ve turned against ye. I’ve hed mair
nor thet against ye, an’ been faithfu’.”
“No one knows that better than I. You have
been a loyal friend, and you must pardon what I
said in a moment of irritation. I came out specially
to cancel that mad agreement, and make up to him
as far as I could, and this is what greets me. It’s
putting me in such a difficult position that it’s
enough to —Hullo. What’s this? Stephen? A fine
picture, Mac; does he really look like that?”
“Aye, does he.”
“A strong face. I’ve made a man of him in spite
of your croaking.”
“An’ what guid’ll thet be to ye, gin ye’ve lost yir
son. But thet’s atween ye; an’ I’ll juist give ye a
word of warnin’, John. He’s no a bairn, to be bidden
come an’ be guid; he kens his ain strength, an’ ye
maun go easy ahead.”
“I’ll bear it in mind. Come on and have lunch
with me, and we can arrange about meeting Stephen
to-night. Now don’t refuse or I’ll think you still
bear me a grudge for something or other. I’ve an
appointment with Cecil at one. Come along.”
But his partner’s manner suddenly became frostier
than ever, and as all persuasions proved useless,
John Daly went away alone.


CHAPTER XXIII.
THE DAY OF RECKONING.
“In that hour of deep contrition,
He beheld with clearer vision,
Through all outward show or fashion,
Justice, the Avenger, rise.”
Longfellow.
Cecil’s undisguised delight at the news of
Stephen’s invention lessened the father’s irritation,
and by the time lunch was ended he felt confident
that with a little tact, the awkwardness could be
bridged over. His spirits rose, and he had not any
misgivings as to the future as they left the cafe. But
as they were crossing to get into the waiting
brougham, a man who was passing, stopped and
looked at them intently; then, with a beaming
smile, he accosted Cecil, who shrank from him in
dismay.
“Got back, eh? Glad to see you, Stevie, old man;
you’re looking fine and fit.”
John Daty glanced quickly at his son’s face; it was
ghastly, and a terrible fear seized him. But his
voice was very steady as he addressed the man.
“You make very free with my son’s name. How
come you to know it so well?”
“That’s good; and you paying up so handsome for
his fun. We’re old pals, Steve and me. How do I
know his name? I’ve had it in my books more than
once, and I suppose I never seen him write it
neither?”
“Where?” The question was a command.


“Go on. As if you didn’t know. You took up all
the bills yourself, didn’t you? By-bye, Stevie. I’m
at the old place if you want another flutter among
the gee-gees.” And with a half insolent nod he
passed.
Father and son stood for a moment looking each
other in the face. Then Mr. Daly spoke, and his
son shivered at the tone. “At last”—then pointing
to the waiting vehicle, he continued, “get in.”
“I’d rather go home in the train,” stammered
Cecil.
“I’ve no doubt,” was the grim reply. “But we are
not going home just yet. This is all to be cleared
up first. There’s been too much delay as it is, and
even now, perhaps ”
He did not finish the sentence aloud, but in his
heart the thought rose insistent and appalling, “too
late, was it too late?”
Mackenzie was busy with his letters, for the day’s
work was in arrears owing to the morning’s inter-
ruption, and he looked up impatiently as they
entered the office; but the frown faded as he saw
his old friend’s face.
“John,” he said, taking his hand in a far warmer
clasp than he had vouchsafed before; “Ye’ve had
bad news.”
“I’d give all I possess to undo what’s been done.
Look at him,” pointing a shaking finger at Cecil; “he
swore to me that he knew Stephen was guilty, and
all the time he was sheltering his miserable self.”
“Ah, ye ken. Who tellt ye?”
“Did you know, too?” was the fierce question.
“'Aye, John, mair nor twa years.”
“And you never told me. I thought you were my
friend, Mac, and no enemy could have been more


cruel. You let me go on in this miserable mistake
when a word would have saved hours of suffering.”
“Listen, John, an’ sit doon; ye look awfu’. I had
ma suspeecions when Feyther Petrie came to see
the lad. He said he didna believe it, an’ there must
be some mistake, for he knew him so well. I’m
slow, ye mind, an’ I took time to think it over. An’
then Hart came with thet last promeesary note.
Steenie wes here when he came in an’ the man didna
ken him at all. Thet wes the first link in the chain.
Then I compared the signatures on the pey sheet
with those on the notes, an’ they were no the same.
So I never rested till I had all the eveedence, an"
then it wes maist November when I’d feenished; an’
I said I’d wait till the year of me promise wes oot
an’ I could be open with the lad. But he wes wild
at the mention of tellin’ ye, and when he confided
to me why he had done it I hedn’t the heart to deny
him; he’s Kathie’s bairn, John. But I hoped the
time would come when he’d be glad to be free; an’
the time came sure enough, for he wes in trouble an’
thocht he maun turn away from love and happiness,
gin his name wes no cleared. I tried again then;
but, no, John, he would no give in, but would go
on to the end though his heart broke. He didna
blame ye for the condeetions, cruel as they were,
but I ken weel he’s felt yir silence an' neglect all
these years. He took it you didna care for him,
an’ only for the money you’d had to pey, an’ ’tis
no wonder thet when he had the chance, he ped
ye in full, an’ mair nor full; so that he could say,
T owe ye nothing.’ ”
John Daly sat still, with his hand shading his
face, until his partner made an end of speaking;
then he said, in a voice that his old friend hardly
recognised,


The truth now, Cecil; the time for lies is past.”
Twice the unhappy young man essayed to speak
before any words came from his parched lips; and
when they did come it was in broken sentences.
‘'You said you’d never pay any more debts for me,
nor give me another chance, if I went wrong again.
I tried to keep straight at first, but somehow I
couldn’t; there was nothing to help me; and by
degrees I was drawn again, and worse than ever.
When I was in despair at what I owed I was
tempted. It was suggested that I could pass for
your eldest son —Stephen was not at home then —
and raise money on my expectations. It was only
too easy. Jim Faversham introduced me to Hart
and others as Stephen, and for a while I was free
from worries. But soon I was in worse trouble
than ever, for Stephen had come home to live, and
I was afraid of their finding out. I was miserable,
and to try and get money to redeem those notes, I
plunged more than ever; only by borrowing from
Stephen every month could I manage at all. Then
the worst came. Jim got into trouble himself, and
said that if he didn’t get money, or, rather, if 1
didn’t get it for him he would come and tell you.
I wish now I had let him do it. But I didn’t think
so then; and in desperation I went to Stephen the
evening I had Jim’s note, and asked him to lend me
some money. He gave me the cheque you’d just
given him; I laughed at first, because it was only
for nine pounds, so he said; but when I got to my
room I saw you hadn’t filled it in properly, you’d
only written ‘nine.’ ”
“That’s true enough, Mac. I remembered after
that I was writing it out when he came in about that
letter of poor Kathie’s, and I was so upset about
that and —and—another matter that I just signed


the cheque and gave it to him, and I couldn't re-
member filling it in.’'
“Jim and I filled it in between us, and I drew it.
It wasn’t crossed as his cheques generally were.
That always helped me, too, that nearly ever}* month
I used to give Hart, or the man who spoke to me
to-day, a crossed cheque made out to Stephen. But
I was in suspense, because I knew there’d be a fine
row when you found out. So I was on the look-out
for a letter from the bank, and when I saw one I
took it away to read it.”
“That was when Elaine saw you?"
“Yes. When I read it and found out that the blow
had fallen I was desperate and was going to run
away when I remembered that it had been drawn
in favour of Stephen and all the bills were in his
name; and —and I hated him.”
“Ye wastrel; an’ he helpin' ye too."
“I did; he was clever and everyone liked him, and
I <was nobody, so I took all the papers I had, and
the letters about _the —the money, and I hid them
in his room. You found them there. I thought
he'd get out of it better than I because he would
have money of his own, and you'd let him off the
first time, as \*ou did me. So I put all the evidence
I could where you’d think he'd hidden it himself."
“So young, and so skilled in wickedness. Truly,
I have reason to be proud of A'ou. But why didn’t
he deny it? At first I thought it was not possible,
the fall was so sudden, and he looked so unsus-
picious ; but afterwards he wouldn’t speak except to
beg me not to enquire into it.”
“That was .” Cecil’s voice Avas almost in-
audible. “That was because I told him if he did
I'd shoot myself.”
“Faugh. When did you say that? I know. You


went as if to steady him when I pushed him back.
And I thought you were begging him to do right.
What have I ever done to deserve such a son? But
did he not know anything about your money losses ?
Why did he give you what money he had?
“He thought I was losing it at cards, and that
was partly true. He urged many a time to tell you,
but I wouldn’t and said if he did I'd run away.”
“I’m not sure it wouldn’t have been a good rid-
dance. Oh, Stephen, Stephen, how am I to undo it
all?”
“Dinna take on so? John. It’ll all come richt.”
“Come right. When I feel I cannot look my own
son in the face again. If he’s got anything of my
nature in him he must be as bitter as gall. His
refusal to let you tell me shows he’s set against me;
and all this money flung back at me. And a fine
son I’ve left to console myself with. Is there any
punishment hard enough? I'll ”
But Cecil, eased now of the burden of deceit that
had weighed him down so long, was no longer the
cowering delinquent he had been a few minutes
back. Perhaps the very danger, also, had nerved
him to speak out.
“First Stephen was the scape-goat, and now it’s
to be me. Is there no blame to yourself at all?
If you had been less of the judge and more of a
father, there wouldn’t have been all this trouble. Our
duties to you. Of course. But what of yours to
us? What did I know of the pitfalls and tempta-
tions that beset a young man? You knew, but did
you ever warn me? Fathers ought to make com-
panions of their sons and win their confidence. But,
no, you never troubled to enquire into my habits
or friends; and the only one who ever tried to pull
me up was Stephen. There was a son you could


have been proud of, and you knew him so little that
you could condemn him hastily and harshly. You
didn’t even like him very much, for a week or two
before you turned him out, I’ve seen you look at
him as if you were longing to get rid of him. If it
wasn’t for mother I'd have gone off before; and if
she consents, I’ll go now; but I won’t be bullied even
by my own father.”
“I’m thinkin’,” said Mackenzie drily, while the
astonished parent could only stare angrily at the
rebel; “there’s a bit of yirsel in baith of yir lads.
Ye were aye headstrong. John, ye mind. But gin
ye’ll listen to me, ye’ll no hed what the fulish boy
sayin’. He’s got a full head of steam on, an’ so have
ye; so it’s least said, soonest ended.”
You’re right, Mac. I only wish I had consulted
you about the trouble three years ago. Anyway
I’ve had one lesson, and I don’t want another. Have
you a time-table here? I must look out a train; I’m
off to Newcastle.”
‘‘Take ma advice for this time, John. Ye juist
bide here till Steenie comes, for he micht be here
at any moment. I’ll send a wire to Newcastle, and
ye can wait the answer. Or would ye rather go
home.”
“Home, no I couldn’t until I know for certain
when he’ll come. There’s one thing I want to do,
and h hat is to see where he has lived all these years.
Perhaps he was with you?”
“He wouldna. He’d live as the mechanic ye wantit
to make of him; so he's lived close to here all the
time.”
“Could you show me the place? I feel as if I
wanted to see it more than anything just now?”
Mackenzie’s face lit up wonderfully; it seemed as
though the question came as the solution to a diffi-


cult problem. He responded with alacrity, and in
sphe of his protests, Cecil was included in the party.
Just as they were leaving the office the manager
cried: , . „
“Stop. There’s Dean. He wes to Newcastle with
them, an' gin he back I suppose
He hurried off, leaving the other two standing at
the door. John Daly felt as if the ground were slip-
ping away from under his feet. Stephen here, and
he to face him so soon! How should he greet him?
What should he say, what could he? But his
suspense was to be of short duration, for Mackenzie
came back alone.
“No. He’s no here yet. They were feenished early
an’ arc back, but he had a call to Cockle Creek, about
anither installation, and sent them home, whiles he
went oot there. He's to get the aifternoon train.
So he’ll be back aboot sax o’clock. Will ye go
home, or ?"
“I’ll go and see where he lived first, if you don t
mind showing me? Or if you are too busy, give me
the address and I’ll go by myself.”
But this was not allowed, and soon all three were
on their way to Mrs. Menger’s select establishment.
“I wes wunerin’ had ye a room to let?” was the
question Mackenzie put to the slatternly maid who
came to the door; she was the successor of “Eliza
Ann,” and was, if possible, even more untidy then
than she had been.
“The missus is out, and I can't show rooms, ’ was
the ungracious response, but the sight of a ready
coin changed her views, and she became eager in her
desire to oblige such generous enquirers.
“Twes a wee room at the back. Aye; this is the
verra place. How do ye like it, John, and ye, ye
model brither?”


“You don’t mean to tell me my son lived here in
this room? Why, it’s a mere kennel.” He looked
with dismay at the wretched room and its miserable
appointments; then he turned away.
“Come, Mac, I’ve had enough. Here’s for your
pains, girl.”
Not another word did he vouchsafe till they
reached the other place, where Mackenzie’s hearty
salutation to the old cobbler, and still more his greet-
ing to Mrs. Mayne, showed he was no infrequent
visitor.
\e II grant this better, he said, as they stood
in Stephen’s room.
The other nodded; he had no heart for speech.
Better? \ es, but it was horribly bare and comfort-
less, he thought, as he looked intently about. The
well-filled bookshelves, and the writing table with
its orderly array of papers, and shaded lamp, gave
one corner of the room quite a different aspect, and
it was here he went to sit awhile.
For a long time he remained at the table, resting
uis head on his hands, and his old friend forbore to
disturb him. As for Cecil, he looked so unutterably
v retched that Mackenzie pitied him, though he felt
he richly deserved to suffer.
111 w rite a note, Mac, said John Dal} r , rousing
himself at last; “and leave it here so that he’ll see
it if he comes here first. And another at the office
for you to give him if he goes straight there. I’ll
get home, then, for I’m very tired;. I’ve got tired
all at once. Hullo. Who’s this?”
He avas holding the miniature of Honor, painted
b\ her mother, that was always on Stephen’s table,
and his look of interrogation was as dismayed as it
was peremptory.
V\ eel,” was the reply, in a quiet voice, though the


eyes were dancing, “yon’s yir future dochter-in-law.
John Daly.” , .
“What!” the voice was thunderous. Yoxxve let
him entangle himself with some low-born
“Stop; Miss Honor Blake and her mither are
friends of mine, as weel as the lad s, an’ I'll no hear
them misca’ed. I ken, Stephen’s forbears, an’ I
dinna think there's muckle of high birth on either
side. But for all thet, yon’s a lady by birth an
education, an’ one thet will grace ony home, be it
never so fine.”
“Don’t be so hot, Mac. You’ll admit, even you,
that I’ve had enough shocks to-day to upset any-
one, and on the top of them all comes this surprise.
Why did you never mention this to me? It seems
I’ve been kept pretty well in the dark about every-
thing.”
4 11 .1 1
“Ye put yirsel in the dark, then,” was the calm
reply. “Ye never speirit audit of the lad, but wes
he working weel, an’ peyin’ in, an’ keepin’ straucht.
Keepin’ straucht,” he spoke with withering scorn.
“Gin ilka one kept as straucht ’wad be a better
world.”
“You’re right there; perhaps right altogether. I’m
the one who is all in the wrong. But I understand
Stephen still less when I think of this,” he touched
the miniature. “How long have they been en-
gaged?”
“Better nor a year! It wes over thet that I tried
to get him to let me send ye the proofs so as to
clear him; but he wes firm. He wes ready to give
oop even thet to complete his work, an’ she sided
with him.”
“Mac, do you mean to tell me that the desire to
shield an unprincipled weakling was strong enough
to induce such a sacrifice? Why, it’s improbable


on the face of it. There must have been some other
reason.’’
“There wes.’
“Do you know it?”
“Aye.”
“Then will you tell me, or should I wait to hear
it from him?”
“He’ll no tell ye, an’ I’m no sure that I should.
But ye’re so trachled thet maybe it would console
ye.”
He drew him close to the bookshelves, so as to be
farther away from Cecil, and went on in a low tone;
‘Tt wes for ye he did it. Aye, ye may weel stare.
He wes fair heart broken when he hard ye were
a renegade (forgie the bitter word, John), and he
askit nothing - better than a chance to win ye back.
An’ when thet trouble came he thocht, gin he took
the blame on himsel’ and gae’d into exile, by the
sacrifice of poseetion, an’ hopes he micht win for
ye the grace of repentance to come frae yir exile
back to yir Feyther’s hoose. ’Twes a thocht worthy
of Kathie’s son, an’ when he askit me for her sake
no’ to spoil his sacrifice, I couldna refuse.”
There was a long pause. John Daly was reading
ing and re-reading the title of a book on the shelf
before him, “Kinematics of Machinery, Caryll.”
Again and again he repeated the words, for he was
obsessed by the idea that were most important,
much depended on his remembering them.
“I think I’ll be going now,” he said, dully, at last.
“But, man, ye hevna written yir letter.”
Without a word he sat down at once and wrote
two notes; one of which he gave to Mackenzie, and
the other he placed in a conspicuous position against
the miniature.
“I’ll ring ye oop, gin he comes back early; but


I’m thinkin’ he’ll no be back till the train at half
twelve. Ye’re lookin’ gey tired, John; an yell
be the better of a rest. So gae hame an’ take it.
Ye ken all noo, aye everything, an’ mair nor thet,
ye ken hoo the dear lad loves ye. What mair could
ye want?”
What more? He could not say. Only his mind
had lost its grip of something that mocked him by
its elusiveness. All the way home it tormented him.
And even when he had laid the whole story before
the others, it was not his wife’s grief, her heart
torn with remorse for her mis judgment of Stephen,
and agony at the wrong and shame of her own son,
it was not Elaine s tearful joy at the fulfilment of
her oft-repeated warning—not these troubled him
so much as that elusive fact.
He had opened the front door widely when he
entered.
‘‘Let no one close it,” he had commanded; “it
stays like that for my son. Whenever he comes
he’ll find the door wide open.”
Now as he paced the library, listening for he knew
not what, starting at every sound, pausing at times
to look at the time-table open at the Newcastle ser-
vice, he felt that elusive something beating like a
hammer on his brain, and yet unattainable. It was
connected with books, so much he did know, and
again and again he scanned the long rows of hand-
somely-bound volumes, but always to no purpose.
There was much to recall his son in this room,
for not only had he let him choose most of the books,
but here he had sat at this desk and shrank from
the reproachful eyes. Here, too, he had sat in
judgment; in this place his son had stood, silent
and brave, and on the wall still hung the picture
of St. Stephen. He looked from the pictured face


of the martyr to the long row of books before him,
and a cry broke from his lips; at last he had grasped
that baffling thought. It was what Mackenzie had
told him; the mind dulled then by the shock after so
much to try it, had not grasped the full significance
of what he had heard; but now he understood it
only too well. For him the sacrifice, for him the
exile, the apostate and prodigal might return to his
Father and his God.
The handsome clock on the mantelpiece rang out
in its soft chimes the passing hours, but he never
heeded them in his agony of mind. At first he tried
to persuade himself that the idea of such a sacrifice
was the outcome of a weak mind; but with that
thought came the remembrance of the powerful
engine he had seen and admired only a few hours
before, that certainly was not the work of a weak
mind, and yet . The more he tried to evade the
logical conclusion, the more it tormented him; until
at last he struggled no more against it, but met it
squarely. If his son had considered his apostacy so
serious that he had offered such a sacrifice and clung
to it in spite of the strongest temptations a man
could have, how should he look at it, he whose
eternal welfare hung in the balance? As he shrank
from the terrible thought, all that his son had done
and suffered for him faded and paled like a star
before the sun, as the remembrance arose of that
tremendous Sacrifice which transcends all human
comprehension, whose beauty and completeness
alone ennoble every human offering and shed a halo
over the smallest act of self-denial. “God be merci-
ful to me, a sinner,” he repeated again and again,
and the repetition soothed him wonderfully, and
stayed in some degree the tumult of his soul.


While the master of the house thus wrestled with
his conscience in the library, in another room
another soul was caught from despair by
strongest of all human affections, a mother s love.
For Estelle Daly, seeing the set hard look on her
son’s face, had followed him upstairs, and when he
would have locked himself in his room, she would
not be denied, but went in with him, and though
no word was spoken she understood the bitter con-
flict and the despair.
He sat down before his window, and she took ner
place beside him, at first without attempting to con-
sole him; but after a while she took in her own soft
pressure his cold hand, and thus they remained for
a long, long time. He made a sudden movement as
if to free himself from that gentle clasp, but in doing
so met the beseeching look of love, and after a short
struggle, broke down, and, leaning on her shoulder,
gave vent to his sorrow and despair.
“Oh, mother, mother,” he cried; “why didn t I tell
you long ago and save all this misery? Why, oh,
why didn’t I finish telling you that day in Nice?’’
By degrees he was able to speak calmly and dis-
cuss with her his best line of action. W hen the
gong sounded for dinner, he made an excuse for
not going down, but she over-ruled his desire to
remain where he was. She herself hurried down, for
there was something she wished particularly to do,
and yet she wanted to be in the room when her
husband appeared, fearing lest he might say some-
thing to Cecil and destroy her work. But her appre-
hensions were groundless, for the master of the
house never looked at either of his children; the
only interest he showed was asking if she had pre-
pared a place for Stephen, and when she pointed
to the seat on his right hand he seemed satisfied.
0 249


“Look,” she said, pointing to a snowy flower laid
at the vacant place. “I found some out. Isn’t it a
good omen?”
“Why? What is it?”
“Stephanotis. That day—you know the day I
mean—l had given him some in the morning, be-
cause he seemed to me a veritable Sir Galahad, and
worthy to wear so pure a blossom. And in the after-
noon, in the library, I tore it from his coat, thinking
him vile and unworthy. There are other sprays
out, and I’m keeping them in case he does not come
to dinner. I want to be able to give it to him myself;
he will understand what I mean by it; and is he
not worthy to wear the white flower of a blameless
life?”
She spoke thus to him thinking to lighten his
dark mood, and drive the strained look from his face;
but he either did not hear her or, hearing, did not
understand or care. His altered appearance alarmed
her, and she noted with concern how all through
dinner he kept looking wistfully at the empty place
on his right hand, and the food lay untasted on his
plate while at every sound he started. She was
still more troubled later when he refused to go and
take a much-needed rest.
“No,” he said quietly, but with such finality in his
tone that she forebore to urge him further. “I’ll be
here to meet him, be the hour what it will. The
last train isn’t in till after eleven. He wouldn’t get
my note till later; and how could he be here before
midnight? I’ll lie down presently on the lounge in
the hall, and don’t worry about me, Estelle; I’m an
old sailor and can sleep anywhere.”
Yet after the others had retired, he felt the loneli-
ness and quiet like a burden, and could not rest, but
moved about from room to room. Once he stole


upstairs to see if all was in readiness for his son;
but there the silence seemed harder to bear, and to
his over-wrought mind the pictured face of the
mother wore an accusing look, and the eyes were
full of reproach. So he went there no moie, but
rather out on the broad verandah, where the cool
air was refreshing and the light wind brought to
him faint odours from the flower beds and heavier
scent from the orangery. There was no moon, so
the stars were in full splendour, but to the anxious
self-tormentor each point of light was an accusing
eye, and he sought again the shelter of the house.
In the library once more, he opened a little-used
drawer of his desk, and took out an old letter. How
could he ever have read those words unmoved, how
forgotten them? Yes, there was the sentence he had
recalled months ago in England, “God deal with
you, as you deal with my son.” He laid the letter
back reverently, and after a pause, took from the
same drawer a rosary, the beads he had himself
taken from the stiffening fingers in obedience to
her last request, “For Stephen”; and he had never
given them to him. He kissed them, and was about
to leave the drawer as it was, when, obeying a
sudden impulse, he slipped the beads into his pocket.
Wearied with so many conflicting emotions, he
lay down on the lounge in the hall, facing the open
door, and in spite of his desire to be on the alert, he
was soon fast asleep. Thus it was that his wife
found him in the early morning; she brought a rug
and spread it over lightly r so as not to awaken him.
Looking down on his worn face a new tenderness
stirred in her heart, and in spite of the breach be-
tween them, she felt more drawn to him than at any
time of their life together.


CHAPTER XXIV.
STEPHEN COMES HOME.
“Let one more attest.
I have lived, seen God’s hand through a life-time,
And all was for the best.”
Browning.
The house was very quiet, Mrs. Daly saw to that,
and Elaine kept watch in the hall beside her father,
who was still sleeping, though not so soundly, for
he moved uneasily, and broken words fell from his
lips. In a dream he was back again in his past life;
it was that awful night in the Atlantic, when the
ship had all but foundered, and he in the engine-room
expecting to be drowned like a rat in a hole. Once
more he felt his heart stand still with fear; once
more heard the jarring of the machinery as from
time to time, when the ship rose on the crest of a
mighty wave, the screw raced madly, then the sick-
ening dive from the height into the yawning troughs,
when every plunge seemed likely to be the last.
Once more he saw, as on that night of peril, some
one hastening down the ladder to him, and he re-
peated the words that had fallen from him then; “Go
back, Alac, and save yourself. It’s not your watch.”
And again came the same reply, “Ma watch a’ways,
when ye’re in danger, John.” Before he could re-
monstrate further the bell rang its message from the
bridge, and he sprang to action. The movement woke
him, and he stared uncomprehendingly—first at
Elaine’s startled face, then at the wide, cool hall;
its marble chequered in the sunlight that streamed
in at the open door.


“The telephone bell woke you/’ said Elaine; “Oh,
I’m so sorry.”
He paid no heed to her, but hastened to answer the
call.
“I’ll do that, Dad,” she began, but stopped, terri-
fied by his whitening face.
“I’ll come at once,” he was saying. “Is Stephen
back? What! I’m coming.”
He hung up the receiver and turned to the maid
who had hastened in at the sound of the bell.
“The dogcart at once,” he said in a curiously level
voice; “tell Scott to be quick. There’s not a moment
to lose.”
“Oh, you’re awake at last, John,” exclaimed his
wife, who just entered from the garden. “Come,
now, and have your breakfast.”
He laughed, a terrible laugh.
“Breakfast, oh, yes! You told me once I ought
to fear a judgment would fall on me. Well, it’s fallen,
that’s all; and I’m going to see how I’ve killed my
own son.”
“Is it an accident?” Her face was as white as his
own, and the roses that had fallen from her hand
lay like a splash of blood on the white marble floor.
Elaine had rushed off at once, and now came back
with a steaming cup of coffee.
“Drink it, dearest,” she said caressingly. “Don’t
despair. Very likely you won’t find things half as
bad as you think. There’s been an accident, and
Stephen’s hurt, isn’t that it? Here is Scott. You’ll
be over there in no time, for he has put Brown Bess
in.”
“John,” Mrs. Daly’s voice was low and imploring,
“let me come; I must, I must.”
He gave a hurried assent as he went to the door,


and Elaine, quick as ever, brought her mother
hat and cloak.
Estelle Daly never forgot that drive. Not once
did her husband break the tense silence, but sat star-
ing as if into another world; only his quickened
breathing and the agony in his eyes showed what
were his sufferings. She went to take the tightly-
locked hands in hers, but desisted when she saw that
he held something clasped in them, a worn rosary.
The gates were barred and guarded by the police,
and it was not until he made them understand who
he was that he was admitted. The man who let him
in at the gate was evidently on the watch for him,
and gave a shrill whistle, which was apparently a
signal, for the foreman hurried to meet him.
“Oh, Mr. Daly, this is terrible.”
“Where’s Mackenzie?”
Clintock pointed to a shed at the other side of the
yard.
“And where ” he could not finish the question,
but the other understood, for he took his arm and
led him across the ash-strewn yard.
“It was this way, sir. Mr. Stephen came from
Newcastle by the boat. It gets in about eight in the
morning, you know, and he came straight here. I
told him you were home, and we went up to the
office together, and I left him there with Mackenzie.
I was just by the door here when the explosion
came; one of the tubes of the Babcock blew out, and
in an instant you can imagine the confusion. And
what does one of the men do but climb up to open
the skylight and let the steam out so that we could
see what to do. I heard a cry of warning from Joe,
but it was too late; and the next thing was the poor
fellow had caught on to a live wire. It was a terrible
sight, for of course he couldn’t let go, then Mr.


Stephen shouted that he’d shut off and ran into the
shed. “I give you my word, sir, I’d have stopped
him if I could have, and as it was I was dashing after
him, when Joe pushed me aside and dragged Mr.
Mackenzie back from the door. Round to the other
side,” he cried, “it’s the only chance, and they two
went; so I got the men together and did what I
could here. In no time poor Mason let go, and we
caught him. I knew, then, that Stephen had got
through, and I went round to the electric shed to
see. Don’t go in yet, sir. You remember the
boiler’s at the far end, and to get through to the
dynamo he had to go past it; a foot and more of
boiling water and the scalding steam, but he did it,
though he was down in a heap when they got to him.
The doctors are in there now.”
Clintock let go his employer’s arm and opened the
door of the shed, and as in a dream John Daly en-
tered. Dazed as he was, he could not help noticing
how they all drew aside to make way for him, and
the first words that fell on his ears were like a
death-knell.
“Quite dead, poor fellow. And it’s just as well,
for his injuries are terrible, and he couldn’t have
lived anyway.”
He saw Mackenzie kneeling on the ground beside
a rigid form, and thought all was over. His only
hope was that his old friend would not look up at
him, for he could not bear the accusation he would
see in the eyes, “First the mother, and now the son.”
Then all was blotted out in a merciful darkness in
which he was sinking, sinking.
“John, John; rouse yersel.”
He looked into the blue eyes so misty now, all
their keenness gpne, and his own dropped before the
misery in them.


“I’ve killed him, Colin,” he muttered, “as surely
as if I’d put a knife into his heart.”
“But, man, he’s no deid yet, though there’s mickle
hope. ’Tis puir Fraser thet’s gone; he wes to the
front of the boiler. An’ yon’s Mason thet’s sufferin’
wi’ shock. The doctors are examinin’ Steenie noo.”
He drew the father nearer to where the doctors
were examining the apparently lifeless form. They
rose as he came up.
“Something hit him pretty hard, for there are a
couple of ribs broken, besides the arm; the scalds
are the worst. It’ll be many a long day before he
stands up again. An ambulance! We’ll get him
to the hospital right away.”
“No.” John Daly’s voice rang out like a trumpet.
“Not to the hospital. He’s going—home.”
One of the doctors began to raise objections, but
another touched him on the arm and whispered to
him.
“Oh, well, if that’s the case, I suppose he must go.
But you can get a private room at the hospital, Mr.
Daly.”
“He's going home,” was the only response. “Un-
less you assure me that it’s too far to take him.”
“No; he’s suffering more from the shock just now
than anything else, and is not likely to regain con-
sciousness for some time. It’s more than likely that
pneumonia will supervene after the inhalation of so
much steam; but the real trouble is the condition of
the feet. We’ll fix him up right away, and you can
take him home.”
To Estelle Daly, left outside the gate, the minutes
seemed hours. With no information but what Scott
could gather from the crowd, she imagined a terrible
disaster, and when the three ambulances passed in,
her fears were redoubled. Soon they came out again,


the first and second escorted by policemen, beside
the third, walked her husband and the manager.
“He’s terribly hurt, Estelle; but we must hope for
the best? Get in, Mac, you’re coming.”
“I vowed once that I’d never cross yir threshold
again,” he said slowly, “but for the lad s sake I 11
come. Thet is,” with a stiff blow to Estelle, “if Mrs.
Daly will excuse ma appearance.”
She held out her hand to him without a word, and
signed for him to step in beside her, though he
evident traces of his share in the work of rescue, and
looked an incongruous figure in the smart equipage.
But they heeded that as little as they did the atten-
tion they attracted, and on their slow drive back
listened eagerly to all the old man had to tell them.
Elaine, warned beforehand, had made all prepara-
tions; priest (this was entirely her own thought),
doctor and nurse, she had summoned them all, and
there was little to do but await the ambulance.
As it appeared in the drive, Cecil, white-face and
miserable, joined the group at the door; but his
father thrust him back.
“Out of my sight, Cain.”
The unhappy young man rushed away, and his
mother, hastening after him, found him in an agony
of grief.
“I must go away, mother,” he said as soon as he
could control his voice. “I must be a wanderer like
the first Cain.”
“But, my darling boy, Stephen is not dead. At
least promise me you will not do anything rash or,
indeed, take any step until you know for certain. I
must go now, but I’ll soon be back and tell you
everything.”
Stephen, opening his eyes, stared uncomprehend-


ingly at the once familiar surroundings, and then
looked into the face bending over him.
“Why, it’s Father Vaughan,” he said weakly.
“V hat has happened? ' When all was explained to
him he tried to collect his thoughts for the reception
of the last Sacraments, and even followed the
prayers with attention; but towards the end the
heavy lids drooped again, and he lapsed once more
into unconsciousness.
When he revived again the afternoon sun was
laying long fingers of light on the walls, and through
the open window came the chirp and twitter of the
birds. All was so different from his ordinary waking
that a line of puzzled thought came on his forehead,
but vanished when his wandering eyes fell on a well-
known face.
''Mac,” he said, contented!}*, as he closed his eyes
again.
“This is your revenge, Colin,” whispered the tor-
tured father; "I took the mother from you; you have
taken the son from me.”
Low as the words were, they roused the patient,
who looked enquiringly in the direction of the
speaker. A flash of recognition came into his eyes;
he tried to rise, but fell back with a groan.
“My son, forgive me.”
As the humbled man sank on his knees bv the
bedside, and laid his hand close beside the one
swathed in bandages, Mackenzie rose softly from his
place.
“It’s no place for us,” he said simply to the others,
“it’s they twa the gither.” And without a word, they
followed him from the room.
Some minutes John Daly came out to them as they
waited on the landing.


“He wants to see you all, and nurse says you d
better come in.”
Yet still while his step-mother tried in broken
words to express what she felt, and Elaine, tearful
but happy, bent over him, Stephen looked enquir-
ingly at his father.
“What is it, my son?” The voice was wonder-
fully gentle.
“Cecil, where is he?’’
Mrs. Daly, smiling through her tears, hurried from
the room and soon returned with her son, who ad-
vanced half-eagerly, half-fearfully. As he bent over
his brother, his quivering lips unable to form a word,
Stephen, with the utmost effort, managed to take
the trembling hand in his least injured one, and
drew it towards his father's.
“Father,” he had brought the hands together
now. “Forgive him.”
There was a momentary pause, and then John
Daly spoke, but with great difficulty;
“Since you ask it, Stephen, yes.”
“And forget.”
“I cannot.”
“But you can promise never to mention it, or
bring it up against him.” The laboured accents told
what an effort this speech was, even if they had not
noted the drops of agony on the forehead. The
father’s heart was wrung.
“I promise. Oh, my son, spare yourself. I pro-
mise.”
And Stephen was content; that at least was
accomplished, and he lay for a while as if sleeping;
but this quiet was not to last long. In spite of pain
and growing fever, he looked so persistently and
imploringly at Mackenzie, that the old man who
knew right well what his lad wanted, but did not


see how to get it for him, was in despair. But
someone else had seen the mute appeal, and inter-
preted it rightly. Mrs. Daly touched Mackenzie’s
arm and beckoned him from the room.
“ Give me the address,” she said quickly, as soon
as they were outside. “ I’m going to bring her to
him.”
To her astonishment, the old man, before answer-
ing, took her hand in his and with old-fashioned
courtesy raised it to his lips.
“ I never thocht to take yir hand, for I cudna
thole thet John should mairry again, an’ so soon.
But I take back ma hard thochts; ye’re a guid
woman. I’ll come with ye an’ shew ye the hoose.
The puir lassie will be frettin’ sair.”
His words were true enough, for when they
reached the house Mrs. Blake, her usually placid
face marred by grief, opened the door to them, and
though her anxiety was pitiable she could not speak.
“ Honor?” asked the old man.
She pointed to the sitting room, and there they
found her, face downward on the cushions, ex-
hausted by long weeping. She rose at the sound
of voices, and when she saw Mackenzie, ran to-
wards him, but Estelle forestalled her.
“My poor child,” she said as she took the grief-
stricken girl in her arms. “ I ma} r say my daughter,
for I love Stephen as if he were my own son, and I
have come to take you to him. He wants you.”
“Then he is not dead?” The pathetic cry went
to the hearts of the listeners.
“ No; and not going to die for many a long year,
we hope. He is badly hurt, and will have a struggle
to pull through; so that is why I have come for you.
We want you to help us and him to fight the battle.”


Honor made no reply, but caught up the hat she
had flung down on the table in a paroxysm of grief
some hours before. She had been on her way to
her usual day’s work when she had heard of the
disaster, and though she had hurried to the yard,
she had been able neither to gain admittance nor
to learn any particulars, except that young Daly
was killed and his father had taken him away. So
it was a heart-broken girl who had come back to
her mother; and even now when both Mrs. Daly and
her old friend assured her that he was living, she
could hardly realise it.
“ There’s room for fewer in the carriage,” said
Mackenzie in a low tone, and Mrs. Daly was quick
to see his meaning.
“ You are coming with your daughter, of course,
Mrs. Blake,” she said cordially; and the two women
looking into each other’s eyes felt strangely drawn
together.
As they went swiftly along, Mrs. Blake told the
other much of Stephen, of their affection for him,
and how he had won respect from all; but Honor
sat numb and white-faced, her only comfort the
kindly encouraging gaze of her old friend who sat
next to her in the brougham. The storm of her
grief was not yet spent, and when a sob broke from
her, he drew her gently to him.
“ Rest, my bairn, against old Mac. It’ll comfort
him and maybe yersel. But dinna greet, there maun
be only smiles for oor lad.”
He took her cold hands in a comforting clasp, and
talked to her soothingly in what was to her almost
an unknown tongue, but she guessed at the mean-
ing, and understood the sterling affection. Mind-
ful, too, of what he had said about being bright, she
made a great effort and roused herself to control


her emotion, and was so far successful that she was
able to smile at him as they neared “Oakhurst.”
But when they alighted at the door, she clung to
his hand aghast. The beautiful grounds, the stately
mansion, filled her with dismay, with a sense in the
vast change in Stephen’s position, and of the wealth
he was heir to which rose like a barrier between
them. But Mrs. Daly, guessing perhaps at the
cause of her trouble, drew her arm through hers,
and, leaving her mother to the care of Mackenzie,
led her up the broad staircase, flooded now with the
radiance of sunset. Pausing for a moment on the
landing to bid the trembling girl be brave, she
opened the door and drew her into the room. There
was no need to fear that Honor would be anything
but brave, for when she saw into what room she
had been brought, she had no thought for anyone or
anything but the one, her hero, her betrothed, lay
suffering there. She was not conscious of the pre-
sence of the others, and kneeling down by the bed-
side, she touched the bandaged hand lightly.
“ Stephen.” She spoke softly, but that low word
had more power to rouse than the loudest trumpet
call. The heavy lids lifted; there was no mistaking
the loving recognition of the glance.
“ Honor. Now I have all I want,” he whispered
contentedly; but soon a change came over his face,
and he turned to look at his father, who, quickened
by love and suffering, understood the mute appeal,
and laid his arm protectingly round the kneeling
girl.
“My dear daughter,” he said, and kissed the
trembling lips.
And when she whispered who had brought her,
and her mother also, he gave his step-mother such a


look of loving gratitude that she felt more than
repaid.
One by one, in obedience to the nurse, they stole
from the room; only two were allowed to remain;
Honor, who still knelt in silent prayer and
thanksgiving, and on the other side of the
bed the silent stricken man, who never lifted
his eyes from his son’s face, so familiar and
yet so strange with its enswathing bandages,
and those tell-tale lines that told of the
bitter struggle of the three years. And Stephen,
between the two who loved him so well, fell at
last into a refreshing sleep.


CHAPTER XXV.
THE FINAL REWARD.
“All is best, though oft we doubt
What the unsearchable dispose
Of highest Wisdom brings about,
And ever best found in the close.”
Milton.
A still December night; not a breath of air moved
the long curtains before the open windows, and a
moth, allured by the brightness within, was beat-
ing its wings against the filmy lace in a vain at-
tempt to reach the attractive glow. Many a scent
was borne in from the garden and mingled with the
rare perfume of the pot-pourri in the tall Eastern
vases; the shaded lights lit up the room, revealing
all its costly appointments, but it was not on these
treasures that the occupants were intent, nor had
the gardens any charm for them to-night, though
lawn, pleasaunce and walks were bathed in the silver
moonlight. As a rule they sat out on the terrace
on the summer evening's, and it must have been
some very special attraction that kept them all in-
side to-night; Mrs. Blake and Airs. Daly side by
side on the luxurious lounge, Elaine in a low chair
beside her father, and the white-haired Mackenzie,
a little apart from them, but absorbed as they were
in the picture before them, and in the wondrous
melodies that flooded the room. From where they
sat they looked into the music room, where the
shaded lights fell on Honor’s bright hair and earnest
face as she sat at the piano, and on Stephen, erect


and strong once more, with the changing lights on
his face as he poured out his heart in the full rich
music he was drawing from his beloved Amati.
And who is this attentively at hand yet never ob-
trusive, turning over the music now for one and
now for the other, a new light on his face as there
is a new hope in his heart? Surely none of the com-
panions of his days of folly and sin would recognise
Cecil?
“Just one more, Steevie,” called Elaine as the
last trembling note died away. “ Remember you’ll
never have Miss Honor Blake to play for you again.
“ Elaine,’’ protested her mother.
“Well mother dear, I’m quite right; he won’t.
After next Wednesday there won’t be any Honor
Blake, only a Mrs. Stephen Daly.”
“ You incorrigible puss,” laughed her father.
“ But in spite of your excellent reason, we mustn’t
let Stephen stand any longer. He’s still somewhat
of an invalid. Xo more music to-night.”
But as Stephen was putting away his violin,
Honor whispered to him, and he at once sat down
to the piano.
“ I know what is coming,” said Mrs. Blake, and
she smiled at the first full chords of Handel. “ You
see,” she whispered to Mrs. Daly, “ that’s the first
piece he played for us, and we always associate it
with the happiness he brought into our lives; be-
sides, Honor is quite fanciful about it. She says
that * Water Music’ is like himself, like his life—
strong, purposeful, broken against opposing rocks
and obstacles of every kind, but gathering beauty
and power from these, it rises at last to such trium-
phant grandeur that it seems more than earthly.”
Estelle Daly, herself a musician of no mean order,
was struck by the appropriateness of the simile,
R 265


and even after the last triumphant chord had died
away, looked thoughtfully at her step-son.
“Any more presents, Honor?” asked Elaine, as
the three came out of the music room.
“ Ever so many. Em afraid I shan’t know what
to do with them all; I never had so many things in
my life. But there are two that are too good for
me though not”—
“ I’ll tell you what they are,” interrupted Stephen,
“ don’t listen to her version. When I showed her
father’s letter and the enclosures, she said all sorts
of absurd things which are not fit for repetition.”
Honor gave him a reproachful look, but he only
smiled at her.
“ May we know?” asked Elaine. “Oris it a high
secret?”
“ Tickets for a trip round the world, and money
for expenses; but we’ll never spend all that, father.”
“ Oh, yes you will” was the laughing comment.
“ I’ve been there and I speak from experience. Fast
as you may travel, money travels faster. Only you
mustn’t stay away too long; the firm wants its new
partner. Clintock says he’s missed you this year very
much, and it’s wonderful, he says, how much he
had come to look to you for all the electric work.”
“ It’s good to think one’s been missed,” said
Stephen. “ I’ve had to suffer all my life from want
of appreciation,” he continued with mock gravity,
“ and were it not for our good foreman there’d be
no one to appreciate me even now.”
Honor gave him a merry look. “ Poor boy; how
sad. I’m afraid that being an invalid for more than
a year has spoilt you more than ever, but,” she
added in a whisper, “ are you not going to tell them
about dear Mac’s present?”
“ Of course I am, when you’ll give me a chance to


speak. But joking apart, we were quite over-
powered when we knew what our dear friend has
given us. Not only a house that is far too good
for me at any rate, but also the full furnishing.
We’re only going to accept it on condition that there
is to be a room in it for himself always. Well,” as
the old man shook his head emphatically, “ for very
often then. Everyone has remembered us, and sent
presents. Cecil, your gift was just the thing.
“ Cecil has another gift for you,” whispered
Elaine later to Stephen. “ I know and so does
Honor, but you won’t know till the morning.”
“ You’re not going out to-night, are you, Stephen.
Your last night at home?” The tone was reproach-
ful.
“ I shan’t be long, father. I’m only going down
to confession for to-morrow, you know. Father
Petrie didn’t come over till late this afternoon, or
I shouldn’t have left you to-night.”
“Of course. I’d forgotten that he was coming up
expressly to tie the knot.”
Stephen laughed. “Yes, and Honor says that
she’d like to know what he meant by writ-
ing that he thought he ought to marry me
as he gave me my first birching. I told
her it meant that he owed me that compensa-
tion ; but she insists that the inference is that birch-
ing and matrimony are taken to be in the same
class.”
“ She’s a bright nature, Stephen, and you are
a lucky fellow to find such a helpmate. It’s the
one thing that consoles me for treating you like
that, for if you had’nt been turned out, you’d never


have met her. May I walk with you as far as the
church?”
“ Why certainly. I'll be only too glad if you
would.”
They walked in silence awhile, and then the father
spoke.
“ We went together, your mother and I, the night
before our marriage.”He sighed heavily as he said
this, and Stephen was emboldened to introduce a
subject that was very near his heart.
“ Father, if I could make any reproach to you, it
is that you have told me so little of her.”
“It was always a sore subject. We were not
happy, Stephen. How could we be. Our lives were
darkened by the shadow of poor Mac’s broken
heart. He told me that he had spoken to you about
the story so I am betraying no confidences by men-
tioning it now. She’d have been far happier with
him, for he s worth ten thousand of me. I think
before she died she had found out that—that—she’d
thrown away—”
Father, please don’t speak like that. She loved
you.”
Ah well, we 11 let it go. Did you know that you
owe your religious education to Mac? It was like
this. After I had married Estelle, she persuaded
me to send you to the same school as her brotfiers
went to; she said it was the only correct school for
a gentleman. Mac knew me too well to expostulate;
he only told me in his quiet way that the day I sent
} ou to a godless school, he’d take every penny of
his out of the business. The bottom had just fallen
out of the iron market, and to lose his capital would
mean ruin, and he knew it. I made the excuse of
expense, and he seized on that to claim the right to
send you to Lakeside. You owe to him;


to me almost nothing. There is a subject we have
never touched on yet, and I must tell you before
you leave me, how I regret my harshness to you.'’
“ Please, father, don’t speak of that, I beg you.”
“ When Mac told me of your motive, I was pierced
to the heart. And I think your sacrifice will not be
unfruitful. You see I never miss on Sundays now,
and I helped Elaine.”
“ Indeed you have been good in that. The dear
girl expected great opposition, and } r ou smoothed all
difficulties away.”
“It was the least I could do. And you will learn
soon that I have done more than that. But it is of
myself I wanted to speak. I do intend soon, very
soon, to make my peace with God. I had been in
doubt for some time, and though I did not realise
it myself till afterwards, I was not happy away from
the path of duty. Then in those terrible hours
when you lay between life and death, I found out
how useless, how pitifully useless, was everything
but the love and friendship of God.”
They walked along for some time without speak-
ing, only Stephen slipped his hand into his father’s
arm, and the loving touch was understood.
“You’ll have some of your own at the altar with
you to-morrow, and that will be a joy to you, I
know; and then you can remember that I hope soon
to make my peace. Why here we are. I’ll wait
for you, my boy. I want all of you I can get.”
Stephen went forward up the steps, but after
mounting one or two he turned and held out his
hands.
“ Come now, father.” Not another word, but the
lamplight falling on his face showed the loving en-
treaty. He hesitated a moment, and then laid his
hands in his son’s.


So they entered the church together.
Early the next morning, Stephen stood at his
window looking out on the dew-drenched garden,
thinking over all the events of the past four years,
and how wonderfully all that seemed tangled and
wrong had been smoothed out and brought to a
beautiful conclusion. He was pondering, too, what
Father Petrie had said to him the night before of
the abundant rewards a loving father pours out on
those who fear Him. “ Holy Simeon was only pro-
mised that he should not die until he had seen the
Saviour, and he not only saw, but had the glorious
privilege of holding Him in his arms. All through
the history of His dealings with men it has been
the same, ‘good measure, and pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over’ has He given to
those who make the smallest sacrifice for His sake.
You only asked one thing, Stephen, and neither you
nor I can see the end of the torrent of blessings
He is pouring out on you.”
No wonder that thinking over these words and
seeing how wonderfully true they were, Stephen
should be so absorbed that he did not notice that
someone had entered his room, and started when
a hand was laid on his arm. He was surprised to
see Cecil standing beside him, and still more sur-
prised at the eager, glad look on his face.
“ Dear brother, whose love I repaid so basely, you
forgave me, but I can never forgive myself. I owe
more to you than the being saved from the conse-
quences of my crime—far, far, more. You need
not look so surprised, Stephen, my brother, more my
brother than ever now, for I was received into the
Church yesterday, and this morning I shall kneel
with you at the altar.”
And without giving Stephen time to say a word,


he turned and went out as swiftly and silently as
he had entered.
How beautiful the garden in the morning fresh-
ness, the flowers heavy with dew, while a silver veil
seemed drawn over the lawns; every leaf was deli-
cately beaded with moisture, which as the sunlight
struck it was changed into sparkling diamonds. Yet
lovely as was the scene, Stephen saw nothing of it,
though he seemed to be still looking out on it. He
was conscious only of the new joy vouchsafed to
him, and he repeated the words spoken to him the
night before —“ Good measure, and pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over.”
Seven years. Seven happy years. Stephen,
standing with his father in the window recess, look-
ing lovingly and proudly at the group in the room.
Yet his tenderest looks were not for his two fine
boys, but for the tiny baby girl whom Mrs. Daly
was holding so importantly for Mackenzie’s inspec-
tion. And the old man is so absorbed in the little
lassie that five-year-old Colin tugs in vain at his
coat, while Peter, a sturdy boy of two, lifts up his
voice to no purpose.
“ I suppose ye’ll be callin’ her aifter her mither?”
he says, looking wistfully at Stephen, who laughs
proudly and happily.
“We want you to be god-father again, Mac. The
worst of calling her Kathleen is that it’s sure to
be shortened to Kathie.”
The old man nodded his head; then taking off his
glasses he wiped them with great deliberation, after
which he again bent over the baby, who lay with
fast-closed eyes.


“I wad fain see her e’en,” he said; and even as
he spoke, the baby eyes opened and looked at him
wonderingly, while the tiny hand closed on his
linger.
“ Grey e’en,” he whispered. “ Kathie, with grey
e’en!”
“ I hope you are not making disrespectful re-
marks about my daughter,” said Stephen in a tone
of banter. “Do you know, father, he told me that
when he first saw r me I was as red as a port light.”
They both laughed, but Mackenzie turned on them
in mock wrath.
“Ye’re gay disrespectfu’, an’ I’ll gar ye rue it.
You were as red as a port licht when I saw ye first,
an’ I’ll tell thet noo will make ye turn as green as
the starboard one. I give ye fair notice thet from
this verra day ye’re disinherited, aye, an’ yir laddie
too, in favour of the lassie.”
“ Bravo,” cried Stephen, and his father joined so
heartily in the laugh that the baby set up a wailing
protest, which drew Mrs. Daly’s wrath on the offen-
ders.
“ You thoughtless, noisy men, to frighten the little
pet. I’ll take her right away.”
She suited the action of the words, while the little
boys seeing their chance, so renewed their attack
on their god-father that they soon had him down in
a big chair while they rifled his pockets; and to tell
the truth it would be hard to say which of the three
was getting the most enjoyment out of it.
“ Mac’s growing younger every day with those
boys of yours, Stephen. I caught him the other day
designing a kite, and in the office, too. And he’ll
do more for little Kathie than for them. It was a
beautiful thought of Honor’s to call her little
daughter after your mother. And I’m glad Estelle


has taken to the little one. It will help to fill up
the vacant places in her life, and comfort her for
the loss of her own daughter.”
For Elaine is no longer among them, her old
haunts know her no more; but in the blessed peace
and seclusion of the cloister a sweet-faced religious
r. ingles with her daily petitions the name of her
dear brother, to whose prayers an influence she
owes, by the blessing of God, the greatest earthly
happiness, a religious vocation.
“Yes, it must be lonely for you both,” assented
Stephen. “ I suppose there’s no hope of getting
Cecil to settle down at home?”
“ No. He’s too taken up with his hospital work,
and he’s making a name for himself, no doubt about
it. lam proud of my two sons, Stephen, and rightly
so. How wonderfully it has all come about, and
how thankful I am for all the benefits bestowed on
me. I often used to be uneasy at the thought of
my forgetfulness of God, and I hoped to return
some day, but I never thought I’d have all my
children Catholics. And I think, Stephen, that it
will not be long before Estelle follows her children’s
example, and then we shall be indeed a united
family. What boundless good has come out of your
sacrifice, Stephen, your sacrifice and exile. It was
my exile, too, for what greater banishment can there
be than that of those who have, like the prodigal
son, gone from their Father’s house into a far
country? All is over now; you in your rightful
place; I back in God's friendship; exile at an end.”
“Is it?” asked Stephen thoughtfully. “Well in a
way I suppose it is; but is not all life an exile? The
prayers and hymns of the Church all breathe this
spirit ; they are the petitions, the songs of children
in a strange land. ‘Nobis donet in patria’ we sing
s 273


at Benediction, and the same strain runs through
all. The hymn of St. Ambrose is only the cry of a-
soul in banishment looking towards the real home.
We look for a real homeland, as St. Paul calls it.
‘ A better country, that is a heaven.’ No father, Ido
not think our exile is over yet.”
‘ Aye, Steenie is richt,” said Mackenzie, who had
just escaped from the embraces of two happy, and
it must be confessed, sticky little boys, and coming
up stood beside them, a hand on the shoulder of
each. “ It’s no over yet oor exile; it lasts as long
as life, an’ for maist long, long years aifterwards,
an’ for some —. For only in one place is the soul
at hame, an’ thet place is far from us noo. Sae we
maun gae on till the end, an’ work an’ wait till the
Feyther calls us, ‘Come hame’; an’ ther’ll be an
end of all oor trouble. But thet’s no yet, an’ we’d
best dae as Steenie did, try an’ learn the hard lessons
of our banishment, an’ gether its fruits, bitter the
noo, but sweet, sae sweet, when come the hairst.
Sae richtly dae we cry tae oor dear Mither, an’ call
oorsel’ banished children of Eve, and lichtsome tae
ane like masel’ who’s been alane the maist o’ his
days, is the end of that same graund prayer aifter
this oor exile.”
THE END.




J. ROY STEVENS,
Printer,
1 and 3 Knox Place, Melbourne
’Phone 3657.






. /f
/ j,* /r>
*
.


