

Q T^
U/l Q
S f{
* is 9*m r*
■■■iillH
♦




.Suites for tlje'Tnedicai Professiat)
lq3 IfjacquarieStreet, .Sydijetp
4 * apposite 7hvlinimi)t House 4 4
AD enreßpßise op
<Cfce City ofSydtiEvfßeal Gstate Co. fid
s ♦ ♦ ■ ♦ ♦ ♦
and Engineering by
HENRY E. WHITE F.I.A. F.N.Z.I.A
28 O'Connell St. Sydnetj.
Construction by
McCONNELL BUILDING Co.Ltd.
58 MArtuxPUce.Stjdnetj.
( Under the Direction and Management of
£tar)tor) & sot) fiimitecL
Starjtoq House, 133
T{eal 6fetate Advisors to tl]e Proprietory.


THE GATE HOUSE OF HEN GRAVE HALL, SUFFOLK, BUILT IN 1538
An outstanding example of Early English Renaissance Architecture, on which the design for the Doorway
of Hengrove Hall, Sydney, has been based.


JWTOONL
fjoiwora,
m " mm 1 y fly»" ''] M" ' JP" By ■> jmi jy fly ' »■ -i mm - fly Z"~ rr WP , "iL- MBFm" y
T TENGROVE HALL, Macquarie Street, striking in the
JLJL architectural beauty of its English Renaissance
facade, unique among buildings of professional
1 ' gy V suites in Sydney in its completeness of equipment and
/ service, marks another epoch-making achievement of The
City of Sydney Real Estate Company Limited.
is htting that a few words of explanation of the activities
of the " Cosreco " organization should be given here.
'r II tS esta fifi s fi men t i n 1910 marked a new departure in Real
V p&yj Estate activities ; its organization is still unique in Aus-
Ay ✓ tralia. Briefly, its purpose is the creation of sound realty
jgffJkT V*- investments by means of scientific real estate development.
fISjT ; WV These activities are neither speculative nor ephemeral.
m Buildings financed and erected by the " Cosreco" or-
A 4 jL ganizatio'n are also serviced by it. Its name will never be
associated with any enterprise that does not measure up
ytßT']; to the highest standards, whether it be professional suites,
I office buildings or suburban homes.
" Cosreco " city buildings are serviced by corps of uni-
formed attendants in distinctive " Cosreco " livery, and
each building is in charge of a fully qualified superin-
tendent, thus maintaining prestige and ensuring the
convenience of tenants, and their clients.
The following pages give a brief outline of " Cosreco "
activities as applied to Hengrove Hall.
All City of Sydney Real Estate Company enterprises are
under the direction and management of Stanton & Son
Limited.


"r»T-»if^jW
An Age of Fertile Fancy
Early English Renaissance Architecture
A PERIOD of change, a period of widely different
influences, yet withal one of the most interesting
ages of English Architecture, in which the virile
native genius of England was beginning to feel the in-
fluence of the great revival of learning of the classic age.
Such was the Renaissance as is found expression in the
architecture of England in the Sixteenth Century.
Not yet was the individual genius of its architects hampered
by slavish adherence to classic formulae ; they were free
to take of the best from the interpretations of the classic
forms by the fertile Italian designers ; something too,
from the French and Dutch.
As John Richard Green so well describes it: " The
prodigal enjoyment of light ?nd sunshine was a mark of
the temper of the age .... long lines of windows stretched
over the fronts of the new manor halls. Every merchant's
house had its oriel. ' You shall have sometime,' Lord
Bacon grumbled, ' your houses so full of glass, that we
cannot tell where to come to be out of the sun or the
cold.' " Truly a spacious age, an age of romance, an age
of artistic fertility, and withal an age of progress in
material things.
Thus we find in this period of Early English Renaissance
Architecture, varied forms, varied ideas, varied designs
woven into a homogenous whole by the genius of the
great architects of the time ; something of Gothic, some-
thing of Norman, and foreshadowings of what were to
become dominant features of the Jacobean and Common-
wealth periods.


9'I^m
Mil IS" iHi |j; ;•§,, § mi mt
twB-L II i" ■ 1 " if" Twili"! 1 >'» mis f|
!"!• f " >!!' !!& Vi»? ! l m w I
' ' *• " ' P 1 1 r 11 1 >* l ■
• - "*• •
The facade of Hengrave Hall, Suffolk
A Great English Manor House
Hengrave Hall, Suffolk
THE great architectural achievements of the Middle
Ages are to be found in magnificent cathedrals and
monasteries ; but with the suppression of the monas-
teries by Henry the Eighth, and the rise of a great new
nobility, the architectural monuments of sixteenth century
genius were largely domestic in character. The great
English Manor Houses of the Tudor and Jacobean eras,
some of them consummate works of art, have a fertility
of fancy, a wealth of ornament, and simplicity of treatment
that raise them to a very high plane.
Hengrave Hall, in Suffolk, built in 1538, is justly one of the
most celebrated of these mansions. It is frequently cited
in architectural works as an example of sortie of the charac-
teristic features of this age of diverse and complex in-
fluences. The entrance of Hengrave Hall led into a court,
round which a corridor was taken —a refinement in plan-
ning which was very seldom introduced, but adding much
to the comfort and convenience of the house.
As regards the main structure, Hengrave owes nothing to
Italian sources, the only indication of the presence of
foreign artists appearing in the decorative carving to the
base of the oriel window above the entrance, and in the
panels set high in the west wall of the courtyard.
It is interesting to find that the shell of the building and
the gate house were the work of artisans from London.
From Fairbairn's Book of Crests
of the Families of Great Britain,
Vok. i and 2.
Sir Thomas de Hengrave, 1419.
HengraveOut of a mural
coronet a leopard's head.
Ducally gorged. 23-7.


jgfi&
i
«43F
'
w
Hengrove Hall, built
according to the most
modern engineering
and building practice,
is faced in sandstone
finish, similar to that
largely used in its
English prototype,
and in keeping with
the spirit of the period.
"The farmer of the sixteenth century pursued many trades in his little
homestead. He had eels in his stew, and bees in his garden. He grew his own
hops and made his own malt. He raised his own hemp and twisted his own
cart-ropes. His flax was cleaned and spun at home. Some of his wool he
sold to the webster, and some kept the spindles moving on his kitchen floor.
He sawed out his own timber. He made his own mud-walls round his cattle
yard. He was his own farrier. He killed his sheep or his calf without the
aid of the butcher. He made his own candles and his own charcoal. He
cultivated herbs for physic, which his wife dried or distilled. His cheese was
manufactured in his own press." —KNIGHT.
The dignity of design
and stability of struc-
ture of Hengrove Hall
form a fitting setting
for the housing of the
leaders of the medical
and dental professions
—to whom the build-
ing has been made
exclusively available.
jp^iix


Wreaths of gold and jewels in the hair, which was fixed on small bolsters ;
rings of precious stones in the ears, great cambric ruffs round the neck,
'smeared in the devil's liquor/ starch, velvet hats, immense farthingales or
hooped petticoats, stomachers blading with jewels—such were some of the
features of the dress of high-born or wealthy ladies. And even the yeoman's
daughter and the cottager s daughter will not stick to flaunt it out in such
gowns, petticoats and kirtles as these. The men were not less brave in their
apparel. Italian cloaks, Spanish mantles, Trench caps, and Scotch daggers
formed the fashionable outfit for men in the times of the Tudors."
MEIKLEJOHN.
Adding New Distinction
Macquarie Street
RISING to a height of ten stories, the imposing facade
of Hengrove Hall looks down on Sydney's finest
boulevarde, flanked by spacious gardens and public
buildings, and long recognised as the medical and dental
centre of Sydney.
Hengrove Hall is located opposite Parliament House,
between King and Hunter Streets, and therefore most
conveniently situated for travelling facilities.
The quiet dignity of Macquarie Street has been materially
enhanced by the handsome Early English Renaissance
architecture of Hengrove Hall. Interesting architectural
features are the fine entrance doorway ; the characteristic
oriel windows, supported by richly carved corbelling
and surmounted by parapets decorated with strap work
in the manner of the period ; and the crowning feature
of the facade, the shaped gablets and parapets, also carried
out in decorative strap work.
The spirit of the period has been faithfully preserved
throughout the building, in features such as hand-wrought
electric light fittings, and handsomely panelled walls.
The beauty and dignity of Hengrove Hall are a tribute to
the work of Henry E. White, F.1.A., F.N.Z.1.A., Archi-
tect and Engineer of Hengrove Hall, and to the McConnell
Building Co. Ltd.,who carried out the work'of construction.


ill)
Service Efficiency in
Building Management
An organisation efficient in every department
of Real Estate has been built up by experience
extending over nearly half a century.
The reputation achieved in the management
of many of the City's most important build-
ings is maintained in the administration of
Hengrove Hall. We are justly proud of our
association with "Sydney's finest building of
professional suites."
STANTON & SON LTD.
Operating in all branches of Real Estate
STANTON HOUSE, 133 PITT ST., SYDNEY
Real Estate Advisors to the Proprietors of
Hengrove Hall


j
A Stately Entrance
Based on Authentic English Models
IN keeping with the best principles of modern archi-
tectural practice, the central decorative features of
Hengrove Hall have been grouped around a stately
entrance.
It is here that it follows most closely the design of Hengrave
Hall, Suffolk. As far as is possible in the construction of a
modern building of this character, where certain construc-
tional features must dictate to a certain extent the form
which the decorative treatment shall take, the entrance
doorway, together with the carved corbelling and de-
corative bav windows surmounting it have been repro-
duced faithfully in detail, as well as in spirit, from the
Gate House of the original Hengrave Hall.
This Gate House has long since been regarded by archi-
tectural students as an outstanding example of the finest
features of the architecture of the period. Beautifully
proportioned, lavishly decorated with skilfully executed
carving in stone, it shows in its decorative treatment
strong evidences of Italian influence, although the work was
actually carried out by Englishmen.
The Gate House is thus described by J. Alfred Gotch,
F.S.A. : " The Archway is perpendicular in character,
but above it is a triple bay window supported on corbelling
full of Renaissance detail, while amorini in Roman armour
carry long scrolls in their hands, and serve as supporters
to a shield of arms. The whole of the corbelling terminates
at the bottom in a foliated pendant." It is interesting to
note that the names of the masons who carried out this
work are still on record. They were John Eastawe and
John Sparke, evidently Englishmen. This beautiful piece
of work was the inspiration for the main entrance doorway
of Hengrove Hall, Sydney.
The Entrance Doorway of Hengrove Hall, Macquarie
Street, opens into a lobby. From here a few steps lead
upwards into the magnificently appointed Main Vestibule,
whilst to the left another flight leads down to the
lower ground floor
A newel post set between the
two flights of stairs is capped
with a handsome wrought-iron
Lantern, designed in keeping
with the architecture of the
period.


Pride
in
Achievement
The linking of the beauty of past ages with the
most modern methods of construction has given
us unusual opportunities in the building of
Hengrove Hall. We are indeed proud to have
our name identified with that of Sydney's new
landmark.
The reputation of the McConnell Building
Company Ltd. is evidenced by the standard of
the constructional works it has recently been
selected to carry out, including Chalfort Cham-
bers, Phillip Street, the Bondi Improvement
Scheme, and Elizabeth Buildings, Sydney.
McConnell Building Co. Ltd.
38 MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY, N.S.W.


A Handsome Vestibule
Enriched by Panelled Walls and
Parquetry Floors
A FEW steps lead up from the Lobby, through a
pair of plate glass swinging doors to the Main
Vestibule. The spacious Vestibule extends the full
width of the building. The handsome panelled walls,
the rich polished parquetry floor, the beamed ceilings, the
specially designed electrical fittings are all selected with
infinite care in character with the early English Renaissance
period.
The light areas on each side of the building provide natural
light in the vestibule ; the windows opening out on to these
light areas are of obscure glass, inset with ornamental
stained glass effects.
On the left hand side of the Vestibule, immediately inside
the entrance doors, is the Hengrove Hall Information
Bureau. This Bureau is in charge of a uniformed attendant,
whose duties are fully described on page 27 of this booklet
(Hengrove Hall Service). This attendant is also in charge
of the telephone switchboard which is connected with
every suite in the building.
The Vestibule is lavishly furnished; with three magnifi-
cent, genuine Turkish rugs (Mosel, Karadja and Sheraz),
a massive carved oak refectory table, and three-piece
lounge suite, with handsome carved backs and cushions
in tapestry.
The top illustration on this
page shows a general view
of the Vestibule, looking to-
wards the Main Entrance Door-
way, whilst that below also
shows portion of the Vestibule,
looking towards the corridor,
in which are situated elevator
and stairways.


" Truth in Advertising " —a
law throughout the Store at
Anthony Horderns'.
" While I Lire I'll Grow"
ANTHONY HORDERNS
(THE SENIOR STORE)
Our seniority is not merely the result of more than a
century of continuous service, creditable as this in
itself is ; but it is based on the additional features
which characterise this House of Business —the
high ideals of merchandising adhered to, the
surpassing values offered, and the unusual measure
of service provided for the shopping public.
Truly Anthony Horderns' is the Senior Store.
Anthony Horderns' are pleased to announce that they
have served Hengrove Hall by supplying all the floor-
coverings.
ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS LTD.
SYDNEY
Postal Address: Telephone: M 2401
Box 2712 C, G.P.O. Day and night


/ / /
Consistent Architectural
Design throughout
the Building
FROM ground to top floor, throughout the whole
of the public portion of the building, in corridors and
stairways, handsome panelled walls, richly polished
parquetry floors and specially selected electric light fittings,
and door furniture, designed in harmony with the period
of architecture adopted for the building, maintain unity of
design and finish throughout.
In the corridor on each floor, situated conveniently to
every suite, is the Kernerator incinerator chute. This is
located in a recess which is protected by a panelled doorway.
A mail chute connecting with a private post box on the
ground floor, is connected with every floor in the building.
A hundred feet above street level is a tastefully laid out
roof garden which has been provided for the use of tenants
and their patients —a quiet retreat from the noise and rush
of the city, from which one may obtain a magnificent
panoramic view of the city and the harbour, stretching for
miles in every direction.
The upper floors are served by a fast Waygood-Otis
manual and automatic elevator service, controlled by a
permanent attendant in distinctive " Cosreco " uniform.
The lift has been designed sufficiently wide to accommodate
a stretcher if necessary.
The lift well is totally enclosed, and both it and the lift cage
are panelled in a style similar to the corridors.
The stairways are of syn-
thetic sandstone in keeping
with the dignified Old
English atmosphere of the
building.
The roof garden is
attractively furnished with
comfortable seagrass furn-
iture, suitable to the out-
door garden setting.


KF\" ■ r ■
jjj '
.■"" ...L ...... 1 . ."'.•. . ~— |~ |"
«*— ' . ~ 7" -h J~ ~ e-'-' 3 *
Tfjtti ..T- • fl ! , ' ..7 <5
1 ¥ -v.*€^ I a
■ ; lu*w frf] t «'
i ! i: jfyidl A7J1 1 : h
: 7; r I'VS 1 ! 1 ' L
i : Ny __j v v 1 . JL= -s A
f. I 'I N |g3 f-~' -• - ' f' j ':
1 ■• ■ ■ [ I A 9 ■ ; /JSfe!! 1
■ ; : , : ft-;'' I • - /i
i p f x/)\/ K -- u - [ I
' ' ! A'' , ' - ' I " 7-1
I - • ' V / • h # !;'
14 i 1 ' . J
N i i mP^'''" T
' ! •' f tWAin
i ■ • ™J11; |—; ■ :
."7 | '' j" '' /■)
cwrJaghknd (oquipmenl
tfloderri or <dPeriod ddiHin^s
AUSTRALIAN
ELECTRIC
cAustralian Company £td.
L ■ _ _ „ ' |


The Electrical Installation of
Heogrove Hall
The selection of this firm for the important
work of installing the entire electrical sys-
tem of Hengrove Hall is in itself evidence
of the high regard of Sydney's leading
architects and engineers.
We are confident that the way in which
this work has been carried out is as grati-
fying to all connected with this great
enterprise as it has been to us.
We have long specialised in electrical in-
stallation work of the very highest standard.
HALL & PEACE
Electrical Engineers
New South Head Road, Double Bay, Sydney


-~si«rf A
y /
'«a# , -■ • ■:• - ■• %■;
* *4#
THE British nation owes much to il
century —age of Drake ; age of Hawk
Raleigh. Then " visions of galleons
diamonds and ingots of silver, dreams oi
threw a haze of prodigality and profusion
seaman." Such was the dawn of the Renais:
History and tradition inevitably link our dai
with the great achievements of the past,
is an inspiring link with that illustrious pa:
site
LOOKING down from the
a magnificent panorama
The Harbour, where, as G(
a century and a half ago "at!
ride in the most perfect securi
green-carpeted lawns and b
of the Botanic Gardens; mile r
—truly an inspiring vista of tl


t
»
_ ntfi'lniTi"'n* - ust-fe
|«^' ; ■ - ■^ : '■ ■: : : : :j%:' > .■ ;ii " : r : ::v;: * V .«- /■ r = ;J ,,.'^^^;: r
\ '
its great adventurers of the sixteenth
-kins and Frobisher ; age of Sir Walter
s loaded to the brim with pearls and
of El Dorados where all was of gold,
n over the imagination of the meanest
issance in England.
aily life and surroundings of the present
In Hengrove Hall, Macquarie Street,
te windows of Hengrove Hall,
1 unfolds in every direction.
Governor Phillip wrote nearly
thousand sail of the line may
irity " ; the verdant foliage,
brilliantly coloured flowers
2 upon mile of Greater Sydney
the ever-growing city.


j T"-
"
t
»
7 ... £&P:- ' -■ ' ■ ■ ' ■'i:. ■■■'■ ''./i' '' '"■ : ' ■ ;: i:: ■ ;Vf/ '':S^
'"• . — 1 -V'
I 1 L_J
tA T •
-1. /
THE British nation owes much to its great adventurers of the sixteenth
century —age of Drake ; age of Hawkins and Frobisher ; age of Sir Walter
Raleigh. Then " visions of galleons loaded to the brim with pearls and
diamonds and ingots of silver, dreams of El Dorados where all was of gold,
threw a haze of prodigality and profusion over the imagination of the meanest
seaman." Such was the dawn of the Renaissance in England.
History and tradition inevitably link our daily life and surroundings of the present
with the great achievements of the past. In Hengrove Hall, Macquarie Street,
is an inspiring link with that illustrious past.
LOOKING down from the windows of Hengrove Hall,
a magnificent panorama unfolds in every direction.
The Harbour, where, as Governor Phillip wrote nearly
a century and a half ago " a thousand sail of the line may
ride in the most perfect security "; the verdant foliage,
green-carpeted lawns and brilliantly coloured flowers
of the Botanic Gardens ; mile upon mile of Greater Sydney
—truly an inspiring vista of the ever-growing city.


JOTk
But little of the skill and care necessary for a large
plumbing installation, such as that we have carried out
at Hengrove Hall, is evident on the surface; yet we are
conscious of work well done
The knowledge and experience which we have put into
this important work, will, year after year, contribute to
the comfort and convenience of the tenants of Hengrove
Hall.
We are proud of the fact that the plumbing installation
of Hengrove Hall is the largest in Sydney for a building
ot its size.
H. M. MURRAY
Licensed Plumber and Drainer
Dot Water, Heating and Ventilating Engineer
26 CALEDONIA STREET, PADDINGTON
Phone F2914


e/S Ik' i &S.
Hengrove Hall has created new standards in the equip-
ment installed for comfort and convenience of tenants
One of the most important of these features, hitherto
but rarely found in Sydney's buildings is the continuous
automatic oil-burning hot water service which supplies
every suite throughout the building.
The whole of this important work was entrusted to us.
Buildings of the future will include many such installa-
tions ; our expert advice and service are at the disposal
of those who contemplate the inclusion of such a
service in any building enterprise.
H. M. MURRAY
Hot Water, Heating and Ventilating Engineer
Licensed Plumber and Drainer
26 CALEDONIA STREET, PADDINGTON
Phone F2914


k i i
'"ijijLjil
1 i A
Hope's Metal Casement Windows
Through the use of Hope's Metal Casements and
Windows, Hengrove Hall is linked with many important
public buildings throughout the civilised world.
The " Mother of Parliaments " looks out upon the ever-
lasting Thames through metal casements similar to
those selected for this, one of Sydney's finest modern
buildings.
The use of Hope's Metal Casements and Windows in a
building stamps it with the mark of efficiency and
modernity.
Full particulars will be gladly
supplied by the sole agents . ..
NOYES BROS. (Sydney) LTD.
115 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY— PAone B/JSI
11 WATT STREET, NEWCASTLE
Telephone, Newcastle 525


v h
jy
Dental Professions
Thoughtful attention to the
needs of tenants is evident
in the general standards
of Hengrove Hall service.
In addition, there are the
numerous special services,
such as an information
bureau, which is connected
by telephone to every suite,
described in detail else-
where in this booklet.
Dental Professions
IN order to maintain the prestige of Hengrove Hall as
an address, tenancy has been confined exclusively to
officially recognised members of the medical and dental
professions.
No finer or better equipped professional suites are to be
found in Sydney; each suite is self-contained, complete
with waiting room and private toilet; composite suites
are arranged where two tenants desire to share the services
of a waiting room attendant. Floor plans of typical unit
suites and composite suites are given on pages 28 and 29
of this booklet.
Every consulting room is light and airy ; those in the front
portion of the building have the additional advantage of a
bay window, which gives still further light and maximum
natural ventilation.
From the third floor up, these front suites command a
magnificent panoramic view of the Botanic Gardens, the
Harbour and waterside suburbs.
In every respect, the requirements of the medical and
dental professions have been very carefully considered
in the designing and equipment of Hengrove Hall, and the
installation of special services such as hot water, incinerator,
compressed air (in dental suites), and ample provision for
lighting and power points and drainage, is further evidence
of that careful study.


| |SK« 1 1 —
The most Modern Budding in Sydney
at its Rental
Phillip Street, long recognised as Sydney's legal centre, is steadily in-
creasing in commercial importance, still further to be augmented by the
extension of Martin Place.
Chalfont Chambers, 142-144 Phillip Street, is built to standards of archi-
tectural beauty and quality of equipment expected in the City's highest-
grade office buildings, whilst rentals are considerably lower.
Modern fireproof construction of reinforced concrete, with a wide, un-
broken span across practically the whole width of the building, gives
maximum light, ventilation and safety.
High grade office space and professional chambers will be subdivided
to suit tenants' requirements.
Chalfont Chambers is entirely modern in its architectural treatment; its
handsome sandstone finish facade is enriched by striking terra-cotta
ornamentation in rich bronze and green.
The building will be serviced by a permanent staff in distinctive " Cosreco "
Uniform.
CHALFONT CHAMBERS
An Enterprise of The City of Sydney Teal Estate Co. Etd.
Under the Direction and Management of
STANTON & SON, LIMITED
STANTON HOUSE, 133 PITT STREET, SYDNEY
Teal Estate Advisers to the Proprietors


T U N 0 A 7f.??rr|yP' H I WHITf ARCHITECT
i TAT { THEATRE K J*MfI EoAJM. 4 Mm a*T*A<T0«J
— ; — —
MARBLE MOSAIC • 6 5 C AC LIOLA- I
5Y ■ MELOCCO M.OS L T0 "J
Synthetic sand stone on stairs and walls of entrance
vestibule as well as terrazzo pavings throughout
Hengrove Hall were carried out by
MELOCCO BROS. LTD.
ANNANDALE
Specializing in work of every description of
natural or synthetic marble as well
as mosaic or terrazzo


*1 »'
Buckingham Palace
is equipped with
Waygood-Qtis
Elevators.
IN THE PALACES OF KINGS
AND EMPERORS
Waygood-Otis service is unrivalled. In the
Occident, in the Orient, in the palaces of
Kings and Emperors, in the warehouses of
merchants, in office buildings in Sydney,
London, Tokio and Naples wherever
vertical transportation is required, Way-
good Otis is to be found.
We were privileged to supply the exacting
elevator requirements of Hengrove Hall.
Way good Otis [Aust.] Pty. Ltd
Works: WATERLOO, N.S.W.


fl
The Kernerator incinerator
equipment provides an entirely
efficient and hygienic means of
disposal of refuse, such as
bandages and dressings. The
Kernerator chute is connected
in a convenient position with
each floor.
A mail chute also serves all
floors.
The furnishing of the
public portions of Hen-
grove Hall has been
carried out with the same
attention to period style
as observed in the archi-
tecture of the building
itself.
Hengrove Hall is Lavishly
Equipped for the Convenience
of Tenants
HENGROVE HALL is unusually complete, and indeed
lavish in both equipment and service facilities.
Everything has been planned and selected with
thought of the practical as well as the beautiful, to con-
tribute to the convenience and the comfort of its tenants.
An efficient hot water service, supplied by a continuous
automatic oil-burning plant of the latest design in the
basement, is connected to every suite, to private
toilets, and to any extra wash-basins that may be installed,
as required.
Cold water, gas and a sufficient number of electric light
and power points are also provided.
In the case of front suites which are to be used for dental
purposes, provision is also made for drainage connected
to the dental-chair unit.
Compressed air, supplied from a central compressor unit,
is also connected to dental suites.
The Waygood-Otis elevator equipment is of the most
modern and advanced design, quiet and high-speed in
operation. Both manual and automatic controls are
provided, and the lift is equipped with latest 2-speed door
and floor levelling device.
The lift cage is handsomely panelled and is wide enough
to accommodate a stretcher. The lift well is entirely
enclosed, and also attractively panelled.


■ vv y r ji
Founded in 1862, and with present security of
.£13,606,358, the London & Lancashire Insurance Co.
Ltd. transacts business
worker's compensation,
marine insurances.
in fire, accident, burglary,
motor car, loss of profits,
Lowest rates, coupled with prompt and equitable
settlements have contributed to our ever-increasing
prestige and capacity for service.
We are privileged to negotiate the various insurance
matters relative to all enterprises of The City of
Sydney Real Estate Co. Ltd.
The London & Lancashire
Insurance Company Ltd.
Directors :
Richard Stanton, Esq. G. H. Tillam, Esq.
Sir Thomas Hughes, M.L.C.
Robert Kerr, Manager for New South Wales.
New South Wales Branch: f)f Pitt St., Sydney


Special Hengrove Hall Services
THE completeness and high standard of service maintained in Hengrove Hall are in keeping
with the importance of the building. In common with other buildings owned by The City
of Sydney Real Estate Company Ltd., Hengrove Hall is serviced by a uniformed staff.
The permanent, uniformed " Cosreco " staff
consists of Building Superintendent, Elevator
Attendant, Page Boy, and Information Bureau
and Telephone Attendant, in addition to an
ample cleaning staff, which will be supplied
with the most modern and efficient hygienic
cleaning equipment.
The whole staff is directly under the control
of the Building Superintendent, who will be
responsible to Stanton & Son Ltd. for the
maintainance of an efficient service at all
times.
In addition to direct City lines, every suite is
connected by telephone to the Telephone and
Enquiry Bureau on the ground floor.
Messages may be left here, and the City
telephone line may be switched through
when tenants are absent from their consulting
rooms.
The Information Bureau is also connected
by a direct telephone line to a taxi service.
Incoming parcels lodged in this ground floor
bureau are delivered to tenants by the building-
staff. Orders may also be left here by tenants
for flowers, newspapers and periodicals.
The Page Boy, in addition to general duties,
will be available for urgent messages and
special telegram service.
Tenants may communicate with the Building
Superintendent by telephone after hours, and
a night bell at the main entrance is con-
nected direct with his quarters
The comprehensive nature of the services
carried out by the " Cosreco " organisation
at Hengrove Hall will add materially to the
comfort and convenience of tenants of the
building.


t i Typical
rO Floor Plan
y( of Unit Suite
w 1 I
■B | a
" tlJi
raissa? ie» 5*5
Annex. I
Surgeri) Surgery
Builders' Hardware of Distinction
Hengrove Hall exemplifies the efficiency of the
" Best " One Key System. The exclusive
basically patented lock control feature answers
a degree of convenience and security un-
obtainable by any other system. Literature
explanatory of the " Best " system is available
on request.
The period hand-wrought door furniture in
rustless Swedish iron supplied for Hengrove
Hall is yet another of our specialities.
Universal Lock & Hardware Co. Ltd.
16 SPRING STREET (cnr. PITT ST.), SYDNEY :: Phone : B 1918
Typical arrangement of
Unit Suites, with Annex
and Private Toilet.
The arrangement of unit suites, as shown on
the accompanying plan, is particularly conveni-
ent. Every suite is located with entrance close
to elevator and stairs.
Waiting rooms are well ventilated and of
ample size for the purpose. Every suite has
its own private toilet and annex, assuring the
utmost comfort and privacy for tenents.


Typical
Floor Plan
of Composite Suite
1 Surgery SurgerLj
L 1 i
■Annex I I
■Ol I wmm Annex ■
I I—- Waiting I
Room b—
Surgeri^
Lift \ Waiting 1
' \ | \ Room
foilefc/ Wa/tinc J r—
LBMBU 'Room I EI
Kl I T - T- I Annex
I Annex I "4~ ■
Surgery Surgeri)
Leasing Information
for Tenants
of Hengrove Hall
SUITES are arranged in two ways, to suit the
convenience of tenants. In Composite Suites,
one waiting room and one private toilet
serve two tenants, enabling them to share the
services of a waiting room attendant.
In the case of Unit Suites, a typical plan of which
is shown on the opposite page, each surgery has
its own individual waiting room and private toilet.
TERMS OF LEASE
Suites in Hengrove Hall are available on
for terms ranging up to five years.
leases
RENTALS
Rentals are fixed according to position, and
follows :
are as
jO/ij/- £i £)/™/-
£3/ I J /" £4 £4/™/-
These rentals are inclusive of all services
cleaning.
except
ELECTRICITY
Charges for electricity will be as shown by meter
readings.
TENANCY
Suites in Hengrove Hall are available exclusively
to recognised members of the British Medical
Association and the Dental Association.
SUITES
Consisting of consulting room, waiting room,
private toilet and annex, together with facilities
and equipment as detailed in this brochure, are
available to a limited number of tenants.
Hengrove Hall is under the direction and manage-
ment of Stanton & Son I.imited, to whom all
enquiries should be addressed.


To us was entrusted the interior
0 r7VH 5) plastering and the special rendering
If » - ■ of synthetic sandstone on the facade
HI of Hengrove Hall.
This work, carried to successful com-
pletion, is representative of the degree
of skilful co-operation of which we
are capable.
A. HARRISON, Plasterer
122 CAVENDISH ST., STANMORE
Phone: Pet. 2088
Architectural Modelling
Hengrove Hall's elaborately modelled doorway, the
modelling at the top of the facade, as well as the orna-
mental fibrous plaster ceilings in the vestibule, repre-
sents the skill in design and workmanship with which
our name always has been associated.
A range of similar highly artistic designs suitable for all
classes of buildings, is available.
We specialise in rockeries, seats, flower tubs, etc., for
the artistic varden.
O
COOPER BROTHERS
381 LIVERPOOL RD., ASHFIELD :: Phone Ull9l


H*]JT
■ iM 4 i^H
W J *J, Lr J V&
The Timber Firm of Bell and Ftazer Ltd.
was entrusted with the supply of timber
and joinery for Hengrove Hall.
Fluge stocks of N.S.W. hardwoods, red-
wood, oregon, baltic, W.A. jarrah, colonial
pine, maple, and kauri, and of mouldings
and joinery of every description, enabled
us to deliver that guaranteed service for
which we are noted. We offer similar
service to interested parties—write for
Price List and Catalogue.
Bell & Frazer Limited
TERRY ST., ROZELLE, N.S.W.
Plumbing Fittings of Distinction
The name of Tylor's has always been associated
with plumbing fixtures of the highest grade;
the fact that we were selected to supply the
requirements of Hengrove Hall in this respect is
still further evidence of the high standing of
Tylor sanitary and plumbing fixtures.
TYLORS (Australia) Limited
Sanitary and Hydraulic Engineers
13 BRIDGE ST., SYDNEY


IN APPRECIATION
HE Directors of The City of Sydney Real Estate Company
Limited wish to acknowledge their grateful appreciation of
the co-operation of the following firms and individuals in
the planning, building and equipment of Hengrove Hall:
HENRY E. WHITE, F.1.A., F.N.Z.I.A.
Architect and Constructional Engineer for the Building
McCONNELL BUILDING CO. LTD.
Contractors for the Building
STANTON & SON LIMITED
Managing Agents and Real Estate Advisors to the Proprietors
American Wall Bed Co. (Kernerator)
Associated Blue Metal Co.
Australian General Electric Co. Limited
(Electrical Equipment)
Bell & Frazer Ltd. (Timber and Joinery)
Cameron, Stuart Co. (Pabco Valves)
J. Castle & Sons (Name Plates and Bronze
Keep, Macpherson Ltd. (Ironmongery)
Melocco Bros. Ltd. (Terrazzo and Stair Treads
in Synthetic Stone)
J. Murray More (Reinforced Steel)
H. M. Murray (Plumbing, Drainage, Sewerage
and Hot Water Service)
Noyes Bros. Ltd. (Hope's Windows, " ROK "
Roofing, Lightolier Electrical Fittings)
_ , , r» ,1," i -j Parke, Lacv, Hardie Ltd. (Compressed Air
Commonwealth Portland Cement Co. Limited T>l
(Cement) Plant)
_ D ~, , ... T-J J State Brick Works (Bricks)
Cooper Bros. (Modelling on Facade and
Principal Doorway)
Grace Bros. Ltd. (Furniture)
Hall & Peace (Electrical Contractors)
A. Harrison (Plasterer)
Anthony Hordern & Sons Ltd. (Linoleum)
George Hudson Ltd. (Parquetry Floors)
David Jones Ltd. (Staff Uniforms)
Sydney Glass Co. Ltd. (Glazing)
Trussed Concrete Steel Co. (Aust.) Limited
(Scaffolds)
Tylors (Australia) Ltd. (Plumbing Fixtures)
Universal Lock and Hardware Co. Limited
( Door Furniture and " Best " Locks)
Waygood-Otis (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. (Elevator
and Equipment)
Zieman, Parker & Graham Ltd. (Wall Tiles)
Designed, Engraved and Printed by W. T. Baker & Co. Ltd., 190 North York Street, Sydney


PAST MASTERS
OF THE
ENGRAVING ART
JONATHAN RICHARDSON
1480 — I530
A portrait etcher who entirely broke away
from the tradition of his time. His work is
lightly executed with a delicate point in a
fresh and open manner.
QUR Artists, Engravers and Colour H
Printers have specialized in their
respective Arts to the extent that
your Advertising Problem receives
the treatment to which it is entitled;
adequate, sensible and in keeping
with Modern Advertising practices.
This Book was designed, engraved and printed by
W. T. BAKER & CO. LTD.
190 NORTH YORK STREET. SYDNEY
Offering a completely
equipped plant for the
production of
Advertising Literature.




FEBRUARY ioth, 1930
which is now complete and ready for occupi
{Between Hunter & King Sts.)
SYDNEY
193 Macquarie Street
0
er
r>
P
PS
to inspect
have pleasure in inviting you
The Directors of Stanton & Son Limi
55
