





Henry George and His Utopia
lecture
Delivered at the Bankers’ Institute of Australasia,
MELBOURNE,
On Friday, October, 1890
BY
Charles Rennick, F.I.A.V.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST,
Melboubne :
Echo Publishing Company, Limited, Printers, Australian Buildings, Elizabeth Street,
And 14 and 16 Best Street, North Fitzroy.
18 9 0.




t ami Utopia.
By CHARLES RENNICK, F.I.A.V.
books,” says Francis Bacon, “are to be tasted; others to be
sSv swallowed; and some few to be chewed and digested; that is, some
books are to be read only in parts; others to be read, but not curiously;
and some few are to be read wholly, and with diligence and attention.”
If Francis Bacon were among us now, there is little doubt of the category
in which his keen and comprehensive intellect would place Henry George’s
“ Progress and Poverty;” little doubt that he would approve the proceeding of
the Hon. James Service, who has told us that some years ago he commenced to
read “Progress and Poverty;” but when he found that the author advocated the
confiscation of the property of landowners without compensation, he threw the
book aside as not worth consideration. Yet the book is worth reading. It is one
that ought not only to be “tasted,” after the manner of Mr. Service, but to be
“ chewed and digested.” For it is the work of a man of whom another Austra-
lian Premier, Sir Henry Parkes, has well said, that “ if Mr. Henry George, with
whose opinions he had never professed sympathy, did not come under the head
of distinguished persons, then there were very few distinguished persons. Mr.
Henry George was a gentleman in whom all persons who professed to be demo-
cratic should take a special pride. Whatever his opinions might be, he was a
man of the highest character; a man, who from the position of a compositor»
had risen to be a person of influence, ability, and accomplishments, as was
acknowledged by the best men on the face of the earth.” (Speech in N. S. W.
Parliament, 30th April, 1890.) And I think that a perusal of Henry George’s
book “with diligence and attention” would enable anyone of ordinary intelli-
gence, especially if he have had the advantage of listening to Henry George’s
eloquence, —to understand how it is that in the “ages of faith” the world fell
under the spell of teachings and doctrines deemed inspired, that will as little
bear examination as the teachings and doctrines' of Henry George will bear
the test of logic. In Henry George we see a man of the same stamp as
those who are counted among the prophets of old, and the founders of religions.
Like them, he is gifted with the power of clothing “thoughts that breathe ” in
“ words that burn,” and like them, he seems blind to his own inconsistencies,
and incapable of estimating the drift of his own arguments. In saying this, I
must not be understood to impugn his sincerity or his integrity. These, I
believe, are above suspicion. Henry George may mislead others; but it is
beyond question that he has first deceived himself. In this, I can distinguish
no difference between him and the other enthusiasts to whom I have alluded.


In the first chapter of “Progress and Poverty,” Henry George sets out the
problem that his book is an attempt to solve; namely, How is it that in spite
of all the industrial improvements of the last hundred years, all adding enor-
mously to the means of producing wealth, the reaping machine, the railway, the
steamship, and the countless other benefits conferred on man by the progress of
invention and discovery, we see want increasing? Why is it that as wealth
increases, poverty increases in a greater ratio? What is the law that associates
poverty with progress, and increases want with advancing wealth ? Similar
statements are made throughout the book. Thus on page 279 it is said: “ The
wealthy class is becoming more wealthy; but the poorer class is becoming more
dependent. The gulf between the employed and the employer is growing wider;
social contrasts are becoming sharper; as liveried carriages appear, so do
barefooted children.” And on page 374 it is said that in every progressive
community, “Wages and interest tend constantly to fall, rent to rise, the rich to
become very much richer, the poor to become more helpless and hopeless, and
the middle class to be swept away.”
It will not be denied, I presume,
It becomes, then, an interesting qu(
the confident statements of Mr. Geor
mother country. The answer is to
Robert Giffen as President of Stati
1883. recently published in the secon
Giffen is the statistician to the Boa
reputation. He makes the following
in 1883, and fifty years earlier:—
that Great Britain is a progressive country.
r question to ascertain what amount of support
George receive from the condition of that, our
is to be found in the “ Inaugural address of Mr.
Statistical Society,” delivered 20th November)
second series of his “Essays on Finance.” Mr.
Board of Trade, and is a man of world-wide
comparison of the wages paid to operatives
Comparison of wages fifty years ago and at the
present time:—
Carpenters, Manchester
„ Glasgow
Bricklayers, Manchester (1825)
„ Glasgow
Masons, Manchester (1825)
„ Glasgow
Miners, Staffordshire, per day
Pattern weavers, Huddenfield
Wool scourers ~
Mule spinners „
Weavers „
Warpers & Reamers „
Winders & Reelers „
Weavers (men), Bradford ...
Reeling and warping, Bradford
Spinning (children) „
WEEKLY WAGES.
INCREASE.
y WAGES. INCRI
, 1883. Amount.
£ s. d, s. d.
1 14 o 10 o
160 12 o
1 16 o 12 o
170 12 0
1 9 10 5 10
138 98
40 14
150 9 0
120 50
1 10 o 46
160 14 o
170 10 o
11 0 50
106 12 3
15 6 7 9
11 6 71
50 Years Ago. 1883.
Amount. Per cent.


Wages have increased in fifty years 50 to 100 per cent., the mean rise being
70 per cent., while at the same time the hours of labour have been reduced 20
per cent. In other words, with less work, the workman gets from 70 to 120 per
cent, more in money returns.
Mr. Giffen quotes Sir James Caird, an eminent authority on all matters
relating to agriculture, as having estimated the rise in agricultural wages since
the repeal of the corn laws in 1846, at 60 per cent
It must not be
forgotten
that money wages are
only
a part of the seaman’s
wages, and that with the improvement in shipping, his food and lodging have
also improved.
Mr. Giffen goes on to show that while, owing to the gold discoveries in
1850, a considerable advance took place in the prices of the principal articles
consumed by workmen in the years 1850 to 1862, yet they had since declined to
the former level of fifty years before, while some of the articles—wheat for
instance —had fallen considerably. Thus, the average price per quarter for the
ten years 1837-1846 was 58s. 7d., while for the ten years 1874-1883 it was
48s. qd., or los. per quarter less. Butchers’ meat, however, had risen in price,
and house rents had advanced 150 per cent. Taking the advance in wages in
the fifty years at 100 per cent., and assuming that the workman paid one-fourth
of his earnings in rent fifty years ago, the following table shows the result in the
two periods: —


Fifty years ago. Now.
Wages
20 1 40 1
Less for Rent
5 1 12/6
Balance to spend on other things
It would weary you to reproduce all the tables supplied by Mr. Giffen in
his most interesting address, and I will therefore endeavour briefly to summarise
the results at which he arrives:—
In the fifty years under review, the population of the United Kingdom has
nearly doubled, while the number of
Prisoners committed for trial has declined from 54,000 in 1830 to 22,000 in
1881. The number of
Paupers in receipt of relief has declined from 1,676,000 in 1849, to 1,014,000
- in 1881. The number of j
Children attending school has increased nearly tenfold.
The number of members, the capital, and the sales of industrial and
cooperative societies have also increased about tenfold.
The following table showing the growth of the deposits and depositors in
Savings ’ Batiks I cannot omit:—
1831. 1881.
Depositors ... ... ... ... 429,000 4,140,000
Amount of deposits ... ... 334,000
Amount per depositor ... ...
Nor do these figures disclose all the advantages that have accrued to the
workman in the interval of time dealt with. He gets, in addition, the benefit of
expenditure of the national taxation for :
Education, post and telegraph service, factory inspection, and other pur-
poses; while of the local taxation amounting to more
than were spent fifty years ago are now spent for such purposes as education,
sanitary improvements, poor relief, and other purposes. So that while the
taxation of the workman has been greatly lightened, he gets much more from
the government than he got before. The general improvement in his circum-
stances is manifested by the greater consumption, as shown by the custom house
returns, of such articles as: Bacon and hams, butter, cheese, currants and raisins,
eggs, potatoes, rice, cocoa, corn wheat, and wheat flour, raw and refined sugar,
tea, tobacco, wine, spirits and malt. But as many of these articles are also
articles of home-production, the customs returns do not show the whole con-
sumption.


But perhaps the most significant fact of all, as to the material improvement
of the condition of the British workman, is the fact that his life has been
prolonged. The mean duration of male life has been raised from 39.7 years in
1838-1850, to 41.9 years at present, an increase of two years; while the average
duration of female life has been raised from 41.9 years, to 45.3 years in the same
time, an increase of nearly years.
And now, to bring these long statistics to a close, I will ask your attention
to one more little table, but a most important one. It has been the contention
of Mr. George throughout his book, that the capitalist and the landowner take
from the producer a larger and larger share of the product of his labour, while
the producer gets a smaller and smaller share of it. The rich, he says, are
becoming richer, and the poor, poorer. The following little table is Mr. Giffen’s
The following little table is Mr. Giffen’s
answer, not perhaps specifically to Mr. George, but to this contention generally.
Table showing the proportion of increase of
income in forty-two years
belonging to capital and labour respectively, in millions
of pounds sterling: —
INCOME OF
I. Capitalist Classes from Capital ...
3. Capitalist Working Income in Income)
Tax Returns /
3. Working Income of Upper and Middle >
Classes below Income Tax Limit 1
per annum.)
4. Manual Labour Class
Mr. Giffen is careful to say that
this table is not to
AMOUNT. PEK CENT.
accurate. Incomes below per annum are exempt fr<
the means of arriving at absolute accuracy do not exist. Bi
reproduction, in an amended form, of one published by him
be taken as absolutely
from income tax, and
But the table is the'
three years earlier.
And when a statistician of Mr. Giffen’s eminence exhausts all available sources
of information in the compilation of a table, and amends it after incorporating
into it all the increased knowledge of three years, it may, I think, be taken as not
far from the truth. Put now his concluding words in contrast with those of
Henry George. I condense them thus: —
“The individual incomes of the working classes have largely increased, the
prices of the main articles of their consumption have rather declined; the rate of
mortality has declined; there is increased consumption of articles in general
use; great advance in general education; great diminution of pauperism and
crime; a vast increase in the number of depositors in savings banks; and other
evidences of general well-being among the working classes. Finally,” says Mr.
Giffen, “the increase of the return to capital has not been in any way in


proportion; the yield on the same amount of capital being less than it was, and
the capital itself more diffused, while the remuneration of labour has enormously
increased.”
Thus, with the help of Mr. Giffen, I think I have conclusively shown that
the problem of Mr. George—the increase of want with the increase of wealth —
is no problem at all, as far as Great Britain is concerned ; that if there be a
problem, such as how to better still further the condition of the working classes,
it is receiving its solution by the forces now at work ; and that those forces,
having already accomplished so much, may be relied upon to accomplish all the
rest without the aid of misguided enthusiasts of the Georgian type.
I have not the material in my possession for pursuing this inquiry into the
relative condition of the capitalist and labourer in other countries ; and if I had
the material, it could not be expected that I could deal with it adequately in
the time at my disposal. But I thought it advisable to make the refutation of
Mr. George's main contention, in the case of Great Britain, as complete as
possible ; because when once it is shown that what he relies upon as facts are
not facts, it matters little what arguments he founds upon them.
But, having dealt with his pseudo facts, I now approach what is more
interesting, the consideration of his logic and his philosophy.
f f
Mr. George ascribes all the evils that he so vividly describes in his book, to
one cause, —the appropriation of land as private property. Land, being necessary
to labour, should be freely open to the labourer. “To command the land,” he
says, page 209, “ which is necessary to labour, is to command all the fruits of
labour, save enough to enable labour to exist. . . . The great cause of
inequality in the distribution of wealth is inequality in the ownership of land.
The ownership of land is the great fundamental fact which ultimately determines
the social, the political, and consequently the intellectual and moral condition
of a people. And it must be so ; for land is the habitation of man, the
storehouse upon which he must draw for all his needs, the material to which
his labour must be applied for the supply of all his desires ; for even the products
of the sea cannot be taken, the light of the sun enjoyed, or any of the forces of
nature utilised, without the use of the land or its products. . . . Material
progress cannot rid us of our dependence upon land ; it can but add to the power
of producing wealth from land ; and hence, when land is monopolised, it might
go on to infinity without increasing wages or improving the condition of those
who have but their labour.”
When land is “ reduced to private ownership, every increase in the
productive power of labour but increases rent, —the price that labour must pay
for the opportunity to utilise its powers ; and thus all the advantages gained by
the march of progress go to the owners of land, and wages do not increase.
Wages cannot increase ; for the greater the earnings of labour, the greater the
price that labour must pay out of its earnings for the opportunity to make any
earnings at all.” —Page 200.
Mr. George contrasts this state of things with what happens in new
countries. “Is it not a notorious fact,” he says, page 204, “known to the most
ignorant, that new countries, where the aggregate wealth is small, but where
land is cheap, are always better countries for the labouring classes than the rich
countries where the land is dear ? ... As land increases in value, poverty
deepens, and pauperism appears. In the new settlements, where land is cheap,
you will find no beggars, and the inequalities in condition are very slight.”


Elsewhere, in the very first chapter of his book, he uses words to the same
effect, and I want you particularly to notice them. “Go into one of the new
communities,” he says, page 4, “ where Anglo-Saxon vigour is just beginning
the race of progress, . . . and though you will find an absence of wealth
and all its concomitants, you will find no beggars. There is no luxury, but
there is no destitution. No one makes an easy living, nor a very good living;
but every one can make a living, and no one able and willing to work is
oppressed by the fear of want.”
Mr. George, having thus traced the evil to its source, and having examined
all the remedies that have been proposed for its cure, propounds his own as the
sovereign remedy, on page 233. “We must,” he says, “make land common
property.” As explained by Mr, George, this proposition does not really mean
what it asserts. You are not to suppose that any man under the Georgian
regime is to be at liberty to enter at will upon the lands, let us say, of Sir
William Clarke or Mr. Tyson, and begin to cultivate any patch he pleases. All
Mr. George’s arguments tend indeed to establish that result; but then, when this
seems to be conclusively demonstrated, we are suddenly pulled up and told, on
page 260 : “It is sufficient if the people resume the ownership of the land. Let
the landowners retain their improvements and personal property in secure
possession.” And on pages 287, 288, he proceeds: “Ido not propose either
to purchase or to confiscate private property in land. The first would be
unjust ; the second needless. Let the individuals who now hold it retain, if
they want to, possession of what they are pleased to call their land. Let them
continue to call it their land. Let them buy and sell, and bequeath and
devise it. We may safely leave them the shell if we take the kernel. It
is not necessary to confiscate land ; it is only necessary to confiscate rent.
We already take some rent in taxation. We have only to make some
changes in our mode of taxation to take it all. What I therefore propose
as a simple yet sovereign remedy, which will raise wages, increase the
earnings of capital, extirpate pauperism, abolish poverty, give remunerative
employment to whoever wishes it, afford free scope to human powers,
lessen crime, elevate morals, and taste, and intelligence, purify government
and carry civilisation to yet nobler heights, is—to appropriate rent by
taxation.” This appropriation is to be made without any compensation. In
the better developed countries, this taxation will not only furnish sufficient for
all the purposes of government, but for all the other benefits above enumerated,
and the landholders will be the revenue-collectors.
There can be no question from the above quotations, and from the further
citations that I shall lay before you, that throughout “ Progress and Poverty ”
Mr. George advocates the confiscation of all existing and all future rents of lands,
save a small percentage to be retained by the landholders to compensate them
for being the collectors of the revenue. He distinctly says on page 288, that
the state need not bother about the letting of lands. “ The machinery already
exists. Instead of extending it, all we have to do is to simplify and reduce it.
By leaving the landowners a percentage of rent, which would probably be much
less than the cost and loss involved in attempting to rent lands through state
agency, and by making use of this existing machinery, we may, without jar
or shock, assert the common right to land by taking rent for public usesv ,r
And on pages 288. 289: “Now insomuch as the taxation of rent, or land
values, must necessarily be increased just as we abolish other taxes, we may
put the proposition into practical shape by proposing—
“ To abolish all taxation save that upon land values.


“As we have seen, the value of land is at the beginning of society nothing ;
but as society develops by the increase of population and the advance of the
.arts, it becomes greater and greater. In every civilised country, even the
newest, the value of the land taken as a whole is sufficient to bear the entire
■expenses of government. In the better developed countries it is much more
than sufficient. Hence it will not be enough to merely place all taxes upon the
value of land. It will be necessary, where that exceeds the present governmental
revenues, to commensurately increase the amount demanded in taxation, and to
continue this increase as society progresses and rent advances. But this is so
natural and easy a matter that it may be considered as involved, or at least
understood, in the proposition to put all taxes on the value of land. That is
the first step upon which the practical struggle must be made. When the
hare is once caught and killed, cooking him will follow as a matter of course.
When the common right to land is so far appreciated that all taxes are abolished
save those which .fall upon rent, there is no danger of much more than is
necessary to induce them to collect the public revenues being left to individual
landholders.’’ But Mr. George seems to have changed his mind, and even
to have modified, if not actually abandoned, his doctrine of confiscation.
For, in an address delivered in Sydney on the 6th of May of this year, he is
thus reported in the Sydney Daily Telegraph of 7th May : “ Now let me say a
little about the confiscation aspect of our propositions. Some of the papers
■seemed to be under the impression that I said something different at Adelaide
to what I said here. I said we had never proposed to confiscate. Now, there
are two or three senses in which that word may be understood. It is not
necessary to confiscate land ; all that is necessary is to confiscate rent, and yet I
have frequently said we do not propose to confiscate anything. Neither do we
in the sense of taking from any one what rightfully belongs to him.
We don't propose to take land from the landowner, or unearned increment from
the man who has already got it, but to tax land values for the future —we will
take not the values of the past, but the values which will accrue in the future.’’
Now I will not undertake to say whether by any amount of casuistry this
quotation from Mr. George’s speech, as reported by the Sydney Daily
Telegraphy about future increment, can be reconciled with the quotations
already given from “ Progress and Poverty” or not ; but I do venture to say
that the attempt to explain away the avowed and flagrant confiscation
proposals of the book, by making them turn on what “rightfully belongs’’
to a man, when Mr. George constitutes himself and his followers the sole
judges of what is “rightful” ownership, is, if not subterfuge and evasion, as
near to subterfuge and evasion as anyone deserving of the character ascribed
to him by Sir Henry Parkes, ought to venture to go.
This question of what constitutes rightful ownership brings us at once to the
root of Henry George s whole system. When we ask : How does Mr, George
justify his doctrine of uncompensated confiscation ? on what principle does he
base it ? the answer is contained in the single proposition : “All men have an
equal natural right to land.” This is Henry George’s fundamental principle,
and it is to be found explicitly set forth on page 239 of his book, and is set forth
with equal explicitness in the first lecture that he delivered in Melbourne. At
the first blush, the proposition that “all men have an equal natural right to
land,” is a very innocent-looking one. It flows so glibly from the lips of a
consummate, earnest, and sincere orator, such as Henry George is, as to beget
ready acquiescence, unless the critical faculties be very much awake. But
when the critical faculty is awake, some very knotty questions arise, to which
not all the power and skill that Henry George possesses can find an answer.


In the first place, where does Mr. George get this all-sufficient, all-embracing
principle? It is certainly not an axiom, or self-evident proposition. Neither is
it one that is forced on our attention by experience ; for in no country, that I
am acquainted with, is such a principle, that “all men have an equal natural
right to land,” acted on. Where, then, does Mr. George get it ? The only
answer, if it be neither an a priori nor an d posteriori truth, is that it is a pure
assumption, and cannot be allowed. I need scarcely say that for the purposes
of an argument, the aim of which is to revolutionise society, a man cannot, in
this easy way, be allowed to assume his premises. If you allow me, for instance,
to assume my premises, I can prove, by incontestable logic, that the moon is
made of green cheese. But you would no more allow me to make such an
assumption of premises than I can allow Henry George to assume this
preposterous premise.
Secondly, even if he were able to base his principle upon anything more
than pure assumption, other objections crowd up in rebellion against it. Mr.
George, in contravention of a well-known logical principle, has not defined the
terms of his proposition. And once we call upon the terms to disclose their
meaning, we shall find that this fundamental proposition is not only baseless,
hut self-contradictory.
What, for instance, is a “ right ” ? What is a “ natural right ” ? And what
is an “equal natural right”? When did this “equal natural right” arise?
This involves the further question : What is meant bv “all men”? Does it
mean all men now living ? All men that are now dead ? All men yet unborn ?
If it means all men unborn now, you will easily see that in earlier ages the right
claimed must have existed for the men then unborn ; and carrying the inquiry
further backward, the right must have existed, by implication, before there were any
men upon this planet. This is a rednctio ad absurdum.
The series of questions that I have propounded opens up a vast field for
discussion ; but in the time at my disposal, I cannot adequately deal with them,
and I accordingly confine myself to the main issue, this alleged “ equal natural
right ; ” and even that I must treat only briefly and perfunctorily.
A right can exist only by contract or consent. It is an acknowledged
permit to do or to enjoy something without molestation by others. It is a growth,
therefore, of the social state in some form ; in other words, of what we are
accustomed to call a civil or political society. Antecedently to such a society,
there are, properly speaking, no “ rights.” What is called a “ natural right ’’ is
simply the right of the mosquito to bite you if it settles on you, and your right
to kill it, if you can. It is the right of the cat to the mouse, of the bird to
the caterpillar, or of the sharks in Hobson’s Bay to my body, if I should be so
unfortunate as to fall overboard from a steamer. I have the “ natural right ”to
kill the shark who attacks me, if I can. In either case, if I kill him or he kill
me, no “natural right” is invaded; no natural wrong is done. But in the
struggle, the strongest will win. In the case of the mosquito, you are the
stronger, and will kill him. In the case of the shark, he is probably the
stronger, and will kill me. Thus when we come to grapple with the terms of
Mr. George’s fundamental principle to find out its meaning, to define his
“ natural right, ’ we only succeed in proving what will not help Mr. George :
“ The good old rule, the simple plan,
That they shall take who have the power,
And they shall keep who can.’’


In other words, that “ might is right.” That is the only interpretation
that “ natural right ” will bear. Thomas Hobbes of Malmsbury was, you will
see, right in describing the ‘‘state of nature” as a state of war, a state in which,
when contract or society is absent, men have to protect themselves, not only
against the brutes, but against each other.
Having thus analysed “ natural right, ” it will readily be seen that what is a
‘‘natural right” is not an equal right ; and what is an “equal right is not a
“natural right.” The “natural right" of the “baby new to earth and sky” is
nil, because it has not the natural might (= right) to supply even its own wants.
Your “natural right ” exceeds that of the mosquito by all the difference between
your respective strengths, or strength and skill combined. And the natural
right of the shark is greater or less than mine by the same difference. Now,
where there is greater or less, excess or deficiency, there cannot be equality.
Hence an "equal natural right” is a contradiction in terms.
In fact, it is only when we come under a political or civil system that equal
rights can exist. And, as I have said, under no political or civil system that I
am acquainted with, do equal rights to land exist, either on the part of the mem-
bers of the community, or on the part of “ all men.”
Mr. George, however, has not appealed to civil or political systems. His
appeal is to nature (natural right), and by the result of his appeal he must abide.
I have shown that the verdict is against him. Indeed, Mr. George, on page 398,
has admitted and described the inequalitie in men’s powers and capacitiesj
but, as I have said, he does not see the bearing of his own arguments. Accord-
ngly, instead of ascribing the difference in men s condition to the differences in
their powers and capacities, he ascribes it to the unequal distribution of land,
not seeing that this inequality of distribution is but the effect of the primary
cause—the difference of natural and acquired powers and capacities.
The truth is, that not alone in the domain of the lower animal life, but in
the domain of humanity, life is a “struggle for existence,” in which the fittest will
survive. The fittest to acquire wealth will in the long run acquire it, and those
who are not fit will fail. But for those who fail, their more successful biethren
have provided ameliorations that are not found in the state of Helpless
men are not left to perish, as the brutes are. It was finely said in the last
century by the illustrious Edmund Burke: "London is the sink of vice j but
the towers and spires of her charitable institutions pierce the skies, and aveit
the wrath of heaven.” In other words, the struggle for existence in the case of
human beings is tempered by altruistic sentiment.
Thus, the more Henry George’s book is examined, the mote faulty
It will appear. It is distinguished throughout by two conspicuous fallacies,
in the first place, it is the most question-begging book that I have ever
read. For example, (1) he cites Great Britain as the country in which the
system of appropriating land to individual ownership has reached its highest
development; and where this is the case, he argues that wages are driven down
to starvation point, and all the other evils that he attributes to the system have
reached their acutest stage. But I have shown that Mr. Giffen has proved just
the contrary. Thus, Mr. George has begged as tacts what aie not facts ; for
in the country most appropriated to private ownership, the condition of the
working classes is probably more prosperous than in any other countiy in the
world j while those classes are year by year acquiring a larger share of the
joint product of labour and capital. (2) Again, he says that in new countries


“no one able and willing to work ” need be ‘‘ oppressed by the fear of want.”
Exactly. But what about those who are not able and not willing to work ?
That is the whole question. I doubt if there is any community, new or old, in
which a man able and willing to work cannot earn a living. Australia is a
new country, and I ask you, are there no idlers and loafers round our street
corners? These are the men who will not work, and this is the class from which
our larrikins and criminals are recruited. The tendency of scientific investiga-
tion is to show that pauperism and crime, or rather the moral and mental
conditions that produce them, are a disease—a disease propagated by transmission,
so that the idlers, drunkards, loafers, and criminals of to-day, are the descendants
of like progenitors. These constitute the great burden upon industry, and blot
upon civilisation. Indeed, Mr. George, who, as I have before stated, does not
see the bearing of his own arguments, admits all this when on page 348 he says :
“ Paupers will raise paupers, even if the children be not their own, just as
familiar contact with criminals will make criminals of the children of virtuous
parents.” (3) Mr, George, as I have shown, begs the question that lies at the
root of his whole system in the proposition: “All men have an equal natural
right to land.” As I have dealt with this part of the subject at length so recently,
I need not repeat the argument by which I controverted it.
In the second place, the book is strikingly illustrative of the fallacy of
proving too much. For example, (1) he labors through several chapters in Books
VI. and VII. at proving that there ought to be no appropriation of land, that it
ought to be common property. And after all, he ends by leaving it private
property, capable, as stated in the extract already quoted from pages 288, 289, of
being bought and sold, bequeathed and devised ; and only appropriating—or
rather confiscating —rent for public purposes. (2) Again, all his arguments go to
prove that all rent ought to be so confiscated ; but if we are to believe his last
Sydney utterance, he means only the future unearned increment. (3) Again, the
common right of men to the soil is stated in terms so wide as to make it
nugatory. “ All men,” he says, “ have an equal natural right to land and on
page 239 he puts it thus : “ The equal right of all men to the use of land is as
clear as their equal right to breathe the air. It is a fact proclaimed by the fact
of their existence. For we cannot suppose that some men have a right to be in
this world, and others no right.” The only possible reading of this proposition
is that “all men have equal natural rights to all land.” Consequently, the
Kamschatkan and the Laplander, the Arab and the Turcoman, have as much
right to Government House Domain, the Botanic Gardens, and the Melbourne
Club Cricket ground, as all and every member of this community. The vast
hordes of China and Hindostan may, in virtue of their rights, come and dispossess
us of this continent, and then what security will there be for the payment of
government expenditure out of the single-tax that Mr. George would impose
upon the rents of the present landholders ? The fallacy is so transparent that
Mr. George has been driven into trying to explain it away, as he tried to explain
away his confiscation scheme. In the Sydney address, already cited, delivered
on 6th May, 1890, he said, as reported in the Sydney Morning Herald , 7th May:
“Some of his critics found this a very great point. The single-taxers, they
said, asserted that all men had equal natural rights to land. That meant that
the Hindoos had as much right to the land as the people of the country. That
was a kind of criticism he could hardly notice in reply. The fact of the people to
every country being equal and entitled to the use and enjoyment of the land,
meant only the people of that country. ” Thus, we learn from Henry George
not only a new political economy, but a new logic,—that universal and particular
propositions mean the same thing.


(4) In the course of one of his lectures delivered in Melbourne, Mr. George
said : “Even when William the Norman conquered England, he did not give
absolute ownership of land.” Here the question at once arises: What right
had William to give even possession of land or anything else in England ? The
only answer is: The right of might. William had conquered the country.
Having done so, he dispossessed the adherents of Harold, and apportioned their
lands among his own followers, subject to certain services and duties. Now,
either Mr. George is the apologist of William, or he is not. If he is not the
apologist, how can he cite William’s land settlement as a laudable precedent T
And if he is the apologist of William, what becomes of Mr. George’s plea for the
equal rights of “ the people of the country” whom William dispossessed? Clearly,
he is on the side of the robber against the robbed.
(5) But the choicest example of the fallacy of proving too much, I have
reserved for the last, as a bontie bouche. He puts forward, as a reason for not
compensating landlords, the parallel case of the refusal on the part of the United
States to compensate slave owners for the loss of their slaves as the result of
the war of secession. And he quotes with indignant eloquence the grand
saying of Emerson : “ Pay ransom to the owner. Aye. till the bag to the brim.
Pay him ransom. But who is the owner? The slave is the owner. Pay
him ! ” But, bearing in mind a little history, and that Mr. George founds his
doctrine on the equal rights of “the people,” this argument proves a great
deal too much, and is capable of a crushing retort, thus :
“ Restore the land to the people who have been deprived of it. Acre by
acre give it back to them. But who are the people? In Australia, the
Blackfellows ; in America, the red Indians. Give the land back to them ! ”
By his own showing, Mr. George has mistaken his mission. Instead of
lecturing in the Melbourne Town Hall to the men who have expropriated the
rightful owners, he ought to have preached a crusade to the aboriginals in the
Australian bush.
I must now bring this paper to a close, with the full consciousness that I
have been able to deal very inadequately and very imperfectly with the subject.
I have not covered more than a fraction of the ground that I had mapped out
for myself. To do so would require a volume. But I trust I have said
something that may lead to an independent examination of the Georgian
doctrines, on the part of those who may be inclined to accept them on the
strength of the beauty and eloquence of the language in which they are clothed.
The style of the book is highly attractive ; and the oral eloquence of Mr. George
more attractive still. Take away these characteristics, and his system has
nothing in its favour. Mr. George assumes his facts, and they are wrong. He
assumes his premises, and they are wrong. These being wrong, his conclusions
are wrong. The cause he assigns for existing evils is wrong, and the remedy he
proposes is wrong. This will best be shown by deducing the consequences of
his own principles, as set forth on page 117, where he says : “Thus rent, or
land value, does not arise from the productiveness or utility of land. It in no
wise represents any help or advantage given to pioduction, but simply the
power of securing a part of the results of production. No matter what are its
capabilities, land can yield no rent and have no value until some one is willing
to give labour, or the results of labour, for the privilege of using it ; and what
any one will thus give depends not upon the capacity of the land, but upon its
capacity as compared with that of land that can be had for nothing.” Elsewhere
Mr. George has recognsed clearly enough that three factors, land, labour, and


capital, are necessary to production and therefore to rent; but in this passage
he omits capital, and treats rent as due to the two factors, land and labour, only.
But it, as Mr. George here contends, land , perse or inherently, have no value, it
follows that the value, or rent, subsequently arising from the application of
. k° t u . r or results of labour ” must be due to this very labour. Consistently
'J 1 ou S ° Wn P™ nc *P^ s t therefore, Mr. George should tax not land but labour.
And this, despite all his eloquent protestations to the contrary, is, after all, what
his single-tax would actually do. Now, it is industry in some form or other, or
the result of industry, that bears all existing taxation ; and no different
result could possibly follow from the adoption of the single-tax scheme.
Thus because Mr. George fails to follow his own principles to their consequences,
the whole fabric of society is to be overturned in pursuit of an illusion. Nor is
this all. Mr. George closes the paragraph on page 117, just quoted, with these
words: Rent, in short, is the price of monopoly, arising from the reduction
to individual ownership of natural elements which human exertion can neither
produce nor increase.’ What follows from this unqualified declaration ? Rent
says Mr. George, arises from the individual ownership of land. Hence Mr!
George, by abolishing the individual ownership of land, would necessarily
abolish that which arises from it—rent. You cannot destroy or remove a cause
without destroying or removing its effect. Thus having abolished rent by
making land common property, Mr. George may impose his much vaunted
single-tax to his heart’s content ; but, by his own showing, there will
be nothing on which to lew it; and it will yield no revenue. So that
his scheme is reduced to an absurdity.
One more quotation, and I have done. He says, page 351 : “The great
lesson that is thus learned is that human nature is human nature all the
world over. It is idle, then, I say, to suppose that human nature will
be changed by a new land-system. Establish by that or any other socialistic
or communistic system, an equal distribution of wealth, and human nature,,
and human inequalities of powers and capacities, being what they are, you
will find the old inequalities in the distribution of wealth re-established
in a single generation. Accordingly, I have no new gospel to preach.
I have shown you that in England there are forces at work producing a great
improvement in the moral and material condition of her people, and
gradually tending to a more equal distribution of wealth. There is no royal
road to that result. You cannot achieve it by single-tax fads and Georgian
fallacies. England, that mighty mother of nations yet to be, tells us by her
example, that honest industry, thrift, good laws, and good government are the surest
methods by which we, her distant sons, may build up this our adopted country
into a happy, prosperous, and contented nation.


hi c&jy


1508
01845200


% *
