





Henry Lawson
Memories
By T. S. BROWNING.
1931
The Henry Lawson Literary
Society, Sydney
SYDNEY:
Printed and Published by
The Worker Trustees
St. Andrew’s Place


Wholly set up and printed in
Australia by The Worker Trustees,
St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney.


ft)
V
n 3 j
FOREWORD.
If this little volume gives you pleasure,
be grateful unto Henry Lawson’s widow.
Miss Bertha Law'son, Mrs. Claude A. Davison,
Mr. Jack Vincent, Mr, Fred Hancock, Mr. T.
D. Mutch and Mr. Clarence Barker, all of
whom have graciously permitted me to repro-
duce photographs in their possession.
Messrs. Hall and Co., Photographers, of
20 Hunter Street, Sydney, must also be
especially thanked for a number of the fine
studies of station and bush life.
For the rest, I have allowed Henry Lawson
to speak for himself as far as possible.
T.S.B.


“Lawson is the mate of Australia. She has
opened out her hard, dry heart and her
withered, wearied soul to him—Australia of
the drought. She has given him her good,
brown hand and her healthy, happy smile—
Australia of the good seasons. Her winds
have sung to him. Her seas have called him.
Her dust has clung, singing to his lips; he
has carried her swag of courage over the
sands of death or by her gushing rills of
life.”—(Zora Cross, in “An Introduction to
the Study of Australian Literature.”)


HENRY LAWSON


The father of Henry Lawson was a
Norwegian seaman, who left his ship at
Melbourne and went to the gold-diggings in
the fifties with the early “rushes.” Concern-
ing him, Lawson has said: “Father always
professed to be a free-thinker, and he studied
the Bible. He was one of the hardest working,
kindest-hearted men I ever knew. I have
known him, after a hard day’s work, to sit up
all night watching a dying neighbour’s child.”


PETER HERTZBERG LARSEN.


Lawson s mother, who had been Louisa
Albury, an Australian girl, came of parents
from the county of Kent. She was a poet and
storyteller in her own right, and encouraged
her son to write as soon as she saw that his
inclination was towards letters. In the
“Bulletin” his brother Charles has told us that
one of Lawson’s first poems was on “William
the Conqueror,” and, at the age of eleven, the
young poet had decided that:
William, called the Conqueror,
Was a brave and gallant knight.
But he was a cruel and evil king,
And his principle was fight.”
According to Charles, “Father was in-
terested, but mother, fresh from the success
of her maiden poem, ‘My Nettie,’ did not
enthuse. She bade Henry try some more
likely subject, assuring him of success. Then
she threw William the Conqueror’ in the fire,
and supplied the poet with paper.”


LOUISA LAWSON.


“Among the roads which so many feet have
travelled there was that which Louisa Lawson
trod, the road to Grenfell, all among the
mullock heaps, where diggers looked upon the
few good women among them as only little
less than angels The road that took the
mother out brought the son back; the boy in
whose quick mind the bitterness of the
woman’s shadowed life leapt up and caught
the sun, and sweetened in the light ”
(Mary Gilmore, in “Hound of the Road.”)


THE ROAD TO GRENFELL.


The little village of Eurunderee, where
Lawson lived until he went to Sydney when
he was about fourteen years of age, lies snugly
in the lap of a well-grassed and timbered
country about five miles from the town of
Mudgee. In the background of this picture of
Eurunderee at eventide can be seen O Brien s
Hill, so frequently mentioned in Law Son s tales
and verses.


EURUNDEREE AT EVENTIDE.


The simplicity, the quietness, and the rest-
fulness of this picture of out-back life are
wonderfully suggestive of “The Fairy West,”
land of the
“dear old homes by the shining river.
The deep, clear creeks and the hills so
grand,”
of “The Fairy West” where
“The grass waved high on the flat and siding.
And wild flowers bloomed on the banks
so fair.
And younger sons from the North came
riding
To vine-clad homes in the gardens there.
Oh those grand old farms of pleasure and
In the fairy tales of the Golden West.”


IN "THE FAIRY WEST."


Lawson must often have seen passing along
the roads about Mudgee and Eurunderee just
such horse-teams as the one depicted here.
He must often have travelled with one,
perhaps worked one, and watched the gums
arching overhead here and there as he went
along, and the ragged patches of sunlight and
shade passing up, over the horses, over him-
self, on to the front of the load, over the load,
and down on to the white, dusty road again.
He must have done these things, because in
the Joe Wilson stories, and others, he has
betrayed an intimate knowledge of teams and
their working, and that is not acquired by
instinct, nor by faith, nor by taking thought,
nor by anything but actual experience.


IN THE BUSH,


At the little home at Eurunderee the
Lawsons lived for fifteen years, and there all
the children, with the exception of Henry,
were born. It consisted originally of two slab
and bark rooms and a kitchen. The additions
were made about 1870, The little house saw
a deal of travelling in its early years, going
with the family from Pipeclay (the original
name of Eurunderee) to Gulgong and back
again to Pipeclay. In his own picturesque style
Lawson has described its goings and comings:
“They said that Gulgong was done, and one
day mother and father packed up all the
things. Next morning we were waked early;
there was a dray at the door, and we heard a
scraping overhead. Suddenly We saw the sky,
and next moment were nearly blinded by a
shower of pungent stringybark dust. Father
Was taking off the roof of the hut—for we
carried the house with us in those days ”


THE OLD LAWSON HOME AT
EURUNDEREE.


The preceding picture is from a photograph
taken in 1920. This one is from a quite recent
photograph, and shows very clearly how well
the place is being cared for to-day. The
present owner of the property is Mr. Clarence
Barker, whose mother, an old friend of the
Lawson family, is seen in the picture.


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE OLD
EURUNDEREE HOME.


Perhaps the chief delight of Lawson’s verse
is that in it he has crystallised into compact-
ness, for all time, delightful and faithful
pictures of aspects of Australian life that have
disappeared and will never reappear. His
work will always have great historic value. In
“The Lights of Cobb and Co. he takes us
back into the years between the sixties and
nineties of last century, and past—
“Old coaching towns already decaying for
their sins,
Uncounted ‘Half-way Houses,’ and scores
of ‘Ten-Mile Inns’;
The riders from the stations by lonely
granite peaks;
The black-boy for the shepherds on sheep
and cattle creeks;
The roaring camps of Gulgong, and many a
‘Diggers’ Rest,’
The diggers on the Lachlan, the huts of
Farthest West.
By clear, ridge-country rivers, and gaps
where tracks run high,
Where waits the lonely horseman, cut clear
against the sky;
Past haunted half-way houses—where con-
victs made the bricks—
Scrub-yards and new bark-shanties, we dash
with five and six;
Through stringybark and bluegum, and box
and pine we go—
A hundred miles shall see to-night the lights
of Cobb and Co.”


ON THE ROAD WITH COBB AND CO.


The Eurunderee Public School where
Lawson acquired the first fragments of his
education was built in 1876 by his father.
For a short time previous to its erection the
fount of learning sent forth its showers in a
little bark shack, the “Old Bark School of
several stories and verses, and of this, in
his little “Autobiography,” Lawson says:
“Father and a few others petitioned for a
provisional school at Pipeclay—it was Eurun-
deree now, the black name had been restored.
Father built the school. It was of bark. It
was furnished with odds and ends thrown out
of the public school in Mudgee when the
public school got new desks, stools and things.
Father made the blackboards and easels, and
mended the rickety furniture. ... A selector,
an Irishman named John A. Tierney, was
selected as schoolmaster. He had served in
some capacity in the Army in Africa, a pay-
master or something.”


THE EURUNDEREE PUBLIC SCHOOL.


‘And west of named and numbered days
The shearers walk and ride—
Jack Cornstalk and the ne’er-do-well.
And the grey-beard side by side.
‘The college wreck who sunk beneath,
Then rose above his shame.
Tramps west in mateship with the man
Who cannot write his name.
’Tis there where on the barren track
No last half-crust’s begrudged—
Where saint and sinner, side by side,
Judge not, and are not judged.
“And, lest at ease I should forget
True mateship after all.
My Waterbag and billy yet
Are hanging on the wall;
And if my fate should show the sign.
I’d tramp to sunsets grand
With gaunt and stern-eyed mates of mine
In Never-Never Land.”
(Henry Lawson, in “The Never-Never
Country.”)


ON THE TRACK.


“It was Golden Gully still, but golden in
name only, unless indeed the yellow mullock
heaps or the bloom of the wattle trees on the
hillside gave it a claim to the title. But the
gold was gone from the gully, and the diggers
were gone, too, after the manner of Timon’s
friends when his wealth deserted him. Golden
Gully was a dreary place, dreary even for an
abandoned goldfield. The poor, tortured
earth, with its wounds all bare, seemed to
make a mute appeal to the surrounding bush
to come up and hide it, and, as if in answer
to its appeal, the shrub and saplings were
beginning to close in from the foot of the
range. The wilderness was reclaiming its own
again.”—(Henry Lawson, in “His Father’s
Mate.”)


GOLDEN GULLY, EURUNDEREE.


A cloud of dust on the long, white road,
And the teams go creeping on
Inch by inch with the Weary load;
And by the power of the greenhide goad
The distant goal is won.
With eyes half shut to the blinding dust,
And necks to the yokes bent low,
The beasts are pulling as bullocks must;
And the shining tires might almost rust
While the spokes are turning slow.
With face half hid by a broad-brimmed hat,
That shades from the heat’s white waves,
And shouldered whip, with its greenhide plait,
The driver plods with a gait like that
Of his weary, patient slaves.”
(From ‘The Teams,” by Henry Lawson.)


A BULLOCK TEAM


“By the bluff where the grey sand reaches
To the kerb of the spray-swept street,
By the sweep of the black sand beaches
From the main-road travellers’ feet,
By the heights like a work Titanic,
Begun ere the gods’ work ceased,
By a bluff-lined coast volcanic
Lie the Ports of the wild South-east.’’
Thus Henry Lawson in “The Ports of the
Open Sea.’’
To the right, out of the picture, about eleven
miles from Kaikoura, is Maungumanu, where
Henry and Mrs. Lawson conducted the little
Maori school. Lawson has given us some
exquisite pictures of this school in “A Daughter
of Maoriland” and several other stories.


KAIKOURA, SOUTH ISLAND.
NEW ZEALAND.


This is a scene with which Lawson, who was
more than once “a rouseabout of rouseabouts,”
would be familiar. A hot, breathless, blinding
sunrise—no hint of morning breeze, nor any
sign on earth or sky to indicate that it is
morning save a hot flush on the eastern sky.
A clearing in the scrub—bare as though the
surface of the earth had been ploughed,
harrowed and rolled, and dustier than the
road. An oblong shed, walled with blue-grey
hardwood slabs, adzed at the ends and set one
alongside of the other, and roofed with the
eternal galvanised iron, apropos of which
Lawson has said: God forgive the man who
invented galvanised iron, and the greed which
introduced it into Australia: you could not get
worse roofing material for a hot country.”
Greasy sheepskins hanging on crazy sapling
fences, and a cloud of red dust already going
up from the yard—the shed is getting ready
for the day’s Work.


SHEARING TIME—YARDING SHEEP.


In “A Rough Shed” Lawson has described
just such a shearing-shed as the one pictured
here:
“At the edge of the timber a great galvan-
ised iron shed, nearly all roof, coming down
to within 6ft. 6in. of the ‘board’ over the
‘shoots.’ .... The first siren has gone. We
hurry in single files from opposite ends of
rouseabouts’ and shearers’ huts (as the paths
happen to lead to the shed), gulping hot tea
or coffee from a pint-pot in one hand and
biting at a junk of brownie in the other.
‘‘Shed of forty hands. Shearers rush the
pens and yank out sheep and throw them like
demons; grip them with their knees, take up
machines, jerk the strings; and with a rattling,
whirring roar the great machine shed starts for
the day.
“ ‘Go to it, you tigers!’ yells a tar-boy.
‘Wool away!’ ‘Tar!’ ‘Sheep Ho!’ We rush
through with a whirring roar till breakfast
time.
“No, gentle bard!—we don’t sing at our
work. Over the whir and roar and hum all
day long, and with iteration that is childish and
irritating to the intelligent greenhand, float
unthinkable adjectives and adverbs, addressed
to jumbucks, jackeroos and mates indis-
criminately. And worse words for the boss
over the board—behind his back. ...”


SHEARING-SHED ON COOPER’S
CREEK.


In February, 1910, Lawson went with his
mate, Tom Mutch, afterwards New South
Wales’ Minister for Education, on a trip to
Mallacoota, where they camped for some time
with E. J. Brady, the poet, who had made his
home there. Mallacoota, one of the most
picturesque spots on the whole Australian
coastline, is in Victoria, fifteen miles south of
Cape Howe. The Inlet is a narrow neck of
water which gives admission to the Purga-
goolah Lakes, which lie embosomed in wooded
hills and receive the whole of the Waters of
the Genoa and Wallagaraugh Rivers, both of
which rise in New South Wales.


MALLACOOTA INLET.


Mr. Tom Mutch says that Lawson entered
into the enjoyment of the life at Mallacoota
with the exuberance of spirits of a boy, insist-
ing on rigging the tent, making the fire, baking
the “dampers,” and calling baking-powder
“Saleratus” (after Bret Harte), In some
verses on “Henry Lawson’s Camp,” which tell
of the trip, Louis Esson has shown in what
regard the people of the bush held Lawson:
“There was pride throughout the country
when the Sydney poet came,
With a mate and small portmanteau, for the
bushmen loved his name.
And Ted Brady, who had lured him,
breathed a sigh of deep delight.
From the wind that blows by Gabo in the
fulness of the night.
For the bush folk loved the poet with his
bright, far-seeing eyes.
With his innocence more subtle than the
craftship of the wise;
And the legend of the district now has
travelled wide and far
Of the time when Henry Lawson camped at
Mallacoota Bar.”


LAWSON AND BRADY AT
MALLACOOTA.


“The Darling—which is either a muddy
gutter or a second Mississippi—is about six
times as long as the distance, in a straight line,
from its head to its mouth. The state of the
river is vaguely but generally understood to
depend on some distant and foreign
phenomena to which bushmen refer in an off-
hand tone as the ‘Queenslan’ Rains,’ which
seem to be held responsible, in a general way,
for most of the out-back trouble. ... We
heard of a man who determined to stick to a
Darling boat and travel the whole length of
the river. He Was a newspaper man. He
started on his voyage of discovery one Easter
in flood-time, and a month later the captain
got bushed between the Darling and South
Australian border. The waters went away
before he could find the river again, and left
his boat in a scrub. They had a cargo of
rations, and the crew stuck to the craft while
the tucker lasted; when it gave out they rolled
up their swags and went to look for a station,
but didn’t find one They crossed
thirty-mile plain at last, and sighted a black
gin. She led them to a boundary-rider’s hut,
where they Were taken in and provided with
rations and rum. Later on a syndicate was
formed to explore the country and recover the
boat; but they found her thirty miles from the
river and about eighteen from the nearest
waterhole deep enough to float her, so they
left her -there. She’s there still, or else the
man who told us about it is the greatest liar
Out-back.”—(From “The Darling River,” by
Henry Lawson.)


A FLOOD ON THE DARLING.


About 1916, upon receiving an appointment
from the New South Wales Government,
Lawson went to live at Leeton, where he was
engaged in describing the Murrumbidgee
Irrigation Area for publicity purposes. He had
previously written much concerning the out-
back when the drought was on, so much, in
fact, that the outsider Would be inclined to
gather the impression that the drought was
almost always on. Also, he had advocated
irrigation with much insistency, and never
tired of pointing out to the powers that be
that this country would be a vastly better one
if there were more water in it. Perhaps that
had something to do with his appointment.
He thoroughly enjoyed his term of office on
the Area, being much sought out by old mates
passing through the district and making many
new ones. It Was there that he met the poet
Jim Grahame, the very close friend of his latter
years. In the accompanying picture he is seen
outside his official residence at Leeton.


LAWSON AT LEETON.


Lawson was a disciple of Isaac Walton. He
loved nothing better than to hie him with his
lines to some shady spot on the bank of a
secluded river and there fish and smoke and
dream. Jim Grahame, in the “Bulletin, has
described a fishing excursion with Lawson.
“At sundown the fish were biting, and Henry’s
spirits were as blithe as a boy s; he appeared
almost as active as one, too, as he scrambled
up and slithered down the banks or climbed
along the dangerous logs that overhung the
water to unfasten lines that were entangled.
About midnight we boiled the billy and toasted
some of the cold pudding, and then we decided
to clean the fish we had caught. In the fire-
light he sat cleaning and scraping and wrap-
ping each one carefully in its own fold of wet
bag, and long after Frank had gone to sleep t
and I had been dozing I could hear him moving
restlessly from fire to water’s edge and feeling
his way amongst the fallen timber to the
lines.”


A QUIET REACH ON THE
MURRUMBIDGEE.


Let me stand on my stone by the side of the
road,
Where the race of men go by—
They are good, they are bad, they are weak,
they are strong,
Wise, foolish—so was I.
So, then. Will I loaf round the Mercy Seat?
No! I know of a better plan.
Let me stand on my stone by the side of the
road
And be a mate to man.


LAWSON MEMORIAL IN THE
SYDNEY DOMAIN.


The Henry Lawson
Literary Society
SYDNEY
Meets in the Assembly Room, Third Floor,
Education Department’s Building, Sydney, at
8 p.m., on the second Monday in each month.
Members, friends and general public are
cordially welcomed at the meetings.
President:
A. G. ALANSON.
Vice-Presidents:
Miss BERTHA LAWSON.
T. S. BROWNING.
Treasurer;
FRED HANCOCK
Publicity Officer:
GEORGE GUNN.
Committee;
Miss MARGARET GILETTE, Mrs. JACK
VINCENT, JOHN L. WESTWOOD and
ARTHUR PARKER.
Hon. Secretary:
JACK VINCENT.
19 Phillip Street, Enmore, N.S.W.






HSNRY LAWSON, to whose sing-
ing days more anecdotes have
attached themselves than writ!
to some modern Australian
poets, will not be forgotten so long as
the society which bears his name has
a surviving member. Mr. T. S. Brown-
ing, a vice-president of the Henry Law-
son Literary Society, has published for
his associates a paper-covered volume
of Lawsoniata, excellently illustrated
with 24 photographs, which every Aus-
tralian with an interest in belles let-
tres should make haste to secure.
We see Lawson, that tragic and yet
splendid figure, in his own places—the
Grenfell goldfield, where he was born
in the days when the world was wide;
at Mallacoota with E. J. Brady; at Lee-
ton in the incon-
gruous role of pub-
licity-wallah; in
the West. The let-
terpress is agree-
ably scant. Mr.
Browning hit upon
the effective plan
of allowing his il-
lustrations to speak
for themselves and
for the poet. They
speak too for the
■■■■■■■■■l past, Australia’s
melting-pot epoch when Gobb and Co.
and the bullock-waggon did yeoman
service before the machine annihilated
the distances that gave Lawson’s song
its unique pitch.
“Henry Lawson emeries,” by T. S. Brown-
ing. Sydney; The Worker Trustees. Private
circulation. Copies at 2/6 from J, Vincent,
TiTPhiJUp Street, Entnore.
b'AfL ' I>|
