

HENRY SMITH’S
EMIGRANT'S VOYAGE AND TRANELS IN
AUSTRALIA.
AS FIRST PRODUCED AT THE
SAINT JAMES’S THEATRE.
AN ENTERTAINING DESCRIPTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
EMIGRANT’S CAREER FROM THE
DOCKS TO THE "DIGGINGS,"
COMPRISING A VARIETY OF ORIGINAL SONGS, WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR THIS
OCCASION, AND ILLUSTRATED BY
TWENTY-SEVEN PANORAMIC VIEWS,
FROM THE PENCILS OF
MESSRS. WILSON, DESVIGNES, MILLS, THOMPSON, &c.




HENRY SMITH’S
EMIGRANT’S VOYAGE AND TRAVELS
IN
AUSTRALIA.
, AS FIRST PRODUCED AT THE
ST. JAMES’S THEATRE.
LONDON.
AN ENTERTAINING DESCRIPTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
EMIGRANT’S CAREER FROM THE
DOCKS TO THE "DIGGINGS.”
COMPRISING A VARIETY OF ORIGINAL SONGS, WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR THIS
OCCASION, AND ILLUSTRATED BY
TWENTY-SEVEN PANORAMIC VIEWS,
FROM THE PENCILS OF
MESSRS. WILSON, DESVIGNES, MILLS, THOMPSON, &c.
The whole under the Direction of Mr. It. Randle.
BIRMINGHAM;
PRINTED BY J. TURTON, YORK PASSAGE, HIGH STREET.
1853.


—Mr. Henry Smith will sing a selection from
the Songs contained in the following pages.
ALL THE ORIGINAL SONGS IN THIS ENTERTAINMENT
ARE PUBLISHED BY
CHARLES JEFFERYS, LONDON,
AND MAY BE HAD OF
ALL MUSIC SELLERS IN THE KINGDOM.


Part First.
INTRODUCTION.
Henry Sm.ih introduces this, his first Descriptive and Anee-
dotical Entertainment to the Public, in the hope that whilst it
amuses, it may yield information.
~ Th ,VTr- 1851 ’ famOUS fM tWO events—the
Great Exhrbition of Industry, and the Great Discovery of
Gold m Australia. Their probable effects. The Age of Gold
in 1852 Age ° f Tm ' Relative P os ‘«en of Gold and Iron
THE LONDON DOCKS.
The Emigrant Ship Ready for Sea. Down the River,
EMIGRANT’S SONG,—“ONWARD HO !"
W ° rds h * C - Jefferys. Music by G. A. Hudson.
Brothers, Sisters, ye who toil,
Bly the loom or till the soil;
* rom o’er crowded cities come,
Seek with me a forest home.
There shall labour win its way,
Toiling, thriving, day by day
Strong in heart and hope, then go,
Through the prairies, onward, ho !
Onward, ho ! Onward, ho !


Where the giant pine now reigns.
We will have our smilling plains ;
Rude our first log hut may be,
But from care it shall he free.
Linger not, no more delay,
Heaven itself points out the way ;
Strong in heart and hope, then go,
Through the prairies, onward, ho !
Onward, ho ! Onward, ho !
TOWN OF GRAVESEND.
Passengers crowding on Board, Confusion in the Tween
Decks, Weighing anchor without scales. Gravesend celebri-
ties. Shrimps, Donkeys, and Water Cresses. Down to the
Downs. The South Foreland. The Channel.
PLYMOUTH ROADS.
The Pier and Lighthouse. Last Port of Call. Parting
Scenes. The last fond Adieux.
THE PARTING SONG—“FAREWELL TO ENGLAND.
Words by Charles Jefferys. Music by Stephen Glover.
Farewell, England, when the Nightfall
Brings its shadows o’er the sea,
I may never more behold thee
Home of friends so lov’d by me.
Fraught with hope afar I’m going,
Yet I shed full many a tear,
For 1 feel while parting from thee,
England, thou art doubl5 r dear,
Farewell England! Fare-thee-well.
Great things of that Land they tell me,
• And of greater yet to come,
But whatc'er Australia’s splendour,
I shall love my Island Home.
Farc-thee-wtll, afar I’m going,
Yet where’er my home may be,
All my hopes; thou dear Old England,
Will be censured still in thee.
Farewell England ! Fare-thee-well.


Advice to Emigrants. Things to become used to. The wrong
Cabin. Hysterical Ladies. Awkward ladders. Anecdotes in
Channel. The Needles. Kirby’s Patent Eyes.
BAY OF BISCAY.
Terrific Storm. Strange effects of the wind. Passengers
look “Streaky,” and cannot find their sea-legs. The safest
part of a ship. The Sexton and the Undertaker.
’TWEEN DECKS.
Strange contusion in the ’Tween Decks. Involuntary dancing
Careless looking. Stray packages and wandering barrels.
TWEEN DECKS.— A Melody.
Air. —“ Such a Getting up Stairs.”
Good people listen to my text,
i’ll sing the trouble of ’Tween Decks ;
Of Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Stiggins,
And a lot of other folks a going to the Diggings.
There was such a falling down ladders,
And calling for the Steward ;
_ Such a falling down ladders, you never did see.
Late one night, when the storm was at its heighth
And we all felt rather so, so !
There was great perturberation—and not a little conster-
Brought the steerage passengers below. ("nation
Said Mrs. Green, oh, dear—l feel very queer,
I can’t stand upright—though I try with all
1 m sure I shall die, said Mrs. Brown, B
For I can’t keep anything dowm.
“I've been Roaming.”
I v e been reeling—l’ve been reeling,
Where the sailor men did grin ;
And I’m feeling—and I’m feeling,
Like a glove, turned outside in.


, “Coal Black Rose.”
Is that you Thompson ? dont stand to near me.
Move a little farther, or I’m sure I shall—oh . dear me ;
Oh, dear, what giddiness and pain,
I wish I may he drowned, if T come to sea again.
The deck —the deck—
The slippery slaunting ueck ;
The wet, the cold, the treacherous deck,
The crowded treacherous deck.
Without any rail, my hand to guide,
I staggered and slipped, from side to side ;
I tried to look cheerful, and hide my pain,
I whistled a lively tune in vain.
I asked a sailor, in accents mild, if he know „
If there was much danger, he said, “you be blow d ;
I never have been at sea before,
I seldom went further than down to the hore ;
And once or twice on atrip to Herne Bay,
But I always was sea-sick all the way.
And if I return to England, I’ll not sail—
I’ll journey, I’ll journey, all the way home by the rail.
“Love Not.”
Laugh not, laugh not, it may be your turn next,
Where others lay, yourself may shortly be ;
The cabin-hoy, the jack-tars on the decks,
May smile at you, as you now smile at me.
Laugh not, laugh not.
“All Rour.d my Hat.”
All round the ship, I wears a huge Macintosh,
All round the deck, creating cruel mirth ;
And if e’er the Captain asks of me, why 1 don t go below and sleep
I tell him I’m afeard of a-dying in my berth.
On yonder cask reclining,
That pale and sickly form behold .
Fast his hand a bucket holds.
The largest one I’m told.
This way his head inclining,
His Macintosh lays on his knee !
And his I see,
Wider awake than he.
Stewards ! e’en while that sound is dying,
Afar, hear others still crying ! , , .
Steward, oh ! Steward, oh ! Steward, oh .


“A Good Time Coming.”
I here s the cabin boy coming now,
The cabin boy coming—
e may not be at once obeyed,
But each shall have some little aid,
Of the cabin boy coming.
Wives and friends may help us much,
But one cabin-boy is worth a
Whole ships ’tween decks full of such—
obbfjfr s l ow ty) Now really Mrs. Brown, I should be so much
obliged to you, if you d have the kindness just to
Move a little further.
There s the cabin-boy coining.
In tween decks and state saloons, though we may stand,
Be it ever such a wretched spot, there’s no place like land.
Land ! land ! land !
Be it ever so wretched—
There’s no place like land.
Who’d be an Emigrant, off to the Gold-fields
Where convicts feel transported, such wealth to see ;
Who d quit their old homes, leave off ploughing old fields,
10 plough the rude ocean, it’s been very rude to me.
I’ll never wash for nuggets or gold dust,
> rather rock all the cradles iat home ;
I’ll not dig quartz as the miners, I’m told must,
And these are the pints, why I’d rather not roam.;
Who’d be an Emigrant.
Patent Water Filter. A caution to passengers.
MADEIRA.
Fair breezes and a calm sea. Madeira, the Sanatorium of Eu-
rope. Its Villas and Vineyards. Splendid scenery. A hint to
loiterers.
OFF THE CAPE.
Passing the Line. Sunrise at sea. The tropics. Optical de-
lusion. The Atlantic Herald. A Naval Newspaper. Births,
Deaths, and Marriages. Byron afloat. Fashions at sea. A
Marine Court Circular.


PORT PHILIP.
Land, ho ! Strange emotions on first sighting land.
LAND HO! LAND HO!
Words by C. Jefferys. Music by S. Glover.
How welcome the sound of the mariner s cry
As with keen eyes he gazes afar,
And tracks out the land from the sea and the sky,
"While we join in his hearty hurrah !
There’s joy in the ship, from the sfemto the stern,
As we eagerly look o’er the main ;
The land boys, the land, for which all of us yearn,
Look ahead, there’s the land, boys, again.
Hurrah !
Our brothers are waiting to welcome us there,
And to talk of their old island home ;
They’ve heard our loud shouts, and an answering cheer
O’er the waters will joyfully come,
Up, up with the signal! the Pilot bears down,
There’s his boat like a speck on the sea ;
Australia the hopeful, the land of renown,
Is now looming, at last, on our lee.
Hurrah !
The new Home. The Great South Land. The Harbour,
ROAD TO THE DIGGINS.
The land of Nuggets and Dampers. Streets paved with Gold.
Bridges of the precious metal. Truth stranger than fiction.
Houses at a premium. Lodgings all let. Chairs five-shillings
the day. Settlers shifts. Wanted a tent. A motley gathering.
' *
BALLARAT.
The oldest Diggins in Victoria. Miners still at work profit-
ably. First impressions at the Gold Fields. _ Extraordinary
scenes. The Open Sesame of the world. Gold in heaps. The
Commissioner’s tent. Novel directions. A Yankee dodge.


MOUNT ALEXANDER; OR, FOREST HILL
CREEK.
Picturesque scenery. Excitement at Mount Alexander.
Immense number of diggers. Richness of the Fields. Fairy
tales realised in the South. California eclipsed. Hardships to
be encountered. Advice to emhroyo Diggers, Try Hampstead
Heath on a rainy day. Wanted—stout limbs and stout hearts.
The Rose in the Desert. Cities in the Wilderness. The old
Flag over the new Home. The one most cherished feeling,
THE COCKNEY EMIGRANT.
Words by J. Capper, Esq,
Air. “ Ths Fine Old English Gentleman* '
Now if you’ll listen unto me. I’ll sing a fine new song,
Set to a well-known good old tune—l will not keep you long—
WholnanA “"t hos^ C hristian name was William Strong,
Who in an A 1 copper-bottom’d ship, sailed lately for Geelong
A hne young Cockney Emigrant, one of the present time.
He took a waggon load of clothes of every kind and form
With fots n of Indi 0l hh Dlg i i?lS hC might d ° uble Work P^orm,
With iots of India-rubber things, to guard ’gainst rain and storm
And long hootslined with rabbit-skins, to keep him nice and warm,’
Did this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. &c.
Besides of tools he took enough for half-a-dozen trades,
With ot s” an d'n an han 6s » fd sharp and crooked blades
With pots and pans for half-a-score of cooks and dairy-maids
In shovels he was quite a trump—in fact a King of Spades, ’
W as this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. & c .
Then down the Channel William sail’d, unto the Isle of Wight
Which looked so very black he thought it had not been named riVht
He took his leave of all John Bulls at Cowes that very nght §
And stood on deck until he saw old England out of sfohtf ’
Did this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &e &c.
Far out at sea the waves rolled high, the wind did loudly roar
Ana al uD d from d ’t Ck ’ d ?"'" bel ° V there rei S n ’ d sore,
And ip rom tween the tween decks young Billy rushed all for
To ask the Captain if he'd kindly let him go on shore,
1 or frightened was this Emigrant, &c. &c.
And Billy saw queer flying-fish come plump against the sails
Wh.lst porpoises were tossed about. like pence, all head, and’tails


And then he saw that spouting thing, which in those seas prCTaU,
Which Jack Tars call the king of fish, he called the Pn
Whales
Did this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. &c.
Now in four months the ship arrived quite safe in Geelong Bay,
And Billy landed with the rest, attired in new array,
With Macintosh, and wide-awake, and Guernsey shirt so gay,
And to the diggins, pick in hand, he quickly took his way,
A fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. &c.
Arrived at Ballarat, our friend the licence fee soon told,
And fell to work with pick and pan, all spick and span, and hold,
He laughed at Infra dig . ideas for he was in for dig for Gold,
And by the night he’d gota glorious heap of-stones and mould !
Had this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. &c.
Next day he fell to work again, with spade like Jacks of yore,
Who historv tells us, dug a pit for Giant Blunderhore,
By night he’d dug and delved, and dug much deeper than before,
A pit that look’d uncommon like a blunder and a bore,
Had this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. &c.
As William worked within that hole a spring came pouring in,
Which quickly rose above his boots, and then towards his chin ;
He called for help some diggers came, who looked down with a grin.
And, passing on, said cooly—“does your mother know you re in.
To this fine young Cockney Emigrant, &c. &c.
Until that luckless night our friend ne’er knew what “damper
meant, . .
He’d heard it was a sort of cake the diggers made in tent ;
And now he wish’d some better cheer these miners would invent,
For by this time he’d tasted “damper” to his heart’s content.
Had this fine young Cockney Emigrant &c, &c.
Escaped from the deep trap, his tools and traps were next day sold
Though not sold more completely than was William once so bold ;
To his maternal parent he a letter wote, and told
He was coming back to England, quick with such a lot of—cold,
No longer a young Emigrant, &c. &c.
Now having sung my sung, I’ll tell the moral of my ditty—
Ye Emigrant’s who leave your home be wise ere you are witty,
And ponder well and deeply if the work ye seek will fit ye,
For harder far is life out there than life in town or city,
As found by this young Emigrant, &c, &c.


A SHEEP RUN.
The Shepherd’s Life. Extent of Sheep-runs or Farms. An
Arcadian Paradise. Good pay, and little work. Results of
economy. The Shepherd turns Farmer. Who make the best
Shepherds. Nobody need despair. Scarcity of Wives.
THE CATTLE FARM.
Driving in stray Cattle. Profitable employment. Splendid
country. Fine scenery. The Stock-keeper. Exciting and
healthy occupation. Excellent horsemen.
BUSH SONG.
Words by J. Capper, Esq. Music by S. Glover.
Hurrah! for a Life in the Bush,
Where our home is the stringy bark tree.
Hurrah! for the spirit that bounds
Like the mountain stream chainless and free.
Oh! happy and glorious the days.
That are passed on the prairie ground,
With the beauty of HeaVen above.
And the beauty of Nature around.
Hurrah ! Hurrah ! Hurrah!
Hurrah! for a life in the Bush.
Hark ! Hark ! the wild Kangaroo comes,
See it flies to its far hiding place,
To horse, brother Bushmen, to horse !
Tally-ho ! forward hounds to the chase;
Away for full many a league,
We are borne o’er that wild grassy plain,
O’er precipice, gully, and stream,
Till the fleet-footed creature is slain.
Hurrah ! Hurrah ! Hurrah !
Hurrah ! for a life in the Bush.
Oh ! ours is a glorious life,
The sole monarchs of forrest and field,
Our subjects ne’er lead us to strife,
And our rifles the sceptres we wield,
Our couch the soft sward, and our throne
The green mound ’neath the stringy bark tree,
A monarch might envy our life,


As the Mountain air blithsome and free.
Hurrah ; E urrah ! Hurrah !
Hurrah ! ior a life in the Bush.
Part Second.
THE QUEEN OF THE SOUTH.
Words by C. Jefferys. Music by S. Glover.
In the far away South there’s a bright land that teems
■With more wealth than e’er shone in the wildest of dreams,
Tis the home on which Nature has lavished her smiles—
Tis the gem in the crown of the Queen of the Isles ;
There our laws are obey’d, there our language is taught,
There in plain words man utters the freedom of thought;
Australia! Australia ! thy name hath a spell,
For we love the bright land where our brothers now dwell,
There shall mingle the Saxon, Celt, Norman and Dame,
While there sons in the bond of true brotherhood reign ;
For together they’ll stand or together they’ll fall,
While the honour of one is the glory of all.
They will war against sloth, and with Industry’s arms,
They will conqour the foe —make, him bow to their charms ;
And the world shall grow wise, for its clammours shall cease,
While all nations exult in the victories of peace.
A glimpse of Australia’s first-born. The voyage from
Victoria to New South Wales. Melbourn and Sydney
trading-ships. Coast Scenery. An Anecdote.
SYDNEY.
The Queen of the South. No longer a Felon-haunt. The
Boy of Sydney. Public buildings in the town. Bustling
scene and street cries. Home Associations, London in
Miniature,
SYDNEY STREETS.
Loading drays for the “Diggins” Exciting time for the
Emigrants. Exhorbitant charges for small services. The
married Emigrant and his wife’s bonnet boxes —“This side
U p»>—With great care.” The Knave af Spades preserevd
Off to the Diggings,


THE ROAD TO BATHURST.
Fine open country, Good roads, Bivonac parties. Ni<dit
camps. Travellers keep strange company. Watch-firos <Tnd
convivial society.
AUSTRALIAN FARM.
The Homestead and its Occupants. Pleasant Rural Life.
Orchards, Pasturage, Kitchen-garden, and Poultry-yard. Dairy
and Stock-yard. Prolitahle Investment for capital with Indus-
try and care,
SONG OF THE AUSTRALIAN SETTLER.
WHUen by Charles Jefferys. Composed by Stephen Glover.
England, tho’ I call thee Mother,
A kind one thou wert not to me ;
Yet I love thee, and no other
Shall win my heart from loving thee :
While at home and discontented
Both M ant and Toil made me their prey.
When I left thee, FaVe relented,
And Hope lit up the wand’rer’s way.
Ah!
As I cross’d the stormy ocean,
. 1 sometimes thought of thee and thine,
Wond’ring in my heart’s emotion
Why so sad a lot were mine.
But my troubles all departed,
found the strong and willing hand
Soon could make me feel light-hearted
In this bright and happy land.
Fruitless toil no more oppress’d me.
Each day, contented, 1 began—
Want no more at night distress’d me.
And then 1 felt once more a Man.
Ah!
England now I call thee Mother,
And proud am I thy son to he,
For I love thee, and no other
Shall win my heart from loving thee.


THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
Bold Scenery of the elevated Land. Bluff Mountain Ranges
and Difficult Roads. Travelling becomes slow and toilsome
The Blue Mountains, the Stepping-stones to the Regions of Gold
Blue Rocks and Blue Looks. Digger’s wit. “Has your Partner
sold his Cradle?” Growing interest of the Scenery. Approach-
the Domam of Nuggets. Insensible to fatigue. “Mammon is
great and Commissioner Hardy is his Prophet.
AN EMIGRANT’S SONG OF HOME,
Words by J. Capper, Esq.
Oh ! think of me when absent,
And let not distance cast
A shadow o’er thy mem’ry,
Or a darkness o’er the past.
But every day each morrow,
Where e’er thy home may be ;
In gladness or in sorrow,
Oh ! think, still think of me.
And shouldst thou see a stranger,
Who like myself doth roam ;
Far, far, away from kindred,
And his dear, his native home :
Where’er thou thus dost meet him,
Oh ! let the wanderer see ;
How kindly thou canst’greet him,
For think, oh ! think of me.
And when the Sabbath calls thee
Unto the House of Prayer,
Oh ! let my mem’ry mingle,
With thy meditations there ;
Then when in solemn silence
All humbly bow the knee,
And hearts beat soft and meekly,
Oh ! breath a prayer for me.
And when the old year waning,
Thou give’st an hour to mirth,
With friends assembled round thee
To greet the new year’s birth ;
Then when the rich wine sparkles,
And all is mirth and glee ;
With toast on toast succeeding,
Fill, fill, one glass to me.


SUMMER HILL CREEK,
Tents and log-huts. Impromptu dwellings. Tavern
charges in Bathurst. New description of Pipe-lights. No
change taken. First arrival at 'Bathurst. The Emigrant’s
Golden Dream. How are you off for Gold ?
THE OPHIR DIGGINGS.
Road from Bathurst across the Valleys. Charlotte’s Yale
and Frederick’s Valley. Ophir. Its present population and
enormous richness. Steadiness of the Australian miners. No
spirits allowed. The Cradle.
NATIVE DANCE.
Manners and habits of the Natives. Proclamation on Dress.
Ab-original Costome,
THE TURON.
Different Modes of Mining. The Wet Diggings. The Cradle.
The License Fee easily collected/ General orderly conduct of
the Miners, and respect paid to the Laws.
DRY DIGGINGS.
Mode of working those Diggings.
OFF TO SUMMER HILL.
Air. —“ The Monument and St. Paul’s.”
words by J, Capper, Esq.
I pour fourth my rhymes—on these gold digging times,
In the hope that our state —you will commisserate ;
From the effects of the strike—we all suffer alike,
From Tom Brown down to Timothy Stiggins.
On our farm we are left—of all servants bereft,
The young and the grey—the most steady, the gay,
Cooks, shepherds, and maids—with picks, cradles and spades,
Have all started away for the Diggings.


On my own little place —there is not a white face
To say “bo to a goose” —while my sheep are all loose,
And my black man he vows —he cant calch the cows,
And I cant catch him —or I’d lick him,
Our ducks have done layin’—our fowls they wont stay in ;
While as for our flour —the whole lot has turned sour.
Could I see an emu —or a small kangaroo,
For our dinner I’d certainly stick him.
From every side from north to south,
The crowds rush on, and still
The cry spreads wide from every mouth
Off, off to Summer Hill.
We have got ten thousand sheep—and the wool it won’t keep.
It will all blow away —at least that’s what they say,
So that my wife and I—were determined to try
If we couldn’t manage a little hit of sheep shearing ;
My wife’s scissors when first we—began were all rusty,
I tried to assist her —soon raised a large blister,
And found out that I—with1 —with a great deal of cry,
Was not likely to have a great deal of wool appearing,
At last I sat down—and wrote into the town,
To my agent to send—and I begged he’d attend,
A man, woman, or hoy —on my farm to employ,
But there was no one to take in my letter ;
So I saddled the old mare—and I’m sure you would stare,
To see us riding pell-mell —thro’ woodland and dell,
Over sandhills and stones —enough to break all our bones,
Johnny Gilpin of old ne’er rode better.
On every side from north to south,)
The crowds rush on, and still
The cry spreads wide from every mouth.
Off off to Summer Hill.
There’s the Parson and Mayor, the Town Clerk and the City
Surveyor,
The deputy Sheriff, and the Parish Beadle —the Collector of Taxes
and indeed all;
Those who’ve got any authority—in the town with the majority,
Of the tradespeople down to the tailor —and the prisoner’s have
all gone off with the jailor,
And you can’t for love or money, obtain in all Sydney a porter;
There’s not such a thing as a sentry—in the whole town, and the
gentry,
Have turned their hands to all eorts of undertakings the Colo-
nel’s wife does all their own bakings.
The Governor cooks, and his spouse —is oblige to milk the
cows.


While the Archdeacon and the Bishop—their own dinners must
dish up ;
And the Colonial Secretary is obliged to go and fetch all the water.
I staid a whole week in—the town, servant seeking,
Both daily and nightly—when the constable told me, very politely,
‘* I needn’t go not no furder”—he’d let me have a steady house-
breaker, and a murderer ;
There very names made me feel quite transported.
You may guess my astonishment—when in spite of admonishment,
The two convicts declined—they’d rather be left behind ;
They thought my farm would lack variety—and out there, they
rather feared, there d be a terrible want of good societ y
So in this, my last hope, I was thwarted.
On every side, from north to south,
The crowds rush on, and still
The cry spreads wide from every mouth,
Off! off to Summer Hill.
At Sydney the town—seemed turned upside down,
The young and the old—spoke of nothing but gold ;
And the last nugget found —on a new tract of ground.
As large as a piece of chalk, and indeed, if anything rather
bigger.
Mr. Jones, how d’ye do ? Pretty well, how are you ?
I guess what track you’re on. Oh ! I’m off to the town,
I’ve got a pick and a ladle. Has your partner sold his cradle ?
Yes, and I’ve sloped away right from the old shop, an out-and-
digger.
The shopkeepers puff—all sorts of queer stuff;
Spurs, lanthorns, and boots—lucifer matches, tart fruits,
Each bill ends and begins—“recommended for the diggins,”
While in fresh things the traders are scheming. °
There a new patent sofa—made expressly for Ophir ;
While the latest invention—is a bed by suspension,
In which sitting upright—you may sleep all the night,
And go a digging and cradling while dreaming.
On every side, from north to south,
The crowds rush on, and still
The cry spreads wide from every mouth,
Off! off to Summer Hill.
DIGGERS ENCAMPMENT BY NIGHT.
Novelty of the scene by night. The web-footed Digger.
Various Amusements after the day’s work. Polkas and
Concerts at the Gold Fields.


THE RISING OF THE WATERS
Gold Digging impracticable during the rainy season. Suspension
of work in the winter. Swelling of the Mountain Streams to
Rivers. The waters hurst upon the Diggers and carry all before
them. Confusion in the Camp, General departure for the
Towns. Thoughts of “ Home.”
THE WHARF AT SYDNEY.
The Homeward-bound. Loading .for London. Precious Car-
goes. Lively and exciting Picture. A motley group. Parting
Injunctions. Farewell to the Homeward-bound. A Southerly
Breeze, and a Rippling Sea. God speed them !
THE RETURN TO ENGLAND!
Written by Charles Jefferys. Sung by Stephen Glover.
Fair winds are blowing, blest be the gale,
Homeward, still homeward, crowd every sail ;
Speed on our good ship—speed o’er the main,
This night we’ll anchor in England again.
Long have we wandered —hard was our toil ;
We’ve had the labour —now we’ve the spoil ;
Run, run for gold, boys, gold in galore ;
When ye’ve enough, mind don’t wait for more.
Ha! ha!
Go forth in hope—faint not by the way ;
But if ye do go, work while ye may,
Fortune, though blind, is not always coy,
Go forth with hope, and come back with joy.
Mind what the song says, “ tho’ you may roam^
All the world thro’, there’s no place like home.”
When you’ve wander’d, you’ll shout with me,
' “ England for ever—the home of the free. ”
Ha! ha!
PORTSMOUTH HARBOUR.
A few words at Parting,


THE FOLLOWING SONGS
FROM
UNCLE TOM’S CABIN,
ARE ALSO PUBLISHED BY
CHARLES JEFFERY’S, 21, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.
ELIZA’S SONG.
“THE MOTHER’S STRUGGLE.”
(See “ Uncle Tom's Cabin,” Chap. VI I.J
“ Eliza, the Mulatto slave, belonging to Mr. Shelby, having
learned that her master had sold her little boy, Harry, to Haley,
the slave dealer, determines to escape with her child. “ Poor Boy !
poor fellow !” said Eliza ; “ they have sold you, hut your mother
will save you yet!” After intense suffering and hair-breadth es-
capes she succeeds, and ultimately reaches the shores of Canada—
“ That happy land upon whose soil,
When once the slave has trod,
He may look up, a man, and own
No master but his God.”
SLEEP, MY CHILD.!
Sleep, my child, let no one hear you !
If you speak, love, whisper low ;
Cling to me ; while I am near you,
Do not start and tremble so :
Sleep, and I will not forsake you,
Lay your head upon my breast ;
No one from my arms shall take you,
There my boy in peace may rest!
Heav’n is shining brightly for me,
And the stars now beaming there
Seem like angels hov’ring o’er me
Just to keep me from despair.
Hark ! that sound ! ’tis like the baying
Of the bloodhounds thro’ the wild,
Heav’n protect us ; while I’m praying
All my thoughts are on my child!
No ! it was the cold winds murmur.
And the sound has pass’d away.
Making all my hopes the firmer—
For ’tis not in vain I pray.
Boy, your father yet mav greet you !
He once more may smile on me;
Husband ! husband, I shall meet you
Where your wife no slave will be.


EVA'S SONG.
The tlmost preternatural feelings of the good and gentle Eva
will, perhaps, recall to the mind of the reader many resemblances
to the kind and gifted children so lovingly pourtrayed by our own
Dickens. Eva will hold a place in the memory side by side with
little Paul and little Nell, over whose early doom more tears have
been wept than have ever fallen for any but these children of our
affection ; the reader, in truth, oonnects some darling of his own
immediate circle with the ideal of the author, and thus his grief is
for the time as poignant and sincere, as if the affliction happened
in reality ; it is the “ touch of nature which makes the whole world
kin ” that gives to “ Uncle Tom’s Cabin” its irresistible charm—
it is the cause of its unbounded popularity —and impressed with
this belief the adapter of the present songs has kept as closely as
possible to the simplicity ol the passages suggestive of his rhymes.
For the subject of the following lines the reader is referred to
Chap. XXVI of the work.
EVA’S PARTING WORDS.
Come near me, all, and hear me speak,
My voice is weak and low,
But you must hear my parting words,
Dear friends, before I go.
I love you, and would have you all
Remember what I say,
And when you hear me speak no more,
Still think of me and pray.
There is a bright and blessed land
Where all good angels dwell, —
A home of love, of peace and joy,
Beyond what words can tell;
And there lives One who died for you ;
He listens for your prayer :
The humblest words will rise to Heav’n
And find acceptance there.
It is for you as well as me,
That land without compare ;
Farewell! remember what I say,
“ I want to meet you there.”
Look up to Heav’n with trusting love,
Do all the good you can,
It is by faith and patient hope
That we may meet again.


GEORGE’S SONG OF FREEDOM.
(See “ Uncle Tom's Cabin,” Chap. XXXVII.)
“ George, his wife Eliza, and their child, together reach the
Canadian shore, and the first impulse of his gratitude is to pour
forth his prayers and thanksgiving to Heaven for their release
from slavery,”
My wife ! my child ! O blessed words !
Go down on bended knee,
And thank the Lord of heav’n and earth
That we at last are free.
0 happy shores, upon whose soil,
When once the slave has trod,
He may look up, a man, and own
No master hut his God !
At sunrise, with a cheerful heart,
I’ll up and do my best,
Because I know, when sun-down comes,
A free man I may rest.
1 shall not lay my head in fear,
Nor think the day may come
When gold can buy my wife, my child,
And tear them from my home !
The lash shall be forgotten now;
The bay of hounds no more
Shall haunt me in my new-found home,
Nor drive me from the shore.
The brand I bear shall bring no shame
Nor evil thought to me ;
My wife and child are by my side,
And all, thank Heav’n, are free!


POOR TOM,
Emmeline and Cassey have, by stratagem, escaped from the
brutal hands of Legree ; as soon as their absence becomes known
Tom ie accused of having assisted them, aud is thus threatened by
his horrible owner ;
‘Well, Tom,” said Legree, walking up and seizing him grimly
by the collar of his coat, and speaking through his teeth in a
paroxysm of determined rage ; “do you know I’ve made up my
mind to kill you ?”
“ It’s very likely, Mas’r,” said Tom, calmly.
“/ have," said Legree, with grim, terrible calmness, “ done—
just — that—thing —Tom ; —unless you tell me what you know
about these gals.”
Tom stood silent.
“ D’ye hear ?”—said Legree, stamping, with a roar like that of
an incensed lion. “ Speak.” (See Chap. XLI. and XLIl.^
UNCLE TOM’S SONG.
Mas’r, I can tell you nothing ;
1 can bear the whip and chain,
I have felt the burning torture,
And can brave its pangs again.
For myself I ask no pity ;
If you send me to the grave,
‘Twill the sooner end my troubles,
And give freedom to your slave!
You have said that you will kill me —
Let this cruel thing not be ;
I tell you, Mas’r truly
It will hurt you more than me.
On your heart put not this burthen,
O repent while there is time !
I would lay my life down freely
But to save you from the crime!
Still your eyes are full of anger,
All my prayers and hopes are vain,
And I know that I shall perish.
Yet I pray for you again ;
And I ask that mercy for you,
Which to me you still deny ;
“ This it is to be a Christian /
Mas’r, Mas'r, I can die."


EMMELINE AND HER MOTHER.
EMMELI NE.
Mother, mother, you are weeping,
Let me wipe your tears away ;
Rest on me, and while you’re sleeping
I will watch until the day.
SUSAN.
Sleep my child? I cannot slumber :
I but close my eyes in vain ;
Dreary thoughts my heart encumber, —
We may never meet again.
TOGETHER.
We have never yet been parted ;
That we may not, he our prayer :
Better to he hopeful-hearted,
Than give way to dark despair.
They who buy, but scorn the tearful,
And deride the eye that lours ;
Let us then look bright and cheerful.
And one home may still be ours.
EMMELINE.
Mother you shall see to-morrow
How I’ll strive to win each heart, —
Then to save us both from sorrow,
They will never bid us part.
SUSAN.
Daughter take my fond caresses,
Let me press you warmly now ;
While I bind these flowing tresses,
Neatly bind them on your brow.
TOGETHER.
We have never yet been parted ;
That we may not, be our prayer:
Better to be hopeful-hearted,
Than give way to dark despair.
They who buy, but scorn the tearful,
And deride the eye that lours ;
Let us then look bright and cheerful,
And one home may still be ours.


TOM AND EVA.
Recitative. —Eva.
“ And I saw a sea of glass with mingled fire look, look, ’tis
there upon the lake I see it now; there the golden beams of
° Ut Up ° n the s P arklin S waves, till like a sheet of flame
the brilliant waters glow.”
TOM.
Oh ! had I the wings of the morning,
To that beautiful shore I would fly ,
That home of the many bright mansions
In the land far beyond the blue sky.
EVA.
Like great gates of pearl do those clouds
look,
And beyond them the skies are like gold :
Is that land the home of the angels
I so oft in my slumbers behold ?
together.
Yes ! it is the land we dream of,
Where the angels, robed in white.
Sing their songs of joy and gladness,
And their hymnals of delight.
TOM.
Ah ! no more of death, or sorrow,
Will there be in that pure land of bliss ;
A thought of that world and its brightness
Is a balm for the troubles of this.
EVA.
Oh ! had I the wings of the morning,
To that beautiful shore would I fly ;
That home of the many bright mansions
In the land far beyond the blue sky.
TOGETHER.
Yes ! it is the land we dream of,
Whele the angels, robed in white
Sing their songs of joy and gladness
And their hymnals of delight.




TOPSY'S SONG.
Words hy C. JuirEßY*.
Music by Stephen Glover.
“What does make you so bad, Topsy ? Why won’t you try and be good ?
Don’t you love anybody, Topsy ? ”
“Donno nothing ’bout love; I loves candy and sich, that’s all,” said Topsy.
“But you love your father and Mother ?”
<- Never had none, ye know. I tolled ye that, Miss Eva.”
“Oh, 1 know,” said Eva, sadly; “but hadn’t you any brother, or sister,
or aunt, or-^-”
“No, none on ’em.—never nothing nor nobody.”
“ But, Topsy, if you’d only try to be good,’’you might—”
“Couldn’t never be nothin’ but a Nigger, if I was ever so good,’’said Topsy.
“If I could be skinned, and come white, Td ivy then.”
“But people can love yon, if you are black, Topsy. Miss Ophelia would
love you if you were good.”
“No, she can’t bar me ’cause I’m a Nigger!—she’d as soon have a toad
touch her. There can,t nobody love Niggers, and Niggers can’t do nothin’;
1 don’t care,” said Topsy, beginning to whistle.
“O Topsy, poor child, I love you!” said Eva. “I love you, because you
haven’t had any father, or mother, or friends —heeouse you’ve been a poor
abused child ! I love you, and I want you to be good. I’m very unwell.
Topsy, and I think I shan’t live a great while; and it really grieves me to
have you so naughty. I wish you would try to be good, for my sake, ,
it’s only a little while I shall be with you.”
See “ Uncle Tom's Cabin,” Chap. XXV
I’m but a little Nigger gal,
As black as black can h e,
You know I can’t love nobody
’Cos nobody loves me.
Dey used to whip me long ago,
And den I wish to die—
-I’spect I donno how to love,
And dat’s de reason why
Now what’s the use for sich as me
Ob trying to be good,
If you canid wosh de hlack-a-moor
Quite white, may be 1 would.
Miss Feely preachee talk all day,
She says me tell big lie—
No good for me to speak the truth,
And dat’s de reason why.
She can’t abear de Nigger gal—
Miss Feely make me laugh—
I touch her hand, she brush away,
As if de black come off
I is so wicked—dat’s the thing
I ’spect be worse by’n by,
She says I is, and so I am,
And dat’s de reason why.
But you, Miss Evy, you so good,
I mind de words you say—
You’re not afraid to touch my hand
You nebber turn away:
You talk to me, you gib me smile,
Till tears come in your eye,
You lub me, and I lub you too,
And dat’s de reason why.
