

I' ‘ y '
1860.
Legislative Assembly.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
HENRY JAMES O’EAERELL.
(DEPOSITIONS IN THE CASE OF.)
Ordered by the Legislative Assembly to be Printed, 8 October , 1869.
RETURN to an Address of the Honorable the Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, dated 12 Eebruary, 1869, praying that His Excellency the Governor
would be pleased to cause to be laid upon the Table of this House, *—
“ A copy of the Depositions in the case of H. J. O’Earrell.”
(Mr. Windeyer.)
109-A
<r •
* ‘


{ * ■, wm
HENRY -TAMES O’FAREELL.
16th March, 1868.—N0. 230.
DEPOSITIONS.— Regina v. Henry James O'Farrell. —Wounding with intent to Murder H.E.H. Prince
Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh.
, ex t Sydney G-aol Delivery.—J.M., A.G.—l9 March, 1868. Wounding with intent to murder —
See within.—J.M., A.Gr.—l9 March, 1868. Darlinghurst Gaol.
(M. 11 & 12 Yic., cap. 42.)
Depositions of Witnesses.
New South Wales,')
District of Sydney, >
to wit. j
The examination of John Waistell Orridge, of Sydney, in the Colony of New South Wales, Superintendent
of Police; Henry Clarke, of Sydney aforesaid, merchant; Simeon Henry Pearce, of Eandwick, near Sydney
aforesaid, Magistrate; John Harding, of Sydney aforesaid, bandsman of Her Majesty’s Ship “ Galatea” •
Charles Pritchard, Bandmaster of Her Majesty’s Ship “ Galatea”; William Henry Bradley, of Sydney
aforesaid, Lieutenant; William A ial, of Sydney aforesaid, coach-maker; Alexander Watson, of Sydney
aforesaid, Surgeon ; Henry Eawlinson, of Sydney aforesaid, Sergeant of Police ; Eichard Musgrove, of
Sydney aforesaid, Sergeant of Police; John Eobinson, of Sydney aforesaid, police constable; William
Montague Manning, Knight, of Sydney aforesaid, Barrister ; John Terence M‘Mahon, of Sydney aforesaid,
clerk ; William Henry Glading, of Waverley, near Sydney, publican; John Carfray, of the Colony of
\ ictoria, squatter; and Arthur Balfour Haig, of Sydney, in the said Colony, Equerry to the Duke of
Edinburgh, taken on Monday, this sixteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-eight, at Her Majesty’s Gaol, Darlinghurst, in the Colony aforesaid, before the under-
signed, one of Her Majesty’s Justices ot the Peace for the said Colony, in the presence and hearing of
Henry James O Farrell, who is charged this day before me for that he, the said Henry James O’Farrell,
on the twelfth day ot March instant, at Clontarf, near Sydney, in the said Colony, did unlawfully and
feloniously wound, with intent then and thereby to murder, Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh.
New South Wales, J
District of Sydney, >
to wit. )
Henry J. O'Farrell: charged with wounding with intent to murder Alfred Frnest Albert,
Dulce of Edinburgh.
John Waistell Orridge, on oath, states: —l am a Superintendent of Police of New South Wales, of
the Southern District; I apprehended the prisoner yesterday, at Clontarf, Middle Harbour, in the District
of Sydney, charging him with attempting to murder Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh, and I
charged him with wounding with intent to murder the Duke of Edinburgh; about 3 o’clock yesterday
afternoon I was at Clontarf, and saw the Duke of Edinburgh and Sir William Manning walking from the
luncheon-room in the direction of the beach, there being a picnic to Clontarf for the benefit of the
Sailors’ Home; there was a large assemblage of people collected; when His Eoyal Highness and
Sir William Manning had got about half way from the luncheon-tent to the beach, I was at a distance of
about 70 yards from them, and saw the prisoner rush up from behind, coming suddenly out of the
crowd, making towards the Prince, whose back was towards him; I saw him present a revolver at the
Prince’s back ; seeing the act, I immediately ran towards the Prince ; I saw a shot fired by the prisoner at
the Prince, who I saw fall on his hands and knees ; the prisoner was about 2 yards from the Duke
when he fired ; a second shot was fired by the prisoner before I reached him ; on my reaching him he had
been seized by some gentlemen who were nearer to him than I was, and I then seized him, and other police
came to my assistance; he was from that time in my custody, on the ground at Clontarf, on his transit by
the steamer to Sydney, and from the landing-place, until I lodged him in this gaol; I could not say
whether the Duke was wounded, as my attention was solely occupied by attending to the prisoner; when
in the cab, on the way from the landing-place in Sydney to the gaol, prisoner who was covered with blood on
his face, said “ I’ve made a mess of it, and all for no good.” Two pistols are in the hands of persons who
found them, and will be produced.
Cross-examined by prisoner: —You did make the remark—“ I’ve made a mess of it, and all for
no good.”
J. W. OEEIDGE.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, ')
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before, — Ji
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.
Henry Clarice, on oath, states : —I am a merchant, carrying on business at the Victoria Wharf; I
was at the picnic to Clontarf yesterday ; about 3 o’clock yesterday afternoon, or a little past that hour, I
was in company with Mr. S. H. Pearce, and saw the Duke of Edinburgh between the luncheon-tent and
the beach, at the edge of a clear space, just before entering some trees; I called Mr. Pearce’s attention,
saying—“ There’s the Prince, Mr. Pearce”; immediately after I spoke I saw the prisoner advancing from
the crowd towards the Prince ; I was in a line with the Prince, and I was about 20 feet from the Prince ;
I saw the prisoner with something in his hand, but at the time did not know what it really was, which he
presented at the back of the Prince—he seemed to be about from 4 to 6 feet from the Prince when he did


eo • I saw a pistol discharged, and heard the report; I then perceived it was a pistol the prisoner held in
his hand and pointed at the Prince’s back ; the Prince immediately fell on his knees, making an exclama-
tion like “ Oh!” or something of that kind ; I then ran towards the prisoner, but before I reached him
a second shot was fired ; I saw it fired, but did not notice in what direction it was fired; it seemed to be
fired in the direction of the Prince, but whether it was aimed at him or not I cannot say —it was fired by
the prisoner ; before I reached the prisoner, and after the second shot was fired; immediately after the
second shot was fired —a man seized him from behind ; I seized the prisoner by the back of the neck, and
Mr. Pearce also seized him, and the prisoner fell to the ground; about that moment the last witness
Mr. Orridge and some df the police came up and caught hold of the prisoner; I assisted the police and
others in getting the prisoner on board the steamer, and I accompanied Mr. Orridge in the steamer to
Sydney.
J J HENRY CLARKE.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, j
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before, — )
Houlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Simeon Renry Pearce, on oath, states; —I am a Magistrate of this Colony; I was at Clontarf
yesterday, and saw the Duke of Edinburgh there ; about 3 o’clock yesterday afternooh I was in company
with the last witness Mr. Clarke, and saw the Prince crossing the ground from the luncheon-tent
towards a belt of trees which fringes the beach at Middle Harbour ; Mr. Clarke called my attention to the
Prince; I heard the report of fire-arms, and saw the Prince fall on his hands and knees and call out
“Oh! Oh!” ; I saw the prisoner retreating backward swith a pistol in his hand ; Sir William Manning was
making towards the prisoner, who, as he retreated backwards, held the pistol levelled in the direction of
the Prince and Sir William Manning ; at this time I was immediately opposite the prisoner, and within
10 or 12 feet from him ; I saw Sir William Manning bend his head, and immediately the prisoner fired
another shot; Sir William Manning was then moving towards the prisoner, and Sir William fell on the
ground immediately the shot was fired; the prisoner backed a few paces further, when a man advanced
from behind and threw his arms round the prisoner ; I ran towards him and seized him, and so did
Mr. Clarke ; Mr. Orridge and a number of the police came up, and I, along with others, assisted the police
in getting the prisoner on board the steamer ; I never lost sight of him until he was placed on board the
steamer.
i,
h
Cross-examined by 'prisoner : —I believe Sir William Manning fell on his hands and knees when the
second shot was fired.
S. H. PEARCE.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, \
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before, — )
Hotjltost H. Voss, W.P.M,
John Rardiny, on oath, states : —I am one of the bandsmen of Her Majesty’s ship “ Galatea”; I
was at the Sailors’ Home Picnic at Middle Harbour yesterday; I saw the Prince go into the tent, and
a little afterwards he came out and came towards where our band was standing; when the Prince got near
us I turned round, and hearing the sound of a pistol-shot I turned round again ; I saw the Prince lying
down with his hand to his side ; I heard another shot fired, and saw then three men struggling together;
Mr. Yial was one of them—l do not know who the other two were ; I ran to the place, and found they
were struggling with a man; I picked up a pistol and an opera-glass from the place where the struggle
took place, as the men who were struggling moved away; I gave the pistol to the Bandmaster, Mr. Pritchard;
the pistol was a revolver, and I noticed that two chambers were discharged and four chambers were still
loaded.
JOHN HARDING.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, (
this 13th day of March, 1868, before, — j
Hodlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Charles Pritchard, on oath, states : —I am the Bandmaster of Her Majesty’s ship “ Galatea” ; I was
with the band at the Sailors’ Home Picnic at Middle Harbour yesterday ; the last witness is one of our
band ; I saw a man advance and fire a shot at the Duke of Edinburgh as he was coming towards us ; when
we are playing in public, and the Duke happens to be present, we generally keep our eye on him as much
as possible ; the man was quite close to the Duke when he fired—l think he was within a couple of feet of
him; the Duke fell; I advanced to the man who fired ; some strange gentlemen had seized him, and I
caught hold of him by the hair of his head ; the pistol fell —I saw it fall; the crowd coming up, and in the
struggle, we moved away from the place where the last witness picked up the pistol and handed it to me ;
I handed it to the nearest officer of our ship, Lieutenant Bradley.
Cross-examined by prisoner :—I both heard and saw the second shot fired ; the second shot was fired
just as he was seized by some gentlemen ;he had raised the pistol and taken aim with it—it was aimed in
the direction of the Duke and another gentleman with him ; the second shot was fired not in the same
direction as the first, as after firing the first from behind the Duke, the man retreated sideways ; and when
the second shot was fired there was a gentleman advancing towards the man who fired, and it was fired in
the direction of that gentleman ; I could not say if the second shot was fired immediately before or after
the man was seized by the gentleman from behind.
CHARLES PRITCHARD.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,)
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before, — , j
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.
William


William Henry Bradley, on oath, states :-I am I^LSih'e
Ship “ Galatea ”; I was at the bailors Home ic Qi Y Bandmaster; it had some sand
to we missed “ een the
two chambers discharged there are three other chambers s i -yy jj BEADLEY,
Kavigating Eieutenant.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,)
this 13th day of March, a y * SB> ty.p.M.
William Vial, on oath, states :-! am a coach-maker, carrying “
this city; I was at the picnic to “^ k g U y££h leave the luncheon-tent with Sir William
walking down the ground, and I saw the D William Manning • they were then standing in front
Manning ; I landing ; I wal standing
of the small pavilion ; they tic P i TJifrhripQs* nassed the Honorable Greorge and
between the “Galatea” band and the pavdion; H.» Eoyal H.ghnessi P ß«d from 25 to
as nearly as I can judge the man had the pis o . p - « Tyr_ broken,” or something to
Prince fell forward when the man fired ;I W the Prince ou * 0 towards me backwards ;
that effect; Sir William Manning turnedL roun a 1 » k j d t b e pistol at him—pulled the trigger,
Manning, who ™.^othround him as he was pointing the pfetol, pinioning his
was struggling to point the pistol at me he sw , ? noticed that movement of his, and
pointed it in the same direction he aimed it when tot nim Jl m fn)nt of and ftt tliat
lowered my right arm knocking down his arm w IC ,1 attempted to throw the prisoner, but
moment the pistol was discharged in a downwar , and whiskers, was thrown down,
before I could effect that I waa seized by some excited people Isw “ml whom I seized;
kicked, and beaten; the prisoner in general appearance.eeemslikeahem^^ w ,F e p“ onC6 called for
I have no doubt he is the man, but h.s sole Spying onlyT few minutes ; whilst
HaThold „Tp47nerTe B CkXrh.Td m a e t me so’that I had an opportunity of seeing his
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, 1
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before,— )
Houltok H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Duke of Edinburgh when I heard a pistol so an ofrlrmpd and found he was wounded over
by the Bhot 1
heard fired when I saw the Prince fall; the bullet has not been extracted WATgON> MD>
Surgeon.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,7
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before,— )
Hotjlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Henry Rawlinson, on oath, states:-I am * I
assisted to arrest the prisoner yesterday at Ciontarf, Middle Harb , prisoner's coat; I accompanied
sergeant Musgrove from the breast-pocket on the e , » 0 n the wharf, as we were going
the police by whom the prisoner was escorted from , obliged to you for getting my face washed”—
from the steamer to the cab, the prisoner said to me, I m much obi g J for d ' ath .p m SO rry
I had caused the blood to be washed off his face ; & sa . ’ voluntarily without my having
I missed my aim-I’ve made a bloody mess of it” ; this was said to me voluntary, y
spoken to him ; when first I laid hold ol when the’shot was fired, and seized him
immediately ; ''ol ZSi M “I've made a bfoody mess of it,” he added-”but I cauuot help
it now.” H. EAWLINSON.
Bwom at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,7
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before, )
Houlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Richard


Bichard Musgrove, on oath, states : —I am a Senior-sergeant of Police, stationed in Sydney ; yester-
day I was at the Sailors’ Home Picnic, at Middle Harbour; I saw the Prince come out of the luncheon-
tent yesterday, and immediately afterwards heard a shot bred ; I ran to the place and found the prisoner
dow/- I seized him by the hair and shoulder ;he called out, ‘‘l’m a bloody Fenian, 111 die for my country
I saw in his coat-pocket the muzzle of a pistol protruding, which I took from him ; it is a small-sized Colt s
revolver; it appears to be a new one, branded “ Challinor, gun-maker Sydney ; I stuck to him until he
was put on board the steamer, and I accompanied him to this gaol; the pistol I took from him is pro u ,
it is in the same state now as when I took it from the prisoner; all the chambers are loaded and the
nipples capped. , £(tl ■, r „
Cross-examined by prisoner : —You did make use of the word bloody. MTT<?PT?OVF
E. MUSGEOYE.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, I
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before,— )
Houlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
John Rolinson, on oath, states : —I am a constable in the Sydney Police; I was on duty at the
picnic at Clontarf yesterday; I assisted to apprehend and bring the prisoner to Sydney; 1 heard shots
fired ; shortly after I seized him I heard him say, “ I’ve done my duty, I can die for my country ; on
board the steamer I heard him say, “ It cannot be helped, I ve made a mess of it. jjqjjjj^SON
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, I
this 13th day of March, a.d. 1868, before,— )
Houlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Eemanded till Monday next, the 16th instant, at 2 o’clock in the afternoon.
J Houlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.
Her Majesty’s Gaol, Darlinghurst, Monday, 16th March, 1868,—Henry J. O’Farrell, brought up on remand.
'William Montague Manning, Knight, on oath, states : —I was at Sailors Home Picnic at Clon-
tarf on Thursday last at lunch ; I was with the Duke of Edinburgh, and when His Eoyal Highness retired
I retired with him and came out of the luncheon-tent with him ; and at the same time His Excellency the
Earl of Belmore and Lady Belmore came out of the tent with the Duke ; the Duke led Lady Belmore to
the private pavilion which had been erected for him ; Lord Belmore accompanied by a lady and I went to
the same tent; the Duke then signified to me that he desired my attendance and walked a little away from
the tent; and walked from the pavilion over the open ground towards the waterside, accompanied by
myself only ; the Duke said he wished to present a donation to the Sailors’ Home, and presented an
envelope to me; we walked a little further in the same direction, when we met the Honorable George and
Mrs. Allen ; the Duke shook hands with Mr. Allen, and then we walked a little further still, going in the
direction of the bay, His Eoyal Highness being in conversation with me at the time, when I heard an
explosion something like that of a cracker or small firework quite close to us ; I was walking on His
Eoyal Highness’ left, and I was very slightly behind the line he was walking, but not sufficiently so to see
anything behind him ; I think the Duke either fell forward or exclaimed something, but whichever it was
it led me to believe that he was struck; I faced round towards the direction from which the report come;
and I believe I advanced towards a man whom I noticed behind the Duke, and who was very near to us ;
the man corresponded in appearance to the prisoner now before the Court, he was dressed like a gentleman ;
after a short interval I noticed him as I should judge 2 or 3 paces from me and facing me, and in
the act of presenting a pistol having a single barrel at me, and, as I thought, in a line with my head ; it
appeared to me that he was in the very act of firing, and I lowered myself quickly towards the ground to
get out of the line of his fire, and in so doing I lost my balance and I believe I fell; either before I moved
downwards, or whilst lowering my head, I noticed the pistol snapped ; I believe almost instantly afterwards
I was in the act of rising when I saw the man again at what appeared to me at a somewhat greater
distance from me, but I cannot be sure of it; he was presenting the pistol again ; and it appeared to me
it was presented directly at me ; and just at that instant I saw two arms thrown round the man from
behind him ; I could not see the man who threw his arms around the man —I only saw his arms; almost
immediately afterwards the pistol exploded; on getting up I next saw a cluster of men on the spot where
the man with the pistol had stood, and they were apparently struggling with some one on the ground ; I
think there were two policemen came and attempted to pull some of the men off; this struggle took place
somewhat on my right hand as I was then standing; almost at the same instant I saw some men carrying
the Duke of Edinburgh towards his pavilion, and heard the Duke ask them to carry him easily, or make
some remark as to the way they were carrying him ; I then went after the Duke, and did not pay any
further attention to the man who had fired the pistol, but the prisoner now before the Court, in figure,
stamp, and general appearance, resembles that man.
AY. M. MANNING.
Prisoner being asked if he had any questions to ask Sir William Manning, replied—“ I have not”;
and prisoner here states —“ If Sir William Manning had not rushed at me the Prince would have received
a second shot and I should have shot myself.”
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,")
this 16th March, 1868, before, — j
Houlton H. Yoss, W.P.M.


~. {°\ n T f rence M‘Mahon, on oath, states: —l am a clerk in the General Post Office, Sydney • I was
at the Sailors Home Picnic at Clontarf on Thursday last, and saw the Duke of Edinburgh on the open
PS +i th i nk t e W S 2 ai \ d T 3 °’ cl ° ck m . the aftern oon, coming from the direction of his own tent
S? rd tbe + be f h ’ Sir WjUiam Manning was with him; the lady with me wished me to walk towards the
f n ; fl e r ttat she might see his face; I did so, and was looking about me ; when I got to within less than
frnm I' th f- meeting him, on the Duke’s left; as we stood there I saw a man following
from the direction of the tent towards the Prince, near the edge of the people surrounding the place: as
I® near the cen fre of the open ground, he, when about 20 yards from the Prince, quickened his
: d r lked ?u- ick ?V? J° hl ? ; 1 kept e l' e on tlle man thinking he was going to call the Duke’s
attention to something behind ; when the man got straight behind the Duke, within arm’s length of the
WT 1 0 A h ®, t?? k a : ste P to th ® and lam f ure the man’s hand must have touched the Prince ; I heard a
nn?/ ired 1 th f r T P ° rt ° f a , Cllinese cracker ; I did not see it fired; there was no smoke; the Duke fell
and IhlT™ T* VI r n j t i ie ?l a , Ce rende J r ass ' sta nce to the Duke, and passed Sir William Manning
and the manwho I believed fired the shot, and as I passed him I heard the cocking or snapping of the
pistol ; Sir William Manning had his arms raised, and the hands of the man and Sir William seemed to
Mann?™ */ a P art;b was afterwards, having passed them, between the Prince and Sir William
5 a T Ug T d n 6 ? an fired 1 the sbot; tbe P risone r now before the Court appears like that man ;he
was dressed in black, and of gentlemanly appearance; I have no doubt but that the prisoner is the man
J. T. M'MAHON.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,")
this 16th March, 1868, before, — j
Boulton H, Voss, W.P.M.
William Henry (Hading on oath, states: —l am a publican residing at Waverley, near this city • I
wtinnn 11 P? 80ner b ? f ° re thl , s ’ 1 sa ' v bim at Waverley about half-past 11 o’clock last Wednesday
a h l CB i lled f ° r a § laBS of ale ’ and asked if 1 had heard the report of
a reviver which he had discharged at the back of my house; I accompanied him up the hill on his leaving
myhouse to show him Waverley; going up the liili he took a white handkerchief out of his pocket and
tW d w ! 68 ’S lt ’ T. g -'I washerwoman would think he had been doing something; he said
rpmnrkprl h “ T ' B6ll finng at i W !, tb hIS ? stol , at 10 J ards ;in the course of conversation he
ZZJont W ? evep ™ s ° sackcd ! n as f ™ las J mght; I had bought a ticket for the ball, and had no
A? ut 1 A ! ent ? a i tail T r and eiJ S a q cd one for the ni gPt, leaving the ticket with the tailor until I
tb f coat and when I came back for it both the ticket and the coat were gone.” He also
asked me what sort of a place Clontarf was, but did not say in reference to why he asked about it.
WILLIAM H. GLAD IN G.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, 1
this 16th day of March, a.d. 1868, before, — j
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.
states :-Assisted by Dr. Young I have extracted the bullet from the
Duke of Edinburgh; I did soiast Saturday morning, about 8 o’clock; the ball had entered the Duke’s
back about 2 inches to the right of the spine, on a level with the ninth rib, passing I believe round to
within 2 mches of the breast-bone; I produce the bullet, and I believe the pistol produced would have
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,! ’
this 16th of March, a.d. 1868, before, — j 4
Houlton H, Voss, W.P.M.
, Jolm . VarJnty, on oath, states lam a squatter from the Colony of Victoria ; I identify the prisoner
b introduced to me as Henry O’Earrell, at his brother’s house in Melbourne, about fourteen years
ago ; 1 think it was in the year 1855. J
JOHN CAEEEAT.
Sworn at Her Majesty’s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, 1
this 16th March, 1868, before,— j
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.
+4a rt f Haig, on oath, states: —I am a Lieutenant in the Eoyal Engineers, and Equerry
to the Duke of Edinburgh, whose Christian names are Alfred Ernest Albert. 4 y
Q _ AETHTJE BALEOHE HAIG. *
Sworn at Her Majesty s Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney,!
this 16th day of March, a.d. 1868, before,— j
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.


- /
'
(N., 11 & 12 Vic., cap. 42.)
Statement of the Accused.
New South Wales, h
District of Sydney, >
O’Farrell stands charged before the undersigned one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the
\VmSm wLSpw2oif Henry Eawl’inson, Eiehard Musgroye. John Eobinson, William Montague
SSSKSI3S^£=;riLsSaSB.i-
-me, and I failed, and am not very sorry that I did fail. j O’FARRELL.
Taken before me, at the Gaol, at Darlinghurst, Sydney, )
this 16th day of March, a.d. 1868, )
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.
The Prisoner Henry J. O’Farrell stands committed for trial at the Criminal Court, to be holden at
Sydney on the 26th day of March instant. HOULTON H. VOSS, W.P.M.
G-aol Delivery.
Recognizance to give Evidence.
New South Wales,l
City of Sydney, >
to wit. )
Be it remembered that, on the sixteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-eight, John Waistell Orndge, a Superintendent of the Pohceh orce , SimeonHe v
Pearce, of Barker-street, Randwick, in the said District and Colony, Mayor of Randwick ; and John
Hardin * of the said City and Colony, bandsman of the “ Galatea, —personally came before the unde -
signed, one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace for the Colony of New South Waies and acknowledged
themselves to owe our Sovereign Lady the Queen the sum of forty pounds each of good and lawful money
of Great Britain, to be made and levied on their goods and chattels, lands and tenements, to the use
our said Lady the Queen, Her Heirs and Successors, if they the said before-mentioned persons shall la
in the condition indorsed. j w QRRIDGE.
SIMEON H. PEARCE.
JOHN HARDING.
Taken and acknowledged, the day and year first above-mentioned, /
at Sydney, in the said Colony, before me, — )
Houlton H. Voss, W.P.M.
The condition of the within-written recognizance is such, that whereas Henry J. arre was
this day charged before Houlton H. Voss, Esquire, one of Her Majesty s Justices of t e ® ace
said Colony, with wounding with intent to murder Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburg .
fore they the said before-mentioned persons shall appear at the next Court of Gaol Delivery to e o en a
Sydney, in and for the Colony of New South Wales, on the twenty-sixth day of March instan , a nine o
the clock in the forenoon, and then and there give such evidence as they know, upon an intormation o e
then and there preferred against the said Henry J. O’Farrell, for the offence aforesaid, to the Jurors "\v o
shall pass upon the trial of the said Henry J. O’Farr ell,—then the said recognizance to be void, or else to
stand in full force and virtue.
HOULTON H. VOSS, W.P.M.
Gaol


] * v ': *
Gaol Delivery.
Recognizance to give Evidence.
New South Wales,
City of Sydney, £
to wit. J
Vial, of int^Baifotv^TTH^^rf Lle f cn “‘ of HMS - “ Galatea” ; and William
rir£ot r o^
the condition indorsed Successors, if they the said before-mentioned persons shall fail in
WM. VIAL.
H. RAWLINSON.
W. H. BRADLEY.
CHAS. PRITCHARD.
Taken and acknowledged, the day and year first above-mentioned, 7
at Sydney, in the said Colony, before me, — j
Hotjlton H. Yoss, J.P,
at Sydney'hf and for ? P6ar neX ‘ Court of ’ Gaol to Soiden
recognizance to else CtaXn fnU fo“ J ““ the said
HOULTON H. VOSS, J.P.
Gaol Delivery.
Recognizance to give evidence.
New South Wales,")
City of Sydney, £
to wit. j
Eichard’w* 1 * 6011 * 11 d f 0f March ’ ” the year of onr Lord one thousand eight hun-
A. WATSON, M.D.
R. MGS GROVE.
Taken and acknowledged, the day and year first above-mentioned, 7
at Sydney, in the said Colony, before me, — j
Hoflton H. Yoss, J.P.
this dayr he recognizance is such, that whereas Hemy James OTarrell was
tte saS C„E w?tr H °^* on neS YoSS ’ Es, ) uire ’ 0110 of Her testy's 'Tustices of the Peace for
they YkZ W 1? mtent *? ” urder Alfred E ™st Albert, Duke of Edinburgh :If
at SvJn. ■" V J before-mentioned persons shall appear at the next Court of Gaol Deliyery to be holden
SstaJ t ‘he Colony of New South Wales, on Thursday, the twenty-siXday of March
fo^thiT t°thenandDiOTe^prefereedagain^ thesald < Jame^O^Fm^^for B theT^nceaforesaid*
t‘o° :t foZTS f“d° y‘r h t e nr id OTtartU^h “ “» °“ d
HOULTON H. VOSS, J.P.
Gaol


Gaol Delivery.
Recognizance to give evidence.
New South Wales,
City of Sydney. V
bJL Wales, and
425 - ,=sf T :^ ;i!:£
to the ouJsaid Lady the Queen, Her Heirs and Successors, if they the said before-mentioned persons
shall fail in the condition indorsed. JOHN EOBINSON.
HENRY CLARKE.
Taken and acknowledged, the day and year first above-mentioned, |
at Sydney, in the said Colony, before me, '
John Evans, J.P.
Colony of New South wiL, on the twenty-sixth day of March mstant at nine of tto dock
theHial of the said Henry J. Cvkrrell,—then the said recognizance to be void, or else to stand in full force
and virtue. JOHN EVANS, J.P.
Gaol Delivery.
Recognizance to give evidence.
New South. Wales, "f
City of Sydney, >
Re it remembered that, on the sixteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one
dred and sixty-eight Arthur Balfour Haig, a Lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, and Equerry to the Du ve
Sydney, hTthe Colony ofNew South Wales,
No. 75, William-street, in the said City and Colony, clerk ; and John Carfray, of IN o. »
in the said City and Colony, squatter, —personally came before the undersigned, one of Her Majes y
Justices of the Peace for the Colony of New South Wales, and acknowledged themselves '% X ? n °to
Sovereign Lady the Queen the sum of forty pounds each, of good and lawful money of Great Britain
be made and levied on their goods and chattels, lands and tenements, to the
Queen, Her Heirs and Successors, if they the said before-mentioned persons shall fail in the condit o
indorsed. T
ARTHUR BALEOUR HAIG.
J. T. M‘MAHON.
JOHN CARERAT.
.aken and acknowledged, the day and year first above-mentioned, 1
at Sydney, in the said Colony, before me, — )
Hotjlton H. Voss, J.P.
The condition of the within-written recognizance is such that the
this day charged before Houlton Harries Voss, Esquire, one of Her Majesty s Justicesi of the Peace• tor t e
said Colony, with wounding with intent to murder Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of lf t -
fore they the before-mentioned persons shall appear at the next Court of Gao ei\ ery, . , ,
Sydney, in and for the Colony of New South Wales, on Thursday, the twenty-sixth day of March instant
at nine of the clock in the forenoon, and then and there give such evidence as they know, upon ail
information to be then and there preferred against the said Henry James 0 l arrell, or le . ’
to the Jurors who shall pass upon the trial of the said Henry James 0 Earrell, then the sai g
to be void, or else to stand in full force and virtue.
HOULTON H. VOSS, J.P.
Gaol
109—B


Gaol Delivery.
New South Wales,) to evidence.
City of Sydney, £
to wit. )
IVioni^tZif °e arch ’, “ the y ear of our Lord <™> thousand eight hun-
ed and sixty-eight, \V illiam Henry Gladmg, of Waverley, near the City of Sydney in the Colon v nf
I^^^l,B^ b f° r6 1 the V n / ersi g ned > 0116 of He/Majesty’s Justices of the
i eace tor the Colony of New South M ales, and acknowledged himself to owe our Sovereign Ladv
Queen the sum of forty pounds of good and lawful money of Great Britain, to be made and levied on
his goods and chattels, lands and tenements, to the use of our said Lady the Queen Her Heirs and
Successors, if he the said before-mentioned person shall fail in the condition indorsed ’ d
WILLIAM H. GLADING.
Taken and acknowledged, the day and year first above-mentioned, 1
at Sydney, in the said Colony, before me, — j
Houlton H. Voss, J.P.
x? f / h Tr wit^i n ‘ w ?' it t en recognizance is such, that whereas Henry J. O’Farr ell was
. ged before H. H, Voss, Esquire, one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace forthe said Colony with
wounding with intent to murder Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh : If therefore he ?LTaid
IrXTf 3103 P" rsou Q ?PPf ar at *ext Court of Gaol Delivery, to be holden at Sydney
for the Colony of INew South Wales, on the twenty-sixth day of March instant, at nine of in
ur!wpT° n ’- an ?+ t i! ien * here f lv ; c ;, sach evidence as he knows, upon an information to be then and there
S. f • against the i said Henry J. 0 Farrell for the offence aforesaid, to the Jurors who shall pass upon
and Hrfcua J ‘ ° Farrell ~ then the recognizance to be void, or else to stand i/full force
/ HOULTON H. VOSS, J.P.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB69.
' Wv. *v ' - ' “ . '•*
*l, V i ; :: ai-L ' --,rr: \
