

Her edity
AND
Enviornment
Delivered before (and printed the request of) the
Criminological Society of South Australia,
October 23rd, 1897.
BY
CATHERINE H. SPENCE.
Adelaide:
WEBB & SON, PRINTERS, 28, GRENFELL STREET.
1897.




Heredity and Environment.
Lecture delivered to the Criminological Society.
The many-sided problems of this age cannot he solved by
going back even to the greatest masters of thought in oldeu
times. Even the highest, authority of nil, although Ho may
indicate the spirit in which social reforms and the betterment
of limimii conditions should be sought for and worked out,
could not lay down methods of work for us, or warn against
clangors which the world He lived in bad no experience of. The
supreme lesson taught by Christ, the brotherhood of man, makes
one thing clear, that wo should seek to lift the fallen, whether
from poverty, from sickness, from weakness, or from sin, up to
the better level in the spirit of love and sympathy, and that all
punishment should be ' disciplinaiy and not revengeful. But
each ago should approach its own problems, not only with all
the accumulated experience of the past, bat with all the wisdom
and inspiration of the living men and women who seek to
follow Christ’s example. Those living men and women may,
however, be one-sided and, though zealous and disinterested,
give too much weight to partial truths. They are absolutely'
confident in I heir own outlook, (heir own iulook, and their own
onlook, to nso James Hinton’s words, for the objective, the
subjective, and the Bpcculalivo. Wo need to compare conflicting
theories so as to find a working hypothesis.
In the great question as to the extent and tho limitation of
heredity, and the influences of environment on diameter and on
conditions, thc>re are two groat schools of thought. In an old
classic for children, “• The Evenings at Home,” I received my
first lesson on the subject in the apologue of “Nature and
Education.” Each took a tree, and each did its best for its
own, and its worst, for the other. Education or environment
spoiled Nature’s pine, the parent of which hud been the main-
mast of a man-of-war. The tree fostered by education was
made unsightly by nature, but. grafting made it produce
tolerable fruit. In conclusion Nature says, “Ail, sister, I see it
is in your power to spoil the best of my works.” “Ah, sister,”
said Education, “ it is a hard matter to contend against you.
However, much may be done by taking pains.” And it is only
by the belief that much may be clone that, wo are led to take,
pains, and direct intelligent thought towards betterment.
This utilitarian theory was good as far as it went, and it, was
a much higher thing than the materialism which seems in our
day to have taken hold of so many of the advocates of over-
mastering heredity. Zola, for instance, shows us only bodies
with their coarse tastes, their selfish desires, (heir low ambitions..
Ho proposes to write as a philanthropist, and conceives that it
is only by telling the truth about life that one can load to its


being made better. But “it needs a soul to move a body even
to a cleaner sty,” as Robert Browning says, and materialism
can no more oast out materialism than Satan can cast out Satan.
Moreover, when the physiologist reigns alone, the picture of
human nature is false as well as painful.
We nil know how paralysing to human effort was the
Calvinistic doctrine of election and reprobation—the unchange-
able decrees of God, who had made one vessel to honour and
another to dishouoni —the conviction that no efforts and no
■prayer could change our own destinies or the destinies of those
who were dear to ns. An old friend of mine, whose father was
an extreme Calvinist, a Glassito, T think, told me that when he
was a boy his Father did not ask him to go to church. IF he
was elected he would bo saved; if he was not, all the oppor-
tunities liu bad would only increase his condemnation.
But seriously, I think wo may consider that no Oalvinistic
-doctrine of election and reprobation is more cruel and hopeless
than Ihe law of heredity as laid down by Zola and Ibsen.
According to these pessimists who ride heredity to death, we
inherit only the vices, the weaknesses, and the diseases of our
ancestors. If this is really the case the world would become
worse and worse in each succeeding generation. Who of us is
-free from taint ?
In almost all his works Ibsen hangs his story on the peg of
heredity, and it we are to believe him, heredity cannot be fought
against. In such a tragedy as “Ghosts” we seethe son repro-
ducing the evil acts of his father, though he had not been
brought up by him, but by a mother of very different nature
•and temperament. Ibsen’s fellow-countryman, Bjornsen, takes
the contrary view of the matter. He says that if we know that
our ancestors drank and gambled or were violent-tern pored or
immoral, we can avoid the pitfall, because we know it is there.
Ibsen’s son, Sigurd, in 1892, married Bjornsen’s beautiful
■daughter, Bergliot, and t hey possess a grandchild in common.
It is useless to speculate which side of the shield young
'Tailored Ibsen will look upon, or whether he will hold the
middle course. Heredity, though an enormous factor in our
■constitution, need not be regarded as an over-mastering fate,
fur each human being has an almost limitless parentage to draw
•upon. Each child has both a father and a mother, and two
grandparents on both sides, increasing as you go back. The
law of atavism, or reverting to a past generation, comes in to
save the children even of drunkards and libertines. I inherit
my crooked little fingers from ray father’s mother, but I did not
inherit the consumption of which she and most of her children
■died. Her children had not this crooked finger, I inherit my
reddish hair from my mother’s father, but not bis rheumatism
or gout. Not one of bis eight sons and daughters had this
•coloicd hair. In most things I hold from my mother, but from
my father and the red-haired grandfather, who wore both too
speculative, I inherit hope, which is invaluable for a social and
political reformer.
I hope yon will excuse these personal notes, because they bear
upon the extent and limitations of heredity. And it depends


greatly on the environment which of the hereditary traits will
.take persistent hold on the character.
Although we are liable to inherit the diseases and the sins of
our parents and ancestors, we inherit a great deal more. We
.inherit their health and their virtues. We inherit the recupera-
tive powers which every human being possesses, though many
may not have been able to exert it. And we inherit from them
ipossibilities which circumstances prevented them from
developing. The. most notable instance of this is that working
bees and ants which are all sterile, mast have inherited latent
possibilities for a life quite different from that of father or
.mother.
It is many years since I road a paper of Francis Gallon’s, in
■which lie accounts for the anomaly tuat. while generally speaking
the children of men of genius show ability, in some cases when
.the genius was exceptionally gicat no child showed ability, by
the supposition that the parent had used up all his potentialities
and left, none to bequeath. Although the paper was strong for
■heredity, it took such a wide grasp of the subject that il was a
cheerful revelation to me.
When a young man fold me lie could not helpdi inking to excess
because his father hail done so, I said, “ Ton are your mother’s
.sou as well as your father’s, and she did not drink.” She was
the most saintly of women, Why could lie not. draw from the
heredity on her side ? But, alas, the environment of the son
was too much like that of the father. Both were brilliant,
with great social gifts, and the environment of men makes
these things temptations at present. Who will dare to say that
it will be so in the future ? Nothing has more impressed mo
as to this than the contrast between men and women of a
■century ago and even later. I can recollect when men drank
freely at all times of (he day and on all occasions, when gentle-
men rarely returned from a dinner parly without, having had a
.great deal too much. But. the women of the same class, though
(hero was no blue or white ribbonism, though (hey might take
beer, wine, or even spirits, were, I think, quite as.temperate as
now, if not more so. Sophia Western, for instance, was the
■daughter of a drunken, swearing, foul-mouthed squire, and her
mother was dead, but she appears as (ho typo of a sweet,
virtuous, innocent, girl, and no one thinks it impossible or
■ii u mil oral. It was no disgrace to Squire Western to live as ho
lived and to talk as ho talked, but an English girl would be
•disgraced if she imitated him.
But besides drawing on a much wider ancestry than the
immediate parents, wo have more than we inherit, or where
•could the law ot progress cornu in P Each generation, each child
who is born, conics into a slightly different world, fed by more
experience, blown upon by fresh influences. And each
individual comes into the world, not with a body merely, but
with a soul. And this soul is susceptible of impressions, not
only from the outer material world, but from other souls also
impressed by ( lie old and the now, by the material and the ideal.
The terrible family record in which the history of several
generations is worked out by Zola, where the taint seemed to be


deepened by transmission, may be supposed to be supported by
Richard Dogdale’s “History of the Jukes.” This book is cited?
continually as proving' heredity, whereas those who read the
book through, instead of merely accepting allusions to it which
arc one-sided and defective, see clearly that it forms the-
strongest argument for change of environment that ever was
brought forward. The assumed name of “Jukes” is given to-
the descendants of a worthless woman, who emigrated to-
America a hundred and fifty years ago, from whom hundreds
of criminals, paupers, and prostitutes descended.
But how were the Jukes dealt with during this period P No.
helping hand removed the children from their vicious andl
criminal surroundings; neither Chinch nor school compelled
them to come in.
The ancestral breeding spot of tins family nestles along the-
forest-covered margin of five lakes, so rocky as to be at some
parts inaccessible. It may be called ono of' the crime-cradles
of the State of New York, for in subsequent examinations of
convicts in the different State prisons, a number of them were
found to ho the descendants of families equivalent to the Jukes,
and emerging from this nest. Most of the ancestors were-
squatters upon the soil, and in some cases have become owners,
by tax-title or by ooccnpancy. They lived in log or stone houses,
similar to slave hovels, all ages, sexes, relations and strangers-
“bunking” indiscriminately. “To this day,” writes Dngdale,
“some of the Jukes occupy the self-same shanties, built nearly
a century ago. The essential features of the habitat have-
remained stationary, and tbs social habits seem to survive in
conformity to the persistency of the domiciliary environment.
•Daring the last thirty years, however, there have been better
houses built, owing to the establishment of factories, and that
has brought considerable improvement.”
Hie Rev. Oscar McCulloch, in “The Tribe of Ishmael, a
Study iu Social Degeneration,” has carried out the Insloiy of
thirty families, which, like the Jukes, were a pest and a cost to
society. ■He says there is reason' to believe that much of this
came from the old convict stock which England threw into the
American plantationsin theseventeenthand eighteenth centuries.
Any one who has read the Tennessee stories of Egbert Cradock
(Miss Murfree), or who recollects the menu whites of Mrs.
Reedier Stowe s tales, may account for this by heredity from
an old convict stock. But consider the environment! When
this white convict s sentence expired, ho found himself in a
society where all the field labour and all tie domestic service
was done either by black slaves or by assigned convict servants.
He had learned no trade. Ho became one of the strongest
advocates for negro slavery, because his colour made him
eternally their superior.
The expired convict was apt to take to the bush, which is not
so barren m the southern Slates as in Australia. He learned
the use of a gun and a bowie knife. He was disposed to be a
nomad. There were no schools for his children to go to. Ho
did not settlo down to industrial life as the Australian expiree
did. Ho saw that all white men must work that they might


■eat. The environment in New South Wales and in Tasmania
might have been improved upon, but it was far better than that
in Virginia, Carolina, and Georgia.
The extraordinary number of murders committed in the
United States as compared with other English-speaking
■ countries, is attributed by Mr. Douglas Morrison mainly to
heredity. So main Italians, Hungarians, and others who have
.'little respect to human life, settle in America. An American
friend of mine, while acknowledging that this is a contributory
• cause, considers that the bad administration of the law is the
■main factor.
Many murders are undetected. Even where there is the
■ clearest proof of guilt, juries will not convict or Judges sen-
tence. Whan the murderer is actually sentenced, the carrying
of it out, is delayed for months, and even years, and especially'
if the criminal has influential friends, it may never ho carried
■ out at all.
I read in a San Francisco paper that if there was the same
swiftness and certainty of punishment as overtook Butler, the
'homicides in the United States would be reduced to one-half or
■ one-third of the present number—lo,ooo yearly. Lynch law,
detestable as it is in a civilized country, could only have been
resorted to by a people who distrusted' the ordinary course of law.
Oscar McCulloch says distinctly that in the tribe of Ishmael
ddiero was much sexual immorality, but little intemperance.
The crime was chiefly thieving and larceny, hut there had been
a good many murders. There was some wandering Indian
blood in the tribe. The licentiousness which characterised alt
the men and women, and Dugdale says the same of the Jukes,
resulted in mental weakness, general incapacity, and unfitness
for hard work. Outdoor relief administered without judgment,
and indiscriminate charity encouraged this idle wandering life.
He himself had known throe generations of Ishmaelito beggars.
McCulloch’s remedies are first to stop outdoor relief; second,
to cheek indiscriminate charity, falsely so-called ; and third, to
.get hold of the ehildien.
Dngdalo’a utterances as to intemperance among the Jukes is
guarded. He hesitates to accept the current opinion as to the
part which ardent spirits play in the carnival of crime. Certain
diseases and mental disorders precede the appetite for stimu-
lants, so that the true cause of their use is the antecedent
hereditary or induced physical exhaustion. The remedy is
healthy, well-balanced constitutions. The intemperance ques-
tion in Dtigdale’s opinion is one fur the physician and educator
rather than for the legislator.
Both our observers object, to institutional life, which breaks
• down the self-reliance of inmates, especially for children. But
in New York, Dugdale’s State, and in Indiana, McCulloch’s
State, there is no hoarding out, and all the children of the
■ State are in institutions. ’ A
When we see what, can ho done, and what has been done,
with our Australian Jukes and Ishmaelites when young by
putting them into decent homes, and giving them as companions
.at school and church, at work and at play, the children of


industrious and law-abiding citizens, wo arc bound t'o protest!
against the paralysing doctrine of hereditary- crime.
Dr. Dagdale has in other writings less quoted than “The-
Jukes” in a series of articles in the Atlantic Monthly entitled'
“ The Progress of Grime in Society,” proved that crime tends
to lesson as detection and punishment became more certain, and
as the attractions of industrial life became greater. By the-
progress of Society a criminal career ought to become! more and'
more difficult, and may be nan-owed down till it will become
possible only for the most clever and the most dexterous, who
.are just those who could do ns well, and indeed even better, in
honest callings. I wish the Criminology Societies of the world,
would republish these articles. They are the work of a man
who has made a life-long study of the subject, and a man whose
earnestness and enthusiasm made him fearless. Ho drove his
sleigh into the midst of the duke habitat alone. The stout
young countryman whom he had hired to accompany him left
him when he learned bis destination, saying, “ I think too mudr
of my life to risk it among highwaymen and murderers. Why,,
sir, they’ll cat your throat for the buffalo robe you have, to say
nothing of your span of horses.” Put always severely earnest
in whatever he thought it. worth his while to undertake, he
proceeded alone, and after talking some time, and making some-
observations ho wished, he partook of a meal with those out-
casts, and departed unmolested. Not only this, but ho had so-
won their hearts by the magnetism of his strong humanity that
two stalwart young highwaymen volunteered to escort him-
through the rough places, and when outside the “ Cradles’”
they wished him good day, and a safe journey back to bis hotel.
One very important generalization laid down by Dngdale
(page ii o) is especially valuable for this Society, as showing the
hopefulness of dealing with criminals, especially with the-
young. It is this
“Hereditary pauperism seems to bo more fixed than hereditary
crime, for very much crime is the misdirection of faculty, and is
amenable to discipline, while very much of pauperism is duo to the-
absence of vital power, being in many eases identical with such lines
of organic disease of mind or body as insnmty, consumption, syphilis,,
which cause from generation to generation the successive extinction
of capacity, till death supervenes.”
Here, too, wo have tho authority of Mr. Douglas Morrison-
much quoted as to juvenile crime, that it is fortunate for society
that the cares of parenthood are largely Incompatible with a lifc-
of crime. In consequence of this, criminals who have children
are often anxious to get rid of thorn. Such children fall upon
tho poor law, or are disposed of in one way or another, so that
the parental calling may not bo unduly hampered. At other
times criminals who have children, send them out to beg, and in.
this way a large number of them are committed to industrial
schools. It is chiefly for these reasons that in English-speaking
countries the criminal calling does not descend in the majority
of cases from father to sou. It descends by apprenticeship, and
not as a rule by parenthood. Now the pauper spirit and con-
dition is eminently hereditary, and the poor fare, the narrow


limitations, the low associations of the English workhouse, and
the American poorhouse are not likely to give the vitality
that these poor children need to sot them free from the
hereditary taint, Ag’ain let me quote from the Jukes
(P* :
“ Criminal careers are more easily modified by environment,
because crime, more especially contrived crime, is an index ot
capacity, and whenever capacity is found, there environment is most
effective in producing modifications of career.'’
And again—■
“We must distinctly accept as an established educational axiom,
that the moral nature, which really means the holding ol the emotions
and the passions under the dominion of the judgment by the exercise
of will, is the last developed of the elements of character. JJr.
Maudsley, that great authority, says it is not maliiro till_ from the
thirtieth to the thirty-third year. Poi this reason this ad important
will is most modifiable by the nature of the environment.”
It used to be a maxim that the first thing to bo done in
education was to break a child’n will , so as to produce instant
and unreasoning obedience. Even good Susannah Wesley,
mother of John and Charles Wesley, iu her dealings with her
very numerous family, held it her duty to break i;ho will,
forgetting that it the ipse dixit ot (lie parent is made the only
law of life, the child has no guiding rule for his conduct in the
world. The will should be trained and strengthened, for it is
indeed the real “ ego.” It is one ot the most fatal influences of
institutional life that the child, accustomed to absolute rule and
authority, to minute regulations for every hour of the day and
every contingency that arises, has developed no will power, no
faculty of choice between the evil and the good —between the
good and the better. The st rict, mother, who boasted that she
had brought up a family who never disobeyi cl or questioned her,
was amazed to see that as her sous approached manhood they
ran away From home, and went, many of them, into evil ways,
against which she bad equipped thorn with no defence. . Ido
not say that parents should accompany every command with the
reason's for it. Far from that; but it should ho made manifest
that nothing unreasonable or arbitrary should bo demanded,
and that things are to be done because they are right and
proper ; not merely because tho parents order them. If, when
a parent has made a mistake, ho or she acknowledges it and
regrets it, tho children will be far more ready to confess their
offences, which are, in more cases than not, only their mistakes.
“ We are too apt,’' says Gnyan, “ to judge children’s actions
objectively, to measure (hem by our own rules, our own precepts,
our own ideals, The child's ideal cannot. he, and ought not to,
be, thus developed ; we must, therefore', pay special attention to
the force of will displayed by (he child, to its self-control, to Us
power of internal resistance. This or that mark of will which
thwarts us, puts us out, and wounds us, may in reality be tho-
mark of internal and subjective progress. Tho moral_ will is
the power of acting along the lines of the greatest resistance,
and it is a thing of very slow growth. It is as dangerous to


stimulate a child to moral precocity as to intellectual precocity.”
All children naturally romance, but that is not lying. The
foundation of thereat lie is fear, fora lie is the child’s only
weapon. Perhaps in the case of children who have harsh or
unreasonable parents truth is developed in intercourse with
schoolfellows in a society of equals, long before it is exercised
to superiors and masters. I believe that games give children
their first introduction in justice. Pair piny and equal oppor-
tunity for all—this is my idea of democratic education. All
games have rules which should ho obeyed. The umpire needed
to settle disputes as to the game is the earliest example of a
court of law, and the subordination of disputes to judges to
whom the people delegate power.
In the course of a railway journey between Hurl ford and New
York, in January, 1894, I had two hours’ talk with Charles
Dudley Warner, who is one of the warmest advocates of indeter-
minate' sentences in (ho States, He, like Dugdale, held that the
“ins and outs” wore the cause of three-fourths of the loss by
crime anil of three-fourths the cost of the machinery for the
detection, trial, and punishment of criminals. By shortening
the sentences of the better offenders, and allowing probationary
liberty lor some time before absolute release, and by lengthening
the terms of those who did not respond to intelligent treatment,
he thought the body and the expense of crime might bo
enormously reduced. He saw two stumbling-blocks in his way
—one was peculiar to America—that the heads of prisons and
penal establishments were appointed for political reasons, and
therefore con Id not bo trusted to decide whether prisoners ought
to he released or detained. This power of rewarding political
partisans with official positions is one which fights hard against
breaking up (he barracks for children and putting thorn in
foster homes. The 28,000 children in institutions in New York
State are oared for by salaried officers who may be removed ou
a change of parties in power. The Governor of Indiana, to
whom I spoke of the wrong of putting little girls of six and
eight into a reformatory, would not listen to me, because the
matron had a political pull, and the more children she had at
so much a head the more profitable it was to her. In Australia
we have not to fight against such vested interests as these.
The other lion in the path seen by Mr. Warner was the senti-
ment of the American people, which was favorable to the
shortening of a sentence, hut would not lengthen it, however
badly the prisoner had behaved. Another opportunity given
for crime, another detection, arrest, and trial, before any
additional term of detention in every case.
That must be combated by education, in Australia ns in
America. We have a beginning of it in the power given to onr
Slate Children’s Council to shorten the Reformatory sentences
on good conduct, and to lengthen them, if the interests of the
child appear to demand it, without any now trial. The same
principle [is carried nut in Massachusetts and in some few
American States, but I must remind my bearers that there are
far more disparities between neighbouring States in (lie Great
Republic than between the neighbouring Australian colonies,


•and one State may be enlightened and advanced, while those
round it may be backward.
Two months before my conversation with Mr, Warner I had
the opportunity of an hour's talk with Dr. Oliver Wendell
Holmes in his own house in Boston a few months before his
■death. Onr talk foil on this great subject of heredity and
environment, and he was disposed to attach more to heredity
than 1 did. My experience with the children of the State
showed rao that where a largo family of had parentage had been
taken young, by far the greater number turned out well; in one
family I recollect one out of six turned out badly, and who can
say that every! hing possible had been done with this exceptional
individual. If we were good enough, wise enough, patient
.enough, might not this one have been saved.
Fresh in my mind was the story of the “ Guardian Angel,”
■"'hero Myrtle Hazard showed so many strains of heredity from
her various ancestry. But also, perhaps unconsciously to the
writer, the hook showed the marvellous power of environment.
The wise and kindly old Professor Byles Gridley stepped in at
most critical times, and cither changed the environment
altogether, as when ho persuaded her legal guardians to send
her to a distant hoarding school, or modified the treatment she
received at home, or called on one heredity to help her against
another out of the myriad inheritances of the past, or out of
the present, the ontwnrd, out of books and out of observation,
tho individual acquisitions which each rational individual can
make, this homely “ Guardian Angel ” lot her in ways that
wore sate and sane and noble. We hold from onr ancestors no
doubt, but wo hold from God directly too.
Without going so far ns T)r. Holmes through Byles Gridley
in his “Thoughts on tho Universe,” that “ tho greatest saint
may lie a sinner who has never got down to hard-pan,” in
■raining parlance, who has not gone through all the strata of
temptation, we may reasonably reduce within very narrow
limits tho number of those who under no conceivable circum-
stances would drift, into crime. And at the other end of tho
moral scale we may restrict to an equally small number those
whom no conceivable circumstances would save from crime.
For tho great mass of human beings, played upon by the
various ourrenls of incentives logood and to evil, tho proportion
•of tho criminal classes in any place or time depends upon tho
amount of effective temptation to which this main body is
exposed, and on the greater or less chance of detection'and
punishment.
No severity of punishment will deter from a lucrative pro-
fession which may last a long while without detection, particu-
larly if tho state of public feeling, or the uncertainty of the law,
•often lets the detected criminal escape. When we see how high
wages will induce men to go into such unhealthy trades as
needle-grinding, where tho average life is only forty years, one
can scarcely wonder that the professional*thief, who' spends two
thirds of his life in criminal licence and vicious self-indulgence,
and one-third in prison, where he is fed and clothed, and
generally recruits his health during these sequestrations, is not


lod to repentance and reform by our present rogime. Criminal
statistics in England prove that with the abolition of the death
penalty for minor offences, the greater certainty of the sentence-
made a change for the better, but the most marked improve-
ment there has been since the abolition of transportation, winch
was, according to Archbishop Whately, a system begun in
defiance of all reason, and persevered in in defiance of all
oxperi nice ! From 1828 to 1838 the average convict population
of great Britain was 50,000, while from four to live thousand
were transported every year to hor penal settlements, of whom
most of the number stayed in the colonies or died there. From
the day transportation was checked in 1838, and finally
abolished in 1867 in West Australia, where it took bold alter
the Eastern Australian Colonies had indignantly repudiated it,
the crime rate in England has been steadily reduced. In 1881,
when Dugdale wrote, he said there were only 10,000 convict
prisoners' and 2,000 ticket-of-leavo men in England. In old.
times there wore 199 prisons in England. Even twenty years
ago there were 113 prisons in England; now there are only 08.
Absolute uniformity prevails in them all with regard to diet,,
discipline; and regulations. This is a great pity. In America-
experiments can be made in various States, and the results aie
published for the benefit of the world. Uniformity is a refuge
for stupidity.
■ It would appear to be an anomaly that the fewer men arc m
prison, the fewer thieves we have at large; but the reason is.
clear. Transportation, which yearly sent out of England
thousands of practised thieves, while the effective temptation
remained the same, other thousands, more easily caught, took
their place. When a country has to punish its criminals on its
own soil, with reasonable vigilance on the part of the police,,
and especially with sufficient industrial oat,lots, the criminal
profession is narrowed into lines which only special dexterity,
ingenuity, and perseverance can follow. I quote from Dugdale s.
words :—•
“ In such visitations as the Great Plague of London, or in times of
disorganization during riots, wo know that people supposed to be-
honest and law-abiding plunder and steal, because the police are-
paralysed, and property is supposed to ho no man's, and if not taken
by .Dick will bo seized by Marry, .hflcctivc chocks uro in abeyance,,
and temptations to crime arc increased, in bad limes, when
employers discharge their workmen it is, of course, their worst, the
least skilful, and the most unsteady, who are thrust out. Iho pro-
fessional thieves find their preserves poached on by new hands easily
detected, and an increase in crime is, singularly enough, accompanied 1
by a decrease in the arrests for drunkenness. The old hands do not
earn ao much to spend iu that way. On the return of commercial
prosperity, the discharged hands, or at least thoso of them who uro
not in the grip of the law, will bo re-engaged ; the crime ratio will
fall, and the proportion of arrests for drunkenness and misdemeanors
arising out of drunkenness will rise.”
But unfortunately we cannot, in this phase of the world’s
history, have prosperity without an immense impulse to specu-
lation. When the currency was in progress of inflation_ in
America, during the Civil War, when a land boom or a mining


boom is inflating values in Australia, the continuous rise in*
prices presents such chances to become suddenly rich, that
numerous clerks, trustees, and directors in public institutions,-
pledge other people’s securities in order to borrow money for
their speculations. With the decline of prices numberless
embezzlements and defalcations were revealed. These are not
committed by the criminal class at all They are mainly con-
fined to tho greatly tempted among lawyers, bankers, trustees,
Church members, all of whom know perfectly well the ethical
wrong of these acts. Every one of these offences is punishable
by penal servitude and social disgrace, and yet, with the pros-
pects of enormous profits, they take the risk. And in order to
escape detection when it is imminent, even greater risks are-
run,'and greater crimes committed. “ More effective auditing-
would be a far better check to such courses than the severest
penal! ins of the law,” is Dngdale's pregnant advice.
In the case of tho young, the gaol is an undoubted school of
crime. Every effort should be used to keep boys and girls out
of gaol. As soon as possible, hoys and girls sent to reformatery
schools should be dispersed where the environment is more
normal, and better than that of fellow-offenders and officials.
But from my experience hero in South Australia, there are very
few of the homes from which young offenders come, that are-
better than a good disciplinary institution. Order, routine, and
cleanliness, prompt obedience, regular work, accompanied by
plenty of’wholesome food and fresh air, and time and facilities
for recreation, arc the very best things for children whose homes
arc dirty and disorderly, and whoso parents are vicious and
careless. Six or twelve months of such discipline is generally
needed by young offenders before they can bo sent out into the
world, It they respond to it earlier, the State Children’s
Conn oil have it in their power to transfer them to the Industrial
School and place thorn out at once.
I do not think it right to deprive reformatory children of
their piny for longer than a few days. Games, according to Mr.
Gnyan, in his book on “ Education and Heredity,” in the Con-
temporary Science soi'ies, are far more important in physical
and mental development than drill and gymnastics. Happiness
is the most powerful of tonics, and the extreme interest felt in
games, and tho riotous delight which children take in their
rougher frolics are of as much importance as the accompanying'
exertion. And I have already showed their moral teaching.
.Heredity, as we know, comes down to ns from countless
ancestoi s, and environment means a great deal more than super-
ficial thinkers associate with the term. The home and the family
are first in order, and it is the worst part of evil heredity that it is
Ulcely to perpetuate a hail environment. There is constant talk of
the want of parental control being answerable for the increase
of juvenile delinquency, but the want of parental sympathy is.
at. tho root of Hie lack of control. The child needing punish-
ment is the child lacking affection. Lavish on it enough love
and blows will be unnecessary, for love begets love, the most
powerful weapon in all education.
A mother may be clean and tidy, and give her children well


cooked food and suitable cloHics,' but if alio pushes them aside
because she is always too busy to spare five_ minutes tor then-
troubles or their joys, when sheseemed happiest when they are
out of her way, and off her hands; when she never speaks to
them but to give a command or to administer a reproof, when
she is as angry about noise and spoiling clothes as about lying
and cruelty,'she need not be surprised if they go elsewhere tor
companionship and guidance. "'Parents are too apt to treat their
children when they are little as if they were never to grow up,
rand then as thsy are growing up they check them as u they
■wore still little. All through our childish_ yoars_ habits are
forming, and it is no small thing whether their habits are good
or bad, whether (bey tend to make the impulses and emotions
our masters, or enthrone the intelligent will as their masters.
When fathers and mothers bring their little children before
•the magistrate ns uncontrollable, I hey often speak the truth,
they are uncontrollable by thorn. You may say that wo need a
reformatory for the parents even more than for the youngsters,
hut let us not be too hard on the parents. They may be
ignorant of what a good home should be. They may never have
seen one. They enter on marriage and parenthood under the
influence of one of the strongest instincts of human nature, and
in poor homes in poor streets, With uncertain employment, it is
not so easy to be model fathers and mothers.
They are told to control, and their only idea is to punish.
When the father is appealed to on his return from work to
• chastise the children for the faults of the day, when bod himself
is only spoken of as punishing the sinner hero and hereafter—as
a sort of magnified detective policeman to hale to judgment and
-execution, the environment, is a bad one, oven if the children
are taken regularly to church and sent to Sunday-school. Why
should not God be spoken of as pleased with the childrens
pleasures, as present at their games, as giving the sunshine and
the rain, instead of his name being brought forward always as
an avenging judge. _ , . ,
A lie me were the' parents quarrel is a bad nemo, t hong b riot
■ quite so bad as where the parents drink. A home where parents
are consistently indulgent may be somewhat enervating, but yet
iis not a bad'home. A home where they arc consistently severe
is not so bad for the children as where they pull different ways.
The most distracting thing to the mind and consciences of
children is when the government is vacillating, y* hen they
,do not know whether or not they will be punished lor an act 0-
carelessness or of disobedience or of wanton mischief, they aic
like the criminals who trust to the uncertainty of the law as to
their conviction or escape. .
Next to the home, the immediate neighbourhood is_ of
importance, I am always very sorry when poverty drives
decent families into very small houses in streets where there ai e
doubtful characters. In a to.wn there is not space in the homo
for play, and the street lias to bo the gathering place. 1 saw
the opening of a playground in one of the worst quarters ot
Chicago, the greatest possible boon, but Chicago needed fifty or
: a hundred of such open spaces. I regret very much tlint our


■beautiful squares, meant to be the lungs and playgrounds of tho-
eity, are so invaded by men of indifferent character that they
are not quite safe for our little ones ryithont some escort.
Perhaps of as much importance in environment is the
day school. Here many children learn their first lessons in
order, cleanliness, obedience, and politeness, as well as the-
lessons which are especially the object of public education.
Without discipline, order, and obedience, largo classes could)
not be taught at all. M. Guyau quotes from Tolstoy bis-
amusing account of the schools ho established for the Russian
peasant children on his estate, where the children themselves-
suggest what (hey want to learn, and may refuse to learn any-
thing else, where they play and fight at their own sweet will,
and then tired out may turn to their books. Some children
could learn much even on (his strange voluntary system, and’
.some inveterate dunces learn little oven by the beat methods,
but S 5 per cent, of children born will learn incomparably more-
■where there is discipline than without it. And they also learn
respect for others, by authority first, but, afterwards reason
approves of it. There is nothing school children despise more-
than weakness and vacillation on the part of those in authority.
There are two points on which wise parents and teachers and
friends may help their young bids and gills, and these arc in,
the choice of companions and of books. These may be most
helpful or most, mischievous. If parents took note of what
companions their children associated with, and encouraged them
to bring their friends home, they might, give a great deal of
pleasure, and might chock undesirable intimacies. They should
make a point, of reading some of the books their children prefer.
The choice of a profession or trade is also a most important, one
for environment. If the you Ill’s heart goes with his work, the-
work is the best moral antiseptic in the world.
It is well for us when we reach the age to claim citizens’'
rights, that wo should- have grown up in a law-honouring and
law-abiding community. The public opinion which influences us
is that, which is nearest to us —that of our mates and equals..
A healthy public opinion is more powerful than the law, In an
educated and intelligent, community it supports the adminis-
tration of (ho law if it is intelligent and. honest, and such law
reacts in the moralising of public opinion.
If the Church only keeps hold of our children while they go-
to Sunday-school, and lets them drift as they reach manhood
and womanhood, it fails in its great mission. The Church
environment is strong but partial. The classes from which the-
professional criminal and the hereditary pauper are drawn are
scarccdy touched by the Churches of the present day. The Sal-
vation Army reaches people whom the organised Churches do-
not touch, and it has a knack of setting its converts to work for
something more than their own salvation, which is real salvation
to those who practise it. The more earnest Ohurthes are stimu-
lated by this example, and many of them now have a social
wing.
But this is a Criminological Society, and perhaps I have-
dwelt too much on the preventive work to be done in the home,,


an the school, in the national institutions, and in the Church.
'The question more immediately before ns is what is to be done
in the reclamation of the criminal and the misdemeanant. _ Wo
■cannot change the heredity : how can wo change the environ-
ment? Ido not think wo have advanced far m reformatory
snirit or reformatory methods at the Adelaide Gaol or at the
: Yatala Labor Prison. The sentences seem punitive, rather than
disciplinary or elevating. Wo are promised a paper on the
'.Elmira Reform Prison for Adults in New York Slate before the
end of the year. The founding of this was the bright spot at
the end of Sard Dugdalo’s life, and Charles Dudley Warner
■•told me that he hud confidence in its methods and its manager.
How far are our methods reformatory? How far are they
canable of improvement ? T ,
Let us take first the short-sentenced offenders. I hud that
the total number of committals for less than six months to the
Adelaide Gaol for the year 1896 was 879 male and *.67 female
offenders. Of the men 290, or about one-third, were re-
committals; of the women 185, or more than two-thirds wore
re-committals. It would have been more instructive it (lie
-returns had shown bow many individual men and_ women had
been in the gaol during the year. Habitual misdemeanants
through drunkenness should be treated as incapable of sell-
control, and made to work for their food and clothes under
strict though kind supervision. The average shortness o the
sentences is shown by the fact that at the end of the year there
were only 75 men and 21 women in gaol, or 8j per cent ot
the committals for the twelve months. And in regard to the
21 women, this must include all long-sentenced criminals, tor
there are none at the Yatala Labor Prison and there was not a
woman in any of the conntiy gaols. iho > short-sentenced
prisoners in the country gaols are so few that it appears to be a
ffrcafc waste of public money to have built them and to have
them kept up with a staff of officials. In all the year Mount
Gambier received 20 prisoners, Wallaroo 47, fort Lincoln 9
Port Augusta 16, and Gladstone 114. There were only tour of
them women. If the average is the same as at the, Adelaide
■Gaol there cannot bo more than 20 or 25 in those five gaols.
'The Redruth Gaol Ims been given over to the use of the Girls
Reformatory. Of all those prisoners—l,:.o2 in all—only 104
■males and 7 females are under 21. Our reformatories now take
■cocnizanco of all offenders, whether lads or girls, under the age
oflB but the very small number of women under sentence is
remarkable Either women are far less criminally disposed or
our magistrates deal with them much more leniently than with
the other sox. Twenty-one women in all as composed, with 140
in the Yatala Labor Prison, 75 in the Adelaide Gaol, and say 2o
■an the country prisons shows favorably for the sex.
'■ The previous convictions of prisoners at the Yatala aroclcnrto
are much better tabulated than those for the other gaols ; 145 was
the greatest number at one time during 1896, and of these 72 were
re-committals; 24 had had one previous conviction, 13 two, and
35 three or more previous sentences. Thus ono-lmlf had been
convicted beforehand one-fourth had been three or'more times


■sentenced previously. Tins largo proportion of habitual
offenders shows either that the discipline is not reformatory, or
that the difficulties in the way of obtaining honest employment
.after release are great.
We cannot emphasise too strongly Dngdale’a generalization
that however hard we may make the way of transgressors,
unless there are opportunities for honest work given at once
.after release, the liberated convict is in extreme danger of
relapse. This was a very strong point in the articles in the
Adelaide Advertiser, written hy “ One with Knowledge.” This
was a strong arraignment of the methods and management pur-
sued in this province with offenders both before and after con-
viction. No notice has been taken of them. Perhaps official
etiquette prevents any reply, but the general public would like
to know if such things are. ,
from the printed rules and regulations we see that the
shortening of sentences depends almost entirely on doing extra
work, which is comparatively easy for a stalwart offender, but
not at all easy for a slight, or weak man. Bad conduct, how-
cncr, forfeits the advantage gained hy work. Bad conduct is
frequently some breach of discipline. Prisoners are forbidden
to see their friends except, once in two months on visiting day;
■of course, across a grating, and in presence of an official. No
prisoner fallowed to receive a latter or to send a letter oftcuer
than once in two months, and he is not. allowed the use of pen
and ink in his cell at any time. If it is by means of his
affections that a man can best, bo reclaimed, such regulations
.seem to provide a minimum of exercise for these. 1 wanted
■much to write to a prisoner at Yatala, but when 1 was told that
it would keep back (ho regulation letter from his far-distant
wife, I refrained, and yet. 1 believe my letter might have done
good. As all letters are opened by the officials, they could do
no harm.
The labour convicts are put to is of no use in helping them to
■earn a living in future. Stonehreaking (outside of Yatala) is
kept, for old and partially crippled men, and there is not enough
of it to go properly round them, as I hear every week when
sitting on the Destitute Board. I wish the prisoners were em-
ployed otherwise, and my poor old men had the job; There are
excellent regulations against harshness of language and
ructions towards prisoners by the warders, but prisoners com-
plain bitterly of both. Though their assertions should ha
received with more than the proverbial grain of salt, there may
bo truth in (hem. A man who goes in without a trade comes
out without one. A man who is brutal is neither softened nor
instructed. Only in two directions is improvement aimed at.
The rebellions are subjected to discipline, and.the lazy aro com-
pelled to work.
Richard Dngdale considers that every gaol should turn out a
Rian a good deal bettor than it. found him, and for the offences
against the pocket— theft, embezzlement, forgery, Ac,—he
believes that after some disciplinary treatment a tiokot-of-leave
might be given, to be forfeited on relapse into crime, “ Gaolt
will continue to, be necessary for the life confinement of


murderers and of criminals addicted to offences of gieas
violence, a class requiring absolute restraint,” but ho says they
are not needed for thieves. It seems strange to look forward!
to a time when they might be all at largo, bub during the-
interval the prison is the great hold for experiment.
I quote from Dugdale again : -
“ The prisons in America and elsewhere are costly failures, built
often in violation of all hygienic requirements, with a barren dis-
cipline, and a stupid system of labor, turning out convicts yearly into
the world without instruction in trade, in manners, or m books, it
was not till capital punishment for minor offences was abolished that
the police in Great .Britain wore rendered efficient. It was_ not till
transportation was discontinued that conditional liberation was
adopted, and that there was any intelligent effort made for the indus-
trial and educational training of youthful offenders. And perhaps it
will not bo till prisons are virtually abolished that the question of
hereditary crime will be studied so as to get to the root of the physical
and moral conditions which keep up the entailable attributes of the-
malefactor."
In speaking' of crime as necessarily decreasing with the
progress of society and the development of indi viid nudism, I do I
nothin chide with crime vice. There are some vices which grow
with the luxury which is fed by individualism ; not that 1 moan
that the man who docs the work obtains the luxuries, but
national wealth, which figures in statistics, and is brought for-
ward to show how large a share each of ns has by the doctrine-
of averages, always goes on increasing in an industrial nation..
It is wrong to say that it the working classes have high wages
they will spend it on vice and debauchery. A, well-paid working-
class in steady employment is a moralising force. The standard
of comfortable living'rises, and the workers respect themselves.
In the large accession of innocent pleasures which are open to a
well-paid working people, there is a valuable antidote to the
coarser indulgences of bygone days. Young Australia drinks
less-than the previous generation. I should be glad if 1 could
say it, gambled less. This vice is on the increase in all civilized
countries, and is especially rampant, in Australia in connection,
with horse-racing, and with ail trials of skill and speed in games-
and contests.
In uncivilized countries there are many murders, and very-
few suicides ; in civilized society there are few murders and
many suicides. As civilization advances crimes of violence
decrease, and crimes of fraud and contrivance increases. Crimes,
of violence were met, by the strong hard of the law, bat the-
more refined and subtle offences, which are most prevalent
wow-a-daya, must, bo encountered by all the wisdom, the insight,
and the patience which the collective conscience of society can,
evolve and.apply.
Webb & Son, Printers, Grenfell Street. Adelaide
