

British association for the Hfcvanccmcnt of
Science.
[Reference No. 1]
AUSTRALIA, 1914.
ADDRESS
Professor WILLIAM BATESON, M.A., F.E.S.,
PRESIDENT.
Part I. — MELBOURNE.
The outstanding feature of this Meeting must be the fact that we are
here —in Australia. It is the function of a President to tell the
Association of advances in science, to speak of the universal rather than
of the particular or the temporary. There will be other opportunities
of expressing the thoughts'which this event must excite in the dullest
heart, but it is right that my first words should take account of those
achievements of organisation and those acts of national generosity by
which it has come to pass that we are assembled in this country. Let
us, too, on this occasion, remember that all the effort, and all the
goodwill, that binds Australia to Britain would have been powerless to
bring about such a result had it not been for those advances in science
which have given man a control of the forces of N ature. For we are
here by virtue of the feats of genius of individual men of science,
giant-variations from the common level of our species; and since I am
going soon to speak of the significance of individual variation, I cannot
introduce that subject better than by calling to remembrance the line
of pioneers in chemistry, in physics, and in engineering, by the work-
ing of whose rare —or, if you will, abnormal—intellects a meeting of
the British Association on this side of the globe has been made physically
possible.
I have next to refer to the loss within the year of Sir David Gill,
a former President of this Association, himself one of the outstanding
great. His greatness lay in the power of making big foundations. He
built up the Gape Observatory; he organised international geodesy; he
conceived and carried through the plans for the photography of the
whole sky, a work in which Australia is bearing a conspicuous part.


Astronomical observation is now organised on an international scale,
and of this great scheme Gill was the heart and soul. His labours have
ensured a base from which others will proceed to discovery otherwise
impossible. His name will be long remembered with veneration and
gratitude.
As the subject of the Addresses which I am to deliver here and
in Sydney I take Heredity. I shall attempt to give the essence
of the discoveries made by Mendelian or analytical methods of
study, and I shall ask you to contemplate the deductions which these
physiological facts suggest in application both to evolutionary theory at
large and to the special case of the natural history of human society.
Eecognition of the significance of heredity is modern. The term
itself in its scientific sense is no older than Herbert Spencer. Animals
and plants are formed as pieces of living material split from the body
of the parent organisms. Their powers and faculties are fixed in their
physiological origin. They are the consequence of a genetic process,
and yet it is only lately that this genetic process has become the subject
of systematic research and experiment. The curiosity of naturalists
has of course always been attracted to such problems; but that accurate
knowledge of genetics is of paramount importance in any attempt to
understand the nature of living things has only been realised quite
lately even by naturalists, and with casual exceptions the laity still
know nothing of the matter. Historians debate the past of the human
species, and statesmen order its present or profess to guide its future
as if the animal Man, the unit of their calculations, with his vast
diversity of powers, were a homogeneous material, which can be
multiplied like shot.
The reason for this neglect lies in ignorance and misunderstanding
of the nature of Variation; for not until the fact of congenital diversity
is grasped, with all that it imports, does knowledge of the systdltn of
hereditary transmission stand out as a primary necessity in the con-
struction of any theory of Evolution, or any scheme of human polity.
The first full perception of the significance of variation we owe to
Darwin. The present generation of evolutionists realises perhaps more
fully than did the scientific world in the last century that the theory of
Evolution had occupied the thoughts of many and found acceptance
with not a few before ever the ‘ Origin ’ appeared. We have come also
to the conviction that the principle of Natural Selection cannot have
been the chief factor in delimiting the species of animals and plants,
such as we now with fuller knowledge see them actually to be. We
are even more sceptical as to the validity of that appeal to changes in
the conditions of life as direct causes of modification, upon which
latterly at all events Darwin laid much emphasis. But that he was the


first to provide a body of fact demonstrating the variability of living
things, whatever be its causation, can never be questioned.
There are some older collections of evidence, chiefly the work of
the French school, especially of Godron I—and 1 —and I would mention also
the almost forgotten essay of Wollaston 2 —thes© however are only
fragments in comparison. Darwin regarded variability as a property
inherent- in living things, and eventually we must consider whether this
conception is well founded ; but postponing that inquiry for the present,
we may declare that with him began a general recognition of variation
as a phenomenon widely occurring in Nature.
If a population consists of members which are not alike but differen-
tiated, how will their characteristics be distributed among their off-
spring? This is the problem which the modern student of heredity
sets out to investigate. Formerly it was hoped that by the simple
inspection of embryological processes the modes of heredity might be
ascertained, the actual mechanism by which the offspring is formed
from the body of the parent. In that endeavour a noble pile of
evidence has been accumulated. All that can be made visible by
existing methods has been seen, but we come little if at all nearer to
the central mystery. We see nothing that we can analyse further
nothing that can be translated into terms less inscrutable than the
physiological events themselves. Not only does embryology give no
direct aid, but the failure of cytology is, so far as I can judge, equally
complete. The chromosomes of nearly related creatures may be
utterly different both in number, size, and form. Only one piece of
evidence encourages the old hope that a connection might be traceable
"between the visible characteristics of the body and those of the chromo-
somes. I refer of course to the accessory chromosome, which in many
animals distinguishes the spermatozoon about to form a female in
fertilisation. Even it however cannot be claimed as the cause ot
sexual differentiation, for it may be paired in forms closely allied to
those in which it is unpaired or accessory. The distinction may be
present or wanting, like any other secondary sexual character. Indeed,
so long as no one can show consistent distinctions between the
cytological characters of somatic tissues in the same individual we
can scarcely expect to perceive such distinctions between the chromo-
somes of the various types.
For these methods of attack we now substitute another, less
ambitious, perhaps, because less comprehensive, but not less direct.
If we cannot see how a fowl by its egg and its sperm gives rise to
1 De I’Espice et des Races dans Us Etres Organises, 1859.
1 On the Variation of Species, 1856.
I. —A 2


a chicken or how a Sweet Pea. from its ovule and its pollen grain
produces another Sweet Pea, ,we at least can watch the. system
by which the differences between the various kinds of fowls or
between the various kinds of Sweet Peas are distributed among the
offspring. By thus breaking the main problem up into its parts
we give ourselves fresh chances. This analytical study we call
Mendelian because Mendel was the first to apply it. To be sure, he
did not approach the problem by any such line of reasoning as I
have sketched. His object was to determine the genetic definite-
ness of species; but though in his writings he makes no mention oi
inheritance it is clear that he had the extension in view. By cross-
breeding he combined the characters of varieties in mongrel individuals
and set himself to see how these characters would be distributed among
the individuals of subsequent generations. Until he began this analysis
nothing but the vaguest answers to such a question had been attempted.
The existence of any orderly system of descent was never even sus-
pected. In their manifold complexity human characteristics seemed
to follow no obvious system, and the fact was taken as a fair sample
of the working of heredity.
Misconception was especially brought in by describing descent in
terms of * blood. ’ The common speech uses expressions such as
consanguinity, pure-blooded, half-blood, and the like, which call up a
misleading picture to the mind. Blood is in some respects a fluid,
and thus it is supposed that this fluid can be both quantitatively and
qualitatively diluted with other bloods, just as treacle can be diluted
with water. Blood in primitive physiology being the peculiar vehicle
of life, at once its essence and its corporeal abode, these ideas of
dilution and compounding of characters in the commingling of bloods
inevitably suggest that the ingredients of the mixture once combined are
inseparable, that they can be brought together in any relative amounts,
and in short that in heredity we are concerned mainly with a quantita-
tive problem. Truer notions of genetic physiology are given by the
Hebrew expression ‘ seed.’ If we speak of a man as ‘of the blood-
royal ’ we think at once of plebeian dilution, and we wonder how much
of the royal fluid is likely to be ‘in his veins ’; but if we say he is
‘ of the seed of Abraham ’ we feel something of the permanence and
indestructibility of that germ which can be divided and scattered among
all nations, but remains recognisable in type and characteristics after
4,000 years.
I knew a breeder who had a chest containing bottles of coloured
liquids by which he used to illustrate the relationships of his dogs,
pouring from one to another and titrating them quantitatively to illus-
trate their pedigrees. Galton was beset by the same kind of mistake
when he promulgated his ‘ Law of Ancestral Heredity,’ With modern


research all this has been cleared away. The allotment of character-
istics among offspring is not accomplished by the exudation of drops
of a tincture representing the sum of the characteristics of the parent
organism, but by a process of cell-division, in which numbers of these
characters, or rather the elements upon which they depend, are sorted
out among the resulting germ-cells in an orderly fashion. What these
elements, or factors as we call them, are we do not know. That they
are in some way directly transmitted by the material of the ovum and
of the spermatozoon is obvious, but it seems to me unlikely that they
are in any simple or literal sense material particles. I suspect rather
that their properties depend on some phenomenon of arrangement.
However that may be, analytical breeding proves that it is according
to the distribution of these genetic factors, to use a non-committal term,
that the characters of the offspring are decided. The first business of
experimental genetics is to determine their number and interactions,
and then to make an analysis of the various types of life.
Now the ordinary genealogical trees, such as those which the stud-
books provide in the case of the domestic animals, or the Heralds’
College provides in the case of man, tell nothing of all this. Such
methods of depicting descent cannot even show the one thing they are
devised to show—purity of ‘ blood. ’ For at last we know the physio-
logical meaning of that expression. An organism is pure-bred when it
has been formed by the union in fertilisation of two germ-cells which
are alike in the factors they bear; and since the factors for the several
characteristics are independent of each other, this question of purity
must be separately considered for each of them. A man, for example,
may be pure-bred in respect of his musical ability and cross-bred in
respect of the colour of his eyes or the shape of his mouth. Though
we know nothing of the essential nature of these factors, we know
a good deal of their powers. They may confer height, colour, shape,
instincts, powers both of mind and body; indeed, so many of the
attributes which animals and plants possess that we feel justified in
the expectation that with continued analysis they will be proved to be
responsible for most if not all of the differences by which the varying
individuals of any species are distinguished from each other. I will
not assert that the greater differences which characterise distinct Species
are due generally to such independent factors, but that is the conclusion
to which the available evidence points. All this is now so w-ell under-
stood, and has been so often demonstrated and expounded, that details
of evidence are now superfluous.
But for the benefit of those who are unfamiliar with such work let me
briefly epitomise its main features and consequences. Since genetic
factors are definite things, either present in or absent from any germ-
cell, the individual may be either ‘ pure-bred ’ for any particular factor,
I. —A 2


or its absence, if he is constituted by the union of two germ-cells both
possessing or both destitute of that factor. If the individual is thus
pure, all his germ-cells will in that respect be identical, for they are
simply bits of the similar germ-cells which united in fertilisation to
produce the parent organism. We thus reach the essential principle,
that an organism cannot pass on to offspring a factor which it did not
itself receive in fertilisation. Parents, therefore, which are both
destitute of a given factor can only produce offspring equally destitute
of it; and, on the contrary, parents both pure-bred for the'presence
of a factor produce offspring equally pure-bred for its presence.
Whereas the germ-cells of the pure-bred are all alike, those of the
cross-bred, which results from the union of dissimilar germ-cells, are
mixed in character. Bach positive factor segregates from its negative
opposite, so that some germ-cells carry the factor and some do not.
Once the factors have been identified by their effects, the average com-
position of the several kinds of families formed from the various
matings can be predicted.
Only those who have themselves witnessed the fixed operations of
these simple rules can feel their full significance. We come to look
behind the simulacrum of the individual body and we endeavour to
disintegrate its features into the genetic elements by whose union the
body was formed. Set out in cold general phrases such discoveries
may seem remote from ordinary life. Become familiar with them and
you will find your outlook on the world has changed. Watch the effects
of segregation among the living things with which you have to do —■
plants, fowls, dogs, horses, that mixed concourse of humanity we call
the English race, your friends’ children, your own children, yourself —
and however firmly imagination be restrained to the bounds of the
known and the proved, you will feel something of that range of insight
into Nature which Mendelism has begun to give. The question is
often asked whether there are not also in operation systems of descent
quite other than those contemplated by the Mendelian-rules. I myself
have expected such discoveries, but hitherto none have been plainly
demonstrated. It is true we are often puzzled by the failure of a
parental type to reappear in its completeness after a cross—the merino
sheep or the fantail pigeon, for example. These exceptions may still
be plausibly ascribed to the interference of a multitude of factors, a
suggestion not easy to disprove; though it seems to me equally likely
that segregation has been in reality imperfect. Of the descent of quan-
titative characters we still know practically nothing. These and hosts
of difficult cases remain almost untouched. In particular the discovery
of E. Baur, and the evidence of Winkler in regard to his ‘ graft hybrids,’
both showing that the sub-epidermal layer of a plant—the layer from
which the germ-cells are derived —may bear exclusively the characters


of a part only of the soma, give hints of curious complications, and
suggest that in plants at least the interrelations between soma - and
gamete may be far less simple than we have supposed. Nevertheless,
speaking generally, we see nothing to indicate that qualitative characters
descend, whether in plants or animals, according to systems which
are incapable of factorial representation.
The body of evidence accumulated by this method of analysis is
now very large, and is still growing fast by the labours of many workers.
Progress is also beginning along many novel and curious lines. The
details are too technical for inclusion here. Suffice it to say that not
only have we proof that segregation affects a vast range of characteris-
tics, but in the course of our analysis phenomena of most unexpected
kinds have been encountered. Some of these things twenty years ago
must have seemed inconceivable. For example, the two sets of sex
organs, male and female, of the same plant may not be carrying the
same characteristics; in some animals characteristics, quite independent
of sex, may be distributed solely or predominantly to one sex; in
certain species the male may be breeding true to its own type, while
the female is permanently mongrel, throwing off eggs of a distinct
variety in addition to those of its own type; characteristics, essentially
independent, may be associated in special combinations which are
largely retained in the next generation, so that among the grand-
children there is numerical preponderance of those combinations which
existed in the grandparents —a discovery which introduces us to a new
phenomenon of polarity in the organism.
We are accustomed to the fact that the fertilised egg has a polarity,
a front and hind end for example; but we have now to recognise that it,
or the primitive germinal cells formed from it, may have another
polarity shown in the groupings of the parental elements. lam entirely
sceptical as to the occurrence of segregation solely in the maturation of
the germ-cells, 3 preferring at present to regard it as a special case of
that patch-work condition we see in so many plants. These mosaics
may break up, emitting bud-sports at various cell-divisions, and 1
suspect that the great regularity seen in the P 2 ratios of the cereals, for
example, is a consequence of very late segregation, whereas the exces-
sive irregularity found in other cases may be taken to indicate that
segregation can happen at earlier stages of differentiation.
The paradoxical descent of colour-blindness and other sex-limited
conditions—formerly regarded as an inscrutable caprice of nature—has
been represented with approximate correctness, and we already know
something as to the way, or, perhaps, I should say ways, in which the
The fact that in certain plants the male and female organs respectively
carry distinct factors may be quoted as almost decisively, negativing the sug-
gestion that segregation is confined to the reduction division.


determination of sex is accomplished in some of the forms of life —
though, I hasten to add, we have no inkling as to any method by which
that determination may be influenced or directed. It is obvious that
such discoveries have bearings on most of the problems, whether
theoretical or practical, in which animals and plants are concerned.
Permanence or change of type, perfection of type, purity or mixture
of race, ‘ racial development, ’ the succession of forms, from being vague
phrases expressing matters of degree, are now seen to be capable of
acquiring physiological meanings, already to some extent assigned with
precision. For the naturalist —and it is to him that lam especially
addressing myself to-day —these things are chiefly significant as relating
to the history of organic beings—the theory of Evolution, to use our
modern name. They have, as I shall endeavour to show in my second
address to be given in Sydney, an immediate reference to the conduct
of human society.
I suppose that everyone is familiar in outline with the theory of
the Origin of Species which Darwin promulgated. Through the last
fifty years this theme of the Natural Selection of favoured races has been
developed and expounded in writings innumerable. Favoured races
certainly can replace others. The argument is sound, but we are doubt-
ful of its value. For us that debate stands adjourned. We go to
Darwin for his incomparable collection of facts. We would fain
emulate his scholarship, his width and his power of exposition, but
to us he speaks no more with philosophical authority. We read his
scheme of Evolution as we would those of Lucretius pr of Lamarck,
delighting in their simplicity and their courage. The practical and
experimental study of Variation and Heredity has not merely opened
a new field; it has given a new point of view and new standards of
criticism. Naturalists may still be found expounding teleological
systems 4 which would have delighted Dr. Pangloss himself, but at
the present time few are misled. The student of genetics knows that
4 I take the following from the Abstract of a recent Croonian Lecture
‘On the Origin of Mammals ’ delivered to the Koyal Society: —‘ In
Upper Triassic times the larger Cynodonts preyed upon the large
Anomodont, Kannemeyeria, and carried on their existence so long as these
Anomodonts survived, but died out with them about the end of the Trias or
in RhEetic times- The small Cynodonts, having neither small Anomodonts nor
small Cotylosaurs to feed on, were forced to hunt the very active long-limbed
Thecodonts. The greatly increased activity brought about that series of
changes which formed the mammals—the flexible skin with hair, the four-
chambered heart and warm blood, the loose jaw with teeth for mastication,
an increased development of tactile sensation and a great increase of cerebrum.
Not improbably the attacks of the newly-evolved Cynodont or mammalian type
brought about a corresponding evolution in the Pseudosuchian Thecodonts which
ultimately resulted in the formation of Dinosaurs and Birds.’ Broom, E.,
Proc. Hoy. Soc. 8., 87, p. 88.


the time for the development of theory is not yet. He would rather
stick to the seed-pan and the incubator.
In face of what we now know of the distribution of variability in
nature the scope claimed for Natural Selection in determining the fixity
of Species must be greatly reduced. The doctrine of the survival of the
fittest is undeniable so long as it is applied to the organism as a whole,
but to attempt by this principle to find value in all definiteness of parts
and functions, and in the name of Science to see fitness everywhere
is mere eighteenth-century optimism. Yet it was in application to the
parts, to. the details of specific difference, to the spots on the peacock’s
tail, to the colouring of an Orchid flower, and hosts of such examples,
that the potency of Natural Selection was urged with the strongest
emphasis. Shorn of these pretensions the doctrine of the survival of
favoured races is a truism, helping scarcely at all to account for the
diversity of species. Tolerance plays almost as considerable a part.
By these admissions almost the last shred of that teleological fustian
with which Victorian philosophy loved to clothe the theory of Evolu-
tion is destroyed. Those who would proclaim that whatever is is right
will be wise henceforth to base this faith frankly on the impregnable
rock of superstition and to abstain from direct appeals to natural fact.
My predecessor said last year that in physics the age is one of rapid
progress and profound scepticism. In at least as high a degree this is
true of Biology, and as a chief characteristic of modern evolutionary
thought we must confess also to a deep but irksome humility in
presence of great vital problems. Every theory of Evolution must be
such as to accord with the facts of physics and chemistry, a primary
necessity to which our predecessors paid small heed. For them the
unknown was a rich mine of possibilities on which they could freely
draw. For us it is rather an impenetrable mountain out of which the
truth can be chipped in rare and isolated fragments. Of the physics and
chemistry of life we know next to nothing. Somehow the characters
of living things are bound up in properties of colloids, and are largely
determined by the chemical powers of enzymes, but the study of these
classes of matter have only just begun. Living things are found by a
simple experiment to have powers undreamt of, and who knows what
may be behind ?
Naturally we turn aside from generalities. It is no time to discuss
the origin of the Mollusca or of Dicotyledons, while we are not even
sure how it came to pass that Primula obconica has in twenty-five years
produced its abundant new forms almost under our ©yes. Knowledge
of heredity has so reacted on our conceptions of variation that very
competent men are even denying that variation in the old sense is a
genuine occurrence at all. Variation is postulated as the basis of all
evolutionary change. Do we then as a matter of fact find in the world


about us variations occurring of such a kind as to warrant faith in a
contemporary progressive Evolution? Till lately most of us would
have said ‘ yes ’ without misgiving. We should have pointed, as
Darwin did, to the immense range of diversity seen in many wild
species, so commonly that the difficulty is to define the types them-
selves. Still more conclusive seemed the profusion of forms in the
various domesticated animals and plants, most of them incapable of
existing even for a generation in the wild state, and therefore fixed
unquestionably by human .selection. These, at least, for certain, are
new forms, often distinct enough to pass for species, which have arisen
by variation. But when analysis is applied to this mass of variation
the matter wears a different aspect. Closely examined, what is the
‘ variability ’ of wild species? What is the natural fact which is
denoted by the statement that a given species exhibits much variation ?
Generally one of two things : either that the individuals collected in one
locality differ among themselves; or perhaps more often that samples
from separate localities differ from each other. As direct evidence of
variation it is clearly to the first of these phenomena that we must
have recourse—the heterogeneity of a population breeding together in
one area. This heterogeneity may be in any degree, ranging from
slight differences that systematists would disregard, to a complex
variability such as we find in some moths, where there is an abund-
ance of varieties so distinct that many would be classified as specific
forms but for the fact that all are freely breeding together. Naturalists
formerly supposed that any of these varieties might be bred from any
of the others. Just as the reader of novels is prepared to find that
any kind of parents might have any kind of children in the course of the
story, so was the evolutionist ready to believe that any pair of moths
might produce any of the varieties included in the species. Genetic
analysis has disposed of all these mistakes. We have no longer the
smallest doubt that in all these examples the varieties stand in a regular
descending order, and that they are simply terms in a series of com-
binations of factors separately transmitted, of which each may be
present or absent.
The appearance of contemporary variability proves to be an illusion.
Variation from step to step in the series must occur either by the
addition or by the loss of a factor. Now, of the origin of new forms
by loss there seems to me to be fairly clear evidence, but of the con-
temporary acquisition of any new factor I see no satisfactory proof,
though I admit there are rare examples which may be so interpreted.
We are left with a picture of variation utterly different from that
which we saw at first. Variation now stands out as a. definite physio-
logical event. We have done with the notion that Darwin came latterly
to favour, that large differences can arise by accumulation of small


differences. Such small differences are often mere ephemeral effects
of conditions of life, and as such are not transmissible; but even small
differences, when truly genetic, are factorial like the larger ones, a d
there is not the slightest reason for supposing that they are capable
of summation. As to the origin or source of these positive Bepwab
factors, we are without any indication or surmise. By then effec
we know them to be definite, as definite, say, as the organisms which
produce diseases; but how they arise and how they come to take part
in the composition of the living creature so that when present they are
treated in cell-division as constituents of the germs, we cannot con-
It was a commonplace of evolutionary theory that at least the
domestic animals have been developed from a few wild types. Then
origin was supposed to present no difficulty. The various races of
fowl for instance, all came from Gallus banhva, the Indian jungle-
fowl. So we are taught; but try to reconstruct the steps m then-
evolution and you realise your hopeless ignorance. To be sure there
are breeds, such as Black-red Game and Brown Leghorns, which have
the colours of the jungle-fowl, though they differ in shape and other
respects. As we know so little as yet of the genetics of shape, let us
assume that those transitions could be got over. -Suppose, further, as
is probable, that the absence of the maternal instinct in the Leghorn
is due to loss of one factor which the jungle-fowl -possesses. So far
we are on fairly safe ground. But how -about \A bite Leghorns ■. Then
origin may seem easy to imagine, since white varieties have often
arisen in well-authenticated cases. But the white of White Leghorns
is not, as white in nature often is, due to the loss of the colour-elements,
but to the action of something which inhibits their expression. Whence
did that -something come? The same question may be asked respecting
the heavy breeds, such as Malays or Indian Game. Each of these is a
separate introduction from -the Bast. To suppose that these, with their
peculiar combs and close feathering, could have been developed from
pre-existing European breeds is very difficult. On the other hand,
there is no wild species now living any more like them. We may, of
course, postulate that there was once such a -species, now lost. That
is quite conceivable, though the suggestion is purely speculative. I
might thus go through the list of domesticated animals and plants of
ancient origin and again and again we should he driven to this
suggestion, that many of their distinctive characters must have been
derived from some wild original now lost. Indeed, to this unsatisfying
conclusion almost every careful writer on such subjects is now reduced.
If we turn to modem evidence the case looks even worse. The new
breeds of domestic animals made in recent times are the carefully
selected products of recombination of pre-existing breeds. Most of the


new varieties of cultivated plants are the outcome of deliberate crossing.
There is generally no doubt in the matter. We have pretty full
histories of these crosses in Gladiolus, Orchids, Cineraria, Begonia,
Calceolaria, Pelargonium, &c. A very few certainly arise from a single
origin. The Sweet Pea is the clearest case, and there are others which
I should name with hesitation. The Cyclamen is one of them, but
we know that efforts to cross Cyclamens were made early in the cul-
tural history of the plant, and they may very well have been success-
ful. Several plants for which single origins are alleged, such as the
Chinese Primrose, the Dahlia, and Tobacco, came to us in an already
domesticated state, and their origins remain altogether mysterious.
Formerly single origins were generally presumed, but at the present
time numbers of the chief products of domestication, dogs, horses,
cattle, sheep, poultry, wheat, oats, rice, plums, cherries, have in turn
been accepted as ‘ polyphyletio’ or, in other words, derived from several
distinct forms. The reason that has led to these judgments is that the
distinctions between the chief varieties can be traced as far hack as the
evidence reaches, and that these distinctions are so great, so far tran-
scending anything that we actually know variation capable of effecting,
that it seems pleasanter to postpone the difficulty, relegating the critical
differentiation to some misty antiquity into which we shall not be asked
to penetrate. For it need scarcely be said that this is mere procrastina-
tion. If the origin of a form under domestication is hard to imagine, it
becomes no easier to conceive of such enormous deviations from type
coming to pass in the wild state. Examine any two thoroughly distinct
species which meet each other in their distribution, as, for instance,
Lychnis diuma and vespertine, do. In areas of overlap are many inter-
mediate forms. These used to be taken to be transitional steps, and
the specific distinctness of vespertine, and diurna, was on that account
questioned. Once it is known that these supposed intergrades are
merely mongrels between the two species the transition from one to the
other is practically beyond our powers of imagination to conceive. If
both these can survive, why has their common parent perished? Why
when they cross do they not reconstruct it instead of producing partially
sterile hybrids ? I take this example to show how entirely the facts
were formerly misinterpreted.
When once the idea of a true-breeding—or, as we say, homozygous
type is grasped, the problem of variation becomes an insistent oppres-
sion. What can make such a type vary? We know, o-f course, one
way by which novelty can be introduced—by crossing. Cross two
well-marked varieties—for instance, of Chinese Primula—each breeding
hue, and in the second generation by mere recombination of the various
factol s which the two parental types severally introduced, there will
be a profusion of forms, utterly unlike each other, distinct also from


the original parents. Many of these can be bred true, and if found
wild would certainly be described as good species. Confronted by the
difficulty I have put before you, and contemplating such amazing poly-
morphism in the second generation from a cross in Antirrhinum, Lotsy
has lately with great courage suggested to us that all variation may be
due to such crossing. Ido not disguise my sympathy with this effort.
After the blind complacency of conventional evolutionists it is refresh-
ing to meet so frank an acknowledgment of the hardness of the problem.
Lotsy’s utterance will at least do something to expose the artificiality of
systematic zoology and botany. Whatever might or might not be
revealed by experimental breeding, it is certain that without such tests
we are merely guessing when we profess to distinguish specific limits
and to declare that this is a species and that a variety. The only defin-
able unit in classification is the homozygous form which breeds true.
When we presume to say that such and such differences are trivial and
such others valid, we are commonly embarking on a. course for which
there is no physiological warrant. Who could have foreseen that the
Apple and the Pear —-so like each other that their botanical differences
are evasive—could not be crossed together, though species of Antir-
rhinum so totally unlike each other as majus and nolle can be
hybridized, as Baur has shown, without a sign of impaired fertility ?
Jordan was perfectly right. The true-breeding forms which he dis-
tinguished in such multitudes are real entities, though the great
systematists, dispensing with such laborious analysis, have pooled them
into arbitrary Linnean species, for the convenience of collectors and for
the simplification of catalogues. Such pragmatical considerations may
mean much in the museum, but with them the student of the physio-
logy of variation has nothing to do. These ‘ little species,’ finely cut,
true-breeding, and innumerable mongrels between them, are what he
finds when he examines any so-called variable type. On analysis the
semblance of variability disappears, and the illusion is shown to be due
to segregation and recombination of series of factors on pre-determined
lines. As soon as the ‘ little species ’ are separated out they are found
to be fixed. In face of such a result we may well ask with Lotsy,
is there such a thing as spontaneous variation anywhere? His answer
is that there is not.
Abandoning the attempt to show that positive factors can be added
to the original stock, we have further to confess that we cannot
often actually prove variation by loss of factor to be a real pheno-
menon. Lotsy doubts whether even this phenomenon occurs. The
sole source of variation, in his view, is crossing. But here I
think he is on unsafe ground. When a well-established variety like
‘ Crimson King ’ Primula, bred by Messrs. Sutton in thousands of
individuals, gives off, as it did a few years since, a salmon-coloured


variety, ‘ Coral King,’ we might claim this as a genuine example of
variation by loss. The new variety is a simple recessive. It differs
from ‘ Crimson King ’ only in one respect, the loss of a single colour-
factor, and, of course, bred true from its origin. To account for the
appearance of such a new form by any process of crossing is exceedingly
difficult. From the nature of the case there can have been no cross
since ‘ Crimson King ’ was established, and hence the salmon must
have been concealed as a recessive from the first origin of that variety,
even when it was represented by very few individuals, probably only by
a single one. Surely, if any of these had been heterozygous for salmon
this recessive could hardly have failed to appear during the process of
self-fertilisation by which the stock would be multiplied, even though
that selling may not have been strictly carried out. Examples like this
seem to me practically conclusive. 5 They can be challenged, but not,
I think, successfully. Then again in regard to those variations in
number and division of parts which we call meristic, the reference of
these to original cross-breeding is surely barred by the circumstances in
which they often occur. There remain also l the rare examples men-
tioned already in which a single wild origin may with much confidence
be assumed. In spite of repeated trials, no one has yet succeeded in
crossing the Sweet Pea with any other leguminous species. We know
that early in its cultivated history it produced at least two marked
varieties which I can only conceive of as spontaneously arising, though,
no doubt, the profusion of forms we now have was made by the crossing
of those original varieties. I mention the Sweet Pea thus prominently
for another reason, that it introduces us to another though subsidiary
form of variation, which may be described as a fractionation of factors.
Some of my Mendelian colleagues have ispoken of genetic factors as
permanent and indestructible. Relative permanence in a sense they
have, for they commonly com© out unchanged after segregation. But
I am satisfied that they may occasionally undergo a quantitative dis-
integration, with the consequence that varieties are produced inter-
mediate between the integral varieties from which they were derived.
These disintegrated conditions I have spoken of as subtraction—or
reduction—stages. For example, the Picotee Sweet Pea, with its
purple edges, can surely be nothing but a condition produced by the
factor which ordinarily makes the fully purple flower, quantitatively
diminished. Tire pied animal, such as the Dutch rabbit, must similarly
be regarded as the result of partial defect of the chromogen from which
the pigment is formed, or conceivably of the factor which effects its
oxidation. On such lines I think we may with great confidence
The numerous and most interesting ‘ mutations ’ recorded by Professor
I. H. Morgan and his colleagues in the flv. Drosophila may also be cited as
unexceptionable cases.


interpret all those intergrading forms which breed true and are not
produced by factorial interference.
It is to be inferred that these fractional degradations are the con-
sequence of irregularities in segregation. We constantly see irregulari-
ties in the ordinary meristic processes, and in the distribution of somatic
differentiation. We are familiar with half segments, with imperfect
twinning, with leaves partially petaloid, with petals partially sepaloid.
All these are evidences of departures from the normal regularity in the
rhythms of repetition, or in those waves of differentiation by which the
qualities are sorted out among the parts of the body. Similarly, when
in segregation the qualities are sorted out among the germ-cells in
certain critical cell-divisions, we cannot expect these differentiating
divisions to be exempt from the imperfections and irregularities which
are found in all the grosser divisions that we can observe. If lam
right, we shall find evidence of these irregularities in the association
of unconformable numbers with the appearance of the novelties which
I have called fractional. In passing let us note how the history of the
Sweet Pea belies those ideas of a continuous evolution with which we
had formerly to contend. The big varieties came first. The little ones
have arisen later, as I suggest by fractionation. Presented with a
collection of modern Sweet Peas how prettily would the devotees of
Continuity have arranged them in a graduated series, showing how
every intergrade could be found, passing from the full colour of the
wild Sicilian species in one direction to white, in the other to the
deep purple of Black Prince, ’ though happily we know these two to be
among the earliest to have appeared.
Having in view these and other considerations which might be
developed, I feel no reasonable doubt that though we may have to
forgo a claim to variations by addition of factors, yet variation both
by loss of factors and by fractionation of factors is a genuine phenomenon
of contemporary nature. If then we have to dispense, as seems likely,
with any addition from without we must begin seriously to consider
whether the course of Evolution can at all reasonably he represented as
an unpacking of an original complex which contained within itself the
whole range of diversity which living things present. Ido not suggest
that we should come to a judgment as to what is or is not probable in
these respects. As I have said already, this is no time for devising
theories of Evolution, and I propound none. But as we have got to
recognise that there has been an Evolution, that somehow or other the
forms of life have arisen from fewer forms, we may as well see whether
we are limited to the old view that evolutionary progress is from the
simple to the complex, and whether after all it is conceivable that the
process was the other way about. When the facts of genetic discovery
become familiarly known to biologists, and cease to be the preoccupa-


tion of a few, as they etill are, many and long discussions must
inevitably arise on the question, and I offer these remarks to pre-
pare the ground. I ask you simply to open your minds to this
possibility. It involves a certain effort. We have to reverse our
habitual modes of thought. At first it may seem rank absurdity to
suppose that the primordial form or forms of protoplasm could have
contained complexity enough to produce the divers types of life. But
is it easier to imagine that these powers could have been conveyed by
extrinsic additions? Of what nature could these additions be? Additions
of material cannot surely be in question. We are told that salts of
iron in the soil may turn a pink hydrangea blue. The iron cannot be
passed on to the next generation. How can the iron multiply itself?
The power to assimilate the iron is all that can be transmitted. A
disease-producing organism like the pebrine of silkworms can in a veiy
few cases be passed on through the germ-cells. Such an organism can
multiply and can produce its characteristic effects in the next genera-
tion. But it does not become part of the invaded host, and we cannot
conceive it taking part in the geometrically ordered processes of segre-
gation. These illustrations may seem too gross; but what refinement
will meet the requirements of the problem, that the thing introduced
must be, as the living organism itself is, capable of multiplication and
of subordinating itself in a definite system of segregation ? 1 hat which
is conferred in variation must rather itself be a change, not of material,
but of arrangement, or of motion. The invocation of additions extrinsic
to the organism does not seriously help us to imagine how the power to
change can be conferred, and if it proves that hope in that direction
must be abandoned, I think we lose very little. By the re-arrangement
of a very moderate number of things we soon reach a number of possi-
bilities practically infinite.
That primordial life may have been of small dimensions need not
disturb us. Quantity is of no account in these considerations.
Shakespeare once existed as a speck of protoplasm not so big as a
email pin’s head. To this nothing was added that would not equally
well have served to build up a baboon or a rat. Let us consider how far
we can get by the process of removal of what we call ‘ epistatic ’ factors,
in other words those that control, mask, or suppress underlying powers
and faculties. I have spoken of the vast range of colours exhibited by
modem Sweet Peas. There is no question that these have been derived
from the one wild bi-colour form by a process of successive removals.
When the vast range of form, size, and flavour to be found among the
cultivated apples is considered it seems difficult to suppose that all this
variety is hidden in the wild crab-apple. I cannot positively assert that
this is so, but I think all familiar with Mendelian analysis would agree
with me that it is probable, and that the wild crab contains presumably


inhibiting elements which the cultivated kinds have lost. The legend
that the seedlings of cultivated apples become crabs is often repeated.
After many inquiries among the raisers of apple seedlings I have never
found an authentic case —once only even an alleged case, and this
on inquiry proved to be unfounded. I have confidence that the artistic
gifts of mankind will prove to be due not to something added to the
make-up of an ordinary man, but to the absence of factors which in the
normal person inhibit the development of these gifts. They are almost
beyond doubt to be looked upon as releases of powers normally sup-
pressed. The instrument is there, but it is ‘ stopped down. ’ The
scents of flowers or fruits, the finely repeated divisions that give its
quality to the wool of the Merino, or in an analogous case the multi-
plicity of quills to the tail of the fantail pigeon, are in all probability
other examples of such releases. You may ask what guides us in the
discrimination of the positive factors and how we can satisfy ourselves
that the appearance of a quality is due to loss. It must be conceded
that in these determinations we have as yet recourse only to the effects
of dominance. When the tall pea is crossed with the dwarf, since the
offspring is tall we' say that the tall parent passed a factor into the
cross-bred which makes it tall. The pure tall parent had two doses of
this factor; the dwarf had none; and since the cross-bred is tall we say
that one dose of the dominant tallness is enough to give the full height.
The reasoning seems unanswerable. But the commoner result of cross-
ing is the production of a form intermediate between the two pure
parental types. In such examples we see clearly enough that the full
parental characteristics can only appear when they are homozygous—-
formed from similar germ-cells, and that one dose is insufficient to
produce either effect fully. When this is so we can never be sure
which side is positive and which negative. Since, then, when dominance
is incomplete we find ourselves in this difficulty, we perceive that the
amount of the effect is our only criterion in distinguishing the positive
from the negative, and when we return even to the example of the
tall and dwarf peas the matter is not so certain as it seemed. Professor
Cockerell lately found among thousands of yellow sunflowers one
which was partly red. By breeding he raised from this a form wholly
red. Evidently the yellow and the wholly red are the pure forms, and
the part why red is the heterozygote. We may then say that the yellow
is YY with two doses of a positive factor which inhibits the development
of pigment; the red is yy, with no dose of the inhibitor; and the
partially red are Yy, with only one dose of it. But we might be tempted
to think the red was a positive characteristic, and invert the expressions
representing the red as RR, the partly red as Rr, and the yellow as
rr. According as we adopt the one or the other system of expression
we shall interpret the evolutionary change as one of loss or as one of


addition. May we not interpret the other apparent new dommants m
the same way? The white dominant m the fowl or in the Chi
Primula can inhibit colour. But may it not be that the original coloured
fowl or Primula had two doses of a factor which inhibited this inhibitor.
The Pepper Moth, Amphidasys hetularia, produced in England abou
1840 a black variety, then a novelty, now common in certain areas,
which behaves as a full dominant. The pure blacks are no blackei
than the cross-bred. Though at first sight it seems that the black
must have been something added, we can without absurdity suggest
that the normal is the term in which two doses of inhibitor are present,
and that in the absence of one of them the black appears.
In spite of seeming perversity, therefore, we have to admit that
there is no evolutionary change which in the present state of our know-
ledge we can positively declare to be not due to loss. When has
been conceded it is natural to ask whether the removal of Inhibiting
factors may not be invoked in alleviation of the necessity which has
driven students of the domestic breeds to refer their diversities to
multiple origins. Something, no doubt, is to be hoped for in that
direction, but not until much better and more extensive knowledge of
what variation by loss may effect in the living body can we have any real
assurance that this difficulty has been obviated. We should be greatly
helped by some indication as to whether the origin of life has been single
or multiple. Modern opinion is, perhaps, inclining to the multiple
theory, but we have no real evidence. Indeed, the problem still stands
outside the range of scientific investigation, and when we hear the
spontaneous formation of formaldehyde mentioned as a possible first
step in the origin of life, we think of Harry Lauder in the character of
a Glasgow schoolboy pulling out his treasures from his pocket —‘ That’s
a wassher —for makkin’ motor cars ’!
As the evidence stands at present all that can he safely added in
amplification of the evolutionary creed may be summed up in the
statement that variation occurs as a definite event often producing a
sensibly discontinuous result; that the succession of varieties comes
to pass by the elevation and establishment of sporadic groups of
individuals owing their origin to such isolated events; and that
the change which we see as a nascent variation is often, perhaps
always, one of loss. Modern research lends not the smallest encourage-
ment or sanction to the view that gradual evolution occurs by the trans-
formation of masses of individuals, though that fancy has fixed itself on
popular imagination. The isolated events to which variation is due are
evidently changes in the germinal tissues, probably in the manner in
which they divide. It is likely that the occurrence of these variations
is wholly irregular, and as to tHeir causation we are absolutely without
surmise or even plausible speculation. Distinct types once arisen, no


doubt a profusion of the forms called species have been derived from
them by simple crossing and subsequent recombination. New species
may be now in course of creation by this means, but the limits of the
process are obviously narrow. On the other hand, we see no changes in
progress around us in the contemporary world which we can imagine
likely to culminate in the evolution of forms distinct in the larger sense.
By intercrossing dogs, jackals, and wolves new forms of these types
can be made, some of which may be species, but I see no reason to
think that from such material a fox could be bred in indefinite time, or
that dogs could be bred from foxes.
Whether Science will hereafter discover that certain groups can by
peculiarities in their genetic physiology be declared to have a preroga-
tive quality justifying their recognition as species in the old sense, and
that the differences of others are of such a subordinate degree that they
may in contrast be termed varieties, further genetic research alone can
show. I myself anticipate that such a discovery will be made, but I
cannot defend the opinion with positive conviction.
Somewhat reluctantly, and rather from a sense of duty, I have
devoted most of this Address to the evolutionary aspects of genetic
research. We cannot keep these things out of our heads, though some-
times we wish we could. The outcome, as you will have seen, is
negative, destroying much that till lately passed for gospel. Destruc-
tion may be useful, but it is a low kind of work. We are just about
where Boyle was in the seventeenth century. We can dispose of
Alchemy, but we cannot make more than a quasi-chemistry. We are
awaiting our Priestley and our Mendeleeff. In truth it is not these
wider aspects of genetics that are at present our chief concern. They
will come in their time. The great advances of science are made like
those of evolution, not by imperceptible mass-improvement, but by the
sporadic birth of penetrative genius. The journeymen follow after him,
widening and clearing up, as we are doing along the track that Mendel
found.
PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO. LTD., LONDON
COLCHESTER AND ETON


