

HEROIC
ITALY
By Theodore Fink
AN APPEAL
1917




HEROIC ITALY
Italian Red Cross
Appreciation and Appeal
Reprinted from
“The Herald,” Melbourne, Australia,
4th July, 1917


HEROIC ITALY
Kingdom and Empire of peoples thou hadsl,
and thy lordship made one
North Sea, and South Sea, and East men,
and West men who look on the Sun;
Spirit was in thee, and Counsel, when soul in
the Nations was none.
—Swinburne (Song of the Standard).
This war opens the first great dramatic chapter in
Australia’s history. But the long story of Italy is a story
of war.
Landing in Naples in April, 1912, we saw the bustle of
troops arriving from the war in Tripoli, and of soldiers
embarking for the front, A day or two after peace be-
tween Italy and Turkey was announced, though the desert
warfare with the tribes continued, and in all the cities of
Italy, as we passed, the streets were gay with military
music and the marching of the youthful soldiers about to
take ship for Africa.
Six months later, strolling through the Austrian Tyrol,
along the military road that Austria built to overawe


Italy, and to enable her to pour her armies like a torrent
over the Italian plain, we met considerable detachments
of the Austrian army in their autumn manoeuvres in the
mountains.
Amphitheatre of War
Although Europe was then an armed camp, but few
dreamt that the two nations would in a few short
months be locked in deadly struggle. We had just passed
the famous Falzercgo pass, the highest point in the mili-
tary road —7000 feet above sea level. Almost overhead
are the peaks of the Dolomites, rugged, sheer, broken, of
wondrous colors, and all in the clear, changing light, beau-
tiful beyond imagination; one of the highest, Monte Rosa,
with its heights veiled in a curtain of opalescent cloud.
A few days ago the cables reported that the Italian
artillery had blown away the summit of one of these fam-
ous mountains.
All this region has been the scene of two years’ hard
fighting, from Cortina, reached by the Italians in their
first northward rush, south-east to Gorizia and the Adri-
atic.
The English papers speak of this fight as being waged
“on the roof of the world.” Though small armies have in
the old days crossed the Alps in winter, never before has
a whole nation in arms encamped in the midst of the Al-
pine !zone from the solitude of the Adamello to the icy
summits of the Dolomites and the dreary Carso.
And in this snow-swept region the Italian soldier has
fought for months, displaying wondrous military organi-
sation, marvellous endurance, and unsurpassed heroism,
attesting the fine martial and personal qualities of the
whole people.
HEROIC ITALY


Help the Crusade
And we Australians, far away from the battle line,
whose aid is being poured out for the sick and wounded
of our Allies and the trampled peoples of Europe, are now
asked to help the Italian Red Cross.
The history of Italy is a long story of war, and this
war, dreadful as it is, is but an incident in the story.
Her soil for centuries has been drenched in blood. Her
towns and villages have been sacked, her fields wasted by
the invaders of many nations, the cities and habitations
destroyed, and new cities built upon the ruins, only to be
in their turn cast down by her savage foes.
Rome conquered and gave laws to the world—but the
long ages of its decline saw the land almost an eternal
battleground. Germanic tribes, Goths, Huns, Yandals,
Byzantine invaders, in turn attacked the Empire, weak-
ened by dissolution, and the capture and sacking of Rome
by Goths and Vandals stand out among the constant rav-
ages and destruction of the great cities of Italy through
the centuries, making the land a desolation.
The story of the Middle Ages is a long drama of strife.
And yet all the wondrous activity of the states and city
republics of the peninsula was enriched by the growth of
art and learning, and the most varied developments of
human genius. The masterpieces of architecture, painting,
sculpture, and every variety of craftsmanship form still
the priceless and unsurpassed treasures of humanity. The
warlike achievements of Venice, Florence, Milan, Pisa,
Genoa, and the other states disciplined the people in the
arts and crafts, so that artistic skill and craftsmanship
probably reached nearer perfection than at any other time,
and humanity itself never attained to greater heights
than in the great men and women of the Renaissance.
HEROIC ITALY


A Plant in Broken Soil
The division between mediaeval and modern history is
of course arbitrary. “The main features of modern his-
tory,” says Dr. Creighton, “are the development of nation-
ality and the growth of individual freedom.”
But at the age when these almost unconscious move-
ments were making themselves felt through the rest of
Europe, Italy remained broken into fragments under the
tyrannous sway of many separate foreign governments,
torn by war and by dynastic feuds between the rulers of
Austria, Germany, France and Spain, and the never-
ending conflicts between temporal and religious forces.
But, through all this red background of war and blood,
the land and its people saw the continued growth of great
achievements. The schools of art and sculpture, of Flor-
ence, Venice, Rome, Umbria and other centres witnessed
the wonderful developments of genius in every form.
Today Italy is the treasure house of art and beauty,
and the names of Dante, Boccaccio, Galileo, Petrarch,
Michael Angelo, are only the greatest of an endless world
of poets, artists, masters of science, philosophy and let-
ters.
Achievement and Fame
The deep-rooted attraction of Italy for great English-
men in every generation is remarkable. Two great Eng-
lishmen, centuries apart, John Milton and Charles Dick-
ens, both loved and visited the land, and were impressed
by its associations. Byron, Keats, Shelley, Landor, Brown-
ing, Ruskin, Meredith, all have attested their love for it
in imperishable literature. And the torch of letters, learn-
ing and science burns brightly today.
HEROIC ITALY


But it is the land of the great patriots, Mazzini, Gari-
baldi, and the great statesman, Cavour, the land of a
people “rightly struggling to be free” that calls to us
today.
Italia Irredenta—ltaly unredeemed.
The fertile province of the Trentino and the mountain
peaks which form its rampart are still held by the hated
Austrian. This war is, for Italy, but the last act of the
drama of Liberation, the drama of the last century of as-
piration and struggle.
The achievement of Italian Nationality (not to be fully
completed until the Austrian is expelled from the Trentino
and Trieste, and Italy becomes again Mistress of the
Adriatic) is an event of yesterday. After the Napoleonic
war, Italy, to use the phrase of Metternich, was only a
“geographical expression” split up into separate kingdoms
or states—Venetia and Lombardy under Austrian rule—
and the individual rulers of the other States under the
sway of Austria, foreign troops dividing with priestly au-
thority Rome itself. The whole century witnessed the
almost hopeless struggle for Nationality and Liberation.
Fire Fuses Fragments
And yet this people, ■so divided, dominated, misgov-
erned, its liberties trampled on, its citizens oppressed,
from the brutal tyranny of the Bourbon rulers of Naples
in the south to Austria’s savage executions of patriots in
Lombardy in the north, fanned the fire of nationality into
life, and after seventy years of struggle, of defeat alter-
nating with victory, finally welded itself into unity under
the House of Savoy in 1870. Mazzini and the fiery hero,
Garibaldi, expressed in words and deeds the spirit of the
land, while Cavour, the most far-seeing European states-
man of the last century, “took occasion by the hand,” and
HEROIC ITALY


Italy again stood forth a Nation and one of the Great
Powers.
To Britain she is an old Ally her soldiers
fought side by side with those of France and England in
the Crimean War. And now, freed from the net of trade
penetration, diplomatic deceit and espionage wmven by her
Germanic enemies, she again stands by our side as our
Ally and makes manifest that the prowess of ancient
Rome still abides.
Italy, the cradle of so much of civilisation, art, letters
and science, is too often regarded by the ignorant as a
tourists’ playground.
But the world’s debt to the Italian people is a great
one, and today their armies form one of the strong ram-
parts of Australian liberty itself. And her brave wound-
ed soldiers and the Italian Red Cross have the strongest
claims on us all.
HEROIC ITALY


“Herald” and “Weekly Times”
Print, Melbourne.
