

HEYTESBURY
BETTER DAIRY FARMING-
SCHOOL
OF DAI
lture,
TUESDAY & WEDNESDAY 11th & 12th APRIL, 1967


PASTURE ESTABLISHMENT, SPECIES AND FERTILIZERS
By J.M. Crook, B.Agr.Sc., District Agricultural Officer
The basic source of livestock nutrition in the Cobden
area is pasture, this being the cheapest form of fodder. The
production and health of dairy cows is vitally dependent on the
quality and amount of pastures grown.
Every pasture sward is a complete community of more
than one species subject to numerous factors, each of which can
have an effect on the persistence, productivity and vigour of the
pasture. These factors include rainfall, temperature, soil type,
grazing management, fertilizers, pest control and plant competition
Some of these factors can be controlled by man, others by nature.
RAINFALL
This mainly determines the choice of species. Long
lived high-producing perennials can only be grown where there is a
growing period of 9 months or more. Most perennial species can be
grown in the areas around Cobden.
TEMPERATURE
This affects the growth rate of pastures, producing
typical seasonal growth rate curves for early and late breaks.
Growth
Rate
JFMAMJJASONDJ
SOIL TYPE
This also determines choice of pasture species as well
as fertilizer treatment, e.g., lucerne requires a friable well-
drained soil, while strawberry clover can grow well on badly-
drained tight clay soils.
PASTURE SPECIES
The effects of climate and soil type can be modified to a
limited extent by the use of the most appropriate pasture species
for each particular situation.
A productive pasture should consist of a mixture of
clovers and grasses, the clovers because of their ability to fix
nitrogen and to raise the soil fertility, and the grasses because
they produce a bulk of feed and roughage for the cattle, utilize
the nitrogen produced by the clovers and also maintain a closed
sward which does not allow weed invasion.


Pasture species vary greatly in their botanical features
and their behaviour in the pasture. Strains and varieties within
a species also vary, and differences in a strain can be important in
the success or failure of a pasture mixture.
Subterranean clover is divided into a number of varieties
that differ in thejlr growth habits. Early varieties are stemmy and
make better growth than the later varieties which are more leafy.
Some varieties have distinctive leaf markings.
The Department of Agriculture, by critical investigation,
has demonstrated the superior agronomic worth of various strains
of pasture seeds and, under the Seeds Act, certifies such seeds for
purity and germination. It is advisable to sow only Government
Certified seeds to guard against introduction of foreign species
and weeds and to ensure adequate germination.
Species Suitable for the Cobden Area
The introduced pasture plants, perennial ryegrass, cocks-
foot, subterranean clover and white clover are the most important
for sowing pastures in the Cobden area. Others sometimes sown
include H.l ryegrass, Phalaris tuberosa, Paspalum dilatatum,
strawberry clover and red clover.
The gyegrasses; Practically all pasture sowings should include
one or more of the ryegrasses.
Perennial ryegrass: On the heavier and more fertile soils,
perennial ryegrass is the most persistent and productive of
all the grasses under heavy grazing. On the less fertile soils,
it is relatively unproductive, and on the lighter-textured
soils will tend to die out after a few years.
Short rotation ryegrass - also known as H.l ryegrass* - is a
hybrid between perennial and Italian ryegrass. It is valuable
for its good winter production and palatability. It is likely
to thin out drastically during a summer drought. High soil
fertility is needed for worth-while winter production, and H.l
ryegrass is not a suitable grass for sowing on unimproved or
infertile land.
Cocksfoot; It is a vigorous deep-rooting perennial grass which
is often associated with ryegrass in mixed pastures. It is
likely to be more persistent than ryegrass on the looser more
friable soils. ‘ It is well suited to the Cobden area because of
its capacity to respond to summer rains. Most suitable type
would be one of the Aberystwyth strains or New Zealand Grass-
lands strain, or Currie cocksfoot on those areas subject to
severe summer drought.


Phalaris tuberosa:
This is a perennial grass which is a
vigorous deep-rooted plant able to grow on the lighter-
textured soil types on which ryegrass will not persist.
It can also survive longer dry spells and persist under
more difficult conditions. It is a better winter producer
than ryegrass and will stand wet conditions.
Paspalum dilatatum: This is a grass which makes most of
its growth during the spring and summer and is completely
dormant during the cold weather. Grows well in areas of high
summer rainfall, but is difficult to establish in this area.
CLOVERS
White clover: Where soil fertility and rainfall are adequate,
this perennial plant can be the most productive of all clovers.
It can persist in most pastures in the Cobden area, being dominant
on the heavier and damper soils, but giving way to annual
clovers on the lighter drier soils. On these latter type of
soils, its performance depends on seasonal conditions, but it
is well worth including in nearly all pasture sowings. New
Zealand certified white clover has proved to be the most
satisfactory of the varieties
by means of creeping stems as
available. White clover spreads
well as by seed.
Strawberry clover; This is a
growth habit to white clover,
wet and salty soils.
perennial clover with similar
but is specially valuable for
Red clover: This is a vigorous but rather short-lived
perennial clover, useful in the first sowings on newly-cleared
forest land. It can be useful in short-term pasture to be cut
for hay. The type known as "New Zealand Cowgrass" has been
found to be most useful.
Subterranean clover: This is an annual clover which persists
from year to year by reseeding. It is the most important
clover in the State, especially in the preliminary stages of
pasture improvement. It has the ability to become estab-
lished and grow vigorously on poor soils, building up the
fertility rapidly.
There is a large number of varieties of subterranean
clovers available commercially. District experience indicates
that the following are most useful in this district:-
Yarloop; An early midseason variety. It has a high
proportion of stem to leaf, but has the ability to grow
under waterlogged conditions and produce well in the
winter.


Marrar (Woogenellup): A recently-released early mid
season variety with good autumn and winter production
Mount Barker: A midseason variety. It does not make the
winter growth of the earlier types , but is the most
popular sub clover in the Western District.
Tallarook: A late variety with a high proportion of
leaf to stem. It has relatively poor winter production
but, under favourable conditions, can grow longer into
the late spring.
Lucerne: This is a very deep-rooted perennial legume requiring
a friable well-drained soil. It provides very valuable green
feed in the summer and, when cut for hay, makes high quality
fodder. It is difficult to establish and maintain, except on
suitable soils. Hunter River is the best variety.
Creeping lucerne: This requires similar conditions to normal
lucerne. The strains available at present do not produce as
well as Hunter River. Creeping lucerne has the advantage of
being better adapted to grazing than ordinary lucerne, due to
its low crown. These creeping lucernes could be promising
species for the future, keeping in mind the need for well-
drained soils.
FERTILIZERS
It is known that at least sixteen elements are necessary
for the growth of the higher plants. They are carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium,
sulphur, iron, manganese, copper, boron, zinc, molybdenum and
chlorin e .
Carbon, Hydrogen and Oxygen
These are derived from the air (carbondioxide and
oxygen) and from water. The others are supplied by the soil,
though some plants, the legumes, when living with the proper
strain of nodule bacteria, can obtain some, or all, of theqr
requirements of nitrogen from the gaseous nitrogen circulating
through the soil.
Nitrogen
This can be supplied as an artificial fertilizer on
pastures, but, under Victorian conditions, this is not usual,
except in high rainfall areas. Sufficient nitrogen is supplied
by the legumes for the grasses; in fact, it can be oversupplied
so that the residue builds up in the soil and rapidly raises the
fertility.


Phosphorus
In Australia, phosphorus and water (H 2 0) are the two
elements most commonly limiting plant growth. Phosphate deficiency
can be corrected by the use of the artificial fertilizer, super-
phosphate. Superphosphate changes its form soon after contact with
the soil and becomes "fixed" in the top few inches of soil. How-
ever, before this happens, the plant has taken up some of the
readily available phosphorus and can gradually extract more of the
insoluble phosphorus as it is needed. The "fixed" phosphorus
builds up in the soil and is called "residual super".
Rates of application of superphosphate depend on the
stage of development of the property and the previous fertilizer
history. Topdressing rate is governed by the following three
phases:-
1. Sowing new country: Generally, new pastures will show
responses initially to 2 bags per acre for several years after
sowing.
2. After the first 3-4 years, the
to 1 bag per acre.
supering rate can be reduced
3. Residual phase: After a large
has been applied over a number
quantity of super, e.g., 30 cwt.
of years, a bank of residual
super has been built up which can supply some of the needs of
the pasture. Because the topdressing rate of each property
needs to be determined, no firm recommendation can be made;
however, 1 cwt. per acre should be an adequate annual applica
tion at this stage.
Time of application of superphosphate: Superphosphate should be
applied early - before the opening break - unless it is desired
to use an insecticide mixed with the superphosphate, when it is
advisable to wait till after the opening break, when the insects
will then be present. The use of 50/50 super-lime mixture is not
a satisfactory source of phosphate as a topdressing mixture. It
does have advantages when new pastures are being established on
acid country.
Potassium
Plants need potassium in large quantities, and deficiencies
are developing very rapidly in the Cobden district, as the initial
soil reserves are being depleted. Cropping and haycutting rapidly
lower soil potassium reserves. Topdressing with potash fertilizer
corrects the trouble. Muriate of potash is the fertilizer used;
it has some residual effect, but, once a deficiency develops,
annual dressings are required.


Potassium (contd.)
Known potash deficiencies can be corrected by an applica
tion of 3 cwt. of 1:1 super-potash mixture. If the area is cut
for hay, this quantity should be repeated; if not cut for hay,
2 cwt. of 3:1 super-potash mixture may be adequate. Potash
fertilizers are not normally required where new pastures are being
established.
Lime
Certain soils in the Cobden area contain strongly-acid
soils on which heavy broadcast dressings of lime may be needed.
The need for lime is discussed in the later section dealing with
pasture establishment.
Trace Elements
This term is given to elements needed by plants in very
small amounts. The trace elements include copper, zinc, boron,
chlorine and molybdenum. Deficiency of trace elements, in
particular, copper and molybdenum, is common in climates suitable
for agriculture.
Copper: Stock become unhealthy on pastures that are low in
copper, even though the plants are growing well. In other
cases, copper is essential for the successful establishment
of pastures. Deficiency of copper is corrected by an initial
application of 7 lb. of copper sulphate per acre in super-
phosphate. This copper sulphate should be re-applied every
three to four years at 3% lb. per acre to maintain pasture and
stock health.
Molybdenum: This is essential for all plants, but is needed in
greatest amounts for nitrogen fixation by the bacteria in the
nodules on clover roots. Because of this, it is most needed
for adequate clover growth on poor soils. On molybdenum-deficieni
soils, clover growth is poor and unresponsive to plain super-
phosphate. Molybdenum deficiency is corrected by applying 2 oz.
of molybdenum per acre in superphosphate. Molybdenum should
not be applied by itself to soils in the Cobden area, because
these soils are either very deficient or marginally deficient
in copper, and applications of molybdenum alone can further
aggravate this deficiency.
ESTABLISHING PASTURES
(a.) Resowing: It sometimes is necessary to resow deteriorated
pastures. This can be done after growing a fodder crop,
except where the fertility is very low, when pastures should be
resown after an autumn cultivation.


It is very important to sow early; any time from mid
March is satisfactory. This early sowing is important in
obtaining a good germination and establishment of clovers.
Sowings made late in May struggle through the winter and
may even fail to establish. If the sowing date is unduly
delayed, it would be better to sow in early sprang than in
mid-winter.
There is little to be gained by sowing pasture seeds
under oats as a cover crop. There is generally insufficient
fertility to support the crop and allow a good establishment
of pasture seeds. Also, the animals can cause severe pugging
when grazing the oats.
(b) Sodseeding: This can be a satisfactory method of introducing
another species into an already existing pasture, e.g., rye-
grass into a clover-dominant sward. Correct timing of this
operation is very essential; immediately after the autumn
break is best, as this gives the introduced species an equal
chance with those already there.
Grazing
Newly-established pasture should be leniently grazed in
the year of sowing, as this assists the prostrate growing clover
plants to compete better with the taller-growing grasses.
Liberal super should be applied at sowing time, together with lime
and trace elements, if necessary. Lime may be required for
establishment. On moderately acid land, lime-coated clover seed
is sufficient. More acid country may require the use of a 50/50
super-lime mixture or the sowing of seeds with lime. On very
acid country, topdressing with 1 ton of lime plus sowing with a
50/50 super-lime mixture may be necessary. Where lime is broad-
cast at heavy rates, it should be worked into the soil with the
final cultivations before sowing. Soil analysis can assist where
the requirements of lime are not known.
PASTURE MAINTENANCE AND PROBLEMS OF DETERIORATION
Maximum production of cheap fodder is most readily
obtained from stable grass-clover pastures. Pastures consist of
clovers and grasses, the clovers being necessary because of their
role in increasing fertility, which then allows the more productive
grasses to grow. The aim is to maintain a balance between the
clovers and grasses so that the grasses will have sufficient
fertility to remain vigorous. Because clovers are checked by
shading from the taller-growing grasses, and the grasses are
checked by continuous close grazing, the aim is to keep the length
of pasture within certain limits so that neither becomes dominant.
The following are the factors influencing the productivity,
'bility and permanence of a pasture:-


Grazing Management
Grazing speeds up the circulation of plant nutrients
through dung and urine returned to the pasture. This
allows the clover nitrogen to become quickly available
to grasses.
Continued selective overgrazing and defoliation of the
more palatable species reduces their vigour and allows
other species to become dominant.
The essential grass-clover balance is upset. Light
grazing during spring leads to grass dominance. This can
be useful in strengthening the grass component in a
clover-dominant pasture. But, usually the effect is one
of deterioration, for the clover growth is reduced by
shading, and the ultimate effect is a nitrogen-deficient
pasture in the following year.
Excessive spring growth can leave a heavy dry residue
at the autumn break which shades clover seedlings and
decreases clover establishment. Such carryover residues
are not a protection for young seedlings; they are an
indication of incorrect and wasteful management.
Heavy grazing during spring maintains a high clover
content the following year, which is more desirable than
grass dominance.
The dangers of overgrazing are not so severe as under-
grazing. But continued overgrazing may weaken the more
palatable species, especially in seasons of adverse
rainfall. However, if the pasture is grown, it must be
eaten. Subterranean clover grows best when about 2"
deep, and growth rate slows if more leaf is present. In
the spring, the growth exceeds 2", and fodder conserva-
tion is essential to maintain a good pasture.
Fodder Conservation
Conserved fodder is an integral part of grazing management.
When the paddocks are short of feed, conserved fodder should
be fed to prevent overgrazing and nutrient deficiency. In
periods of good growth, the stock numbers per acre should be
increased to prevent the pasture getting away over the whole
farm. This concentration of stock allows hay and silage to be
cut on the remaining area.
Silage: Because of difficult weather conditions at harvest
time and the value of silage as a bulky feed for summer feeding,
silage has a definite place in the Cobden area. It is not
difficult to make and self-feeding eliminates much of the hard
work associated with it.


B. Soil Fertility
The maintenance of soil fertility is vital to continued
pasture production. When pastures consist of a balance of
clovers and grasses and water is not limiting, then the
correct fertilizers can increase growth and enable more
stock to be carried.
Superphosphate
1. Annual applications are essential.
2. Early autumn topdressing is the most effective.
3. High initial rates can be reduced as residual super in
the soil builds up
Trace Elements
Re-application of trace elements. Copper in particular
should be re-applied at regular intervals. The current
recommendation is to apply 3% lb. of copper in rotation to a
quarter of the farm each year. This will maintain an adequate
level for stock and pasture. Molybdenum appears worth
applying to all soils in the area when copper is re-applied.
Potassium
Potash is by far the major nutritive requirement of
plants an 4 without adequate supplies of it, no amount of
superphosphate will improve pasture productivity.
Fodder conservation can cause a rapid drain of the
potash reserves in the soil. When potash deficiency
develops, the following symptoms can be observed:-
(a) Clovers lack vigour, grasses and weeds replace clovers,
but they are usually not vigorous.
(b) Clovers do not respond to superphosphate
(c) In early spring -
+ White dots appear around the outer sections of the
leaves of white clover.
+ Fawn and brown dots of dead tissue appear around the
outer sections of the leaves of red and suckling
clover.
+ Leaves of sub clover become a dirty yellow-green
colour at first, then dots of fawn dead tissue
develop over the surface.
In late spring
Outer sections of sub clover leaves turn brown and the
plants die some weeks earlier than normal.
(d) Flatweeds and sweet vernal grass often become prominent.
(e) Moss becomes prevalent on some soils.


(f) In severe cases, the clovers disappear altogether and
only grow on the patches where the animals have urinated.
2 to 3 cwt. per acre of 2:1 super plus potash will
usually correct the deficiency. Vigorous pasture growth
can be maintained by 2 cwt per acre of 3:1 super and
potash fertilizer annually.
Insect Pests
The insects of most importance and their control are
as follows:-
Underground Grass Caterpillar: These caterpillars, which are
the larvae of moths which fly in September, can cause serious
damage to improved pastures during autumn and winter. They
can grow to a length of 3" and live in silk-lined vertical
tunnels almost 12" deep, emerging at night to feed on the
pasture. They can completely denude a pasture, if in
sufficient numbers
Control: Apply 10 oz of actual D.D.T. (2 pints of 25% D.D.T
emulsion) an acre as an emulsion spray.
Caution: Stock should be kept out of a treated pasture for
49 days after applying this insecticide.
Pasture Cockchafer: The pasture cockchafer grub is the cater-
pillar of a dark brown or black beetle about 3/8" long and 1/8"
wide which fly on warm summer nights in January and February.
These beetles lay their eggs in the soil and young grubs hatch
within about three weeks and become active after autumn rains.
They burrow in the ground and throw up little heaps of soil
and feed on young pasture growth
Control; Apply 2 oz. of lindane an acre mixed with super-
phosphate .
Caution; The pasture should not be grazed for 10 days
following application of lindane.
Red-Legged Earth Mite: These are about the size of a pin's
head with a dark globular body and red legs. They are active
after autumn rains during late autumn, winter and spring,
disappearing with the onset of hot weather. The leaves of
attacked plants present a bleached and silvery appearance.
Control: 1. 11 Imidan" or "Imicide" - apply 3% fluid oz. of
15% concentrate an acre as an emulsion spray.
Don't graze the pasture for at least 7 days after
treatment.
2. Azinphos-ethyl - 1% fluid oz. of 40% concentrate
an acre as an emulsion spray. The treated pasture
should’not be grazed for 7 days after treatment.


3. D.D.T. - 8 fluid oz. of 25% concentrate or 10
fluid oz. of the 20% concentrate an acre as an
emulsion spray.
Caution: The pasture should not be grazed for
at least 21 days after treatment.
4. Lindane - If pasture cockchafer grubs are also
present, apply 2 oz. of lindane an acre mixed
with superphosphate.
Lucerne Flea: This is a globular, light green, wingless
insect, about 1/8" across. It is active during autumn,
winter and spring. They eat small clean holes out of
leaves and make short darting movements when disturbed.
Control: 3% fluid oz. an acre of 15% concentrate of
"Imidan" or "Imicide" emulsion. The pasture should not
grazed for at least 7 days after treatment.
Field Cricket: This is a very dark-brown insect with a
body about one inch long with powerful hind legs like a
grasshopper and long thin feelers. It is a serious pest
of pastures where the soil cracks severely in the summer
Control: Apply a bait containing *5 oz. of lindane
(equals 5 oz. of 10% lindane dust or 10 oz. of 5% dust)
in 30 lb. of bran an acre. This should be spread in the
autumn during the late afternoon over infested areas.
Caution; The pasture should not be stocked for ten days
after treatment.


PLACE' OF FODDER: CROPS ON' DAIRY "FARM'S
In districts of good reliable summer rainfall, all grass
farming may be possible. However, in dry summers, pastures will not
remain productive, yet many plants selected as summer crops will
provide leafy high protein supplement to the feed supply at periods
of poor pasture productivity. Summer crops used in a renovation
program can often be a valuable step in the preparation of a
paddock for new pasture.
SPECIES SUITED TO SUMMER CROPPING IN THE COBDEN DISTRICT
Rape: Sown mid-September to October, ready for feeding early
January. Not affected by frosts. Usually completely used
by early autumn and paddock resown to pasture. Aphis-
resistant rape is best variety - sown 3 lb./acre.
Turnips: Sown mid-September to October.
varieties - York Globe, Yates 1 Flat Empress - ready
for feeding in early January.
Midsown varieties - Red Globe, Mammoth Purple Top - ready
for feeding in early February.
Late variety - Green Globe - ready for feeding in late
February - will hold well into early winter without
rotting.
Turnips are the most satisfactory crop on land of low
fertility. Red Globe appears to be the best general-purpose
variety. h lb seed per acre is adequate on a good seedbed.
Chou Moellier: Sown mid-September to October, ready for feeding
late January. Not affected by frosts. Demands highly fertile
soil for satisfactory results (old clover land). Excellent
general-purpose crop with high production in summer and
vigorous regrowth for winter feeding. Useful in combination
with phalaris for spring pasture establishment and autumn
feeding. 2 lb. of chou moellier is adequate seeding.
Japanese Millet: Sown early November, ready for grazing 8 weeks
after sowing for succession of grazing through summer. Frost
tender. Little insect trouble and most palatable, not taint-
ing milk. However, productivity is more dependent than the
brassicas i*n a moist summer. 12 lb,Vacre of millet seed
is required for establishment.
Maize: Sown early December, ready for grazing at 6 weeks. Frost
tender. Most productive if heavy early summer rains are
received, otherwise can be disappointing. 1H bushels per acre
of seed is usually sown.


PROCEDURE TO ENSURE SUCCESS WITH SPRING-SOWN CROPS
1. Select paddock early and heavily graze throughout winter to
alljow early spring cultivation, and sowing with a minimum of
delay. Best results will be achieved if the soil is highly
fertile - old weedy clover pasture is ideal.
2. Sow early. The leafy cabbage type crops may be sown from
mid-September onwards. Grassy crops (millet and maize)
demand later sowing; (early November). whejn_danger of late
frosts is past.
3. Prepare a fine weed-free seedbed. Cultipacker compaction
before and after sowings is a good insurance against poor
germination in a bad spring.
Choose the crop according to when feed will be needed. Rape,
millet for December-January, chou moellier, turnips for late
summer-autumn feed.
5. Mix the seed in the fertilizer box and drill immediately with
1 bag/acre of superphosphate. Seeding should not be delayed
as injury to the seed can occur with long contact With super.
6. Protect the young crop from pests, especially in seedling
stage (red-legged earth mite and lucerne flea important when
crop germinating}- Cabbage moth, cabbage butterfly become
important in growing stages of brassicas).
UTILIZATION OF SUMMER CROPS
Crops should be treated as a supplement, not a full
ration, and should be used in conjunction with hay and pasture.
Crops are usually provided for highly productive stock, e.g.,
milking cows, lambing ewes or weaners, to ensure full growth and
lactation oh a good protein diet.
Stock should never be shut on a crop without a pasture
run-off, especially if hungry;, otherwise serious digestive up-
sets can result.
Dairy cows are usually allowed strip grazing of crop for
short time each day for best utilization. Sheep usually have
access to the whole crop with pasture run-off.


CEREALS FOR WINTER GRAZING
C.T. Patton, B.Agr.Sc., Agronomist
Winter-growing cereals are probably the most commonly-
grown forage crops in all districts. Their most valuable property
in this regard lies in their ability to make better growth during the
late autumn and winter than most pasture species. Their comparatively
large seed size no doubt contributes to their rapid seedling growth.
In the drier cereal-growing districts (with annual rain-
fall under 20"), oats are sown extensively in rotation with wheat,
with the dual purpose of providing winter feed for sheep and lambs
and a subsequent crop for grain production if the season permits.
In these districts, oats usually make quick growth shortly after
the autumn break, and are more reliable than the annual pasture
species available.
In the higher rainfall districts, oats or other cereals
may be sown more specifically for their grazing value. In these
districts, there is more opportunity to vary the sowing time, and
there is also a wide variation in the feed requirement with time
according to the type of livestock production.
In medium rainfall sheep districts, early winter feed may
be the problem, while subterranean clover pastures become estab-
lished, while in colder dairying districts the demand may be spread
over the whole winter period, especially where milk contracts have
to be met. In most cases, these demands can be met by choice of
suitable types.
GROWTH TYPES
Generally speaking, the best yields of early feed are
produced by early-maturing types of
right early growth and do not stool
varieties Alpha, Kent and Ballidu.
early growth, and in some districts
oats during this period. The early
do not recover as well from grazing
cereals which have fast and up-
out profusely, e.g., the oat
Barley also has this type of
far outyields even the best
growth types, however, generally
as later types and do not yield
as well at subsequent grazings. Mid-season and later-maturing varie-
ties which spend more time in the grassy or stooling stage are
generally best for later grazing and give the highest total green-
stuff production over a longer period up to mid-spring.
The late ripening oat varieties of the Tartarian (side or
tree oat) types have upright early growth and conform to the early-
maturing oat type in green matter production.
Ryecorn is another cereal which has a reputation for
vigorous growth under cold conditions. The early-maturing type
known as South Australian has been quite effective for this purpose


in trials at Toolangi, in the Great Dividing Range, but at lower
altitudes it is not as good as oats or barley. The late-maturing
N.1.A.8. rye has generally proved unsuitable under our conditions
as it makes very little growth in mid-winter, although it is very
productive in the late spring.
VARIETIES
Oats
There are many varieties of each type in existence, but
frequently there are only a few available. The varieties usually
most abundant are those which are also used for grain production in
northern areas. Unfortunately, several of the more desirable graz-
ing types are .relatively poor grain producers, and, unless arrange-
ments are made to have crops grown especially for seed, grain pro-
duction is not likely to increase.
This is why Alpha, for instance, which is the best variety
for early growth, is often hard to get. Kent, however, which is now
grown extensively for grain, is a good alternative.
Avon is an outstanding grain oat in all districts and
should be freely available. It is a midseason type with quite good
early growth.
Algerian and Algeribee are still very widely grown.
Although their early growth is generally slow, they stool profusely
throughout the winter and can be grazed over a long period, giving
peak production late in the winter.
Barley
More information is now being collected regarding the
differences in grazing yield between barley varieties. Data to
date suggest that there is not much
varieties, Prior, Research and Cape
between the three common
TIME OF SOWING
Although the cereals grow quite well in the winter, they
will grow faster in warmer temperatures. It is important, therefore,
that, where early feed is required, the crop s'hould be sown as early
as possible consistent with suitable soil moisture conditions. In
high rainfall dairying districts, a start can be made as early as
late February. Even later-maturing varieties such as Algerian will
give good late autumn feed under these conditions. If an early
variety is sown at that time, it may tend to run into head, in which
case it should be checked by a quick grazing before it gets too far
ahead, otherwise the crop may mature and die off before the winter.


FERTILISER
Cereal plants have a high demand for phosphate early in
their growth, and, wherever possible, seed should be drilled with
superphosphate. As a general rule, the amount of super, put in
with the crop should be at least as much as is normally used for
topdressing pastures or for cereal grain crops in the district.
The response of cereal forage crops to nitrogenous
fertiliser has been variable. Increased yields from nitrogen
appear to be more likely in moister districts where soil fertility
is low, e.g., on new land.
RATE OF SOWING
Green fodder yields are closely linked to plant (or
tiller) numbers, particularly in the early stages before the plants
have put out secondary tillers. Crops for grazing, therefore, need
to be sown heavily.
A general seeding rate of about 100 lb. per acre is
suggested for grazing crops in the 20" to 30" rainfall belt, while
higher rates may be an advantage in wetter colder districts.
Incidentally, it is probable that the good grazing
reputation of Early Kherson (or Burke) is due to the high plant
density obtained with this small-seeded variety when sown at normal
seeding rates.
CULTIVATION
Grazing crops will germinate under quite rough methods of
cultivation with adequate moisture, but good seedbed preparation
producing, say, a good 2-3 inches of firm tilth will usually pay,
particularly if a dry period follows sowing.
GRAZING MANAGEMENT
Normally, a crop will be ready for grazing when leaves
are about 8" to 10" long, which would take about two months when
sown in mid-autumn and somewhat less if sown in warmer weather.
Where a succession of grazings is required, and particu-
larly where the crop is expected to recover for grain, it is
important that the grazed plants are weakened as little as possible
Grazing management should aim at removing only the leaves of the
crop, leaving apical tissues which produce the leaves at the
bases of the stems undamaged. As the plant passes from the vegeta-
tive phase into the reproductive phase, the internodes lengthen
(jointing) and the apical (grain forming) tissues are raised higher
up the stem and so become more liable to damage. If the apical
tissues are destroyed, that shoot dies and new growth can only
arise from later and generally weaker shoots.


Early varieties usually have upright stems and pass into
the reproductive phase sooner than later varieties which produce
more tillers over a longer period before jointing. Early varieties
therefore are more liable to damage by winter grazing and usually
do not recover from grazing as well as later ones.
Quick grazing at high stocking rates is suggested as the
best way of utilising a cereal forage crop. The stock are removed
from the crop as soon as the leaves have been trimmed off and
before the crowns are damaged.
COST
Little information is available on the costs of growing
a forage crop. The variable costs for one Western District farm
surveyed by K.D. Cocks amounted to about $4 an acre for cultivation
and seed on annual pasture land. Smaller and steeper areas would
involve some increase in cost, while the need to resow a perennial
pasture because the land was broken up for cropping would increase
costs considerably.
YIELD
Yields vary greatly from season to season and from time to
time during the one season.
Total yields of from 3 to 10 tons of greenstuff (20% dry
matter) have been obtained with up to four grazings over five months
from May to October in southern and N.E. Victoria. At the first
grazing, yields of from 1 ton to 3 tons can be expected from an early
cereal, while a late variety may yield some 25% to 50% less at this
stage.
PROBLEMS
Waterlogging
Probably the biggest worry is that the land will become too
wet to graze when the crop is ready and the feed is needed: this
risk may be reduced by selecting areas which are normally well
drained.
Under poor drainage conditions and prolonged cloudy weather
which inhibit active growth, there can be an accumulation of nitrate
in oat crops which may lead to nitrate poisoning in stock fed on them
Barley is very intolerant of waterlogging and quickly turns
yellow and loses many of its leaves to fungus diseases in wet condi-
tions. Oats will survive better.
Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus
The yellow dwarf virus causes severe stunting of oat
plants, which is usually accompanied by reddening of the leaves. No
immune varieties are known, but Avon has useful tolerance. Most of
the other commonly-used varieties are very susceptible. Barley is


NITROGEN FOR THE DAIRY FARM
The potential of nitrogen fertilizers for the dairy farmer
lies in their ability to lift pasture growth rates over the critical
winter period.
This is the most critical feed period of the year for the
dairy herd because it coincides with the beginning of the lactation,
and the level of feeding at this stage largely determines total
production and annual returns.
Winter pasture feed is nearly always insufficient for
herd needs, and this feed shortage probably causes more worry,
hardship and expense than any other farming problem.
The Winter Feed Shortage
The winter feed shortage has the greatest limiting effect
on production from grazing land and affects both production per head
and production per acre.
Consequently, it is the greatest limit to efficiency and
profitability in the dairying industry.
The pasture feed supply over the winter months is, on
average, less than half the feed demand in a typical situation.
This would be where fertility is reasonably good or where annual
topdressing rates are approximately -
Superphosphate at 1% to 2 cwt./ac. on dry land;
at 4 to 6 cwt./ac. on irrigated properties; and where
potash is being applied if needed.
On properties where fertilizer rates are lower than
above, the feed supply will be lower, and the effect of this will
be felt greatest in winter.
On all properties, seasonal variation would also result
in at least a 50% fluctuation of winter feed supply above and below
the average.
Feed demand varies both in quality and quantity, as
lactating animals must be fed highly digestible protein and
energy-rich feed such as pasture, whereas other stock can be
adequately maintained on medium quality feeds such as hay and
silage.
The winter feed shortage is thus even more critical because
it occurs during the lactation, and the most desirable feed -
pasture - is the one in shortest supply. The deficit can be made
good with feeds such as hay, silage and oats, but they are rarely
as good and/or as cheap as pasture for milk production.


The problem is also accentuated by the fact that feeding
early in lactation has the major bearing on total production per
head over the complete lactation. Feed of insufficient quality or
quantity early in the lactation will depress total production, and
consequently the winter feed shortage can affect milk and butter-
fat yields in spring and summer as well as in winter.
Why the Winter Feed Shortage Occurs
Pasture growth rates fluctuate throughout the year with
the seasonal changes in temperature, moisture and amount of
sunlight.
With high temperatures, adequate moisture and high light
intensity, growth is at its peak, and this occurs in spring (and
summer under irrigation) and to a lesser extent in autumn.
With low temperatures and low light intensity, even
where moisture is adequate, growth reaches its lowest ebb, and
this occurs in all areas during the winter months (June-August).
As stated above, these slow winter growth rates limit the
productivity of grazing land.
The obvious explanation for slow growth at low tempera-
tures is the effect on plants themselves. It is well known that
pastures will cease to grow if the temperature falls low enough,
such as in a frosty period. After the frosts are over, generally
when a shower of rain falls, growth will pick up as the tempera-
ture rises.
Relative growth rates that may be expected under a
number of mean monthly temperature ranges are given in Table 1 for
perennial ryegrass and white clover.
These can be compared with the mean monthly temperatures
actually recorded at a number of points in Victoria (Table 2).
Table 1 - Pasture Growth Rates
Growth Rate
Temperature Range
(mean monthly)
Clover , Ryegrass
Below 45° F
45° F-50° F
50° F-55° F
55° F-60° F
Dormant ; Very slow
Retarded Moderate
Moderate Fair
Active ' Acti
Active


!
i
May
June
July
August
September
\
Echuca
54
49
4 9 i
50
54
Tatura
53
48
47
49
53.5
Colac
52
47.5
46.5
,48
51.5
Camperdown
52.5
48
47
48.5
52
Melbourne
54.5
50.5
49
51
54
Leongatha
53
49
48
49.5
5 2.5
Table 2 - Mean Monthly Temperatures
Temperatures reach their lowest ebb in late June-early
July, and this coincides with the slowest pasture growth rate.
Of the other ryegrasses, annual ryegrasses such as
Wimmera and Italian will grow some 50% faster than perennial rye-
grass, and short rotation ryegrasses, H.l (Manawa) and Ariki will
fall somewhere between in growth rate. Phalaris is similar in
growth rate to perennial rye and cocksfoot is a little behind.
An additional very important reason for slow growth at
low temperatures is the effect of temperature on the availability
of clover nitrogen to grasses.
Clovers take in atmospheric nitrogen with the help of
nitrogen-fixing bacteria and convert it to clover or organic
nitrogen inside the plant. This clover nitrogen eventually gets
to the soil by way of grazing animals or breakdown of clover
plants and is made available to grasses by nitrifying bacteria.
The nitrifying bacteria ’feel' the temperature like
plants and are very sluggish during the winter months. Con-
sequently, little nitrogen is made available to grasses during
winter, despite the fact that there is usually a triemendous
amount of organic nitrogen in soils under pasture.
Thus, a temporary nitrogen deficiency occurs over
winter because between about 45° F and 55° F the supply of
available nitrogen is insufficient for the amount of growth that
a grass is capable of making.
Basically then a winter feed shortage occurs because
the pasture growth rate or feed supply falls well below the
demand, and this is due to slow winter growth rates caused by
(a) The low temperature effect on plants
(b) A temporary nitrogen deficiency.


Only \
50 Ib./ac.
;Production
Response
1963
21 recordings
i
790 ;
1,140
i i
; 1
350
44
1964
45 recordings
870 ;
1,340
470
54
1965
75 recordings
1,450
1,995
545
38
1966
88 recordings
950
1,370
420
44
; Overall average
i 229 recordings
1,080
1,540
460
42
j
Solution to the Winter Feed Shortage Problem
Obviously the most practical solution to the winter feed
shortage problem lies in attempting to overcome the temporary
nitrogen deficiency.
The breeding of pasture grasses that will grow faster
at low temperatures is a slow process and outside the reach of
individual farmers, although wise selection of pasture species
from the range now available can result in relatively high
producing winter pastures.
Sodseeding of good winter-growing grasses such as oats,
annual ryegrasses and H.l ryegrass can improve winter feed pro-
duction on a farm fairly quickly, although irrigation appears to
be essential for reliable results in the winter following sod-
seeding .
Nitrogen fertilizers have great potential in over-
coming the temporary nitrogen deficiency because they work
quickly and the nitrogen is in a form immediately available to
grasses.
Results of four years of ICIANZ research on this
subject have shown that, on average, an application of 50 lb.
nitrogen per acre* at any time between May and August results in
a 40%-50% increase in pasture growth over 7% weeks, and this
further provides a 50%-60% increase in grazing time.
* (50 lb. nitrogen per acre
Urea at 1 cwt./ac
NITRAM (ammonium nitrate) at
150 Ib./ac.
Sulphate of ammonia at 250 Ib./ac
Table 3 - Pasture Measurements 1963-1966
(Yields in lb. Dry Matter/ac.)
Super I Super + Nitrogen j lncreased jPercentage


Super
Only
Super + Nitrogen
50 Ib./ac.
Increased
Grazing
— 1 A
Percentage
Increase
1963
(4 trials)
32
57
25
77
! 1964
(20 trials)
36
55
19
53
1965
■ (9 trials)
40
65
25
62
Overall average
| (33 trials)
1
37
58
21
57
1
Table 4 - Dairy Grazing Trial Results 1963-1965
(Measurements in Effective Cow Pays/acTT
This is shown in Tables 3 and 4.
Pasture types tested varied from average to very good,
but all contained a reasonable proportion of grass; in most
cases, this was perennial ryegrass.
Where H.l ryegrass or Wimmera ryegrass (irrigation areas)
was the main grass, responses to nitrogen were 50% better again than
the average.
The response period chosen was such that it fitted
current pasture management practice, in that it did not leave a
paddock out of the rotation for too long and yet allowed sufficient
I
time for a nitrogen response.
Regrowth responses almost invariably occurred because the
effect of the nitrogen did not completely disappear after main
response period. These regrowth responses are borne out by the
results of grazing trials and are usually at least 20% of the
initial response (at 50 lb. of N/ac.).
Nitrogen fertilizer can have a long-term effect through
the winter because of the increase in leafiness of pasture that
accompanies the main response, maintaining a higher growth rate
than normal.
Nitrogen can also have a cumulative effect on feed
supply over the whole farm because longer grazing afforded by
treated paddocks results in a longer spell for other paddocks
In the trials, most applications were made in May and
July and were aimed at meeting a feed shortage period 6-8 weeks
ahead. Early winter applications were in fact aimed at pro-
longing the autumn, whereas mid to late winter applications were
aimed at hastening spring growth.


The actual harvested increases in feed supply obtained
are of an order held by agricultural workers to be profitable in
many dairying situations before the introduction of the Govern-
ment bounty on the use of nitrogen fertilizer. Since the bounty,
which brought a reduction of 25%-30% in the cost of nitrogen.
profitability has increased still further, and the use of
nitrogen will become economically worth while on many more farms
as stocking rates rise and conventional methods of supplementary
feeding become more and more difficult and expensive.
Not only can dairies having whole milk contracts use
nitrogen profitably to replace expensive concentrates, but butter-
fat producers can offset heavy hand feeding of hay and concen-
trates early in lactation and provide a better milk-producing
ration at this critical stage.
Practical Points in the Use of Nitrogen
1. Apply 6-8 Weeks Before the Critical Feed Shortage
| " " "■ ' .. i .
! Type of Production j Main Feed Shortage ! Application |
i I : Time ;
! 1. Butterfat
(a) Irrigation
(b) Dry land
August
July
May
C+ July)
July
to August
2. Butterfat + Milk
Contract
(a) Irrigation
(b) Dry land
July to August ; May + July j
June to September : May + July j
| (+ September!
The feed shortages in the above table are for a fairly
well-stocked property, and may not be severe enough to warrant
multiple applications as indicated. For only one application,
the earliest date will generally be best.
Where multiple applications are necessary, these are
best made to the same paddock or paddocks.
2. Apply Nitrogen to a Grassy Pasture
The pasture should contain at least 50% grass and
preferably more and be fairly dense. The grass species should
be vigorous winter growers such as -
Wimmera and Italian ryegrass and barley grass
H.l and Ariki short rotation ryegrass
Perennial ryegrass, Phalaris and cocksfoot
Fog grass will give moderate responses, but often indicates
low fertility and should be treated with caution.


3. Use a Fertile Paddock
A nitrogen response will be restricted by a phosphate or
potash deficiency, and consequently nitrogen fertilizer should
only be used where superphosphate rates are adequate -
lh to 2 cwt./ac. for dry land
4 to 5 cwt./ac. for irrigation, and where
potash is being applied if needed.
4. Best Rate = 50 lb. Nitrogen Per Acre
50 lb. nitrogen per acre per application ensures a good
response that is economical and allows a reasonable regrowth
effect. Higher rates can lead to uneconomical responses and
lower rates can be less efficient.
5. Method of Application
Nitrogen fertilizers are applied most accurately with a
dropspreader or drill with hoses trailing and tynes or discs
lifted. A spinner does a less accurate job, but can give a
spread if the rate of flow is cut 50% and the width of
spread is halved.
6. Response Period
It is most important to spell a paddock for 6-8 weeks
after application, as this allows the pasture growth rate to
accelerate properly. If nitrogen is applied immediately after
a grazing or to a paddock that is autumn saved, no inter-
ference with the normal management routine should occur.
7. Select the Best Winter Paddocks
This usually guarantees a fairly well-drained paddock or
at least one that doesn’t waterlog badly in winter.
Waterlogging, by preventing plant growth, also stops
responses to nitrogen.
8. Use Nitrogen with Caution
If in doubt about the need for nitrogen fertilizer in
a particular situation or the suitability of paddocks or the
method of use, always consult somebody who has had experience
in its use.
It is a special fertilizer that does a special job, and
cannot be relied upon to cure all pasture problems.


Pasture Measurements (lb.
Dry Matter/ac.)
Date of
Application
Response
Period
(days)
Super
Only
Super +
Nitrogen
50 Ib./ac.
Differ-
ence
1963
-
Cobden
June
6
55
339
569
230
-
Irrewillipe
June
10
65
752
882
130
1964
-
Cobden
May
6
56
693
1,663
970
-
n
II
91
990
1,750
760
-
Irrewillipe
June
16
63
730
1,030
300
-
IT
Aug.
28
27
1,240
2,400
1,160
1965
-
Heytesbury
May
6
56
1,466
2,130
670
-
ff
July
29
56
2,128
2,658
530
-
II
July
1
42
1,167
1,327
160
1966
-
Jancourt
East
July
7
41
453
1,088
635
-
Glenfyne
July
3
45
554
1,069
515
-
Cooriemungle
May
11
47
490
960
270
-
II
July
14
64
1,358
1,933
575
—
Pirron
Yallock
July
17
66
1,209
1,769
560
Average
54
970
1,505
535
LOCAL TRIAL RESULTS
Dairy Grazing Trials


FEATURES OF A GOOD MILKING MACHINE
G. A. Mein, Dairy Husbandry Officer
1. Soft, narrow bore inflations, with small mouthpiece cavity.
2. Large volume stainless steel culster claw, with smoothly rounded
cut-off bevels on claw nipples. Transparent plastic sections in
a claw, which allow milk flow from each quarter to be seen, are
helpful but not essential.
3. Pinch valve cut-off clamps in place of dropper taps
4. True end-of-milking indicators mounted for convenient observa-
tion.
5. Milk line; Stainless steel 20 g. milk tubing of adequate
diameter. Suggested sizes are -
Diameter of
ilk Line
IV
l*s"
2"
If Perpendicular Milk If Tangential Oblique
Line, Inlets are Used Milk Line, Inlets are Used
Up to 6 units maximum
Up to 8 or 10 units
Up to 16 or 20 units
Up to 12 or 14 units
Up to 24 or 28 units
For low lines, reduce the above maxima by 25%.
The exact number of units for any milk line depends on the type
of shed, type of cows and the system of milking management, all
of which influence the peak rate of milk flow in the milk line.
6. Releaser: For high line installations, either stainless steel
spit chamber types of adequate capacity or mechanical types are
suitable. For low lines, a mechanical releaser (diaphragm type
or centrifugal type) must be used.
7. Vacuum regulator: Dead weighted compensated type rated at 15"
mercury, mounted at or near the vacuum tank.
8. Pulsation system; Any type of pulsation system is satisfactory,
provided it is reliable and repeatable from bail to bail. A rate
of 45 to 50 p.p.m. and a basic ratio of 50/50 to 60/40, with a
gently choked squeeze phase, is recommended for bail pulsators.
The releaser pulsator should run at a slower speed and basic
setting of about 55/45, and have a snappy action. The optimum
setting for the releaser pulsator depends on the type of
releaser.
9. Air lines; All air lines should be kept as short and straight
as possible. Where changes of direction are required, use bends
or elbows instead of crosses.
The air line from vacuum tank to pump can be IV for up to 8 or
10 units, but should be IV for larger plants. The pulsator air
line ana releaser air line can be IV up to 12 or 14 units, but
should be IV for larger plants, and should enter the vacuum
tank through separate connections.


Vacuum pump: Adequate pump capacity initially providing a
reserve air flow about 5 or 10 c.f.m. above recommended allows
comfortable margin for normal pump wear and small leaks.
There is no advantage to be gained, but some disadvantages, in
having a reserve air flow greatly exceeding recommended
values.


MODERN HERRINGBONE DESIGN
J. E. Green, Dairy Extension Officer
Since swept bends have been allowed in milking machines,
the trend in herringbone design has been towards the straight in,
straight out, running parallel with the air space. Several special
appointments have been featured (see plan) for convenient operation
A cupboard installed at the end of the pit, the top section
with doubled doors and the bottom section a drop-down door to
provide a table for the tester, cleansers, rubbers, teat
ointments, penicillin and other requisites.
The normal 9" pit overhang is deleted after the last cow to
allow a wider pit for the tester to work in.
Guillotine exit gates. They can be operated from anywhere
in the pit. They can close immediately behind the outgoing
cow, and in front of the incoming cow.
Hot water connected to pit to cleanse machines. An old
washing machine, with agitator removed, makes an ideal
utensil to wash machines.
If the shed is elevated, a 9" step at shed entrance, a 9"
step at guide rail entrance, with a 9" incline between the
two steps, raises the cows 2'3" without an immediate step.
The number of units determines the length of guide rails
(these can be gates).
A steel nib plate in place of
kerb - V plate is the normal
the top is a V pipe.
the conventional concrete
thickness used. Welded to
Boom gates at the rear of the
cow platforms
This shed design lends itself
very well for either low-line
or overhead milking machine installations
Existing conventional milking sheds can usually be converted
to this herringbone design much cheaper and without very
much major alterations.
9/3/67


ABBREVIATIONS: C = Cupboard with drop door
T = Tester
KR = Head rail
GG = Guillotine gate.
BG = Boom gate.
Head rail - adjustable - 12" to 18"
Milker's alley - 4' at top - 5'6" at bottom.
Steel nib wall - overhang cut away at last cow
Hot and cold water connected to pit.


IDEAS WHICH MAKE ACCOUNTS MORE USEFUL
R. Shoobridge, Agricultural Economics Officer
1. COSTS
(a) Overhead costs: Costs which don't change over a wide
range of production (output), e.g., Shire rates,
accountancy fees, repairs to buildings, fences and water
supply, telephone, loan and interest repayments, living
costs, car costs, wages, depreciation.
(b) Variable costs: These costs vary with production levels
and stock numbers. Most of them can be allocated to enter-
prises; for a dairying enterprise, these costs are
commonly classified as -
A. Herd costs
(i) Dairy husbandry, e.g., A. 8., herd testing, vet.
costs.
(ii) Shed costs, e.g., rubbers, detergents, and shed
supplies.
B. Feed costs - e.g., fertilizer, hay and silage making
costs, bought feed, forage crop costs.
CAPITAL costs are spent in one year, but spread over
the useful life of the item (e.g., tractor) by
depreciation.
OVERHEAD COSTS need not be covered in a particular year
(cash items have to be paid), but must be covered over
a number of years so that you can plough money back into
the property.
2. GROSS INCOME is the value of the production (output) of your
property, i.e., produce sold + produce kept + produce used on
farm less produce purchased (not output from your farm).
3. GROSS MARGIN is gross income less enterprise variable costs
the amount an enterprise contributes towards overhead costs
This measure breaks costs up to show what accountants call
"cost-volume-profit'' 1 relationships.
These terms mean the same thing
(a) Output or volume or variable costs
(b) Time or overhead or fixed costs.
4. RECORDS you will need in addition to taxation records so that
you can plan more effectively and have more useful accounts
prepared -


1. Paddock book.
2. Stock records.
3. Feed records.
4. Casual labour records.
5. Machine use records (tractor and vehicles).
6. Inventory of feed, farm supplies (e.g. , fuel, seed, super.).
on hand at the start and end of the accounting year.
7. Herd testing.
8. Herd breeding.


lecture 8
Tuesday
11th April* 1
"FARM BBVEE.QHIEaiT FIN/^GB"
Ur* g a g, Sheeran
enior Rural. Loans Officer .Victoria
Commonwealth Development Bank
KerboiiPne* ViCo
The interesting speakers whom you have listened to
today and whom you will he hearing tomorrow will no doubt
persuade many of you to put their ideas into practice*
To achieve the desired results a good deal of capital
will be required, and I am happy to take part in this
course as a representative of the Commonwealth Development
Bank to outline to you the sources of finance which are
available to the farming community and the advantages
which some may have over others*
Credit facilities are available to farmers in
Victoria from the following main sources :
Trading Banks
State Savings Bank of Victoria
Commonwealth Development Bank
Rural Finance and settlement Commission
Life Assurance Companies
Private Investors
Pastoral Houses
Hire Purchase Companies
We will very briefly consider each in turn and also
touch on the basic features of lending*
Basic Features of Lending
The prospective lender (whether a private individual
or an institution) dictates the terns and conditions of
his lending and the popular image may be that these terms
are often ungenerous and at times unrealistic*
It is as well to keep in mind that in many Instances
the lenders are often trustees, responsible to their clients
e*g. Bahtc/customer ; solicitor/dient*
The lender will therefore decide
1* the purpose for which he will lend;
2* the minimum/maximum amounts to be made available;
3* the interest rate; (subject to Reserve Bank
control)
4* the term of the loan and the principal repayments
required (if any);
5* the security required;
6* the incidental costs to be charged, e*g,
procuration fee, establishment fee*
A borrower will have to accept these terms if he
wishes to horror.', but he may decide to utilise the services
of two (or more) lenders and obtain some advantages by


doing so.
This evening the emphasis is on development loans -
development being (according to the dictionary) growth or
a stage of advancement, The concept, in farming circles,
is well understood viz. that the farmer will, hy applying
modern principles and s ound management, improve his
property, increase its productivity or production and
raise his income.
In other words progress is envisaged rather than
stagnation and to achieve this, capital input is certainly
required.
The main source of finance is Trading Bank lending
which, as at July, 1966, had provided S649EU to farmers -
or in other words about 22$ of all Trading Bank advances
were to the rural sector. While some of these funds were
provided for purposes other than direct development, the
figures indicate the level of assistance which is
available to the rural community from Trading Banks in
this country,, . While the bulk of these funds are provided
on overdraft, legally repayable on demand, many advances
continue on a medium or long term basis. About Has
been made available lo primary producers by Trading Banks
by way of Term Loans for fixed periods/- usually 3 to 8
years.
Further, to the Trading Banka* overdraft and Term
Loan facilities, a Farm Development Loan Fund was added
early in 1966, when the Reserve Bank released ()50m, from
the Trading Sanies' resources specifically for farm
development purposes 0
The lending policies, terms and conditions of the
lenders will vary as b etween each other and from time to
tine for various reasons, not the least of which is the
availability of funds.
It cannot bo too strongly emphasised that a
prospective borrower should direct his enquiries to the
organisations concerned and not accept a secondhand report
on prospects of success of an application from an
acquaintance,
Whatever the policies or terms of the "conventional H
lenders may be, it is almost certain that their assistance
will be limited - limited as to amount and to a
predetermined security margin, (The security “margin" Is
the percentage which a lender will normally advance in
relation to the valuation, of the property offered as
security). It is usual for these lenders to seek a first
mortgage.
Pastoral houses are an important source of credit
(s2sBm, at September, 1966) but their function is mainly
the provision of short term and seasonal assistance so that
for the purpose of this exercise we will regard them as a
source of short term finance.
StesJ
Since the Second World War, hire purchase finance has
become a major source of short and medium term finance.
Certainly, much of the support given by hire purchase
companies is directed to consumer credit but none—the—less
quite a proportion is development finance made available to
rural (and industrial) sections of the community for the
purchase of machinery and other producer goods#


Hire Purchase propositions involve greater risk
taking than normal hank overdraft business (items of
equipment can quickly deteriorate or become obsolete),
and. this type of finance is especially sought by those
whose lack of acceptable security (or perhaps lack of
unencumbered security) makes their proposition unattractive
to other lenders - the chattel being acquired becomes the
sole security for the transaction. This latter point
of course in itself is an. attraction to a borrower, as
unencumbered assets are still left free for other
borrowing purposes.
The financing of the purchase of plant and
machinery can quite often be easily encompassed within
the hire purchase facilities available from the various
hire purchase companies as well as the Development Bank#
In many instances, this tjroe of credit may suit the farmer
as he can coincide Hire Purchase commitments with the
receipt of his Income - that is to say the machinery is
paying its own way 0 The Development Bank provides
equipment finance for producer goods.
The limitations mentioned earlier may prevent a
farmer from obtaining all the funds required to carry out
a development programme successfully and against this
background the Commonwealth Development Bank was created
as a supplementary source of finance.
The policy of the Commonwealth Development Bank - as
far as farmers are concerned - is to consider assistanao
for the development of or irarjrovements to rural properties,
provided funds are not otherwise available in whole or in
part on reasonable terms and conditions. May I add that
to us the term development has the widest connotation
possible and in considering applications the Commonwealth
Development Bank is required to have regard primarily to
future prospects rather than available security.
This approach is a departure from the attitude of
"conventional 11 lenders and the main features of
Commonwealth Development Bank lending are as follows :
Lending Policy
The Commonwealth Development Bank will consider
applications which are designed to increase the productivity
of farm properties -- clearing, pasture, fencing, water
supply, plant and equipment, e ssential buildings, basic
livestock. In certain circumstances provision of essential
carry on can be considered particularly where it arises in
connection with a programme of development, but it is
important to remember that C.D.B, was not designed to
finance all rural activity and other lenders must play
their part ’which brings me to one requirement.
iot Otherwise Available
In terms of the Commonwealth Banks Act, the
Commonwealth Development Bank can consider applications
only where, in the opinion of the Development Bank, the
funds sought are not otherwise available on reasonable
terms and conditions, and it is therefore appropriate for
an applicant to first discuss his requirements with his
own trading bank, to ascertain whether the funds (or part
of then) are available from this source.
Repayments
Repayments will normally require to be made by
instalments at half intervals to coincide with
Income receivals, In appropriate cases r arrangements can


fact, it would toe prepared to lend, in d'oo course, the
total amount needed to make the enterprise self-sustaining*
In those circumstances, we must carry the programme forward .
to the point where we can get the appropriate' - answer. This
is usually done in consultation with the' applicant, against
the background that it is his -programme and that he must
accept responsibility for the programme* (However, it is
usufil to confine our approvals to the first 2 or 3 years
only of a programme - if necessary additional assistance
can then toe considered)•
When all relevant information has toeen assembled, we
can draw together the "raw material" of a development loan
proposal into a coherent financial whole. This is done in
the form of a "whole-farm" cash forecast or budget.
In many cases, the budget must toe carried forward
year toy year to the point where income, after rising
progressively as a result of the development programme, is
expected to reach its new year-in-year-out level - where,
for example, the full carrying■capacity made possible toy
the programme will too achieved.
A first step is usually to prepare a "stock schedule"
u forward projection of probable purchases, sales, natural
.increase and losses. This enables us to see such things as
,the cost of stock purchases to keep the property up to its
increasing carrying capacity; how many stock might toe
available for sale and, (in the case of sheep) how many
are likely to toe shorn each year. Similar consideration
is given to other physical aspects; crop production, seed
and fertiliser needs and so on.
Then the budget can toe prepared, incorporating
allowances for living costs, plant replacement, taxation and
interest* This allows us to see what total commitments
might* toe, whether adequate funds or credit are available
to meet them, and how "long the expected yoar-in-year-out
net income surplus would take to repay liabilities* We
can then make a decision, based on the merits of each
individual case, with particular reference to the
applicant's prospects of successfully repaying his
borrowings over a reasonable period.
It may appear- that the practices I have described
seem a lot of trouble for a lender to go to merely so that
he will toe able to say "yes" or "no" to a request for
finance, I certainly agree that this is so tout it must
be remembered that what we are concerned with is marginal
lending. This is fundamentally different from the greater
part of the loans made, for example, toy a trading bank.
Development Bank lending is not a field in which a
predetermined percentage of security can toe the test,
indeed, the great majority of Development Bank loans to
farmers are not■adequately secured toy the tests normally
applied toy a banker - development lending is an area in
■which the determinant is generally the judgment of the
lender regarding the prospects of success of the applicant.
In conclusion nay I stress that if you do not ask us
for finance there is no way wo can help* The ball is in
your court.
Where to apply? Well, every branch of every trading
bank is our agent for receipt and transmission of
applications. They have our application forms, as have
the various branches tbs nommonwoalth Bank* If you


prefer, post your application direct to us and If you
think the completion of the Porn is beyond you don't
hesitate to put your case up in letter form to us* We
are out to assist you and in fact to approve wherever
possible* You will surely agree this is a fresh approach
to lending and every farmer should avail himself of it.


FEEDING DAIRY COWS
W.I.D. Gilmour, D.H.0., Warrnambool
FEEDING
1. Essential Nutrients
All animals require, in their diets, the following
classes of nutrients
Carbohydrates)
Fat )
Protein
Energy
Vitamins
Minerals
Carbohydrates and fats are energy suppliers. They are the
fuel supply of the animal. They provide energy for all the
animal's activities, such as walking, breathing, grazing and
producing milk. Energy nutrients are found in the sap of
all plants and in more concentrated forms in the grain.
Ruminants (cows and sheep and other cud chewing
animals) have a special ability to convert, with the aid of
micro-organisms in the rumen, the stringy fibrous part of
grass into forms which supply energy. Energy nutrients are
sugars, starches, fats, oil and fibre. Different foods
supply different amounts of energy to the animal. We
measure this by comparing the amount of energy supplied by
100 lb. of the food with the Equivalent energy in starch.
This is called the starch equivalent of the food. If a
food has a starch equivalent of 40, 100 lb. of that food
will supply the same amount of energy to the animal as
40 lb. of starch.
Protein is the building material of living things. Cows
require protein to build and repair their bodies and to
make the protein part of the milk. Protein occurs in all
living plant material. All animal products such as dry
milk powder, dried blood, meat meal and fish meal are high
in protein.
High protein concentrates are usually costly
A unit similar to starch equivalent is used to measure
the protein in foods. It is called protein equivalent.
(c) Vitamins and minerals are necessary to make certain pro
cesses of the body work. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies
are rare with animals fed mainly pasture. Copper deficiency
is probably the most common deficiency disease today.


Maintenance and Production
A cow producing 2 lb. of butterfat a day needs more food
than a dry cow. The amount of food a dry cow not in calf needs
to keep going without putting on weight is called the maintenance
ration. The extra she needs to produce milk is called the
production ration. The bigger the cow, the more she needs to
maintain herself. A cow weighing 1,000 lb. needs 6 lb. of
starch equivalent and 0.6 lb. protein equivalent for maintenance.
To produce 3 gallons of milk at a 5.0 test, she requires an
extra 9.3 lb. starch equivalent and 2.3 lb. protein equivalent.
Digestibility
When the main food for the cows is pasture and hay or
silage, the digestibility of the food is an important considera
tion. If a cow eats 100 lb. of pasture and uses 80 lb. of this
for production and maintenance and wastes as dung only 2 0 lb. ,
the digestibility of this pasture is said to be 80%. The
digestibility of pasture varies a great deal with the stage of
growth. The following table illustrates differences in
digestibility and energy values (starch equivalent) of pasture
at different stages of growth and of well-made silage from
that pasture:-
For cows to get the same nutriment from the two different
pastures they would have to eat nearly 20% more of the mature
pasture than the short pasture.
For the silage, the figure is about 23% more of the stemmy
mature material for equal nutriment.
Cow Efficienc
The efficiency of a motor car is measured by dividing the
number of miles by the amount of petrol used.
Cow efficiency is measured by dividing the amount of milk
produced by the amount of feed eaten. High-producing cows are
more efficient than low-producing cows, that is, they produce
more for a given amount of feed.
Mature cows are more efficient than 3 year olds, which in
turn are more efficient than 2 year olds.


The most important variation in efficiency is the way
efficiency falls the longer the cow has been milking.
A good cow, early in lactation, will be about 30%
efficient, that is, she will convert about 30% of what she
eats into milk. The same cow, after milking for about 30
weeks, has dropped in efficiency to about 10%.
Another important variation in efficiency depends on
level of feeding. A cow fed as much as she can eat all through
lactation is less efficient than a cow which has been restricted
to eating what she requires. In other words, over-feeding is
wasteful.
The Appetite of a Milking Cow
Freshly-calved cows cannot eat enough to cover their pro-
duction requirements. They lose weight to keep up the milk
supply. Appetite gradually increases until it reaches a peak
at about 4% to 5 months from calving. At this stage, the cow
will be eating far more than she requires to cover her produc-
tion requirements. As appetite does not allow the cow to eat
enough to cover her production requirements, she loses weight
after calving. She will continue to lose weight for 6 to 8
weeks, after which she will gain
through the rest of lactation.
weight and will continue
Costs of Various Feedstuffs
The cheapest feed of all is
bush and finish up with pasture,
pasture. If you start from
fenced and watered, the cost
will be somewhere in the vicinity of $l4O. Add another $l2
per year for fertilizer, repairs and maintenance to fences and
water, pasture harrowing, topping, etc. The average annual
cost for a pasture lasting 25 years is then about $lB. The
pasture will produce about 7,500/10,000 lb. dry material per
year, with a starch equivalent of 50/70. Taking the lowest
figure, this means a production of 3,750 lb. starch equivalent
for $lB or approximately half a cent for 1 lb. starch equiva-
lent as pasture.
Considering protein, a pasture producing 7,500 lb. of dry
material in a year will have produced about 1,100 lb. at
protein equivalent at a cost of about $lB or a cost of a little
over one and a half cents for 1 lb. of protein equivalent.
The table below shows the costs of energy (starch
equivalent) and protein in a variety of foodstuffs.


S.E.
P.E.
Food
Cost/100 lb.
$
Cost/S,E.
Cents
Cost/P•E.
Cents
30
15 +
Pasture
-
%
1*S
36
4.6
Hay
1.00
2.-8
21
62
7.6
Crushed
Oats
2.00
3.2
26
44
9.9
Bran
2.40
5.5
24
69
10.6
Pollard
2 . 50
3.6
24
71
6.8
Crushed
Barley
2.50
3.5
36
35
8.3
Lucerne
Chaff
1.40
4.0
17
63
26.0
Linseed
Meal
4.15
6.6
17
68
37.0
Meat Meal
50%
4.45
6.5
12
+ Dry Material
The table shows:-
(i) Pasture is a very great deal cheaper than any other cow feed
(ii) Protein-rich foods are a very expensive way of buying energy
(see linseed meal, bran and meat mealj also in this class
are high-protein propietary diary cow foods).
7. The Milking Cow's Requirements
(a) Dry pregnant cows: A dry cow needs enough food to maintain
herself plus nutriment for the growing calf and an allowance
so thst she may gain in condition. Compared with a milking
ration, this amount of fot6d is small.
Ruakura recommends for Jersey cows in good condition
either 15 lb. good average hay per cow per day, 65 lb.
good average silage (1% cubic feet), or dense leafy pasture
6" to 8" high at a rate of 110 cows per acre per day.
For this Jersey cows which require to gain weight at a
faster rate than the above will allow, the recommendation is
either 19/20 lb. good average hay per cow per day, 80 lb.
good average silage per cow per day, or dense leafy pasture
6" to 8" high at a rate of 90 cows per acre per day.
Too much emphasis is often placed on feeding before
calving. Provided that the cow is in good condition and is
gaining weight rather than losing it, milk and butterfat
production will not be impaired. Half a lb. liveweight
gain per day in dry pregnant cows in reasonable condition is
sufficient. Experiments have shown no increase in milk pro-
duction when, before calving, the cows were gaining at a


rate of 1 lb. and over per day; all this assumes of course
that adequate feed is available when tbe cows have calved.
(b) Milking cows: Early lactation (Ist 6-8 weeks - July/
August).
This period is the most important period in feeding
dairy cows. They are losing weight producing heavily and
their appetite is down. They are at peak efficiency,
turning up to 30% of what they eat into milk. Any check
at this stage will reduce production for the whole
lactation.
A Jersey cow weighing 900 lb. requires
(i) For maintenance - 5.5 lb. starch equivalent and
.55 lb. protein equivalent.
(ii) For production - 2.9 lb. starch equivalent and
.70 lb. protein equivalent for each gallon of 4.5%
butterfat milk.
An average cow will probably reach a peak production
of 1.5 lb. butterfat per day; she can probably eat about
115 lb. of green pasture.
1.5 lb. butterfat requirement - 15.6 lb. S.E. and 3.00 lb. P.E
115 lb. grass supplies - 16.1 lb. S.E. and 5.2 lb. P.E.
Adequate high-quality grass early in lactation will just
supply the starch requirements of an average cow, and there
will be protein to spare. When the cow is a high producer or
when grass is limited, protein will still be in adequate
supply, but the cow will be short of starch. She will need
an energy supplement. Hay can be used. However, care must
be taken, as the cow can eat only a limited amount and hay is
a bulky food. The total amount of nutrients eaten by the cow
can be reduced by feeding too much hay. This depends on
pasture availability of course, but, as a general rule, more
than 3/5 pounds of hay per cow per day in early lactation can
be detrimental to production. Hay has benefits in supplying
fibre to keep up the butterfat test and binding loose cows.
However, too much will have a worse effect on production than
too little. A concentrated energy food can often be fed
profitably in early lactation. Crushed oats or pollard is
usually dearest (see earlier table). In this early lacta-
tion time of the year (usually July/August), there is never
any need to feed a protein concentrate. It would not do
any harm to do so, but would be a waste of money.
(c) Mid-lactation (September, October, November, December)
In general, the cow's appetite has increased, her
production is still high (especially the later calvers) and
pasture growth has increased. There is adequate pasture
feed to meet the herd's requirements, both for energy and
for protein.


On more lightly-stocked farms, pasture is wasted and
grows rank and mature. This type of pasture is low in
food value, both starch and protein. Topping paddocks to
ensure that the pasture is green and growing is worth
while (if you can find time!).
There is no point in any supplementary feeding at this
time of the year. Feeding in the bail will mean that cows
will eat less pasture. This is merely giving the cows a
choice of expensive concentrate or cheap pasture. They
will nearly always choose the expensive alternative.
End of lactation (January onrtards)
By this stage the cow's appetite is well in excess of
what she is producing. Pasture production is well down.
Since you have already got 75% of the year's production,
restricting the cow's intake has only a small effect, and
the cow is reduced in efficiency to somewhere around 10/15%
feeding is not so critical in this phase of the lactation.
Cows at this time of the year are producing round 1 lb.
of fat per day. The requirements of a 900-lb. cow
1 lb. butterfat/day are 11.7 lb. S.E. and 2.0 lb. P.E. good
quality hay or (15% crude protein) silage as much as the cow
can eat will provide 8 lb. S.E
what pasture is available will
requirements and what they are
silage, of course, will supply
Because cows are not very
and 2.0 lb. P.E. Usually
make up any difference between
getting. Excellent hay and
more nutrients.
efficient at converting food
to milk at this stage of lactation, they tend to put it on
their backs rather than in the bucket, and, because it would
be necessary to feed an expensive balanced protein feed, it
is very doubtful economically to feed concentrates at this
time of the year. If you have a crop, start feeding it
early. All you can hope to do is hold production. If
production has fallen, it is too late to bring it \ip. For
the same reasons, do not ration the crop too strictly.
A Word On Herd Efficienc
Up till now, these notes have concentrated on the individual
cow's requirements. It is obviously necessary to get as high a»
production as possible from each cow. But it is also necessary
to get as high a production as possible from the farm, as
economically as possible. This means converting as much of the
cheap pasture as possible into milk. An experiment with high
stocking rates compared with low stocking rates measured that
the cows heavily stocked ate and converted 41% more of the
pasture available than the lightly stocked cows.


Good pasture in this area will produce 10,000 lb. of dry
material per year. If all this is eaten and turned into butter
fat, it will produce nearly 300 lb. of butterfat per acre.
This would need high stocking rates to make sure all grass is
eaten, good cows to make sure it is converted efficiently,
calving at the right time of the year to ensure that the cow's
needs are fitted best with pasture production (July - perhaps a
little earlier), and to make sure that the bulk of the feed
was converted when the cows were most efficient.
How efficient are you?


HAY AND SILAGE MAKING
By P. C. Medling, Fodder Conservation Research Officer
The time at which the pasture or crop is cut is the most
important thing affecting the quality of the hay or silage.
With a grass-dominant pasture, early cutting (grasses
before flowering) is necessary for good quality." With grasses,
losses of 10% per week of digestible nutrients have been measured.
Where clovers predominate, later cutting is suitable, as
the protein content of clovers is higher.
Although earlier cutting reduces yields, the increase in
the regrowth after cutting is often more valuable.
The earlier the paddock is closed the greater the yield\
in most cases. However, early closing may reduce grazing in late
winter or early spring, and it may pay to close later and use
nitrogen to boost yields.
Time of closing does not seem to affect time of flowering
of grasses, hence later closing will not give flowering later in
season where haymaking weather is better.
Hay or Silage?
Basically, if hay or silage is well made from the same
crop at the same time, there will be very little difference in
feeding value between the two.
Thus, the choice depends on practical features - the
main one being the ability of the farmer to make good quality hay
or silage. This is often mostly influenced by the weather, e.g.,
if you have a grassy pasture, you must cut early for good quality,
but the weather may not be good enough for haymaking early, hence
silage is the best bet
Another e.g. - With a clover pasture, it is more difficult
to get top quality silage, also later cutting is satisfactory, hence
hay is the best bet.
However, the costs of making hay or silage can often be
important, and these must be worked out for each farmer's situation
average costs are useless for making a decision on a particular farm
The cost of feeding out must also be included, e.g., if
silage can be self-fed, this may well weigh the balance in its
favour.
Other factors may be just as important, e.g., some
rubbishy pastures may be palatable as silage but inedible as hay.


SILAGE
The basis of silage making is to convert the sugars which
are present in plant juices to lactic acid, which preserves the
silage.
Grasses, oats, etc., have more sugars than clovers and
lucerne, and hence are easier to make into silage.
Also the earlier the crop is cut in the season the lower
the sugar content (and the higher the protein content), hence a
balance must be reached.
Thus a mixed pasture gives safest results, and it may pay
to put alternate loads of oats or grass with lucerne or a clover
pasture.
HEATING burns sugars which should be going to lactic acid
or energy, and hence should be avoided by rolling adequately.
Heating also lowers protein digestibility. In some cases, heating
can make an inferior wet silage more palatable, but a much better
remedy is wilting.
WILTING is necessary with succulent pastures to lower the
moisture content before ensiling. Too much water in silage has
several disadvantages
(i) It washes out and dilutes the sugars and lactic acid,
(ii) The effluent around the stack can make conditions muddy.
(iii) You cart considerably more water into the stack for each
ton of dry matter.
Although wilting means two operations, it need not take
any more time. Some foragers have difficulty picking up wilted
material. This can often be avoided by cutting first at a higher
level so that the forager cuts some wilted and some unwilted crop.
Overwilting makes it difficult to roll the stack sufficiently to keep
the temperature down and, in this case, a layer of unwilted crop may
have to be added.
A Rough Test for Moisture Content of Pasture
Cut some typical pasture into small pieces and squeeze
tightly for one minute.
* If the hands have juice on them, the pasture is over 75%
moisture content and too wet.
* If the ball of grass holds its shape and there is no
juice on the hands, it is 70%-75% and O.K.
* If the ball falls apart, especially if it springs apart,
it is below 70% and too dry.


Buckrake or Forager?
The forager usually gives a better quality silage and
is easier to remove from the stack. Although the buckrake costs
less, the cost per ton of the silage is not necessarily less than
that made with a forager. This is because the rate of work is much
slower with the buckrake giving high labour costs.
Types of Storage
Uncovered above-ground stacks can be very wasteful with
40% and more of the original material being lost. On the other
hand,-a pit or an earthwalled bunker can have 2p% or less wastage.
Pits are also safer for rolling and are surprisingly cheap -
considering the initial cost can be spread over many years.
Clamp-sided stacks are safer than open stacks, but not as
safe as pits or bunkers. They may be most useful where the stack
is to be self-fed from the sides.
Plastic Covers
These can save wastage when they are weighted with earth,
rubber tyres, etc., which will keep the air out. Whether covering
is economical depends on how long the silage is to be kept and on
what value is placed on the silage. If the silage is likely to be
kept through the winter for the next season's use, covering will be
worth while. In some cases, especially where silage is scarce, it
will pay to cover for only a few months. The choice depends on
individual circumstances.
If the silage is top quality and to be used as a production
ration, it is going to be more likely to be worth covering than a
poor silage used for, say, maintaining dry cows.
Usually it pays to buy the thinnest cover (I*s-2 thousandths)
and discard after one year. However, with care, it is possible to
re-use 3-4 thousandth covers, and this may be cheaper in the long run.
Vacuum Silage
Essentially, you are usilng a vacuum to do the job that
rolling normally does. Results have shown that good, covered pits
or bunkers give similar quality silage and losses to vacuum silage.
Hence, the choice depends on cost and other practical features.
Vacuum stacks are versatile and can be placed where required each
season. Also, they are attractive, in that they are a "packaged
deal" and in some respects require less skill.
However, the vacuum job requires attentipn to detail and
patience. Also, the process depends on the plastic remaining
unholed and hence is vulnerable.
Farmers' reports from here and overseas vary from complete
satisfaction to the other extreme, e.g. , where the cover has torn.


The cost of the method compared with conventional methods
is the main disadvantage, especially as the plastic is only used once
Feeding out Silage
Hand-forking can be the biggest bugbear in the silage process
Small rear-mounted buckrakes or grabs are useful, although can make
the stack surrounds very muddy, as they depend on rear-wheel traction.
Chainsaws and sharp cutters are useful aids. A rear-mounted combined
ripper and small buckrake is a useful tool.
However, self-feeding must be regarded as more attractive
from the labour point of view. A single electric wire along the
face is the simplest setup and is successful especially where the
cows have access to the silage for long periods. If access is•
restricted, boss cows can be a big problem and timid cows will not
get enough. Some farmers have fed cows separately in groups;
others use simple head stalls.
The more the silage is chopped, the easier for the cows
to pull it out. Also, a dryer wilted silage is easier to extract.
A uniform, good quality silage will be eaten evenly along the face
and lower the time spent cleaning up
wastage. A well-drained approach to
Additives to Silage
the face and also lower the
the face is essential.
Most readily available are
Kylage and molasses. Kylage is
chemically; molasses simply
a powder which assists silage making
adds more sugars. Both can be useful in difficult silage making
conditions, e.g., in lucerne or clover-dominant crops or in wet
succulent crops where wilting is impracticable. However, in good
silage making conditions, they are unnecessary.
In most dairying districts, the major problem is to dry
the grass fast before rain can damage it.
Machinery is available to help fast drying, but is often
expensive and most dairy farmers can only consider them by sharing
to lower the cost.
CRUSHERS increase the drying rate and can enable baling
to take place one to several days earlier. However, at about
$1,200, they are not often a one-man proposition, and could well be
shared by a group of farmers.
TEDDERS increase drying rates to about half the extent
that crushers do and are very useful to fluff up pasture that has
been rained on.
Some RAKES can be used to give a tedding or fulffing up
effect, e.g., the Vicon Lely Acrobat which makes small windrows
with each individual finger wheel.


Most rakes can be adjusted to some extent to make
fluffier windrows and, if the first raking is done into small
windrows, these dry faster than larger ones and are easier to dry
out after rain.
Many SLASHERS are now adapted for haymaking and most do a
good job, especially in rough and tangled conditions which normally
cause mower blockages. It will pay to check in a heavy crop on
steep land that your tractor has enough power for the slasher even
though the power requirement of slashers has lowered over the past
few years.
Some FORAGERS can be adapted for hay cutting and at least
one FLAIL MOWER on the forager principle is on the market for cutting
hay. The main advantage here is that the drying rate is extremely
fast, faster than crushed hay. With modified foragers, losses due to
cutting short pieces can be high and often -
(i) the rotor speed has to be slowed; or
(ii) the forward speed increased (if enough tractor power);
(iii) shear bars or covers close to the flails have to be removed.
These modifications all help to prevent excessive chopping.
A swath is better than a windrow for fast drying of flail-cut material
Baling and Stacking
It is preferable to bale the hay dry enough to be able to
cart it in immediately (not too dry though, as shattering can cause
loss of one-quarter of the crop). However, if rain threatens and
hay is still slightly too wet to bale, stacking in tent-shaped stocks
such as made on the Rutherglen stocking sled can allow the bales to
be left out to dry with a minimum of rain damage.
Econ fodder rolls which are self-fed in the paddock are not
a proposition in many dairying districts, but can be useful where the
summer and autumn are dry enough.
BALERS are often best shared if not much hay is made and
an article in the Journal of Agriculture for August 1966 shows the
savings which can be made by sharing haymaking equipment.


NOTES FOR HEYTESBURY FARM SCHOOL
CASE STUDY FARM
W.I.D. GILMOUR, D.H.0., WARRNAMBOOL
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF FARM
As operated 1965/66 season.
1. Area
108 acres
5 acres bush
103 acres used for dairying
Central lane gravelled leading to dairy, subdivided
into 13 main grazing paddocks.
2. Policies
Jersey herd, 65 cows, supplies milk on butterfat
basis. About 20% replacement rate; stocking rate 63
milking cows per 100 acres.
3. Labour
Owner/operator.
Wife helps with milking
Share arrangement for silage.
Contractors for baling hay.
4. Buildings
New walk through dairy
New hay shed.
Calf shed.
5. Water Supply
Dams reticulated to troughs in each grazing paddock.
6. Plant
Tractor, landrover, plough, harrows. Half share in
forage harvester and manure spreader.
7. Fertilizer
Up to 1964/65 season - straight super
1964/65: 18 tons super. - whole farm @ bags/acre.
2 tons potash - 20 acres @ 2 cwt./acre.
2 tons sulphate of ammonia - 20 acres @
2 cwt./acre.
1965/66; 18 tons 2:1 super, and potash - whole farm @
1H bags/acre
lh tons 1:1:1 super, potash and ammonia
sown with crop.
2 tons sulphate of ammonia - 20 acres @
2 cwt./acre.


8. Calving Pattern
All calved June/August.
9. Fodder Conservation
Hay - 1,200 bales.
Silage - 15 acres.
10. Fodder Cropping
7 acres winter crop oats.
7 acres summer crop turnips.
11. Concentrates
9 tons oats.
4 bags bran.
12 bags "dairy meal"
Fed mainly from calving to spring flush.
PRODUCTION AND PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT
MEASURES OF EFFICIENCY OF FARM BUSINESS
(a) Assume 6% return to capital invested and subtract this from
nett farm income; remainder is the return to labour and
management.
1963/64: Capital invested
$30,414
6% of this
1,824
2,436
Return to labour
and management
-1,824


$32,792
1964/65:
Capital invested
6% of $32,792
1,967
Return to labour and management
4,010
-1,967
$2,043
$41,370
1965/66: Capital invested
6% of $41,370
2,482
Return to labour and management
5,584
-2,482
$3,102
Assume owner*s reward for labour and
management plus wife’s labour
$4,000
2,430
1963/64: Nett farm income
No return to capital invested.
Farm business failed to meet
owner's reward for labour and
management by
1964/65: Nett farm income
Less
Return to capital = $lO.
1965/66: Nett farm income
Less


RECOMMENDED CONTROLS FOR PASTURE PESTS IN VICTORIA, COSTS*
OF MATERIALS AND WITHHOLDING PERIODS FOR GRAZING OR
CUTTING FOR STOCK FOOD
March 196?
S. Erlich, B.Agr.Sc., Senior Entomologist,
Victorian Plant Research Institute, Burnley,
Department of Agriculture
Pest
Control
Cost of
Chemical
Per. Acre
Withholding
Period in
Days
Pasture cockchafer
Aphodius tasmaniae
1. Gamma-BHC (lindane)
2 oz. per acre mixed in
superphosphate.
2. Gamma-BHC (lindane)
0.40
0.75
2 oz. per acre of actual
lindane as an emulsion
spray.
Red-legged earth
mite, Halotydeus
destructor
1. Imidan** oy Imicide**
or Imidine**
3-g- fluid ounces of the
15 per cent concentrate
per acre as an emulsion
spray.
2. Azinphos-ethyl
1-4 fluid ounces of the
40 per cent concentrate
per acre as an emulsion
spray.
3. DDT
2 oz. per acre as an
emulsion spray. This
is equivalent to 8
fluid ounces of 25 per
cent or 10 fluid ounces
of 20 per cent concen-
trate per acre.
Lucerne flea,
Imidan or Imicide or Imidine
fluid ounces of the 15
per cent concentrate per
acre as an emulsion spray.
Sminthurus viridis
Underground grass
caterpillar,
Chlorfenvinphos
8 fluid ounces of the 50
per cent concentrate per
acre as an emulsion spray.
1.35
Oneopera
fasciculata
Common field
cricket,
Gamma-BHC (lindane)
0.5 oz. per acre of actual
lindane mixed in 30 lb.
bran applied as a bait.
For mixing use 5 oz. of
10lindane dust or 10 oz.
of s i° lindane dust.
0.37
Teleogryllus
commodus
* Based on December 1966 prices
** Registered trade mark


Cost of Withholding
Chemical Period in
Days
1.25 2
2.22 3
Pest
Control
louthem armyworm,
'ersectania ewingii
1. Trichlorphon
10 ounces of the
80 per cent soluble
powder per acre, as
a spray.
2. Garbaryl
20 ounces of the 80
per cent wettable
powder per acre, as
a spray.
In handling any of the above-mentioned chemicals, the
precautions advised on the container labels should be strictly
adhered to.
Names of Spray Materials
The brand names are given in alphabetical order and no
preference for any particular brand is implied.
COMMON NAME
azinphos-ethyl
carbaryl
chlorfenvinphos
trichlorphon
BRAND NAME
Azinphos A
Azinphos E4O
Ethyl benzathion
G-usathion A
Thionex 40 E.C.
Bugmaster
Carbaryl
Davam
Dicarbam
Dimoth
Le-Baryl
Pestone
Resistox
Savem
Savyon
Septene
Zevilon
Birlane
Dipterex
