

HIBISCUS
HEART
M. FORREST


HIBISCUS HEART


HIBISCUS HEART
BY
M. FORREST
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers) LTD.
PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.


Printed in Great Britain at
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd.


DEDICATED TO
BON




The verses heading each chapter are extracts from
the author’s poems which have previously appeared
in The Australasian, The Australian Woman's
Mirror, "Aussie," The Bulletin, The Daily Mail
(Brisbane), "Home" (Sydney), The Sydney Mail,
The Triad, and The Wentworth Magazine.


HIBISCUS HEART
" The wind comes up from the sea
It tastes of brine from the green waves creeping
And the heart of the wild red flower is sleeping—
Oh 1 sea-wind let it be I
For you blow from the shores of the singing isles
You have carried their rhythms thro’ careless miles
Tho’ the balm of waters be on your breath
And the charm of tides that the samphire threads
Where the moon-pearls rock on their emerald beds.
You have known high noons of the golden death :
And the bleak grey kingdoms where storm Kings are
With the rotting hulk and the shifting spar :
Have seen the Day like a drowned rose die
In the shallow pools where the dead men lie :
Or brown lovers laughing in surf like snow,
All the strings of the harp of the world you know,
From the blue horizons of dreams you came
. . . And the heart of a flower may hide a flame !
Oh I wind of the world apart 1
You have trodden the trail of the Thousand Ways,
Of the star-white night—of the sun-lit days
To the red hibiscus heart! "
M. FORREST.
Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia, 1926.


HIBISCUS HEART
CHAPTER ONE
" She is weaving Seven Spells
Making flowers out of clay
And scenting them too sweet.
And her voice is as the sound of Nippur bells
Blowing to the desert from the street."
The Assyrian Witch.
EVERYWHERE was music, the soft measures
wrung from Nature needing no touch of Man’s
to lure its sweetness from the strings.
Great green rollers, coming from the other side
of the world, broke on coral-white beaches with
their soft cradle-song, that yet has its deep under-
tone of Death. They creamed to the jut of the
black, glossy rock here and there upthrust, and
gnarled, twisted, wind-tom pandanus, its heavy
olive-tinted fruits marked with the cross of the
Knights of Malta, strange unchristian denizens of the
deserted beaches. Sometimes these green rollers
brought curious flotsam and jetsam to the quiet
sands : weird purple, emerald, and blue shell-fish ;
ropes of seaweed, coloured like young lettuce; bits
of cobra-worm eaten wood ; an old pair of blucher
boots, rotted with the salt tides, flung overboard
from some outward-bound tramp ; more than once


a scrap of clothing with ugly red stains, ripped by
the cruel ivory teeth of the flashing black rockets,
guardians of these but Pacific waters; always the
sea added its own music to the leaf-sounds of the
gum-tree solitudes. Here, on the grassy cliff which
hung sheer above the pandanus, the ebon rocks,
and the white sands, the fecund earth had musics
of its own. At hot noon the locusts shrilled, at eve
came the reedy pipe of the cricket, the eerie laughter
of the kookaburras, above the call of a shore-bound
gull; at dawn the magpies sang, but all the day,
even when the birds were still, there was the gentle
sighing of the burgeoning boughs, little lazy notes
of creaking branches, twigs brushing together, wind
whispering in long tufted grasses, fall of a dead
limb like a swiftly arrested touch on the piano of
the forest; minor rhythms that might have been
the rustle of wings, or the big box leaves clapping
together when the salt airs came in sharply from
the sea.
To-day the wind blew fresh and high through
the hibiscus bush that had stood there since some
bird, alighting in the mud of a far-away tropic
garden, carried the seed of this bush plant on its
foot, and, coming to rest on the cliff, sowed a red
hibiscus here to play its part in a drama of life and
death in the years to be.
Radiant it was, with rich trumpet-shaped
blossoms, and these, like fairy gramophone horns,
seemed to have a music peculiar to themselves,


melody proven not by sound but in colours rich and
rare, the rose-tinted petals gathered round the
crimson heart, and set about the lacquer-green leaves
of the tree. It was a wonderful sight with pale
zircon-hued cliff grasses clinging to its knees: its
branches outspread, pixy umbrellas making shadow
on the earth, and hung with brilliant favours that
were as distant flags to eyes looking from the beach
below. Behind the hibiscus bush stretched glades
of wiry bracken, rust-coloured and enamelled green,
with giant gum trees, from whose huge trunks
strips of pale yellow and brown bark hung in the
background. Now the noon sun trickled through
the gum-boughs, made slants of light in the
bracken, and the cheep-cheep of young birds
added their primitive chorus to the orchestra of
the world.
Only here and there little sommer-weben of
white cloud trailed on the faint and exquisite blue
of the heavens. On the sky a plume of smoke, like
a young widow’s veil, followed coquettishly in the
wake of an unseen ship. Not far from the shore
were ochre-coloured rocks almost touching at their
apex in a pale golden arch, prehistoric formations
round which the waters gurgled and purled, for the
rest was unbroken sea with ruffles of white, and
turning waves that were full of fish-shoals, silver,
dun, and mottled maroon, with a deeper shadow
that meant a shovel-nose, or his more deadly brother
tiger-shark. Clear eau-de-nil jelly fish floated on


the swell and were left to melt in the blazing sun
by the careless tide, helpless things that drift where
the currents choose, and yet have a cold-blooded
life of their own.
There were no fishermen on the pale beaches,
though in one place the keel of an old wooden boat,
gnawed by creatures of the sea and honeycombed by
cobra worm, and from under which an ash-coloured
army of sand crabs marched, lay half buried in the
soft sand. Except for that smudge of smoke on
the horizon, Man and his works seemed forgotten.
Presently there was a stir amongst the lower
branches of the hibiscus bush and parting the
polished green leaves and the glowing trumpets of
the flowers, a hand stole out.
It was a brown hand with spatulate fingers, a
large thumb turned back a little at the first joint,
the wrist slight and sinewy, the arm nut-brown and
bare. ... Now above the hand a face appeared,
brown as the hand, with dark eyes and black brows,
a tousle of dusky hair that showed bronze where
the light betwixt the dancing leaves caught it, a
strong throat rising from the turned back neck of a
faded shirt which might once have been blue.
Crawling on his belly as the snake went out of
Eden, the man drew from under the hibiscus bush,
blinked in the sun and looked out to sea and down
again to the ragged, turfy edge of the cliff.
Nothing in sight I Only the sea that does not care
whether men walk erect, crawl on their bellies, or lie


with blind wide eyes gazing up at the pitiless dome,
as the big waves suck their cold bodies under, or
toss them up again into the sun that can warm them
no more on the bosom of the endless waters.
At the edge of the cliff there were bluebells in the
grass. Fairy things, fragile as pretty, faithless
women, delicately etched against the paler blue of
the ether.
The man looked from left to right and back again
to the green shelter from which he had emerged.
His eyes were anxious, bloodshot. . . .
Every now and then he passed his hand over them
as though endeavouring to brush away something,
once he pressed the palms hard against his forehead
as does one striving to remember.
He shuddered . . . glanced round once again
. . . the pitiful watchful look of the trapped
animal. . . .
A twig snapped somewhere in the timber, a coterie
of “ happy family ” birds commenced a shrill
chattering. Impatiently he frowned, then dragged
himself slowly to his feet, and stood amongst the
feathery cliff herbage, staring out to the tremor
and tumble of waters.
His head could scarcely ache more than it already
did, though the sun was striking on his hair now
making him look as though crowned with burnished
bronze. As a little boy his mother had said she
seemed to have narrowly escaped having a red-
headed son. .. . His mother I Ah, the years


between . . . when he had forgotten her . . . and
everything else that usually tethers a man.
His mother !
He had been like her, people said. He shrugged.
No time for mawkish sentimentality, nor remem-
brance of old wrongs. . . .
He must find a way out. . , .
If only that damned whisky had not left his brain
so muddled. . . . Sleep. . . . He would lie down
again near the hibiscus, flowered with banners red
as spilled blood ... he shuddered again ; lie down
there within sound of the sea and the gracious
healing of boughs, lie down and sleeo till his head
cleared.
He put his hand to the back of his neck ... it
came away wet. . . Sweat , . . the day was a
summer one. No. Red as the hibiscus blossoms
. . . blood.
Then Darney had got that kick in, after all.
An unpleasant smile twisted his mouth a moment.
Then he turned his back on the sea.
Standing watching him, her hands full of a foam of
gum-blossom, creamy and honey-sweet, was a girl
in a white frock.
Behind her the bulk of the giant gums accentu-
ated her slenderness, about her knees the varnished
curled green fronds of young bracken. She was
daintily fresh and clean from the crown of her burnt-
straw hat to the white shoes he could not at once
see, among the brown bracken stipes. She presented


an extraordinary contrast to the earth-and-blood-
stained figure in front of her, coatless, hatless, with
heavy eyes and dark hair, adorned with a stray
green leaf or sallow grass stalk. All about them
was the music of leaf and wave and little flower-
scented wind, with which she seemed so perfectly to
harmonize, he alone was discord in the melody of
forest, ocean, and tranquil skies.
Suddenly she laughed, throwing her white chin
back and showing the grace of her shapely throat,
laughed as only the heart-whole and care-free can,
laughed with challenge in the sound.
“ You do . . . look awfully funny, you know ! ”
He scowled, then a sheepish grin came on his
face. He supposed he did! Bemused as he was
from drink and with a heavy cloud of black dread
of the consequences of hot-headed action hanging
over him, he yet found her laughter infectious. He
must make duet in the world’s music with her. If
anyone had told him he could find anything humor-
ous in such a situation as he was now, he would have
damned him as a silly liar. A man so up against it,
and through his own fault . . . that was the rotten
part of it . . . nothing comical in such plight as
this . . . but the girl . . .
Any other woman would have screamed and run
away . . . taken him for an escaped lunatic or a
dangerous tramp. . . .
She might be in hideous danger for aught she
knew . . . could know . . . and yet she stood there
B


with no greater defence than a handful of wild bush
flowers, and laughed, laughed at and with him, as she
might have done with an equal . . . with a man of
her own obviously fine calibre . . . laughed. . . .
“ You do look . . . awfully funny, you know.”
He could feel something trickling down his back,
moist under his torn shirt . . . the earth danced
in a curious way : the trees joined the leafy jig . . .
the hibiscus bushes swayed . . . how red the
blossoms were! Now they seemed to gather and
fuse in one dripping clot in the green ... to his
eyes they, too, took a certain shape.
“ Hibiscus heart,” he muttered. " Hibiscus
heart . . and fell face down, crashing into the
green favoured boughs.
There were two white petals amongst the red
blooms on the hibiscus bush . . . two cool, white
petals where all else burned. . . . They drifted on
to his hair, were soft and tender about the base of
his skull where the coat smarted. . . . Carney’s
boot had copper nails in the heel . . . They bound
something cool, too, about his head . . . little white
petals on a red hibiscus bush. . . . Queer that . . .
but so many things had been queer in the last forty-
eight hours.
Little white petals . . . now they changed to
hands with slim capable wrists smelling of honey
of gum-blossoms. . . .


Through half-open lids he could see them flutter-
ing over his head. He lay on his back; one ramage
of the hibiscus was between him and the sky. It
bore great red flowers and an opening bud on its
point. . . .
He heard the rustle of her dress mingling with the
other music. . . . How long had he lain here while
she tended him ?
What manner of girl was this ? What fashion of
Samaritan ?
Perhaps she was religious, if so, what a shock she
would get when she found out to whom she had been
ministering!
He tried to lift himself on his elbow, his head
swam, he could not see her now . . . yes . . .
there she was on the other side of the bush, picking
flowers. . . .
She was talking to them, or herself. "You poor
dears,” she said, " I must take you home. ... I
have walked so far to get you, but to-morrow you
will be just a furl of red. ... I won’t be able
to look into your hearts any more . . . and then
you will drop and leave only a stem and a
bunch of leaves . . . what a little while you
last! ”
“ Like a man’s good intentions,” he was thinking
of Carrow’s pub, his own good resolutions not to
get off his horse here to play cards with Darney,
the gradual yielding to the latter’s insistence, "Just
one nobbier,” and then later, " Just one game of


poker ... go on . . . don’t be a softy, you’ve
time for one game.”
Was the grog doctored ? What had happened ?
Why had he accused Darney of cheating ? What a
rough and tumble they had had on the mud floor.. . .
Where was Carrow ? And that black gin, how she
giggled . . . and then she screamed . . . seemed
to turn grey . . . horrible, the look of an aboriginal
turning pale . . . ghastly, like charred bones in a
bush fire. Then, when he was underneath, Darney
had suddenly jumped up and kicked him. And then
he had killed Darney. . . .
He had ridden like hell all night ... till his
hack sobbed and dropped. ... He had taken the
bridle and saddle off . . . and left the poor
devil. . . .
For there comes a time when a man forgets even
his horse. ... He had not known he cared so
much for life . . . just life . . . without honour
. . . money . . . anything . . . harried perhaps by
the police.
If he could get over the border. . . .
What a fool he had been ! Much better to give
himself up to the sergeant. . . . They would get
him in the end. . . .
They always did. . . .
Manslaughter ! If the black girl’s evidence was
taken . . . which it wouldn’t be ... in Queens-
land. ... If Carrow only showed himself half a
man, they must see the provocation. . . . Why,


Darney even said rotten things about his mother
... his mother, of whom Darney could not possibly
know anything . . . but they had both had too
much whisky, and he knew what a fiend that always
made of himself. ... Yes, perhaps Darney had
not been the most to blame. . . .
Anyway, when a man’s dead, there is always
sympathy for the corpse.
Were the district out after him ? This girl did
not seem to know anything about it. . . .
How many years did a man get of quod ... for
. . . manslaughter ?
But he had run away . . . run away . . . that
looked black.
Murder . . . deliberate . . . because Darney had
won his money. All his money ... at poker . . .
at Carrow’s low-down pub, where decent men
did not go. . . .
Black case . . . damn it all, how sick he
was. . . .
But this girl . . . what harm had she ever done
to him, that he should allow her to be implicated.
Accessory after the fact, or some confounded thing.
She might be accused of helping him to get away
. . . hiding him.
No. A chap might commit murder. . . . But he
couldn’t do a rotten thing like this. . . .
" I say ! ” his voice was a mere thread. How he
must have been bleeding . . . that beastly whisky,
too. “ I say ! ”


She was at his side in an instant. She seemed to
him like some fair white bird swooping . . . her
frock crisped like shielding wings. . . .
" I say , . . you must not stay here.” He passed
his hand over his eyes again. “ Thanks awfully . . .
but just . . . get out . . . you don’t know . . .
what kind of man I am . . . what kind of man
you’ve been kind to ... just go . . . leave me
... I’ll be ... all right.”
“ You won’t,” she said. *' And as to what kind of
man you are, that does not matter ... we don’t
carry visiting cards in the bush. . . . You’re sick,
very sick . . . and you’re hurt . . . badly. ... I
was just waiting till you came to, to go back to the
homestead and get somebody to help to carry you
in. Stodge will get the spring cart.
“ The homestead ? ”
“ Yes. You’re near Sea-Garry grazing farm . . .
didn’t you know ? ”
Lord. What a long way he had ridden, blindly in
the last forty-eight hours. .. , Sea-Garry ? He
wrinkled his forehead again. No : he did not know
if, after all, he had even never heard of it , , , and
Stodge ? Who was Stodge ? Stodge and the
spring cart ? Lord I How he wanted a drink 1
“ Is there any water about here ? ” he asked
dully.
" There's a spring half a mile away, but if I get
Stodge ”
Half a mile away. . . . Suppose he asked her to


get him some water, and crawled away into the
bracken where she could not find him when she
returned. . . . How far could he crawl ? And the
sergeant ? The troopers . . . how near would they
be by this ?
He must get rid of the woman, must not drag
her in.
He managed to raise himself to a sitting position.
He looked around.
“ Go away,” he said, “ I killed a man yesterday.”


CHAPTER TWO
" Had you sinned some sin
With the dread of a prison over you ? ”
The Shadow.
STODGE GARRY had decided to take the
afternoon off. He had been helping Dick
Cormorin to brand young calves all the morning.
His lungs were full of dust, his soul of boredom.
The mail man would call at noon. There might be
papers. Stodge devoured newspapers. He read
everything from the Stocks and Shares to the social
gossip columns of Brisbane newspapers.
For, although he was every inch a bushman in
appearance, and not really fitted for any other life,
by natural gift or early training, Stodge hankered
after the city. He often nursed fancies of himself
in a little shop : a " mixed business ” that also had
a newspaper run. He adored bands and street
processions. He liked to watch men, big numbers
of them, going up and down the streets of a town.
He liked to be amongst men if not exactly of them.
Now, at nearly forty, he owned a grazing farm,
which did not pay badly, two miles from the coast
and not too far from a market for a little side line in
crops. Except for the presence of his housekeeper
and stepsister, he spent a great deal of time alone


amidst gum-trees and stock, instead of with shop
windows and fellow-men. He knew he would
probably remain in the bush, making a fair living but
nothing to boast about: it was to his credit he did
as well as he did with his heart always in the metro-
polis. His stepsister was a dozen years his junior.
They were alone in the world. She had some fifty
pounds a year of her own : her mother’s legacy, and
the two got on well together. They were absolutely
different, perhaps that was why they never clashed,
though it was hard for Stodge to understand what
he called Mirry’s “ flower craze.” She would walk
miles this Miranda of the gum country, for one
bright blossom for the ginger and jam jars of her
makeshift vases. She had not the slightest wish
even to visit the city. She had the very spirit of the
forest country and the blue Pacific seas that creamed
to the long pale sands by Sea-Garry farm.
Stodge thought her, on this point, a little cracked.
She was the most fearless woman he had ever
known. Thought nothing of telling him, when his
city nostalgia grew so strong that he became morose
and damned everything from the price of hides to
the plum duff she made on Sundays, to go off to
Brisbane for a fling while she kept house alone with
Thomas Cholmondeley, the half-caste, who insisted
upon bearing his supposititious father’s family names,
in the hut, and under the more distant watchfulness of
Jim Brown, the lean kangaroo shooter, who lived across
the creek and lent a hand when Stodge Garry needed


any help with the stock. Miranda had her vegetable
garden and she reared turkeys who looked after
themselves and fed the house, and sometimes the
exchequer. With her high-held head, her delicate
nostrils, her level mouse-coloured brows and chest-
nut hair, Miranda often made him think of a high-
mettled racer; but Stodge was not given to metaphor:
his ideal woman was shaped and clothed like the
women he read about in the city papers and whose
photographs were sometimes reproduced in the
Society pages of a weekly. She must be fashionably
turned out from top to toe. She must do the Block
on Saturday mornings, lounge in her carriage, be
the ornament of tea-rooms, have her frocks
described when she went to the Races, and be a first-
nighter at the theatres.
Poor Stodge, his stepsister was none of these
desirable things ... in fact all would have bored
her to extinction. . . . Give her the wide sun-
kissed, shadow-flecked miles of bracken, the ragged
boles of the painted gums in that sandy hollow by
the bush trails, the sudden sight of blue wind-
ruffled sea at the far end of a green scrub avenue
and you could have all your shop windows, your
racecourses, your “ first nights ” from here to
Melbourne! Yet, he knew, she was desirable in
appearance, always dainty and sweet in her simple
white frocks—one could not bother to think if they
were the latest mode in cuts. She was Miranda of the
leaves and flowers, the wild birds and the bees.


But, of course. Stodge, whose baptismal name
was Herbert, was only her stepbrother. Familiarity
blinded him to her charm, as it blinds us all to the
virtues of those most nigh to us.
Now, seated in his squatter chair, with his feet,
sockless for coolness sake, thrust into an old pair
of kangaroo-hide slippers which Brown had oblig-
ingly cobbled for him, his pipe in his mouth, no hat
on his fair head where a small circle of pink and
shiny pate showed, Stodge was preparing to open
the latest papers the mail man had brought through.
Beside him at the verandah edge were a cup of tea
and plate of currant cake. Stodge liked his after-
noon tea handy while he read the social column.
It gave the correct atmosphere to the printed
matter.
The trees, which came close to the verandah, for
the enclosed garden was at the rear of the house,
shed a faint watery shadow, red wasps building in a
corner of the eaves made an occasional dart and
whir at an imagined or visible foe, but did not
come too near Garry’s chair.
He could hear a broody hen clucking to visionary
chicks : a horse stamped at the annoyance of sand-
flies, in the paddocks. Miranda was away some-
where ; she had been babbling of an hibiscus she had
discovered in what she called “ a faery glade ” by
the sea, and Stodge, who had read some botanical
paragraphs in the Queenslander, was contending
that the red hibiscus was not a native of Queens


land. He couldn’t remember how many others were
autochthonous, so had let the subject drop early :
she was probably walking miles after some absurd
blossom fancy. Stodge would be undisturbed and
need have no guilty feelings about work neglected
which her quizzical eyes occasionally engendered,
at least until five o’clock, when she returned to
prepare his dinner.
They were really fond of one another, but not
blind to each other’s weaknesses. Stodge would
have been sorry to part from Miranda; Miranda
from Stodge, but he did think her rather “ balmy ”
over flowers ... so hot to tramp far for anything
less simple than a shop window or the grandstand
at a race meeting. ... No one but a “ pea-eater ”
surely would do it. .. .
Then, just as he had focussed comfortably, his
mouth full of cake and tea, on the elongated descrip-
tion of a society leader’s " pink ball,” he heard
someone coming at a quick pace through the
paddock and along the fence.
Miranda, swinging her burnt-straw hat in her
hand, her hair mahogany-dark touched with gold-fire
in rings on her forehead, her face flushed with
exercise and perturbation.
“ Stodge 1. . . quick .. . there’s a man ill. .. .
I’ve dragged .. . hustled .. . pushed .. . yes, I
really believe I’ve sworn at him .. . and, you know,
I don’t ... to Dickson’s corner. .. . He’s been
toppling every few minutes. . . .You must go out


with the spring cart and haul him in. .. . No,
don’t go for Brown,” for Stodge’s annoyed eyes
were turned in the direction of the kangaroo
shooter’s hut. " It has to be kept quiet, I say.”
Stodge rose to his feet, putting his beloved papers
aside.
" Look here, Mirry, what in the hell do you
mean ? Have you got a touch of the sun ... or
have you picked up a jail-breaker in the scrub ? ”
“Possibly . . . that doesn’t matter. . . . You’re
not going to let a man bleed to death on Sea-Garry
edges, are you ? Particularly as he does nothing
but try to break away and hide. .. . Isn’t it better
to have him alive .. . than mere body ? Even if
it is a jail-breaker, you’d have to bury him .. .
and you would hate the exertion of that.”
She had turned in by the wooden gate that swung
past between paddock and house, and was catching
the horse, ready to put him between the shafts of the
new spring cart.
Her stepbrother saw his fate was upon him. He
went inside for his socks :he was not going in
amongst the sandflies and mosquitoes in the timber
without them for any man alive or dead.
Nearly a mile away as the crow flies, the principal
cause of Garry’s broken hour of peace was sitting
(head on knees, swaying every now and then like a
drunken man from side to side, his fingers stained
with mud and plastered with grass from his frequent
collapses in moist places) on a log in a little sunlit,


shadow-pooled clearing, trying to force his puzzled
braip to contrive some manner of escape from the
too-insistent kindness of the woman who had been
his hardily determined rescuer and propeller of
himself to within so short a distance of what she
believed to be harbourage. Now, since he could go
no further, and even she was becoming weakened
with the hopeless task, she had gone off, swift-footed
as Atalanta, to bring some “ help,” she said, and
perhaps a vehicle to take him to her home and, he
believed, straight into the arms of the Law.
Before she got back with her well-intentioned aid,
he must be hidden so securely that she could not
track him, but how ? Where ?
“ Tho’ I flee to the uttermost parts of the earth ”
. . . Had he read that in the Bible ? (It was so
long since he had read it, anyway) or in Shakespeare ?
Or was it Tennyson ? Tennyson was like the Holy
Book in spots . . . Dam’ like. . . .
He tried to stand . . . how sick he was ! Could
he have dreamed in some wild delirium the scene
at the pub. Barney’s sneering face and long sallow
neck. . . . Barney’s boot heel with the copper
nails in it. . . . Had an ague come upon him, and
was his crime a part of the phantasmagoria of
diseased imagination ?
The one thing certain was ... for whatever more
distinct reason ... he must “ get out ” before
that girl with the cool hands and the skin like plum-
blossom, came back to worry him again.


A flock of grey apostle birds began to screech at
the rim of the clearing, a yellow and black goanna
dashed for safety to the rough-barked haven of a
tree, and into the dapple of light and shadow rode
a man in khaki.
Gordon’s head fell forward on his knees.
The game was up.
He couldn’t break away now, in some quiet
cloisterage to define the marked divisions between
the Real and Unreal . . . how much was bitter
fact . . . how much a fevered dream. . . .
The sergeant knew him quite well. He had only
to raise his head and even in his present disorder
those sharp eyes would mark their man.
Who had informed ? Somebody would have to.
. . . They could not (even Carrow dared not, he
supposed, since he had nothing to gain by Darney’s
death) put the body away without notifying the
police and having some sort of enquiry, but they
had been quick . . . quick even for Brody, who
was looked upon as the sharpest man in the force
hereabouts. Brody the cockney, who had come
to Australia to make money in gold mines and had
ended by joining the mounted police on the fields
far North before he was transferred to this district.
Brody and he had often talked gold and old mining
days of Queensland together over a pipe. He
knew Brody had a poor opinion of mine host of
the bush shanty, but that wouldn’t weigh when
it was a matter of killing , . . over a game of


poker of all things. . . . Sounded like a Bret Harte
story.
He supposed, looking through his fingers as the
sergeant dismounted, the chestnut hack rearing
at the irritation of the bites of a settling cloud of
sandflies, he supposed Brody had “ the darbies ” in
his pocket. Did he expect Gordon to show fight
... or walk beside the horse, handcuffed, back to
Carrow’s, or into the township ? He might as well
shoot him where he stood. Brody always carried a
revolver in that hip pocket. There were devious
living men over the ranges who would have been
glad to get him from behind. . . ,
He dropped his hands from his face.
“ I give myself up,” he said, while his muddled
brain tried to piece together carefully the story of
his escape from Carrow’s, the fall of his horse,
anything to keep out that girl’s name. “ Hibiscus
Heart ”he had christened her; he scarce knew why,
but her heart seemed so warm, so red, so human,
her hands so lily cold.
“ I’ll come quietly, Brody. I’m done . . . but for
God’s sake let me lie down and sleep first.” Then
querulously, “ Don’t put the handcuffs on me, old
man. I give you my word I won’t try to get away.”
Brody took a quick step forward, the restive
plunging horse dragging at the bridle rein looped
over the sergeant’s striped sleeve.


" For she was just a girl with little wrists
And great Madonna eyes . . . that was the help.”
The Burning.
HOW those apostle birds chattered.
They had found some ripe wild fruits
scattered from a green-bannered bough, green-
bannered but rotting where the white ants, unseen,
had tunnelled . . . And Brody . . . what hard
white teeth he had . . . made one think of a
rat. . . . Good fellow Brody, though, if one had
not broken the law. , . . Man’s law. . . . God's
law. . . . Was the whiteness of his teeth the occa-
sion of Brody’s inveterate habit of always chewing
at something ?
He had a gum-twig between his teeth now. Ted
Gordon could smell the reek of eucalyptus mingling
with the delicate scent of Brody’s special flavoured
tobacco. Brody was an educated man ... he had
never said exactly why he left London . . . youth
gold-fever ... a woman perhaps ... a woman
with cool hands. . . .
From the sun-soaked earth came the peaty smell
of fem roots, the choking damp odours of moss. The
world was good . . . when one’s head cleared a
little. ... He would hate the walls of a jail more
CHAPTER THREE


possibly than did most free-born men. . . . Perhaps
some day, if the sentence was “ life,” he would dash
his brains out . . . what little was left of them . . .
against those walls men had built for man’s correc-
tion . . . but it might not even be “ life.” It might
be death ... to be hanged by the neck . . . like
Fagin . . . hanged by the neck . . . until he was
dead* ...
And the apostle birds . . . other apostle birds . ..
would quarrel over the wild ripe fruits . . . and the
smell of the fern . . . and the grasses . . . bright
as new paint. . . .
Brody laughed.
“ And what the devil do you want to be arrested
for, Mr. Gordon ? I’m damned if I knew you at
first, thought you were a pea-eater or a sunstruck
swaggie. What in hell’s happened, anyway ? ”
He stared hard at the other. Brody’s eyes always
opened very wide with an expression of engaging
innocence and good fellowship when his suspicions
were aroused,
" Haven’t you heard . . . what happened at
Carrow’s ? ”
Gordon’s voice seemed to come from far away; it
was as though another spoke through him as
Spiritualists believe their dead do.
“ Oh, Garrow’s / I stopped there a minute for a
drink. ... Wretched grog, too. ... I wonder
they dared put it over me,” he laughed grimly.
Brody was proud of his reputation as a dangerous


man to anger, in the district. “ Only heard that
that waster Joe Darney had got into holts with some
fellow . . . served him right Carrow said; seems he
owes Carrow money and Dick never forgives that. . .
he’s a Taffy . . . and Darney is in the township
hospital getting patched up . . . they took him in
on the dray more dead than alive . . . but the
Scotch doctor . . . the new chap you know who
sweeps as clean as all new brooms, says he will get all
right and that ‘ you can’t kill a cairt,’ whatever that
means! . . . But what about you, Mr. Gordon ?
Have you run away with somebody’s wife ? Or
kidnapped a girl under age ? Excuse my remarking
on it, but I don’t think you are any danger to the
ladies as you appear now. . . . Lord, man, you look
as though you had been on a bender for a week.”
“ Good God ! Brody ! I thought I had killed
Darney.”
The trees and the good brown earth were doing a
wild dance . . . the sky had never seemed so blue
... it seemed to dip ... to touch him with
strange benisons. . . .
" Thought you had killed Darney ! It’s a blanky
pity you didn’t,” sighed the sergeant, loosening his
leather belt luxuriously and rubbing his restive
horse’s nose with a reflective forefinger. “ All this
worry because you thought you had accidentally
exterminated vermin that should have been deliber-
ately squashed long ago. . . . Do you think any
sane man would put the handcuffs on you for that ,


Mr. Gordon t Dear me .. . dear me .. . the
man’s conscience is over tender.”
Brody laughed comfortably at his own jest. He
always laughed at his self-manufactured jokes,
because then it did not matter as to whether anyone
else did. But the troopers never failed him there.
It was wiser not to.
Gordon was trembling all over . . . shame . . .
a mixture of wild relief ... as much for the sake
of the girl who had tried so hard to befriend him as
for his own. He groped for words, his hands pawing
the air as his tongue refused to frame them; then
there was the blunt beat of unshod hoofs on the bush
trail: the whir of turning wheels, rattle of harness,
the crack of a whip-lash, and a new spring cart with a
sweating brown horse between the shafts, came
trotting into view, a broad-shouldered man with a
sour expression, at that moment, anyway, holding
the reins ... a woman in a white dress beside
him. . . .
“ You’re the very man I wanted, Mr. Garry,”
said Brody saluting genially. “ The prize black
bull has been stolen, or at any rate, has disappeared,
from Cormorin’s, and I want to know if you have
seen any suspicious characters this way.”
Garry pulled up the horse, looked at the crumpled
figure on the mossy log, and pointed deliberately
with his whip, " I don’t know what you think about
it,” he said, “ but this man looks a confoundedly
suspicious character to me, Sergeant.”


Like a big white moth floating suddenly to earth,
so it appeared to Gordon, the girl was over the
shiny wheel of the cart and was standing between
himself, the pawing chestnut, and the sergeant.
“ How could this man steal anything ? ” she
asked. “ He’s ill. Do you think I don’t know the
look of malaria ? Look at him. . . . yellow with
dengue fever . . . women are wise in these things,
aren’t they, Sergeant ? ” She glanced at the man,
wily Eve in her eyes. She knew Brody prided himself
on his physical fitness. “ Strong men like you
don’t know how bad a man can feel with this
sickness . . . makes them imagine themselves . . .
criminals even sometimes, doesn’t it ? But anyone
can see this man couldn’t steal Cormorin’s bull,
even if he wanted to. . . . I’d be afraid to venture
within a mile of its paddock myself.”
Her stepbrother reddened; More persons were
mentally affected than the battered dark-eyed man
with whom the sergeant had been talking. What had
come over Mirry ?
But the sergeant, before the other man had time
to frame ponderous thought in lucid speech, sided
with the girl.
"You are right, Miss Garry. This gentleman is
Mr. Gordon, an old acquaintance of mine . . . just
having a little joke with me, asking me to take him
in charge.”
" We are going to do that for you,” laughed the
girl nervously, pretending she understood what was


absolute Greek to her for the moment. " And
Stodge and I are going to take you both back to
Sea-Garry for tea . . . quick . . . before he faints
again.”
The “ again ” escaped the sergeant. But his free
arm kept the man from crashing.
An obvious case of fever. . , . Tiger mosquitoes
in the scrub he supposed, infecting his blood, just
as they did with yellow fever in Brazil ... he
knew about it from Dr. Sutherland the other side
of the range. How Ted Gordon came to be in the
scrub and without his horse, he explained in a man’s
way with an aside about Carrow’s doctored whisky
to Stodge Garry, who was beginning to look both
uncomfortable and a little compunctious.
If Brody vouched for anyone in this district, that
man, no matter how much appearances were against
him, must be all right. As for Gordon himself, he
was past caring now as to whether they left him to
lie on the grass where he fell or hoisted him over
that shiny wheel into the spring cart, for a tortuous
blurred mile of jolting. On the whole he would
probably have preferred their desertion, since he
had reached the stage when man is just suffering
animal.
Later he was conscious of how very deliciously
cool sheets in a room that smelled of gum-tips and
grassy-perfumed geraniums could be: a cold
bandage on his head; a faint reek of iodine where
the cool hands had bound his wounds; a long


chilled lemon drink at his bedside—Miranda kept
her cordials in a water bag that swung in the breeze
on the verandah —silence, but for the occasional
murmur of purposely lowered voices on the steps
outside and dusk coming softly with gentle healing
over the sunset world. Gradually he slid into dreams,
uneasy at first, a broken moaning sleep, then
presently into a quieter haven, body recovering,
fatigue passing under the following of Nature’s
almost unfailingly successful prescribing of rest,
sleep. . . ,
Out on the verandah steps. Stodge was taking his
undisturbed sister somewhat severely to task. It
was not to be supposed because this chap could be
vouched for by the sergeant, that she had not done
a dangerously foolish thing in picking up a dis-
ordered looking individual anyhow in the bush, and
caring for him like a mother, championing a fellow
whom she knew absolutely nothing about, and
tending him even more carefully than she would
a poddy lamb, or a calf the dingoes had dragged
down and been hindered in finishing off. It wasn't
because she had got off scot-free this time that it
would be safe to follow a similar course in the future.
. . . How did she know she could trust the man ?
A fellow she had never set eyes on before.
With her hands loosely locked round her knees,
Miranda sat on the step below her admonitor and
looked into the shadow-cloaked trees ; the air was
pungent with night odours, all the boughs had


smoky edges now . . . the birds were going to sleep
in their twig castles. . . . She had nothing to say
. . . nothing . . . for, for the first time in her clear
reasoning, she was puzzled at herself. . . . How
had she known the man was not a rotter ? An
evil tramp ... a hardened criminal. . . .
She did not know . . . but she was somehow
happy that she had acted as she had, without
knowing.
To her there had been red revelation in those
glowing flowers on the hibiscus bush . . . deep down
she saw the man’s heart under the traces of the
storm and wrack from which his life had come. . .
And it was pure gold. . , .
Brody was splashing in the bathroom , . .
snorting like a grampus, thoroughly enjoying him-
self ... in the stranger’s room it was very still
now. . . .
She sprang to her feet, laughed, patted Stodge on
the bald patch of his round head, and ran into the
house to do the washing up. . . .
She was not going to attempt to explain to
Stodge what she could not explain to herself. . . .
She was just . . . going to wash up the tea-
things 11
Gordon woke to the sound of magpies in the
timber, a spot of sun blossomed a pale gold flower
on the pinewood floor. Cholmondeley, the half-
caste, was grinning round the door, his handsome
dark head held sideways over a tray with tea and


thin bread and butter which only a woman’s hand
could have arranged. On the tray was a bunch of
the purple and white “ ramshorn " creeper which
straddled the verandah roof at Sea-Garry.
Though the back of his head was stiff and sore,
though his eyeballs ached and he knew even his
tough hide must be a mass of bruises, Gordon could
appreciate the thoughtfulness that placed the
flowers there ... a kind of message. . . . Forgive-
ness for all the trouble he had caused ? Charit-
able understanding ? What ? Pleasing, anyway.
He thanked Cholmondeley and gulped the tea . . .
food did not appeal just yet. . . .
Then he turned over drowsily again . . . nothing
mattered much for a while, and anyway he had not
killed Darney ; not that the world was likely to be
any better for that. But it was comfortable to know
there were no prison walls ... no dangling ropes
looped for his head to-day. . . .
He slept. . . .


CHAPTER FOUR
" The air is thick with cloudy cinnamons
Through which there cuts like some keen Afghan’s knife
The scent of bitter grasses, ’Tis the flowers
Heaped high above the god whose breath is fire."
Marigolds.
MONTHS of dry weather had burned the
bracken by the sea: parched the grasses
of the mainland, and laid its searing finger on
paddock and garden.
Miranda gave up hope of her blossom beds : stole
water from the tank, when it was down to the third
ring from the bottom, and when Stodge was out of
the way! She dragged buckets too heavy for her
from the dwindling creek which now was a chain
of jade-green and stagnant pools with but a slim
junction between. Birds came to the verandah,
made bold by thirst, and drank from the water bag,
the earth gaped in the more exposed places on the
Run; the Cormorins talked of travelling their
stock, though they had more grass than most, not
altogether an advantage with the earth like tinder
and the sun like a live coal, when the bush fires
began. They were burning strips along the fences,
making the homestead safe.
Round Sea-Garry the timber grew dangerously
thick for the bush fire season. Miranda, grieving


the death of the wild flowers, saw the sun shine like
a copper ball through a veil of smoke, but had no
particular fear for the homestead. Every now
and then clouds rose in the sky and perhaps a few
heavy drops fell, but a wind came in from the sea-
ward side and blew them all away—surest sign of a
droughty season.
The thermometer went high, for the air was dry
and brittle. Stodge lost a stone in weight taking the
stock to water over by Cormorin’s as the creek grew
more dangerous and greedy in the matter of bogged
cows. Crows cawed in the taller gums, watchful for
ewes staggering with weakness or for stray, untimely
lambs.
Butter was scarce because milk was poor in
quality and quantity ; potatoes, which they did not
grow at Sea-Garry, leapt to exorbitant prices; the
teamsters had to buy feed for their horses.
Then one morning Miranda pushed her window
wide to smell fire in the air : the resinous scent of
the burning gum-trees, the hot breath from active
flame.
Near at hand the trees were green—untouched—
the bracken and dry grasses rustled in a sere wind,
but a pall of smoke hung heavy on the earth.
All the men had ridden before daybreak to the
further side of the Run to get the stock away from
the advance of the sweeping Fire King’s array, over
by Wilson’s Boundary. Wilson was down with fever,
and Mrs. Wilson had a young child. It was the


unwritten law of the bush to rally to her in any
case.
Miranda had walked far the night before, to see
how her pet hibiscus bush fared. It seemed to have
some private means of sustenance for, although it
was not in bloom and the leaves looked wilted, its
stems were sturdy and healthy, and one imagined the
roots had discovered a secret gushing fountain of
perpetual youth far under earth.
It was not going to succumb as some of the
smaller soft-wooded trees had done, to become
russet-crested and sapless of trunk, to the final
crashing when the first big storms of the rainy
season broke over the land.
She had felt very weary when she finally came
through the acrid smoke-weighed air to the home-
stead, and, this morning, the same lassitude assailed
her.
She had left some cold meat and bread and a tin
of molasses ready for Stodge’s breakfast, and he had
told her not to bother to get up to make his tea,
since she had no garden to attend to now and the
turkeys had wandered seawards, perhaps finding
it cooler there, or for a chance of pickings on the low-
tide beaches. She had heard him, half-waking,
half-sleeping, fill the kettle and light the fire she
had laid over night, then had turned her face again
to the comparatively cool pillow as the sound of
the horse’s hoofs died away in the distance.
But when she threw the window wide as it was


many hours later, she was conscious of a feeling of
danger in the air, such as the aboriginal and the
bird feels before a cyclone or an earthquake.
Perhaps, across the path the men had gone, the
fire had taken a sudden treacherous curve and was
creeping on her in her fastness ? The beaten trail
would keep it away, if the trees did not catch . . .
but the wind had changed to the west in the night.
Last evening it had veered easterly, for a space
blowing as cool as rain in the white moonlit world ;
west, and hot as a blast from hell. . . .
She went along the verandah to the roofless bath-
room. Four walls and blue sky above as is the way
with many a bush bath house.
Miranda had always delighted in this—nothing
between her fair slim body and the azure unbroken
miles with sometimes a flood of pale yellow morning
light enveloping her or blot of moving shadow from
a careless bird wing on the blue, or the swaying
shade of some high delicately leafed tree. City
bathrooms with their white tiles and white grooved
ceilings always made her feel uncomfortably shut in
after her “ wide, wild, and open to the air ” bath
at home. She declared she never felt properly
washed in a city, for air and light were a portion
of the delights one’s skin found in ablutions.
She smiled to herself now as she remembered how
shocked a school marm from the nearest State school
had been when she once remarked on this in the
township.


Miss Stiggs did not think it “ nice ” to be looked
at “ in a state of nudity ” even by a sparrow-hawk.
Naturally divine nakedness would be a “ state of
nudity ” to a Miss Stiggs.
Coming from the bathroom, wrapped in her loose
towelling robe with its girdle of kangaroo leather,
Miranda knew the smell of the fire was stronger.
The wind that comes before the flame blew against
the eaves of the house.
She looked round for all the available buckets and
tubs and, before she made herself tea, struggled
backwards and forwards to the lessening water-holes
to fill them.
They stood, a soldierly row on the verandah, as
she turned into the house again to eat a healthy
meal.
After all, the fire might not approach the home-
stead. She had never heard of anyone being
" burned out ” on the site of Sea-Garry, but one
must be prepared. It is the slogan of the bush-
woman as well as of the boy scout.
She was sitting on the verandah trying to mend
the heel of an almost impossibly worn sock of
Stodge’s, when she looked up startled by a sudden
rush of wings near the railing, a scarlet-breasted,
green-winged King Lory had alighted a foot or two
from where she sat.
Beyond, among the brown bracken and hay-
coloured grass, was a tiny frill of flame—a little
ruffle it appeared at the skirt of the grey-green


forest —behind it again blue spirals of smoke,
beautiful on the ruffled foliage as valley mists
at morn.
In five minutes or less she was out to meet it,
with a small flour bag she had hastily soaked in one
of her buckets of water, making fierce counter-
attack upon the advancing fire—but one against
the fire hordes does not weigh for much ; as she
beat it down in one place it broke past her in another.
She kilted her skirt to her knees and fought, but,
though masterly, hers was a retreat, inch by inch.
If the timber did not catch it would not matter
so much. She could probably check the conflagration
at the house. It was all coming with the breeze
from the west; she knew where to meet and face her
foe, but, presently, there were sparks on the wind
and an increase in volume of the roaring sound it
brought: trees were alight further back : there was
dead timber amongst the green.
Crash 1 She heard a slender black-butt fall —a
flaming torch to make the sunlight curiously wan.
The ends of her loosened hair were frizzled in the
flame: her eyebrows, nay, her very eyelashes
scorched: her hands blistered: her arms one
automatically moving ache.
If the wind did not change and the timber all
round the house caught —if
There was not time to think. Backwards and
forwards she went between the verandah and the
mocking ripple of gold with its black following


smoke. Sometimes a whirl of half-burnt leaves and
grass and smoke-curls caught her right in the eyes
and, for a moment, blinded her: some weird
unreasoning willy-willy of the fire breaths.
Now the air seemed to darken, the flames through
the pall of smoke took on a vivid and extraordinary
blue. The log harness-room, which stood a little
away from the house on the right, had caught.
Sparks from the boughs on the old red gum, which
had been a full-grown tree ever since she could
remember; a long branch fell; she had thought it
tougher than that—there must have been white
ants in it.
If the roof caught fire, single-handed how could
she get up there to spread wet blankets over the
shingles ? How often she had said they should
have iron while she yet rejoiced at the picturesque-
ness of the shingled roof where the great purple and
white waxen clusters of the " ramshom ” creeper
hung.
The dairy, behind the harness-room, was built of
bark for coolness sake. There is nothing more cool
than bark with earthen floors; little chance for that
now ! It would go like tinder.
An old turkey gobbler, his blue wrinkled throat
puckered, his small red eyes gleaming with terror
and a kind of hopeless anger, came swaying on to the
verandah out of the very heart of the furnace:
behind him clucked and squeaked his harem, and
now past the left-hand corner of the verandah she


saw a rusty-coloured dingo at full gallop, his wet
red tongue hanging.
She thought she could smell singed hair that was
not her own. She remembered the sheep : silly
crossbreds that would burn where they huddled
in the river pocket against the wire fences in the
panic-stricken, petrified fashion of sheep.
The brown horse whinnied fear at the rails. She
ran round to him, clutched at his mane with her
blistered hands, led him somehow up the steps and
on to the verandah, trembling and lunging. She
remembered someone once saying you must keep
a horse’s head away from fire lest he go mad and
rush into its midst. She did not stop to consider if
this were mere superstition; she left him there
shivering, his nose against the water bag, where
she felt the water must surely be “ on the boil ”
by now.
If the house took fire, she must somehow contrive
to get on to the other side of the creek which ran
parallel with the homestead, but she was not
going easily to desert her post. Defence became
mechanical. She moved to and fro, almost without
conscious volition. She felt a sharp stinging sensa-
tion in one knee : she had somehow met a spark, or
cannoned against a burning log. Her stockings were
thick woollen mosquito protectors, her holland
skirt was honeycombed with burned holes. Her sun
hat was ablaze on her head; she threw it from her
into the flames : thrust her hairpins deeper into her
D


coiled hair: it would not do to have her head afire
like Abraham’s burning bush.
Then she heard a shout from the creekside : saw
dimly through the fog of the smoke and the cascade
of sparks a man urging his horse at a jump ; knew
that she had come to the end of her strength,
sank sobbing on her knees at the very rim of the
fire’s advance—and felt that her overstrained heart
was breaking through her uncorsetted ribs at
last.
She did not know who, or what, he was, she did
not care; he was at least another human being, come
to share her terrible vigil, her apparently hopeless,
useless labour against the inferno of this unending
flame and pillar of smoke.
She heard another tree crash, saw the blazing
creeper ripped from it in its fall, like a long ribbon
of gold and red, across the smoke pall, knew that if
someone did not come to lift her up, she would lie
and burn there where she fell—wondered what
witches felt like when they were being tied to the
stake—a knot here—a tightening rope there . . .
wondered over the Hindu widow . . . but she is
drugged not to feel too much of the awful death that
reunites her to her dead Ruler —wondered
He was dragging her, with quiet but effectual
curses, from the too-eager embraces of the flame;
he had lifted her right up in his arms and staggered,
but determined, had borne her to the verandah
edge, was emptying a whole billyfull of water (and


the water was nearly at an end) over her dark
chestnut hair.
The horse reared and plunged off the end of the
verandah, kicking up earth and cinders, and began
to race wildly round and round the house—another
tree broke and collapsed in the paddock, a score of
parrots came screeching murder and destruction on
the shingled roof, where, here and there, a clot of
fire smouldered.
But the shrouding smoke lightened, it seemed to
be passing.
They did not guess the wind had changed. They
clung suddenly to one another.
Her grey eyes had found his brown ones—ere she
dropped down—down into unconsciousness that
seemed as a gracious respite.
" How good you are ! ” she tried to say. She must
have made him understand what she meant to voice,
or he must have guessed the words she would have
framed.
“ Tit-for-tat, Hibiscus Heart,” he said, and held
her closer.


CHAPTER FIVE
" The fine hair of the rain
Swishing round the tall trunks moist and brown.
Till it was dipt again
By the gold sdssors of the sun
Along whose blades the rainbows run.”
Sou’-Easter.
RAIN began to fall at midnight. Here and there
a tower of flame fell hissing through the steady
downpour. Smoking stump and post: earth that
steamed like a boiling tub gradually cooling, leaving
faint spirals of smoke, smouldering logs, and coals
glowing red as poppies seen through the mist
greeted the murky morning.
The end of the drought had come at last as far as
Sea-Garry was concerned. Riding home at mid-
night, through a world that alternately sent up
sparks, commas of gold on the black night, or swept
wild rains into one’s smarting face, Stodge Garry
had set his horse to leap a log that was just a tunnel
of flame with an outer shell that sizzled and splut-
tered under the heavy deluge, because a sudden fear
of what he might find at the homestead laid freezing
fingers upon his heart.
He was some miles from the house when he found
indications that the fire had crept across their tracks
and tricked them, for all day he had been too busy


to consider all that the wind's quarter might possibly,
though improbably, involve. It had blown towards
where his sister stayed alone, and the swift veer to
the east and the oncoming rain might have been
just an hour too late. For horrible things happen
sometimes in the timberlands, when the Fire God
is ranged in battle array.
But, through the still-hovering smoke, the pitiless
rain, the smouldering, boiling land, he saw the
yellow gleam of a lamp in the windows at Garry, and,
driving his horse at the desolation the fire had made
of his paddocks, while a huge still-flaming tree
crashed just behind him, he discovered, with an oath
of relief, the homestead practically intact, the
harness-room somewhat lopsided, the dairy still
smoking, but the main portion of the building was
as he had left it, and he could hear the carthorse
moving restlessly behind the huddle of the walls.
A man was looking out of the window, his shirted
shoulders silhouetted against the orange light.
" That you, Garry ? Right. Ted Gordon here ?
.. . Yes .. . Sister Ai now —just a bit of a faint. . .
we have some tea ready and will tell you all about
the day."
It was pleasant to hear Gordon’s voice ringing so
cheerily after that searing space of overmastering fear.
Stodge suddenly found himself trembling as he
slid from the saddle and turned his horse adrift,
and then went, carrying saddle and bridle, up the
steps. Something slipped, pulpy and swift, under


his foot. Snakes, driven in by the fire. There was
the charred body of a paddy-melon just beyond the
steps, and a soft scrap of wings and claw, that had
been a bright-plumaged bird at noon.
Thank God, Miranda was safe 1
He heard “ all about it ” as he sipped tea and
sliced cold beef in the wood-lined dining-room. The
air was full of the acrid smell of suddenly damped
fires. Little charred motes, that were part of leaf
and bark, floated in at the windows, and hung in
comers of the room. “ The world stinks of fire,”
said Stodge, looking for the whisky jar.
Then he shuddered away from his secret thought.
... It might well have reeked of burned and
precious human flesh.
He wanted to know all about ( the chance that
had brought Gordon this way, all about Miranda’s
heroic defence.
There were tears in his eyes. He had suddenly
realized what she meant to him, this stepsister
who cared so little for the fashion and the crowded
human warrens of cities; whose life was a thing of
open spaces and of many flowers. Miranda of the
timberlands, Miranda of the gum trees, he had
often called her. Indeed he believed that was how
many in the district always spoke of her. How she
looked after him ! How she cared for his comfort,
and few men outlive the inborn feeling that a woman
was created principally for that office. He looked
affectionately at her. She was pale and weary,


aching all over, yet how gallantly she held her
head!
" If you hadn’t been my sister, you are just the
girl I would have married,” he said, a few minutes
after he had found the whisky hidden away in the
coolest place possible behind the kitchen door, life
taking on the mellow pleasantness potations induce
with an easy tendency to sympathetic weeping.
She laughed, “ Not you! You would want some
fashion-plate lady, got up in the last ‘ do the block '
style, who hasn’t a thought above the newest paper
pattern of a spring frock or what kind of shoes to
wear to the races. Not you, Stodge ! I’m a com-
fortable soul to have round to boil the salt beef
and keep the kangaroo rats out of the vegetable
garden, but I’m not nearly feminine enough for you,
dear."
She crossed the room and laid her hand on his
shoulder, and winced as she did so, for her palm
was raw and blistered.
Gordon said nothing : he bent to do something
to his leggings. His face was flushed when he
raised his head. His eyes were dark and intent as
he looked at her.
Another man would have framed a compliment.
She laughed again. There was a new sensation in
her heart. Perhaps she was the kind of girl no
man would ever fall passionately in love with !
Hitherto it was a matter on which she had neither
bothered to ponder nor speculate.


“ To-morrow I shall go to see how my red hibiscus
has fared,” she said. “ I wonder if the change of
wind saved it—or if it is just a blighted, blackened
stick now.”
Then she crimsoned, too, for she remembered
what Gordon had called her when he came out of
the flame to her.
What swift memory of their first meeting had
made him give her that blossom-name ?
A rush of rain and wind slammed the wooden
shutter of the open window, another tree fell noisily
in the timber. The swinging door banged, a rattle
of china and falling tinware made her glad of the
excuse to turn to the kitchen to make things fast.
The rain was trickling off the shingles, rushing in
a stream from the broken piping : there seemed a
reiterative melody in it, an antiphone to some
strange confusing chorus in her own soul.
“ Hibiscus Heart! ”it said, “ Hibiscus Heart! ”
And that was what Gordon was thinking as he
fastened and unfastened the straps of his leather
leggings for the third time.
How calm, how perfectly poised she was, almost
unwomanly in her sex-detachedness, no coquetry
here —her face like the petal of a lily, cool and pale :
her hand, the hand he remembered that day when
they first met, chill in the summer air, lily-fair and
lily-cold—and the heart of an hibiscus is warm.
" What you should do ” —Stodge was pushing
the whisky jar across to him, but was looking at the


door through which Miranda had disappeared—
“ What you should do, my girl, is to stay in bed
all day to-morrow and rest from your labours.”
He looked at Gordon now, " Isn’t she a plucky
sort, my sister ? ”
“ She is.” Gordon’s voice sounded wooden. He
wondered if she could hear through the wash of rain
and the howl of wet winds. “ I think I’ll turn in,”
he added stupidly “if you can manage a shake
down for me. I must get away early. Lord only
knows what damage has been done at Cormorins.
Any place where I can stretch out will do.”
A tiny rivulet meandered across the floor. The
rainy season had come in all earnest.
Miranda came out of the kitchen, lifting her skirt
to escape the water. She carried a blanket and a
pillow over her arm.
“I am going to fix the sofa for you,” she said
practically, “ and show you where the tea and
sugar are, that you can make a stirrup-cup before
you leave.”
As he took the blanket from her, expostulating
that she should trouble over him, his hand accident-
ally touched hers. Cold, despite the burns on her
delicate skin, these little hands he had himself in-
sisted on bathing in olive oil after he had found her
to-day, fragile wrists, blue-veined, frail, yet strong
as steel. He wondered if the pulse in the little
hollow above her thumb would ever quicken a beat
for any man.


And outside the rain streamed down over the
charred body and swollen tongue of the paddy-
melon and beat into the sodden earth the bunch of
bright-coloured feathers that, at noon, had been
song and flight, free of God’s blue miles.
Miranda heard him moving about while it was
yet dark. She was sleeping with her arms thrown
over her head, her hands swathed in oil-soaked
bandages. She felt stiff and sore all over, her eyes
smarted. She believed she had lost her long eye-
lashes. One had not had time, in the fire-fight
yesterday, to consider loss of beauty. Not that she
had ever troubled much about her appearance. It
would be a silly handicapping to begin now.
But when she finally dragged herself out of bed,
she went first to the little thick-glassed mirror above
the pine chest of drawers, where a spray of wilted
gum-tips remained in a glass of water still, despite
all the happening of the last twenty-four hours.
Her hair hung, a great wave of chestnut and gold,
to the tips of her white shoulders. After all
Then she laughed—she meant to walk to the edge
of the sea to-day to see how her hibiscus had fared.
There was a glimpse of sun over the trees : for an
instant a watery diluted light: then down came
the rain again, sweeping its grey feathers over the
world. Sullen columns of smoke defied it from tree
and stump. In places the ground hissed as it met
the showers: the wind that brought the silver
wires of the deluge against the verandah, carried


with it fragments of brown and black leaf —little
spirals of charred stems that had dreamed in spring
they would break in foam of scented blossom.
Stodge was knocking at her door with a huge
pannikin of tea. She slipped a faded wrapper over
the nightdress and reached out gratefully for it.
“The drought has broken, anyway,” he said,
and went singing tunelessly to the bathroom.
Stodge Garry had a large repertoire but no ear for
music; all his songs were set to one tune, but he
was quite satisfied that he could sing.
In the afternoon, Miranda put on her stoutest
boots and walked through the desolation of the
incinerated forest towards the sea.
Rain still fell—but weather never troubled this
woman of the timberlands. She swung away
through the smoking wilderness, her heart full of
hope.
Miranda had been bom and bred on Sea-Garry.
She had seen bush fires before, though never such
a disastrous one, had known the blackened acres of
to-day one carpet of emerald with a pattern of
daisy and bluebell and small bee orchid on the
morrow; showing the green forgiving of the earth
for the things that men had wrought.
Presently the underbrush would spring again:
little rose-madder suckers deepening to warm olives,
charred stumps even don here and there rosettes of
translucent malachites. On the shallow, shrinking
creek would rush a brown flood, and later, the small


yellow and pink cups of water-lilies in deep pools,
where the metal-blue dragon flies hovered and
swooped; birds would nest in rocking boughs, a
cyclone growth of saplings, hardy and bursting with
life, would replace in time the slain forest giants.
Stodge and the kangaroo shooter would give up
Sunday morning’s loaf, for rebuilding the harness-
room and putting fresh bark on the dairy, whose
hard-wood supports had repelled the flames. Emaci-
ated and charcoal-black they stood now, over a
white ash of roof, corrugated with raindrops. Even
her flowerless garden would revive from parched
days; the tank be full of water. When the rain
stopped, she must remind Stodge about getting
that disused well cleaned out: it would be a stand-
by if drought came again.
So she went, between the mourning tree aisles,
down to the sea.
Here was a belt of sallow grass, already tinged
with green shoots, so swiftly did the good brown
earth recover from lean days !
Gracious, ever ready to respond to healing showers:
the benisons of the blue. The wind had changed in
time to save this part of the world ; sandy runnels
of cattle tracks, too, had made fire defences against
the ruffle of lesser creeping flames. Kookaburras
laughed suddenly through the rain that ran down
the dark trunks of ach and black-butt. She could
hear the tweet-tweet of smaller birds somewhere
hidden. Then she came to the place where the


hibiscus did sentinel all day long over the storm-
thrashed seas, and as she did so a shaft of light
broke through the slate-coloured cloud and shone on
the bush. Buds that had endured through the
burning days, for the red hibiscus loves the sun,
were unfolding to the touch of the rain, red as
Indian lacquer, yet soft as panne velvet, with a
heart of deepest crimson coloured like a damask
rose, the veins of the fluted petals a shade paler than
the leaf, veins which made pathways for the seek-
ing bees, or for the tiny sticky black ants that
seemed to evolve out of nothingness, for this honey-
hunting. The pear-shaped leaves of the bush were
green as enamel and polished as by fairy fingers,
the rose-tinted pistil capped by five little plushy
cushions. She quoted an American writer, “ How
Nature loves the number five,” as she leaned to look
at the flowers, velvet cushions dusted with golden
pollen, that held a raindrop like a gem.
With one clumsy bandaged hand she turned the
face of a blossom up to her. Against the soft
greyish-green background of the rescued forest, it
burned like the passionate lips of youth, thirsty for
life and intensity of living.
There were tears in her eyes, and she always
declared she never “ wasted tears, eyes were too
valuable.” Somehow the loveliness of the flowers
after the desolation of the land through which she
had passed —hurt ... as exquisite music some-
times seems to wound the hearkening soul. . . .


The element of sadness in all supreme beauty had
escaped her ere this. Was she, at twenty-eight,
becoming sentimental for the first time in her tale
of tranquil days ?
She shrugged her shoulders, smiled, looked out to
sea, where a driving mist almost hid the great
arched rocks over the grey palisade of the mounting
waters.
The sun had gone again—the rain came down.
But, through the rain glowed the Hibiscus
Heart. . . .


CHAPTER SIX
" I turn to go my way
Where the long roads of wanderers lie
And the tall masts are beckoning hands
Into the undiscovered lands."
Daughter of Joy.
A FTER his initial (and not unnatural under the
circumstances) mistrust of the battered, hat-
less gentleman on the log, Stodge Garry had con-
ceived a somewhat violent attachment for the
wandering drover, for as such Ted Gordon had
described himself to his host, when the healing of
rest and comfort had done their desired work and
he was able to get into a squatter chair and yarn
to Stodge about the cities he had seen beyond the
coast-line of Australia.
He liked Stodge, though at times the other bored
him, for Gordon hadn’t a patient temperament.
Accustomed to take what he wanted, and be negli-
gent of any man’s “ Nay,” or any woman’s denial,
he found himself curiously tolerant of Herbert
Garry’s uninteresting personality.
One sin could not be laid at Gordon’s door. He
was not an ungrateful man. His character was far
too independent for that, and the kindness of the
Garrys, from Miranda’s first discovery of his plight
by the hibiscus bush, and after the sergeant had, as
they all phrased it now, “ given him his reprieve,”


had sunk deep. If ever it came to his turn, Gordon
meant to repay in full the consideration showered
upon him. Brody had departed (still thirsting for
information of a black bull of some value and distinct
achievements, since it had tossed a couple of hands
at Cormorins unexpectedly, and shaken both their
pride and their bones considerably), and with some
of Miranda’s currant cake in his saddle-pouch to
regale a tedious journey. Garry had remembered
that the Cormorins were looking for a trustworthy
man to take charge of a mob of stores for the
southern market. The long overlanding job would
be just the thing for Gordon, who seemed at a loose
end, as far as work went, though he knew the
district pretty well, and who frankly declared he
wasn’t worth five pounds at the moment, as soon
as he was all right again. Garry insisted upon that,
with the easy hospitality of the bush, and he could
tell at a glance, so he said to Miranda confidentially
behind the dairy, that this wasn’t the kind of cove
to come for a week and stay three months. Miranda
wrinkled her eyebrows over Stodge’s perspicuity;
she knew her brother’s rapid diagnosis of old, but,
this time, he was certainly right.
Before he was really fit for the saddle, Gordon
had mounted Garry’s rat-tailed piebald, a joke in
the district, but a decent rough hack, nevertheless,
and had gone out to find traces of the knocked-up
horse he had discarded in his flight from Carrow’s.
The mail man had come across it, looking tucked-
up, but on its feet, grazing by Thompson’s.
62
HIBISCUS HEART


Thompson’s boy had lassoed it, playing cowboy, and
hoping no one would claim the neddy. Ten shillings
out of Gordon’s small store placated the Thompson
boy, who had heard a rumour of a circus coming to
the township, and gave Gordon a horse of his own
between his knees again, and he remembered where
he had left the saddle and bridle. A startled goanna
crawled out from under the former as he took posses-
sion, but the bridle he never saw again. Perhaps
the bower birds, heavy as it was for these little
gleaners of the underwood, had hauled it off some-
how to an adjacent playground, attracted by the
buckle, or streaked brightness of the bit.
The Thompson boy lent a halter, and Stodge,
who wanted to present it, was presently persuaded to
let him pay for an old bridle that had belonged to
Miranda’s riding horse. Returning Stodge’s bor-
rowed shirt, he remarked, laconically, that he was
going to ride back to the township to find his own,
since his luggage remained more or less permanently
at the Stockman’s Arms; he had bidden good-bye
to Sea-Garry and the two waving figures God-
speeding him from the doorway.
They would see him soon, shouted Stodge.
Miranda had said nothing but “ Good-bye,” her
eyes thoughtful, and it was not until his dramatic
entrance on the day of the big bush fire that they
had seen him again. In the meantime, he had been
south, got the stores through without loss. Jim
Cormorin was delighted: his flapper daughter, just
up from boarding-school in Sydney, more so.
E


With her cousin, another obvious flapper, she had
definitely decided that Edward Gordon was a
romantic figure. “ I like them dark and compelling,”
she had told her cousin Arline, as they sat with
their knees drawn up in Arline’s bed and exchanged
confidences, while a slow white moon broke through
the rain clouds and looked in at their open
Arline agreed. " But, Beatrix ” (Arline had
social aspirations), “ he’s only a drover, you know.”
Beatrix whispered in her ear.
“ Not really ? ” her cousin’s tones were awed
“ Not really ? ”
Beatrix nodded, mouth pursed tightly. As to
whether she whispered “ highly connected,” or “ a
nobleman in disguise,” the white lady moon was
indifferent, but the white lady is too high in heaven
even to smile at Youth’s inaccuracies and the
inherent snobbishness of young and human things.
The flappers were asleep; their arms entwined,
and over in the bachelors’ quarters, Ted Gordon
sprawled in a long verandah chair and wondered,
and regretted, over things quite alien to their youth-
ful philosophy.
He was in a groove that pleased him just now. He
had seen Darney with a scar on his cheek and a
sulky expression, near the door of the Stockman’s
Arms, a few days ago. They had shaken hands
and had a drink together. Not more than one,
though.
Darney, suddenly effusive, had insisted upon
others, and " make it my shout.”


Gordon left him paying for drinks all round for a
dapper half-caste Chinese and two degraded looking
whites.
He would never like Darney, though, just now,
to see him walking about safe and sound meant
almost intolerable relief. What a bad forty-eight
hours he had been able to give Gordon once —a
following ghost imagination had created in foul
disguise.
He would always be grateful to Darney for not
dying and branding him with Cain’s stigma.
Oh ! The blue sky was good to look up at! The
winding ribbon of grey road—the free—free miles !
No man surely could be jailed and ever be the
same. . . . Something surely would break.
It was good to wake in the morning and know he
could range the world an’ he would, with only a
matter of how far a pound would go, to worry him ;
no man’s hand to stay him ; people could say what
they would about the harmlessness of breaking the
law. In many ways, no man could deny Law was
not Justice ; better men no doubt had been jailed
in their day than those who went scot-free, admired
and lauded by fellow-men, but, the point was, that
it is a rotten thing to be shut up anywhere like a
bird in a wicker crib, by those who had the power
behind them to make stone walls a prison, and iron
bars a cage. All the highfalutin about free spirits
soaring beyond bolts and bars couldn’t prevent a
man’s chagrin at having to pace a prison yard with
a squad of other incarcerated felons, having his


photograph in criminal records: his finger-prints
on official files; to be shut in a cell while other
men were under the open stars ... to be ordered
here and there, to be a number instead of a name, to
lack privacy. He wasn’t a bit better than other
men, worse perhaps than some : he had done things
that made him ashamed when he remembered grey
eyes looking at him from under a crown of chestnut-
coloured hair—cool hands that bound what might
have been a jail-bird’s head ; but he had not earned
the penalty of being shut behind those clanging
doors. He had not “ served his time ” for anything.
And Damey’s life assuredly wasn’t worth loss of
freedom even for a month of days. . . .
He supposed he would always be a poor man;
he did not contemplate ever making a home—
taking a wife.
He mused a moment, letting his pipe go out.
But marriage itself was a kind of penal servitude.
Tied—no—he could never bear to be chained or
tied. . . .
He could imagine himself living in a hut in the
forest: eating of wild fruits and honey: snaring
or shooting the wild things of feather or fur, to keep
life in himself, bathing in the shallow creek that
cast up the reflex of gum-tree boles, and the dusky
flight of birds, " gone my all ” for the sake of the
freedom only. He who hated towns, where the men
grew all alike and women sold themselves for bread.
He remembered slums in Glasgow, where the
price of virtue was “ two bawbees,” where there


were lasses who had grown from babyhood to
maturity whose bare feet had never known a shoe :
was it to be wondered at that Communistic schools
flourished there ? He remembered, blown on a wind
of lust, his visit to the outskirts of a great trans-
continental city where the millionaires came down
to buy the women of the streets ... of an Eastern
port where a vermilion lamp hung over dark-arched
doorways; a girl with a bright scarf and with
jingling coins on her head-dress: a girl with feet
like little golden lilies . . . and the going down to
the ship in the cold, grey dawn. He must thank
her still for the hour she laughed away for him
For despair was black upon him then . . . and it
would have seemed an easy , thing to look too long
at the slow, sliding, oily river, running between
black hulks—whose waters spelled forgetting. . . .
No doubt she was laughing away the hours of
remembering with other men now. . . .
It did not matter. She had helped him to find
himself again, turn a corner. He had been so young
and so unhappy. ... He needs must bless her for
that hour her little feet kept pace with his. . . .
Further back he remembered snow on the ground ;
the tower of a church looming over a murk of trees ;
in which the rooks were calling. There was a tiny
curve of moon—wheels on the road. . . . Snatched
from a warm bed, he was muffled uncomfortably in
a thick cloak : a voice like a honey-thread whispered
in his ear of all the toys and sweetmeats he would get


if he would only keep quiet for a little while, “ be a
good boy. Mother's good boy.”
Then the avenue—with a star at the far end.
A sudden sharp challenge: his face hidden
abruptly against a shoulder smelling of Harris tweed
and, faintly, of cigars. . . .
He could hear a woman crying—very low —very
troubled He had never heard a woman cry
quite like that since. . . . Then he was back in his
warm bed again, holding the rag-doll he had been
worrying about, when the honey-sweet voice he
knew now to have been his mother’s was promising
toys he was never to see, and sweetmeats he did not
want, in any case, nearly as much as his old rag-doll.
Days after that, he was alone in the big house
from whose window he could see the church
tower, days with a dark sour-visaged man who did
not seem to like him . . . who watched always for
his tripping, seeming almost to hope he would trip.
That was his father . . . but he never saw the soft
face with the crown of yellow hair, nor heard the
honey-sweet voice again. . . .
People told him afterwards she had not been a
good mother. He did not know that—he only knew
she breathed of honeysuckle and roses and her hair
was like gold silk and she was as a flower to touch—
and his father seemed all broad-cloth that smelled
of black dye, and wiry side-whiskers and distressing
angles.
And, when he had to sit in a corner of the
Vicarage pew and listen to his father’s sermons,


they always seemed, when particularly vindictive
against sinners, to be specially levelled at himself:
that was when he grew bigger and came home from
school at holiday time.
At fifteen he ran away from home to “ find his
mother.”
He never found her. Nobody would ever tell him
anything.
The snatching from his warm bed, the promises,
the sound of wheels on a midnight road merged in a
blurred dream.
To-night, in fuller knowledge, it came strangely
back to him. Now he knew his mother had gone off
with another man, had tried to take him with her ;
she was like that, for the laws she had not the
slightest respect—and, at the last moment, somehow,
there had been a rescue. He had been carried back
to the house—but she had not. . . .
The Man of God never forgave. He died without
ever forgiving the son who ran away to find his
mother ; the mother who ran away to love, hoping
for happiness. . . .
Love—that was more to her than husband or
son. . . .
Gordon shook the ashes from his pipe, looked up
at the stars showing through the cloud-woof,
yawned, stretched, and went into the quarters,
to bed.
He was thirty—and in Australia. . . .
A far cry to four-and-a-half in an English
parsonage. . . .


CHAPTER SEVEN
*' I think that was our days of days
When love was new —and half afraid
And yet . . . there are so many ways
Where a love a loveliness has made.”
Festival.
BEATRIX CORMORIN sat by the creek that
wound among the willows at the foot of the
grassy banks sloping down from wire-netting fences
of Cormorin station garden. On either side of the
little wooden gate were clumps of dwarf bamboo,
beyond, glimpses of dark spiked yucca and sweeping
pepperina trees.
Across the creek ran a low footbridge, not much
more than a duck-board, though, further up, a
swaying suspension bridge balanced precariously
to the eye unaccustomed to such, among the boughs
of gum and willow, but the track from the home-
stead gate ran to the duck-board, and the trail from
the station street met the narrow footbridge on the
other side, merging in the “ street ” by the wool-store,
between the long galvanized iron-roofed wool-shed,
the station store and book-keeper’s office which, in
its turn, was faced by the paling fence and primitive
Saxon arch of the gate that led to the long, low, forty-
year-old building comprising the bachelors’ quarters.
Between the trailing willow branches, Beatrix
watched as Napoleon may have kept vigil under his


willow trees on St. Helena, for the rescue ship he
died expecting, but the slim, fifteen-year-old girl
was not thinking of ships, or flowing seas, but rather
of the tides of Man’s affection.
Beatrix was in love, as only youth and inexperience
name the romantic, callow sex-attraction for a man
who is all they imagine him to be —only in that
imagination.
She had not spoken half a dozen times to the
“ wandering drover ” before she judged him Hero,
and she was naturally, being just released from a
convent boarding school, painfully anxious to fall
a victim to some kind of Hero-worship.
Arline was not so romantic. She liked to know
who people were and what they did ; she was more
suspicious and of a more phlegmatic temperament;
a pound box of chocolates would be a serious rival
to romance with Arline still: but Beatrix quoted
poetry. She had been reading Tennyson and
Shakespeare—
" All my fortunes at thy feet I lay and follow
thee, my lord, throughout the world,” and :
“ Across the hills and far away
Beyond their outmost purple rim,
And deep into the dying day
Through all the world she followed him,”
she murmured to the willows.
Deep in the shadows from which, by day, the
black, red-billed swans and ungainly, smoke-
coloured cygnets sailed into the ruffled stream, the


boughs of the willows dipped, green tresses of a
hamadryad, vain as Narcissus. A full moon, like a
circle of platinum, hung over the darker timber.
The time and the place, but how her young heart
ached for The Loved One.
There had been a day when she worshipped
characters in French history, utterly unworthy
gentlemen who wore picturesque clothing.
D’Artagnan had, for a time, been plucked from
Dumas, to be her special deity. Ever since she
could remember, Beatrix had been in love with
some dream prince, or mysteriously attractive
character in fiction.
At ten she had conceived a concrete passion for
a fat boy with sandy hair who had come to stay
with his mother at Cormorins, but he had tried
to be funny one day at the expense of her pet cat,
tying pussy up in a dishcloth and throwing him
into the creek, and an indignant and weeping little
girl in a drenched holland pinafore with a miauling,
equally drenched cat under her arm had been
punished for jumping into the creek with all her
clothes on, even though she was, like most bush
children, a good swimmer, and the dream had died
in a fierce hatred of fat boys with sandy hair.
After all, cats were more reliable.
Perhaps this had been the embryo of her belief,
that men, to be proper heroes, must be “ dark and
compelling.” Almost at first sight, and before he
stole her hair ribbons, and created an interest


decking his stockwhip handle with a bow of blue,
Beatrix had capitulated.
It was her dream now, as she sat with her thin
knees drawn up to her chin, her small peaked face
sunk on her folded hands, her big eyes searching for
the flaring yellow kerosene lamplight of the
bachelors’ quarters, it was her dream that Mr.
Gordon should happen to walk this way.
Even in fancy, she had not yet attained to the
calling him “ Edward.”
She could hear a night bird shattering the silence
of the gum-lands.
Cormorins was too far away from the sea for the
breath of salt airs to blow in this direction, but her
mind wandered coastwards to Sea-Garry where
Miranda lived. It was through Stodge Garry (at
the thought of Stodge her lip curled, he was fat and
fair) her father had first known of Mr. Gordon.
Only last night, she had overheard him discussing
with her mother, who never discussed anything, as
to whether, if offered, Gordon would take a perma-
nent job on the station. With his lame leg, the result
of an angry attack by a wild boar on one of the wild-
pig infested islands off the coast, he could do with a
manager. One of his sons wanted to get away in
charge of whalers for India, and the other was keen on
trying his luck in Southern Rhodesia, fruit farming.
Gordon could do the work of both boys, since
Jim Cormorin was one of those wise people who
know relatives work best, as a rule, for strangers.


Gordon was a queer kind of chap, sullen sometimes,
but " damned reliable.”
“ I s’pose so,” sighed his wife.
As long as Beatrix could remember anything, she
remembered her laconic mother’s " s’pose so ” as an
answer to almost any remark.
It would be amazing if mother ever argued about
anything. She was the same when cook appeared
for orders. All suggestions came from cook. When
positively cornered for an opinion, Mrs. Cormorin’s
defence was always her liver. She had suffered since
girlhood, she told her attacker, “ with her liver.”
Beatrix remembered the rows of little pill-boxes
in the storeroom. Poor mother!
Perhaps that was why she was always half
asleep. Beatrix hugged her knees, prayed she might
never get “ a liver ” ; it sounded so unromantic.
Now, to die early of consumption—just fading
away—with a hectic and becoming spot on either
cheek, her eyes “ unnaturally bright,” or to drop
down preferably at the feet of the Beloved (she
blushed in the chequer of light and shade the moon
and the swaying boughs made at the more
audacious thought), or " clasped to his manly
breast,” of an unexpected heart disease. This was
the fitting end to a romance, a hopeless love
possibly, since Mr. Gordon had not spoken to her
for two whole days, nor stolen another hair ribbon—
but “ liver ” and rows of empty pill-boxes ! Better
Death than such dishonour to Youth’s ideals.


Poor mother! No wonder she never said more
than “ s’pose so.” But of course mother was old—
quite fifty, possibly.
Beatrix concluded that people did not really care
about romance at fifty.
She had escaped by her bedroom window, to
dodge Arline to-night, because she wanted to be
“ alone with her thoughts.”
She quoted Shelley :
" That orbed maiden with white fire laden.
Whom mortals call the moon.”
She liked the music of the lines so well, she said
them over a dozen times.
A water-rat splashed in the creek ; she could see
the small driving blot of its head as it crossed. . . .
She was tired of sitting here. . . . Suppose she
went over the creek just a little way up the track
into the station street. . . .
The moon made a silver of the iron roofs. Nobody
seemed about, though she could hear a man playing
a concertina in the hut.
The yellow lamp in the quarters cast a fan of
orange light on to the flooring of the low-roofed
verandah. Trembling, with burning cheeks, she
approached the paling fence, the Saxon arch of the
gateway, the gate swung ajar.
She knew her father would be very angry, though
she scarcely understood why, if she went to the
bachelors’ quarters alone.
She could see a figure hunched in the squatter


chair: the tiny red glow of a pipe. Was it Mr.
Gordon ?
From the crown of her sleek head to her strongly
shod feet, she was all a-quiver, scraps of poetry
whirled through her head, she felt unaccountably
guilty, unaccountably exhilarated, her First Adven-
ture she named it to her quivering consciousness.
A faint sweet smell from the white moss-rose tree
in the enclosure in front of the quarters came to her
on the dry dusty air which yet, after the long sunny
day, seemed cool as mist on her forehead.
He was there —thinking great thoughts no doubt.
Perhaps on the morrow he might steal another hair
ribbon for his stockwhip handle as knights of old
placed a lady’s glove in their morions.
Maidenly terror seized upon her, a great shadow-
ing fear of the Unknown. The man on the verandah
had risen to his feet: and walked to the edge, looked
into the night, then he began to sing in a soft rich
baritone :
" I arise from dreams of thee
And a spirit in my feet,
Hath led me, who knows how ?
To thy chamber window, sweet.”
Oh ! the terrible, delicious unconventionality of it
all! Oh, the beautiful roses and raptures !
" Lilies and languors.”
But, if he came down the path past the white moss-
rose bush ! If he recognized her—if " a spirit in
his feet,” his shapely number tens, led him to where


she stood. Oh ! whatever would she say to him.
She couldn’t just remark, “ How do you do, Mr.
Gordon ? ”
How thrilling Adventures were—but they made
one feel just a little sick—and cold —bilious, like
Arline after too many chocolates. Perhaps she was
getting a liver. ... Oh ! what a sobering thought!
He was actually stepping off the verandah —and
the moon was so bright on the empty station street —
anyone might see. . . .
She had taken to her heels, fled like a lean
kangaroo dog that winds its prey, back by the way
she had come—long plaits banging her straight
back, short skirts flying.
In the bachelors’ quarters’ apology for a garden,
unconscious that he had been watched by the
adolescent eyes of romance through moonshine,
Edward Gordon was cutting a moss-rose bud from
the solitary bush—a milk-white bloom cased in its
thick green coat.
The bud lay in his palm like a snowflake. He
considered it.
“Too pale and young for me,’’ he said, a smile at
his own conceit quivering his mouth. “No white
flowers for me, my dear, but a brave, jaunty,
glowing blossom, my fearless one —Hibiscus Heart.”
Arline had gone to bed, with her back turned.
She pretended to snore. She was deeply offended
with Beatrix; she had called her stealthily and in
vain from the bamboo clumps. Her Aunt supposed


them both in bed, but while Arline was rummaging
in the pantry for an extra piece of cake from the
bread crock, Beatrix had, somehow, escaped her.
She had left her sitting in her room, ostenta-
tiously beginning to take off her boots, and when
she pushed open the bedroom door with the remark :
" Look, Bee, I’ve got two junks,” only emptiness
and the kerosene lamp, where a flying ant spluttered
into death against the white globe, replied.
" Mean thing! ” Arline was too much afraid to
go down the river bank at night to look for the
missing one, when no answer came to her call, and
the verandah boards creaked so where the grapevines
were stencilled in black shadows on the flooring.
She heard her cousin creep in, but she was past
forgiveness now ! It was half an hour since she had
gone to fetch the cake. She determined to be
aggravating and not to show any curiosity as to
Beatrix’s movements. If Bee had anything to tell,
and she was probably dying to, she could “ bottle it ”
till the morning, when Arline might gradually forgive.
The question of betraying Beatrix never entered
her mind. Had they not signed a document, vowing
eternal fealty to one another, with their own blood ?
Pricked from each forefinger with a rusty needle.
Luckily it was healthy blood and they escaped the
deserved consequences of such an unhygienic
operation.
In the damp old garden of their Sydney convent
with the gnarled fifty-year-old trees : the iron gates,


between stone pillars, convict-built, the glimpse of
dancing blue harbour beyond, they had sworn
solemn oaths. In the spirit, if not in the letter,
Beatrix had broken hers to-night. She had gone
forth looking for adventure, and had sneaked away
from Arline.
With her lips set in a thin, determined line, Arline
pretend :d sleep so well that presently all pretence
ceased as her even breathing proved.
But Beatrix, a slender Juliette in her plain white
nightgown, her rosy-toed feet bare, watched the
round, pale moon climb higher in the purple night
skies, till it hung at last in a spider-web of cloud,
right over the house. . , .
A dingo howled somewhere far away. On the
main road she heard the thlop-thlop of a horse’s
hoofs, a midnight traveller to the township: one
of the evil men from beyond the ranges, bent on a
sheep-stealing or a cattle-duffing ride, perhaps. . . .
From the garden came the heavy peach-like odour
of the yucca blossoms, the whiff of a faded rose.
It did not smell as sweet as did the moss-roses in
the garden at the quarters.
Then, suddenly chilled, she crept shivering in
beside Arline.
Over in the quarters, lying on his back and
occasionally waking to curse the mosquitoes hum-
ming in his badly drawn nets, Edward Gordon was
dreaming too, . . ,
But not of half-open buds !


CHAPTER EIGHT
" That noon we watched beside the sea,
Green waves like Fable’s unicorns
In some old tale of mystery
Drove at the land with silver horns.”
Festival.
FAR, to a sky that was cloudless, stretched
the green sea wastes, here and there broken
into flowers of foam by sudden gusts of warm wind.
At noon the wind died and the sun was hot on
sheer cliff and clover blossoms, amongst which the
brown, fat-bodied bees hummed drowsily. Now
the sea was still, save for the little pleading ripples
that lapped the fortress of rock below the clovered
cliff, still and so clear that the ethereal tendrils of
seaweed wavered on the sandy bottoms, dragging an
anchor of delicate mauve and rose tints of fluted
shells, or weighed with the irised bubble of a
jelly fish.
Sometimes a black pirate fin lifted from the
lucent depths, some white-toothed and bellied leader
of a shoal of sharks, or a greedy gull darted, rising
again with a flash of shuddering silver in its curved
bill, but on the landward side was no life, no move-
ment, only the “ yellow-breeched philosophers ”
honey seeking in the clover.
Then, down the zigzag of goat track that led


from the grassy levels by the hibiscus bush, a large
green-lined white cotton umbrella over her ruddy
hair, her sun hat crushed under one arm in company
with a rough bath towel and a moss-green bathing
gown, came Miranda of the timberlands.
On this September day the blue sparkle of water
called insistently. Winter with its bright days and
sharp westerlies was over past, the land had drawn
a verdant coverlid over the burnt patches, young
succulent saplings were starting from the once
chastened earth in all the fire-swept places. Dreams,
born of the languid sweetness of the summer morn,
filled the girl’s brain, to and fro through which a
pair of brown eyes occasionally flickered.
Between the dark rocks and the arch which the
flooding sun turned to ochre and peach-coloured
marbles, was the bottle-green glimmer of deep
pools, about their spurs the tremulous ebbing of
shallow tides. So clear was the air that, far out, a
wooded island, seldom visible from the mainland,
lay like a purple bubble on the ocean.
Behind her the bush spoke in flowers ; the young
gum leaves were madder-brown against the cloudy
olive ; the sky was soft and blue as forget-me-nots.
The bees made a minor susurrus in their refectories ;
in the closer timber a magpie voiced a shrill
ecstasy.
Before descending the cliff, Miranda closed her
eyes a moment on the panorama of sea and sky and
clover'blooms.


There was no sign of the river sharks now:
they had disappeared under the soft treacheries of
green and blue, and spread lilies of the foam.
Far to a cloudless horizon reached the wastes of
tumbling water; the wind had freshened again ;
the sea seemed to laugh with the thoughts of the
girl. Life was good. Ah! . , . how good she had
not guessed before!
She slid and scrambled down the jutting escarp-
ments, the grooved irregular trail that the cows
had helped to deepen. For cows, mild-eyed
Hathors, are bom poets, they drift and wander
over a landscape, and pause to chew the cud of
their imaginings on sheer declivities.
Beyond the pandanus palms, rooted in split rocks
and scraps of dun-coloured white coral, cast dry
sponges, hollow crab claws streaked with vermilion,
of honeycombed driftwood, pencil-grey from the
bleaching salt waters, was a tall veined rock she
called her bathing house. In the shelter and cool
shadow of this, a shadow pointed like a pyramid,
she slid out of her clothes and into the moss-green
one-piece gown, and went daintily over the hot
white sand to the inviting curling foam that seemed
to run forward to kiss the hot soles of her feet. She
waded out till the water drew caressingly round her
shapely thighs, and before striking out into deeper
places, took a comprehensive survey.
She seemed to see the roundness of the world
then, feeling as a fragile butterfly or insignificant


ebony fly might feel dropped into a cup of rare
china, blue and transparent and filled with some
elixir of youth.
She lifted her white dimpled arms over her head
in invocation to the spirits of air and light ; the gay
red and green striped handkerchief on her bright
head a landmark to a man who had just ridden into
the glade above the cliff and, with stockwhip
balanced on hip, was looking out to where sea met
sky and the bubble of the purple eyot was as a fairy
thing hung between. A lean brown-faced man with
eyes like a hawk—and those eyes saw what her
happy grey ones, dazzled with the shattered stars
of sun on ruffled waters, failed to descry.
Between the girl and the sandy beach, where the
water dipped into a shelving hollow in the shore
front, was a tiny fan-shaped drift of black.
In a moment she would cleave the shimmering
surface and strike farther out.
And that black fan-shaped blot on the blue and
green and silver of the merry water, that fan-shaped
blot—was it only a submerged branch, floating over
from some other beach, bough of a scrub-tree come
on a freshlet to the mouth of the wide river by
Sea-Garry, and so past the mud flats and the man-
grove swamps to the open sea ? Only a blackened
log drifting ? Yet, something told him that was
not a log, but a sleek black flashing body with white
teeth and a white belly that would be only visible
for a moment —before it struck . . . struck there


among the green waters till the white buds of the
foam bloomed the bright red-blown flowers of
Death. ...
He flung himself from his horse and left it with
trailing bridle to work its own will. He almost fell,
so headlong was his pace down the cliff, he all but
burst his lungs with his mighty shouting.
It had the desired effect: the black triangle
disappeared with swiftness to join its more sluggish
brethren in the racing undertow, and the girl, alive
to danger, made rapidly for the shore, to confront
him presently, a moss-green Aphrodite, with pearl-
gleaming limbs and a coquettish twist of hand-
kerchief on her sun-aureoled hair.
She cast a quick glance behind her. Only the
dapple of light on the inviting water —nothing in
sight as an excuse for a man’s fiend-like yelling,
which had induced a correspondingly discomforting
quickening of her own heart-beats.
She was annoyed, so much so that, for a moment,
she did not recognize him. She raised her arm to
shield them from the glare of the white sand and
changed the words, “ you fool,” she hoped success-
fully, to " Mr. Gordon 1 Whatever did you do that
for? Is it a joke ? ”
“No,” he answered, panting, and flinging him-
self down on the sand where the thin shadow of a
pandanus trunk was indifferent shelter. “ Hardly,
There was a shark in the offing and you did not see it.
Whatever makes you bathe alone, on open beaches? ”


She wrinkled her brows, became aware of the
briefness of her bathing suit, crossed the sands and
made for her rock cabin.
“ You’ve spoiled ray dip for the present with your
incursions and alarms ... I'll talk to you with
more advantage if I get into a wrapper.”
She enveloped herself a la Tuareg in her big bath
towel and bringing with her the white umbrella,
snuggled down, thrusting her bare toes into what
she considered a modest convering of sand, with
critical eyes and ears alert for a proper explanation.
“ I took a careful look before I went in; it is so
seldom there are sharks here —besides, in four feet of
water 1 They want more room than that to strike.”
“ Do they ? ” he said, and a swift red recollection
came to him of a man friend of his own, diving with
young-bodied urge and jest, into a great turning
roller in warm Pacific Island tides, and of how the
roller revolved, bearing amongst the rainbow of its
prisms, dancing and wonderful, a faint rose adding
to its beauty : the life-blood of a comrade he found
it hard to lack.
He and the man-eating shark had fought over the
body of his friend; one of his lean flanks bore the
white scar of ripping teeth to this day. He had won
—God ! What a fight it had been, fists and a short
Malay kris—and he had dragged the dear torn
body ashore, and, helpless, had seen the life-blood
pump away into the hot crushed corals of the
strand. ...


He was not going to tell the arrogant lady beside
him the hideous story—but, as if to support his
inward contention, as they both looked seawards
now, within five feet of the shore rose not one black
fan of hate, but six .. . seven .. . eight—a whole
school of the dread denizens of this lovely garden
of the tides.
For a moment neither spoke. Then he took out
his pipe and began to cut up tobacco, grinding it in
his palm as a bushman does, and pressing it down
with a dexterous thumb into the bowl of his pipe.
" I am afraid it’s a polite fiction—that story
about four feet of water being too shallow for Mr.
Shark," he said quietly. “Do you mind if I
smoke ? ”
She looked quickly round, the colour ebbing in her
smooth cheek. Then she laid one hand lightly on his
own, for a minute.
“ Thanks,” she said.
Was she thanking him for showing forbearance in
not driving the lesson home by a pointed finger at
the black sails of the deadly fleet ? Sails that might
well have been marked for her with the skull and
crossbones ? Or, for possibly saving her life by his
prompt signalling of danger ?
He did not ask her, nor did she speak.
Only, for a little space, was silence, with wind
rattling dryly in the stiff pandanus leaves, and the
lisp of little innocent waves on shelly beaches.
Then, " That wind in the screw-palms is just like


the rattle of sand in a desert khamsin,” he said,
lazily blowing blue smoke on the bluer air. “ How
you would love the desert—yet there is no place in
the world where a man realizes more quickly Thou,
Thyself, Art Heaven And Hell. . . . Old Omar
Khayyam must have sat on the rim of the desert
and watched the night come sly-footed over the
sands many a time, I’ll warrant. . . . Thou, Thyself,
Art Heaven And Hell. ... I suppose the orthodox
would not approve of those sentiments —yet, how
can a man possibly know anything of what comes
after the body’s death ? It always amazes me that
anyone is presumptuous enough to presume he
can.”
Were his thoughts running on death, because of
the danger those ambient waters had hid for her ?
After all, she supposed she had dodged sharks
before, unwittingly perhaps in her lonely bathings—
but just to-day, she did not think she would
attempt another salt water plunge. ... A shiver
ran down her spine. She drew her big striped towel,
which served as a wrap as well, closer round her
shoulders. Nobody wanted to end as fodder for the
fishes ! At least, not when one was only twenty-
eight—though verging on twenty-nine—and this
was September weather —and the world a fecund,
glowing thing.
A wilful mood seized her: the aftermath of a
throbbing emotion catching her with cold reaction.
“ I don't know : it must be a consolation to have a


fixed opinion to hang on to; and what would the
world be like without religion ? Think how many
single ladies of uncertain age fill their lives with
it . . , teaching in Sunday schools, attending
divine services regularly—and when it makes
ordinary people feel so good compared with their
wicked neighbours, like ourselves, who never gang
tae the kirk, though we fail to molest other people’s
manners or morals. . . . Wouldn’t you like to feel all
nice and good and religious and sure about a front
seat in the next world ? ”
He mused, biting on his pipe-stem, “ My father
was a clergyman, you know, Miss Garry.” Then he
laughed, shook the loose flakes from his pipe, and
pressed the smouldering embers down again, with
a swift change of subject, “ What about the well,
though ? Your brother asked me to give him a
hand at cleaning it out —and I forgot all about it.”
" Stodge won’t forget it in a hurry,” she smiled
provocatively. “Do you know he donned a pair
of shorts to descend in, put the ladder down, the
longest ladder we have, and slid as far as that
reached, and found when he got to the bottom he
had gone bare-legged amongst an alert family of
snakes. Oh, no I He hadn’t been at the whisky
jar! They were genuine natives, four of them,
brown wretches. Stodge made a record rush for the
ladder, and as he did so a fifth snake coiled round
his leg. I couldn’t think what was happening:
such swear words I never heard issuing from the


mouth of the well. I grabbed the rifle and ran to the
mouth of it and saw Stodge’s head just appearing
over the top. He had managed to shake the snake
off —it was a black one ! But there’s no more
cleaning out old wells for Herbert Garry ! It meant
the whisky jar and a pannikin full then, to steady
the poor old dear’s nerves, and we spent more of the
afternoon with an oil flare down the well on a
length of wire, while, by the flickering and un-
certain light—to put it poetically—we took pot-
shots at the disturbed snakes from the upper earth.
Cholmondeley got the ladder up subsequently—no
more descents into hell (we were on Biblical matters,
weren’t we ?) for Stodge. He says he will have the
well filled in.”
“ By George, this is snake-time and no mistake !
Do you know, as I rode out to-day, just at the rim
of Fern-tree Gully ... it is foaming with maiden-
hair just now —we must picnic there some day . . .
my hack jumped into the air and began hitting out
with its fore feet. I was nearly chucked off. . . .
Then I saw a black snake coiled round the left fore
leg. . . . Luckily the poor neddy stunned the beast,
but, for a while, I did not know if it was bitten or
not: he trembled and went into a lather of sweat;
but he’s all right, at least when I Came after you.
I left him loose up there among the clover : he won’t
go far ; and I killed the snake, so, if you would care
to meet me at Fem Gully one afternoon, while this
weather holds, I’ll bring the pint pot and some tea,


and you can provide the currant brownie —say it’s
a go, now ? If only because I yelled murder, and
saved you from the sharks ? ”
They looked, smiling, in each other’s eyes. A
drowsing content rested on sea and shore. The
sharks had disappeared; the wind had died down
again: silken surfaces revealing nothing of the
strange preying lives below: zinc-blue jelly fish
stagnated in glassy pools—the island became hazy,
indistinct on the dimming horizon. An old white
billy-goat, with a following of black and white
nannies and pink-nosed kids, surveyed them com-
placently from the little crooked path. They were
soaked in sun to a degree of contentment which it
seemed nothing could break.
“ Yes, I’ll come,” she said. " What about Wednes-
day ? I make bread on Tuesdays—and, like all
good housewives—Monday is our washing-day.”
Gordon’s horse had strolled to the crest of the
cliff behind the goats, bridle trailing. He gazed
reproachfully at his forgetful master.
" He’ll put his foot through the bridle rein in a
minute,” said the girl. “ You’re a nice one —to
leave a horse like that.”
" Even to rescue you ? ” answered Gordon, lifting
himself out of the sand and shaking it from his shirt-
sleeves and moleskins.
“ Even to rescue me,” she challenged.
" I’ll secure him while you dress,” continued the
man, "and then I can go with you some of the


way back to Sea-Garry. ... By the way, did I tell
you I had agreed to stay more or less permanently
at Cormorins ? Dan is off to South Africa next
month—and Jim wants me there.”
" A rolling stone like you ? But I am glad,” she
said, as she stood with her striped towel wrapped
round her and the slender beauty of one ankle bare
to his caressing gaze.
As he went up the cliff to his horse, the nodding
buttercups and tall grasses in the track seemed to
be whispering “ I’m glad . . . I’m glad.”
He did not know if it was an echo of her voice, or
only the song of his own leaping heart.


CHAPTER NINE
“ The happiest things, X think, are little birds . . .
They fear not Life, but when Death says ' ’Tis time,’
Make no protest, but creep away to die
In some small green cathedral of their own.”
Little Birds,
" Spring came at tiptoe through the quivering leaves.
The smell of sappy wood was in her hair ;
And the crisp taste of bracken, and the sweets
Of wild flowers, delicate and palely fair,
' With the insistent pulse in every bud, I bring
More things than Life into your life ? ’ said Spring.”
Spring Month.
THE township street was white with dust; dust
grooved by wheels and marked with the un-
shod hooves of horses.
Outside the Stockman’s Arms two quarrions
sulked in a small galvanized wire cage : the bright
rose and orange ear-patches contrasting with their
neutral-tinted plumage and brown-barred tails.
Two horses were hitched to the post near the
wooden water-trough under the shadow of a creamy-
blossomed hauhinia. Their owners were inside the
bar “ stopping one.” The younger of the two, a
cattle man from the other side of the ranges, had
just sold the inland parrots to the hotel keeper as a
birthday present for his girl who was away at a
convent school in Brisbane.
Riding into the one street of the township, Ted
Gordon’s eyes were instantly attracted by the caged


birds; then by a recumbent figure sprawled on a
wooden bench along the boarded verandah.
“ Hello, Harney! ” he said, dismounting and
lounging towards the open door of the bar from
whence came the tinkle of bottle on glass, and the
gruff reminiscent tones of men yarning over a
drink.
Damey, who had been, as he would have ex-
pressed it, “ potted ” since overnight, only grunted
in reply.
Gordon stood a moment, looking at the birds.
The cattle man, bow-legged, with his cabbage-
straw on the back of his head, came to the bar-room
door.
" Good day, Mr. Gordon. . . . What do you think
of the birds ? ”
“ Good day, Stokes, I’ll give you five bob for
them.”
" Five bob be blasted : they are worth more than
that.”
“ Well—ten, then.”
Harney reared up from the form and began to
laugh.
“ Hidn’t know old Gordon kept a zoo,” he said,
and subsided again. “ Hidn’t know old Gordon,
silly old josser, was a bird fancier.”
" Oh! say British Constitution—and —go to hell,”
answered Gordon cheerfully. " I’ll give you ten bob,
Stokes.”
Stokes grinned sheepishly.


" Too late, my buck, I’ve sold them to old ‘ Make-
it-two ’ for his kiddy’s birthday.”
“ Rot.” Gordon went into the bar. “ What’s
this, Gibson, about you buying parrots for Mollie’s
birthday ? She’d much rather have a quid to spend
in the city, I'll warrant. What about letting me
have the pair for twenty bob ? ”
Gibson, wiping glasses, laughed. “ What’s taken
you to-day, Mr. Gordon ? ... You must have a
sweetheart somewhere who’s after quarrions.” But
he turned the offer over in his mind; his stout wife
had already called him an ass several times in
succession for giving anything for the birds, the
blacks beyond the hill would trap some other parrots
for Mollie any time she wanted them, and she had
anticipated Gordon’s remark about money to spend
on lollies and fal-lals. Mollie wasn’t a baby any
more, and she had taken up with “ the poonah
painting,” and were not all the parlour cushions
sticky, like an adhesive plaster to the back of the
unwary, from her oil-colour efforts on black satin ?
Goodness knows her “ accomplishments ” had cost a
pretty penny. She played the " planner ” something
beautiful.
Parrots indeed!
So Gibson said “ done,” and a greasy note changed
hands before Gordon swallowed his nobbier and
went back to the verandah. He leaned over the
twittering nervous bunches of feathers and unlatched
the little wire door.


Oh ! What a flight was theirs ! Up and up
towards the pathways of the birds —the freedom of
the blue ! Tiny bursting hearts that had dreamed
they would rise no more to " quaff the honeyed
mead of polished flowers ” or joy afresh :
" Because the wind is full of apple bloom ;
Because far hills are moulded out of blue.
Or they can see their reflex in a pool."
They lit on the branch of an adjacent red gum
preening their feathers: their gay-cheeked heads
and lemon-yellow crests turned rapidly from side to
side.
The cattle man was watching with a dropped jaw.
“ You blanky fool,” he muttered into his golden
beard. " What did you buy them for, then ? ”
"A fool and his money,” giggled Darney, his
head nodding on his chest, “ a fool—and his damned
money.”
But Gordon vouchsafed no explanation, as he
waved his gum switch at them, and went grinning
up the street, and out on the road to Cormorins'
again.
Miranda heard the story, filtered through with
additions by some “ bush telegraph,” before she
set forth, armed with a book, the white umbrella,
and a package of brownie and sandwiches, to tryst
with Gordon, where the maidenhair clambered to
the lips of the gully, set amidst its terraces of barren
and raddled stone.
It may have run with molten lava in old volcanic
o


days, this waste of stone by Fern Gully, where the
earth chasm’d by three strange grey pillars of
basalt. Fossil bones of the giant kangaroo and
monster prehistoric saurian had been found here by
visiting professors, to the enrichment of the blacks
then camped within cooee.
The rich red earth had rooted thick with the
coffee-coloured stems and fair green dancing leaves
of the maidenhair fern, thousands of the bonny
nodding plants lined the sides of the long crooked
fissure, which was only some five yards across, and
at the bottom of the steep-sided rent in the earth
ran a narrow silver thread of water, crystal clear,
reflecting the green curtseying of the dainty fern.
An ideal spot for a picnic, for there was a flat rock
below the Three Fates, as Miranda christened the
basalt pillars, where a fire could be made and the
billy boiled in peace with an emerald tapestry
curtain behind one, and plenty of escape for the
fragrant wood smoke on the unsullied air.
Gordon rode over the ridge and fastened up his
horse as she came through the bush on the other
side, walking as only she could walk amongst the
women in the district; the flappers at Cormorins
always preferred to ride.
Gordon stooped to gather some dead, wind-blown
bits of bough and dry pepper-hued bark as he came,
and, balancing them on his shoulder, gave his other
hand to help her down the faint track, worming its
way in and out of the fern.


The soft luxuriance of the maidenhair made a
sharp and delightful contrast to the stony reaches
round the fissure. A flight of rosellas, scarlet, green,
and blue, crossed the paler blue overhead just as
the billy came to the boil, and Gordon was busied
measuring out the tea in his palm, having insisted
she should do nothing but “ play the lady ” amongst
the sweet moist-smelling fern.
She indicated the birds with a lazy uplift of chin.
“ I have been hearing a story about you,” she
said.
He coloured, laughed, dropped the tea leaves into
the clear bubbles of the steaming water. “You
might easily do that,” he answered. "To ray credit,
I hope ? ”
“ I think so —though the unavoidable comment
of your well-wisher and friend is that you have a
foolish habit of throwing hard cash about—buying
birds and such.”
" Not hard cash, my lady . . . only a dirty
flimsy note that I got from a Chinaman. Now—do
you like much sugar ? ”
"Oh yes. . . . It’s the genuine bush tea, of
course, and don’t dare to speak of milk —though
I see a suspicious-looking bottle in your saddle-
bag.”
"To tell you the truth, I did bring some—for
you—but who told you about the birds ? ”
“ I will tell you, if you will explain why you did
it ? Does it pleasure your highness to fling bank


notes in lordly fashion —or was there another
reason ? ”
He had lifted the billy from the fire with a forked
stick, and was dipping a pannikin in the tea. He
set it to cool beside her. “ Look out for ants:
There are always plenty of nippy little black ones
amongst the fern roots —like the dampness, I
suppose ”
" I will point a moral by adorning a tale, Miss
Garry. When I was a boy my father punished me
by shutting me up in a room at the Vicarage,
originally an old still-room with a bricked-up
window, where my great-grandmother brewed her
simples and cherry brandies, and distilled waters....
I would rather have been thrashed. There was one
wooden bench along the inner wall, and some narrow
shelves where a mouse lived. ... I could hear him
nibbling, but I never saw him. I used to think he
was the ghost of some old rodent who had ravened
there. . . . The room had a kind of twilight:
getting dark about three in the afternoon, even in
summer. Outside I could hear blackbirds—some-
times a thrush in the old pear tree. ... I have
never forgotten. . . . Sometimes I beat at the
locked door till my fingers bled. ... It was the
refinement of cruelty to shut me in there. . . , He
said it would break my spirit—and lead me to
Righteousness. That is why I can never bear to
see birds in cages. . . . I’m as fanatic as W. H.
Hudson in these matters —but, to me, it has a kind


of personal application. . . . I’m not a philan-
thropist—or anything.”
He looked a little ashamed, as he blew on the
hot tea in his own pint.
" I like you for that,” she said softly, stirring her
tea with a gum-twig. " Garry got the story from
someone, Cholmondeley, I suppose. ... He was
going to chaff you about it—but I won’t let him
now . . .” more softly.
He seemed to wish to change the subject. “ I
saw Damey in the township,” he said. “ I shall
always have a soft spot in my heart for the blighter,
for not really dying when I hit him. ... I’d so
much prefer some other cause of death for the dear
chap.”
She laughed, sipping thirstily.
" I begin to think you are one of those who
liveth best ‘ who loveth best all things both great
and small.’ What with freeing quarrions and letting
off gentlemen who deserve a short trip, without a
return ticket, to the next world, if anyone does . . .!
That man seems such a perfect rotter ... I wonder
the district doesn’t rise in a body and kick him out.”
At the back of her mind was the unpleasant echo
of a story about a pretty little seventeen-year-old
Irish girl at the Stockman’s Arms. Damey seemed
to have a " way with women,” prided himself on it.
"Oh ! well. It’s generally live and let live in the
bush, isn’t it ? Even then we have our pet aver-
sions. . . . What is yours, I wonder ? ”


He was thinking what a compassionate mouth
she had, soft, well-moulded lips that looked as
though they could speak only kind words. Perhaps,
after all, that was what the world called Charm and
Fascination in women : the thing that outlasted
beauty was merely kindness . . . pitifulness.
He could not understand men who loved hard,
mannish women.
Her grey eyes became very serious, steadfast.
She set down her pannikin while the breath of hot
tea mingled with the aroma of the ancient alluring
savagery of forests, of sun hot on stone, of homely
grasses, the faint sickly sweetness of ti-tree in bloom
in the swampy, green land beyond the arid stones.
“ Drunken men,” she said, " I find it harder to
forgive that than anything. Stodge says I’m un-
charitable—that a bush-bred girl should be broader
minded—but they have always been my ‘ very
most ’ pet aversion. I can't help it—they make me
shudder.”
Her eyes were glacial now.
He looked at her intently for a moment, dropped
his lids, then measured another pint of tea, sugaring
it lavishly.
“ They are pretty disgusting,” he said, " but they
never realize it when in liquor . . . and whipping
the cat afterwards doesn’t seem to cure them.”
" Don’t let us talk about it,” she said, leaning
back, the nape of her neck on the warm rock, her
limbs stretched luxuriously. " It’s too lovely


here, ... You killed the only snake in this Eden
last week ... so why believe there ever were such
things ? ”
“ You’re right,” he commented. " What shall I
do to amuse the Liege Lady ? ”
“ Sing to me,” she said, " any old ballad except
the ‘ Wild Colonial Boy,’ or ‘ A gallant young Stock-
man lay dying.’ . . . The kangaroo shooter sings
all those in the stilly night— and often.”
He clasped his hands round his knees, threw his
head back and began :
“ She’s ma lady love, she’s my dove, my baby love,
She’s na girl for sittin’ down to dream,
She’s de only queen Laguna know's,
I know she likes me, I know she likes me.’’
(Straight from the London music halls—of some
years gone ... so correct phrasing not guaranteed)
“ She’s de lily of Laguna,
She’s ma lily and ma rose.”
The two chestnut ladies’ hacks from Cormorins,
with a flapper in holland jumper and short serge
skirt, astride on each, came to a dead stop some
fifty yards from where Fern Gully ran its river of
fragrant spotted fern, rank-brown stripes, and a
blue curl of smoke, through the stone terraces.
Finger on lip, the riders slipped from the men’s
saddles they bestrode, tip-toed over the stones,
flung themselves on their stomachs and, finally,
wriggled like Indians to the edge.


" Fairies ? ” whispered Beatrix, with a wide-eyed
glance at her cousin.
But Arline, whose neck was the longest, craned
over and made a moue of disgust, pointing with
derisive finger into the green and dun shadow below.
“ No. . . . Only them! ” she ejaculated with a
scornful chuckle.
Beatrix sat back abruptly on the hard stone,
rubbed her thighs ruefully, then rose to her feet.
“ Evidently we are not wanted here,” she said.
" But they might give us some tea,” hazarded
Arline who, though she objected to what she called
" spoony couples,” had an ever-present hunger.
" I could eat nothing: it would poison me,”
declared her cousin dramatically, making off towards
the tethered horses. " I shall gallop all the way
home.”
She was as good as her word, as the chestnut
showed. Indeed, Jim Cormorin gave her a sharp
lecture on kindness to animals as she came, her hack
in a white lather, into the station street at dusk.
Arline was jogging along a mile behind, so she
escaped a scolding.
But that was not why Beatrix cried herself to
sleep.


CHAPTER TEN
“ Oh ! dweller in
The hidden chamber, tho’ thou barrest the shrine
Of light with darkness . . . yet shalt thou be mine."
The Window.
" Afraid of the darkness on the hills ?
Of the rocky trails for your jewelled shoon ?
Oh ! I will bring you the big white moon
That on the mountain her lanthorn spills.
If the mist of the plain your vision mars
I will light you candles among the stars t ”
Doughty Deeds.
THE MOUNTAIN, as it was always called to
distinguish it from the lesser peaks of the
ranges that lay inland from Cormorins, was the
highest peak of the barrier that stretched like a
herd of following elephant between the timbered
country, the sea, and the wide rolling plains beyond,
where there was immensity of bird life, and where
even the pretty little quarrions ventured in dry
seasons from the more central districts, to the
confounding of local ornithologists.
Miranda Garry, though she had often ridden far
afield in a day, on some business connected with
station stock or agistment matter on Sea-Gany,
had never been up The Mountain. Though her
brother was the last person in the world to whom
she would have confessed it, Miranda of the timber-
lands, for some strange subconscious reason, feared


The Mountain even while she admired it, so the
camping-out parties, arranged at rare intervals by
settlers in these parts, had always found Miranda
failing to respond to the roll-call at the last moment.
She usually had a good excuse. Once Stodge was
down with dengue, once a pet calf had a broken leg,
once there were dingoes in the neighbourhood,
pulling down the calves or levying toll on the cross-
breds; there, had ever been some reason why
Miranda had not joined the week-under-canvas
parties, though the campers returned laden with
bird’s-nest and hart’s-tongue fern, to tell her of the
wonders she had missed.
She realized it. In theory she loved the hills, but
she always remembered the first time she had seen
The Mountain, miles, it is true, from its wooded
feet, but near enough to distinguish its vast purple
loom through the clear August air. A day with a
touch of rising westerly, when horizons were sharply
defined.
It had been a glorious ride from a selector’s, thirty
miles from the foot of the range, where she and
Garry had slept between coarse unbleached calico
sheets smelling of wattle-bark and yellow soap, on
hard beds stuffed with corn husks, and they set
forth while petals of rose still clung to the golden
gates of day.
|sThe late August sun was bright and warm, and
the westerly did not gain force till after ten o’clock ;
there was a chitter of nesting birds ; the breath of


the sun-warmed grasses, smell of sappy twig, ti-tree
with ivory-tinted pompons, “ lamb’s tail ” wattle
coming early to bloom; - bottle-brush, scarlet and
bee-filled.
Stodge, charging his pipe, reined his horse and
looked up at The Mountain.
" Some day I will take you there,” he said.
And even as she opened her lips to answer how
she would love to explore in the virgin jungle, a
cold shiver ran down her spine, and a cloud seemed
to come out of the cloudless blue, to settle on her
merry spirit, and she shuddered as she looked
towards the ranges.
Stodge had some stud sheep to inspect; he could
not take her so far to-day. They boiled the billy
where the red bottle-brush swung over a cloud
creek, feathered green like Chinese jade with reflec-
tions of trees. There were tiny curls of mist still
rising from the flats: a flight of carmine-bodied,
blue-winged lories crossed their way. Stodge was
talking about The Mountain; of the towering
flooded gums: rosewood, Moreton Bay pine, and
then, in a stump near their bivouac, they found a
little grey spitfire of a kitten putting up a fight to
the death (probably of the kitten) with a black and
yellow goanna, three times its size—a striped,
beautiful little creature, offspring of some timber-
getter’s family pet: gone back to nature and living
on unwary young doves, field mice, and low-flying
swallows.
105
HIBISCUS HEART


Stodge dropped it in a ration bag, and they
finally got it home to Sea-Garry, where it had led
a semi-domestic, semi-wild existence ever since.
Sometimes it disappeared for a week into the
timber; then came back, looking lean and fierce,
but purring apologies with a frantically waving tail,
and a huge appetite for home cooking and raw
steak.
While Stodge went over to study the crossbreds
at a little grazing farm, under the loom of where the
ranges seemed to lie like a crouching animal drinking
the green plain between, Miranda sat cross-legged
by her horse, with the somewhat pacified morsel of
grey fur in her lap. Under her gentle strokings, it
had consented to make an elaborate toilette on its
bushy tail where there were burrs, and to now and
then lick her detaining thumb with a friendly, if
rasping, tongue. It expressed approval of the taste
of her skin, but Miranda was not considering it now,
except mechanically.
She was staring at The Mountain, the only thing
she could honestly say that had really ever frightened
her. Far away, she could hear the hollow note of a
bullock bell: they used bullocks for carting timber
down The Mountain; the only industry there was
timber-splitting.
Her riding hack cropped the grass at her elbow.
She could smell the wattle by the creek, the honey-
foam of clover on the flat, and all the world near
seemed a pleasant place of easy valleys and friendly
slopes.


Why did she think The Mountain watched . . .
The Mountain waited ?
What for? It was so great, so majestically
beautiful. . . . Stodge had told her of the blazed
trails where tree and log and stone and root were
green with cooling earth's first counterpane of
velvet moss. He had told her of the tall columnar
palms ; the satin-boled gums, spaced like steps and
stairs with bird’s-nest; elk-horn and hart’s-tongue
fern, the scarlet and orange and mauve fungi; wild
raspberries currant red ; gooseberries—hadn’t some
of the bygone picnickers brought her a dress basket
of them once, topaz-coloured, sweetly acid. Of the
great owl that goes ghostly by night, where the
fungus burns pale flames amongst the trees and the
fog comes down, as an octopus cast by some tidal
wave of the world on the mountain top, its huge
writhing arms in aisles of wild tobacco and liana;
of how the parasite fig straddles, like a vast lizard,
the doomed eucalyptus; of the starry white and
bunch-yellow orchids; acres of mustard-bright
everlastings, trailing petunia, and violet-hued sarsa-
parilla—glossy lily-leaved cunjiboy. . . .
“ Some day you will come to The Mountain,” he
said, and she knew, as though a secret voice had
spoken, too, there was no need to hasten, what-
ever happened in her life or her step-brother’s down
here at the foot of the hills, The Mountain would
wait. . . . Aye! . . . into centuries —for its will to
be served. . . .


She shook herself mentally, physically, getting a
grip on her foolishness. Was she tired, after the
broken sleep on that corn-husk mattress ? She
thought the selector’s daughter must have left some
of the corn cobs in, too. It was not like her to
be morbid. . . .
She could see Stodge diminishing into distance in
the direction of faint wisps of bluish smoke on the
plain.
Even he was—different somehow—when he
talked about The Mountain. ... It seemed to stir
him, as only a well-dressed shop window had
previously done ! Had he become more imaginative,
poetical almost . . . said that when he died, like
Cecil Rhodes, he would like to be put on a hill-t0p....
Funny, coming from Stodge—as funny, almost, as
her own fear of The Mountain. She who had never
given way to fear . . . she, who always dared the
future . . . challenged the present. . . .
The kitten had grown weary in well-doing to its
tail, and was asleep : its chin on the back of her
hand. . . . How warm and soft and comforting was
its fine furry touch. ...
She looked again at The Mountain ; its crest was
filmed with the faintest drift of cloud. ... It was
wonderful with blue distances . . . untamed . . .
unconquerable.
She visualized its vine-swathed trees ; its saffron-
cupped orchids; its gay-plumaged parrots; its
plushy moss; its silver rushing waterfalls. .. .


Yes, some day she would conquer this curious,
almost repulsive, attraction —mingled with fear —it
had for her . . . some day she would go boldly of
her own free will: not waiting for the Fates to
weave a web to draw her there. . . . Some day she
would go to The Mountain.
Stodge returned, highly pleased with himself.
He had secured a prize ram at a bargain price, and
couldn’t yet see that he had been inveigled to
purchase a pig in a poke, though she thought,
secretly smiling, he might, unfortunately, have to
be convinced of that later. Stodge was subject to
these commercial enthusiasms.
Once she looked over her shoulder, as the trees
began to veil the lower foothills. . . .
It almost seemed as though The Mountain drew
nearer, as the horses’ hoofs ate up the distance
between this gracious ' tree-girt plain and the
selector’s, where they had put up last night, and,
for a moment, all about her she breathed the hot,
steamy, tumultuous, exciting atmosphere of the
jungle. . . . She could smell crushed fern . . .
bruised leaves . . . hear the witches laughing down
the wind. . . .
But she told herself it was only the first onslaught
of the now high westerly which dried her lips and
made her thirsty for yet more tea, by the time the
selector’s iron roof came in sight. Stodge thought
she was over-weary. He had never known her so
taciturn before. . . .


Even she allowed she might be rather knocked up;
perhaps she had a touch of the sun : her riding hat
was small: she would wear her topee next time
they rode this way.
She hated to allow, even to her startled inner
consciousness, that for the first time in her adult
life, she had been “ frightened at nothing ”... at
the mere shadow of a mountain. . . . But this was
long before she met Ted Gordon at the hibiscus
bush, long before the bush fire, long before he
warned her of sharks in the green sunlit bay, long
before they trysted amongst the speckled fern in
the emerald-lined chasms of the rocky terrace.
For all she knew or cared, The Mountain still
waited. . . .
She had not ridden that way again.
But Ted Gordon had.
He had been interested in the wooded ranges ever
since he came to the neighbourhood, and feeling
always the call of hills, he planned to do a little
exploring there on his own account the first time
he could snatch a few’ days’ holiday from Cormorins.
A couple of days’ ride there, easy stages, and a
couple of days, or less, on the way back, and a day
and night to forage in the wilderness.
He could lie under the stars : he liked that, and
would choose a time when the dry season was on.
December weather would do well, and he might
spend his Christmas this way, since the heavy hospi-
tality of Cormorins was a bit wearisome with the


thermometer over a hundred, and he liked all the
Cormorins too well to wish to hurt their feelings,
even Mrs. Cormorin, who sat eternally in her rocking-
chair, with a conversational limit of " I s’pose so ”
and her liver. Married at seventeen, she had
apparently been rocking herself, when not inter-
mittently rocking her three offspring, ever since,
and Delia, the big-boned North of Ireland woman,
who grimly cared for the young Cormorins, had
done most of the cradle-rocking. A love of family
noveletters in her teens had sent Edith Cormorin’s
romantic spirit seeking affinity in such an unlikely
object as her James. Baffled romance probably
accounted for her liver, though Delia brusquely
declared if she would do “ a hand’s turn in the
house, she wouldn’t have so much liver to fash
herself about.”
Even Delia, Gordon found amusing, but in many
ways he was too much exercised in mind just now to
hanker after the boisterous gaiety of Christmas on
the station, where one rejoiced with sweat running
from every pore in the dog-days, and had to put on
a boiled shirt and a stiff collar for the feasting, or
even a quieter, happier one, with Stodge and his
sister.
That way danger lay—his peerless, fear less lady !
But he must not tell her that. ... He must lift
up his eyes to the hills, and go there for counsel. . , .
He had no desire to tie himself to any fixed land-
mark of life. Indeed, there were strong reasons why
H


he felt it would not be fair to do so . . . if it meant
he should pledge himself to be responsible for any-
one hut himself. . . . Certain things in life are
marked Forbidden . . . and one was that he should
make any woman suffer through his own weak-
nesses . . . though he rigidly denied the right of
any man to interfere with his freedom to do either
well or ill by his own none too valuable existence.
Just now The Mountain signalled as something
eminently attractive: a little baffling, but behind
its wooded declivities, the promise of utter peace,
of bird-glad solitudes, of strange, almond-scented
sub-tropic flowers, of the green immensities of lofty
forests, almost blotting out the blue . . . the song
of the waterfall, punctuated by the cry of the
crested stockwhip bird . . . the waking to dawns of
amethyst and gold unsmirched by the smoke of
cities; the smell of the pines ; the chatter of the
brown warblers, the darting silver-eye amidst the
wild passion vines, and gauze-enclosed goose-
berries. . . .
Was it any wonder that Christmas Eve found
him riding towards where The Mountain lay, like a
cone of royal blue among the lesser hills. . . .
Back at the station, Beatrix was haughtily dis-
appointed. She had chewed the end of a lead
pencil, sitting on her bed with a cheap writing-pad
on her sharp knees, over a letter she intended to
send to Mr. Gordon by a “ trusty messenger ” yet
to be found. Delia certainly would not be bothered


with “ such flummickings,” and would probably
carry the billet-doux, first of all, to her father. She,
with the dictionary beside her, had got as far as
asking the unconscious offender why he had " trifled
with her young affections.” It seemed a dignified
way of putting it, and " would he kindly return her
hair ribbons ; list enclosed.” That didn’t seem so
dignified, somehow.
It drew attention to the fact that she still wore
her hair in pigtails. She nibbled the pencil again,
and wondered if her mother would let her put up
her hair at Christmas. She would be sixteen on
New Year’s Day. After all, her mother had been but
a year older when she married.
If Mr. Gordon married, she wondered if they
would give him the overseer’s cottage. One could
make quite a nice garden there. She saw herself, a
slender “ child wife ” (like Dora, but, of course,
much more sensible) with a fancy watering pot. . . .
Perhaps, after all, it would be better not to chill
the young man at the onset. Delia said it was
easier to hinder them than to hurry them, un-
fortunately. She said a man wanted so much
encouragement: she had never been able to bring
herself to the doing of it: that was the only reason
why she was still a spinster. . . . Delia had always
been so busy . . . but no girl could be expected to
approve of her hero sitting out in ferny gullies with
other women. She could not call Miranda “ a girl,”
she was nearly thirty. Old, compared with sweet
sixteen.


She wondered if Mr. Gordon knew Miranda’s age.
She was also, though she would not allow it to
Arline, chagrined that he had preferred to ride
alone to The Mountain, rather than come to Christ-
mas dinner at the station. It seemed useless to
have killed the fatted turkey ... a Sea-Garry
bird . . . and stirred the Christmas pudding furi-
ously for luck. . . . Arline had taken a surreptitious
lick at the spoon afterwards . . . but Beatrix was
beyond that, if a dark compelling person was not to
sate his godlike appetite upon either. . . . She
would keep him some almonds and raisins, any-
how. . . . Her bitter feelings suffered a change.
After all, he must have a romantic nature, to ride
“ thus alone into the vast wilderness.” Perhaps he
wrote poetry. . . .
Some day he might “ do ” an ode to herself.
She left the writing and the dictionary on the
bed, and went to the wardrobe mirror to see what
she looked like with her hair “ up.” She had taken
the precaution to lock the bedroom door, and now
Arline was waggling the key on the other side.
" Go away,” said her cousin, “ I’m busy.”
“ I expect you’re eating all the conversation
lollies out of the top drawer. . . . Greedy guts—
greedy guts. I know you, Bee ... let me in, half’s
mine, the storekeeper said, so.”
Conversation lollies ! What a child Arline was !
She let her hair down, smiled in a superior fashion as
she turned the key, pulled open the top drawer, and
pointed to the still intact greyish white paper bag.


" You think of nothing on earth but food,” she
said.
" And you think of nothing at all but the new
manager,” snapped Arline, who was hot and bored.
She had been playing with the kangaroo dogs, and
they had started a bush rat and left her. Beatrix
smiled again, pityingly. Locked in her own bosom
was her own tragedy.
Arline should never know the extent of that.
“You don’t understand men at all,” she told the
other, selecting a chaste peppermint circle with
" you’re. my girl ” in rose pink lettering. As it
melted on her youthful tongue she shook her head
again. “ Some day, Arline, you will be wiser and
sadder,” she murmured below her breath, then
abruptly, "I am going to ask Mother if I can put
my hair up on my birthday.”
Arline gasped, awestruck, “ Not really. Bee . . .
not really. Why . . you’ll be mistaken for a
lady”
“ I am older than my years, everyone says so.”
Beatrix was back on the bed again, lying flat, her
eyes on the pine ceiling, her tongue rolling another
sweet.
“Oh ! Lord I Poor thing, I thought I saw grey
hairs coming ! Oh don’t 101 l there and drivel, Bee .. .
for Heaven’s sake come for a bogie.”
They towels and bathing suits and
went down to the creek.
And Ted Gordon rode on, towards the ranges. . . .


CHAPTER ELEVEN
" I hear the call of woods, of waters green
While bowed beneath the sameness of my load
I seek Adventure on the open road
Dreaming of leaf—of flower —of rustling wings.”
Adventure.
IT was late in the afternoon when he began to
scale The Mountain.
On either side of the track were tall palms and
the white barked swinging " monkey ropes,” with
here and there a more fragile, pale mauve-blossomed
creeper or sudden broad green frond of the tree
fem, with the ever-present glossy olive lawyer
vine to catch at and imprison one. It meant a
sharp look-out and an equally sharp knife in requisi-
tion as one ascended the narrow trail.
He dismounted from his horse, and presently,
following the old pioneer fashion, found himself
clinging to the neddy’s tail as he went up. Some-
times the hack scrambled catlike along the timber
chutes, and both horse and man were sweating
before they reached the summit.
Gordon’s hands were torn from the vines, and
a leech swelled unnoticed till the blood ran on his
leg, just above the stout leather leggings, while
something burrowing in his neck felt suspiciously
like a scrub tick. This was all part of the game.


He had sighted a yellow and black bird whose
metallic colouring he felt almost sure was that of
the rare Regent bird: he had started a covey of
wallflower brown and speckled pheasants; had
heard the mocking crack of the whip-bird’s note,
plash of many an unseen waterfall, and now he
came into a clear space near the top of The Mountain.
Timber-getters had been here; there were bleeding
stumps of grizzled forest giants: acres of the
grey-green wild tobacco, a wider path leading down
The Mountain on the other side through the volcanic-
red soil, wild raspberries, gooseberries, magpies
a-plenty, far-away howl of a dingo in some palm-
choked, moss-deadened gully, chittering of a thou-
sand wee nesting birds, and himself the only man
on the crest of the hill to-night.
He unstrapped his swag from the front of his
saddle, got out his blanket, his jackshay, tea,
sugar, and cold corned beef, and a loaf of station
bread: built up a good pile of dry timber: it
would be cold up here to-night, for all the swelter
of the plains and the summer light on the far-off
sea. From here he could see the sun dying on
distant beaches and a grey reach that was the
Pacific.
In the night he heard the mopoke at its red
hunting, the plaint of cows somewhere far below
on the other side of the slope, the yapping of dogs
in pursuit of prey; but for the most part he slept
soundly, rising once to heap more logs on the fire,


kick the smouldering wood into a blaze, and send
forth sparks like fireflies seen at Malta into the
purple stillness of the wonderful mountain night.
At daybreak he found a forest pool reflecting
glistening boles and a mosaic of unknown fern, in
which to bathe. All along the banks were piccabeen
and full-skirted tree fern, while in the boughs
overhead a bird’s-nest fern flourished by a hanging
bunch of wax-yellow orchids. He sang while he
splashed in the pool the song he had sung to Miranda
in Fern Gully :
" She’s ma lady love, she’s ma dove, ma baby love,
She’s na girl for siftin’ down to dream,
She’s de only queen Laguna knows,
I know she likes me (does she ?)
Bekase she (doesn’t) say so . . .
She’s de lily of Laguna,
She’s ma lily and ma rose."
God 1 This was the life ? Fancy having the
woman one loved up here on The Mountain. . . .
Adam and Eve in a new Eden. . . . Cloudless
heavens above . . . unclouded hearts below. . . .
But a woman would tire of it, he supposed . . .
and the women he had seen who lived the open-air,
tent life in Australia had become wrinkled, old,
worn before their time . . . and perhaps it was
true that high living and soft lying made beautiful
women . . . but Miranda of the timberlands had
not had very much of either . . . and she. . .
His tethered horse whinnied from the other side
of the clearing. He went across naked to it, the
sqn drying his wet shoulders and thighs, the early


orange light warm on his dark head. He wondered
if he had ever been happier in his life ... or
hungrier for many a year ? He attacked the salt
beef, and set the billy in the still glowing embers
before he got into his shirt and trousers again, and
unslung his rifle. There might be a flying shot
at a pigeon, which would broil exceeding well for
his Christmas dinner. Gravely he wished himself
a Merry Christmas, examined the horse’s hide to
see if a tick had lodged there, and warned him off
nibbling at the pale, lily-leafed cunjiboy, which
makes an animal’s mouth and tongue swell and
which the natives use for a mustard plaster and as
a cure for rheumatism, and he went singing, bare-
headed, down the other side of The Mountain
" to explore,” leaving the hack to guard the camp
for the present. It was easier getting through the
jungle without a horse; the poor brute would be
ripped by the lawyer vines and lashed by the
stinging nettles, though he was an old stock horse,
and cunning at squeezing through apparently
impossible places. . . .
He had eaten his fill of the ruby-tinted wild rasp-
berries, the amber-coloured gooseberries: had
explored the runnel of a long-dry river filled to the
lip with sharp grey boulders : had drowsed on a
log lying over a ravine, full of storm-broken timber,
seen visions of primeval things, and dreamed a
strange leaf-haunted dream, when across the
sweet gum-scented, blossom-flavoured wind there


was blown to him an acrid and less pleasant
odour.
He thought suddenly of butchers’ shops, of the
shambles of a battlefield where had been treacherous
ambush, of a slaughter of goats he had seen out
on the G.N.R. when the goats, having almost
eaten the small settlement out of house and home,
the indignant inhabitants had arisen to a man and
shot them down in their tracks, a hideous, if deserved
battue, where seven hundred billies, nannies, and
bleating kids paid the toll, and the townsfolk built
a post and rail round the bodies and called it “ the
graveyard ”... all this came back to him now
with the weight of blood upon the wind. . . .
A bridle-track crossed his wandering way here,
marked by the pressure of cloven hoofs. In one or
two places the tall flooded gums were blazed, and
not very long ago as the moist congealing gum
showed. Evidently the trail led somewhere . . .
to something . . . probably nothing more exciting
than a timber-getter’s camp. They might have a
load of fresh meat in. But the timber-getters
would be far away on the plains in some small
wayside pub, or straggling township, keeping
Christmas in the only way that appeared possible
to them in the bush.
If he found their camp it would be deserted.
He came abruptly to the end of the trail, breaking
through a palisade of green bush-oak boughs, laid
across the runnel like a defence, or a shelter. . . .


The boughs were not much faded either ; but then
the scrub was so thick hereabouts,, only a green
translucency filtering through to the moist leaf-
mould on the earth below.
Looking through the screen of leaf and twig
he could see the rough-barked poles that made
a rugged, though stout, yard.
It looked to be new work, or comparatively
recent, though a length of barbed wire was stretched
across the path on the side where Gordon stood.
It was from this enclosure that the stench of
spilled blood came.
And with reason.
Lying in various quiescent attitudes, as though
they had dropped without a struggle, were the well-
nourished bodies of seven or eight sleek-skinned
cows. Two, he almost mechanically noted, bore
the Cormorin station brand . . . further on was
the immense bulk of a splendid black bull.
In a flash he recalled the meeting with Brody in
the glade half-way to Sea-Garry: the spring-cart
with its gleaming wheels : the girl in the white
frock : the sulky-faced, stout man with the reins :
and Brody’s question :
" You’re the very man I wanted, Mr. Garry . . .
the prize black bull has been stolen, or anyway has
disappeared, from Cormorins.”
The prize bull! Had he been used to lure away
cows from the neighbouring stations ? The other
brands as far as Gordon could see just now, as he


climbed over the rugged railings and leapt into the
yard, had been carefully “ smudged ” with a brand-
ing iron. . . . Cattle from the far side of the range,
he supposed . . . and nobody had thought of
looking in The Mountain thickets for the missing
beasts, though complaint and speculation had
drifted through at times to police headquarters.
It must have been a job to get the stock up here,
unless the reivers knew of some less steep way than
the trails familiar to a few picnickers from nearer
the coast.
Somehow he had stumbled upon a secret ... a
bloody, inhuman secret . . . where men who were
deliberately seeking lost animals had gone astray.
Cows in milk every one of them. . . . How
damnable!
But it made the reason for the slaughter easy
enough to find.
Somehow, disturbed at their cattle duffing, or
else afraid to take the calves on the hoof coastwards
or to market with their mothers and the prize
Cormorin bull, to secure the clean skins, whose only
proof of ownership could be established by the
mothers of the herd, these pedigreed younglings
had been rendered bloodily parentless by the crack
of a deliberate rifle.
Most of the beasts had been drilled clean through
the forehead; the bull alone had a burnt spot over
his heart as well: he must have charged while
someone got him from the side. . . .


Gordon stood there, in the warm, musk-scented,
Christmastide air, a righteous wrath shaking him
from head to heel as he spluttered curses, the tears
near his eyes. . . .
How damnable ! Such beautiful satin-skinned
brutes . . . and the vast mountain of cheated
energy and thorn-scarred hide that had been Cor-
morin’s prize bull . . . how . . . how . . • hellish!
Well ... he hadn’t a swear word unused in his
vocabulary.
He shook his fists at the mingled greens of the
softly rustling forest about him ; at the starry white
clematis blossom; at the tiny yellow orchids
pushing up from the grass outside the stockyard
rail.
The very personification of an Avenger. . . .
“My God! If I could catch the crawlers who
did this thing ! ”
The wind, running along the crests of the ranges,
carried his words away into the blue. ... In the
close jungle ways a whip-bird called mockingly and
elusively sweet . . . and somewhere, in the more
open spaces, a kookaburra laughed. . . .


CHAPTER TWELVE
" To one shall come the apple of desire
Red stained upon the amber of its globe
Shutting within its core a smouldering fire."
The Fruit of Day.
GORDON was destined to make another dis-
covery that day, though, as far as he could
tell, it did not bear at all upon the more gruesome
one in the stockyard.
Some fierce idea for the moment took possession
of his brain : the instinct of the vindicator, to
try to make sure by which road the cattle slayers
had gone their way, with their smoking rifles and
the mob of “ mickies ” they intended, somewhere
in the fastnesses of the ranges, to brand and make
legally, as far as the letter of the law went, their
own.
Caught here and there by the detaining runners
of the polished lawyer vines, tripped by logs rotting
under their exquisite ’broideries of deep beryl-
hued moss and salmon-tinted fungi, he went over
the hoof-beaten trail that led away from the yard.
These men of the ranges might conceal with their
sly bushcraft the marks of their own and of their
horses’ feet, but the sharp hoofs of the young
stock were not so easily muffled.


Bracken and pliant fern obliterated the path in
places; but there was bruised frond and uprooted
plant, and more than one battered' cunjiboy, to
reveal the passage through the jungle. Reddish
hair clung to the bark of a scraped sapling, and
there a broad-leafed stinging nettle had a bloody
hieroglyphic, and more red and white hair scrawled
over it.
Suddenly Gordon went headlong over the glossy,
rough-coated body of a white-eared calf surely
sired by none other than that great prize bull of
Cormorins.
Perhaps the robbers had feared the young calf’s
betrayal.
Little stumbling, terrified creature, the mother’s
milk still fermenting in its round barrel. . . .
Perhaps mere wanton cruelty had made some
callous ruffian slit the young white-marked throat
on that last bellow. . . . The ants were already
hanging on that scarlet ridge where the blood
coagulated.
“ Damn them,” said Gordon again, raising the
absurd big-eared head with the glassy, glazed eye
a moment . . . then letting it fall again among
the reddening fern where probably dingoes would
find it to-night.
“ Damn them : the skulking hounds,” said Ted
Gordon, but it wasn’t the dingoes he meant, and
again he shook his fist at the uncommunicative
aisles of the forest. The soft sough of wind was in


the topmost palm : brown warblers had built a
fairy nest on the trail. The murderers may just
have brushed it with the crown of their hats as
they went by. . . . Perhaps they had not time
to wait to strangle the young birds. . . .
So he kept his rifle at half-cock for more than
half a mile downhill, and presently he came to
a shallow tawny stream rushing noisily over mossy
stones between a monster tree fern, whose lace of
fine green leaf dripped moisture on to his head.
Here vine and bough were interwoven so thick he
could not see the sky. . . . What a place for an
ambush! He kept his finger on the trigger of his
weapon.
Little spirals of wet honeyed bloom whipped his
face as he climbed the other side of the creek, which
cuddled in a dip of the hills. He could hear it
murmuring as he strove up an almost indistinguish-
able track, nearby which bush turkeys had been
scraping the earth for a nest: he caught a glimpse
of a fuscous mound, and then, across some fallen
timber, fire touched perhaps, and crashing in the
big gales that swept the hills in July, he came to
his next discovery. The Lonely Hut. . . .
Some scientist, perhaps a bird-man from the big
cities, had used it as a home while he raked the
scrub for evidence and scientific data about a new
insect, a shy-suspected bird, a paleolithic fern, or
some man-hating hermit had stayed in residence here
till he went mad in the great green solitudes and


hanged himself from a rotting beam, or blew out his
brains behind the wooden door that swung, creaking
on its hinges now as Gordon approached the humpy
warily.
After what he had seen in the stockyard he had
need for caution, with no help but his own right
arm to defend him from the usual fate of informers,
intended or actual, in all uncivilized spots.
But there was no one in the hut, though, as he
stooped under the lintel and entered, his foot caught
on something in the earthern floor and he shot
forward into the little dwelling, cannoning off a
small wooden table, whose four supports were
bedded in the earth below.
There was a sacking bunk in the comer, the
material obviously rotting through, and the table
itself showed traces of the borer, which the city
dweller called the furniture beetle.
Evidently it was long since anyone had been
in the hut, either cattle-duffer or scientist.
Gordon sat on the table, realizing how tired he
was. The sun was in mid-heaven, and going back
to where he had left his horse would be all uphill.
He must not forget that.
Yes ; he did not think any more could be done
to-day. He must ride early to-morrow back to
Cormorins, and into the township to let Brody
know what had been happening here, up on The
Mountain at this time of peace and goodwill on
earth.
I


He hoped when the devils were caught they
would get a hard sentence. He remembered the
mild-eyed mother’s life-blood thickening on the
streaked earth of the gum-surrounded shambles
. . . he remembered the black bull’s rough-hided
son with the slit in its innocent throat. . . .
It cried for its dead mother perhaps as it
was being hustled away by these men of the
ranges. . . .
The sun, striking through the network of green
overhead and finding the door of The Lonely Hut
ajar, caught and glinted on the small protrusion
from the stamped-down earth that had tripped
Gordon as he entered.
He looked down, went closer, got out his knife
and eased the earth about it.
No doubt at all, it was the solid cork of a jar or
bottle buried there.
" Hidden treasure perhaps,” he spoke aloud.
“ Needs something to make up for that sticky and
unpleasant sight in the bush yard.”
He prised at the cork, throwing back the earth
from about the neck of the demijohn, and the cork
came out grudgingly, leaving the rich fruity bouquet
of old, well-seasoned rum on the close dusty air
of the hut’s interior.
“By George ! ” He remembered what a long
time it was since he had had a drink. His eyes lit
up, and this was Christmas Day! Poisoned, per-
haps ?


But bushmen, cattle-duffers, or even scientists
did not poison good grog . , , not in this country,
anyway !
He felt for his small pocket drinking cup, fitted it
together, tasted the overproof and found it good.
Things began to look brighter. He would find
those cattle thieves yet . . . capture them single-
handed. That was at the second drink . . . hand
the reward the stations and the Crown would offer
to Brody . . . wouldn’t it be a joke to see Brody’s
face ? He would say something witty to Brody . . .
confoundedly witty ... he was sure he could if he
tried.
What a thirsty job it had been digging out the
demijohn! He must have another strengthener
for luck . . . and another for Christmas Day . . .
and another for " the only Queen Laguna knows ”
. . . and another. . . .
The demijohn, earth-stained, deep golden tinted,
was on the table the borers had made somewhat
unsafe . . . the afternoon sun streamed in now
on a man lying half across it. . . .
The long walk had tired him ... he had had
a strenuous time coming down the hill ... he had
been shocked . . . horrified . . . whitely angry....
His rifle lay on the earthern floor: a green head
ant had already crawled quite a long distance along
the barrel, a tarantula swung from the web-draped
rafters of the bark ceiling and almost touched the
sleeper’s head.


On the mountain top the kookaburra were pre-
paring to chortle their farewells to the day : mists
ringed the smoky edge of the valley; the tethered
horse stamped impatiently throughout his lone
Christmas afternoon, threw back his head, and
whinnied once. . . .
Winged things sought shelter in swaying eyries :
a yellow dingo sniffed at the corpse of the little
satin-black calf in the fern grove . . . then another
. . . and another. . . .
There was a tearing, crunching sound, dripping
saliva . , . muffled growls. . . . Flesh-eating night
birds flapped, anticipatory of the feasting. . . .
And the only thing that ever mastered Ted
Gordon had him by the throat in The Lonely Hut.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
" What have you found at the dawn o’ day
Have you a package of hope for me,
A ribboned dream on a thorny spray ?
Or only a memory of golden years
That drifts as dust and that tastes of tears ! ”
June.
TOWARDS two in the morning he woke stiff
and cold, to find himself in the sacking bed,
an end of which had collapsed with his weight :
one leg trailed uncomfortably on the earth floor.
He struck a match to look at his watch and to
wonder confusedly where he was and how he had
got there : brushed something from his hand, and
knew it to be an evil-looking black scorpion.
His muddled brain gradually lightened to the
extent of a vague recollection of the coming to The
Lonely Hut, and the finding of the rum jar. He
looked distastefully across to where the demijohn
stood : his temples were bursting : his tongue was
thick and dry as a blotting-pad. He wondered
where he could get a drink of water. When he
stood he swayed on his feet, and now a pale purity
of moonlight streamed in through the doorway.
Lord ! For a glass of water with ice clinking in
it!
Lord ! For a snow-fed River Jordan to be pouring
down his parched throat . . . the demijohn, ugh !


Why didn’t a cove know when to stop 1
It was months now since he had gone off at the
deep end like this . . . and then he remembered
his poor brute of a nag left alone on the hill top . . .
tied, too . . . dingoes might be yapping at its
heels now ... a hundred things might happen
while its master was sunk in a drunken stupor
in The Lonely Hut. He was distressfully aware
that, like most deserted habitations in the bush,
the empty hut swarmed with fleas.
He lay back on the bunk, too sick for the moment
to move far, and slept heavily again, till morning
looked in to find him dirty and sweat-stained and
with a splitting headache, but sober once more.
With daylight he discovered half a cask of brown-
stained but drinkable water behind the hut, brown
from running off the bark roof. Dead leaves
floated in it, flavouring it with pine and eucalyptus,
but a man with a thirst like Gordon’s does not
pause to think about bacteria. He gulped the
gratefully cold fluid down, more greedily than he
had sampled the old Jamaica, and, though as a
natural result, his head reeled again for a few
minutes, he began to pull himself together and
recall the duty of informing Brody of what he had
found in the ranges as quickly as possible, going
back by the way he had come to water his horse
and see what had happened to his camp in the
night hours. He was stiff and sore, but he set his
teeth and lifted the half-full rum jar to return it


to its unoccupied grave. About its mouth were
clustered carnelian-bodied flying ants with frail
detachable wings, green flies, enquiring wingless
ants, for, as Mary Kingsley found in the Cameroons,
all winged insects and a considerable number of
wingless are as greedy for rum as a confirmed
human toper.
He trod the earth about the shoulders of the jar
again. There it could stay till some other fool
found it, or he himself wanted it again, since he
knew well that it is only when the devil is sick he
turns saint, and repentance comes usually hard
upon the unsatisfactory results of the self-indulgence.
Then he picked up his rifle and dragged himself
on to the trail again.
Good bushman as he was, he managed to gain
the crest of The Mountain without passing the
shambles in the fern.
But the stench of it was tainting the wind. He
knew he would be deadly sick if he viewed it this
morning : his gorge rose at the very memory.
It was high noon when he gained the mountain
top, found his hack had broken the tether and
was knee-deep in the little pool, where he had
bathed on Christmas Day, chewing water-grass
complacently. A great thick-bodied carpet snake
slowly unrolled itself from his blanket: there were
ants in swarms and battalions about the loaf, and
a magpie, head on one side, perched on the jack
shay, but for one thing the very loneliness of The


Mountain, particularly in the Christmas holidays,
forbade possibility of loss of portable property.
Gordon’s face and hands were swollen from sand-
fly bites, and his body itched all over from the
attentions of the small brown denizens of The
Lonely Hut.
He stripped and went headlong into the pool.
God ! What a relief!
He ducked his head under the water, then leant
thankfully against the bole of a piccabeen that came
to the edge of the bogie hole.
The carpet snake, a miniature boa constrictor,
had crawled away behind a log; the magpie was
in a tree overhead, consulting with a black and
white mate.
Gordon couldn’t think of food yet. He decided to
camp here all the afternoon, sleep off his experience,
and the rum, and ride by moonshine down The
Mountain, and out to the plain, to make up for the
time he had lost last night in getting the news of
the cattle-shooting through to the sergeant.
He was as hard as nails, and the several hours’
unbroken sleep would set him up sufficiently to
enable him to take the road to-night.
He made some tea, and out of the broken rein
contrived a hobble for the horse that would prevent
its straying far enough to break its leg in some
treacherous, timber-filled gully while he slept. Having
first carefully searched his blankets with a re-
membrance of last night’s scorpion, he flung himself


down, and in five minutes had forgotten everything
but that he was clean in body again, and too fatigued
in mind to give himself the slanging he knew he
probably deserved for letting the rum lure him to
" drink with the flies ” to the extent of an un-
authorized Christmas spree.
“ Another chap shouted, anyway . . . inadver-
tently’’ he muttered with a half smile, as he forgot
the waking world in the land of sleep.
The kookaburras woke him as they said good-
night to the last of the sun-gold lingering on the
tree-tops.
Already it would be dusk on the plains and far-off
beaches ! Now the western sky was salmon-tinted,
eau-de-nil and gold. There would be a few hours’
dark before the moon rose. He would build a new
fire in the ashes of the old. Some more strong tea,
and he began to feel brisker.
He would sit here and watch the stars come out:
the horse saddled and bridled ready for the start
down The Mountain. A skull-white fig-tree, bearing
a treasure of fem high in its clutching arms, glim-
mered beyond the glade; the fungi, where the light
of the fire did not reach them, shone bluish-sulphur
as fairy lanthoms.
He thought he could hear the plash of a water-
fall, or was it only the wind in the trees ? Soughings
of scented air through acres of virgin loveliness ?
What a pity he had ever found The Lonely Hut,
and the damned jar 1


He had meant to see the chief waterfall: had
meant to dig up some specially beautiful little ferns
for “ the only queen Laguna knows.”
He was going back with nothing but the gruesome
information for Brody. Possibly his visit here had
served a good purpose. It might smoke out the
hornets’ nest of those cattle-duffers in the district...
but, as a pleasure trip, as a romantic journey into
fairylands of scmb and ferny glens, as he had
intended it to be, it was a failure.
A self-conducted tour into vain Mirage! Ah
well!
" Dry your eyes : laugh at a fall: get up and
begin again,” said Browning, but it wasn’t the first
time, and, since there is nothing surer than that you
can predict the future from your knowledge of the
past, it wouldn't be the last time either.
What was the kink in an otherwise decent chap
that made him go off the handle like that ? In the
company of other men, led on from drink to drink,
boon companionships, it was natural enough from
a man’s view-point, but he, Ted Gordon, did the
unpardonable. When he drank, it was usually
secretly and alone. It was as though there came a
time when he must drug himself with drink for a
day or two, and while he was under its potency, he
had got into many a scrape he would never have
risked being entangled with in sober blood. Witness
the time when he thought he had killed Darney,
and had fled, like a hunted thing, to cover.


That was how he had met with Hibiscus Heart!
After all, there was honey in the lion’s jaws !
He had known some out-and-out rotters who were
water drinkers, and who had preached unctuously,
intolerably, to their less temperate brethren. . . .
There were worse things than drink; hypocrisy
for one. . . .
And that day in Fern Gully, Hibiscus Heart had
said her pet aversion was a drunken man.
" Good job she didn’t see me last night,” he
grinned, biting on his pipe-stem. Possibly, nay,
more than probably, she never would see him like
that, since on their first meeting she had been
convinced that his fever was entirely due to the
epidemic malaria, for which the tiger mosquito, and
not the rum or whisky jar is responsible. Brody
had known, and possibly Stodge Garry, that his
sickness was not all caused by the fact that he had
been kicked on the head, exposed in the scrub,
suffering hunger, thirst, and exhaustion. But
Hibiscus Heart never questioned. Was ever a
woman with a sweeter, less suspicious mind ? How
she had defended him that day I A man would
have to prove himself an out-and-out bad lot before
Miranda Garry would condemn him. Her com-
passionate mouth, her grey fearless eyes . . . yet
he could picture that mouth severe . . . those eyes
bleak . . . and turned away. . . .
He felt his cheeks burn, and not from the sand-
fly bites.


Somehow, the memory up here, in the untrodden
cleanly freshness of the gum-tree seclusion, of a
woman sweet and pure as they, made him ashamed.
He lay back on the dry turf.
“ I’m damned if I won’t try and beat it—for her
sake,” he said.
The tree-tops showed a light silver bloom, twigs
were engraved blackly on the luminous sky . . .
now the faint, eternally recurrent, burnished rim of
gold appeared, lifted from the dusk of the under-
world.
Gordon got up, rolled his swag, packed his saddle,
refilled his pipe, put his foot in the stirrup, and
swung into the seat, reining his horse a moment to
look back at the faint ruby glimmer of the coals in
the dying fire. It would not do to set the forest
ablaze, but the fire was safe enough : a thick ridge
of grey ash on either side ; only a few smouldering
coals and the smell of cold tea, with which he had
doused it.
He heard the harsh squark of a night bird, myriad
rustlings of unseen things. Behind him, a wallaby
crossed the ragged, violet-grey wild tobacco
bushes. . . .
He decided to make a detour : go straight into
the township, since he was not yet expected back
at Cormorins. All night he rode down the greasy
slopes, where great ridge roots of vast trunked trees
intruded on the faint track, and the hot steamy


scents of the jungle followed through the clear cool
night air. Part of the way he did on foot, lest the
hack should slip on the sheer declivities where
gargantuan logs had been hurled along the track, to
slide to the waiting j inkers below.
He met no one: heard only the wild life of The
Mountain murmuring about him; smelled the
peppermint of gums; the rich choking odours of
decayed leaf ; the bitter-sweets of bush blossomry.
He rode by the little creek where the red bottle-
brush grew : yellow lily-cups on its silken surfaces ;
he saw Dawn on the plains striding as a god with a
flying cloud of flame, had a snack at the selector’s,
where the corn cob mattresses invited in vain, for
he said he “ must push on,” and at dusk he came
to the one street of the township, and found Brody,
still suffering from indigestion after a too hearty
Christmas dinner at the Stockman’s Arras, and
exceeding ready to vent an active spleen on the
likeliest criminal.
He was grateful for the news of the slaughter-
yard, though a little annoyed, as Gordon had ex-
pected, that a layman had found the trail of the
cattle-stealers.
He called to a trooper, who was cleaning his boots
with goanna fat in the backyard of the police
station (an ordinary weather-board cottage, but
with the royal arms on the white-latticed verandah),
gave him some low-voiced instructions, and came
back to Gordon who, with a lime juice and soda at


his elbow, was stretching legs, cramped by the ride,
along a squatter chair, and wishing he was in bed
without the trouble of unlacing his boots.
" You’ll stay here to-night, Mr. Gordon. I want
to get all this in writing. I have a black girl cooking,
wife to one of the troopers, who really can cook,
for a wonder. I want you to taste her stews. I
can’t do much till to-morrow. I’ve a couple of
" two up ” men under my eye. Caught ’em at
Boxing-day races, and the jail is none too safe. . . .
The white ants are in the slabs.”
Gordon thankfully agreed to both the stew and
the bed.
After tea, they sat awhile and smoked on the
verandah.
The last time Gordon had been in the township
was the occasion of the buying and freeing of the
quarrions.
Somehow, that remembrance reminded him of
Barney. He had heard nothing of him for some
time.
" I suppose Barney has been hitting up the town,”
he said, lazily looking to where an oil flare invited to
the Stockman’s Arms bar, and a tinny piano rattled
a polka from the coffee-room.
" Barney has been sober for a month : that means
mischief to someone,” answered Brody, heels on
the verandah rail above the blue and gold royal
coat of arms, his hard white teeth chewing a straw.
" Heard the other day from a trooper who had been


invalided down to the East, that Darney got a
broad hint to leave the Cairns district over a shrewd
suspicion of opium running to the niggers; used to
skipper a steam-launch up and down by the planta-
tions ; a coastal steamer had a Chink slushy aboard,
with a fancy to dangle a tin on a rope’s end astern.
When the sea wasn’t too rough, Darney ran his boat
past the steamer, and did a bit of fishing in the blue
Pacific. There was never anything in Barney’s boat,
of course, and the half-baked Customs officer didn’t
look for a thin line dragging behind. He was a go-
between for Chinese and Blacks ; pretty low-down
job for an educated Englishman. They say he had
a brother with a title who kicked him out. . . .
Nobody could ever prove anything, of course . . .
and there’s money in the game. . . . He’s tricky as
a snake . . . but he somehow got a hint there was
a new Customs official coming up, and the river and
sea fronts might not be so healthy thereabouts, . . .
Anyway, he sold his boat to a Mission, and came
here. Nobody knows what he lives on, but he talks
of going on the land . . . seems to have a credit in
the bank, anyway. The banker’s wife told me last
week he was “ range,” likes to air a bit of French.
It sounds better than saying, what I don’t think
anyone will believe, that Barney’s going to run
straight now.”
“ Is he here ? ” asked Gordon, lolling back in his
slouching canvas, glad to vary the subject from that
of the dead cattle for a little.


" I haven’t seen him about for more than a week.
Not at the pub ... so he can’t be in town. ... I
must be away, too. ... I’ll to Cormorins to-
morrow with you. . . . Must see the boss for more
information about that bull. He’s a clue. . . I
had, to tell you the truth, given that job best.”
After this frank admission, rather unlike Brody,
for he prided himself on his professional skill and
sleuth-like faculties, the sergeant spat the straw on
to the roadway and went into the house.
Gordon rested an aching head against the supports
of the chair back.
He was fast asleep when Brody returned.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
" The shadows of the bamboo reeds
Where the gold sunlight trickles thro’
Write on the turf their summer screeds
And everyone has word of you.”
Fidelity.
IN secret conclave, Jim Cormorin, Brody, and
Gordon decided it would be as well to keep
dark the latter’s discovery on The Mountain, to give
them all a better chance of catching the cattle-
duffers tripping.
Two troopers rode immediately by the bottle-
brush creek and the wooded tilt of the land that
went ever upward to the mist-capped highlands.
Brody followed later, with a pretence of looking
into the matter of a landmark illegally removed.
On the far side of the range, the troopers found
the shifty-eyed O’Dwyers at work, ploughing a
recently cleared patch of their land, they said, with
a wink, “ for pineapple planting.”
Riding, on surreptitiously retraced paths, about
their run, the troopers noticed some fine young
stock, “ mickies,” who were an extraordinarily
marked improvement on the long-barrelled, sharp-
horned old milkers, and the nondescript black and
white scrubber bull, from whom the O’Dwyers
vowed they were sprung. The appearance of the


calves gave their begetting the lie; yet there was
nothing the troopers could drop on to in proof that
they were not the offspring of the polyglot dams and
sires, whose own weedy youngsters might easily
have been killed and eaten, or gone up in smoke as
a burnt-offering to the kind of trade the O’Dwyers
were suspected of, but of which they had never
actually been convicted.
Brody, arriving later in a casual fashion, had
made no further progress on the road to discovery.
He sprang the story of the murdered cows upon the
tall, loose-jointed shifty-eyed brothers, and they
vowed it a lurid shame and offered to help to look
for the blanketty blanks, who would shoot cattle
in cold blood.
Brody glanced once at the well-oiled rifles on the
walls of the hut, but who could arrest on a mere
supposition ?
He wished to God the brothers would break the
law in some more obvious fashion, that he might
handle them and find a way of elucidating other
mysteries.
He stood by the rough bush yard and saw the
swollen, dingo-raked carcases of the mild mothers
of the herd. He knotted his brows over every trace
he could find of the reivers, but there was not even
a dropped cartridge as a clue.
The beggars had cleaned up their traces well; the
tracks of the calves had been lost on stony ridges,
and then, somewhere in a flooded creek that came


brawling down after the big storm at the end of
December.
The Saunderses, further on, had nothing to say
cither, though they also and officiously offered Mr.
Brody any help, if such a clever man as Sergeant
Brody needed, it.
Beaten for the present, and exceedingly angry
that the law in Australia did not allow of some
Third Degree to be practised determinedly on the
spare-shanked O’Dwyers and short, pugnacious-
looking Saunders crowd, whom every instinct told
him were in league with one another, Brody left
the pickings of the slaughtered cows’ bones to the
eagle-hawks and tribes of ants, and rode sadly back
to the plains.
He had sent the troopers with revolvers along
the spurs, telling them to hang, unheralded, about
the district for a while, and Ranald MacPherson,
the big red-whiskered stock owner, at Willow Tree,
who had lost cattle in driblets for the past two
years, swore, as he raged over the tall nobbier
of whisky neat, of which he partook in the
sergeant’s company, that he wouldn’t mind risking
the hangman’s drop for a shot at both families,
the O’Dwyers for preference, since they were Irish-
men.
The Saunderses were of Scotch extraction. If they
were in the duffing, they must have been led into it
by the O’Dwyers, as Prince Charlie was led into
mischief by those Irish adventurers who thronged


his suite before and after Prestonpans, and Falkirk,
but not after Culloden.
A man of strong racial prejudices was Cluny
MacPherson.
One thing rather surprised Brody. He found the
O’Dwyers had a boarder agent staying along for
a bit. “We may be after sellin’ out to him,” said
Martin O’Dwyer cheerfully, and when Darney came
strolling out of the back room—there were but two,
divided by Hessian walls—in a clean shirt and riding
breeches and boots, and perfectly sober, Brody
began to piece together for future reference things
that had long puzzled him about Darney.
In with the O’Dwyers, was he ? H’m. ... It did
not make the hands of the slira-shanked brothers
look any cleaner . . . despite all their casually
offered and apparently unconsciously served-up
alibis for the Christmas season. He knew for one
thing that Darney, for all his intemperate ways,
was an ugly man in a row and a dead shot, though
most people in the township considered him not
much more than, a fool, who was always “ half
molared.” Another thing the sergeant knew was
that Darney, who owed Carrow money, had recently
settled his debt, and Carrow swore by him now,
where once he was just as likely to swear at him,
and to kick him from under the drunks’ form on
the hotel verandah into the open roadway . . .
and Carrow’s name was little better than the
O’Dwyers’, where meura and tuum were concerned.


So Brody had many things to conjecture as he
rode once more to where the gin prepared a well-
onioned stew, and his black-and-tan dog yelped
delight at his master’s return.
Beatrix sensed excitement in the air: she had a
vague notion when Brody and her father and Gordon
remained shut up in the dining-room, and she and
Arline were told to “ run away and play ” by Delia,
that something romantic and more than slightly
discreditable to someone was abroad. She and
Arline discussed it, their feet in the rippling water
of the creek, for it was a broiling summer’s day
when the conference was held.
At first Beatrix had a vainglorious notion that
“ Mr. Gordon ” was approaching her father with a
view " to an alliance with his only daughter, the
sunshine of his home,” but this chimera was speedily
dismissed from her love-sick brain: there would
surely not be any reason to bring the sergeant into
that. ... A question of settlements ? The sergeant
being the nearest approach to a lawyer available ?
No. Mr. Gordon hadn’t any money . . . unless
he had lately inherited a fortune, without letting
her know. . . . True, there had been an English
mail in . . . but as he never got any letters. . . .
The bookkeeper, who was her ardent admirer,
although he had bow-legs, had told her that.
She was aching with curiosity, but was afraid of
her father. Jim Cormorin could be summary if his
orders were disobeyed.


So she sat with her feet in the creek, and discussed
the matter with Arline.
" Bet it’s nothing interesting,” said her cousin,
sticking her pink big toe into a company of water-
beetles that skated on the tide, and sending them
scurrying along wide spokes of disturbed water over
the waving, submerged grasses. “ Some old thing
about cattle or sheep, or that Indian hawker who ran
amok on Christmas Day Eve up at Barrinnong.
Delia told me all about that. Delia loves a good
tragedy. He tried to shoot Stewart, the shepherd,
at Widgee. I never could bear Stewart’s beard, or
the way he wears corks round his hat . . . and he
has no socks and never washes.”
“ That's no reason why he should be shot, Arline.”
Beatrix was grave : she felt such years older than
Arline, though when her query as to whether she
could put up her hair at sixteen had been met with
a yawn from her mother, and the customary
“ S’pose so,” her father had come down with a
sharp interjection, “ Let little girls remain little
girls as long as possible, and don’t be an ass, Edith,
let her keep her plaits. I like them.”
Little girls indeed! And she sixteen . . . and in
love I
Her father might live to rue this day.
She did not know why, but he might. . . .
" I see every reason,” said Arline stubbornly.
“ I do like clean men. I've never seen Mr. Gordon
with a dirty shirt or collar and, for a bushman,


it’s perfectly absurd the way he polishes his
boots.”
Beatrix sighed, but the qualified praise of her
hero gratified her.
“ Some day I will tell you all, Arline,” she mur-
mured generously.
‘‘l’m sure you will—when there's anything to
tell,” snapped Arline. Beatrix was so sentimental
nowadays, she even neglected her meals. It wasn’t
half the fun staying at Cormorins that it used to be.
Arline would write to her mother and say she thought
it was time she came home —there were her music
lessons. . . .
But Beatrix's next remark decided her to post-
pone writing the letter, also the music lessons for a
while.
" Father says we might go to The Mountain at
Easter: a picnic party .. . just ourselves, Stodge
Garry, and Mr. Gordon . . . won’t it be heavenly ? ”
“ But what about the Garry girl ? Won’t she
want to come ? ”
Arline watched her cousin's face maliciously, as
she threw sticks at a black swan, mirrored swan
and shadow, on the willow-shaded pool a little
further up.
“ Oh ! she won’t come ... at least I think not:
though we’ll have to ask her,” said Beatrix flushing.
“ Do you know she’s got out of every camping-out
we’ve arranged up there. Sometimes, Arl, I think
she’s . . . afraid of The Mountain.”


" Mr. Gordon says she isn’t afraid of anything on
earth : he says she’s the pluckiest woman he has
ever seen this side of the world. The other woman
was a Red Indian squaw who ruled a tribe and stood
with her back to a rock and shot four low-down
whites who tried to capture her, with an old rifle.
He said he was glad, and wouldn’t lift an arm to
help them. I think it was somewhere up towards
Jack London’s country—the Yukon.”
“ When did he say that ? ” Beatrix leaned
forward in breathless interest, a little twinge of
jealousy pricking at her heart. Someday, she would
do something “ horribly brave,” and make Mr.
Gordon say she was the most valiant woman of them
a 11... so young.... too, he would add, wiping away
a manly tear: an emotion of which he was un-
ashamed, " strong man as he was.”
“ I heard him telling Aunt Edith, and you can
guess, of course, what she said. . . . ‘ I s’pose so ’
. . . and asked him to hand her a pill-box off the
shelf.”
“ Arly—you’re joking I ”
"No. . . I’m not: it actually happened .. . well
... about the ‘ s’pose so,’ but I’m not so sure about
the pill. . . . Perhaps she asked him to pour her
some lime juice.”
Both girls laughed irresistibly.
“ I don’t mean to be nasty about your mother,
you know. Bee. She’s very good to have me here
so long ~. after all, it was only measles that sent me


up here for a change ... but she has her ‘ little ways,’
hasn’t she ? ”
“ She has,” agreed Beatrix. “ But then, she was
married at seventeen . . . and you can’t call Father,
dear thing, romantic.”
“ No —o .. . you can’t: but I’d like to marry a
man just like Uncle Jim. He must have been quite
good-looking, Bee, before the wild boar charged his
leg and lamed him.”
Then they turned their heads abruptly, for some-
one was singing:—
“ A ferlie came ben to me yestreen
A lady jimp and sma’
Wi’ a milk-white snood and a kirth green.
Yellow and roun’ were her bonnie e’en,
And she said ‘ Will ye come awa’.
Will ye gang wi’ me to the Elfhyn Knowe
To milk our queene’s coo ? ’
‘ Na na,’ qu’ I, ' I mean shear my sheep,
I’ve my bam to bigg, an’ my com to reap,
Sae I canna come the noo’.’ ”
Down the path from the house they heard the
sound of feet, the drag of a spur in the grass. Ted
Gordon sat down between them, his legs crossed
under him, since he said he did not feel inclined to
paddle.
Arline chattered on, questioning him about The
Mountain, telling him of the proposed picnic : saying
April was a good month to go up there, because then
the weather was usually fine, and there were not so
many snakes about as in September.


But Beatrix, lifting first one foot and then another
from the water, and tucking them out of sight under
her holland frock, was in a misery of self-conscious-
ness, mingled with a bitter anger at herself for being
so tongue-tied when she yearned to say something
subtle . . . brilliant . , . arresting . . . whereby the
hero could remember her, when he went up the
other bank to The Quarters. ...
Arline, who did not care, was quite amusing.
But Beatrix when she opened her lips to choke
upon a halting sentence was positively stupid.
When Ted Gordon tweaked her pigtails and told
her she was getting a big girl now, and he supposed
he mustn’t ask her for a kiss, she could neither draw
herself up with the proper proportion of haughtiness,
nor answer " brightly provocative,” as were maidens
in novels.
That she did not fall into the creek and have to
be ignominiously fished out was merely because, as
Arline said afterwards, "it must have been her
lucky day.”
Perhaps it was, for Ted Gordon twitched one of
her pink ribbons off before he went, and raced
laughing across the footbridge, crying, “ By my
halidome! A lady’s favour for my morion! I ride
for the Queen to-night.”
Far away up the station street they heard him
singing his old Scotch song,
"I’ve my bam to bigg, an’ my corn to reap,
Sae I canna come the noo'."


“ I don’t know what it all means, but it’s very
attractive. . . . Someone should get him to sing in a
choir,” said Arline, drawing a reluctant foot from
the water and shedding a rainbow spray of drops on
to the golden air.
Beatrix said nothing; she looked dreamily at
the wispy end of an undecorated plait of hair,
stroking it tenderly with a reflective finger. . . .
“ A lady’s favour ... for his morion,” she said
mystically.
” I’m hungry," yawned Arline. “ For the Lord’s
sake, let’s hurry Delia with the lunch.”


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
" Butterflies born of a dream are sailing
Into the far away; . . .
Oh ! Love, come out of that dreary room
There’s a trickle of green down the dusty hill
'Tis a pixy path to the haunted rill
Whose waters turn to bloom ! "
Silky Oaks.
CONTRARY to Beatrix's prognostications, and
the occasioning of a certain amount of mis-
chievous glee to Arline, Miranda Garry did not
refuse to join the Easter camp at The Mountain
this year.
Perhaps the knight who rode not for, but to, the
Queen that night with the invitation to join the
party from Cormorins, had something to do with
persuading her to neglect the warning of her sub-
conscious recoil from the dark and beautiful bulk of
that mysterious and jungled height.
This time she made no excuse at the last minute
to withdraw from the expedition into the wilderness,
indeed she took a good deal of pleasure in her pre-
parations in the way of riding clothes, clean linen
blouses and short tough shirts and thick stockings
for those leech-infested ways.
Early April saw the Paschal moon high in the
heavens this year; early April in Queensland usually
brings a procession of lovely days. The great heat


has passed and under normal conditions the rainy
season is also over. Cooler nights, clear sunlit days,
with a drift of great white cloud occasionally on the
soft deep blue : ideal weather for camping out even
when the mountains will not guarantee not to
occasionally veil their topmost peaks in white
swathes of mist.
Miranda was not the least of the company to feel
the entrancement of the beauties of that primeval
forest. Her fear of The Mountain seemed to fall
from her, and even Beatrix’s tossed head and
offended manner when Ted Gordon proved too
constant a squire of “ the only queen Laguna
knows ” did not really mar Miranda’s pleasure.
She thought sometimes that the flappers giggled
and whispered together a little too obviously, but
she had always liked the girls, and deep in her
tortured soul Beatrix secretly admired Miranda.
Indeed, at one time, before the coming of Gordon
into their lives, there had been some danger of
Miranda herself becoming the object of the girl’s
inveterate hero-worship.
There wasn’t now. But Beatrix was wont to
darkly mutter as she dodged a stinging nettle, or
relented upon a helpful sandwich, lines from a poem
of Whyte Melville’s:
" The hand I love has dealt the blow.
It is not hard to die like this.”
And then to confide to Arline that it “ would not
matter in the least ” if she had not felt herself “ as


good as engaged to Mr. Gordon all the summer,” as
she slashed with a formidable looking butcher’s
knife (she had begged it of the storekeeper to
stick in her leather belt in true backwoodsman
style) at the lawyer vines and monkey ropes in her
path.
All the same, she was more or less enjoying
herself. There were occasional excitements when
Ted Gordon pulled her plaits, helped her over mossy
logs she could have more easily negotiated alone,
and chaffed her about “ being too big to kiss,”
picked handfuls of yellow glistening everlastings for
her and climbed twenty feet to get a fern from a
chalk-white fig. Every day had its possibilities,
and, on the whole, she was a healthy-minded girl
who slept soundly and enjoyed the freedom of the
wild. Besides, she fondly hoped Miranda was as
jealous of her as she was of the mistress of Sea-
Garry.
That Miranda never thought of her as a possible
rival, nor indeed allowed herself to ponder Gordon
as a suitor for either, never entered her smooth
young head. She played such an exciting drama in
imagination that she could hardly have believed it
if Miranda had revealed the simple truth that there
was no thought of love or rivalry, or of the green-
eyed monster’s tactics, entering into her tale of blue
and golden days. Miranda kept a fine veil over any
feelings not hitherto considered in her philosophy,
in her calm, well-poised soul.


Mrs. Cormorin had been transported with some
difficulty, her rocking-chair with a good deal more,
up The Mountain. She had been resigned to the
fact that she would presently fall off her steady-
going, old sure-foot horse, who sweated tremendously
under her inelastic body all the way up, while her
husband limped beside her, and held her on, and
Gordon followed behind to pick up the pieces in
event of a landslide.
The girls walked part of the way up by a shorter
cut, leading their nags, while Stodge did valiant
things with a tomahawk in clearing the way of over-
hanging boughs of feathery, but incommoding,
sweetness, since the honeyed ones were full of small
black ants with a tendency to drop down one’s neck
and further pioneer.
On the morning, after the somewhat restless night
of sleeping where impertinent stars peered through
the tent-flaps and the moon, like a curtseying
Columbine, looked over the ranges, and the strange
sounds of hills and valley were things to grow
gradually accustomed to along with the fact that
there were several kinds of larger ants more ferocious
than the sticky little black and red, the girls and the
two younger men decided, subsequent to a plunge
in the pool and a large breakfast, that they would
walk to the head of the major falls and be back for
lunch.
After putting something tasty on to stew in the
huge stockpot that hung over the permanent fire,


Mrs. Cormorin went into her bough shelter for a nap,
and Jim Cormorin, who was limping a good deal
after the climb up the steeps yesterday, stretched
himself against a fern-sunk log, to doze and smoke ;
a doze presently interrupted by the beat of horse’s
hoofs coming from the far side of The Mountain.
Dr. Sutherland, from Stony-bar, rode into the
encampment, waving his hunting-crop.
Arline always declared the doctor was made of
leather, his face burned by Indian suns before he
ever came to Queensland, his spare dry body, his
strong sinewy wrists, his long cadaverous jaw. He
certainly wasn’t a beauty, but one of the kindest of
men. He was taking a short cut over The Mountain
to aid a selector’s wife in the valley. He had been
riding since midnight. The district said he could
feel his way all over the country in the dark. They
vowed he had cat’s-eyes.
He got off his horse, and was glad of some of the
cold tea in the black billy.
They could hear Edith Cormorin’s gentle snores
mingling with the pleasant twitter of bird life in
olive-tinted shadows.
“ Don’t wake her,” said the doctor, sitting on the
log and taking out his tobacco pouch ; “I’ll have a
smoke here, and then I must push on, though I
don’t think I’ll be needed before dusk. I passed the
girls at the corner. What a fine lass that Miranda
Garry is . . . looks as straight as a die. . . . Who was
the new chap squiring her ? ”


“Oh ! that’s Ted Gordon. He’s my right hand
man, I ‘can tell you, Doctor, now the boys are gone.
My new manager . . . works like a tiger, says we give
him too much holiday, but, as he gets through his
job in about half the time it takes any man on the
station, myself included, that’s his own jolly fault.
. . . I’m very fond of the fellow.”
" H’m,” said the doctor, striking a match on his
trousers. He believed he was old bushman enough
to light his pipe even in a high wind with one match.
He got really annoyed if he couldn’t start either a
pipe or a camp-fire thus.
“ Looks a nervy bloke to me . . . jumpy . . . like
a chap who doesn’t sleep over-well . . . something
overstrung . . . quivering nostrils . . . though he has
a clean eye—appears to my professional gaze the
outcome of strained conditions, an unhappy mar-
riage ... an inharmonious mating. ... You know
my theories and my hobby-horse—l believe in
natural selection. If everyone married for love,
real true mateship, cutting out the lust of the eye,
the lure of propinquity, the in-love-with-love young
blood, we should have less hysteria, brighter eyes,
better blood, better morals, finer brains, amongst the
young folk of to-day. . . .
“ I believe so thoroughly in the insoluble differ-
ences of temperaments . . . that makes me believe
just as heartily in speedy divorce where the marriage
was never a real 0ne.... We should have a healthier
crowd of human beings if we understood all that
L


better than we do .. . but most of us are brought up
all wrong. . . . There’s some hereditary curse on that
young chap ... to my medical, and perhaps imagin-
ative, eye.”
” Curse, Doctor ? ” Jim was laughing, pulling
his hat over his deep-set eyes as the sun encroached
on the green shadows.
“ I mean just that. ... A nervous kink . . .
might drive him to some secret vice . . . drugging
of some kind . . . nerves raw . . . crying for seda-
tives. ... He doesn’t drink, does he ? ”
"No ; not more than any of us ! Has a wad
occasionally . . . sometimes a double-header . . .
but I've never seen him helpless."
" That’s good,” said the doctor heartily, gulping
more cold tea. “ I’m anything but a Puritan myself,
you know, but I took too many whisky pegs when
I was in Allahabad . . . started over a woman . . .
a bit of fluff, officer’s wife—with too much spare
time and no babies. . . . That’s why I had to clear
out of India . . . and I know that a man who
soaks must become unreliable ... no matter what
a good fellow he really is at bottom . . . and they
nearly always are good fellows—in the beginning.
. . . After a while they are not responsible. He
looks just that highly keyed-up sort whose brain
worries him, and he tries to get away from a sort
of inherited depression, a pre-natal legacy, by looking
upon the wine when it is flame coloured . . .
because he’s the sort of chap who hates to be


miserable, couldn’t bear any restraint either. I’m
glad you can vouch for him ... for I took a devilish
sudden fancy to him . . . that’s why I’m garrulous
as an old woman myself.”
Mrs. Cormorin’s snores ceased: she sat up on
the rug and looked across at the men, straightening
her hair and groping for her sun hat.
The doctor got up stiffly, and went to speak to
her.
Cormorin stretched out his aching leg and,
pondering, shrugged his shoulders and laughed
again.
“ Pretty rapid diagnosis . . . even for the doc-
tor,” he murmured. “ How a man’s ideas get him
down 1 Always looking for confirmation of his
mere theories . . . dear old leather-face,” then
louder, “ What about a whisky before you go ? ”
The doctor shook his head. " I might make it
two, and I must get on down The Mountain. I’m
drowsy enough now: it’s a sleepy day. Talking
of drink though, that reminds me of a scientific chap
I once knew, who did the hermit for months some-
where hereabouts: lived the simple life, and,
somewhere on The Mountain, he told me this years
afterwards when I met him in Brisbane, he had
planted a demijohn of fine old rum, thinking he
might come back some day. He said he never
could remember where he put it! Do you think
we could find it if I took Sunday off on my way
back, Cormorin ? ”


“ We might get Brody and the trackers up to
smell it out,” said Jim Cormorin. “Be sure you
do call as you come through again, Doctor, we might
get into a brush with the cattle-duffers, and want
our wounds attended to.”
They all laughed together then. It seemed so
out of the question.
And not so very far away, in a thicketed glen
to which only the O’Dwyers and a few picked men
knew the direct route, there was a smell of singed
hair and the hot glow of branding irons on sizzling
hide. The O’Dwyers were not taking a spell this
Easter. They had such a fine lot of young mickies
to mark with three bars to-day, for they had post-
poned branding until now, because of the dry
spell.
At least, so they told incautious enquirers.
And the gentleman boarder lent a hand: some
of them were getting his own brand. He was doing
a deal with the O’Dwyers.
When the explorers returned from their stiff climb
to the Falls and their slipping and sliding journey
back, the first demand was for the kerosene bottle :
ticks were discovered: one beneath the ruddy
wee " kiss curls ” on Miranda’s ivory-clear neck:
one in Beatrix’s thin white shoulder. Arline was
ruefully taking a fringe of leeches from her ankle.
They did not bother Beatrix, for a leech senses
out the plump rich-blooded victim in an uncanny
fashion


Stodge was a goal for every leech on The Mountain
it seemed, and he was regarding sorrowfully the
red marks on his insteps despite lace-up boots.
“ They seem to get at me even through leather,”
he declared, though Jim Cormorin said that was
impossible, but the smell of stewed meats and hot
tea sent the sufferers helter-skelter to the bough-
roofed shed where lengths of planed pine on trestles
made their dining table.
What a merry meal it was! Afterwards they
went to look for a rare fern someone in the township
had told someone else should be there if it wasn’t!
And when night came, over the mystic distances
of the plain and the purple peaks of the hills of
near to God, shone the fair pale wonder of the
Paschal moon.
Ted Gordon sat at the door of his tent far into
the night.
He could not sleep: he was moody, restless:
the old unreasoning depression came over him in
waves of leaden coloured unease.
He called himself a fool, and gritted his teeth.
He was happy now, happier perhaps than he had
ever been, though not so happy as he could be if
he knew he had “ beaten it ” and was free, clean
washed by his own will, to woo and win Miranda
of the timberlands : he had no conscious reason for
dourness.
“ Hibiscus Heart,” he whispered, looking at the
moth-wing of the canvas fly, where she lay sleeping


amidst the musk-scented boughs and fern of her
springy bed, " Hibiscus Heart! ”
But a cloud was drawn for a moment over the
Easter moon, great silver port-hole in the ship of
Heaven.
Even as to him, as he dreamed and set his mouth
in a straight firm line, there came the insidious
leering memory of the buried jar, the secret places
of the green wildwood.
There was always one way . . . the only way
he knew to beat off the black shadow that spread
over his life at times, as the shadow now grew
across that silver light. . . .
Before he had never scrupled to employ it,
but the girl ? . . . What had she said to him
that afternoon in Fern Gully ? Oh! hang it
all! He wasn’t going to be tied, to be dictated
to. . . .
He remembered the dark room, dark even at
three o’clock in an English summer, the mouse on
the shelf, the blackbirds whistling outside. . . .
Confound it, reason insisted though, there was
another way of looking at it. . . . If he did not
beat that insidious palliative, was he not something
like the boy shut in that twilight room . . . caged
by his own weakness ... by the very thing he
could not conquer.
Then he chuckled with another glance at the
moth-white canvas beyond the glade where the
red eye of the banked-up fire smouldered. " Good


Lord ! Surely I’m not going to turn religious . . .
and be ‘ saved "... at my time of life ! ”
He decided, ere he went in to sleep at last, as the
first flame-rose of dawn tapped at the doors of the
pearl-enamelled East, that he would leave it “ to
chance, for the present.”
And Miranda turned in her sleep and whispered
something that sounded like his name.
Beatrix, who slept beside her, woke swiftly,
stared at her with hate in her drowsy eyes, then
turned her back and snuggled under the blankets
. . . dawn was cold in the highlands, and she was
very tired.
And, by morning, both had forgotten what had
troubled them a heart-beat, at the gates of dawn.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
" Her grey eyes look so hard at me.
And they condemn as there they look
They read me like a blotted book.
Her gentle hands forgivingly
Unseen by her, my fingers clasp :
Her eyes and lips are armoured bright.
Her woman hands, so fine and white.
Lie, warm and naked, in my grasp.”
Her Hands.
IT had required no little manoeuvring on Gordon’s
part to get Miranda away by herself, to himself,
on the day before they were all to return to the
plains.
He had planned in the still, sleepless night-watches
to take her with him along the path he had pioneered
that Christmas Day, to show her all, except where
the picked bones lay pale in the now grass and
weed-grown stockyard: he knew the detour by
the clematis vines: the tiny open place of yellow
everlastings that, when other flowers came and
went with the seasons, yet remained as gilt-armoured
sentinels of the sub-tropic range.
He had drawn her aside a moment while Arline
and Beatrix were washing up with a full measure
of cousinly bickering on a slippery log by the palm
pool, and Edith Cormorin was taking a tick out of
her James’ cheek and Stodge poring over a fashion
journal he had somehow unearthed from the saddle


pack. Perhaps Miranda had placed it there.thought-
ful for his dull moments.
He had shouted something to Gordon about taking
a pot shot at a pigeon later, and Gordon muttered
an unintelligible word which might have been
either “ Yes ” or "No ” ; Stodge, he knew, being
too comfortably settled on the warm sun-flecked
grass to bother to come to where he and Miranda
were airing the blankets from the respective tents
and looking them over for spiders or scorpions.
Below her breath, Miranda had agreed to fall in
with his scheme, and by a subtle strategy they
escaped into the green canyon of bough and creeper
to the left of the camp, on pretence of gathering
some everlastings for the gracious touch to the
pineboard table and, obstinately deaf to a following
hail from Beatrix, who had turned sharply, thereby
causing Arline to slip into a foot or so of stirred-up
stream, they caught each other’s hands and ran
breathlessly into the Unknown. . . .
At least for a space: this wasn't the time to think
about landmarks. They came down the remnant
of path at the double, turned on their tracks, cut
across timber, fell suddenly on to the signs of a
splitter’s camp, which made Gordon quote his
namesake, Adam Lindsay, between gasps:—
“ I could neither eat at the splitter’s camp
Nor drink at the splitter’s well.”
Here he lifted her over a log, three feet from the
ground, the corpse of some slain giant who had once


reared a haughty head when the high wind tore
at the eyries of the birds. Here was a sandy hollow,
marked with the tridents of birds’ feet, an empty
mallee hen’s nest: a darting frilled lizard : a startled
wallaby : a cooing of innumerable doves . . . and
now nothing but the sage-green and apple-bright
foliage of the leafy cathedral, where Pan alone was
worshipped.
The camp was left behind: the flappers could
track in vain: and probably Jim Cormorin would
forbid their attempting this, and Stodge would take
so long considering that, finally, he would decide to
wait for some tea and brownie and start off on his
pigeon-shooting, with one of the cousins on either
hand. He was making a species of heavy banter-
ing love to Beatrix, who found it tolerable in the
desertion of Ted Gordon, though, naturally, the
Eve in her blamed Miranda more than Ted for this
neglecting.
" I want to show you a place I found when I was
here at Christmas. I have not told anyone about it.
I can’t exactly say ‘ Why,’ but I had a kind of feel-
ing that, some day, I might wish to get right away
by myself, where no one could find me . . . and
I kept this as a kind of ... of refuge.”
" Thinking of turning bushranger ? ” she mocked :
her eyes alight, her cheeks rosy from the run : she
was all hibiscus heart ... no cool, pale lily now.
" Perhaps ... I might ... if I wasn't so afraid
of being caught and locked up. . . . This way . . ,


it is not so far, but it’s a tricky place to find when
you seek for it. The kind of spot foredoomed to
be discovered by someone who is not looking for it!
There’s a magic here, I fancy 1 ”
She thought there was. To hide her betraying
eyes she bent to pluck a bunch of red berries from
a dwarf bush.
He took her hand again in his. " It’s safer,” he
explained.
" Was it,” she wondered. ...
They crossed the swollen stream where the volcanic
boulders were ridged by the lovely tapestry green
heads of the tree ferns : the mosaic of moss on the
trail: the grey hanging " old man’s beard ” parasite
to the damp-rooted trunks of the trees.
Overhead was the ceaseless harping of the wind
in boughs. A regent bird, metallic black and gold,
flew past them : there was a scurry of tiny clawed
feet, and so they came by way of bole and bough
to the door of The Lonely Hut.
It was much the same as when Ted Gordon first
saw it, though an aqueous-tinted tree snake whipped
from the rafters, and slid with a faint shining rustle
on to the bark roof. A frog croaked in the now full
water-cask where more saffron gum leaves swam.
Gordon looked down to where the amber sunlight
peered through and touched the obvious ridge in
the earthern floor.
They sat side by side on the dust-deep table.
He kicked at the little hillock on the floor.


" Do you know what that is ? ” he said : his eyes
seemed very dark between narrowed lids. “ I
want to tell you all about that ... it means the
answer to a riddle perhaps—perhaps the riddle
itself . . . perhaps—something more. . . . But you
must know about it . . . before. . . . Suppose I
said I loved you, Miranda ? ”
She was trembling: she tried to conceal that
under a laugh:
“ From three things may the Lord deliver us . . .
this is what my old Scotch nurse used to say. . . .
The pride of a Drummond : the gab of a Graham,
and,” her voice became infinitely tender, " the love
of a Gordon.”
“ She was right, I suppose,” he said, “ under
certain circumstances.”
Then, with the sound of the wind in the trees
and the call of the stockwhip bird punctuating the
leaf-music, he told her . . .
Told her of the shadow across his days : of how
he got up and began again ... in vain, how he
came here to this lonely hut and deliberately drank
himself blind ... sick . . . helpless. . . .
“ I can’t believe it,” she said. " I can’t believe
it,” but she had withdrawn a little from him; she
was at the far end of the table now. He set his
teeth a minute, then went on.
One must play fair . . . and she had said she
hated drunken men. ...
“ The very first time you saw me, under the


hibiscus bush, I was getting over the hell of a spree
at Carrow’s . , . Carrow’s, of all rotten places . . .
I had tried to kill a man in a drunken fight.”
" I don’t believe it,” she moaned. “ The grog
must have been doctored ... it often is ... at
Carrow’s . . . besides, you had fever . . . you can’t
deny that,” triumphantly.
" How kind you are —how kind,” he said gently.
“ But I have been in pubs in many parts of the
world where the grog was pure. . . . This rum, for
instance,” he kicked at the earth-covered cork,
" it’s good old Jamaica. . . . It’s me, I tell you,
not the liquor. Sometimes Igo six, even ten, months
without a bust-up . . . but, sooner or later, it
comes . . . first I can’t sleep . . . then I get
jumpy . . . restless . , . shaky ... all to bits—
then Igoat it blind for three or four days . . . some-
times a week . . . once in Buenos Ayres—three
weeks on end—then I’m all right for a while.”
“ But you have such a strong will.”
" I have,” he jerked. " And I’ve been wondering
—if—if I had something, someone in life much dearer
than myself—l couldn’t conquer it—for her sake.”
There was silence, through which the stockwhip
bird lashed at the scented shadows.
“ I think so,” she said, her face drooping under
the shade of her hat. He could only see her hands
clasping and unclasping in her lap: the rise and
fall of her slight bosoms. . . .
” I think so."


He waited a moment. Should he take her in
his arms and kiss her deep and close, so that they
might seem even here in the dusty cobweb-hung
hut with the tree snake on the roof, vowed to be
as one flesh ?
Was it a fair go ? Tether her to him because she
was sure and he was not. . . .
And he knew.
He jumped down from the table.
“I’ll tell you what I’ll do ... I’ll dig this
blessed jar up with my bowie knife, as Beatrix calls
it, and chuck the damned stuff out —then there won’t
be any temptation for me ... or for any other fool
who finds the hut.”
She rested her cool pale hand a moment on his
sleeve.
" No,” she said, paused a thoughtful moment,
then “No ” again with a decided shake of her
bent head. " I doubt if we have any right to burn
the Alexandrian library, play iconoclast even for
a principle. Leave it here. ... I don’t want to
preach, and perhaps it may save some poor bushed
chap’s life some day. In any case, see if —if you
can know it’s here—any time for your taking —and
—and —if you can resist ... I don’t care to play
the Deity game at all,” with a nervous laugh that
went down fighting on a sob. “ I hate to take up
a preachy attitude—but I think it’s fairly true,
don’t you, that Regeneration comes from within ?
Some men shelter behind taking the pledge for so


long—some by complete avoidance of anything
more heady than hop-beer—but, of course, that is
entirely your own affair; but it seems to me that
courage to look a thing squarely in the face, going
right up to it and saying, ‘ I won’t and you can’t
make me,’ is the best brake of them all. ... Oh !
please don’t think I’m talking like a Young Men’s
Christian Association or a Good Example out to
stop anyone else enjoying themselves ! I’ve always
been used to men who drank—to a certain extent.”
“Yes”—he was grim “but they know when to
stop ... I don't. I mean Ido . . . but I won’t!
Very well, we won’t dig up the jar . . . not yet,
though I warn you I may go off the handle some
day , . . and come straight here —and ...”
“ Don’t.” A hand, soft and smelling of crushed
gum-leaves with a faint and exquisite odour that
was all her own, closed over his lips a moment,
and before he could kiss it again was snatched away.
“ You’ve got to beat it alone, you know,” she
whispered.
Then they went out of The Lonely Hut, and back
very quietly by the way they had come.
He had not contradicted her nor had he definitely
asked her to help him out with her love, her watch-
fulness. ...
To both it seemed, though unvoiced, he had set
himself a test.
The Knight must win his spurs before he demanded
of The Lady.


They sat round the camp fire that night and
Gordon sang. Scraps of opera, old ballads, bush-
men’s sentimental twaddle, songs that yet sounded
sweetly enough under bright Easter stars . . . and
they saw the Easter moon come over the black tree-
tops, and they heard cattle bellowing somewhere
far below, and Jim Cormorin said the dingoes must
be after the calves while the mothers went to water,
and the steers, and even the old worker bullocks,
would form a ring round the young tawny-hided
things and beat off the wild dogs till the frantic
mothers came rushing back, lowing with horned
heads thrust in fierce defence.
Beatrix crept closer to her father and held tightly
to his arm. She shuddered: it was so weird, so
wild, something of the stark terror that lurks in
jungle places clutched at her soul.
Arline sought solace in the last of the ginger nuts.
She said it was better to eat all they could to-night,
that they might travel light to-morrow.
Once, when the fire died down, where the gently
stirring trees left a plume of black shadow amongst
moon-pooled places, Gordon’s hand clasped on
Miranda’s. For a little she let her cool fingers lie
in his. Neither spoke, but the same thought was
in both minds.
" Could I go on caring if he was not strong enough
to beat it ? ”
" Would she still care if she knew I was not
strong enough . . . ever to be sure."


Compassionate lips ! Surely, if she cared enough,
a woman with a mouth like that would forgive a
man anything! But the fine mouse-coloured
brows were straight and firm. She looked frankly
at life ; she had once told him she was not romantic.
Away on the plain the bellowing was stilled,
comforted mothers were licking their long-legged,
soft-nozzled calves: the wild dogs had retreated,
watching from a safe distance, then suddenly turning
tail, slinked off to an easier kill.
And over all The Mountain brooded—touching
the stars. . . .
M


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
“ I may go down to the silken surf,
And follow the rune of the wandering sea ;
I can lay me down in the springing turf,
Since the dance you piped for has wearied me :
Or I may slip to some jungled place
Where the hunting moon cannot find my face.”
The Pipe.
“ The torture of those long, uncertain hours.
That groove a hollow in her ivory cheek
And set a thorn among her favourite flowers."
Ladders.
IT is a well-proven fact that trifles influence
destinies. Napoleon said it. He knew.
If Chris Steerway, who, for the greater part of
the year, was one of the most sober and most
respected cocky-selectors in the district, had not
chosen the very day that Miranda Garry rode into
the township to buy material for a winter frock, to
be found very greatly drunken upon the front
verandah of The Stockman’s Arms, if, under that
madness that plus whisky makes upon a man who
is ordinarily abstemious, if he had not seized the
very moment of Miranda’s passing to stagger into
the road, and catch her horse’s bridle, a capture
more owing to luck than sureness of aim, much
that is now part of the story of Hibiscus Heart
might never have been written.


Steerway was the kind of man who becomes more
solemn in his alcoholically conceived universe than
he ever does in the world of sober things.
The expression, " as drunk as an owl,” became
him, for he was preternaturally solemn, and thus
ever ready to take offence at imagined insults to
his sense of dignity. Everything was an insult to
Chris when in liquor.
He was also the victim of a fixed idea when in
this condition, and the foggier he became, the
clearer the fixation of the idea. To-day, it was that
his wife would come into the Stockman’s Arms to
look for him.
Poor woman, she was, at that moment, innocently
enough and twenty miles away, setting lettuces
because she knew Chris liked salads.
And Steerway’s legs became more uncertain as
his manner gained in precision. He kept a firm
grip on Miranda’s bridle-rein, thinking her none
other than that little wife for whom he had abruptly
conceived a deep affection, though the brown hack
objected as much as the rider, as it reared in the
roadway.
“ Don’t do that, Mr. Steerway,” said the girl,
colouring angrily. She had noted his devious mode
of progression. "Is there anything you want to
say to me ? I’ll wait and listen, but please don’t
hold the bridle. The Colonel is a restless horse.”
She was willing to humour the drunken man.
As a rule she liked both Chris and his wife . , . but


she did not like him at all when he breathed stale
whisky.
Unlike most bush girls, she could not take what
they called the state of " being potted ” in a sporting
spirit. Even if she smiled, as in duty bound,
deprecatingly, in her soul she shuddered.
Stodge had sometimes laughed at her for her
Puritan attitude, and told her jokingly, she did not
object to hardened criminals, provided they were
sober ones.
She had never given the latter much thought,
insomuch as to dissect the fairness or unfairness of
her attitude towards men drunk or sober, but, since
the Easter picnic in The Mountain, since Ted Gordon
had sat beside her in The Lonely Hut, and brought
his problem before her (and she frankly confessed
to herself now, her own), she had been peculiarly
sensitive on the matter.
What seemed subject for likely jest with most
bush folk hurt her now, as though someone had
unintentionally pressed roughly on a bruise unseen,
but on her heart nevertheless.
She had turned the question of the one flaw in
“ her man,” for secretly now she called him that,
over arid over in the night-watches. The stars
knew, the tender young boomerang of the May-tide
moon sinking behind the pines knew, too . . . and
all the time she had built up hope either that Ted
would be strong enough to “ beat it ” alone, or that
she would be staunch enough not to mind the


occasional “ going blind,” when she bore his name—
and lay upon his heart. . . .
It had come to that. . . .
And now out of the blue and golden May day
arose this semaphore on the path that led to the
Gates of Joy . . . the kind of happiness a woman
is likely to have with a man of whom she is not
sure ... or worse still, who is periodically liable to
become, as Chris Steerway now was ... an object
of ridicule . . . pity . . . aversion. . . .
His long serious face ravaged with drink, the
stubble on his small pointed chin : his bleared eyes
looking between swollen lids . . . animal . . . hate-
ful . . . like the eyes of obscene things peering from
cobwebbed caves in times prehistoric—this is what
Gordon’s curse had made of a decent chap like
Steerway.
He muttered unintelligibly in reply to her words.
She thought of his wife. Amy Steerway was the
kind of woman who would not care much . . . she
might cry a little, and wish he would come home
when she expected him, and not make a show of
himself in the township, but she would presently
go on planting her vegetables. She—she—well—
Miranda decided sharply, Amy did not idealize at
all . . . not idealize as she, for all her insistence on
not being romantic, must idealize where she loved.
If it had been Stodge, for instance, she would
have pulled off his boots for him, and have got him
on to his bed, not that she had ever seen Stodge like


Chris. He " carried his grog ” well, the district said,
and it seemed to brighten his wits. He had even
been known to make quite a good speech at a show
dinner once after many potations.
And she did not really mind about Chris Steerway ;
the difference all lay in the fact as to whether one
loved a man, as a woman loves a lover or possible
husband, or whether one did not love him . . . then
one applied things.
And all the while Chris leaned against the annoyed
brown’s shoulder, and gibbered and stuttered with
infinite and abnormal dignity, she was putting Ted
Gordon in his place. Could she bear to see her knight
sans peur, and, as she would have him, sans reproche,
like this ?
“ Do let me go, Mr. Steerway. . . . I’ve shopping
to do.”
She was fighting down the painful artifice on
which her lively imagination insisted, the putting of
Gordon in Chris's place. "Do let me go.” She was
pale now.
Two bar-loafers lounged from the door of the
hotel, whispered a coarse joke behind hands: she
sensed insult without actually hearing or compre-
hending the words that framed it.
“ I wantsh to tell you ”
Chris’s hand slipped from the horse’s neck.
He was solemnly and distressfully sick in the
sunlit road. Miranda forgot all about her winter
frock, forgot everything but the uneasy blot upon


the limpid perfection of the day. . . . Forgot every-
thing, but the knife-like challenge from heart to
brain ? that perhaps Ted Gordon, with this man's
weakness, was no finer thing than he. . . .
She wheeled her horse and went galloping out of
the township, out to the clean-smelling gums, out
to the brown road that ribboned back to Sea-Garry,
the hibiscus bush : the blue treachery of the laugh-
ing opal-tmted waters where the sharks were. . . .
If Gordon had been more or less drunk when she
first found him by the hibiscus bush, and she scarcely
believed that, and, anyway, he was then to her
nothing but a wounded man in dire distress, all the
mother in her going swiftly out for his protection,
as it would to a beast with a broken limb, or a
young bird fallen from a tree-top nest . . . this was
the argument with which she had come to drug
herself under the sickle moon and in the starry
darkness, if he had been drunk then, it did not alter
the situation now, which she found so intolerable... .
Then he had been something with a claim on her
pity . . . she had looked down, detachedly, not
up . . . but now—now
Could she bear a god with feet of clay ? For her
god he would surely be if she let all the warm red
passion of her hibiscus heart go to him in the brim-
ming measure, a lover a wife does not restrain. . . .
Could she hear it ?
Could she endure to see Gordon as she had just
seen Chris, in the little dust-filled, sunny street of


the township, while bar-loafers jested at his, at
her, expense, in the drink-sodden atmosphere of the
public bar ? Men who lived for nothing but the
“ going on the shicker,” and the getting over it
preparatory to scraping up the money, or credit,
for " another bust.”
Oh ! how horrible life was ! The blue, blue ocean
all limpid, all dimpled foam-blossomed loveliness . . .
the milk-pale sands sweeping down to the blue—
luring the happy maiden-feet on—on . . . The
blue sun-kissed ocean of love—of marriage—the
nearness of the beloved —and “ they twain shall be
as one flesh,” and then. . . .
To see one’s other soul, one’s other body, as she
had seen Chris Steerway just now in the township
street. . . . Chris, who was no less decent, no less
particular as to personal cleanliness and the things
that mean self-respect, than Ted Gordon was,
Chris, who had a devoted wife and curly-pated
four-year-old son ?
Could she, Miranda of the timberlands, who had
kept far away from all contamination " the secret
shining soul ” that was herself, her maiden purity
of mind as well as of body, endure to hang upon a
drunkard’s kiss, to have the foul breath of stale
spirits blown with his caresses on her lily-pale cheek ?
She did not spare herself, nor did she spare the
Colonel. . . . She galloped him to a dark sweat ere
she came to the road that branched from the home-
stead to the sea.


She walked him slowly then, patting his foam-
flecked neck and speaking tender words.
In her own travail she had distressed the innocent
animal.
The Colonel was highly offended: he tossed his
head, then hung it, pretending to be more exhausted
than he really was, for, fresh from green feed, he
needed the exercise she had certainly not failed to
give him to-day.
She rode into the little glade by the hibiscus bush :
let the Colonel nibble the frail cliff grasses, while, chin
sunk in hand, she considered the immediate prospect.
The sea far out was deeply, royally blue, rough-
ened by the cold May wind. She remembered
something she had read about dark blue being the
colour chosen for mourners in the Roman Republic ...
and that blue is still the mourning colour of Bok-
hara. . . . She had meant to buy blue material for
her winter frock . . deep royal blue like the
distant sea to-day . . . something to show up the
hawthorn whiteness of her skin . . . lily-pale ! He
had called her lily-pale and cool! Pshaw ! What a
fool she had been to gallop away from town without
buying that dress length !
If anyone besides those bar-loafers had seen her,
how they would laugh, perhaps they would only
think a March fly had stung the Colonel . . . and he
had bolted. . . . The Colonel had a hard mouth . . .
but she was a fool, anyway, to have wasted her day
like this . . . nothing accomplished. . . .


Tears were pricking her lids . . . she felt dis-
gusted, disgruntled, disappointed both with herself
and her ride . . . she had gone off in such high
heart this morning. . . .
What had she galloped away from ? Herself ? or
Chris ? Or what Chris’s condition spelled . . . the
signpost.
Oh ! her knight must be without fear and without
reproach, if he would wear her glove upon his
helmet. ... He must not go to tourney with a
tarnished shield !
Why was she built like that ? Why couldn’t she
accept for him what she accepted for other men of
her acquaintance, good men and true, as the world
judges. . . . Why had she been so hard on poor
old Chris Steerway, perhaps this was his only
" going over the odds ” in a twelvemonth ?
She looked at the sea—empty —beautifully
blue. . . .
She got up from the grass, bright as oil varnish in
the sun, caught the still affronted Colonel, and rode
back towards Sea-Garry.
Why had she bothered about a new frock ? She
really did not need it . . . except to look fair in Ted
Gordon’s eyes. . . .
She flushed, but her lips were dejected; her grey
eyes had a wounded look, as though they had gazed
into something that left no pleasing remembrance ...
something hitherto most carefully veiled. . . .
And veiled . . . because she willed it. . . .


The happy family birds were chattering in the
timber. Overhead was one of their old empty nests,
probably never tenanted, even in the nesting season,
since these merry triflers are apt to build some six
camouflaged homes, for some mysterious reason of
their own, to the seventh which they really occupy.
Perhaps they are the smart set of the world of
wings; their cackle presupposes it, with their town
houses, their hunting lodges, their country homes
And she had built herself only one castle in Spain,
and at the fragile drawbridge thundered the enemy.
Could she bear it ? Could she bear it ? Could she
see Gordon as she might inevitably have to see him
some day, and go on loving just the same ?
The query kept rhythm to the blunt sound of the
Colonel’s hoofs. ...
But the answer did not come.
After all, she decided, as she drew near the home-
stead and tried to prepare some excuse for Stodge
that wouldn’t make him chaff her half the evening,
after all, she did not really need a new winter frock... .
She could make the old one do. . . .


" To-day, in fancy, I can hear
The ringing of the bushman’s axe.
The sudden splintering of the tree
That shows dead bees among the wax ;
The honey, in a golden flood.
Comes slowly dripping from the wood :
Since the first day a bee grew wings
And sought to lay its treasure by.
Gleaner of every bannered bush
That proffers budding to the sky,
Man, following the reiver’s trade,
Has levied on each store it made."
Bees,
JIM CORMORIN followed the man with the
axe into the corner of the paddock where the
sugar-bag was located. Arline and Beatrix, accom-
panied by two lean kangaroo-dogs, were hard upon
his heels.
The man with the axe, a casual-looking station-
hand in a weather-stained cabbage-tree hat, had
marked for some days the disappearance of the
plump bees into the hollow limb of a big box-tree.
He had promised the girls long since to get them a
" sugar-bag ” at the first opportunity, since the
honey the blacks brought in was under suspicion of
being strained through dirty Government dole
blankets.
A week ago the girls had ridden out to the blacks’
camp at the edge of Cormorins Run, and had decided
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN


that, though it was interesting, especially to town-
bred Arline, even she wouldn’t care to eat anything
that had come in close contact with those dingy
grey blankets.
The bark huts, conical in shape, were set in a
clearing ; a thick smoke rose from one or two fires ;
town ’possum skins, ragged remnants of old shirts,
and a number of mangy dogs, a fat black baby, and
a withered crone occupied one of the miamias, while
a young lubra roasted a huge bone at the brightest
of the fires.
For a stick or two of dark Texas tobacco, Arline
secured a polished, red-smeared nullah-nullah to
take home, and Beatrix a glossy myall-wood boome-
rang, but a bark coolaman full of dusky, golden
honey was firmly refused, even at the price of
“ gibbit shillin’, Missie.”
Gordon, who was with the girls that day, had
tried to get the promise of old Jacky, the head of
the tribe, that he would arrange a corroboree next
week for the “ White Marys ” to see.
He had some notion of asking them to invite
Stodge and Miranda Garry for the festival, and was
promising Jacky “ boodgery lot of baccy,” if he
could make his people amenable. The tribe would
shortly be moving on, so there was no time to be
lost.
Arline spoke of this now, as they watched the
station hand at work on the tree.
Splinters flew, and the kangaroo-dogs sat and
thumped their tails in anticipation, saliva dripping


from their mouths. Perhaps they thought there
would be at least one ’possum in the hollow trunk
to reward their patience. A black boy in a pair of
Jim Cormorin’s old trousers, with his naked chocolate
coloured body revealing every rib, appearing between
the ragged red braces, joined the group with a bent
billy-can.
“You after honey, Tim?” asked Jim Cormorin,
who was sitting on the grass watching operations,
his tomahawk handy for the cutting open of the
limb that would hold the virgin honey, that most
coveted spoil.
" Yowhi,” Tim grinned in a flash of flint-hard
white teeth. Somehow he had from a distance
smelled out pickings. There was a crash of falling
branches, small green-tufted twigs flew hither and
thither with the strong odour of sap from bleeding
chips. Jim Cormorin was busied with his toma-
hawk splitting the bough where ran the golden
flood encased in clear white wax and mixed with
dead bees and splinters of wood.
The girls were licking their fingers, taking out
junks of the dripping comb, a taste of wattle and
other pungent bush flowers on their lips, and they
gormandized over the gleanings of miles of sun, of
white daisies on the black-soil plain, of thick creamy-
tinted gum flowers, hoya bedewed with silver jewels
of the rain, all the “ brown philosophers,” for this
was the harvest the plump imported Italian bee (or
“ English ” bee, as the bushman calls it, not the
small black fly-like native) had looted from many a


Vvide and blossoming mile through months of shadow
and light.
" It’s a bit rough on the bees,” said Arline, wiping
her sticky fingers on a broad box-leaf. “ They have
all the work ... and we have all the profits.”
“ I’m afraid that’s the way of the world for more
than the bees,” answered Jim Cormorin with an
eye on Tim, who edged nearer and nearer with his
dirty billy-can. “ Steady now, youngster ... I
want some for Missus up at the house.”
" Cobbon,” said Tim, graciously squatting on
his haunches, an attitude which entirely concealed
his horny-soled black feet in the voluminous trouser-
legs.
Tim was well content to hang about for the
leavings of the “ White Marys.” Time is naught to
the Australian aboriginal, just as to the native of
Eastern lands, although he felt something like an
adult native outside his own “ towri ” and without
a message-stick.
The man with the axe was examining a scratch
on his thumb. Beatrix coquettishly offered to tie
it up with her handkerchief. He reddened and
licked the wound. “ Soon be all right. Miss.” He
would rather any day ride a hard-mouthed outlaw
than talk with a woman, though he thought the
Boss’s daughter beautiful. How beautiful she
would have been surprised to learn she appeared to
him when he serenaded the stars with his old
concertina on the stump behind the men’s hut,
where the rubbish-heap was.


He had cut a picture from an illustrated paper
of a foreign princess of decided charms, and had he
known it, of doubtful morals, which he vainly
believed to resemble Beatrix, and he had pasted it
on the slab wall of the hut.
He had blackened the eyes of a ribald rouseabout
who had written something more witty than decent
beneath it, and no man dared even remark upon it
more.
It was for Beatrix he had really brought out his
axe to get the sugar-bag to-day. He did not dip
as much as one grubby forefinger in the golden
goblet the hollow bough made.
When Beatrix insisted he should " have a taste,”
he confided he “ ’ad han ’oiler tooth that might
hache like ’ell ” if he took “ anythink sweet,” and
she never knew it was sheer modesty that prompted
the lie about a defect in his perfect set. . . . Some-
how, to have eaten before his divinity would have
choked the axe man.
Long afterwards he regretted that he had not let
her, bind up his thumb instead of licking it clean.
He might then have secured “ 'er ’ankercher ” for
a keepsake.
Presently they went back through the slip-rails
towards the homestead, leaving Tim and his billy
gleaners of the residue. Tim had been exceedingly
vague when questioned about next week's corro-
boree. In his secret soul he did not believe Jacky
would persuade the gins to perform nor the bucks
to do themselves up in white ash and red clay.


There was no “ bora ” on. There was no religious
reason for rehearsal of the fatiguing dance and song
unless, of course, Jacky could be made to consider
the ’baccy as such. He went home thoughtful to
his meal of roast ’possums. Tim was too young for
the bora, and he was very greedy for honey. There
was nothing left in the billy by the time he got
back to the camp, and he had a bilious attack next
day, but it was Gordon who volunteered to go over
to Sea-Garry. He wanted to interview Stodge about
several things, as well as to ask the brother and
sister over for the projected song and dance of the
natives.
They would be obliged to stay the night at the
station, and he hoped for a dance on the long rough-
boarded verandah with Miranda. . . . Perhaps more
than that. . . .
Station work intervened. There was a buyer-up
for some of the fats. It was late in the day before
Gordon was able to ride far afield, out of the white
homestead gate in the direction of the home of his
hopes.
It was dark, a moonless, starlit night, before he
reached his goal. He wondered if they were still up
at the house: he could see the light in Stodge’s
room suddenly quenched, leaving utter blackness.
Stodge had been reading a magazine in bed, and
had become drowsy. He was asleep five minutes
after he blew out the candle. There was no light in
Miranda’s room : perhaps she, too, was asleep.
N


He hitched his horse’s bridle to a low-hanging
bough, and went a few paces towards the house:
he stood behind Miranda’s favourite tree, his feet
moving velvet-soft over mossy trail and leaf-thick
ways.
It seemed to him that something stirred in the
murk of the woodland before the house. There was
rustle of a gown, surely, or was it only the wind
among the fallen leaves of the plane tree ? He
leaned his cheek against the smooth bark of the big
gum of which Miranda always spoke as her “ forest
pet,” above the roughness that armoured the lower
half of the bole. It seemed to bring Miranda of the
timberlands nigh to him, and, of late, she had been
so aloof, so very far away.
He clasped his arras round the tree, and the tips
of his fingers touched something warm, silken, alive,
on the other side. Hands, softer than his own, were
clasping the great trunk, too, and fingers encountered
other fingers in an unexpected caress.
A low cry came from the far side of the tree, but
he had swung round and gripped one hand at least
tightly in his own.
It was so dark here they could not see one another’s
faces, but he smelled the luring fragrance that hung
about her, reminding him of the coastal box, which
scents the air in Spring along the sea line, and once
she had laughingly told him, in those happy days of
The Mountain picnic, she could trail him if she were
a pointer dog by that “ smell like pine-boards and
nice tobacco ” that clung to him. " I wish you


would tell me what brand of soap you use. I won’t
accuse you of perfume,” she had added. “You are
not the kind of man who puts eau-de-Cologne on
his beard and shoves it into women’s faces.”
“ And he hasn’t a beard, either,” Beatrix had
interrupted indignantly. The very suggestion of a
beard on a hero was a horrible solecism to commit.
"Oh ! you startled me 1 ” For a moment now
she was all joy at finding him there. She had
forgotten Chris, that semaphore of the township
street, and the ways that such men went, forgotten
everything but that faint aroma of pine-boards,
light mixture, and the breath of manhood that was
his, and he was intoxicated with her nearness, the
whiff of coastal box, the soft muslins of her frock,
the tingling of her palm in his own.
Miranda’s grey cat, doing evil things with a frog,
brushed past them. The frog cried piercingly. The
hollow sound of a bullock-bell echoed through the
trees. They could hear Gordon’s horse stamping in
a bed of pennyroyal, and adding a quota of the
bruised tang of the plant to the night air.
" I came with a message from Cormorins,” he
said, still holding her hand tightly in his own.
“ They are trying to get Jacky to fix up a sort of
corroboree for next week, and want you and Stodge
to come over for it. . . . I’m sorry I’m so late . . .
station work ”
She was considering him, trying to pierce the
darkness with eager, excited eyes.


She wished her heart would not beat so quickly.
She murmured something about thanking him . . .
thanking them . . . she would ask Stodge . . . she
thought, perhaps . . . they could come. She wished
he would free her hand . . . but he was drawing
her closer. . . .
" I did not ride all this way—for—just that, you
know ! . . . I won’t be able to ask you for a shake-
down either—must be back by daybreak,” he
whispered.
Her face was against his shoulder.
She wished he would not . . . she wished he
would . . . she did not know what she wished. . . .
How foolish 1 how dangerous this scrub-scented
darkness. . . . Life throbbed so insistently for full
expression in these unpeopled places. ... It was
so hard to remember the scruples that day set as
fetters about one’s heart’s freedom, so easy to forget
everything but the nearness of the Beloved . . . the
irresistible fine cord that draws Man and Woman to
one another till the cord becomes a very rope to
eternally bind. . . .
The reek of the crushed pennyroyal: the brush
of the grey cat’s sleek body through the shrubs . . .
the squeaking of the tortured frog . . . the creak
of wind in boughs. . . .
And a man and a woman kissing in the shadows
Then swiftly she slid from his arms. No . . . she
couldn’t give herself like this. . , .
In a flash she saw the township street. . . . May


sunlight . . . the mealy dust . . . two men laugh-
ing in a bar that stank with the smell of spilled
beer and draught whisky. Chris Steerway, abnor-
mally grave, lurching into the road, snatching at
her bridle-rein. . . .
She remembered her vigil by the sea that after-
noon. The weighing of the pros and cons . . . the
ultimate decision. . . . Was she so weak a thing as
this ? ... a female creature to be kissed . . . and
cajoled, through her pliant sex, by a man’s mere
nearness in the dark ?
She thrust him from her with two passionate
hands.
“Oh ! no . . . I . . . can’t come ... to the
corroboree ... I can’t. ... I can’t! Oh, please
go . . . please go.”
She was gone, swift as the grey tiger-cat out of
the gloom into the glimmering ghost-light of the
open spaces, across the verandah into the silent
house.
He heard a door slam. . . .
Then the grey cat came rubbing and purring
against his boot, tail erect, pridefully conscious of
pleasant murder done upon the green frog in the
privacy of a wild grape vine.
" Well . . . I’m damned,” said Ted Gordon as he
went back to his horse.
Yet, riding by starlit ways where soft bush boughs
brushed his cheek and sometimes left a trail of
unseen bloom along his shoulder, he suddenly began


to whistle an old Jacobite song which the Scotch
Gordons had whistled in Forty-five and before.
" Oh he’s a rantin’ rovin' blade,
Oh he’s a brisk and bonnie lad ;
Betide what may, my heart is glad
To see my lad wi’ his white cockade.”
She had been glad to see him ! she had!
The swiftness, unexpectedness of his coming had
broken down her barriers of reserve , . . somehow he
had made a breach in that wall. He had kissed her,
because she was glad to see “ her lad wi’ the white
cockade ”... glad . . . and surprised into showing it!
She had been angry with herself—for some
mysterious maidenly reason, at having revealed that
gladness. . . .
He stopped whistling, slapped his horse on the
shoulder, startling it from its ambling doze, and
laughed, and quoted Kipling, remembering her
coldness towards him before other people, more than
once of late,
“ If in public her face is averted . . .
Take heart, for there never was loser
Content with the loss of the game ! ”
Meanwhile, away back in the hushed timber-
lands, Miranda lay awake till dawn, on a pillow wet
with angry tears.
But, whether she angered more at herself, or at
the rantin’ rovin’ blade who had kissed her under
the shadow of her “ forest pet,” of this, perhaps
even she in her heart of hearts was not absolutely
sure.


CHAPTER NINETEEN
“ A curlew whistled from the plain ... a mopoke flapped . . .
and then
The night was full of slitting oaths ... of pistol shots . . .
and men.” Moonriss.
JULY weather, crystal clear, nights cold and a
great yellow moon; such a moon as delights the
souls of bush children and adult 'possum hunter,
who go seeking the little marsupial when its fur is
thickest and most marketable, by the method known
in Australia as " mooning ” 'possums, which means
getting the small dark body and rodent head between
oneself on the earth and the golden circle in the blue,
where poor 'possum shows up, a black silhouette,
looking as though cut from burnt paper, on the
glowing disc. A target on the moon, the gold
beyond the black for the old muzzle-loader borrowed
from father’s gun-rack, or the up-to-date repeater
alike for the barefoot, sturdy bush youngsters of to-
day and yesterday, who see pocket-money in the
skins, and for the regular marsupial hunters who
make their living by the winter slaughter.
To-night, in the moon-sprayed glades beyond The
Mountain, the 'possums went to their gum-leaf
suppers undisturbed.
There were no brown-legged selectors’ kiddies on
the prowl, no lean gaunt trappers and shooters with


murder in their hearts and finger on trigger; but
now and then in the moongilt boughs, a furry figure
leapt and scrambled, and was etched against the
gold Diana.
There was a touch of frost in the air: the stars
twinkled diamond white, the grass glittered in great
swathes of spread green; a red kangaroo with his
does went hopping past, his tail thudding hollowly
on the earth: his nostrils twitching, for, on the
wind, he smelled the taint of human beings.
Muffled hoof-beats sounded far away, then the
lowing of cattle coming past the dark clump of
brigalows where the bower bird’s playground was:
the clump a blot of shadow to which an arm of
tangled scrub reached out, as though to hold the
brigalows, a bouquet in its swarthy clasp.
There was no sound from the brigalow : the small
mob of young cattle paused, sniffing the air, and the
three men like following shadows and the one silent
cattle dog, who was too well bred to do anything
but bite without barking, halted too, the men leaning
forward on their saddles and staring, keen-eyed,
round the clearing.
Then they moved on, a ghostly brigade, the milk-
sour breath of the young beasts blown like smoke
on the cold air.
None of the men spoke.
They were in ticklish country, for this was the
rim of MacPherson’s run and MacPherson had
entered some grass-fed steers for the Brisbane show


in August. . . . Suppose he went lacking one of his
prime young hoofs ? It would be blow before word
with Cluny MacPherson, and they knew of things
he had sworn to do if ever he caught the O’Dwyers
or Saunderses at the game. . . .
So the three men drove their gleanings towards
The Mountain, stealthily and with care. . . .
They had a goodish bit of earth to cover before
the dawn found them in the intricate mountain
fastnesses which they knew like the palms of their
hands, which all the soap and water in the world
could never make quite clean.
Yet they felt secure enough, for they had had
word by their special bush telegraph how Mac-
Pherson and his stockman had ridden over the
ranges, coastwards, two days ago to some particular
business in the township ; they had news, too, from
the same source that Brody had left for Brisbane
to give evidence in a Land Court case, and that the
well-blasted and inquisitive manager from Cormorins
had gone with him, and as for Stodge Garry, anyone
could fool him, though there was no fear of his coming
up this way just now; they had heard he was too
busy over some matter of boxed sheep on the other
side.
Bush telegraph proved the coast clear, and they
were making their coup untroubled by any special
nervousness as to results.
So secure were they in their consciousness of
having all but pulled off a good thing satisfactorily.


while the shepherd was away from the fold, that one
of the men riding a little in front of the others, took
out his pipe and proceeded to fill it, sitting sideways
on the saddle, and shielding the match from the
wind.
They were level with the brigalow clump now ; an
owl disturbed by their approach came hooting from
the dusk of the trees, some doves in their crow’s-nest
eyrie above stirred sleepily.
Then, out of the sombre gloom of the thick-leaved
trees, out to the silver of the moony reaches under
the cool indifference of the stars, there came a
shattering shout:
" Hands up, O’Dwyer . . . stand and deliver those
mickies . . . if you please ... or I’ll drop you with a
bullet without your pleasing ! ”
It was the sergeant’s voice, triumphant, incisive.
They knew his clean-clipped English accent, but
they did not know how many might be concealed in
that dusky ambush.
They could see Brody on his roan, the fastest
police horse in the district, the two troopers on their
black geldings, two other men, one of whom they
instinctively guessed to be that damned manager
from Cormorins, and Lord only knew how many
more were, perhaps, encircling them. The Bush
telegraph had lied, been in the pay of the sergeant,
perhaps.
This was no time for excuses; there was one
beast amongst the handful they drove which bore


MacPherson’s brand; it would have been so well
smudged to-morrow that no man could decipher it
. . . but that was to-morrow. . . .
For a moment the night was filled with curses . . .
revolver shots . . . and the impact of a horse’s
shoulder against the body of a swiftly turning
beast. . . .
One man was down, and on his feet in an instant:
the cattle stampeded in all directions, bellowing
terror, the ’possums disappeared like lightning into
their hollows in green-arched trees. There was a
trooper, one on each side of the O’Dwyer whose
horse had spilled him, and Stodge Garry, with his
back to the unseated man, was off after a vague
figure that fled . . . ready to leave his comrades to
their fate as long as he could make good his get-
away.
As the troopers drove their horses at the dis-
mounted O’Dwyer the shadowy fleeting figure
turned in his tracks, brought his horse to a sharp
halt, raised his right hand, and they caught the
glitter the moonshine made on the revolver bole.
Brody shouted something to the troopers about
" go ahead,” he had him covered, but it wasn’t at
the troopers the cattle-duffer aimed.
As Stodge lifted his horse to clear a sunken log
among the grasses in his track, the third cattle-thief
fired and he got the charge full in his breast.
He pitched forward on the pommel. The terrified
hack'raced’on with the bridle slapping its neck, and


Stodge, who was a heavy man, was thrown and
dragged, his foot caught in the stirrup, leaving a
bright trail of blood on the dew-blurred grass.
The troopers had secured the dismounted man.
He was handcuffed in a trice and one mounted
guard while the other went across to Brody, who
was exchanging shots from a rearing horse with the
other O’Dwyer, whom MacPherson and his stock-
man, who had risen as it seemed from the earth in
the path that led mountain-wards, had rounded up
at last, to the red-bearded Scot’s entire satisfaction.
It was left to Ted Gordon to go to Garry’s assis-
tance, and this he did with a sharp exclamation and
set white face. He must not further madden the
frightened horse —his own had been almost un-
manageable since the gunfire started—but Stodge’s
seasoned hack had often been taken by his master
stalking bustard, It would not have been so alarmed
but for the heavy weight of that master head-down
by his side, the thundering of the terrified cattle,
and the unusualness of having a rider who hung
from the stirrup like a log, pulling the saddle under
his belly with the weight; all this seemed to have
temporarily crazed the mettled brute.
Gordon, cantering behind, his mouth set grimly,
wondered what he was going to face when the run-
away finally came to pause.
He would take a short cut, not to further frighten
the horse, and coming alongside try to capture the
bridle-rein.


. He was riding a good stock horse, though a young
'un, that could turn and prop on its flanks in an
instant.
Somewhere about here was a wide fence. If he
could get Stodge’s horse against that . . .
He wheeled, accomplished the manoeuvre by a
lucky fluke, headed the runaway off and brought
him trembling and sweating, with wide-distended
eyes, against the frost-silvered wire. He quieted
Stodge’s horse with soft murmuring words, and a
gentle hand patting its shoulder where the muscle
quivered under the wet hair, as he stooped to dis-
engage Garry’s foot from the girding stirrup.
Poor chap! ... he would be horribly knocked
about. . . .
That was all he would let himself think.
But the face had not suffered much; just a
few bruises and scratches . . . perhaps Stodge had
been able somehow to protect himself with his
hands. . . .
He slid heavily to the earth.
No elasticity of life here . . . possibly he had
fainted from loss of blood. . . . There was a dark
patch just over his heart welling through the thin
cotton shirt he wore . . . dark in the tender moon-
light . . . dark . . . life-blood.
The eyes were wide . . . startled. . . .
Ted had often thought how extraordinarily
innocent Stodge Garry’s eyes could look.
They stared up at the pale star-wreathed skies


now, between the soft flutter of the wind-stirred
boughs, with a guileless question in their depths.
Gordon had lit a match and was holding it close
to them. His own horse began a leisurely and un-
concerned cropping at some undergrowth, pulling
at the rein which his rider had kept over his arm.
From the glade by the brigalows there was no
sound except the jangle of a horse’s bit, or an im-
patient stamping hoof.
The prisoners kept sullen silence, and the third
shadowy rider, with Cluny MacPherson and the
stockman following a blind trail, was diminishing
by a clever double the distance between himself and
The Mountain.
For if Brody’s roan was fleet, his chestnut was
fleeter still.
A sleepy bird twittered in a slim sapling where
an empty rag of summer-nest hung, on Ted Gordon’s
right; Garry’s horse with head hanging and sides
heaving emitted great sobbing breaths that made a
faint haze on the July night.
But from Stodge Garry’s heart came no beat:
from his lips no breath.
There was a hell of hate in Ted Gordon’s heart as,
folding the big rough honest hands over the blood-
stained breast, he closed the bruised lids so white on
the sun-browned cheek over the innocent staring
eyes, leaving him in the soft pennyroyal-scented
grass by the wire fence and taking careful note of
the way by which he had come, that they might


instantly return to guard the body from night-
prowling things. When he had reported to the
sergeant, riding one horse and leading the other, he
went back to tell Brody there were other charges
than that of cattle stealing to lay at the O’Dwyers’
door, yet not principally at their door, for, in the
moment when the man had reined his horse to fire
at Garry, though his hat was low on his face and he
wore a muffler almost to his mouth over his chin,
something in the way he raised his arm, something
in the swift silhouette had left an impression upon
the retina of Gordon’s eye like that made by a photo-
graph of some one well known, seen from a quick-
passing vehicle in a shop window.
Just an outline ... just an impression of
familiarity —but it came back to him now, though
he did not believe Brody or any of the others had
experienced that hint to memory.
" Damey ... by God! ” he said, and bit on his
lip. MacPherson had staked his horse and had to
return with the lame steed by the way he had come :
the stockman, a cautious Lowlander, had returned
with him; since they seemed to have lost all trace
for the present of the third shadowy reiver it might
be as well to see to rounding up the scattered
stock.
Belike some o’ the Saunders’ " cairts ” might be
out before the morrow’s morn, pick up the braw
beasties, and slip a brand on them before one could
deny, and just after Gordon rode back to the


brigalow patch the stockman and Mac reappeared
from the range-side trail.
They must hold council of war.
The O’Dwyers, silent, stoical, already busied in
their subtle minds on a tale for their defence, were
handcuffed and set on their mounts, their ankles
lashed together underneath the horses’ ribs ; the
troopers were on guard : there would be no escape
for the disarmed duffers.
MacPherson volunteered to watch by Garry’s still
body till Brody could go to the nearest selector’s
for help and some kind of conveyance, for it was
Ted Gordon, who, with strained mouth and fierce
eyes, suggested that the body of the murdered man
should be taken back to Sea-Garry for burial.
“ Aye: he’ll keep right well this weather,” said
the Lowlander practically, though he bent his
head and muttered a brief prayer over the burly
form in the soft grass that lay so very still, like a
child gone to sleep after play.
" And belike that bonnie Garry lass will want to
put a wee flower on his busum,” he added kindly.
Gordon turned sharply away.
For an instant the great gold moon swam in a
mist: then he brought his hand hard down on the
butt of his revolver, for they had all come armed to
the foray on this July night, after the Bush tele-
graph, in the pay of both sides, had told them
what they wanted to know in Brody’s quarters, at
Cormorins and at Sea-Garry.


Brought his hand down and swore that he would
neither watch by Herbert Garry nor ride to round-up
the straying stock, to elude the Saunders’ outposts
or any other light-fingered gentry The Mountain
passes bred. Brody would have official business
to see to, but there was no one to tie Ted Gordon
to any special mode of procedure : his horse was
fresh, too fresh as it had proved in keeping his hands
full at the first attack on the raiders, his heart was
a burning fire that must be fed ... an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth. . . .
The others could do their part as they thought
best ... he was under orders from no man.
And, by hook or by crook, at midnight or at
dawn, at noon or dusk, he would not stay his speed,
he would spare not himself nor his horse till his
bloodthirst was sated.
He was out to get Darney now, and, by God, he
would. For this man was not only a good friend
. . . a decent chap. ... He was the brother of
the girl who looked but distantly at Gordon nowa-
days . . . the girl with the cool, pale cheek . . .
now turned away. . . .
Hibiscus Heart. . . .
o


CHAPTER TWENTY
“ And yet, somehow, I cannot sleep to-night ;
Ghost fingers seem to touch me in the gloom.
Ghost voices halt upon a broken word,
A prescience comes to me of shattered things ....
Are you somewhere, Beloved, in the dark,
Needing the help I am too far away
Tooffer? ” Night.
THE same round moon that filtered silver
coinage down amongst the desolate stony
tors, the green jungled valleys, palm groves, and
singing waterfalls of the ranges, shone silver to
silver on the wash of Pacific seas and on the un-
couth dwarf shadows of the pandanus palms cast
on the beach below the red hibiscus bush.
It swept, a pale tide, over the billowing miles of
gum-trees, the grassy tracks, the umbrella tree,
which came originally from Whitsunday passage,
in Miranda Garry’s garden, and on the grey-striped
cat she had found in the loom of The Mountain—
now a sturdy rover of its tribe, as it flitted from
shadow to shadow amidst the forest ways, on its
savage hunting or mating expeditions—spilled its
light through the open windows of Sea-Garry home-
stead, and specially through the wide lattice where
Miranda’s mane of chestnut hair was spread,
unfilleted, over her low pillow.
It must have been the moonshine on her closed


lids that woke her, for she dreamed that her step-
brother called to her, and there was pitiful, hopeless
insistence in the cry, “ Mirry . . . Mirry.”
She sat bolt upright, slid her bare feet to the
floor before she remembered that Stodge had been
gone these two days, some mysterious business
about which neither he nor Ted Gordon nor Brody
(who came secretly to the house one night, stepping
suddenly from behind her favourite gum-tree, and,
finger on lip, asking if anyone was within earshot)
had been at all informative.
He stayed late talking to Garry and to Gordon,
who rode up soon afterwards. She heard the clink of
glasses, a smothered laugh from Gordon, a sharp
word from Brody, and then the two men had melted
away as they came into the scrub aisles and Stodge
had tapped at her door and promised to " tell ”
her in the morning; but, when morning came, he
said he had business of which he would speak
later: that walls had ears and Bush telegraphs
were everywhere, working for “ wasters beyond
the ranges,” and that was all she knew even
now.
She expected Stodge back “ when she saw him,”
as he put it, and she had not minded.
She was not by nature curious, holding that every-
one had a right to the heart’s closed door, and she
felt he must have some good reason (Stodge who
usually blurted out his business to everyone) for not
giving details; but he wanted food for a day’s


journey, and she could not help seeing he had
cartridges for his revolver on the table, which he
tried to cover with a paper, one of those fashion
papers he delighted in.
Even then she did not think of her stepbrother
as being in danger. Perhaps they might be shooting
some old scrub bull who had proved a nuisance,
or some cattle-duffer’s decoy, perhaps they were only
going in for target practice over a bet.
Once he and Gordon had competed at cutting the
heads from sunflowers in her garden, and she had
protested, though the fowls enjoyed the subsequent
spoil. Men were always getting up bets about
something. . . .
Nowadays she did not see much of Ted Gordon;
she had even heard from Miss Stiggs, who dis-
approved—as she did of most things—that he was
likely to marry Beatrix Cormorin, “ and she no
more than a school-girl, but I believe her mother
was married at seventeen . . . runs in the family
, . . absurd I call it. Look at Edith Cormorin’s
life . . . does nothing but rock herself in a chair
all day . . . young marriages wrecking constitu-
tions. What fools women are 1 ”
Miss Stiggs, anyway, was in no danger of being
wed too young.
Miranda had long seen that Beatrix had made
a god with feet of gold of Ted Gordon, but it
only amused her, though wistfully, for it seemed
pleasant somehow to be young enough never to


see the very different composition of the feet most
idols hid under a trail of the flowers of imagination,
but she did not believe there was any real truth in
the story of the projected marriage. In her presence
Gordon had always treated Beatrix as a child he
liked to chaff.
Of course one never could tell with men! It
would be a disastrous mating anyhow. . . , Indeed,
marriage with Ted Gordon might be disaster even
for a mature woman with her eyes open.
Since the April picnic in The Mountain she had
heard more than once of wild doings in the town-
ship. Even Stodge had allowed Gordon was a devil
in drink, though the best fellow in the world other-
wise.
No: she had no fear, for all the mystery of his
setting out, that Stodge was riding to danger of
any sort, but now following on her rapid awakening,
on her vivid impression that her stepbrother had
called to her with despair in his voice, a mood of
depression fell upon the girl.
There was no one about the place, though a fire
smouldered in the galley of the kangaroo shooter’s
hut, so she walked on to the verandah dressed only
in her nightgown with her hair like a cloudy rope
to her waist, and stared out into the moon-flecked
silence.
The sough of rising wind, wind tasting of the
sea, came through the wildwood.
She could see the planets swinging low, the path


of the Milky Way almost indistinguishable in the
moon’s queenship of the sky.
She was greeted by a faint “ miau ” from her pet >
who with tall vertical tail rushed from the tree
trim, only to dash past her, keeping at arm’s length
lest if she catch him to her even for the pleasant
stroking of his round blunt head she might curtail
his nocturnal rambles and a cat, above all things,
must have freedom, being of the leisure classes who
only work for play, or under the obligation of
hunting.
She shivered. She should have remembered
July nights were cold, though warmer here by the
sea than further inland. She went back to her
room for her Paisley shawl: it had belonged to
her mother, and was faded with the flight of years.
Somehow she felt she could not go back to bed
for a little while.
She had thrust her feet into Stodge’s hide slippers;
they seemed to bring him closer, though she shuffled
in their vastness and the heels went clop-clop on the
boards.
She began to think back on her life here with
Stodge, her alert affection turning like a light that
turns even dust motes to gold . . . from the days
when he had first, a stout boy, carried her pick-a-
back to see men felling trees at the Two Mile, of
how he had taught her to catch crayfish in the
creek with a junk of raw meat on a string . . .
the branches of a foundered sapling washed in the


blue green tide . . . the mined earth fell from the
bank and made the water cloudy . . . another
time he had baited her hook for mullet . . . had
taken her on the old grey horse that died last
spring, down to the sea for her first salt-water
paddle.
His presence seemed all about her now, the
growing bald patch on his dear old head : his simple
honest eyes: the silly laboured little compliments
he paid women; his pile of fashion papers and
copies of the Brisbane Couriers which he had put
aside for a spare day, that never came, on his own
particular shelf where they mounted higher and
higher and grew dustier and dustier, for he would
not have one thrown away, and there was nearly
always something for him to do about the house
in an idle hour, if only to have a nap in the long
squatter chair on the verandah where the sacking
sagged with his thirteen stone ... or there was
a newer fashion magazine or a package of Couriers
of later date than the ones he had saved up for
perusal, and which the mail man had just brought
through.
Dear old Stodge! How he would have loved a
little shop in the city, and to go to the park to listen
to a band on Sundays. How he would have enjoyed
a semi-fashionable suburban home . . . and wife
. . . and not by any chance would he ever be in
a position to acquire either I
She laughed, but she sighed too. . . .


Why was there something mournful to-night even
in the mere thought of Stodge’s small ambitions
and love of city life ? Yet he got through the work
at Sea-Garry quite as well as men who seemed more
ambitious of greater things. . . . True he wasn’t
a “ hard grafter ” like Ted Gordon : there was
nothing restless about Stodge, yet . . .
He was so reliable : a woman need never hesitate
at the thought of marrying Stodge . . . but . . .
somehow . . . one couldn’t picture a woman ever
being madly in love with the dear old broad-
shouldered, artless-souled stepbrother of hers.
Why did he seem such a pathetic figure to-night ?
She was not usually morbid about anything: the
fairy godmother presiding at her cradle had given
her a generous helping of the salt of humour. . . .
Why had she awakened like that ? Springing from
bed as though to go to him as she had done many
a time in the days when he had a touch of pleurisy
and made sure he was going to die before morning,
as does a man who has never known serious illness ?
Her uneasiness increased : she would go back to
her room now, but she would get up early, question
Cholmondeley sharply, as to which way “ Boss
Garry ” had ridden, and taking a sandwich in her
saddle pouch, ride out that way to meet him.
There could be no harm in that surely, for whatever
the secret business that had called him forth, what-
soever the conclave with Brody and Gordon had
meant, it would be over by now.


“ Over now . . . yes ... it would be over now
... all over.”
It almost seemed a ghostly voice echoed, and
spoke aloud her whispered words ... a voice
coming from somewhere beyond those moon-fretted
paths where the grey tiger-cat sported, from beyond
the umbrella tree, crisply rustling in the garden,
from the mystic edge of things where spirits walked
between the midnight and the morn. ...
"All over now ... all over."
The night was haunted . . . the forest pregnant
with some awful birth the day would bring forth
upon a world aghast. . . . How cold this July
dawn ... how cold.
The wind came from the sea with a sound as of
woman’s weeping.
And, heedless of Brody’s advice, nay, commands,
that he should wait for someone to accompany him,
and even to Brody’s parting jibe that he wanted the
five hundred pounds reward for the body of the
murderer, dead or alive (which Brody meant no
more than Gordon believed he did), heedless of
anything in the world but the fixed determination
that he would have blood for blood of the man
who had slain the brother of the girl who now
listened to the voice of midnight things coming
to her from the strange grey peaks of the Sub-
conscious, or from a shoreless sea too vast for man’s


charting, Edward Gordon tightened his saddle
girths, asked for more cartridges from the troopers,
and got them, rode through the Antignon-rose of
dawn between the spears of light thrust at a waking
world by the god of Day, up the vine-hung way
that led to The Mountain and the lair of the hunted
man.
He followed no reasoning, only a blind instinct
like that of a pointer dog for the prey ... as the
Medicine Man of African tribes smells out the one
he desires to do to the death, so, in the musk and
almond perfumed morn, the lush and fern-set ways
where the wild tobacco spread its livid leaves and
the purple poison berries grew, Edward Gordon,
with pale set face and smouldering brown eyes,
“ smelled out ” inevitably his blood-guilty foe.


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
" Whom Vengeance followed fast.
Although the dragging lawyer vines were cast
To stay the following footsteps. Hate’s desire
Thirsty to fill with blood its brazen cup
And drink the toast of ‘ righteous murder ’ up.
. . . She was fair,
And Death was not an easy thing to choose
When there was life . . . and life with her —to lose.”
In The Ashes.
THE air was like wine to-day, clear and brilliant,
cool in the shadows, pleasant in the sun as it
is in most parts of Queensland in the winter months ;
but the horse’s shoulders were dark with sweat
before Gordon topped the ridge that led by the bush
track past the slaughter-yard, as the scene of the
cattle-shooting had come to be definitely spoken
of on the sparsely populated ranges.'
His first intimation that he was not astray on
the trail of Darney was the whinnying of a horse
unseen somewhere where a shaft of gully was
rimmed with thick timber and where some giants
of the world of wood had crashed, leaving sharp
splintered stumps at the edge of the miniature
ravine.
The horse’s cry appeared to come from the gully,
and, dismounting, Gordon led his hack to the brim
of the timber-filled depression and looked over,
straining his eyes and keeping a hand on his revolver.


Down there Darney might be preparing to take
a pot shot.
Nothing stirred.
Then he heard a snorting sound as though the
fallen animal was making attempt to rise, and the
thrashing of a leg and of a partly lifted body came
distinctly to him from amongst the underbrush.
High up in the only glimpse of blue the towering
trees parted to show a dark bird wing drifted . . .
another and another . . . crows scenting a meal,
though possibly a delayed one, on such tit-bits as
a helpless four-foot creature’s eyes.
Hitching his horse’s rein to the stout knotty
branch of a rush-leaved sapling, Gordon wormed his
way down, taking advantage of all the cover, and there
was plenty, and advancing with studied caution.
Presently he saw pricked chestnut ears, a bony
head, two startled distended eyes, and a pair of
straining shoulders. Darney’s horse was here right
enough, with the left fore leg and the right hind
broken.
The saddle and bridle had been removed and
hidden somewhere amongst the close bracken.
Evidently Darney had not given up hope of
coming back for these later, but had pressed for-
ward on foot.
A man must be yellow, indeed, who leaves his
horse to slow-tortured dying, perhaps a death
harassed by minor things of feather and of fur,
when he has a spare bullet to finish him cleanly.


This was significant. Assuredly Darney was
saving his ammunition.
To put a quick end to the poor brute as he yearned
to do would mean perhaps warning the quarry that
he was being successfully tracked. He would return
yet for the merciful deed, and he only prayed the
crows and eagle-hawks would leave the chestnut a
little longer, while Gordon ascertained how far
ahead the cattle-reiver was.
Then he made a discovery.
He had come unexpectedly on to the wooden
plateau behind The Lonely Hut.
He remembered how he and Miranda had sat on
the dusty table and talked, how she had said he
must leave the rum jar there . . . and prove him-
self “ strong enough to deny it in too-brimming
measure.” “We must not burn the Alexandrian
library,” she had said. . . ,
He remembered the sweetness of the palm of her
hand across his mouth : he remembered Stodge with
his sightless eyes turned up to the July blue.
He stumbled over the projecting root of a chalk-
white fig tree and pressed on.
He would have a look at The Lonely Hut, any-
way, for Darney, too, might have paused there.
By Jove, how well a tot of rum would go now !
There wouldn’t be any harm in allowing himself
that. . . . Miranda herself would probably advise
it ... he was thirsty and weary, but he was not
likely to make any slip in the task he had set himself


to do . . . the calling of Darney to account .. .
the bringing to justice the murderer of his friend.
Once well away, and he had made a good start,
for Gordon had not taken the right track at once,
the hunted man might be hidden for months in the
untrodden labyrinths of the ranges and, finally,
knowing the coast so well, might get away to South
America or some other overseas port, where he
would be difficult to trace.
At the swinging door of the hut the afternoon
sunlight caught the glint of a revolver.
Gordon decided to rush it . . . his blood was up,
his own weapon cuddled in the palm of his right
hand.
He believed afterwards that he shouted some old
slogan of his English schooldays, an equivalent to
"Up guards and at ’em.” He did a reckless, dare-
devil, wholly successful dash at Darney, and the
latter’s revolver went off, the charge only scoring
his cheek, as he came to grips with the reiver.
Darney, physically, was no match for Gordon now,
dissipation, love of women, liquor soaking, had
played their part, and that was hell, with his
muscles and wind, but a man who has dropped his
man, and knows the penalty fights like a cornered
rat.
Over and over they rolled on the floor of The
Lonely Hut. They jolted over a hole in the floor,
and even in the rough-and-tumble, Gordon had
disinterred the rum jar before it crashed and


shattered from the dusty table where he had sat
with Miranda ; the man’s aim had been unsteady,
he was more than half-tight . . . fool to let drink
get him when he was out for his life !
He dashed Carney’s head against the table leg
and felt him suddenly limp in his arms : his breath
coming with a thick, snoring sound.
Gordon rose, shook himself, like a retriever just
out of water with a duck in its mouth.
“ Seems I’ve fractured something in the chap’s
skull ... or grog and battle have been too much
for him,” he thought, for his capture was only
partly conscious; the lids were drooping over his
blood-shot eyes: veins swelled in his long yellow
neck.
Wary of the chance that the man might be
shamming, or might rapidly recover from his swoon,
Gordon unwound the green hide rope he had securely
twisted about his waist before setting out on his
hunting, undid Darney’s leather belt, then his own,
and secured the man’s wrists and ankles in a tight
hobble. He pushed and dragged Darney, who was
no heavy weight, round at the back of the hut where
the water-cask was, wetted his handkerchief, the
one Beatrix had embroidered crookedly but de-
votedly for his birthday, and left it on his enemy’s
head in the shadow of a pretty feathery tree with
foliage fine as the lace on a fairy’s trousseau, and
returned to the hut to see if there was anything left


in the fatal demijohn. Nothing ! There was a
small moist place on the earthen floor. Small,
indeed, for Darney had sampled deeply and well ; this,
and the blow on his head, would make him docile
enough prisoner while Gordon had a spell, and
considered what was the best thing to do with
him.
If Darney wasn’t able to walk to where Gordon
had tethered his hack, and where the chestnut lay,
still making valiant efforts to rise on its useless legs,
tormented by sand-flies, and already a prey to
gathering leeches, it was a pretty pickle for Ted
Gordon, unless some of the timber-getters, who
would probably be helpful now—on the Vicar of
Bray principle, now they knew the gang of cattle-
duffers was in process of being broken up—came
this way.
It might be a good notion to fire a shot to attract
attention.
If not, it meant vigil here by the man. One
could scarcely leave him here all alone all night,
even if it was unlikely he would revive sufficiently
to make attempt to escape. Some of the Saunderses
might be on the alert. A comfortless, hungry watch
it would be for Gordon with only half a tot of rum
in Barney’s pannikin on the table, and the brackish
water in the cask for sustenance.
If the worst came to the worst, he would see that
the prisoner’s gyves were secure and go back to his
horse. Maybe he had overlooked some of the


brownie and salt beef in his saddle-pouch, and
there was, he knew, some tobacco there. His pipe
was in his trousers pocket.
As the kookaburras signalled departing day, the
sun dying on far beaches, a white mist rolling up
along the hills, he made haste to accomplish this
before the fog declared the finding of even his own
tracks an impossibility.
He got possession of his horse and the dry but
acceptable provender, and returned to find Barney
still snoring.
He reeked of stale rum, and Gordon wet the
handkerchief again and put it on the low-sloping
brow. . . .
Queer fish this . . . born, somehow, to crimin-
ality . . . cunning as a fox, or he would have been
caught out before this. . . .
Gordon’s jackshay was on the saddle : he made a
fire near the door of the hut of the dry resin-scented
flutter of the leaves, and scraped enough spilled tea
out of his saddle-pouch to brew a weak, gum-
flavoured decoction.
Several times he spoke to Barney, but the man
neither moved nor responded.
Whether he was playing 'possum, or practically
" done in,” Gordon could not yet determine.
The night promised to be cold. He would prefer,
with recollection of certain infinitesimal, but zealous,
inhabitants of The Lonely Hut, to remain outside,
but the fog crept clammy and chilling.
P


He decided not to try to move Darney back
again. He might die of cerebral haemorrhage and
cheat the gallows, but he covered him with his own
coat and some green boughs he broke from the
fairy-foliaged tree.
“ Babes in the wood administered to by robins,”
grinned Gordon over his task.
It was an odd chance that brought him here—
doing sick-nurse for Darney —of all men!
He tried to give him a drink of water, but it
spilled from against his clenched teeth over his
blue lips.
Anyway the fog would be as good as a drink
presently.
It folded itself whitely round The Lonely Hut,
till the small humpy looked like an island in a
drifting stormy sea. Gordon had managed to give
the horse an unsatisfactory drop out of the jack-
shay ; grass there was in plenty where the bare walls
met the ground.
He discovered that the ceiling swarmed with
cockroaches. He remembered now he had seen
them once down a Queensland gold mine, brown-
glazed patches in the vaulted roof, two thousand
feet below the level of the earth. He could hear
the tick-a-tack of their legs now as they came down
to investigate himself and the smeared table. He
shivered, for the fog was slowly eating up all the
warmth of his body : had another look at Darney,
who seemed quiet enough now, and, with his


revolver close to his hand, fell suddenly" into the
blessed dark of the soundless gulf of sleep.
It was ten o’clock in the morning before he woke,
so close the fog arms had held The Lonely Hut in
their viscous embrace through all the long night
hours.
Barney had not stirred. He looked like a swaddled
mummy; the horse was cropping the grass, as he
appeared to have been cropping it ever since Gordon
fell asleep.
Faint and far through the mist-filled valleys, bird-
calls pierced the rolling white, but it was only
vaguely light in The Lonely Hut.
Gordon looked round lazily, collecting his thoughts,
for he had slept like a stone flung from a height
into a deep lagoon.
On the floor lay the shattered demijohn : on the
table Barney’s empty pint; an inquisitive tiny grey
bird, it looked to Gordon not unlike a myna, peered
cautiously in at the half-closed door.
Then it fled suddenly.
Through the fog-bound ways she had approached,
so quietly over wet grasses and fern. Gordon saw
her before he heard her coming out of the muffling
mist: saw her gazing at him, as she had long ago,
when the sea stretched blue and wide and the red
hibiscus swung in the dry, scented wind. . . .
He stood up and swayed on his feet, his revolver
still in his hand : his eyes fixed, as are the eyes of
those who think they see a ghost.


“ You I ” he said.
She stepped forward into the room : her short
skirts, her long boots, her small green-felt hat, all
serviceable, wise woodlander, workmanlike in her
garb, as Hibiscus Heart would be. . . .
Her pupils dilated.
" I heard ... a man . . . had been shot,” she
said quickly, and then the question he dreaded so
much to hear came hurrying between little gasps:
" Where is my Brother ? ”
He told her, faltering the words, with bowed
head, his own eyes wet, faltering, taking an un-
steady step forward, for his legs were stiff from the
long ride, the cold night, and the mingled fatigues
of yesterday.
For an instant she too swayed on her feet, her
hands held stiffly to her sides.
“ Dead ... oh! no ... it couldn’t be . . . not
Stodge ... he ... he wasn’t that kind of man .. .
things happen to. . . . Oh, no, you must be mis-
taken, Mr. Gordon.”
" I wish I was,” he answered sadly. " I wish to
God I was, my dear . . . but it is true ... he was
shot in the fight with the cattle-duffers—two nights
ago.”
She straightened her shoulders, threw back her
proud head, as does a soldier who is to face the
firing party when his last earthly dawn comes over
the purple hills, while the slow crystal tears gathered
and dropped down her lily-pale cheeks; then, as a


shaft of gold morning sun ripped the fog at last
and shone in at the open door, revealing the interior
of the hut as though with a yellow-glassed watch-
man’s lantern, her glance, fire through rain, swept
the little room, took in the significance of the broken
demijohn, the pint pot on the rum-stained table,
took a mental photograph of every detail, and then
turned, with such fierceness that her fury scorched
up her tears, on Gordon, swaying, one hand on the
table seeking support, before her. . . .
“My brother, your friend . . . lies dead . . .
foully murdered . . . and while men go looking for
his murderer . . . you . . . yon stay here and.
Her eyes fell again to the shattered fragments of the
jar, climbed to the reeking pint, and then back to
the man in a white scorn, with inference he could
not mistake.
So she thought he had come here " to drink with
the flies,” unable to resist the memory of the rum
jar in The Lonely Hut.
But unable to resist while the blood of the man
he called his friend cried for vengeance on his slayer 1
So . . . she thought that of him . . . that was
all Edward Gordon meant to her . . . that was
all. . . .
He stiffened, bowed over his folded hands,
laughed shortly.
“ The fog is clearing now,” he said with exag-
gerated politeness. "It will clear enough presently.
If you will do me the honour to step this way, I


will show you my prisoner. He had not had time
for a shave, I’m afraid, but nevertheless I am in a
position to oblige him to receive visitors, if I choose.”
And he stood aside for her to precede him from
the hut round to where Darney lay on his side,
still breathing heavily, half-covered in fog-glistening
green, and with Gordon’s coat close about him.
“ This is the man who shot your brother. I have
kept him here since yesterday,” said Gordon. ‘‘Now
that you are here one of us can ride for help . . .
while the other watches. lam willing for you to
decide the way of it.”
She drew away, shuddering, from the unconscious
man.
“ Cholmondeley is not far behind,” she answered.
" He followed me from Sea-Garry when he heard
there had been a fight in the mountains. We
camped at the foot of The Mountain last night. I
came on ahead this morning while he brought the
horses. . . . There was no fog down there, ... I
met it half-way up and have been floundering in it
till, somehow, I came on the old trail ... we once
walked together. ... I’ll go back now ... to
meet Cholmondeley. . . . I had ridden . . . to meet
Stodge coming home. ... I met a swaggie who
told me he heard the police had a brush with the
cattle-duffers . . . that a man had been shot . . .
he did not know whether a trooper ... or one of
the cattle-duffers. . . . At the selector’s, where I
stayed for a meal, they had news that the troopers


had passed by the upper road with prisoners, but I
missed them all . . . then I got frightened about
you . . . and . . . and I pushed oh, after Chol-
mondeley caught me up with blankets and things . ..
he seemed to understand I wouldn’t stop till I knew
something. ... lam a good walker, you know. I
couldn’t wait. ... At daybreak I started up The
Mountain . . . but I never thought of any harm
coming to Stodge. . . . Are you sure he is dead ?
Perhaps if I went to him ... if I got the doctor....
I did not properly realize Stodge was with the
Sergeant. ... I think. . . . But I knew you would
be. . . .”
He brushed aside the implication that she had
been anxious for his sake; his eyes were sunken,
his mouth a straight line. He had not forgotten her
words, and more than that, the suggestion in her
gaze inside the hut.
He heard her go, stumbling blindly, her tears had
come back.
He could even hear her low exclamation, “ Oh !
no. . . . It couldn’t be Stodge . . . those kind of
things never happen to Stodge. . . . Oh! no. . . .
Oh ! no 1 ”
Then the boughs closed in behind her, heavy with
tatters of mist, and he heard the creak of leather,
the click of buckles, feet rustling in the fern.
Cholmondeley, the handsome half-caste, was
coming up with the horses.


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
“ Outside in the walled garden deep and grey
A slight girl watched. O’erhead a phantom moon
Threw tremulously one faint, pallid ray
To show the muslin gown, the dew-soaked shoon.
The small unquiet breasts, the slim young hips,
The hair unpowdered, the unpainted lips."
The Old Mahogany! 1
MRS. CORMORIN had electrified her family
by making a suggestion entirely on her own
initiative, a fact which considerably upset her
daughter.
“ Why not ask the Garry girl over to stay awhile,”
she murmured over her breakfast egg, a few weeks
after the capture of the cattle-duffers and their
arrival in the township, under the vigilant eye of
Brody and the escort of the troopers, to make their
initial bow at the Court-house. "It must be terrible
for the girl to be alone in the house with all
her dead brother’s things lying around. . , . Mrs.
Sampson told me she went over to see her last week,
and found her crying her heart out over piles of old
newspapers, fashion magazines, and things he had
put aside to read some day. She’s too much alone,
that she is, brooding about the place. . . . She told
Mrs. Sampson she did not know how much she
minded till she saw Stodge’s fashion-plates in an
old scrap-book he used to paste things in.”


Mrs. Cormorin leant back in her seat,, forgot she
was not in her customary rocker, aind tried to rock
herself, with the result that she caught her shoulder
sharply on the straight back of the dining-room
chair.
She rose slowly, sighed, went out to the pantry,
and took a digestive pill, but returned again with
still definite purpose. “ I think some one should
go and fetch her over,” she murmured and then
passed out, on to the porch where her rocker
stood.
The girls gazed at one another with uplifted
eyebrows and open mouths.
Jim Cormorin was already at the yards, having
finished a hasty breakfast; both he and Ted Gordon
were subpoenaed for the trial at the higher court in
Brisbane.
There was a lot to see to on the station. Un-
fortunately the criminal case was coming on at one
of the busiest times of the year.
Beatrix looked at Arline, Arline at Beatrix, while
the regular sound of the rocker's rising and falling
on the verandah boards came to them.
It was a fine day, and Mrs. Cormorin was sitting
in the patch of sun that streamed through the dry
rattling arms of the grape vines along the verandah
side.
" I’ll be gone, anyway,” said Arline, who was
returning home to her neglected music-lessons and
her impatient parents next week. " I’ll be gone.


It will be nice company for you . . . Bee. . . .
Keep you from missing me,” maliciously.
Beatrix reddened a little, making a pattern with
her fork on the damask tablecloth. "It must be
rotten for her there, with all Mr. Garry’s clothes
and things about . , . and ... I suppose we
should ask her. But fancy the suggestion coming
from Mother. I have thought lately she was
restless about something . . . like the Bramah hen
looking for a place to lay in. . . . She must have
been working up to this. ... I wouldn’t mind. .. •
No, not really, Arline . . . but it’s Edward Gordon.
... I don’t think he likes her now.”
" H’m,” said Arline, her head on one side, her
eyes squeezed up and looking quizzically at her
cousin. " Wouldn’t bank on that too much if I
were you . . . but, if you really think he doesn't
like her . . . why hesitate about asking her along ?
It would make a blooming difference if he wanted
her to come ! ”
" You’re a cat, Arline,” retorted Beatrix, " and
I’m glad you’re going home.”
Arline saw that Beatrix’s eyes were full of tears,
and her own softened. She became compunctious.
‘‘l’m sorry, Bee . . . I really aw over the odds . . .
and Mr. Gordon is the Hero of the Hour. . . .
Mother says there was such a lot about him in the
Southern papers . . . half a column in The Austra-
lasian. . . . How he caught a desperado single-
handed. ... He told me himself he’d had an offer to


do a turn in vaudeville, cracking a stockwhip or
throwing knives, and asked me if I’d be the woman
who stands against the wall and is outlined in
blades . . . but I never know whether he’s pulling
my leg or not. . . . Anyway they won’t hang
Darney ? ”
Beatrix shuddered. " What do you mean ?
Don’t they hang murderers ? Doesn’t it make you
think of Fagin and the last hour in the cell. . . .
‘ I’m an old man, me Lord ... an old man.’ . . .
I can’t read that without feeling all cold-showery-
bathy-in-winter down the spine . . . but why won’t
they hang him ? ”
“ I heard Uncle telling Mr. Gordon this morning
after the letters came. I was hiding in the cedar
tree. The Lunacy Commission says he is really mad,
not shamming, as our old Dr. Leatherface thought. ..
that a bit of bone has lacerated his brain . . . the
leg of the table in The Lonely Hut finished him, I
expect. . . . Uncle says he has a tendency to
criminality always. (I can say all the words if I’m
not expected to spell them.) Something you can’t
help, it seems . . . like love or liver ... so he’ll
be shut up all his life . . . but the funny thing
was, Bee. . . .”
“ What ? ” she leaned forward, alert, over the
toast rack.
" That Mr. Gordon kept saying ' poor devil, poor
devil, to be caged all his life! I’d rather have the
rope myself . . . shamming or not.’ Mr. Gordon


thinks he’s still shamming to be mad, I believe, and
then Uncle said ‘ Oh ! If he saves his bacon he won’t
care as to whether he’s cooped up or not, and
probably he’ll get out in the end.’ Uncle seems to
want to see him hanged by the neck until he is
dead.” Arline picked up a dinner napkin, put it
over her head in the fashion in which she supposed
the black cap to fall on a judge’s head, and added
“ And may the Lord have mercy on your soul! ”
‘‘ Don’t, Arline, you make me all jumpy .. .
come down to the creek. We’ve got to hold a council
of war over this Garry girl. I really got very fond
of Stodge that time last Easter. ... I think he
liked me, too.”
Beatrix had worn black hair-ribbons for the past
few weeks out of respect for Stodge’s memory. . . .
Both girls had wept sincere tears when they heard
he was dead. Arline probably out of sympathy for
the " bond of blood ” between herself and her
cousin, for she couldn’t help a small thrill of pleasur-
able excitement when she wrote home about the
occurrences in The Mountain, the Deadwood Dicks
of real life, the splendid capture Gordon had made
single-handed at The Lonely Hut.
She was longing to encounter some of her old
Rose Bay schoolmates again, to increase the thrill
by telling them of her own wandering " unpro-
tected ” so close to the scene of the ultimate battle,
the sensational affray and capture. . . . She would
be the most important girl in her set at tea-parties


in her favourite caf6 when she got home, again . . .
every one would be wanting to shout . . . cream
cakes, chocolates galore . . . bribes to tell and
retell the things that she saw in Queensland.
No girl, rising sixteen, could resist such lime-
light. But she had been very sorry about Stodge
Garry, though he had, so Beatrix phrased it, “ died
like a man ” ; in fact, for a time, as Arline put it
tersely, she had thought the dead lion was going to
oust the living dog with Beatrix. Anyway her
cousin had, somehow, got a lock of his hair, or
pretended it was his hair, for it was curiously like
that of the sandy cat at the station store, and she
wore it in an old silver locket of her mother’s, with
a Mizpah in blue enamels on it round her thin neck,
even under her nightdress, where Arline knew it
must scratch.
She pondered these things, and added her urgency
to Mrs. Cormorin’s eloquence in suggesting that the
Garry girl should be carried off, more or less by
force, since she seemed to feel she could not leave
the old home for a spell of weeks at Cormorins.
With wisdom beyond her years, Arline said finally,
“ I don’t think I could bear to be near the sea if
anyone belonging to me had died. . . . There is
always something sobbing under the waves . . .
even when it’s all blue and jolly.”
Beatrix nodded. She might have said that her-
self, only she would have finished the sentence more
poetically, but then she considered she had literary


gifts. Then she decided to seek Mr. Gordon before
the invitation went out.
Her mother was sure not to write the note in-
viting Miranda, even if she regained in time the
strength she had expended in merely making the
suggestion.
Beatrix would have to write. Arline’s scrawl was
too awful, and Jim Cormorin never wrote letters
except to his banker.
Late that evening Arline had occasion to pursue
a beloved black and white cat into the Cape mulberry
trees that leaned their soft-wooded stems against
the back fence beyond the kitchen and wash-house
at Cormorins.
She could hear Delia singing a hymn over a tub
where she was " blueing out some wee bit things ”
of her own, by aid of a kerosene hurricane lamp in
the laundry, and she thought she heard a muffled,
still stranger sound coming from where a clump of
dwarf bamboos made a thicket by the Cape mul-
berries. They always made eldritch music when
the wind blew these bamboo reeds, and when she
had been smaller, on her visits to her uncle’s station,
Arline had cherished a secret belief that they were
haunted.
It seemed on this cold moonless night, when
frosty stars entangled in the web of heaven, that
the banshee herself was lurking there.
But a sneeze between the sobs, and a furious nose-
blowing with which she was somehow familiar,


assured Arline that her childish fancies had no more
foundation now than they had in the past.
Beatrix sneezed like that, and for some unex-
plained reason Beatrix was secretly " howling ” in
the bamboo grove.
Arline felt really alarmed; whatever had happened ?
She had left Bee talking to Mr. Gordon on the lawn
while she went inside for a coat, then she stopped to
some peppermint-chips, and had become interested
in a novel Aunt Edith had left on the dining-room
table, near the wood fire she delighted in, and which
she had forbidden the girls to read. Arline had
decided, her curiosity sated, that it was " mushy
stuff," anyway, and thought she heard the black
and white cat crying outside. He usually loved a
corner of the hearth; perhaps, early in the year as it
was for them, he had found a comatose snake. Any-
way, she had become bored with both Mr. Gordon
and Bee to-night, and was not going back to them
in a hurry. They didn’t seem to feel the cold, and
now there was no sign of Mr. Gordon, and Beatrix
was yelling to herself in the bamboos.
Whatever had he done ? Kissed her, perhaps, but
she doubted if that would make Bee really cry,
though it might cause her to pretend to.
And she never really knew what had happened
between her cousin and Ted Gordon, at least not
until both were middle-aged, and Beatrix could
afford to laugh about what she called her “ first real
affair and all on my side, too.” " But," she would


add whimsically, " Edward Gordon was always a
gentleman. I don’t think a man ever showed a girl
she was a little fool and that he was in love with
another woman more plainly or delicately.”
But there was many a full year after the August
night when winter still lingered in the stars, though
the birds were beginning to build their light-swaying
nests on Cormorin station and away past Sea-Garry,
down to the azure miles of the wide Pacific. . . .
She fled before Arline to-night, climbed the back
fence with unforgotten schoolgirl agility, disappeared
somewhere amongst the darkness of the paddocks,
where Arline, being fat and short of breath, tried to
follow in vain.
“ My grief is my own,” she said that night, as the
girls brushed their hair and Arline, remarking that
she seemed “ a bit bent,” proffered a bull’s-eye.
“My grief is my own,” repeated Beatrix; she
liked the phrase, and presently Arline saw her take
out the black-covered exercise book, in which she
was writing “ The Story of My Life. ... To Be
Read After My Death by Those Who loved Me,”
and add a page or two. She seemed to find great
comfort in the scribbling of this portion of her tale
of years. She bit the end of her pencil many times,
sighed, and once she smiled, then murmured some-
thing about " Renunciation ” and “ Sacrifice ” and
went to bed and soon to sleep.
Next day she toyed with her food at breakfast,
as she was anxious everyone should observe, and


afterwards borrowed some of her mother’s best note-
paper which Edith Cormorin never used and began
the note of invitation to Miranda Garry.
On the following day Gordon and Jim Cormorin
were to start for the city. Mrs. Cormorin was
busied sorting Jim’s best socks now, and only
Arline noted how many times Beatrix scored the
new blotting-pad, on which her father wrote letters
to his banker, with the word “ Sacrifice.”
Q


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
" In triumph does a King forget a woman who is lonely now ! ”
The King Came Home.
“ The neighbours shake their heads and say
‘ No garden can for Life atone.
It is not wise to dream all day.
It is not good to live alone.' "
Fidelity.
NOT to Arline alone was there " something
sobbing underneath the waves,” and, on a
late afternoon two days after Jim Comorin’s
blotting-paper had suffered so curiously from his
daughter’s betraying pen, Miranda had deliberately
come down to the ocean edge from her desolate
home to find it. It fitted all too well with her mood
this evening. The sands were wet from a stormy
tide, mirror-like they reflected moving shadows of
ebon-hued crabs, of swooping wing.
The far hills were extraordinarily deep in colour,
royal sapphire, with here and there a peak of cold
Wedgwood blue: the water was dark bottle-green
with sudden hillocks of thick white, the green
having the heavy clearness of oil. There was a
curiously unreal eau-de-nil light. The arched rocks,
where the spume of spray allowed them to be seen,
were almost black, outreaching boughs on the cliff
were as those in a Japanese etching: the sea one


immense tent of grey. The bird notes were low,
muffled. There seemed an ominous brooding over
both land and sea.
“ Dr. Leatherface ” had been to see Miranda that
day; he had told her she must pull herself together.
He had spoken of many things : of Stodge’s gallant
spirit, and the girl had cried with out-thrust hands :
“ But he never had a fair innings , . . somehow
he missed all the big, best things of life. ... I
feel as though my brother had never really lived.
Doctor.”
“ Sometimes those are the happiest lives,”
answered the doctor gravely. “ Happy is the
country that has no history . . . yet, my dear,
I know just what you mean. I felt it too with
him . . . but who knows. . . .”
He pondered a moment over his pipe :
" That isn’t the immediate question though.
You have got to get up and begin again, carry on
where he left off. You are too young, too vital,
to bury yourself in a grave, my girl, even one that
holds beloved dust . . . you must get a grip on
life . . . again, not sit here and brood . . . but
it’s early days to talk to you like that yet. . . .
Great joy, great grief have a tendency to make us
self-centred : the garrison flock to man the stockade
against a world which might attempt to steal a
jewel, or intrude upon the sanctity of the beloved
dead . . . natural enough . . . bad for the world
when the stockade is too long garrisoned. . .


He went on to speak of Darney: “ There’s a
worse fate. It’s pretty sure-that he’ll be consigned
to the madhouse, and I don’t believe, despite the
Lunacy Commission, that he is really insane. . . .
I think him a consummate actor; though his head
was badly injured, it’s a case of hereditary crimin-
ality ... so I suppose the plea of insanity might
have some foundation. . . . Only, yes, despite this
talk of high-placed relatives, all the more so because
that is true! They shipped him out here to get
rid of him . . . but he couldn’t run straight if he
tried . . . not long, anyway. ... I don’t know that
we should punish those kind of people. They should
never be allowed to be born. ... Don’t you think
it’s better to go out—cleanly—like your step-
brother ... a man’s death ... in defence of
the law of the tribe that keeps communities together
than hang on, year after year, behind walls ? ”
Miranda’s attention was riveted. It was so like
Gordon’s arguments.
“ Every now and then some political wirepuller,
some social crank will have a go at setting him
free . . . and then he will be Lunacy Commissioned
all over again. He will do perhaps for an example
at election time. . . . Already, I believe, some
neurotic women are getting up a petition ...
something about his firing in self-defence. ...
Thank God, Ted Gordon and Cormorins can bear
witness against that. . . . They are both sub-
poenaed for the High Court in Brisbane. By the


way, what a forgetful old duffer I am. I have a
note in my pocket from Cormorins for you. They
want you to stay there with them.”
He searched his pocket, brought out first his
stethoscope, then a small phial of iodine, a length
of knotted string, a pocket forceps, and a roll of
antiseptic cotton wool and, finally, the note on
Mrs. Cormorin’s best paper. It was a rigid little
letter, but kindly. Beatrix had not scrawled
" Sacrifice ” for nothing.
Miranda read it listlessly. “Oh ! I couldn’t go,”
she said. She was thinking of Gordon, of the scene
in The Lonely Hut, of how the sympathy of the
household would touch a raw wound. She longed
to turn her face to the wall and hide herself and her
grief away from all prying eyes, however friendly,
till healing came. The trees, the birds, the life of
the wild soothed her as no human companionship
could do just now.
But perhaps the doctor was right. It wouldn’t
do to become a “ Hatter ” always mooning away
alone, because life had cruelly robbed her in more
ways than one.
She thought of the fate of many a solitary shep-
herd in the backblocks. No: it was not good for
man to live alone. When Dr. Sutherland had
finished his tea and pushed on, to set a broken arm
further down the coast, she would go for a long
walk and consider the matter of accepting the
Cormorins’ invitation.


She would see Gordon again. ... No : he would
be in Brisbane. Was she glad of this ? Was she
sorry ?
She put the question firmly away on the shelf of
her mind labelled, " Things not to be thought
about.”
She had made a mistake in her treatment of
Gordon. Coldly he resented it, though he had been
courteously kind. There was a subtle difference in
him to the day on which his lips had shamelessly
betrayed him to her as he kissed the palm of her
cool hand in The Lonely Hut. His lips had not
been cool! “ Dr. Leatherface ” saw the flush on her
cheek: the chagrin in her eyes: the trembling
movements of her hands.
He rose to go. Outside they could hear his horse
stamping impatience into the turf.
“ Go ... if you can make yourself,” he said,
looking down at her. He pressed her hand a moment,
then rode away.
So many eyes he had closed with his hard, capable
fingers that could yet be so tender, so many griefs
he had seen, stony-eyed sorrows unsoftened by
tears. He did not think Miranda of the timberlands
suffered like that.
He had seen her tears: he had delved to the
heart of her sorrow. He did not believe she was
one of those women to whom family affections will
ever grow to be the great devastating flood that love
of lover, or of husband, can sweep over lives.


Miranda had yet to hear the sound of that trumpet
call that cast down the walls of Jericho.
“ And then, by Jove! If anything happened to the
chap . . . she’d go out . . . pouf” —he dropped
a quenched match with which he had just relit his
pipe into the road—“ like that. I don’t believe
she’s half awake yet to man’s love . . . but when
she is . . . it’s through fire and water for you,
my girl. . . . Aye, if he was the very devil himself
. . . fastidious as she is.”
The doctor rode away by a path that paced with
the sea, and Miranda went to fetch her hat, the sun
umbrella she thought was hardly needed this after-
noon. It was cloudy, chill with a feeling of rain in
the air: the forest life subdued though a crow
cawed drearily on a ring-barked tree, and down
among the low flowering bushes there was the zoom-
zoom of a few small black native bees.
Should she go to Cormorins ? Should she stay
here ? Cholmondeley would look after Sea-Garry
house. Neighbours were never too far away in the
bush to proffer little kindnesses. Everybody in
the district was ready to help the girl now. Never
had case been more discussed hereabouts than the
capture of the cattle-lifters. Brody walked with a
swagger. There was a movement on foot in the
township for a presentation to him. In any case
he would get promotion.
She thought of The Mountain, untouched,
strangely terrible, arrestingly beautiful; no wonder


she had feared it, and yet, now, now that The
Mountain had devoured the life for which it waited,
the love for which she craved, for which it had
waited through centuries perhaps ... it had left
a curious allure. . . .
She wanted to go back to The Mountain.
When Stodge would have taken her there she had
been afraid. The Mountain had enticed her step-
brother across its purple-wooded immensities, its
amethystine silences, enticed him to his death. . .
The Mountain had given her her love . . . only to
steal him from her again. . . . Set a trap for her
heart, closed cruel steel points upon its opening
warmth. . . .
Yet, as she walked through the bough-hung,
root-crossed road, past an unfenced ravine where
the green gold bracken was looped by mauve con-
volvuli and where holly red berries grew on diminu-
tive stunted shrubs, walked till she came to the
sound of the sea in an atmosphere of watery green
light on that late afternoon, she knew she wanted
to go back to The Mountain. It had not done with
her yet . . . that mysterious crouching thing that
lipped the green plain below.
Perhaps it had reparation for her . . . perhaps
another tragedy.
There were no flowers on the hibiscus bush
to-day, though presently it would be pennoned
scarlet once more. The plant has its moods, some-
times it seems to die down, becomes almost lifeless,


then breaks into sudden, swift, shy, cherished
beauty, conspicuously alive, like the passions of
that Southern Asia from which its forbears came.
She skirted the glade, went down the goat track
to the sands. How high the tide had been ! It had
left an emerald pool here and there, as though an
isle goddess playing with her gems upon the blue
cloth of heaven had dropped some of them to earth,
and now grieved her loss behind the grey curtain
she had drawn across the sky.
Rain was coming. The birds flew low . . . the
bees would have winged homewards, the sun seemed
to have descended to the “ chilly waters of widower-
hood ” without as much as a parting red flare in
the cope. Presently “ Luna and her orphaned
stars ” would move through the heavens; then*
when the moon climbed over the sea, Christ on a
path of silver might walk the waters.
To-night the ocean moaned like a tortured thing.
~ . Miranda shivered. A drop fell heavy on her
cheek ... so the rain was coming fast, presently
it would drive its grey hairs across the world, the
branches would tail out in the wet wind . . . and
there would be no Christ on a path of silver till the
rain had had its will. She paused, arrested by the
analogy.
She, too, would have her time of tears. . . .
But as the moon would yet cast off her mantle of
rain and reveal her loveliness to the distant waves,
so life and love, like a Saviour, might again walk the


waters for Miranda of the timberlands, bringing, if
no unwished-for forgetting, still the balm that
Time always brings.
When she reached home the house was dark,
desolate, but even as she stepped on to the verandah
a light leapt up. Cholmondeley, who was some-
thing of a cook, was grilling a chop that smelled
good in the kitchen, and singing in his thin whining
tenor something handed down from the black half
of him, soft native utterances of untranslatable
words.
Soft, and yet containing an ancient savagery
of crude loves and hates, that was somehow infi-
nitely bracing.
Across the creek the rain and filtered moonshine
made a mystic loveliness : boughs of near trees in-
vading the sky were elusive, wavering, seeming a
thing of shattered branches badly knit, and swathed
with shimmering mist. . . .
As she kicked off her wet shoes and shook out
her long rain-gemmed hair, Miranda came to a
decision.
Yes, she would " get up and begin again,” and,
as a preliminary, since there were more things to be
buried than the body of her stepbrother now hidden
in the cool brown earth, she would go to Cormorins.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
" Oh, If another I should bring
To shelter in my garden place,
Do you believe those birds would sing.
My rose unveil her silken face ? "
Fidelity.
" A sentimental ballad ? Nay, my lords,
I have done with such folly, feel no urge
For those thin minor notes that lovers pipe.”
Motley.
DESPITE the distraint upon the O’Dwyers’
property, the Saunders brothers managed
to make their caretaking job a profitable one —to
the Saunderses,
So much they certainly put by for the cattle-
duffers when they should come out after their long
sentence. One of the best criminal lawyers had
defended them in vain as far as their escaping jail
was concerned, but not to the honour and glory of
his own reputation. ... In fact, he had made his
Honour both laugh and frown, and had harangued
the jury into loggerheads. However, evidence was
too black against the O’Dwyers, though Cluny
MacPherson's face was as red as his beard before
the play was over ; he had sworn to his last bawbee
to bring these men to justice.
Now that he was satisfied without being driven
to that extremity he kept a sharp look-out on the


Saunders mob, lest he should catch them also
tripping.
But if they tripped, they did it far from Mac-
Pherson’s !
Dr. Sutherland confessed, though not to Cluny,
to a sneaking admiration and some liking for the
Saunders men.
They were such cheerful villains, he said, and in
their grim Scotch way, they never wearied of making
little jokes at their own expense.
They had brought the old Highland grandmother
to live at the hut and “ do ” for them, and '“Dr.
Leatherface ” sometimes paused, in passing, to have
a crack with her. She concealed her entire baldness
under a blue mutch which delighted him, and her
small dark Highland eyes were as sharp as needles
despite her ninety years. She was active too,
for all the “ rheumatics ” in her hands, for which
the doctor treated her under the running fire of
her disbelief in “ the like of these physicky
things.”
Once, when he had spoken as “ friend to friend ”
about the cattle-lifting in the district, she had
laughed in her silent inward-shaking way, " Deed
an’ it wad hae been thocht tae a man’s honour
more than his ill, a few hundred years by. . . .
Where was the Cameron and Campbell, an’ most
of a’, the Macgregor, who didn’t gang over the
borders o’ his neighbour’s land for cattle? ’Twas
to the credit o’ the clans when they drave a guid


herd to the byres. . . . I’m no saying as my lads
ever had hand in onny o’ the reiving in these
parts, but an’ they did: you, being a doctor,
should ken how bliud will oot,” and she giggled,
stirring something that smelled delicious, after a
long wearying ride, in her stock-pot.
Then she made such shortbread as the doctor
had not tasted since he was in the Land o’ Cakes,
and New Year always brought him his share if he
cared to call at O’Dwyers, as the selection con-
tinued to be named, though the Saunderses tilled the
ground, and ran their stock there, it having a better
water frontage than their private holding.
Secretly Dr. Sutherland believed the Saunderses
had had a salutary lesson; they were running
straight, indeed they prospered, so had little tempta-
tion to do otherwise. He believed that the old
woman, for all her naive defence, took care that
nothing that was not born and bred on their own
property felt the branding iron at O’Dwyers.
The lines the years had written on her face were
not crooked ones, deep runnelled by experience
though they were. Once she had showed him a bit
of white heather she had from Scotland; another
grandchild was being married in Glasgow, this was
a bit of her bridal bouquet.
She offered him a sprig for luck, and thinking
of a girl with hair like an autumn leaf, beyond The
Mountain, " Dr. Leatherface ” placed it in his note-
book, and when next he went across the ranges


and down to Sea-Garry he gave it to the girl who
he thought might need a mascot.
She was not in the house when he rode up.
Cholmondeley, who was digging in the garden with
frequent pauses for “ smoko,” indicated the path
to the clump of wattle where Miranda had recently
swung a hammock, and where she often rested in
the afternoons in a bower of gold and perfume,
where clouds of tiny moths, yellow as the dropping
flowers, passed to and fro, or birds came after the
black pods.
He could see a glimpse of white frock with a
trailing black sash, as he drew near the grove.
Her book and a copy of a recent Sydney Mail
lay on the ground beside her; one arm hanging
over the side of the string hammock as though the
reading matter had dropped unheeded on the grass
. . . from a sleep-languid hand.
She was asleep, but she woke as he stood looking
at her.
" I might have won a pair of gloves,” said the
doctor, sitting beside her on the grass. " Don’t get
up : it’s not half such a graceful action getting out
of a hammock as lying asleep in one . . . and I
had some interesting things to tell you.”
“ You always have,” she smiled faintly.
She was looking better, he thought. In the months
that had passed since the tragedy of The Mountain,
she had taken her hold on life again with Arm and
confident hands.


She was putting the past behind her, cutting
the dead wood from the tree to make ready for
another spring. Still, he did not think she was
happy . , , nor, if the first sharpness of her step-
brother’s loss had gone, did she seem on the high
road to even a measure of content: her hands were
restless now that she was awake : her eyes had
a certain hopelessness steadily repressed in a shallow
smile: the kind of hopelessness he hated to see in
young eyes.
But he was always tactful.
“ What is your news ? ” he said, looking for his
pipe.
“ Nothing much. A party of surveyors camped
near here last week. One had quite a nice tenor :
we had several musical evenings.”
" I met them in the ranges. They had just
become excited over chopping dovra a tree in the
way of the theodolite, and finding a black fellow’s
skeleton in it. One chap was English : it was an
experience to write home about. He thought the
aboriginal had left off planting his dead in tree
trunks. I told him (I arrived just in time to count
the bones) this skeleton had been there a long time.
Funny thing, when I totted up the bones were all
intact, skeleton of a big male, except the knee-
caps . . . but Jimmy Coolun was able to solve
that mystery. ... You know old Jimmy ? Says
he’s a hundred and four, and there’s no one to dis-
pute it. He told us the gentleman who was buried


in the tree was a very old king in his tribe. He was
paralysed, or something, and the niggers used to
carry him round on a sheet of bark: he was a
most arbitrary old devil. One day they accidentally
—at least so Jimmy related—spilled him down a
gully in The Mountain. When they reached him
the old chap was dead . . . they were so afraid his
ghost would rise up and follow them: they took
away his knee-caps ! Logical, wasn’t it ? ”
The doctor laughed.
“ They are not strong on logic,” said the girl.
“ The black half of Cholmondeley, even, gets the
upper side sometimes, and it’s no use arguing
with him.”
“ Jimmy thinks if they had buried the old fellow
in The Mountain and put big boulders on top of him,
the tribe might have been spared a deal of subse-
quent trouble. They got phthisis in the camp. He
reckons because they buried the King in a tree
and he was able to swing out by his arms, catching
hold of the branches. Jimmy says even he, as a
picaninny, has seen him jibbering up there at
night 'all the same koala.’ But I reckon it was
some of the rotten whites taking up with the lubras
that first brought the disease amongst them. Only
to-day Jimmy asked me to look at one of his great-
grandchildren. . . . Bone rot . . . hopeless ... all
along of godly white man ‘ civilizing the natives.’ ”
The doctor pressed tobacco vindictively into the
bowl of his meerschaum. " It’s the same on the


West Coast of Africa. Christianize a Kroo Boy and
you make a rogue. . . . Wherever, the White
Trader gets close to the Black . . . with anything
to barter from copra to women, he brings him nothing
more permanent than disease—or a taste for rum.”
" I suppose it’s because it’s usually the wrong
kind of white man who reaches the native first,”
said Miranda, coiling up her chestnut hair, which
had become loosened in a struggle to sit up grace-
fully in her string bed. “ What have you got there ?
Aboriginal knee-caps ? ”
He was taking out his notebook: he had some-
thing for her.
“ White heather,” he said, “ from Scotland . . .
brings luck to a bride, you know.”
" Then it’s no use to me,” she shook her head,
laughing. “ But I’ll keep it for the sake of the
donor.”
She tucked it in at the bosom of her muslin frock,
swinging her legs sitting on the side of the swaying
hammock.
" What about the very attentive man of the
Easter picnic,” asked Dr. Sutherland, looking to
where the flowering wattles met in a canopy of
orange and canary, pollen-scattering blooms.
" Have you turned him down —for good and all ?
She did not speak for a moment: her eyes were
nettled. " Oh, Mr. Gordon ! Would you advise
a woman to marry a man who drank . . . you , . .
with all your experience, Dr. Sutherland ? ”
R


He guessed he had somehow offended her, that
there was a deeper chagrin behind her words.
He did not pretend to misunderstand, though he,
she knew, liked Gordon.
" I wouldn’t,” he said. “ But circumstances
always alter cases. It would depend in this case
. . . entirely on the man—and the woman. . . .
Besides, if you mean Gordon, he’s running straight,
take my word for that: has been since the trial.
Don’t tell me, my girl, you’re the kind that wants
an unspotted-from-the-world kind of chap . . . milk
and water and texts on the wall. . . . God Bless
Our Horae and cotton antimacassars.... It wouldn’t
suit you a bit, Miranda of the timberlands, not a
little, little bit. ... You don’t quite know your-
self . . . you . . . with Helen’s hair 1 ”
There were red spots on her cheeks: she held
her head loftily :
“ Are you confident he wouldn’t break out
again ? He has told me of—so many times. . . .
Could a woman ever be sure ? ”
The doctor sucked at his pipe-stem, brought
his brows together in cogitation. He wanted to
say, “ Yes; a woman could be sure,” but he was
a professional man, and he was not a liar.
“To the best of my ability ... as I’m on oath
. . . I think Gordon has beaten it, my dear . . .
but . . . well . . . there might be a kicking over
the traces now and then. Marriage is never all
perfect. You have to figure out the thing you can


stand best . . . the faults you can least forgive,
before you take the plunge. . . . Marriage is
imperfect, because life is . . . but I’m not seeing
you an old maid, Miranda, if I have to marry you
myself. ... It would be wicked waste of fine
material. . . . Nature abhors waste. ... I believe
in the early days of Greece and Rome there were
no old maids ... we won’t say too much about the
Vestal Virgins . . . history is a confounding thing.
. . . I believe to a certain extent, despite Mrs.
Grundy, in the Chinese method with women. . . .
So there’s your problem. You couldn’t watch Ted
Gordon . . . that would make him kick over the
traces at once . . . but I firmly believe with you
beside him, he would have ninety-nine per cent
more chance of beating the thing altogether than
he will ever have alone. You know how men, clever,
highly strung men, drift ? It takes a woman, clever
as well as intensely feminine, to tether them. . . .
Flirt with your husband, take a lesson, you respect-
able women, from those branded otherwise, allure
your husband and laugh at the wine shops ! Bah!
. . . the fellow will be able to tell you all this,
some day, better than I ever shall, for I loved a
woman who wasn’t even respectable, and I saw the
reverse of the medal , . . but that’s old history
. . . thick with dust . . . but Trust your man,
trust him, or make him think you do, even when
you don’t. . . . That goes a long way to making him
worthy of it. He won’t enjoy the heart-burning,


the secret shame that conscience socks into him,
when he knows he is not worthy of your trust. . . .
If you marry him, take him literally for better and
for worse. Tell him, though you feel sometimes
you’re lying, that there never was such a fine man
as he, and that he has only to try just a little and
he’ll be a St. George of Old England, able to slay
any dragons of temptation life can bring. Trust
your man; it will make Mm strong .”
She was laughing, a little unsteadily. “ That’s
all a man's argument, Doctor, from first to last I
How many women have trusted, only to be deceived,
in the man they took for better or for worse ? Begging
your pardon, Dr. Sutherland, I think I prefer the
maidenhood to that . . . and then . . . then there
are other men in the world besides Edward Gordon.”
The doctor laughed. “Not for you, My Honey.
At the risk of offending you even more, and being
refused the cup of tea I’m longing for, Edward
Gordon’s your man. . . . God doesn’t make two
alike . . . any more than He makes two Mirandas
of the Timberlands. That is if God had any hand in
making you. I doubt a Holy Man would have
given you that chin and that hair like Helen's. . . .
Ready to make a blaze of Troy ! ’’
She sprang suddenly, and, he had to allow, with
success, as far as the grace of her movements went,
from the hammock.
“ You shall have your tea, but I think you’re
both a gossip and a busybody, and even if every


other man fails me, I won’t marry you, dear Dr.
Leatherface,” she said impertinently,, slipping her
arm through his, as he stood up beside her and
pocketed his pipe. " And there’s one thing you’ve
missed in all your argument. ... If Ted Gordon
ever cared—like that ... he doesn’t any more! ”
“ How do you know ? ” The doctor stood still,
frowning, while a wattle bloom like a pixy powder-
puff settled on his tweed-clad shoulder.
“ I do know,” she said gravely, her mouth thin
and fine. “ And now that subject is finished with —
for always. We have heaps of other things to talk
about . . . including black fellows’ knee-caps . . .
and you haven’t seen my new rockery ... at the
back of the wash-house. . . . Cholmondeley de-
clared it encourages ants by its dampness . . . funny
how ants love anything moist.”
“Yes,” said the doctor. “ When I was in Towns-
ville, I wanted to use an eye-dropper once . . .
couldn’t for the life of me make it work, then found
it was stuffed up with tiny red ants. . . . They
used to float in cones in my water-bottles and over
the surface of the wash-hand jug . . . but Pentland,
on the Great Northern Railway, was the most ant-
infested place I've ever been to in Australia. There
the water is never seen, you know, the evaporation
is too great, it runs under sand in the beds of creeks
along whose banks the beefwoods grow—pretty
things beefwoods in flower—and the gravelly surface
of the creek used to be crowded with every sort of


ant. I knew a woman who went up there with her
husband when he was inspecting timber for the
railways: she took a cake with her from Towns-
ville, and when she opened the tin box the ants had
eaten every bit; one could never say how they got
into things.”
They talked on as they went up the verandah
steps, and Miranda put on the red enamel kettle
for tea.
They did not speak of Ted Gordon again, but the
doctor noticed Miranda still wore the scrap of white
heather in a brooch at her throat.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
" Then out to sea as the dawn wind leaps from under the arch
of the hills
To where God holds in a sapphire cup the tithes of a thousand
rills. . . .
The soul of blossoms would stir and rise where the close-
packed petals lie
With sandals cast by the fleeing moons, and snoods of the
azure sky. The Boar of Sommer.
THE crests of the huge malachite waves were
frost-white, snow-capped mountains of per-
manent impermanency. Some, as they neared the
shore, were lashed yellow with sand, some showed
the leaping brown-spotted silvers of fish ! blue-grey
shells, verdigris-green seaweeds and scraps of seal-
brown drift.
There was a King tide coming in: to-night the
full moon would see itself in a vast assemblage of
waters, thundering on the trunks of the pandanus,
flooding the milk-white beaches. To-night the
cliff where the hibiscus stood would be murmurous
with sound of many waters, and to-morrow the
darting gulls would be over-busy amongst the
floatage of the sodden sands. Late afternoon was
golden now over an unclouded world, the far-off
eyot was once more visible, a magic earth-born
vapour upon the royal blue of distance.
Near the foremost breakers, where they swirled


laced with foam about the shore, Miranda, in her
moss-green bathing-dress, was surfing alone. Re-
membering the day long ago, when Gordon had
warned her of the approach of the black fleet, she
was not venturing far out, indeed, the heavy swell
would have convinced even a more intrepid swimmer
than herself that to hug the shore was the dis-
creetest plan; but the water was full of salt, bracing,
exhilarating, and she felt that kind of gay defiance
of the vast tidal mother which puny man, who is
yet a sea-lover, feels at the rim of the ocean which
could take him and toss him like a feather, he and
all his weight of brain and muscle, his hopes, his
fears, his loves, his hates, and his belief in immor-
tality, and in a few short minutes beat from him all
volition for evermore.
It was more than a year since they had laid Stodge
Garry under the winter wattles that bloomed downy
yellow as a chicken’s breast and were scented like
a goddess’s perfume casket. ... A year since she
had bowed her head in bitterness over the dear
trifles that had been Stodge's recreation, and Youth
and Life bade her once more take up the old trails,
for she had decided it would be better to have a
Sea-Garry, whose corners were haunted by a beloved
ghost, than fare far in the hope of finding that
forgetfulness that is, at last, a dulling and a healing
to acuteness of suffering.
Sane, strong, and fine was Miranda of the Timber-
lands. She bent morbidly over no engraved


tombstones, but she worked hard to make the
property that had been Garry’s as he would have
wished it to be: she ran the holding with the devoted
assistance of Cholmondeley and an old Scotchman
Cormorins had lent her, and who was now in the
kangaroo shooter’s hut across the creek, Brown
having taken to himself an emigrant wife, and being
busied regretting it, further south, on a small
selection, with twin babies and a scolding better-
half, who insisted on being so. City bred, she had
an amazing vocabulary, and Brown had always
been “ slow at the lamin’.”
Miranda had improved her property : she had a
gift for management, and though Stodge’s old
canvas chair still stood on the front verandah, and
his old house coat still hung behind the door, she
had taken up the burden of life again with some
laughters in the refrain of her days.
Always her beloved flowers made companionship,
and her splendid health provided that elasticity
which will allow of no prolonged brooding.
Stodge had lived like a man : he had died like
one . . . slipped away without suffering in moon-
light and starshine, with a valued friend to close
his eyes. Died as men die on battlefields, wept
and sung, though he left no woman to give tears for
him, except his sister, but there was always a warm
word wherever his name was mentioned in the
district, and Miranda doubted if he had ever made
a real enemy in his life.


She shook the salt water from her shoulders : a
great wave had just tumbled her over on the sands,
and she watched it run away from her gracious
body, down to her white ankles, and so back to its
bed, to return with a blinding crash further in
next time.
She laughed at the fury of the water, withdrew a
pace; thinking of the many who spoke well of Stodge,
her mind reverted to Ted Gordon. He, probably,
had made bitter foes in his day.
He had been usefully kind to her after Stodge
died; he had been good to her when he arrived
from Brisbane at the end of a few weeks with the
Cormorins, but, ever since the morning in The
Lonely Hut, she had felt it was " so-far-no-further ”
with Edward Gordon. Somehow she had herself
placed the bolt in the door between them.
The wave was returning now, a valiant fellow,
determined to rout her.
She shook her fist delightedly at it.
" I hold my ground. Usurper 1 A King must die
standing, you know,” and she sprang to her feet.
But the wave was too strong. It toppled her
backwards on the warm glistening sand, filled her
eyes, her ears with water, left a swathe of seaweed
like a necklet round her throat, then retreated
ruffling, all green and bright and filagreed with a
pattern of sun-gold like the design of an ancient
Chinese ornament. It was a beautiful wave, and its
ebb caressed her whole body, warmly, tenderly,


before it left her again. Breathless, she went to
the dry sand to recover. She must-have another
tussle with the water. It was full of the elixir of
life to-day!
Overhead there were wings in the blue, and the
roar of the breakers was in her ears still, so she did
not hear Gordon till he was close behind her.
He, too, carried a towel and a bathing suit, and
he made off towards a shielding rock.
“ I'll join you in a minute," he said, “ Aphrodite! ”
He was debonair, light-hearted as herself, to-day.
For a moment she turned, looking over her wet
shoulder strangely at him.
Well, after all, she did not own the sea ! It was
any man’s who chose to come to it!
She shrugged, tried ineffectually to disentangle
herself from the seaweed necklace, where a small
cone-shaped shell hung pendant-wise. From under
her black twisted silk head-dress her hair burned, as
an autumn leaf flames in October woods of colder
lands. She looked back to the cliff and the tree-
broken skyline, where the sun beat sweetness from
wild flowers. There was a richer scent of sea foam,
eucalypti and hill earth.
After all, even with the sea and sky, in her battle
with the ardent waves, she had been a little lonely...
a joyous experience shared is always a pleasure
doubled.
He was singing as he stripped behind the humped
rock and got into his bathing togs, an old Jacobite


song she had always liked to hear in those spring
evenings at Cormorins.
“ My lad was born in Aberdeen,
The bonniest lad that e’er was seen,
And now he makes my heart full sad :
He’s ta’en the field with his white cockade.
I’ll sell my sock. I’ll sell my reel.
My rippling kaim and spinning wheel,
To buy my lad a tartan plaid,
A braid sword, dirk, and white cockade."
She remembered how Beatrix had wanted to
know what a " rippling kaim ” was !
He hummed the refrain as he came back to her.
" I haven’t seen you for ages,” he said, sitting on
the sand beside her, his brown, hard leanness, for
all her determination that he should not be conscious
of it, stirring the age-old woman in her.
He had such splendid limbs, narrow flanks, wide
shoulders, arms that were clean and straight, with
the muscle to strike a foe—or hold a woman. . . .
Colour rushed to her brine-damp cheek. She
leapt to her feet, etched a moment, spirit of youth
and loveliness, against the green, the blue, the frost-
white summits of the sea.
“ Come on ! . . . Come on,” she said. “ Here’s a
big fellow advancing.”
She held out her hand : he clasped it close in his.
They could see the swelling mounds of the sea,
inevitably marching to them, higher, higher, to
break in a wall of water scrolled with foam and full


of opal and turquoise light, and golden grains of
sand.
“ Come on! . . . come on ! ”
The rush of water drowned her voice. He kept
his feet in the onslaught, legs braced wide apart,
but the water submerged her again, tore her hand-
kerchief away, and sent her hair, a mass of beaten
copper, about her shoulders.
He lifted her up : his arms were round her ; his
mouth was lashed a moment by her wave-driven
hair; he could feel her trembling sea-cold body,
her warm pulsing bosom, as the wave weakened
and went jealously into retreat, its aftermath still
swirling to their waists.
Gordon held her against his body, fierce as the
wave that tried to drown her, to make her its own,
his eyes ablaze, the salt spume falling from his dark
head, his mouth triumphant. Here they were. He
and She and the Ocean, the wilful cruel syren, the
eternal, the wonderful Mother, out of whom came
all life, the greatest conception of God. . . .
They did not see ; they did not heed, nor care.
Breast to breast they kissed, while the seaweed the
water-nymphs had twisted to adorn her throat
broke free and half-encircled his brown neck, and
linked them there between the advancing and
retiring billows, as wise Nature loves to link two
beautiful and human things.
As they went shorewards, racing before the
onslaught of the third great wave, they did not


speak: they looked into each other’s eyes. Once
they laughed. . . .
How simple it all was ! How strangely clear and
plain!
She loved him: he loved her; they had always
loved one another, before Time was. When the
world still steamed, ere the water hardened to earth
and they were eyeless, formless things . . . how
simple it all was! The sea had brought them
together in her great world-enveloping arms; the
sea was on their lips ; in their hair; the light of it
was, somehow, in their souls, as a water-wave is
reflected into shadows ; it dripped from their dark
eyelashes, ran over her white breast, outlining its
firm, swelling loveliness in shining drops. They
tingled from head to foot with the life-giving brines
of it, under the westering sun.
Then, like the Atalanta to whom he had once
likened her, she sped to her secret dressing cave,
and he to his cairn of rock.
He was first out on the dry sand again, restless,
hungry to hold her once more, to show the land, as
he had shown the sea, that she was . . . his . . .
his . . . his . . . after all!
The bolt was driven back in the door that had
estranged them.
He knew she loved him now.
She was wringing the water from her chestnut
mane of hair as she came, very demure, in her little
holland frock, with the black belt and sailor’s knot


of silk, to him, very demure, maidenly, and shy, as
he drew her down on the sand beside him.
‘‘l’ll dry your hair for you,” he said.
But the wind and the sun had their say in that:
the wind that drove the lank, damp strands against
his face, the wind and sun that loved to bring the
thick rich gold tints out in the autumn leaf of it.
" Through fire and water,” he whispered in her
car, remembering the first time he had held her to
him, " Through fire and water.”
Then abruptly : " Tell me, Miranda of the Timber-
lands, tell me, my lily of Laguna and ma rose, are
you sure you love me enough to marry me ? ”
She looked down carefully at her sea-bleached
hands lying in his, then she looked out to sea, up
at the cliff, tormented him as is a girl’s way, but
the woman conquered : she threw back her head
and her drying hair shone like a halo about her
glowing face.
“ Nothing will make any difference now” she
whispered, and he saw only the wise compassion of
her mouth, though her eyes were dark to tears.
“ I love you,” said Hibiscus Heart.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
The march of stars in the moon-washed skies
That are too lofty to dream of lies.”
The Pipe.
" Give me the wind that knows no binding.
That bows the awns of the scented grass,
Tho’ I pay the price with my tears’ wild blinding,
And catch at kisses that pause—and pass.”
The Rivals.
MISS STIGGS, who arrived on her flea-bitten
grey with the spavined leg, was the first to
proffer her felicitations to Miranda: these good
wishes she accompanied by the present of a mustard-
yellow pillow-sham covered with cotton crochet,
hoping Miss Garry would not think the gift “ in-
delicate.”
She partook of Miranda’s brownie and some weak
tea, told her of her own engagement in the days
that are forgotten, to a prominent Rechabite : said
what a comfort it was when a man avoided drink
altogether, related how her Augustus had died of
ptomaine poisoning after a Sabbath picnic, and
gathered up her long riding skirt to depart, pausing
on the verandah to gaze in the direction of the
offending bathroom, and supposed Miss Garry would
have it roofed over, now that she was to become a
married woman.


Miranda re-told the story to Gordon that night
under the northern scented pines on the sandy ridge,
on the road that led to Cormorins, which Ted
Gordon’s hack had grown to know to boredom
recently.
He laughed.
They laughed easily and often about nothing,
these two, nowadays.
At Cormorins, Beatrix had put up her hair, and
moved with what she would have called, and prob-
ably did in the privacy of her own thoughts,
" stately grace.” She pictured herself as “ growing
old beautifully,” caring for Gordon, and Miranda’s
children; perhaps they would call the eldest after
her. She would be known to these shadowy and
problematic personages as “ Aunt Beatrix.” People
would guess her life held somewhere a hidden
sorrow, and would never know who had been the
object of her thwarted affections. She decided, even
now while Miranda and Gordon laughed under the
pines, to add a prophetic page to the Story of her
Life, somewhat neglected lately in preparation for
the township race ball, at which she would be a
debutante " amongst them, but not of them,” but
when she pulled out the lower drawer, where her
black-covered exercise book lay, she discovered
under its ebony severity the bit of mignonette-
green velvet she had been looking for all day, and
which would be just the thing to tie up her bonny
brown hair for the ball,
S


She sat on the bed, the book in her lap, her fingers
busy with needle and thread, fashioning her snood.
Her thin fingers were clever ones.
Presently the Story of her Life slid to the floor
unnoticed: the snood wouldn’t go quite the way
she wanted it.
As she crossed to the dressing-table to try the
effect of the decoration before the mirror, a new
one her father had had sent from the city, she trod
on the book, kicked it out of the way, and, looking
down to see what had nearly tripped her, exclaimed
" Oh ! bother,” and though she did not know it at
the time, even when she returned the unopen book
to the drawer again, she had passed a milestone in
her emotional career.
The glow surrounding Edward Gordon had begun
to fade; presently he would be merely faintly out-
lined in phosphorescence, and, finally, would be no
more than just an ordinary man who had married
another woman, and had declined into the hum-
drum position that is all matrimony offers to many
a once-gallant knight-errant.
When she went to bed she dreamed of conquest
at township balls and mignonette-green snoods
entangling susceptible bush hearts.
Meanwhile Ted Gordon and Miranda, in the moon-
less night, sat hand in hand on a mossy log and
talked of the days to be.
“ I suppose you would like Melbourne or Sydney
for our honeymoon,” he said.


For a moment she did not answer, her free hand
stripped tufts of rosetted moss from the log.
A flying fox dived from the trees overhead, making
its hideous scissor-grinding sound : they heard the
leathery wings flap into silence.
Then her lips voiced what his heart secretly urged,
though because of all that had been ... he dared
not openly speak it.
" I would like to go to The Mountain,” she said.
The Mountain ! To have and to hold, under the
canvas house they would build, nothing but the
virgin forest about them, to bathe in the little palm-
reflecting pools, to lie close and hear the dingo
howling in scrub-engulfed gullies, to wake to the
carolling of magpies ; twitter of silver-eyes ; shrill
parrot calls; the whip-bird rousing the dewy earth
from its fine rainbows of lingering mist; to see the
sun like a golden egg fall through the white-heaped
feathers of cloud. To go with her by the trails they
trod full of doubt and misunderstanding, knowing
they would never tread those ways with the shadow
between any more.
He caught her fiercely to him. How one they
were in heart ... in soul!
" Hibiscus Heart . . . Hibiscus Heart ! ”
But the courting days were not all unclouded
ones. . . .
One day she waited for him by the sea, and he
did not come.
At high noon she went home, where the wild


white clematis strewed the garden, and in her own
garden a lily stood up like a crystal shaft beyond
the roses.
He had made appointment with her and had
failed to keep it. . . . Can a woman ever experience
this and not be affronted ?
With blazing cheeks and high-held head she
took the homeward way.
How dared he! She would take the turquoise
matrix and diamond ring from her engagement
finger, fling it in his face. . . .
He must learn to keep faith with Miranda of the
Timberlands.
Calmer counsel hinted there might be station
work, an accident: her cheeks grew pale. ... No !
She did not believe it! She was Miranda of the
Timberlands, sane and fine, but she was also a
daughter of Eve.
Who was the other woman ?
She stopped dead in the path; the “happy
jacks ” were busy about some affair of importance
in the grass. She could see one of their “ make-
believe ” nests in the trees overhead. A king-
fisher, a flash of blue and green, lit for a minute on
a dull-hued bush.
Miranda stamped her foot. “ How dare he keep
me waiting ? ”
She went home, blind with angry tears. Raged
about her flower-sweet home, would find him no
excuse in her accusing heart. She would give him


up : he was unreliable. Long ago she had herself
said, men who drank . . .
She sat down suddenly in Stodge’s canvas chair.
Was it . . . that ?
Her hands grew cold : she remembered Chris long
since in the township street: she remembered
stories she had heard of what wives suffered when
men rioted in township bars, of the return home,
of wrecked domestic happiness.
She looked into the sunlit bush. From the wet
earth where Cholmondeley had been watering
again, as she had told him not to, her garden by
sunlight, rose the sweet smell of freshly turned soil.
How often had she told Cholmondeley to wait till
dusk ?
What did Cholmondeley’s disobedience matter ?
Her problem was here, stark and waiting.
If Ted Gordon was not going to “ beat it ”
before marriage. . . . what could she expect after-
wards ?
She must end it all. Go back to the days of
quiet peace before she knew him, before her step-
brother died, the tranquil days.
She had done without men then; had never
thought about them seriously. She must go back
to that.
Her happy love had been no more than the
hibiscus flower that lasts but a day.
She must cut the knot that bound her to this
uncertain Englishman. . . .


Courage . . . that was the greatest thing in the
world. . . .
He came to her at twilight, when she was out
amidst her flowers.
" Where have you been ? ” she asked.
It was so hard to be cold, proud . . . and . . .
courageous when one sensed the dear nearness of
him: his straight back, his lean strength of limb,
his gallant head, his fine dark hair, his hazel eyes
that caressed her; so hard; but the greatest
thing in the world is courage.
She waited to hear his explanation.
“ Caro mia, I ask your pardon.”
“ But . . . why . . . didn’t you come ? ”
She wished he would not look at her like that. It
made one almost forget the offence, this glamour
of his presence.
She trusted he wouldn’t take the mean advantage
of touching her. It confused one’s mind so . . .
one only wanted the solace of his lips . . . the
crush of his embrace . . . that stayed the heart
hunger always present when he was not there.
But he did not.
" I have no excuse really, dear,” he said. " Jim
sent me into the township with a wire to the bank.
They were giving a send-off to Carrol Erie at the
Stockman’s Arms. They asked me to come to it,
but I had refused . . . the finish was we . . .
I ... all of us got more or less ' shot.’ ... I
dare not. ... I would not, I mean . . . come to


you till I felt all straightened up again .... I never
will come near you like that, dear . . . it's muddy
feet in a shrine. . . . It’s a rotten thing to have
to tell you . . . but it’s better than a lie.”
She looked at him. A soft grey moth burred past
her cheek, one tiny star swam in the pearl-gold
west . . . but it was still in the garden.
The greatest thing in the world was courage.
She fidgeted with the ring on her finger. . . .
It had always been too large. He had said he
must take a better measure for her wedding ring.
Her wedding ring ! She thought of Miss Stiggs,
of the terrible bilious-yellow of the pillow-sham,
of her remarks about roofing in the bathroom. . . .
The foot that slides once may slip again . . .
and Gordon had promised. . . .
She reviewed her placid days before they met,
and all the time he stood before her, his expression
non-committal, his eyes asking —asking
“ What ? ”
The greatest thing in the world was courage.
Then she laughed, and, laughing, gained her
victory, a victory she never had to win over again.
Heedless of Cholmondeley, who was carrying
a saddle into the harness room, she flung her arms
about Gordon’s neck.
The greatest thing—for them both —was Com-
passion. . . .
She did not fear the future: she would not fear
the future.


And if she did, no human love, no human life,
was all happiness.
For better, for worse—for richer, for poorer—the
words that have no more real significance in the
marriage service with benefit of clergy, than they
have in the honest love of Man for Woman and
Woman for Man, that takes no heed of marriage
laws, seemed to flow through her mind, and wash
away the self-pity, the smart of wounded vanity,
the despair of the afternoon.
He had not lied to her, had not pleaded work
on the station, or some sudden summons to the
edge of the Run, as he might easily have done.
He had told her the truth, even if, in their present
position, a somewhat humiliating one, because he
trusted her.
He rested his life upon her life, as the wild white
gull rests secure upon the breast of the eternal
mother, the ocean, that is too great ever to be any-
thing but . . . great.
“ My man,” whispered Hibiscus Heart.
" My woman,” said Ted Gordon.
And Cholmondeley, putting away the saddle and
bridle in the harness room, began to sing an
aboriginal love song, a song of stark loving, older
than any marriage code framed for Black Man
or for White.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
“ October lays her glowing hands in mine ;
Her eyes are opals, but her hands are gold.”
October.
" Some trembling woman in a lover’s arms.
Whose laugh holds the first carol of the babe
And the throb
Of mating Spring-time in the Pipes of Pan."
Laughter.
BECAUSE she had been bom in October’s
mystic month, Miranda of the Timberlands
chose a day from that month for her wedding.
Gordon had gone up The Mountain some days
previously to pick the site for their encampment.
His idea had been to pitch their tent close to one
of The Mountain’s numerous waterfalls, by the
unbroken gloom of tree-fern shadows: the swing
of many boughs, where the pale clematis dropped
honey, yet where their beloved sunshine could slip
through, for Miranda, being a child of October,
must necessarily love her native sun which browns
the golden cheek September, Queensland’s spring-
month, turns.
Gordon naturally wished to avoid the unhappy
associations connected with The Lonely Hut, and
even some memories which would be stirred by
a return to the picnic plateau of the Easter holidays,
for then Stodge had been with them.
It was on the second day of his solitary exploration


of the ranges that he came upon the ideal setting
for his idyll.
The path which he followed with the call of the
waters in his ears was a cool and pleasant one
through the scrub. Birds twittered in the thickets
and leafy defences of the wood land. Pheasants,
warm russet of plumage, flew low on the narrow,
fern-patterned way : the cat bird cried : the whip
bird rejoiced in the trickle of sun that made its own
waterfalls of light amid the green dusks. There
were trailing sprays of damp and scented things,
wind-blown tendril fingers that touched his tanned
cheek with gentle curiosity, hieroglyphics on fungo-
trimmed chocolate-coloured logs, sprinkled with
red like royal missives of Eastern princes. Bare
boughs, knife sharp, here and there slashing leaf
canopies, boat-shaped husks of native chestnuts
with half-eaten glossy mahogany kernels scattered
on the moist ground where the shadow dredged
all the sunshine away, dashes of lemon-yellow in
twig palisades that meant a blossoming orchid, or
the light leaf of a parasite fern, columns of twisted
creeper decking the spring mornings for scrubland
festa : cunjiboy with glistening lily-wide fronds,
a stinging nettle modestly sombre-olive, watching
its chance, satin-white boles of flooded gums, and
always the murmurous contralto of the waters to
draw him on to the chuckling chorus of the falls.
There was a stretch of flat rock by the channels
of the stream. There were waterfalls above and
below where Gordon penetrated, but the crystal


tides eddied round volcanic rocks, patched with the
lichens of hoary centuries.
On the left of the major cascade, which thundered
down by the flat rock, a bird’s-nest fern had found
permanent abiding in a slim wild chestnut tree,
beyond that again were pillars of vine clasped about
tall forest dwellers, pools full of sun-glitter and
more boulders, thick with the tangled arabesques
of moss, vert as the rust of copper. Lofty picca-
beens had set their dainty feathered bonnets at a
sky of periwinkle blue.
Round his tired feet, as he dabbled in the tide,
the waters swished and swirled a plaintive susurrus
of sound, the melody of some lost Undine who ever
sings of her days of forgotten loving. Beyond the
pools was a cave hollowed in the seventy-foot wall of
rock, where, high up, Gordon could see traces of
old aboriginal paintings on the stone, crude things
of red and black, a hand, a foot, a not-impossible
kangaroo. The shimmering pool below this a
flickering opal-green. Between the moss-splashed
rocks were bone-white buddings over which leaned
a tree full of minute jacaranda-tinted flowers. As
his bare foot explored this pool he found the rock
slippery and unsafe where his movements had
broken the quivering reflex of close-bunched rushes,
and shivering water grasses brushed eerily against his
ankles, with feeble repulsing strokes, as though they
blamed this intruder for disturbing an age-old peace.
Sitting on the brown rock, forgetful of the almost
certain and premeditated attention of leeches, with


the soothing of running waters in his ears, Ted
Gordon decided that he need go no further for the
fitting background of his honeymoon days.
He could so readily picture Hibiscus Heart here,
could almost hear her laughter now in the low
tinkling waters, see her white feet on the naked
rocks, her arms upreached for the guerdon and the
rifling of the budding boughs.
He would set their tent up here ... in the
wilderness.
It was at the foot of The Mountain now in a
spring cart, guarded by the old Scot from Sea-
Garry, with the rest of the bag and baggage. Gordon
would pitch it here on the warm rock, line the in-
terior with the boughs of sweet resin-scented bush-
oak and reedy conifers, and the golden everlastings
which would not fade: his carpet should be of the
plumage of stripped pine boughs, and he laughed
as he marked a cinnamon and malachite-tinted
bush of mistletoe, high up on a gum : he must have
that to hang over the doorway . . . even if he had
to shin up the tree like a nigger to get it.
A young axe-man in the neighbourhood, to whom
Gordon had been a hero since the capture of Darney,
had offered to help to get the things up The Mountain
by pack and to supply the tent poles, anything else
Mr. Gordon needed.
The district seethed with romantic interest in
the young couple, and the Cormorins insisted that
the wedding be “ something to talk about: a big
affair at the station.”


Neither Edward Gordon nor Miranda Garry
would have aught of this. Someday soon all the
pickets posted about the township would know the
actual date when they would ride in and be married
by special licence without those social appendages
of bridal maid or best man, and then they would
fare forth “ wherever love led.”
This was all the most careful cross-examination
could wring from either of them.
Miss Stiggs said it seemed barely decent that
Miranda Garry should arrange to have “ no woman
to stand by her,” and be married, as the girl said
frankly, in a " plain white linen frock.”
Nevertheless, wedding presents arrived by mail-
pack and special messenger to Sea-Garry through
September’s end. Six marble clocks and half a
dozen cruets and an abnormal percentage of butter
knives and toast-racks confronted Miranda whenever
she went into her kitchen now, and Beatrix Cor-
morin, who was spending an hilarious holiday in
the city with her cousin Arline, embroidered a tray
cloth with the combined initials of bride and bride-
groom, a little lopsided like all Bee’s embroideries,
to show at least that she had quite got over her
“ lifelong disappointment.”
Beatrix had really no time for writing the Story
of Her Life nowadays . . . that life itself was
altogether too absorbing.
And Dr. Sutherland wrote a characteristic note,
with the old brass Buddha he had picked up long
ago in Benares, which he sent Miranda for her


“ Hearth God.” She blushed and did not show the
letter to Gordon.
On the plain the day had been hot. October’s
opal fires burned fiercely on the stretches of green-
sward and on the little creek with the lily pads
and red bottle brush: the smell of clover dusty
sweet was blown on the evening wind. There were
harebells on the flat and small white-bonneted
daisies. A cloudless day dropped down into the
rosy arms of a perfect night. Wonderful eau-de-nils
and splashes of apricot and gold made banners in
the west, suddenly the sun god winked his fiery
eye on the horizon and disappeared, twilight under
lilac-tinted skies broke out in pale stars swimming
low down in lemon-coloured seas. . . . The Moun-
tain became purple, then black, the stars flamed into
contrasting brightness. The Milky Way laid paths
for the fairies that run between earth and heaven
through the dark hours, and these pixies, made of
star-dust and blue strips of ether, met with the
earth fairies whose wings are the petals of flowers
and whose shoe strings are of grass, and danced to
the glimmering light of the fungi-lanthorns in
mountain ways. . . .
Not long did the stars hold entire sway of the
skies. . . .
Lifted in ever-aweing beauty, queen primrose
in the fields of night, or rare gold coin from a god’s
gaming table, looking down on the plain where
the cows went to water as of old, and the sly pack


dingoes watched their chance, and the little red-
brown calves complained, making a silver streak of
the creek with the lily flecks of shadow on the sheen,
up came the glory of the full October moon from
the dusk cellars of the day.
It sailed over the heavens where a faint film
of cloud gathered. It searched among the narrow
timber-filled gorges, the crooked mountain roads,
the fragile filaments of fogs in the aisles of the
topmost-growing trees, till it came to the far-off
waterfall where love of life was making carnival.
Out of the dusk of stem and foliage glimmered
the white tent.
The air was full of the musks of tiny unscheduled
plants, of sappy fern, of lavish honey-gatherings of
flowers. . . . The running stream was as syren
song in the ears of the man who sat at the edge of
the rock, letting the cool, diamond-clear waters
wash round his ankles.
In the walls of the lamplit tent he could see a
woman’s shadow blurred in grotesque waverings,
now high, now low. . . .
She threw back her head: he could guess she
was brushing her long and lovely hair, tinted like
polished bronze. . . . He could almost hear the
rhythmic strokes of the brush above the old, old
song of the waters coming down through miles of
bracken and of frailer fern.
He threw away his cigarette. Who could pretend
to smoke to-night ? . . .


There was a cup-shaped nest of bell birds almost
within reach of his hand, on an overhanging bough.
. . . Some small furred quadruped came stealthily
to drink at the quiet pool, below the aboriginal art
gallery of the cave.
The water made a strange melody in his ears ....
strange and yet always ultimately interpreted,
though differently, by generations of men, black
and white.
The night to him was full of music: the tall
flooded gums were organ pipes in a cathedral no
hand of man had ever made so fine: the tree ferns
were dancing ladies in a minuet at the court of
green and unspoiled things: the drowsy chirp of
birds, even the cry of the hunting boo-book owl,
were merged in one vast psalm of thanksgiving.
And his soul had suddenly stumbled upon Ms
part in that great Te Deum. . . .
He saw the moon rise . . . noble and gracious
as beaten gold, a god’s victory-shield, over the
trees.
He saw the lamp go out in the tent that had
settled like a winged creature blown from an en-
chanted world on the moss-carpeted rock.
He got up from the rock, waded through the
shallow pools which the moon was already beginning
to transform into a mirror of light.
He smelled the sweet, piney odours of the broken
boughs that lined and carpeted his bridal room.
He lifted the canvas flap; he went into the tent.


