

HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION.
AND
MATTERS PERTINENT THERETO.
By J.I. HA Y CROFT.
Master in Engineering, Queen's University . Ireland ,
Assoc. M. Inst. C.E.,
Borough Engineer, Woollahra,
[Read before the Engineering Section op the Royal Society
of N. S. Wales, on 18th October, 1893.]
f“ it} 3 Ogct*




For Private Circulation only.]
HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION.
MATTERS PERTINENT THERETO
By J. I. HA Y CROFT,
Master in Engineering, Queen's University. Ireland ,
Assoc. M. Inst. C.E.,
Borough Engineer , Woollahra
[Head before the Engineering Section of the Royal Society
op N. S. Wales, on 18th, October, 1893.]
Sydney:
Saml. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer,
83 York Street.
f 107




HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND
MATTERS PERTINENT THERETO.
The highways of a country, especially those more generally
called the roads, may be sa d to form an excellent criterion as
to the degree of civilisation existing in the country under
consideration.
Roads are symbolical of the progress or stagnation of any
age or people. As a writer has said : “If the community is
stagnant, the condition of the roads will indicate the fact; if they
have no roads, they are savages.”
It has been stated that since the introduction of railways,
roads are not reliable as an indication of progress or otherwise,
the author is not of this opinion, however, though undoubtedly rail-
ways have altered the character of the traffic on country roads.
Roads in civilized countries now-a-days may be considered as
discharging very different functions to those for which they were
originally designed previous to the introduction of railways;
then their object was to facilitate communication between distant
centres of population. This function being usurped by the
railway, through increase of speed amongst other reasons, the
road has to take a secondary, but still important, place as feeder
to the railway.
The great antiquity of road-making is generally allowed,
and though the Romans are constantly cited as remarkable road-
makers, still the art did not originate with them. The
Carthaginians, for fully five centuries before the founding of the
Roman Empire, constructed excellent roads, some of which are
in existence at the present day ; the date at which the Incas in
Peru constructed their roads, of paving blocks ten feet square, is
lost in the obscurities of forgotten ages.
As I intend in this paper to give details of road construction
as practised in various parts of the globe, it will not, perhaps, be
uninteresting to recount shortly how the Romans constructed
their highways. The method of location seems to have been very
simple. In the unavoidable absence of maps, a prominent land
mark was selected, and the road constructed towards same, as a
general rule, in a straight line, totally ignoring any natural
obstacle which might be on such a route ; the width of the roads
varied from 8 to 20 feet, and they were, as a rule, constructed
as follows : the formation was executed by cutting a trench for
full width of the road, and about three feet deep, the finished


surface being thus practically level with adjoining natural surface.
The materials of which the road was constructed were as follows :
(I.) The “ statumen,” consisting of two courses of large flat
stones laid in lime mortar; (2.) The “ rudus,” composed of
broken stone, mixed with lime in proportion of one to three, and
well consolidated by ramming; (3.) The “ nucleus,” being a
mixture of broken brick, potsherds, tiles, gravel, and lime;
(4.) The “ summa crusta,” a pavement of irregularly-shaped stones,
about six inches deep, closely jointed, resembling a mosaic
pavement. These roads were remarkable for their strength and
durability, but were deficient in other qualities requisite for a
good road.
Most writers agree that from the fall of the Roman Empire
until early in the present century, the art of road-making fell
into desuetude ; the reason for this 1 am not called on to discuss
in this paper, but the fact remains that previous to the appear-
ance of Macadam, about 1816, the roads of European countries
were, if they can be classified at all as roads, and not tracks, in a
deplorable condition.
In Young’s “Tour in the North of England,” is the following
passage : —“ I know not, in the whole range of language, terms
sufficiently expressive to describe this infernal road. Let me
most seriously caution all travellers who may propose to travel
this terrible country to avoid it as they would the devil ; for a
thousand to one they break their necks or limbs by overthrows
or breaking downs. They will here meet with ruts, which I
measured, actually four feet deep, and floating with mud, only
after a wet summer ; what, therefore, must it be after a winter 1
The only mending it receives is tumbling in some loose stones,
which serve no other purpose than jolting a carriage in the most
intolerable manner.”
This language is strong, but no doubt the circumstances
merited its use, and judging from the present-day literature it is
equally applicable to some of the roadways in America, if not,
indeed, to portions of this continent.
The author does not intend, except, perhaps, very briefly
later on, to deal with the question of the laying out of roads
from an engineering point of view; such detail is entirely
governed by locality, and cannot very well be dealt with from a
general standpoint. Practical experience is absolutely necessary
for the successful treatment of this branch of my subject, and
forms a special sub-branch of the profession.
It is univet sally conceded that the roads of France and
Switzerland hold the premier place amongst the highways of the
world, both as regards construction and maintenance. The
author will now proceed to review, as concisely as possible, the
highways of these and other countries.


The roads in Prance may be taken as divided into three
classes, viz., State roads, departmental or provincial roads, and
communal or township roads. There is also the class lying
within a city and its suburbs, known as municipal thoroughfares.
As a rule the highways of France are macadamized, pavement or
other material only being used for streets, or where traffic is
severe. The macadam is composed of various materials, according
to the district, porphyry, basalt, granite, limestone, and flints
being most frequent. The depth of the coating varies from 4
inches for light traffic to about 12 inches on the State roads.
One precaution is always taken in construction, viz., thorough
drainage, both of the bed and finished surface; that of the bed is
various, sand being invariably used over clay formation. The
top surface of the macadam is lightly dusted with stone broken
very fine, and watered previous to rolling ; this rolling is carried
out by steam rollers weighing as much as 15 tons. After suitable
consolidation by the roller, the surface is treated with clay, earth
or other suitable material, to act as binding, and subjected to
further rolling before being opened to traffic. A strict system of
maintenance is enforced immediately on a road being opened to
traffic, under capable officers, the system comprising the constant
removal of dust or mud, though little of the latter has to be dealt
with, except during a continuous inclement season, the former
not being allowed to accumulate; all depressions are immediately
cleaned, roughened, and filled with fresh material, the material
gained during the roughening being used as binding material.
Thorough repairs are carried out as the surface may require it,
the periods of repair naturally varying in accordance with the
amount of traffic ; these repairs are carried out by sheeting the
surface of the road with fresh materials, rolling and binding same
until thoroughly consolidated.
In some departments the necessary labour for road mainten-
ance is furnished by the taxpayers, who are bound either to work
themselves three days every year, to provide a substitute for such
labour, or the monetary equivalent for such substitute. These
repairs are executed under the supervision of competent engineers,
the taxpayer not being honoured by being considered as having
the necessary qualification to act on his own responsibility, but
merely to obey instructions, which are enforceable under penalty.
The highways of France are remarkable for their durability,
smoothness and cleanliness. They are swept and watered daily, if
necessary ; no rugged furrows or depressions exist to incommode
the traveller; neither dust, decay, or rubbish is about to suggest
neglect. Their excellence is due to several causes : first, the care
exercised in providing thorough drainage when constructing;
the admirable system of maintenance ; the natural suitability of
the materials employed ; and in many districts to the fact that
the immense waggons used act as rollers or consolidators, not


disintegrators, due to the use of broad tires from 4 to 6 inches
wide, and to the fact that the rear axle is always longer than the
front one by double the width of the tire. Thus with a 6 inch
tire at least two feet wide of the road is rolled by every passing
waggon. The streets of French cities and towns are invariably
paved with stone blocks; this is indeed a very common form of
pavement throughout the Continent. The mode of construction
is very cheap, consisting generally in the formation by excavation
for a depth sufficient to receive the foundation of sand, about
6 inches deep, and the paving block, also about 6 inches ; these
paving blocks, which vary greatly in the exposed dimensions, are
laid by hand on the sand bed, in transverse rows at right angles
to the direction of the street, the longitudinal interstices breaking
joint, all interstices being filled with sand and the surface made
regular by ramming with a paviour’s rammer. The repair of
this pavement is very simple. Suppose a block or several blocks
have sunk, the maintenance man lifts them with a suitable tool,
fills in sufficient sand to bring the blocks to a suitable level,
replaces the blocks, and rams them.
The nature of the stone paving blocks varies in different
districts; thus Paris and the north use granite or Belgian blocks,
whilst porphyry or hard sandstone is used in the south. The
porphyry resists wear, but is very slippery, and for this reason its
horizontal dimensions are much less than those of granite blocks,,
in order to afford more joints for foothold. In some cities the
sand foundation is underlaid with concrete, the sand being then
much thinner ; this construction is used in clayey or insufficiently
resistant soils, on tramway lines, or in streets of great traffic.
Natural asphalt is largely used in the great French cities in
principal thoroughfares; and wood blocking, with soft wood
similar to London practice, has latterly been introduced. Both
these surface materials overlie a concrete bed. Natural asphalt
is extensively used as a material for footpath surfaces in Paris
and other cities ; it gives great satisfaction, as should be expected,
owing to its smoothness and capability of being easily cleaned.
In Switzerland, where the roads are also excellent in
character, the system both of construction and maintenance
differs somewhat from that in vogue in France. The majority of
the present main roads are identical in position with the Roman
roads, some noted exceptions being the Simplon and St. Goshard,
two highways which are monuments of constructive skill. Whilst
the metalled roads of France are constructed in accordance with
Macadam’s views, the roads of Switzerland are invariably
somewhat after Telford’s method; or perhaps, to be more correct,
after the model of the numerous Roman roads throughout the
country, the distinguishing characteristics being a carefully hand-
laid pavement of roughly-dimensioned stones. This foundation
course is never omitted, except when the road formation is in


rock. The Swiss engineers act on the principle that without an
adequate foundation there is no durable road ; no matter on what
system, or with what care and expense, the surface is treated, the
result will be swift ruin unless the superstructure is properly
supported from beneath. The worst surface with a good
foundation affords a better road than the costliest surface without
a foundation.
Great vigilance is necessary on the part of the maintenance
staff to ensure good surface in such a mountainous country as
Switzerland, and anyone visiting the scenery of the Alpine passes
cannot fail to be struck with the excellent condition of the roads.
The fact that Switzerland is a favourite touring country for
cyclists speaks volumes for the condition of the road surfaces in
that country. Gravel is largely used in the maintenance and surface
construction of roads; this material is plentiful in the mountain
regions, due to glacial action. Steam rollers are not used to
anything like the extent they are used in France ; the ordinary
traffic is used to consolidate the road surface. The natural stone
of the country is the best description, being of volcanic origin.
The footpaths, of which there are many hundred miles in the
neighbourhood of cities and picturesque scenery, are covered with
fine gravel. The footpaths in the cities are invariably asphalted
with natural asphalt. The city street surfaces are either
macadamised (cement being largely used to bind the surface),
stone pavement, pressed asphalt, and wooden blocks. The stone
pavement consists of blocks from 4 to 5 inches deep, laid on a
3 inch bed of sand, and at the end of from 15 to 20 years needs
renewal. The wood pavement is of Baltic timber, and in some
places local wood, principally pine, laid on a 6 inch concrete bed.
The asphalt in the streets is also laid on concrete, and lasts 20
years with little or no repairs.
Great attention is paid to the surface drainage of the
highways in Switzerland, the convexity being as much as 1 in 20,
and ample facility is provided for storm water passing across
underneath the roads through masonry culverts. In both Swiss
and French cities tree planting is extensively adopted, and it
goes without saying the foliage is very pleasing to the eye, and
affords welcome shade during the short though very warm
summers in these countries.
In Germany, owing to the network of railways throughout
the Empire, the construction of new main roads may be said to
have ceased upwards of 20 years ago, the attention of the
authorities in the various provinces which now form the Empire
being centred on the improvement of the highways leading from
the railways to the surrounding districts.
The mode of construction varies in different provinces, some
using Macadam and some Telford pavement. As a rule, the
roads are excellent, due, no doubt, to the naturally suitable


quality of the materials employed, such as granite, porphyry,
basalt, limestone from the Jura mountains. Many of the
country roads have only the centre portion treated with stone,
the wings, or sides, forming dirt roads.
A distinctive feature of many German highways are the
fruit trees planted on both sides. The crops of these trees—
apples, plums, pears, cherry, and such like—are annually let by
auction in the spring, and yield large profits, in many cases much
more than sufficient to maintain the roads. These trees answer
other purposes besides those of revenue; they afford shade and
are pleasing to the eye • they mark the boundary of the road at
night time, and in winter during periods of snow. This latter
service is invaluable, as throughout the greater part of Germany,
as also other European countries, fences are the exception, not
the rule; even in some parts the railways are unfenced.
Stringent laws exist in many of the German States which
are unknown in other parts of the world. Some of these are as
follows :—ln the case where a manufacturer uses an otherwise
easily maintained road to get his wares to market, he must pay a
special tax to remedy any injury to the road surface; building-
speculators must, before commencing operations, deposit with the
authorities a sum equal to the whole cost of making the street;
various laws affecting the width of tires; all new streets must
have both storm waters and main sewers constructed before
surface materials are applied ; in winter time the taxpayers must
supply supplementary labour to remove snow.
It is an invariable rule in constructing streets in towns, to
do so at such a temporary low level that when it is desirable to
pave such street, the original road surface forms the foundation
for such pavement, being merely brought to the required curve
in cross section by the usual layer of sand. The streets of
German cities are either metalled, paved with wood or stone, or
asphalted. As a rule, all new streets are metalled ; the stone
pavements are of the ordinary type, granite cubes, laid on sand,
and provided with a foundation of either concrete or the old
metalled surface. Wooden pavements are not viewed with
favour, as a rule, in Germany. In Berlin wood pavements, with
wide joints, of American cypress and Swedish pine, were laid
down, but had to be removed and replaced by asphalt in a few
years. The Berlin Horse-car Company, however, have been
successful in the use of impregnated beech wood as a paving
material between their lines, it proving more suitable than asphalt,
which was too slippery, granite setts which ruined the horses, and
metalled surfaces which proved unsuitable owing to frequent
repairs. A Smelting Company have recently laid down as an
experiment in the Unter den Linden a pavement consisting of
wood blocks capped with steel, the joints being filled with
bitumen, and the foundation being of concrete. Up to date this


has proved successful as far as durability is concerned, but is
naturally very noisy.
No waste is permitted throughout Germany in connection
with the stone pavements. When the paving stones are so worn
in a first-class street as to be considered unsuitable, they are
removed and used in the construction of less important streets,
and when, in course of time, they become unfit for further use as
pavement they are broken up and used as metal. This treatment
is no doubt due to the first cost of the material, which has to be
imported from Sweden, Norway, Belgium, and the Danube.
In many of the small German cities the use of concrete as a
foundation is dispensed with, and gravel, well consolidated by
rolling, used instead. The asphalt pavements in German cities
are of the ordinary type, on a concrete foundation, the material
being the natural rock from Switzerland, France, or Sicily.
Experiments have been made with artificial asphalt, but not
successfully. The surface of footpaths in Germany is constructed
of an infinite variety of materials; concrete made of slag and
cement being prevalent in the iron districts; asphalt, cobble
stones in the older cities, granite slabs in the centre and asphalt
at each side ; concrete consisting of 1 cement and 6 of gravel,
with a surface coat 1 inch thick of equal parts of cement and
sand, cross hatched into diamond shape while soft, and reserved
from traffic until thoroughly set; mosaic pavement of limestone
and porphyry, and in some cities of square plates of what is
known locally as “ Dutch tile.” In Berlin, where the road is
impervious, such as when asphalt is used, the invariable rule is to
construct the outer 3 feet of the footpath next the kerb with
mosaic strips. The reason for this is given to afford a vent for
gas or water leakage from pipes in the roadway, and so prevent
injury to basements; also to facilitate the planting of shade
trees.
The highways of Austria may be divided into the two classes :
Imperial or State roads, and provincial roads or streets. The
mode of construction varies in the different parts of the Empire,
some being constructed on Telford’s system, some on that of
Macadam, the majority of them being the latter. The State
roads are administered by a special Department, it having been
found, after many years experiment, that the system of
maintenance by contract was not satisfactory. The expense of
this Department is defrayed by tolls collected on the roads. The
general plan of maintenance is to repair by small patches, and,
where the road is sufficiently worn, to construct entire lengths at
one time.
The five State roads leading to Vienna, for a total length of
five miles, are paved with granite setts, in order to economise
maintenance. The Telford pavement, when used, as in Bohemia
and the Tyrol, is generally 12 inches deep, being covered with


8 inches of ballast. The Macadam is generally 14 inches deep.
Each maintenance man, or, as he is called, “ road keeper,”
has the care of about two and a-half miles ; and each inspector,
or ganger, has eight road-keepers under him. Rolling newly laid
material has been abandoned on the ground of expense, and the
traffic is solely utilized for that purpose. Stringent police
regulations are in force, regulating the width of tires, the use of
brakes, nothing but skids of prescribed width being allowed in
case of waggons ; the removal of snow ; the confining of traffic to
the metalled portion of the roads, and the providing suitable
depots by the provincial authorities for all dust or mud removed
from the road ; and the care and planting of trees about 35 feet
apart, and in some districts fruit trees. Various laws also exist
controlling the widths and permissible gradients of roads. The
streets of Vienna are paved with granite setts 97 %, asphalted,
%, wood blocks %, and treated with what may be translated
as metallic pavement /. This latter pavement consists of a
concrete made of blast furnace slag, cinders, cement, carbonate
of soda or ammonia and water. It is stated to make a pavement
durable and pleasant to vehicular traffic, and, in comparison with
the granite setts, noiseless. The setts are all procured in the
Empire, the best quality being those from Bavaria. Other
Austrian cities have their streets paved with sandstone setts.
In Trieste these setts, if indeed they can be called by such a
name, measure from 2 to 5 feet long, 12 to 18 inches wide, and
6 to 10 inches thick.
Belgium may fitly be called the country of pavements, other
kinds of roads being the exception. The paving materials, known
to us as setts, are locally called Belgian blocks ; they are either
of porphyry or sandstone, and are shaped as truncated prisms,
about 5 inches square on the broader end ; this wedge shape leads
to a natural convexity in the road surface. These blocks are laid
on a compacted bed of sand, porpyhry being used when the traffic
warrants it, sandstone elsewhere. The country roads, where
necessary, are only paved for about 12 feet wide, the sides being
dirt roads defined by lines of ornamental or shade trees. The
stones are well rammed into the sand bed by hand beetles,
commencing from the outer edge and working to the centre.
Whilst the streets of Antwerp are entirely paved, this monotony
is broken in Brussels by the use of asphalt (Val de Travers) on
concrete in some of the flat streets, and on the footpaths. Wood
pavement (of the American type) is but little used, and only on
the Boulevardes. These Boulevardes are a credit to the city, and
afford accommodation for heavy traffic on stone setts, tramway
traffic principally wood blocked, carriage ways of asphalt, wood
blocks, or highly-macadamized with finely broken granite; equestrian
rides of from 12 to 16 inches of broken brick covered with a
layer of sand, and footpaths of asphalt. They are of varying


width, and are planted with ornamental shade trees, and liberally
supplied with seats. Some of the older cities in Belgium, such
as Flanders, use sandstone setts of a cubical shape, not alone for
the streets, but for footpath surfaces; quick locomotion either
for vehicles or pedestrians is impossible on such a surface, nor is
it indulged in. It is, however, wonderful what immense loads
animals will draw on these pavements. The author has seen a
horse draw a load of from 3 to 4 tons, and a miniature cart,
holding two adults, drawn by a dog.
The cleanliness of the streets is well attended to, most of the
cleaning and scavenging being done by night. The highways of
Belgium are constructed and maintained either by the State, the
provincial authorities, or communal authorities, but in the latter
two cases the approval of the State engineers must be obtained
previous to construction or maintenance as to the manner or
quality of material. The old paving setts on State roads are
given to the Communes to enable them to pave their roads, or to
property owners bordering the State roads to pave the sides of
the State roads or private approaches to same.
The highways of Russia may be divided into the three classes,
country roads, suburban roads, and city streets. The country
roads are maintained at the expense of the Government, tolls
being levied only on one, viz., the eastern Siberian highway, by
which most of the tea is imported from China into Russia. In
some parts of Russia, notably the coast road bordering the Black
Sea, in the district known as the Crimea, the roads are kept in
fair order as macadamized thoroughfares; but in other parts,
except that the line of load is marked by the position of the
bridges, and the erection of posts about 40 feet apart, nothing
would lead the traveller to believe that the track so defined was
intended for a road. They cannot be classed as anything but
dirt roads ; horses have to wade through a foot deep of dust in
dry weather and up to their knees in mud in wet weather ; for
this reason all important traffic is conducted during the winter
months in sleighs, when these roads are only apparent from the
posts erected along their sides. The inhabitants of the principal
cities get their annual supplies in summer time by the aid of
railways or rivers, and dispose of their manufactures during
winter time.
Suburban roads are generally macadamized about 12 inches
deep, or hand paved with cobblestones, the interstices being filled
with sand and finely broken stones, the entire surface being well
rammed.
The streets of the principal cities vary. In some, cobblestone
pavement as described is used. In others, a primitive form of
wood-blocking is used. This consists of laying a tarred plank
floor on the formation, which is consolidated as much as possible
by rolling. The wood blocks, of pine, are laid on the floor as


close to each other as possible, and kept from spreading by a
plank on each side of the floor, set on edge. Latterly, in St.
Petersburg, some French engineers have modified this system by
chemically treating the blocks to prevent decay, and grouting the
joints with cement mortar. The great difficulty with these wood
pavements is to prevent their destruction as regards surface lines
on the break up of the rigid frosts experienced. Asphalt, up to
the present, has proved a failure, owing to the destruction of the
concrete bed on a thaw setting in A few streets in the capital
have been paved with granite setts on sand, and have proved
successful. Their first cost is, however considered prohibitive.
There exists in Spain at the present day the remains of the
most ancient paved roads, viz., those constructed by the
Carthagenians. Roman roads are also very common in this
kingdom. Roads are divided into three classes, varying in width
from 27 to 20 feet. Previous to 1833 little attention was paid
by the authorities to road construction; all available money was
needed for war purposes; but in that year a special bureau of
roads and canals was initiated, and a special school established
for the education of civil engineers. This was followed in 1842
by the formation of a national corps of road builders, who are
classified and uniformed, and employed in construction and
maintenance of the roads.
The three classes of roads form what is called the general
system. No road can be constructed until it has been classified;
this Act is beset with red tape on all sides. To get a road
classified it is necessary to draft a memorial outlining the
proposed route ; this is submitted to the city Councils interested,
to the provincial Assembly, to the Council of Agricultural Industry
and Commerce, to the chief engineer of the province, to the civil
Governor of the province, who forwards it to the Minister of
Roads and Canals, who then submits it to the Council of Roads,
Canals and Ports, in order to determine whether the scheme shall
be submitted to the Cortes, or Parliament. If the policy is
approved of, such is announced by Royal decree. The Minister,
through his officials, inspects the construction of the roads, and
if not satisfied complains to the Provincial Assembly; if that
body refuses to notice such complaint, the chief engineer of the
province, in conjunction with the civil Governor, sees that the
work is carried out in accordance with the requirements of the
Department. When a road is completed it must be accepted by
the chief engineer of the province before being opened for use to
the public ; if any dispute arises, the case is laid before the civil
Governor, whose decision can be reviewed and set aside by the
Minister.
In the case of construction of private roads on estates or
mines, the consent of the civil Governor of the province must be
first obtained, also when an individual wishes to construct a road


through a neighbour’s estate ; the civil Governor then orders the
alienation of the necessary land, and asseses the damage.
It is through these and similar regulations the spirit of local
enterprise is effectually smothered. It strikes the author, other
countries besides our colony are in need of a Local Government
Bill.
A large percentage of the country roads are simply graded
and cleared tracks, or dirt roads; though labour is cheap, the
cost, due to improper use of the labour, is large. In grading a
road the surplus material is carried to bank or spoil in baskets
holding about three shovelfuls, on the heads of the labourers;
material for surfacing the road is brought from the adjacent fields
in the same primitive manner. When the works are extensive
the patient, slow-going donkey, or the fashionable high-kicking
mule, is substituted for the man with the basket. Each animal
is equipped with large panniers of esparto grass, filled with
material; from 40 to 50 animals, with their attendants, form a
gang. In some districts where the materials are available, the
roads are fairly well macadamized with granite, limestone, or
sandstone ; this is principally in the north of Spain.
City streets are treated in various ways. Sandstone cubes,
wood blocks, of red pine or Swedish fir, laid on concrete, and
joints grouted, the blocks being treated with creosote and
sulphate of iron; asphalt pavements, which, however, have not
proved successfnl, and streets paved with thick flags. Round
oak wood blocks have also been used successfully in Barcelona.
These are laid on a light macadam foundation, and the interstices
filled with sand. Belgian blocks have also been imported by
some cities, and laid on the usual sand foundation. The new
streets in Barcelona, varying in width from 66 to 200 feet, are
well macadamized with basalt, and kept in good repair. In order
to facilitate traction between the port and city of Valencia on
the macadamized road connecting them, about two miles long, a
double trackway consisting of steel rails of inverted channel
section has been constructed. The tracks are about 4 feet
6 inches apart, centres and the intermediate space is paved with
flints; it is favourably spoken of as regards durability and
permitting large loads to be handled. In and about Gibraltar
the roads are of limestone, macadamized, and are naturally very
dusty. Some of the principal thoroughfares, where traffic is
heavy, are wood-blocked somewhat after the English system.
In Italy the roads are divided into four classes—national,
provincial, communal, and parish, and the construction and
maintenance of all classes is regulated by law, administered by
the Minister for Public Works. The necessary funds are
provided by taxes, or, where inability to pay is pleaded, by
compulsory service. A variety of systems are employed, the
commonest being Macadam for roads and pavement for streets.


Drainage from the surface is amply provided for, especially in the
mountainous districts. A very common feature in some cities,
and also on roads of heavy traffic, is the construction of stone
tramlines. In Catania lava is almost exclusively used as a road
material, broken to a 2|- inch gauge as macadam, about 8 inches
thick, laid on a lime concrete base.
In Genoa granite paving setts, 12 inches by 2 feet on the face
and 8 inches thick, laid on lime concrete, is much used ; the face
of the setts is scored to afford a better foothold, and on steep
inclines the width of the setts is diminished to 6 inches, and
each alternate row is separated by a row of hard-burned bricks
set on edge. The suburban streets of Genoa are well
macadamized with broken flints, about 10 inches in depth. In
Messina some peculiar streets exist. These are paved with
granite setts laid forming the sides of squares and rectangles, the
interiors of these figures being filled in with cobblestone
pavement; this pavement is laid either on a sand foundation and
grouted with sand, or on a concrete bed and grouted with cement
mortar, the cement used being natural hydraulic lime.
In Tuscany, on the country roads it is usual to place
posts from 2 to 3 feet high, and about 4 feet apart, on what we
understand as the kerb lines, to divide vehicular from pedestrian
traffic. The roads and parks are macadamized, gravel being
largely employed. The maintenance of roads in this district is
provided for by the compulsory service of all males, not disabled,
over 15 years of age.
In Sicily limestone is solely used for construction of roads as
macadam, and for streets as blocks from 18 inches to 2 feet
square and 10 inches thick, laid on a lime concrete foundation.
In many places the surface of the natural rock, roughly dressed,
forms the road surface.
Peculiarities exist as regards the highways of Holland. The
streets of the large cities, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, &c., are paved
either with native clay bricks, scoria, or slag bricks made by a
Middleborough-on-Tees Company, limestone setts and Belgian
setts. The only foundation used is sand from 4to 6 inches in
depth, well rammed ; constant repair is needed, not due to surface
wear, but to inequalities of surface due to the heavy traffic
proving too severe for the sand foundation. Very little pleasure-
driving takes place on such streets, and the system is a very good
one to avoid. The footpaths are invariably paved with brick ;
this does not seem to affect the average Dutchman, who does not
feel the inequalities through the wooden shoes generally worn.
Some of the country roads are brick paved, but the majority
are lightly macadamized, either with broken brick rejected from
the streets or with gravel. The roads are, as a rule, laid out on
the centres of the dykes, and constructed at the expense of the
communities, locally known as “ polders,” or drained lakes, created


hy the dykes. Some of the main roads are maintained by the
Government for State reasons.
The author will now briefly describe some of the pavements
in vogue in the principal cities and districts of Great Britain.
In Birmingham stone pavements, wood pavements, and
macadamized streets exist; both stone and wood have in all cases
a concrete foundation, 6 inches thick. The stone setts are
granite, laid direct on the concrete, and last upwards of 14 years
under heavy traffic. The wood blocks are creosoted yellow deal,
grouted with a mixture of hot pitch and tar. The macadamized
streets are well made, consisting of 9 inches of ashes on the
formation, then 8 inches of gravel or broken slag well rolled, and
then surfaced with 6 inches of rowley rag stone, the binding used
being 1 inch of chain gravel.
In Leeds two classes of stone pavements are used In heavy
traffic streets granite setts on 9 inches of concrete, and for light
traffic gritstone 6 inch cubes, laid on a 4 inch deep bed of ashes.
The other streets, principally residential, are constructed as
Telford pavements, the pitching being from 8 to 10 inches deep,
and top cover 7 inches thick.
In Hull the foundation of the granite pavements is concrete
7 inches thick ; this is rendered about 2 inches deep with cement
mortar, in which, whilst plastic, the sets are placed with a
maximum | inch joint; little or no ramming is permitted, the
joints are filled with dry shingle, and finished off with a mixture
of pitch and thick-boiled coal tar ; before this has time to set the
whole surface of the pavement is covered about 1 inch deep with
fine gravel. The street is closed to traffic until cement rendering
and pitch is thoroughly set. The wood pavements are set on
7 inch concrete rendered inch thick ; the blocks are redwood,
5 inches deep, creosoted to the extent of 12 lbs. to the cubic foot;
the joints are inch, filled in with fine shingle to 1 inch from
surface ; on this shingle is poured a similar pitch to that used in
the stone setts, and the joint is finished off with cement mortar
1 to 2, and the entire surface of the pavement being covered with
line gravel. The macadamized streets have on the rolled
formation an 8 inch layer of 4 inch gauge stone, then a 2Jr inch
layer of 2-J inch granite, well rolled, the surface being formed of
a 2| inch layer of 24 inch gauge whinstone, the binding being a
loamy gravel, properly consolidated with a steam roller.
In Liverpool, its 250 miles of streets are all paved with stone
setts, and certainly may be quoted as the best streets of the kind
in the world. The pavement is divided into three classes,
determined by the amount of traffic. In all cases great care is
taken that the formation consists of sound material and is well
rolled. In first-clast streets a minimum thickness of 6 inches of
cement concrete is laid on the formation; on this, when set, is
placed a half-inch layer of very fine gravel; on this bed, the setts,


which are granite, are laid with close and properly-broken joints..
These joints are then filled with dry shingle and well rammed,
additional shingle being used as the ramming proceeds, until the
joints are well filled. The joints are then grouted with a hot
mixture of coal pitch and creosote oil, and the entire surface
with half an inch of small sharp gravel. Some of the second-class
streets have a foundation similar to the first-class ones, or a
foundation consisting of 6 inches of broken stone (granite)
grouted in situ with a mixture of hot coal pitch and creosote oil,
the surface is then covered with drippings and well rolled. The
setts used in first-class streets are 3|- inches wide and 6-j inches
deep ; those for second-class streets are 3 inches wide and 5
inches deep, or 4 inch cubes. These are laid with close joints on
a half inch gravel bed, and treated the same regarding the filling
of the joints as first-class streets. In third-class streets 4 inch
cubes are used, and the foundation consists of a 6 inch deep
Telford pavement bought to a surface by added gravel, and well
rolled. The pathways are formed of 3 inch thick Yorkshire or
Lancashire fLgs, bedded on gravel, the joints being flushed with
mortar. Two particulars in connection with Liverpool streets
are worthy of special mention. First, the tramways are con-
structed and maintained by the Corporation, and leased to
Companies at a yearly rent of 10 % on their cost; secondly, no
one can open up a street for any purpose whatever. When such
is required, the Corporation do the work and charge cost of same
to the person requiring the opening to be made. There the
Corporation really own the streets, and I hope to see the day
when a similar healthy rule will exist in this colony. The roads
in the district round Liverpool are invariably Telford pavements.
Some in the mining districts are provided with a 6 inch concrete
foundation. The Telford pitching varies from Bto 10 inches in
depth, and is invariably consolidated by a steam roller before the
surface material is applied. This latter is applied in two 3 inch
layers, each being well rolled, and consists of granite broken to a
2 inch gauge, the surface is finished with granite chippings,
watered and rolled. In the neighbourhood of works the
lower layer is sometimes made of scoriae, the upper surface
being of granite. Tar-metal roads, somewhat similar to those
made in Sydney and suburbs, are constructed. The Telford
pavement is 10 inches deep, and well rolled. The first layer on
this is 3 inches of dry 2J inch granite or scoriae, surfaced with
gravel and well rolled ; the upper layer is 3 inches thick of 11,
gauge granite, mixed before spreading with boiling coal tar
and pitch. This is thinly coated with limestone chippings, also
mixed in coal tar and pitch, the surface being then finished with
dry chippings, either limestone or granite, and well rolled.
These make, as should be expected, excellent roads, and are not
allowed to deteriorate for want of repairs. The fact of the top


layer only befing mixed with the tar may be well noted. I will
refer to this Hater on.
In Manchester and the surrounding districts, such as Black-
burne, Salforcd, Bolton, and Stretford, great variety exists in the
class of pavements. The heavy traffic streets are invariably
paved with giranite setts on a concrete foundation ; other streets
have a Telford pavement, 12 inches thick, instead of concrete,
whilst others are constructed with a foundation consisting of a
10-inch layer of clinkers and mill ashes. This latter foundation
has, however,, proved very undesirable in severe winters, causing
disturbance too tire surface during a thaw. “ Millstone grit ”is
also largely msed for paving setts and flags on footpaths, For the
former purpojse they are excellent, but are not so long lived as
granite setts. They are, however, very largely used on inclines,
as affording ai better foothold for horses.
Before proceeding further, I may mention that good
thoroughfares;, and, in a sense, uniformity of construction, is
ensured through the operation of the Municipal Act throughout
England. By this law every new street, and in some cases old
private thoroughfares, must, before being opened to the public, be
constructed at the expense of the frontage owners, and in accord-
ance with the levels and specifications of the several Corporations.
Sewers, house connections, gas and water pipes, must also be con-
structed before the street is made, at the owner’s cost, so that it
is the exception to see a street opened for anything except repairs.
The several Corporations then take charge of and maintain such
streets out of the general rates.
In Sheffield, the streets are constructed for heavy traffic, of
granite setts; for medium traffic, of gritstone setts or wood blocks;
and for light traffic, of what is called “ tar macadam.”
The granite setts vary in size from 6 x 4 and 6x3 for heavy
traffic, to 5x 4, 5x3, and 4-inch cubes for lighter traffic. The
setts are bedded in a layer of fine shingle, also the bottom of
joints, the upper portion of joints being run in with a mixture of
boiling pitch and tar.
The gritstone setts are 10 in. deep, and vary from 6 to 10 in.
wide. The foundation consists of a layer of shingle on the rolled
formation, the setts being well rammed with a beetle. The joists
are treated same as granite setts. The wood blocks used are of
red deal, and lately these have been creosated, though hitherto
used plain.
A concrete foundation is provided similar to that for the
granite setts. The blocks are bedded on a layer of sand, the
transverse joints being | inch wide, maintained by 3 iron studs
in each block ; these joints are now grouted with cement mortar
instead of pitch and tar as formerly. The tar macadam consists
of an aggregate of furnace slag, limestone, or granite, broken to
a 2 inch gauge, mixed with boiling pitch and tar. The foundation


is a Telford pavement, well rolled. The macadam is laid so as
to be 4 inches thick after rolling; the surface is then made by a
thin rolled layer of tarred shingle or granite chippings.
In describing the several modes adopted in constructing the
streets of London city and surrounding vestries, a separate paper
might be written. I will, however, content myself in briefly
describing some of the leading classes. The materials used are,
order of extent, broken stone, wood setts and asphalt. It is
unnecessary to remark that, within the city limits, broken stone
roads are unknown, for obvious reasons. The wooden pavements
have solely a foundation consisting of a minimum thickness of 6
inches of cement concrete; also the streets with stone setts and
asphalt are similarly constructed, lime concrete being sometimes
used. The system of wood-blocking is, or rather was, of a very
diversified character. It may safely be said that in no other city
in the world were more experiments tried to secure a good wood
pavement, or more money squandered with this object in view.
The various systems can be ascertained from several text books
by those interested in the cases of failure. The wood blocks at
present in use consist of Baltic fir and Swedish deal and yellow
pine, beech and yarrah from West Australia, of various depths,,
from 3 to 6 inches, used either plain or treated in various ways,
such as creosoted, napthalized, &c. Mr. Weaver, the surveyor of
Kensington, says the probability is that blocks deeper than 4
inches will in future not be used in, or to save, the great waste of
wood when the road is re-paved. The old fault of having wide
joints, which were considered necessary to afford a foothold, has
in late years been remedied, and the practice now is to have the
joints from J to -|th inches, and in some cases the blocks have
been laid with close joints with satisfactory results. The blocks
are generally chemically treated before laying, creosoting being
much in favour. The joints are filled in the lower portion with
melted asphalt, the upper portion with cement and fine gravel
grouting.
A newly adopted modification in wood-blocking has been
tried successfully. This consists in laying a cushion coat of
asphalt mastic, half-inch thick, on the concrete base. Henson’s
system of wood-blocking has been largely used. This consists in
a layer of ordinary roofing felt on top of the concrete and strip
of the same material of same depth as the blocks between the
transverse joints. These joints are made as close as possible by
driving up the courses with mallets as every set of eight or ten
is completed. The surface of the blocking is then treated with a
bitumenous compound and grit before being opened to tiaffic.
Both wood and asphalt pavements in the city are maintained by
contract, which extends over 17 years, the first two of which the
pavement is maintained at the contractor’s cost. Natural asphalt,,
as you are aware, is largely used in the city as a street pavement,.


where the gradient does not exceed 1 in 60, and certainly forms
an excellent surface for traffic, except when in what is known as
the greasy conditions. It is undoubtedly the most sanitary
pavement known.
Col. Haywood’s conclusions as to the merits of asphalt and
wood, after a series of exhaustive observations, may be stated
shortly as follows : —“ Asphalt is the smoothest, driest, cleanest,
most pleasing to the eye, and most agreeable pavement for general
purposes, but not so quiet as wood.” The latter of course refers
to London wood pavements, in which, after being subjected to
traffic for a very short time, the fibres brush and get turned down
into the joints. That as regards safety “ wood is superior to
asphalt.” The noise on asphalt is due solely to the feet of horses,
vehicles on it are practically noiseless due to its continuous
surface. Now, if London wood pavements are less noiseless than
asphalt, the author is of opinion that if a similar class of blocking
to that recently laid down in Sydney were introduced into London it
would be a decided improvement, and I see no reason why it
should not be a success financially; undoubtedly the first cost of
the soft wood blocks is less than that of imported hard wood, but
the difference would soon disappear if the annual cost of main-
tenance, by replacement, in the case of the first-named, were
taken into account
The streets of Glasgow are stone sett pavements for heavy
traffic and metalled for light. Wood paving, similar to London,
has been put down but has not been favourably received, and
when repair is necessary will be replaced by stone setts. The
foundation for the stone setts consists either of 6 inches of
cement concrete, or what is locally known as asphalt, consisting
of a layer 6 inches thick of 2-inch gauge whinstone, thoroughly
grouted with British bitumen and pitch oil, being well rammed
during grouting and the surface worked smooth. The setts are
laid close together, breaking joint, on a cushion coat of 1| inches
of sand ; the joints are filled with drippings grouted with bitumen,
the entire surface being then dusted with chip pings. Sometimes
the grouting for the joints consist solely of bitumen or cement
mortar. The setts are either 3 inches wide and from sto 7 inches
deep, or are dressed as 4-inch cubes. The metalled streets are
Telford pavements, 9 inches deep; in clayey or retentive soils a
2 inch layer of ashes is used under the pavement. The surface
consists of a 6 inch coat of 2| inch metal, generally granite or
whinstone, dusted with sand, watered, and well rolled. The
street is then surfaced with chippings, well watered and rolled.
In Edinburgh the streets are either paved with stone setts or
macadamised. Wood pavement of pine and Baltic redwood was
laid down, but not proving satisfactory from an economical point
of view was, when worn out, replaced by stone setts. Recently,
however, a short length of the shop side of Princess-street has


been laid with Scotch beech blocks, and up to date has proved
satisfactory. Both stone and wood blocks have a foundation of 6
inches of concrete. The stone setts, either granite or whinstone,
are laid on a cushion coat of 2 inches of sand. They are 7 inches
deep, 4 inches wide, and average 12 inches in length, are laid
with close joints grouted with a mortar composed of 1 of lime and
2of small gravel. Before the grouting has time to set the surface
of the pavement is well rammed by hand. For light traffic streets
the concrete foundation is omitt d, the formation being well
rolled, the joints of the setts being grouted with cement mortar.
Macadamised streets are only used in the residential portion of
the city or where traffic is not severe, and consist of a well rolled
formation on which is laid a 10-inch layer of road metal, generally
whinstone, compacted with a 20-ton steam roller, the binding
material being road scrapings. In Leith, the seaport of Edin-
burgh, the quays and heavy traffic streets are paved with stone
setts similar to Edinburgh, but the foundation is composed of
lime concrete in the proportion lof lime, 1 of 2|-inch whin-
stone and 1 of fine gravel. Two streets in Leith are wood-blocked
with pitch pine and redwood. The foundation is 6 inches of
cement concrete and the joints, £-inch wide, are grouted with
bitumen ; the blocks are the ordinary size—9 inches by 6 inches
by 3 inches. Leith has also a street covered with Val de Travers
compressed asphalt, on a 9 inch cement concrete foundation.
The asphalt was originally laid down 2J inches in thickness, and
has given great satisfaction during its life, nearly 20 years
duration. The macadamised streets of Leith are constructed 10
inches thick on a well rolled formation. The bottom layer is
whinstone 4-inch gauge, the next layer being 2-inch gauge and
same thickness, the top surface being of whinstone about 1-inch
gauge and gravel (crushed), the whole being well compacted by
rolling. The country roads are either macadamised or constructed
as laid down by Telford, though within the last quarter of a
century the latter system has not been followed. The macadam,
as a'rule, consists of a 6-inch layer of 2J-inch gauge whinstone,
laid on a prepared formation, well rolled; the binding material
is often the natural soil derived from the formation. The foot-
paths in Edinburgh and Leith are ordinary Caithness flagging
as a rule and call for no special mention. A favourite footpath
in Galashiels is however worthy of note. The path is formed 12
inches under the kerb level, 9 inches of this is filled in with 3-
ineh gauge broken stone, brick, or other suitable material, hand-
rammed and levelled off. On this is laid a 2-inch layer of
concrete composed of 1 of cement and 4 of washed gravel, the
wearing surface is then applied and consists of 1 inch of concrete
composed of 1 of cement and 2 parts of crushed granite, floated
smooth on top. The surface is divided off into areas 6to 8 feet
long by wooden strips. In the back streets of Scotch cities a


system of paving the footpaths known as “ hornizing” is in vogue.
It forms a durable, but rather uncomfortable surface. The path
is formed about 9 inches deep, a bed of sand or ashes is then
applied about 4 inches deep. On this are set the river stones,
averaging 1 to 2 inches thick, 4 to 5 inches deep, and from 5 to
8 inches long. The stones are set on edge, grouted with sand,
and well rammed.
In Belfast the streets are, in order of length, paved with sea
pebbles, macadamised, or with stone setts. The foundations for
the pavements are from 6 to 12 inches thick, according to the traffic.
The setts were formerly 3| inches wide by 7 inches deep, but now
they are 4 inches by 4 inches by 6 inches deep; They are laid close
together and grouted with gravel and cement; the surface of the
concrete foundation is floated inch deep with fine gravel cement
mortar and the setts laid in same whilst unset. The macadam-
ised streets call for no special mention ; they are largely con-
structed of prison-broken metal.
The streets of Dublin are either stone-paved, wood-paved, or
macadamised. In the paved streets the foundation is 6 inches of
concrete, floated for wood pavements, and covered 1 inch deep
with fine gravel for stone setts. These setts are trap rock from
Wicklow, very roughly dressed ; the joints are filled with pitch
and creosote oil, and top of joint and surface treated with fine
gravel. The wood blocks are 3 inches wide, 5 inches deep, and 9
inches long, of well-seasoned Archangel deal, creosoted 10 lbs. to
the cubic foot. The joints are £ inch, filled in the bottom with
pitch and creosote oils, the top of joint and sutface of blocks being
treated with cement mortar, one of cement to six of fine gravel.
The metalled streets are constructed with a Telford pavement 9
inches deep. On this is laid a 6-inch layer of 3-inch gauge stone,
then a 3-inch layer of 2-inch gauge stone, and the surface is
finished with a 2-inch layer of fine gravel, the whole being
thoroughly rolled. The material used is a trap rock locally known
as greenstone- Compressed asphalt has been in use in Dublin
for street surfaces for over 20 years, and has given entire satis-
faction as regards wear * the objection to it being its cost.
The streets of Cork are generally macadamised, though some
of them are paved with sandstone pitchers. No concrete bed is
used, the natural formation being well compacted. The macadam-
ised streets are of limestone or sandstone from the neighbour-
hood, and need constant repair where subject to traffic. As a
rule, the footpaths in Irish cities are paved with sandstone or
slate flags, either from Welsh or local quarries.
The Irish country roads vary greatly in character, depending
on the local material; where the material, as in the north and
west, is basaltic, the roads are second to none in the world, but
when the material is rudimentary, as in the south, the constant
maintenance required causes the surface to be rough. As a ruie }


the foundation consists of a Telford construction, or what is
known as rip-rap, consisting of a layer of field stones or boulders
roughly broken to a 6-inch gauge. The coating material averages
8 inches thick on these foundations. The construction and
maintenance of roads is carried out by contract, under the Grand
Jury system. The kingdom is divided into districts, averaging
1,500 miles, each administered by a County Surveyor, assisted by
from four to five deputies. The surveyors are appointed, as
vacancies occur, by competitive examination of a high standard.
In Quebec the streets in the “ lower” or more ancient portion
of the city are very narrow, varying in full width from 8 to 12
feet. They are planked full width with 3-inch pine, laid longitu-
dinally, and are naturally very slippery. This kind of surface is
slowly disappearing, and is being replaced with stone setts. In
the “upper” or newer portions of the town the streets are much
wider, and are wood blocked as follows :—The formation is well
rolled and on it is laid longitudinally boards, with about
|-inch joints. On these, and at right angles to them, are laid
similar boards also with |Jnch joints. The surface is then strewn
with sand, so that when the joints are filled the sand is about
deep. It is stated the sand is used as a drainage medium,
to prevent disturbances during thaws. The wood blocks are of
red tamarack, 12 inches long and from 10 to 15 inches in diameter.
The bark is not removed, and great care is taken to use the wood
when it is in a green state or freshly cut, when the sap is down.
The spaces between the blocks are wedged with pieces of wood,
and the remaining small spaces are grouted with sand, cement
and tar, or fine cinders and cement. The surface is covered with
sand and well rolled. This class of pavement has lasted for 35
years, and though the blocks were worn down to about half their
depth they showed no sign of decay.
In Montreal, wood blocks, stone setts, and asphalt are used
in street construction. The foundation in all cases is cement
concrete, 6 inches thick—composed of 1 of cement, 3 of sharp
river sand, and 8 of 2J inch guage stone, allowed 7 days to set
before pavement is placed on it. The wood blocks are of tamarack,.
3 inches wide and 6 inches deep, creosoted and laid close together
the grouting, of coal tar and pitch, is applied as long as absorption
is apparent. The pavement is then coated 1 inch thick with fine
gravel, and opened for traffic. The stone setts are granite or
Belgian porphyry, 3to 4| inches wide and 6 inches deep. The
blocks are set on 2 inches of sand, with half-inch joints, grouted
with cement mortar. The surface is well rammed and covered 1
inch deep with sand before being opened to traffic. The asphalt
streets of Montreal are constructed so that when rolled it is
inches thick, and is either Trinidad or Sicilian.
Toronto has upwards of 110 miles of streets wood-blocked,
the foundations being cement concrete 6 inches deep, and the
blocks being sawn, either of cedar or tamarack.


Other towns in Canada have their streets constructed of
macadam, round cedar blocks, and bricks made of slag and iron
furnace debris. In all cases the effect of the thaws in the severe
climate is sought to be obviated by the use of a thick layer of
sand immediately under the materials forming the surface. All
roads are located and constructed by Government, under a definite
system, which lends itself to the development of the country.
The roads are usually of four classes. First-class are provided
with a Telford pavement 9 inches deep, 12 to 15 feet wide,
superimposed by 9 inches of gravel. Where stone is not teadily
procurable, the roads are planked or cordurozed. Second-class
roads are simply cleared and graded. Third-class are only cleared
to the level of ground of all timber and brush ; and fourth-class
are simply cleared tracks for pack animals. Roads are maintained
by annual contract. In Ontario district, compulsory labour of
male inhabitants between 21 and 60 years of age is enforced.
This, however, ceases on the individual becoming possessed of
property and being assessed.
In America several kinds of stone pavements are laid down
in city streets. The commonest consists of what is known as
“ cobblestone,” consisting of selected waterworn stones, vaiying
in size on exposed surface from 4to 8 inches. They are laid on a
bed of sand or fine gravel 40 inches deep, and when the formation
is of clay this depth is increased to 18 inches. The stones are
well rammed and receive a coat (2 inches thick) of sand or fine
gravel. It has been found to form a rough but moderately cheap
surface, and—it goes without saying—is very noisy.
In Venezuela the ordinary method of transverse rows is
varied by laying out the street surface in 3 feet squares. The
interiors of these squares are then pitched diagonally, No special
preparation of the foundation beyond the necessary grading is
done, with the result that the streets are being constantly repaired.
Cobblestone pavements extend for 490 miles in Philadelphia,
and 280 miles in Albany. Other cities use the pavement to a less
extent. What is known as Belgian block pavement is used in
some cities. This consists of trap rock of about 5 inches square
on surface and from 6 to 7 inches deep. It is laid on a sand
foundation 6 inches deep, and the joints are grouted with sand.
It forms a rough and noisy pavement, is slippery, and, owing to
the number of joints, soon wears unequally. New York has 200
miles of this pavement, and Philadelphia 120 miles Granite
block pavement is also largely used as a street surface. Originally
large-sized blocks were used, but found defective, principally
owing to unequal settlement and want of foothold. The present
practice is to use the less durable granites, such as syanite and
those in which hornblende predominate, in blocks 7 inches deep,
3 inches wide and 9to 12 inches long. The foundation consists
of concrete from 4 to 9 inches in thickness, according to traffic


requirements. A cushion coat of sand, | inch thick, or, in some
special cases of bitumenous cement, 1 inch thick, is used between
the concrete and the blocks. These are dressed square, laid with
sides and ends touching, and well rammed. The joints are grouted
with alternate layers of fine gravel and bitumenous cement. This
latter consists of 100 lbs. of coal tar pitch, 4 gallons of tar, and
1 gallon of creosote, and is run into the joints while boiling. By
this means an impervious joint is secured, and displacement of
surface from thaws prevented. Formerly, cement and lime
mortar was used as a grouting material, but failed, owing to
disintegration from traffic. A special form of joint-filling
material, known as “ Murphy’s grout filling,” is used in the central
States. This consists of cement, iron slag and sand. It is
reduced to a creamy consistency with water, and swept into the
joints with steel brooms. New York has 140 miles of this pave-
ment, Boston 62, Brooklyn 55, and other cities in a somewhat
smaller degree.
Sandstone block pavement is also used, principally in the lake
cities, Buffalo having 138 miles of it. The sandstone is what is
known as “ Medina,” and the blocks measure 4 inches wide, 7
inches deep, and not less than 8 inches long. The foundation
consists either of 6 inches of concrete, with a 3 inch cushion coat
of sand, or a foundation of from 10 to 18 inches of sand, depend-
ing on the quality of the formation. The joints on the concrete
foundation are filled with bitumenous cement, and those on
the sand foundation with sand. Limestone block pavement has
also been tried, but has not proved satisfactory, proving uneven
in wear and splitting under the action of frost.
Specially prepared bricks are used in paving street surfaces
in many cities in the States. Columbus has over 21 miles so
laid. The system is comparatively young, having been used in
this country only about 20 years. Its success depends on the clay
being free from lime, thorough grinding before burning, and
thorough annealing when burned. The foundation used is very
diversified, consisting of 6 inches of concrete with a sand cushion
coat, a layer of broken stone 8 inches deep, well rolled, with a
3-inch sand cushion coat, a 3-inch layer of sand on the rolled
formation, then a layer of 1-inch oak boards dipped in tar, laid
lengthwise or crosswise, superimposed by an inch cushion coat of
sand. The bricks usually have champered edges to prevent
chipping, and vary in dimensions according to locality and maker,
3by4 by 9 inches being an average size. The bricks are laid
breaking joint and touching at sides and ends. The grouting
material also varies, the following being used : cement mortar,
boiling pitch, and dry sand brushed in. The specifications for
brick pavements vary widely, and up to date no standard of con-
struction or test for the quality of brick has been arrived at.
The pavement, however, has found favour as being suitable for


moderate traffic, affording a good foothold and being easily-
cleaned.
Wood pavements in the States have in many instances
proved so unsatisfactory that they have been removed, and other
materials substituted. Ido not wish, however, that it should be
understood that wood pavement is unknown in America, or that
the cause of failure was due to the material. Chicago has over
400 miles of wood pavements, Detroit 116 miles, and other large
cities use this material to a considerable extent. The cause of
the failure of the wood pavements was due to want of a proper
foundation, to the use of wood in a green state, to the absence of
maintenance, and to the soft quality of the wood used.
Washington, D.C., upwards of 20 years ago, laid down some
50 miles of wood pavements of 12 distinct varieties, the blocks
being all soft woods, such as hemlock, pine, spruce, &c. The
greatest life was four years; and ultimately all were removed
u-nd re-placed by granite setts or asphalt. It is interesting to note
■ihe method of wood pavement adopted in Chicago—the city with
the greatest mileage of wood pavements in the world. The
formation is first well rolled ; on this is spread a 3-inch coat of
sand from Lake Michigan ; this is also thoroughly compacted by
ramming and rolling; on the sand are laid hemlock planking 2
inches thick, laid longitudinally, and resting on pine stringers 8
inches by 1 inch, under the ends and the centres of the longitudinal
planking. On this planking cedar blocks, stripped of bark, 6
inches deep, are laid. The blocks- vary from 4 to 8 inches in
diameter; anything greater than 8 inches diameter must he split
and the corners removed. The interstices vary from | to 1|
inches. The interstices are completely filled by ramming in lake-
shore gravel up to 1 inch gauge. The surface of the pavement is
then flooded with a composition supplied by the city authorities,
consisting principally of tar, applied whilst at a temperature of
300° F. The surface is then treated with -JAnch gauge gravel,
rammed as much as possible into the interstices. The surface is
then finished by receiving an inch coat of half-inch gauge gravel
and composition. The life of this pavement is said to be 10
years, and the cost is given at 4s. 9d. per square yard.
The method of laying wooden pavements in Minneapolis is
somewhat similar. White pine plank is used instead of hemlock.
The blocks are of cedar, free from bark, 6 inches deep, and from 4
to 10 inches in diameter. The interstices are filled by ramming
in one-inch gauge gravel, and the surface is finished off with a
one-inch layer of the same gravel.
The 116 miles of wood pavement in Detroit is constructed
principally as follows :—The blocks are cedar, free from bark, 7
inches deep and from 5 to 9 inches in diameter ; they rest on a
bed of sand and gravel 6 inches thick, carefully rolled. The
interstices are filled with screened gravel, and the surface is


finished with a |-inch layer of sand and gravel. The cost of this
pavement is about 7s. 6d. per square yard, and the life is given
as 8 years wichout any extensive repairs.
In Duluth the natural formation is clay. The 3-inch layer
of sand was found to be insufficient, and the present practice is
to construct a 6-inch Telford pavement. The surface of this is
covered with a layer of wet gravel and well rolled. On this is
laid a 2-inch coat of 2-inch gauge stone, covered with gravel and
again rolled. A thin layer of sand is then applied, and on this
the planking, 1 inch thick, is laid.
The majority of American cities use untreated wood, as
experience has shown that the use of chemicals supposed to
preserve the wood has the opposite effect; it being practically
impossible to procure seasoned timber, dry rot eventuates.
In San Antonio, Texas, the blocks are of Mesquite, 5 inches
deep, hexagonal in form, varying from 4 to 8 inches in diameter.
They are sawn with a slight batter, the top being -| inch less than
the lower end on which they rest. The foundation is 6 inches of
•concrete, with a one-inch cushion coat of sand, and the joints are
grouted with sand.
Asphalt is now somewhat largely used for street sufaces in
American cities. Buffalo has as many as 83 miles, Washington
50, Philadelphia 25, Brooklyn 9, Omaha 16 miles of this material.
When first used the material was imported from Europe; but
h'gh freights caused the Americans to look elsewhere for their
supply, with the result that nearly all the asphalt now used is
composed of a mixture of Trinidad bitumen, limestone, and sand.
The use of sand has been proved to be beneficial, as it reduces
the slippery condition inherent in natural asphalt under certain
conditions, and also enables its composition to be suitably varied
for extremes of temperature. Bitumenous rock is found in
California and Kentucky, but high railway freights prevent its
use at any considerable distance.
The foundation for asphalt in America is either cement
concrete or what is known as “ bitumenous concrete.” This latter
consists of a 4-inch depth of 3-inch gauge stone, thoroughly com-
pacted by rolling, then treated with a special preparation called
“ coal-tar paving cement,” in the proportion of 1 gallon to the
superficial yard. This is then covered with a layer of
bioken stone, not exceeding 1-inch gauge, mixed with the paving
cement in the proportion of 1 gallon to a cubic foot of stone.
The stone and cement are heated in revolving heaters to 250° F.
and applied whilst hot to the base course, levelled off to the
required thickness, and thoroughly rolled. The wearing surface
is then applied, and consists of inches of prepared asphalt, the
whole thus constituting a solid mass, 7 inches in thickness. This
class of pavement is largely used on account of its cheapness and
facility for repairs of trench openings, as compared with a concrete


base. The asphalt on the latter base is laid either as a one or two
coat pavement. Both are ultimately 2| inches thick when finished
off by rolling, and in the two-coat pavement the lower or cushion
coat is half-inch thick and has an excess of 3 per cent, of asphalt
cement more than the upper coat. The asphalt now used consists
either of a mixture of asphalt cement, sand, and limestone dust,
or the addition of hard stone dust, such as derived from granite or
basalt. The asphalt cement consists of refined Trinidad asphaltum
mixed with the residuum of distilled petroleum in the proportion
of from 17 to 20 per cent, by weight; this residuum has for its
base paraffine, which is specially treated whilst mixing with the
refined asphaltum, the resulting compound forming a viscous mass.
In all cases where asphalt is laid in streets in which tramlines
exist, the asphalt is not laid close up to the rails, but is separated
by a course of stone setts laid alternately header and stretcher.
This is done to prevent the cutting of the asphalt by vehicles
using the track whose width between wheels is not coincident
with gauge of the rails.
Asphalt in the shape of blocks is also used. Philadelphia
has 19 miles, Washington 10 miles, and Chicago 4 miles of such
pavements. They are principally used in light traffic residence
streets. The blocks, which vary in size from 4bysby 12 inches
to 6 by 8 by 27 inches, consist of crushed limestone from |-inch
gauge to dust, mixed with 10 per cent, of asphalt cement. Sand
is unable to be utilized as it cuts the moulds, so that the blocks,
being 90 per cent, limestone, cannot stand heavy traffic. The
foundation consists of a 6-inch layer of gravel well rolled, and a
bedding layer of 2 inches of sand. The blocks are laid with close
joints, and under the action of the sun ultimately form a mono-
lithic pavement. The blocks when laid are lightly covered with
sand and rammed in sets of 4 as follows : —An iron plate 20
inches by 8 inches and 1 inch thick is laid on the blocks and
struck with a paving rammer weighing 45 lbs,
Natural bitumenous sandstone rock is found in California,
and several miles of the streets of San Francisco are treated with
it. The foundation is 6 inches of cement concrete, and the asphalt
coat is 2 inches thick when rolled. These pavements have not
been laid sufficiently long to afford an idea as to their durability,
but up to the present have given satisfaction. The surface is not
hard, but receives impressions from horses’ feet and wheels.
A modification of the tar pavements seen in this city and the
suburbs is also used in American cities. There the foundation
is similar to the bitumenous concrete previously described, con-
sisting of a base 4 inches thick and a binder course 2 inches thick.
The wearing surface is 2 inches thick and consists of the following
mixture:—Sharp sand about 60 per cent., broken stone or dust
25 per cent., cement 0 - 9 per cent., slaked lime OTS per cent.,
flour of sulphur 0T per cent., and paving cement 14 per cent.


This latter consists of 25 per cent, of refined Trinidad asphaltum
and what is known as No. 4 coal-tar cement. This mixture was
arrived at after numerous experiments to prevent the cracking
and disintegration of the ordinary tar pavements. It has given
satisfaction on streets with moderate traffic and as a surface for
squares and reserves.
Broken stone and gravel is used in the construction of streets
in many American cities. A modification of Telford’s system
seems to be most in favour, though many cities use Macadam’s
method, St. Louis has upwards of 227 miles, Boston 172, whilst
Bridgeport has over 50 miles of macadamised streets, in which
the materials are only 4 inches in thickness. In this latter case,
which is certainly exceptional in the matter of thickness, the
formation consisting of sand, loam, and what is known in the
States as “ hard-pan,” is thoroughly compacted with a 15 ton
roller. Trap rock is used as the macadamising material, the
binding being either trap screenings or coarse sand ; the surface
is well watered and compacted by rolling. Mr. Pierce, C.E.,
states that these roads are traversed by loads averaging 3 tons,
and give entire satisfaction. In St. Louis the formation is formed
parallel to the finished surface and well rolled. The Telford
pavement is limestone 7 inches deep. On this is spread a coat
of limestone gauge. On this is spread coarse sand well
watered by hose until all interstices are filled : the surface is then
rolled. The wearing surface is then applied, consisting of gravel
not exceeding 1-inch gauge, and with not more than 15 per cent,
of sand or loam ; this is soaked with water and well rolled. It is
said to form a moderately clean and durable surface.
Macadamised roads formed of successive layers of gravel are
constructed where suitable material is available. Boston has 160
miles, Bichmond 46, and Washington 34 miles. In the use of
this material precaution is taken that where a natural binder,,
such as ferrugineous clay does not exist, half the bulk of gravel
used is broken, and to the whole quantity clay to the extent of |4h
of the entire bulk is supplied. Sand is unsuitable as a binder, it
prevents compacting under the roller.
Roads in the country districts of America are, as a rule,
infamous in character during inclement weather. On this part of
the subject, I may quote Consul Tanner, who states as follows :
“ There is only one road in the Western and Southern States that
can make any pretensions to be called a road, and that is in the
Yalley of Virginia. Most of the others that have come under my
notice are little short of bogs, swamps, and marshes, and the
bridges man-traps. These roads are utterly at the mercy of the
weather. I have been on the road and saw a poor old Rosinante
tugging away at a waggon stuck in the mud, almost out of sight.
Some of these roads are marked with skeletons of horses that have


been beaten to death or drowned in the mud of some bridgeless
stream.”
At a special convention held at Trenton on January 22, 1892,
for the purpose of discussing the best means of improving the
roads, Dr. Mackenzie said that in lowa a mud blockade due to
bad roads caused a Joss of <£300,000, and that at every general
election in New York State 20,000 farmers will be disfranchised.
A national league, for “ good roads,” was organised at
Chicago on October 20, 1892, at which over 1000 representatives
were present. General Stone, of New York, in the opening
speech, remarked as follows :—“ Columbus discovered America in
vain, if after 400 years we are still behind the ancient Peruvians
in road-making—and are not ashamed of it.”
In the Engineering News for April 6th this year, the editor,
in an article on good roads, says inter alia “ it is true that many
of the roads are shamefully neglected, and where some semblance
of repair is kept up, it is by the utterly wasteful, useless method
of allowing a farmer to work out a road tax, and this should be
corrected as soon as possible.”
As far as can be gathered from current literature, the author
understands that country roads, meaning thereby those distinct
from highways in the neighbourhood of cities or townships, are,
with few exceptions, what are known as dirt or in timbered
country, plank-roads. Little advantage can be gained from the
study of this branch of American highways, except perhaps what
to avoid.
The American plank road is generally constructed 8 feet
wide, of 3-inch planks 8 to 12 inches wide, laid transverse to the
road. These planks rest on stringers or sills laid about 4 feet
apart centres. The sizes of sills vary, but 12 inches wide, 4
inches thick, and from 15 to 20 feet long are common dimensions.
The sills in one row break joint with those in the other, and
where joints occur a short length of sill is placed either under or
alongside the joint. At one side of such a plank road, and some-
times on both sides, the surface is constructed as a dirt road, and
in order to facilitate the passage of vehicles from these side tracks
to the centre plank road, the ends of the planks project alter-
nately in sets of 3or 4 about 4 inches. Where attention is paid
to drainage and repairs, it is stated that plank roads are very
suitable and economical in timbered country. The cost is given
as from £2OO to £BOO per mile, and the average life as 8 years.
Where swamps occur on the line of a road, and where deviation
is inadvisable and drainage excessive in cost, log-roads or corduroy
roads are formed, consisting of trunks of young trees, as straight
and uniform in size as possible, laid side by side transversely to
the line of road. This naturally forms a very rugged surface, but
enables traffic to pass over what would otherwise be impassable.


An exceptional kind of road is the charcoal road, as found
in some of the Western States. It is found where wood is abun-
dant and cheap. The construction consists in clearing the site of
the proposed road of all standing timber and undergrowth, burn-
ing same in clamps covered with earth or sods. When combus-
tion has effected its purpose the sods are removed, and the charcoal
spread as a layer about 15 feet wide, 2 feet thick in the centre,
and 1 foot at the sides. The sod or earth cover for the clamps is
procured from the side drains. These roads are said to wear well
and are free from dust or mud.
The materials used as surfaces for footpaths, or, as they are
called in America, sidewalks, are very diversified. Stone, both
natural and artificial, is largely used both as paving blocks and in
the shape of flags in the large cities, with the exception of
Chicago, which in 1892 was said to possess 2240 miles of planked
footways, which, however, are being yearly replaced with stone
and concrete surfaces.
Other materials used are asphalt, both natural and artificial,
on a concrete foundation, paving brick laid on a gravel foundation
with a cushion coat of sand, tar concrete similar to what is called
asphalt in Sydney and suburbs, and gravel footpaths.
In Ceylon, excellent roads are to be found. This is due
principally to the splendid class of material available, gneiss and
a gravel abounding in clay and iron-stone ; also to the intelligent
manner of construction adopted by Mr. Macßride, Director of
Public Works. The roads on being formed are constructed with
a Telford pavement about 15 feet wide and from 6 to 9 inches
deep. On this the road metal, broken to a 2-inch gauge, is spread,
so as to form a coat 3 inches thick when rolled with bullock
rollers. The binding material used is clean gravel, and water is
liberally used during rolling.
In Bombay the roads and streets are also Telford pavements,
from 6to 12 inches thick, according to the traffic. On this is
spread 2-inch gauge metal, spread and consolidated in separate
layers, until a thickness varying from 6 to 9 inches is arrived at.
Steam rollers are used, and the finished surface is composed of
what is locally known as sandstone, which is described as a soft
littoral concrete.
In the Punjab a calcareous deposit known as “ Kankar ” or
“ Kunkur ” is used as a surface material for streets and roads.
It makes a very smooth surface and lasts fairly well.
It seems in China that, with the exception of those cities or
districts where the Caucasian is tolerated, the construction of
roads is unknown. This may be accounted for in several ways,—
either to the fact that the country is covered with a network of
canals, or that merchandise is transferred by the agency of coolie
labour. Minister Denby, residing in Peking, says “ the roads
outside the cities are merely a line of ruts across the fields. In


winter, when free from rain, as they are for nine months in the
year, they keep in very good condition. In summer they are a
fathomless, impassable bog, and travel, except on foot, is sus-
pended. Inside the cities some of the most crowded thorough-
fares are paved with massive blocks of stone.” “In Northern
China the large rivers can be crossed by ferries only. The ferry
boats are intentionally constructed with a high side-board, so that
carts cannot be driven on without unhitching. This gives em-
ployment to a crowd of ‘ hanger’s-on ’ in unhitching and lifting
on and off the carts, for a compensation. At some places there
are bridges which are too narrow to be crossed by carts, where
the mules are taken out and led over singly, whilst the carts are
carried over on men’s shoulders. Where nature has afforded no
convenient impediment, bad characters sometimes dig holes in the
road in order to obtain employment in helping carts through.”
Mr, Kingmill, of Shanghai, in a paper read before the
Asiatic Society, said : “ Chinese highways can hardly be said to
exist. There are merely the customary tracks from one village
to another, never macadamised, and following all the irregularities
of the surface. In the northern provinces the farmer has a
perfect right to plough up any road parsing through his land, and
the teamster has an equal right to drive his waggon anywhere over
the country. The result is sometimes a battle between the two ;
the construction of pitfalls by the farmer in the line of old roads,
running over crops by the teamster, and finally a compromise.”
In Hongkong and Amoy good macadamised streets and roads
are to be found. The materials used are granite broken to varying
gauges, from 4 inches to 2J inches, the surface being made of a
kind of concrete. In Hongkong this is composed of 1-inch gauge
granite, shell lime and red earth ; in Amoy of disintegrated
granite, in the shape of sand, shell lime and clay. This mixture
is applied wet, and either rolled or beaten down by broad-headed
hammers. It forms a durable surface, and is suitable for the
light traffic to which it is subjected.
Japan, until late years, was similarly situated as regards
roads to the China of to-day : recently, however, macadamised
streets and roads have been constructed. Where railways are not
constructed, inland traffic has been and is carried out by the
agency of pack-horses and coolies.
Recently in Jerusalem, street improvements have been
attempted; streets on which vehicular traffic is permitted are
macadamised with marble in the centre and paved with marble
setts at the sides; other streets are entirely paved with such setts,
but no vehicular traffic is permitted on them.
The country roads in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem are
macadamised in a rude fashion with marble, the binder used being
either earth, gravel or marble chippings, stone rollers, drawn by
mules, are used to consolidate it. The labour necessary for


construction is enforced from the peasantry, which nominally
costs nothing, but the contingent costs of the necessary
superintendence and guards to watch the compulsory labourers
renders the cost of road-making so prohibitive that very few roads
exist. In Syria, a remarkable road, viz., that from Beirut to
Damascus, exists. This is 71 miles in length, and has been
constructed and is maintained by a private company. The road
is macadamised eight inches thick, principally of calcareous
pebbles, broken to a 2| inch gauge ; where it passes over Mount
Lebanon, the marble quarries are utilised to provide macadam ;
the binding material used is crushed marble, effected by passing
a heavy roller over the fresh macadam. For purposes of
maintenance a permanent staff is kept, who repair in rotation
one-third in length of the road each year, completely renewing the
surface. The road is about 21 feet wide, and accommodates
traffic averaging 25,000 tons per annum ; the necessary revenue
for maintenance, &c., is derived from tolls.
In Egypt, with the exception of the cities of Alexandria and
Cairo, no roads exist. The streets in these cities, such as they
are, are macadamised about 12 inches thick. Sheet asphalt and
block asphalt have been tried in Cairo, but unsuccessfully, owing
to extreme temperature. A short length of pine wood blocks, on
concrete foundation, has been laid down recently, and gives
unbounded satisfaction. Its price is the only drawback to its
more extensive use.
From the report of the Public Works Department of this
colony for 1891, it seems there are upwards of 32,000 miles of
roads maintained by the Department, at a cost, for that year, of
less than £3O per mile. The colony has been divided into six
divisions on the recommendation of Mr. Hickson, M.lnst.C.E.,
Engineer-in-Chief for Hoads and Bridges ; and this, in the author’s
opinion, is a step in the right direction. It has worked satisfactorily
in other countries, and there is no reason why it should not succeed
here. From the reports of the officers in charge of these divisions,
in the report referred to, little can be gathered as to the actual
condition or mode of construction of the roads under their control,
he would be pleased to receive supplemental information from any
of these officers during the discussion on this paper.
It is a foregone conclusion, however, that with a revenue of
less than £3O per mile it would be unreasonable to expect really
good roads. I notice that some of the division officers have
experimented with corduroy and burnt clay roads. It would,,
perhaps, be interesting to get a more detailed account of these
than appears in the annual report. Reference is also made to
the question of width of tires. This is a subject which should
undoubtedly receive the attention of our Legislature, as nothing


is so destructive to an ordinary road surface as an improperly
proportioned tire.
As regards a wearing surface for city streets, the present
system, and that in use for the last few years in Sydney, viz.,
wood-blocking with close joints, or -£-inch joints on grades, is, in
my opinion, as near perfection as it is possible to arrive at. The
sooner the old style of blocking—which, with its wide joints, is
little better than miniature corduroy—is taken up, even though
its life, from a worn-out point of view, is not ended, and re-set on
the present system, the better it will be for everyone, with the
exception, perhaps, of makers of vehicles.
In connection with this matter of wood pavements, it may
not be out of place to quote the final paragraph of the Wood
Pavement Board appointed in 1884 to report on the suitability or
otherwise of wood-blocking in Sydney. The investigation was of
a searching character, and no doubt the conclusions arrived at in
the report were honestly based on the then available information
on this subject, which was principally American. The paragraph
referred to is as follows: —“Your Board, therefore, recommends
that the paving of the streets of this city with wood should be
discontinued, and desires to add that this recommendation is
intended to apply, not to the p irticular mode of construction here
adopted, but to the material itself and to every known method of
construction.” The appointment of this Board was largely due to
Mr. W. B. M'Clure, who, in a letter to the Health Society, drew
a highly-coloured picture of Sydney as it would be if declared an
infected port. However, the recommendations in the report were
not adhered to, and the area of wood-blocking has been largely
increased since its date without, as far as the author can learn, any
proportionate increase in the death-rate. No doubt had the
system of wood-blocking as practiced in American cities prior
and subsequent to the investigation been adopted here, the result
would have been very different; but with properly-seasoned
hardwood blocks, with or close joints, suitable grouting
material, as sanitary a pavement can be constructed, if indeed not
more so, than the stone sett pavement, with its wide and porous
joints, its disagreeable noise from traffic, and other inconveniences.
The question of using the most sanitary pavement known, viz.,
natural asphalt, is an open one. Personally he is of opinion tha‘,
irrespective of its additional cost, it is not so suitable for Sydney
streets, the question of grades alone limiting its application. It
would, however, have been most suitable for footpath surfaces,
especially where the materials now being used to remedy the
patchwork condition of the footways have to be imported. Anyone
who has had the advantage of experience in travelling on it and
various other materials for footpaths, will, if unprejudic d, be of
the opinion it is by far the most sanitary and comfortable footpath
surface material known. The question of temperature need not


limit its use in this climate, as the material can be manipulated
to stand greater variation of temperature than is experienced
here.
In conclusion, the author will now say a few words as to
what we may learn, both to follow and to avoid, from the various
systems of highways mentioned in this paper.
In all primitive types of roads, such as are known as dirt,
plank, or corduroy, the first point which needs the greatest
attention is drainage. Side drains should be cut sufficiently deep
to ensure this, the depth varying with the material dealt with,
and the excavated material, if suitable, spread on the surface of
proposed road, after same has been cleared of all vegetable or
perishable matter. In running such a road through timbered
country, a clearance of all timber over 5 feet high should be made
for a width of at least half a chain on each side of the drain.
Coming now to broken stone roads, which form by far the
greatest percentage of highways in the world, the author is of
opinion that, with a given class material and all other circum-
stances being equal, a better road can be formed by using a
modification of the method advocated by Telford than by any
other. Telford designed his pavement on a flat transverse section,
and arrived at the requisite camber by using stone in the
foundation course of varying dimensions. Tresaguet, a French-
man, designed the foundation of his road on a cross section,
cambered parallel to the finished surface of the road, but his
foundation course was much inferior to Telford’s.
In general, the best road will be secured by making the cross
section parallel to proposed finished surface. For borough streets
the author has found this to be a convexity of 12 inches in the
width of 42 feet between kerbs when sandstone or similar material
is used. A less convexity, probably 9 inches, is sufficient, if harder
material, such as basalt, granite, or the local bluestone is used.
For narrower streets a convexity in the above proportion will be
suitable. The formation, as it is completed, should be consolidated
by rolling. This is especially necessary in clayey soil, either in
cutting or filling, and probably only in filling in such soil as
sand or loam. The rolling should proceed in a systematic
manner from the sides, and will be greatly aided and im-
proved upon by judicious watering previously. The Telford
pavement may then be laid, and if two qualities of stone
are available the inferior can be used for the pavement.
The stones should be laid with their greatest base downwards,
and if laminated with the beds vertical, special care should be
taken that all the interstices should be filled with wedge-shaped
stones of good quality, driven home with a hammer, and the
upper surface of the pavement should be approximately parallel
to finished surface by having all protruberances knocked off. A
depth of 9 inches will be found sufficient for an ordinary muni-


cipal street. If, however, the traffic is extraordinary and the
natural formation weak, a depth of 12 inches would be advisable.
On this pavement is then spread the surfacing material which, if
composed of sandstone, should be broken to a 3-inch gauge, and
spread so as to be 6 inches deep after rolling. If the traffic
warrants it the depth may be increased to 9 inches. If an
igneous rock is used direct on the pavement, a minimum thickness
of 4 inches of such rock, broken to a 2A inch gauge, would be
necessary in ordinary cases. It is not absolutely necessary to
secure good results to construct a Telford pavement in rock
formation, a modification of Macadam’s system will, in such case,
answer better.
One great mistake which the author has noticed as very
general in constructing streets is the excessive use of what is
popularly known as “blinding.” In the majority of cases this
term is the most correct that could be applied, as it undoubtedly
serves for a “ blind” or “ screen” for bad work underneath. It
is no doubt a corruption of the proper term which, as you know,
is “ binding.” The so-called “ blinding” which is most favoured
in the neighbourhood of Sydney is an ironstone clay, with which
the surface of streets made of broken stone is liberally treated.
This undoubtedly saves rolling and, in a sense, hastens consolidation
of the upper surface, but its ultimate effect on the material of
which the street is constructed is injurious, in wet weather the
street is either disagreeably sticky or even a sea of mud if the
gradient be flat, and in dry weather everyone within 100 feet of
such a street is blinded with clouds of dust. All these discom-
forts can be avoided by the intelligent use of a suitable binding
material. The wearing surface of a broken stone street can be
made to reach as near perfection as such material is capable of,
by using sand as a binding material. On applying the sand, which
may be done freely, as any excess is easily removed, the
surface should be first well rolled dry; judicious watering
should then take place. An excess of watering should be
carefully avoided when sand is used as a binder. The surface
should then be re-rolled before allowing traffic on it. When clay,
loam, or marl is used as a binder, its use should be restricted to a
minimum. In executing repairs of highways by the system of
“ patching,” much improvement could be made in the general
method practiced about Sydney and elsewhere. The author is not
going to discuss the point whether patching or periodical renewal of
surface is the better, but with the funds available under present
laws he is of opinion “ patching” is unavoidable. However, when
carried out, it should be done in a proper manner. The spot
needing repair should be picked up sufficiently deep to receive
the new layer of material. Such portion of the old material as is
suitable for binding should be then applied, and if satisfactory
results are desired the surface of the patch should be watered and


rammed. How different this is to actual practice ! You can see
for yourselves, at any time, new material being applied ; no such
thing as cleaning the old surface, let alone picking it up, being
thought of. Then the intelligent workman looks about him—and
in the majority of cases he has not far to look—for some mud.
This he applies, scattered broadcast over the patch of new
material. He then generally takes a rest, after, perhaps, a few
final pats of the back of his shovel, and views with apparent
satisfaction his noble work. The result, however, of such work
is varied ; loss of material owing to same being scattered by fast
vehicular traffic; inconvenience and danger due to loose stones on
the surface; loss of material owing to attrition under slow
vehicular traffic due to want of consolidation of the materials ;
and the perpetuation of mud and dust in their seasons due to use
of filthy mud as a binder.
Another matter which is capable of improvement is the
method of constructing tarred metal surfaced streets or roads.
The usual method is to spread the metal 2J-inch gauge, which has
been mixed with tar, on the broken stone or concrete foundation,
in different thicknesses, according to traffic. The surface coat of
tarred screenings is then applied and well rolled. Such a con-
struction, if repairs are properly attended to, makes a sanitary,
and, as far as the materials permit, a good street. The improve-
ment the author would suggest is to lay the layer of 2--inch
gauge metal unmixed with tar. The use of tar in such a case is
needless, and in fact leads to waste, both in the cost of itself and
the labour of mixing it with the metal. The author has laid
down streets in this improved manner, and after a lapse of about
six months, on their being opened up for pipe trenches, he has
found that the blue metal which was laid dry had become
cemented together by the effluent tar from the surface materials.
The recently-constructed cable tramway in Sydney was constructed
with the tarred metal on concrete. Had the metal been laid dry
a considerable saving might have been effected, and the result
have been equally effective.
Regarding wood-blocked pavements, the author is of opinion,
as stated before, the present system in vogue in Sydney cannot
be improved upon. As regards the use of cement grouting, the
author considers it inadvisable, especially where the blocks are
laid as close together as practicable. Its use is presumably to
secure a water-tight joint. The author cannot see how this can
be effected in a practical manner as sufficient time is not allowed
to elapse between its use and the pavement being opened to
traffic to permit of its hardening or setting sufficiently to resist
vibration, and so prevent its crumbling, either wholly or in part,
into dust. To form a water-tight joint it shou dbe equally
attached to the wood on both sides of the joint it fills, but no
one ever saw this during the removal of old blocking. The


author understands its use is also prejudicial to the life of the
blocking, as it causes decay. Care should be taken in providing
ample space for expansion. The neglect of this precaution has in
several instances caused injury to the kerb line and the material
forming the surfaces of the footpath.
As regards the cleaning of road and street surfaces, sufficient
attention has not been paid to this item in the life of the
materials composing same. After constructing a highway,
whether same be a dirt road (the cheapest), a pavement of wood
blocks or natural asphalt (the most expensive), or any of the
intermediate materials; after going in many cases to considerable
expense in grading and draining same, it is little short of criminal
to neglect, as is too often the case, the maintenance of such a
highway,—and in maintenance the most important item is
cleansing. Nothing is so destructive to the materials forming the
surface of a road, or so non-productive of longevity, to say
nothing about its unsanitariness, as permitting the accumulation
of dirt or moisture in any shape. Were more attention paid to
this in connection with country roads or suburban streets, large
sums would be saved in the repairs of such highways, and the
comfort of travellers greatly improved. If want of funds
prevents this necessary attention to all highways, at least let
sufficient be allocated for cleansing the principal ones. Rate-
payers in many instances submit cheerfully to the levy of a
special rate for watering streets in order to minimise the incon-
venience and destruction of property from dust. I am of the
opinion, on the principle that prevention is better than cure,
especially in this climate, that this rate would be more beneficially
applied in the intelligent prevention of the nuisance than in
allowing it to arise and then temporarily altering its nature into
one personally less disagreeable, but more destructive to the road
surface materials.
In conclusion, the author hopes any omissions, of which there
are several—but the present length of the paper must be
sufficient excuse—will be supplied during the discussion which I
hope will take place.
The information is largely from personal knowledge, gathered
during many years, some kindly supplied by officials in foreign
countries, and the American mainly from Mr. Byrnes’ recently
published work on “ Highway Construction.”
J. I. HAYCROFT, M.E., Q.U.1.,
Borough Engineer, Woollahra.
sth Oct., 1893.


J r Af t
BI6UO
ft 0 Softer
N
SYDNEY :
Saml. E, Lees, Printer and Stationer,
83 York Street.




