

H I.G. HERE D U C A TIO N.
%
NAUGDRAL A.DDRESS
AT
St. John’s College,
WITHIN THE UNIVERSITY OE SYDNEY,
13 V
The Most Rfv.
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, D'.D.
Ok




HIGHER EDUCATION.
Jnaugural Address
AT
St. John’s College,
WITHIN THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
BY
The Most Rev.
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, D.D.




CONTENTfS.
PAGE
Introduction'.. .. I( 3
SECTION I.
Pagan Teaching.
Great Men, Centres of Culture 3
The Greeks,—Poets, Sophists, Rhetoricians .. .. .. 9
Men of Science .. .. .. .. .. 11
Beginnings of University Teaching 12
Athens .. .. .. ~ .. .. 13
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle .. .. ~ .. it (i lg
Alexandria .. .. .. ... „ ~ tt .. t . 19/
Blots in Greek Training .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. mm 23
Rome .. .. .. .. .. .. lt .. .. 26
Rome compared with Greece .. ~ ~ 28
The great flaw in Pagan Schools .. .. ~ 30
SECTION 11.
Catholic Teaching of the Past.
Love or enthusiasm introduced by Christ .. .. .. 31
Directly opposed to the pagan principle .. 32
Love, the root of the Christian principle .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
Testimony of Pascal .. .. .. .. .. .. M .. 33
Tests of Christian Love, Courage, Fear of Sin ... .. .. .. .. 33
Directive principle of the new enthusiasm .. .. .. .. .. 36
Relation of the Christian to the Pagan principle.. .. .. .. .. 37
Origin of Christian Schools, Christ, the Apostles, Bishops 38
School of S. Mark at Alexandria .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 39
Pantaenus.. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
S. Clement, his method .. 41
Origen 42
S. Basil, S. Gregory of Nazianzus 43
S."’Jerome, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine 43
Fall of the Western Empire ~ .. ~ .. .. M .. 44
The Church civilizes the world again .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
S. Benedict .. .. .. .. .. tl .. 46
Benedictine influence and teaching .. .. .. ~ .. ~ 47


PAGE
Venerable Bede .. .. . . .. .. .. 48
Schools of Ireland .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
Charlemagne and Alcuin in France .. .. .. .. ... 52
King Alfred in England.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 55
Causes of the development of learning .. .. .. .. .. .. 58
Monastic teaching insufficient ... .. .. .. .. .. .. 59
Paris, seed-plot of Universities .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60
Growth of Universities .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61
University-cities under the Popes .. .. .. .. .. .. 61
Oxford founded by great Catholic Bishops .. .. .. .. .. 62
Great interest of Popes in Universities—the Sapienza .. .. .. 6 3
Still the Schools not immaculate .. .. .. .. .. .. 65
Immorality and infidelity in spite of Pome’s authority .. .. .. 66
The Sorbonne .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Pules for scholars .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 67
Influence of the Holy See over Universities .. .. .. .. .. 69
State of Italian Schools .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 70
Guardianship of the Church over Faith and Morals in the Schools .. 71
The Church alone adequate to restrain pride of intellect and human
passion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 72
SECTION 111.
Catholic Teaching of the Peesent.
page
The Quod Divina Sapientia of Pope Leo XII .. .. .. .. .. 73
Peflection of St. Augustine.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 74
Pope Leo’s Address at the Sapienza .. .. .. .. .. •• 75
His Encyclical .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 77
Spirit of Pope Leo’s Bull on Education .. .. .. .. ... 78
The Church invariable in her fundamental principles .. .. .. .. 79
The Christianity of to-day .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 80
Principles of “ the most complete and refined science of the day ” .. .. 81
Testimony of Mr. Llewelyn Davis to the spread of scepticism in England 82
Dr. Carpenter’s view.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 83
The Lublin Review, Mr. Leslie Stephens, and Mr. Sherer .. .. .. 84
Mr. Lecky on the evil effects of Rationalism .. .. .. .. .. 85
One cause of infidelity .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 86
Reaction against the “ advanced thinkers,” Mr. Forsyth .. .. .. 87
Mr. Martineau .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 88
Professor Pritchard, Sir J. Herschel, Professor Agassiz .. .. .. 90
Professors Sedgwick, Aldis, and Maxwell .. .. 91
Scientific men contradict each other .. .. .. .. .. •• 92
The Church a firm stand-point .. .. .. .. . • • • • • 93
Her unchangeable character; her teaching on Science .. .. .. .. 94
Higher Education, her instrument for maintaining truth .. .. .. 95
Efforts of Pius IX in this direction —the University of Dublin, energy and
generosity of the Irish People .. ... .. «. .. .. 95
University of Louvain, its rapid development .. .. .. .. >• 96
Speech of Mgr. Cartuivalis .. 97


PAGE
College of Higher Studies in England 98
Pastoral Letter of the English Bishops 99
Catholic principles still in full force 100
Root of the educational difficulty
Principle of the Sydney University and Colleges 102
View of Sir Charles Nicholson .. .. •.
Dr. Woolley invokes the Spirit of Alfred 104
To teach Catholicity the main duty of St. John’s ..
A double guarantee of Orthodoxy 106
Harmonious action of the University and the College
Practical view of Catholics .. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• 108
Nothing less than the present compromise would satisfy them .. • • 109
1 f)Q
Conclusion .. • • • • • • • • • • • • ±KJ
Appendix .. .. •• ... .. •• • *




Jnaugural Address.




INAUGURAL ADDRESS, &c.
Plenitude* Legis Diledio (Rom. xiii., 10).
Your Grace, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, —
You may not all be aware that although St.
John’s College has been in existence for some fourteen
years, still it has never been formally opened or formally
blessed. Like all institutions of learning which are des-
tined to run a glorious career, it has had to struggle in its
infancy with many difficulties; and it has only been by
slow degrees—comparing it with the railway speed at
which material advancement progresses in the present day
—it has only been, I say, by degrees that it has been
working itself into that position which augurs for it good
prospect of smoother seas and fair sailing.
The fabric is now in a good state of repair ; the
beautiful Chapel, like the rest of the building, is modestly
furnished. We have an able staff of teachers, and have
reason to believe that every year will add to the number of
our students.
Such being the present position of affairs, I did not
think it a presumptuous thing to propose to have an
opening of the College—to pledge ourselves to the Catholic
public that we shall strain every nerve on our part to
make it a success, and to secure from them at the same
time—seeing, as they do see, wffiat already has been done
—-that cordial co-operation, and that substantial support,
without which such institutions as these must dwindle
away, and all our most earnest energies must be without
effect.


And as on such festive and joyous occasions as these
the public has a claim to know, not only what we have
been doing-, but what also we are about to do —has a right
to take part with us in our anxieties, and in our anticipa-
tions, —to lighten our burdens by its sympathy, and to
participate in our pleasant auguries for the future by
learning what they are —as, my Lords, Ladies, and Gentle-
men, without you, we, the Rector and Fellows of this
University College, could not advance a single step towards
the fulfilment of our high vocation, it is well, I say, that
I should make confidences with you, and enlist your
sympathies in my regard, by laying before you, however
humbly and inadequately, the views which I entertain
touching the principal aim of this noble institution,
and the advantages which the Catholics of Australia
will derive by giving it their countenance and generous
support.
This, it appears to me, should -be the object of an
inaugural address on an occasion like the present,— to lay
before you the principles on which we begin, or inaugu-
rate the working of the College—and, consequently, if
we are consistent with ourselves —the way in which we
have the intention of continuing that work.
Looking, then, at Education in its length and breadth,
taking a large and extensive view of it, of its achievements
and its failures, beginning with the Greek and ending with
our own civilization, there is one thing as evident as a
steady course of historical fact can make it, viz., that the
ancients, though infinitely more cultured than ourselves in
many branches of education—and exhibiting the full flower
of the freshness of nature cultivated to its highest blooming
—still, with all this exuberance of native they
egregiously —X can hardly say failed, for failure implies an
abortive attempt, and they made no attempt at all —they,
I say, were totally divested of one element in the develop-
ment of man, taken in his integrity; and by reason of
this, whilst they offer us much that may make us despair,
at the same time they are also models and standards to us,
in other things, of what we should avoid.


The Greek and Roman Teachers trained the intellect
and the will in the order of literature, logic, and discipline,
to perhaps its very highest point; hut they were Pagan,
and that is enough, and, therefore, they lacked the culti-
vation of the heart. This was their great blot. Ido not
blame them to the extent that I pity them; but, whether
blamed or pitied—they exhibit to us the highest forms of
perfection on the one side, and the lowest class of degrada-
tion, corruption, and animalism on the other. The fruit
was beautiful to look at —but, penetrate beneath the skin,
and it was rotten at the core.
Row the object of University education is to form the
entire man, through and through—to take what is best
from all sides, and to turn it into an instrument for ripening
and developing him.
Where, however, is true education of the heart to come
from ? It comes from the teachings of Revelation through
our Lord, and through the Christian Church. What
Greece and Rome cannot give us, that is bestowed on us
by Christianity. Hence, together with the highest culture
of intellect and will, we must secure the highest culti-
vation of the feeling and the heart. In proportion as the
former is advanced, and the latter kept in abeyance, we
are falling back into the corruptions and idolatries of
Paganism ; in proportion as the latter is fostered and
encouraged together with all other cultures, we are ad-
vancing towards the fulness of Christian civilization and
real progress, in the strict meaning of the term—for, thus,
the whole entire man is purified, informed, enlightened,
and elevated to high and beautiful things,—his private, as
well as his public life, is ruled by the spirit of purity,
truth, justice, and love; and he is as sound in the heart
as he is in the utterances of his theories and in the
exposition of his beliefs.
. Such being the case, it is evident what one of our prin-
cipal duties will be at St. John’s. Whilst the University
is exercising the intellect and disciplining the will, we shall
have to inform, instruct, and educate the heart. In pro-
portion as this is successfully done, shall we turn out


Christian men of power, of real enlightenment, and true
steel: in proportion as we are unsuccessful, the rising
generation will fall into that refined and blighted paganism
which is, alas ! becoming too much the vogue at present
amongst the more cultivated classes in the modern world.
Such are the points on which I take the liberty of
addressing you, points of intense practical importance at
the. present day, and bearing immediately on the cardinal
duties of the Rector and superiors of St. John’s, and on the
highest interests of its Students.
Section I.
I begin, then, thus:—To know and to love are the
two master passions of man, one energizing from his in-
tellect, the other from his heart. Here below, these two
passions never can attain their fullest satisfaction, they
only then can achieve their complete fulfilment when the
creature finds himself at last in that Presence which is the
Origin of all wisdom and of every charity. Here we gain
glimpses and passing and broken visions of knowledge;
here, through a glass, and in a dark manner, man yearns
after the light which attracts his spirit, and craves after
larger draughts of these waters which alone can quench the
thirsting of his soul. These two passions, or forces in
human nature, are the natural basis of all man's strivin°*
in the direction of science and religion; and we find, even
in the remotest antiquity, these two yearnings so combined,
so interpenetrating each the other, that it is hardly possible
to fix upon a philosopher or friend of wisdom, even amongst
the pagans, whose intellect was not at one time occupied
with those problems which bear upon his relation to the
gods, or to a future state of happiness.
Retired, into the recesses of some solitude, or hidden
away in silent meditation, the great men of old, however
erroneous their teaching may have been, pondered and
contemplated truth according to their method of viewing
it; and far from the din and whirl of men, drew out
sophies which were for a time to rule the world. The


followers of Pythagoras dwelt in lonely solitudes, Epicurus
gave lessons in the arts of life and its happiness in his
famous garden : the Stoics frequented solitary groves and
silent porticoes; whilst Aristotle, under the softening shade
of over-hanging boughs, amidst the gardens, shrubberies,
and avenues of the Lyceum, poured from the fountains
of his clear and limpid intellect, those principles of reason-
ing which have become the common heritage of the modern
world. And as for Aristotle’s master, with his contem-
plative and soaring spirit, where else could he possibly
be found, save, far from the laughter of the empty sophist,
hidden from the pulses of the outer world ? The poet tells
us where; in
The olive grove of Academe
Plato’s retirement, where the Attic bird
Thrills her thick-warbled notes the summer long.
Such men as these, intensely energising in the realms of
thought, have been to the world as salt and light. The
world may boast of Croesus, Hieron, Dionysius, and Alex-
ander; but let me ask, where would these have been
without Solon, Pindar, Plato, and Aristotle ? In religion
and in the church it is just the same. If we have
Ambrose, Leo, and Boniface, we have also men who have
done our thinking for us, as well as men who have acted
an heroic part. Origen, Gregory, Jerome, John of Damascus,
Peter Lombard, Bonaventure, Thomas of Aquino, and many
others, have left us treasures of thought which, possibly
in the long run, may surpass in value the achievements of
men simply engaged in beneficent works and in the
charitable pursuits of active life. Anyhow, theory and
practice, thought and act, exhibit a division of labour which
starts with the beginnings of the history of civilised man.
Before the creation of schools and universities, which
were instituted for training the young for the battle of life,
and for exercising their every faculty, and offering them
their choice in every sort of universal knowledge—before
any form of combined effort after culture had been set on
foot—certain individuals of lofty intellect and creative
genius arose from time to time, attracted the attention of


their generation, and formed a kind of school or following.
Man, with that thirst for knowledge and craving for light,
which is a part of his inheritance, has always been drawn,
as by a magnet, when any teacher of deep thought and
superior skill in utterance has exhibited himself. The
thinker has but to open his mind and present his treasures,
and he is sure of a large and attentive audience. So it was
at least in the days before colleges and universities, such
as we have now, had come into existence. And such were
the initial seeds or germs which, by means of association,
organisation, discipline, and system, grew eventually into
those great centres of spiritual activity which have been
the seed plots of the intellectual life of nations.
We need not go hack farther into the past to trace the
genesis of the great Universities of East and West than
the days of ancient Greece. That which is last refined
by careful culture was the first which appears to have
attracted the masses of mankind. Poetry flourished ages
before science attained anything worthy of a name. That
seeking for knowledge, and for love of which I have spoken
before, setting on fire the imagination, produced those
masterpieces of poetry, which, though coming to perfection
thousands of years ago, are still the despair of our modern
writers, in spite of their superior culture and the experience
of ages from which to draw more perfect methods. To
know, to love, and to sing with all the freedom of an
exquisite nature—-just as the lark or nightingale, spon-
taneously, from nature’s fount pours out unpremeditated
melody, so seems it to have been with the first educators of
the highest gifted people of the world.
Hesiod and Homer may be said to have written the
Bible and the Literature of early Greece, And wandering
minstrels and enthusiastic rhapsodists, decked in bright
attire, with crowns of gold upon their heads, poured into
the ears of delighted crowds their thrilling numbers which
lit up the imagination like a flame, and found a response
in every Grecian breast. The rhapsodists, answering to
the character of the people, and playing upon eyes, ears,
and intellects exquisitely fashioned by nature herself as


recipients of all things bright, melodious, and fair, acted a
part in their days, though of course, most imperfectly,
■which universities are erected to achieve in these : that is,
they tended to educate the people, and to stimulate them
to exercise their minds and imaginations on something else
besides following cattle and digging up earth..
The sophists or rhetoricians, when the originality and
the energy of poets began to wane, next gained possession
of the multitude. They partook greatly of the Charlatan.
We have their counterparts in the days of Abelard and
William of Champeaux in the Middle Ages. They ap-
proached nearer to the professor-class than the poets and
rhapsodists; but their teaching was by no means as sound ;
and pretending to know everything, and to teach universal
knowledge, they naturally talked a vast amount of non-
sense. They knew that, whatever they taught, a willing
audience was ever at command. The Greeks had a passion
for novelty, possessed a restless curiosity and instability,
were exquisitely framed, so tenderly, so perfectly, as to
receive any and every intellectual impression with all the
perfect fullness of its force; besides this, they preferred,
on the whole, to be amused, startled, played upon, tickled,
to being instructed; and hence the sophists and rhetoricians
became, if possible, even more popular than the poets. If
they had a vast fund of self-assurance, they had a deeper
well of mother wit. Brilliant, subtle, unscrupulous, brazen,
ready for any emergency, like daring intellectual acrobats
they gathered their crowd of bright-eyed Greeks around
them with every sense open for impression, and undertook
to popularise philosophy, to lay down the law on every
conceivable subject, and to have an answer made off hand
to any question. Like polished adepts in the art of fence,
they mixed with the gay and thoughtless multitude, and
represent to us the scholastic contests of the Middle Ages,
as translated into the brightness, polish, and readiness of
the Grecian mind. Gorgias, Protagoras, and Prodicus,
are specimens of a class. Like literary knight-errants
they travelled from city to city, ready to enter the jousts
with any antagonists, and astonishing the crowds of their


eager countrymen who surrounded them, by the dash of
their rhetoric, by the assumption of their knowledge, and
by the marvellous dexterity of their retorts.
In fact, the Greeks were never in the full swing of
their happiness except when engaged in conflicts intel-
lectual or physical. They lived in a round of intellectual
dissipation. The stage, the arena, the cock-pit, the law
courts, the rostrum, and the supper-table—each held out
its especial attraction, whilst all were strongly seasoned
with everything that was brilliant and sparkling, or start-
ling and exciting. It was the play of fancy, the dexterity
of. dialectics, the gladiatorial exhibitions of intellectual
strife, which took possession of their imaginations, espe-
cially in pre-Socratic times, more than a sober steady
pursuit of truth. The “ quibble,’’ the “ snare,” the
hook,” the “ labyrinth,” and a whole family of sophist-
ical abortions, were sufficient to make play for them, and
to occupy minds which had been trained by Sophists and
Grammarians into too volatile a frame to bear the presence
of serious study, and had ever enjoyed the reputation,
justly or unjustly, of being contention is avidiores quam
veritatis.
Poets and rhapsodists, sophists and rhetoricians, what
after all are they but teachers and university professors,
uncultivated, and run wild, doing their work in their own
way, and in the absence of an organized system of univer-
sity instruction, offering to the people some kind of
refreshment for their imaginations, if not much solid food
for their minds.
Besides poetry and rhetoric, the Greeks, after all, were
not altogether indifferent to science. Indeed, whilst it is
generally admitted that in poetry they hold the palm, it is
not altogether certain that they do not also hold it in more
sublunary studies : they were rather erratic in their views;
still, erratic also at times are even our foremost scientific
leaders of the day. The most polished university education
of the modern world does not render even physicists infal-
lible. u The Materialistic theories of to-day,” says the
learned Hierarchy of Ireland, u which recognize in matter


the promise and potency of every form and quality of life,
are nothing else than the teachings of a school of pagan
philosophers who, for about six hundred years before
Christ, and especially for some one hundred and fifty years
between Thales and Socrates, delivered themselves up to
speculations concerning the nature and origin of the
physical world. The leading tenets of those philosophers
agree, one by one, with the doctrines we have heard lately
enunciated in our midst. According to them, as according
to their latest disciples, man is but a streak of morning
cloud, destined to melt into the infinite azure of the past.
1 We are born of nothing,’ thus does the sacred writer describe
their doctrine of life, £ and after this we shall be as if we
had not been; for the breath in our nostrils is smoke; and
speech a spark to move our hearts, which being put out,
our body shall be ashes, and our spirit poured abroad as
soft air, and our life shall pass away as the trace of a cloud,
and shall be dispersed as a mist w r hich is drawn away by
the beams of the sun.’ ” (Wisdom ii., 2,3.)
Evidently there are replicas of the ancient teaching at
the present hour amongst our modern lights. There is a
fair choice amongst the Greeks of a scientific master.
Eor example, Thales, the Milesian (b.c. 600), said water
was the ultimate cause of all things; Anaximenes, by
way, I suppose, of change, said chaos was ; Anaxi-
mander (b.c. 500), his successor —two of a trade very
seldom agreeing—declared it to be air; Diogenes, of
Appolonia, added life to air; Heraclitus, the Ephesian
(b.c. 502), said it was caloric; Pythagoras, who has many
friends in these days, stood up for the primal monad. And
here we have, without doubt, some progenitors of modem
philosophy, for Xenophanes, of Colophon (b.c. 617),
indulged in material pantheism; Parmenides denied the
world of sense altogether—as, I believe, has been done
since his time as an original discovery ; Empedocles, of
Agrigentum (b.c. 492-432) was a Pantheist. Then we
have Democritus, of Abdera (b.c. 460), declaring the soul
to be a fiery particle—which has been repeated, satirically
perhaps, in more modern days. Anaxagoras (b.c. 500)


taught an eternal matter penetrated by an Eternal Nous:
Protagoras, of Abdera, held the doctrine of perpetual flux;
whilst Gorgias, of Leontium (b.c. 494-400), and, under
the circumstances, I cannot be very much surprised at it,
stoutly maintained—and doubtless he did so with some
effect, for he was the first orator of his day—that nothing
had any existence whatsoever. Here, anyhow, is a goodly
array of men of science, who no doubt made a small mark
in their day, and one at least of whom, according to
Professor Tyndal, gave, 2000 years ago, “a fair general
statement of the atomic philosophy as now held.” %
Naturally, the efforts of individual teachers, and the
action of men specially gifted with powers for attracting
the young around them, speedily resulted in some kind of
centralization. Families are the formation of societies,
societies of cities; and then we have commonwealths,
nations, and extensive empires. So with the action of
learned men and able teachers. They are naturally
attracted to the centres of population. They set them-
selves down in favoured cities and emporiums of trade, in
the resorts of the wealthy, the gay, and the lovers of what
is soothing to the senses and stimulates the mind. Either
on account of the position itself of the place, or because
of the patronage of some high potentate, or because it is
the home of letters, some foremost city is chosen, or,
at all events, becomes a light of civilization and of
culture, throwing out its strong rays on all sides, and
forming the thoughts, the manners, and the intellect of
nations. Thus, in Pagan times, before the light of Christi-
anity came in, we have three Seats of Wisdom, above all
others in their eminence and in the greatness of their
achievements, —Athens, Alexandria, and Eome —-just, as in
more modern days, we can look upon Naples, Paris, and
Oxford as especial centres of Christian letters.
Now, with regard to the Athenians, did they possess no
higher gifts than those of lightness and frivolity—to
which I have referred—never could they have attained
* Address before the British Association at Belfast, 1874, p. 4,


the eminence they reached. Athens would never have
exhibited a picture of taste and cultivation, such as has
never yet been rivalled and will never he surpassed. She
never would have been held up in modern days as a
pattern Alma Mater of the world, as the great emporium
of knowledge thrown into its most fascinating form, and
developed in its highest perfection by men of the most
cultivated genius, if her children had not possessed a rare
and exceptional endowment.
Consider her for a moment. Her very situation was an
attraction in itself. Placed on the blue iEgean, within
easy reach by water of sunny towns which dotted the
Mediterranean coast, she was the natural resort of thousands
of enterprising merchants, and youths drawn from every
quarter of the world in search of fortune, excitement, and
of the prizes and arts of life. The very air of Attica had
something inebriating in it—its purity and its elasticity,
its freshness and transparency, seemed almost to exert an
influence upon the intellect itself, and produce analogous
effects in the teeming minds of poets, sculptors, and rhe-
toricians. For hundreds of years did she hold her supremacy
as the Sedes Sapientice of East and West. States rose to
power and fell into decrepitude, the throes of domestic re-
volution shattered the peace of kings and rulers, civil war
spread darkness and devastation amidst happy homes, fruit-
ful valleys, and waving plains, whilst she, the mistress of
all that is perfect in art and refined in philosophy, still
continued to rule with undisputed sovereign sway the Em-
pire of the Beautiful. How pleasant was it for Gregory of
Nazianzus in the opening years of early youth to leave the
wilds of home, his native bush, and find himself in the
midst of the high cultivation of the great Athenian world of
letters! the natives of Pontus, and Cappadocia, and Egypt,
and Asia may have felt the pang of parting, and may have
looked back to many charms they had left behind, but
when once they had learnt to know what was meant by
living in Athens, what it was to be thrown into com-
panionship with the highest works of art, and amidst the
most enthralling influences of the imagination and the


feelings, they could not do otherwise than admit that, some-
how or other, at Athens, and there alone, was to be found
the source and spring of all that is beautiful in nature
when elevated by all that is most refined in the arts of life.
Thither it was that the learning and mysticism of the east
flowed in, and found a refinement they had never known
before. Here was the chosen shrine of sculpture, painting,
eloquence, and philosophy. Here nature and art, the
Agora kept cool by Timon’s trees, the Acropolis and the
Areopagus, the temples, theatres, and porticos, all spoke to
the wondering and almost stupified barbarian—to the in-
habitants of the Mediterranean cities, of the lonian Isles,
and the sea board of Asia Minor—regarding effects which
can be produced by an enthusiastic cultivation of that por-
tion of the human intellect or imagination which is princi -
pally occupied with a love of the beautiful, the graceful, or
the true. Thousands came to Athens to see, to be dazzled,
and to return to their native woods and plains. There was
hardly a sailing ship which splashed its way out of the
Piraeus which did not return with iron, brass, and wine, with
corn, coal, and timber, indeed, but also with its freight of
eager boys and youths, who were bent on seeing with their
own eyes, those marvels which had been the theme of tra-
vellers, and which were the staple topic in every mouth
which had opened in amazement whilst looking on the
wonders of Athenian skill.
Who could watch Phidias or Scopas throwing all that
is Divine in human form into the snowy marble without
being struck by so much genius ? Fancy any young man
from Pontus, or Cappadocia, from the islands of the sea,
or elsewhere, landing for the first time amidst these
creations of the human intellect ? Would he not be over-
powered by what he saw and heard ? So different from
all his former experiences, so new, so strange, so fair.
The very paintings in the Temple of the Dioscuri by
Polygnotus would be enough to startle him with amaze-
ment. Or let him stroll amidst spreading groves along the
banks of the Cephissus, and gaze on the temples and statues
which casually meet his eye, and he will have enough to


fill his imagination with wonder and delight, or if he be
more eager after the living power of human genius, he may
join the throng which surrounds the Divine Plato amongst
Pis plane trees, or stroll quietly into the garden where
Epicurus is enlarging on the joys of life, or watch Zeno
amongst his chosen followers, or join the great and gather-
ing crowd which Aristotle has drawn around himself, and
pear him discant, with that mixture of keenness, clever-
ness, and conceit, which forms part at least of his at-
tractive influence over his disciples, with regard to his
relations to his former master, and his views on his
philosophy. Or, if he prefers some more exciting
spectacle, let him place himself under the influence of the
splendid rhetoric of Isocrates, or give himself up for a
time to the pleadings of such men as Demosthenes, Lycias,
and Theophrastus; or watch Pericles thundering from the
lema, and he will be able then to return to his native
home with food for thought and wonder for a life.
Now, if a university is a place for teaching all know-
ledge, and for exercising youth in the methods of attaining
it, surely Athens may be looked upon in the light of a
university planted and developed by the hand of nature.
It was of natural growth. There was the site, well adapted
for the object; the genius of the people pre-eminently
suited for exercises of art; and the flocking in on every
side of professors and of students, the one class acting on
the other, till the city became a vast market, satisfying the
calls of supply and demand which were pouring in from
every quarter of the world. Thus, for instance, Theo-
phrastus is said to have had four thousand pupils; whilst
lonia, Africa, Cyprus, Thrace, Sicily, Syria, Armenia,
Bithynia, and Thessaly set their contingent of learned
men to enter into competition with the highest talent of
the day.
Thus, in process of time and by degrees, the flux and
unsteadiness of individual effort gave way to some kind of
order, division, and discipline in teaching. Not that the
Athenians ever arrived at our more systematized methods
of university organization. The realm of letters was-


rather a republic than an empire: rather a home for all,
where each might teach his own as he listed, depending
solely for his place and his success upon his cultivation and
his gifts, and upon the art he displayed in attracting, and
then retaining wandering scholars, who were seeking for a
master.
The characters and methods of such professors can be
best brought out by touching on the history of the three
most eminent amongst them—by describing the character
of their own education, and the way in which they treated
their disciples after they had formed a school.
Socrates, for instance, was too poor to engage a Sophist
in his education. He received a training which was
eminently Athenian. His development of mind took place,
not in some stifling garret—not on some hard form, with
elbows fixed upon a desk, and under the rods of rigid task-
masters —but in the free and open air of Athens, in the
Agora, the gymnasia, and the market-place, and in the
company of poets, philosophers and statesmen. No book
could impart such stimulus as this; and no method of the
schools could compete with the activity produced by con-
tact of mind with mind, and by the friction of one sharp
intelligence upon another. As he was brought up himself
so he taught others. He had no lecture-hall, no class-
room; he was no recluse hiding himself from his fellow-man;
he had neither a garden nor a portico; he chose the open
crowded street, and courted the presence of his countrymen.
If his appearance was against him, his intellect was clear
as crystal, and his power of dialectics was so astounding
that he speedily gathered large crowds around him, and
became one of the most famous men of the most famous
city in the world.
Plato was one of his disciples. He was about twenty
years of age when he was first attracted by the dexterity
and honesty of Socrates. His education had already been
carefully attended to. Dionysius the grammarian, Draco
and Metellus the musicians, and Aristo the trainer were
his early masters. . Poetry, the lyre and the flute, wrestling,
boxing and running exercised both body and mind to


become supple and strong, so as to make them capable of
sustained exertion in their respective spheres. Thus pre-
pared, he attended the open-air schools of Socrates. For
eight*years did he follow his master about the city, per-
fecting himself in the art of disputation, stimulated by him
in thought, and learning the principles of intellectual
honesty. Next he travelled to foreign parts. Italy, Magna
Grcseia, Sicily, Egypt, added their quota to his develope
ment and education. At length he returned to Athens. He
retired to his little house and garden at the Ciramicus. It
waS a mile from town, a beautiful suburban spot, with
pleasant shady walks and resting-places. Though he loved
solitude, and to commune with his own spirit—though he
shrank from the din, and noise, and heartless worry of the
world —the world would not leave him alone. His was a
master-mind, a source of intellectual light, and the gaudy
flies of Athens were drawn by it. As I have said else-
where, “ Old and young were equally attracted. The
ambitious hoped to learn something which would teach
them how to rule their fellow-men. The gay young
Athenian, all life and plumage, like a summer bird, would
flutter round him, dazzled for the moment; the wondering
youth from some far province of Asia Minor, from the
wilds of Cappadocia, or of Thrace, would hang spell-bound
on the sage’s lips, as if enthralled by some divinity. Whilst
the self-conscious and haughty Lacedoemonian would feel
himself compelled to offor his proud testimony to the
mastership of the Athenian mind. Neither the fame of
Isocrates the celebrated rhetorician, nor the tenets of Aris-
tippus which flattered the worst passions of mankind, were
able to cast a shade on the unapproachable popularity of
the divine Academy. Men who were learning to be tyrants';
future orators, governors, philosophers and poets—men of
acute intellect and restless temperament—nay, even accom-
plished courtesans, such as Aspasia, Lasthenea, and
Axiothea mixed with the general throng, testifying at
once by their presence to the corruptions of the State, and
to the hollowness of all philosophy which is simply founded
on human genius and natural gifts. The picture, there is


no doubt, is refined, is captivating, is sweet and soothing
to the cultivated intellect of man. Nature can rise no
higher. Plato manifests it at its brightest and its best.
Elegance, culture, taste, delicacy, high thoughts, noble
aspirations, beautiful conceptions of the mind and the
imagination —all are here displayed in their most perfect
grace and flower! ” f
It was in this atmosphere that Aristotle spent seventeen
years of his early life. But Aristotle was far more active
and ambitious than his master. Before Plato was dead
Aristotle had formed a circle of admirers, and had com-
menced to lecture on his own account. Then he left Athens,
and after an absence of twelve years he returned. During
the following thirteen years he laid the deep foundation of
his enduring fame. He taught publicly in the Lyceum,
the most splendid gymnasium of the city. Here were the
groves, avenues, and gardens; the porticos, theatres, and
courts; the Stadium, arena and promenades, which, by their
beauty and magnificence, seemed to lend a dignity and im-
portance to his esoteric and exoteric teaching. He passed
his morning in the company of his more intimate disciples,
whilst the evenings were spent amongst the thronging
crowds from the city, who had come to drink in those prin-
ciples of knowledge which were here taught with a clear-
ness of outline, a depth of exposition, with an originality
of conception, and a persuasiveness of logic, which in vain
were to be looked for from any other master.
Thus, throughout, we find that the personal influence of
genius was the main force which drew schools together
and educated the ancient world. It was a period of enthu-
siasm which took possession first of the master, and then
of his pupils. One man of exceptional gifts, and then
another, took up his place in the great mother city, and
left a school of disciples, and monuments of his works. As
money is said to make money, so culture and creative
power produce their like. Thus the city became beautified
and embellished ; it acquired a name ; it held it two*
t Life and Labours of St. Thomas of Aquin. Yol. 11., pp. 610—41.


hundred years in height of reputation ; till, finally, it
created for itself a tradition of the beautiful, and, if I* may
so say, grew and nurtured men of master genius and of
surpassing gifts of mind. It was, in so far as it went, a
marvellous display of the highest intellectual endowments
of man; a splendid standard, in many ways, to look back
upon; a cause of humility for us in the modern world,
who can only read of and admire the achievements of
the ancients, but can never even wildly hope to rival them.
Those days are past. We live in a more sombre and a
more stable age, but not in one of such glorious natural
gifts; still we possess things which make us more than
contented with our lot; we possess the main gift—the
Truth of God; yet, even that great privilege does not
destroy or cloud the fact that though Attica, like the form
of one once living, is dead now and gone, still she lives
amongst us like a beautiful vision of what fair gifts God
can give to man; still is she eloquent, still she speaks to
us, still teaches the children of our boasted age that she it
is and not another who holds the palm in sculpture and
architecture, in poetry and oratory, and in all that adorns
the natural life of man and makes it beautiful.
And if Athens is the first great light-house of culture
and refinement, the primal Alma Mater of pagan antiquity,
Alexandria assuredly is the second. How can I best
describe this many-peopled city of the Eastern world ?
How can I bring vividly before your imaginations this the
first systematized seat of learning, lavishly endowed by
an enlightened monarch, and surviving, as it did, through
the soundness of its academical constitutions, in all its pris-
tine vigour, for many hundred years ? Cannot we find
some habitue of the place to take us round and describe the
city with its splendid buildings, and its marvellous Museum?
May we not, without irreverence, ask the spirit of S.
Gregory of Hazianzus, who knew the place so well, for he
studied there before finishing in Athens, and indeed almost
lost his life in going thither in one of those terrific storms
which sweep the AEgean during the winter solstice ? —may
we not ask him to indicate its points of special interest ?


Setting sail from Athens, the first thing that strikes the
eye on approaching the Alexandrian harbour —one more
beautiful than that of Corinth—is the great Pharos towards
the north, standing as it were sentinel on guard over the
vast and sumptuous city. The wide embracing harbour,
as you round the Pharos, and come in sight of it, is gay
with a thousand boats and ships of merchandise, and vocal
with the cries and screams of strange garbed sailors of.
every colour and every language under the sun. There,
our guide points out to us, are barques laden with corn,
which a few months back was waving in the sun
in the valley of the Nile; those boats almost sinking
with their burden in the water, are heavy with blocks of
rose-coloured granite dug out of the quarries of Upper
Egypt; and were you able, he says, to pry into the secrets
of a hundred more that are slumbering on the sea, you
would marvel at their rich freights of ivory, spice, and gold
dust from Ethiopia or Arabia; or perhaps light upon bags
of priceless gems picked up in Eastern lands. The fact is,
he continues, that city before you is a great emporium of
trade, a centre of commerce, and a kind of monster halt-
way house between the markets of the Eastern and Western
world. She possesses a highway such as few can boast—a
mighty river which, on its bosom, brings to her very doors
the whole riches of India and the Eastern hemisphere.
Into her markets flow all the luxuries of Oriental life, and
thence are borne by swift trading boats to every seaport of
the Western world.
Follow now the sweep of the waters as they lave the
granite quay, you could see it clearer were it not for the
shipping. That long line which we are now approaching
is alive with moving masses. See how the Exchange is
crowded! But before we get too near, take a general view
of the vast metropolis. It stretches round for a good six
miles in the shape of a.ll amphitheatre, a city of temples and
of palaces.
The boat lightly touches the granite step. We mount
up on the esplanade. Our guide conducts us through the
busy throng of merchants, sailors, students, and men of


every costume, and every colour and tongue. We silently
walk along the broad street, shaded by rows of plane
trees, and push our way as best we can till the crowd be-
comes less troublesome; and, still by the water’s edge, we
find ourselves comparatively at liberty. Now turn your
back upon the sea, says our guide, look at those splendid
piles of architecture, half hidden in the welcome foliage of
umbrageous trees! that is the serapium, those the gym-
nasium and stadium; the amphitheatre and theatre stand
there; and in the midst the palace of the king. It is a
marvellous sight, we reply, but our anxiety is to see the
university? There it is, exclaims our guide, there is the
Museum where you see those colonnades, that noble portico
close upon the palace. Under its protection, and refreshed
by the pure sea air, the well-paid professors of this royal
college take their recreation, or walking up and down, as
they do in Athens, instil into the curious and expanding
minds of youths from every quarter of the world, the various
sciences which are there professed. Eye, and voice, and
manner, the living action of most cultivated intellects, the
personal influence of the educated mind, here add force
and charm to a teaching which is not to be found in book.
Here, surrounded by his pupils, Ilephsestion, the gram-
marian, poured forth those principles of poetic culture which
made him an enduring name. Here Aristarchus taught the
young those canons of criticism, without which they would
find literature a labyrinth without a key. And do not
imagine that any man can enter here. Athenian freedom
and indifference to money, the reckless love of the beautiful,
the dreamy luxury of simply resting on high imaginings,
will not find an entrance here. It may have been the in-
fluence, indirectly, of Aristotle on Ptolemy, through Alex-
ander ; or it may have been the result of a well-ordered
mind, but the fact remains: this college or university is
hedged round by order and system; and maintained in
vigour by the munificence of a royal hand. The truth is,
the spirit of commerce and trade on a large scale, teaches
men the value of money, what money can do, and how little
lasting good can be done without it. More than that, it


in troduces what are called business habits, habits of order,
precedence, regularity, and of getting the best article by
giving the best price. Thus Ptolemy, like a man of the
world who really desired his centre of cultivation to be a
great success, chose for it a beautiful position, built costly
and convenient apartments, or rather a palace of learning,
filled it with thousands of choice books, and with the most
renowned professors that could be drawn together by the
influence of high pa}q royal treatment, and the ambition of
enlightening a nation, and acquiring a name. Only tried
men are allowed to enter here. But when once they have
made their concursns then they are at liberty to choose from
700,000 volumes, to frequent the portico, and those large
rooms which open upon it, where the professors meet to
dine, to read, or to instruct their pupils in the sciences, or
to enjoy the cultivated charm of the best society. There,
probably in that lecture room, Galen imparted his unrivalled
knowledge of medicine. There Archimedes taught, there
Apollonius, and Euclid, and Diophantus initiated the
youthful mind in the first principles of conic sections, geo-
metry, and algebra; there Ptolemy drew out the lines of
that celebrated system which for so many years was held
by every subsequent astronomer. JKven now, at this hour,
you can see for yourself, how vast a gathering of teachers
and taught are crowded into the Museum, and like a hive
of bees are swarming in and out of the columned portico.
All here is taught on system. Here the ruling idea is order,
method ; a more masculine and more scientific form than
finds favour in philosophic Athens is ruling in the midst.
To this well-stored and well-ordered emporium youths come
from every quarter of the known world ; here they congre-
gate to imbibe the principles of polite literature from
the living voice. Here they attend the lectures of the most
brilliant and educated teachers of the day. Here distinct
courses can be followed in grammar, rhetoric, poetry, and
philosophy, astronomy, music, and medicine, and in other
arts and sciences besides.
Evidently, if Alexandria does not stand first in the gifts,
the highest gifts of creative genius, she certainly is in ad-


vance of Athens in her method and her system. Her
teaching has something more practical and manly about it.
Her university is more ordered and compact. Her teachers
are more fitted to instruct the general run of youth. She
delights in subjects bearing more immediately on the re-
quirements of the age, and ministers more efficiently to the
wants of practical humanity. Her professors are soberer,
more tnoughtful, more filled with that placid spirit which
is the temperament of wisdom; and besides that, she is
securely set up with abundant funds, with royal patronage,
and with every thing that could enhance the value of
learning, and perpetuate the enduring attributes of fame.
So deeply is learning here planted in its place, that when
the universities, or at least, the schools of Europe,
shall have grown into flourishing institutions, Alexandria
still will boast of her academy, of her twenty colleges, and
of a concourse of students flocking to her from every quarter
of the world.
Itfow, why have I dwelt so long on Greek and Alex-
andrian culture ? How does it bear upon the teachings of
the modern world ? A moment’s thought will suggest the
reason. Athens and Alexandria, as seats of learning, are
indeed no more—hut their spirit survives them. There is
no academy in Christendom, worthy of the name, where
Greek philosophy and culture do not live in the atmosphere,
and affect the formation of the mind. Our logic, our
methods of thinking, our literature, and even our physical
and natural science are—if I may say so —Greek in their
origin, if modern in their developments. Or, to use
weightier words than mine:—“ To the Greeks we owe the
logic which has ruled the minds of all thinkers since. All
our natural and physical science really begins with the
Greeks, and, indeed, would have been impossible had not
Greece taught men how to reason. To the Greeks we owe
the corrective which conscience needs to borrow from
nature. Conscience, startled at the awful truths which,
she has to reveal, too often threatens to withdraw the soul
into gloomy and perverse asceticism; then is needed the
beauty which Greece taught us to admire, to show us


another aspect of the Divine Attributes. To the Greeks
we owe all modern literature ; for, though there is other
literature even older than the Greek, the Asiatic, for
instance, and the Hebrew", yet we did not learn this lesson
from them; they had not the genial life which was
needed to kindle other nations with the communication of
their own fire.” *
These words, in the main, we readily endorse. Attica
cultivated the mind to its highest pitch, she surpassed us all
in the delicacy of her taste, in the exquisite finish of her
manner, and in her mastery of the realm of mind. Her
dream was beauty, and her repose was the vision of her
own ideal. But she had one destroying blot. She was
pagan, and almost of necessity fell into that darkness
which, however exquisitely trained, seems to shroud the
pagan mind. Like a graceful and lovely creature, doomed
to die of some fearful inward malady, we look on her with
all the more tenderness and sadness—just because she is so
fair. She had but developed one side of the complicated
being of man—the human, the perishing; whilst her very
methods were a fearful peril to many of those natural
virtues which she contrived at times to see by means of
her strange and elevated spirituality of mind. “ There
was little in her temper of the spirit of reverence,” says a
high authority. “ Her morality and her religion did not
spring from the conscience. Her gods were the creatures
of imagination, not of spiritual need. Her highest idea
was, not holiness, as with the Hebrews, nor law, as with
the Bomans, but beauty. Even Aristotle, who assuredly
gave way to mere sentiment as little as any Greek that
ever lived, placed the beautiful (to koXoV) at the head of
his moral system, not the right, nor the holy. Greece,
in fact, was not looking at another world, nor even striving
to organise the present, but rather aiming at the develop-
ment of free nature. The highest possible cultivation of
the individual, the most finished perfection of the natural
faculties, was her dream.” |
* Temple’s Education of the World, p. 99. f Id., p. 17.


The result of such a system as this is easily anticipated
by any one who knows the force of human passion and the
power of human pride. The religion of the Greeks, as a
people, was of the most depraved description. The forces
of nature were transformed into immortal gods—and these
gods were simply transcripts of human lust, cruelty, and
depravity drawn out on a large scale, and placed before the
people, as the beings in whose hands they were held in
thrall. Ido not believe that there is a conceivable form of
lust or impiety, of perjury, imposture, or debauchery, or of
any other abomination which does not possess a sanction
and an exemplar in one or other of the gods of Greece.
The natural effects of such a religion soon displayed
themselves. Sensualism and debauchery are the prolific
parents of unbelief, superstition, and cruelty. Whilst the
minds of the people were sunk in the density of the grossest
superstition, the men of cultivation looked with contempt
on the indecent mythologies, and the crude theogonies
which had been rendered popular by the poets. Unable to
believe in the only form of religion which was current
amongst them, they ceased to believe in anything but
in human beauty, and in carnal and intellectual pleasure.
Protagoras could not conceal his contempt for the religion
of his countrymen. Prodicus declared that the gods origin-
ated in the egotism of men. Critias said they were the
invention of the lawyers; whilst the comic poets created
shouts of laughter by the manner in which they held up to
ridicule the only subject matter which pretended to deal
with another world. To sum up : putting on one side the
ignorant masses of the people who were brutalized by every
form of animalism, Greek education took no account of
another world, of a strict moral law, knew nothing of codes
of discipline, or of a secure deposit of religious truth. The
Greeks in their pursuit of culture well nigh extinguished
the original and primitive revelation given by God to man,
except when some sages, like Plato, or perhaps Socrates,
head and shoulders above their fellows, were enabled
by contemplation, or by the singular honesty of their
nature, to gather in some few uncertain rays of light.


Thus we see, without disguise, how far the highest
culture can carry man when applied to the fittest subjects
for its exercise. As a flower, on the surface it is very gay,
opulent, and beautiful, but it wants substance, stamina,
power to resist the nipping frost of pride, the fire of lust,
and the storms and hurricanes of the world. Greece and
Alexandria, after all, present to the thinking mind of a
Christian man a saddening picture of beauty that is born
to fade, and of men with noble characters and gifts, exqui-
sitely finished in the order of intellect and aesthetics ; but,
still, it must be said, mere whitened sepulchres, within
rottenness and corruption, and full of dead men’s bones !
And did Rome do better than Athens and Alexandria ?
Alas ! no; worse if anything. With all the depravity of
Greece, Rome did not possess those gifts of nature which,
as it were, spread a gloss over the depravity of the Attic
life, those marvellous instincts and endowments which gave
the Greek a spontaneous attraction for the beautiful Such
fresh youth, such vigorous intelligence, such mastery over
every form of natural excellence, was reserved for her
alone.
In the place of a love of the fair, Rome’s master gift
was that of law, order, and organization as subservient to
conquest. Whilst Greece took possession of the realm of
mind, Rome energised in the sphere of action, in the
difficult domain of the concrete. She began as a den of
thieves on the banks of the Tiber, and within seven
hundred years domineered over a hundred million souls.
Besides the European continent, she held in control
Africa, Ethiopia, Arabia, Parthia —her arm reached from
the Atlantic to the Euphrates, and from the Danube to the
Cataracts of the Nile. A tough, vigorous, iron race,
ambitious of conquest, patient of fatigue—her legions,
with untiring step, tramped along her grand highways and
military roads, and made the great eagles visible as far as
Caledonia on the one hand, and the Thebais and Arabia on
the other. Tf Greece was supreme in the order of intellect,
Rome held the sovereignty in the power of her will. She
knew how to enforce order, to control the passions of the


populace, to spread out the boundaries of her power, and,
in fact, to take possession of the world. If Greece is
unique in her creative power and in her refinement of the
fancy and the higher gifts of man, Home is no less so in
her mastery over the strength, wealth, and liberty of the
subject. As the thoughts of Greece still live and energise
amongst us, so the spirit of modern legislation, and the
framework of modern politics, and the forms of local
o-overnment, still speak with no uncertain voice of that
true wisdom and statesmanship that ruled in a mighty
empire, which alone could he disintegrated by poison
Generated in the heart.
° The very system of school discipline speaks of the
military spirit of this warlike people. “ Teaching and
learning was a department of Government; and schools
were set up and professors endowed, just as soldiers were
stationed or courts opened, in every great city of the East
and West. . . . No youth could obtain admission to
the Roman schools, without a certificate signed by the
magistracy of his province. Next, he presented himself
before the Magister Census, an official who was in the
department of the Prsefectus Urbis, and who, besides his
ordinary duties, acted as Rector of the academy. Next,
his name, city, age, and qualifications were entered in a
public register; and a specification of the studies he pro-
posed to pursue, and of the lodging-house where he pro-
posed to reside. He was amenable for his conduct to the
Censuales, as if they had been Proctors; and lie was re-
minded that the eyes of the world were upon him, that he
had a character to maintain, and that it was his duty to
avoid clubs, of which the Government was jealous, riotous
parties, and the public shows, which were of daily occur-
rence and of most corrupting tendency. If he was
refractory and disgraced himself, he was to be publicly
flogged, and shipped off at once to his country. . . . .
The Professors were under the same jurisdiction as the
students, and were sometimes made to feel it.*’ *
* Newman, The Office and Work of Universities, p. 154,


liow different in character is all this from the free and
untrammelled methods of Athens and Alexandria! The
whole mechanism of school life speaks of the rigour, pre-
cision, and stiffness of military discipline. It
to the training of boys who were to turn out soldiers, than
to a deep anxiety after the enlargement of the mind, and
the exercise of the faculties upon the subject matter con-
nected with a liberal education. And the results tend
strongly in the same direction. Whilst Home turned out
the greatest number of the hardiest soldiers the world has
ever seen, —obedient as machines, stubborn in endurance,
perseverant and indomitable in courage,—she was not able
to produce, at all events between Augustus and Justinian,
one single literary man whose name or fame has been
handed down as remarkable for history, discovery, or creative
efforts in the higher branches of polite learning. Ho:
Rome’s fame hangs on her genius for organising Empire, in
her gifts in the art of aggressive warfare, and in her know-
ledge of how to hold with a firm grasp that which she has
obtained. A clear eye, an iron will, and an insatiable ambi-
tion lifted her on her pinnacle, and has made her to be, in
the practical action of political aud martial life, that which
(fleece was in the realms of mind and imagination.
But rigid discipline, and the trying experience of camps
and fields, strength of arm, and nerve of spirit, gave way
at last. They could not successfully resist a domestic
enemy which gnawed away and destroyed the heart. What
intellect could not do for Greece, the will, however strong
and iron, could not do for imperious Rome. Her moral life
was rotten to the core, and spread corruption throughout
her system, swimming in the blood, penetrating into the
marrow and the joints, and at length paralyzing the entire
system. Discipline relaxed her hold, reverence for authority
waned, the strong arm and iron hand of the warrior lost
their cunning, and the Roman soldier became a parody on
what he was. The great mother city of the West, Eternal
Rome, became one vast receptacle of iniquity ; Syria, Asia,
Greece, Egypt, each emptied its own especial vial of cor-
ruption and decay into the great heart of the Western


"World, and prepared the way for the breaking up of a vast
bodv politic, which appeared at one time as if it were to en-
dure for ever. Take, at random, specimens of men highest
in position, —they are hut pictures of the corruptions over
which they ruled. Nero stabbed himself (68); Domitian
died by the hands of his wife ; Septimus Severus died of a
broken heart; Maximin was made away with by his soldiers;
Decius perished miserably in an expedition against the
Groths; Valerian was flayed alive by the Persians; Aurelian
was murdered by his secretary; Maximian was put to
death; Galerius rotted into his grave; and Dioclesian
starved himself to death. Then comes the overthrow, with
the ravages of Goths, Germans, Sarmatians and Parthians,
wiping out for ever, if not the Roman name, at all events
the whole network of her power.
Now what is the outcome of all I have been saying up to
this ? What am I aiming at in thus developing at length
the characteristics of Greek and Roman life? in drawing
out the culture and the beauty, the force and masculineness
of these two master powers of the world ?—of these two
powers which live in history now, but whose views in
literature, letters, and logic, in politics, government, and
legislation still survive them, and are so embedded and
intertwined with the life and action of the modern world, as
to become part and parcel of the civilization of to day ? Why
have I so prominently brought forward unique specimens
of the highest cultivated intellect of the world, and the
strongest tempered will of ancient times ? Then, why have
I pointed to the collapse and corruption of either ? Because
lam opposed to the greatest enlargement and most exquisite
cultivation of the faculties ? Assuredly not! Because I con-
demn, or do not value, the masculine vigour of the governing
spirit? I admire force of mind, and power of organization,
and the genius of rule, as much as any man. I Jove to see
every endowment of human nature elevated to its highest
point. And it is for this very reason that I have thus
pointed out the strength, and then the weakness of Grecian
and Roman education. Satan is made up of intellect and will;
but I never heard that he had a heart. Neither in Greece


nor Rome was the heart improved or educated; being at the
outstart u prone to evil, 5 ’ having no high and pure Object on
which to fix itself, from which to drink and feed, it lost its
vigour, it clung to things more sickly than itself, it became
soft and diseased, and its blood being corrupted, spread cor-
ruption throughout the entire system. The intellect of
Greece could not become its saviour, the will of Rome,
however iron, finally succumbed to the pressure of the
domestic enemy which it was nursing in its bosom. Thus
it was just because all endowments were not cultivated,
because one endowment of human nature was excluded, that
the methods of Greece and Rome resulted in gigantic failures.
Had those men learnt how to cultivate and train the heart,
had they known the Object on which to fix it, had they
possessed and practised the law of love in the divine sense
of it, then their histories would not contain so many dark
and abominable pages, and their ends would not have been
written in the book of shame.
These two cardinal instances of the successes and failures
of nations when left to themselves, without supernatural
religion, contain a lesson which no thinking man of the
present day, in the midst of our present tendencies, can
affect to disregard.
Let us now turn to that system of education which,
together with the intellect and will, aims systematically at
the cultivation of the heart and the elevation of the
feelings.
Section 11.
In the midst of the corruption of the great Roman power
a seed of a new energy came upon the earth, —new in its
nature, new in its method of action, new in its scope and
object, the principle of the most mighty revolution the world
has ever seen. Not only was it new in these respects, but
more than that, the principle of its successes, and the end
which was its one object to attain, were diametrically opposed
to all past experience ; so much so, that men were compelled
to exclaim that this vital power could not have sprung out
of the earth, or out of the intellect or will of man; but God


must have visited His people; and the new energy that
worked so strangely, and produced mighty changes in human
society, could have come from Him alone, who “ knows man’s
frame, and remembers that he is dust.”
You know at once, my lords, ladies, and gentlemen,
what that influence is to which 1 refer. It is unique, none
i s? or has been like it, or ever will be. I speak of the work
performed on earth, the revolution realised, by the Incar-
nate Word of God, Jesus Christ, the Victim as well as the
Model of mankind.
What was the master-key by which He unlocked the
secret of man’s heart ? the fulcrum as w T ell as the lever by
'which He elevated, and moved the world ? It is summed
up in one word, —Love. If God is the essential love,
Christ is His only begotten Son, the express Image of His
substance. This love alone is capable of fulfilling the law.
It alone is capable of bearing the pressure of the world,
and of sustaining unswervingly the martyrdom of ages.
Love, and it alone, is adequate to explain the Incarnation,
to solve the mystery of Christ’s suffering life, and to throw
an explanatory light upon His bitter passion and death. His
divine personal love of man, of each man as if he had room
to love no other; and then man’s intense self-immolating love
of Him, not merely as a man, but, which adds infinitely te
its intensity, as a CW-man, does account, and alone can ac-
count for the marvellous union amongst His children, and
for the rapid spread of His elevated teaching, whether in
the realms of mysterious belief, or in the self-denying cha-
racter of His philosophy
Nor is this new power, which He brought in, a mere principle
of contemplation and of rapt admiration of some beautiful
object. No : on the contrary, it was the vivifying germ of
a creed of morality and faith, an energy stronger than death,
which many floods could not extinguish. His followers be-
lieved in Him, loved Him, and, as a natural consequence,
obeyed His teaching, propagated it with all their might,
and felt it a joy to die witnessing to its truth.
Its principal tenets are: believing that sinful man re-
quires a redemption, that earth is a place of trial, that


Heaven is man’s final eternal resting place that creatures
are to be used as a means to attain eternal bliss; and that
this use consists in loving God above all, in believing His
word, in obeying His commands; that the senses must sub-
mit to the intelligence, the flesh to the spirit, the passions
to reason and conscience, and these to the Almighty God;
that the elements of rebellion in the intellect and members
must be, and can only be kept in subjection through a
higher power than man’s, —through the grace of Jesus
Christ, which alone can secure for us that liberty wherewith
Christ has made man free; that it would be better to die
than to sin; that in comparison with the next life, this life
is as dung, and of no account; and, finally, that the one
paramount interest of man in this world is to prepare him-
self by the use of it for the world to come.
How diametrically opposite are such principles as these
to the thoughts and strivings of Greece and Eome is
patent to any thinking man! It is equally evident that,
were they actually put in practice by a large body of per-
sons organized for the purpose, they would effect a revolu-
tion in the moral and intellectual courses of society. In
fact, not only Greece and Eome were ignorant of these
principles—no people ever knew anything of them, ex-
cept the Jews, and those who had become converts to
Christianity. Love is not only the root and principle of
Christ’s teaching ; it is the mark and test of it, cutting it
off from every other, and being, as it were, its very
definition.
“ The true religion.” says Pascal, with his customary
profoundness, “ ought to have for its note an obligation to
love God: it is most just that such should be the case;
still, our own religion alone lays down such a command. It
ought also to recognise the fact of man’s concupiscence, and
his inability to acquire any virtue of himself. It ought to
offer a remedy, of which prayer should be the principal
one. Our religion has done all this : no other has ever laid
on man obligations similar to these. That a religion be
true it must know human nature, the greatness and base-
ness of man, and the reason of the one and of the other.


other religion besides our own has known all these
things?”*
In one sense it is an advantageous thing that the Roman
Empire persecuted with such extreme cruelty the religion
0 f Jesus Christ. The mighty contest brought out, as it
could be exhibited in no other manner, the special charac-
teristic of Christianity. There is no doubt now about the
fact that the essence of the new influence is love, sacrifice,
devotion. It is illustrated with pictures of martyrdom in
the first three hundred years of the Church’s contest with
the Empire. With no other influence could she have sur-
vived the struggle; no other bond could have held together
the unity of her life, or have steeled the martyr’s nerve to
hear the ordeal through which he had to pass. Only love,
divine, supernatural love, could have poured out so
lavishly such an ocean of blood, such a deluge of tears,
and have sacrificed lives numerous as the sands of the sea
shore, in witness to that which is at once its Object and its
Origin.
Nor could such weapons as she made use of have been
wielded successfully by any hands except those which are
directed by a spirit burning with an ardent self-immolating
charity. “The foolishness of preaching,’ 1 “the weak
things of the earth,” “ sheep in the midst of wolves,” were
the instruments of Christ’s success. Rut it was love that
animated all, and made all strong.
I will simply take two instances of the action of this prin-
ciple ; first, the courage of the believer in face of persecution;
and secondly, his fear of falling into sin. Historians tell us
that, “in the colloquy of the aged Ignatius, the disciple
of the apostles, with the Emperor Trajan, we have a sort of
type of what went on for three, or rather four centuries
This colloquy, taken with the Saint's letters to his Roman
brethren, shows the principle lam insisting on. “May those
beasts,” he says, “ be my gain, which are in readiness for
me ! I will provoke and coax them to devour me quickly,
and not to be afraid of me, as they are of some whom they
* Pensees, chap. VII. f Grammar of Assent, Religious Inferences, p. 472.


will not touch. Should they be unwilling, I will compel
them. Bear with me ; I know what is my gain. Now I
begin to he a disciple. Of nothing of things visible or
invisible am I ambitious, save to gain Christ. Whether
it is fire or the cross, the assault of wild beasts, the wrench-
ing of my bones, the crunching of my limbs, the crushing of
my whole body, let the tortures of the devil all assail me,
if Ido but gain Christ Jesus.” Again : “ I write to you,
still alive, but longing to die. My love is crucified ! I
have no taste for perishable food. I long for God’s bread,
heavenly bread, bread of life, which is the flesh of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God. I long for God’s draught, His
blood, which is Love without corruption, and Life evermore.”
Then, before Trajan: “Who are you, poor devil?” the
Emperor cried out to the aged man, “ who are you, who are
so eager to transgress our rules?” “That is no name,”
answered Ignatius, “for Theophorus.” “Who is Theo-
phorus ? ” asked the Emperor. “ lie who bears Christ in
his breast,” was the reply.
Such is simply a pattern of the deaths of thousands of
stubborn spirits, ardent in faith, because animated with the
one master-passion of Christianity.
This same trait comes out, perhaps even more startlingly,
in the shrinking fear of sin which animated the early Saints,
and in the way they courted suffering and penance, that they
might keep their passions in subjection.
For instance, S. Paul lived on a few oats and a little
water, and fought sleep as he would a tyrant. S. Hilarion,
who at fifteen years of age went naked into the wilderness,
though “ armed with Christ,” lived in a morass, with gnats
and flies, amidst reeds and rushes. Peter the Simple became
a hermit when sixty-eight. Paphnutius was brought up
in a hermitage. Ammon was twenty-two years in the
desert. Serapion wore only a piece of linen round his loins.
S. Onuphrius was seventy years in the wilderness. Spyridion
was a shepherd in the Isle of Cyprus. Abbot Mark was
shut up in a cave thirty years. Didymus dwelt ninety
years alone. Abbot John lived three years on a bare rock,
without covering, in a mournful solitude. Auxanon, when


a child, inhabited a mountain cave. S. James of Nisibis
lived for years in caverns and forests, on roots and leaves.
S. Auxentius dwelt on a wild mountain, and S. Zeno in a
tomb; and so I might go on wearying you with an endless
litany of men, whose breasts had been transfixed with
the arrow of this new enthusiasm, and who ruthlessly
abandoned this world, that they might prepare for another.
And not only one by one, but in large companies, in vast
multitudes, they fled from the cities of the East, and peopled
the deserts and solitudes with thousands of worshippers,
who had drunk deeply of the chalice which Christ held out
to them ; and if they do nothing else, if they do not teach
us human prudence and worldly wisdom, and how to battle
with active life, they certainly do show us how the new
spark of a divine and self-immolating charity can upset the
wisdom of man, and create a mighty revolution in his heart.
For instance, Anthony left Pachomius to rule over 50,000
monks. Posthumus of Memphis presided over 5,000 ;
Ammon over 3,000. In the one city of Oxyrinchus there
were 10,000. Hilarion in Syria had from 2,000 to 3,000.
Whilst Martin of Gaul was followed to the grave by 2,000
of his disciples. Trithemius tells us that, at the end of the
fifteenth century, one monastic order of the Church alone
had 15,000 convents; and Pope John the Twenty-second,
in his census of the Benedictine order, numbers, up to his
time, 22,000 archbishops and bishops who had been monks,
and as many as 40,000 saints who had lived and died
wearing the monastic cowl.
Thus, we may say that we have the evidence of fifteen
centuries to prove to us the force and the endurance of that
great motive power which Christ spread abroad like a fire on
the earth.
Now love approaches to madness if it he not enlightened
and directed. Hence the divine guidance of Peter and his
Successors in the doctrines of belief and in the principles of
practice. Man had already abundantly proved his own
incapacity to light himself to heaven, or to rule the rebellious
passions of his nature. Now, he was to have no excuse.
The principle of Love found a safe direction in the guidance


of the anointed one, in the infallible teaching of faith and
morals, and in the sacramental administration of the Church.
The Holy Ghost guided, the Apostles preached, and the
world, after many shocks and throes, was converted to
Christianity. Even before the downfall of the Roman
Empire she had achieved her stupendous victories, which
alone could issue in adequate results through her organi-
zation, which was divine, and, through the fearless and
uncompromising utterances of her teaching. “We are
a people of yesterday,” says Tertullian at the close of the
second century, “ and yet we have filled every place
belonging to you, cities, islands, castles, towns, assemblies,
your very camp, your tribes, companies, palaces, senate,
forum. We leave you your temples only. We can count
your armies, and our number in a single province will be
greater. In what war with you should we not be sufficient
and ready, even though unequal in numbers, who so willingly
are put to death, if it were not in this religion of ours more
lawful to be slain than to slay?” *
Thus we see the extent as well as the intensity of the
enthusiasm which is certainly unlike anything else which
we meet with in the annals of human life, and how it separ-
ated over against each other, like the opposing armies of
two rival Empires, the votaries of Christ on the one hand,
and those of Greek culture and Roman paganism on the other.
Is it not natural, inevitable, that the men of the new
Philosophy, if I may with St. Chrysostom, thus designate
the religion of our Lord, is it not, I say, inevitable that they,
loving their children as tenderly as themselves, should do all
in their power to educate them in this new and saving
enthusiasm, and to foster the flame of this strange and
wonder-working charity in their hearts ? And what was
inevitable took place. Men introduced the divine principle
of the religion of Jesus into their schools and teachings.
The culture of Greece was by no means despised, it was
cherished as something humanly beautiful and worthy, and
so was the mastership, in organization and law, of the Roman
* Epist. ad Diogen.


mind; but these were not made all in all, they had to he con-
tented with their place : they required regulation. This
double culture had not saved Greece or Rome from the seeds
of corruption and decay, perhaps it had but fostered them:
any how, the deep master principle of Love was to hold the
tightest place, for it regulated all, gave a tone to all, pointed
to the one grand object to be aimed at, and threw a halo of
heaven over the cultures and refinements of earth. Thus,
whilst the followers of Christ, before all things, fostered and
honoured the one supernatural spark which their Master had
died to set in flame, they at the same time drew into their
companionship whatever was of good report in the teaching
of the ancients, and in the efforts of Greece’s happiest hours.
Human culture and refinement joined to the pure ardour of
a divine enthusiasm, which kept the thought of heaven
uppeimost and earth below in its place, was the happy
synthesis by means of which the best and brightest of human
things weie made to harmonize with the divine principle
which came from heaven through the Incarnation.
Christ, the fountain-spring of the new devotion, taught
His Apostles and Disciples, and filled them, as we learn from
their lives and deaths, with the principle on which I have
been insisting. They, in their turn, went forth from Judea
into Asia Minor, Greece, and Rome. Their voices were
heard, and their influence felt, on the plains of Arabia,
and Scythia, they lit up the fires of the new Love in the
hearts of the swarthy inhabitants of the banks of the Indus
and the Ganges, they penetrated into Spain, and carried
the cross of their Master to the very pillars of Hercules.
Then they, and those that succeeded them, settled in their
fixed abodes, knit their thousands of converts into the
organism of the Church of God, and set about teaching and
schooling the young in the maxims of that new creed in
witness to the truth of which they are ready to shed their
blood.
Thus the origin of the Christian schools of the world is to
be sought,—not in human talent or brilliancy, not in a
desire to make men even worldly wise in the first instance,
not in the vulgar ambitions of wealth or fame, but in the


intense desire of the followers of the philosophy of Christ,
out of their single-minded love of Him, to engraft into His
system, in so far as it was possible, the whole of the rising
generation over whom they had control.
It stands to reason that teaching in the first ages could
not be on a very large and magnificent scale. The seed,
however, quickly began to sprout, grew up, and spread
itself abroad. Bishops would settle down in principal cities,
and surround themselves by a few chosen assistants and
followers. Naturally, they would at onee set about training
youth to assist them in their labours and ministrations, and
to take their places when they died. These men of God,
being filled with the true spirit of Christianity, would con-
sider it a first duty to infuse that same spirit into the so-
ciety, of which they became, as it were, the centre. Thus
at Ephesus, and Edessa, and Antioch, and Tarsus, and Da-
mascus, and Csesarea, and Alexandria, silently, but steadily,
a Christian community was formed, and its youth was edu-
cated in the saving maxims of another world, as well as in
the secular knowledge necessary for this.
Take Alexandria, the pagan schools of which I have al-
ready described, as a specimen of the rest.
St. Mark entered this vast Metropolis of the East, bearing
with him the message of Salvation. He was alone and soli-
tary, without a friend or an acquaintance amidst that throng
of the u many-peopled” city. Accidently the thong of his
sandal broke. He went into a shop to get it mended ;
whilst there he conversed with Anianus, the shoemaker, on
that one topic which was uppermost in his soul. He spoke
to him of the Scriptures which reveal the Christ to be the
Son of God. “Of what scriptures do you speak?” asked
the shoemaker, “ I have never heard of any writings but
the *lliad’ and the ‘Odyssey,’ and other such things as are
taught to the sons of the Egyptians.” St. Mark then un-
folded to him the whole divine scheme of supernatural Love,
and Anianus joined him an eager follower of Christ. Ihe
Evangelist then took up his abode close to the very temple
of Serapis, close upon those marble porticos, where the mas-
ters of Pagan wisdom carried on the imperial schools. What


addition did he bring to the refined and cultivated teaching
of the Museum ? Here intellect was exercised to its highest,
here the will was trained in the knowledge of system, of
law, organisation, and government. He brought in just
that one thing which the Pagans had not, and which Christ
brought down from Heaven as a revelation to man —the super-
natural principles of devotedness, the law of infallible belief,
and the unswerving directive teaching regarding morality
of manners. He brought heart-guidance, and presented
before the minds of men the one Object of their elevation
and adoration. Hence he introduced into his school the Life
of Christ, the Model of mankind—indeed, his own special
Gospel, which, written with his own hand, though faded and
discoloured, is still preserved in the Treasury of St. Mark’s
at Venice to this day: here, in his school, under the very
shadow of the old regime , he developed the grand teaching
of the loving Peter, of the zealous Paul, and fixed in the
intellects of his scholars those immovable maxims of the
Christian faith, which are contained in the symbol of the
Apostles, and which are the corner-stones of the vast fabric
of church teaching. Added to these instructions were the
practices of holy prayer and sacred song, sung in alternate
choirs.
The pupils of this school being impressed by the nature
of the system which fashioned them, learnt that though life
has its pleasure and adornment, still, after all, it holds but
a secondary place, and is but a gymnasium, at best, in which
to prepare for heaven.
Thus, Christian education is of Divine origin, for St.
Mark himself did but learn from Blessed Peter, in whose
school he was brought up, together with Clement and
Evodius, and Linus; and Peter was essentially of the
school of Jesus Christ. Thus, St. John the Divine taught
Poly carp and Papias, and these iD their turn had other
disciples, who carried abroad into distant lands the methods
of the same divine and Christian scholarship. For
example, St. Irenseus, the pupil of St. Polycarp, took with
him into Gaul the principles of the Christian schools, and
established them wherever he had an opportunity. “ Early


remembrances,” he writes to Florinus, u grow with the
soul, and entwine themselves about it, so that at this
moment I could point out the place where Blessed Polycarp
sat when he taught us, repeat the nature of his occupations,
and describe to you his personal appearance,”
The school of Christ, founded by St. Mark, under the
shadow of the Museum, gradually grew into public signi-
ficance. An illustrious pagan, Pantaenus, studying the
principle of the new philosophy, was struck by it, and the
joined the school founded by St. Mark. He had missed
the principle of heart-education, and here he found it; and
thus, adding to the root-principle of Christianity the
highest cultivation of the pagan mind, he enlarged the
scope and the efficiency of the Christian teaching and ele-
vated to a high standard of perfection the threefold
influence which educates intellect, will, and heart, at once.
He became director of the school, he introduced a wider
range of studies, whilst his former reputation for eloquence,
being called the Sicilian Bee, gave him an additional weight
with the pagan public, when, with “transcendent power,”
to use the words of Clement his disciple, he defended and
illustrated his new faith by his old learning. This principle
of action was not confined to himself, but was practised by
those celebrated masters who succeeded him. He and they
abundantly illustrate the grand Christian principle which
has already been described, and which runs, like a golden
thread, through the whole system of Christian scholarship,
from the days of our Saviour to the present hour.
Allow me to refer to two other masters of the Alexandrian
school. First, there is S. Clement, the earliest disciple of
Pantaenus, w r ho succeeded him as master of S. Mark’s
Academy. To show that my view of this Christian method
of teaching is founded in fact, at all events, that it is not an
invention made to suit a purpose, I will quote a few words
from an independent author. Speaking of S. Clement’s
teaching, this writer says :—“ He had visited all lands and
studied in all schools in search of truth, and had found it at
last on the humble bench of the Catechumen. No one
understood better than he the emptiness of human learning


when pursued as an end, or its serviceableness when used
as a means. His end was to win souls to Christ; and to
reach it, he laid hands indifferently on all the intellectual
weapons that fell within his reach; poetry and philosophy,
science and even satire ; —he neglected nothing that would
serve his turn. He did not disdain to give a Christian
interpretation to Pagan fables, and took occasion from the
stories of Orpheus and Amphion, who, as poets pretended,
had moved the stones and tamed the wild beasts with the
music of their lyres, to present to his hearers the Word
made Flesh, conquering the stony and ferocious heart of
fallen man, and restoring that universe which he beauti-
fully calls u a lyre whose harmony had been destroyed by
sin.” He could use with equal ease the phraseology of the
Neo-Platonists whilst engaged in dispersing their trans-
cendentalism into thinnest air, or the plainer language of
the Gospel when he had to put heretics to silence. Nor
was he too deep or profound for the comprehension of the
simple-hearted faithful; he could write hymns for little
children to sing in Church; and when he spoke to exclu-
sively Christian hearers set forth no other wisdom, no other
model for their imitation than ‘ Jesus Christ and Him
Crucified.’
The second master was a man of wider range and greater
genius even than S. Clement. He was the son of a martyr,
and the disciple of Clement, and of the learned Hyppolitus,
who was a philosopher, a poet, and a mathematician, as well
as an ardent believer in the philosophy of Love—l refer to
the great Origen. He carried the Christian principle into
the school of Caesarea (321). His method with two of his
most celebrated pagan pupils exhibits the same divine prin-
ciples as S. Mark had introduced in Alexandria. Theodore,
afterwards Saint Gregory the wonder worker, and his
brother Athenodorus, were two of his first disciples. They
were pagans, imbued with the culture of the ancient schools.
His first care was to make them reform their lives, to break
them of their evil habits, and to show them the depravity
* Christian Schools and Scholars, Yol, I, p. 9—lo.


of their false and worldly maxims. “ Then he taught them
in succession the different branches of philosophy ; logic, in
order to exercise their minds and enable them to discern
true reasoning from sophistry; physics, that they might
understand and admire the works of God; geometry, which
by its clear and indisputable demonstrations serves as a
basis to the science of thought; astronomy, to lift their
hearts from earth to heaven; and finally, philosophy, which
was not limited like that taught in the pagan schools to
empty speculations, but was conveyed in such a way as to lead
to practical results. All these were but steps to ascend to
that higher science which teaches us the existence and
nature of God. He permitted his pupils freely to read
whatever the poets and philosophers had written on this
subject, himself watching and directing their studies, and
opening their eyes to distinguish those sparks of truth which
are to be found scattered in the writings of the pagans, how-
ever overlaid by a mass of fables. And then at last he
presented them with the Sacred Scriptures, in which alone
the true knowledge of God is to be found. In one of his
letters to S. Gregory he explains in what way he wishes
him to regard the profane sciences. i They are to be used,’
he says 4 so that they may contribute to the understanding
of the Scriptures; for just as philosophers are accustomed
to say that geometry, music, grammar, rhetoric, and astro-
nomy all dispose us to the study of philosophy, so we may
say that philosophy, rightly studied, disposes us to the study
of Christianity. We are permitted when we go out of Egypt
to carry with us the riches of the Egyptians wherewith to
adorn the tabernacle; only let us beware how we reverse the
process, and leave Israel to go down into Egypt and seek for
treasure; that is what Jeroboam did in old time, and what
heretics do in our own. 5 ”*
Not only the methods of Christian education, not only the
heart culture of the teachers in the early Church, hut the
very character of the men turned out by Christianity, even
when they had been educated in pagan schools, shows the
* Ibid, Vol. I, p. 12—13.


marvellous force of the principle of Love, which seemed so
strong as to allow nothing to interfere with it, and to he made
of so "ardent a fire as to burn out whatever dross of earth
might offer to fix itself upon the Christian heart. For
instance, St. Basil the Great, the founder of the Monasticism
of the East, the great pillar of the Church against despots,
the most ascetic of the Fathers, the most uncompromising in
his dealing out the doctrines of the Church, was the disciple
of Libanius, a pagan rhetorician, and prosecuted his studies
in the most pagan centres in the world, —Csesarea, Constan-
tinople, and Athens, contributed their quota to the develop-
ment of his faculties. But whilst pursuing human science,
one thought and image ruled supreme in his intellect and
heart, and kept them pure in the midst of the defilements of
the pagan schools, and that thought was the love of God,
that Image, the Image of his Saviour. So with St.
Gregory of Hazianzus, called, especially, ‘ c the Theologian,
or divine, on account of his accurate mastery of the doctrines
on the Godhead. His youth was spent in the Alexandrian
Museum, and in the pagan schools of Athens. "Whilst his
heart was fixed on God, his intellect was being trained and
exercised by the best masters in the great Alma Mater of
the West. But his whole career tells us, how the one prim
ciple held mastery over him. His life was past in tender-
ness to others and in rigour with himself. Even to his last
hour, u he spent his time in fasting, tears, and watchings;
his knees were worn and wounded with kneeling; his bed
was of straw, his coverlet a coarse sack-cloih, his habit a
single tunic; he went barefoot, lived without the use of fire,
and had no company but the wild beasts. But notwith-
standing his austerities, his continual sickness, and his great
age, he still felt violent struggles of the flesh against the
spirit. ’’ * St. Jerome, St. Chrysostom, and St. Augustine,
three of the great giants of the early Church, the very
columns of the temple, drank as largely as any of the
waters of the Pagan world, and were exercised in all the
refinements and subtleties of the cultivation of the past;
* Fleury’s Eccles. History, (Oxford), Book XIX, § 11, p. 156.


but this did but render them the more efficient in the vast
works with which they were entrusted, and were but orna-
ments and additions to that one master principle of their
entire being—their overwhelming love of Christ, and their
unalterable belief in the teaching of His Church. With
them, will, intellect, and heart, were elevated to their
highest, each playing its part largely and freely, and
rendering him, who called them his, a pattern and
standard for all time, not merely of what culture can do
for the intelligence, but what Christianity can do to elevate,
purify, and sweeten concrete human nature, and render a
man, in his wholeness and integrity, thoroughly sound, not
merely in the sight of man, but in the all-piercing sight
of God.
Thus, before the fall of the Western Empire, Christian
schools turned out their learned men and master minds,
and even pagan schools added their culture to the teachings
of the .Cross. Bishops, and priests, and holy men, even the
fathers of the desert, did what lay in them to fix deeply in
the hearts of the young their own master passion, and
around it to group those gifts of nature and art which give
to the action of Saints themselves greater eclat before the
world, and greater efficacy in their results.
I have thus drawn out at some length the principles of
education in the earliest times—in times nearest to Christ
Himself, that you may clearly see what His spirit was from
the broad course of action of His immediate followers. The
first five centuries of the Church surely exhibit, with vivid
luminousness, the characteristics of the new enthusiasm.
And none amongst those characteristics stand out with
greater prominence than the principle of love in education,
as giving a meaning and a direction to mere human culture
and natural gifts.
So far for the period which ends with the fall of the
Homan Empire. Was this same principle to be found in action
after the flood had subsided, and the Church was recon-
structing society on a new basis, and forming the Christian
civilization of the modern world ?


Before answering this question I need scarcely remind you
jjow entire was the desolation and destruction which came
upon Babylon the Great, the eternal city of Borne, and that
imperial organization of which it was the heart. Ravaged,
pillaged, and desolated by an inexhaustible population of
barbarians, who like flights of locusts came down from
the North, —the Goth, the Hun, and the Lombard did their
work of blood with a completeness of destruction not read of
in any other annals. Plagues carried off thousands of the
Boman population, floods broke out and destroyed the very
arts and elements of life. Lire, blood, water, and disease
each helped on the great catastrophy of the disintegration
of a mighty civilization, till, finally, the Imperial City,
which boasted of its aqueducts, its military roads, its
amphitheatre, its unrivalled Pantheon, and of the two
millions of its people, was reduced to so low an ebb, as to
be without one single inhabitant, the grass growing in its
streets, and the foxes disporting themselves on the Palatine
hill, and basking in the Golden Palace of the Caesars. And
this is but a specimen of the universal breaking up of the
old civilization wherever the Boman Eagles had carried
the knowledge of Boman government and law.
Though submerged in the gulf of destruction the Church
was not destroyed. She had to face a new state of the
world. She long had had to exercise herself in Christia-
nising the educated pagans of the ancient civilization, and to
act upon a system which, from its very age and iniquities,
was falling into decay. Just the reverse of all this now. She
had to encounter with her own weapons, to subjugate, and
take possession of the mass of turbulent barbarians who
had gained the mastery of the world. Brute force and the
philosophy of love now stood face to face The kings and
the wild warriors of the German forests, having destroyed a
civilization which they could neither understand nor
imitate, now found themselves confronted by a force which
was still more strange and mysterious to them than that
which they had so ruthlessly trampled on. At first they stood
aloof from the Church, but finally they were unable to with-
stand the irresistible attraction of her moral force and


beauty, and were in the end compelled to do homage to her
tenets, and to find a shelter under her benign and civilisin®’
sway. As time went on she moulded them more and more
into the type of genuine Christianity, and by the marvellous
influence of the principle of Christian love, endowed the
rude and barbarous children of the forests with new
manners, created a new society adorned with principles
and institutions, with ranges of thought and aspirations
such as bestowed a dignity and purity on humanity which
never had been known before. And by blessing the sword
of the warrior, and sanctifying the crown of the Prince, she
succeeded in joining in one vast political organization,
through the oneness of her unbending teaching, those various
hostile and antagonistic races which otherwise would have
been carrying on a perpetual war amongst themselves.
And all this through the action of the principle of enthu-
siasm. The barbarian, what could he know T of intellectual
culture? How could he be reached by the majesty of
Homan law ? There was but one single point vulnerable in
his armour, and that where the spear or shaft of Christian
Love could penetrate his heart. To convert him, and change
him, and Chiistianize him, he had to be educated and in-
formed by the Christian schools. What were these schools
which produced such marvellous effect ? On what principle
were they set up ? What was the temper of the teachers ?
The schools which tamed the barbarians, and laid the seed
of a civilization which grew into a mustard tree in the
modern world, sprang from the deep heart of the monastic
life.
St. Benedict as a boy fled from the city, hid himself in
a cave, collected a few followers round him, practised them
in exercises of penance, prayer and self-denial, based their
whole monastic vitality in their supreme love of Christ
taught them to cultivate the earth, and to prepare in the
most perfect way for heaven. Thus they lived in holy
companies, far from the din of cities and the strife of men, by
silence, and self-control, by the discipline of obedience, and
the training of a masculine life, preparing, unknown to
themselves, to plant the future civilization of society.


Kings left their crowns, Princes their ambitions, to join in
the holy peaceful throng. Like Paulinus and Arsenius and
Martin they abandoned power and position to devote them-
selves to the enthusiasm of Christianity in the heroic love
of religious life. According to his rule St. Benedict under-
takes the instruction of youth. What that instruction would
be, how deep the impression, how heavenly, any one may
imagine by looking on those men who were the teachers.
What its influence was may be measured by the position
attained by this great order not only in the Church, but in
the direction and formation of civil society itself. In the
lively language of a great writer: “ The lonely Benedictine
rose from his knees and found himself a city. This was the
case not merely here and there but everywhere ; Europe was
new mapped, and the monks were the principle of mapping.
They had grown into large communities, into abbeys, into
corporations with civil privileges, into land-holders with
tenants, serfs, and baronial neighbours; they had become
centres of population, the schools of the most cherished truths,
the shrines of the most sacred confidencies. They found
themselves priests, rulers, legislators, feudal lords, royal
counsellors, missionary preachers, controversialists.’’ * And
taking it in all its branches this order is accustomed to claim
37,000 houses, 30 Popes, 200 Cardinals, 4 Emperors, 46
Kings, 51 Queens, 1,406 Princes, 1,600 Archbishops, 600
Bishops, 2,400 Noblemen, 15,000 Abbots and Learned Men.f
What a power of immense vitality must have been nursed
in the silent Benedictine convents ! Surely the elements of
the new civilization must have been contained in the monastic
rule!
Without possessing the high fastidious culture of pagan
periods, the monks knew one thing better than any other
people, how to master, purify, and cultivate the heart. Not
that they despised literature. Had it not been for them, for
their reverence in preserving and copying, our shelves would
now be empty of their most precious treasures, and we
* Newman, the Mission of St. Benedict, Historical Sketches, XXX, p. 443.
t Ibid, p. 372.


should have lost all the best exemplars of the past. Greece
to us would have remained but a name, the best thoughts of
Roman Latinity would have ceased to exist, and even Judea
and Galilee would have been reduced to a shadow. Nor did
they decline teaching the ancient authors. Their monasteries
were thickly dotted over Europe; each monastery was a centre
of culture and a place of education, so that throughout the
length and breadth of the land there were havens of repose
where the wearied spirit could retire to refresh itself with God,
and where, from their tender infancy, or at least from their
early boyhood, the rising generation could be sent to learn
the maxims of the other world by seeing with their very
eyes the lives of those who were preparing for it in this.
At York, and Jarrow, and Paris, and Lyons, and Tours, at
Fulda, and Richenau, and Ferrieres, and Rheims, and Cluni,
the great principle of love was inculcated by the practice as
well as the precepts of devoted men, whilst Greek and Latin,
and the Curriculum of the Seven Sciences, formed the course
prescribed for the rising generation.
Perhaps nothing would convey so just an idea of the
spirit of the monastic schools, as by here introducing an
account of the death of a master who was a monk, written
by his disciple. The disciple is Cuthbert, the master no
other than the light of the Anglo-Saxon Church, the model
of the Benedictine spirit, the Venerable Bede. “He was
exceedingly oppressed,” says Cuthbert, “with shortness of
breathing, though without pain, before Easter Day, for
about a fortnight; but he rallied, and was full of joy and
gladness and gave thanks to Almighty God day and night
and every hour, up to Ascension Day; and he gave us, his
scholars, daily lectures, and passed the rest of the day in
singing the psalms, and the night, too, in joy and thanks-
giving, except the scanty time which he gave to sleep.
And as soon as he awoke, he was busy in his customary way,
and he never ceased with uplifted hands giving thanks to
God. I solemnly protest, never have I seen or heard of any
one who was so diligent in thanksgiving.
He sang that sentence of the Blessed Apostle Paul, ‘lt
is a dreadful thing to fail into the hands of the living God,"


a nd many other passages of Scripture, in wdiich he warned
uS to shake off the slumber of the soul, by anticipating
our last hour. And he sang some verses of his own in English
also, to the effect that no one could be too w T ell prepared
for his end, viz., in calling to mind, before he departs hence,
what good or evil he has done, and how his judgment will
lie. And he sang too, the Antiphons, of which one is, ‘ 0 King
of Glory, Lord of Angels, who this day has ascended in
triumph above all the heavens, leave us not orphans, but
send the promise of the Father upon us, the Spirit of Truth,
Alleluia.’ And when he came to the words, ‘ leave us not
orphans,’ he burst into tears and wept much. He said, too,
‘ God scourgeth every son whom he receiveth,’ and, with
St. Ambrose, ‘ I have not so lived as to be ashamed to have
been among you, nor do I fear to die, for we have a good
Lord.’
In those days, besides our lectures and the psalmody, he
was engaged in two works; he was translating into English
the Gospel of St. John, as far as the word, ‘ But what are
these among so many ?’ and some extracts from the Notce of
Isidore. On the Tuesday before Ascension Day be began to
suffer still more in his breathing, and his feet were slightly
swollen. However, he went through the day dictating
cheerfully, and kept saying from time to time, ‘ take down
what I say quickly, for I know not how long I am to last,
or whether my Maker will not take me soon.’ He seemed
to us to be quite aware of the time of his going, and he
passed that night in giving of thanks, without sleeping. As
soon as morning broke, that is on the Wednesday, he urged
us to make haste with the writing which we had begun.
We did so till nine o’clock, when we walked in procession
with the Belies of the Saints, according to the usage
of that day. But one of our party said to him, ‘Dearest
Master, one chapter is still wanting; can you bear our
asking you about it ? * He answered, ‘ I can bear it; take
your pen and be ready, and write quickly. 5 At three o’clock
he said to me, ‘ Run fast, and call our priests, that I may
divide amongst them some little gifts which I have in my
box.’ When I had done this in much agitation, he spoke to


each, urging and entreating them all to make a point of
saying Masses and prayers for him. Thus he passed the day
in joy until the evening, when the above-named youth said
to him, 4 Dear Master, there is yet one sentence not written; ’
he answered, ‘ Write quickly.’ Presently the youth said,
‘ Now it is written ; ’ he replied 1 Good, thou hast said the
truth; conbummatum est; take my head into thy hands,
for it is very pleasant to me to sit facing my old praying
place, and thus to call upon my Father.’ And so, on the
floor of his cell, he sang, ‘ Glory be to Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost,’ and, just as he had said ‘Holy Ghost,’ he
breathed his last, and went to the realms above.”*
If it be true that as a man lives so he dies, it is no less
true that as a man dies so he lives. The death of Venerable
Bede is but a picture of the characteristic of his life, and
of the lives of those who had drunk deep of the monastic
spirit. It was essentially opposed to the rude ruthless
character of the barbarian temper, which it had to soften
and convert. It represented that one necessary quality
without which wild human nature could never have been
tamed, and the violent passions of man could not have been
reduced to order. It was the principle of the divine affection,
to which Paul gives attributes which of themselves offer
sufficient explanation of the success of its operations in
any moral field on which it could fairly be brought to bear.
Whenever the influence of this spirit was brought into
contact with aboriginal human nature it seems to have
fairly transformed it, and almost to have turned it into
something else, —so different is the rude savage barbarian,
from the gentle, truthful, noble Christian who takes his
place.
Beautiful and devoted Ireland was no exception to the
rule. “Whilst (in the fifth century) the flames of war
were blazing around her, the green isle,” says the celebrated
Gorres, “enjoyed the sweets of repose. When we look
into the ecclesiastical life of this people, we are almost
tempted to believe that some potent spirit had transferred
* Newman’s Historical Sketches, Yol. 111., p. 428.


over the sea the cells of the Valley of the Nile, with all
their hermits, the monasteries with all their inmates, and
had settled them down in the western isle—an isle which
in the lapse of three centuries gave 850 saints to the
Church, won over to Christianity the north of Britain, and
soon after a large portion of the yet Pagan Germany; and
while it devoted the utmost attention to the sciences, culti-
vated with especial care the mystical contemplation in her
religious communities, as well as in the saints whom they
produced.”
So rich were the Irish monasteries in science and in
learned men, that they were not merely a light to their own
people, but they carried the torch abroad and took a large
share in educating and civilising the world. Of this the
eloquent Montalembert shall be my authority :
“ Still more than the intellectual development,” he says,
“ of which the Irish monasteries were at this period the
centre, is the prodigious activity displayed by the Irish
monks in extending and multiplying themselves over all the
countries of Europe —there to create new schools and
sanctuaries; there to carry the light of the Gospel, at peril of
their lives, to countries that were still Pagan. We should
run the risk of forestalling our future task if we did not
resist the temptation of the subject which would lead us to
go faster than time, and to follow those armies of brave and
untiring Celts, always adventurous and often heroic, into
the regions where we shall one day find them again. Let
us content ourselves with a simple list which has a certain
eloquence even in the dryness of figures. Here is the
number, probably very incomplete, given by an ancient
writer of the monasteries founded out of Ireland by Irish
monks, led far away from their country by the love of
souls, and no doubt a little also by the love of travel, which
has also been one of their special characteristics—thirteen
in Scotland, twelve in England, seven in France, twelve in
America, seven in Lorraine, ten in Alsace, sixteen in
Bavaria, fifteen in Ehetia, Helvetia and Allemania, without
counting many in Thuringia and the left bank of the lower
Rhine; and finally six in Italy. And that it may be fully


apparent how great was the zeal and virtue of which those
monastic colonies were at once the product and the centre,
let us place by its side an analogous list of Saints of Irish
origin whom the gratitude of nations, converted, edified and
civilized by them, has placed upon their altars as patrons
and founders of those Churches whose foundations they
watered with their blood—lso of them (of whom 36 were
martyrs) in Germany; 45 (of whom six were martyrs) in
Gaul; 30 in Belgium, 13 in Italy; 8 (all martyrs) in
Norway and Iceland.’'
Thus we see the same principle which animated the Twelve
in the Upper Boom still existing after hundreds of years had
elapsed, under strange skies, in the heart of strange nations,
and under every condition of manner and of life.
In France and in England the same influencies were en-
couraged and developed in the teaching of youth, in the puri-
fying of the conscience, and the directing of the will, as are
found amidst the peaceful monasteries of Christian Ireland.
Indeed, under the powerful influence of the monastic teachers,
each of them types and standards of largeness and enlighten-
ment, not to say of piety and learning, those natural growths
and expansions took place which were the immediate prepara-
tion for the great medieval Universities of which I have as
yet to speak.
To carry out into any large proportions an undertaking
which is in a measure National in scope, and of universal
interest, the assistance of men of position and of established
character must he enlisted. Now such men as these
were just what England and France could boast of with
regard to Education. There is Charlemagne in France,
who was assisted by Alcuin, the Yorkshireman; and we
have King Alfred in England, who set up a home of edu-
cation, if tradition has any truth in it, which grew eventually
into the most glorious University of which England can
boast.
Charlemagne in life and stature was head and shoulders
ahoye his fellows. His native thirst for learning amounted
to a passion, and was only equalled by his intense desire to
bring the light of science and the instruments of cultivation


amongst his people. In his journeys and wars he ever had
his mind carefully fixed on one advantage, —that of enlisting
the sympathies of scholars in his favour, and of drawing
them together to conduct, under his own protection, schools
in which he was not too proud to become a disciple. To
him it mattered not what a man’s nationality might he, —if
he were learned in the sciences, if he were a master of
language, if he were, able to teach that which heretofore
was not imparted, Charlemagne did all that lay in his power
to secure his services, and to offer him every inducement to
help in the great cause of enlightenment which he so highly
prized. Thus he secured the services of Peter of Pisa,
Paul Warnefrid, ‘ the Venerable Paulinus, the master of the
Art of Grammar, ’ and, above all, of our own Alcuin, who
brought over to France a contingent of learned men to
take part in the teaching of the schools. The principal
seat of wisdom was the Palatine School; and here it was
that the King himself, with several royal princes and
princesses, together with a crowd of bishops and nobles, of
courtiers secretaries and councillors, took lessons in the
science of that age from the most learned men that could be
called together from every quarter of the world. The
King’s one anxiety was to transform his court into a modern
Athens —having the doctrines of Christ taught and insisted
on, in place of those of Plato. Indeed, this same principle
of Love which animated the monastic teachers, who had
abandoned the world for Christ, is abundantly, strikingly
evident in the methods and tastes of this Christian potentate.
Both Charlemagne and Alcuin were at one on this — that
they preferred to promote the study of St. Jerome, and St.
Augustine, before that of Virgil and Cicero. And the
King was accustomed to exclaim that he only wished that
he had a dozen such men living at his court. The City of
Cod was read aloud at the royal table; and the minds of
students appear to have been more occupied with questions
bearing on theology and religion, than on the niceties of
pagan teaching, and the peculiarities of classic taste. This
same temper animated the teachers of his schools ; and the
same tendency towards things divine comes out in his re-


commendation to all professors throughout the kingdom, in
787. “We exhort you,” he says, ‘'that you fail not to
cultivate learning with the humble intention of pleasing
God, so as more surely to penetrate the mysteries of the
Holy Scriptures. We wish, in short, to see you what the
soldiers of Christ ought to be—devout in heart, learned in
intercourse with the world, chaste in life, and scholars
in conversation—so that all who approach you may
be as much enlightened by your wisdom as they are
edified by your holy life.” It is easily imagined what an
impetus such earnestness as this must have given to the
schools, how the principle of the King would be enlarged
and cherished, and how learning would flourish, with such
a royal example before it, both in the precepts of devoted-
ness, and in energy of work—stimulating it ever more to
vigorous action. Thus, claustral schools received an
additional life, whilst public schools were founded in many
parts, such as those at Fulda, St. Gall, Tours, Gorze,
Fleury, and many other places. The earth was carefully
tilled for a further development, and learning was fostered
by a large and royal hand. That Alcuin, the great
luminary of the Palatine School, took the same view as his
master on the conditions of education, is evident from his
1 Treatise on the Seven Liberal Arts.’ It is thrown into
dialogue, and I here quote, as a specimen of the rest, one
question and its reply :
“ Disciple: 0 wise master, we have often heard you
repeat that true philosophy was the science which taught
all the virtues, and the only earthly riches that never left
their possessor in want. Your words have excited in us a
great desire to possess this treasure. We wish to know
where the teaching of philosophy will lead us, and by
what steps we may attain te it. But our age is weak, and
without your help we shall not be able to mount these steps.
Master: It will be easy to show you the way of wisdom,
provided you seek it purely for God’s sake, to preserve
the purity of your own soul, and for the love of virtue ;if
you love it for its own sake, and do not seek in it any
worldly honour or glory, or, still less, riches or pleasure. ”


Alfred adopted the same methods of introducing learning
into England as Charlemagne made use of in France. At
the time of his accession the country was plunged in the
darkest ignorance. The Danes had ruined every source of
culture, the laity had almost returned to barbarism, the
clergy had lost the spirit of their state, and the monastic life
had been deprived of all its spirit. Alfred, had hn not
been a man of strong character and high religious feeling,
would have failed in his attempt to restore light, order, and
culture to his distracted kingdom. Still, he so far succeeded
as to lay the deep foundations of England’s future intel-
lectual prestige, and to start a tradition of learning which
is still surviving in our midst.
Like Charlemagne he possessed an ardent natural craving
for knowledge, and ever found an attraction in the company
of clerks and learned men. His pilgrimage to. Pome no
doubt tended to open his mind and sharpen his appetite
for knowledge 5 and on his journey home he came in contact
with many distinguished scholars. He did his best to draw
such men as these from their hermitages and retreats,
whither they had retired during the ravages of the Danes.
Werefrith, and Plegmund, and Ethelstan and Werwulf,
and, above all, Asser, a monk of St. David's,. were the
principal instruments he made use of in introducing letters
and founding schools. The plan of his school was the same
as that of the Palatine Academy of Charlemagne. Here, as
in the days of Alcuin at Paris, the sons and daughters of the
king studied in the Academy. They were instructed in
Saxon and Latin, they learned the Psalter, and mastered
what Asser calls the liberal sciences. The king was evi-
dently in favour of compulsory education for he made a law
that every free man who could boast of two hides of land
should keep his son at school till fifteen years of age,
“ Because,” he said, “ a man born free, who is unlettered,
is to he regarded no otherwise than as a beast, having like
it, no understanding.”
That Alfred was as filled with the principle of Love as
Charlemagne, or even more so, is shown in many instances,
and that he would introduce that same principle into his


schools stands to reason, for his main object, after all, was to
civilize and soften, to reclaim and to save the rough and
almost ferocious children of a dark and difficult age. The
horarium, if I may so call it, which he followed, and which
is handed down to us by Asser, is a sufficient index to his
character, and to the ruling passion in his mind. After
telling us how energetic the king was in the government of
his people, Asser says :—“ Having set all these things in
order, mindful of that saying of Holy Writ: ‘ Let him who
would give alms begin with himself,’ he reflected on what
he could offer to God of the service of his own mind and
body, wishing to consecrate them to God, as well as his
exterior riches. So he promised, as far as infirmity, possi-
bility, and means would permit, willingly, and with all his
might, to give to God one-half of the service of his mind
and body, both by day and night.’’ His one longing and
one prayer was for skill in divine wisdom and the liberal
arts. And the reason of his earnestness in this two-fold
petition, whilst it manifests the piety of his spirit, clearly
brings out the divine principle of his teaching, which, as I
have before said, like all truly Christian education, was
founded on the basis of a divine enthusiasm. To use
words taken from another context and not my own: “ The
coupling together of divine wisdom and the liberal arts, as
equal objects of solicitude, is easily understood w T hen we
remember the plan according to which human knowledge
was then pursued, always in subordination to that which was
divine, and usually in connection with it. Intellectual
pursuits not having yet been set free from their holy servi-
tude to faith, were not recognised as possessing any peculiar
dangers: nay, rather they seem invariably to have been
regarded as something meritorious; and knowledge, far
from being preached against as perilous to the soul, was
ranked among those better gifts which a good man might
earnestly covet.” *
So far for the efforts and the educational principles of
Xing Alfred. I might go on to describe at length the
'* Christian Schools and Scholars, Yol. 1., p. 276.


restoration of the monastic schools under S. Dnnstan, S.
Oswald, and S. Ethelwold; the foundation of many new
monasteries, and the restoration of many old ones, such as
those of Ramsey, Bridferth, and Croyland; the break-up of
the Empire of Charlemagne; the ravages of Normans,
Saracens, and Huns; the destruction of schools, and their
restoration; the position of Germany under its great
Emperors, and the efforts of St. Bruno, Gerbert and others
in the cause of literature and learning. But time does not
permit. I will simply make one quotation from the
writings of Horswitha to show that in the tenth century in
Germany the same methods of Love in the development
of the mind were in action as have been found wherever
genuine Christianity has set up a school. In a philosophic
dialogue on music, the following passage occurs :
a Disciple : Whence do you derive all this knowledge ?
Master : It is but a little drop that I have gathered from
the overflowing source of science; and now I desire to share
it with you.
Disciple: Thanks to your goodness: nevertheless that
admonition of the Apostle terrifies me: 1 God hath chosen
the foolish of this world to confound the wise. ’
Master: Foolish and wise will alike be confounded
before God if they do what is evil.
Disciple: That cannot be denied.
Master: How, I pray you, can the arts and sciences be
better employed than in the praise of Him who has created
ail things that we can know, and who furnishes us at
once with the matter and the instruments of our knowledge ?
Disciple: Certainly that is the best way to use science.
Master: It is : for the more we know of the admirable
laws by which God regulates the weight, number, and
proportion of all things, the more our hearts will burn with
love of Him.”
As time went on, and the turmoil of war subsided, as
populations and towns increased, and learning took a more
definite shape, the methods of monastic schools gradually
became insufficient for the ambition and restlessness of
students and professors. The influence of such men, though


very different from each other in character and career as
Berengarius and Lanfranc and St. Anselm, introduced a
deeper study of philosophy than heretofore, and encouraged
in a way never heard of since the Grecian Sophists
the spirit of dialectics and of logical dispute. Capella
Cassiodorus (407) and Boethius, though they brought in the
elements of the new development, were silent and earnest
thinkers who did not venture beyond the Trivium and
Quadnvium, though certainly the latter, without knowing
it, may almost be called the parent of the knight-errantry
of logic, on account of his sowing the seeds of a question on
L niversals, out of the writings of Porphyry, which eventually
grew into the large proportions of a vast and complicated
intellectual war. Then, the establishment of the great law
schools of Italy, the revival of classical learning in the
Abbeys, the multiplication of books and libraries the
earnest study of the elements of logic, and the contests
which took place between orthodoxy and error, between
ilmcmar and Gotteschalc, Berengarius and Lanfranc—all
tiiese things taken together began to move men’s minds as
with the power of fermentation, and we begin to see our
way out of the comparatively narrow sphere of catenae and
summulce , of chronicles and annals, and to gain visions of
that more lively and exciting culture, of those larger and
more academic methods which ushered in the era of the
great medieval Universities. There is no doubt that study
o Aristotle s dialectics, and of the teachings of the arts of
intellectual fence, were very instrumental in stimulating the
student s mind, and introduced him into a field new to the
solitude of contemplative life—to the arena of conflict, and
the battle ground of faith and of opinion. Still, it was not
one thing or another that gave a new impetus to the minds
ot men ; it was many causes concurring together the con-
verging on one point of various streams of thought and
feeling, the treasures of Greek culture imported by the
Arabians through Spain, the gradual ripening of the human
mmd towards larger views of learning and more scientific
methods of dispute, that eventually sent the teachings of
Christendom, from their silent and peaceful cloister into the


noisy city, and introduced to the world the great contests of
the schools. . . j _ ,
The solemn abbey, with its quiet methods, no longer
satisfied the mind of the student awake to the excitements
of the City. Fulda and Gall, York and Citeaux were all
very well in their way; but the streams of learning were
flowing down the mountaiu side and were filling the valleys,
filling o Paris, and Bologna, and Oxford, and Padua, and
Haples, with the living strife of brilliant and contending
intellects,— and the city was becoming the home ot philo-
sophy, literature and letters. If the mountain will not go to
Mahomet, Mahomet must go to the mountain. The religious
found themselves compelled, whether they would or no, to
follow in the wake of those who would no longer be con-
tented to hide in solitary places.
The grandest and oldest centre of attraction was the
venerable school of Notre Dame, as I have already said,
in all probability founded by Charlemagne himself, or the
outcome of one of those free or public schools which the
Bishops set on foot at the request of that energetic Monarch.
This school or college formed the nucleus or centre—
was the Queen-Bee, round which all the others gathered,
and found a oneness. The re-union of the Faculties always
took place at Notre Dame, and even so late as the eighteenth,
century, the Chancellor of Notre Dame, had the privilege
of being one of the Chancellors of the University. # The
work of Alenin here was continued by a succession oi
learned men. Remigius of Auxerre, and Adam an Eng is -
man, and Peter Comestor, and Peter Cantor, and others
maintained the reputation of the school, till the contests o
Abelard and William of Champeaux gave it a celebrity
which was the beginning of its pre-eminence amongst a
store of large and flourishing Institutions. .
Then came the college of St. Genevieve, which traces its
origin to Clovis, and Clotilde; and the College of St.
Catherine, set up by four celebrated professors, Richard,
Edward, William, Manasses, and favoured by King Dorns,
and the school of the children of St. Norbert; and the
immense establishment, the largest in t e iy> o


Carthusians, and the Cluni College, and the Sorbonne, which
owes its very origin to the overwhelming crowd of students
who flocked into Paris, and, notwithstanding the size and
number of the existing Colleges, were unable to find a home.
Iv or are these by any means all the places of learning which
grew up as if by magic in the centre-city of France. To
enumerate them all would be wearisome indeed; suffice it
to say, the provincial schools ceased to satisfy, Bishops es-
tablished their colleges in the city, private individuals
founded as many more, till Paris was converted into one
enormous receptacle of learning, one vast emporium of
Colleges to which people from all quarters of the world re-
sorted to drink of the flowing sparkling waters, and to
partake of the excitement of the hour.
As I said, even the Regulars were attracted by this vortex
of learned men and Institutions, —even those whose vocation
would seem rather to draw them towards another goal.
The Trinitarians were busily lecturing there as early as
1209, the Children of the ascetic St. Bernard, the grave
and mortified Cistercians, the barefooted Carmelites, the
self-disciplined Augustinians, the large-minded Benedic-
tines, and even the solemn Carthusians—each had their
separate and each, according to their measure,
took part in the general development and friction of mind
with mind. The vast numbers of young men who would
thus be attracted to the schools of Paris can easily be
imagined.
And what took place there was repeated in other great
centres of education throughout Europe.
So vast was the number of students in Paris that the
young men were divided, not according to Schools, but
according to Nations. So great was the number at one
period, that in a procession, whilst the first rank was
stepping into Notre Dame, the last had not yet got clear of
S. Methurins. Kings would honour with their presence
five thousand graduates at a time. On one occasion the
University promised to send 25,000 scholars to increase the
pomp of a funeral. In 1262 Olfred gave lectures to 10,000
scholars in Padua. In the sixteenth century there were


40 000 students there. Bologna, Padua, Salamanca Naples
TTnsal Lisbon, and Borne, followed suit. In 1260 there
were 10,000 students in Bologna; in 1262 some say there
rp 20 000 In 1200 there were 4000 scholars m Oxford,
ri27i: 30,000. We read of 5000 being at Cambridge.
Toulouse was equally flourishing with the College of
(luienne, at Bordeaux, which counted 2500 students.
Finally, the University of Louvain, later on, had as many
as forty colleges attached to it, whilst before the Reforma-
tion, Europe could boast of as many as sixty-six
Two causes tended towards producing these extraordma y
developments; first, the increase of a certain class o
knowledge, which had grown from a small spark, hidd
away in Monastic seclusion, to a large flame; and, second y,
the ltrenuous encouragement of the Holy See-that is of
that same Individual Authority which in the very outset o
Christianity had sent the Twelve to teach all Natl ,
subdue the world to the maxims of the Cross. Her cou
of action has never deviated from that day to. this.. He
one grand anxiety being to save souls, to purify heaits,
and to prepare her children for carrying ou her own work
amongsf each other. The Monastic principle of enthusiasm
was sfmply the all-saving principle of Chnstiamty loster
by a community of men or women who had dedicated their
undivided strength to one undivided service The same
principle being dragged out of its resting-places, m
tained itself amidst the turmoil and contentions of the
great colleges of the noisy city. Whatever the form
teaching, whatever its special development, whatever p
was followed out with the greatest earnestness, the Cliuic
approved, encouraged, and blessed, as long as le
principle was recognised, and so long as secular teac * °
was purified, guarded, and. sanctified by the higher and all
important principle of Christian Bove. ,
Those famous Universities which flourished in the very
domain of the Popes, exhibit most luminously the temper
of the ‘ Sovereign Pontiffs. Bologna, and Rom®, anc [
Perugia, and Macerata, and Ferrara, and Urbino, an “
Camerino were University cities, filled with students, and


canning out as freely as elsewhere the study and develop-
ment of literature and science. Paris and Oxford both owe
their prestige to the Holy See, not to say their very exist-
ence. It was the Papal blessing and the exercise of the
Papal prerogative that gave birth and life to the great
teaching centres of Naples, and Siena, and Turin of
Salamanca, Vienna, and Hiedelberg, of Bale, Greifswald,
Wurtzburg, and Louvain, and many more which need not
be recounted.
And what can be said of Paris and Bologna, and other
emporiums of knowledge, can be asserted with equal truth
of Oxford. _ Not only was that famous seat of learning
founded the Papal blessing, but its very greatness
must be attributed, if not absolutely to the Pope, certainly
to his representatives, to men who held the same Paith as
himself, and together with him, were placed to rule the
Church of God. It was the Spirit of Love animating the
bi easts of the Great Catholic Bishops of old, and urging
them to exert themselves in their especial calling, that of
giving light and elasticity to the intellect, and of forming
the heart to virtue, that induced them to impoverish them-
sejves in founding colleges, and to dedicate their substance
to the education of the rising generation. Where would
Merton College be now had it not been for the munificence
of Walter de Merton, Catholic Bishop of Rochester ?
Where Exeter College, without Bishop Stapleton ? Where
the renowned Oriel, without the presence of Adam de Brome,
Archdeacon of Stone ? Had it not been for the enlightened
generosity of Robert de Eglesfield, of Wykeham of Win-
chester, and Chichely of Canterbury, and William of
Waynflete, and Eotheram of Lincoln, where would be at
this hour the boasted Queen’s, and New College, and All
Souls’, and Magdalen, and Lincoln ? Then Brasenose was
founded by William of Lincoln, and Corpus by a Bishop of
Winchester, and Christ Church, the Queen of all, by the
Catholic Wolsey on the very eve of the break-up of the old
faith in England. These may almost be called Papal
foundations, any how, foundations laid with a kingly gene-
rosity by men whose whole temper of mind, whose whole


current of thought, taking them as a body, were in complete
harmony with, the views and principles of the Holy See.
Without her encouragement and permission never could
they have laid these foundations; and only by her approval
a nd patronage could they, I will not say simply have
flourished, but have remained in academical existence. It
is vain and vulgar, as vulgar as it is vain, with such
warranty of History staring us in the face, to pretend that
Borne is opposed to learning and to culture, or that she
looks with cold indifference on the enlargement of the
"human mind. Rome fosters learning and culture, but she
will never approve of it, if it be not guarded and purified
by the divine principle of Christian Love.
Or to leave England: take almost at random one crucial
example of the interest, not that one Pope alone, but that a
whole line of distinguished Pontiffs have taken in University
education. I refer to the Roman University called the
Sapienza.
I suppose it is not necessary to go back beyond Pope
Nicolas V. Yet, even before his time the Sapienza was a
flourishing institution. Innocent IV. took a large interest
in it, and gave a great impetus to the study of canon and
civil law and of theology, by drawing into its walls the
learned and blessed Ambrose Sansedonio; then Urban IV.
gave to it the prestige of the great name of S. Thomas of
Aquin; Clement IV. introduced the study of languages ;
Boniface VIII. bestowed other privileges on it; and finally,
Eugenius IV. loaded both professors and students with
many extraordinary favours, and by this means filled the
University with learned men and crowds of scholars.
But it was Nicolas V, that gave to the University its
enduring name, —a Pontiff who did so much for learning
and science in his day, that he is said to have introduced
the Golden Age into the Eternal City* The writings of
such men as Nicolas Pirotto, Platina, JEneas Sylvius, Marc
Antonio, and Sabellico, are loud in the praises of their
* Hie sita sunt quinti Nicolai Pontificis ossa, aurea qui dederat smcula, Roma, tibi.
His Epitaph in St. Peters.


august patron. . He collected together a vast quantity of
Greek and Latin authors, and what is still more to the
point, he attracted to Borne, as Charlemagne and Alfred
had done before him, companies of learned men, each of
whom he provided with a handsome pension. If letters
were restored throughout Italy, and afterwards up and
down Europe, the merit is due to Pope Xicolas V. He was
called in those times the very author of eloquence and
speech. Pomponius Loetus, and Domitius Calderino were
his professors .of Latin Eloquence. Emmanuel Chrysoloras
gave lectures in classic Greek' whilst John of Turrecremata
professed Canon Law for twenty-five years with great eclat.
Possibly, to the general reader, these names convey little else
than sound • not so to one who knows the profound erudi-
tion and brilliancy, the deep piety and humility of such
men: to him a bright image presents itself of the scholars
and the teachers of this flourishing school of letters.
During the whole course of the fifteenth century the
Sapienza rejoiced in a first-class set of men. Every one
knows that Leo X. did all he was able to encourage and
reward the votaries of learning. He called them together
to Borne from all parts of Europe, and gave them frequent
opportunities of admiring his breadth of mind and his large
generosity. He caused new buildings to be erected for the
Sapienza, and endowed it in a manner worthy of its exalted
reputation. These favours and encouragements were not
long in producing their effect. The Boman Pontiffs here
found a nursery of distinguished men of whom they could
make use in the highest sphere—as Ministers of the Apos-
tolical Palace, as Legates, Bishops, and Councillors. These
were the first to bear the pressure and onset of the Beform-
ation. Jerome Aleandre, whom King Louis XII. had
engaged as Professor of the Paris University, afterwards
became the. glory of the Sapienza; and rendered most
signal services to the Holy See under Popes Leo X.,
Adrian VI., Clement VIII., and Paul 111. Able scholars
in those days had no occasion to solicit occupation. They
were sought out in the most distant quarters of the world,
and mediocrities were speedily displaced to make way for


really learned and superior men. This is what was done
in the case of Eoderic the Portuguese mathematician, whom
the Cardinal of Viterbo brought to Pome from Spain as it
were in triumph. The Roman Sovereign and his people
received with acclamation into their midst, Philip Beroard
the younger, Donato the Florentine, the Sicilian Anthony
Flaminius, Anthony Tilerius, Augustus Valdus, Barnard in
Capella, George Sovraman the German, Francis Palmieri,
who had professed theology at Pisa, Tolomei, so deeply
versed in language and mathematics, and many others whom
it would take too long to mention. Amaseo, whom Paul I LI.
begged of the Venetians, and took to Rome, became
Secretary of Briefs under Julius 111. and Huntio in
Germany and Poland. Jerome Pariset, another professor
of the Sapienza, who laboured at the correction of Gratian
and of the Decretals under Gregory XIII., was sent as
Huntio to the Diet of Augsburg. Pius IV. called the
celebrated Sylvius Antonianus to Rome, and made him
Professor of the Sapienza, and twenty-five Cardinals assisted
at his first lecture. So flourishing was the Sapienza under
Pope Gregory the XIII. that a large number of strangers
from all parts of Europe flocked to the University.
In fact, from first to last the names of Popes especially,
and of Catholic Bishops have been indissolubly bound up
with the advancement and the interests of literature and
science. The simple difference between them and those
who would decry them, consists in this : that neither Pope
nor Bishop can, or ever will forget, that Love comes first,
and learning second: they subordinate the light of this life
to the Glory of the next, and would rather a man were
ignorant of the sciences here, so that he gain Heaven here-
after, than that he should become a learned man, and make
shipwreck of his soul thereby.
Such was the temper of Popes and Bishops. Still, not-
withstanding all they did, I do not mean for one moment to
insinuate that all was immaculate in either Faith or Morals
in the schools, even of the Middle Age. But what happened
in them was not in consequence, but in spite of the ener-
getic action of the Holy See. Her constant endeavour was


to keep Faith pure, and Discipline intact. Again and again
did she bring her authority to bear upon the rationalizing
of professors and the turbulent lives of scholars; and had
it not been for her high authority, and for the vigour with
which at times she exerted it, the great University-cities
would have been hot-beds of the worst paganisms and sinks
of the deepest depravity. It stands to reason that so vast a
multitude of youths congregated in one spot, from all the
parts of Europe, and Professors of every temper and cast of
mind coming together, would, if human nature was then
what it is now, give cause for anxiety to the authorities,
and from time to time break out into open rebellion against
the law.
The spirit of the Church at this period is very fairly
exhibited in the person of an enlightened founder of one of
the most distinguished colleges in Paris. I refer to Eobert
of Sorbonne. He was not only a person of considerable
ability, but unrivalled as a man of business, and for his
knowledge of the world. He it was who founded that
celebrated Parisian college which still goes by his name:
a school surpassing all the rest for its magnitude, its dis-
cipline, and its world wide reputation. It may be regarded
as the very type of what the Popes would look upon with
pleasure. Alexander IV. publicly recommended it to the
faithful:—whilst Clement IV. proved by his dealings with
it, how keen an eye the Holy See kept over the rising
institutions of the day. In 1270 the Faculties were estab-
lished in different places; Law, at Clos Bruneau, Arts at
Eue du Fauare, the Sorbonne remaining the chief seat of
the Theological Faculty. To be admitted to the college a
man had to be a bachelor, to defend a thesis, and to obtain
the majority of votes in three scrutinia. The members con-
sisted of two classes: of the Hospites and the Socii. The
former were provided with all facilities for study, but they
had nothing to do with the administration, and on becoming
Doctors they had to leave the college. The Socii carried
on the administration, and were on a strict equality,
according to the old saying of Sorbonne; ( omnes sumus
sicui Socii et (Equates. ’ The rich Socii paid the same amount


jn support of the college as the needy ones received from
it * and, on the whole, the method of life and form of govern-
ment here established, is about the best specimen of
University or college management which could be found in
medieval annals.
Now, to show how the spirit of enthusiasm, or heart-
culture, pervaded the teachings of this institution, I will
place before your attention the rules laid down by the
founder himself as to the method and scope of University
training and instruction. Let it be remembered that this
was not a monastic foundation. It had nothing to do with
the religious orders. Robert was Confessor to King Louis,
and lived more the life of a courtier than of a monk, whilst
his college, which became so famous throughout Europe,
was essentially secular in its nature, and in the character of
its scholars and professors. Hence, the teaching of Robert,
with regard to methods of mental cultivation, and its scope,
was drawn from the general acknowledged teaching of
antiquity, and embodied that spiritual tendency and
character which is never absent from the mind of the Catholic
Church. His teaching is but a specimen of the universal
Catholic feeling, based as it is on the Love of Jesus, and on the
belief in a future world, —where all science of the present will
be swallowed up in a wider and clearer intuition of the truth.
He says, then, that the scholar who would profit by
going to college should observe six essential rules:—
“ 1. He should dedicate one certain hour to one specified
piece of reading, according to the recommendation of St.
Bernard to his brethren of Mont Dieu.
2. He must fix his attention on what he is going to
read, and should not easily pass on to something else.
There is the same difference, says St. Bernard again,
between reading and studying as between a visitor and a
friend —between a salute exchanged in the street and an
unalterable affection.
3. He should extract each day one thought—one truth
of some sort, and engrave it on his memory with especial
care. Seneca has said, ‘ Cum multa percurreris in die,
unum tibi elige quod ilia die excoquas
F


4. He should write a resume —for unwritten words are
blown away like dust before the wind.
5. He should join with his companions in the c disputa-
tions, ’or in familiar conversations. This practice is of even
greater service than reading, because it results in clearing
up all doubts and all obscurities, which have been left on
the mind by reading —‘Nihil perfecte sciiur nisi dente dis-
pntationis feriatur?
6. He should pray—for this in point of fact is one of the
best means of learning. St. Bernard teaches that reading
should exercise the affections of the soul, and that such in-
fluences should be turned to account in elevating the heart
to God, without on that account interrupting study. . .
In the acquisition of knowledge the pleasures of the flesh
must be abstained from ; creature comforts must not be
embraced. There were at Paris two masters associated
together, of whom one had seen much, read much, and re-
mained bent over his books day and night—hardly did he
give himself leisure to recite one Pater. This man had
only four disciples. His companion had a worse-furnished
library, was less carried away by study, heard Mass every
day before giving his lesson—and nevertheless his school
was full. ‘Now tell me, how do you manage?’ the first
asked him. I My plan is simple enough,’ the second replied
with a smile— c God supplies my want. Igo to Mass, and
when I return I know by heart the whole lesson that I
have to teach.’
Meditation is not only becoming in the master: the
good student should also take a walk in the evening on the
banks of the Seine; not to idle his time, but to repeat his
lesson and to meditate.”
u Grammar,” he says further on, “ forges the sword of the
word of God, rhetoric polishes it, and finally theology makes
use of it. But there are some scholars who are always
learning to fashion it, and point it, and who keep on
sharpening it till they have worn it all away ; others keep
it shut up in the scabbard, and when they want to draw it
out, they themselves have grown old, and the iron is rusty,
and they can make nothing of it. With regard to those


•who study in order to become dignitaries and prelates, they
a re very much deceived, for they hardly ever realise the
end of their ambition.”
The spirit of these instructions is evidently to keep the
student steady to his work, and at the same time to bind
him close to the other world. The intellect, will, and
heart are controlled and cultivated pari passu, and whilst
the boy’s mind is being filled with the knowledge of human
things, his conscience is being ripened and exercised in the
service and love of his Creator.
It was only by means of the occasional interposition
of the supreme authority which sent its commissioners
from time to time to examine into the nature of
University teaching, and to report on dangerous specu-
lations and unsound deductions, that large bodies of
learned and cultivated men were kept at all within the
bounds of orthodoxy. And had it not been for the con-
trolling force of a power possessing the historic position,
the august prerogatives, and the vast experience of men
and things of the Papal Chair, the state of the European
Universities both with regard to scholars and professors,
though turbulent enough, would have been very different
from what it was. As things were, with all the authority
of the Holy See, and all the efforts of men bent upon carry-
ing out the Christian principles, there were only too
frequently startling scandals in professors’ chairs—men
teaching pantheism and materialism, and bringing in all
the corruptions of Eastern mysticism and Grecian infidelity
—whilst amongst the students themselves, especially
amongst those who were free from college discipline, there
were cases of undiscipline, immorality, idleness, extrava-
gance and dissipation, which earned for the medieval schools
in many ways anything but a savoury name. If such were
the case when the influences and pressure of the Holy See
were in exactly the opposite direction, what would not
have been the case did not such a central and supreme
Authority exist ? It is evident to every student of history
that Home has ever been tender as a mother to the
Universities and Colleges, fostering them, encouraging


them, building them up, and loading them with privileges,
whilst on the other hand she has ever striven to prevent
them degenerating into mere nests of paganism and infi-
delity, and has never ceased doing all that lay in her power
to keep alive the spirit of Love and the cultivation of the
heart.
Time does not permit me to enlarge on the great work
achieved by the religious orders amidst the turmoil of
secular life, and the temptations of great cities. Both
Franciscans and Dominicans had their work to do, and did it;
nor is it necessary for me to trace down the action of the
Universities to the Age of the Reformation ; or to stop to
consider the influence of the Renaissance. It certainly was
a time of sudden and marvellous excitement; it effected
some good, and did its evil, and, like all abnormal condi-
tions of intellect and imagination, was speedily followed by
its reaction.
Then came the period of general revolt from the autho-
rity of the Catholic Church, and the gradual withdrawal of
Universities from the Supreme control and directing power
of the Holy See. How the principle of private liberty and
licence in dispute had crept even into schools subject to
the Papal Chair just before the Council of Trent, shows at
once the dangers which threatened academical society, and
the vigour which, even in the most perilous times, Borne
made use of to avert them.
A commission of eminent prelates, with a high reputation
as eloquent humanists and University scholars, appointed
to look into abuses by Pope Paul 111 (1537), thus speaks
of the state of Italian schools:—•
“It is a great and pernicious abuse that in the public
schools, especially of Italy, many philosophers teach impiety.
Even in the Churches most pernicious disputations are
held, and if some are of a pious nature, yet in them sacred
things are treated before the people in a most irreverent
manner. We think, therefore, that it should be pointed
out to the Bishops in those places where public schools
exist, that they admonish those who deliver lectures not to
teach impiety to the young, but to manifest to them the


weakness of natural reason in questions appertaining to
God, to the recent origin or eternity of the world, and the
like, and that they rather lead them to piety. Also, that
they permit not public disputations to be held on questions
of this nature, nor even on theological subjects, which
certainly in this way lose much in vulgar esteem; but let
disputations be held in private on these matters, and let the
public disputations be on other questions of physics. And
the same thing ought to be enjoined on all other bishops,
especially of great cities where disputations of this sort are
wont to be held. And the same care should be employed
about the printing of books, and all princes should be
written to, warning them not to allow books of all sorts to
be printed everywhere in their dominions. And the care
of the matter should be committed to the Ordinaries. And
whereas it is now customary to read to boys in the schools
the ‘ Colloquies ? of Erasmus, in which there are many
things which instil impiety into inexperienced minds, the
reading of this book, and of others of a similar character,
ought to be prohibited.”
Having received, from the first, the deposit of faith,
having been divinely guided in her annunciation of it,
having the promises of Christ that her faith should not fail,
and that she should teach all saving truth, it became the
Church’s high and solemn duty to he true to her Divine
Commission and to make use of the steady infallible light
which she possessed. It may be denied that she really has
been gifted with these exceptional attributes, it may be
said that she assumes to herself that for which she has no
warrant—of course it may : but my point here is, that
from the first days of the Apostles, who commanded men to
believe the Gospel on Christ’s authority, to the present hour,
the Church has, as a. matter of fact, without swerving or
exception, not only declared that such power was hers, but
has in hundreds of instances acted upon it, and uttered her
condemnations, and given her warnings, and spoken her
truths, in good and evil report, and in the face of all laws
of so-called human prudence and expedience, just because
to hold her tongue, or to shrink in times of storm and peril,


would be to prevaricate at the very moment when the
exercise of her prerogatives was most required. And what
she did in the past she repeats this very hour in which we
live.. It is not merely the same voice that we hear speaking,
but it is the same intellect divinely guided, uttering the
same principles, giving the same warning, and aiming at
the same end. Her love of University education has not
grown cold in the course of ages, her voice is as clear and
as earnest as ever it was, and in this era of so-called en-
lightenment she has given evidence of her deep solicitude
both for the culture and enlargement of her children’s in-
tellects, and for the purifying and directing the affections of
their hearts.
Indeed, I hardly see how, without some such authority
as the Church possesses, the unity of Christendom could
have lasted, I will not say fifteen or sixteen hundred years
—but for one single century. Nor do I see how professors
in the Universities scattered up and down Europe could have
been kept within any decent bounds, without having over
them, in matters concerning morality and faith, some sure,
unswerving, steady, and divine infallible guidance, by
means of which they might be assisted and enlightened,
reproved, and if necessary condemned, as the case might be.
I need not point to the present state of European society,
to perhaps the majority of the educated and refined English
of the present day. I need not refer to men of the highest
eminence in their professions, who having rejected the in-
spiration of the Scriptures, and who, like the Greeks and
Homans, possessing no other guide but the individual
conscience, are startling and saddening serious men by the
rationalistic, materialistic, and infidel tendencies of their
minds, and by the unconcealed satisfaction which many of
them manifest in striking at Hevelation, and at those
mysterious truths which Catholics receive on the authoritv
of the Church.
When once tne supremacy of Love, as taught by an infal-
lible Teacher, is denied, the whole question of the antique
paganism will present itself, sooner or later, with its ancient
horrors. It was this supremacy alone which worked the


conversion of the world. Intellect had been cultivated to
its highest in Greece; Eome had exercised the will in the
sphere of discipline and law ; but one thing, as I have said,
was wanting, the divine culture of the Heart, and hence the
putridity and decay which lay close under the varnish of
the pagan schools. And had not the Voice of the Teacher
commanded or forbade with an inexorable imperative, had
not mankind acknowledged its supreme right to speak on
account of its possession of unadulterated knowledge, never
would that Voice in the long run have been obeyed: for
nothing short of such attributes as these would have been
forcible enough to curb the proud intellect of man, or
overawe the wild violence of his passions.
Section 111.
Now, what view does the Church take of education at
the present day ? What are the fundamental principles
which rule her dealings with the sciences and the liberal
arts ? What is the tendency of the educated classes ? and
in what way does the Ecclesia Docens attempt to meet the
perils consequent on modern thought ?
The most important document issued by the Holy See
in modern times, regarding university education, is the
Bull Quod Divina Sapientia of Pope Leo XII, which was
published in August 1824. This learned Pontiff had
determined, for the benefit of society and religion, to reor-
ganize the Universities and schools in the States of the
Church. Knowing how much depends on education both
in Church and State, he determined, so far as he and his
dominion were concerned, to preserve it from that spirit of
impiety which corrupts the heart, and from those false
methods which lead the mind astray.
This document becomes all the more interesting and
important from the fact that it was issued to meet those
errors and evils which, in our day, have grown into such
large and perilous proportions. Those false methods of
instruction which were even then taking the place of
ancient ways—those principles of philosophical impiety


which now are rampant in so many schools, and that spirit
of rebellion against all manner of authority, that has been in
fashion for the last three hundred years —all these things
had to be weighed and legislated for; and, therefore, the
evils being the same now as they were then, only greater,
the teachings of Pope Leo, and the principles of the Quod
Divina Sapientia, will be as interesting to us at this hour, as
•they were fifty years ago when they first issued from the
press.
The Holy Father, at the very commencement of this
Bull, lays down the broad principles of action which should
animate the Holy See in its relation to education. He says
the first duty of the Church is to insist that all those who
have to do with the teaching of youth should be animated
with a love of true wisdom and with a detestation of impiety.
u Having before our eyes,” he says, “ that doctrine which
Divine wisdom teaches all men, and w T hich it places before
all those who walk in the way of Salvation, Veritatem
meditabitur guttur meum, et labia mea detestabuntur impium;
we perceive that it becomes a duty of our Apostolic Solici-
tude to use all our care to the end that not only the masters
of sacred learning, but also those of the secular sciences
and liberal arts, and the instructors of the young, should
embrace this doctrine, and constantly put it in practice, and
strive to impress it on the minds of those they teach, for
the progress of religion and the salvation of society depend
on it. And since well organized studies contribute much to
this end, we have considered it our duty to labour with
the greatest possible zeal to render perfect the methods of
teaching and the progress of studies.” Then he cites the
following words of Sextus V. : “ The knowledge of letters,
the doctrines and disciplines of the liberal arts, which
young men learn and are imbued with in the public
gymnasia, are very useful to Christian Society, provided
that they are allied with piety.”
Then, in order to bring out his own mind all the more
clearly, the Pope quotes these admirable reflections of St.
Augustine: —“ What controversies of philosophers are
there, what writings, what laws of cities that can be com-


uared with the two precepts on which Jesus Christ tells us
the Law and the Prophets depend: Thou shalt love the Lord
tt V God with thy whole heart , with thy whole soul, and with
ail thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself ? Hence physics,
for all the causes of natural things are in God the Creator;
hence ethics, for a good and honest life consists in nothing
else but this, to love what ought to be loved-—God and ones
neighbour; hence logic, for truth, the light of a soul
endowed with reason, is nothing else but God; hence the
safety of a well regulated society, for a city is not solidly
set and well kept together unless it be founded and united
hy confidence and concord, which proceed from a love of the
common good. God is the true and Sovereign Good: and m
Him men love each other sincerely, for they love each, other
for His sake from whom they cannot conceal the spirit in
which they do love.”* _ . .
Of course St. Augustine had no idea of banishing natural
science, any more than Pope Leo had. Put he wished to
remind Professors and Students that all these things have
their principles in God, if they are rightly .understood, and
are to be in harmony with reason and religion: and more
than this, that they ought necessarily to be referred to the
Almighty, the Beginning and End of all veritable science.
It is upon this Catholic basis that Pope Leo XII. founded
his Constitution on Pnblic Instruction for the Pontifical
On November sth, 1824, he read a paper at the Homan
Sapienza, in which he pointed out the dangers that Piofes-
sors should avoid. Having spoken strongly against the
bias which paganism gave to the study of the sciences, a
bias tending only to vain glory, he contrasted it with
Christian science joined to charity, which edifi.es, and to
evangelical humility. “Whilst we recommend to you above
all things,” he says, “ the Wisdom of God which shines
princinally in sacred doctrine, we do not pretend to throw
the other inferior sciences, and the human faculties into
disfavour: far from forbiding the knowledge of them, we
* Epist. ad Volusianum.


earnestly recommend young men to study them with
ardour. I wish mathematics, and physics, and medicine,
and the other Faculties to be honoured as they deserve.
They all come from God, the first principle of all things,
they are therefore good: for God saw all the things that
He had made, and they were very good. In all of them,
the Primeval Truth shines forth, the work of a Wise and All
powerful God: they are therefore to be desired. Does the
soul look for anything stronger than Truth, asks St. Augus-
tine ? But have all those who have sought after, and still
seek after truths discoverable by human reason, above all
those which have to do with God and his cultus, and the
public and private duties of man, —have they really found
out these truths ? are they discovering them in these our
days ? It must be said clearly, that in the search after
truths of this sort, even of those which belong to the
natural order, the most popular schools have fallen into a
multitude of errors, which are enumerated, as far as the
ancients are concerned, by St. Augustine.* All this mani-
festly shows the necessity of Divine Bevelation. Providence
permitted the ancient philosophers to fall into so many
errors to show the necessity of Revelation. But since the
Word was made flesh, each man possesses the True Light
which enligliteneth every man that cometh into this world.
After so many centuries—after the shedding of the blood of
so many martyrs, and the accomplishment of so many mi-
racles—divine truth and true religion, as well as all those
principles of natural philosophy which serve as their support,
having been manifested and demonstrated more and more
clearly, and invincibly confirmed by all manner of proofs
suitable to the ignorant and to philosophers, is it not an un-
exampled folly, or rather a very guilty piece of wickedness,
for the false philosophers of our day to resuscitate the errors
and absurdities of paganism, of which they take up the de-
fence, and to which they add still more dangerous errors of
their own ? At one time with an appearance of virtue or a
love of science, at another with open unbelief, they do their
* L. VIII. C. 11. Be Civitate Bei.


best to upset the foundations of all science, and of all the facul-
ties, and even of logic itself, in order to ruin the Catholic
religion; they strive to cast the contagion of every impiety
and error into the souls of young men, and even into the
establishments of public instruction, as if the Gates of Hell
could prevail against the Church of Jesus Christ, and as if
the immutable principles of the eternal Law could be
changed and reversed at the caprice of man.” The Sove-
reign Pontiff concludes by deploring the abuse which was
made of those sciences which ought to serve to the glory
of God. “In these latter times we avow,’ 5 says Pope Leo,
“that ethics, hermeneutics, natural sciences, archeology,
mathematics, medical art, and polite letters, have made
progress, thanks to the labours of some true savans. Kept
within the boundary of the true, all these things are an aid
to morality; they demonstrate the immateriality of the
soul, in addition to the metaphysical arguments which
prove it; and, what is more important and more noble,
they proclaim the glory of God and announce the works
of His Hands. Should we expect, after this, that even men
the most corrupt would be unable to see the Sun in the
midst of so much light, that others would not understand
how to do good, and that all would misuse the arms fur-
nished them by the sciences and the arts, by making use
of them to overturn the rule of morals, to close the way to
true happiness, and even to combat the existence of God,
and to drag the belief in Him out of the hearts of men ? 55
In November 1824, this same Pontiff published an
Encyclical, calling the attention of Bishops to the best
means of combatting materialism, which even in those days
was too much in fashion; whilst Cardinal Bertazzoli, first
Prefect of the Congregation of Studies established by the
Pope, shortly after issued a letter to all students in the
Pontifical States, pointing out the relative rank and position
of the sciences, and the harmony which subsists amongst
them, and condemning the various errors of the day.
Taking these documents together, they convey an accu-
rate picture of the epoch in which Pope Leo XII. published
his Constitution. We perceive first, a profound forgetfulness


of the essential end of all the sciences; then, the dangerous
turn given to instruction; next, the unchristian teachings
which were fostered in too many professorial chairs, and
the upsetting of traditional methods in the interests of these
godless views—in a word we perceive a wide-spread cor-
ruption in Universities, Colleges, and Schools, especially
where the prerogatives of the Holy See had either been
usurped or rejected; a corruption which, unless some
stringent measures had been adopted, would have found its
way into, and have taken possession of the teaching institu-
tions of the Papal States.
Leo believed, as a dogma of religion, that the Church
had a special commission to preserve purity of faith and
morals. Hence he created a special Congregation of
Cardinals, whom he placed at the head of Public Instruc-
tion. . And hence, also, the explanation of that large
authority which Bishops have ever had over Universities
and Schools. All Professors and Masters were obliged, by
Pope Leo’s Bull, to make a profession of Catholic Paith.
Still, the rules laid down by the Quod Divma Sapientia were
certainly by no means all new. The most are but a re-
assertion of hierarchical inalienable rights over the teachings
of Professors, for Leo speaks more as a Pope than as a
temporal Sovereign. Much that is said, too, is but a repe-
tition of the traditional discipline of the Church ; such, for
instance, is that which is touched upon regarding the
authority of Bishops over Universities, which can be traced
back beyond the thirteenth century. The most striking-
characteristic of the entire document is that Apostolic Spirit
which it breathes; a spirit, indeed, which we may fairly
say is both the origin and the object of it. I mean that
temper of Love, which I have been insisting on all along,
and which, whilst it holds in high estimation the cultures
ot this world, holds as of paramount importance the
cultures appertaining to the next; and which will never
cease to reprove, exhort, and anathamatize, as the case
may . be, those who make use of human knowledge
to stifle divine, and take up arguments drawn from so
called science, to blot out that Creed of faith and of morality


which is the most precious inheritance bestowed by God
on man.
Two things which I have been insisting on are clearly
demonstrated by the action of Pope Leo; first, that the
Church is the Guardian Mother of Science; and secondly,
and above all, that she is the Guardian Mother of Souls.
The same principles hold good at the hour in which we
live. The semper eadem of the Church is to be found here,
as well as in other of her fundamental teachings : and the
same interest which she has taken in the long course of
ages, in good report and evil report, in University culture,
she takes now, though fallen on an evil day and encompassed
by such clouds of enemies. But, though we may tremble
and feel dejected, she does not; battle is her element, and
contest her normal condition; that is her vocation : and in
carrying out the end for which she was set on earth by the
Governor of all, she works calmly, freely, and without
despair, full of the consciousness of His presence who is
with her, and who with one fiat could reduce all her enemies
to naught. She does not ever turn to wake Him, for she
knows that though her Beloved sleepeth, still his heart
watcheth, and that underneath are the everlasting arms.
Kor has Pius IX. been behind the most energetic Popes
in the way he has encouraged Christian education, and the
development of higher studies in the Church. England
and Ireland, Prance and Belgium, Holland and America,
are witnesses to his zeal and far-seeing sagacity. And
having been warmly seconded by learned hierarchies of
various countries, he has succeeded in planting centres of
science, purity, and faith in the midst of the temptations
and errors of the modern world. The Church is still at her
old work, and she will continue labouring at it to the end:
be it ignorance, be it perverse knowledge, be it any form of
blindness or depravity, be it over cultivation, be it one-sided
development, she knows her place, the lesson she has to
teach, and the most successful methods of accomplishing her
mission.
But, before touching upon what has been done in recent
times, allow me to refer to the present conditions of society,


that it may become evident what weighty necessity presses
upon the Ecclesia Docens to use all her energy to guard her
children from error, to teach them truth; and then, to fit
them as instruments, in their place and measure, for con-
veying the light to others. For Christ set up the Mater
Altrixque Scientiarum upon earth, not merely for her own
children, but as a beacon to the world in time of storm, and
as a harbour of refuge in case of danger.
Now, to bring out the facts fully, permit me to quote a
passage from my reply to an Address presented to me by the
Hector and Fellows of St. John’s, on the occasion of my first
visit to the college. I then said: that “ over against those
divers religious forces which base their existence on Chris-
tian Eevelation, I have perceived an ever growing body of
men, massing themselves together from almost every walk
of life, and falling into some kind of shape and consistency
through their common attitude of menace to Christianity
in all its creeds. Its attractive power springs from the
way it wields, what I may call, the awful logic of denial.”
Then, the reply goes on to say that the Church alone seems
to have stamina enough to oppose, with any hope of suc-
cess, the mighty tide of infidelity which is preparing, “in
due course, to break upon these- shores.” And, finally,
speaking of the College itself, I said that I at once recog-
nized it as “ being pre-eminently fitted to become the main
fortress amongst us of Catholic Christianity.” *
What, then, is the real state of the case ? are we better
than our fathers in the Middle Age, or than our prede-
cessors in the days of Paul Vor Leo XII ? It appears to
me that the principles of the sixteenth century have steadily
been effecting their work,—'that then corruption was set-
ting in, and now it is steadily carrying out that which it
then began.
But, leaving generalities, what precisely are the prin-
ciples which form the acknowledged basis of the philosophy
of modern thought ? Lest I might be suspected of mis-
understanding them, allow me to quote the words of a
* See Appendix.


scientific man, who has deeply studied their nature and
their effects. I refer to Professor Pritchard. In his speech
a t the Church Congress, at Brighton, in October of last
year, he said;
“ According to the latest and most authoritative state-
ment of the new philosophy, it asserted with considerable
confidence —1. That the potential of all things terres-
trial, including man, with all his powers, intellectual and
moral, the potential of their very selves, for instance, in
that Assembly, was originally contained in the atoms of one-
of those nebulous patches of light, thousands of which were
brought within the ken of the modern telescope. How that
potential got there was not stated. 2. That the present
state of things had been brought about, not by the subse-
quent intervention of any supreme cause or governor of all
things, but through the natural interaction of these atoms
or atomic forces. Combinations and recombinations through-
out unnumbered ages had ensued, and the fittest had sur-
vived. Of living organisms the powers had descended by
inheritance, had then been modified by their environments,
and again the fittest had survived. That succinctly was
said to be the origin of man by evolution. 3. It was
asserted that throughout Nature there were no certain tokens
of design ; wonderful adaptations were by no means denied,
but they were referred to the influence of successive environ-
ments and natural selection. That philosophy asserted that,
if there were an intelligent author of nature, an absolute
Supreme, He was to us unknowable. Such, so far as he
could understand it, were said to be the legitimate philo-
sophical conclusions of the most complete and refined science
of the day.”
It is not much to be wondered at, with such principles as
these, already brought to a kind of scientific maturity, that
the world at large of educated and literary men, who take
most of their views second hand, should have become tainted
with infidelity. Both unbelief and looseness of manner,
have been, there is no doubt, far from improving in these
latter years. Certainly this is the case in English-speaking
countries, such as Great Britain and America. Immorality,,


and the springs of it, are working on a vaster scale than
before, and infidelity possesses greater freedom to stalk
abroad, not at dusk alone, but at daylight; many of its
votaries are men of high fastidious taste and culture, like
English-speaking Greeks, but minus the mythology; whilst
the public prints and press, and no inconsiderable number of
first-class professors in first-class chairs, together with the
mass of the great lay writing world, are deeply steeped in
infidel philosophy, and in an element, whatever it may be,
which renders them as offensive to the Church as they are
antagonistic in their habits of thought to her, —not to the
Church alone indeed, but to the name and office of priest,
and to ascetic principle in either Testament. If too
well educated to be insulting, they are not sufficiently self-
controlled to restrain that slight curl of the lip and gaze of
the eye, which are indexes directly connected with the
inmost heart, and speak with a more piercing directness,
so far as feeling goes, than a thousand polemical assaults.
But let me introduce one or two authorities who have a
right to speak regarding our present Christianity:—
u We have seen scepticism spreading through the thought
of all classes of society,” says Mr. Llewelyn Davis, “with a
propagative action like that of fever germs on the spores of
a fungus. How is the [Protestant] Church to be preserved,
we have asked, if men cease to believe the Gospel ?Or
rather, our question has been—Who will have the heart to
care, for the outward forms, the endowments, and the minis-
trations of a national Christianity which has no longer any
real life in the convictions of the people. . . . I have
admitted a general diffusion of scepticism. Men have seen
many current religious beliefs—especially that of the infal-
libility of the Bible, which was the boasted foundation of
Protestantism—violently disturbed by historical and scientific
investigations. They have been uneasy through a conscious
inability to determine how far the distinctive action of such
inquiry could rightly claim to go. Whilst they have been
not less religious than formerly, they have felt themselves
unable to answer perplexing questions, or to formulate a
defensible profession of their faith. They have been duly


impressed by the growing authority of science. The name
of science has been used very freely by advanced thinkers.
It was science here, and science there; science was to upset
everything that good people had been accustomed to believe
in; until some, perhaps, have been conscious of a feeling
similar to that of Billaud, when he said to Bobespierre,
u Avec ion Eire Supreme tu commences m? ernbeter.” No
one, indeed, could entertain any sentiment but that of
respectful admiration towards the wonderful discoveries
made by scientific men in the heaven above and in the earth
beneath, in the microcosm and the macrocosm alike. But
over and above these its definite achievements, science was
vaunted as having a kind of divine authority to lay down
the laws of human life, to fix its boundaries, to assign its
objects. Men were to go to science for everything. The
new infallible teacher was diffusing a mysterious awe ; she
was said to have in her train all the intellects amongst
educated living men that were both able and honest, But
there had been a good deal of reserve amongst many of the
prophets of science; and this reserve in bringing its whole
teaching to bear upon the departments of faith and morals,
though far from being a calculated policy, had had the effect
of a veil in exalting the probable greatness' of the power
which was waiting to declare itself, and in spreading a vague
but depressing anticipation.
Again : “ From the experience of the last ten years,” says
Dr. Carpenter the eminent Physiologist, “ it clearly becomes
all who duly care for their own and their children’s welfare,
to look well to the foundation of their beliefs, which are
likely soon to be tested by such a wave as has never before
tried their solidity. New methods of research, new bodies
of facts, new modes of interpretation, new orders of ideas,
are concurring to drive onward a flood, which will bear with
unprecedented force against our whole fabric of Doctrine;
and no edifice is safe against its undermining power, that is
not firmly bedded on the solid rock of Truth.”
* Church Prospects, Contemporary Review, January, 1875, pp. 225, 6.
a


Again: “We believe/’ says the Editor of the Dublin
Review , “ that at this moment, among the more highly-
cultivated non-Catholics, belief in a Personal God is the
exception and not the rule; nor can any young Catholic
who has acquired intellectual tastes mix in the society of
those who resemble him in that respect, without finding the
very idea of religion treated by several of them —we will
not say with disapproval—but rather with contempt and
contumely, as a dream and superstition of the past; while
the large majority, even of those more soundly minded,
occupy no definite stand-point of opposition, nor hold with
undoubting firmness any religious dogma whatever.” Then
he quotes Leslie Stephens: “We all,” says he, “ make
believe as hard as w T e possibly can; we go to church with
the most praiseworthy punctuality ; . . . and some of us go
home to lunch and treat the whole story, as Socrates treated
the polytheism of his time. No one who has any knowledge
of the kind of language held by intelligent men , when not
arrayed in surplices and cassocks, will doubt that such sen-
timents are exceedingly common. It is only a few who have
the iconoclastic temperament and desire to break down the
convenient old creeds because they may be rotten at the
core; but a large minority, or possibly a large majority ,
believe that they are rotten.” *
Once more : Mr. Edmond Sherer, writing in the Melanges
d'Histoire Religieuse , says—“ That w T hich is really im-
perilled is not so much Protestantism; it is Christianity;
it is religion itself. As for natural religion, that exists
only in books. ... As long as the authority of the
priest or of the book preserves its prestige, the believer
receives his religion ready made for him, without himself
making distinctions; but as soon as that authority is shaken,
a man, if he does not entirely reject his first belief, will at
least no longer accept it without reservation. He only
retains so much as gives satisfaction to his religious require-
ments. Thus it is that religious sentiment becomes the
measure of religious truth. Let but a thing be indifferent
* See Dublin Review, January, 1874, p. 191.


to his religious sentiment, and he feels it inopportune and
looks upon it as a foreign, useless, arbitrary element. At
flrst sight this gradual emancipation of faith, and this cor-
responding progress of religion in the way of Spiritualism,
seem a natural process. We imagine all difficulties removed,
and fancy that we catch a glimpse of the religious future of
humanity in a sort of Christian Rationalism, a rational
Christianity not excluding fervour of devotion, but leaving
all its liberty to man’s thought.”
Were it necessary, or at all called for, I might multiply
extracts indefinitely, to show the present state of feeling
amongst educated men ; but these, I suppose, are sufficient;
it is almost enough to open the public prints and periodicals
of the day to become convinced that the old teaching of old
England, indeed the modem creeds of Great Britain, are
going fast the way of all flesh.
“It can hardly be doubted,” says Mr. Lecky, in his
History of the Rise and Influence of Rationalism in Europe
“that the general tendency of these influences (of Rational-
ism) is unfavourable to enthusiasm, and that both in actions
and in speculations this tendency is painfully visible ....
Our age exhibits a marked decline in the spirit of self-
sacrifice, in the appreciation of the more poetical and
religious aspect of our nature. The history of self-sacrifice
during the last 1800 years has been mainly the history of
the action of Christianity upon the world It is
the moral type and beauty, the enlarged conceptions and
persuasive power of the Christian faith, that have chiefly
called it into being, and it is by their influence alone that it
can be permanently sustained. The decay of the old spirit
of loyalty, the destruction of asceticism, and the restriction
of the sphere of charity, which has necessarily resulted from
the increased elaboration of material civilization, represent
successive encroachments on the field of self-sacrifice which
have been very imperfectly compensated, and have given our
age a mercenary , venal , and unheroic character , that is deeply
to be deplored At present the tendency towards
Materialism is too manifest to escape the notice of any
attentive observer.”


There are many causes to urge on the present tendency,
which is the natural, indeed, inevitable, result of having
thrown off the guidance of the Oracle of God. But to leave
the past alone: one great cause of infidelity has been the
influence of men of world-wide reputation in one science,
undertaking to dabble in another. The world does not
make very fine distinctions : and because Professors Huxley
and Tyndal, and Messrs. Spencer, Congreve, Darwin, and
Mill, and others, have, by their perseverance and acute-
ness, made for themselves a name in science, therefore they
are received as grave authorities in Theology and Morals.
Were those who ex professo undertake to lead the thought
of the day, not only acute in their own groove, but large-
minded and many-sided as well, remembering that, because
they deal so much with earth, that is no proof that there is
no heaven, then, indeed, the courses of the world might run
in a somewhat different track.
Indeed, as extremes are dangerous, and great excitement
is followed by a reaction, it is not at all impossible that
these men, who have carried things with a high hand, and,
in their eagerness to strike an adversary, have stepped
across their own proper field of investigation, and lost their
balance on a new and slippery ground —it is not at all
impossible that the thinking world will, eventually, at least
partially, recover itself, and find that, after all, science,
when properly understood, cannot in the nature of the case
come into collision with Revelation.
We are not without signs which point in this direction.
There are, fortunately, cautious and humble men devoted
to the discovery of truth, as well as arrogant and proud
men. They are beginning gently, yet firmly, to put the
over-rash leaders back into their places. They do not feel
inclined to be dogmatised to by any master but Truth; nor
are they tempted to receive, without a protest, oracular
utterances which are not vouched for by the voice of a
genuine demonstration. Truly scientific men are irritated
when the scientific method is silently dropped, and when a
wish, which is the father of the thought, is made to take
the place of a rigorous observation of phenomena. Indeed,


the very fact of saying a man is eminent in science, is almost
the same as saying that he has dedicated the whole power
of his mind to one study. It is this concentration that
lends him his pre-eminence, together, of course, with natural
gifts. But on the other hand, this very exclusiveness
renders him a stranger to other methods, which, though
different from, are no less true or conclusive than his own.
Had Professor Tyndal had a course of Catholic philosophy,
he would never have so exposed his weakness at the Belfast
meeting: had Mr. Darwin put his animals and orchids .on
one side for a time, and studied the teachings of antiquity
in the Greek and Latin Fathers, possibly he would have
never made those slips in his famous book which others
have corrected for him.
Mr. Forsyth has said in a recent speech that.
“The danger of too exclusive a devotion to physical
science was that the mind was so occupied with secondary
causes that it was tempted to rest upon and be satisfied
with them as if they were the final and efficient causes ot
all the phenomena of nature. Link after link in the great
chain of causation was unrolled under the searching analysis
of the philosopher, until he was apt to forget that he could
never get to the end of the chain, and he contented himself
with the idea that it was self-supporting. In other words,
he was in danger of substituting the blind energy of matter
and its inherent properties for an intelligent first Cause,
by whose Almighty will that energy and those properties
were given. The consequence of this, if not corrected by
other views, was, first, scepticism, and then denial of a
Creator. Keligion, of course, could have no place in such a
theory. Indeed, the word supernatural could have no mean-
in0 * where Nature was supposed to be self-sufficient to pro
duce everything. This, then, was the danger, and he would
venture to suggest some considerations which would show
that such a result was not only unsupported by fact, but was
in the strictest sense of the word unphilosophical. For phi-
losophy did not imagine causes; she only investigated and
verified them. We knew nothing of the ultimate con-
stituents and the cause of the formative powers of matter.


If we confined ourselves to matter alone, that would tell us
nothing about them, although we could by analysis and ex-
periment discover the modes, and processes, and conditions
under which they worked. We knew that vhat we called
gravitation was a force by which every particle of matter
attracted every other particle, and which varied inversely
as the square of the distance, just as we know that 8 parts
of sodium would exactly unite with 35 5 of chlorine and
produce common salt. But as to what gravitation really
was, and as to the reason why bodies would unite in fixed
and definite proportions, we were profoundly and helplessly
ignorant. The natural philosopher had no right whatever
to speak of ultimate material causes as self-created and self-
sufficient to produce not only the world of matter, but the world
of reason and intelligence. He knew nothing about them,
and all that he could predicate of them was conjecture and
unverified hypothesis. And surely he incurred a very grave
responsibility if, notwithstanding this, he threw out utter-
ances which, how r ever vague and unwarranted, the mass of
mankind would believe to be justified by the conclusions of
science, and which, if true, would absolutely destroy religion,
and even destroy the very notion of moral responsibility. He
thought that we had a right to complain that a man like
Professor Tyndall would, in the chair of the British Associa-
tion at Belfast, have used language which it was difficult by
any charitable construction to exculpate from the charge of
teaching mere materialism in its most undignified and
offensive form. What was to be complained of was that
scientific men should quit the domain of science, and substi-
tute conjecture for proof, and imagination for reality.”
The reaction to which I referred comes out not only here,
but also in these words of Mr. Martineau : Speaking of the
arrogant assumption of so-called scientific men who, “ with
the ambitious sweep of a universal theory,’’ undertake to
report on everything that is, he says : “To the inexpert
reader this report seems to be all of one piece ; and he is
disturbed to find an account, apparently complete, of the
i Whence and the Whither ’ of all things without recourse
to aught that is Divine; to see the refinement of organism


and exactitude of adaptation disenchanted of their wonder ;
to watch the beauty of the flower fade into a necessity; to
learn that man was never intended . for his place upon this
scene, and has no commission to fulfil, hut is simply flung
hither bv the competitive passions of the most gifted brutes;
and to be assured that the elite of beings that tenant the
earth tread upon an infinite series of Mures and sunuve
as trophies of immeasurable misery and death. Tims an
apprehension has become widely spread that Natural ! is
tory and Science are destined to give the coup de grace to
all Theology, and discharge the religious phenomena from
human life; that churches and their symbols must disap-
pear like the witches’ chamber and the astrologers tower;
and that, as everything above our nature is dark and voi ,
those who affect to lift it lead it no whether and musUake
themselves away as ‘ blind leaders of the b.ind.
this apprehension is well founded or not is a very grave
question for society in many relations; and is emphatically
urgent for those who educate men as spiritual guides to
others, and who can invest them with no directing power
except the native force of a mind at one with the truth of
things and a heart of quickened sympathies. Hitherto they
have been trained under the assumptions that thei Universe,
which includes us and folds us round, is the Life-dwellin o
of an Eternal Mind; that the world of our abode is the
scene of a moral government...... And if thenewfaith
is to carry in it the contradictories of these positions, it it
leaves us to make what we can of a simply m ° um "
verse and a pessimist world, and an unappeasable battle ot
life _it will require another sort of Apostolate, and vou
make such a difference in the studies which it is reasonable
to pursue, that it might be wisest for us to disband, and
let the new Future preach its own gospel, and devise it it
can, the means of making the tidings ‘glad. Better at
once to own our occupation gone than to linger on sen -
mental sufferance, aid accept the indulgent assurance that,
though there is no longer any truth in religion, there is
some nice feeling in it; and that while, for all we have to
teach, we might be shut up to-morrow, we may harmlessly


keep open still as a nursery of ‘emotion? * I think that,
when ‘ emotion ’ proves empty, w T e shall stamp it out and
get rid of it.” |
Professor Pritchard, in eloquent words, proclaimed that
our very powers and capacities point to something higher
than mere materialism. lie said :
u We, too, possessed powers and capacities immeasurably
beyond the necessities of any merely transitory life. There
stirred within us yearnings irrepressible, longings unutterable,
a curiosity unsatisfied and insatiable by aught we saw.
These appetites, passions, and affections came to us, not as
Socrates and Plato supposed, nor as our great poet sung,
from the dim recollection of some former state of our being,
still less from the delusive inheritance of our progenitors;
they were the indications of something within us, akin to
something immeasurably beyond us; tokens of something
attainable, yet not hitherto attained; signs of a potential
fellowship with spirits nobler and more glorious than our
own; they were the title deeds of our presumptive heirship
to some brighter world than any that had yet been formed.
But our knowledge of these atomic forces, so far as it at
present extends, did not leave us in serious doubt as to their
origin; for there was a very strong presumptive evidence
drawn from the results of the most modern scientific inves-
tigation that they were neither eternal nor the products of
evolution.”|
Sir John Herschel lays down the same opinion, with
great happiness of expression, that is to say, regarding
those elementary molecules, which our et most advanced
thinkers ” wish to raise into divinities. His most careful
study of them simply brought him to the conclusion that
they possessed u all the characteristics of manufactured
articles.” Professor Agassiz exclaims that u we cannot
consider the development theory proved because a few
* See Professor Tyndall’s Address before the British Association, with Additions,
p. 61. ’
f Address delivered in Manchester New College, London, by Janies Martineau,
LL.D., Principal, p. 5—6. 1874.
f See Times, October 9, 1874, p. 9.


naturalists think it plausible; it seems plausible only to the
few, and is demonstrated by none.” Professor Sedgwick
declares that “ whatever discoveries might be made, the
Bible could never be proved to be falseand Professor
Aldis that “ Physical Science does not contradict religion.
Professor Maxwell, speaking of the modern materialism
founded on evolution, argues that, “.No. theory of evolution
can be formed to account for the similarity of the molecules
throughout all time, and throughout the whole region of
the stellar universe, for evolution necessarily implies con-
tinuous change, and the molecule is incapable of giowth or
decay, of generation or distinction. None of the processes
of Nature, since the time when Nature began, have pro-
duced the slightest difference in the properties of any mole-
cule. On the other hand, the exact equality of each
molecule to all others of the same kind precludes the idea
of its being eternal and self-existent. We have reached
the utmost limit of our thinking faculties when we have
admitted that because matter cannot be eternal and self-
existent it must have been created.” “ These molecules,”
he adds, “ continue this day as they were created, perfect m
number, and measure, and weight, and from the ineffaceable
characters impressed on them we may learn that those aspira-
tions after truth in statement and justice in action, which
we reckon among our noblest attributes as men, are oui s
because they are the essential constituents of the image of
Him who in the beginning created not only the heaven and
the earth, but the materials of which heaven and earth
consist.” .
Referring to these words, Professor Pritchard exclaims :
cl A grander utturance has not come Irom the mind of a
philosopher since the days when Newton concluded his
u Principia ” by his immortal scholium on the majestic
Personality of the Creator and Lord of the Universe.’’
Then, besides Newton; Kepler, Leibnitz, Ampere, Secchi,
Owen, and Faraday, are notoriously Christian Thinkers.
Even the great champion of advanced science seems to have
felt his mistake at Belfast. In the Free Town Hall, at
Manchester, when speaking of “ Ohrystalline and Molecular


Forces,” in October last, he repudiates the materalistic
doctrine which the whole world understood him to proclaim
as his own, in his celebrated Address: “We are surrounded,”
he said, “by wonders and mysteries everywhere. I have
sometimes —not sometimes—but often—in the springtide
Watched the advance of the sprouting leaves, and of the
grass, and of the flowers, and observed the general joy of
opening life in nature : and I have asked myself this ques-
tion. Can it be that there is no being or thing in nature
that knows more about these matters than I do : that I,
in my ignorance, represent the highest knowledge of these
things existing in the universe ? Ladies and gentlemen, the
man who puts that question to himself, if he be not a shallow
man, if he be a man capable of being penetrated by a pro-
found thought, will never answer that question by profess-
ing that Creed of Atheism which has so lightly (save the
mark!) been attributed to me.”
Evidently, then, there is a reaction at work against the
arrogance of a certain advanced section of scientific men, a
reaction which it appears they themselves have felt the
influence of. How marvellously scientific men contradict
each other, comes out, clearly enough, in the few specimens
which I have brought together; and I fancy that the
Edinburgh Reviewer was not very far from the mark
when he declared that “Natural science is fast becoming
identified with what is most fluctuating, hypothetical, and
uncertain in current opinion and belief.”
Indeed, after surveying the different realms of scientific
thought, it appears that, outside the Church of God, there
is little to be found of security and certainty. Science, with
all her real progress, seems to reflect that instability which
belongs to the human mind when left altogether to itself;
and unless some one rock-like basis can be found on which
to stand, whilst surveying the flowing and changing waters,
it is very difficult to see how a wide-spread scepticism is to
be avoided, and how faith, in its genuine meaning, is to be
kept upon the world. Absolute disbelief is not so much
the danger, as a tendency to maintain that man can be
neither said to know nor not to know the fundamental truths


0 f the Christian faith : that denial and affirmation are not
for him; that the life to come being out of the sight of his
mind, is out of the reach of his intellect, and that it is not
for him to waste his strength with beautiful dreams, or to
pretend to search into depths, which are unfathomable. The
tendency is, to ignore the whole question, and to let time, or
rather eternity, reveal whatever secrets, if it has any, it
has to tell. From such a temper as this in the theoretical
order there is only one step to the practical and real. When
the Christian creed is gone, Christian morality speedily
follows. It may linger for a time on account of custom,
habit, and the influence of the past; but every year lessens
its influence, and finally a Pagan heart becomes the com-
panion of a Pagan mind: we have Pagan Greece and
Borne over again, with new modifications, such as may
be produced by modern manners, and the indistructible
influence of a Christianity which in substance has been cast
away.
tfow, it is against the melting away of Christian dogma,
and the consequent introduction of pagan principles and
manners, that the Church, in these latter days, has been
contending. One of the great instruments in this contest is
Catholic Christian higher education. By means of it the
mind of man gains a rock-like stability in cardinal truths of
Revelation and Morality, and secures a standpoint from
which to view the teachings of philosophers around him.
Unlike the uncertainty which underlies the theories of mere
explorersj her fundamental principles never vary; and for
hundreds of years she has shed a light on the methods of
the scientific world, which has been as steady and enduring
as herself; and which would have saved philosophers many
humiliations if they had had the sense to profit by it. She
solemnly declares, with regard to science and revelation, not
a new doctrine, but a teaching, as old as the truth which
she protects and preaches :
u In the Constitution De Fide Catholica she sets forth her
entire conception of the just position of science in the world
of truth. In language of exquisite simplicity she declares
—(1), her own estimate of science itself and of its achieve-


ments; next, she prescribes the method which each science
is to follow and traces the limits beyond which it ought not
to wander; then, she contemplates the supposed case of con-
flict between faith and reason, to declare that real conflict is
impossible ; and, finally, lays down rules by which, in cases
of apparent conflict, the embarrassment may be removed and
the truth protected. And, first, hear her estimate of science :
4 The Church, far from opposing the cultivation of human
arts and sciences, in many ways helps and promotes it. She
is neither unacquainted with, nor contemptuous of, the advan-
tages resulting therefrom to the life of mankind ; nay, she
confesses that as they have come from God, the Lord of all
knowledge, so, if rightly handled, do they lead to God, His
grace helping’ (Constit. DeFide Oath ., chapter 4). (2.) She
delivers her judgment as to the method and limits of the
sciences. And here, the outcry daily raised by her
enemies would lead us to expect that her whole aim
would be to enslave and crush her hated rivals, by im-
posing her own method on each, and with a high
fixing arbitrary limits for all. Hut it is not so. 1 She
forbids not that the sciences, each in its own range,
should employ its proper principles, and its proper method.’
(Ibid.) And this freedom to investigate on the basis,
and according to the peculiarities of each science—which
includes all that the princes of human learning have
ever demanded—the Catholic Church declares to be the
just liberty of science. (3.) She refuses to believe it
possible that between her dogma and any science which
confines itself to its own subject-matter, and investigates
according to its own proper principles and method, there
can be conflict. 4 -For,’ she says, 4 no real conflict can ever
occur between faith and reason; since the God who
reveals mysteries and infuses faith is He who gives to the
soul of man the light of reason; and God cannot deny
Himself, nor can truth ever contradict truth.’ (Ibid.)
(4.) She lays down rules by which any apparent collision
between them may be explained. 1 The empty appear-
ance of contradiction arises chiefly from this, either that
the dogmas of faith have not been understood or ex-


plained according to the Church’s mind, or that mere
theories have been put forward as decisions of right reason.’
(Ibid). ”*
Now, Catholic Universities and higher schools are the
homes of science thus guarded and illuminated. They are
the shrines of supernatural Love and Christian purity. The
Church’s one anxiety is to fill her centres of learning with
the largest number of Catholic youth; for, whilst she blesses
their progress in the wisdom of this world, she keeps a
jealous eye upon their morality and faith, upon those two
great instruments which are so intimately connected with
the salvation of their souls.
This accpunts for the efforts which have been made by
the Sovereign Pontiff to extend higher education. This
explains how, when the odious scheme of godless education
was about to be forced on the noble Irish people in 1845,
the Pope himself, perceiving the peril at hand, started the
idea of a Catholic university. This accounts for the way in
which his view was taken up by the great Episcopate of
Ireland. This accounts for the brave enthusiasm of that
Catholic people, for their large and touching generosity in
contributing to its erection. Hardly had the throes of the
deadliest famine subsided when those, whose motto is, “Faith
and Fatherland,” were called upon to assist in this great-
undertaking : and of their poverty they subscribed £200,000.
For seven centuries has the u Island of Saints and Doctors”
battled for the sacred rights of National Education: but
even at this hour, in the light of this 19th century, the
boasted land of freedom and fair-play turns a deaf ear to the
cry of right. Whilst Trinity has its ,£60,000 a year, and
the Queen’s colleges thirty thousand, with charters and
royal recognition ; that one seat of learning which represents
the Faith and Science of the vast proportion of the population
remains isolated and alone, without charter or endowment;
the only seat of learning which the Irish people really love,
depending, like some poor scholar, upon the charity and
generosity of the faithful for its support.
* Pastoral Letter of the Irish Hierarchy, Oct. 14, 1874.


The intense earnestness with which the Catholic leaders
of the Irish people strive to advance the interest of their
University, and the dogged resistance of the liberty-loving
people of the Sister Isle against claims which are only too clear
and urgent to be disputed, at least show this : the paramount
importance, in the eyes of the opposing parties, of Higher
Education. Let them but persevere, and the Irish will carry
their point: truth and justice may tarry, but they will not
tarry for ever: and the day will assuredly come when that
seat of learning, wdiich began with the blessing of Pius the
Hinth, will be invested with the privileges and prerogatives
which belong to it, and when that land, which has bled so
profusely and suffered so much, will be able to recal the
days of her prosperity, when she earned for herself the glor-
ious title of “ Island of Saints and Doctors.” “ When the
Catholics of Ireland,’’ exclaims F. Burke, u cease to believe
in God, then, and then only, will they abandon their deter-
mination to secure Catholic education for their children.”
And what Ireland is commencing in Dublin, that has
been going on, for some time past, at the grand Belgian
University of Louvain. It has not existed as yet half a
century; but in a short space it has fulfilled much time.
It has developed itself under the protection and fostering
care of the Holy Father; and, as of old, in the medieval
times, the seats of learning were safely guarded under the
shadow of S. Peter, so has it been here. Of the four great
Belgian Universities, Louvain is the one which takes the
lead, and even by the opponents of its principles it is
acknowledged to be the first seat of learning in the King-
dom. Five and thirty years ago it had about as many
students as it now has professors. In 1834 there were only
86 students; now they number 1,500, and the various
faculties are taught by about 70 professors, many of them
men of European reputation.
The result may be anticipated. The Catholic University
of Louvain has sent out thousands of youths filled with the
spirit of genuine Christianity. But let Mgr. Cartuivalis, its
Vice-Rector, speak. At the great Annual Meeting of last
year he exclaimed :


“ What she, the University, is most proud of, I make
bold to say —what seems to her above everything else,
worthy of the respect of Catholic Europe, is the fact of her
having formed a multitude of men such as yourselves ! It
is that of having prepared for such various careers so many
Christian generations proud of their faith, ready for any
advance, loyal to their duties, prepared with equal zeal to
attest their devotion to God and to their country.” Direct-
ing attention to the high office devolving upon the Catholic
Students of Louvain, the Vice-Rector exclaimed: “The
influence of your zeal radiates beyond our frontiers. In
beholding the effect you produce on modern society, in ap-
preciating the incalculable force with which you advance
what is good, and defend religious liberty—all of which is
the direct result of an education based on Christian prin-
ciples—other nations cast envious eyes at you, and would be
glad to emulate your deeds ! Our institution each year
dispatches to the scene of conflict a new contingent of
intellectual and courageous youth, whom scepticism has not
subdued, and evil passions have not conquered. Huch an
impetus has been giveD to learning, that the work of Catho-
lic Universities has become one of the great actual pre-
occupations of the Church, and of the people in Ireland, in
England, in France —in England, above all, where the vio-
lence of actual persecution does not in any way retard the
building up again of ruins shattered by long-past revolu-
tions. This very day—permit this detail —the venerable
chief of the family of Universities, renewing the traditions
of an antique fraternity, carries the authority of its word
and the light of its example and experience to the recon-
struction of one of those grand schools, the future University
of the North of France, participating in the resurrection of
an illustrious academy which owed its first establishment at
Douai to the zeal of a detached colony of the Alma Mater
of Louvain.”
I might dwell, at length, on the movement that has been
set on foot in France, Holland, Canada, and the United
States of America. I might direct your attention to the
übiquitous presence as it were, of Rome’s spirit ever there


where some work of enlightenment is to he set on foot;
and never absent when there was a question of building up
a centre of Catholic light. But space forbids me. However,
one country I must not omit on account of its intimate
connection with the Land of our adoption.
What, then, has been done in England ? She also is
taking part in the general movement. The Old Religion
has been steadily spreading herself abroad, and a pressing
want has for some time past been felt for some college
“in which those who are destined for public service at
home and abroad, for the army, for the duties of public
life which locally attach to the higher classes and for various
professions, may obtain, under the securities and guarantees
of Catholic Professors and Catholic guidances, a. more
advanced study of Modern Languages, Modern History,
Constitutional Law, Physical Science, in application to
certain professional employments, and, above all , a sound
course of Menial Science and of the Philosophy of Religion,
with a more complete and scientific treatment of Faith f *
It was debated, with great show of interest on both sides
some years ago, whether it would not be advisable to erect
a College at Oxford, rather than set about the difficult task
of establishing an independent seat of learning. The Holy
See, which sees beyond the reach of ordinary human eyes,
and which is enriched by the experience of ages, expressed
her wish that English Catholics should not be thrown. into
the great Protestant life that energised with intense activity
in the two greatest Universities of the nation. After a time,
the project of a College of Higher Studies was seriously
entertained. The Holy Father, by a special letter, written
by his own hand, imparted his Apostolic Blessing upon the
work, and upon those who should assist in carrying it into
effect. Then the Bishops issued a joint Pastoral,f in which
are expressed those same fundamental truths relating to
science and religion and their mutual relations, as the Great
Mother has ever taught her children from the first, from the
days of St. Peter, St. Mark, St. Clement, and St. Basil, to
* Synodical Letter of the English Bishops. t August 30th, 1874.


tho se of Theodore, Sextus, and Leo. She at all events knows
her own mind : and there is no difficulty to her children in
reading it. The consistency and solidity of her teaching
individuality other consciousness, are brought out in
these weighty words of the Pastoral, which are but a varia-
tion of the same eternal strain which has been given forth
from the first by the Voice of Truth. She is conscious of
the marks of her wounds and the place of the chains that
have dropped; still, again she is renewing her youth and
preparing herself as of old time, to hold out the torch of
truth for the illumination of her children. If Oxford has
discarded the Dominus Illuminatio Mea —she cannot* it is
wound up with the very fibres of her life. Therefore the
Bishops tell the world that: “ The Christian philosophy
wdiich made the ancient universities in vigour and solidity
what they. were has given place to a philosophy which
claims as its peifection that it begins by destroying all
belief. From this sceptical development of the national
intellect, penal laws, social exile, exclusion from the public
and national schools of learning, have saved us. We have
our inheritance by a lineal descent, inviolate in all its
principles, instinct, and spirit. What the Supreme Pontiff
laid down as the true basis of scientific education we still
possess as an heirloom from our forefathers. After declar-
ing that Catholics are able, by adhering to the principle of
the unity of all truth and the supremacy of Revelation, to
cultivate, to explain, and to render certain and useful* all
sciences, His Holiness adds, “ which cannot be attained if
the light of human reason, bounded as it is even in the
investigation of natural truths attainable by its own powers
and faculties, shall not venerate above all, as is due the
infallible _ and uncreated light of the Divine intelligence
which shines forth everywhere in a wonderful way in the
revelation of Christianity. For although the natural
sciences depend on their own first principles, which are
ascertained by reason. Catholic students ought to have
before their eyes Divine revelation as a guiding star to
warn them by its light of quicksands and errors, where* in
their studies and researches, they perceive that they may be


led, as is often the case, to publish matters more or less con-
trary to the infallible truth revealed by God.” (Apostolic
Letter of Pope Pius IX., Tuas libenter , Dec. 21, 1863.)
So far for the teachings of the Church in her first
beginnings, during the long course of her battling with the
wo'rld, down to the very days in which we live. I have
expended much time and space in dwelling upon this sub-
ject ; for it lies at the bottom of those grave questions of the
present day on which our future hangs.
We, my Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen, belong to the
Old Tradition, to the Church of St. Peter, St. Basil, and
St. Augustine, of Bede, and Alfred and St. Edmund.
we, who find our guidance, in a difficult day, in that
Apostolic See, which has done more for Universities than
all the Sovereigns of Europe taken together; we, who
make it our boast to combine intellectual Freedom with
Obedience to authority; we, I say, who form part and
parcel of the wide-spread Catholic Church, far from looking
on the principles which have been dwelt upon as relics of
a barbarous age, and the antiquated forms of a system
that has gone, hail them as the very instruments of our
advancement, and as the seeds or germs of true progress,
enlightenment, and freedom. Indeed, far from having
become effete, they are energising in full force amongst our
brethren in Europe and America, in England and in
Ireland; and we look upon the maxims of Pope Leo, and
those learned Pontiffs who preceded him, as the guiding
stars of a truly Christian Education.
What, then, precisely is our position with regard to such
maxims in the country of our adoption? What is the
relation of our higher Education to the teachings of Popes
and Councils?
To reply with sufficient fulness to this question, you
must allow me to clear the way by one or two remarks.
Before the rejection of the primacy and authority of the
Church in the sixteenth century, before men threw off, as
it is called by some, “ the yoke of Borne,’ 5 the Christianity
of the world was far simpler in its nature than it is at
present. Universities were not only Catholic, but more


than that, they were dependent on the authority and dis-
cipline of Borne. That is, whilst giving full scope to
the _ free play of every legitimate faculty, the Holy See
I gained just so much power over them, as to preserve in
vigorous action, those principles, without which Christian
education, is little better than a mockery. The break up
0 f the unity of Christendom brought in, as a necessary
result, independent societies or creeds, each of which
demanded for itself that freedom and independence which
it professed to accord to the other. This independence in re-
ligion, as an inevitable consequence, was carried to the
Schools. If each man was to have what religion he liked best
each man, too, must choose his own principles of education!
And as each man of each creed was as much a citizen as
his neighbour, and contributed equally to the public funds,
each man had an equal claim to his share in the general
benefits. Hence the tendency to disestablish churches;
hence the efforts, vain though they may be, to induce the world
to fall in love with national schools with a colourless reli-
gion; hence the struggle to gain some sort of unity at the
expense of Christianity, and to set on foot a kind of National
religion which does not exceed the bounds of police morality
and the law of Nature; hence the abortive attempt to melt
down Religion until it becomes undistinguishable from the
policy .of the State, and the expediency of diplomatists and
politicians. All these are essays to solve a difficulty,
one of the most trying and puzzling of the modern world.
As far as we who are Catholics are concerned, we know but
one solution, viz., for the world to trace up its mistake to
the root, to give up doctoring and patching, which will only
aggravate the evil, to reconstruct the unity of Christendom
on the Old Basis, and to listen once more to the accents of
b. deter. This is our view: but the world of fact is not
ruled by our theories, nor are evils remedied, nor is work
one, y those who waste their time in endeavouring; to
revive the past. Therefore, the real question at the present
moment is:. What are we to do under actual circumstances
m the age in which we live ? The past we cannot recal:
How are we to deal with the present ?


As regards higher education, on which I am now dwell-
ing exclusively, the answer has already been made for us.
A compromise, if possible, should be effected, yet without
ceding one iota of those principles which have ruled Catho-
lic teaching from the first. This compromise has already
been effected. Therefore, I have but to deal now with
accomplished facts.
Whilst your sons can receive the highest advantages of
a University course, they can also be imbued deeply with
the principles and teachings of the Church. Whilst they
are at liberty to take degrees and carry away the highest
honours, they may be said at the same time to live under
a roof which shelters the living presence of the Old Tradi-
tions, and gives the strongest guarantees of Catholic Faith.
To my mind the principle on which the University of
Sydney and its Affiliated Colleges are mutually regulated,
manifests a breadth and largeness of mind well fitted to grapple
with an almost overmastering difficulty. This, no doubt,
was owing, in great measure, to the training of those able
Statesmen, I believe nearly all members of our old Univer-
sities, who were called upon to deal, in the first instance,
with the question of higher education in New South Wales.
They hit upon as fair and equitable a compromise as could
have been expected. They would not hear of a godless
education, or of godless colleges: they were too deeply
imbued with genuine Christianity foi that. In their early
days, the traditions of the past hung to the walls of the old
Universities, and they still maintained the antiquated notion,
as some might call it at the present day, that man’s heart
wants softening, moulding, purifying; that he requires
an Object to love, as his eye yearns for the light; and that
unless the training of the rising men of the Colony be
deeply religious, there will not be much hope of laying
a broad and lasting basis of a future Empire. The whole
temper of their minds, in so far as I can read them, runs in
this direction; and wherever they may be, either dead or
alive, I raise my feeble voice to thank them, and to utter
my tribute of admiration for the statesmanlike and Christian
views which they have bequeathed to us; not views un-


r ealized, but existing and energising in our midst; and
represented by our Sydney University, which, from the
eminence on which it stands, seems, on the one hand, to be
patching the progress of its sons in the various careers for
which it had prepared them; and on the other, to be looking
over undulating meadows on those Stately Colleges, which
lend to it at the same time dignity and support. Great
must have been the energy, high the appreciation of
university training and academical life, of those who were
able to realise in fact, so splendid an ideal! It is for us
who are now reaping the harvest sown by them, to emulate
their vigour, to catch some portion of their better spirit,
to do all that in us lies to maintain the principles on
which they acted, and to advance the interests which were
to them so dear.
The formal opening of the University took place in 1852.
The Vice-Provost, Sir Charles Nicholson, delivered a
speech on the occasion which touches on the compromise to
which I have referred. He shows that, whilst in the
Colleges, in which the students mainly live, the principles of
religion are carefully taught, the University, without in-
fringing in any way on faith, conscientiously confines itself
to its own special branches of secular instruction. And, as
if perceiving that there was a system theoretically more
perfect than the present one, he puts forward the following
apology, well worthy of a thoughtful man :— u In thus
abstaining,” he says, “from blending secular and religious
teaching, neither the Legislature nor the present conductors
of the institution can permit it to be inferred that such a
separation is to be held as implying indifference on their part
to those higher objects of revealed truth, upon the due per-
ception and practical observance of which the happiness of
all, both here and hereafter, must depend. It is not because
we abstain from inculcating, that we ignore the existence
of Dogmatic truth. Rejoicing in the blessing of religious
freedom, and believing that religious convictions are the
most valuable of all possessions, we leave the guardianship
of them to parents and teachers, whose special function it
may be to assume and to exercise such a trust. Whilst the


University will not fail to in force, as far as her power
extends, a correct deportment amongst her alumni, parents
and guardians, or those affiliated institutions which we hope
to see spring up, and with whom the students may be
domiciled, will more effectually provide for their religious
training and general behaviour. The establishment of
suffragan colleges by some of the great leading denomina-
tions of Christians was an event contemplated by the
Legislature, and would, in its realization, supply all that
could be wished in rendering our Academic system complete.
In the event of such affiliated institutions being called into
existence, their action might be carried on simultaneously
and in perfect harmony with that of the University ; those
multifarious branches of secular instruction, which educated
men of whatever creed must know, being communicated by
the one institution, the religious training and moral super-
intendence of the student being entrusted to the other.
The elements of grammar, the principles of logic, the laws
of physics, of mathematical and chemical science, are universal
in their nature, and have no relation to those opinions
respecting revealed truth about which men so often differ/’
Thus, this eloquent speaker proclaims that “ religious
convictions are the most valuable of all possessions,” and
that the affiliated colleges were to be erected for the special
purpose of conducting the “ religious training ” and under-
taking the “moral superintendence” of the students. He
moreover held, with the Catholic teaching, that true science
can never come into conflict with religion, and appears
deeply impressed with the conviction that a profound
religious training, and a firm belief in dogma, are essential
to the well-being of man in this world and in the next.
The late lamented Dr. Woolley spoke in words that would
be even more intelligible in the mouth of an English ultra-
montane than in his own:—“I have invoked,” he said,
“ the spirit of Alfred; and I hope, without presumption or
exaggeration; it is in his spirit that the founders of tins
University seek to be partakers of his success—in the spirit?
first, I will boldly say, of his religion; for true religion and
sound learning cannot brook to dwell apart; the foundation


0 f the faith can never be finally impaired by knowledge;
the effect of science, if it be but deep, earnest, comprehen-
sive, and therefore humble, cannot but be to awaken the
consciousness of our spiritual nature, the desire to satisfy
our spiritual longings, and to enter into our spiritual rela-
tions. True, we may not in this place exercise the privilege
of manifesting towards sacred truth the open homage which
was permitted to Alfred. The passions, but still more the
misconceptions of men, have rent the bond of brotherhood
asunder.”
It is evident, that the spirit of the Legislature, and of
those principally concerned in founding the University,
was that of making the best of an inevitable necessity. If
dogma and morality were not taught at the University,
they were to be cared for in colleges, specially built for the
purpose of giving religious training and education to the
students. Whilst at S. Paul’s the full principles of the
Protestant creed were to be inculcated; whilst S. Andrew’s
was to teach its own religious dogmas; S. John’s also, was
to be free to instil into the minds of the rising generation
the principles of Catholic Faith and Morals. Indeed, more
than this, the one main end and object of the incorporation
of the Catholic College of St. John’s within the University
of Sydney, was to carry out this very purpose; it is the one
duty singled out as obligatory on its directors, being espe-
cially provided for in the following words of the “ Act of
Incorporation : ” —“Whereas considerable funds have been
subscribed for the Institution and Endowment in the Arch-
diocese of Sydney of a Eoman Catholic College within the
University of Sydney, to be called ‘ The College of St.
John the Evangelist,’ wherein the students shall receive
systematic religious instruction, and be brought up in the
doctrines and discipline of the Eoman Catholic Church
Be it therefore enacted &c.’ ’ Then, of the eighteen Fellows,
six must always be duly approved priests. The Hector
must also be a priest duly approved; and the Eoman
Catholic Archbishop of Sydney is ex officio the Visitor of
the College. All this has been enacted by Her Most
Excellent Majesty the Queen by and with the assent of


the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Hew
South Wales in Parliament assembled.
Thus we have the highest civil authorities not merely
silently permitting, but absolutely obliging us to imbue
systematically the students of our College with the Spirit
of the Catholic Church, and to fix her Doctrines in their
minds, and fill their hearts with the spirit of her Morality;
in one word, strange though it may seem, an obligation
is laid upon us, not simply by the Pope, but by the Civil
Power to carry into effect those very principles which were
taught by blessed Peter, which flourished in the school of
S. Mark, and which the Holy See has so unbendingly
maintained up to this very hour in which we live. We
are obliged, by an Act of Parliament, which has received
the Poyal approbation, to inculcate systematically that very
Body of Truth and no other, which we are bound to believe
through the infallible teaching of the Church. So at S. John’s
we possess a double guarantee of orthodoxy j our obedience
to Caesar harmonizing with our obedience to Cod, Church
and State putting us under the self-same obligation. Here,
our religion, thank God, has not to be taught by stealth
or by permission, or by favour, but as a solemn duty,
which we owe to our position before the world, and as the
condition on which this College was incorporated by the
Queen. Hence my readiness in speech to-day, and my
openness in laying down, in such an assembly as I see
before me, the teachings of our Eeligion on cardinal
principles of higher education.
And whilst the main duty of the affiliated College of St.
John’s is to turn its young men out thorough Catholics, the
University itself, acknowledging this duty, acts in perfect
harmony with our fundamental obligation. Whilst it
carries out its functions regarding secular knowledge and
the teaching of the sciences, it is bound both by Law and
Honour to respect, or, at least, to leave alone, the religious
convictions of the students who frequent it; and whilst
giving full unimpeded play to the development of secular
instruction, it religiously leaves to colleges and guardians
the duty of inculcating Eeligious Truth. Or, to use more


weighty words than my own hearing on this principle :
“ Ample assistance is offered towards their [the Colleges’]
endowment; and the maintenance of the fundamental
principle of the University—the association of
without respect of religious creeds, in the cultivation ot
secular knowledge—is secured consistently with the most
perfect independence of the Colleges authorities within
their own walls.” *
And to show all the more unmistakably how anxious the
University is to respect the religious convictions of parents,
guardians, and students, it confines itself strictly to those
branches of secular knowledge, which, if taught scienti-
fically, and within their own environment, cannot by any
possibility come in contact, at all events with the teachings
of the Catholic Church. Hence, the University does not
claim the right to teach the students Ethics, Metaphysics,
or Modern "History. These branches may be taught, if
superiors think fit, in the Colleges j and thus, with a
scrupulous desire to avoid touching, in any way, on the
religious traditions of the Colleges, the University confines
its efforts strictly to matters upon which sensible and
scientific men can have no dispute.
Whilst thus all contentious matter is eliminated from the
University Lectures, whilst our men are there occupied
with the dry light of science; at the College, on the other
hand, those principles of Eeligion which we deem funda-
mental are inculcated, and the Students are grounded in
the whole method and system ot the Catholic Faith. They
are bound by the “By Laws ” to attend morning and
evening Prayers, Mass, and all public services in the College
chapel; to approach the Sacraments at least once each Term;
and whether resident or not, all receive gratuitous and
systematic instruction in the Doctrines and Practice of the
Catholic Church. Then, with regard to those branches of
knowledge which necessarily have a bearing on Eeligion, it
is moreover enacted, that the course of Philosophy commonly
distributed into Logic, Metaphysics, and Ethics, as well
* See “ University Calendar ” for 1874-5, Preface, p. 15.


as Modern History, shall be taught in the College, and that
attendance at these Lectures is obligatory on all the
Students.
Thus, in reality, the College possesses full mastery over
the religious training and instruction of its youth, and has
every necessary instrument in its hands for moulding the
minds and hearts of its alumni according to the highest
Catholic and Christian examples.
In a word, St. John’s may be looked upon as a Catholic
Home, in which the parents retain in their own hands the
education of their children’s hearts, and their instruction,
not merely in religious matters alone, but in those sciences
which inevitably bear upon religion,' whilst the University
may be regarded as a Learned Centre, in which these
children spend some hours of the'day, imbibing from the
scientific teaching of the most able professors, the secrets
of that portion of secular knowledge which cannot if,
fairly treated, infringe upon religion.
This, as I have said, is about as fair a compromise as
could have been expected. Nor do I believe that Catholic
parents, or Catholic Authorities would have been contented
with anything less. Nor would Pius IX. have written to
express his satisfaction that, to use his own w r ords, u a
college of St. John the Evangelist had been established by
the faithful of the Diocese of Sydney in order that their
youth might be diligently and accurately imbued with
religion, piety, literature and sound discipline,”* had he not
been satisfied that their religion would not be tampered
with at the University.
Indeed, Catholics now feel that efforts have honestly
been made to protect the Religion of their children. They
feel assured now that that protection to faith, which guardians
and parents cannot give at home, will be given at this
college. There the faith is fostered and developed; and a
* Ex iisdem enim non mediocri jucunditate novimus, ab istis Sydneiensis Dice-
cesis fidelibus Collegium St. Joanne Evangelista appellatum fuisse excitatum, ut
adolescentes religione, pietate, litteris, ac disciplinis sedulo accurateque imbuan
tur. Datum Komse apud sanctum Petrum die 25 Aprilis, Anno 1859, Poutificatu-
nostri anno Decimo tertio. Pius P.P, IX.


systematic moral and intellectual training in the Catholic-
Creed and discipline advances pari passu with the University
curriculum.
Had this not been guaranteed, the idea of founding a
Catholic College in connection with the University would
have died away in the utterance of it. But the very reverse
took place. Unparalleled was the enthusiasm which enflamed
the Catholic body, when they first began to realise the
advantages which were held out to them. Enthusiastic
meetings were held, and thousands of pounds were collected,
and thousands were promised, by those who were bent upon
their children being put in a position to receive a Liberal
Education, and to take the place due to their position in the
battle of life. They all felt that, now, at last, was open to
them an opportunity of combining the cultures of Greece,
Alexandria, and Home with that formation of the Heart, which
Christianity alone can give \ that the whole man now could
be educated and trained in intellect, will, and the feel*
ings ; and that whilst attaining the position which culture-
alone can give, their children would be deeply grounded in
that Faith, which, to them, was more dear, as it was to
those who went before them, than all the world besides.
Conclusion.
I hope that, during the course of these remarks, I have
clearly replied to the question with which we started. It
has been shown that, in this country of your adoption, the
Catholic mind can, without let or hindrance, he thoroughly
imbued with maxims of Christian education as expressed
by Sextus V., and Leo XII. ] and that the relation of oui
higher Education to the teachings of Popes and Councils is
by no means affected in its harmony, by the acceptance of
a compromise which places upon us the responsibilities of
the Faith, Morality, and Discipline of our rising genera-
tion, and the formation of their minds in Philosophy and
History.
Moreover, I trust, also, that I have clearly brought out
and explained those principles which may be considered as


the main spring of all our duties in reference to this College.
To lay before you, with all explicitness, the nature of those
principles should be, as X said at the outstart, the object and
«nd of an Inaugural Address. With these guiding lights
we commence our work, by their steady flame we shall
continue it. I cannot, indeed, boast novelty in their
favour : truly, they are very old indeed ; they are as old as
that Truth with which they are identified; they are as Good
as that same truth, for they are one of its manifestations; and
they are as Beautiful, for they are but the expression of
its effulgence.
As to the result of our labours, if we act upon our prin-
ciples, I have no misgivings. They will, and must issue,
if with the blessing of God we are true to our sacred calling,
in turning out men animated with those high and noble
qualities which Christ alone has exhibited in their fulness,
and which are the seeds of all true greatness and nobility
of character. The Christian and the Gentleman will be the
fruit of the maxims which it will be our privilege to incul-
cate. hTot only genuine Catholics, but good Citizens, we
shall aim at giving to the world; men loyal, patriotic, and
lovers of public order; men honest as the day, pure as the
light, whose very bearing and demeanour will inspire con-
fidence and respect. Thus, Catholics will take their place
amongst their fellow-citizens, and do their share towards
advancing the interests and prosperity of this new and
growing country in which their lot is cast. The very
Philosophy which they are taught will tend to enlarge
their minds, and to teach them how to deal with the con-
crete world into which they have been born; will tend to
soften those asperities, and smooth down those angles,
which impede the free movement of social intercourse;
and will open out to them the advantages of that forbearance
and that charity, which are essentially connected with
genuine Christianity. They will learn, in one word, how
to live and let live; and how it is quite within the range of
possibilities to be staunch, courageous, and upright
Catholics, without on that account giving umbrage or
offence to those who are of a different religion from them-


selves. Theological hatreds and religious bitterness are
plants which grow on sour and uncultivated ground. A
large embracing charity, and a generous view of the actions
0 f those who differ from us—giving others credit for that
aianliness and honesty which we claim for ourselves—are
the results of Catholic principles joined to Catholic training,
and will be one of the especial characteristics, I am deeply
persuaded, of the students of St. John’s. Such a temper
as this, let me remark, does not come down straight from
heaven, does not grow up spontaneously in the soul: to
expect this, would be as unreasonable as to be affronted
because habits of business, and practical judgment, and
cultivated taste, and elegant accomplishments, cannot be
made to order, but require a long and wearisome appren-
ticeship for their attainment. All these things are the
results, not of chance, but of steady conscientious training
and self-control, joined to that enlargement of the Intellect
and Heart, which can alone be produced by the combined
influences of Science and Religion.
* Such men as are thus deeply possessed of the religious
principle, and are imbued with the higher culture, who
know, at sight as it were, the true standard of human
actions, the root of them, and the influence they should
exert upon the world ; such men, grounded thus in the real
strength of Christianity and culture, through the very
force and beauty of their moral character, will enter into
the activities of worldly life as living Christian energies or
arguments; doing, perhaps, more by the example of their
lives to prove the Divinity of their Religion, than the most
subtle reasonings of Theologians or of Schools.
This is what I mean by calling St. John’s a citadel of
Catholic Christianity,—sending forth the fruits of the
Christian tree, that men may thus judge of the tree itself.
Sharp controversies and theological disputations may,
possibly, clear away difficulties, and explain objections, but
they very seldom produce that effect upon the soul which
results from witnessing the lives and conduct of men who
have been trained in the Christian School, and who are as
far above the infidel in thought and feeling, in the ambi-


tions of their lives, as heaven is above the earth. Things
go for what they are worth in this world; and the best
way to show the worth of Christianity is to live lives in
keeping with the maxims of Charity, Purity, and Truth,
which it inculcates; and to hold up in this practical
intelligible way the out-come of our teachings. There is
little doubt that an argument such as this is almost the
only really effective one, considering the temper of the
present age. And it is for us to do our part to make it as
telling as is possible.
Anyhow, we, in these days, whether we will it or no, are
forming the future of the world in which we live; and we
are responsible for that future, perhaps, even more than
those who, when we are gone, will be acting their parts in it.
If the world is to remain Christian, it will only be
through Christian Education. If this sunny land, blessed by
Providence in so many ways, is to follow the Leadership
of Christ, it will only be by fixing our eyes upon liis
Cross, and following the standard of His Life.
We, with God’s blessing, mean to do our part; the
future is in His hands —the present He has placed in ours.
Knowing that we have a u good Master,” we are contented
to concentrate our energies on the work He has graciously
entrusted to our care, and leave the issues to Himself. It
is privilege enough for us to labour for Him, without
anxiety as to failure or success. Day by day to do our
work, and do it earnestly, and to live under His Eye, and
to find our stay in the thought of how merciful He is, is
enough for us. He has never let His Church fail yet, nor
been wanting to those who have wished to serve Him. And
in one way or another, often in unexpected ways, He has
brought out great things from poor beginnings, and has
manifested His glory in the most abject of His creatures.
I say, then, to myself, and to all those who have thrown
their lot with me in this great undertaking: Let us be
humble, and pray much, and work hard, economising our
strength, that we may spend it all on God, never giving
way, or slackening in our efforts; remembering that we
work not for ourselves, or for man, or for name or fame,


or success, but simply out of Love of Christ, the very
idea of whom should bum out of us every hope or
thought which is not in keeping with the Presence of such
a Master.
These words, with which I end, written and acted on in
a Celtic Monastery twelve hundred years ago, have lost
none of their freshness through their antiquity: u No man
can be the child of Science who does not love Truth and
Justice; and there is no Truth and Justice without the
Knowledge of God.”




APPENDIX.
'Extract Jrom the “Minutes ”of the Council Book of St.
John s College, within the University of Sydney.
VISIT OF HIS GRACE THE COADJUTOR-ARCHBISHOP TO
ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE.
His Grace the Coadjutor-Archbishop paid his first official visit to the
Rector and Fellows of St. John’s College, within the University of
Sydney, on last Tuesday (May sth, 1874). His Grace was accom-
panied by hxs Secretary, the Very Rev. Father Gillett, and was received
by the Very Rev. Dr. Forrest and the Fellows, in University uniform
in the aula maxima of the institution. Immediately after His Grace
had taken the seat prepared for him, the Rector read the following
address:— °
*' To Hls Grace the Most Reverend Roger Bede Vaughan Arch-
bishop oe Nazianzus and Coadjutor to His Grace the Arch-
bishop or Sydney.
“ May it please your Grace :
“We, the Rector and Fellows of St. John’s College, within the
University of Sydney, take advantage of this, your Grace’s first official
visit to this institution, to tender you our most cordial welcome.
e College of St. John the Evangelist, was instituted and incorpo-
latec m older that Catholics attending the University might receive
systematic religious instruction, and be brought up in the doctrines and
discipline of the Roman Catholic Church, and might be prepared for the
L niversity lectures and examinations under collegiate control, aiid receive
instructions m ethics, metaphysics, and modern history.
“We believe that few are better able than your Grace to appreciate
the advantages of such an Institution. The greater part of your life has
been spent either as a student or as a director of studies • and that these
exercises have not been fruitless is demonstrated by the learned works
which have proceeded from your Grace’s pen, evincing, as they do, a deep
-tensive acquaintance with ancient, medieval, and modern literature.
We deeply regret that, owing to causes which it would be out of
place here to discuss, this College has not hitherto realized the aspirations
ot its founders. r


“We trust, however, that your Grace’s arrival will be a new era in
its history, and that the Fellows of St. Johns and other liberal contri-
butors to its erection may live to enjoy the full reward of their laboius
and munificence in seeing it filled with studious Catholic youth.
John Forrest, D.D., Rector.
W. A. Duncan.
Edward Butler, Q.C.
George F. Dillon (Rev.)
D. J. D’Arcy (Rev.)
John Donovan, LL.D.
J. P. Healy, M.A.
John Rigney (Archdeacon)
John Dillon, B.A.
Eyre Goulburn Ellis
Calaghan M’Carthy (Rev.)
James Charles Gilhooly, M.D.
R. O’Connor, M.A.
Patrick J. Jennings
Michael M‘Alroy, DD., Y.G.
John F. Sheridan, 0.5.8.
His Grace Archbishop Vaughan replied: —
I am deeply sensible of the honour which you, the Rector and Fel-
lows of this College, are conferring upon me, in thus formally, and as
a corporate body, bidding me welcome to St. John’s. The words in
which that welcome is expressed are few and simple; but, like a text or
a motto, they are pregnant with significance, and suggest to the reflect-
ing mind a whole world of serious and not unpleasing thought. To me
collegiate and academical pursuits have ever been very sweet indeed.
The simplicity, frugality, and purity of the Catholic scholars private
life—a life which aims, to use a poet’s words, at “ plain living and high
thinking ” —naturally offers many attractions to one who has been called
to consecrate his energies to the service of the altar, and to guard the
sanctuary of religious truth. To have room to breathe, and time to
think, to pray and to resolve, in the midst of the whirl and fever of the
nineteenth century, are great privileges —privileges, I can assure you,
gentlemen, which are valued by none more highly than myself. But
my interest in this institution springs from a deeper source, and takes a
wider range, than could possibly be the case with regard to any merely
personal preference of my own. From the peace and security of his
study-room, the student—who is not a simple dreamer—looks out with
lively interest, and at times with keen anxiety, on the battle which is
ever raging in one quarter or another on the vast field of human energiss.
Over against those divers religious forces which base their existence on
Christian revelation, I have perceived an ever-growing body of men, massing
themselves together from almost every walk of life, and falling into some
kind of shape or consistency through their common attitude of menace to


Christianity in all its creeds. Its attractive power springs from the way
it wields, what I may call the awful logic of denial. All forms of
Christianity, however fragmentary, seem to possess a kind of animal
instinct, which urges them to repel the assaults of such a foe as this.
Each and all, in one way or the other, naturally aim at the preservation
of their own peculiar form of life. But, from what I have been able
to observe, the Catholic Church alone is showing herself robust enough
to offer any semblance of successful opposition to the common enemy.
And this is not at all unnatural. For, taking merely a human view of
her, her great historic name, her wide-spread influence, her strong
organization, and the heroism of so many of her children, point her out
as the natural opponent —the only system with weight and stamina
enough to resist the pressure of a sustained and vigorous attack. The
wave of infidelity which is upheaving, confusing, and, I may say,
sickening the mind of Europe, will, doubtless, in due course, break
upon these shores : or, to change the figure, the battle which is being-
waged in the old world will have to be fought out in the new. Now,
I believe it is the case that before a strategist takes up his position in
the field, he carefully reconnoitres the ground, and endeavours to dis-
cover the key to his position. And is it at all singular, Gentlemen, that
I, with such thoughts as these occupying my mind, on coming a stranger
to this colony, should have cast about me to find the coign of vantage,
the stronghold of the Catholic position 1 I can assure you, Gentlemen, I
was not long discovering where it lay ; for, no sooner did my eyes fall
upon this noble pile of buildings, than, with the quickness and vivid-
ness of light, I recognised it as being pre-eminently fitted to become the
main fortress amongst us of Catholic Christianity. All praise to those
generous men and women, who, as I know, many of them, at great
personal sacrifice, raised a princely sum to build this college with ! all
praise to that enlightened Government which, with a statesmanship not
likely to be forgotten, doubled the sum which had been collected, and
made it £40,000 ! I, for one, recognise, with admiration, in this great
work, a spirit of true progress and beneficence in the people of this
colony; and, as far as in me lie s, and in so far as I may be permitted to
do so, I shall use my best energies and such poor means as I may possess
to assist in bringing about such results in times to come as may be in
keeping with these glorious beginnings—such results as may in some
measure repay, and, if so be, reward those noble friends of liberal and
enlightened education who have set me such a glorious example. And
when I turn from this material building to the principles animating
those who compose the fibre of its strength, I must confess that I feel
myself cheered by a large and sanguine hope. Eor the very same
principles which are laid down by the civil power as the raison d'etre
of this institution—the very object or end for which this college
was instituted and incorporated, is absolutely identical with
that which has rendered the Church and those learned bodies sub-
ject to her control, so formidable against infidelity and irreligion, when-
ever it has been their duty to grapple with those poisonous enemies.
"Wherever men have been carefully “ brought up in the doctrines


and discipline of the Roman Catholic Church,” and have received
“ systematic religious instruction” in the Catholic Faith, there athletes
have been so exercised and so equipped as to be able not only to confront
but also to confound the modern manoeuvres of an adversary as old as
he is implacable. Here, the civil power and the Catholic Church find
themselves in perfect harmony. Here, the more successful the training
of youth in Catholic doctrines and discipline, the more intensely they
are imbued with the theology of the Catholic Church, so much
the more perfectly will this institution be carrying out the object
for which it was incorporated, and so much the more completely
will it be fulfilling the Church’s highest aspirations in its regard.
The vital spark, gentlemen, of your academic life, is as old as
the lungs of Christianity itself: it was incarnate in the great Irish
school of St. Finian, and its traditions, and the odour of its sweetness,
like that which is said sometimes to hover about the bodies of departed
saints, still lurk among the beautiful hall and colleges, the chapels and
the cloisters of Oxford and of Cambridge. Yes : the same vital principle
which is the life of your body corporate now, once animated those fore-
most Universities which in days gone by were justly called the lights
and the eyes of England. They were Catholic in faith and science, in
philosophy and literature, in discipline and morals. The modern world
may look back upon those select specimens of past Catholic greatness,
and see what fair and fragrant trees of knowledge, beauteous in blossom
and rich in fruits, gradually, and in a course of years, arose to their full
stature, from a corn or seed identical in specific character with that
which is the living germ of the body corporate which I see before me.
Thus the example of the past serves as a presage of the future. You
have been asked, gentlemen, to try no hazardous experiment: you have
simply to aim at doing what your forefathers have done before you:
you have to sow the seed of that imperishable tree, which, when “ planted
by the stream of the running waters,” has never failed to “ bring forth
its fruit in due season.” For a time it is buried out of sight, dead, as
some may think, and without a resurrection ; but its roots are even now
silently striking into the ground, and the day will surely dawn when the
earth will bud forth that which will mightily subserve the moral and
intellectual salvation of our people ! But do not imagine, gentlemen,
from what I have been saying, that I am confusing the education
which fits a man for the world with the training of Catholic
missionaries and religious controversialists. The duties of clergymen
and laymen in regard to Christianity, are as distinct as their vocations.
Still, both classes of men, if they are Christians worthy of the name,
must of necessity be witnesses to the truth which is within them, and
influence mankind by the impress of their lives. For example, the main
object of the profession of arms is to defend one’s country; that of the
judicial Bench, I believe, to give decisions according to law; still, the
soldier is looked upon as the embodiment of honour, while the judge is
the type of strict impartiality. So with the really Christian gentleman,
whilst he is educated so as to acquit himself with honour in the battle of
life, he, at the same time, becomes a pattern of what is morally and


intellectually beautiful in the teachings of the Gospel—he is a breathing
manifestation of Christian truth. What the clergyman or controversialist
does consciously in the pulpit, he does unconsciously by the whole
character of his life. Men are not asked so much to believe what he says,
as to look at what he does; or rather, they are not asked to do anything
at all • for, whether they will or no, the very demeanour of such a man
as this inflicts itself upon them as an exposition of Christianity, and the
world becomes impressed by the force of a living fact which is energising
‘before its eyes. I believe that in these days, especially, the logic of
realities carries more weight than the logic of syllogisms, that example
is stronger than precept, and that a good life is more conclusive than a
bi'illiant argument. St. Athanasius, St. Augustine, and St. Gregory,
were mighty teachers and controversialists; but I firmly hold that the
examples of their lives—that the purity and splendour of their intellects
and hearts, have done more towards maintaining the pre-eminence of
Catholicity, than all their writings put together. It is an old saying,
that the tree is known by its fruits. We, Gentlemen, are animated with
a conviction as deep rooted as our faith itself, that Catholicity is the
tree of life, whose very leaves are for the healing of the nations.
Majestic as the cedar, fruitful as the palm, fragrant as the balsam, if it
be but cultivated and cherished carefully and tenderly, men will soon
declare it to be fair to behold and sweet to eat of, whilst they will reject
and fling from them with horror, the scorpions and stones which infidelity
offers them in the place of bread.
Thus, the Christian gentleman, if he has been stamped with the royal
image and inscription in his youth, will bear the evidence of his
Christianity about with him. The better Christian he is, so much the
better man of the world will he become, elevating, refining, and
ennobling his special pursuits in life with the loveliness and graces of a
Christlike character. Gentlemen, I thank you once again for your kind
and sympathising words, and hope that we may work together in this
college during many years to come, in advancing the interests of the
purest and noblest cause which could be intrusted by God into the hands
of man.




