

THE
HIGH SCHOOL
HO BAHT TOWN.
1861.
■




Ax the Annual General Meeting of the Shareholders and
Subscribers, held on Saturday, the 15th March, 1851,
Thomas Daniel Chapman, Esq., in the Chair.
The Report of the Council having been read,
It was resolved , —“ That the same he adopted and printed
for circulation.”
It was resolved , —“ That Thomas John Knight, Barrister-
at-Law, he elected a Member of the Council, vice Mr.
Henry Dickenson, absent from the Colony.”
It ivas resolved , —“ That the Rev. Dr. Lillie, Mr. Chapman,
and Mr. Nutt, who retire from the Council in accordance
with the provision of the Deed of Association, be re-
elected.”
The Treasurer’s account having been placed on the table, duly audited.
It was resolved, —“ That the thanks of the Meeting be
offered to the Treasurer and Auditors for their services
during the past year; and that Messrs. Dixon, Rout, and
Sprent be re-elected Auditors for the ensuing twelve
months.”
It was resolved, —“ That the thanks of the Meeting be given
to the Rev. Dr. Lillie for his discharge of the duties of
Rector during the past year.”
th w
It was resolved, —“ That the thanks of the Meeting are due
to Messrs. M‘Lachlan and Jackson for their valuable
services in the selection and appointment of Masters.”
An additional share-list having been opened, and several names subscribed,
It was resolved , —“That Messrs. M'Naughtan, Chapman,
and Officer form a Sub-Committee for obtaining further
subscriptions, and for the adoption of measures calculated
to relieve the Institution of debt.”
It was resolved, —“ That a vote of thanks be given to Mr.
Chapman for his conduct in the Chair, and for the interest
displayed by him during the past year on behalf of the
Institution.”
nr? JsS*s'//«
fi ~ ‘7p




REPORT,
Hobart Town, March, 1851.
The Council of the High School have to
congratulate the Shareholders and Subscribers upon
the marked success which has attended the progress
of the Institution during the past year.
At the period of the last annual meeting, the
Council were anxiously engaged in making the
arrangements necessary for carrying on the business
of the School until the appointment of a successor
to Mr. Eccleston, whose sudden death had recently
taken place.
The Council have now the gratification of
announcing to the proprietary that the acceptance
of the office of Rector by the Rev. Dr, Lillie, and
the strenuous exertions of Mr. Dobson, aided by
the temporary appointment of Mr. J. D. Morris as
Classical Master, have preserved the efficiency of the
Institution unimpaired during the past year. This
fact is demonstrated by an increase in the number of
pupils from fifty-six to eighty-one, a number which


would doubtless be considerably increased if accom-
modation for resident boarders were afforded at the
Institution.
The conduct and progress of the pupils during
the year have been of the most satisfactory character,
particularly in those branches of study which have
been superintended by Mr. Dobson; and the result
of the annual examination was such as to justify a
public distribution of prizes, which took place in
December last. Mr. Dobson having very kindly
proposed to superintend an evening Mathematical
Class, and to deliver a Course of Lectures on Natural
Philosophy, open to the pupils of the Institution, the
Council readily availed themselves of his offer. The
class and course of lectures have been each well
attended ; and the admission fees have been set apart
by Mr. Dobson for the purchase of mathematical and
philosophical instruments for the use of the Institution.
The practical and successful test thus applied to
the principles upon which the Institution was
established, and by which it has been governed,
furnishes of itself the most complete refutation of
the statements affecting the Institution contained in
a pamphlet recently published by Mr. Cell, the late
Warden of Christ’s College. This pamphlet was
subscribed by Mr. Cell, in the character of Chaplain
to the Bishop of Tasmania; and, therefore, the
Council conceived it to be their duty to expose its
untruthful character by means of a reply generally


circulated in the Colony, and which will be published
under their sanction in London.
The Council have to announce to the Proprietors
that, by the assistance of Messrs. M‘Lachlan and
Jackson, Mr. George Brien, M.A., of Trinity College,
Cambridge, has been appointed Head Classical
Master of the Institution, at a salary of £4OO per
annum. The experience acquired by Mr. Brien as
one of the Masters of the School of the London
University College, and the high character of the
testimonials in his favour, afford a complete guarantee
of his fitness for the office.
The Council have prevailed upon Dr. Lillie to
retain the honorary office of Hector during the
present year. This arrangement has been made by
the Council for the purpose of preventing either the
Classical or Mathematical branch of Education beiim-
o
rendered subordinate to the other. Mr. Dobson and
Mr. Brien both concur in it, and they will receive the
advice and assistance of the Rector in all matters
affecting the interests of the Institution.
This arrangement has rendered it necessary to
equalize the salaries of Mr. Brien and Mr. Dobson,
by raising that of the latter to £4OO.
In consequence of the absence of Mr. Henry
Dickenson from the Colony, a vacancy in the Council
has taken place, which should be supplied by the
Shareholders and Subscribers at the present meeting.
The. Chairman of the Council, the Rev. Dr. Lillie,


A/ AfU and Mr. Nutt also retire from office, according to
'/ the provisions of the Deed of Association; blit are
eligible for re-election.
The very heavy expenses attendant upon the
opening and establishment of an Institution of this
magnitude, in addition to those occasioned by the
change of Masters, consequent upon the decease of
Mr. Eccleston, have increased the liabilities of the
Institution to the sum of £lOOO. The Council
rely on the exertions of the Proprietors to relieve
them from this debt, either by the purchase of
additional shares or by further subscriptions ; and
the attention of the Shareholders is especially called
to the fact that each new Subscriber of £lOO is
allowed, during life, the privilege of educating one
boy at the school free from the annual tuition fee
of £l2.
The Proprietors having far more than performed
the conditions upon which assistance was promised
to the Institution by the Local and Imperial Govern-
ments, the Council intend to apply to the first
Representative Assembly for that assistance to which
the Institution is so justly entitled ; but they are most
anxious that such aid may be applied in extension of
the scope and objects of the Institution, and more
particularly to the erection of a building for the
reception of resident students; and they therefore
confidently rely on the exertions of the Proprietors
to discharge the existing claims upon them.
