

HIGH SCHOOLS
VERSUS
SCHOLARSHIPS:
ENQUIRY INTO THE MERITS OF THE
TWO SYSTEMS.
BY
EDWIN BEAN, B.A.,
Late Scholar of Trinity College, Oxford.
IEAD MASTER OF ALL SAINTS’ COLLEGE, BATHURST,
AND
J. D. SLY, LL.D.,
HEAD MASTER OF HURSTVILLE COLLEGE, GOULBURN.
BATHURST:
YNDWR WHALAN. PRINTER, SCHOOL OF ARTS BUILDINGS.
HOWIC STREET.
1886.


High Schools V. Scholarships:
WHICH SYSTEM IS FAIRER, CHEAPER, AND
MORE EFFECTIVE ?
diminishes crime, and fits men for the duties of
citizenship. Propositions of this kind have been freely
uttered and indiscriminately received in Parliament, on the
hustings, and at the mass meeting. People do not stop to enquire
what sort of education, whether of the heart or the head. A little
reflection would show that the character and the intellect not being
the same, a training which may be excellent for the one may not
affect the other at all. Says the London Journal of Education for
last month, “ Much that now-a-days passes under the name of edu-
“ cation is merely the acquisition of a knack or dexterity, which has
“ no more to do with moral training than skittle-playing or turning
“ catherine-wheels in the street.” It is the formation of habits
rather than of ideas which it concerns the State to promote.
“ Manners makyth man ” is the motto of the oldest, and one of
the noblest, of English Pub ic Schools ; and while much outcry has
been raised against the intellectual defects of the education in these
establishments, it has generally been allowed that they have been
distinguished for the production of a robust and manly character.
The sons of the wealthy are, as a rule, sent, not to day schools, but
to boarding schools, in order that they may form habits of self-
reliance in the little world of school life. In “ Tom Brown’s School
Days,” the squire echoes the opinion of many an English gentleman
when he says that he does not send his son to Eugby to become a
brilliant scholar, but to grow into a manly and honest gentleman.
What are the advantages of boarding schools over day schools as
training places for character ? First, there is more complete con-
trol by the educator—and few would underestimate the importance
of that. Secondly, the more varied experiences and closer relations
of pupil to pupil, and of both to the teacher, admit constant modifi-
cation of character. Thirdly, the social life of a large school may
be so organised as to initiate youths into habits of self-government
and corporate action. Fourthly, esprit de corps and a preference for
the public before the individual welfare may in these be most effec-
tively produced. Lastly, the close communion of life with life in
these schools produces a most powerful public opinion. If this


public opinion is of a high tone the power for good of the teacher is
beyond comparison greater than that of a day-school master, and
having regard to the parental position of the former, it becomes
almost a matter of necessity that, to be effective, boarding schools
profess some form of religion. What would the Rugby of Arnold have
been without its chapel ? Or what would half the great schools of
England be at this day without the religious training that moulds
their character ? And under this Australian system of compromise
of sects where will be found an Australian Arnold, or Yaughan, or
Percival ? What could the best of them do in a day school, where
they are forbidden to teach religion ?
It has been endeavoured thus far to show that (1) the State should
place at least as much value upon the training of character as upon
the acquirement of learning ; (2) that such training is sought for 1 ,
by those who can afford it, rather in boarding schools than in day
schools.
Had there been no State interference with secondary education,
this colony would, in the natural course of supply and demand, have
gradually been studded with schools belonging to various denomi-
nations. These schools would have been partly boarding and partly
day schools—in other words, the best schools for the requirements
of the State. Why then should not the State avail itself of such
schools as already exist by establishing a system of scholarships
throughout the length and breadth of the colony, and permitting
the winners to attend any secondary school they choose, provided
only that they present themselves in due course for examination by
a recognised authority ?
Instead of this, the authorities, jealous of the mere name of
denomination, must needs set up secular day High Schools to com-
pete with, undersell, and try altogether to undermine the very
schools which are proved to be doing the State’s work in the most
effective way.
It was in the year 1878, upon the motion of Mr. (now Judge)
Windeyer, that a resolution passed both Houses of the Legislature of
this colony, and was communicated to the Governor, recommending
the establishment of Grammar Schools in three principal country
centres, Goulburn, Bathurst, Maitland. Queensland already bad a
system of very successful grammar schools, founded by subscription
in various towns, and aided by a Government grant; the manage-
ment being committed to trustees in these towns, while a widespread
system of exhibitions from the State schools, permitting the winner
of any such prize to attend any of their secondary schools, afforded
a nucleus of talented pupils, and the brilliant success of these, espe-
cially the Brisbane Grammar School, where not less than 70 exhibi-
tioners from all parts of Queensland are gathered, doubtless excited
the emulation of the promoters of education in New South Wales.
It might have been well if the lines of Queensland policy had been


followed here. In that case the Sydney Grammar School would
have been available for the teaching a largo number of exhibitioners;
its annual subsidy of £ISOO (since raised to £2000) would have
been changed to an equivalent endowment of 100 exhibitions, and a
second grammar school established, say at the Glebe, on the same
footing, would have kept up a healthy rivalry ; while a girls’
grammar school similar to that of Brisbane could also have teen
established.
It is true that throughout the country there had already sprung
into existence schools either of a private character or founded by
religious denominations, and that if the State contemplated com-
peting with them, ordinary fairplay demanded that compensation
should be offered ; and that where it was feasible, and the owners
were willing, the buildings and staff of such schools as were most
affected by the contemplated change, should be taken over by the State.
In Sydney, where the constantly growing population allowed
room for many schools, competition would not be injurious ; but in
the country towns where, with much labour and expense, higher
education was being carried on by individuals oi denominations,
unless care was taken to respect the interests of those who had
already taken up the work, and were doing benefit to the State
thereby, much injustice might be done, In Goulburn there were at
least two secondary schools for girls and three for boys, including
two large establishments, Hurstville and St. Patrick’s College ; in
Bathurst, two good Colleges, All Saints’ and St. Stanislaus’—
besides two high-class ladies’ schools, and a commercial grammar
school; in West Maitland, besides others, Mr. Frazer’s long-
established school. If in addition in each of these towns a Govern-
ment grammar school were established the competition must be, if
not fatal, at least injurious to schools which had been doing good
work, and had already borne the burthen and the heat of the day.
On the other hand, if a system of State Scholarships were estab-
lished upon the Queensland plan, sothat boys from the far interior
might equally with those in all country towns (and not merely in
Goulburn, Bathurst, and West Maitland) secure the means of
attending any secondary school throughout the colony, no injustice
could possibly be done to any existing interests. Grammar schools
might afterwards be founded in such towns as were willing to pay
halt cost of establishment, while those that preferred to keep the
denominational or other schools already in existence could do so.
These views were urged at the time in letters to the Herald ; and in
the Examiner’s report at the Sydney Grammar School notice was
taken [of the cause of the successful competition of the Brisbane
Grammar School with Sydney Grammar School. Had Mr. Weigall
the advantage possessed by Mr. Hoe of Brisbane of securing 70 or
80 of the picked boys of the colony to form a nucleus for his school,
more justice would be done to the able staff of Sydney masters.


About a year after the date of Mr, Windeyer’s resolution, occurred
the celebrated change in the attitude of the Government towards
Denominational schools. Following the example of Sir Henry
Parkes, many members of Parliament who had at previous elections
been staunch defenders of the dual system, suddenly changed their
principles and advocated a uniform State-controlled system of
secular schools. The new Act provided that High Schools,
as a connecting link between the Public Schools and Uni-
versity, be established in various towns not specified. No provision
was made for compensating those schools which the Government
system was to supersede ; and which were of course expected to
wither away before the all-conquering advance of subsidised offi-
cialism. Something was indeed inserted about “ Scholarships ” to
the University ; but instead of an equitable system like that of
Queensland, equitable alike to existing schools and distant students,
an imitation of German grades (a system foreign to English freedom
of growth) was to be introduced.
At first sight the arguments for establishing High Schools are
plausible enough. To found schools at various centres in which
genius wherever existing should have an opportunity of develop-
ment ; to guarantee that no talent among any section of the com-
munity should be lost to the State by reason of poverty, was a noble
and patriotic thought. And to accomplish this by inventing a
higher grade of schools, thereby creating an outward and visible
symbol of the progressiveness of State Education, was a scheme
which well might fire the imagination of an enthusiast. In addition
to this the popular reaction against denominationalism, and impatient
with the apparent caprices of denominationalists, seemed to justify
a sweeping and radical alteration of system. Consequently the
injustice and the defects of the High School organisation was over-
looked. That it was unjust to start a rival system of subsidized
secondary schools to crush out of existence schools that were doing
(in the faith that they would not be interfered with) bond fide work
beneficial to the public—this will hardly be denied. Again, it is
still less to be denied that in the present High Schools rich and
poor, clever and stupid pupils alike, may be almost without discri-
mination educated at the public expense. If (as in other colonies)
a system of scholarships had been instituted, none but really clever
boys could have received the benefits which the State desires for them.
As a nation we profess Free Trade, and deprecate any, the
slightest, interference with the natural fluctuation of supply and
demand. How inconsistent, therefore, when the natural growth of
the colony indicates in which schools, and at what centres, secondary
education is required, to foster by a hot-house and Protectionist
process, establishments that depend on a State subsidy for their very
existence ! The cases of the Primary Schools and University are
different. Were there no subsidy, Primary Schools could not exist.


The University has no competitors, it is mi generis. But secondary
schools have never before attracted the attention of the State. They
have grown up healthily, naturally, spontaneously. And no matter
what the State can do towards their destruction, some of them will
still survive to educate those who will not be pauperised by any
largess or pseudo-liberal offer of cheap terms. Erroneous statesman-
ship may cripple and hamper, but it cannot effectually destroy,
private enterprise.
Sir John Robertson, who first had to administer the new Act,
having the statesmanlike determination that the new High
Schools should be self-supporting, framed a set of conditions under
which country towns could apply for their establishment, A mini-
mum of 50 pupils of a certain standard must be guaranteed for
three years. This practically shelved the question for the time; but
in 1883, his successor in the office suddenly gave notice of the
establishment of three High Schools at three places mentioned in
Mr. Windeyer’s resolutions, and of a fourth in Sydney to be opened
in Hyde Park, in close proximity to the Sydney Grammar School.
This last proceeding is not a little strange. The fees for the Sydney
Grammar School amount to £4 and £3 per quarter, and (with the
aid of a Government subsidy of £ISOO or £2OOO a year) are inten-
tionally placed on a scale sufficiently moderate to be within reach of
persons of small means. The new High Schools were made to
charge the still lower rate of £2 2s. per quarter, thus underbidding
the State-aided Grammar School. If a fee of £4 was found to be
too high for the poorer classes, why should not the balance have
been reduced by making the wealthier constituents of that school
pay a higher rate, which they could well afford, and allowing boys
of smaller means to attend on smaller fees, after passing an entrance
examination ? Two State-supported schools competing for the
same public examination and teaching the same subjects, but
charging different scales of fees, can mean nothing else than the ac-
centuation of class differences in a professedly democratic commu-
nity. Henceforth the Grammar School would be a place where rich
men’s sons could get an education below cost price ; while the
Sydney High School would offer the same teaching to a less select
body of pupils. Queensland in a spirit of impartiality sends her
exhibitioners to mingle with the best families in the land, in her
municipally-founded Grammar Schools : Victoria has just declared
her intention of doing likewise, but does not disdain to make use of
her “excellent denominational Grammar Schools” already founded:
Tasmania has adopted this principle for many years. It is only in
New South Wales that we find class distinctions fostered by official
regulations, and the children of poorer parents withheld from
mingling in the society of the well to do. If in Sydney Mr. Reid
Lad established another Grammar School, with similar fees and en-
dowment, and had given to each its complement of exhibitioners,


the move would have been statesmanlike and beneficial to both
places. Of course as it is the Sydney High School is a flourishing
institution. How could it be otherwise, with a skilful and experi-
enced headmaster and lower fees than any school of the kind in
Australia? But (on the hypothesis that none but poor men’s
children avail themselves of this school) would it not be better if
these presumably less refined students could avail themselves of the
social atmosphere of a school like the Sydney Grammar School ?
Again, the Sydney Grammar School is a flourishing institution.
How could it be otherwise, with a brilliant and highly-psid staff,
and the reputation of being at once cheap and exclusive ? But would
it not better justify its State subsidy if the children of the poor were
commonly found within its walls?
The prosperity of the Sydney High School, with its 334 pupils,
has to some extent cast its halo about the High Schools in the
country towns. It has been rumoured that these latter are not a
great success—but in official reports the results and costs of the
High Schools are given in the aggregate, and the satisfactory
reckonings of the Sydney High School thus considerably improve
the average of its weaker sisters.
In the Departmental report of 1884, however, it was neverthe-
less found necessary to issue an official plea for the High Schools,
and this was done by Inspectors Bridges and Morris, on whose
report a few remarks may here be made. These gentlemen assert
that “ High Schools are necessary, because private schools have as a
rule proved themselves unequal to the task of preparing pupils for a
University course .” This is stated in 1885. What are the facts ?
In 1885 the country High Schools passed at the matriculation
respectively Bathurst, none ; Goulburn, none ; West Maitland,
1 : and the private ischools in those towns passed—Bathurst, 3 ;
Goulburn, 3 ; West Maitland none ; or a total of 6to 1 in favour
of private schools. Again, take the present year 1886, the former
passed—Bathurst, none ; Goulburn, none ; West Maitland, 1: and
the private schools, passed—Bathurst, 2 ; Goulbnrn, 3 ; Maitland,
1 : again a total of 6 to lin private schools. Or again, taking the
total matriculation for the colony this year, the High Schools,
inclusive of Sydney, only passed three candidates, while private
schools passed 27, or, counting private tuition, 55. Again, taking
the results of Public examinations, the country High Schools gained
22 passes in senior and junior, and private schools in the same
towns gained 56. These results be it remembered are the more in
favour of private schools, because the picked students of the public
Schools are supposed to be sent to High Schools, while the other
establishments have to take pupils of all intellectual grades.
Messrs. Morris and Bridges further assert that there is a necessity
for High Schools, because “ they form a connecting link with the
“ University, and bring the means of higher education within reach


Bathurst.
Goulburn.
Maitland.
Actual cost of each for 1885,.
. £1175 0 0 .
.. £999 11
9 .,
.. £1343 5 1
Fees received
. 258 1 5 .,
,. 137 11
0 .,
,. 531 9 2
Cost of each to the Srate
. £916 10 8
.. £761 0
0 .,
.. £911 15 11
Number of Boys
30
12
46
,, » Girls
24
11
20
Total
54
23
66
“of talented children who would not otherwise secure this boon.”
How, not otherwise ? Do not plenty of poor talented children secure
this boon, and in a much better manner, in Queensland, Victoria,
and Tasmania, by means, not of High Schools, but of scholarships?
Where is the necessity of ignoring already existing schools in order
to establish State subsidised schools to compete unfairly with them
by underselling them ?
The inspectors, however, even as it is, admit that private schools
are better attended. “ Many from private schools,” they say,
“ would have sought admission to High Schools, but from fear of
“ failure at the entrance examination.” Anyone who remembers
the absurdly easy standard of the first examination, will be surprised
at this ; and will be more surprised to hear that the standard of
entrance is still further lowered. Surely, if the public are to pay
for High Schools, it is ‘desirable that the standard should be
raised and not lowered, in comparison with those entrance papers
of 1883.
Lastly, what are the High Schools costing ? Omitting Sydney,
which is sui generis, and does not concern the question of “ higher
“ education for the country towns and districts,” the following are
the facts, based on the Minister’s reply to Mr. Stephen on March
30th, 1886
The cost, therefore, of each pupil is : Bathurst, £2l 15s. 3d. ;
Goulburn, £3B 14s. 5d.; West Maitland, £2O 7s.
other words, the State would find it much cheaper to educate the
whole body of High School pupils at the private schools at current
rates. Is not this in itself a sufficient condemnation of the system ?
If the State were to close its High Schools, and send these children
to private establishments, it could make a large profit out of the
transaction ! The loss to the State alone, not counting cost to
the parent, is from £l2 in Maitland to £3O in Goulburn. And
how many children are thereby benefited ? Just the dwellers in
those towns. And what if attempts be made to extend the High
School system to other towns ? If it is so costly in these centres,
what will it be in less populous places ? and how are the deserving
and talented children of outlying districts to be reached ? Then
again, for the sake of forcing a High School upon a town, is the
standard of entrance to be still further lowered, so that for the sake


of one clever boy, who may “ pass from the State school to the
“ University,” a dozen or twenty mediocre boys are to receive a
(to the State) costly education, and not pass to the University?
The State was losing on 143 pupils at Bathurst, Goulburn, and
Maitland the sum of £2589 15s. 4d., or an average of £863 ss.
on each place. Suppose that, instead of this, 86 exhibitions of £lO
were established at each, and the winners given their choice of
schools, —subject of course to restrictions as to public examinations
and supervision—then for, the same outlay 258 pupils, or an
increase of 55 per cent, could find instruction at the ordinary rates
of private schools. But the probability is that to gain the accession
of numbers so offered the private schools would be willing to make
a considerable reduction in their terms in favour of exhibitioners—
the State being the gainer. If in addition to this a certain number
of exhibitions were offered sufficient to assist up-country students to
defray part of their expenses at town schools, the inducements held
out would cause other towns to establish secondary schools of their
own, and the State instead of having to stand almost the entire cost
of Departmental High Schools, would be able to avail itself of the
voluntary efforts of private persons. Something has already been
attempted by private denominational schools in this direction. The
King’s School has certain exhibitions; All Saints’ College, Bathurst,
offers exhibitions to the local Public School, and it is certain that
many schools would come forward to meet the Government half way
if a scholarship system were inaugurated.
In conclusion, the abolition of High Schools and substitution of
Scholarships is here advocated, because—
1. It is the system which is working well in Queensland, Vic-
toria, and Tasmania.
2. It costs much less than High Schools.
3. It benefits only those who require help.
4. It does not make the poor man pay for the education of the
rich.
5. It reaches the remote districts as well as the town population.
6. It does not unjustly establish State-subsidized rivals to
schools already established.
7. It encourages private enterprise.
8. It saves the country from the monotony and uniformitj of
a centralised system, and permits the spontaneous growth
of various schools, each according to its environment.
9. It promotes the intermingling of classes in high-class
schools, thus refining those who would otherwise have few
social advantages.
O. Whalan, Printer, School of Arts Buildings, Howiok Street. Bathurst.
