

JH For Private Circulation only,]
I i
I I
si HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION
I
| AND |
|l Matters Pertinent Thereto. |
|i I
I S
| ByJ. /. HA YCROFT, |
h M.E. Q 6
/ Assoc. Memb. Inst. C.E.
A] /Issoc. Memb. Amer. Soc. C.E. fjf
S _ S
I I
t[RBAD BEFORE THE ENGINEERING SECTION OF THE ROYAL fe
Society on N. S. Wales.]
?
* 5
| DISCUSSION. |
I I
(. -7: ;o! I
II
| SYDNEY: 6
«! Same. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 83 York Street.
| ,5k ' ; |




For Private Circulation only.
HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION
Matters Pertinent Thereto.
By J. /. HA YCROFT,
M.E. Q.U.1.,
Assoc. Memb. Inst. C.E.
Assoc. Memb. Amer, Soc. C.E.
[Read befdre the Engineering Section of the Royal
Society on N. S. Wales.]
discussion.
■ ■ p? Co!
SYDNEY:
Saml. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 83 York Street.
f t 0307




Highway Construction, and Matters Per-
tinent thereto.
Mr, Statham considered that Mr. Hay croft’s paper was an
interesting review of the various practices of road construction
throughout the world, and contained much valuable information,
which he must have been at considerable pains to compile.
He gathered from the paper that the French practice was, on
the whole, what he thought the best. The late Chief of the Roads
and Bridges branch was a believer in the doctrine that “ they
managed these things better in France,” and adopted their practice
to a great extent, employing skilled Frenchmen as assistant
Engineers, and these men have certainly left their mark upon
the Department—such as Valentine de St. Remy and G. A.
Morell, both men of high attainments, to whose memory a
grateful tribute was due.
Between the desirable and the attainable there was often a
great gulf fixed, and it was not surprising that this country should
fall far short of perfection in the results obtained ; here it was not
a question of the best method of road construction, or a choice
between the rival systems of Telford and Macadam—which, like
the brook and the battle of the gauges, was likely to go on for ever
—but a question of cutting the coat according to the cloth, or
doing the best that could be done with the material and means at
disposal. Speaking from his own experience as a supervising
Engineer, he had last year the control of 4646 miles of roads, on
which the expenditure averaged £3l ss. per mile, about one-third
of which was absorbed in maintenance and repairs, including the
working of ferries; of the balance available for construction,
bridges absorbed about one-eighth, leaving about £l7 10s. per
mile for road construction, out of which it was scarcely to be
expected that very much “ fancy work ” could be accomplished.
Nevertheless miles of construction were carried out, the
standard being—formation, 40 ft. wide ; metal, 3-in. gauge, from
6to 9in. deep, and 18ft. wide. The details of construction could
be best gathered from a specification. Rolling was practiced where
traffic was heavy, but experience here accorded with that of Austria,
as pointed out by Mr. Haycroft, namely, that it was necessarily
restricted on the ground of expense, and in many instances very
good roads could be made without it, especially where good binding
material, such as granite, grit, or ironstone was obtainable.
As to the broad tyre regulations in force in France, it had
frequently been urged that legislation of this sort should be
introduced here where unduly heavy loads were carried on
exceptionally narrow tyres. It was, however, questionable whether
it was advisable to go the length of varying the gauge of the fore
and hind wheels of waggons. This would not be attended with
inconvenience where all roads were thoroughly constructed ; but


here, where waggons had to travel not only made roads, but
considerable lengths of bush track, the difficulties and dangers of
driving would be materially increased, and the innovation would
be strongly objected to, desirable as it might be from a road-
maintenance point of view.
Mr. J. W. Grimshaw considered one of the advantages of
the paper was to remind them of what was done in other
countries, and suggest what might be done here with advantage.
For instance, the planting of fruit trees along the sides of the
roads, as in Germany, had the advantage of supplying both fruit
and shade; the trees would have the advantage of the water
washing off the road into the side drains.
The author seemed to have omitted a very interesting feature
in French roads, namely the straight military road, which
extended for miles without a turn or bend; and where it was
absolutely necessary to zigzag down a valley and up the other
side, the road was brought back into its original line. In
mentioning these roads it was not with a view of advocating
straight roads by any means, but they formed a feature of the
country.
The narrow roads in China might in some degree be
attributed to economy, necessary in a thickly-populated country,
where there was next to ho vehicular traffic.
In Japan it was very different, as there were some splendid
roads there, with fine avenues of trees for miles—such as the
road from Utsunomiya to Nikko, and many others which could not
be said to be of recent construction. A feature of roads there was
the frequent occurrence of a tunnel through the crown of the hill,
in some degree easing the grade. There were some very steep
roads, going straight up the mountain range, which were
sometimes entirely pitched with rough stone cubes, such as the
one between Mishima and Harkone. Of course vehicular traffic
was impossible on these.
Mr. Grimshaw quite agreed that there should be legislation
as to the tyre width. He believed such was the case in South
Australia, if not in other colonies. In that colony there were
some very good limestone roads, which were firm and smooth,
and not too hard on the horses’ feet. Blue metal on a country
road was too hard. Sandstone and red gravel made good roads,
and dried quickly after rain.
He quite agreed with the author with regard to binding,
and thoroughly believed in the metal being rolled, instead of
being left loose for the cart wheels to cut tracks through and
cause irritation to all who had to go over it. He drew attention
to a discussion on a paper on Road Construction by J. Owen in
the Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers of
February, 1893, in which the use of clay in binding met with
no favour. Still, it was an easy way of doing the thing, and a
roller could not always be had.


With regard to soft-wood blocking in London, he noticed
that the flint sand thrown over them to prevent slippiness formed
a hard crust on the surface, which protected the soft wood from
wear and tear in a great measure. Here he had only seen
quartz sand used, which did little good and only increased the dust.
In repairing roads in a town he considered it simply
disgraceful that only one shift of eight hours should be worked,
and that traffic should be hampered for week after week in a
most unnecessary manner.
It had been stated during the discussion that horses did not
“ claw ” their way. Perhaps not, as a rule; still he had often
noticed that the horses drawing over the greasy granite blocks in
the north of England towns did “ claw ” their way, and entirely
depended for foothold in doing so. In saying this he was not
advocating the practice of laying wooden blocks with spaces
between them ; he merely mentioned it as a fact.
He was not in favour of asphalt for footpaths. It was
terribly hot to walk over in summer, and after being once
disturbed was rough and unsightly.
The Chairman, Mr. H. Deane, said that it would appear from
Mr. Haycroft’s paper that the French roads were the best in the
world. If this was the case, it was due quite as much to the fact
of waggons being used with broad tyres and with the wheels
placed as described as to good construction and efficient mainten-
ance. It was a great pity that in this country the width of tyres
could not be regulated by legislation ; as it is now, all teamsters
seem to prefer narrow tyres, the consequence of which is that the
front wheels plough up the ground and the others only increase
the mischief, and the drays frequently get bogged.
Mr. Haycroft suggests that in tar-paved roads the use of tar for
the under layers is superfluous, because the surplus tar in the top
layer will inevitably drain down and cover the surface of the
layers beneath it. Mr. Deane’s opinion was that if only the
proper quantity of tar be applied to the material on the top layer
there will be nothing to drain out of it, and that the proper
method was to efficiently tar all the material, but to carefully
avoid using too much.
With regard to the use of cement grouting for wood blocks,
a good deal has been said lately about the action of cement on
wood. It has been asserted that the lime in the cement has a
direct chemical action on the fibre of the wood, destroying its
structure and causing decay. Mr. Deane doubted this action
very much, and said that if lime had such a direct action on wood
fibre engineers had been wrong from all time, because it was a
common practice to place wood in contact with concrete in
foundations where, according to the theory stated, it must
undoubtedly suffer seriously. Mr. Deane thought that where
decay had resulted—as on the Circular Quay—it was due to the


action of Micro-fungi, nourished in a damp situation, .possibly
aided in their propagation by the absence of a preservative such
as tar, but certainly not due to direct chemical action. He was
of opinion, therefore, that no fear need be anticipated through
the use of cement grouting on the tramways Mr. Haycroft had
referred to.
Me. Haycroft, in replying to the several gentlemen who
considered his paper worthy of their criticism, intended to be as
brief as possible, owing to the amount of business that evening.
The author must say, however, he was rather disappointed in not
having some of the present officers of the Roads Department
contributing their quota, as he was sure their experience would be
most valuable.
Mr. Grimshaw considered one of the advantages of the
paper was “to remind them of what was done in other
countries and suggest what might be done here with advan-
tage.” This certainly was one of the objects of the paper,
and a very laudable one. It was only by the experience
gained in the various branches of this profession abroad
that a young country like this could hope to come to the
front. As regards the straight military roads in France, the
author purposely avoided mentioning them, as he considered
portions of this colony simply ruined by wretched caricatures of
those noble French works. Had he mentioned them he might
have been accused of advocating the style adopted here, where,
he understood, roads had been laid out by gentlemen depart-
mentally qualified to survey land, and therefore in their own
opinion perfectly competent to undertake any engineering opera-
tion. Mr. Grimshaw referred to the good limestone roads in South
Australia : these the author could understand as existing under a
proper system of maintenance in any country where frost that
penetrates more than one inch was absent ; but in any country
they require more care than any other kind of broken stone
surfaced road. The author could not agree with Mr, Grimshaw in
the statement that “ blue metal was too hard,” presumably on the
horses’ feet; it is contrary to world-wide experience. Mr.
Grimshaw’s remark “ that road construction in towns to the
detriment of traffic through utilizing only one eight-hour shift,”
was worthy of the greatest praise in the author’s opinion, and also
applied to the manner of carrying out public works in this, and,
indeed, other countries; such, for instance, as the relaying of the
tram line and wood-blocking of Elizabeth-street some few years
ago.
Mr. Grimshaw evidently had not reaped the benefit from the
paper on one point which the author hoped he would : he was not
in favour of asphalt for footpaths. He said “it was terribly hot,
and when once disturbed is rough and unsightly.” As regards
the first point, the author was sure he was mistaken, presuming, of
course, he referred to some of the natural asphalts, not the hybrid


rubbish known as asphalt in the surrounding boroughs. If
properly manipulated before laying, the author was of opinion a
cooler material for the surface of a footpath could not be found ;
on investigation it would be found by comparing the several co-
efficients of conductivity of asphalt and natural rocks used on
footpaths, that the former had a decided advantage. Those
nations, reputedly the most civilized in the world, used it to a
large extent, and with evident satisfaction.
As to being “ rough and unsightly after disturbance,” that,
the author held, depended altogether on the manner of restora-
tion ; undoubtedly if this work, which demanded special knowledge
and care, were carried out in a similar manner to that pursued
by contractors acting under some of our departments, there was
not the slightest doubt in the author’s mind as to how very un-
sightly the surface could be left.
Mr. Statham’s figures as to the amount of money available
for road construction were very interesting, and showed what an
energetic officer like Mr. Statham could accomplish. He gave a
balance available for new roads as £l7 10s. per mile, the standard
of construction, being formation 30 feet wide, metal 3-inch gauge
from 6 to 9 inches deep, and 18 feet wide.
Taking the smallest depth of metal 6 inches, 18 feet wide,
for one mile, this worked out to 1760 cubic yards per mile as
necessary. How taking the price <£l7 10s. per mile as given,
and allowing nothing for formation, the author arrived at the
result that the metal had been quarried, carted, broken to gauge
and spread, for the sum of less than 2Jd. per cubic yard. This, as
the Yankees say, licked creation.
The author was sorry Mr. Statham, after his large experience,
did not take more kindly to the known benefits both to
teamsters and road surfaces due to properly proportioned tyres
and inequality in fore and rear axles. The author failed to see
how the difficulties and dangers in driving on a bush track would
be materially increased thereby ; he was of opinion the opposite
would hold. The softer the surface, the greater the area over
which a given weight was distributed, the less the chance of sink-
ing. Anyone who was at all conversant with construction of
foundations, must be in favour of broad tyres, even if they never
had been called on to grapple with the injuries caused by narrow
ones.
Mr. Statham was of opinion such an “ innovation,” as he was
pleased to call the recognised practice of centuries by civilized
nations, would be strongly objected to; no doubt such would be
the case, but should any weight be placed on the objections of an
objurgating bullock driver ?
Mr. Deane misunderstood him if he took him as stating
that “ in tar-paved roads, the use of tar for the under layers was
superflous, because the surplus tar in the top layer would inevitably
drain down and cover the surface of the layers beneath it .” The
author could not see how such a construction could be placed on
the words he actually did use, which could be found on page 36.


What the author meant to convey was this : That, on a given
foundation, in constructing a roadway of tarred metal laid in two
layers of different gauges, or even of the same gange, it was
needless to tar the lower layer, and the fact of doing so led to
waste, both of the tar used and labour of mixing. The metal, if
laid dry on the given foundation, can be sufficiently consolidated
by hand-rolling or ramming, if such consolidation was considered
necessary, as no doubt it would be in isolated cases, but not as
a general rule: the upper tarred layer when applied and con-
solidated by rolling would keep the under layer in its place very
effectually, if the work was intelligently done.
The author merely mentioned the fact that on a roadway so
constructed being opened, he had found that the originally dry-
laid metal had been cemented together by the effluent tar from
the top layer. Mr. Deane’s opinion was that if only the proper
quantity of tar was applied to the material on the top layer, there
would be nothing to drain out of it. This was certainly correct in
theory, but it was one of those theories it was impossible to repro-
duce in practice ; the proper quantity of tar, thereby meaning
that there should be no effluent as it lay in a heap after mixing,
depended on the weather, cceteris paribus ; if the mixing took
place during the occurrence of cold weather, and seemed theoreti-
cally perfect, and the spreading in cold weather, followed by hot
weather, or if it is spread in hot weather, it would be found that
surplus tar would exude from this hitherto considered perfectly
mixed heap. As regards what other critics said, judging from
the short notes kindly furnished by the hon. Secretary, the
author quite agreed with Mr. Wells that strict maintenance was
good economy.
The author could not agree with Mr. Cowdery, that hand-
broken metal was worthy of being called superior in comparison
with machine metal. The fact of its being different only on the
point of regularity to gauge, which did not enhance its wearing
properties, was far overweighed by its additional cost. Mr. Jones
was credited with saying that the roads about Sydney have more
convexity than those in Victoria. The author was glad to hear it
in the interests of the travelling public of Victoria ; what goes
by the name of convexity here should properly be called
“ unqualified borough foreman’s hump.” The author had seen
suburban streets, on a moderate gradient, where the convexity
amounted to nearly 2 feet 6 inches, where it was impossible for
two vehicles to pass on a 66 feet street, except at a walking pace,
and the occupants of the vehicles were inclined to lie out like the
crew of a centre-board during a gust, to maintain equilibrium.
In conclusion, the author’s principal object would have been
attained in writing the paper, if the reading of it, and the
criticisms it led to, had even a small effect in improving the
thoroughfares, in making them a credit to this nation, and a good
example to others.
Sami. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 83 York-street, Sydney.




