

HIGHLAND EMIGRANTS,PER SHIP MIDLOTHIAN.
Disclaiming knowledge of any previous arrangement by which those
Emigrants would become Occupiers of Land instead of Labourers.
(No. 253.)
Domning-street,Ath December, 1838.
I have received your Despatch, No. 114, of the 20th July last, on the
subject of the disposal of a number of Emigrants from the Highlands of Scotland,
who had arrived in New South Wales in December, 1837, by the ship Midlothian.
On referring to the correspondence which took place between Dr. Lang,
to which reference is made in your Despatch, I am clearly of opinion that it con-
tained nothing to warrant the inference that these Emigrants were to be considered as
on a different footing from others, the expense of whose passage is defrayed from the
funds applicable to Emigration.
It was suggested by Dr. Lang, that as (on the ground of their speaking the
Gaelic language) they would, if dispersed over the whole Colony, be placed, in a
great measure, beyond the reach of religious instruction, arrangements should be
made for their settlement in the same part of the Country, which Dr. Lang stated—on
his own knowledge, to be quite practicable, owing to the great and general demand
for labour in the Colony. Such a proposition appeared to me well deserving of con-
sideration ; but I certainly never understood it to involve the settlement of the
Emigrants by the Government as Occupiers of Land on their own account, and the
allusion in Dr. Lang’s letter to the general demand for labour, negatived the pre-
sumption that such was his intention, I could not have given my sanction to a pro-
9 posal


posal by which the condition of these people, on their arrival, was to be changed from
that of Labourers to Occupiers of Land, by the act of the Government, independently
of their own resources and industry.
Of the circular letter written by Dr. Lang to these Emigrants prior to their
embarkation, I was entirely ignorant before the receipt of your Despatch.
I have the honor to be,
Your most obedient Servant,
GLENELG.
