

v_r—
> nJj^f
' - < Sst r f ,
C &>'
' '*/£'■»■ f "~^
V t /
“


Jb&faTied lB2#, by Ows, iS. Holiom, feppos&J&rmHalj-Jhn Jj^oruivt .


HINTS
ON
EMIGRATION
TO THE
Keto Settlement
ON THE
SWAN AND CANNING RIVERS,
ON THE
WEST COAST OF
AUSTRALIA.
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. CROSS, 18, HOLBORN,
OPPOSITE FURNIVAL’S INN.
MDCCCXXIX.




HINTS ON EMIGRATION,
To Persons, who from various circumstances
may have it in contemplation to quit their native
Country, either for a limited or extended period,
it is desirable to have such information as may
be most useful in guiding their determination,
and save them loss of time and waste of property.
With this view, the following Document,
which has been issued by the Colonial Depart-
ment for the encouragement of a new Settlement
on the West Coast of New Holland, is placed
a 2


under consideration; with a few Remarks, for
the use of those who may wish either to secure
increased comforts during their life time for them-
selves and families, or, by an exercise of talent
and adventure, found for their posterity certain
wealth.
44 I. His Majesty’s Government do not intend to
44 incur any expense, in conveying Settlers to the New
“ Colony on the Swan River; and will not feel bound
44 to defray the cost of supplying them with Provisions,
44 or other necessaries, after their arrival there, nor to
44 assist their removal to England, or to any other place,
44 should they be desirous of quitting the Colony.
44 2. Such persons as may arrive in that Settlement,
44 before the end of the year 1830, will receive, in the
44 order of their arrival. Allotments of Land, free of
44 Quit-rent, proportioned to the Capital which they may
44 he prepared to invest in the improvement of the Land,
44 and of which Capital they may he able to produce
44 satisfactory proofs to the Lieutenant Governor (or
44 other Officer Administering the ' Colonial Govern-
-44 ment), or to any two Officers of the local Govern-
-44 ment appointed by the Lieutenant Governor for that
44 purpose, at the rate of 40 acres for every sum of £3.
44 which they may be prepared so to invest.
44 3. Under the head of investment of Capital will be
44 considered stock of every description, all Implements
44 of Husbandry, and other Articles which may be appli-
-44 cable to the purposes of productive industry, or which
44 may be necessary, for the establishment of the Set-
-44 tier on the Land where he is to be located. The


u amount of any Half-pay or Pension which the appli-
“ cant may receive from Government, and which he
“ may he prepared to invest as before mentioned, will
“ also be considered as so much Capital.
“ 4. Those who may incur the expense of taking out
“ laboring persons, will be entitled to an allotment of
“ Land, at the rate of £15., that is, of 200 acres of
“ Land, for the passage of every such laboring person,
“ over and above any other investment of Capital. In
“ the class of ‘ laboring persons’ are included Women,
“ and Children above ten years old. With respect to
“ the Children of laboring people under that age, it is
“ proposed to allow 40 Acres for every such Child, above
“ three years old; 80 Acres for every such Child, above
“ six years old; and 120 for every such Child, above
“ nine, and under ten years old. Provision will be
“ made, by Law, at the earliest opportunity, for ren-
“ dering those Capitalists, who may be engaged in
“ taking out laboring persons to this Settlement, liable
“ for the future maintenance of those persons, should
“ they, from infirmity, or any other cause, become
“ unable to maintain themselves there.
“ 5. The Licence to Occupy will be given to the
“ Settler, on satisfactory proof being exhibited to the
“ Lieutenant Governor (or other Officer administering
“ the local Government) of the amount of Property
“ brought into the Colony, to be invested as above
“ specified. The proofs required of this property will
“ be such satisfactory Vouchers of Expenses, as would
“be received in auditing Public Accounts. But the
“ Title to the Land will not be granted, in fee simple,
“ until the Settler has proved, to the satisfaction of the
“ Lieutenant Governor (or other Officer administering


“ the local Government) that the sum required hy
“ Article 2 (viz. Is. 6d. per Acre), has been actually
“ expended in some investment of the nature specified
“ in Article 3, or in the cultivation of the Land, or in
“ solid improvements,—such as Buildings, Roads, or
“ other Works of that kind.
“ 6, Any Land, thus allotted, of which a fair propor-
“ tion, at least one fourth, shall not have been brought
“ into cultivation, or otherwise improved, to the satis-
“ faction of the local Government, within three years
“ from the date of the Licence of Occupation, shall at the
“ end of the three years, be liable to one further payment
“ of 6c?. per Acre for all the land not so cultivated or im-
“ proved, into the Public Chest of the Settlement; and,
“ at the expiration of seven years more, so much of the
“ whole Grant as shall still remain in an uncultivated
“ or unimproved state, will revert absolutely to the
“ Crown. And in every Grant will be contained a Con-
“ dition, that, at any time, within ten years from the
“ date thereof, the Government may resume, without
“ compensation, any Land not then actually cultivated,
“ or improved as before mentioned, which may be re-
“ quired for Roads, Canals, or Quays, or for the site
“ of Public Buildings.
“ 7* After the year 1830, Land will be disposed of,
“ to those Settlers who may resort to the Colony, on
“ such conditions as His Majesty’s Government shall
“ determine.
“ 8. It is not intended that any Convicts be trans-
“ ported to this new Settlement.
“ 9. The Government will be administered by Cap-
“ tain Stirling, of the Royal Navy, as Lientenant
“ Governor of the Settlement ; and it is proposed that


“ a Bill shall be submitted to Parliament, in the course
“ of the next Session, to make provision for its Civil
“ and Judicial Administration.”
For convenience in the consideration of the
subject, a skeleton Map of the World is annexed;
and a Chart of the Swan and Canning Rivers,
Cockburn Sound, and the adjacent coast and in-
land survey, upon a large scale, can be obtained
from Mr. Cross, 18, Holborn.
By these it will be seen, that the proposed
situation of Cockburn Sound, near the Swan and
Canning Rivers, is one of peculiar advantage,
placed without the tropics, in lat. 32 S.
The climate will he nearly of the same tempe-
rature as those parts of the Continent of Europe
which are most agreeable, and productive of all
articles of necessity; the best grain, seeds, horses,
cattle, &c. as well as those of general European
commerce, between 35 and 50 N. latitude ; and
it may be presumed such a situation will agree
with the health and constitutions of persons ac-
customed to such latitudes.*
* It appears from Captain Stirling’s Report on that Coast,
the Thermometer in the hot months of January, February,
and March, averaged in the Morning about 60°; at Noon about


But, however admirably gifted by nature any
situation may be deemed for the purpose of form-
ing a new settlement, many weighty considera-
tions must press upon the mind, and much priva-
tion wjll be endured, before any individual will
determine to quit his native land, in search of
ease or affluence in a distant uninhabited world.
Therefore, the difficulties and embarrassments
ought to be considered, as well as the prospects
of comfort and independence. And one material
object should always be borne in mind—whether
the step can be retraced without an excessive
sacrifice, in case of disappointment.
One point of consideration in the proposed
measure (although in reality of no essential im-
portance to pecuniary success) is of considerable
magnitude, as regards moral feeling and the pride
of many—that is, there being no admission of
convicts into the proposed Colony !—Those who
establish property and families, will feel that their
names and fortunes cannot be mixed hereafter
with any dubious idea as to their origin. They
78°; and in the Evening 65°. The Barometer averaged about
30°. The weather generally fine, —some rain and showery
weather, and occasionally thunder and lightning.


can return to their mother country and to so-
ciety with the certainty of possessing purity of
character, and without risk of rejection, into
every situation to which fortune, talent and
character may justify their aspiring.
Without any illiberal sentiment, this is a
disadvantage under which Port Jackson and Van
Diemen’s Land certainly suffer. Nevertheless
these thriving Colonies, in the course of 30 or 40
years, have made surprising progress in agricul-
ture, population, commerce and wealth. The
situation of Port Jackson was the most distant
from the Mother Country ; its position was not
peculiarly adapted to production or traffic with
any part of the Globe; therefore, the improve-
ment can only be attributed to a favorable soil,
free from the taxations of old European Govern-
ments, a low fee cost, or a nominal pepper corn
rent, which circumstances have not only been
capable of maintaing those who adventured, but
of yielding a profit for capital sufficient to induce
others to pursue the same course.*
* It may likewise be remarked, the progress of Botany
Bay and Van Diemen’s Land was during a war; while every
individual and the capital of the country found ample employ-


If independent persons of correct character
and a little property, others of some rank in
society, such as honorable servants of the Crown,
retired from the Army, Navy, and Public Esta-
blishments, with moderate but certain incomes,
embark in a new Colony, and act simultaneously
for the promotion of their own and the general
interests, the probabilities of a speedy and
favorable result are greatly increased. •
To such persons these remarks are intended ;
and, in the consideration of them, it is proposed
by parties of respectability, to offer a Plan for
individuals to visit the Settlement and judge for
themselves.
They shall be provided with passage in first
class ships, commanded by experienced officers,
at a fixed charge.
meut. How much greater will be encouragement at this
moment, with a superabundant population and an unemployed
capital! There is much also to be said on the want of direc-
tion to the Settlers in Van Diemen's Land and Port Jackson.
They never had pointed out to them those articles of utility
and necessity of the mother country’s consumption, which,
by cultivation, would have enriched both, had they been
attended to ; —but every thing has been left to nature and to
chance—wool, wood, and lately oil and whalebone, have been
the only exports from thence for Europe, and coals for India.


They will be provided with every requisite for
the passage out, according to rations accompany-
ing the engagement.
Six months’ provisions in the Settlement ac-
cording to the same rations.
A free passage home, in the event of not
remaining.
Should the individual determine to remain
in the Settlement, he shall receive a proportion
of his advanced money, in provisions or stock,
equal to six months’ maintenance, according to
the same rations; and money or stock at his
option, in lieu of his passage home.
This Plan offers many advantages.—An in-
dividual may form his own opinion by an absence
of 12 or 14 months, and a six months’ observa-
tion on the spot, of the prospect of success.—
Should he be disappointed, his expenditure will
probably not exceed that of his residence at
home; and, if he is a man with a family and
approves of the Settlement, he can fix his locality
and return for his family at a certain expence,
or he can make arrangements for his family to
join him when his situation may be determined
and in some forwardness.


It is not intended in these remarks to en-
courage any individual in views of emigration.
They are addressed to those whose minds are in
some measure fixed ; and it is to those who have
to choose the most advantageous situations in
new Settlements for their future residence, that
any practical knowledge is offered.
Their attention is therefore drawn to the fol-
lowing leading features of the proposed new Set-
tlement on the West Coast of New Holland:—
The climate between 30 and 35 S. # must be
excellent, and congenial to all European consti-
tutions. —The soil is represented as rich, and the
country well wooded. The Swan and Canning
Rivers, taking their sources at the foot of elevated
lands, 30 miles from the coast, and 1200 feet
above the level of the sea, pass through plains,
joining in one outlet, near Cockburn Sound, at
which place the principal Settlement is intended
to be formed. At the mouth of the river there
is a rocky bar, therefore, Cockburn Sound, se-
curely land-locked at the distance of five to six
miles from the river, will be the great anchorage
* De Freycinet’s account of Baudin’s Voyage, places Swan
River in lat. 32. 4. 31. S. lon. 115. 46. 43. East of Greenwich.


for ships, while small craft will navigate the
rivers to the interior for many miles. So situated,
every article may be produced for its own main-
tenance in the most convenient places, while its
productions of export can he conveyed to the place
of shipment by water carriage, with little trouble
and expence. The safety of the harbour and coast,
its contiguity to the islands and markets in the
East Indian Archipelago, Java, Timor, the Ce-
lebee and Molucca Islands; its clear passage to
the Continent of India, the short distance to the
Mauritius, and favorable run to and from the
Cape of Good Hope, and its convenient inter-
course with Van Diemen’s Land, being also
nearer to England by 2000 miles, or 20 days’
passage, are circumstances highly in its favor.
How it has happened that this portion of Aus-
tralia has remained so long unexplored, is diffi-
cult to conjecture f for certainly no spot appears
more eligibly situated for receiving tropical luxu-
ries at least cost and repaying their value both
directly and circuitously in productions of utility !
It may now not be inapplicable to consider
what raw productions of Europe and Asia, for
which Great Britain is so large a customer to


other countries, (which she either consumes, or
again sends forth in a manufactured state,) can
be cultivated advantageously by the Settlers at
Cockburn Sound or its neighbourhood; and in
the production of which, they may be enabled
to compete in price and quality with those of
Europe or Asia. If this can be shewn, it is to
be expected his Majesty’s Government will give
to the Colony a decided support, upon the wisest,
genuine and simple principles of political economy
and self interest—that of getting the most for
their money!
In this country’s traffic with Russia,* Great
Britain receives from St. Petersburg, Riga, and
Archangel alone, in hemp, flax, and tallow, two
millions sterling.
From Prussia and Poland,f through the Ports
* It is too notorious to need comment, that the Russian
Government has for a number of years acted with great hos-
tility towards-English Commerce. Every new Tariff contains
some additional or prohibitory duty upon British Manufac-
tures;—woollens are nearly excluded—cotton goods are under
rigid restrictions—Colonial produce is heavily taxed—in fact
no object is forgotten that can annoy this country.
f Some of the remarks in the preceding note are applicable
to Prussia: now greatly encompassed by Russian Polayd in her
rear, and the sources of her rivers commanded by Russia, her


of Memel, Konigsburg, and Dantzig, consider-
able supplies of hemp and flax are received ; like-
wise much flax manufactured into yarn.
Let two articles of cultivation be selected for
consideration, out of the number that will here-
after offer: viz. hemp and flax.
Ist. A new richsoil cannot be otherwise than
well suited for their cultivation.
2d. The climate and temperature will also be
suited, because these articles are grown in Russian
Poland, the Ukraine, Austria, and Italian States,
and in New Zealand* of a peculiarly fine quality.
Yorkshire and Ireland likewise produce excellent
flax.
produce and consumption are greatly curtailed, and our inter-
course consequently much altered. She does not however
evince much disposition towards a fair and liberal reciprocity
in her trade with England, and, therefore, our Ministers may
as well endeavour to ascertain whether this country cannot
obtain a greater quantity of every article of necessity and use,
at a cheaper rate elsewhere. If this is real economy, how
much more will its importance be increased, when accomplish-
ed through the employment of a superabundant population in
a new Colony!
* That the Settler may know there is no deception in these
representations, he can have the means of ascertaining the
quality of hemp and flax grown in New Zealand; and likewise
the hemp or grass of Manilla, now becoming the favorite ar-
ticle for cordage in America.


It may therefore be taken for granted, an
equal quality can be grown, with immediate con-
venience of shipment upon navigable rivers;
whereas the cultivator in the Ukraine and distant
parts of Siberia, Russian Poland, &c. must deliver
his produce at Archangel, St. Petersburg, or
Riga, partly by land carriage and partly by navi-
gation, at different seasons. A view of the map
of Russia will shew how great a proportion of the
value of the article must be expended in its trans-
port.
The present price of hemp at St. Petersburg
is about £32 0 per ton
English Duty 3 10
Freight 3 0
London Charges 3 0
fiTTo"
which is about the present value in England.
Suppose hemp of Australia the
same value 41 10
It is presumed the Government will allow its im-
portation nearly duty free, merely to mark the
quantity imported. Allowing an average of four
months for voyages to the Baltic and White Sea,
and ten months for an Australian voyage, an in


creased rate of freight must be charged equal to
two and a half voyages* . ... £7 10
London Charges the same in both
cases 3 0
Additional Premium for Insurance 1 0
11 10
Leaving for the Cultivator, per ton 30 0
£4l 10
What may be the exact cost of the cultivation
of hemp in Russia and Poland it is very difficult
to conjecture; but it is known to be generally
produced on the estates of, perhaps, the most ex-
pensive aristocracy in the world. It passes un-
der the controul of Managers and Agents, until
it reaches the first dealers in contracts ; it then
comes to others upon a more extended scale, and
finally arrives at the ports of shipment, with all
its accumulated charges of commissions, profits,
* This rate of homeward peace freight is higher than need
be calculated, because the ships employed to Russia make
very little or scarcely any outward freight; while new settle-
ments require constant supplies, and receive a regular augmen-
tation of inhabitants. The outward freights and passage mo-
ney contribute greatly to reduce the rate homewards, and a 65
per ton for hemp and flax, properly screwed and stowed, will
be sufficient. In such calculations, however, every thing
ought to be allowed liberally for deductions.
B


transits and Government dues. Therefore, if a
moiety is netted of the £32 per ton, it is as much
or more than can be expected •* and no apprehen-
sion need be entertained of any competition from
an increase of quantity or reduction of price. It
cannot be afforded in Russia under its present
cost; and recently, whenever the price has de-
clined below the rate now paid, a decrease of pro-
duce has followed.
With regard to the article of flax, none need
be mislead; an excellent estimate may be made
from the experience of those who have grown flax
in the neighbourhood of Thorne and Goole in
Yorkshire, and others on a larger scale in Ireland.
The price of very fine Yorkshire groVn , flax is
about 7s. per stone, or <£s6 per ton.
The price of best Russian flax is about £3B
to £4O per ton.
Supposing therefore the same quality grown in
Australia and to produce in England £56 per ton
* It is not more than forty years since hemp cost no more
than a 615 per ton at Petersburgh, and was sold in England to
advantage at £23 per ton ; therefore the expense of cultiva-
tion cannot be great. The advance has occurred from taxation
in Russia, and other political causes.


The deductions will be, Freight . £7 0
Premium for Insurance ... 2 0
London Charges 3 0
£l2 0
Leaving for the Colonist ,£44 per ton, or ss. 6d.
per stone.
The question in this case is simple—Whether
land, rent free, unencumbered with poor rates,
tythes, and taxes, cannot be cultivated for the
produce of flax to much greater advantage than
the difference between 7s, and ss. 6d. per stone ?
Any person will answer that the cost will be more
considerably reduced, and certain and early re-
turns may be relied upon.
It is unnecessary to trouble ourselves with
speculations upon the cost of flax in Russia, Po-
land, Holland or elsewhere; we have here a data
that cannot deceive the Adventurer.*
* Hemp and flax are well adapted for new settlements j
they require extent of land, without the necessity of a great
population. The labour required is not great; but attention
is requisite when the article is ready to be cut, gathered, and
prepared, to be cleared from the stem or pith. The process
is simple, and easily acquired a knowledge of; and, if thought
desirable, a few labourers from countries where these articles
are brought to the greatest perfection, may be obtained at an
expence very little beyond the supply of food and clothing.


From these facts it is not unreasonable to be-
lieve that, in a few years, several thousand tons
of both hemp and flax may be shipped from Cock-
burn Sound, with great advantage to the Settlers
and increase of wealth to the Colony.
Here then are two articles of produce, in an
unmanufactured state, which the commerce of
Great Britain requires, and which the Government
can in a direct manner encourage. Other articles
will gradually succeed, as the Colony advances
in population and prosperity ; because there ex-
ists no fundamental impediment either in climate,
voyage or distance, to opening an intercourse
with the whole world. Linseed, tallow, hides,
bristles, wool, fish, oils, &c. will become valuable
exports, while it is probable the finest grain will
be produced for its own maintenance.
Should His Majesty’s Government he actuated
by a sincere desire to promote the success of the
Colony, the Navy Board may he directed to ac-
cept tenders for a given quantity of hemp, accord-
ing with a sample from the early growths.
Should the quality in the first instance not sa-
tisfy the rigid scrutiny of their officers, it is well
known that inferior hemp can be applied to infe-
rior purposes; consequently a moderate encou


ragement may be given, without detriment to
the public service ; and supposing 1000 tons so
obtained, what will be the sacrifice, and what
the benefit of the state?
The loss to Government by the relinquishment
of the duty on hemp to the general consumer, on
1000 tons, would he - <£3500
The benefits will be as follow : 600 tons in-
creased employment for mercantile shipping, in
consequence of performing one voyage in ten
months, instead of one in four months. Em-
ployment of 40 additional seamen in the naviga-
tion of 600 tons of shipping, shipwrights, ropers,
sailmakers, blockmakers, anchorsmiths, copper-
smiths, iron manufacturers, canvas, slops, ship
chandler’s stores, &c. &c. &c., to the amount of
£IO,OOO for the cost and equipment of 600 tons
of shipping, renewable every few years.
Thirty thousand pounds returned to the Co-
lony in the produce of the mines (iron, lead, tin,
and copper) of England; and in every description
of its manufactures—woollens, cottons, earthen-
ware, ironmongery, rum, porter, and ale, &c. &c.
too numerous to mention.*
* If the benefits derived by Government from duties of ex-
else. &c. chargeable through all the ramifications of eraploy-


In the infancy of a Colony, the certain main-
tenance of the Settlers should be well established ;
and it is also right to know with what facility
and at what cost, an adequate supply of neces-
saries, comforts, and even luxuries may be
obtained.
Adjacent, and favorably situated to Cockburn
Sound, are the Mauritius, Cape of Good Hope,
Timor, Java, Sumatra, and the East Indian
Presidencies.
Rice, from Java, can be obtained in five
weeks, at or under Id. per pound.
The bantam fowls and China pigs at equally
moderate prices.
Sugar, from the Mauritius, Java, or Calcutta,
at 3d. per pound.
Coffee, from Java, 4 d. per pound.
Spices, the production of the Moluccas, Ce-
lehees, &c. &c. at the lowest possible rate:—viz.
pepper, nutmegs, cloves, &c.
Algoa Bay, the Cape of Good Hope, furnishes
cattle and sheep. The coast of Cockburn Sound
meat in the production of 3630,000 of manufactures, could be
accurately calculated, no doubt the balance would be greatly
in favour of a sacrifice of 363500 duty upon one thousand tons
of hemp!


and Swan and Canning Rivers, promises plenty
of fish for the table —also, oil for use. Tea will
not cost more than 2s. 6 d. per pound through
Java; from whence stock of cattle, poultry and
pigs can be added of the best quality.
There is no intention in these remarks to
shew the extent of production of which the soil
and climate are capable; time and prosperity will
be requisite to bring forward all their capabilities.
Nothing, therefore, has been said of the articles
grown in similar latitudes in Asia, and carried
to Smyrna and other Turkish Ports at immense
distances, for export to England, France and
Holland. There is, however, no reason for sup-
posing that silk, (equal to that of Brussa,) opium,
madder roots, goats wool, senna, gums, currants,
raisins, and the highly esteemed Turkish tobacco,
and various other productions, may not be culti-
vated to advantage half a century hence. But,
in the commencement, it is sufficient to look to
early, certain, and profitable returns; without
calculating upon chances of wealth, which may
not be realized in the lifetime of the present
Adventurers.
J. Cross, Printer, 18, Holborn, opposite Farnival's Inn.
