

HINTS
TO
CRICKETERS
THE AUTHOR
Price 1s.
BY
ARTHUR CHRISTIAN


' YL
\.r
mmm
MI
mm
\ \ ,rf , ]| I* ih'' 1 r l7.
'l /o b:
*h
GROWNALL CRICKET BALLS
are equal to the best
imported- all hand sewa
... i«in» A
pt
sscTtoN below shows
iNfeIDC CONSTRUCTION
Vi
&
ssg
as
1 fe'sboft*'
CROWNALL
CRICKET BALLS
“ CROWNALL”
CRICKET BALLS
For Match Play
The Super CROWNALL -j
is a high-grade, 4-piece Ao, -
Match Ball, with selected cover,
special centre, genuine hand-sewn,
6-row ball.
Cut sewn, 2/6 extra.
The CROWNALL is a t i //
good, medium priced, At/O
hand-sewn ball, 4-piece, 6-row,
made specially for Club use.
Where a cheaper quality is
required, we recommend
SUPER KRAFT. A good i rj /
2 piece 6-row club ball, AU/“
hand-sewn throughout. SPECIAL
VALUE.
KRAFT, a 2-piece 6-row o /
Ball OX-
DEMAND THEM FROM
YOUR DEALER
HUGO
FISCHER Ltd.
PERTH Manufacturers
eceo


s\
KEEP your wicket up by
taking SAL VITAL —the
lemons Health Drink. The
stinging hot, thirsty days of
rummer take the starch out
of you, and you do dot feel
up to “TEST STANDARD.’’
Bubbling and sparkling with
health and vitality, SAL
VITAL is just the drink you
need to quench your thirst,
tool and refresh you, and
make you feel as fit as a
fiddle.
Keep a tin of SAL VITAL
handy as an emergency—you’ll
surely need a drink that, is
refreshing and invigorating
during the hot spell, or at any-
time you feel thirsty.
A glass first thing in the
morning means health for the
day.
■fuuxtih
\
-jL
n
m
A
IJI
I
&
-rc ■>
r- ■:
SERVES
YOU
HEALTH I
BICKFORD’S
JdefyiS
Agents for Western Australia:
Felton, Grimwade 8C Bickford Ltd.
PERTH


CHAMPION OF THE ROAD
AND .
A Real Australian
OLYMPIC
TYRE
Super-heated—steam and water definitely cure the Olympic
from the INSIDE and OUTSIDE, thus producing a perfectly
cured tyre.
“A Better Tyre at the Same Price”
Distributors - ATKINS (W.A.) LTD.


INTRODUCTION
TTHE Author of this little booklet was the greatest
all-round cricketer Western Australia has had, a
capable and inspiring captain, and a keen student of the
game. Mr. Christian is also a wise counsellor in the
administration of cricket in Western Australia, and he is
so well known that this publication needs no introduction
or commendation, but having been afforded the privilege
of writing a short foreword, I have much pleasure in
doing so.
The extensive experience of the author entitles him to
speak with authority on all matters pertaining to cricket,
and the subject of this instructive booklet has been treated
with his customary thoroughness, and in a most interesting
manner.
Mr. Christian has always taken a keen interest in the
development of young cricketers, and there is little doubt
that the articles were written, primarily, for their benefit.
The booklet is sure to have a far wider appeal, however,
and as it is bound to have a beneficial effect on cricket
generally, I trust it will have a wide circulation.
A. C. RANDELL, Chairman,
Western Australian Cricket Association
Cricket Committee.


For
PROTECTION
against
ACCIDENTS
or
Loss by
FIRE
Insure with
The Ocean Accident &
Guarantee Corp. Ltd.
BRANCH OFFICE:
66 ST. GEORGE’S TERRACE, PERTH
RUSSELL WRIGHT, Local Manager


FOREWORD
'T'HE articles printed in this booklet have
already been published in the West Aus-
tralian, and are written with the idea of
assisting the aspiring youngster to improve as
a cricketer.
Wherever a suggestion is made to play in
a certain way, or to do certain things, I have
endeavoured at the same time to fully explain
my reason for making such suggestion, so that
the idea may be carried out intelligently.
It is not of much value advising certain
actions if no explanation is given as to the
results to be expected.
The advice tendered, and suggestions made
are all either taken from actual personal ex-
perience, or from advice given to me when a
junior by some of the finest cricketers Australia
has ever produced.
If this pamphlet is of assistance to youths
anxious and ambitious to become good
cricketers, then my object has been attained.


HINTS ON CRICKET
Mr. Arthur Christian Engaged
Extract from West Australian, 17/10/34]
“The West Australian” has engaged Mr. Arthur Christian, for
many years one of the mainstays of the North Perth Club and the
the finest all-round cricketer in Western Australia, to contribute a
weekly article in which special, attention will be given to young players.
These articles will he published on Fridays.
A cricketer with the long experience of Mr. Christian is well
equipped to instruct the young idea in the way it should go and the way
it should not go, as since his retirement from active participation in the
game he has coached the younger members of his old club.
The performances of Mr. Christian in first-class cricket are out-
standing. Before coming to Western Australia he was a member of the
famous East Melbourne Club and represented Victoria in Sheffield
Shield contests.
A brief summary of his performances will indicate his all-round
ability.
Playing with East Melbourne from 1897 to 1906 he had 91 innings
for 2,509 runs, highest score 145 not out; average 30 runs.
He howled 8,747 balls, took 255 wickets for an average of 13.8.
His best season was 1904-5, when he won the batting average with
48 for ten completed innings and took 32 wickets for an average of 6.6.
Arthur Christian’s best performance in Sheffield Shield matches
was against a strong New South Wales side. He was one of the open-
ing pair and was out before lunch for 98. He hit sixteen fours and the
manner in which he ofif-drove and square-cut M. A. Noble, roused the
onlookers to enthusiasm. Joe Darling, who was an onlooker said that
it was one of the most brilliant batting feats he had ever witnessed.
Arthur Christian came to Western Australia in 1907, and for 14
seasons was the best all-round player in the State. Among outstanding
performances were his double of 73 and 57 runs against South Australia
in April, 1909, and taking 7 wickets for 144 and 4 for 56 in South
Australia’s second innings which was declared ct 5 for 116. Playing
against Victoria in 1910 he scored 31 and 97 and took 4 for 149 when
Victoria made the big total of 563.
In all he played 34 innings for Western Australia to score 793
runs and took 82 wickets at 25.7.
CLUB CRICKET N WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Batting: 207 innings, 33 not out, 6,655 runs, average 38.3.
Bowling: 3,000 overs, 522 maidens, 8,578 runs, 995 wickets, 8.6
average.
On two occasions he took over 100 wickets in a season, a feat
equalled only by “Bobbie” Selk.


ENCOURAGEMENT OF JUNIORS
This season should be a most successful one in Western Australia.
The fact that Ernie Bromley, a West Australian, was selected as a
member of the Australian team to tour England should prove a great
incentive to our junior players.
There are plenty of good cricketers in Western Australia who
need only a bit more experience, and in some cases more enthusiasm,
to shape them into really first-class players.
To reach Australian XI standard, regular intensive practice is
absolutely necessary, and the game should be studied very closely.
What Bromley has done should be accomplished by others, so our
youngsters should set themselves determinedly to improve their game
generally, and to keep on improving it. After all, although other classes
of sport have ardent devotees, cricket stands alone as the finest game
in the world, and is well worth all the attention and study we can
give it.
Never do I remember such interest in cricket as has been shown
during the tour of England by the Australian team. For the past three
months cricket has been played fairly regularly by both young and
old, in and around Perth. This interest is due to the great performances
of the Australian XI, and also to the wonderfully interesting manner
in which a ball by ball description of the Test matches was broadcast
from Sydney. Hundreds of people who hitherto had taken not the
slightest interest in the game looked forward quite keenly to these
broadcasts, listened in regularly, and were quite eager to discuss the
various happenings afterwards.
Passing a lane one lunch time in Perth, I noticed a cricket match
in progress. The bat used was a bat of sorts, and the wicket two
petrol tins. Just as I came opposite the lane, the bowler had evidently
sent down one “ out of the box,” as there was a great rattle of tins,
and immediately one of the fieldsmen remarked “And he’s out!” Evid-
ently the young sport had been “ listening in.”
It is to be hoped that cricketers will continue their keenness and
enthusiasm throughout the season, not only to improve their cricket,
but also to give spectators something worth watching. The general
attendance of spectators at the senior games has of recent years been
very meagre, but this is, to a great extent, the fault of the players
themselves.
If the players will only display more keenness and energy, especi-
ally in the field, and play the game as it should be played, good attend-
ances will be the result. There was never yet an Australian who was
not ready to watch a keenly contested sport of any description, from a
cricket match to a dog fight.
The selection of Bromley as a member of the Australian XI shows
very clearly that the Australian Board of Control are quite prepared
to select players whom they consider to be the best exponents of the
game, irrespective of the State to which they belong. It is true that
Bromley has been a resident of Victoria for some little time, but the
fact remains that he learnt his cricket in Western Australia.


With this example before them, the clubs this season should afford
promising juniors every opportunity of progressing. When I say this
I do not mean that if a youngster in any district shows promise of
developing into a good cricketer, he should be selected in the “A”
team, put in to bat last or second last on the list, never given a bowl,
and be asked to field in the outfield during the whole match. This is
not giving the lad either encouragement or chances, but rather will it
make him long to be back in his old team where his ability is properly
recognised.
A sufficiently promising junior should be given a place in the “A”
team, and should be placed on the batting list (that is if he is in the
team for batting), so that when his turn comes to go in, the batsman
at the other end will be old and experienced, and one who is capable
and willing to help the youngster with a word of encouragement oc-
casionally, which will go a long way towards helping him to overcome
that natural nervousness with which everyone is more or less afflicted
in his first big match.
It is wonderful how encouraging it is to a youngster to have his
experienced batting partner give him a word of encouragement or com-
mendation occasionally. It bucks the lad up tremendously and shows
him that his older clubmate is taking an interest in him. This encourage-
ment will naturally give the junior more confidence, so that he will
be in a better frame of mind to demonstrate the ability which resulted
in his selection in the team.
If the boy should be a bowler, the captain should try to field within
easy speaking distance so that encouragement and advice could be
easily given.
Nothing is more disheartening to a junior having his first match
with the “A” team than to get the impression that he is in the side
simply as a stop-gap and to do all the running about in the field so
that the older players may have an easier time.
The treatment of juniors is being stressed because time and time
again I have seen lads selected because of their good play in a lower
grade, and then not given an opportunity of doing themselves justice,
simply through either carelessness or selfishness on the part of the
seniors in the team.
One of the main objects which should always be in the minds of
the clubs this season is—try to make the game attractive to the public.
Play the game in all its branches with zest and enthusiasm, and for
goodness’ 1 sake be lively and keen in the field. There is every indication
that the general public are now keenly interested in cricket, and it is
up to the players to keep that interest alive, and perhaps increase it,
but this can be done only by every member of every team entering into
the game wholeheartedly and doing his utmost in every match.
Just notice Bradman when he is bowling, batting or fielding; he
is absolutely keyed up all the time, and in consequence is the greatest
cricket attraction who has ever appeared in Australia or England. Jack
Gregory was another example, and thousands of people have attended
matches just for the sake of seeing men such as these in action.


Next chapter I intend offering some advice to young cricketers, most
of which will be the result of personal experience over 30 years’ par-
ticipation in senior cricket.
It is a very great pleasure for me to take advantage of the oppor-
tunity to offer our junior cricketers some advice which I hope they will
find of benefit. .
After 30 years’ continual experience in senior cricket, my first
season still stands out very distinctly in my memory, and I will never
forget the kindly advice and encouragement given me by those famous
old-time champions, Tom Horan, Harry Boyle and Frank Laver. These
three names will perhaps not have much meaning to the youngsters of
to-day, but in their day these men were known throughout Australia
and England as three of the finest cricketers in the world. Most of
the advice I am offering was given to me by them when I was a lad
and anxious to improve as a cricketer.
The first essentials are enthusiasm and determination to progress.
About the first thing I was told was that it is impossible to con-
centrate unless you are comfortably and suitably clad. Flannel shirt
open at the neck, and serge trousers, should be roomy (but not over
big, of course), while footwear should consist of thick woollen socks
and thick soled boots, fitted with good serviceable sprigs. Be quite sure
and have your sleeves rolled up to just below the elbow.
The reason for properly sprigged thick-soled boots is that your
feet should be well supported and protected from the hard ground,
and that your feet shall not slip. A day’s fielding on a hard ground,
wearing thin-soled boots or sand-shoes, will make your feet very tired
and sore, with the result that towards the end of the day you are
thinking more of saving your feet than of playing your best. If your
clothing is quite comfortable and your boots suitably soled and sprigged,
you are free to concentrate entirely on the game whether batting, bowl-
ing or fielding.
Keep your fingernails trimmed fairly short, so that if you happen
to misfield a ball they will not be broken. Such a happening is painful
and may cause you to be a little bit timid when next you are stopping
the ball. Do not wear a ring or wristlet watch when playing. The
first is dangerous, and the watch looks quite out of place.
Now that you are suitably dressed and ready to commence play,
make up your mind that, whether you are batting, bowling or fielding,
you will do your very best right up to the last ball of the day. If you
should slacken off at any time it may mean the loss of your wicket,
more runs to the opposing side, or a dropped catch, which may be
altogether disastrous to your side.
PHYSICAL FITNESS
Physical fitness is just as important for cricket as any other game.
A full day in the field or the making of a century calls for a great
amount of energy, and if you are not in sufficiently good training, your
play must suffer. To give you some idea of what physical fitness
means, let me recall that Don Bradman batted all day in the fourth
Test match, and 20 minutes before closing time hit the ball right out


of the ground for six. If you can keep yourself in a fit enough con-
dition to do that, then your play will be just as good at the end of the
day as it was at the start.
The main factors which go towards the making of a first-class
cricketer are natural ability, enthusiasm, pluck and practice. Even with-
out natural ability the last three factors should make you into quite a
fair cricketer.
When I say practice, I do not mean going down to the ground on
Tuesdays and Thursdays, having an indiscriminate slog for 7 or 10
minutes and then 15 or 20 minutes’ casual bowling—that kind of prac-
tice is quite useless. When your turn to bat arrives, see that you have
your pads correctly fitted, with no loose straps, and then bat as though
you were playing in an important match. Do your best to make good
strokes along the ground, and, above all, if you have a coach try very
hard to follow his instructions. Try placing the ball when batting.
Should the wicket be enclosed on both sides with nets, imagine the
posts to be fieldsmen and endeavour to place your strokes accordingly.
If you bat in this way at practice you will naturally do the same in a
match, and must improve.
When bowling at practice, concentrate on keeping a length with
direction. Quite a sound idea is to select one stump of the three and
bowl at that consistently. Should you be turning the ball, then pitch
it in such a spot that the break will bring it back to the stump at which
you are bowling. Perhaps the batsman, for the sake of strengthening
a weakness, will ask you to bowl at some particular spot, either on the
off or leg. If so, concentrate on this spot instead of the wicket, but
you must maintain a good length, not only to improve your bowling,
but also to afford the batsman an opportunity of improving his game
also. Do not bowl for too long without a spell, otherwise you .will get
overtired and consequently careless. Fifteen minutes is quite long
enough; then perhaps have another 10 minutes half an hour or so later.
FIELDING PRACTICE
Try to get as much fielding practice as you can. A splendid method
for practising fielding is to have someone with a bat and a couple of
balls hitting catches to you. When you think sufficient time has been
spent on practice, finish up with a run round the ground, a shower and
a brisk rub down. If you follow this procedure regularly two evenings
each week, your game must improve, and the Saturday matches will
continue to be a pleasure right up to closing time.
As you will see, I have not .yet attempted to deal with the actual
game itself, but simply with the methods to be adopted in order to
prepare you thoroughly to take part in a match, and to play the game
as it should be played. Make up your mind to neglect nothing which
will increase your value as a player to your side, and remember that
the success of your team should at all times be your first, second and
last consideration.
In my next article I shall try to give you some idea as to the
actual game in its various branches, batting, bowling and fielding. These
suggestions will be the result of actual experience over a number of
years, and their value has been proved over and over again.


HINTS TO YOUNG PLAYERS
Dress, Stance and Material
If you want to become a good cricketer the first essentials are
enthusiasm and determination to play the game as it should be played.
Cricket is the best game in the world, and is well worth the expenditure
of a good deal of your time in studying its various phases. So just
make up your mind that it is a worth-while game, and, of course,
whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing as well as ever you can.
You cannot all be champions, but by perseverance and concentration
most of you could develop into useful players.
If you are going to give your whole attention to the game you
should be suitably dressed. When I say suitably dressed, I mean so
that your clothes and boots are comfortably fitting. If this is not the
case a certain amount of your attention is taken from the game while
thinking of your discomfort.
When you are selected to play in a match be punctual. It is bad
to see a player rush out on to the field five or ten minutes after the
game has actually started. When playing, obey your captain quickly
and cheerfully, and whatever you do refrain from criticising his in-
structions. Remember that the captain has been selected by the team
as being the most suitable man for the job, and all the players should
be content to do as he says. Nothing disorganises a side more than to
have one or more of the player questioning the captain’s orders, and
perhaps doing as told reluctantly and unwillingly. Team work wins
matches, not individuals, and if one of a side is not doing his best,
then the whole machinery of the team is thrown out of gear, with
the result that errors are made which may possibly result in the loss
of the match. On the other hand, if the eleven players are working
smoothly together, and each one trying his hardest, the game is not
only much more enjoyable, but the side has much more chance of suc-
cess. So, take an old man’s advice, and go in to bat when you are told,
bowl or not bowl as you are ordered, and field in any position to which
the captain may send you. Do all these things cheerfully to the best
of your ability; then you will see what a fine game cricket really is.
Now, coming to the actual game itself. I suppose most of you
prefer batting to either bowling or fielding, so I will start with batting.
Choose a bat which will be of the most suitable weight for your style
of play. The batsman who scores most of his runs in front of the
wicket will need a heavier bat than the man who depends mainly on
late cutting and leg glancing for his runs.
See that your pads are fitted so that the buckles on the straps are
on the inside of each leg, and be careful to tuck the strap ends away
securely. It is very untidy to see loose straps, and, besides, there is


LEKMEK
RADIOS
A ustralias
Best
A Lekmek for Every Home
Remarkable Range of
Lekmek Models
as under:
58 E.M.—5 Valve A.C.
58 E.C.—5 Valve A.C.
504—5 Valve A.C. . . .
51 E.C. —5 Valve A.C.
62 E.C.—6 Valve A.C.
604—6 Valve A.C. D.C.
603—6 Valve A.C. Dual Wave
701—7 Valve A.C. All-wave
803—8 Valve A.C. Broadcast
1 101 1 1 Valve A.C. All-
wave
45 B.M
Short
45 E.M
Short-
-53 B.M.
53 8.C.-
501 M.-
501 C.-
54 8.C.-
601—6
802—8
wave
. —3 Valve Battery
-wave Converter .. .
.—4 Valve A.C.
-wave Converter .. .
-4 Valve Battery Set
—4 Valve Battery Set
—5 Valve Battery Set
—5 Valve Battery Set
—5 Valve Battery Set
Valve Battery Set . .
Valve Battery All-
Set
£ s. d.
15 12
19 19
22 10
28
29 17
37 17
39 15 0
40
51 19 6
15 15 0
17 11 6
25 10 0
28 10 0
30 0
32 10
37 10 0
41 5 0
52 10 0
DUAL-WAVE, SHORT-WAVE, ALL-WAVE, BROADCAST, also
SHORT-WAVE CONVERTERS to suit all makes.
Agents in Western Australia:
H.C. Little* Co. Ltd.
858 Hay Street ■ ■ Perth


always the danger of the ball hitting one of them and the umpire giving
you out, caught behind the wickets. This has happened on quite a
number of occasions.
If you should be playing on turf be quite sure that your boots are
properly sprigged. It is always preferable to wear boots rather than
shoes, and heavy soled ones at that. Boots provide much more support
for your feet and ankles than shoes, and. with heavy soles, permit you
to play the whole day through without becoming unduly footsore.
HOLDING THE BAT
The most convenient way of holding the bat is to grasp the handle
with your lower hand, from two and a half to three inches above the
splice. Your upper hand will then be perhaps half an inch away from
your lower hand. The back of the lower hand is facing the wicket
which you are defending, and the back of the top hand will be facing
the bowler.
When taking block ask the umpire to give you middle stump, as
by so doing you will have your bat, when shaping up to 1 the bowler,
covering as much of the wicket as possible. When you have block,
place your feet in such a position that your head will be directly .above
the blade of the bat. This means that your eye will be in a direct line
with the bowler and directly in front of the middle stump, so that you
can more easily judge if the ball is coming straight or otherwise.
The best way to place your feet when standing at the wickets is
from nine to 12 inches apart, according to your height, and have your
body balanced equally upon both of them. A stand such as this enables
you to play back or forward as quickly as possible, and in order to
execute a stroke correctly, the position of your feet should be placed
properly in quick time. When facing up to the bowler, concentrate
on watching his hand and arm. By doing this, you will be able to
judge immediately the pace at which he is bowling, and also be able
to tell in which direction he is trying to turn the ball. These two points
are very important, so that you can have as much time as possible to
get into position and play the correct stroke.
When you get a loose ball, see that you hit it hard, but have the
stroke well under control so that the ball will travel wide of the fields-
men, thereby giving you much more opportunity of scoring. It is not
of much use hitting the ball hard if it is to go straight to a fieldsman.
Besides wasting your energy needlessly, it is only giving the fieldsman
useful practice. When making a shot keep your bat well over the ball
all the time, and when playing a late cut see that the bat comes down
on top of the ball and not on the side of it. You can, I am sure, easily
see the advisability of making a shot in this manner. If the bat is
placed on the side of the ball when making a stroke, there is a big
possibility of the ball coming along off the pitch a wee bit higher than
you anticipate, with the result that the slip fieldsmen are given an op-
portunity of making a catch, whereas if you have the bat on top of
the ball there is no possibility of a catch being given.


THE SQUARE CUT
For square cutting the bat should be placed directly behind the ball
with the blade turned slightly towards the ground, so that when the
shot is made the ball will naturally be sept long the ground instead of
up into the air. When driving, the ball should be hit when it has reached
a spot directly below your head. This will keep it along the ground.
Should you strike the ball with the bat before it reaches the above
position, naturally your bat is moving upwards at the time of impact,
and the fieldsmen are given an opportunity of taking a catch. 1 would
advise you not to try and hit sixes, as generally the boundary is a long
way away, and it is quite easy to miss putting that extra ounce or two
into your shot which is necessary to land the ball over the fence. You
will find scoring quite rapid enough by hitting fours, without jeopardis-
ing your wicket.
To pull a short ball to square-leg, the back foot should be placed
across in front of the wicket so that your body will be facing the direc-
tion in which the ball is coming. This position will give you very
much more power in making this particular shot. Be satisfied always
to stop a good ball without scoring off it. If you are batting for any
length of time you are sure to get any amount of loose balls without
running any risk with the good ones.
It is remarkable how many short runs can be easily obtained with-
out the slightest risk of a run out if the two batsmen thoroughly under-
stand each other and use discretion. One batsman only should have
the call in every case. If the ball is played in front of the wicket the
striker should have the privilege of calling for a run, while if the
ball goes behind the wicket then the non-striker should call. If only
one of the batsmen calls each time, and the other one watches him and
responds instantly, there will be no confusion between the wickets,
and you will never see a batsman running out, hesitating, and perhaps
running back, which so often happens when the players both decide to
call at the same time.
MAIN SCORING STROKES
Value of Foot-work
There are a number of scoring strokes other than cutting, late
cutting and driving, such as cover driving, leg glancing and hitting to
leg, while there are also the defensive strokes to be considered.
Cover driving is a variation of the straight drive and should be
made by moving the front foot across the wicket so that the body is
facing cover point, and the bat swung over the shoulder in that direc-
tion. Following through with the bat after actual contact with the
ball is a very important factor in the correct execution of this shot,
which should be made off a ball well pitched up on, or a little outside,
the off stump. It is quite a safe stroke to attempt, provided the front
foot is moved well across to enable the batsman to get well over the
ball.


The leg glance is executed by standing directly in front of the ball
and allowing it to glide off the face of the bat. It is a delicate shot,
very pretty to watch when made correctly, and success depends almost
entirely upon correct timing. The leg glance is used when a ball is of
good length, or a little bit further up and coming straight at the bats-
man, though quite a number of the champions, both in England and
Australia, use the leg glance to a ball pitched on the leg stump. How-
ever, in this case a miss almost invariably means an l.b.w. decision
against the batsman.
The hit to leg is a safe stroke from a half volley or a long hop,
coming either straight at the batsman or outside his legs. If the timing
is correct, the ball can be placed clear of the fieldsmen for an almost
certain four. A number of cricketers use the leg glance persistently
against a ball which should be hit and hit hard. It is much better for
the side if the batsman hits the ball to leg for four than if he makes
a stylish leg glance for a single. I am a great believer in hitting a ball
hard when it can be done with safety and with some idea of missing
the fieldsmen.
PULLING A SHORT BALL
The pull off a short ball is a sure scoring shot and one which is
absolutely safe if a little judgment is used. Should the batsman be
lucky enough to get a long hop bowled either at the wicket or straight
at him, he should move his back foot across the wicket quickly in order
to be squarely facing the ball. From this position he will find that
Comfortable and correct stance at
the wickets
tremendous power is possible
and that the ball can be hit on
the on side in almost any direc-
tion. There is no need to lift the
ball off the ground for a shot
such as this. It must be remem-
bered that timing has everything
to do with the direction the ball
will take. For instance, if you
want to play the ball forward of
short leg, then the bat must make
contact sooner than if the direc-
tion sought is behind the square
leg fieldsman.
The strokes described in this
and the previous chapter cover, I
think, the chief scoring shots of
the batsman. They will, of course,
be varied in direction, and the
batsman’s aim should always be
to pick out the open spaces. You
will notice that when describing
the above strokes the first thing
mentioned is correct placement
of the feet, and I am quite sure
you will fully realise that once you are standing correctly the proper


shot can be made easily with the maximum of safety and minimum of
effort.
One of the two most noticeable faults with our batsmen seems to
be stepping back from the wicket before attempting to play a ball
pitched either on the leg stump or going straight at the batsman. By
doing this, the batsman immediately moves his head away from above
the line of flight, gets his feet out of position, and then finds it almost
impossible to make a decent shot. The other fault is attempting to
square cut a ball pitched outside the off stump without moving across.
This is dangerous, as unless he is well over the bally the line of flight is
very difficult to judge, and, in consequence, the success of the shot
depends too much upon luck.
BUILDING UP DEFENCE
So far I have dealt entirely with scoring strokes, but there is the
other side of the question to be considered—defence. Here again cor-
rect placement of the feet should be the first care. Whether the bats-
man plays back or forward when on the defensive depends entirely
on the pitch of the ball. If the ball is up far enough for him to reach
on the half-volley, or close enough so that he can make the stroke before
any spin takes effect, then he should play forward; but if he is doubtful
about being able to reach the ball in this fashion, then he should move
back and give himself as much time as possible to see what the ball is
doing.
The correct method of playing a
forward defensive shot.
Back play is essential when the wicket is bad, as then the ball is
liable to cut all sorts of capers. The longer the batsman has to watch
the flight of the ball, the more chance there will be of his successfully
stopping it. Whether playing forward or back, he should be quite sure


of keeping his head well over the bat, which will help him in turn to
get his bat directly behind the ball.
Apart from actual stroke making, there are other things in con-
nection with batting which might well be mentioned at this stage. Do
not make a chance shot, generally known as a “perhapser”—meaning,
perhaps you will hit the ball and perhaps you will not. Make up your
mind about the stroke you intend to play as soon as you see the
ball coming along, and do your best to play a stroke correctly. What-
ever you do, refrain from deciding upon a particular stroke before the
hall is actually delivered.
Do not give your wicket away through carelessness. Remember
there are eleven men in the field trying to get you out, so why increase
it to twelve by being reckless or careless, and so assisting your oppon-
ents instead of helping your side? Try and use good judgment when
running between the wickets. Many a good innings has been termin-
ated by faulty judgment in this direction, but at the same time do not
miss taking a run when it is available. For example, should the man
in the outfield be a poor thrower there should be a run obtainable after
he has actually picked up the ball, but of course you want to be sure
that he really is a poor thrower. A number of times I have seen the
outfieldsman return the ball to the bowler slowly along the ground.
If both batsmen are watching, a very easy run may be taken in this
case.
PLAY FOR THE SIDE
Play as correctly as possible always, concentrate on placing the
ball, watch the bowler’s hand and arm, and at all times be on the
look-out to get runs through slack or careless fielding. Accept at all
times the umpire’s decision without question or hesitation, even if you
thnk his ruling is incorrect. Nothing looks more unsportsmanlike than
for a batsman after being given out to show by his actions that he
disagrees with the umpire.
Do not become conceited over your ability as a batsman if you
do happen to get a good score. You should not spend any time after-
wards patting yourself on the back for the good strokes made. You
would be much better employed in thinking over the bad shots included
in your innings, and working out how to improve on them in future.
By doing this you will probably make a larger score next time. Remem-
ber always that your aim' should be to make runs for the benefit of
your team and not for the sake of bettering your individual batting
average. A batsman who is everlastingly thinking of his batting average
is a constant nuisance to his side.


CORRECT CUTTING
Perfect Control Necessary
Last chapter I tried to describe how the hat should meet the ball for
square cutting, late cutting and driving. Now I will endeavour to tell in
plain language how to play these shots correctly.
To play the square cut move your back foot across the wicket so as to
get as near'as possible to the line of flight of the ball. Then swing your
bat well back towards your shoulder and bring it down behind the ball
when it is directly opposite to your body. An important point to re-
member is to follow through with the bat after actually making contact
with the ball. The hat should come directly behind the ball with the
face slightly turned towards the ground. Do not swipe, but hit the
ball reasonably hard and have the shot sufficiently controlled so that
This picture shows the correct position
of feet, bat and head when playing
forward
you may be able to place the
stroke out of reach of the fields-
man. If the stroke is timed cor-
rectly, the ball will travel hard
enough to reach the boundary
without excessive effort on the
part of the striker.
To make the late cut cor-
rectly the back foot is moved well
across the wicket and the bat
brought down on top of the ball
when it is just past the body.
The swing of the bat for this
stroke is not as long as that
used for square cutting, and here
again the speed at which the ball
travels from the bat depends en-
tirelv upon correct timing. The
pace at which the ball leaves the
bowler’s hand helps the speed of
the stroke, but even from slow
bowling it is quite possible to
score a four if the bat meets the
ball at exactly the right instant.
Although a well executed late cut
is one of the prettiest shots in
the game, it is also, perhaps, the
most dangerous. It is certainly
a very risky stroke to try without
moving in to the correct position
and bringing the bat down on top of the ball.


IMPORTANCE OF TIMING
We will suppose a fast bowler is operating. There will be the
wicket-keeper standing 10 or 15 yards back from the wicket, with
three men in slips, a third man, and a point (who will probably be
moved so that he is fielding slightly behind the wicket). Thus six
fieldsmen out of the eleven are in a position to snap up a badly executed
late or square cut. When you consider this side of the matter I am
quite sure you will realise how important it is to play the stroke
correctly if you want to remain at the wicket.
Watching the Australian XI when they last played in Perth, I
noticed particularly that; neither Ponsfofid nor Woodfull seemed
anxious to back cut Halcombe’s bowling, but preferred to move right
across the wicket and play a forward shot with a perfectly straight bat.
I know from experience the danger of standing firm-footed and attempt-
ing to cut, either late or square, a ball outside the off stump. It has
been my downfall hundreds of times. When I did get out like this,
my captain, Frank Laver, was sure to pass some uncomplimentary
remarks about my style of play.
In one interstate match between South Australia and Victoria,
Clem Hill settled down and scored 175 runs without giving a chance.
He was well over the century and had not attempted to cut a
single ball. Noticing this, one of the bowlers took third man away and
placed him at extra cover, leaving a wide, open space behind the
wicket. The next ball Hill cut beautifully for four and while at the
other end in running remarked, “Don't you think it as well to have a
third man.” These champions will back cut as long as there is little
or no risk, but as soon as there is a fieldsman placed waiting for the
shot they prefer to use shots in front of the wicket. To sum up, I
would advise you to be careful with your late cutting and to use it
only when there is a wide, open space, and you are sure you can play
the shot correctly.
ART OF DRIVING
Although a well executed late cut is a fine shot, it is very hard to
beat a really honest drive which causes the ball to hit the boundary
fence with a resounding bang. Besides being very spectacular, it is,
I suppose, the safest shot in the book. The drive was Warwick Arm-
strong’s pet stroke. He used to tiniq it perfectly, and when he received
a ball to suit him the whole weight of his body was behind the bat at
the moment of contact. The ball used to travel so fast that, if it were
anv distance at all away from the outfield, the fieldsman had no chance
of cutting it off.
To drive properly, the front foot should be moved forward close to
the direction in which the ball is travelling from the bowler’s hand.
The bat should then be swung back past the shoulder and should meet
the ball just as it comes directly beneath the batsman. At the actual


moment of contact, the body should be moving forward, and the bat
swung right through in one long sweep. Charlie Macartney, when
driving past cover-point, seemed to throw the whole weight of his body
on top of the stroke, and it was surprising the force which resulted.
A mistake often made by our batsmen is to have all the weight
on the back foot when driving.* By doing this, very much less power
is imparted to the stroke, and whr.t is much worse, there is a decided
tendency to lift the ball ofif the ground, thereby giving mid-off or
cover-point a chance of taking a catch. If your body is moving back-
wards while your hat is moving in the opposite direction, a really good
drive is impossible, besides calling for much more energy.
The important points to'think of when making the above strokes
are: — %
(1) Correct placing of the feet.
(2) Correct movement of the body.
(3) Correct timing.
(4) Follow through.
If you can do these four things you will be well on the way towards
becoming a first-class batsman.
EFFECTS OF NERVOUSNESS
Poor Deliveries Often Flattered
Probably the biggest disadvantage a young batsman has to contend
with, particularly in his first important match, is nervousness. Many
times I have seen a youngster, who was really good at batting, shape
like a regular novice entirely through extreme nervousness when pro-
moted to a higher grade. Of course, the bowling improves as a player
moves along to a higher grade, hut at the same time no bowler is un-
playable, and there is certainly no howler in the world who does not
bowl a loose one occasionally—one that is simply asking to he hit for
four.
Generally the reason for such nervousness is the howler’s reputa-
tion, and my advice to the young cricketer is, when he is lucky enough,
or shows sufficient ability to earn promotion to a higher grade, to go out
to the wicket with confidence in his ability to play the strokes correctly,
and to forget any reputation the bowler may have. Nervousness will
depend to a certain extent upon a youngster’s nature, but at the same
time most of it can and will be overcome by concentrating his mind
on the fact that he is capable of playing good bowling.


One incident stands out vividly in my memory as an example of
nervousness being the cause of a good batsman losing his wicket. A
combined metropolitan team was playing a combined country team. The
In making the late cut the back foot is
moved across with the head well over the
ball and the bat coming down on the
ball
country team was batting and at
the fall of the first wicket in came
a batsman whose scores through-
out the season had been close to
creating a record. I was bowling
at the time, and after he had
taken block and shaped up the
first ball he got was a simple
straight slow ball with absolutely
no guile about it. The batsman,
evidently expecting something
extraordinary, played a stroke
which would have disgraced a
schoolboy and was bowled. If the
same ball had been bowled to this
man in an ordinary club match
he would have hit it for four
without any hesitation whatever.
What I want to impress upon
you is waste no time in thinking
of the bowler’s reputation, but
set your mind entirely on watch-
ing the ball and making your
stroke, and do not forget to deal
severely with the loose ones.
HIT THE BALL
While being content always to stop a really good ball, do not fall
into the habit of pottering about and dealing too gently with balls
which can be safely hit hard. Always play the ball, and do not just
hold your bat still for the ball to hit. A really good batsman is always
looking for runs, but is not reckless by trying to score from balls which
should be treated carefully.
Endeavour to secure a pair of pads which feel comfortable, and
do not impede your running between the wickets. The strap above the
knee should be fairly loosely buckled, while the other two, especially
the one at the foot, should be fastened tightly enough to keep the pad
in the correct position. It is advisable to wear two batting gloves,
preferably those covering the whole of the hand, and I would advise
wearing them also at practice so that you will become quite accustomed
to them. By being well padded and gloved, more confidence in standing
up to the ball is gained.
Have confidence in your partner and run immediately he calls.
Hesitation in starting for a run is generally disastrous. When run-
ning between the wickets keep off the pitch as much as possible. The


runners should keep on opposite sides, and the striker should note the
side on which his partner is running, then use the opposite. The bats-
man at the bowler’s end should stand, of course, on that side of the
wicket not being used by the bowler. Should you hit the ball into the
outfield, when passing your partner between the wickets it is helpful
to let him know if there is more than one run possible. The informa-
tion, if there should be more runs possible, will enable him to make a
quicker start on his return journey.
When there is a possibility of a second run, the batsman should
run only far enough, to allow him to reach forward and let the bat touch
the ground just behind the popping crease. He should then turn as
quickly,as possible to start the return run before actually looking for
the ball. When running a short one, do not forget to ground your
bat as you approach the crease, and if you watch the man waiting to
take the ball at the wickets, you will be able to form a good idea, by
his actions, of the proximity of the ball.
When your partner is taking strike, back up a yard or two after
the ball has left the bowler’s hand, but be quite su/re that the ball is
actually in flight before leaving your crease. By making a couple of
yards in this manner, you have less distance to run, and consequently
less chance of being run out.
Often I have seen a batsman, after playing the ball, pick it up
and return it to the bowler, or perhaps knock it back with his bat.
Although this latter action is not so bad, it is better to let the fieldsmen
do this work. It looks bad for the batsman to handle the ball, and, of
course, if there is an appeal, you would be given out.
KEENNESS TO LEARN
Although it is essential to have confidence in your ability as a
batsman, be quite sure not to get the idea into your head that you know
all there is to know about cricket, and that no one can teach you any-
thing. I have met several youngsters who have adopted this attitude,
and although they might have possessed a lot of natural ability, they
would never get past a certain stage. No one is such a good player
but that there will be something about the game he can learn. Consider
how it is that the members of the Australian and English teams aie
such wonderful players, Most of them are naturally good players, but
this natural ability had to be developed by the picking up of useful
points, here, there and everywhere. Ihe result is that they become
champions.
Be on the watch constantly to find out how these players go about
their work, and I am sure that the ideas you glean will improve your
play a great deal.


Dependable Cricket Materials
by the World’s best
makers at -
Makers’ names that are most familiar and
respected wherever cricket is played. Bats,
balls, wickets, pads, gloves, and indeed every
possible accessory are obtainable at Foy’s, and,
in every instance all cricket material at Foy’s
has been personally selected by leading world
cricketers, each an outstanding performer in
his particular sphere of the game. Before
selecting cricket material be sure to inspect
the range at Foy’s, for, besides the assured
reliability you will find that the values are
easily the best obtainable in Western Australia.
Special Discount
allowed to Clubs
FOY& GIBSON Pty. Ltd.
>
m
I: r
a


Do not show off. If you are spending time on thinking how
prettily you are batting, that will be so much time wasted. Tf you wish
to improve your batting, it will be necessary for you to give your whole
mind to the job. Concentrate entirely on your batting and let the
spectator do the thinking about your style, pretty or otherwise.
A very good way to overcome weaknesses, should you happen to
make a good 'score, is to recall the strokes you made, and instead of
dwelling on the good shots, think of the bad ones and decide upon
methods you will adopt to correct these errors. By doing this your
next innings will be freer from errors, and consequently of more value
to your side.
By the above suggestions, I am trying to show you that batting
is not only a matter of using the bat correctly for the purpose of
hitting the ball. To be successful, a great deal of thought and con-
centration is very necessary. Batting may be classed as a friendly
battle with the striker on one side, and the ten fieldsmen and a bowler
on the other, with victory to the side which backs up ability with clever
thinking.
ART OF BOWLING
Developing the Fast Ball
The great majority of cricketers prefer batting to either bowling
or fielding, although I am sure that they realise that the three branches
of the game are of equal importance. There is certainly a decided thrill
in making a good stroke and watching the ball racing to the boundary,
but the ability to beat and bowl a good batsman is, I believe, still more
thrilling.
For whichever branch of the sport you decide to make your special
hobby, our first requirement is enthusiasm coupled with the determina-
tion to succeed, irrespective of the number of disappointments and
failures you may meet at the outset. Constant practice is also most
essential. Then you should realise that a good bowler must be physically
fit to stand the strain of a long day at the bowling crease. Be quite
suie that you wear boots which are "fitted with good, serviceable sprigs
(if you are playing on turf), and that your clothing is roomy and com-
foi table. Try to develop a style of bowling which is most natural, and
decide upon a run up to the bowling crease with no awkward twists
or side turns in it.
When a youngster commences his career as a bowler, his first care
should be to decide upon the length of run which will be most suitable.
l his can be done by bowling in your natural style, and then measuring
oflf the number of strides taken to reach the correct position at the
bowling ciease. Whether you are to be a fast, medium or slow bowler,
depends upon your natural aptitude and phvsique.


PHYSICAL STRENGTH
It is not much use deciding to be a fast bowler unless you have the
physical ability to stand the strain involved. Just think of all the great
fast bowlers there have been in England and Australia, and you will
find that, without exception, they were all big strong men. For instance.
Crip for an off-break. Note the first
finger placed along the seam of the
ball
those speed merchants whom I
can remember are Richardson
(England), Jones, Cotter, Greg-
ory and McDonald (Australia)
and Larwood (England). All
these men were very powerfully
built, which, of course, was an
absolute necessity, as a fast
bowler to be of use to his side
must be able to maintain his pace
consistently.
A fast bowler relies upon
pace mostly to give him results.
A medium paced bowler strives
for accuracy of length and direc-
tion, while a slow bowler depends
upon spin combined with ac-
curacy. Let us first consider the
fast bowler and try to visualise
one of the champions, say Larwood, in action. I am selecting Larwood
as an example, as he is freshest in our memory, and forgetting the
body-line controversy, he really is a fine bowler. Larwood, I think,
takes a run of 16 or 17 yards up to the bowling crease, and if you
watch him closely, you will notice that not one yard of that run is
wasted or unnecessary. The pace of his approach to the bowling crease
steadily increases until, at the actual instant of delivery, he is travelling
at top speed. His arm extended at full length is brought over as high
as possible, while his right wrist at the commencement of the swing
is bent backwards as far as possible. For the delivery his arm is
brought down at a terrific speed, the wrist being bent forward, and
the whole weight of his body follows the arm. Action such as this by a
fast bowler must require strength, so that you should abandon the idea
of being a fast bowler if you are not built for the part.
GRIPPING THE BALL
Grip the ball so that your fingers are in a naturally comfortable
position, and the fingers (generally the first and second) which have
most to do with the spin and flight, should be placed on the seams,
which you will find will increase the friction of yOur hand on the ball.
Should you be of the rght build, the first thing to remember is to
measure the length of your run accurately so that you can start off and
finally deliver the ball from the correct spot without having to alter
your stride in any way. Run so that your speed will increase with


Success . . .
f
u
YOU WILL GET EARLY RESULTS BY
ADOPTING THE BODYLINE OF
R. B. HENKEL 8C CO.
Service
Style
Satisfaction
R. B. Henkel & Co.
Tailors
128 WILLIAM STREET, PERTH


every stride, and on no account (as I have seen lots of fast bowlers
do) travel at top speed when half-way through your run, then slow
down to be sure of placing your feet in the right spot behind the bowling
crease.
Keep your arm well up when delivering the ball. Your body must
be upright and follow your arm in its final action. All the best fast
bowlers follow through so completely that they move several yards up
the wicket after the hall has actually left the hand.
Like every other class of bowling a great deal of your success will
depend upon length and accuracy. A good length ball for a fast bowler
would be pitched shorter than what would he termed a good length
ball for a medium pace or slow bowler. The reason for this is that the
hall may have time to rise to an awkward height by the time :t teaches
the batsman. It should be pitched in such a spot that the striker is in
doubt as to whether to play forward or go back.
Most successes by fast bowlers are obtained by bowling at, or just
outside, the ofiF stump, with an occasional one on the middle or leg
wicket. This latter ball should be used occasionally in order to keep the
batsman wondering. If ball after ball is bowled in the same direction,
the batsman will soon know what is coming, and will have all the more
time to prepare for it.
PLACING OF THE FIELD
The most important fieldsmen for a fast howler are the wicket-
keeper and first, second and third slip. The bowler should see that the
wicket-keeper is standing back from the wicket just far enough to
allow a good length ball'to reach him at a convenient height. First,
second or third slip should be placed so that either the wicket-keeper
or one of these fieldsmen should be within reach of the ball which is
coming along anywhere between third slip and the wicket-keepei.
The slip men should be placed far enough back to allow them to
have an opportunity of sighting the ball after it leaves the bat, and also
to have time to move a yard either way. But they should be close enough
to the wicket to he sure that the ball will reach them on the full. 1 hud
man should be right on the boundary, so that he will have as much time
as possible to intercept the ball.
Point should field a yard or two behind, rather than square with
the wicket, as usually when a square cut is executed from fast bowling,
the pace of the ball will divert it in this direction.
For a fast howler it is most important that he be well shod with
boots having thick soles fitted with good serviceable sprigs. The front
foot at the instant of delivery comes down very heavily on to the


ground, and unless the feet are well protected, the bowler will very soon
become footsore. If the boots are not thoroughlv well sprigged, it will
be easy to slip and perhaps sustain a badly twisted ankle or knee.
Measure out your run at practice and never on any account vary
it. Strive after accuracy and be sure to keep yourself in good physical
condition.
MEDIUM PACE BOWLERS
Accuracy an Essential
The most useful bowler to a side is the one who, bowling at
medium pace, has command of length, direction and flight, combined
with sufficient stamina to continue for a long time without a spell and
without losing accuracy. Such a man is generally considered the stock
bowler for his side and one who is always liable to give the opposing
batsmen trouble.
Until recent years both the English and Australian teams relied
largely upon their medium pace bowlers, such as Tate, Barnes, Foster,
Parkin (England) and frumble, Howell, Noble, Kelleway and Laver
(Australia). Since the pitches have been brought to such a state of
perfection, medium pace bowlers have found their task much more
difficult; hence the introduction of the googly type of bowling as ex-
ploited bv Mailey, Grimmett, O’Reilly and Fleetwood-Smith.
With due respect to the googly expert and the fast bowler, I am
still of the opinion that medium pace bowling is most useful, and I
know that the Australian eleven selectors would be glad to find a class
bowler of this description.
On good, hard turf wickets such as are prepared on the Sydney,
Melbourne and Adelaide Ovals and in good weather, it is almost im-
possible for a bowler of medium pace to turn the ball to any appreciable
extent, that is of course before the wicket has become worn after two
or three days’ play. As these bowlers cannot hope to turn the ball
sufficiently to beat the bat, they have been compelled to devise other
ways and means to bring them success. Therefore, the swerve was
developed.
1 lie greatest exponent of the swerve ever seen in Australia was
M. A. Noble, who, with a wind to suit him, could make the ball swing


in the air six inches or more. If the wicket was helping at all, after
The grip generally used for making the
ball swerve. Note the two first fingers
lying along the seams
a swerving ball hit the pitch, it
would break in the opposite
direction, so that one can judge
what an awkward customer
Noble would lie on a worn wic-
ket with a suitable breeze. Of
course, to get this result he
would bowl into the wind.
Trumble, one of the finest
bowlers the world has ever seen,
did not use the swerve, but had
a wonderful command of length
and direction. With the slightest
assistance from the wicket he
would turn the ball two or three
inches, just enough to beat the
bat, but his success was mainly
due to his cleverness in finding
the batsman’s weaknesses and
exploiting them.
To be a good medium pace bowler it is absolutely necessary that
you master three things—accuracy, length and direction. Without being-
in command of these three, a man who bowls at medium pace will al-
ways l)e severely dealt with by a good batsman. Constant practice is
necessary in order to develop an action of delivery which will impose
the least strain upon your arm and body.
The most suitable length of run for a medium pace bowler should
not exceed 12 yards. By running further than this, a bowler will tend
to tire himself without gaining greater efficiency, and anything less
imposes too much strain on the delivery.
Try to hold the ball in various ways, but never take such a grip
that your fingers feel uncomfortable. If your fingers are stretched
too widely around the hr. 11, they will soon become tired and lose their
efficiency, while if they are too close together, you are liable to have
insufficient control of the delivery. The best way to discover the most
suitable grip is to pick up the ball in a manner most natural to yourself
and then see how your fingers are placed. The only alteration you may
have to make to such a grip would be to see that your first and second
fingers are using the seams on the ball, so as to get increased friction at
the second the ball leaves your hand.
Taking for granted that you are satisfied with your length of run
and your method of holding the ball, the next two things to consider
are the run up to the wicket, and the action of delivery. Both run and
delivery must be such as to impose the least amount of strain upon


your legs, body and arms, because a bowler of this description probably
will be called upon to continue for an hour or more without a spell,
and he is expected to be just as accurate and efficient at the finish as
at the commencement.
Whatever you do, refrain from introducing any fancy or short
steps into your run; at times I have seen medium pace bowlers go
through antics in the course of their run up to the wicket which were
more suitable to an eccentric dancer, and which must militate against
their accuracy and lasting power. When delivering the ball you must
keep your arm as perpendicular as possible so as to keep the flight, of
the hall as nearly as you can in line with your eyesight. A very 1 striking
example of a perfectly upright delivery was the actions of Hugh
Trumble, who, when delivering the ball, put his head on one side just
as though he were making more room for his arm to come straight
over.
When delivering the ball make use of your body by following
through so as to ease as much as possible the strain on your shoulder.
Try to bowl without any forward movement of your body, and then try
following through and you will immediately notice how much easier
the latter action is.
When practising concentrate upon bowling at the ofif, middle, or
leg stump. It is really immaterial at which stump you bowl, so long
as you keep to that one. The ofif stump may be the most convenient, as
there is less chance of the batsman obstructing your view. At the same
time try and pick out a spot on the wicket upon which a good length
ball will pitch (in line with the stump at which you are bowling, of
course), and then absolutely concentrate on these two points until you
are reasonably certain that the ball is travelling as desired..
Do not become disheartened if you cannot do this at your first
practice. It is very difficult and can only be mastered by continual
practice and great concentration. The reason why really good medium
pace bowlers are so seldom seen is the difficulty of keeping accurate in
length and direction persistently.
MEDIUM-PACE BOWLING
Variation of Flight and Pace
In the last chapter I reached the point of stressing the importance
of length and direction, asserting that these most necessary qualifications
for a medium-pace bowler can be attained only by constant practice.
When once you are reasonably accurate with your bowling, the next
rhingc to consider are variation of flight and pace.
To flight the ball, a cross or head wind is necessary, preferably
the latter, so that the ball meets with more than the average resistance
from the air during the flight to the batsman. There are two methods
most generally used—top spin and back spin.


Top spin means spinning the ball in the same direction as that in
which it is moving. If sufficient spin of this nature is imparted to the
ball, it will travel through the air a little faster than the ordinary
delivery, and upon touching the ground will come through to the bats-
man a good deal faster than would be the case with a ball which is not
spinning. This is the means by which bowlers make pace off the pitch.
When back spin is imparted by the bowler, the flight of the ball is
retarded, with the result that it travels somewhat slower, and upon
striking the ground there should be just sufficient slowing up of pace to
cause the batsman to mistime his stroke. Back spin is attained by
spinning the ball in the direction opposite to its flight. This type of
delivery is usually termed “a hanging ball,” and when properly con-
trolled, it is liable to get a wicket.
A swerve is obtained by holding the ball so that the first two fingers
are close together along the seam of the ball, and as much off break
spin as possible imparted at the time of delivery. A swerve is very
difficult to accomplish without a breeze blowing against the direction of
delivery.
PACE OFF THE PITCH
To make pace off the pitch, as the ball is being delivered the wrist
should be bent in such a way that the back of the hand is just about
facing the batsman. The ball then is delivered really over the top of
the hand and between the thumb and first fingers. When this is well
done it is surprising how much faster the ball comes off the pitch.
To give a ball back spin, the wrist and hand should be well behind
the ball in order to make it spin in the opposite direction to the de-
The top of swing, showing the position
of the fingers for complete control of
the ball
livery, and with a delivery such
as this the flight of the ball
should be tossed a little higher
than usual. The swerve, top-
spinner and hanging ball are only
mastered by the most assiduous
practice, the great difficulty be-
ing to, at the same time, main-
tain accuracy in length and direc-
tion.
Now let us consider the get-
ting of wickets by a medium-
pace bowler. The very first
thing to do is to study the bats-
man closely to find out not only
his weak strokes, but his good
shots also. Two or three overs
should give you a fairly good
idea of the strokes by which the
man is likely to get most of his
runs, and also how he is most
likely to he trapped.


As an example let us suppose the batsman is a strong on-side
player, but does not move across to a ball outside the off stump. This
lack of footwork is a noticeable fault with a great many of our local
cricketers. It is not much use when bowling at a batsman of this descrip-
tion to try and bit bis leg stump. But there should be, a very good
chance of having him caught behind the wickets or on the off by
bowling just outside the off stump, and, if you can, making the ball
turn away from the wicket.
This turn needs to be only very slight, otherwise the batsman will
miss the ball altogether. When you realise that the width of a bat is
4j inches, and the striker is trying always to have the ball hit the
centre of his bat, it is obvious that a break of inches will be enough
to cause a snick into the slips from the edge of the bat. To obtain this
result the ball must be pitrhed up far enough to make the batsman play
forward, but again not far enough up to allow him to play it before
the turn comes into effect. In other words, make him feel for the ball.
This desired length depends, to a large extent, upon the batsman’s
reach, and must be worked out by the bowler himself. An occasional
alteration in flight and pace to a ball of this description makes it much
more dangerous.
ON-SIDE WEAKNESSES
You may discover that the batsman is not too certain of his on-
side play, and to a ball pitched on his legs or leg stump is inclined
to play back, or, if he comes forward, tries to force the ball to the on-
side with a cross bat. This is quite a common fault.
Against a batsman of this description, a good length ball making
pace off the pitch should have a very good chance of success, but
remember that to beat the batsman with the pace, he must be induced
to play bade at this particular ball. Therefore, it should be just slightly
shorter than good length.
Both the above ideas for getting wickets have been successfully
used over and over again, and will continue to be used for years to
come; but before satisfactory results can be expected, a good command
of the ball is essential.
Where a batsman specialises upon playing forward, the hanging
ball if properly controlled and disguised is always liable to make him
play too soon, and so give someone a catch, while in the case of a man
who plays back a great deal, the ball which makes pace off the pitch
should prove most effective.
Remember that the different varieties of bowling mentioned above,
to have a chance of success, must be delivered with the same length of
run and the same action. Otherwise, any change of 'delivery or run
is simply telling the batsman that something different is coming along,
which affords him the opportunity of suspecting the riieans of variation.


If you can arrange a set of signals to be used by you to the slip
style of ball is to be delivered, it will be an advantage. One bowler,
fieldsmen and wicket-keeper whereby they will know when a different
for whom I fielded in slips for years, generally bowled at medium-
pace, but occasionally would send along a very fast one. When preparing
to bowl this fast one he would place one finger straight up and down
the ball for a second, and immediately we two slips would move back
a couple of yards. Signals of this nature are only of use when the
fieldsmen are on the alert, and is mentioned to show how bowlers and
fieldsmen can co-operate with advantage to the side.
SLOW BOWLING
Quick Thinking Necessary
A slow bowler, to have any possible chance of success, must have
a temperament which is not disturbed by punishment. Every bowler
of this nature will at times be opposed to some hard hitting batsman,
who will master his deliveries and hit them hard. When this happens,
should the bowler lose heart and become discouraged, the captain should
immediately give the ball to some other bowler.
A really efficient slow bowler should welcome the advent to the
batting crease of the hitter, because when a man is hitting it is not
possible for him to give as much time to watching the flight and break
of the ball as can a batsman wbo is batting cautiously. A cautious bats-
man, if he is a quick thinker, often has time to change his stroke for
slow balls, but there is not much chance of a hitter doing this when once
he commences to swing his bat.
A slow bowler, if he knows his business and lias a variety of bowl-
ing under command, has much more chance of deceiving a hitter than
a stone-waller. It always appears to me that clever thinking is more
essential for slow bowlers than for any other class.
There are various ways of holding the ball for slow bowling, ac-
cordnig to the spin you desire, but like medium-paced bowlers, you
should endeavour to cultivate a grip which, while being effective, is
quite comfortable and does not subject your fingers to undue strain.


The roughness of the seam should be utilised as much as possible to
How the ball leaves the hand for a
leg break
increase the spin imparted to the
ball, and should you be bowling
leg and off breaks you should use
the same grip with this altera-
tion. When bowling an off break
the first finger should be along
the seam, while for a leg break
the third finger should have con-
tact with the seam. The finger
which has to do the work should
have the seam upon which to
operate.
Either an off or leg break
may be bowled with the same
grip of the ball; for an off break
the ball is rolled over the first
finger, while for the leg break it
is passed over the third and
fourth fingers.
Tt is much more difficult to control length and direction with a
leg break than with an off break, because the off break is delivered with
the fingers acting in a natural manner, while for the leg break the
fingers and wrist must be moved in the opposite direction.
To bowl a googly the delivery is the most difficult of all, as the
spin imparted to the ball is great. Included in the googly style of bowl-
ing usually are three types of delivery —the leg break, the off break
and the top spinner. The leg break is delivered so that the hall leaves
the hand with the wrist practically unbent and the back of the hand
just about facing the batsman. The leg break is obtained by turning
the wrist to such an extent that the palm of the hand is facing the
batsman.
The top spinner is bowled by bending the wrist at about a right
angle to the arm, allowing the ball to come right over the top of the
hand and over the little finger. This is the type of hall which has
secured for Grimmett and Mailey so many l.b.w. decisions. Great con-
trol is necessary for googly howling, and even the best of our googly
experts bowl quite a lot of rubbish, but you can reduce the number of
bad balls delivered by regular and concentrated practice.
DISGUISING THE DELIVERY
The main asset for googly howling is the effective disguising of
the delivery so that the batsman does not know which particular kind
of ball is coming to him. At the present time there are quite a number
of men who can howl the “wrong-un” as well as the leg break, but
the difference in the delivery is so pronounced that an ordinary bats-
man has no difficulty in detecting the change.


A slow bowler should need only a short run before delivery—five
or six yards. Some of our slow howlers take as many as a dozen steps
before delivering the ball, hut I think that three or four yards could
be taken from this run and the hall be just as effective. A howler of
any description whatever should he careful to waste as little energy as
possible. Bowling is quite a strenuous business without making it worse
by unnecessary labours.
A slow bowler should be very careful to see that the fieldsmen
are placed in the positions he thinks best. The captain of the side has,
of course, the privilege of placing the men in the various positions, but
the bowler of experience should be allowed to alter the field to his
liking. A slow bowler will probably be working on a scheme for dis-
missing the batsmen, so that when he alters the field or asks for it to
be altered, the captain should immediately see that this is done.
Bowling of any type is only partially done by the arm. The actual
physical action, although at times it may be successful, has ve4-y much
more chance of getting results if the bowler uses his brains at the same
time. If you deliver each ball mechanically and trust to a certain ex-
tent to luck, you will find the successes are few and far between; but
if, by watching the various batsman against whom you are operating
very closely, and then bowling with something definite at the back of
your mind, your successes will be far greater.
Should you be a googlv bowler with the ability to bowl a straight
ball without any appreciable alteration in your delivery a good sound
urifHß
scheme to follow would be to bowl two or three balls dead on the middle
stump, and breaking to the off so as to induce the batsman to step into
the wicket. Your aim should be to get this batsman stepping across in
front of the wicket so that he may more easily get behind the ball.
When you have the batsman doing this regularly it would be a good
idea to send along an over-spinner—one which is a little faster and
goes straight through without any turn at all, but which makes pace
off the pitch. With a ball such as this following a series of leg breaks,
unless the batsman is very watchful, you will have a good chance of
getting an l.b.w. decision against him. If the batsman does not move
across his wicket, he will give you the chance of having him caught in
slips if you occasionally bowl on or just outside the off stump.
A lot of ideas, such as the above, can be successfully carried out
by the bowler who concentrates on his work, and who is accurate with
length and direction.


FIELDING
This is a branch of the game for which a great many cricketers
have a distinct dislike, mainly because they are lazy, out of condition,
or so wrapped up in admiration of their ability as bowlers or batsmen
that they think it is not quite the thing to expect them to be lively and
enthusiastic in the field.
If players would make up their minds to carefully watch every
batsman with the idea of learning his style of play, they would then
be able to tell in which direction his favourite strokes are most likely
to travel,, and with this knowledge they could make perhaps four or
five yards by travelling in the right direction before the ball is actually
struck by the bat.
If a fieldsman is concentrating on the batsman he should be able
to tell, as soon as the man shapes up for a stroke, in which direction
the ball is likely to go. It is this ability to anticipate that made Brad-
man and Bromley such magnificent fieldsmen in the last English tour of
the Australian XI. Woodfull himself told me that the anticipation of
these two men appeared at times absolutely uncanny.
Jack Hobbs, known all over the world as one of the finest cover
points who ever played cricket, is another example. He was not a very
fast runner, but his concentration on the batsmen enabled him to tell
in good time in which direction the ball would travel, and as a result,
he was on his way to the correct spot before the ball was actually hit.
I think that not enough practice at fielding is taken by our senior
clubs, which is a pity, as after all, a really good fieldsman, even if he
is only a moderate bat, and no bowler, is invaluable to his side.
For an energetic player, fielding should be just as enjoyable as
batting or bowling, but to be in a position to appreciate the thrill of
cutting off a good shot by smart fielding it is quite essential that the
player gives his whole mind to the game. From a spectator’s viewpoint
it is almost as interesting to watch a good fieldsman operating as it is to
see a good batsman make runs.
It is a big advantage to a side if the majority of the players have
regular positions in the field. Each position is operated in a different
manner to any other, so that it stands to reason a player who fields
regularly, say at point, will be able to more efficiently control that posi-
tion than a man who may field there only occasionally. This, of course,
is a matter for the captain to decide, and once a player has proved that
he really can occupy a certain position in the field with advantage to
his side, his captain should see that he is retained in that particular
position.


SHIRTS ' 423D 'SHIRTS
WHOLESALE G. & R. WILLS & CO. LTD.
Shirts of Quality
in all styles
Cream " LAMBSKIN ” Shirts
made specially by Ezyfit for all Sports Wear
Wholesale - G. & R. WILLS & CO. LTD.
The Ideal SPORTS TROUSER
for all occasions
rrvy
Hi
Ju
r
ir
',w>
CtR WILLS & CO. ltd:
SOLE AGENTS FOR W. AUSTRALIA


Positions such as first and second slip, third man, point, cover-
point, mid-off, mid-on and the outfield should each be allotted, as
often as possible, to particular players.
The fieldsmen will have to be changed around according to the
nature of the bowling, but the regular places such as first slip, third
man, point, cover-point, mid-off and mid-on are positions which should
always be occupied.
A fieldsman at first slip must be very much on the alert at all
times, and of course should possess a safe pair of hands. If he is
capable of catching well with either hand it would be a distinct advan-
tage, as quite often it will be impossible to get both hands to the ball.
At the same time it is wise to use two haffds wherever possible.
First slip should take up his position far enough back from the
wicket to give him a chance to sight the ball after it leaves .the bat,
but he should be close enough to make sure of the ball reaching him
on the full. The distance from the wicket varies according to the pace
of the bowling. For a fast bowler concentrating on the off stump, three
slips would be advisable, and they should regulate the distance from
each other so that with outstretched arms the tips of the fingers would
just touch. If this position is adopted and the men are alert and
active, very few balls should pass through the cordon.
A man fielding at slip should keep his eye on the bowler up to
the time he commences his run up to the wicket, and then should
watch the bat. This will enable him to pick up the flight of the ball
immediately it is snicked, and is very much easier than trying to
follow the flight of the ball from the bowler’s hand up to the bat, and
then have to pick up the flight after it has been deflected by the bat.
Be sure and have your hands in the correct position for catching
before the batsman makes his stroke, as it will be so much time saved,
and time is a most important factor in slip fielding.
For a medium-paced bowler with a turn to the off, two slips
should be necessary, and they would field closer in to the wicket than
for a fast bowler, and should be close enough to each other and to the
line of the wicket so that it would be possible to reach any ball which
conies between the wicket-keeper and second slip.
For a slow bowler one slip is generally sufficient, and he should
be placed fairly wide of the wicket. A snick from a slow bowler would
not travel very fast, so that the fieldsman should have time to move
a yard or two either to right or left.
Third man for a fast bowler should be placed right on the boundary
to stop fours, and he should be covering the gap between third slip
and point, if anything a little closer behind third slip. This fieldsman
should be a fast runner and a quick and accurate thrower.


For a medium-paced bowler, third man could be placed twenty or
thirty yards in from the boundary, and should remember that when a
ball is back cut it always spins away from point towards slip. It is very
important to remember this and allow for it, otherwise for an uppish
shot the ball will probably spin out of reach upon hitting the ground.
For a slow bowler a third man is not always necessary, but this
will depend on the class of batsman who is taking strike. Should a
third man be used, he should be fairly close in, more like a wide extra
slip.
Point’s position also will vary according to the pace of the bowling
and the nature of the batting. Against a fast bowler a square cut will
usually travel slightly behind the wicket, and point should be moved
round accordingly.
For a medium-paced bowler point should be square with the wicket,
and for a slow bowler somewhat in front of the wicket.
Point’s distance away from the wicket will be regulated by the
pace of the bowling, and the cutting power of the batsman. This is a
matter for the captain to decide upon.
Cover point is, I suppose, the most important position on the field,
excepting, of course, the wicket-keeper. The distance from the wicket
should be regulated according to the style of the batsman and also to
the fleetness and agility of the fieldsman occupying the position.
He should be far enough back to have the opportunity of covering
quite a lot of ground, but not sufficiently far back to allow of| a run
being taken each time the ball is hit in his direction at moderate pace.
HINTS ON FIELDING
Concentration and Anticipation
Last chapter the subject of fielding- was dealt with but there are
more points to be. discussed.
If there is no fieldsman at long off, mid-off should be fairly deep,
but close enough to make a short run a doubtful proposition. It is
quite common in local cricket to see mid-off so deep that an easy run
is obtainable every lime the ball is hit in this direction, if the runners
are on the alert and understand each other. The fieldsman at mid-off
should be active and possess a safe pair of hands.
The usual position for mid-on is just about in line with the wicket
at the bowler's end, and close enough to that wicket to allow the fields-
man to reach every ball which may come between him and the wicket.
The idea of this is to save the bowler having to cross the wicket in order
to field the ball.
The square-leg or fine-leg position depends upon the type of
bowler operating, and also on the manner in which the batsman, plays a
ball to the on. The general rule is to place leg in front of the umpire


for a slow bowler, square for a medium-pace bowler, and behind the
umpire for a fast bowler (out just about the same distance as that of
the square-leg umpire).
When a fast howler is on and aiming at the leg stump, a fine leg
on the boundary is generally necessary. Of course, there are other
infield positions made use of at various times, such as extra cover, silly
mid-on and silly point, according to the nature of the batting.
Silly point and silly mid-on are used a great deal in local cricket,
and on a great many occasions quite unnecessarily. These two fields-
men are useful when the howler is accurate and is capable of flighting
the hall. They are also of use when the wicket is bad and the hall
liable to hump. Under ordinary circumstances I think these two posi-
tions could be left vacant and the fieldsmen used to more advantage
elsewhere.
It is well to remember that apart from the bowler and wicket-
keeper, only nine fieldsmen are available, so that it does not pay to
waste any of them by placing them in positions which are not important.
In nearly every game I have seen this season a silly point has been
utilised, but so far no catches have been taken by him. It is most
essential that when men are! placed in positions so close to the batsman,
the bowler must be consistently accurate in his length, otherwise the
positions may be dangerous. •
KEEPING ON THE MOVE
Cover-point and mid-off (and extra cover when used) should
commence to walk slowly towards the batsman immediately the bowler
commences his run to the wickets. This is advisable because it is possible
to turn much more quickly if you are moving than if you are standing
still. It is necessary to move slowly, otherwise too much exertion is
necessary if you have to change direction quickly. Point and mid-on
could also with advantgae be on the move.
Long-off, long-on and deep square-leg are positions made use of
when a medium-pace or slow bowler is operating. These positions are
varied to check most of the shots, and should be filled by players who
are fast runners and accurate fast throwers.
The men in the outfield should guard against the slightest loss of
time in returning the ball to the wickets. A common fault is too much
swinging of the arm before the ball is thrown. Frequently a run-out
has been missed through the ball being returned to the wrong epd. This
can be almost entirely eliminated by the fieldsman quickly visualising
the positions of the runners and also listening to a can from one of the
other fieldsmen.
The outfieldsmen should remember that it is most important to
station themselves right out on the boundary. It is much easier to run
in than to back out. The fieldsman looks very foolish when the ball is
hit over his head and lands inside the boundary.


When returning the ball to the wickets, a fraction of time should
be taken to make sure of the aim. The infield should return the ball to
the wicket on the full, while the outfield should return it so that it
reaches the bowler or the wicket-keeper on the first bounce.
Refrain from returning the ball hard to the bowler or wicket-
keeper (especially to the bowler) when there is no possible chance of
securing a run-out. It knocks their hands about unnecessarily. When
no run is being taken every fieldsman should be careful to return the
ball to the bowler in such a manner that he can take it with the least
possible exertion. One error is to return the ball by rolling it along
the ground, making the bowler stoop to pick it up. Continual stooping
is very tiring, especially to a fast bowler. Every ounce of a bowler’s
energy is needed for his work, so do not tire him out by careless returns.
BACKING UP
Backing up is very important, and the fieldsmen who are backing-
up should get into position as quickly as possible. Every fieldsman
should lose no time returning the ball to the wickets; even if there is
no possibility of a run out. There is no need to hold on to the ball after
it has been fielded. It is quite unnecessary and looks bad.
#
The wearing of wristlet watches and rings when fielding is not
advisable; in fact, the wearing of rings is dangerous. Many years ago
I was playing in a pennant match, East Melbourne v. Carlton, "when one
of the Carlton fieldsmen, wearing a ring on his little finger, stopped a
particularly hot shot with the result that the ring cut his finger very
badly. A wristlet watch looks unsightly, and quite out of place.
I would advise cricketers to take as their pattern regarding dress,
die champions who visit Perth. You will notice that none of them wears
a watch or a ring. They all have their sleeves neatly rolled. Even if
you are only a moderate cricketer it is as well toi look the part.
When in the field all the players should give all possible attention
to the captain or bowler in case either of them decides to alter the
placing of the field. When you are moved, take up your new position
as quickly as possible so that the play will not/be delayed unnecessarily.
Finally, if you enter into the business of fielding energetically and
enthusiastically, doing your-best to anticipate the batsmen’s strokes,
and never under any circumstances slackening off or taking your atten-
tion from the game, I am sure that you will find fielding a most enter-
taining pastime, and as enjoyable as either batting or bowling.
A good, live-fielding team is always worth watching even if the
batting and bowling is not up to standard.


THE CAPTAIN’S DUTIES
Players Should Be Studied Closely
To captain a cricket team successfully is by any means an easy
task. If you are going to carry out the work successfully you should
be conversant with the laws of cricket, have sufficient knowledge to
enable you to anticipate correctly how the wicket is going to behave,
and you should also be well acquainted with all the members of your
team, both as to their cricketing ability and temperament. Above all,
you should be most careful not to favour any player more than others.
Look upon your team as good fellows who are anxious to do their
best' for the ultimate advantage of their side, and looking to you to
handle them so that each individual will have every opportunity to pro-
duce his best. Many a good side has been to a great extent spoilt
through poor captaincy, and many a moderate side has been made to
perform well through astute leadership.
When writing out the order of batting, each man’s capabilities
should be carefully considered; the opening batsmen should be possessed
of determination and should be quite content to stop a good ball when
it comes along. They should also be ready to punish anything loose.
The first and second batsmen to follow should be the most brilliant
batsmen on the side. If the opening batsmen have carried out their job
satisfactorily and remain at the wickets for any length of time, the
next batsman to follow should be able to score quickly from somewhat
tired bowling.
It is not advisable to send in first your most brilliant batsmen, as
these players as a rule are inclined to take risks and this is dangerous,
especially when the bowlers are fresh. A batsman who is simply a
hitter should be sent in when the bowlers and fieldsmen are likely to be
tired, so that he may not have the bowling when it is at its top. Then,
should he give chances there is more possibility of his escaping if the
fieldsmen are weary.
Should there be any juniors in the team, see that they are given
every chance to do well, and ask their batting companion to give them
as much encouragement as possible. Always endeavour to have an ex-
perienced man batting at the same time as a junior; a word of encourage-
ment and praise occasionally from one of the older players is of great
assistance to a youngster and helps him to overcome that nervousness
from which all juniors more or less suffer when startifigjn a higher
grade.
Some cricketers, owing to their temperament, need much more
careful handling than others. Some batsmen get nervy if they have to
watch their club-mates batting for any length of time, and players of
this disposition would probably perform better if they were sent m
first, that is, if they were in any way fitted for the position.


INSPIRING CONFIDENCE
Above all, the captain of a team should act in such a manner that
every individual on the side has complete confidence in him, and is
happy to carry out all instructions quickly and cheerfully. A splendid
example of a captain having the whole team’s confidence is Woodfull.
During the stay in Perth of the Australian eleven recently, I came in
contact with most of the players, and one and all expressed the opinion
that there was no one like Bill Woodfull. When a feeling like that
towards a captain is general through a team, it is a certainty that good
cricket will be played and everyone will also thoroughly enjoy the games.
Bowlers need very careful handling, and a lot of thought is con-
stantly required to see that they are all used to the best advantage.
In practically every side there are one or two stock howlers who
might be considered as the basis of the attack, and who should in-
variably be asked to open the. bowling. Although these stock bowlers
may not be as dangerous as some of the others, they can generally be
relied upon to keep a good length and test out the batsmen, at the same
time giving the special bowlers of the side an opportunity to study the
batsmen’s strokes, and thinking out ideas for getting wickets when their
turn to bowl arrives.
It is a bad plan to keep one man bowling 1 for long periods, unless he
is having success and is continually dangerous.
If the bowlers are changed quickly, the batsmen are not allowed
the opportunity of settling down, and, moreover, the bowlers are not
becoming unduly tired. It is rather a common occurrence here to see
the champion of a side commence bowling at the start of an innings and
be kept on by his captain for an hour without a spell. The result is
that when this man is relieved, he is dog-tired, and, placed in some
quiet part of the field, becomes stiff, and usually practically useless for
the rest of the day’s play. It is much better to bowl him for about 20
minutes, or at the most, half an hour, and then let him take some
position in the field where he will have a certain amount of exercise,
to prevent his becoming stiff.
Another objection to tiring a bowler is that he would then have to
be nursed in the field, thereby imposing extra work on his team-mates.
Be quite sure that each bowler is used at that end of the wicket
for which his style of bowling is most suitable. This is very important,
as the success of the team depends largely upon the skill or otherwise
shown by the captain in handling hrs bowlers.
Should a junior be included in the team as a bowler, give him every
opportunity to do his best, and do not give him his first try-out when two
batsmen are thoroughly set. It would be better to reserve him until the
best batsmen are dismissed and let him have a try at the other fellows,
so that he would have a good chance of securing a wicket or two. A


TYRE RETREADING . .
This is a payable proposition if you
have the work done properly on
suitable tyres.
You can get a really first-class guar-
anteed job by sending your cover
to —
Arthur Christian
130 WILLIAM STREET
PERTH
Fifteen Years’ Experience


little success would encourage him and give him more confidence in his
ability to get wickets. In later matches he could be used with discretion
against the better players. While a junior is bowling, it would help him
if the captain were fielding in a handy position so that occasionally he
could pass the youngster a word of advice.
ORGANISATION NECESSARY
When taking the field a captain should see that all the men are ready
and should then lead them out in a body. It is unseemly for eleven
players to straggle on to the field in ones or twos.
Try to place each man in that particular position in the field for
which he is most suitable. There are sure to he changes and alterations
as the game proceeds, but every man should have a place which may be
called his own, and he should be kept in this spot as much as possible.
Co-operate with your bowlers constantly so that you may know their
plans, and do not make any drastic changes in the field without first
consulting the bowler. With a good knowledge of the game, a captain
should be able quickly to pick out the batsmen’s weaknesses, and should,
in conjunction with the bowler, place his field accordingly.
Be careful to keep your fieldsmen placed so that every man is
being utilised, and each one of them is getting something to do. If a
man is fielding in some position to which the ball never, or very rarely
travels, that man is practically useless to the side.
See that your bowlers keep an accurate length with correct direc-
tion. As soon as the bowler begins to deliver too many balls outside
the batsman’s legs (unless he is howling leg theory), he should he
taken off and a man more accurate given a trial.
A captain should set an example to his team by his intentness on
the game, and alertness in the field. Even if two batsmen are well set
and appear to be playing all the bowling with ease, the captain must
never lose heart and become careless or indifferent to the way the fields-
men are placed. When once the players realise that their leader has
given up trying, it is only natural for them to follow suit, with the
result that the team will become disorganised.
The captain should set an example to his side by playing quite fairly,
accepting all decisions given by the umpire without the slightest demur.
If he does this, he is then in a position to stop unfair methods or
criticism by any of his club-mates. A captain who always plays the
game in the proper spirit and is constantly striving to introduce tactics
which will benefit his side will always command the respect and
obedience of his club-mates, which will naturally lighten his duties and
make the game pleasant and enjoyable for all concerned.


Should a fieldsman miss a catch or fail to stop a ball, the worst
thing a captain can do is to take him to task before the other fieldsmen.
If the mistake was made through carelessness or laziness, take the first
opportunity of speaking to him quietly, but make him realise you expect
him to do his job as well as he can. Where the fieldsman makes the
error while doing his best, he deserves sympathy rather than censure,
as he will feel the mistake more keenly than either the bowler or
captain.
RUNNING A CLUB
Care in Selecting Officials
As a general rule when a cricket club is formed and actually
operating, the whole of the work in connection with the affairs of the
club is left to the secretary, the remaining members of the club simply
joining in the games and having an easy time. Some secretaries seem
to enjoy having everything to look after, but if the club is to be a success,
from both a playing and financial standpoint, a lot of work is necessary;
in fact, so much that no single individual could possibly give all the
duties proper attention.
At annual general meetings where office-bearers are appointed for
the ensuing season, too little thought is given to the appointments. Start-
ing with the president: He should be prepared to do more than donate a
certain sum to the club funds each year. He should be a man who is
really interested in the club’s activities, attends the matches regularly,
and if at all possible, presides at all the meetings, both committee and
general. A man who is enthusiastic enough to carry out those duties
is of tremendous assistance, especially to a junior club, as he will be
able to see that the club is conducted on proper lines, that the players
conduct themselves in a proper manner, and to have all matters in con-
nection with the club, more especially in regard to finances, run on sound
business lines.
In nearly every club an unlimited number of vice-presidents is
every year nominated for one purpose only, the hope of getting a
donation from them, so that being nominated to such a position is no
distinction whatever. It would be much better to limit the number of
vice-presidents to, say, four, and endeavour to have four men who are
really interested in the doings of the club. By limiting the vice-
presidents, those men nominated could then safely feel that instead of
the nomination being very similar to a request for money, it would
mean the club members are desirous of offering these four men some
compliment from their club which, of course, would immediately place


some value on nomination. If this were done regularly each vear, and
* the club became more important, a ballot for the election of these vice-
presidents would probably be necessary, which would further enhance
the value of the position.
%
GENERAL COMMITTEE
General committeemen should be elected because they are interested
in the club and are quite ready and willing to work hard for its progress.
A man is very often elected to the general committee because he has
quite a number of personal friends in the club 'and not because he
would be a good man to occupy an executive position. The best way,
I think, in which to appoint committeemen is to call for nominations,
such nominations to close a week before the annual meeting, and the
names of the nominees to be made known to the members immediately
the time for the recipt of nominations has closed. By adopting this pro-
cedure every member will have an opportunity of studying the nomina-
tions, and studying the qualifications of each man, so that he can vote
intelligently for the welfare of the club at the annual meeting. Of
-•course, it sounds very complimentary to propose your friends for
official positions, but that is not the real, club spirit. You should con-
sider the welfare of your club before personal friendships, and give
* your vote to the man whom you honestly consider is best fitted for the
position.
The committee should try and conduct the affairs of the club in a
business-like manner, and what is most important, fix some definite
period for receipt of subscriptions. Most junior clubs depend almost
entirely upon members’ subscriptions to keep them financial, and allow
them to purchase adequate material, and if subscriptions from the
members are not paid into the club’s funds within reasonable time, the
secretary has either to try and get credit from sports houses or allow
the club to be short of gear. If the committee were to pass a resolution
that allowed members, say, two months’ time from the commencement
of the season in which to make their payments, and adhered to this
resolution irrespective of individuals, I am quite sure the result would
be very much more satisfactory than the slipshod methods in use to-day
by many of the clubs. This rule should state that any member who may
be overdue with his subscription will not be eligible for selection in the
team or teams, until he is financial. Make this rule applicable to all
members of the club, irrespective of their standing or ability as players,
and although, when first enforcing it, there may be some dissatisfaction,
ultimately it will be realised as a sensible move, and the members will
soon appreciate it.


AN IMPORTANT COMMITTEE
The social committee is a most important body in connection with
a cricket club. If it be a live committee it will not only help materially
with the finances but also bring players and supporters into much closer
contact with each other, and so extend the club’s interests. It is better,
I think, to appoint to the social committee members of the club who are
not all on the general committee. One general committeeman would be
enough, and he could then keep his committee informed regarding the
activities of the social committee.
Other sub-committees may be useful, such as a material committee,
selection committee, etc., and each of these sub-committees should re-
port in full their operations at each general committee meeting. As
many, members as possible should be utilised in forming these sub-
committees so as to expand the club's interests. General committee
meetings should be held at least once a month, when the club’s activities
and prospects should be carefully considered. The secretary should also
submit a balance sheet showing the exact position of the club’s finances.
If this be done in a proper manner the committee will then be able to
tackle any position which may be apparent and take steps to improve
the position. Finally, every club member should be induced to take an
active interest in his club, both on the field and off, and if everyone is
constantly working to the one end, it is wonderful how quickly the club
will progress.
The Paramount Print, 609 Wellington Street, Perth. 83776


m
You cannot buy any other car
in the low-price field to equal
Chevrolet for value. You can-
not get Chevrolet combination
of beauty, plus luxurious rid-
ing comfort, plus exceptional
power and running economy,
at anything less than Chevro-
let’s price. Call and see the
range of latest models at
Sydney Atkinson’s and ask for
a demonstration. A drive of
only five miles will make you
quickly realise WHY these
CHEVROLET
CARS
cars - have achieved such won-
derful popularity. Sydney At-
kinson’s are also the Distribut-
ors for Chevrolet Trucks and
Buick and Pontiac Cars.
■
Sydney Atkinson Motors Ltd.
TEMPLE COURT, PERTH


THE PALACE HOTEL
St. George’s Terrace, Perth
SfPAIACE
R.ADIO
CABLES
“PALACE"
PERTH
ST. GEORGES TERRACE
PERTH
r:
Nf
m*
m
■»• ••• >•
mm
HOTEL
Ihe TflaywA tflfie TUetf"
J H.GLOWR&Y PIXOPIXIErTOP.
0 \
(a
m
1
r
Rooms with Private Bath
Phones in all Rooms
INCLUSIVE TARIFF OR BED/BREAKFAST IF DESIRED
J. H. CLOWREY, Proprietor
