

f-tddio&s
No. 5.
March, 1878.
Health of |l lEales.
HINTS
TYPHOID FEVER
“Prevention is better than Cure.”
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET,
1878.


TYPHOID FEVER.
Suggestions for preventing the rise, and checking the pro-
gress of enteric or typhoid fever, often called gastric, low,
or Colonial fever.
Enteric or typhoid fever is a slightly infectious disease
which prevails especially during the autumn months. It is
one of those diseases which, though among the least curable,
can certainly be greatly checked if not entirely prevented.
All classes of the community are liable to be attacked by
it —high and low, rich and poor, whether residing in the
town, suburb or country. It attacks the rich man in his
mansion, as well as the poor man in his cabin. The late
Prince Consort died from it in Windsor Castle, and the
Prince of Wales lay at the point of death from it, though
living in a mansion in the country.
How then can we escape, or prevent its attack ?
By avoiding exposure to, or effecting a removal or des-
truction of its cause.
What then is its cause, and through what channels does it
•operate 1
The cause is a poison or germ generated by the decom-
position or fermentation of foecal, or animal matter. The
poison thus generated passes directly, or indirectly, through
sewers or drains, by leakage or in filtration, into the air we
breathe, or the water we drink, and so enters the human system
and destroys life. The poison or germ of typhoid may also be
transmitted by means of the intestinal or other discharges
that come from the bodies of persons suffering from the
disease. Hence, if we would prevent the rise of the disease,
we must either destroy, or safely carry away, the discharges
from our bodies and the refuse from our houses, before fer-
mentation sets in, by means of properly constructed sewers
and drains. All closets and cesspits should be so con-
structed as to prevent the exudation of their putrefying
contents into the soil around, and the pipes connected there-
with so arranged that the gases arising from foecal fermen-


tation shall not find their way back into the closet, but only
have egress high above human habitation. If an old cess-
pit be found under or near a house the inhabitants should
leave while the contents are being removed. As a general
rule all refuse animal matter should either be burnt, or buried
well beneath the surface of the earth.
But if we would arrest the spread of the disease when it
has broken out in any locality we must
First, separate the sick person and then see that the sick
room be thoroughly ventilated both night and day.
Secondly, we must be careful to receive all discharges
from the body into vessels strictly kept for one person, into
which a solution of proto-sulphate of iron (copperas), or
dilute muriatic acid has prevsously been placed.
Thirdly, never empty such discharges into any closet,
sewer, or cesspool, but bury them several feet beneath the
surface and mix them well with the earth.
Fourthly, the bed and body linen when removed should
be placed in a vessel containing a solution of chloride of
lime, or be sprinkled with dilute muriatic acid, and then as
soon as possible washed in boiling water.
Fifthly, all sewers and drains connected with the house in
which the sick person is should be flushed daily with a
solution of copperas in the proportion of two ounces to a
pint of water.
As regards disinfectants too much reliance must not be
placed on them in the sick room, for if they should be used
in sufficient strength to destroy the organic poison or germ,
they would destroy the life of the patient too.
There are too ways in which a disinfectant may act on
putrefying matter : it may arrest the process of putrefaction
by virtue of its preservative or antiseptic power; or it may
absorb or decompose the products of putrefaction, or it may
do both.
Carbolic acid arrests putrefaction, but is powerless to
absorb or decompose the poisonous products of putrefaction.
Condys fluid, which is only a solution of permanganate
of potass destroys one of the products of putrefaction, viz.:
sulphuretted hydrogen, but has little power to prevent
putrefaction.
Proto-sulphate of iron or copperas not only arrests putre-


TM-p
BffSUo
fid&oo*
hj cy
faction, but also absorbs and remders inert to as great an
extent as any other disinfectantt, the organic products of
puterfactive fermentation.
Without, therefore, enumerating any other in a long list of
disinfectants, we would suggest tlhe general use of a solutioii
of copperas not only for flushimg drains and sewers and
throwing down cesspits, but also for use in the sick room —
the only draw-back to it being tfuat it stains and spots brown
the several articles brought in comtact with it.
