

\ /-,CW - f j(* \ v(r^
| ■ HINTS |
I .. \
<
I 1
| ON THE |
/ >
*
| '
I
I
\
1 ■■ , MELBOUENE;
LAND QUESTION
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET,
anb saint peter’s, eastern hill;
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1858.


I
i
4


HINTS
ON THE
LAND QUESTION
MELBOURNE:
A J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET,
and saint peter’s, eastern hill;
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1858.


HINTS ON THE LIND QUESTION.
The mode of disposing of the public lands of this colony, in a man-
ner which shall be most advantageous to the entire population of it,
without favouring any particular class at the expense of the others,
is a problem of considerable importance.
It is generally admitted that the system at present in use is not
satisfactory ; and those who remember the debates in the Assembly
on the Land Bill, introduced by the late Government, will have
some idea of the difficulties attending the question.
The principal complaint against the present system, is that it pre-
vents the hona fide agriculturist from obtaining land in quantities
suitable for cultivation by individual exertion, without exposing him
to unfair competition : there are several ways in which it effects this.
First.—By the conditions of the present mode of sale by auction,
which provide that ten per cent, of the purchase money shall be
paid when the lot is knocked down, and the remainder within a
month. These conditions expose the intending purchaser and cul-
tivator to the competition of land jobbers in localities where culti-
vation is required; or in any case where there is a prospect of profit,
the land jobbers outbid the poor man who wants a small portion for
his own cultivation, and get all the best land knocked down to
them ; they pay the deposit on the whole, but only select the best
lots, forfeiting the deposit on the remainder; the poor cultivator is
then obliged to come to them, and buy from them a smaller portion
of land, with his limited capital, than he first intended, paying them
a profit which more than covers the loss sustained by the forfeited
deposit. The forfeited lots are thus, in the case of town and subur-
ban lots, thrown out of the market altogether, or, in the case of
country lots, open for selection at a higher price than they are worth,
and virtually out of the market also, thus leaving the land jobbers
the sellers without competition, of the available land. The squat-
ters pursue the same means when land forming part of their run
is exposed for sale, but they have the additional advantage of the
use of the land on which the deposit is forfeited.


Second.—By the land being put up for sale in blocks so large,
that only persons of considerable capital could purchase it.
Third. —By the land surveyed and put up for sale being situated
so far from any available market as virtually to prevent an intend-
ing agriculturist from purchasing it.
By the last two means vast quantities of the most fertile lands in the
colony have been alienated from the Crown at a price greatly below
their real value, simply from having been put into the market before
there was any actual demand for land in the locality, and where
competition for it was impossible. The late Surveyor-General is
answerable for this lamentable result. He came to this colony and
assumed office when there was a great outcry for unlocking the lands,
and the system previously pursued in this colony was contrasted
with the more liberal policy pursued in South Australia. Instead of
proceeding in a legitimate way to get the land surveyed, and put up
for sale in small quantities near the great centres of population,
which would have best answered the wants of the people who were
anxious to settle on the soil, and would have rendered food cheap,
he employed the staff of the surveyors in the survey of lands in
out-of-the-way places, and in large blocks; the consequence of
which was, that the land was either bought at a minimum price by
capitalists or wealthy squatters, or else it remained unsold; and
the Surveyor-General was soon able to meet the cry of “ unlock the
lands,” by stating that there were thousands of acres open for selec-
tion in different parts of the colony. This was true, but as for meeting
the demands of the people, they might as well have been open for
selection in the moon. The result of all this is, that there is less
land cultivated in proportion to the quantity sold in this colony
than in any other part of the world. The greater portion of the
sold land being at present of no benefit to the colony whatever, and
only likely to become useful when it is cut up and sold in smaller
lots by the present holders, as it becomes wanted, at a greatly
increased price—a price which would have gone into the revenue of
the colony, instead of into the pockets of speculators and capitalists,
if the land had not been unwisely and unseasonably sacrificed. The
operation of the system has been to prevent the occupation of the
land by working men, who have by digging, or other industrial pur-
suits, saved a little money, and who are desirous to invest their
savings in the purchase of a small farm, with the intention of work-
ing it by their own or their family’s labour. Such a mode of de-
veloping the resources of the soil is particularly adapted to this
colony, where machinery, and more especially hired labour, are
expensive.


The present system of disposing of the public lands having sig-
nally failed to produce either the cultivation of the colony or the occu-
pation of it by the only permanent class of settlers, a cry has been
raised for the lands to be surveyed and laid open for selection, in
small portions at a low fixed price. This plan would, on a super-
ficial view, seem to meet the wants of the people, but a deeper con-
sideration of the scheme will show that it would be impracticable for
that purpose, and, moreover, that it would be utterly unjust. Let
an act for the purpose be framed, and fenced with all manner of pre-
cautions that can be invented, it would be impossible to prevent a
vast amount of the lands thus selected passing into the hands of
capitalists at a slight increase on the original price. For instance,
suppose a man takes up one hundred acres of land thus laid open
for selection, at ss. per acre, it would be impossible by any equitable
enactment to prevent his disposing of it, as soon as he has got the
title deeds, for Bs. or 10s. an acre ; and with a low fixed price there
is no doubt that speculators and land jobbers would employ persons
to take up land and pass it over to them for a per centage on the
transaction, till all the available land in the colony that could be
brought into the market would pass into the hands of capitalists, and
be alienated from the very classes of persons for whose benefit it was
laid open for selection. It may be said that such a perversion of the
intention of the scheme might be prevented by imposing certain con-
ditions of sale, such as residence on the land, the erection of pre-
mises, the improvement of the land by cultivation, &c. But
practically it is impossible to carry such conditions without
unjust restriction on the purchaser. Suppose merely residence
was required—the erection of a tent and the occupation of it
for a short time is residence. If a more lengthened residence
was required, circumstances might, and very often do, occur, which
would render it necessary for him to sell part of the land to cultivate
the remainder \ or even to sell the whole of it, to cover expenses indis-
pensably incurred by sickness, or any other unavoidable cause, before
the required term of residence was complete. Such a condition would,
in many cases, involve utter ruin to the purchaser. Then, as to the
erection of premises of a substantial character, it would be manifestly
unjust to compel any one who had only the means to purchase and
stock the land, to expend such means in the erection of premises
which he could well do without till the land brought him some
return. Compulsory cultivation, if not absolutely required to be
performed by the purchaser, would not prevent his selling it at a
slight profit at once, and, if required to be done by the purchaser,
would, in the cases before alluded to, press very unjustly on him


possibly prevent his selling the land, even to save his life. The
scheme of laying the lands open for selection, at a low fixed price, is
manifestly impracticable for securing the cultivation of the lands of
the colony by the class of men best suited to it.
Moreover, it would be unjust. It is not for the interests of the
whole colony that the lands should be sold below their value, for the
benefit of any particular class. No enactment of such a nature
would be just. Large sums of money have been borrowed, and will
be borrowed, on the security of the public lands ; and such lands
cannot be rightly sold for one farthing less than their value. It
would be saddling our posterity with a debt, and at the same time
depriving them of the means of paying off that debt. Such a policy
would at once lower the value of our debentures, and shake the
credit of the colony. It is scarcely necessary to notice the system of
deferred payments : such a system would be attended with such
trouble in getting the remaining purchase-money after possession of
the land had been given, and would throw such impediments in the
way of afterwards transferring the land, as to be virtually impracti-
cable. Besides, land ought not to be sold to people without the
necessary money not only to buy the land, but to stock it. Too
many people in this colony imagine mere manual labour is all that is
required to make a man a small farmer; they altogether forget, or ignore,
the outlay necessary for animals, implements, seed, and fencing, as
well as the expenses of clothing and food, till such time as the returns
of the farm become available. If a great number of those who are
now clamouring for land got it as a free gift, they would not be able
to cultivate it for want of means.
The persons for whose benefit the lands should be made available,
are those who have been brought up as farmers or agricultural
labourers, who either come out to this country with a little money,
or who have by their industry and economy saved a sum sufficient
to enable them to commence a small farm. Such as these should be
encouraged by all means consistent with due regard to the interests
of the whole colony. Their settlement on small farms would be a real
benefit to the colony. Their interests would be identical with its
welfare, and the results of their labours would tend to produce an
abundant supply of food for all classes of the community.
After so much failure in attempting the solution of this difficult
question, the writer of this pamphlet has considerable hesitation in
bringing forward a plan for the better disposal of the public lands of
this colony. The following scheme was, in 1854, submitted to Capt.
Clarke, then Surveyor-General; but it did not suit that gentleman’s
policy, and the publication of it was, at his request, suppressed.


It is proposed—
Ist. That the agricultural lands of the colony, as near the centres
of population as possible, consistent with the avoidance of auriferous
land, should be surveyed, and divided into lots varying in size, from
80 acres downwards, according to the distance from the centre of
population; that these lots should be advertised for two or three
months, and then sold by auction to the highest bidder.
2nd. That two-thirds of the purchase-money be paid down at the
fall of the auctioneer’s hammer, and the other third at the end of
three years.
3rd. That at the termination of a period of three years from the
date of sale, if the whole of the land be securely fenced, and two
crops of agricultural produce raised and removed from one-third of
it, the remaining third of the purchase-money be altogether remitted,
and the title-deeds supplied to the holder of the land, on payment of
a fee of ss. for each lot.
4th. That if the conditions in proposal 3rd be not fulfilled, or the
remaining third of the purchase-money be not paid at the termina-
tion of three years from the day of sale, the land is to revert to the
Crown, and be sold again at the first land sale, after having been
advertised for three months previously.
sth. That all land remaining unsold after having been put up to
auction, shall remain in the hands of the Government till it is
required by the wants of the people. It shall then be advertised for
three months, and put up to auction as before.
It is assumed that the payment of two-thirds of the purchase-
money (which will be the whole payment required, if the conditions
of proposal 3rd are complied with), will prevent any interference on
the part of the land-jobber or the squatter with the bona fide agricul-
turist ; whilst the bonus of one-third of the purchase-money, if the
land is entirely fenced and partly cultivated at the end of three years,
will give such advantages to those who intend cultivating the land,
as will effectually prevent the competition of those who buy up for
the purpose of reselling. Moreover, this mode of selling the lands
will be no injustice to the interests of the whole colony, but the
reverse, for it will tend to throw the land into the hands of those
who are able to cultivate them to the best advantage both to them-
selves and the colony, and this, too, at a fair price ; for if the land
is not forced into the market unseasonably, those who intend to
cultivate, whilst they are exposed to no unfair competition, will


clearly see the advantages of the plan, and can afford to bid against
each other, so that the land will not be sacrificed under its value.
It is presumed that by thus seasonably bringing the lands into the
market in small blocks, with such manifest advantages to the working
agriculturist, the settlement of the colony will progress more rapidly,
the best kind of settlers will be encouraged, and the remaining por-
tion of the lands will constantly increase in value.
It is not intended to place any restriction on the transfer of the
land before the expiration of the three years, so that if the purchaser
gets into any unforeseen difficulties, or becomes sick, or, in short, if
anything should occur to prevent his complying with the require-
ments of the third proposal, he shall not be prevented disposing of
his land to the best advantage. At the same time the bonus on the
cultivation of the land at the end of three years will generally secure
the intended settlement, no matter whose hands it falls into.
It is not intended that any limit should be placed to the number
of lots which any one individual may desire to possess. A man
with a little capital, and a family of five or six sons, could not employ
them beneficially on too small a farm; consequently, they would be
obliged either to separate, or to leave the colony in quest of some
home where they could obtain the amount of land they required
without being obliged to separate. A united family of this kind are
the best settlers, and there ought to be no restriction to their re-
quirements of land. The regulations with regard to the bonus on
cultivation, or the alternative of paying one-third more for the land,
will be a sufficient security against large purchases by one individual.
There is nothing to prevent capitalists investing their money in
land, only, if they do so, they must either cultivate themselves or
hire labour for that purpose, or they must pay one-third more for
the land than the competitors who intend cultivating themselves ; in
either case the colony will benefit.
It is not intended that there should be any land open for selec-
tion : the sth proposal will deal with lands remaining unsold at
auction, and if land is sold under its provisions when it is really
wanted, there can be no just cause of complaint, whereas the dis-
advantages of the system of selecting such lands is obvious. As an
instance, it may be stated that a wealthy merchant of Melbourne
took up in one day 12,000 acres of land in this manner, at the upset
price of one pound per acre. Soon afterwards it transpired that
the Melbourne and Mount Alexander Railway was to run through or


near it, and its value was at once immensely increased, but the in-
crease of value is entirely lost to the colony.
With regard to the Squatting question —
A considerable period must elapse before stock can be raised on
agricultural produce (including grasses) so that it may be sold at a
price to compete with stock pastured on the waste lands of the
colony, though there is no doubt that this result will be ultimately
attained. In the mean time the squatting system is a necessity for
the colony, and ought to receive a fair amount of encouragement. It
is proposed, therefore, that the squatters should be left in undisturbed
possession of their stations, under regulations similar to the fol-
lowing :
The whole of any station that may be required for any public pur-
poses whatever, to be at the disposal of the Government after six
months’ notice to the occupier; and any portion of a station that
may be required for any public local purposes, to be at the disposal
of the Government after one month’s notice. The actual improve-
ments on such station, or part of a station, to be valued and paid
for by the Government, as well as any loss sustained by the sudden
compulsory sale of stock.
No rent to be paid for any station, but, instead, an annual assess-
ment on stock, according to the capabilities of the station, to be de-
termined by periodic survey and valuation.
It is assumed that the squatters will thus be enabled to derive
from their stations a fair, but not extravagant profit, sufficient to in-
duce them to make the most of their stations, and yet not so great
as to make the loss of their stations, in the event of their being taken
from them for public purposes, a grievance of any amount.
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, FLINDERS-LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.




,
t-
*
"... $
.
■i
- ' ' . ' ' ft | S ' •
i.
■ • /
■i'j
\ «
