

HIS ISLAND HOME
ETC.
ILLUSTRATED.
By Jamas Grey.


A. H. SPENCER
NEW BOOKS
SECONDHAND AND RARE BOOKS
RARE PICTURES AND PRINTS
RARE AUSTRALIANA
MELBOURNE - ■ TEL. XW 1548




PUBLISHED BY
LYON & BLAIR, STATIONERS,
WELLINGTON.


HIS ISLAND HOME;
AND
AWAY IN THE FAR NORTH.
ft Narrative of Travee?
ip THAT PyM\ T OF THE
BY JAMES GREY.
>r
SSHtllington:
MINTED AT THE OFFICE OF THE NEW ZEALAND TIMES NEWSPAPER COMPANY, LIMITED.
MDCCCLXXIX.


TO
JOHj't Bryce, B3Q.uiH E >
Member of the House of (Representatives,
THIS HUMBLE ADDITION TO COLONIAL LITERATURE IS MOST
RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
BY THE AUTHOR.


/g-ff
INTRODUCTORY.
The contents of these pages are the outcome of two visits which I paid to that part of
New Zealand lying to the north of Auckland—one towards the decline of 1878, and the
other during the earlier part of the present year. “ His Island Home,” and “ Away in
the Far North ” were contributed originally to that ably conducted journal the Christ-
church Weekly Press , from which the former was reprinted by the Auckland Herald,
Wellington Nen> Zealander, and other newspapers; and the latter, revised and slightly
augmented, was reproduced in the Sketcher columns of the Nem Zealand Mail. It will
thus be seen that my title was adopted from a more southern standpoint than Wel-
lington. Nothing but the earnest solicitation of several of my most esteemed acquaint-
ances could have induced me to present my series of articles in their present collected
form. My little volume has no pretensions to literary merit or excellence; its sole
object is to afford information respecting a part of the colony which is at present
unknown to at least nine-tenths of its population, and to awaken a more lively and
widespread interest in the history of a land which has a great destiny before it. If
such he the effect of a perusal of these pages, my readers can then have recourse to the
numerous historical works on New Zealand that have been issued from the press at
various times, and which, I have too much reason to fear, are seldom consulted, except
by a comparative few, whose position, as public men, renders it necessary that they
should have an intimate knowledge of colonial affairs, past and present.
JAMES GREY.
Wellington, June, 1879.


Residence of Sir GEORGE GREY, K.G.B., Kawau.


/''So
//j||ij%EAllS hence,[when the present gene-
I \ lljjjl ration shall have passed away, and
\ personal and political prejudices shall
v\/ have been obliterated by the lapse
I I of time ; when men can calmly re-
view the history and associations of
the past with intelligence and impartiality, un-
moved by party considerations and private ani-
mosities, then must the historian, in describing
the principal features of the land he lives in,
devote a considerable portion of his descriptive
narrative to the island about which I have
been asked to furnish a few particulars that
may prove at least interesting, if not instruc-
tive, to a very large section of the population to
whom the Kawau, except by repute, is prac-
tically unknown. He will find it incumbent
upon him to do this, not merely on account
of the manifold natural attractions of this lovely
spot, which Nature has endowed so copiously
with her most precious gifts, and the good
taste and wealth of our Premier have helped
to beautify and make more lovely still, but
because there is associated with it a name that
will for ever hold a prominent place in the
history of the past, so long as New Zealand has
- an existence, and its'records are preserved. In
writing this sketch it is not my intention to
refer to Sir George jGaey in his public and
political capacity, but rather to speak of him
as I found him—a private gentleman, re-
tired after the fatigues and turmoils of the
session to a place which for loveliness is not
to be surpassed, nay equalled, by any other
which it has been my good fortune to visit in
this Colony. Having a taste for the picturesque
and the beautiful, and hearing so much about
the Premier’s island home, I need hardly say
with what feelings of pleasure I accepted an
invitation to visit Kawau ; and these were
enhanced when I discovered jthat I should
have the privilege of being escorted over the
place by its owner, and by him shown the
HIS ISLAND HOME.
various objects most interesting to behold.
There is such an intense feeling of satisfaction
at pleasures to come, however distant, that wo
seldom pay even a moment’s consideration to
the troubles and trials we must endure before
they come within our grasp ; therefore, a few
sleepless nights and the excruciating tortures
of mal de mer, to which, like most other poor
mortals, I am subject, had no terrors for me
when I threw myself into an easy posture in
the saloon of the Hinemoa, and told Captain
Fairchild that I would never leave him until
he landed me at my destination. The after-
noon on which we started was about as cold
and cheerless a one as can well be described ;
the rain came down in tropical copiousness,
and the wind whistled through the rigging
with a sound which betokened what landsmen
would term a frightful night at sea ; but before
we had reached Pencarrow Head we discovered
that the storm was entirely local in its effects,
and out of the gloom which at the time of our
departure surrounded the Empire City, we
were ushered into sunshine as we passed the
most southerly point of Palliser Pay. The s.s.
Taranaki had preceded us by twenty-one
minutes, and as we sat on the deck of the
Government steamer, making all sorts of guesses
as to when we should overhaul the Union
Company’s boat, little did we think that the
Taranaki was proceeding on the last voyage
northward she would make from PortNicholsou.
Onward we went across Palliser Bay, every
minute decreasing the distance between the
two steamers, until we shot past the Taranaki,
and long before bed-time the lights of
the ill-fated steamer could not be discerned,
she had fallen so far behind us. Beyond the
usual incidents of a sea trip, there was’nothing
calling for special observation. Early in the
morning we could see Napier, at which the
Hinemoa had called to tranship the Hon.
Colonel Whitmore and Mrs. Whitmore into a
steam launch which had been advised by tele-
1
ms ISLAND HOME.


gram to be on the look out for them; and as
soon as they had made their adieux, our course
was set for Portland Island. Until we reached
the East Cape we had been favored with most
delightful weather, and Captain Fairchild was
in hopes that the run from Wellington to
Kawau, notwithstanding the time lost in going
out of our course to call at Napier, would be
the fastest on record ; but
“ The best laid schemes o’ mice an’ men gang aft
agley,”
and the hopes of sighting Kawau at breakfast
time on the second morning after our departure
from Wellington were doomed to disappoint-
ment, for no sooner had we rounded the East
Cape than a head wind set in, which increased
in violence until during the night it blew
almost a gale. It must surely blow constantly
in the Bay of Plenty; I have crossed it several
tipaes going North, and as frequently coming
Southward, and I have always noticed that
the wind has been dead ahead. However, as
we sped along at a slower rate than we
could have desired, we could already feel
a difference in the temperature, and by the
time we were close upon the Alderman
and Mercury Islands, and were running up
that most picturesque portion of the North
Island coast, stretching from the northern ex-
tremity of the Bay of Plenty to Cape Colville,
we were again favored with beautiful weather
and a cloudless sky. I had not been at this
particular part of the coast for over ten years,
and the memory of its picturesqueness had not
been blunted in the meantime or my admira-
tion lessened of what I beheld as the Hinemoa
steamed past the numerous islands which
abound in such number, and are so grouped
together as to make the scene particularly
charming. Our contiguity to the northern cap-
ital dawned forcibly upon us as we passed two
or three of the fleet of small craft engaged in
the timber trade, and when we had left the
Great Barrier some distance in the background,
we pictured to our minds how, when the City
of Auckland became a densely populated one,
the Great Barrier, from its healthy position,
might become a second Isle of Wight, and be
a place of pleasant resort to those who desired
a temporary retirement from the business cares
of city life. The wind again combated against
our progress as we entered the Hauraki Gulf,
and it was evident from what Captain Fairchild
told us about distances that we could not reach
Kawau until after dark that evening.
It was Sir George Grey’s desire that we
should first behold the island by daylight, and
we devoutly wished that we should enjoy that
privilege, but our captain,' perceiving that
there was no chance of doing so, was in no
way inclined to go unnecessarily fast. We
passed the Tiritiri light on our left, and at last
between eight and nine o’clock were steaming
under the southern shores of Kawau. Here
we were reminded of Wellington by the strong
wind that was blowing, but we were assured
that this was quite an unusual thing, and that
it was unfair to associate the place with such
a boisterous locality as Port Nicholson, because
at Kawau it blew once in a twelvemonth, and
that once happened most inopportunely. How-
ever much we felt inclined to suspend our
we were nevertheless convinced
that it could blow elsewhere as well as in
Wellington. Proceeding under easy steam,
within what appeared to be only a stone’s throw
of the island, the night, which had promised
otherwise, becqme exceedingly sombre, and
this rendered it very difficult to ascertain our
exact position. Soundings were constantly
taken, and a sharp look-out was kept for a
rock called the Beehive. The rock is so
called on account of its resemblance to a
beehive ; in shape it is precisely similar,
and it rests on a low-lying reef, which runs
out for a considerable distance. The way
to our anchorage was between this reef and
another running out from the island, but the
night was far too dark to distinguish the Bee-
hive, and under the circumstances Captain
Fairchild and Sir George Grey were of one
opinion that discretion was the better part of
valor, and that the safest course to pursue was
to drop anchor for the night. The Hinemoa
was accordingly brought under the shelter of
the land, and the anchor dropped, but no
sooner was this done than the fog lifted, and
the Beehive could be seen by everybody. I
felt rather pleased than otherwise, however, at
the determination arrived at to anchor for the


night, for I was anxious that my first im-
pressions of the place about which I had heard
so much should be formed under the most
favorable circumstances. I was astir shortly
after daybreak ; the wind had moderated to a
breeze, and there was every indication that
we should have real summer weather. • The
sea was still running high when we weighed
anchor, and the spray came over our port side
in large quantities as we steamed past our Itte
noir of the previous night—the Beehive. On
our starboard side lay the Kawau, fringed here
and there by bush growing down to the water’s
edge. Taking a general glance at the island
as we passed along it, we could not help being
stronlgyimpressed with itsbeautyand situation.
It is rather hilly than mountainous ; here it
dips into the ocean in the form of abrupt cliffs,
and at other points terminates in a succession
of gentle slopes, which relieve the scene of all
monotony. The surface had a very emerald
appearance about it for this advanced period
of the season, and we are all pleased with the
picture presented to us. We still go on, find-
ing it difficult to determine which is the most
lovely nook that discloses itself to view,
when, with a suddenness almost magical, we
emerge from troubled waters, and find our-
selves in a beautiful cove, where the surface of
the water is as placid as a mill pond. The
transformation is effected so rapidly that we
can hardly realise the fact that but a moment
before we were being rudely tossed by the
angry billows which continue to play as angrily
still only a cable’s length from where we lie iu
smooth water. Overhead there is not a cloud
to be seen; the sun sends forth his joyous
rays with uninterrupted brilliancy, and im-
parts a truly grand and gladdening effect to
everything around us. The atmosphere is pure
and still; the water beneath us camposed and
transparent; the distant islands clothed with
a beautiful bluish tint; the land in front aud
on both sides of us decked Out in its gayest
holiday attire. There is an air of calm serenity
about the place which is peculiarly fascinating,
and resist the inclination as we may, the mind
is disposed to travel back into the distant past,
to the days of our boyhood when tales and
pictures of fairyland formed our sole literary
treasures. The ripple on the shore is scarcely
loud enough to be perceptible, and the con-
tinual buzzing of the locusts, which tells us it
is summer, and the singing of native and im-
ported birds, are the only sounds which disturb
the reigning tranquillity. Large native trees
overhang the shores, and rear themselves in
majestic stateliness to the hill tops which
domineer the cove into which we have been
conducted as if by some magic agency ; the
lark is already sending forth its joyous notes,
and the birds indigenous to the island and
those which its owner has imported vie with
each other as though they were engaged in a
competitive chorus for supremacy. The little
wind there is wafts to us from the shore
scents of the richest fragrance, and our delight
at the whole prospect is unbounded. Gaze
were we may, there is something to please and
interest us, something to enlist our admiration.
At the toe of the horsehoe, which in shape
best describes the natural formation of the
cove, a nice sandy beach forms the foreground.
Behind this beach, on which stands a well-
appointed boat shed, are magnificent gardens,
in the midst of which the residence of Sir
George Grey rears its stately dimensions. The
picture is rendered complete by the rich cur-
tain of foliage which surrounds it, and the un-
dulating space in the background, on which
the tall English grass rolls wave-like sub-
missively to the gentle breeze. This clearing
is surmounted by several native trees and
pines of various descriptions which have been
planted in such positions as to produce a most
artistic effect. Viewed from the deck of the
Hinemoa, the whole scene presented a coup
dtceil of most enchanting magnificence, to
which it would require the descriptive powers
of a Sir Walter Scott or a Lamartine to do
ample justice.
Many months had elapsed since Sir George
Grey had been to Kawau, and on shore there
were evident indications of joy at his return.
When he reached the island he was gladly
welcomed by a large number of his employees ;
and the return of Mrs. Seymour George, his
niece, appeared also to give infinite satisfaction.
On going to Wellington before the session, Mrs.
George had brought with her several servants
whose parents were in her uncle’s employment


on the island, and as they had been absent ten
months, their joy at meeting each other again
was unbounded. Ever thoughtful, even in
minor matters, Sir George Grey directed the
whistle to be blown as the steamer passed
along the island, in order to inform those
living at a distance from the landing place of
their relatives’ arrival.
Shortly after breakfast we were informed
that Sir George Grey would like to see all
hands ashore, and a ready response was given
to the invitation. No sooner had we reached
terra firma, where Sir George received us most
cordially, than our first impressions of the
place were strongly fortified by what we be-
held. Acting as our guide, Sir George Grey
showed us over his residence, which is a truly
beautiful mansion, built of permanent materials,
the rooms large, lofty, and cheerful, admirably
furnished, and the walls hung with paintings
of great antiquity and value. Once again in
the open air, we followed Sir George in an ex-
cursion through the grounds and gardens sur-
rounding his residence. These are replete
with the choicest shrubs and plants ; there is
hardly a country under Heaven from whence
Sir George has not obtained a plant of some
kind or other, and they are now all to be seen
growing at Kawau with as much health and
vigor as though they were indigenous to the
soil. Eor variety of color and species I have
never seen anything to equal the flower beds
at Kawau, which struck md as being remark-
ably well cared for. As the gardens are en-
compassed by hills, except on the harbor
side, they are well protected from the prevail-
ing winds, and the soil being good and warm,
every delicacy is fit for the table many weeks
before they make their appearance in the
South. As I passed through the gardens,
finding so much to rivet my attention, it was
rather difficult to say what pleased me most,
until I came to the orange and lemon trees,
which thrive here to astonishing perfection,
bearing latitudinal considerations in mind. The
trees were crowded with fruit, and Sir George
told his visitors to help themselves freely to it.
The summer oranges were very large, but
tasted somewhat bitter compared with those
w o get from Eiji; but a finer fruit than the
lemons I pulled at Kawau, alike as to size and
flavor, I have never seen. Any one of them
would make two or three of the ordinary lemons
which people buy in the shops, and the ex-
cellent flavor I have found them to impart to
aglass of whisky toddy makes me almost wish that
I had taken away with me a larger quantity.
From the gardens by a series ef zig-zag path-
ways, Sir George conducted us to spots on the
island from which some splendid views could
be obtained, and in the course of our progress
we could not help reflecting how bountiful
nature had been to this gem of the Southern
Pacific, and how much art had done to adorn
nature with the lovely mantle she now wears
so gracefully at the Kawau. The expense in-
curred must have been enormous, but double
the amount would not have accomplished the
same effect had not good taste and sound
judgment in the matter of adornment been
thrown into the scale along with capital. Our
verdict is unanimous as to the beauty and
serenity of the whole scene, as the eye wanders
over hill and dale, over beautifully undulating
slopes and meadow land, and rests on the sur-
rounding waters of the Pacific, which lend a
majestic charm to the whole picture, as seen
through the rows of lofty pines which stand
between us and the ocean. Our way back
was by a different path, no less interesting than
that by which we had ascended ; there were
still rare plants to be seen—natives of China,
Japan, the Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius,
India, Sweden, Denmark, North and South
America ; in fact, of almost every country in
the world, including the most recent British
possession, the island of Cyprus.
Those who have had the honor of a personal
acquaintance with Sir George Grey couldnotfail
to perceive that he isjan extensively read man,
well versed in every department of literature.
His knowledge of men and books is net of that
superficial kind which begets pedantry, but is
deep, penetrating and reliable. Like most
really well learned men, he does not bore you
with a display of his superior learning and in-
telligence ; but to him a literary conversation
is at all times irresistible, aud he will join in
it with the ardor of an enthusiast. He is
full of anecdote, and crop up what subject


there may, you will hear from him something
that is always Apropos, and either instructive
or amusing, according to the nature of the
matter under discussion. To a man of such
strong literary tastes a good library in an ab-
solute necessity. This essential is also to be
found at Kawau, and Sir George can with
truth declare that he possesses the finest
private library in the Colony. It contains not
bne or two, but dozens of works which the
British Museum would like to have, besides a
number of original manuscripts of which fac
similes even do not exist. There you will see
the handiwork of the monks done centuries
ago, long before Caxton had discovered the
art of printing; you take up the ponderous
volumes one after another, and as you turn
over the leaves and trace the marvellous uni-
formity of the characters: as you pause in
breathless admiration of the brilliancy of the
illuminations which ages have not sufficed to
tarnish or make dim, or behold with reveren-
tial eyes the artistic illustrations with which
the pages abound, you wonder at the patience
with which these holy men must have labored,
at the time it must have taken to produce
these works, and feel how deeply grateful
succeeding generations ought to be to men
who have done so much to promote the cause
of learning and to preserve our literature. You
restore these volumes reluctantly to their
shelves, and take down one of the very first
books issued from Caxton’s printing press,
which is of course a curiosity worth seeing.
You afterwards trace the improvements made
in printing by an examination cf several most
valuable works issued from the press at various
dates from the discovery of the art down to
the present day. The library comprises all
kinds of literature, and the linguist will find
in it ample materials wherewith to while away
the time. Leaving the books, which are far
too numerous for systematic examination,
Sir George next showed me a large portfolio
containing many original manuscripts of the
Cromwellian period, of almost incalculable
value, amongst others several letters written by
Sir Philip Meadowes and the poet Milton. A
little beok has recently been issued, which
alleges that a certain epitaph written by Mil-
ton has only just been discovered ; but en
making a comparison of the fac simile of the
original with the hand writing of Sir Philip
Meadowes in his possession, Sir George Grey
arrived at the conclusion that the authorship
of the epitaph had been wrongly attributed
to the immortal poet. To myself and the
gentleman who accompanied me on my visit
to the binary (Mr. Adino B.) Sir George pointe d
out the great similarity existing between the/oc
simile of the epitaph and the handwriting
of Sir Philip Meadowes; we examined the forma-
tion of the characters with a critical scrutiny
by means of a powerful glass, and arrived
at the same conclusion as Sir George—
that there were general and particular proofs
by the comparison we made that the epitaph
was written, not by theLatinsecretary (Milton),
but by the general secretary of the Common-
wealth, Sir Philip Meadowes. Other manu-
scripts equally interesting were brought under
our notice, and our only regret was that time
would not permit of a more lengthened inspec-
tion. Sir George Grey has maintained a cor-
respondence with many of the greatest states-
men and scholars of the day, and when the
time comes when no objection can be raised
against the publication of the letters which
his library contains, the public will reap a
great advantage by having the collection sub-
mitted to them for perusal. I noticed quite a
heap of letters which Sir George Grey had
received from Dr. Livingstone, and these
will no doubt hereafter prove cf intense in-
terest, as affording an insight into the motives
and aspirations of the greatest of modern ex-
plorers. Before leaving the library I-rau my
eye casually along the shelves containing hun-
dreds of volumes of general modern literature,
and I pulled out a book which appeared to be
moat expensively and elaborately bound. It
was entitled “ The Early Years of the Prince
Consort,” and on opening it, I discovered that
the volume had been presented to Sir George
Grey by her Most Gracious Majesty, that fact
beingrecorded in the Queen's own bandwriting.
Avisitor to the Kawau could spend quite a month
in the library, and by the end of that time he
would find that he had not exhausted all the
objects of interest and curiosity which it con


tains, and which must contribute in no small
degree to make a sojourn at the Kawau par-
ticularly instructive and agreeable.
Being left alone with the owner of Kawau,
I took advantage of the opportunity to obtain
some information of a general character res-
pecting the island. I found Sir George com-
municative on all points which I desired to
know something about, and the result is, that
I have been permitted to afford a greater
variety of information to the public than has
ever yet been published. The area of Kawau
is between fire and six thousand acres. The
Admiralty survey sets down the acreage at
nearly seven thousand, bat the former estimate
is the more correct one. The island was
originally Crown-granted to an Aberdeen Com-
pany, who for several years worked the capper-
mines, and the locality of their operations is
plainly visible as you pass along the southern
shore of the island. Kawau contains a variety
of minerals, including gold, specks of which
are to be found almost everywhere, but the
precious metal dots not exist in payable quan-
tities. Copper ore is abundant, and in reply
to my question as to why he did not work it,
Sir George told me that he had no desire to see
mininggoiogonandtheprivacyof hisislandhome
disturbed. Sir George Grey purchased the
island from the Aberdeen Company, and about
eleven years have now elapsed since he first took
np his residence there. In purchasing Kawau,
Sir George Grey was instigated by motives of a
purely philanthropic character. It was his inten-
tion to convert it into a kind of acclimatisation
depot for the introduction of foreign plants,
animals and birds for subsequent distribution
throughout the Colony. He incurred a con-
siderable amount of expense in this direction,
and in his early efforts he was even more suc-
cessful than he believed he could be. A large
number of foreign plants, birds and animals
were accordingly introduced to the Kawau,
and to the acclimatising exertions of Sir George
Grey, the Colony, and more especially the
northern portion of it, is in no small degree
indebted for a great deal of the game and rare
plants which it now contains. Beer stalk over
the Kawau at the present day, and game of
various kinds abound upon it in ail directions; the
waters which encompass it are alive with fish
of ail sorts, and oysters cling to the rocks in
millions, not more than a hundred paces from
where Sir George resides. The gardens sur-
rounding the mansion produce most lucious
fruits, all combining to make the Kawau what
it really is, an earthly paradise. With such
attractions as these, it is little wonder that Sir
George Grey determined to take up his abode
at the Kawaujfor here, indeed, one could retire
without regret, and live at peace with all man-
kind.
I have already told my readers of the extent
of the Kawau, and thereby removed a great
deal of ignorance which prevailed on this par-
tioular point amongst the public generally.
Before I visited the Island I shared in the be-
lief that its area was limited to something like
two or three hundred acres, but when I found
that it would take two whole days to go round
it, I was very much surprised. There are no
fewer than three harbors leading into it, in all
of which there is deep water and excellent
shelter for the small sailing traders which fre-
quently take refuge there. The geographical
position of the Kawau lends an additional charm
to it. Lying in the Hauraki Suit ata distanceof
only three or four miles f rom the mainland, on a
clear day the view to be obtained is magnifi-
cent. The water distance from Kawau to
Auckland is twenty-nine miles, passing the
celebrated Waiwera en route, and the passage
down is accomplished in three hours and some-
times less by steamers of ordinary speed. There
is a telegraph station on the mainland, nearly
opposite Kawau, and when Sir George is stay-
ing there he sends his telegrams to this place
instead of Auckland. The Kawau is not the
solitude which some people imagine it is. Thera
are, generally speaking, from 80 to 100 inhab-
itants on the island, including the wives and
families of those to whom Sir .George Grey
gives employment during the year. Their
cottages are dotted all over the island, and
each family has a patch of its own to cultivate
for its particular use. The residents of the
island are a happy and contented lot of people,
and they all appear to have a deep regard and


affection for Sir George. The monotony
of their lives is relieved by a series of enter-
tainments, which are held once a week, and
these terminate in a dance, in which all take
part as though they were all one happy family.
They are at liberty to invite the settlers on the
mainland to these entertainments, and the
latter return the compliment by inviting their
Kawau friends occasionally to similar enter-
tainments on the opposite shore. There are
many children who have been born on the
Kawau and have never yet left it. They think
a great deal of their native place, as an anec-
dote which Sir George Grey related to me will
show. It is Sir George’s custom on occasions
of festivity and file days to invite the citizens
of Auckland to visit Kawau, and hundreds
avail themselves of the opportunity. The in-
flux of so many people of course arouses the
curiosity of the Kawau youth, and leaves vari-
ous impressions on their minds. It was on one
fine morning, shortly after a visitation of this
kind, that Sir George was proceeding up one
of the roads leading to the high ground. . A
little boy, who walked before him at some
distance, suddenly stopped as it to make an
admiring survey of the whole scene, and as
soon as Sir George got up to the point where
he was standing he exclaimed, “Oh, Sir George,
what a beautiful place our island is,” as though
he had a partnership interest in it. “ What
makes you think so ?” Sir George demanded.
“ because,” readily answered the boy, “ so
many people come to see our place, and we
never go to see theirs.” There was so much
innocent reasoning in what the boy said, and
such an apparent feeling of contentment with
his isolated habitation in the sentiments he
uttered, that the lad’s words will never be for-
gotten by him to whom they were addressed.
The Kawau, for the most part, is laid down
in English grass, and about 2000 sheep depas-
ture upon it, besides a number of cattle. A
portion of the land is cultivated every year,
and a sufficient quantity of corn, potatoes, tur-
nips, carrots, &c., grown to meet the require-
ments of those living on the island. The
keeping in order of the gardens and plantations
claims the greater part of the attention of
those in Sir George’s employment, and they
appear to do their work most thoroughly,
judging from the condition in which I found
everything to be on the occasion of my visit.
The cause of education has not been neglected
at the Kawau. For years past the education
of the children has been confided to a school-
master named M’Donald. He was a resident
of the island for years before it came into the
possession of Sir George Grey. He has grown
old and feeble, and for some little time past he
has been unable to perform the duties of
teacher. Consequently the education of the
children has been temporarily suspended ;
but Sir George Grey has erected a new school-
house, and the Auckland Education Board
have acceded to his application to appoint a
master for Kawau, and to bring the school
within the operation of the Education Act.
Although superseded and too infirm to work,
poor old M’Donald will always have a comfort-
able home at the Kawau, where he has ex-
pressed a desire to end his days. Years ago
an only son died and was buried there. The
manner of his death was rather singular. He
got his hand scratched, and the blood flowed
from a spot no bigger than a pin’s head. The
flow of blood, small as it was, could not bo
stopped through the ignorance of those then
living on the island, and the poor young fel-
low actually bled to death. The event proved
a dreadful blow to the boy’s father, who
from that moment never wished to leave the
Kawau. He now totters about in his dotage,
and does little odds and ends about the house
and gardens more for his own apparent gratifi-
cation than anything else. [The poor old
fellow died since the foregoing was written.]
Sir George Grey, during a sojourn at the
Kawau, has plenty of material at disposal to
occupy his mind and attention. He is an
early riser, and frequently indulges in long
rambles through the island. He takes a per-
sonal interest and pride in everything that
goes on in the shape of improvements, and
exercises a sort of general supervision over them,
offering suggestions to his workmen, and at
other times giving way to them in matters as
to which he supposes they ought to know bet


ter than himself. A great deal of his time is
spent in his library, and in the inditing of
private correspondence which has fallen into
arrears by reason of the demands of public
duty. At home, he is in all respects the true
type of an English gentleman—kind, hospi-
table, and considerate. His love of children is
proverbial, and there is no nurse living whose
tongue can command so many nursery rhymes.
When I now sit down to write this hurried
sketch of the Kawau and what came under my
observation during my visit, I am puzzled to
understand how any human being can give up
the repose that is to be found there in exchange
for the cares and troubles inseparable from
active public life. Politics may have their
attractions, but to my mind the amount of
happiness to be derived from a residence at
this sublunary paradise far outweighs all other
considerations.


Kororareka, Bay of Islands, in 1836.


AWAY IN THE FAR NORTH.
PART I.
© mos *‘ Southern colonists that por-
-11 / (l[ || i tion of New Zealand lying to the
\ north of Auckland must until this
\! / day be a terra incognita. Perhaps
a few monied or comparatively well-to-do
people have found their way to the Hot
Springs at Waiwera, whilst more have been
attracted to the Pink and White Terraces of
Botomahana, and have penetrated the island
as far as Lake Taupo ; but as yet there are
not many persons in the South who have any
practical knowledge of the country embraced
within the parallels of Auckland and the North
Cape. I have recently visited that part of
New Zealand, and my sojourn there has been
sufficiently prolonged to enable me to pen a
few interesting details in connection with it.
In fact, I may say that in my rambles in the
far north I have completely networked the
country, and have made a pilgrimage to
almost every locality that has been rendered
historical either in connection with the ear-
liest missionary enterprises or with the first war
against the Europeans, instigated by that re-
nowned scion of the Ngapuhi nation, Hone
Heke. I am sure, therefore, that anything I
may write on these subjects will be acceptable
to my readers, more especially when I assure
them that the imagination will not be drawn
upon to any appreciable extent. With regard to
events which happened years before I was in
my swaddlisg clothes, I must have recourse to
the most reliable authorities extant in the
matter of dates, and the chronological order of
notable occurrences ; but the greater part of
these sketches will be comprised of matter
purely original, and will have reference to
what came under my personal observation in
the course of my peregrinations. To make
the story more readable, it will be necessary to
intersperse it with anecdote, and at times, as
the familiar saying goes, to descend from the
sublime to the ridiculous, but this departure
from stubborn facts will not obtrude itself in
such a manner as to require any apology.
Without further preface, I shall at once pro-
ceed with the task I have undertaken, and I
hope that by the time X have brought my
labors to a termination, there are not a few of
my readers who will be free to admit that they
have derived pleasure and profit from a perusal
of what I have written in these pages.
Imitating the style of not a few novelists, I
will commence by saying that the day was a
dismal one—dismal for an Auckland day in
the early part of March—when I took passage
for Russell, Bay of Islands, in one of the
Union Company’s steamers. The rain came
down as it well knows how to fall in the Nor-
thern capital; and, as the passengers huddled
themselves together under the awning of the
poop in preference to going to the saloon below,
where the atmosphere was almost unbearable,
everything around looked particularly misera-
ble. I felt, however, within myself that I was
the most miserable being on board, and there
were circumstances operating which had a de-
cidedly dispiriting influence upon me. Only
half an hour had elapsed since, in a drenching
downpour, I had followed the remains of a very
dear friend, and one for whom a brother’s
affection than mine could not have been
stronger, to their last resting place in tho
Symonds-street Roman Catholic cemetery—
(J. M., of the 58th Regiment, who served in
the war against Hone Heke)—and as I stood
on the deck in close proximity to the com-
panion, shivering in my wet garments and
vainly endeavoring to escape the drippings
from the awning which the wind drifted upon
me in cruel disregard of my already saturated
condition, my feelings were not those of one
9
AWAY IN THE FAR NORTH.


bent upon a holiday excursion to places which
at least had the charm of novelty about them,
however much in a scenic point of view they
might disappoint me, when compared with other
localities in various parts of the colony to which
a natural inclination for travel had already
attracted me. The people and everything
around wore such a dreary aspect that it was a
kind of relief to find at last that we were away
from the wharf, and shortly afterwards steam-
ing full speed ahead past the noble island of
Rangitoto. Our party was three in number.
He whom I shall designate our chief was a
nice, amiable gentleman, but a very bad sailor;
at an early stage of our passage he was pros-
trated with sea-sickness, and rolling himself in
a rug, he made a seat on deck his sleeping
apartment for the night. The nature of our
mission required that we should have an inter-
preter, and in Auckland our chief was fortunate
in securing the services of Mr. ,G. B. I say for-
tunate advisedly, because not only did Mr, B.
discharge the duties of interpreter with marked
satisfaction to all concerned, but throughout
the whole of our travels this gentleman proved
himself to be a most agreeable and obliging
compagnon de voyage. I first met him at the
Maori Parliament at Orakei, where we were
introduced to each other, and from that day to
this I have continued to entertain the highest
esteem for him, and I don’t think I am wrong
in assuming that the feeling is reciprocated.
Mr. B. is by birth a half-caste, his native place
being the Taranaki district, and he speaks the
Maori language with a pure Waikato accent.
He has received an excellent education, is
naturally intelligent, converses in English with
grammatical accuracy, and can acquit himself
with credit in any discussion that may crop up.
He is one of nature's gentlemen, and so far as
polished manners, amiability of disposition,
and general knowledge are concerned, he
would put scores of University men to the
blush. But Mr, B. is like most other people
when he goes to seaj the smell of engine grease
and the cooking, combined with the oscillation
caused by the screw, in nine cases out of ten
overpowers him, and he collapses into that
state of prostration which generally culminates
in the afflicted one wishing somebody else to
do bim a kindness by throwing hint overboard.
We had not moved many fathoms’ lengths
from the wharf when my friend quietly con-
fided to me that he had a sort of predisposition
to feel unwell. I prepared for the worst, but
as it turned out the antidote which I pre-
scribed was moat efficacious in its effects.
Whatever Sir William Fox and other cold-
water worshippers may think to the contrary
—and I give them all credit for the sincerity
of their convictions—there is a great deal to
be said in favor of the opposite remedy, more
especially at sea. Personally I had no doubts
whatever in the matter, and I strongly advised
my friend to have a good stiff glass of “ red
funnel,” an alcohol which is as familiar as
household words to those who have been
in the habit of travelling in the Union
boats up and down the New Zealand
coast. My advice was followed; the
colonial custom of “ a shout for a shout” was
observed ; the remedy was effectual, and my
friend was so much a better sailor than myself
that when the bell for tea rang that evening,
he was the first to rush down the stairs of the
companion, and his consumptive faculties dis-
played themselves so conspicuously on that
occasion that I fear my veracity would be
questioned if I told my readers how plate
disappeared after plate, as each successive
ejaculation of “ steward" announced that my
friend’s appetite was not yet appeased. I
don’t pretend to maintain that in every case
“ red funnel” would be a preventative of sea-
sickness, but in the instance I have referred to
the relief derived from it was undeniable ; and
“red funnel” now forms one of the articles of
faith to which my excellent acquaintance will
readily subscribe whenever he puts to sea.
We experienced a tolerably good passage to
the Bay of Islands, and our sleep was Undis-
turbed by any unusual tossing about of the
steamer. I was now going into a part of tne
country totally unknown to me, and a desire
to see everything that was to be seen prompted
an appearance on deck just about the time we
were rounding Cape Brett, and before the sUn
was many minutes above the horizon. Steam-
ing along through comparatively smooth water,
I thought I had tieVer before beheld anything


more beautiful or serene. Island after island is
passed in rapid succession, and, as we proceed
up the beautiful bay, I cannot help thinking
of that great circumnavigator, Captain James
Cook, and how appropriately every locality
has been named. In no instance is this fact
more forcibly demonstrated than in the case
of the Bay of Islands. Nearing Bussell, or
Kororareka, as it used to be called, the first
prominent objectdiscernedis the flagstaff stand-
,ing on a high hill which as yet shuts out
the township from view. There is a historical
association connected with this flagstaff which
I must not forget to refer to. It was on the
11th of March, 1845, that on this very hill the
first hostilities took place between the Maoris
and the British troops, but I should be antici-
pating my narrative if at the present time I
entered into further details concerning that
event. We must first of all round the point
before we can catch a glimpse of what was
once the capital of New Zealand, and the scene
of many a lawless act at a time when might
was right, and when American whalers were
masters of the position, and did exactly what
they pleased with everything and everybody,
according to their own peculiar notions of civi-
lisation. I have a decided preference for old
names, and shall therefore continue to call the
place Kororareka (which means sweet penguin,
“ korora” signifying penguin, and “ reka”
sweet). The village, as it now exists, presents
nothing like the bustle it did in former years,
and the few inhabitants who still remain in it
evince no disposition to improve the order of
things, or to release themselves from that
groove of inactivity into which they have
drifted, I suppose on account of their isolated
position. To my mind there is no place in New
Zealand more beautifully situated., The village
itself, or the main portion of it, stands on the
beach at the bottom of one of the numerous
indentations which are to be seen in the Bay of
Islands. The beach in shape very much re-
sembles a half-moon, and viewed from the
harbor, the township is decidedly pretty.
Directly opposite to it, on the other side of
the bay, about four miles distant, you can
almost discover the spot on which the Treaty
of Waitangi was signed. As you stand on the
Kororareka beach, and gaze on the opposite
shore, you can see where the waters of the
Keri-keri empty themselves into the bay,
whilst quite close to Waitangi, a little to the
left, stands Paihia, a small village which will
always claim some importance on account of
its connection with missionary enterprise in the
very early days of the colony, under the
auspices of the Anglican Church. Further
still to the left, you can see the mouth of the
Kawa Kawa, a name which is gradually be-
coming more familiar on account of the coal
discoveries which have been made in the
locality. But with regard to Kororareka it-
self, there is hardly a soul astir on the morning
of our arrival, with the exception of the boat-
man and his eon, who take our party and
luggage ashore from the steamer, and are any-
thing but extortionate in the demand they
make for their trouble. The place boasts of
two hotels, and at the better one of thema gentle-
man residing in Kororareka (Mr. F.), had
kindly, executed our telegraphic commission,
and had a suite of rooms engaged for us.
Everybody who has travelled on a steamboat
must know what a luxury it is to have a bath
after arri ring at his destination, or at the very
least a good wash. The former in an hotel
at Kororareka is a thing unheard of, and in
our case we were nearly deprived of the latter.
I do not know how to account for it, but some-
how or other the servants appeared to be
helplessly dumfoundered on the morning of
our advent to Kororareka. Perhaps the rush
of three was an unusual phenomenon, and
accounts for our difficulty in procuring water,
then soap, and last of all something to dry our
faces with, when to our dismay a trembling
housemaid informed us that all the towels in
the house were at the wash, and with an
apology told us that we should have to use
sheets as a- make-shift. My first impressions
of hotel life at Kororareka were of the most un-
favorable kind, and they improved little by
the experience of a week’s sojourn in that
delightful locality. The beds, though I will
say scrupulously clean, were as hard as iron,
and the pillows appeared to have been stuffed


with pebbles from the beach, cemented together
with a sort of everlasting durability. So hard
were they that I dreaded moving my head up-
on them, frightful of the consequences that
might ensue, and of the phrenological de-
velopements that might result from the
operation. But if the beds and pillows were
objectionable through the absence of one
single soft spot about them, there was little
to complain of so far as the table was con-
cerned. People may abuse Celestials to
their heart’s content, but it was owing to
the efforts of the Chinese cook at the Koro-
rareka hostelry that our lives were rendered
endurable. Although we could see the fish
jumping out of the water not a stone’s
throw from the hotel, we were at a loss to
account for the non-appearance of fresh fish
for breakfast, but the want was attempted
to be supplied by a tin of preserved
salmon from the Columbia River. Although
grass was growing around the place, and
we naturally enough expected an abundant
supply of new milk, in this item, also, we
were disappointed, and we had to content
ourselves with the preserved Swiss article
The tea we were supplied with was of a
delicate bluish tint, and from day to day
its color was unchanged. One of the guests
(Mr. L) at last protested, but the land-
lord was strong in his assurances that the
tea was of the very best brand obtainable.
It is unnecessary to repeat in its own forcible
language what the rejoinder was, but it was to
the effect that the guest didn’t much care
what the brand was so long as the landlord
gave him the tea canister, and allowed him to
exercise his own discretion as to the quantity
he should put in the teapot. The hint was
never acted upon, and being unable to stand
the tea any longer on account of its inferiority,
I was ultimately compelled to resort to a small
bottle of Bass or Guinness for breakfast every
morning. A curious incident happened to me
during my stay at this establishment. Having
some writing to do, and the small kerosene
lamp shedding an insufficient light for the work
I desired to accomplish, I applied to the house-
maid for a couple of candles, but as she did not
bring them I allowed twenty minutes to elapse
before I went to enquire after her. When I
next saw her, in answer to my enquiry about
the candles, she coolly informed me that she
was told ta say no candles could be spared.
Bursting with indignation at such a display of
meanness, I went straight away to Buchanan’s
store and purchased a pound of sperms, lighted
a couple of them when I returned to the sitting
room, and when I had done with them I blew
them out, and with great ceremony stowed
them away in the recesses of my portmanteau.
When I related the circumstances to my chief,
he could hardly believe that such a thing could
have happened in a place where we paid well
for everything we got, but when he gravely
asked me if what I told him was a reality, and
I replied that it was, he almost split his sides
laughing at the occurrence, and at the paltry
application of economic principles which had
caused me so much inconvenience and loss of
temper. The landlord, in other ways, tried to
make himself most agreeable, but he devoted
too much time to his store to the detriment of
his hotel business, which he did not appear to
care much about; and in this respect the
unanimity of the host and hostess was wonder-
ful, for she gave one the idea that she con-
sidered nature had intended her for something
superior to hotel keeping.
If you want to get away most completely
from the bustle of city life, by all means go to
Kororareka. Your tranquility will not be
disturbed—not as in the times gone past when
the harbor literally swarmed with whaling
craft, and when their intoxicated crews made
things on shore particularly lively. It is only
on those days when steamers arrive that the
place shows any signs of animation at all. Then
everybody turns out and goes down the wharf
to gaze at the intruders. Besides two hotels,
the township boasts of two or three stores,
which seem to exist without customers ; at
least, I passed and repassed them several times
without seeing anybody commit the trifling
extravagance of buying even a box of matches.
In fact, the place is lifeless, and the people
exist there in a sort of hand-to-mouth fashion ;
they are without ambition, and it matters to


Hone Heke and his Wife.


them not what to-morrow will bring so long as
they have enough to supply their requirements
to-day. Their lives are perfectly aimless and
inactive; year after year rolls by, and still
their condition remains unaltered, save that
they are growing older, with no better provi-
sion made for declining years ; not that they
are improvident with the little they have, but
their indolence prevents them accumulating
something more for a rainy day. I must say, how -
ever, that it is not at Kororareka alone that
indolence is a characteristic of the people ; it
shows itself in almost every settlement north
of Auckland. I have been a little puzzled to
account for this, and the only excuse I can
urge is, that the inactivity of the people is in a
great measure due to climatic influences. Be
that as it may, there is nothing like the life
and energy in the North that is observable in
all the Southern portions of New Zealand.
I shall now furnish my readers with a few par-
ticulars concerning the early history of Korora-
reka, and in doing so I shall conduct them far
into the distant past, long before the colonisation
of the country was seriously contemplated. Many
years ago the coasts of New Zealand were
visited by quite a fleet of American whaling
vessels, and the principal place of rendezvous
was at the Bay of Islands. They used to make
for this harbor when the fishing season was
over, in order to transship the whale oil into
other vessels bound for American ports, and to
refit. In this manner a considerable trade
sprang up between those engaged in the whal e
fishing enterprise and the natives, and eventu-
ally Europeans principally from Sydney, were
attracted to the spot. Houses were built, a od
these increasing with extraordinary rapidity,
the township of Kororareka soon assumed con-
siderable dimensions. For many years, at cer-
tain seasons, as many as forty whaling ships
rode at anchor in the bay, and it may well be
inferred that the trade of the place must have
been very brisk, A life in those rude times
was not accounted a great deal, and many an
act of ruffianism, and even homicide, was com-
mitted *on that same Kororareka beach with
impunity. Whilst tribal feuds decimated the
native population, the American whalers ap-
pealed to the bowie knife for a settlement of
their own differences, thus setting to the
native people anything but a good example.
The first attempts that were made to assert
the majesty of the law was when New Zealand
became a dependency of New South Wales,
and Mr. Busby appeared on the scene as
British Resident in 1833. Even then the vin-
dication of the law was attended with danger-
ous consequences to those whose duty it was
to administer it, and not unfrequently was the
life of the Resident Magistrate threatened by
a band of cut-throat whalers, because some of
their runaway comrades had been captured and
sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Then
came a period when the connection between
New Zealand and New South Wales was
brought to a termination, and the former was
declared a separate colony. The removal of
the seat of Government to Auckland was the
first grea. ,blow to the prosperity of Kororareka.
Its trade diminished, and many of the settlers
took their departure for the new capital. But
in a historical point of view, Kororareka is
perhaps one of the most important localities in
the colony, inasmuch as that it was here the
first conflict occurred between the natives and
the Europeans. On the most prominent hill
at one end of the town a flagstaff had been
erected to indicate the Queen’s sovereignty
over the land. Incensed at this, the great
Ngapuhi warrior, Hone Heke, determined to
drive the red coats into the sea, and in order
to carry his design into execution, at daylight
on the 11th of March, 1845, 200 natives, under
one of Heke’s fighting generals named Kawiti,
attacked Captain Robertson’s position on the
hill domineering the Matawai Pass, at the
rear of the mission house erected by the late
Bishop Pompallier. Simultaneously with this
movement, Hone Heke surprised the soldiers
at the flagstaff (a detachment of the 96th Regi-
ment), and cut the flagstaff down. Seeing the
soldiers running precipitately down the flag-
staff hill, Captain Robertson spiked his [gun
and likewise fell back. After some
hard fighting, it was decided by the military
authorities to evacuate the town, and accord-
ingly the whole of the soldiers and inhabitants
embarked on board H. M. Hazard, the United
States corvette St. Louis, the whaling ship


Matilda, and the schooner Dolphin. Thus
abandoned, the warriors under Hone Hebe and
Kawiti entered the town and commenced
plundering it. The natives gorged themselves
with rum and sugar, the majority of them
became intoxicated ; by accident more than
anything else one of the houses caught fire, and
once started, without any attempts being made
to extinguish the flames, the conflagration
rapidly extended, and almost every building in
the place was levelled to the ground, Bishop
Pompallier’s Mission House, the Anglican and
Roman Catholic Churches, and one or two
other buildings alone escaping destruction.
From this blow Kororareka never recovered.
Only a few settlers returned when peace was
proclaimed ; the whaling vessels which in
former years had made it their place of call
gradually diminished in number, and became
fewer year by year, until at the present time it
has become what is vulgarly termed a sight
for sore eyes to see a whaler drop anchor in
the bay.
Before undertaking my recent tour through
the North, I had determined to see
everything of interest, and I found much to
occupy my attention at Kororareka. By a
singular coincidence, it was shortly before dusk
on the anniversary of the fight at Kororareka
that, with my friend Mr. G. 8., I ascended the
flagstaff hill, and examined the spot from which
Hone Heke had driven the soldiery. The
stump of the old flagstaff which Heke cut
down still remains, and until a few months
ago a portion of the top lay on the ground
alongside, but some mischievous persons tbok
it into their heads to roll it down the hill on
the opposite side from Kororareka, and there
it now lies amongst the manuka scrub.
Almost every stranger visiting Kororareka
makes it a point of going up Flagstaff Hill,
and the result is that the bottom portion of
the flagstaff is one mass of names cut into the
wood all around it. With a curiosity not
unnatural, I made searching enquiries about
the first native outbreak from men who fought
under Hone Heke on that occasion, as well as
from old settlers who had the most vivid
recollection of everything that occurred on
that memorable eleventh of March, in the
year 1845. From both sources I learned be-
yond question that Hone Heke never con-
templated the destruction of the settlement or
the massacre of the settlers. He had got an
idea into his head that the redcoats (so he used
to call the soldiers) had been brought into the
country to take the land from the natives, and
make them taurekareka (slaves), and he
determined to resist the attempt, and to drive
the soldiers into the sea. With regard to the
settlers, however, he entertained no feelings of
animosity ; the natives had by this time
learned to appreciate the advantages which
accrued from an intercourse with the Euro-
peans, and the relations between the two
races were of the most cordial and friendly
nature at the time of the conflict between
Heke’s warriors and the soldiers quartered at
this the first European settlement in the
colony. That he did not intend to harm them
is borne out by the fact that even after the
settlement was evacuated, add the inhabitants
had fled to the ships, some of them returned
to the shore when the houses were being
plundered, and mixing pell-mell with armed
natives, were permitted to carry away with
them whatever property they could save from
destruction. I was one day walking along the
beach with a gentleman who went to reside at
the Bay of Islands as far back as 1823, and he
pointed out the very spot where he had landed
with a view to saving property before the con-
flagration had gained much hold on the settle-
ment. He was one of several who embarked
in this apparently hazardous undertaking, but
he assured me that while he and his com-
panions remained ashore the natives never
attempted to molest them, or to frustrate their
efforts to recover the p r opcrty which belonged
to the terror-stricken inhabitants, who were
now free from all danger on board the vessels
lying in the bay. The evacuation and sub-
sequent destruction of Kororareka was due,
beyond doubt, to the bungling of the military
authorities ; and it wo aid have been well for
the colony, and would have saved the expendi-
ture of a vast amount of money and the
sacrifice of hundreds of valuable lives in after
years, it military bungling had not only origina-
ted at Kororareka, but had also ended there,


Tamati Waka Nene.


Besides the renewed Flagstaff Hill, the visi-
tor to Kororareka, if he knows anything at all
about the history of the land he lives in, or
takes any interest in the associations of the
past, will meet with many objects to engage
his attention profitably. (Strolling to the rear
of the township, he will 'discover the spot on
which the one-gun battery was thrown up, and
at the bottom of the hill he will find the
eighteen or twenty-four pounder which Cap-
tain Kobertson spiked before he abandoned
the place. There the old piece of ordnance
lies, harmless as a toy gun, and with the rust
fast eating the metal away. The next inter-
esting object which presents itself is the mis-
sion house which the late Bishop Pompallier
erected, but which has now passed into secu-
lar hands ; then comes the Anglican church,
pierced with bullets here and there by reason
of its exposed position during the fight in 1845 >
The church is surrounded by a graveyard,
which I cannot say is very well cared for.
Portions of it are overgrown with grass and
weeds, and the fencing round many of the
graves is in the most dilapidated condition.
Exposure to the weather has had the effect
of almost entirely obliterating the inscriptions
from many of the tombstones. The oldest I
was able to make out was placed there in 1828,
and several of the graves contain the remains
of those who fell in battle in 1845. At the
top of the main pathway, in close proximity
to the church, the Government some time ago
erected a monument to the memory of Tamati
Waka Nene, the great Queenite chief, whose
loyalty and valuable services on the side of
the Europeans were acknowled by her Majesty
granting him a commission as an honorary
post-captain in the Koyal Navy, and by the
Colonial Government giving him a life pension,
and after his death conferring an annuity on
his widow. This brave and powerful old chief
expired in 1871, and the last official act per-
formed by Governor Sir George Fergusson
Bowen prior to his departure from New Zea-
land to assume the Governorship of Victoria,
was the unveiling of the monument erected
to bis memory, and on which an inscription
appears in the English and Maori languages,
The following is the English translation :
I H. S.
In memory of
TAMATI WAKA NENE,
Chief of Ngapuhi.
The first to welcome
The Queen’s Sovereignty
In
New Zealand.
A Constant Supporter
of the Pakeha.
This stone is erected
by the
Government of the Colony,
"Which for upwards of 31 years
He faithfully upheld.
Sage in Council,
Renowned in War,
He died, regretted by all
The inhabitants of these islands,
on the
4th August, 1871.
1 one day called to see Tamati’s wife. She
is now very far advanced in years, and lives in
a small weatherboarded house not many yards
from the Kororareka beach. She is fast be-
coming very decrepid, and not long ago she
had to undergo an operation to prevent blind-
ness. This she went through in Auckland
most heroically, and when we inquired after
her sight, she assured us that she could see
comparatively well. The renown of her de-
ceased husband reflects upon this old woman
an amount of importance she would not other-
wise possess, because she was only a slave cap-
tured by the Ngapuhi during one of their fight-
ing excursions to the south of Auckland. In
those times the Ngapuhi was a very powerful
nation, and their intercourse with the Europeans
at the Bay of Islands had resulted In their being
well armed, while the Waikato and other
southerly tribes possessed the Maori weapons of
warfare only. With advantages so enormous,
the Ngapuhi at one time caused great havoc
amongst the Waikato people, but some years
later the Waikato, armed then quite as effi-
ciently as the northern invaders, dealt the
Ngapuhi a severe blow, and those who were
left of them were only too glad to return to
their own territory in the north. Since that
period the Ngapuhi and Waikato tribes have
been estranged, but I‘perceive that the ice
has at last been broken, delegates of the former
tribe being sent to attend the King meeting
at Te Kopua.
The flat land about Kororareka is of limited


extent, and is not of a particularly first-class
character. Even if the area were greater, I
feel certain the residents would be too slothful
to make use of it. Almost everything the
people consume is imported. Potatoes, bacon,
cheese and flour come from Canterbury, and salt
butter of an exceedingly inferior quality finds
its way to the Bay of Islands from Auckland-
The people’s energies are limited to the pro-
duction of a few heads of cabbages, pumpkins,
and water melons, and their exports may be said
to consist entirely of smoked fish and rockbysters
during certain months of the year. To a newly-
married couple I can recommend Kororareka,
on account of the quietude which generally
prevails there. In that retired spot they can
indulge in dreams of eternal happiness and
joy; they can ramble about amongst the
rocks without being annoyed by the presence
of intrusive strangers ; they can while
away the time by oyster gathering and in a
variety of other ways ; and, as in the clear
moonlight they stroll along the beach on which
the gentlest of ripples make itself usually
heard, they can fancy they are patrolling the
salubrious shores of the Lake of Como; and
while two hearts beat fervently as one, they
can build up as many Chateaux d'Espayne as
Claud Melnotte in the fertility of his imagina-
tion erected for the reception of his adored
Pauline.


PART II.
i (] WARDS the conclusion of my last
11 / (fjjfli contribution, I referred incidentally
\ to the export of oysters from the
Bay of Islands ; in fact, it is
from oysters and smoked fish only that the
place derives any direct income. In saying
this, I am of course referring to the imme-
diate vicinity of Kororareka. Oysters are
certainly very plentiful, and during the season
Maoris are employed gathering them at the
rate of four shillings per sack ; they are then
forwarded to Auckland, Wellington, Christ-
church, and Dunedin, where they are retailed
at an enormous profit. The Maoris, hearing of
this, have struck for a higher rate than four
shillings a sackful, and I believe their demands
have been acceded to this season. Notwith-
standing the necessary restrictions that have
been placed upon this branch of industry, it is
deplorable to see the quantity of oysters that
are destroyed. The law only forbids the sale
of them during certain months of the year, but
it does not prevent persons from gathering
them for private use ; therefore a great many
are taken off the rocks at all times, whether in
or out of season, and under such circumstances
the fish must some day or other disappear alto-
gether, unless the most stringent measures are
adopted for their conservation. It is asserted
by the people of the Bay that the season shou'd
commence a month earlier, as in March the
oysters are in very excellent condition. Those
I knocked off the rocks in that month of the
present year were without doubt the finest of
the species I had ever tasted. For size and
quality the Bay of Islands oysters are superior
to any that are to be found to the northward
of Auckland. The drying and smoking of fish
for purposes of exportation southwards is a new
branch of industry into which one or two men
have entered, and the results so far have been
highly satisfactory.
Hearing a great deal about the Kawa Kawa,
and having a couple of days at my disposal, I
resolved to pay it a visit. I had now been
nearly a week absent from Auckland, and as
Kororareka did not contain a barber’s shop
amongst its other institutions, and I had many
years before got quite out of the way of shav-
ing myself, I not only looked “ seedy ” but felt
I did, on account of the bristles which appeared
like the points of so many needles projecting
through the skin. For the first time in my life
I thought shaving an intolerable nuisance, and
one of those customs of modern civilization
that ought to be abolished. But my convic-
tions were wonderfully shaken when G. B. in-
formed me that in all probability we should be
introduced to some ladies during our visit to
the coal country, and to go unshaven was
therefore out of the question. I was in this
dilemma : that I could not shave myself, nor
was there a “ professor ” in the settlement.
Whilst I was debating in my own mind whether,
under the circumstances, I should proceed to
the Kawa Kawa or not, a gentleman who was
aware of the predicament I was in, suggested
that there was an old native named Rawiri
(or David, as he is generally called), who,
he believed could do the job, although he
could not pledge himself that David's art ex-
tended beyond hair cutting ; he knew the
brownskin was in the habit of cutting people’s
hair, but as for using the razor he could give
no guarantee that my throat would not be cut,
or that something equally diabolical would not
ensue There was a degree of novelty inbeing
shaved by a full blooded Maori which tickled
my fancy, and my resolve being taken to go
to the Kawa Kawa, into David’s hands I en-
trusted myself with just as much confidence as
I ever reposed in the irrepressible Jerry Flem-
ing, of Christchurch, or the equally well known
Professor Augustus on Lambton-quay in
the Empire City. David was a tall, well-
built, goodnatured old fellow, and, as I was
the first European whom ha had ever shaved,
he chuckled quite as much at the idea as I did
myself. He began his task somewhat ner-
vously, and as the razor pas ed over my cheeks,
and I was in momentary expectation of the in-
strument penetrating, in barber’s parlance,


about a fortnight below the skin, the sensation,
I assure you, was anything but agreeable. I
felt I was a martyr to circumstances, as, after
each pause on the part of the artist, the razor
again descended upon my face with the ponder-
osity of an American axe, threatening instant
annihilation. I was afraid that David’s ex-
treme caution would result in the drawing of
what in prize-ring slang is denominated the
ruby, but I was agreeably disappointed. The
time occupied in the operation was about half
an hour ; David was evidently proud of the
manner in which he had acquitted himself ; I
dropped a shilling into his hand, for which he
was profuse in his acknowledgments, and I
rose from that chair with feelings somewhat
ruffled, about the face more especially, and
with the positive assurance in my own mind
that until my dying day I should never forget
my first experiences of a Maori barber. My
friends, who were anxiously waiting for me
below, congratulated me on the pluck I had
displayed and on my escape from the hacking
of which they anticipated I should certainly be
the victim.
In half an hour after the circumstances
above narrated my friend G. B. and myself
had paid the skipper of the Ida five shillings
a-piece, and were steaming away in the direc-
tion of the Kawa Kawa. It was a beautifully
bright Saturday morning ; the light blue sky
was reflected upon the placid waters of
the Bay, and the whole scene was one which
I believe incapable of reproduction by any liv-
ing artist. Our destination was a place called
the Derrick, up to which point the river is
navigable at high water, but the tide had been
ebbing for some time before we started, and the
compact little steamer we took passage by could
only proceed as far as the coaling ground, so
called from the fact that it is at this place that
vessels are loaded with coal from the mines of
Kawa Kawa. There is a small village here,
inhabited by men of the Coal Mining Company,
and in the stream there were lying a j number
of barges filled with coal for such steamers and
sailing craft as might put in for a supply_
At this point we transshipped into a
small boat, and after a brief delay re-
sumed our journey towards the Derrick, being
pulled up stream by a weather-beaten old
“ salt,” who'rejoices in the soubriquet of Black
Charlie. This notable character in the district
is a half-caste Portuguese, with an equal
sprinkling of Malay blood on the maternal
side. He is quite an institution in his way,
and one can allow a tolerably wide margin for
the stories he relates to his passengers as he
pulls them up stream. Forgetting his own
complexion, Charlie will tell you in almost
unadulterated English that he was the first
white man on the Kawa Kawa—an item of in-
formation that never fails to provoke a hearty
laugh, especially when Charlie, suspecting
that you doubt him, becomes very emphatic
in his assertion ; then he will inform you of
the number of matrimonial conquests in which
he has figured as the hero, and will relate
with watering eyes how devotedly attached
he was to his last departed Mrs Charlie, thus
convincing his audience, or trying to all
events, that
‘‘Fleecy locks and black complexion
Cannot alter Nature’s claim ;
Skins may differ, but affection
Dwells in black and white the same.”
It requires great experience on the part of a
boatman to conduct you up the Kawa Kawa
without getting stuck fast on a mud flat at
low water. Charlie has followed the occupa-
tion of boatman for many years, and he knows
every inch of the river. The channel is a most
sinuous one, and but for Charlie’s knowledge
as to where the deepest water was to be found,
we should have run aground, and remained
there under a burning sun until the water rose
sufficiently high to float us off, and enable us to
proceed on our journey. Without any mis-
hap, however, we reached the Derrick after
about a couple of hours’ pulling. A narrow
guage line of railway connects the Derrick
with the coal mines. It is about three miles
in length, and was constructed by the Auck-
land Provincial Government, who leased the
coal mines to Mr. John McLeod, and subse-
quently to the company by whom the mines
are at present being worked. I understand
the company enjoys the, free use of this line,
they keeping it in repair, and paying a royalty
of sixpence or ninepence for every ton of coal
extracted. The company will commence pay


ing interest on the sum expended in the con-
struction of the railway as soon as it is ex-
tended to the point nearly opposite to Korora-
reka, where steamers of the largest tonnage
can go close alongside and coal. During my
visit to the locality I had the pleasure of meet-
ing a very old Canterbury acquaintance in
the person of Mr. Triphook, the well known
engineer, who was so many years in the
service of the Canterbury Provincial Govern-
ment, and subsequently in that of the
General Government as resident engineer of the
Xorth Canterbury Railways. To that gentle-
man I am indebted for some particulars con-
cerning the extension of the Kawa Kawa line,
for which be is surveyor and resident engineer.
The demand for Kawa Kawa coal having
enormously increased, it has been decided to
construct six additional miles of line to the
deep water opposite Tapu Point in the Bay of
Islands, in two sections or contracts of three
miles each. The section now under survey,
or I presume by this time completed,
commences on the present line opposite the
residence of Mr. Hemi Tautari, and runs up a
gradient of about one in a hundred to the
Bluff over the mill at Eiverhead, then crosses
to the northern side of the Kawa Kawa rivet
by a bridge of some ten chains in length, the
superstructure of which is to be kept well
above the high level of the floods now so well
known in this locality ; thence it runs down
by easy grades to a point opposite the embou-
chure of the Karetu river, where the flood
level is considerably lowered, keeping an
average level of five feet above high water
mark a'ong the foot of the spurs to Slackwater
Point, where there is a fair depth of water for
landing. The survey of the next section to
deep water is also in progress. An alternative
line was proposed on the south side of the Kawa
Kawa river, but the steepness of the grades re-
quired to cross the Karetu saddle, and the re-
quirements of the shipping at the deep water,
together with the practicability of future ex-
tension up the Bay of Islands, caused the
engineers, after a careful examination of each
route, to give their decision in favor of that on
the north side of the river, ending opposite
Tapu Point. The survey o£ the first mile, in
which the Kawa Kawa bridge and the heaviest
earthworks are situated, is completed, rind I
expect that by this’ time tenders are being
called for the work.
The fare from the Derrick to the mines is
sixpence, no distinction being made as to class
of carriage, and for a considerable portion of
the way the train runs through dense bush.
There are several houses of settlers on both
sides of the line, where the land has been long
since cleared of its timber, but none of the
residences have the external appearances of
comfort which the house of Hemi Tautari, at
Taumarere, presents. It is now the season
tor quinces, and at places the yellow fruit
shows itself in great abundance, and where
the cluster of trees is unusually thick the
sight is peculiarly fascinating. At Kawa
Kawa, the train stops immediately in front of
a very good hotel, kept by a person named
Swift, whose lack of conversational powers is
more than amply supplied by the eloquence of
his better half on topics of purely local interest
and concern,' the weather, and so on. The
house is very creditably managed, and most of
the comforts of a city establishment are at
command. In the locality of the mines the
country is of the bleakest possible description,
with not a single tree to break the dreary
aspect. The houses in which the miners and
their families reside are dotted over a con-
siderable area, and the ground and atmosphere
around are thick with coal dust, which is
most unmerciful in its effects upon white linen,
as I discovered to my cost. Of course we
went to see the mines, which are now being so
energetically worked under Mr. Moody’s
direction. There is a great deal of sameness
about mines, whether they be coal, gold or
manganese, and, like the tourist who en-
countered so many risks in the ascent of Mont
Blanc, I merely went into the mine at Kawa
Kawa for the sake of having it to say I had been
there. Having the Kaitangata disaster fresh
in my recollection, I was not a little surprised to
see our conductor (one of the foremen) enter
the drive with a naked light. Inquiring if
there was no danger in the proceeding, he


assured me there was none, as no gas had ever
been discovered to exist in that mine. Just
so, thought I to myself, but as we walked
alocg the drive and penetrated further and
further into the bowels of the earth, I could
not help thinking what a disagreeable sensation
it would be to myself personally, and after-
wards to my friends, if they had to come there
and gather me up piecemeal after an explosion.
It is just that over-confidence in security
which was here displayed which has led to catas-
trophies wherein the loss of life has been calcu-
lated by hundreds of victims, and I am certain
that more accidents will happen in coal mines in
this country if those working in them are not
thoroughly impressed with the belief that they
are in the midst of constant danger. I remem-
ber some years ago making use of the same
observations on the occasion of a visit I paid
to several coal mines in the Malvern Hills,
province of Canterbury. There are nearly two
hundred men employed in various ways about
the Kawa Kawa coal mines. They take out
on an average 160 tons a day, and the coal has
been found to be of such a first-class character
for steam purposes that all the Union boats ©n
the East Coast service go regularly to coal at
the Bay of Islands, as well as the steamers of
the same company which ply between Sydney
and New Zealand. It is delivered free on
board at 12s. per ton. At the time I visited
the mine they were working a seam varying
from 6ft to 15ft. in thickness, and some splen-
did coal was being turned out, including a
sixty ton sample for the Auckland Gas Com-
pany. The company have a great deal to con-
tend with on account of the water, and pumps
have to be kept going day and night without
intermission. Even then the men are working
almost to their middles in water. Mr. Moody,
the manager, considers that the workings were
commenced upon a wrong basis, and he is revo-
lutionising the whole affair, in order that the
mine may be worked more effectively and with
greater profit to the company. What with an
increased demand for Kawa Kawa coal and the
necessarily extended operations of the company,
this mining township in the North must even-
tually become a place of no small importance.
Population has already increased to such an
extent that in a short lime initiatory steps will
be taken to have Kawa Kawa constituted a
borough, as it is considered that a local body
will be more competent than the County
Council, whose jurisdiction extends over so
large an area, to deal with sanitary and other
matters requiring attention in a thickly-popu-
lated neighborhood. The mining township has
increased so rapidly that amongst other signs
of progress a newspaper has been started there,
and the proprietor of the Northern Luminary
has my best wishes for the success of his under-
taking.
Our inspection of the coal mines being
finished, G. B. proposed that we should proceed
to a place called Taumarere, where he desired
to introduce me to some acquaintances. The
proposal was at once acquiesced in, and to
Taumarere we accordingly went. I was there
introduced to Hemi Tautari, a native whose
name is well known throughout the whole of
the north. For many years Hemi Tautari
sailed vessels of bis own between the Bay of
Islands, Auckland, and other ports in the south,
and he is thoroughly au fait in navigation. At
one time he brought the late Bishop Selwyn on
a cruise through the South Sea Islands, and a
more intelligent native is not to be met with
in the North Island. Although he speaks
little English, his manners and customs are
those of a well-bred European gentleman, and
kindness and hospitality are qualities which he
possesses to a high degree. Mrs. Tautari is by
birth a half-caste, and a kinder and more hospi-
table lady I have rarely had the pleasure of
meeting. She has received an excellent educa-
tion, is naturally intelligent, and has all the
accomplishments of a lady brought up in the
most select educational establishment. Our
reception was of the most cordial description,
and notwithstanding that we had taken up our
quarters at Swift’s Hotel, Mr. and Mrs.
Tautari were most pressing in their invitation
that we should stop at their place, and as there
was no doubt about its genuineness, we most
cheerfully accepted it. We had no reason to
regret having done so. Our host and hostess
made our visit a most agreeable one. After
partaking of an excellent tea, and being treated


Group of Northern Natives in front of Runanga or Meeting House.


to an abundant supply of grapes and water
melons, a soiree musicale was agreed upon, and
as there were a number of young ladies staying
at Taumarere, there was no lack of performers.
Our hostess set a very excellent example by at
once sitting down to the piano and playing her
own accompaniment to a charming ballad,
which she sang exquisitely; then Miss
0., Miss P., and others followed, and
as it was mutually agreed that we should
all contribute something towards the enter-
tainment, my turn at length came ; how far I
succeeded it is not for me to say. Then there
was an adjournment for supper, and when Mr.
B. and myself retired for the night we both
agreed that a more enjoyable evening we had
never spent, or been the recipients of greater
hospitality in any part of the country. I had
told Mrs. Tautari that I had never partaken
of food cooked in a copper-Maori, and on the
following day I was informed that my curiosity
would be gratified. Across the Kawa
Kawa, at no great distance from Mr.
Tautari's residence, there is a Maori
settlement, and on the Sunday morning our
hostess had sent over to say that she and some
visitors would cross over to the Kainga in the
afternoon, and that she would like to have a
copper-Maori prepared. Mrs. Tautari having
great influence with the Maoris living there,
her request was readily acceded to. Favored
by fine weather, quite a numerous party of us
set out for the Maori settlement about three
o’clock. To cross the river an ancient canoe
was put in requisition, and it had to cross and
recroSs the river several times before we were
all conveyed to the opposite bank. There we
were met by some of the natives belonging to
the settlement, and after passing through an
Indian corn cultivation, we arrived at the
marae, or open space in front of the native
dwellings. We were made heartily welcome
in true Maori fashion, and when the customary
salutations were exchanged it was intimated
to us ■ that the copper-Maori was ready for
consumption. Mats were spread upon the
ground, and we prepared to partake of what was
to me a novel repast. We departed somewhat
from the Maori custom of eating, in so far as
Mrs. Tautari’s forethought had placed a supply
of plates, knives and forks, at our disposal.
The copper-Maori consisted of kumara, or
sweet potatoes, Indian corn, mullet, and flat
fish, enclosed in cabbage leaves to keep them
from breaking. Everything was beauti-
fully hooked, and I thought I had never before
tasted anything more palatable. Mr. Trip-
book, who received an invitation to accompany
us, was loud in his appreciation of the bill of
fare, and like myself did full justice to it. As
we squatted around the copper-Maori and ap-
peased our appetites in the most approved
manner, a running commentary was maintained
by the ladies of the company with respect to
the way in which we acquitted ourselves a la
Maori, and the conversation was of the most
animated kind, interspersed here and there
with an ejaculation of astonishment, as Mr,
Triphook and myself dived deeper into the
contents of the copper-Maori, and brought to
the surface still another steaming hot patiki,
which went the way its predecessors had taken.
The only things that disturbed the general
comfort were the thousands of sand flies and
mosquitoes which the odor of the cooked provi-
sions attracted to the spot, and being “ new
chums,” as it were, these pests were particu-
larly attentive to Mr. Triphook and myself.
By the time the meal was over our faces and
hands bore ample indications of our martyr-
dom. We then passed round the settlement,
visiting several of the dwellings on our way-
In front of almost the last one we came to
we found an old man basking in the sun, a
helpless cripple from the effects of rheumatism.
His is a sad, sad story, and eminently calcu-
lated to arouse the sympathies of all who hear
it told. In the early days he fought on our
side under Tamati Waka against the rebel-
lious force led by Hone Heke. A few years
after peace was restored, he was seized with
rheumatism, which is by no means an uncom-
mon disease amongst the Native race, and his
complaint grew from bad to worse, until now
he is so utterly helpless that he can barely
crawl about at a snail’s pace. It is a long time
since he was last able to walk. In the
midst of bis affliction he was deserted by his
wife, who took away with her one of the twin
children which resulted from their union, and


she now lives further down the coast with
another native. Keeling remorse on account
of her cruel and heartless conduct, she paid a
visit to her husband about four years ago,
but again went away, and has not since been
seen in the neighborhood. The name of the
sufferer is Rapota Matariki; he has been in-
valided for over thirty years, and his case
ought, I think, to be inquired into by those
who are in authority, and therefore in a
position to do something in his behalf. The
flesh has almost entirely disappeared from his
bones, and his fingers have been twisted
about in the most extraordinary manner by
the terrible severity of the disease which has
rendered him so much an object of commisera-
tion. Added to this, he is very badly off, and tears
ran down the old man’s cheeks as he declared
that but for Mrs Tautari’s kindness he would have
died long ago. This lady provides a home for
his daughter, and the latter crosses the ri\ er
frequently in order to attend to her father’s
wants. I am quite sure the case only requires
to be brought under the notice of the Native
Minister to have that attention paid to it
which it deserves. When it is considered that
this poor old fellow fought on our side on the
occasion of the first outbreak of hostilities,
and ever afterwards remained firm in his
allegiance, I think it will be admitted that he
has a fair claim on our generosity. I trust,
therefore, that having brought the matter thus
prominently forward, it will be promptly
enquired into, and that this incurable invalid
will not be permitted to end the last days
of his life in a state of abject misery and
starvation. It would be base ingratitude, and
a cruel thing besides, if he were any longer
neglected by the Government; but I can
hardly believe such a thing possible when the
circumstances are officially placed before them.
I turned away from the heartrending sight
the old man presented with feelings of intense
pity for his condition; and the suggestion
was then made that we should ascend the
high hills adjacent, in order to obtain a good
view of the surrounding country. A con-
siderable time was occupied in reaching the
summit, and not unfrequently we lost the
track winding up the hills through the dense
scrub with which they are clothed. We
were adequately repaid for our trouble,
however, as, when we got to the top, we
obtained a panoramic view of the country
for miles and miles around. Dismal as the
country is in the neighborhood of the coal-
fields, it could not be said with regard to it
that distance lent any enchantment to the
view. Near and far away it wore the same
dreary aspect, somewhat resembling the Black
Country in Wales. That portion of the
Kawa Kawa Valley open to view, with the
serpentine stream of that name running
through it, in a measure redeemed the unsight-
liness of the surrounding country, on account
of its picturesqueness and verdancy. It has
some of the characteristics of the Lower Hutt
Valley, the most objectionable one of all being
that occasionally the river overflows its banks,
and the water rushes over the flat land, destroy-
ing everything before it. On one occasion the
floods were so great that a wooden house was
washed off its foundations, and carried a con-
siderable distance down the river before its
owner and his wife and family were rescued
from it in boats. If steps were taken to con-
serve the river within its banks, and the
swampy portions of the valley w ere drained,
the land would be of great value, as it is rich in
quality and capable of growing anything. The
people of Kawa Kawa have an evident taste
for horse racing, and there is a very good course
at Taumarere. Our descent was accomplished
in about one third of the time it took us to
ascend, without any mishap, except that some
of the ladies’ attire was torn through coming
in contact with projecting branches; and after
thanking the natives for the trouble they had
taken to entertain us, we repaired to the river
bank, where the party embarked by numerous
instalments. I happened to be one of the last
to leave, and this time the canoe was so heavily
laden that the water came over the sides, and
it would have taken very little more to swamp
it altogether, I was standing up in the
stern, with my back to the bows, silently
congratulating myself on the very pleasant
afternoon I had spent, when all of a sudden
the canoe ran against the bank, and the
concussion was so violent and unex


pected that in the twinkling of an
eye I lay stretched on the broad of my
back in the bottom of the canoe, where the
water bad accumulated to such an extent as
to saturate every stitch of clothing I had on
me. In the fall my bell-topper and its wearer
parted company, and the picture I presented
must have been most ludicrous, considering
how heartily everybody laughed as I struggled
to regain my feet. I had on a dust coat, which
showed so unmistakably what had happened,
that when I turned my back upon them, the
ladies could not resist the temptation to burst
out into fresh fits of laughter. But I had my
revenge, for as Miss 0. was about to step out
of the canoe she lost her equilibrium and ex-
perienced the same cooling sensation that I
did. This young lady had been “ chaffing”
me most unmercifully but a moment before,
little expecting that I should be a spectator
of a similar scene in which she was the central
figure of observation. To have a comrade in
misfortune was to me a wonderful [source of
satisfaction, more especially a comrade who
evinced so much amiability during my visit to
Taumarere, and who, like our hostess, possessed
none of that namby pamby stiffness and un-
geniality of disposition which render the society
of many ladies’in this colony so very object-
ionable. The incident was a source of con-
siderable amusement to the rest of the company,
and to none was it more thoroughly enjoyable
than to an old native woman named Eliza,
who lives at Mrs. Tautari’s as a sort'of help-
ing hand, and who, by the kindliness of her
nature, appeared the prototype of Aunt Chloe
in “ Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” The remainder of
the day was spent so pleasantly that the hours
seemed to be shorter by one half the number
of minutes. In the evening we had vocal
and instrumental music of a sacred character,
and at nine o’clock next morning we bade our
adieux and were soon en route for Kororareka.


(MoME time prior to the death of Sir
\ f Donald McLean, one of the measures
\\ , which he adopted, with a view to
V ) the permanent pacification of the
country, was the establishment of native
schools in various districts of the North ; but
in adopting this course the then Native Min-
ister was only following in the footsteps of
Sir George Grey, at whose instigation, when
he occupied the position of Governor, many
very excellent schools were founded in certain
centres of native population. Amongst the
native boarding schools established and main-
tained under the fostering care of bis Excel-
lency during the period of Sir George Grey’s
first GovernorshipofNew Zealand, the following
may be mentioned :—There were three ex-
cellent institutions on the Waikato, kept by
Archdeacon Maunsell, Mr. Ashwell, and Mr.
Morgan, of the Church Missionary Society.
Mr. Ashwell’s was a girls’ school, conducted
by Mrs. Ashwell, and was a perfect model of
what such a school should be. It and the other
two on the Waikato had each about 120 pupils.
There was another excellent school at the Three
Kings, kept by the Wesleyans, with upwards
of 150 children as boarders ; a very efficient
girls’ school at St. Stephen’s, Auckland, under
the direction of the Bishop of New Zealand ; a
large boarding school at Otaki, kept by Arch-
deacon Hadfield, the present Bishop of Wel-
lington ; another at Taranaki, kept by Mr.
Turton, a Wesleyan missionary ; there was a
girls’ orphan asylum at Wellington, kept by
the late Bishop Yiard ; an admirable school at
Napier, conducted by two Catholic priests ;
also two boarding schools at Auckland, under
the direction of the late Bishop Pompallier;
and throughout other parts of the colony sim-
ilar institutions were in existence. All these
were in a state of the highest efficiency in the
year 1853, but they unfortunately fell into
decay when the native war came on. In re-
suscitating the native school system, the late
lamented Native Minister adopted one of the
most certain measures that could be devised
towards a reconciliation of the races, and the
wisdom of such a course must be apparent to
all who have seen that system in operation in
the North Island. During my tour in that
part of the colony I visited several of these
institutions. There was none of them with
which I was so highly pleased as with the
select boarding school established at a place
called Taumarere, three miles distant from
Kawa Kawa. This excellent school is one
which' the Native Department may well feel
proud of. It is conducted by Mrs. Tautari,
than whom a more accomplished mistress is
not in the service of the Government. Mr.
Commissioner Kemp took a great interest in
the founding of this school, and in a conversa-
tion I had with him on the subject he was
exceedingly pleased to find that my opinion
coincided with his own respecting the high-
class character of the school at Taumarere.
There are upwards of twenty female pupils in
constant attendance, Europeans, Maoris, and
half-castes. Mrs. Tautari obtains from the
Government a certain capitation allowance,
but I do not consider the amount anything
like adequate remuneration for the valuable
services she renders to the Native Department.
She imparts to the children entrusted to her
care an excellent English education, besides
instrumental music and singing ; and Euro-
peans visiting the school for the first time
would be suprised to see how far advanced
several of the Maori girls are in the latter ac-
complishments. Mrs. Tautari is assisted by a
highly cultivated governess (Miss 0.), and
what struck me very much was the entente
cordiale existing between the mistress and her
assistant and the girls under their charge. In
point of discipline, Mrs. Tautari is necessarily
strict, but she is loved by all the children on
account of her kind and amiable disposition.
At the express desire of our chief, Mrs. Tau-
tari assembled her school for inspection, with
a result that was as surprising to ourselves as
it must have been gratifying to her. Several
of the girls sang to Miss C.’s accompaniment
PART III.


while others displayed their abilities on the
pianoforte. Part singing was a prominent
feature in the programme, and the choruses were
sung with marked precision. The room was then
cleared, and dancing was kept up with spirit
for an hour or so. The Maori girls and half-
castes are exceedingly fond of dancing, and
music, too, both vocal and instrumental, is
another of their specialities. At Mrs. Tautari’s
establishment they are also instructed in house-
hold duties, in order that they may be Euro-
peanised as much as possible, and in all re-
spects rendered fit to become the wives of
settlers in the country. In some instances,
but I am happy to say few, Mrs. Tantari’s exer-
tions are inagreatmeasurelost,in consequence of
some of theparents at adistance taking their chil-
dren away just at the time when their progress
in English instruction gives promise of very
satisfactory results. Some Maori parents do
not sufficiently appreciate the benefits derived
from education, and if their children go home
for the holidays, they do not allow them to re-
turn; but instances of this kind are exceptional.
Children are sent to the Taumarere school from
very long distances, on account of the high
reputation it enjoys, and the time will soon
arrive when a larger schoolhouse will require
to be erected. A school such as this must
effect a wonderful amount of good in estab-
lishing a better understanding between the
two races, and I think the lady who is instru-
mental in doing this is clearly entitled to a
sufficient recompense for her pains. I trust,
therefore, that she will be dealt with in a
liberal spirit by the Native Department. There
are several other schools in the northern dis-
trict—amongst others one at Te Ti, near the
mouth of the Waitangi river, presided over by
Mrs. Hickson, another at Kaikohe, under the di-
rection of a Europeanised Maori named
Hirini Taiwhanga, and a third (a very credit-
able establishment), conducted by the
Misses Lundon, at the Lower Waihou,
on the Hokianga river, a few miles below
Herd’s Point. The following is a complete list
of the native schools at present open in the
country north of Auckland, in addition to those
already referred to, with the names of their
respective teachers: —Pukepoto, Mr, 0, M,
Masters; Ahipara, Mr. George Masters;
Kaitaia, Mr. Robert Dunn ; Awanui, Mr.
Ernest D. W. Matthews ; Peria, Mr. John P.
Capper ; Te Ngaere, Mr. Edmund 0. Comes ;
Ohaeawai, Mr. E. W. Watling; Waikare, Mrs.
Horseley; Oromahoe, Mr. E. M. Tabuteau ;
Mangakatia, Mr. Samuel Calkin ; Waiomio,
Mr. D. Lorrigan ; Waitapu, Mr. Charles P.
Hill ; Waima, Mr. John Hoskiug ; Whirinaki,
Mr. John Mitchell; Pakia, Mr. George E.
Woods ; Orira, Mr. Joseph Harrison ; Upper
Waihou, Mr. J. B. Needham ; Matakohe, Mr.
J. Ovens ; Otamatea, Mr. R. Haszard ; Kaihu,
Mr. H. W. Baker.
On our way down from the Kawa Kawa
we called in at a small settlement named
Paihia, where I observed a monument erected
in front of the Church to the memory of the
late Venerable Archdeacon Williams. Paihia
was one of those places where the Church of
England missionaries established themselves.
In fact, the Bay of Islands was the first scene
of their labors, for it was on the 22nd De-
cember, 1814, that the Rev. Samuel Marsden
arrived in the ship Active, and anchored off
Rangihoua Tepuna, just inside the north head
of the Bay of Islands, where he landed and
settled Messrs. Kendal, Hall and King,
the first missionaries. On Christmas
Day, 1814, the Rev. Samuel Marsden
preached there for the first time the Gospel in
New Zealand, which was interpreted to the
natives by a chief named Ruatara, who had
been to England. The text was very appro-
priate, being Luke 2, 10, “Behold I bring you
glad tidings of great joy,” &c. In August,
1819, Mr. Marsden brought Messrs. Butler
and Kemp, and established a mission station
at Kerikeri, at the head of the Kerikeri river.
In August, 1823, Mr. Marsden brought the
Rev. Henry Williams and family, and formed
the mission station at Paihia. On the 25th
of January, 1826, the schooner Herald, the
first vessel built in New Zealand, under the
direction of Mr. Henry Williams (who had
been a lieutenant in the Royal Navy) was
launched on Paihia beach, and was navigated
by Mr. Williams to Sydney, where he met
his brother, the Rev. William Williams, late


Bishop of Waiapu, on his way to New Zealand,
and on the 26th of March in the same year
they arrived together in the George Osborne,
and landed at Paihia. Bishop Selwyn arrived
at Paihia on June 20th, 1842, and on the fol-
lowing Sunday, to the surprise of everybody,
his Lordship preached a sermon to the natives
in ttye Maori language, of which he had be-
come a proficient master on the voyage out.
On December Bth, 1842, at the time of the
greatest apprehension for the safety of
the young co ony, consequent on the
murder of the Eobinson family and a
half-caste girl (granddaughter of the chief
Eewa) on an island in Paroa Bay, by
Maketu, a young chief of noble connection,
who was hanged for the crime at Auckland,
the famous helmet that had been presented by
King George the Fourth to Waikato, a Nga-
puhi chief, residing at Tepuna, was delivered
up to Mr. Williams as a token of his fidelity
to the English, just before the great meeting
at Paihia, when the principal Ngapuhi chiefs,
with the exception of Hone Heke (who with-
drew), signed an address to Governor Hobson,
professing their allegiance. The helmet was
afterwards returned to Waikato by Mr.
Williams, enclosed in a pair of blankets. The
Venerable Archdeacon Williams died at his
residence at Pakaraka on the 16th of July,
1867, at the ripe age of seventy-five years, and
on the 11th of January, 1876, a monument to
his memory was erected at Paihia, where he
first settled, at the sole cost of the Maori tribes
of the North Island. It bears the following
inscription on each of its four sides :
Bo
Whakamaharatanga
Mo
TE WIREMU.
He tohu aroha ki a ia na te
Bahi Maori.
Be tino matua ia ki nga iwl katoa,
Be ‘angata toa kite hohou rongo i rote i nga riri
Maori.
E 44 nga tan i rui ai ia i te Kongo pai ki tenei motn
I tae mai ia i te tau 1823.
T tangohia atu 1 te tau 1807.
In loving memory
of
HENRY WILLIAMS,
44 years a preacher of the Gospel of Peace,
A father of the tribes,
This monument is raised by the
Maori Church.
Be came to ns in 1823,
He was taken from us in 1807.
Nga iwl na ratou i whahatu tenei kobatu ko
Ngapuhi Ngatiraukawa
Te Rarawa Ngatikahungunu
Te Aupouri Ngatiporou
Ngatimaru.
The tribes who raised this monument are
Ngapuhi Ngatiraukawa
Te Rarawa Ngatikahungunu
Te Aupouri ' Ngatiporou
Ngatimaru.
I am indebted for most of the foregoing in-
formation to the widow of the Archdeacon,
who, far advanced in years, still resides at
Pakaraka, within a stone’s throw of her son’s
house, who now represents the Mangonui and
Bay of Islands district in the General Assembly.
Mrs. Williams has kept a diary with great
regularity ever since her arrival in New
Zealand in 1823, and the journal is a most in-
teresting one. Many things recorded there are
of great public value, and it is to be hoped that
the diary will fall into the hands of some one
who will be able to string a readable narrative
together, and issue it in a presentable form. It
would be a thousand pities if a complete record
such as this is should continue in obscurity, or
if its perusal should be confined within a limited
family circle by reason of its non-publication.
In saying this, I am fully aware that Mr.
Carleton, in his “ Life of Henry Williams,” has
drawn largely upon Mrs. Williams’ diary for
his information, but another most interesting
work might be easily compiled out of the abun-
dant material it contains. A great many
people are too rpady to condemn the mission-
aries, and to declare that they have done more
mischief than good in the country. On that
subject I shall abstain from expressing any
opinion. All I know is, that they showed
great pluck in coming to New Zealand at a
time when cannibalism was in full swing, when
tribe fought against tribe, and the survivors
devoured the bodies of the slain. People who
now arrive in the colony can have no idea of
what it was in primitive times ; and, experi-
encing all the comforts and conveniences of an
English home, they can hardly estimate the
privations which the early missionaries must


have endured, the self-denial they must have
practised, and the danger that constantly sur-
rounded them. All these things considered, I
don't think the missionary is quite the monster
that he is frequently painted.
A little distance further down the bay
brought us to a place rendered famous in the
history of New Zealand. It is named Wai-
tangi, and here it was that the Treaty of
Waitangi was signed on the 6th of February,
1810, in a large marquie a little in front of
Hr. Busby’s house. The spot is unmarked,
but Mr. Busby will show it to anyone visiting
his homestead. Our chief stopped here a
couple of nights, and be slept in the very room
that the celebrated Darwin occupied when in
the capacity of naturalist he visited the Bay of
Islands many years ago in the Beagle. He was
then (1835) a comparatively unknown man.
Mrs. Busby is still alive. She witnessed the
burning of Kororareka on the opposite shore
in 1845, and she left shortly afterwards for
Sydney. Several chiefs, thinking that fear had
something to do with her departure, gave her
assurances of their protection, and Mrs Busby
has lived to learn their sincerity. The Busby
family own an immense area of land in the
North, and it was on the Waitangi estate that
I saw Angora goats for the first time in my
life. By far the greater part of the land in
the vicinity of the Bay of Islands is of very in-
ferior quality ; cultivation is limited, and the
growing of wool and the grazing of cattle is
what settlers there confine their attention to.
The grass is not good, being what is known as
rat tail, and if the laud carries a sheep to every
three or four acres, I imagine it is just as
much as it is capable of doing. Therefore the
Bay of Islands has no attractions for the
station owners of Canterbury or Otago, where
the pasturage, compared with that about the
Bay, is so abundant and of a very much better
description.
The time had now arrived when we should
go further north, and it was no agreeble task
to have to rise between four and five o’clock in
the morning and proceed breakfastless on board
the lona, where passages had been secured for
ns on the previous night. This steamer does
almost all the trade between Auckland and
the northern settlements, and her captain
is justly popular on account of his kind and
obliging nature. It was a lovely morning
when we steamed away from the wharf at
Kororareka, and the passage up to Whan-
garoa was a most cheerful one. In weather
such as that which favored us, a voyage be-
tween Kororareka and Whangaroa, it three or
four hours’ steaming canbedesignatedby such a
title, is one of the most delightful things I have
experienced. Lamartine’s trip down the Mediter-
ranean I recollect having read with avidity,
and I can picture to myself how beautifully so
skilled a descriptive artist as he was could re-
produce by pen and ink the spectacle which was
presented on the way. Except in point of
time, the passage from Kororareka to Whan-
garoa very much resembles that between
Tauranga and Auckland. Islands are passed
in rapid succession, and on the most prominent
of them we observed a solitary white goat
which years ago had been placed there by the
natives. I could find no one capable of giving
an authentic account of the reasons which
had induced the Maoris to banish this un-
fortunate quadruped from the mainland, but
thfire was no doubting the fact that the goat
was the victim of some'superstitious whim of
the Maoris, because it and the island upon
which it held its solitary habitation were
tapued, or, in plain English, made sacred.
Until I had seen the harbor of Whangaroa, I
considered that for loveliness Akaroa held
the palm, but the attractions of the latter, from
an artistic point of view, sink into insignifi-
cance when compared with those of Whangaroa,
than which a finer harbor is not to be found in
the colony. The entrance is not very wide, it
is true, and sailing craft might find some
difficulty in entering it and getting out again
at all times, but steamers can get in and out
on all occasions. The first prominent feature
of the harbor is Peach Island, on which
a Villainous old savage once satiated his thirst
for blood by tomahawking close on three
hundred captives—age and sex being totally
disregarded. There are various accounts
about this terrible butchery, but the most
reliable is what I shall relate to my readers


further on, because it has been obtained from
the most authentic sources.
In the early days, before the worst type of
European contagion had demoralised the
Maoris, the natives of the North Island clung
tenaciously to the traditions of their ancestors,
and were in all respects a nobler and more trust-
worthy race of people. Then, as nature made
them, there were no disturbing in-
fluences at work; they had not before
them the demoralising example of the runaway
sailor, whose reckless conduct in after years
was viewed by the Maoris in the light of
a reflex of modern civilization. They were
then undisturbed by Pakeha-Maori “ palaver”
and bad advice, and dealt with each other, as
honest men would, according to the merits of
respective situations. Ear-wigged and incom-
petent Resident Magistrates were unknown
creations ; and some years later the few un-
scrupulous lawyers then in the land had before
them, in terrorem, the fact that the slightest
departure from the straightforward duties of
an advocate would launch them into a sea
of trouble and disaster. Those were
the good old days, when the grip of a
man’s hand meant something—when you could
depend on that man’s word, and when
impecunious pettifoggers could not inter-
vene to disturb a mutual understanding.
But, alas ! how things have changed. With
the growth of our boasted civilization counter-
feits of all descriptions have arisen, and, what
is most lamentable, seem to prosper, too. A
Maori now-a-days does not respect you and
confide in you as of old, because by the vicious
example that has been set him he has been
taught to distrust you. If he has a dispute
with you, however frivolous it may be, like the
highly civilized Smith, Jones, or Robinson, he
has recourse to one of the most demoralising
of our institutions—the Resident Magistrate’s
Court, where the facilities afforded are so great
as to encourage litigation. Judges, when ad-
mitting young men to practice at the bar in
this colony, are in the habit of advising the
new fledglings to discourage litigation, but
alas ! how many of them there are who in after
practice pay little heed to their Honors’ admo-
nition. I am aware there are numbers of highly
honorable gentlemen in New Zealand practising
the law as a profession—men who would a
thousand times sooner save their clients their
money by bringing about an amicable settle-
ment where possible, than involve the parties
in an expensive suit; but there are many more
of the Dodson and Fogg family, who consider
everybody fa'r game that come within their
clutches, and are ever prepared to fleece them
accordingly. What did I hear a leading mem-
ber of the New Zealand bar recently declare
when referring to the duties of a Taxing Officer ?
“ That it is an office of trust, the holder of
which has a large power to modify the evils
attending litigation to the public at large ; one
in which he has also a power which I consider
to be of the highest value in checking what,
as an old practitioner, I cannot help calling the
rapacity of the profession in the matter of
costs.” The Resident Magistrates’ Courts
open the door to a great deal of needless liti-
gation and expense, especially where (as in the
case of a large Southern magisterial district)
they are presided over by men who allow
themselves to be ear-wigged and prejudiced in
their private chambers either by their clerks
or by parties who have some personal interest
to serve in connection with some case or other
that may afterwards be brought forward for
investigation. If these Courts had appointed
to them men who could administer the law
with sound judgment and impartiality—such
men, for instance, as Mr. Mansford, at Wel-
lington—the decisions of Resident Magistrates
generally would be received with greater
respect, and people could then rest assured that
justice, according to Portia’s example, would
be administered with a due regard to statute
law, and in accordance with the notions and
feelings of honorable men when the question
at issue became one of equity and good con-
science.
In a former paragraph, I conducted my
readers into the splendid harbor of Whangaroa,
whieh, on account of scenery and the facilities
for shipping it presents, is not to be surpassed
by any other harbor in the colony. There is a
fine depth of water all round, and ships of the


largest tonnage could lie within an arm’s length
of the shore. Viewed artistically, there is no
scene I know of which will impress itself so
vividly on one’s recollection as that to be
observed the whole way up from the entrance
to the wharf. The harbor is full of lovely
indentations, andnumerous islands disclose them-
selves to view as thesteamerproceedstoherdes-
tination. Among these the most notable is
that known as Peach Island, so called on
account of the peach orchards that at one time
flourished upon it. But it is not for the peaches
that gr ew there in such abundance that this
island has become famous. There, in the
coldest blood, and in the most cowardly manner,
were put to death about three hundred natives,
who had become captives of a bloodthirsty old
chief of the Ngapuhi. Unfortunately, my
note-book got mislaid, or I could give the name
of the chief, at the mention of which some
aged natives will shudder at the present day.
The victims of this butchery were tied hand
and foot, and placed in rows by other natives,
who dared not to disobey any command which
heir chief had given. Everything being in
readiness, the old cannibal went across to the
island in bis war-canoe one morning, and with
his own hand he despatched the whole of his
captives, totally regardless of age or sex. There
was then a horrible feast, the choicest of the
bodies being selected to appease the cannibalis-
tic appetites of the chief and his followers.
Cannibalism has long since disappeared in that
part of the colony north of Auckland, but at the
present day there are living amongst the Nga-
puhi nation several old natives who have eaten
the flesh of those of their enemies who had
fallen in the tribal battles which took place
from time to time for the sake of conquest, the
acquisition of larger territory, and the extension
of what amongst the natives are termed mahiu-
ga kai, or places from which the natural pro-
ducts of the country, such as Ti (cabbage-tree),
fern root, &c., &c., were obtained. At Koro-
rareka I remember meeting with an old native
who informed our party, when questioned on
the subject, that he had been in the habit of
eating human flesh till he was a grown-up lad.
We shuddered at the idea, but the old man
(now thoroughly civilised and attired d la mode)
did not appear to think that he had committed
anything dreadful, seeing that it was the cus-
tom «f his countrymen. The most recent dis-
play of a cannibalistic nature manifested itself
on the occasion of the Rev. Mr. Volkuer’s
murder on the East Coast, when Kereopa
scooped the eyes out of the head of the deceased
gentleman, and fanatically swallowed them in
front of his band of Hauhau murderers. Al-
though this was at the time related with every
indication of truthfulness, there are many per-
sons who believe that the wretch Kereopa
(since then most justly executed at Napier)
did not carry out his barbarity to such lengths,
but I fear the story was but too true.
The massacre on Peach Island is not the
only one of which the harbor of Whangaroa has
been the theatre. Here it was that in the
year 1809 occured the murder of the crew and
passengers of the ship Boyd. This vessel
sailed from Sydney for England, with the in-
tention of calling at Whangaroa for spars. She
carried seventy Europeans and five New
Zealand natives, who were shipped at Sydney
to work their passages to their own country.
Of the latter, Tara (or George, as he was called
on board ship,) was the son of a Whangaroa
chief. During the voyage he refused to work,
because he was sick, for which the captain
stopped his food, and flogged him twice at the
gangway with much severity. When the ves-
sel arrived at Whangaroa, and Tara and his
four shipmates went amongst their friends,
they related how cruelly Tara had been treated
on the passage from Sydney, and Tara bared
his back to afford ocular proof of the sort of
treatment he had been subjected to. The
vessel had come there for spars, and the natives,
after a council of war, resolved to turn this
circumstance to advantage, in order that they
might have revenge upon those on board the
ship. One day, by appointment with the
natives, and in total ignorance of the plot, the
captain and doctor Of the Boyd were rowed
ashore by some of the crew. On the captain’s
landing, the natives agreed to supply the spars,
and a price was fixed upon. In order to satisfy
him as to the quality of the spars they intended


to supply, they asked the captain to follow
them into the bush, and they would point them
out to him. He assented to the proposition,
and the doctor accompanied the captain. In
order not to arouse the suspicions of the boat’s
crew, the natives allowed their women to re-
main with the sailors until they might return.
Having penetrated the bush a sufficient
distance, the natives despatched the
captain and doctor, and, returning to the
water’s edge, and taking the sailors by surprise,
they murdered them also. The assassins now
proceeded in their canoes to where the Boyd
was lying at anchor, and, not knowing their
designs, those on the ship allowed them to
board her without opposition. Once there
they resumed their revengeful work, and only
four souls amongst the crew and passengers
escaped this sanguinary slaughter. Having
no more lives to take, the natives at once set
to work to pillage the ship, and there are
natives still alive who can tell you everything
about it ; they were either youths at the time
and were living witnesses of what happened,
or they have been told of what occured by
those who took an active part in the affair.
Before commencing to pillage the ship, lines
were stretched across the deck from the star-
board to the port side, and whatever was found
in each partition from the deck to the bottom
of the ship was to belong to the respective
chiefs. In their ignorance many of the
natives seized bars of brown soap and com-
menced eating away at it, in the most raven-
ous manner, but they soon discovered its
distasteful qualities, and threw it away,
frightened out of their wits at the amount of
froth which the eating of the soap had pro-
duced. That circumstance is thoroughly well
remembered, but such of them as are living
would sooner have you knock them down than
suspect them of having taken part in the
massacre or in the feast on shore. They rum-
maged the ship from stem to stern, and some
of them became intoxicated. Happening to
go into the magazine, they were experimentalis-
ing with the flint guns, when a spark got
amongst the powder, and the ship and all the
natives who remained on board were blown
up. It is believed that a mere handful of those
who had assisted in the massacre escaped, and
these were on shore at the time, participating
in the feast which the women had prepared
with the bodies of those who had fallen there
. in the morning. What remained of the Boyd
drifted further up the harbor, and came aground
on a mud flat. When I visited this part of the
world in the beginning of the present year, the
remains of the Boyd were still to be seen at
low water, and by rolling your trousers up as
far as the knees you could stand on the ribs of
the ill-fated vessel. Mr. Ratcliffe, a most cour.
teous and obliging gentleman, with whom it
was our good fortune to meet at Whangaroa,
once ventured to place a flag on the hull of the
ship, in order to indicate where she lay to
strangers visiting the harbor, but an aged chief
the next day pulled off to the spot and tore it
down. Then he went to Mr. Ratcliffe and beg-
ged of him not to re-erect it, because the natives
had no desire to have perpetuated the recollec-
tion of an event which occured in by-gone days,
when the hearts of the Maoris were dark. This
is an expression commonly used by the native
people when they wish to prove their repentance
for acts committed at a time when civilization
had not reached them, and when their hearts
were guided in accordance with their savage
notions of ■ revenge and disregard of human
life. Mr. Ratcliffe has respected the old chief’s
feeh'ngs, and the curiously-inclined will have
to find out the spot where the hull of the Boyd
now lies by making personal inquiries on the
subject. Several articles which belonged to
the vessel have been discovered at various times,
and during a very pleasant hour or two which
I spent at Mr. Ratcliffe’s house, ho showed me
a silver spoon, shell pattern, with the word
“ Boyd” engraved upon it He assured me that
he dug it up himself three or four feet below
the surface, and there is not the slightest doubt
whatever that it was a portion of the plunder
which the natives succeeded in getting ashore
before the explosion took place. It seemed
but an act of retributive justice that most of
those who had cruelly put to death so many in-
nocent persons in the forenoon should on the
afternoon of the very same day be themselves
blown to atoms. The four Europeans whs
escaped death when the vessel was boarded


were a woman, two children, and a cabin-boy.
The latter was saved by Tara (the cause of the
massacre) in gratitude for a trifling kindness.
The four survivors were rescued subsequently
from the natives by Te Pahi and Mr. Berry,
the supercargo of the ship, who was then at the
Bay of Islands.
Two very prominent features in the harbor
of Whangaroa are a couple of large hills which*
from their resemblance to domes, have been
named respectively St. Peter’s and St. Paul’s.
They face each other from opposite sides of the
water, St. Paul’s being on the left and St.
Peter's on the right-hand side from the en-
trance. Of the two St. Paul’s is the more
dome-like in shape, and I believe it is much
higher than its Homan rival, its height being
somewhere about 800 feet. It is surmounted
by a mass of solid rock, up one side of which
a guide from the regions of Mont Blanc might
ascend with comparative ease ; but it was too
perpendicular to tempt me to risk my neck for
the mere sake of saying that I had accomplished
what others of our party had not the boldness
to attempt. The land all around the harbor of
Whangaroa falls so abruptly down to the water
that there is no room whatever for a township
of any size. On the hill side, immediately be-
hind the sawmill, a number of houses threaten
to roll over one another at every instant into
the water beneath. A winding narrow road-
way has been scooped out around the base of
the hills, and sites for dwelling-houses have
been obtained by the process of excavation,
which is ten times more necessary at Whan-
garoa than in the Empire City even. As arm-
in-arm my friend G. B. and myself walked
round that narrow pathway by the water’s edge
in the clear moonlight, we could not but admire
the scene, with the puriri trees overhead, and
their outspreading branches reflected on the
surface of the glass-like waters ; but we could
not at the same time help thinking about the
solitude of the place, and how unsuitable it
would be for those who had been accustomed
to the perpetual hubbub of large cities ; and
yet there are in that ®ut-of-the-way locality*
where many would consider themselves buried
alive if they were obliged to live there, several
whose early career was associated with the
never-ending stir and bustle of city life. A
Liverpool lady told me that when she first went
to reside at Whangaroa she thought she would
go mad with ennui, but she has lived there
long enough to boast that she would not abandon
Whangaroa for a thousand Liverpools. Can
anyone doubt that lady’s happiness, however
much theyjnay consider themselves incapable
of arriving at a like conclusion if circumstances
forced them into a residence at a place where
everything is s® unchanging from year’s end
to year’s end, and where people seem to live
merely for existence {sake, without a single
yearning for anything less monotonous ?
Public-houses are so much an acknowledged and
apparently indispensable institution in this
country, that it is needless to say Whangaroa
boasts of two of these establishments—one
called the Gloucester Arms, at which, in
Yankee parlance, we “ put up,” and the other
rejoicing in the extraordinary name of “ The
Donkey’s Nest.” Why it was so called nobody
seemed to be able to inform me, notwithstand-
ing that I was most persistant in my inquiries,
and even incurred a long walk on two occasions,
and an expenditure of 5s each time, with a view
to obtaining the desired information ; but each
time I got there I found that the old gentle-
man who “ ran” the establishment had retir ed
for the night. His name is Downes, and I am
told there is no man living in those parts who
can tell so many interesting yarns about the
olden days. He has been a principal actor in
many scenes where coolness and courage were
both required, and many a rowdy and bounce-'
able whaler has had cause to regret coming
to any misunderstanding with my hero. He
became a pakeha-Maori when quite a young
man, and he is the father of a large family of
half-castes. I regretted very much that he was
in the land of dreams on both nights I called
to see him, in hopes that I would obtain some
information about his early adventures amongst
the Northern tribes, as well as about their on-
slaughts upon each other, at a period when
only a handful of white men could live amidst
them without fear of molestation. The
Donkey’s Nest is an antique and unpretentious
establishment, whose patrons are attracted to
it by the associations of the past. The hotel


we stopped at, however, is a creation of modern
days, and its host and hostess are compara-
tively new to Whangaroa. They both
tried hard to make us comfortable, and
if they did not entirely succeed, I must at
any rate give them credit for their good inten-
tions. The hostess was a chatty little Irish-
woman, with a pronounced brogue, and at
each meal we sat down to she was good enough
to see that we were supplied with an abundance
of grapes and water melons. She was most
attentive to our wants, and we therefore paid
ungrudgingly for what we received, however
much we might think that to make hay while
the sun shone was the maxim of the establish-
ment. It was our misfortune to be at Whan-
garoa a short time prior to the approach of
St, Patrick’s day, and several of the true sons
of old Erin, who had been working in the bush
for a twelvemonth, some less, had come down
to do honor to the Patron Saint. This con-
sisted in their getting religiously drunk at the
start, and remaining in that condition day
after day, now attempting to sing an Irish
patriotic song, and again vainly endeavoring to
dance an Irish jig without the remotest regaid
to time or gracefulness of motion. Meantime
they were “knocking down” their cheques,
and living at the rate of ten thousand a year
for a brief period, but their extravagance
pleased them, and they appeared to derive in-
tense satisfaction from the knocking-down
process until their resources were exhausted,
audit was time for them to depart days before
they could “ wet their shamrock ” on the date
facetiously known as the seventeenth of Ire-
land. The disregard which the majority of
bushmen have for money is almost unaccount-
able. They work hard month after month,
and when their cheques have accumulated to
a pretty round sum, they make for the nearest
“ public,” and squander the lot in a few days.
This is not a characteristic of the Whangaroa
bushmen only ; it applies to every locality in
the North Island where the timber trade is in
full operation, and where hundreds of reckless,
dare-devil men find employment. For their
own sake, it is a pity they do not learn to appre-
ciate more highly the value of their toil and
the honest reward of their labor, but I be*
lieve that even the forcible and kindly advice
of a Father Matthew would be of little avail
amongst a class of men whose natures have
been changed by their isolation from soc ety,
and whose lives are spent in the company of
those who contaminate them by bad example,
and who soon succeed in depriving them of
any feelings of decency or self-respect which
they might have possessed when first they be-
came bushmen. Let it not be understood from
these observations, that all bushmen in the
North deserve to be placed in the same cate-
gory. There are exceptions, lam glad to say,
but compared with the total number of “black
sheep,” these exceptions would not bear the
proportion of forty to every hundred. There is a
large saw-mill at work at Whangaroa, belonging
to the[ Auckland Timber Company, but occasion-
ally it is stopped until a fresh comes down the
creeks and rivers, and brings down with it
the immense kauri logs which perhaps have
been felled and squared many months before.
After these freshes the water along the shores
swarms with magnificent logs, kauri being the
predominant species of timber, and these are
sawn up in due course, and forwarded to Auck-
land and the South. There is an enormous
kauri trade carried on between the saw-mill
districts of the North and the province of Can-
terbury, and the consequence is that a great deal
of the produce raised in Canterbury finds its
way into the North.
I think that in all my journeymen I never
came across so thoroughly demoralised a lot
of natives as I beheld at Whangaroa. I was
informed, however, that the majority of them
belonged to the Kaeo, and had come to Whan-
garoa on this occasion “to see life ” after the
manner of many of their pakeha acquaintances.
Whether they hailed from the Kaeo or else-
where, they were no credit to their countrymen,
numbers of whom witnessed their uproarious
behavior with mingled feelings of disgust and
sorrow. During the whole of the time they
stayed there they appeared to be in a perpe-
tual state of intoxication, and this condition
of things was not confined to the men only,
but extended also to the women. These peo-
ple had evidently profited little by contact with
the Europeans, and the vices of both races


Northern Native, Wife and Child.


made themselves conspicuous in the conduct of
these rowdy, drunken brown-skins. The time
waa now approaching when we should have to
leave for Mangonui, and our journey overland
will form the commencement of my next
chapter.
PART IV.
(/ 1 saddle horses and a pack-horse
1 1 11 were required to bring our party
\ * from Whangaroa to Mangonui, our
chief having decided on going over-
land to the latter place, instead of
waiting nearly a week for a steamer. I was
rather pleased than otherwise at this deter-
mination, because a week’s sojourn in a place
like Whangaroa is about as long a time as one
can put in there, without being overcome by
a depression of spirits consequent on the never-
ending sense of solitude that surrounds him,
especially when fishing has lost all its pleasura-
ble , attractions, and climbing the hills day
after day becomes tiresome. I have no doubt
that those who are hard at work in the saw-
mills or iu the neighboring bush find that time
passes away rapidly enough, but the tourist
who has “ done the place ” over
and over again till all the sights
to be seen become monotonously familiar to
to his eyes, will conceive that the days are
double their length when he has to await an
opportunity of getting away.
Through the kind exertions of Mr. Eatcliffe,
arrangements were made with a Maori half-
caste at Kaeo, named Jimmy Snowden, to
have the requisite number of horses and a
pack horse waiting for us at a certain point
on the opposite side of the harbor, and some
distance inland, by eleven o’clock on a certain
day. We were to pull across the harbor, then
proceed up one of the many rivers which find
an outfall in the harbor of Whangaroa, and by
this means save a very considerable round—
something like sixteen miles or thereabouts.
Breakfasting at the Gloucester Arms at eight
o’clock, we bade adieu to the good folks of
Whangaroa, and were rowed across the harbor
by two powerful half-caste lads, who, I was
told, were sons of the proprietor of the rival
establishment to that at which we had taken
up our quarters. Contiguous to the entrance
of the Ngaiwitaua river, towards which our
course was directed, I was shown, on my right,
the old mission station which had been estab-
lished by the late Bishop Pompallier, and in
the gardens of which fruit of all kinds used to
grow in such abundance. The station is now
in an advanced state of dilapidation, as indeed
are most of the Catholic mission stations north
of .Auckland. The clergy of this denomination
seem to have almost abandoned that part
of the world altogether, and their visits to the
Northern settlements are now few and tar be-
tween. This may be accounted for by the
fact that for a considerable time past the dio-
cese of Auckland has been without a bishop
to direct its affairs ; but be that as it may,
many of the members of the Church iu that
part of the colony complain bitterly of the way
in which their spiritual wants are neglected.
One very enthusiastic Eoman Catholic at
Hokianga told me that he found it necessary
to have his children baptised in batches, as the
expense of sending each addition to his family
to Auckland for the purpose of having it
christened was more than he could afford to
pay. His is not the only case of the kind ;
there are instances all over the country where
grown up youths are baptised at the same time
as the youngest of the family.
At the mouth of the stream up which we
proceeded, a novel feature presented itself to
the eyes in the shape of a mangrove swamp
of several hundred acres in extent. To see
these trees growing up through the water is a
peculiar spectacle to behold for the first time,
and until I witnessed it, I was not aware that
mangrove thickets were to be met with in New
Zealand. Cattle are ravenously fond of the
leaves and shoots of these trees, and at low
water wade out to them and divest them of all


their foliage. In this manner the trees nearest
the shore are quite bare and stunted, while
those in deep water beyond the reach of the
cattle are tall and bushy. It is no uncommon
thing to see clusters of oysters clinging to the
bottoms of these trees. The river narrowed
itself gradually until it was hardly more than
a boat’s length wide by the time we got to our
destination. Much to our annoyance, the
horses were not there according to appointment,
and whilst some of the party proceeded to the
house of an eld settler named Anderson, others
sheltered themselves from the rays of a broil-
ing sun under some peach trees which grew
upon the river’s bank, and from which some
excellent fruit was obtained. It was a few
miles from here, in the direction of Kaeo, that
the famous Hongi Hika received the
wound which ultimately proved fatal,
during the fight with the Whangaroa
natives in 1827. A sharp outlook was
kept in the direction whence our horses were
to come, but an hour rolled by and yet there
was no appearance of the animals or their
half-caste owner. While we were debating
whether he had mistaken his instructions, and
was not coming at all, half a dozen horses came
rushing down the hill at a smart gallop, Snow-
den tryingasmuch as possible tomakeupforloat
time. To us time was an object, because we had
telegraphed to Mangonui for a boat to be in
waiting for us at a point in that harbor at a cer.
tain hour in the afternoon, so that we might,
as the saying goes, catch the tide and save our-
selves a long and wearisome ride round to the
Ferry. Under these circumstances, therefore,
we were determined not to lose a moment in get-
ting away. As ill-luck would have it, however,
the half-caste had brought no pack-saddle with
him, and we had to fasten our luggage on the
horse’s back as best we could by means of
ropes and flax leaves which were fortunately
at hand. Eventually we were en route. Our
road at first lay through a long patch of dense
forest, containing various kind of trees, inter-
spersed with the nikau, which is so highly
prized by the native people. Out of this bush
we emerged into country of a broken, undulat-
ing description, with not a tree of any kind upon
it. Indeed, the whole of the land lying between
Whangaroa and Mangonui may be described
as almost worthless for grazing or agricultural
purposes. It is what is known as kauri-gum
land, and indications of the gum-digging in-
dustry presented themselves the whole way
through. The kanri gum is found quite close
to the surface, and as we passed along we
could see large pieces cropping out under the
tread of our horses’ hoofs. A great many of
the natives abandoned their kaingas and went
gum-digging when that article brought a high
price, and it also afforded employment to a
large number of the surplus population of
Auckland at a time when things were at a
very low ebb in the northern capital. Several
of the Maoris made heaps of money from this
source, but as a rule they squandered it in
drink, and are now worse off than if they had
never engaged in the enterprise. The gum is
procured in a peculiar way. Armed with
spears, the Maoris go about probing the ground,
and when they find the gum in sufficient quan-
tity at any spot they dig it out, and then pass
on to some other locality, where the same process
is gone through. By this means the ground is
turned over in patches, and presents the appear-
ance of a Stubblefield after a number of pigs have
been over it. The only patch of good land
that is to be seen on the way from Whangaroa
to Mangonui is a valley of limited extent,
through which a beautiful stream flows, and
where Mr. Ball, an ex-member of the House
of Kepresentatives, resides. Our chief made a
call upon him to renew an old acquaintance-
ship, and Mr. Ball was very glad to see him.
Amongst other fruits which he placed before
his visitors, Mr. Ball gave them a number of
truly magnificent pears, which were very
acceptable after being so long in the saddle
under a hot sun. Our pack-horse was out of
sight at the time we reached a point where
the road forked into two tracks. The country
being new to us, it was not at all surprising that
we should follow the wrong track, and we had
galloped for three or four miles before dis-
covering our mistake. This made an addition
of eight miles to our journey, but something
still more annoying awaited us. We at last


got down to the place at which the boat was to
await our arrival, to find that it was dead low
water, and that there was no boat within hail.
The weather became threatening, and drops of
rain began to fall It seemed not at all im-
probable that we should have to camp out for
the night, and to do this without tents or blankets,
and with no more shelter from the wind and
rain than the adjacent manuka scrub afforded,
was anything but an agreeable prospect. To
attract attention, we kindled a fire, and there
being lots of firewood at hand, no difficulty
was experienced in maintaining a fine blaze, a
mass of green material being thrown on
occasionally in order to make the volume of
smoke more dense and therefore more at-
tractive to the people living on the Mangonui
side. The signal had its desired effect, and
after waiting for about a couple of hours a boat
came out to us. In consequence of the low
state of the tide the boat could not approach
within a hundred yards of where we were
standing, and we were obliged to force our
horses, much against their will, though soft
mud up to their girths in order to get on board.
The half-caste was then paid a sovereign for
the hire of each of his horses, and no sooner
were we in the boat than he started back again
for home, intending to go half way that night.
Onr party was now five in number, including
Mr. L. and the ferryman; and what with our
own weight and that of our luggagßj
we soon found that our boat was firmly em-
bedded in the sand. Without a moment's con-
sideration, and not even hesitating to pull off
his boots, Mr. L. jumped out and gave our
frail craft an effectual shove, which brought
her into deeper water. A few more contretemps
of a similar kind were overcome in like man-
ner, and late in the afternoon we were landed
at Mangonui. On our way we inquired
of the ferryman how it was that he was not
waiting for us at the appointed place. He
was quite a youth, and helped to support a
widowed mother out of his earnings as ferry-
man. He told us he was at his post, but a
gentleman had arrived before us, and directed
him to pull him across to Mangonui. Think-
ing this person was the party for whom he bad
been sent, he rowed him across, and was not
aware of the deception that had been practised
upon him until be had seen us. On the night
prior to our departure from Whangaroa, a
fussy old individual forced himself into our
company, and to all external appearances he
was a most agreeable acquaintance. He, too,
was going to Mangonui next day, and in the
course of conversation he learnt that we had
sent a telegram for a boat to meet us at the
spot indicated. Next morning he passed up
stream in a different boat to that which we
had chartered, and as we were detained for a
considerable time through the non-arrival of
our horses, our acquaintance and his sou ob-
tained a good start of us, and making use of
what he had heard of our arrangements in the
most dishonorable way, he led the youthful
ferryman into believing that the boat had been
specially ordered for him, and so got to Man-
gonui under false pretences. He was on the
wharf when we got there, grinning all over, no
doubt thinking he had been the author of a
capital joke, but we “ cut” him, and he soon
cleared out for his home in the Awanui, where
it is to be hoped he will remain attending to
the duties of his school until he acquires the
manners and can put into practice the actions
of a gentleman. It is fair to the people of
Mangonui to add that when they were made
aware of the circumstances, they were
thoroughly disgusted with such conduct
towards strangers as Mr. S. had been guilty of.
' Mangonui was at one period of its existence
a very busy settlement, but since whaling has
died out, as indeed it has nearly done, the
place has dwindled down to a state of the
most hopeless inactivity, and there is nothing
that can I see which will rescue it from that con-
dition, unless a gold field is discovered in the
vicinity. There are rumors of gold having
been found, but whether or not it exists in pay-
able quantities yet remains to be proved. A
gentleman who resided at Mangonui for thirty
years, informed me that he had seen at one
time as many as thirty-seven whaling ships
inside the harbor, and ten or twelve more
cruising about in Doubtless Bay. The harbor
of Mangonui is not to be compared with that
of Whangaroa either for depth of water or
artistic beauty. It is full of mud flats, and at


low water the smallest craft will run aground
upon them. But from the Heads up to the
Ferry the water is deep, and vessels of large
tonnage can lie alongside the wharf. The land
about Mangonui is of an inferior quality, red
clay being the characteristic of the country.
It fact, looking around the neighborhood a
stranger would be puzzled to know what in-
duces the' people to remain at Mangonui,
because cultivation there is none, if I am to
.exclude a few garden, patches, and the
pasturage is not of a kind calculated to make
beef-growing a payable speculation. The
same habits of idleness that are apparent in
the people of Kororareka are reflected by their
more northern countrymen of Mangonui, and
the same hand-to-mouth existence seems to
harmonise wonderfully with the natures of
both. As in the case of Kororareka, so at
Mangonui, the number of tenantless houses is
in most unpromising proportion to those that
are inhabited, and the whole aspect of the
Settlement is one of retrogression rather than
development—of silent decadence rather than
improvement and increasing prosperity. We
stayed at the Settlers’ Hotel, where the bill of
fare was so sumptuous as to call to mind the
old days of travelling between Christchurch
and Akaroa, at the dinner stage on the way,
where, if you dined on mutton and potatoes
to-day, you had by way of a change potatoes
and mutton to-morrow; and it was the same
at Mangonui. We could see the fish Jump out
of the water before the very door, and yet
Columbia River, salmon and sardines were
held in greater esteem by our host, until we
succeeded by hints and innuendoesto convince
him that we preferred the local article. Our
perseverance at this distance of time surprises
me; and I can well remember the look of
disappointment that used to creep over the
features of our chief whenever tinned
salmon made its appearance on the table. The
climate of Mangonui is most agreeable, and
sufficiently warm that bananas will grow there
in the open air, but not to the same perfection as
atFiji. Those I sawwere large and well-formed,
but I was told they would not come to ma-
turity. I have no doubt they would mature
if grown inland from the sea ; those I speak
of were growing alongside the water, and this
may account for their not ripening thoroughly.
During our stay at Mangonui, an event of
no small importance occurred. A young
chief from Hokianga had been paying his
addresses to a Maori girl named Taranui, the
daughter of Topi, a well-known chief in the
Mangonui district, who holds a master mariner’s
coastal certificate for New Zealand, and who
has traded a great deal between the northern
settlements and Auckland. A day was fixed
for the wedding, and from an early hour of the
morning the friends of the bride and bride-
groom began to assemble at the hotel where
we were staying. Dor the first time in that
part of the world, it was arranged that the,
wedding ceremony should be performed by
Mr. George Kelly, the Registrar, and I had
the distinguished honor of being asked to at-
tend as one of the witnesses. In the afternoon,
as soon as dinner was over, the party set out
for the Court-house, and my friend G. B. and
myself were in the procession, each with a
dark divinity linked on to an arm. The bride
was rather fascinating in appearance than
otherwise, and could speak some English.
The novelty of the whole scene so impressed
me that I determined to make the most of it,
and as the marriage was carried out after
the English fashion, I resolved to make it
more English still by having the first kiss. I
seized the opportunity when the time came,
and my readers can imagine the astonishment
of that young Hokianga chieftain as, with an
exclamation of “ aue,” he perceived his spouse
embraced by the pakeha stranger. The cus-
tom was subsequently explained to him to his
perfect satisfaction, and the young chief buried
bis tomahawk and smoked the calumet of
peace' during the wedding festivities in the
evening. I more than suspect that the regis-
trar intended to do precisely what I did on
the occasion, and was woefully disappointed
when he found himself forestalled. After the
wedding the procession marched back to the
hotel, where toasts were proposed and duly
honored, and speeches made by Maoris and
Europeans, including one by myself, which
was interpreted to the company. Altogether,
a most enjoyable afternoon was spent, and the


conduct of the Maori guests was such as to
convince me that they know how to behave
themselvesaswellas other people when a proper
example is shown them. The newly married
couple remained at the hotel all the night, as
did also the bride's father and mother, and
next morning they set out for their kainga,
situate a few miles distant, at the base of a
high mountain which our chief will always
remember as Maunga-tani-wha.
To the land speculator who goes to Man-
gonui in search of territory, I would advise
him not to come away because he finds no
good land in the immediate vicinity of the
township. If he will only hire a horse and set
a day apart for the purpose, having first of all
obtained the services of some one competent
to pilot him, he will be conducted to a splendid
piece of country embraced within what are
known as the Awanui and Victoria Valleys.
There are other valleys running into these, and
altogether there are about one hundred thou-
sand acres of the finest agricultural land to be
seen in any part of New Zealand. Some small
portion of it has been disposed of, and it will
not be long before the whole block is placed
in the market. There is a capital harbor lead-
ing to the Valley, so that every facility is
afforded for getting the produce away. Several
southern speculators have already paid a visit
to the locality, intending to become purchasers
as soon as the land is offered for sale, but it
would be a thousand pities if the block were
not cut up into small farm settlements, for
which it is so admirably adapted.
It was our original intention to cross over-
land almost in a direct line to Hokianga, on
the West Coast of the North Island, but an
obstacle presented itself which necessitated an
alteration of our plans. To go direct from
the East to the West Coast between these two
points is no easy task to undertake, inasmuch
as the narrow track passes over a rugged and
precipitous mountain called Maunga-tani-wha,
and for about a couple of miles it is even dan-
gerous to lead horses, because in the event of
their stumbling, death to man or beast, or per-
haps both, is no improbable contingency. It
was somewhat amusing to hear the various
accounts that were given of the road in answer
to our inquiries concerning it. While to some
the crossing of Maunga-tani-wha appeared
to be surrounded with insuperable dangers
and difficulties, to others who had crossed the
mountain perhaps once, and then in the dryest
of seasons, the journey possessed none of the
terrors that less experienced bushmen thought
inseparable from it. Out of the mass of con-
tradiction which our enquiries created, there
was one item of information upon which all
our informants were unanimous—namely, that
it was a thing impossible to get through the
bush track over the mountain with a pack
horse. It so happened that the nature of our
mission, and perhaps - an over regard to per-
sonal comfort, had hampered us with a con-
siderable quantity of luggage, and a pack horse
was indispensable ; but as it was impossible to
get through with the latter, and as a three
days’ heavy downpour had placed the narrow
track in an almost impassable condition, we
abandoned the idea of braving the ascent and
descent of Maunga-tani-wha, and resolved to
await patiently the arrival of the steamer lona.
The weather becoming more settled, we thor-
oughly explored the vicinity of Mangonui, and
while our chief rode out to have a look at the
magnificent tract of agricultural country com-
prized within the Awanui Valley, my friend
G. B. and myself devoted our attention to pis-
catorial and other pursuits of an equally agree-
able nature. Mangonui for, as it is erroneously
called, even in official documents, Mongonui,)
derives its name from two words signifying
great shark —Mango shark, and nui great— and
in a fishing expedition which we took to the
entrance of the harbor from Doubtless Bay,
we learned to appreciate how aptly the place
had been named. We had been fishing for
some time with a degree of success hardly in
keeping with our anticipations, when we dis-
covered that there was a monster shark at
the end of one of our lines. It afforded
us some amusement to observe how the brute
rushed about through the water, and when we
had allowed him a sufficient time to realize
the awkwardness of his position, we commenced
to haul in the line. It was as much as both
of us could do to haul him up, and as soon as


he approached the surface of the water he gave
a terrific twist (his tail being above the gun-
wale of the boat) and our stout line broke in
two as though it were a piece of sewing cotton.
As the presence of sharks was a sure indica-
tion that no other fish were there to bite, we
hauled in our fishing-tackle and made for shore.
The solitary snapper we had secured before
sharks made their appearance we had used for
bait, and we returned empty-handed to our
hotel, there to be ‘‘chaffed” most unmerci-
fully by the landlord, whose salmon from
Columbia River, and sardines from the coast
of France we had held in such low estimation
as to leave them untouched at every meal.
But, after all, our non-success was no excuse
for the continual absence of fresh fish from
table, considering that they could be seen
jumping out of the water not a stone’s throw
from the place at which we were invited to
consume the tinned article. The night prior
to our departure was spent most agreeably at
the residence of Mr. George Kelly, our host
and hostess doing everything in their power,
and succeeding wonderfully, to make our visit
to their house one of the many pleasing
reminiscences of ©ur tour in the North. Mr.
Kelly has inaugurated a new industry (fruit
preserving), and his shipments to the Auckland
market have been profitably disposed of. In
fact, Mr. Kelly has received so much encour-
agement that he contemplates extending his
scope of operations. I have heard it said that
as tinned by Mr. Kelly, the peaches, <fec., are
far superior to the fruit which is now so largely
imported to the New Zealand market from
America ; and this being the case, it is to be
hoped that every success will attend the
development of this new phase of local industry,
even In so remote a corner as Mangonui,
where (as indeed in most of the Northern settle-
ments) men of the enterprising and persevering
spirit of Mr, Kelly are much needed.
The day of departure at last arrived, and
not an inviting one by any means. The
weather had suddenly become boisterous, and
while rain fell in torrents, the wind blew with
a force that portended a most disagreeable
passage to Whangaroa, and thence to the Bay
of Islands. The good little steamer left the
wharf early in the morning, and rode at anchor
in mid-stream until all intending passengers
had got on board. There was a heavy sea on,
even in the harbor, and what with the rain
and the spray which rose up from the boat’s
bows and fell upon us in copious showers,
there was not a dry stitch on us by the time
we got on board the lona, there to be told by
the captain that the weather was a little damp,
a harmless piece of sarcasm which our infor.
mant appeared to relish immensely. Our
chief, as I before told my readers, was a very
bad sailor, and he was no sooner on board than
he began to feel seasick. There was every in-
dication that w© should have a very rough
time of it, seeing immediately that we got
outside the Heads almost a gale of wind would
be blowing right ahead, and our chief being
such a sufferer at sea, even in comparatively
fine weather, he made up his mind at the last
moment to return on shore, and to proceed to
Hokianga via Maunga-tani-wha. It was the
horror of sea-sickness, and not any cowardice
at what might eventuate to the steamer if she
ventured to put to sea, that induced him to
take this step. There are few in this colony
who have more courage than the same gentle-
man, and few have seen more active service
during the Maori wars in New Zealand since
the first rebellious outbreak on the part of the
natives to the establishment of peace on the
West Coast of the North Island not many
years ago ; but to him sea-sickuess has more
terrors than a shower of bullets from an enemy,
on account of the complete prostration it pro-
duces. As soon as those who were not leaving
by the steamer set out for the shore, the lona
sailed for Whangaroa, but when we got some
little distance beyond the Heads it became
evident that we could not proceed against such
a high wind and sea. However disappointed
we all felt at having to turn back, we were of
one mind concerning the wisdom of such a
course on the part of the captain, and once
again within the shelter of Mangonui harbor,
there we lay until three o'clock on the follow-
ing morning, by which time almost a dead
calm prevailed, and the sea had gone down to
such an extent as no longer to offer any
resistance to our progress. Reaching Whan-
garoa at six in the morning, we had merely to
ship a small mail-bag, and twenty or thirty


sacks of kauri gum, and continue our voyage
to the Bay of Islands. In a previous article,
when describing the numerous attractions of
Whangaroa harbor, I omitted to state that
there is one very remarkable feature to be seen
there. There is a very high rock raising its
huge proportions for several hundreds of
feet above the level of the water, and it is the
invariable custom of the lona’s corteous com-
mander to call strangers' attention to it, because
when the steamer gets into a certain position,
your eyes behold a perfect facsimile of the
features of the illustrious Duke of Wellington ;
and if a sculptor had been engaged to chisel
out the facial expression of the Iron Duke, his
success could not have been greater than the
effect which a freak of nature has produced on
a rock which has existed there for centuries
before the traditional migration of the Maoris
from Hawaiki.
It was a beautiful day on which we returned
to Kororareka ; a shade hotter, perhaps, than
would hare been agreeable had we just arrived
from the cooler regions of Otago or the tnoW-
clad ranges of Western Canterbury ; but we
had by this time become thoroughly acclima-
tised,; and the heat was nothing beyond what
we could comfortably endure. As we had to
be at Hokianga next day, we had only suffi-
cient time at our disposal to make a hurried
call on some of those whose acquaintance we
formed on the occasion of our advent to the
Bay of Islands. Then bargaining with two
Maoris to row us across the bay, and up the
Waitangi Eiver as far as the Falls, for the
sum of 155., we transferred ourselves and our
baggage to their care, and were m voyage once
again. We entered the Waitangi in a line
almost directly opposite Kororareka, and keep-
ing Mr. Busby’s residence on our right (where
the famous treaty was signed by the Ngapuhi
chiefs), and a Maori sohoolhouse on our left,
we soon got into water sufficiently shallow to
indicate that we had nearly missed the tide, a
circumstance which would have upset all our
calculations. We were fortunate enough,
however, to escape running aground en any of
the sandbanks which at low water impede the
navigation of the Waitangi, except for boats
of very light draught, and in about a couple of
hours after leaving the wharf at Kororareka
we were safely landed at the Falls. These are
a very interesting sight, and the perpetual din
of the falling waters is to be heard for a con-
siderable distance down stream. The Falls
reach from bank to bank, and from their
regularity of form may be pronounced a Niagara
in miniature. The reflection of the sun’s
rays on the falling waters produced a most
beautiful effect, contrasted with the sombre as-
pect of the banks in the immediate vicinity of
the waterfall. The river is very deep for a
considerable distance below the Falls, and at
the spot where we landed, a steamer of large
tonnage could lie without touching the bottom.
I ought, perhaps, to inform my readers that
from the Bay of Islands northward there are
only two modes of travelling, namely, by boat
or on horseback. In a part of the world
where the roads are mostly mere tracks, and
where a macadamised highway is a luxury in
which its inhabitants have not yet indulged,
there are no such things as buggies which a
traveller can hire when he desires to get from
one place to another with ease and comfort.
He must necessarily do his journey on horse-
back or ina boat, and the chances are that he will
have plenty of both before reaching his destina-
tion. At first, not being much of a horseman,
I was not a little afraid to struggle into a
saddle from the wrong side of the horse, and a
vivid recollection of that Mexican Plug whose
performances Mark Twain has immortalised>
tended to increase rather than diminish my
timidity; but by and by I became used to
this new order of things, and felt confident
that I could pilot Larry Markey’s Mousetrap
through a Grand National just as well as Dan
O’Brien, or any other cross-country rider. In
accordance with our invariable custom, we had
telegraphed for horses to he in waiting for us
at Goffe’s Waitangi Falla Hotel, and our
horses were ready for us as soon as we
were prepared to start. At Mangonui
we had been living on coarse mutton for
a week, and the change in the bill of fare
provided at Goffe’s was a most acceptable
one. It consisted of a fine round of roast
beef, with plenty of good vegetables, some


cheese, which, from its superiority, I believe
came from Canterbury, and plenty of ripe grapes
and water melons, A cup of excellent tea com-
pleted a most enjoyable meal, and after re-
plenishing our pocket pistol and despatching
the packhorse ahead, we sallied forth on eur
way to Hokianga. As it was impossible to get
there that night, we divided the journey, con-
tenting ourselves with getting as far as
Ohaeawai (a place rendered famous in New
Zealand history on account of the great battle
which was fought there in 1815 between the
troops and the rebel natives under the leader-
ship of Hone Heke), putting up at Goffe’s Hotel
No. 2 for the night, and starting early in the
morning, so as to reach the Taheke River,
where a boat was ordered to await our arrival
to take us down to Herd’s Point, a name by
which Hokianga is more generally understood.
The country from Waitangi Palls to within a
couple of milesof Ohaeawai is rough and broken,
for the most part covered over with stunted
fern, with patches of native flax here and
there. The flat land is limited in extent; what
there is of it is remarkably rich, but it will
cost a lot of money in drainage works before it
can be rendered profitable for cropping pur-
poses. A good deal of the country still re-
mains in the possession of the natives, but the
larger proportion is in the hands of Europeans.
We made a short halt at the residence of Mr.
E. M. W., where we partook of some refresh-
ment, and had time enough left to admire the
contrast which his well-kept homestead and the
lands about it presented to the primitive look-
ing condition of the surrounding country. As
Mr. W. was proceeding to Hokianga on much
the same errand as ourselves, we had the plea-
sure of his company as far as Ohaeawai that
night, and again to Herd's Point on the day
following. I was anxious to see the battle
field at Ohaeawai, but it was dark before we got
there, and we had therefore to pass on, and
content ourselves with the idea of visiting it
on out return journey. At Ohaeawai we met
with two other gentlemen {Mr. J. W. and Mr.
K.) whose companionship we had every reison
to appreciate, not only on account of personal
considerations, but because of the interesting
information they were able to convey, and
which nothing but a long residence in the
country could have enabled them to impart
with accuracy. After tea, the question as to
the hour of the morning at which we should
resume our journey was discussed, and, as the
majority were in favour of six o’clock, the time
was fixed accordingly. An early retirement
was therefore necessary, and the fatigue we
had gone through, considering that we left
Mangonui at three in the morning, and were
at Ohaeawai shortly after seven o'clock the same
night, had such an effect upon myself and my
companion G. 8., that no sooner were our heads
laid on the pillows than we were fast asleep,
and our slumbers were undisturbed until five
next morning, when we were warned that it
was time for us to dress. In the kitchen below
a good-natured little Irishwoman was even then
busily engaged getting breakfast ready for our
party, now swelled in numbers to six, includ-
ing a stubborn cub whom Goffe had sent in
charge of our pack-horse, and whose reckless
conduct when out of sight on a subsequent oc-
casion resulted in the pack-horse coming to
grief, and one or two of our portmanteaux sus-
taining irreparable injury. Notwithstanding
the early hour, the hostess had a very substan-
tial meal prepared for us, and there was an air
of cleanliness about it that increased our appe-
tites. Breakfast over and our horses fed, we
were again in the saddle, passing through
country which for the richness sf its soil is not
to be surpassed in any part of New Zealand.
This land of superior quality begins about two
miles on the Waitangi side of Ohaeawai, and
terminates at the end of the Kaikohe Valley.
The soil all the way is volcanic, without being
stony, and of a fertility capable of growing
any description of crop for several seasons with-
out manuring. The block comprises several
hundred thousand acres, and the land is almost
entirely in the hands of the natives, who de-
dine to sell at almost any price. I was told
that a Sydney speculator some months ago
offered £20,000 cash for 10,000 acres of it, and
that the native owners declined to accept it.
The quantity of land is far in excess of what
the Maoris can profitably occupy, with results
beneficial either to themselves or the country,
and it seems a pity that, by their obstinacy in


Native Woman of the North.


refusing any reasonable offer, so much valuable
territory should be absolutely locked up. As
it is, they cultivate only a limited area in the
vicinity of their kainga at Kaikohe, and a tew
head of cattle are to be seen straggling about
in parts of the valley and on the adjacent hills.
The greater portion of the land is covered with
tall fern, than which there is no surer proof of
the fertility of the soil underneath. If the
natives could only be induced to grant long
leases, since they will not part with the fee
simple, this Kaikohe Valley would become
one of the most productive districts in the
colony.
The Maori settlement at Kaikohe is of con-
siderable extent, th« houses being numerous
and the population comprising a goodly number
of men, women and children. The adoption
of European customs makes itself manifest here
as the traveller passes through. Although
there are many Maori whares of the old style
to be seen, with their inmates and their con-
tents huddled together in the most uncivilised
and disorderly fashion, yet there are several
substantial residences which would do credit
to a European town. These are built of wood,
with doors and glazed windows, and are com-
fortably furnished. They belong to natives in
high tribal positions, to people who have
mixed a good deal with Europeans, and who
can sufficiently estimate the advantages to be
derived from a civilised mode of living. Kai-
kohe boasts of a native school, conducted by a
native named Hirini Taiwhanga, a very intel-
ligent Maori, who speaks moderately good
English, and who will talk to you about bribery
and corruption, the British Constitution and
Hume’s History with as much confidence as a
Britisher. Sydney made himself very con-
spicuous at the gathering of the Ngapuhi tribe
at Taumarere, and subsequently at the inter-
view with Tawhiao last month ; and I don’t
suppose that if you were to search New Zea-
land from one end to the other, you could find
a native who has got a keener appreciation of
the side on which his bread is buttered than
the same Hirini Taiwhanga. He is quite an
argumentative character is his way, and affects
to have European politics at his fingers’ ends.
He is rather instrusive in manners and com-
bative in disposition, reckless in assertion, and
occasionally intemperate in discourse ; but
one can readily forgive him, seeing his anxiety
to be considered superior to his countrymen so
far as the higher attributes of civilisation are
concerned. I believe, too, that Sydney is the
only full-blooded Maori who can boast of pos-
sessing a white woman for a wife, to whom he
was united in the bonds of matrimony a year
or two ago. She happened to be a widow with
several incumbrances, but these were no ob-
stacles to the consummation of his love, and
the woman, and her white children by her for-
mer husband, her present brown-skinned pro-
tector, and a number of half-caste Taiwhangas
live together at Kaikohe in a state of existence
that can neither be described as Maori nor
European, but rather a combination of both
elements. It was in Auckland that Tai-
whanga wooed and won the object of his de-
votion, and thither Mrs. T. occasionally re-
traces her steps when something happens that
we are told will occur even in the best regu-
lated families. [Since the foregoing was
written, it would appear that Mr. and Mrs
Taiwhanga have had such a serious misunder-
standing as to lead to words, then to blows, and
finally to a judicial separation.]
The great taste which the native people
have for horse racing is fully demonstrated at
the Kaikohe settlement. There they have
laid off a capital course, which is well looked
after, and although their grand stand is rather
primitive in construction, it is sufficient to show
that the Maoris in those parts desire to emulate
the example of the Europeans in every possible
way. Leaving the Kaikohe Valley, our route
lay across a broken, desolate-looking country,
very similar in appearance to that lying be-
tween Whangaroa and Mangonui. The track
abounds with the roots of decayed trees, and
these render it exceedingly dangerous to rid* at
anything beyond a walking pace. We at last
emerge from the open into dense forest, through
which we continue our journey for a distance
of four or five miles ; we then pass through a
tract of level land where the fern tree grows
to the height of our saddles ; to this succeeds
an area of volcanic formation, stony land
which will never be fit for anything but


for grazing purposes, and after a ride of some
minutes’ duration, we find ourselves dismount-
ing in front of an accommodation house on the
banks of the Taheke, conducted by a man and
his wife named Hudson. Our boat is in wait-
ing for ns ; and after partaking of a comfort*
able meal, and giving the necessary directions
for our horses to be here again on a certain
day to take us to Kawa Kawa, we get on
board and are fast pulling down stream in the
direction of Herd’s Point,
PART V.
A distance from the Taheke, at the
I j I ( point where we left our horses, to
' \' '•-f Herd’s Point, is eighteen miles, no
small journey to go in an open boat
on a scorching summer day. Our
boatman was in the habit of making three
trips per week up and down stream, but the
trip on this occasion was a special one, for
which, of course, he was adequately rewarded.
At the place of embarkation the river is very
narrow, and is navigable for a short distance
only further up stream. For the first few
miles (proceeding downward), the Taheke
possesses many of the characteristics of the
Avon, in Canterbury. It is narrow and
serpentine in its course ; willows overhang
its banks at almost uniform distances from
each other, and impart to the waters beneath
a sombreness of color that is by no means
cheering. That one of our party (J. W.),
who has been elected steersman by mutual
consent, has constantly to be on the alert ;
his eyes and ears must always be open in order
that he may put the directions of the boatman
into immediate execution when he sings out
“ Now to the right,” and shortly afterwards
“ a little to the left,” as, with the aid of two
stout arms and the current, we are carried
round the sinuous corners of the river at the
rate of six knots an hour. He is duly cautioned
about the existence of rocks in the middle of
the river at a certain point, and these safely
passed, he is instructed to keep a sharp look-
out for snags, in order to avoid possible dis-
aster. By-and-by the river widens ; its banks
are high and more regularly defined ; instead
of swamps to the right and to the left, the land
is high and dry, but still in the condition nature
left it ; the hills at no great distance are
densely timbered from base to summit, and the
scenery that opens to view as each bend of
the river is passed is indeed magnificent. The
only sound that breaks the stillness is the
Maori salutations which greet us as our boat
speeds along past this and that native kainga
on our way down. We at last approach a part
of the river where the renowned warrior chief-
tain Hongi Hika threw a bridge across in order
to conduct his warrior band to the opposite
bank during one of the tribal wars which that
indomitable chief had proclaimed and prose-
cuted with so much vigor, and with such terrible
results to his enemies. There are no remains of
the structure to be found at the spot now, but
there is no doubt whatever as to its where-
abouts. The Waima river runs into the Taheke
several miles above Herd’s Point, and the
stream is then more generally known as the
Waima (white water). Nearing out destination,
the river assumes a considerable width, and at
its junction with the Hokianga the expanse of
water is so great as to lead one to suppose that
he is afloat on a broad inland sea. We made
Herd’s Point shortly after three o’clock on the
Saturday afternoon, and having been pent up
in a small boat for three hours and a quarter,
it may be safely inferred that we were not
sorry at reaching terra Jtrma once again, and
having an opportunity of indulging in the
luxury of “stretching our legs.” It was a
red-letter day in the history of Hokianga. Our
chief, who had preferred the attendant risks of
crossing Maunga-tani-wha to the tortures of
mal de mer, reached Herd’s Point about half


an-hour before us, having performed the eques-
trian part of the journey the day previously,
and resuming it by boat next morning down a
beautiful river called the Mangamuka. In-
deed all the rivers in the North may be so
described. They differ in every respect from
the rivers in the Middle Island. They are not,
like the latter, mere shingle beds, sometimes
almost dried up, and at other times impassable
when the snow has melted on the western
ranges, but are broad and deep, richly cur-
tained with foliage, and navigable for miles
and miles inland. Most of them are subject
to tidal influences, and the water is as salt as
the sea for many miles up, and brackish to
within comparatively short distances of their
respective sources. This being the case, the
Northern rivers abound with fish of almost
every species caught at sea for table use, and
fishing constitutes a very agreeable pastime to
the tourist travelling through that part of New
Zealand. The adjacent swamps and forest
lands afford a home for native and imported
game of all descriptions, and some portions of
the Taheke were literally alive with grey ducks.
Southern sportsmen may talk as they like, but
there is more real sport to be derived in the
North in one day than is to be found in the
South in a whole month. Not only is there
more to shoot at, but the privilege is not pur-
chased at the cost of so much personal dis-
comfort. The climate is incomparably better,
and the effects of “ waiting for your game” will
not be one-tenth as injurious to health as those
resulting from a night’s exposure on the chilly
shores of Lake Ellesmere at the commencement
of the shooting season.
I have already said that the day of our
arrival at Herd’s Point (a name by which
Hokianga in generally known), was a red-letter
one in the history of that lively settlement.
Our visit had much to do with the native
people, and they mustered in full force at the
landing-place to bid us welcome. There were
numerous offers made te carry our luggage
from the boat to the quarters which had been
engaged for us beforehand, and no sooner were
we inside our sitting-room than the table was
loaded with grapes, peaches, and water melons.
A suite of rooms had been secured at Bryers’
Hotel, and I candidly confess that I never felt
more comfortable in my life than I did at this
establishment. Mr. Bryers the elder is what
may be termed a very old hand. He went to
live amongst the natives when he was a young
man, and, marrying a Maori woman, he deve-
loped into what is known as a Pakeha-Maori.
He is au fait in all the customs of the native
race, and though he speaks the language in a
style denominated “ whaler’s Maori,” he can
make himself thoroughly understood, and can
understand everything he hears in the native
tongue. Old Jimmy Bryers is very popular
amongst the natives of the Hokianga district,
and having a lively imagination, and a wonder-
ful memory, his anecdotes about the “ good old
times” are most enjoyable. His wife is still
alive (a fine, kind-hearted woman of influential
parentage), and while Jimmy helps in the bar
and store, and acts occasionally as peacemaker
when individual natives fall out with each
other in their cups, the old woman (as he affec-
tionately terms her) looks after little odds and
ends, and attends to the wants of her grand-
children, with whom she is an universal
favorite. It is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Bryers
who is landlord of the hotel and proprietor of
the store attached to it. We found him a
moat agreeable host, and a thoroughly shrewd
and intelligent man of business. He speaks
both Maori and English fluently, and from his
mother inherit ß considerable rank amongst the
hapu to which he belongs. It was this same
Mr. Bryers who at the late assemblage at
Kopua, as one of the representatives of the
Ngapuhi nation, made such a forcible speech
on the side of the Government. Of our hostess
it may be said that nothing could exceed her
solicitude for our comfort. Our apartments
were well looked after, and I can assure my
readers that in that remote corner of civilisa-
tion there was a great deal less to grumble at
than I have found to be the case with respect
to so-called first-class in various
cities of the colony. It was true that at the
first meal we sat down to that bite noir of our
existence—tinned fish—was amongst the edi-
bles provided, but we prepared for the emer-
gency. Our chief led the assault, and in the
attack he was most vigorously supported by hi a


subordinates ; the landlord protested that
before our arrival he had given his guests fresh
fish so frequently that they began to ask him
whether he did not think they would shortly
become scaly ; but protests were in vain, and
like a sensible man Mr. Bryers conformed
gracefully to our desires, and ever afterwards
the table was abundantly supplied with fresh
fish of various kinds, than which none were so
highly esteemed as the patiki. At Herd’s
Point there is another hotel and ttore owned
by Mr. John Lundon, a name pretty generally
known, and during our stay in the settlement
that gentleman was instrumental in getting up
a soiree and ball for our entertainment. Each
of our party received an invitation, but one
only was able to avail himself of the intended
kindness, the others regretting that prior
engagements prevented their attendance. The
affair was a great success, and therefore greater
was the regret of those who were unable to
take part in it. A pleasanter or more healthy
site for a township can scarcely be imagined
than Herd’s Point. It consists of a high bluff
running into the harbor, with a sufficient
area of table land on top to admit of the erec-
tion of a large-sized township. On both sides
and in front it is bounded by water. Herd’s
Point is eighteen miles distant from the
entrance of the Hokianga River on the West
Coast, and on a calm night the noise of the
surf can be very distinctly heard even at so
great a distance. Of all the northern settle-
ments, that of Hokianga is certainly the most
lively and industrious. It is a splendidly tim-
bered district, and several sawmills are in
active operation in the locality, especially up
the Mangamuka, where kauri is very plentiful.
There is one thing which militates greatly
against the progress of Herd’* Point. At the
time when recognition was given to the claims
of the Busby family, and scrip was about to
be issued to them covering a vast area of
country, it was naturally concluded by the
Auckland provincial authorities that they
would exercise their scrip over so promising a
locality as the township of Hokianga, and in
order to prevent this, the Provincial Govern-
ment vested the land in the Education Board,
thinking, no doubt, that it would revert to
them as soon as the Busby family had com-
pleted their selection. The abolition of the
provinces, however, upset all their calculations,
and the consequence is that the land is still re-
tained by the Board. This body will neither
sell (and I doubt whether they have power to
do so) nor grant leases of sufficient duration to
induce people to take up building sites, and the
result is, that the progress of the settlement is
materially hindered. This is very much to be
regretted, seeing how industrious the settlers
are, and what an impetus would be given to
the prosperity of the Hokianga district if
facilities were afforded for the erection of a
large township on one of the most beautiful
sites that could be selected for such a pur-
pose. Viewed from Herd’s Point, the grandeur
of the scenery around the harbor is such that it
cannot fail to impress even the most unartistic
mind. The broad expanse of water which here
opens out is bordered by high ranges, which
from the summit down to the water’s edge are
thickly clothed with timber, whose foliage,
variously tinted, produces a most gorgeous
spectacle when the sun is declining in the west
on a cloudless summer’s evening.
In the Hokianga district will be found a
great number of the first colonisers of New
Zealand; in fact there are many who were
living there before colonisition was determined
on by the Imperial Government. The great
bulk of the population is comprised of Mao-
ris and half-castes, and with the very few
exceptions the Europeans who have made
homes on the Hokianga are united in marriage
either to Maori or half-caste women. The off-
spring of these unions are generally speaking
robust and healthy ; but I have noticed that
where two half-castes become united in matri-
mony, their children are weak and sickly, and
die in most instances before arriving at matu-
rity. Byron’s philosophy is fully borne out
where he exclaims that—
“ Marrying their cousins—nay, their aunts and nieces.
Always spoils the breed/ if it increases.”
During our sojourn at Herd’s Point we were
introduced to several of the old settlers, in-
cluding Mr. Manning, an ex-Judge of the
Native Lands Court, and the reputed author
of “ Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha-Maori,”


Eruera Maihi Patuone.


of whom the Earl of Pembroke thus speaks in
his introduction to the new edition of that
highly interesting work :—“ He was, I believe,
sixty years old when I first saw him; but, in
spite of his age, looked the finest man for
strength, activity, and grace I had ever seen.
Six feet three in height, and big in proportion,
a symmetry of shape that almost disguised
his immense size, I felt I could well under-
derstand the stories I had heard of his popu-
larity and his feats amongst the Maoris, es-
pecially when I watched the keen, bright
expression of his humorous Irish face. In
manner and conversation he was the very
opposite of what one would expect of a man
who had lived since his boyhood among savages.
With a real love and a considerable knowledge
of literature, a keen appreciation of all
intellectual excellence, and a most delightful
humor, I think I never came across so charm-
ing a talker as the man whom I may not
inaptly christen the ‘ Lever’ of New Zealand.”
And so we found ex-Judge Manning. He
was kind enough to give our party an invitation
to his place, but as he resided several miles
down stream, and we had no more time at our
disposal, we were reluctantly obliged to decline
the preferred hospitality. Ex-Judge Man-
ning, I was subsequently informed, has a few
remarkable eccentricities, and while he is most
kind and hospitable to strangers, so long as he
does not entertain a suspicion that they intend
to settle in the district, he is quite the opposite
with those who incautiously declare that they
are going to establish homes on the Hokianga.
Towards the latter he has been known to dis-
play the cold shoulder, and when they had
ventured to acquaint him with the fact that
they would like something to eat, the only
satisfaction they have received was an
announcement from mine host that there was
plenty of firewood about, and lots of bread and
bacon in the kitchen, which they could cook
for themselves. Amongst other gentlemen to
whom we had the pleasure of an introduction
were Mr. Webster, a well-to-do settler in the
district, Mr. Yarborough, a crack University
oarsman, and Mr. Von Sturmer, the Resident
Magistrate, who has got a very valuable col-
lection of Maori curiosities, and who has
studied surgery and medicine sufficiently to
I enable him to be of great service occasionally
in a district which does not yet possess a per-
manent medical practitioner. There is a small
lake adjacent to Herd’s Point, and a few years
ago Mr. Von Sturmer liberated in it a few gold
fish. These have since increased to large num-
bers, and several of them are frequently
caught and forwarded to the South.
My presence in Hokianga reminded me of
the many sanguinary scenes which were
enacted there in early times, when Hongi
Hika was the terror of the North, and
of the tribal fights which ensued periodi-
cally between the Ngapnhi, Earawa, and
other tribes, and occasionally between hapug
of each. A few miles from here, on the
Waima, resides Hariata, the widow of Hone
Heke, and of Arama Karaka. She was about
sixteen or seventeen years old at the time of
the rebellion of 1845. Although now upwards
of fifty, Hariata still retains many of the
good looks which she possessed at the
period her portrait, at page 13, was
taken. It was in the Hokianga district
that Patuone was born, one of the most
celebrated of the Ngapuhi chiefs, full
brother to the no less renowned Tamati
Waka Nene, and, like the latter, one of the
most steadfast friends the Europeans had
amongst the Maori people. A very interest-
ing account of the life and times of Patuone
and of the most remarkable of bis con-
temporaries, is given in a brochure published
by Mr. C. O. B. Davis, a gentleman who is
admittedly one of the most accomplished Maori
scholars in New Zealand, and whose acquain-
tance with the habits, customs, and
characteristics of the native race, their
traditions and legendary lore, is more ex-
tensive than that of any other man in the
colony. Having directed the attention of my
readers to the source from which they can ob-
tain a good deal of useful information, it they
have an inclination to become conversant with
the early history of New Zealand, I shall con-
tent myself wiih making a few extracts from
Mr. Davis’ book, which cannot fail to be of
peculiar interest, from the fact that Patuone
was probably the last surviving native whe re-
collected the visit of Captain Cook to the


Bay of Islands, and whose account of that
visit harmonises so circumstantially with the
version given by the great circumnavigator.
Relating the circumstances to Mr. Davis,
Patuone said—“ My father, Tapau, and many
others were fishing with their nets on the
coast near Matauri, when Cook’s vessel was
observed near Motukokako (Cape Brett). The
people immediately abandoned their fishing,
and, paddling away, went alongside the ship,
and presented fish to the strangers, then called
maitai, i. c., from the sea. I saw Cook’s,
vessel. To meet it went the people in four
large canoes. No. 1 was named Te Tumuaki,
commanded by my father, Tapua, manned by
eighty men ; No. 2, Te Harotu, commanded
by Tuwhera, with 40 men ; No. 3. Te Homai
commanded by Tahapariu, with 40 men, and
No. 4 named Tikitiki, commanded by Ne, with
60 men. The canoes were paddled to the ves-
sel, the chiefs went on board, and my father
received presents of garments, and brought
with him to the shore a cooked joint of pork,
which was eaten by myself and sister Tari.
This was the first time we Maoris had seen the
flesh of a pig. Cook’s vessel was piloted to a
place named Te Puna, and the land in that
neighborhood was given up to Cook. When
the Europeans landed, the Hokiauga tribes
were in great alarm. I looked into the faces
of these strange people, greatly wondering.”
The record in Cook’s Voyages is as follows :
“ On the 27th November, the Endeavor was
among a number of small islands from which
several canoes came off. . . . The Indians
threw their fish into theship by handfuls, with-
out' demanding anything by way of barter.
. . . Among the fish obtained from these
canoes were cavalles in great plenty ; for this
reason the captain called these islands by the
same name. . . . Having weathered Cape
Brett, we bore away to the leeward and got
into a large bay on the south-west side of
several islands, and anchored ; after which we
were surrounded by thirty-three large canoes,
containing near 300 Indians, all armed. Some
of them were admitted on board, and Captain
Cook gave a piece of broad cloth to one of the
chiefs, and some small presents to the others.”
Patuone died at the North Shore, Auckland,
in 1872, at, it is believed, the advanced age of
108 years. Shortly before his decease he made
a curious present to Sir George Grey, whom ho
always regarded as a friend and benefactor.
It consisted of a manuka walking stick (now to
be seen at the Premier’s residence at Kawau)
with the aged chieftain’s last tooth driven
into the head of it. Patuone’s remains
were interred with military honors in the
cemetery of Trinity Church, Davenport,
North Shore, near to the grave of the late
Captain Wynward, and some time afterwards
the grave was enclosed by Government with
an iron fence, and on the stone slab surmount-
ing the grave, the following words are inscribed
in Maori and English :
Ko te tohu tapu
o
Eru Patuone
Te Tuakana
TAMATI WAKA NENE,
Tamariki a Tapua,
He Rangatira nut
No Ngapuhi,
IHe hoa aroha no te pakeha.
He kai hapai i te ture Kuini,
a
He kai hohou rongo ki tona iwi.
1 mate ki Akarana,
19 o Hepetema, 1872.
Na te Kawnatanga
O Nui Tireni
Tenei kohatu i whakatakoto
He! tohu tuturu mona.
Sacred to the Memory of
Eru Patuone,
Elder brother of
TAMATI WAKA NENE,
Sons of Tapua,
A noted Chieftain of the
Ngapuhi tribe,
A warm friend of Kuropeans,
Supporter of the Queen’s laws,
And peacemaker with his own countrymen.
Hied at Auckland,
19th September, 1872.
This stone is erected
by the Government of
New Zealand.
With this brief reference to the memory of
a very devoted friend of the Europeans during
many trying episodes in the history of early colo-
nisation, I will conclude the present chapter,
reserving for the next and final one an account
of our journey homeward, including a visit to
the famous battlefield of Ohaeawai.


PART VI.
11 we specially ordered it, the wea-
I Y|f |ir | ther could not have been more pro-
\ U fSzw pitious than thatwhich prevailed on
\yY~~) the morning of our departure from
Hokianga. Overhead, there was
not a cloud to be seen. The broad expanse of
water that lay before us, as we took up a posi-
tion in front of our hotel shortly before the
breakfast bell had sounded, was disturbed by
the least perceptible of ripples ; the birds,
evidently pleased at the brightness of the
morn, sent forth their notes with redoubled
energy and effect, and the whole scene was
one of unalloyed tranquility and repose. The
atmosphere was pure and buoyant, and on the
distant mountain slopes were reflected those
beautiful, varying tints so peculiar to Kew
Zealand scenery. Strange that no artist has
yet been able to reproduce them faithfully ;
and even if he succeeded, the fidelity of the
picture would be questioned by those who
have never risen with old Sol in this colony,
or watched the beauty and variety of the colors
and alternating shadows developed by a New
Zealand sunset on a summer or autumn even-
ing, like some gorgeous transformation tableau,
which it is impossible for art to equal on ac-
count of its surpassing grandeur and loveliness.
It is astonishing how subject the human
mind is to atmospheric influences, and how
materially one's spirits to-day will contrast
with those of to-morrow, it even nothing more
than a change of weather intervenes in the
meantime to affect them. If the weather be
dull and cheerless, a depression of spirits is
the invariable result; if bright and gladdening,
then all our sprightliness returns, and a happy,
joyful and contented mind asserts its ever-
weloome supremacy and power, and we feel
like ourselves again. It was precisely this
feeling which animated us on the morning
when we had to say farewell to Herd’s Point,
and to the pleasant and sociable lot of people
we met there. A large number of both races,
in which, however, the native element predo-
minated, had assembled on the beach to bid ns
good-bye, and as the boat hauled eff from the
shore, the people were most demonstrative, and
cries of “ Ka pai Paraihi, ka pai Kerei, ka pai
Paraone,” resounded through the air until we
had turned a bend in the river, and were no
longer in sight. Returning by the way whence
we came, the eighteen miles’ journey from
Herd’s Point to Hudson’s on the banks of the
Taheke had no new attractions for Gr. B. or
myself, but our chief enjoyed the scenery quite
as much as we did when we first made ac-
quaintance with it, though he was unwilling to
confess that in point of magnificence it came
up to the scenery on the Mangamuka, down
which he had been pulled in a small boat on
the day after be had crossed the Maunga-tani-
wha. Contiguous to the locality where the
Waima branched away to the right, we per-
ceived a large quantity of wild peaches and
grapes quite close to the river’s bank, and some
of the party gazed at them with longing eyes
when the order was given to the oarsmen to
pull on, as the least delay could not be afforded,
seeing how far we had yet to travel before we
could reach the place where, upon the kind
invitation of Mr. J. W., it was resolved we
should put up for the night. The day being
particularly hot, thirst was a natural conse-
quence. Like true tourists, we never travelled
minus our pocket pistols, and a resort to these
was at the moment supposed to compensate for
the loss of the luscious fruit which we had now
left a short distance astern; but second
thoughts convinced us that the river water
was still too salt to mix satisfactorily with
cognac, and there was no help for it but to
exercise our patience until we had attained a
part of the river several miles further up,
where the water was drinkable. Arriving at
Hudson’s Hotel about noon, our first inquiries
were directed towards ascertaining whether our
horses had reached that place according to
contract. Much to our dissatisfaction, we dis-
covered that they bad put in an appearance at
Hudson’s only a few minutes before ourselves,
and one look was quite sufficient to satisfy our


minds that they had been driven rather hard
from Ohaeawai that morning. This was
somewhat disheartening, considering that
they had to carry us back to Ohaeawai,
and thence to Pakaraka the same day, allow-
ing ourselves sufficient time to visit all places
of historical importance on the way. It was
questionable whether we should be able to do
this. The horses in this part of the world are
what in the South people would be inclined to
call “ weeds,” and “ weeds" they unquestion-
ably are, as poor and angular as the veriest
Bozinante. They are neither fed nor cared
for as horses are in the South, and sometimes
they are ridden almost to death. Not one in
every hundred has a set of shoes on, and in the
majority of instances their hoofs are permitted,
through sheer neglect, to assume most un-
sightly Ours might be pro-
nounced the creme de la creme of their species
in these parts, but it would be nothing short
of a reflection on a man’s character to be seen
astride any one of them in the thoroughfares
of a Southern city. Our first duty on this
occasion was to see that they had some oats
and water, and then to obtain something for
ourselves to sustain us until we go to a distant
stage. Eenewing acquaintance with the Hud-
sons, we found everybody inside the hotel in a
state of great commotion, consequent on ex-
pecting a newly-married couple from Herd’s
Point to spend the honeymoon at this retired
and orderly accommodation house. The mar-
riage had been celebrated about the time of
our departure, the bridegroom being a Mr.
Bates, and the bride a half-caste girl named
Harris, Although busied with the necessary
preparations for the proper reception of the
bridal party, Mrs. Hudson did not neglect
her other patrons, and we had nothing to com-
plain of, either in respect of attendance or the
quality of the mid day refection which was
placed at our disposal. Man and beast being
fully refreshed, and the reasonable demand for
the same being duly liquidated, we were soon
in the saddle and on the road to Ohaeawai. It
was a lucky thing for us that we had given the
pack-horse a considerable start, or the chances
are that most of our luggage would have been
lost beyond recovery. We had come along at
as fast a pace as the nature of the track, and
the overworked condition of our horses per-
mitted, and no incident occurred worth men-
tioning until we were nearing the place where
the British arms sustained a great disaster
during the first native rebellion. We had
passed through Kaikohe, whither Hone Heke
retired after being wounded at Mawhe, and
were within a couple of miles of Ohaeawai,
when the horse ridden by the foremost of our
party shied at something which lay alongside
the road, and which on closer inspection was
found to be my hatbox. A little further on a
bran new portmanteau belonging to G. B. lay
on the road with a hole in it as though it had
been pierced by a round shot ; a few yards
more brought us to where our chief’s port-
manteau was lying comparatively uninjured,
and then the road was strewn with pieces of
straps sufficient to indicate that our pack-horse
had come to grief meat completely. That it
was not a case of sticking up, and that the
locality had not been paid an unexpected visit
by a Kelly gang, was clear from the fact that
the contents of our portmeanteaux had not
been extracted, but they might have been
appropriated by the first stranger coming along,
because there they lay without the slightest
protection. It was clear that the youth in
charge of the pack-horse, instead of leading it,
had attempted to drive the animal in front of
him, and that the horse made a bolt of it for
home, divesting himself of his burthen piece-
meal as he gallopped off in his wild career.
Collecting the wreckage in a heap, and leaving
one of the party as a sentinel over it, we were
just on the point of starting off to see what had
become of the pack-horse and the youth from
Goffe’s, when the latter was seen approaching
us with the same horse and a fresh pack saddle.
He explained that the accident occurred pre-
cisely as we anticipated, and when we had
helped to secure his load we warned him to be
more careful anether time, and resumed our
ride.
In going overland from Hokianga to Wai-
tangi, Waimate, or the Kawa Kawa, there are
a great many localities which are surrounded
with more than ordinary interest. The travel-
ler will have his attention directed to the sites


Group of Northern Natives —march of civilization.


on which stood the pa of this and that great
warrior chief, in times when internecine war-
fare made such terrible havoc amongst the
native New Zealanders. In addition to these,
such names as Ohaeawai, Okaihau, Mawhe, and
Euapekapeka will recall to mind the hard-
fought struggle that ensued at each of these rebel
strongholds in 1845 ; but even apart from such
associations of the past, the country itself is
worth seeing. We had made up our
minds to visit the sulphur springs
at Ohaeawai, and to bathe in the
adjoining lake, but the delay occasioned by
the accident to our pack-horse, rendered it im-
possible for us to go that much out of our way,
and still have ample time left for a minute in-
spection of the old pa (or what remains of it)
and the battlefield to the vicinity of which we
were fast approaching. We were forced, there-
fore, to content ourselves with a distant view
of the lake and sulphur springs, and then to
pass on. They are about two miles distant
from Goffe’s Hotel, and I was informed by
several gentlemen who had visited the springs
that they had derived very great benefit from
bathing in them. It is the custom for people
to bathe in the hot sulphur springs first, and
then to plunge themselves into the cold lake
immediately afterwards ; or, by scraping out
a small channel through the sulphur, so as to
allow the cold water to run into them, people
can regulate the hot springs to whatever tem-
perature is most agreeable to them. There can
be no doubt that when the country comes to
be opened up, and European settlers take up
their residence along the fine tract of country
embraced between Ohaeawai and the termina-
tion of the Kaikohe Valley, these springs will
be a source of great attraction to the tourist
and invalid ; but, as I before remarked, the
Maoris evince a determination to keep the land
in their own hands, at all events every acre that
has been already Crown-granted to them.
The sun was fast sinking in the west by the
time we reached the place where one of the
fiercest battles of the war of 1845 was fought
between the rebels and the troops under the
command of Colonel Despard, of the 99th re-
giment. It was here the former concentrated
some time after the encounter at Mawhe.
The pa belonged to Pene Taui, but as it had
not been built originally with a view to sus-
taining an attack from the British forces, the
retreating rebels took advantage of the interval
that elapsed since the fight at Mawhe to en-
large and strengthen it, and into this pa the
natives threw themselves, under the immediate
command of Pene Taui and Kawiti, Hone Heke
being then located at Kaikohe, suffering from
his wound. Indeed it may be said that by this
time the originator of the war had lost mana,
and Pene Taui was the general in whom the
rebels placed their entire confidence. The
troops which marched against the pa at Ohaea-
wai consisted of a detachment each of the 58th
and 99th regiments, and a number of sailors
and marines from H.M.S. Hazard, the whole
force being under the command of Colonel Des-
pard. There was also a native contingent,
under the joint command of those staunch
friendly chiefs Tamati Waka Nene and Mohi
Tawhai. The attempt to breach the pa was
maintained for a week, but was ineffectual.
On the Ist of July some of the besieged made a
sally from the pa, which resulted in the tem-
porary occupation of the knoll on which the
Native Contigent had encamped, and the Union
Jack belonging to Tamati Waka was captured.
The position was gallantly recovered by a party
of the 58th Eegiment, under Major Bridge
(two of whose sons I remember meeting at
Akaroa some years ago), but the Union Jack
was carried inside the pa, and there hoisted
half-mast high, and upside down, below the
Maori flag. It is stated that this was the
cause of the disaster which ensued. Colonel
Despard is reputed to have been a very hot-
tempered man, and the sight of this indignity
to the British colors was more than he could
bear. He therefore ordered an assault upon the
pa. No breach having yet been made, the
hopelessness of success was perfectly well
known to the storming-party. They were
marching to certain destruction. They did
their duty to the utmost, some of them even
firing into the pa through its own loopholes,
but within five minutes from the commence-
ment of the attack one-third of the number lay
stretched upon the earth. The men returned
to the bugle call, but not till then. One officer


only, Captain Westropp, escaped unhurt.
Among th» killed was Lieutenant Philpotts, of
the Hazard, who had distinguished himself with
great bravery during the assault, and who fell
nearest the pa, perfectly riddled with bullets.
It is related that poor Fhilpotts was satisfied
that the assault must end in disaster, and ex-
pressed himself to that effect ; this expression
of opinion was met by some observation as to
personal courage, which drove him wild. I will
leave Mr. J. P. Dumoulin, of the Commissariat,
to tell the story :—“ You are aware that
poor Philpotts [for a reason assigned] was
not likely to be on reliable terms with
Despard. He may have expressed an
opinion that the storming of Ohaeawai pa
would end in disaster ; in fact, every one of us
believed that; but that such a remark was
made by Philpotts lam not aware. Although
in command of the Naval Brigade, he was not
officially so at the assault. The Naval Bri-
gade was attached to Major Macpherson, of
the 99th. The circumstances connected with
the mad start in his drawers will be conclusive.
The attacking columns paraded, and finally
marched at 3 p.m. A short time previously I
left the camp for the knoll a few hundred yards
off (on the top of which a brass 6-pounder was
placed and at the base a 32-pouuder naval gun),
for the purpose of witnessing the assault. On
arriving at the naval gun, Philpotts overtook
me, and said—‘Here, Mullins, pull these
trowsers off ; I don’t want to die a soldier.
(They were black cloth, red stripe, soldier’s
trowsers.) He sat on the gun carriage, and I
hauled the trowsers off, over his boots. He
then drew his sword, threw the scabbard into
the fern ; his forage cap, a soldier’s, after the
scabbard ; and left, attired in a sailor’s blue
woollen shirt, tight cotton drawers, boots and
naked sword. He followed Major Macpherson’s
att'eking column, which passed us a short dis-
tance off. I soon followed Philpotts, instead
of going to the top of the knoll; and
when within sixty or seventy yards from the
pa, I stood behind a dead tree with my watch
in hand. The two attacking columns were
Major Bridge, 58th, with the light companies,
58th and 99th, Major Macpherson, 99th, with
the grenadier companies. The reserve column
under Colonel Hulme, mixed. On the two
former reaching the pa, to within twenty-five
yards, they received, nearly simultaneously, a
fearful volley from the enemy, which killed
Captain Grant, and caused a havoc in a body
of nearly four hundred of the finest of troops,
which threw the whole of the two columns
into a mass of confusion. The natives con-
tinued independent firing, which killed Phil-
potts, who, with Grant, fell as sketched in
next page. When Philpotts was killed, an
attempt to escalcade was made by the ladder
party, to effect what I know not, nor anyone
else, then or now. One of them, a good-looking
young sailor of the Hazard, reached the top of
the first row of palisading, tripped, tumbled
over, and was riddled. Some days previous to
the assault, it was suggested to the command-
ing officer that a breach might be effected by
powder bags. Philpotts volunteered to perform
that duty, for which he was snubbed. He
then, out of bravado, left the camp in mid-day
unarmed, and reached the pa to within a few
yards ; when a native climbed the second row
of palisades, and called ont in broken English
—‘ Go back, Toby, or else you will be shot.’
I was an eye-witness to this piece of foolery."
After the repulse of the storming party,
Colonel Despard was for retreating to the
Waimate, even before the bodies of the slain
had been recovered. He told Tamati Waka
that he would leave a sufficient force to pro-
tect him and the natives under his command.
Boiling with rage, Waka replied that he would
neither retreat nor permit any soldiers to re-
main for his protection ; that it seemed to him
that Colonel Despard required protection more
than he did, and that he (Waka) would remain
where be was, and maintain the honor and
dignity of the Queen, if the Colonel pursued
the foolish course of falling back to the Wai-
mate. One of Waka’s fighting generals,
named Mohi Tawhai (whose son Hoani Mohi
Tawhai, an influential chief residing on the
Waima, I became acquainted with at Korora-
reka and whom I saw afterwards at Hokianga)
also remonstrated vehemently against the re-
treat to Waimate which Colonel Despard or-
dered on the morning after the assault. This
chief at last shewed anger, and used a disagree


able expression, Meurant, the interpreter, un-
willing to repeat it, began to boggle. The
Colonel’s suspicions were aroused ; he thought
the interpreter was playing him false. “ Tell
me instantly, sir, what the native says.”
“Nothing of any consequence, sir,” replied
Meurant. Thereupon Despard flew into one
of his outrageous passions, frightening the poor
man into bewilderment. Meurant fought off
as long as he could, and at last, in desperatiom
replied, “ Well, sir, if you will have it, Moses
says that you’re a hold bass.” Such is the
story told by Mr. Dumoulin. Colonel Des-
pard was induced to stand his ground, and
some days afterwards the pa was evacuated
in the night, and it was destroyed by the troops
on the 11th of July. On the third day after
the battle the natives allowed the troops to
recover the bodies of the slain for purposes of
interment. The natives, however, would not
give up the body of Captain Grant, which
had been multilated for the performance of
some heathen rite. The Venerable Arch-
deacon Henry Williams cut a lock of hair
from Lieutenant Philpotts’ head, where he lay,
as a relic for his friends, and took away his
eyeglass also, which was handed to Captain
Johnson on the seventh day after the disaster.
Some of the hair remains till this day in the
possession of the Williams family.
Such is the brief recital of the most
disastrous affair that occurred to the troops
during Heke’s rebellion in the North, and it
was rather a singular coincidence that within
three months of the thirty-fourth anniversary
of that memorable event, I should be shown
over the site of the pa which proved itself
impregnable, by the son of Pene Taui, the
chief who defended it on that occasion. But
what a change has since ensued ! In the centre
of the site stands a handsome little church,
which was erected some years ago by the
Natives, and the remaining space is now used
as a burial ground. We made an extensive
examination of the place. The trenches still
exist, but are for the most part concealed by
fern and weeds. The trenches were so con-
structed that an attacking force would be
placed between three Area. The stumps of the
posts which formed the outer and inner pali-
sades are still to be seen, and from these it
would appear that the pa was a very strong
fortification. We were shown the part of the
pa on which the assault was made by the
troops, and our chief who has had considerable
experience of fortified pas in the Taranaki
and Wanganui districts, expressed his opinion
that the attack could not have been directed
against a more favorable spot. We had indi-
cated to us also the place where the gallant
Philpotts fell, and where so many of the troops
and men from the Hazard were placed hors dt
comhat by the first murderous fire of the enemy;
further off we could see the knoll on which the
rebels captured the Union Jack, and where
Mr. H. T. Clarke (late Under-Secretary of the
Native Department) was severely wounded in
the thigh ; we could also distinguish the me-
morable puriri tree at which Colonel Despard
posted himself during the assault ; and further
away, at about a distance of some two or three
hundred yards from where we stood, was the
locality were the troops encamped, and from
whence so many brave hearts marched to cer-
tain death on that ill-fated Ist of July. Here,
too, the slain were buried three days after-
wards. Except as regards the site of the pa
itself, no alteration has taken place in the
general features of the battle-field. After
erecting the church, the Maoris, to show their
respect for the memory of the slain, and to in-
dicate their friendly feelings towards the Go-
vernment, asked permission to disinter the bones
of the soldiers and sailors, and to bury them
again in a large grave at one end of the church.
The assent of the Government was given, and
Mr. H. T. Clarke was deputed by the latter
to superintend the proceedings. On the 29th
of June, 1872, the bones were carefully disin-
terred, and placed in six large sheila or coffins.
These were afterwards removed to the runanga
house of the village, preparatory to being con-
veyed to the churchyard inside the pa. On
Monday, the let of July (being the twenty-
seventh anniversary of the affair), the coffins
were removed to the churchyard. They were
each covered with a red ensign, and a firing
party marched in front, headed by Heta te
Haara, a chief of the place, and the represent-
ative of the late Pene Taui. After the coffins


followed a long train of Europeans and Natives.
The procession was met by the Venerable
Archdeacon E. B. Clarke, and conducted to a
large grave that had been dug out at the chan*
cel end of the church. As soon as the burial
service was over, three volleys were fired over
the grave, which was then filled in. The pro-
cessionists returned to the runanga house,
where they partook of the hospitality of Heta
ta Haara and his people, and speeches appro-
priate to the solemnity of the occasion were
made by several of the principal natives pre-
sent. A monument suitably inscribed, and
erected at the sole cost of the natives to the
memory of those who had fought against them,
stands in close proximity to the entrance of
the church, as an enduring testimony cf the
noble sentiments by which the Maoris were
actuated when they expressed a desire that
the bones of those who had fallen on that
fatal day should rest side by side with the
remains of those who had shot them
down. After this who will dare to
assert that there are not certain traits in
the native character which entitle them to our
admiration and respect ?
In order fo make my narrative still more
complete, I must not omit the inscription on
the Ohaeawai monument, which the good feel-
ing of the Maori survivors of that memorable
fight dictated in the following terms :
Ko te tohu tapu teaei
o
Nga Hoia
Me
Nga Heramana
o
Te Kuini,
I hinga i te whawhai
Ki Konei
Ki
Ohaewai,
I te tau o to tatou Ariki
1845.
Ko tenei (Trupa
Na nga Maori i whakatakoto
I muri iho
o
Te maunsra rongo.
t Translation .]
Sacted to the memory
of
The Queen Soldiers and Sailors,
Who fell fighting here
at Ohaewai,
In the year of our Lord
1845.
This graveyard was set apart
By the Maoris
After peace was made.
It was almost dark when we turned our backs
on the battle field of Ohaeawai, and after thank-
ing the son of Pene Taui for the trouble he had
taken in showing us over the place, we directed
our course towards Pakaraka. We had pre-
viously given orders that the pack-horse should
leave an hour or so earlier, in order to avoid
another contretemps, which was by no means
improbable, owing to the nature of the road
over which we had to travel for the greater
part in darkness, because the moon was only a
day or two old, and the dull light it shed was
something akin to that of a single candle in a
spacious apartment—only serving to make
darkness visible. Where the road branched off
to Pakaraka we bad© good-bye to Mr. K., who
had been all along a very desirable companion,
and who had now to strike out for the Waim&te
alone. Finding a pack-saddle strap lying on
the road a short distance from here, we con-
cluded that our baggage had come to grief a
second time, but after events proved that we
were in error in assuming that it had. Shortly
afterwards we entered upon the estate of Mr.
John Williams, the member of the House of
Representatives for the Mangonui and Bay of
Islands district. We rode on mile after mile,
and they seemed the longest miles I had ever
traversed in my life. Parts of the way were
very rough and broken, and now and again as
we descended some declivity or other, I was in
momentary expectation that the horse I was
riding would perform a sommersault, and land
me heaven only knew where. By dint of great
caution, however, and by putting'Mr. E. M.
W. (who knew the country, and was mounted
on a whitish-colored steed) in front as a guide,
we managed to progress without accident, and
not one of our party was more thankful than
I was when I found myself seated in the din-
ing-room of Mr, Williams’ residence, doing
ample justice to the excellent meal that was
placed before us shortly after arrival. Much
to our surprise nothing had been seen or heard
of our pack-horse, and until early next morn-
ing we remained in blissful ignorance of what
had become of it. At daylight a messenger
was despatched in the direction of Ohaeawai
to ascertain what had happened, and he had
nearly reached the hotel when he met Goffe’s


man coping towards Pakaraka at an easy
pace. We afterwards discovered that he had
taken French leave to remain all night at the
hotel, where cut-throat euchre in the kitchen
had an attraction for the youth which it was
impossible for him to resist.
We stopped all night at Pabaraka, and
next morning we had an opportunity of taking
a tour round, and congratulating Mr. Williams
on the splendid estate belonging to him.
The house this gentleman and his family reside
in is a fine country mansion, and the grounds
immediately surrounding it are laid down in
English grass, and planted with choice trees
and shrubs. It has in every respect the appear-
ance of a wealthy gentleman’s estate in the best
counties in England. At a short distance from
the house stands an exceedingly neat church,
specially endowed by the Williams family.
The residence of the late Archdeacon is in close
proximity to his son’s, and here Mrs. Williams
still reside-'. She is now turned eighty-three,
and her intellect is as vigorous as ever. It was
to this lady’s diary that reference was made in
an earlier part of my narrative. Mr. Williams
and his wife treated us most hospitably, and
after breakfast on the following day we set
out for Kawa Kawa, The ride across is rather
an uninteresting one, as the country is gener-
ally speaking of a barren character. The
land in the Kawa Kawa Valley is not nearly
so good in quality as that between the mines
and Taumarere, and is so stony as to render
it almost valueless. I believe it belongs to the
Government; and this reminds me of the fact
that throughout the North nearly all the bad
land seems to have been acquired by the Gov-
ernment, while the good has either been re-
tained by the natives or been purchased by
private individuals. After a month's absence,
we spent another very pleasant afternoon and
evening at the residence of HemiTautari ; and
next day we left for Kororareka, where we
took passage the same afternoon, and next
morning were landed safely at Auckland, noth-
ing the worse of the fatigue we had gone
through during four weeks of our existence,
except that our hands and faces were a great
deal browner than they had ever been before.
The tour which had now come to a termina-
tion, was surrounded with pleasing reminis-
censes which I shall never forget. In the
first place, the chief of our party had throughout
displayed the greatest consideration towards his
fellow travellers. Although subordinate to him,
and subject to his orders, he consulted their
comfort, convenience, and desires in everyway,
and I can assure that gentleman that he was
none the less respected for it. Again, the
amount of hospitality bestowed upon us by
the settlers at the various places we visited
will not readily be forgotten, nor will the kind-
ness of some members of the native race be
easily effaced from recollection. It was with
the greatest regret that we found time would
not allow ns to accept the invitation of Wi
Katene, an ex-M.H.E., to visit him at the Wai-
mate, where he resides in a very fine house, in
which I have been informed all the comforts
and luxuries of a well-to-do English gentle-
man’s home are to be found. It is
only to be regretted that a great many more
of his fellow-countrymen have not emulated his
example. Whatever some people may say to
the contrary, it is an undeniable fact that the
native population is rapidly decreasing. This
is to be attributed to numerous causes ; first of
all, to the wretched hovels they mostly reside
in, where little or no regard is paid to the
important matter of ventilation ; secondly, to
their irregular ways of living, and the dissi-
pated habits into which a great many of them
have unfortunately fallen. With regard to
food, it is with them either a feast or a famine;
and so tar as clothing is concerned, it is quite
a usual thing to see them muffled up on a fine
day and comparatively naked when the weather
is wet and cold. Then, again, they often sleep
on the damp ground, and all these things pro-
duce the diseases which have been very preva-
lent amongst the Maori people ever since they
abandoned their fastnesses in the hill country
and came to reside near the sea coast —fever
and ague, asthma and rheumatism.
I must not forget to mention that in very
many places throughout the North indications
are afforded of the immense amount of slaughter
that mast have ensued owing to the tribal wars
which history, traditional and otherwise, in-
forms us raged from time to time amongst the


aborigines. Large heaps of human remains are
to be encountered in almost every district, but
more particularly about Whangaroa and in the
neighborhood of the Hokianga. Further north,
too, on the sands of Parengarenga, there is
evidence of a fierce battle having been fought
at some time or other, and the bones and skulls
have been so long exposed to the atmosphere,
that they will crumble away in your hands,
though before picking them up they appear to
be thoroughly hard. The Maoris are so very
superstitious that they will avoid going near
these localities, or their regular burial places,
fearful that the spirits of the departed might
do them some terrible injury. In those parts
of New Zealand where intercourse with Euro-
peans is less frequent than in others, the super-
stition existing amongst the natives is bound-
less, and an individual has a stout heart who
will venture out after dark ; but in the neigh-
borhood of European settlements this dread of
a visitation from their deceased ancestors does
not take possession of the Maori mind or daunt
their courage ; and it is no uncommon thing
te see a Maori start out on a journey similar
to Tam O’Shanter’s Ride frae Ayr, so fortified
with frequent imbibations as to induce the
belief that, with Maori and pakeha alike—
“ WT tipenny we fear nae evil;
Wi’ usquebae we’ll face the deevil.”
At the present time, when the chances of
another Maori war are considered probable by
some people (though I do not share in the
belief), it may be as well to state upon
the continued loyalty of the natives to the
north of Auckland the Government can rely
with the most implicit confidence. The Nga-
puhi and Earawa tribes are, generally speaking,
a peace-loving lot of people, and they know too
well the advantages they derive from mixing
with the pakeha to give any support or counten-
ance to anything that would lead to a conflict
between the races. In fact, should the Govern-
ment stand in need of their services, there
would be many of both these tribes who would
volunteer to march against the turbulent spirits
about Paribaka.
Travelling through the North, even the most
casual observer cannot help remarking what
useful and important functions those persona
are discharging who are conducting native
schools ; and neither the Government nor Par-
liament should hesitate to make adequate pro-
vision for those already in existence, and for
increasing institutions which are doing so much
towards establishing a thoroughly good under-
standing between the natives and Europeans.
X left the North a good deal more enlightened
than I was before I went there ; and if my
readers—these in the South more particularly
—have derived any pleasure or profit from a
perusal of what I have written in these pages,
I shall feel pleased indeed to think that my
humble endeavors have had that very desirable
and satisfactory result


THE ILLUSTRATIONS.
The author desires to express his acknowledgments to Me. Wm. Bkickell
Gibbs, landscape photographer and copyist, for the highly satisfactory
manner in which the work of illustrating this volume has been executed.
The illustrations are from photographs and lithographs; and whilst, in
copying them, the originals have in no way been deteriorated by the
process, in most instances they have been considerably improved upon.
I am sure my readers will agree with me, that the pictures reflect the
highest credit upon the artistic skill of Me. Gibbs, who has already
acquired an enviable reputation in New Zealand.
