









HISTORICAL
STUDIES
By Students of the School
of History in the Univeristy of
Melbourne








Historical Studies
by
STUDENTS OF THE SCHOOL
OF HISTORY
in
THE MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
Edited by
M D. CLARKE
and
R. LOWENSTERN, B.A.
flDclbourne:
Ford & Son, Printers, 372 & 374 Drummond Street, Carlton.
1919




CONTENTS.
|L—Castlereagh and the Resettlement of Europe.
By F. ALEXANDER.
' . tfh .// -. if
' > |N. Jr t. « .
I. The Conference of Chatillon and the Treaty of Ghaumont.
-—2. The aims and policy of the various Powers. —3.
The Congress of Vienna.—Castlereagh’s policy.—4.
Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle.—s. Congress of Troppau
and Laibach. Castlereagh and the restoration in
Spain.—6. Castlereagh and the Eastern Question.—7.
His attitude to the Spanish Colonies.—B. Comparison
of the policies of Castlereagh and Canning.—9. Castle-
reagh’s great defect—his disregard of the principle of
nationality.
v. .
11. Canning and the Seizure of the Danish Fleet.
By T. N. BROCKLEBANK.
Significance of Napoleon’s supremacy in Southern and
Western Europe.—-Berlin and Milan decrees.—Canning
and the Treaty of Tilsit.—Despatch of English force
to Denmark.—Failure of Jackson’s secret negotiations
at Danish Court.—Bombardment of Copenhagen.—Sur-
render of Danes.—Attitude of Parliament towards the
Ministry’s action.—Canning’s defence.—Result of, and
justification for, his action.
111. —Foundation of the East India Company.
By M. D. CLARKE.
Early Portuguese trade with, the English.—Beginnings of
England’s Eastern enterprise. Origin and foundation
of English East India Coy.—Trade rivals of the Eng-
lish.—Trouble with Mocrab Chan and the Portuguese.—
Extent and growing importance of company’s activi-
ties.—Servants of the Company.—Dutch animosity and
its result.


IV.—Venetian Reports on Early English
Colonisation.
By E. M. COOK.
Evidence of European interest in England's colonizing yen-
tures. Importance to Venice and to Spain ot result ot
English search for N.W. Passage. Difficulties of Eng-
lish trade in the Mediterranean and Levant. —Des-
patches relating to the Peace Treaty, 1603 —Venetian
opinions on plantation of Virginia, Reception of 18
project in Spain. —James I/s attitude to Virginia Lov.
—The Bermudas. —Henry, Prince of Wales.
V. —Sir Walter Raleigh and his Voyage to Guiana.
By M. H. GUEST.
Effect in England of Spanish search, for the land of El
Dorado. Raleigh’s Ist expedition to the Orinoco. —im-
portance of this failure. —2nd expedition —further ex-
ploration.—lmprisonment of Raleigh.—Endeavours to
keep alive interest in Guiana. —Last expedition. Policy
of Gondomar. —Treachery of James I .—Failure of en-
terprise.—French interest in Raleigh s safety. -Mis
arrest and death.
VI. — Question of the Low Countries, 1792-1798.
By W. K. HANCOCK (Trinity).
Low Countries and cause of War. —Attitude of Pitt.—Attitude
of Fox often misunderstood. —Decision of Pitt a triumph
for reaction.
VII. —Georges Cadoudal and the Ohonans.
By M. McCAY (Trinity).
The war in La Vendee. —Carrier as deputy at Nantes.— The
Noyades. —Georges Cadoudal. —Plots against Napoleon.
—-The conspiracy of Pichegru.


Ylll. —Bigge*s Report on New South Wales.
By K. A. McKENZIE (Ormond).
Introduction —Elements in the colony.—System of Govern-
ment.—Bigge’s Commission. —*The Report ßad effect
of concentration in towns —-evil of extensive Govern-
ment works.—Yan Diemen's Land.—Criticism of Mac-
quarie’s policy. Recommendatio ; Yalue of agricul-
ture.—Possibilities of colonies for grazing and wool-
growing.—Need for separate colonies. —Resignation of
M acquarie.—Conclusion.
IX.—Bacon’s Rebellion.
By W. F. MERRYLEES (Queen's).
Causes of Discontent. —Tobacco. —-Form of Government.—
Character of Bacon.—Attack by Indians. —‘Commission
refused. —Treachery of Berkeley forces Bacon's hands.
X. Lord Durham's Conception of Colonial Self-
Government.
By F. C. L. ROADKNIGHT.
The basis of Lord Durham's view of colonial policy.—His
limitations of the powers of self-government.—The con-
sequences of responsible Government. —New problems
and difficulties.—Great, Greater and Greatest Britain.
[XI. —-Slavery in the Early American Colonies.
By J. T. STRACHAN (Newman).
Reasons for introduction of Slavery into Virginia.- Slavery in
the Carolinas.—Enslavement of Indians.-—Attitude of
New England State.—lnfluence of Quakers in New
Jersey.—Legal Status of the Slave.
Xll.—William Cobbett.
By W. K. HANCOCK (Trinity).




Castlereagh and the Resettlement
of Europe.
BY F. ALEXANDER
“ I have the honour to inform your Lordship that . . .
the Senate had a meeting, and have declared that, as
Napoleon had deserted them, they feel themselves author-
ised in choosing another chief to the government of
France, and that they are unanimous in declaring their
legitimate Sovereign,Louis 'XVIII. * ? So wrote Sir Chas.
Stewart to Lord Bathurst, from Paris, on April 1st,
1814.1
The war, then, seemed to be over, but the difficulties
facing the Government of the Allies in restoring peace
and order were enormous. The task w r ould have been
bad enough had the Allies been a strong union, with
common interests, but they were, in fact, a loose asso-
ciation of jealous and suspicious nations, whom only the
overweening ambition of Napoleon had at last forced
into alliance. Even when this united action had been
successful in driving back Napoleon, the Allies began to
quarrel among themselves, and their conflicting interests
came near to breaking up the alliance. It was largely
due to the attitude which Castlereagh adopted at the
Conference of Chatillon, in the beginning of 1814—
at which Conference he showed the willingness of Great
Britain to aid with liberal cash subsidies, and to sacri-
fice many of her conquests in order to reconstruct a
balance in Europe —that the Treaty of Chaumont w-as
signed on March 10th. This Treaty may be divided into
two parts. The first, which we may call temporary and
particular, made arrangements for the successful prose-
cution of the war ; the second, the permanent and general
part, provided for the collective protection and guar an-
I.‘ Correspondence, etc., of Lord Castlereagh, IX., 418.


tee of territorial and other arrangements agreed upon
as a result of a successful termination of the war. It is
in its second aspect that the Treaty is important, for it
formed the basis of the negotiations at Paris and
Vienna.
To understand the policy pursued by Castlereagh in
the months that followed the flight of Napoleon, some
attempt must be made to understand —if that will ever
be possible —the aims and policy of the Czar Alexander.
At heart, Alexander seems to have been a strong
sympathiser with radical and humane ideals, but he
also had the position of Russia and Europe before his
eyes, and the need here, as it seemed to many, was for
strong centralised and autocratic rule. The result was
that the “ enthroned Jacobian,” as he was called, could
never be relied upon to pursue any policy consistently.
In 1804 he proposed to Pitt a somewhat vague scheme
for the protection of Europe against such persons as
Napoleon, and then proceeded to ally himself with
Napoleon by the Treaty of Tilsit. Nevertheless, he still
clung to the idea that he was destined to be the world’s
peacemaker.
The attitude Alexander took up on entering Paris was
the cause of much trouble to Stewart, our Envoy there.
1 •/
“It is evident,” he wrote to Lord Liverpool, “that the
Emperor of Russia’s policy throughout has been rather
that of coquetting with the nation instead of making
any public and manifest declaration of his wishes to
Louis XVIII.” 2 It seemed as though he was thinking of
another Tilsit, in which Alexander, and not Napoleon,
would be the supreme Sovereign.
Now Castlereagh ? s main aim was, as he himself said,
“ to direct my main efforts to secure an equilibrium in
Europe.” 3 It would, as he thought, have been better to
do without alliances, but “the tone and conduct of
2. Correspondence, etc., of Lord Castlereagh, IX., 438.
3. Ibid., Lord Castlereagh to Wellington, X., 173.
8


Russia,” lie wrote, “have disappointed this hope, and
forced upon us fresh considerations.
He was faced, then, with two alternatives—a union
of the great German powers, supported by Great Britain,
with Russia and France on the other side, or else a
union of Austria, France and the Southern States
against the Northern Powers, with Russia and Piussia
in close alliance. This idea of Castlereagh’s that the
peace of Europe could not he obtained by any one huge
league of the nations which would not allow (for some
time at any rate) alliances within that league—is very
interesting, for exponents of the “ League of Nations ”
theory admit that it will be desirable foi the
Allies to maintain their alliance within that league for
some time.
Of the two alternatives, Castlereagli thought the alli-
ance of Prussia and Russia the better, since France
need never dread a German league —it is in its natuie
inoffensive ’ 6 —a remark which we know, to our cost,
was quite wrong.
After several urgent requests from Stewart, Castle-
reagli came in person to Paris, on April 10th, and
shortlv afterwards signed the preliminaries of peace.
I have tried to show that Alexander’s policy was a
mixture of sentiment, religious mysticism, humanity and
love of power and self importance. Prussia, on the other
hand, had definite aims in view. She wanted, if pos-
sible, to prevent Russia getting too large a share of
Poland, and thought it a good opportunity to annex
Saxony to Prussia, though probably her first demand
was only put forward as a means of obtaining the
second. 7 Prussia was, however, very keen on getting her
revenge on France for the very humiliating (though ve
4. Ibid., Lord Castlereagh to Wellington, X., 173. „
f> Eg Prof. Atkinson, “Reconstruction After the .War
(1918). „ , , v
Correspondence, etc., ot Lord Castlereagh, X., Lo.
7. Ibid., Lord Castlereagh, X.. 219.
9


must say not quite undeserved) treatment she had
undergone at the hands of Napoleon. In short, she
desired the dismemberment of France, and in this the
attitude of Austria was very similar.
Russia was opposed to this, however, The following
extract from a letter to Castlereagh (probably from
Nesselrode), illustrates what Alexander's aims" at this
juncture were : <e tant pour pacifier la France que pour
assurer le repos de V Europe entiere Le double result at
ue sauroit etre atteint qu’en conservant dans leg negocia-
tions actuelles, la meme purete d 5 intention, le memo
desinteressement; ,e meme sprit de moderation, .qui out
constitue jusqu'ici la force irresistible de la ligue Euro-
peenne et qui out si puissamment contnbue a ses suc-
ces. This savours well of Alexander s humanity. 5 '
That he was opposed to any permanent dismemberment
is clear, for Nesselrode writes of Quelques arrange-
mens ucrritoriaux comp tables avec le systeme des
guranties temporaires.”
Castlereagh's attitude is equally clear, but the Cabinet
was by no means unanimous-on the matter. Castlereagh
himself recognised the importance of safeguarding the
Netherlands from France. 9 He considered that it was
the fundamental duty of .Great Britain to weigh what
is the best security for peace, and for keeping the Low
Countries out of the hands of France, 10 but at the. same
time he recognised two things which Liverpool and
others overlooked. Firstly, if the Allies demanded too
great a cession of territory from France, the government
there would be overthrown, or strongly disputed. The
great aim of the Allies should be the peace of the world,
and this, he thought, c< Revolutionary France is more
likely to disturb than b ranee under a regular govern-
ment, however long her frontiers. ssll The second point
S. Correspondence, etc., of Lord Castlereagh, XL, 11
9. Correspondence, etc., of Lord Castlereagh, X., 144.
10. Ibid., Castlereagh to Wellington, X., 144.
11. P.O. Congress, Prance, Viscount Castlereagh, quoted Allison
Philips, “ Reconstruction of Europe,” 139.
10


which Castlereagh recognised was that France would be
necessary to preserve some sort of balance in Europe
later on.
We may sum up Castlereagh’s views on these matters
in his own words: It is not our business to collect
trophies, but to try if we can bring back the world to
peaceful habits. . . . France, with her existing dimen-
sions may be found a useful, rather than a dangerous,
member of the European system. 12
To satisfy Prussia and to ensure the protection of the
Lowlands, Castlereagh agreed —and induced Alexander
to do likewise—to the temporary ocupation of parts of
France (including certain fortresses). In doing so, he
accomplished three things. He prevented Prussia from
making another war inevitable in the near future (as
she did in 1870), he protected the Netherlands, and he
mad© Alexander feel that he was not the exclusive pro-
tector of France, as that self-important individual would
have liked it thought. '
It is not easv to clearlv distinguish the terms of the
Treaties of Paris and the Congress of Vienna, and as it
is not the intention of this paper to detail the steps
by which the reconstruction was effected, it will be suffi-
«/
cient to note that the more important matters, with the
exception of the above, were held over till the Congress
of-Vienna. ■>," VV/' ■- V, g VC' -V
In accordance with Talley rand’s principles of Legiti-
macy, the Great Powers at Vienna willingly acceded
to Louis XVIII. ’s return to France, but the King of
Saxony, who had during the war lost his kingdom,
rightly contended that it should be returned to him.
Prussia, however, was eager to get Saxony, and she
found. her opportunity when the Emperor of Russia
expressed his intention of recovering almost the whole
of Poland. It is interesting to note that Castlereagh
thought that Alexander’s aims in regard to Poland were
12, Correspondence, etc., of Lord Castlereagh, X., 490,


not due to mere greed, but that he intended the “ moral
regeneration of Poland —giving it a semi-independ-
ence. Once more we see the mixture of “ humanitarian-
ism and materialism ” in this strange character.
Now Prussia at first strenuously opposed such a plan,
as did Metier nidi and Castlereagh, but Prussia “ gave
way ” to Russia, demanding in return the kingdom of
Saxony.
The attitude of Castlereagh towards these two ques-
tions is well expressed in his speech in the Commons in
defence of the Congress of Vienna. In regard to Poland
he says : ‘ ‘ There was undoubtedly a strong feeling in
the country (i.e., in England) upon the subject of inde-
pendence and a separate government; and, as far as 1
was able , / exerted myself to attain that object. This,
however, that was not the wish of all. It was found to be
inconsistent with the views of several of the great Powers
of Europe, and, of course, such a project could not be
carried into execution without complete and general
assent/’ l3 Undoubtedly it was a pity that an indepen-
dent barrier State was not constructed to prevent the
aggressiveness of Austria, Germany and Russia taking
too violent a form, but it seems from this speech that
Great Britain did all she could to establish such a
barrier.
As regards Saxony, the Prussians had to content them-
selves with part only of the Saxon kingdom. “ I
was onef of those persons/’ said Castlereagh, who felt
himself (sic) entitled at Vienna to contend, in the
strongest manner, against the incorporation of the whole
of Saxony with the Prussian dominions/’ 14
I have tried to show the importance attached by the
British to the immunity of the Netherlands from attack
by the French. It appeared to the representatives at
Vienna that this immunity would be greatly increased
13. Parliamentary Debates, XXX., 292-305,
44, Tbid.


by uniting Holland and Belgium into one count iy.
‘‘The people of the Netherlands,” said Castlereagh,
iC will now become a nation of great importance in the
balance of power, and have great weight when properly
called' out ” . . . this country “ now so strong by nature
and by art, will at all times be capable of opposing an
effectual resistance at least till the arrival of such aid as
the natural interest of the Powers would urge them to
supply.” 15
Almost .similar action was taken in the union of Nor-
way and Sweden, the Czar feeling himself bound in
honour to support this union, which had, in effect, taken
place in 1812 as the outcome of an agreement between
Alexander and the Crown Prince of Sweden.
The next important matter dealt with by the Congress
of Vienna was the restoration of the old regime in Italy.
Despite all Napoleon took
#
organisation —a central government, with Murat as
King of Napl es. It was hoped by many that the Con-
gress of Vienna would make a unity out of Italy instead
of leaving her as “ a mere geographical expression.”
In Sicily, where a British garrison had been in control
since 1305, and where an “ English Constitution” had
been issued by Lord William Bentinck, the feeling
against a return of the old regime was very strong.
The feelings of the people were, as was the usual prac-
tice of the Congress, quite disregarded, and the old
regime was restored almost in its entirety. The Pope
returned to Rome, and regained his territorial Sove-
reignty, despite considerable opposition from many
Italians. Savoy and Nice were ceded to France to
Piedmont, which kingdom was also increased (largely
owing to Austrian and British insistence) by the cession
of Genoa. 16
15; Parliamentary Debates, XXX., 292-303.
16, Parliamentary Debates, XXX., 292-303,


Castlereagh defended the action of the Congress on
two grounds. “ Such a course as the creation of an
Italian Kingdom was, ha said, “ altogether out of the
question ; in the first place, because it afforded no
prospects of success, and was not even demanded by
the Italians themselves, and in the next, because it
was inconsistent with our engagements with Austria/'
Further, he denied the fact that Italy had any
claim on Europe, seeing that “ the Italians did not
raise an arm in their own cause/' As regards bis
second excuse, we must admit it w T ould have caused much
strife within the Congress—which was never too amic-
ably inclined—to endeavour to push Austria out of
Italy. The other excuses, however, can scarcely have
any great weight when we think of the strong; opposition
to the old regime, especially in Genoa —though Castle-
reagh was probably right in regarding Bentinck's pro-
clamation establishing an independent government, as
being a purely provisional action.
The attitude of the Congress to Italy generally was
founded on the same principle as guided them in the
Netherlands. “The motive," as our representative put
it, “the sole motive, which led to the mcorporation of
Genoa with Piedmont, was the sincere conviction of the
necessity of a barrier between France and Italy, which
ought to be made effectual on the side of Piedmont." l7
As regards Venice, the policy of uniting Holland and
Belgium compelled the Powers to confirm the Treaty of
Campo Formio, whereby Austria received Venice in
exchange for Belgium.
Although it is most suitable for the purpose of this
paper to consider? the work of the Congress of Vienna in
a general way, we must remember that there 'were two
distinct ssesions of the Congress, the first concluding
just at the time of Napoleon's escape from Elba. Be-
11. Parliamentary Debates, XXX., 292-303,
14


tween these two sessions came the second Treaty of Paris
after W aterloo, by which certain French fortresses were
to be held by the Allies, and France itself was to be
occupied by *lOO,OOO troops under the Duke of Welling-
ton. This occupation was to continue till France could
be trusted to re-occupy her old position in the family of
nations, cured of her revolutionary mania.
*
After the lapse of two or three years, the state of
affairs in France was anything but" satisfactory. The
Prussian troops were acting with considerable cruelty,
and the reactionary party in France was growing in
numbers. Louis was forced to dissolve his Parliament,
and replace it by a more moderate one. The temper of
the nation was not yet republican, however. Wellington
summed the trouble up by saying that France desired
the monarchy, but the monarchy would never be really
strong SO' long as it seemed to rest on foreign bayonets.
So much bad feeling resulted from the occupation that
Wellington reported in a draft memorandum laid before
the Cabinet in 1818, that if the occupation lasted
another two years, he wmuld be to draw in the
scattered line of his troops and concentrate them, be-
tween the Scheldt and the Meuse. 18
Consequently, the British Government summoned
another Congress at Aix-la-Chapelle, to consider the
evacuation of France.
The Congress, which commenced its work on September
30th, 1818, agreed, after some hesitation, to the evacua-
tion at the end of the third year, subject to the payment
of certain instalments of the indemnity.
. •./
On the admission of France on equal terms there was
not the same unanimity. Alexander proposed that the
Quadruple Alliance be preserved as a protection against
possible danger from France, and that a general
18. F.O. Congress, Continent, Aix-la-Chapelle, September-
December, 1818— quoted Allison Philips, 162.


alliance should be formed “ consisting of all the signa-
tories of the Treaties of Vienna, having as its objects
the guarantee of the state of territorial possessions and
of 1 Sovereignty at antique.” l9
To the second of these suggestions Castlereagh was
wholly opposed. To understand his attitude we must
consider his opinion of the Holy Alliance.
x «/ ,
This scheme of Alexander’s was really a continuation
of the idea of universal peace and union propounded in
1804 to Pitt. In September, 1815, he presented to an
astonished world his Scheme for the future peace of the
world. The sole object of the alliance was to be “ the
maintenance of peace and the union of all the moral
interests of the peoples, which Divine Providence has
been pleased to come to under the banner of the
Cross.” 2o
Mr. Allison Philips, in his book on the “ Confedera-
tion of Europe,” states 21 that the Holy Alliance was not
altogther “the piece of sublime mysticism and non-
sense” that Castlereagh judged it to be, and that Alex-
ander really believed that, by getting all the Sovereigns
of Europe except the Prince Regent of Great Britain,
the Pope and the Sultan to sign this document, he had
committed the Sovereigns to the principle of an all-
embracing international system.
Th is may quite well be the case. Even Castlereagh
himself wrote: “My persuasion is that he (i.e.,
Alexander) means to pursue a peace policy,” 22 but still
the scheme was delightfully vague, and if, for this reason
only, Castlereagh may be justified in treating it as
“ sublime mysticism,” if not as absolute “ nonsense.”
Although Castlereagh was strongly opposed to any
such Holy Alliance, w r e must not confuse this with the
Quadruple Alliance, concluded later in the same
19. Allison Philips, “Confederation of Europe,” 173.
20. Alexander to Count Leven, St. Petersburg, March, 18. 1816.
21. P. 150.
22. Correspondence, etc., of Lord Castlereagh*-XII., 49.


year (1815), to which Great Britain was a party, and
which Castlereagh heartily supported.
The Alliance, when set forth originally by Alexander,
savoured too much of internal interference for Castle-
reagh’s liking, so he issued a counter project, in which
he urged the Powers “ to keep the internal affairs of
France in the background, and to make the colour
of the contingent interference as European as pos-
sible/’ The Alliance was agreed to on November 20th,
1815, on the lines of this counter project, the parties
agreeing to carry out the second Treaty of Paris, to
renew the Treaty of Chaumont, and to meet at fixed
intervals —“meetings,” ran Article VI. 23 “consecrated
to great common objects, and the examination of such
measures as at each one of these epochs shall be judged
most salutary for the peace and prosperity of the
nations, and for the maintenance of the peace of
Europe.” So that Castlereagh supported this scheme,
with its clearly defined aims, but he strongly opposed the
vagueness and the danger underlying the vagueness of
the principles of the Holy Alliance.
It is only when we understand that such was his atti-
tude that we see that his memorandum in reply to the
Russian suggestions at Aix la Chapelle as set out above,
was not inconsistent. This reply is so important that I
will quote it at some length : “ The idea of an Alliance
Solidaire,” wrote Castlereagh, “by which each State
shall be bound to support the state of succession, govern-
ment and posssession within all other States from violence
and attack ” upon condition of receiving for itself a
similar guarantee, must be understood as morally imply-
ing the previous establishment of such a system of
general government as may secure and enforce upon all
kings and nations an interal system of peace and
justice. Till the mode of constructing such a system
shall be devised, the consequence is inadmissible, as
23. Quoted Allison Philips, p. 155,
17


nothing would be more immoral or more prejudicial to
the character of government generally than the idea
that their force was collectively to be prostituted to the
support of established power without any consideration
of the extent to which it was abused. Till a system of
administering Europe by a general alliance of all its
States can be reduced to some practical form, all
customs of a general and unqaulified guarantee
must be abandoned, and the States must be left to rely
for their security upon the justice and wisdom of their
respective systems, and the aid of other States according
to the law of nations. 7 ’ 24
This memorandum is important for several reasons.
In the first place, it explains Castlereagh’s attitude pre-
cisely. It was a policy of peace for Europe —alliances
might be necessary to preserve that peace, but as regards
the internal affairs of the nations themselves the prin-
ciple of non-intervention was to hold the field.
Perhaps its greatest importance lies in the opinion
expressed by Castlereagh that the internal affairs of
nations must be on a proper footing before international
control begins. We find this being reiterated at the
present time, when proposals for a league of nations are
discussed. Though what Castlereagh meant should first
be done, and what is now thought the preliminary
course, are two different things, yet the idea underlying
both points of view is the same. Thus Castlereagh would
probably have required as an essential that the govern-
ment of individual nations should be on a perfectly stable
footing before international control could be realised,
while at present our thinkers demand that the govern-
ments must first be on democratic lines. Still, the
idea is similar —get a composed nation before you try
to get a composed world.
The result of this memorandum, which clearlv showed
“ %/
Europe what England’s attitude was to be, was, firstly, a
24. Memorandum of Lord Castlereagh, cited Allison Philips, 183.
18


secret protocol renewing the Quadruple Alliance, in case
of fresh revolutionary outbreaks menacing the peace of
Europe y and, secondly, a public declaration announcing
the formation of an alliance which France was invited
to join the Quintuple Alliance. Alexander’s feelings
were assuaged by the fact that the declaration was ex-
pressed in language resembling that of the Holy Alli-
ance, but making it clear that the treaties, and the
treaties alone, were to be the basis of the European
Concert.
the Czar, though once so strong a supporter of radi-
calism, is now seen in another light. CVtith the restora-
tion of the old regime in Naples and Spain there was
considerable discontent, and it was not long before the
discontented became active revolutionaries. It was to
help against these that Alexander now conceived it his
duty for we must give him the credit of being sincere—
to act. He accordingly advocated the holding of a
further Congress at Troppau, to aid the Sovereigns in the
disaffected countries. With the details of this Confer-
(wdiich w r as adjourned to Laibach to allow the King
of Naples to attend), space will not allow me to deal
except to show 7 ’ that Castlereagh/s sympathy w r ith “ Con-
gress-rule ” was further weakening. ‘‘ If it is desired,”
he wrote, “to extend the alliance so as to include all
objects, present and future, foreseen and unforseen, it
would change its character to such an extent, and carry
us so far, that we should see in it an additional motive
for adhering to our course at the risk of seeing the
alliance moved away from us without our having quitted
i •
With this as her clearly defined attitude. Great Britain
declined to send a special representative to the Congress,
' * Observations de Milord Castlereagh, sur ime Passage
dun rapport de M. le Prince de Metternich.” p. o,
domestic, September-December, 1820. (Philips',
w -i I / •


her ambassador at Vienna- —Stewart —looking after her
interests, and Castlereagh refused to sign the protocal
issued by the rest of the Powers. These Conferences are
important as marking a definite schism in the Grand
Alii a nee.
The next feature of Castlereagh/s policy worthy of
particular attention is his attitude to the East —soon to
be called the ‘ 1 Eastern Question The majority of Rus-
sians naturally sympathised with the revolting Chris-
tians, and were eager to help them, against Turkey.
For a time it seemed as though Alexander actually was
going to do so, and it was only after a struggle that
Castlereagh brought him down to earth, using Alexan-
der's own devotion to the principles of the Alliance to
urge, along with Metternich, that it would be con-
trary to the principle of the Alliance to interfere with
Turkey to aid “ revolutionists. 7
It wns to settle this question and also to consider
whether aid should be given to the Spanish Government
to win back its colonies in South America from rebel-
lion, that it was proposed to bold another Congress at
Verona. Castlereagh made great preparations to attend
in person, probably foreseeing that this Congress was
destined to be the last of the series largely owing to the
attitude taken up by Great Britain.
The death of Castler eagh brought into power his rival,
George Canning', but the policy pursued by the latter
did not at any time differ in essence from that of Castle-
reagh. In this particular case the memorandum which
Castlereagh had drawn up for his own use and guidance
at the Congress was passed on untouched by Canning
to Wellington, who was to take Castlereagh’s place at
Verona. The details of the Congress do not concern us
here, but these instructions are very important, as show-
ing clearly what Castlereagh’s ideas were, and in refut-
ing the belief, very commonly held, that Canning and
Castlereagh held entirely opposite views. Canning had
no doubt always viewed the hampering of England by


Continental alliances with impatience, but, as we have
seen, Castlereagh's support of the Congress idea was very
definitely limited. Hence we must agree with Mr.
Phillips that, had he lived, his eventual policy would
probably have differed from that of Canning only in the
more conciliating choice of its forms. "26
In the Memorandum referred to above he defined
Great Britain's attitude as follows : —As regards Naples,
no action whatever was to be taken; in the struggle of
the Greeks, Great Britain would preserve a rigid neu-
trality, but would recognise a facto" government
if such were set up; a “ rigid abstinence from any in-
terference with the internal affairs " of Spain was
and on the subject of the independence of
the Spanish colonies, Castlereagh was disinclined to
recognise their governments as de jure " yet, but sug-
gested two alternatives : that they be recognised as “ de
facto," or by the means of diplomatic agents. He hoped
to arrive at some agreement on this question at
Verona. As a matter of act, the first of these alterna-
tives was eventually adopted by Canning.
Before taking a general “ bird's-eye" view of the
policy outlined throughout this paper, there are a few
matters which, though of minor importance in one
sense, must not be wholly omitted.
The first is Castlereagh's attitude to the Slave Trade.
Effoits weie made to obtain, a general abolition during
the period of reconstruction, it seeming to Wilber force
and others an excellent opportunity for joint action by
the Powers. Castlereagh himself sums up the result of
these attempts in these words: “ Though the Slave
Trade is not actually abolished, yet I have the satisfac-
tion to announce that a great step has been made
towards its suppression. The eight Powers who were
parties to the Treaty of Paris have published a solemn
26. “ The Confederation of Europe,” 244,
21


declaration that this detestable traffic should be swept
from the face of the earth'.” 27
The Treaty of Ghent, too, though directly concerning
the peace with America, must not be overlooked, for it
had an important bearing on the negotiations on the
Continent —Britain's hands were left quite free. In-
deed, the desire of Castlereagh to obtain this freedom
led to the slurring over of important issues that had
brought about the war. Bathurst, for instance, wrote
on December 6th, 1814, of a certain article as likely
to lead into long discussions which would retard the
progress of the negotiation, it being “ very desirable
that the conclusion of the Treaty should not be de-
layed/' 28 On December 24th the Treaty was duly signed
on the-“status quo" basis.
In a general consideration of the policy of Castlereagh
two matters should be particularly noted.
The first is that Castlereagh was not the admirer of
<£ Congress-rule," that many people seems to think he
was. There is no wide divergence between his views and
those of Canning. Castlereagh saw that, for a tem-
porary peace, at any rate, some Concert of Europe was
necessary. He would have liked to do without Congresses
at all, but accepting them as a necessary evil, he deter-
mined (and succeeded) in limiting the field of their
operation to matters of European imports, excluding
from this category the internal troubles of any one
nation.
The other feature of Castlereagh's policy is that, in
common with the other diplomatists of the day, he alto-
gether disregarded the wishes and national feelings of
the people themselves as regards reconstruction. We
have evidence of this in the union forced on Norway
and Sweden, and Holland and Belgium, and the rest or a-
27. Parliamentary Debates, XXX., 292-303.
28. Bathurst to Commissioners at Ghent, Correspondence, etc., >
of Lord Castlereagh, X., 217,
22


tion of the old regime in Italy. This was due to the
lact that Castlereagh looked on the Sovereign as the
State, instead of the State as the Sovereign, and also to
tie ever present desire to “ secure an equilibrium in
Europe."
It is doubtful whether Castlereagh, even had he recog-
nised the desirability of giving effect to the wishes of the
people in the nations concerned, could have done, so, but
still the fact remains that, great as his work in this
critical period was, he only postponed the dav when
national feeling should break out again, as it had done
c uiing the latter pare of the Napoleonic wars. Something
must be allowed, however, for Castlereagh ? s ingrained
conservatism. It is impossible," he wrote to Ben-
tmek, on May 7th, 1814, <x not to perceive a great moral
change coming on in Europe, and that the principles
O' freedom are in full operation. The danger is that
the transition may be too sudden to ripen into any-
thing likely to make the world better or happier,
l am sure it is better to retard than accelerate the opera-
tion of this most hazardous principle which is abroad. "29
It was, then, not Castlereagh ? s perception of the situa-
tion that was at fault, but the judgment he delivered on
that situation.
29. Correspondence, etc., of Lord Gastlereagh, Yol. X., p. 18.


Canning and Seizure of Danish
Fleet.
BY THE A DEN BROCKLEBANK
Before giving, an account of that dramatic stroke by
which Canning, in 1807, secured possession of the Danish
fleet, allowing the startled world no time for protests, let
us look at the map of Europe. If we do this, we shall be
less likely to underestimate the influence of circumstances
when we come to weigh and judge his action. In the
year 1807 the power of France overshadowed the whole
continent, and France/herself was dominated by a gieat
superman —Napoleon Bonaparte. He had consolidated
his power at home by giving security and strong govern-
ment, and by his military genius he had cowed the
nations, changed the boundaries of centuries, and
levelled to the dust the most ancient of monarchies. Aus-
tria and Prussia though, indeed, still independent after
Austerlitz and Jena, were left weak and subseivient.
Holland was a subsidiary kingdom, and Italy was ruled
in accordance with the will of the conqueror. Napoleon
practically ruled Europe; but why should he stop there
—why should he not aspire to rule the woild.? But
there was a great obstacle to be overcome, for Great
Britain held the seas, and his victorious armies were
confined to the Continent. As Admiral Mahan says :
“ Those far distant, storm-beaten ships, which the Grand
Army never saw, stood between it and the dominion of
the world.” The Emperor had failed to wrest that
command from her by naval warfare, and his fleets had
been destroyed and his ports blockaded. Now he re-
solved to strike at her through her commerce —to destroy
her power at its source. So he issued his Berlin and
Milan decrees, but if this “ Continental system ” was to
be a success, every maritime nation in Europe had to
accept the decrees, and Napoleon was prepar ed to entoice


acceptance at the sword’s point. It was partly with
this object that he made war on Russia in 1807, and
anti-English feeling is the dominant note in the secret
articles of the Treaty of Tilsit. By this Treaty 1 Russia
pledged herself in the event of Great Britain declining
her meditation to join the Continental Blockade, and
unite with France to compel Portugal, Denmark, Sweden
and to wage war on British trade. English
Ministers were kept well informed in Continental
matters, and by July 21st, Canning, 2 the Secretary of
State and For eg >n Affairs, knew the general tenor of
the secret articles, if not the actual terms of the treaty.
f i
The source or sources of his information are still a
matter of mere conjecture, but its accuracy and the
short time taken in transmitting it to him are the
important factors. Bernadette was campaigning in
Prussia, and on August Bth the Emporor wrote to him :
“ If England refuses to accept the Russian mediation,
Denmark must declare war against her, or I must declare
war against Denmark. In the latter case, your duty will
be to seize the whole of the mainland of Denmark.” But
before the new Allies had time to act. Canning had
decided on a line of action, and won the support of the
Cabinet. Whatever the cost, the Danish fleet was to be
prevented from falling into French hands.
The Ministers decided to send to sea with the greatest
secrecy a powerful military and naval armament, con-
sisting of about 20,000 men and 27 sail of the line. A
division of the fleet under Commodore Eeats w T as
detatched to the Great Belt, with instruction to allow 7 no
military force whatever to enter Zealand. This island
was to be kept in a state of blockade, shut off both from
the mainland and the adjacent island of Funen. The
main division of the fleet, under Admiral Gambler, was
to be accompanied by the army to the Sound. The
1. Fournier, Life of Napoleon, Vol. 1., p. 463,
2. Temperley, Life of Canning, p. 77,
25


whole of this armament was to remain in active pending
the result of the negotiations to be opened with the
Court of Denmark. Mr. Jackson was selected to carry
out this delicate negotiation. He was to repair to the
residence of the Prince Royal and “ to enter into imme-
diate and unreserved explanations with his Royal High-
ess respecting the views and sentiments of the British
Government." 3 Canning, in his instructions to Jackson,
dated July 28th, gave his reason for despatching the
expedition to Denmark, “In consequence of intelligence
received here, through various channels, of the designs
of Bonaparte to occupy the territory and ports of Hol-
stein, for the purpose of shutting out Great Britain
from all communication with the Continent, 4 and ulti-
mately to avail himself of the Danish marine as an in-
my 0 m
strument of active hostility against this country, it has
become necessary that the most prompt and decisive
explanation should immediately be entered into with
the Court of Denmark." The envoy was charged to
express “ His Majesty’s just determination to obtain-for
himself that satisfaction and security which the designs
of the enemy and the situation of Denmark impose on
His Majesty the necessity of requiring," and which the
forward state of the Danish fleet alone would justify.
On this last point the Government was misinformed. On
July 25th, Captain Beaumont, after visiting the: Danish
dockyard, drew up a report, in which he said : “ 1
found the ships in a state of ordinary," “ all in com-
pletes! order," “ I am of opinion the whole of the
Danish fleet might with greatest ease ... be at sea in
six weeks from the commencement of equipment. 5 I
may assert there is not at present the shadow of appear-
ance for the equipment of a fleet." Everything was to
be done to induce Denmark to comply with the British
3. Annual Register, 1807, p. 258.
4 Eng. Hist. Review., H. Rose, p. 84.
5. Holl. Rose, Eng. Hist. Rev., p. 84.
6. Holl. Rose, Eng. Hist. Rev., p. 84.


demand, and to give her compliance the appearance of
compulsion in order to protect her from the vengeance
of Napoleon. The British Government being not “ un-
aval e of the apparent harshness of the demand, 7 6 wag
ready to enter into any reasonable stipulation the Court
of Denmark might suggest. England was prepared to
enter into a treaty of alliance for mutual defence, or
to receive the fleet as a sacred deposit, with a solemn
convention as to its restoration at the conclusion
of the war. ,; Acquiescence was to be given an air of
constraint, but, in the last resort, Jackson was to an-
nounce to the Prince Royal 7 the English Courtis deter-
mination to impose its demand by the powerful arma-
ments in the Sound, and the fleet was to proceed to hos-
tilities. In Ins Separate and Most Secret Instruc-
tions to Jackson, on July 28th, Canning ordered him
to remember “ that the possession of the Danish fleet is
the one main and indispensable object to which the whole
of your negotiation B is to be directed, and without which
no othei stipulation or concession can be considered
as of any importance or value."
The fleet, with Jackson, arrived at Kiel on August 6th,
and from there the envoy proceeded on his way. At
Terming ton he found “ a very considerable fermenta-
tion." It was due to the the action of the British
Minister, who, having heard that Bernadotte intended
occupying the ports of Schleswig and Holstein, had
oideied the ships there to seek the protection of the
blockading fleet. The Danish Ministers either hadn’t
heard, or wouldn t accept, the truth of his information,
and were indignant. Thus, when Jackson began his
difficult negotiations, the Danish Government was
already irritated, and we can share Dr. Rose’s opinion
that he seriously compromised the success of his mission
by holding a loaded pistol at the Crown Prince’s head.
7. Annual Register, 1807.
8, Holl. Rose, Eng. Hist. Rev., p. 86.


Instead of emphasising the value of an Alliance with
England, and insisting on the surrender of the fleet as
the main condition of that Alliance, he demanded the
fleet, and stressed the consequences if the demand were
refused. Count Bernsdorfi flew 7 into a violent passion,
and denied that Denmark had received any communica-
tions from France. The Prince was “ affected by the
menace accompanying the terms/’ and after some
argument announced las intention of rejecting them and
adhering to the policy of neutrality he had formerly
followed.
There was ample testimony to the unpreparedness of
the Danes for war. There were no forces in Zealand,
and not a gun w 7 as mounted on the ramparts of Copen-
hagen, in which city the blockade had caused the greatest
confusion. The negotiations dragged on till August
16th, when the army was landed and took up a position
behind the town, the fleet forming an impenetrable
blockade by sea. On the morning of the fourth day the
Commandant of the city sent a trumpeter to request a
truce, in which to arrange the terms of the capitulation.
By the capitulation, as signed, England gained the
Danish fleet, but undertook to evacuate Zealand in six
weeks, or less if possible. The British Admiral at once
fitted up the Danish ships, and at the expiration of the
period tow 7 ed them arid all the stores and equipment he
could lav his hands on to England. There can be no
doubt that the Commanders exceeded their powers in
binding themselves to evacuate Zealand within six weeks;
but whether the retention of Zealand was an essential
part of Canning’s policy or not is another question.
The Opposition in both Houses of Parliament launched
a spirited attack against the Ministerial policy. There
was an insistent demand for the production of the
papers, and as members lacked the definite information
we now possess, we are not surprised to find many de-
claring that the high-handed action of the Ministers was
unwarranted by Napoleon’s attitude. A member com-
28


plained that Ministers now had no rule of right but
their own wills, and declined to take the House into their
confidence. To have done so in this instance, where
secrecy and despatch were the essentials of success ,would
have been manifestly foolish.
It was denied that Denmark had shown any hostility
V i/
to England. If she had meditated an attack upon us,
would she have left a third of her mercantile marine
within our ports? Others claimed that proof of Napo-
leon’s designs against Denmark w T as lacking, and even if
it had been existent, who could say Denmark would not
have resisted to the last man, and in the end have saved
her fleet from the conqueror? Admitting the hostility
or weakness of Denmark, the design of Napoleon, and
his power to carry it out, if the Ministry was justified
in seizing the Danish fleet, was it not also justified in
retaining Zealand 1 Even if their action was right, their
policy was bad, for they had gained no material advan-
tage, and had, on the contrary, forfeited the good-will
of the Danes, alienated the Russians, exposed Sweden to
unnecessary danger, and by evacuating Zealand, had
enabled the French and Danes to close the Sound and
the Baltic to English trade. 9 The Ministers had pro-
moted hostility without depriving the enemy of the
power for revenge. Above all, Mr. Secretary Canning
had dragged England from her proud position as the
sole upholder of justice and right. There was no State
now to form a rallying point for the nations. At last
Mr. Canning rose and answered the arguments of the
Opposition. He very skilfully proved either that Den-
mark wilfully favoured France, or that her means for
resisting Napoleon were quite inadequate. What had
Denmark’s attitude been in the previous wars? Was not
the Ministry justified in watching her with suspicion,
seeing that Napoleon’s avowed intention was to bring
every power in Europe to act against Great Britain?
9. Parliamentary Debates, 1808, Wm. Ponsonby.


Prom the East he had threatened the Crown Prince, say-
ing, “Let that little Prince take care of himself/ 710 and
had made overtures to Sweden and Portugal to induce
them to join him in enforcing the Continental system.
Denmark had certainly adopted a subservient attitude
towards France, either from fear or choice. The Orders
in Council roused indignation, but Napoleon’s decrees
did not even lead to a Danish protest. Denmark had
allowed French troops to march over her borders and
violate her neutrality. She had withdrawn her troops
from Holstein at Napoleon’s command, and she had
neither made preparations for her own defence nor
accepted the proffered assistance of England or Sweden.
Whether she had the will to do so or not, she was power-
less to thwart the designs of France. Why should the
Ministry, being apprised of the disposition of France,
and of Denmark’s weakness, have waited for a declara-
tion from the latter country?
In both Houses the debates on the Ministerial policy
dragged on wearisomely, bringing nothing fresh to light,
each member rising just to repeat the argument of the
last but one.
Was the seizure of the Danish fleet the beginning and
end of Canning’s pplicy, or was it but part of a com-
prehensive plan for a Northern Alliance against France?
Dr. Holland Rose holds ll “ that the alliance of Denmark
was strongly desired as a means of staying the course
of French conquest, and of protecting our ally Sweden
from pressure on the west,” and it is because it was
undertaken partly for the protection of Sweden that he
finds; its moral justification. On this ground, he main-
tains, that the ultimate aim of Canning was not the
seizure of the Danish fleet, but an Anglo-Scandinavian
League, to save the Northern Powers from the wreck of
the European system. Dr. Rose considers that this aim
10. Canning’s Speeches. Speech on Expedition to Copenhagen.
11. Eng. Hist. Review, p. 90, etc.
30


was defeated, because he laid such stress on the possession
of in W. mr* instructions, and by JactL “
bad diplomacy. He quotes passages from Canning’s let-
ters showing his disappointment and general dissatis-
faction at the evacuation of Zealand, in which, referring
menace of revolution and subversion, he says •
Ihe possession of the Danish fleet, although it removes
part of the instruments which might have been used
against the safety of Great Britain, or of the States
north of the Baltic, is in itself not onlv not sufficient to
avert the great and threatened evil, but is calculated
unless accompanied by other measures of occupation to
accelerate its arrival, and its complete success.” Dr.
ose concludes; ‘The English, after doing their worst,
have now tied their hands by the terms of the capitula-
tion ” and here he sees the failure of Canning’s policy.
n the other hand, Mr. H. Temperley that
Canning explicitly declared that he had no design of
holding Zealand throughout the winter, because the
English forces were inadequate, and that his great
annoyance and irritation was because “this article
straitens us too much in point of time. His main aim
was to prevent Napoleon closing the Sound; in this he
succeeded the project of cutting off the Sound is now
become, in a great degree, an idle threat after the oppor-
tunity which the British Navy has now had of explor-
ing the navigation of the Belt. ”13
Canning’s policy seems to have embraced , the two
aims. His most immediate, as he says, very definitely
in his secret instructions to Jackson, was to anticipate
Napoleon and get possession of the Danish fleet. If
Denmark acquiesced the Northern Alliance would prob-
ably be a fairly simple matter. If she did not, and
joined hands with France, England would have deprived
her of her most dangerous weapon. Denmark did resist.
Jo* U' 7r Temperley, Life of Canning, p. 71.
13. H. \. Temperley, Life of Canning, p. 71.


and declared war on England. I'* 1 '* But the war was inevit-
able. and would have followed from the pressure of
Napoleon in his anxiety to enforce his Continental
system. England kept the Sound open, sent assistance
to Sweden, and was free from attacks on her own or Irish
shores. ...
The information Canning received from Tilsit is an
ample justification for his action. There was no ques-
tion of Denmark remaining neutral, and no proof that
she had been strictly neutral. Canning vas sincerely
and firmly convinced that her attitude was hostile, and
that on Napoleon’s return she would close her ports.
With the knowledge he possessed, had he not acted, he
would have failed in his first duty that of leaving
nothing undone to secure the safety of England. The
European situation was exceptional. England was the
only free country in Europe, and she was engaged in a
life and death struggle, contending against Napoleon,
as Canning said, for “ a prize—the liberty of the
world.” And, as he saw it, the worst fate that could
befall Europe was her defeat.
The seizure of the Danish fleet and the opening of the
Sound was one of the wedges he was determind to drive
into the Continental system, and must be considered
with the blockade of the Tagus and his whole policy
towards France at this time.
Little by little Napoleon’s - system was to be broken
down, and channels opened by which British goods would
flow into Europe.. Mr. Temperley considers that “ the
seizure of the Danish fleet was a master stroke, Hence-
forth Napoleon was cut off from the sea, and the Con-
tinental System destroyed.” It was foreign to Canning’s
policy to attack the rights of small nations. He was
a great upholder of the doctrine of “ non-intervention,”
and the assertion of the rights of the small against the
great.
14. Parliamentary Debates, 1807, p. 76


He himself said “ that any attempt at forcible inter-
ference with the internal affairs of other nations, unless
in the case of direct peril to the nation that interfered,
was dangerous and opposed to national law. For this
reason Napoleon was to him an outlaw and a tyrant, at-
tacking the liberty of the world.
Canning once said it was not measures but men that
counted, especially in times of difficulty and danger,
when ‘systems are shattered and when general rules of
fj Ce
conduct fail.
For such emergencies, he with his great powers of
thought and action, prompt decision, and vigorous exer-
tion, was the man. Lord Acton, speaking of English
Ministers, said, “No Foreign Secretary has equalled
Canning/' l5
15. H. V. Temperley, p. 268.
33


The Foundation of the East India
Company.
BY MARY DRURY CLARKE.
Caspar Correa, in his account 1 of the voyages of
V asco da (lama to India, recorded a strange prophecy
told in the East by a “ diviner so diabolical,’ ? that all
Ins sayings were written dow r n and preserved “as pro-
phecies that come to pass.” This legend asserted that
the whole of India would, in the far distant future, be
taken and ruled over bv the white subjects of a very
c tl
distant King, who would do great harm to those who
were not his friends.
The truth of this prophecy time has vindicated,
though the instrument of its fulfilment was not destined
to be the Portguese race, some illustrious members of
which, the King of Camanore in 1498 received in such a
propitiating manner. 2 For a century the Portuguese
held the “ gorgeous East in fee,” trading unmolested
from the Cape of Good Hope to the Red Sea, and the
Persian Gulf to the Spice Islands and China. In 1580
Portugal became united to Spain, and not until the
defeat of the Spaniards in 1588 was the sea free for
the enterprising Dutch and English seamen to sail
southward round the Cape and take part in the com-
merce of the Eastern world, whose commodities previous
to this, had reached England through the hands of the
Venetians, via Egypt and the Red Sea.
In 1577, Francis Drake had visited the Moluccas and
Java, and returned laden with plunder. Still more
detailed information was forthcoming from the accounts
of three English merchants who, before, 1580, braving
]. Lendas da India. Translation for Hakluyt’s Society.
2. He pressed upon them more presents and goods than could
be stored away in their ships.


#
EAST 1 NJ>/£S (^y
C




■ - _ ■#
the wrath of the Portuguese, travelled through a great
part of India. 3 Thither, wrote one, iC come many
shippes . . . very richly laden with pepper, spices . . .
much merchandize of silke and cloth and of precious
stones, both rubies, di am ants and pearles/’ 4
Not until 1591, however, did the English make any
definite venture, and this expedition met with severe mis-
fortune.
Captain Benjamin Wood, in charge of three ships, and
carrying a letter from the Queen to the Emperor of
China, made a second effort in 1596, but neither he nor
his ships were ever heard of again, “ Thus/ ’ writes the
chronicler, rather prematurely, “ perished the attempt
to open a passage into India/’ 5
In spite of this pessimistic opinion, English mer-
chants determined to pursue more vigorous efforts, for
the Dutch, after 1595 , had been forming associations for
trading in the East. In October, 1598, therefore, a
body of English merchants memorialised the Queen for
permission to send ships to trade in India. They sur-
veyed the Portuguese settlements on the Malabar and
Coramandel coasts, and their factories in Malacca, the
Band as and the Moluccas. These memorialists drew
attention to the many countries which might be visited
with advantage by English traders. 6
In 1599 the Dutch raised the price of pepper in the
English market from 3s. to Bs. per lb., and this proved
to be the last straw that broke the camel's back. The
Lord Mayor of London immediately called together a
t/ »/ ___ CO
meeting of the principal city merchants —drapers,
grocers, y inters, goldsmiths, and leather sellers —to con-
sider what course should be pursued. At Founders 7 Hall,
Loth bury, on September 22nd, Mayor, aldermen and
3. Ralph Pitch, James Newberry, William Leedes.
4. See Hakluyt’s Voyages, Vole 11., p. 382-402.
5. Hakluyt’s Voyages, Vol. IV., p. 373-4.
6. Calendar of State Papers, Colonial, for the East Indies,
1513-1616, p. 94.


merchants alike agreed u with their owne handes to ven-
ter in the pretended voiage to the Easte Indies, the which
may it please the Lord to prosper." £30,133 6s. Bd.
was subscribed by 101 merchants, in sums ranging
from £lOO to £3OOO, and the adventurers resolved to
apply to,Queen Elizabeth for royal consent to the project.
A body of fifteen Directors was appointed to manage
and arrange affairs, but at the last minute the necessary
warrant was withheld, because the Privy Council
thought “it more beneficial for the general state of
merchandise” 7 to entertain the peace proposals on hand
between Elizabeth and the King of Spain, than to char-
ter the company, and so forego the opportunity of con-
cluding peace.
Meanwhile, the disappointed merchants prepared a
sound defence for their just demands by drawing up,
eai 1} 160v3, “ certaine reasons why the English mer-
chants may trade into the Easte Indies," 8 in which they
distinguished sundry well-known islands wholly out of
the dominions of Spain and Portugal.
The cautious Elizabeth, wishing to have this report
fully verified before she committed herself, directed
Fulke Greville, Treasurer of the Navy, to report upon
the document. His decision being favourable, the Queen,
ever alive to the interests of commerce, granted to the
adventurers a charter, constituting them “a body cor-
porate and politic in deed and name," and so, on the
last day of the first year of the seventeenth century, the
English East India Company made its appearance upon
the stage of history.
Purchas furnishes the list of the original members of
this Company of. Merchants of London, trading with
the East Indies,” which consisted of the Earl of Cumber-
land and 215 knights, aldermen and merchants. The
“ privilege" granted on December 31st, 1600, gave Her
7. Court Minutes of Company No. 260.
8. See Court Minutes of the East India Company, No. 265,
p. 103.
36


Majesty’s permission for fifteen years to the adventurers
who, “ at their owne cost and charges,” undertook the
trade. Alderman Sir Thomas Smythe was appointed
first governor, while the joint direction of the voyages
and the provision of shipping and merchandise was
placed in the hands of twenty-four Committees, which
were to be elected annually. The wisdom and thor-
t/
oughness of the Company are shown by the way in which
they obtained from Queen Elizabeth a circular “Ires,”
for presentation to the native rnonarchs, and by the fre-
quency of their consultations with Mr. Hakluyt, 9 who
read unto them out of his notes and books, “ divers in-
structions, ” and at their request “ set down in writing ”
the principal trading centres of the East Indies, which
information would prove of inestimable value to the
“ better instruction of our factors in the said voiage.”
Four ships and a small pinnace were prepared to
sail, when a difficulty arose. The Lord Treasurer strove
to place Sir Edward Michelbourne, a court favourite, in
charge of the expedition —a proposal which, fortunately,
did not find favour with the hard-headed city merchants,
who purposed “ not to employ anie gent in any place of
charge or comaundent in the said voiage,” their inten-
tion being “ to sort their business with men of their owne
qualitie.” Finally, James Lancaster was placed in com-
mand, with Captain John Davis, the famous North-West
navigator, as pilot. That the Company was generous in
its financial arrangements witli its servants is made
evident by a perusal of its terms of agreement with John
Davis, with which the said captain had every reason to
be “very well pleased.On the 2nd April, 1601,
Lancaster set sail from England, having on board
besides officers and factors., to be left as residents, the
ate*. # ' *
0. Company held Hakluyt's abilities and knowledge in high
respect, and there are several references in the Court
.Minutes to the practical value of his services, e.g., No. 2 85.
10. Red Dragon, 600 tons; Ascension, 260 tons; Hector, 300
tons; Susan, 240 tons; Guest, 130 tons.
11. Calendar of State Papers Colonial for East Indies, No. 268.


sum of £28,742 'in bullion, and £6860 worth of British
staples, with which they hoped to open up a trade in
the East.
After sundry mishaps, and fierce attacks of scurvy,
the adventurers, on June sth, anchored off Acheen, in
Sumatra, Hero a most favourable treaty of peace and
privileges ay as drawn up with the “ great and mightie
King/' who took more interest in cock-fighting than
in listening to the letters of Queen Elizabeth to “her
■"i • t
loving brother." It is reported, however, in the Court
Minutes for October, 1602, that this monarch sent to
Her Majesty “ a ring beautiful, with a ruble, two ves-
tures woven and embroidered with gold, and placed
within a purple box of China," which mark of thought-
ful attention must have teen very manna to the hungry
vanity of the royal lady.
Lancaster settled a factory at Acheen, but on account
fj S
of the failure in the previous year’s harvest, could
obtain only a small store of pepper, and “daily grew
full of thought how to lade his shippes to save his owne
credit, the merchant’s estimation that set him aworke,
and the reputation of his country." Sailing through
the' Strait of Malacca in October, he sighted, and after
the fashion of the times, captured, and thoughtfully
lightened a Portuguese ship of “ 950 packs of calicoes
and pintados," many packets of merchandise and much
rice. The general, the simple narrative continues, was
“ very thankful to Cod for it . . . that had eased him of
a very heavy care."
Delighted with such good fortune, they sailed on to
Bantam, in Java, where they left a factor and traded
• t
“ very peacably," though the Javia us “be reckoned the
greatest pickers and thiefs in the world." The ships
returned to England in the summer of 160-1, the Court
Minutes recording that on the 16th of June, the “ Ascen-
sion " appeared in the river with a cargo of 210,000 lbs.
of pepper, 11,000 lbs. of cloves, 6030 lbs. of cinnamon,
38


and 4080 lbs. of gum lacquer. l2 Though £917 were
due as Customs duties, 13 yet the voyage was successful
enough to encourage the company to subscribe together
£60,450 for a second expedition, which, after some
delay, sailed in 1604 in charge of Henry Middleton.
As early as 1603, the Court Minutes of the Company
record that the Dutch had represented the English as pirates,
telling the native princes that they had come to> plunder
the country. The Spaniards and Portuguese, too, in
March of the same year, signified their disapproval of
the English trading with “ either of the Indies/’ to
which they said with true “ Portugal brag,” they would
never consent. Thus it is evident that before the English
had even fairly started as adventurers in the Eastern seas,
they had rivals to cope with, who had no intention of
“hating the foe with a playing at hate.” Upon occa-
sions, the “honest Dutch,” so eager to grapple with the
slowly-decaying influence of the Portuguese, but equally
determined to hinder English expansion, were out-
wardly our allies; but they were false friends, and as
such more dangerous than open enemies. English sea-
men and factors had, from the first, been suspicious of
the Hollanders, 14 but, strangely enough, their bitterest
enmity was directed against the Portuguese, who, had
they but realised it, were the lesser of the two dangers,
while the wily Dutch in secret obstructed and prevented
our officers, daily subjecting the company’s servants
to “ the whips and scorns of time, the oppressor’s wrong,
the proud man’s contumely.” Scattered through the
Court Minutes, we frequently come upon letters from
distant commanders or factors, living bv the sufferance
' »!
of some native prince, under fiery skies, and amid the
gaudy surroundings of the East, isolated from their
12. Court Minutes in Calendar of State Papers Colonial for
East Indies, No. 138.
13. Ibid, No., 321.
14. Letter from G. Ball, of Macassar, to Bantam. See J. W.
Kaye’s “ Administration of the E.I. C 0.,” p. 60.
39


kind, and surrounded by constant danger and difficulty,
who, in their quaint and homely English, report to the
Directors at home, disastrous loss of goods, fruitless
efforts to establish factories, Jesuit intrigues, murder by
bloodthirsty Turks, the obstruction of trade by ‘ ‘ in-
sufferable, saucy, insolent Portugals,” and the less open
hindr a n ce o f dr u n ken Flem i ngs.
Still, as evidence that the Company did meet with
some measure of prosperity, we have the testimony
of the petition of the Turkey Merchants recorded
in the books in 1604, wherein they blamed the East
India Company as the chief cause of the decay of their
trade, “ whereby all spices, silkes, indigo and goods
of the Indies/’ came no longer overland through Persia
and Turkey, but ” direct from the Indies/’ by sea.
In spite, too, of the interference of private traders,
or “ interlopers/’ the company continued to make sound
progress, and prepared for a third voyage, during the
course of which the first English factories on the Indian
peninsula were opened up. The fleet, under Captain
Keeling, anchored off Surat on the west coast late in
1607. Mr., Finch was landed to form a factory/ 5 and
William Hawkins, “ on account of his experience and
language,” arrayed in “ scarlet and violet apparel,”
provided by the company for the purpose, ee his cloak
lined with taffeta and silver lace,” 16 set off to Agra to
obtain from the “ Great M a gore, ’ ’ permission for the
English to trade. It was to this feeble representative
of a mighty dynasty —Jehangire, ” the marvellously poor
creature and singularly bad king —a sensual, tyrannical
native, that the wisest fool in Christendom ” wrote
letters from “ our palace of Westminster,” beseeching
him to cherish and support our English traders by the
continuance of his favourable assistance and protection.
Mr. Hawkins was the first Englishman representing the
15. C. R. Low’s “History of the Indian Navy,” Vol. 1., p. 7.
16> Court Minutes, p. 148, No. 362.
40


Company to make his appearance before the mighty
Eastern potentate, who reared for himself stately
pavilions sparkling with diamonds and pearls, and
whose elephants and horses glittered with trappings of
jewels and azure and gold.
By degrees, in spite of Portuguese opposition, 17
trade was opened up at Surat and Cambay, where
cloths and calicoes were purchased and carried to
Java and the Moluccas, where they were in
great demand, to be; exchanged for the more valued
spices and pepper.
As soon as the Company found that they had firmly
established a trade in India, they directed their atten-
tion to obtaining from James I. a renewal of their
charter, containing " divers better conditions. 77 This
was granted to them in 1609, and gave to them exclusive
rights for perpetuity of trade in the East.
On the same day the Governor admitted as freemen
of the Company, a number of important persons, “ no
mere merchants, 77 18 and this occurrence, combined with
the new charter, inspired so much confidence that sub-
scriptions for the sixth voyage reached the sum of
£82,000, and the Company almost immediately set about
building the ‘ c goodliest ship . . . for beauty, burthen,
strength and sufficiency ... in England. 77 It is not sur-
prising, therefore, to find the Venetian Ambassador re-
porting to the Doge and Senate in the following year,
that King James I. went to. see the launching of a great
ship of 1800 tons, the "Trade’s Increase, 77 built
by the East India Company, the Governor of which enter-
tained the King on board at a splendid banquet,
" served on China dishes. 7719
The rapid progress in the extension of the Company
between the year 1609 and the date of the new charter
in 1616, is test recorded in the letters of the comman-
17. See C. R. Low’s History of Indian Navy, I., p. 8; also
Kaye’s Administration of E.I. Co., p. 59.
18. Lord Treasurer, Lord Southampton, and several other
noblemen. See Court Minutes, No. 443.
19. Calendar of Venetian State Papers, 1610-1613, p. 417.
41


tiers, factors and officials to the Governor and Corn-
mi bee, At the outlet, the factors were under the ini me-
diate orders of their own chiefs —Surat being the seat
of t ent I al authority—but the General or Commander of
tiie fleet seems to have had a controlling power, since
consultations were frequently held on board the ships
lying in the Roads. 2o As time advanced, however, the
control of the naval authorities was shaken off, and the
Pi evident of Surat became the chief representative of
the Company in the East.
The native dignitary from whom the English received
toe most ti on ole was, apparently, the Viceroy of Surat,
Mociab Chan, whose disposition savoured more of a
child than a man, This person feared the enmity of
the Pin tugucse and mistrusted the English. He endea-
voured in 1612 to cause trouble between the two coun-
tries, and would make a decisive judgment in favour of
neither.2l The arrival of the English fleet under Cap-
tain Best slightly altered the aspect of affairs, and the
Portuguese, who would not lightly surrender their
opulent settlements, attacked the English'-with f galleons
and 2e) fi igates in S Aval ly Roads. 22 The latter, lioav-
CAnoi, drove their snippes on ground on the sand tlnvart
the Bar re of Surat/’ losing only three men in the under-
taking, but “having killed by report some 200 ” of the
Portugal. Immediately afterwards Captain Best con-
cluded an agreement, confirmed by the Great Mogul,
which permitted the English to trade and settle factories
in the cities of Surat, Cambay a, Ahmedabad, Goga, or
any other parts of the country within the “ Great
Magore s dominions. The just observance of these
articles Avas to serve as “a true pledge of perpetual
20. Consultation with Captain Keeling on Board the “ Charles ”
Swally Roads, February 25th, 1616. Kaye’s Administra-
tion of E.I. Coy., p. 66.
21. Court Minutes of Company, No. 227.
22. Village of Swally was seaport of Surat, situated about 12
miles west of city.
42


anmity,” and the breach as a a just cause of war irre-
vocable/' 23
The trouble with Mo-crab Chan, however, did not end
here, and the correspondence of the time is full of com-
plaints against this “ malicious wretch,” who, in order
to furnish himself with what lie pleased, seized the
factors' goods, deprived them of their- means of defence,
opened and “ most basely searched ” their packs of mer-
chandise, and at times even forbade them to land their
goods. In short, as one factor angrily asserted of this
capricious tyrant, “ he discovers to us the secret rancour
of his poisoned stomach, and the hidden malice which
he beareth unto our nation/' 24 The Portuguese, too,
“ used hostility against the King's subjects in these
parts,” burning and pillaging “ divers small towns,”
and at one time keeping the English factors in daily
dread of being poisoned by their Jesuit priests.
These constant indignities led the Governor, Sir
Thomas Smythe, to/employ, with the approval of the
Company, Sir Thomas Roe, “ a gentleman of pregnant
understanding, good breeding and comely personage/'
as Lord Ambassador at Agra, with directions to obtain
from the “ Great Mogul,” an absolute settlement, and a
guarantee “ for quiet and peaceable trade/' 25 Roe
arrived in October, 1615, and immediately made his
“ demands and complaints ” to the native authorities.
He wrote also to the Viceroy of Goa, admonishing him
to restrain “his barbarous miscellaneous people,” and
warning him that the spirit of the great Elizabethans
still dwelt among the English traders. As Roe probably
anticipated, no reply was received to this communica-
tion, and, in accordance with his warnings, open war
was pronounced against all the Portugals in the East
Indi es, “ with fire and sword, in the name of the King of
England,” while the native peoples anxiously looked on
23. Court Minutes, No. 674, p. 266.
24. Ibid, No. 847.
25. Ibid. Letter to Directors, December, 1614,
43


to see Hie contest between the two great Western powers.
Besides Surat, Cambay and Ahmedabad, the English
had factories at Agra—from which goods were trans-
ported to Surat by carts and camels —Baroach, Ajmere
and Calicut, 26 In addition, late in 1616, they opened
a new factory in Bengal a, which, later, became of
supreme importance. On the east coast also, as early
as 1611, trading settlements had been established at
Masulipatam and Pettapoli. 27 In addition to these posts
established on the Indian peninsula, and the factory at
Ferando, in Japan, 23 the most important islands in the
Indian Ocean had not been overlooked.
In their dealings with the island of Sumatra, notably
at Acheen, the English had to surmount all manner of
difficulties. Some of their factors, especially Oxwicke,
of the “ proud and disdainful carriage,” proved unfit
for their positions, while the opposition of the Dutch
was constant, though, reports one factor, “the more
they sought, the less they prevailed.” 29
From the King of this island, who wished to manifest
his affection for the English nation, came the singular
proposal that King James should grant him one of his
subjects for a wife. More singular still was the fact
that an English gentleman “ of honourable parentage,”
entertained his proposal, and proffered his daughter, “ a
gentlewoman of most excellent parts, very beautiful and
personable.” Fortunately for this English lady, the
fathers of the Church raised strong objections, and
apparently, His Majesty’s consent could not be
worked,” although her own father actually collected
and proved from the Scriptures lawful reasons for the
enterprise.” 3o
26. Calendar of State Papers Colonial for East Indies, Nos.
765 and 770.
27. Court Minutes, No. 47 0.
28. Captain John Saris, in spite of Dutch opposition, had ar-
ranged for permanent trade there in 1611. See Low’s
History of Indian Navy, 1., p. 11.
29. Court Minutes, No. 639.
30. Ibid, Nos. 789 and 812.


At Lan dak, in Borneo, the natives were very anxious
■ - y ' t/
for the English to settle a factory, but this was by no
means easy, owing to the opposition of a savage people
called the Dyaks, whose favourite employment appeared
to have been that of ‘ v lying in the rivers on purpose to
take off the heads, of all they can overcome. 7 ’ On a
V
second attempt, however, the feat was accomplished, not
by love, but by fear of English powder and shot. From
t/ , ox
this island the traders obtained quantities of fine dia-
monds, “ the best in the world ” (records of the sale of
which can be found in the minutes 31 ), and “ bezoars
exceed ing good and gr e at. ’ 9
Large quantities of pepper were exported from Java,
where the English Company had factories in Bantam
and three other towns. The climate, though, appeared
to be unhealthy, and proved a frequent source of com-
plaint. 32
At Macassar, in the Celebes, where, reported one, “ the
Dutch behaved more like cannibals than Christians,” at
least one of the Company's factories had been settled,
and with the kingdoms of Malacca, Cambay a, Pegu,
Siam and Cochin China, the English obtained a certain
amount of trade, although the Dutch, and even the
Portuguese, undersold them whenever possible.
With China we carried on promiscuous trading by
means of junks plying between English factories in
Macassar, Siam, and other settlements, but up to 1616
no direct commercial intercourse was established. 33
As the trade gradually fell from the hands of the effete
and degenerate descendants of the early Portuguese
adventurers, the struggle was restricted to the Dutch
and the English, each eager to obtain possession of this
source of wealth, the true value of which was yearly
becoming more apparent. With the Spice Islands or
Moluccas, the Dutch from the very outset determined to
> t j
31. Ibid, p. 285. One realised £535.
32. Court Minutes of East India Company, Nos. 683 and 765.
33. Ibid, No, 250,
45


prevent the English from holding any communica-
and when they approached and were well re-
ceived, as they invariably were, the Hollanders, with
overwhelming force, compelled them to depart, and
wherever possible, forbade and prevented the angv in-
habitants from trading with them. It is important to
note, by the way, that as the English either lost or
resigned nearly all their early, original trading posts
in the islands of the Indian . Ocean, so they ultimately
gained practically sole possession of the very numerous
settlements along the coasts of the Indian peninsula.
Meanwhile, at home, from 1613-1616, English and
Dutch Commissioners bartered and quarrelled over cer-
tain professedly conciliatory commercial proposals,
which, fortunately for the welfare of the English Com-
pany—a joint stock company since 1612—and, in spite
of the King’s efforts, produced no results. 35
So the conflicts in the East continued unchecked, while
the English Company grew in size and importance,
and consisted in 1617-18 of nearly 1000 proprietors. 3^
Direct and settled trade was opened up with Ispah-
han, Jask and Ormuz, in Persia, during the years
1613 to ko 15, a cor ding to the advice of the Lord Ambas-
sador of Persia/who persuaded the company to trade
there. 3 7
It is of interest, and, indeed, remarkable, to note
.
men the English East India Com-
pany numbered among its servants. Gallant seamen
like the three captains of the fleet —Keeling, Best and
Downiton; sturdy factors and faithful officers like
Kerridge. Roe and Hawkins in India, Cocks in Japan,
and in England Edward Wright, “ the excellent mathe-
34. Ibid, Nos. 754 and 972.
35. Proposed to unite English stock with a Dutch company.
See Court Minutes in State Papers, Colonial for East
Indies, Nos. 955, 999, 1000, 1014.
30, Ibid, Nos. 1021 and 1130. In 1616, cargo of single ship,
the “ New Year’s Gift,” valued over £140,000,
37. Ibid, p. 304 and 487.
46


inatician and engineer, 5 ' and Christopher Lanman, one
of the most perfect and sufficient acountants in Lon-
don. 5588 Men with faults sufficiently glaring and not
famous in history, but who on treacherous waters, in
strange lands, and in the face of bitter opposition,
braved danger; loss and battle in days when the govern-
ment made little pretence of protecting English subjects
beyond the seas. These were the type of men who over-
came barbarism, and “ opened up new scenes for the
civilisation of mankind. 55
The opposition of the Dutch to English enterprise
became each year more openly aggressive, until finally
in 1623, the massacre at Amboy n a sowed the seeds of a
still more bitter animosity between the two races, which
yielded after its kind a harvest of long conflicts for the
ultimate, supremacy of the sea.
Under this pressure, the English Company, as we have
seen, was driven from the Eastern archipelagos, and
gradually turned the greater part of its attention to
the growing factories and settlements which studded the
coasts of India proper.
The “ Honourable East India Company, 55 as this
small joint-stock trading concern later became, was the
authority under, whose rule British domination was
established, and maintained in India down to the time
of the Mutiny, when the Crown assumed direct control.
38. Ibid, p. 306 and Hakluyts Voyages, 11., p. 447.
47


Venetian Reports on Early English
Colonisation.
BY ELAINE MOXON COOK.
Of the fact that the importance of England's colonis-
ing ventures was appreciated to the full throughout
Europe, no stronger evidence than the Venetian
Despatches could be supplied.
In their reports to the Doge and Senate, the ambassa-
dors set down the smallest piece of news concerning
the voyages and plantings, together with any comment
heard in England. It is, indeed, not for new facts told
that the despatches are valuable, but rather for the
very shrewd and unbiassed judgment on all questions of
polity involved —seeing each occurrence, and hearing
each opinion in its proper perspective, appreciating
the point of view of Spain quite as well as that of
England, and, moreover, carefully weighing the effect
each move of these Powers was likely to have upon
European affairs.
The discovery of the North-West passage, even more
than the planting of colonies, was a question of vital
interest to Venice. In 1610 Foscarini wrote that Zuniga
... . O
had come on a special mission from Spain, and among
other things urged the king ... to desist from man-
ning ships for the North-West passage. . . . The North-
West Passage gives them the greatest anxiety, for it
would be a fatal blow, they would lose the trade of those
•/
parts which would be transferred here.” But, he adds.
‘ ■ It is thought Zuniga will receive small satisfaction
on this point.” l
Later, after describing the voyages of Thompson in
search of the Passage, and setting down the plans of the
1. Calendar of State Papers, Venetian, 1607-1610, p. 108.


optimistic London merchants for its use, he writes that
“ men thoroughly versed in the matter, and who are
not interested persons, point out . . . that unless there
are upon the route some narrows which the English
could fortify, and thus block the Passage for foreign
vessels, others may take the same route, which cannot
be kept secret for long, and so all W. Europe on the
Atlantic seaboard will share in the profits. I have
f / t j SO II d your Excellencies a full
account of a matter of such importance, and one which,
as it is believed, may easily alter the aspect of com-
merce.” 2
Few persons and the Venetian Ambassador was not
of their number—doubted that the pa .sage would be
found, and would be of the greatest importance. Spain
apparently thought with the Ambassador, that “ The
new route will, beyond doubt, be a mortal blow to
Spain, 3 and she exerted herself to the utmost, both to
gather clear information about the North-West Pas-
sage, and to endeavour to break up the design.” 4
As late as loot I, when the Virginia Company was
much exercised concerning rumours of a projected
Spanish attack upon the colony, the Ambassador re-
ported : I understand the King will not support the
Comp an \ openly, as he counts more on the profits to be
derived from the new route to the Indies than on that
which will acruq from Virginia.” s
Quite unconsciously, Scar a m ell i , who was Ambassa-
dor early in James* reign, makes out a verv good case
for the English persistence in the face of Spanish oppo-
sition. lor he records that the V enetians, by duties and
prohibitions, had sought to win English trade in the
Levant. Ihe waters of the Mediterranean were every-
where pirate-infested, and from Venetian accounts the
2. Calendar, 1607-1610, p. 228.
3. Calendar, 1613-1615, p. 299.
4. Calendar, 1610-1613, p. 373.
5. Calendar, 1610-1613, p. 647.
49


&
English had a particularly disastrous and costly time.
Not that Venice wasted sympathy upon these English
mariners. Maffio Michiel informed the Doge that “ not a
sailor of that nation but is a pirate.” 6
In addition to losses in the Levant, Correr told his
masters that “ the war in Muscovy has completely ruined
trade in those parts, so that of twelve ships that used
to arrive here from there, only three have arrived, and
t/ y
those with light cargoes. 1,7
The Venetians could certainly appreciate the English
desire to find a new route. Whether they prayed for
their success was another matter.
W ith regard to Virginia, the Ambassadors occasionally
showed positive sympathy, and during the haggling
over the peace treaty in 1603, the plausible answers of
England to Spain's hysterial demands are related with
evident enjoyment. Badoer stated positively that
members of the Privy Council were bribed by Spain, 8
which seems to bear out the story of Nolin, his sue-
fj j
cessor, “ The Dutch say that gold works miracles every-
where, and nowhere greater than in England. This is
a country where only those who are lavish are held in
account.” 9 Be that as it may, Spanish gold held no
magic on this occasion, for although “ The Spanish wish
the king to pledge himself to stop (the navigation to the
Indies), the English say they cannot do more than permit
the Spaniards to punish all they find at it.” 10 When
the Treaty of London was concluded Nolin could report
only that “the India navigation is to be open.” 11
The Spaniards were not slow to avail themselves of
England's permission “to punish all they find at it,”
The peace was ratified on September 30th, 1604. On
December 16th of that year Nolin wrote : “ The Span-
6. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 13.
7. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 380.
8. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 127.
9. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 179.
10. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 166.
11. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 170.
50


ish in the West Indies have captured two English vessels.
They cut off the hands, feet, noses and ears of the crews,
and smeared them with honey, and tied them to trees, to
be tortured by flies and other beasts.” 12 The Earl of
Salisbury “ came to words with the Spanish Ambassa-
dor ” over the matter. When the plans to plant a colony
in Virginia first took definite shape, the Ambassador
kept the Doge and Senate posted with all details of the
proposed expedition, and the progress of the prepara-
tions for it. “ Certain English gentlemen/ 7 he wrote,
propose to fit out a number of ships and to sail for
the discovery of unknown country in the West Indies.
Spain will oppose the scheme, and the council will sup-
port it, and this will furnish fresh cause for friction. 77l3
And a little later, in April, 1606, he reported, The
expedition to the Indies is being slowly fitted out; the
Spanish Ambassador does all he can to hinder the enter-
prise, but it will not be forbidden for all that. In
fact, they show they have no intention to abandon the
West Indian Trade.” l4 So alarmed was Spain at the
news of the expedition that it was reported to Guistinian
that the colonists in the Sp an ish colonies had been forced
by their home government, not only to retreat inland to
the fortified towns, but also to burn their coastal villages
and to destroy their provisions—an order complied
with only with the greatest reluctance. 15
Spain formally protested against English ships molest-
ing trade in the Indies on the pretext of discoveries.
“ They go out at their own risk/ 7 replied King James.
As a matter of fact, 77 commented the Ambassador
Zorango, “ if they go at all, they go armed, and if they
fall in with the Spanish they give battle. 77ls
After the return of the ships in 1607, some of the
general excitement over the favourable reports appears
12. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 199.
13. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 341.
14. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 344.
15. Calendar, 1603-1607, p. 450.
16. Calendar, 1607-1610, p. 184.


to have animated the Ambassador, whose writings con-
cerning the subject are as nearly enthusiastic as one
could expect of a diplomat. He justified his optimistic
opinion by the fact that “ X am told they are supported
by the richest and most powerful gentlemen of the
country. * 17 From this time, constant despatches concern-
ing fresh expeditions make their way to the Doge,
usually supplemented by the text of the Spanish Ambas-
sador’s protest, together with the wily James’ reply :
“ His Majesty pleads that the undertaking is a
private one, and that he cannot interfere.” “ All the
same,” he goes no, ” I hear that not only are many great
personages in the scheme . . . but the Prince has put
some money in it, so that he may, some day, when he
comes to the Crown, have a claim over the colony.” The
7 ♦ t
French, too, are sending six ships to the Indies; it
seems that every nation has its eye on those parts, with
a view to enriching itself and breaking the absolute pos-
session of Spain.” 18 The Spaniards’ lot was not a happy
one! Very often, indeed, they had a legitimate griev-
a nee. Correr recorded that in 1609 the Spaniards found
on an Indies bound ship a cargo of coins of the kind
circulated only in the Spanish Indies. 19 One feels that
Correr had a long and keen political nose, for he was
able to retail many scraps of private policy.
When James finally gave official recognition to Vir-
ginia, the shareholders were not best pleased. Correr’s
version is that ” The King, although lie has frequently
told the Spanish Ambassador that he would take no part
in this business, yet has this time made up his mind to
confer the title of Viceroy on the Commander, and has
given him patents for the distribution of land, subject
to His Majesty’s authority. Those who have embarked
their capital, however, are afraid of a repetition of the
massacre of the French by the Spaniards in Florida, nor
17. Calendar, 1607-1610, p. 27.
18. Calendar, 1607-1610, p. 249.
19. Calendar, 1607-1610, p, 336,
52


are they confident that, if the necessity arose, the King
would show himself openly in their favour.
The Ambassadors were very indignant when “ idle
vagabonds returned from the colony full of abuse and
unfavourable reports about it. Still more annoyed were
they at the credence given to these stories. “ Divers
persons, scornfully states Contarini and Correr,
“ gladly accept all unfavourable rumours against hon-
ourable enterprises. “ Past experience has shown that
fathers rid themselves of sons, masters of troublesome
servants, wives of wicked husbands, all to the damage
of the enterprise. 7 ' 21 Nevertheless, these “vagabonds”
provided a very salutary lesson for the Viriginia Com-
pany, who, in future, took some pains to get hold of the
right stamp of man.
Spain was extremely malcontent. Her puerile coin-
plaints and her alliance with the French had produced
nothing more tangible than alarm in the breasts of the
Virginia Company. _ So in 1612 the Spanish Ambassa-
dor reported to Venice, “ The Council of State has met,
and resolved to send a Commission expressly to Vir-
ginia to take plans, and consult with the Spanish resi-
dent there as to the best way to expel the English, who,
Don Pedro thinks, will offer a stout resistance A 22 The
Commission would annear to have arrived at the same
conclusion, and the Company was not called upon to
use the extra garrison it had collected.
Of English colonies other than Virginia, of which
the Venetian Ambassador seemed to have heard only the
bright side of its early struggles, references are made
here often to the Bermudas, and to Newfoundland. It
is amusing to read that Captain Peter Eston, the
pirate king of Newfoundland, who did such damage
there before John Mason routed him, “ haugtilv re-
Co f /
20. Calendar, 1607-1610, p, 249.
21. Calendar, 1607-1610, p, 428.
2/2. Calendar, 1607-1610, p. 449,
53


fused a pardon, declaring lie would not bow to the views
of one king when he was, in a way, a king as well/’ 23
The English were for a time very anxious lest the
Spaniards should attack the Bermudas, whence they got
“ a considerable quantity of amber, and what is more
important, it is very handy for harassing the Spanish
Flottav” 24
Concerning the relations between the English and the
French, both in Canada and in Florida, the Ambassador
showed himself a shrewd judge when he gave it as his
opinion that the disputes “concerned individuals,”
and that “ all will pass off quietly.” 25
What the Ambassador knew of the attitude of Henry,
Prince of Wales, makes one think of the “ Might-Have-
Been.” “He protected the colony of Virginia, under,
his auspices the ships sailed for the North-West Passage
to the Indies. He had begun to put the Navy in order,
and raised the number of sailors. He was hostile to
Spain.” 26
The very evident admiration of the Venetian for the
t/ ,
young Prince would make it seem that he, too, foreigner
as he was, saw that in Prince Henry’s policy, and not
in that of his father’s, lay the salvation and development
of England.
The men chosen to represent Venice at the Court of
England appear, without exception, to have been an
extremely upright and independent procession of diplo-
mats. They neither censured nor flattered unduly, were
thoroughly conscious of the dignity and importance of
their position; and, above all, their writings ring very
true.
I should imagine it would have been no easy matter
to throw dust in the eyes of any one of them.
23. Calendar, 1610-1613, p. 433.
24. Calendar, 1610-1613, p. 477.
25. Calendar, 1613-1615, p. 307.
26. Calendar, 1610-1613, p. 450.
54


Sir Walter Raleigh and his
Voyage to Guiana.
By MARGARET H. GUEST.
Wonderful tales of a mysterious country, full of gold
and precious stones, where the trees never lose their
leaves, “ 'but have always fruit either ripe or green, and
most of them both blossoms, leaves, ripe fruit and green
at one time, were brought to England during the latter
hall of the 16th 1 century by sailors, who heard these
utoi ies fiom the Spaniards. This land the Spaniards
themselves had not yet found, but by the natives of
South America were told of its wonders and its mar-
vellous city, Manoa—called by the Spaniards El Dorado
—which was built of gold. The Spaniards, who claimed
America for themselves, and had already imposed their
merciless yoke on the natives of the West Indies, deter-
mined that the treasures of this land should be theirs.
Many Spanish expeditions during the former half of
the century set out to search for it, but, after w r eeks of
dreadful sufferings, from hunger, frost and fever, and
in constant danger from the natives, they only succeeded
in lengthening the list of ghastly failures. 2
As time went on, and each attempt proved as unsuc-
cessful as the last, the search was for a long time given
up. But one lasting result was brought about by these
expeditions, and that was the undying hatred felt by
the natives for the Spaniards. This feeling was still
strong when, years afterwards, Antonio de Berreo re-
sumed the search, and continued the tradition of Span-
ish cruelty and deceit towards the Indians. The date
of his expedition is uncertain, but it was probably
undertaken al>o ut theye a r 1582 A D es-cen ding th e
1. Dalton s History of British Guiana, Yol. 1., p. 111.
2. Life of JRaleigh, by Edwards, Yol L, p. 168/
3. Edward’s Life of Raleigh, p. 169.


Orinoco, and experiencing great losses, they failed to
get any news of Guiana for months. A tribe, more
friendly than most, with whom they lived for three
months, gave them some images of gold, and confirmed
the stories about the golden city. But the difficulties
de Berreo experienced were too great, and at last, with
the help of a pilot, he reached Trinidad. From here he
sent out expeditions which served only to deepen the
hatred of the natives. In the name of the King of
Spain lie took possession of the land on April 23rd,
1593.
For many years others besides Spaniards had been
fired with a desire to find this land. Sailors brought
these stories to England's shores, and among those who
listened to them was a young lad of Devon —Walter
Raleigh. He became the pioneer of English colonisation
in the new world. His first attempts at settlement in
America culminated in 1587 in the ill-fated expedition
under John White, which established itself at Roanoke
Island. It was with the object of colonisation as much
as from the desire to share in the fabled riches of
Guiana, that he conceived the project of exploring that
part of America where it was supposed to be.
In order to gain information and prepare the way, he
sent Captain Whiddon to explore the Orinoco and its
tributaries in 1594. 4 Antonio de Berreo was at this
time Governor of Trinidad, and learning of the intended
journey, hampered Whiddon at every turn. Raleigh
sailed from England in February, 1595, with five ships
and small craft for navigating the rivers. s The Lord
High Admiral and Sir Robert Cecil had both contributed
to the enterprise, and, in addition to the crew,
Raleigh took with him one hundred other adventurers.
Reaching Trinidad in March, lie set about making a
chart of the coast and rivers, and obtaining the confi-
4. Edward’s, p. 172.
5. Edward’s, p. 17 3.


deuce of the natives. So successful was he in this that
the fame of his kindness spread far andi wide, with last-
ing results. Raleigh attacked and took the town of
St. Joseph, and de Berreo fell into his hands. Not
suspecting Raleigh’s intention, this man told him of
his own experiences, and gave him certain information
about the country. When de Berreo became aware of
Raleigh s purpose, he tried, as Raleigh tolls us, to dis-
suade him, assuring “the gentlemen of my company
that it would be labour lost; and that they should suffer
many miseries if they proceeded. ”6 He ended his argu-
ments with a veiled threat. He was expecting soon, from
Spain, a large force, which his agent, de Vera, had gone
there to raise. Even this did not daunt Raleigh, who
now embarked his hundred men in the small craft, with
provisions for one month. Leaving his ships at anchor
near Los Gallos, in the Gulf of Paria, he wended his
way through the Bay of Guanipa. As his pilot was a
native, with very scanty knowledge, it was with great
difficulty that they navigated these waters successfully.
If God had not sent nsj help, we might have wandered
*
• in that labyrinth of rivers. . . This
providential accident was the capture of a few Indians,
one of whom proved himself a skilful pilot. But this
did not lessen the miseries of the journey, nor deprive it
of its perils. The vegetation on the banks of the river
Manamo, in which they found themselves, was so dense,
that it made the air stifling, and prevented them from
finding a landing place. They at length entered a narrow
feeder of the river, and, assured by their guide that
a large town stood on its banks, they went on and on,
and though the officers and men took turns at rowing, it
became almost unendurable. They were now a great
distance from their ships, and had been absent twice the
stipulated time. The allowance had to be reduced, the
heat was increasing, and still the river stretched in front
6, Edward’s, p. 179,
57


of them without any sign of habitation. They soon
found themselves unable to make headway against the
current, and to these discouragements was added a new
terror in the sudden and furious rising of the river.
Whosoever had seen and proved the fury of the river
after it began to rise, and had been a month and odd
days, as we were, from hearing aught of our ships, would
perchance have turned back somewhat sooner than we
did, if all the mountains had been gold or rich,, stones. ”
Before retracing their way to the ships they landed and
found promise of minerals, but had no tools except
their daggers with which to dig for them. Raleigh
speaks of the difficulties of looking for gold under such
circumstances, but adds that he could have brought back
a good quantity “ if I had not shot at another mark
than present profit.”
As a search for the golden land of Guiana, this
journey might be considered as great a failure as those
of the Spaniards, but there was one vital difference.
Though he had only explored the branches of the Orinoco
at its delta, Raleigh had established such friendly inter-
course with the natives, that the mere mention of his
name became a passport for subsequent explorers.
Almost two hundred years after Raleigh’s death, travel-
*' 1 s
lers heard oral traditions of his promised return. Their
journey back to the ships was quickly accomplished.
They had added much! to their knowledge of that part
of America, and Raleigh was convinced of its suitability
for colonisation. “ I have never seen a more beautiful
country, nor more lively prospects,” 7 he said, and “ that
for health, good air, pleasure and riches, I am resolved
it cannot be equalled by any region either in the East
or West.”
On his way home he followed the instructions in his
commission by which he was empowered to do Us ser-
vice in offending the King of Spain and his subjects to
7. Dalton’s History of British Guiana, Vol. 1., p. 110.
58


your uttermost power/' by victualling his fleet at the ex-
pense of the Spaniards. He reached England about
August.
By January of the next year —1596 —he had sent out
a hurriedly fitted up expedition, under Captain Keymis,
who was absent for about five months. He found
that Antonia, de Berreo had a strong and well-organised
force to resist any further explorations, and to defend
certain mines, so that he was not able to search for
minerals; but he traversed much new country, exploring
the rivers between the Orinoco and the Amazon.
No national effort was made to follow up Raleigh's
scheme, but he tried to keep the interest in it alive by
sending out ships and by cementing his friendships with
the Indians. An attempt on a larger scale was planned
for 1598, to be made under Sir John Gilbert, “ as it is
said he intendeth to inhabit it with English people"/
but, unfortunately, this, for some unknown reason, fell
through. The services of Raleigh against Spain were
meanwhile required in other spheres.
With the death of Elizabeth, his position was changed.
James never forgave him for having been an enemy of
Essex, and Raleigh took no steps to make peace with
James. In- the year of James' accession—l6o3—Raleigh
was accused of having conspired 9 <( to deprive the King
of his government; to raise up sedition . . .; to alter the
religion." He was also accused of having written a
book against James' title. Raleigh may have brought
suspicion on himself by associating with dissatisfied
spirits, but there is not an atom of proof that he was
guilty of even the wish that James should be deprived of
his throne. The only evidence against him was the unre-
liable confession of Lord Cobh am, but it was judged
sufficient to condemn him. On November 17th, he was
tried —or, rather, called before his judges to hear the
8. Edward’s, p. 199.
9. Howell’s State Trials, Vol. 11., p. 1.
59


judgment they had already decided to give against him.
After a travesty of a trial, in which, in the very words
of one of the judges responsible for it, (< the justice of
England has never been so injured or degraded/ 510 he
was condemned to death. Jamed hesitated for long as to
whether the sentence should be carried out, but finally
decided that Raleigh should remain in prison. The next
twelve years of his life were spent in the Tower. His
estates were despoiled, and given to court favourites.
Many suits were made to the King for his release, among
others by Queen Anne and Prince Henry. The King of
Denmark begged for his freedom that he might take ser-
vice as an Admiral in his own navy, but in vain.
Raleigh relieved the tedium of his imprisonment by
chemical studies, until his liberties in this direction
were abridged. He then undertook a more lasting work
in his “ History of the World/ 5 and his other writings.
He tried to keep alive the interest in the Guiana enter-
prise by continual correspondence about it, and by send-
ing out whenever possible further expeditions. At
length, through bribes to his relations, he managed to
interest Sir George Villiers on his behalf. 11 He had also
urged on Secretary Win wood the hopeful prospects of
gold-mining in Guiana. As a result, an order was
signed for his release on January 30th, 1616, in order
that he might make preparations for the voyage to find
the mine.
Many were eager to join the expedition, but they were
men of the worst type, among whom were some paid
instruments of Spain. The capital of the joint stock
company raised for the purpose was nearly £30,000.
Lady Raleigh sold a valuable estate, and assistance was
sought in the Netherlands. Under the Act of Parliament
for the encouragement of shipbuilding, Raleigh received
£175 from the Crown. Though released, Raleigh was
10. Edward’s, p. 383.
11. Edward’s, p. 562.
60


not formally pardoned. He could have bought a pardon
by paying £7OO to Court favourites, but acted on
Bacon s advice when he decided not to do sod 2 “ Spare
jour purse in this particular,” wrote Bacon, ‘ 1 for upon
my life you have sufficient pardon for all that is past
already, the King having, under his broad seal, made
jou Admiral of your fleet, and given you power of the
rnart ial I a w over you r offi c er s and so 1 d iers. ’ ’
There was one man in England wTio was as keenly
interested in the preparations now being made as was
Raleigh himself the man who for years had controlled
James foreign policy, if not James himself, and was
now determined to put every obstacle in Raleigh's way.
This man was Gondomar, the crafty Spanish Ambassa-
dor, and Raleigh knew exactly what to expect from him.
In spite of all that Gondomar could do, Janies allowed
Raleigh to proceed with his preparations, only insisting
taat he should give him a list of the number of men and
ships, and ai complete plan of the intended voyage, pro-
mising, on the word of a king, to keep it secret. 13 James
immediately handed these papers to Gondomar, who
promptly despatched copies of them to Madrid. “So
active were the Spanish Ministers that advertisement
was sent to Spain and to the Indies before the English
Tfleet got out of the Thames. There was only one thing
more that Gondomar needed to do, and that was to in-
sert in Raleigh’s commission ‘ k That the fleet should coni”
mit no outrages on the King of Spain’s subjects by land
unless they began first.” l * Having done that, Gondomar
could rest, knowing that the question of who might begin
a disturbance did not matter. Let there be trouble be-
tween Raleigh and the Spaniards in South America,
and all would go as he had planned. And he had made
sure that there would be trouble. He had played his
12. Dalton, p. 121,
13. Howell’s, State Trials, p. 32.
14. Ibid, p, 33.
61


part in the drama, and could now stand back and watch
the other actors as it drew to a close.
We would rather draw the veil over the last scenes
of the tragedy, made possible by the treachery of the
one man above all others who should have protected the
lives and interests of Englishmen. But this was merely
the continuation of James" policy as King of England.
In order to get and keep the friendship of Spain, he
allowed England to be dictated to by a Spaniard, and
sacrificed his own subjects at Spain’s command.
From the very outset troubles surrounded Raleigh’s
enterprise. It. was early in July or late in June, 1617,
before he left Plymouth. Adverse weather made it neces-
sary for him to put into Cork, where the delay wasted
his provisions, and gave time for the bad element in
his fleet to spread. But “ the indomitable will was still
in 1617 what it had shown itself in 1582. The physical
strength was fast breaking. The resplendent intellect
had now and then already been overshadowed. But the
firm and patient force of character yet remained unim-
paired. It led him now in 1617 to face with every power
he had the perils of a foredoomed enterprise.’ 5 He
reached the Canaries in September, calling at the island
of Lancerota. Water and provisions were promised
but were delayed, and meanwhile three Englishmen had
been killed as suspected Turkish pirates. Raleigh reso-
lutely curbed the desire of the English for revenge;
but the Governor refused to allow them any water. At
this point Captain John Bailey sailed away with the
stores and munitions and returned to England to spread
a pre-arranged story which caused the charge of piracy
to be made against Raleigh, both in London and
Madrid.
It was essential for him to obtain water, so he sailed
to Go-mera; one of the smaller Canaries. The wife of
the Spanish Governor here was an Englishwoman, and
she sent Raleigh presents of fruit. The discipline ol his
sailors was so good that the Governor offered to send to
62


Gondomar an account of the fine behaviour of the fine-
lish. He must have teen an unusual character for a
Spaniard not to realise how unwelcome such a report
would be to Gondomar. This visit to Gamer a “ was to
prove for a year to come the one pleasant oasis amidst
the dreary memories of a voyage crowded with
calamitv.
*
Sickness spread through the fleet with such disastrous
effect that many officers and men died. Raleigh lost
his own friends and personal attendants. They experi-
enced a great hurricane and the rain fell in such tor-
rents that they were nearly drowned in their cabins.
Raleigh was all this time keenly alive to the spirit of
mutiny in the fleet and to the danger of Gondomar 5 s
intrigues in London. Unfortunately for him, Secretary
Sir Ralph Win wood died suddenly at this time. On
the 11th November they reached Cape Orange and
pushed on to the Orinoco. But Raleigh himself was
now so very ill that he could not undertake the expedi-
tion, so he appointed his nephew, George Raleigh, to
command it. His young son, Walter, with four others,
he put in charge of the land force, and to Capt. Keyrnis
he gave the responsibility of finding the mine. All
had stringent orders that there was to be no conflict
with the Spaniards. On the 11th of December, with one
month’s provisions, and a force of four hundred, they set
out. for twenty-three days they ascended the river,
when the news of their arrival was carried by a fisher-
man to the town of St. Thomas. As they neAred the
town they were fired on by the Spaniards.’ Soon after
nightfall they were attacked in force. The English were
nobly and well led by Walter Raleigh, who fell, in the
moment of apparent victory, at the head of his men.
The English pushed on and drove the Spaniards out of
the town. Keymis then attacked the Spanish camp at
Seiba, but was repulsed, and returned to St. Thomas for
reinforcements. He knew that the mine was within two
or three hours 5 march of Seiba, for on his voyage in
%) O
63


1596 he had assured himself of its existence, and he
knew also that more difficult enterprises had been
carried through in face of greater dangers than Spanish
ambuscades. But the loss of young Raleigh had dis-
heartened his followers, and Keymis gave up the enter-
prise in despair. They carried away much spoil from
St. Thomas, and when some days later Keymis put into
Raleigh’s hand the captured correspondence, including
Raleigh’s own plan of the voyage, “ both must have felt
themselves to have been for doomed when they sailed from
Plymouth.” Kevmis had also to break to him the news
tt/
of the death of his son. For his action in deliberately
giving up the search for the mine Raleigh reproached
him bitterly, but these reproaches only finished what
remorse had almost completed. Keymis went to his
cabin and ended his life.
The smouldering discontent in the fleet now burst into
flame, and several of his captains deserted him because,
in spite of the danger, he determined to return to Eng-
land. The troubles were not yet over, for on the return
voyage storms scattered their remaining ships, which
eventually managed to reach different ports of England
and Ireland. In a royal proclamation Janies described
the English defence at St. Thomas as an horrible in-
vasion of the town of St. Thome,” and a malicious
breaking of the Peace which hath been so happily estab-
lished and so long inviolately continued.” The
Spaniards were assured that f£ His Majestie . . . will
be see severe in punishing them as if thev had done the
like spoyle in any of the cytties of England,”
Raleigh was arrested at Plymouth, and, surrounded
by spies, who tempted him to speak against the King,
was sent to\ London. He managed to delav long enough
at Salisbury to write his ° Apology for the Voyage to
Guiana,” that the world might know the true story.
Plans were made for his escape to France, but were not
carried out; in fact, the attempts of French officials to
64


effect his escape led to strained relations between the
English Government and France.
All that James had now to do was to give an appear-
ance of legality to Raleigh’s condemnation. Gondomar
desired that he should be tried for a breach of the
peace, and so gain from England an acknowledgment
of Spain’s possession of America. 15 James was able to
see through this, and decided that he should be proceeded
against on the old charge of 1603. The accusation
against him, then, was that he had conspired with Spain
to dethrone James, and to alter the religion of England
—-in short, in the words of one of his judges, that he
“had a Spanish heart” —and this charge was now to
be used in order to condemn him for being the enemy
of Spain ! It little mattered what the charge w r as. Gon-
domar was resolved that the last favourite of Eliza-
beth-—the only man of note left alive that had helped to
beat the Spaniards in 1588 —should die. He was offered
by his King as a sacrifice to that nation from whose
clutches he had helped to save his country.
15. Howell’s, State Trials, Vol. 1., p. 33.
65


Question of the Low Countries
1792-1793.
By W. K. HANCOCK (Trinity).
It is a remarkable fact that, in the last throe hundred
years, England has fought her four greatest wars,
either at the close of an old century or the beginning of
a new, and that in each case, the Low Countries have
been not only one of the arenas of conflict, but to a large
extent, its cause. Still more-remarkable is it that states-
men have been so neglectful of history that they have
seldom read the writings stamped there so plainly to
warn and instruct future generations. In these days
especially, no work can be so necessary nor so well
repaid, as a study of the complex and difficult times of
the last French wars. It has been well said that the true
statesman is the historian in practice. Never has the
world had greater need of such statesmen, for never has
there been greater need to apply to the present the
lessons taught by the past.
As we read the letters and speeches leading up to the
war of 1793, we are at once struck by their resemblance
to the documents and oratory with which we are so
familiar to-day. In things of the spirit the France of
those days is very different from the Germany of our
e/ */
own, but as disturbers of European peace the two are
similar —missionary states, propagating their philo-
sophy with theories in one hand and a sword in the
other; ambitious states, also, to whom a treaty is but a
small matter. And, again, we find that England (who
has also much to answer for), when she is face to face
with the crisis for which her own policy is partly to
blame, does not shrink from the task which is before her.
Finally, the immediate causes of the war are the same
in 1914 and 1793 —the question of the Low Countries
and a broken treaty.


Early in 1793, during the debate on the proposed
augmentation of the forces (everyone knew by this time
that war was inevitable), it was said by one member that
we collectively sought pretexts in the Netherlands and
the Scheldt.” 1 An honest examination of the corre-
spondence of the Foreign Minister, Lord Grenville,
proves that this was not the c a se. Engla n d w as deeply
interested in the Low Countries for their own sake.
Thus, on November 19th, 1793, only three days after the
French General Dumouriez had routed the Austrians at
Jemoppes, Grenville wrote to the French Ambassador,
Chauvelin, England will never see with indifference
that France shall make herself either directly or in-
directly sovereign of the Low Countries,” The corre-
spondence preserved in the Dropmore Papers is full of
passages which prove that to English statesmen the
question of the Netherlands was very important. Thus
in February, 1793, after France had declared war on
England, Grenville wrote: 2 “ Men, commanders, ships
and money. We couldn't ask more if this country were
a part of Yorkshire; but 1 incline to think it should
be considered so for the present.” These passages are
sufficient to prove that the business of the Netherlands
was more than a pretext.” Moreover, we must re-
member that on November 23rd, 1792, French gun-boats
had opened the Scheldt. France had in five treaties en-
gaged to keep the river shut to all countries save Hoi-
land. Now since 1788, England had been the ally of
Holland. It was, the ref ore, clear that she had a very
definite casus belli.
It is also evident that Pitt and Grenville were by no
means impatient to come to blows with France. Text-
books often stress their delay, and the fact that it was
f
France, and not England, that declared war. Thus
there was a delay of a month and a-half after the
1. Parliamentary History, Vol. XXX., p. 307.
2. Dropmore Papers, Vol. 11.
67


Scheldt was opened. But it is inconsistent to admit the
provocation, and, at the same time, to praise the tardi-
ness of the Ministry in acting on it. And, as a matter
of fact, the correspondence of Auckland and Grenville
pr oves that England had decided on war, and was only
waiting till the preparations of Holland were more ad-
vanced, and the forces of the Allies nearer the Rhine.
The Ministerial speeches in the Commons and the
Lords clearly set forth the policy of England, laying
great stress on the question of the Low Countries. Pitt
opened the question early in his speech. “ I wish the
House to attend to the practical effect of the French
system in the question of the Netherlands/’ He denied
that the Belgians wished for French freedom. “ A
hollow square of French troops was drawn round the tree
of liberty at Brussels, to prevent the natives from pull-
ing down the emblem! of French freedom/’ 3 Passing to
the question of the Scheldt, “ lie denied the right of
France to interfere at all, unless she was the sovereign
of the Low Countries, or boldly professed to be the gene-
ral arbiter of Europe.” In face of this last argument it
was futile to contend, as Mr. White!)read did, “ France
had declared her intention not to add the Low Countries
to her own territories, but to suffer the Belgians to
erect themselves into an independent sovereignty.” 4
Moreover, as Grenville pointed out in the Lords, ‘‘ The
French said they would retain possession . . . until the
consolidation of the liberties of the country. And who
was to be the judge of that consolidation? The French
themselves/ ’ 5 Still stronger was the Government’s
position with regard to the Scheldt. They were bound
by the faith of a solemn and recent treaty to secure to
•. # /
the Dutch the exclusive navigation of the Scheldt. . . .
France can have no right to annul the stipulations rela-
3. Pitt’s Speeches, Vol. 1., p. 308.
4. Parliamentary History, XXX., p. 298.
5. Parliamentary History, XXX., p. 314.
68


five to the Scheldt, unless she has the right to set aside
equally all the other treaties between all the Powers of
Europe. 7 76
A ow, every one of these assertions is true in every
particular. They seem to completely justify the action
of the Government, No- sane person would deny that
England had a complete casus belli. And yet we find
such a great man as Fox refusing to idenitfy himself
with the conduct of the Government. Factious and dis-
loyal, many of the Ministerialists called him. Even a
historian of the standing of Holland Rose blames him
for setting party and prejudice above patriotism. Text
books have been kinder to Pitt than to his rival. The
attitude of Pitt is well known, and we have done justice
to his policy with regard to the war, and the Low Coun-
tries. Let us now see if something cannot be said for
the attitude of Fox.
First of all, we find by examining Fox’s speeches that
he made no attempt to justify the French action with
regard to the Scheldt. He admitted that the invasion
of Belgium ought to alarm us, if the result was to make
that country an appenage of France. 77 7 “He was as
little disposed to defend their operations in Belgium, as
the right honourable gentleman. 778 Now, Fox made this
so clear in his speeches that only calumny could assert
that he held a brief for France, no matter what her
actions were. It is a pity that historians have to a
large extent repeated the charges of his slanderers.
Where, then, was Fox at variance with Ministers? He
had seen that the French had broken a treaty. He saw
their armies overrunning the Low Counties. Why
could he not throw in his lot with the Government 1
Simply because he refused to judge its action on its
surface value. He saw —and events! prove that he was
ri^ht—“that, if England became involved in a war with
6. Pitt's Speeches, Vol. 1., p. 408.
7. Parliamentary History, XXX., p. 306.
8. Ibid, p. 270.
69


France, she would be fighting with the crowned heads
of Europe to overthrow those ideas that terrified them,
to restore the Bourbons, to crush the Revolution. France
might be aggressive, but which side had begun the
aggression ? What about the Declaration of Pulnity ?
Was England to save Austria from the reward of her
own arrogance? Was it even fair to blame France for
the horrors of August and September? Surely the
people had had provocation, and what right had Eng-
land to interfere with their concerns? Moveover, the
worst outrages of the Revolution could not exceed those
threatened in Brunswick's manifesto. Englishmen had
never given the French a fair hearing. The Avar on the
Continent was a struggle between progress and interest.
True, England had provocation. There was the affair
of the Scheldt. There Avas the Decree of November 11.
Normally there would be adequate reasons for Avar. But
the times Avere not normal. Let England be patient!
Let her try conciliation, and make a definite statement
of her aims. It might be possible to stave off Avar.
Certainly it Avas desirable to do so. For to go to Avar
would mean a minor right and a major wrong. Not for
one moment, Fox maintained, Avere the decree of
November 11, and the policy in the Loav Countries jus-
tifiable. But they Avere not the main issues. On the
one side Avas a glorious gospel of freedom; on the other
side was despotism. England had provocation for mak-
ing Avar; but to do so Avas to aid the baser cause.
Fox Avas all the more vehement in his criticism be-
cause he believed that the Government Avas well aAvare
of what its action involved. In truth, moderate re-
formers like Pitt —their correspondence and speeches
prove it —had been so frightened by the Revolution, as to
be driven into the arms of the reactionaries. From the
first they had been on the side of absolutism. Tliev had
never been truly neutral. “We perceived no danger
from the success of despotism,” Fox complained, but
the moment the opposite cause was successful our fears
70


were extreme.'’ 9 The Allies had over rim a great part of
t ranee, and England had done nothing. Burke, now
sitting on the Treasury Bench, had rejoiced that France
would prove to the world by her weakness the folly of
revolution. But, to the surprise of the world, the
invaders were turned back at Valmy. The French chased
f..-
the enemy across their borders. At once “it was said
that we must withdraw their troops from the Austrian
Netherlands.” lo This was not impartial neutrality.
“ Were we then com© to such a pitch of intolerance,”
asked Fox, “ as to say, ( France, you have conquered
part of an enemy’s territory that mad© war upon you ;
we will not interfere to make peace, but we require vou
# 1 x
to give back the advantage you have maintained, while
he is preparing to attack you anew.’ ” France could
hardly be expected to hold her hand, to remain quite
passive, unless she were given some compensation for the
last attack, and some guarantee that there would be no
—•- m
new one. England could not go to war, Fox asserted,
without playing into the hands of the enemies of free-
dom. Granted, there was provocation enough in the
Low Countries; but what about the events leading up to
that provocation? Moreover, it was impossible to fight
the cause of the Scheldt without fighting the cause of
Vienna and Berlin. Events proved that Fox was right.
What especially jarred on Fox was the fact that
Ministers refused to admit what he was well aware they
realised. On the questions under discussion he agreed
with them, but to him they were of minor importance.
Moreover, he saw that even in these matters the Govern-
ment was not completely sincere. England affected the
role of the chivalrous nation coming to the rescue of
o
poor Holland. But it was the English interest, not the
Dutch, that the Ministry had in view. As Fox pointed
out : ‘ £ The Dutch had not called us to observe the
treaty” ll : and if he could have seen the despatches of
9. Ibid, p. 304.
10. Ibid, p. 306.
71


Auckland, lie would have known that our diplomacy was
directed to the rather difficult task of forcing the Dutch
to act Moreover, “to force the Dutch into war was not
to fulfil, but to abuse, that alliance. ll It was England,
and not Holland, that was anxious about the situation.
“We are awkwardly situated about the Scheldt,” re-
ported Auckland, “till we hear something official from
the Dutch Republic.” l2 His letters show how diligently
he was trying to hurry on their high mightinesses, the
States General.
Again, there was a good deal said about the upset of
the balance of power, and the rights of small nations. If
England really cared for these things, why had she not
acted before? Where would the Balance of Power have
been if France had not recovered herself at Yalmy? Was
not the outraging of Poland “ a greater and more con-
temptuous violation of the law of nations,” than the
opening of the Scheldt?
Thus Fox remorselessly probed to the bottom of Minis-
terial motives, and showed that the question of the
Netherlands, and an unselfish chivalry, were not the real
causes of the war. Ample provocation there was in the
Low Countries, doubtless—and French progress might
well be a menace to- Britain. But underneath there was
th is fundamental hostility to French principles, this
fundamental bias —perhaps unconscious—for the cause
of the Allied monarchs.
But had Fox any definite policy of his own ? His
opponents, including many historians, have asserted
that his policy was peace at any price. It was not.
First of all, as his speeches prove, lie would have taken
the bold course of recognising the revolution. He would
not have treated Chauvelin with Grenville's cold hauteur.
He would not have maintained the Government's par-
ticular brand of neutrality —a benevolent one to the
11. Ibid, p. 305.
12. Dropmore Papers, Yol. 11.


Austrians and Prussians. And who can estimate the
force of a protest coming from a Government of which
Fox was the head? The crisis of 92 might never have
arisen. But what would have been his course of action
after December 23 ? Even then Fox saw hope of peace.
He begged the Government to make a definite statement
of its aims, and a definite claim of satisfaction, before
resorting to arms. “We say that evacuation at the end
V—'
of the war is not enough, nor is it. But we do not say
what is enough. That war i which does not
the enemy the amount of atone .’ *l3 Fox wished for
definiteness. Maybe the war could not be staved oft; but
at any rate, the English would know what they were
fighting for, and could refuse to be entangled in the aims
of the Allies.
It could not be expected that the Ministry would make
any concession to Fox. Their fundamental convictions
were entirely different from his. He believed in the
Revolution, despite its faults. They hated it and feared
it. Thus they had no intention of wasting time in
sincere negotiation. The French were their natural foes,
and, as Buckingham wrote to Grenville, it was best to
come to issue with them on the question of the Low
Countries. We cannot do it more wisely than by choos-
ing for the ground of the quarrel, one so essential to
us.
We must remember that the bulk of the nation was be-
hind the Government. England went into the war with
a clean conscience. She would have been false to her-
self if she had stayed aloof. To the people the war- was
another crusade against worse than infidels —the devils
that had drenched Paris in blood. England w r as fighting
for truth and justice.
But so were the French. That is the trouble with all
wars. They are not so much a conflict of right and
13. Parliamentary History, Vol. XXX.
14. Dropmore Papers, Vol. 11.
73


wrong, as a conflict of two rights—at any rate, as far as
the masses of the people go. A few men may be pur-
suing selfish or foolish aims, but to the majority, every-
thing is glorious, and noble. Here were the French,
chastising the tyrants who had attacked them, bringing
a new gospel of freedom to the down-trodden, fighting
for nothing that was not fine. As for the little matter of
a treaty —were they bound to keep the promise made by
their old tyrants, especia Uy when these promises went
contrary to material interest and the first principles of
justice? The English on the other hand, in their quiet
way, were equally certain of the purity of their aims.
The immediate cause of the war, which to the French
was nothing, was to the English everything. “If this
House, said Pitt, 'means substantial good faith to its
engagements, if it retains a just sense of the solemnity
of treaties, it must show a determination to support
them.” W e could not wish for a nobler, more restrained,
or more dignified utterance —and yet it enrolled England
among the champions of an old and rotten system.
France, as Fox had admitted, had been guilty of the
“tyranny of giving liberty by compulsion, 7 '; now
Britain’s interests in the Low Countries were impelling
her to become party to a combination that was seeking
to* force its ideas on the French people, and Britain was
honest. “ This country, 77 said Pitt, “ has always been
desirous of peace. We desire it still, but such as may
A
be real and solid, and consistent with the interest and
dignity of Britain, and with the general security of
Europe. 77 Could he have foreseen that the coalition of
armed forces against France was to strengthen her
martial spirit, and throw her revolutionary fervour into
close partnership with the most powerful of military
despotisms? That England would lead the world
through years of strife to a greater tyranny —that of the
Holy Alliance? .
t/
Pitt carried the House with him by an overwhelming
majority; and the small body that remained faithful to
74


Fox endured the abuse and misunderstanding of the
dominant party. But Fox has since won the apprecia-
tion and gratitude which in his own day were largely
denied him.
75


Georges' Cadoudal and the
Chouans.
By MARGARET McKAY.
The first period of the war in La Vendee ended in 1793
with the execution of the Prince de Talmont, and a little
humanity might have prevented further bloodshed. After
Gholet (October 1793), Mans and Savenay (December),
the country would have welcomed peace. A republican
soldier describes thus the war-weary land: "I did not
1/
see a single male being at the tow r ns of St. Amand, Ghat-
on nay, or Herbiers. A feAv women alone had escaped the
republican sword. . . . Habitations of every sort had
been reduced to ashes. . . . Wolves and other wild
animals . . . had been attracted from afar to the scene
of slaughter.lt had indeed seen enough of war.
From Gholet ran away Deputy Jean Baptiste Carrier,
a coward, yet a man who was to do much to keep alive
the horror of Avar in the pleasant land of Brittany,
whose clear streams Avere doomed to mirror scenes of
bloodshed and misery, though more fitted for pictures of
happy, healthy life in the picturesque farms studding
the Avooded slopes.
Carrier’s excesses in Nantes, and Thurreau's elseAA T here,
led to the flight of hundreds of Vendeans, Avhom the
peasants of Britanny sheltered. The severities of the
Republicans on those Avho succoured fugitive Vendeans
led to the terrible Ghouan Avar. A brief account of his
cruelties Avill not be amiss, for they largely caused the
Breton peasants’ hatred of the Republic, and their devo-
tion to its foes, the Bourbons.
Carrier Avas elected to the Convention as member for
Cantab in 1792 ; the next year he was sent to Normandv,
y «/ «-■ J
1. Alison, History of Europe, 111., 475-6.


and thence to Brittany, to purge the body politic/’ of
the Vendean evil. 2 He declared h© “ would make a
graveyard of France, rather than not succeed, Fran
castet, Carrier's fellow official, for some reason, went
to Augers, and left Carrier supreme —and blood-thirsty ;
he had come to kill. His instruments in the terrible
days to come were (I) his Revolutionary Committee; (2)
the Marat Company, a band of ruffians formed to make
domiciliary visits, (3) the Revolutionary Tribunal, (4)
the Lenoir or Military Commission, (5) the Bignon Com-
mission ; and (6) his “Staff,” comprising Lamberty,
Fouquet, Lavaux, Robin, Laboulet, and O'Sullivan, all
notorious for their deeds during Carrier's sojourn in
Nantes.
On October 20th, 1793, Carrier took up his residence
at Nantes; on November 16th, the first of a series of
“noyadas took place; Carrier described it to the Com-
mittee of Public Safety as “ an. incident of a novel
i
kind. 11 Alas lit was not long novel. Deciding that 90
captive priests at the monastery of the Little Capucius
were “ useless mouths, he ordered them aboard a vessel
on the Loire and handed the matter over to Lamberty.
The fiendish Lamberty understood his chief ; on the night
of I.6th November the priests were bound and placed in
a coffin-like “ gabare ” ; this, with its living freight,
was towed to just above Chevire Island, where the Loire
is 1700 feet wide, and sunk, by removal of plugs, pre-
pared for the purpose. Lamberty was given the galliot
“La Gloire 99 as a reward, and the “ brigande got the
priests' clothes. One priest escaped—the Abbe Julien
Landean of St. Lypshard; after a fugitive life he died
in the swamps near his old parish on 24th June, 1799;
his death was due to the hardships and exposure he en-
dured.
“ Noyades ?? followed each other, hard and. fast. The
construction of gabares became quite an art. One, Affile,
2. Lenotre, “ Tragic Episodes of the French Revolution In
Brittany.”


made the vessels for the second noyade on December 9th,
superintended by Richard, adjutant of the Marats; they
were made with movable planks in the bottom. On
December 9th fifty-three priests perished; live days later
129 unfortunates, men, women and children, were taken
to La Fosse; and there, before their very eyes, prepara-
tions were made for the “ novade of the 129 terrified
victims only two escaped, Leroi and Garmei, who gave
evidence later at Carrier’s trial. The horrors they re-
fj
lated are too terrible to repeat.
During the rule of this “ Destroying Angel,' 7 as
Carrier was called, the peasants were afraid to bring
their wares into the city for sale, so famine was added
«/
to the sufferings of the Nan ton’s. Carrier’s remedy was
to shoot and drown, so that there would be fewer mouths
to feed. In addition, pestilence being over the city, for
few bodies were buried after the shootings, the prison
conditions were such that of thirty-two guards at the
Entrepot nineteen died in a few days
The total number of novades was between twenty-three
and thirty; estimates of the number of victims vary
between 2800 and 9000. Carrier could not feed the
prisoners—mostly survivors of the Yen dean exodus after
Cholet —and he was afraid to release them; so he mur-
dered them, one and all. Sometimes when being led
to the river, mothers would give their babes to compas-
sionate people in the crowd, wdio looked after these ill-
starred little ones; so, many children grew up not know-
ing even what their names were. The great pool below
the Prairie au Due was the scene of so many noyades
that it became known as the “ National Bathing Place. ’ 7
So many people were drowned in the river that the water
became unfit for use, and in Pluviove of the year 2
an edict was issued forbidding citizens to draw water
there. y|
On February 13th, 1794, Carrier got his recall from
Nantes, where he had lived in sodden brutality, gloating
78


over the horrors which his subordinates carried out by
his directions. He was recalled by the instrumentality
of Marc Antoine Jullien, who reported some of his doings
to Robespierre. Yet the Convention did not seem to
have any ill-intents on Carrier, and on March 2nd he
resumed his seat with the “ Mountain 77 party. After
the fall of Robespierre (July) came retribution, and
after a lengthy trial this fiend in human form died on
the scaffold in November, 1794.
As mentioned above, the Breton peasants sheltered
the fugitives who sought to escape from the almost
incredible cruelties afflicted on Vendeans by Carrier
and his willing subordinates. The pitiless persecution
the peasants endured in consequence was the cause of the
terrible Chouan War, under the valiant leaders, Cha-
-7
rette Stofflet, Tintemiai, Puisave, Bourmont, Cadoudal,
Thurreau’s twelve “ infernal columns, 77 ranged the
country, robbing, murdering, burning; the result was
that the Chouan bands were swelled by despairing and
homeless multitudes. Soon in a space of 1200 square
leagues, 30,000 men were in arms, carrying on a guerilla
warfare in bands of 2,000 or 3000.
Charette’s successes were astonishing. Against this
enduring, cheerful, resourceful chieftain, General
Hako —Thurreau’s subordinate —fought in vain. Thur-
reau had established sixteen entrenched camps round the
insurgent district. In 1794 40,000 men under Cha rette
stormed three of these camps, and put the garrisons to
the sword.
Lacking fortresses, cavalry, artillery, stores, maga-
zines, money, these undisciplined and inexperienced
bands vet endangered the Revolution more than all the
V —/■
grab armies of Europe ; often they would destroy 10,000
to 15,000 of their foes in a single battle. But mere
valour cannot contend indefinitely against a regular
Government, for everything in war depends on organi-
sation.
79


The outlaw Puisaye was the soul of the insurrection.
Early in 1794 he urged the British Government to land
10,000 men, arms and ammunition for a great effort to
restore the Bourbons. By the end of that year —accord-
ing to Carnot —there were 80,000 Republican soldiers in
the Western provinces actively at war with these irre-
pressible Royalists; bands of whom actually appeared
between the Loire and the Seine, striking terror into
the heart of Paris. With a prince of the royal blood
to lead them, or with 15,000 English regulars to help
them, perhaps —who knows? —little Louis XVII. might
have been crownd King, instead of dying a prisoner in
the Temple.
After the fall of Robespierre, and the execution of
Carrier, at Carnot s suggestion, a proclamation was
issued couched in terms of reconciliation and amity; the
result was the treaty of la Jaulnais, January 18th,
1795, which gave peace to the tortured land for a time at
least. The terms promised the Bretons religious free-
dom, indemnities, exemption from taxes, and other
advantages in return for their submission to the laws of
the Republic. It is uncertain if Charette’s assertion —
that the Convention bound itself to restore the monarchy
later on —is trustworthy.
This temporary peace preceded a long-delayed British
raid on the French coast, including 6000 emigres, the
instigators of the move, an artillery regiment from
Toulon, eighty cannon, and equipage for 80,000 men.
Puisaye and the Comte de Sombreiul each commanded a
corps in this Quiberon expedition; a third was to follow 7
as soon as a footing was secured in France. The Comte
d’Artois was in supreme command; help was expected
from the Chouans and Vendeans. It w 7 as too late —why
did they not come before la Jaulnais?
On 27th June the expedition landed at Quiberon
Bay, after a running sea fight, in which the English
Cornwallis put the French fleet to flight. Though 10.000
Chouans hastened to Quiberon Bay and received arms


and equipment, dissensions among the leaders and
vigorous measures taken by the Republican General
Hoche, led to a dismal ending for the invaders. Hedged
into a narrow promontory, with few supplies, Puisaye
and Sombre!ul made a desperate effort to break free —in
vain. General Hoche then attacked, and Puisaye
escaped with important and incriminating documents,
while Sombreuil made a last valiant stand on the beach.
At last he surrendered, on promise that the lives of his
brave men should be spared. Despite this promise the
711 prisoners perished, by order of the Convention, in a
field near Auray, termed the Field of Martyrs. By 1796
Hoche subdued the few Chouans still undaunted bv the
Quiberon failure, and once more there was a lull.
Unfortunately, Hoche's successes did not end the
Clio nan war. The cruel and unnecessary persecutions of
priests by Director La Revelliere Lepaux led to a new
revolt in March, 1799. Cholet, Mortagne, Herbiers and
Mans in that year saw Yen dean and Chou an victories,
and Godet de Chatillon entered Nantes in. triumph.
Napoleon set to work after the coup-d'etat de Brumi-
aire to bring about permanent peace, and, as Alison says,
his “complete and rapid pacification of this distracted
province shows how much the long duration of its
bloody and disastrous war had been owing to the cruelty
and oppression of the Republican authorities. 8
Throughout the war Georges Cadoudal, commonly
called “ Georges,” showed himself an inveterate foe of
the Republic. When peace was made in February, 1801,
Napoleon offered him the rank of Lieut.-General in one
of his armies if he would foreswear the Royalist cause.
But Georges proudly replied, “I have taken an oath of
fidelity to the House of Bourbon, which I will never
violate.' H He resisted an offer of 100,000 francs to be
3. Ibid, V. 301, note.
4. Ibid, V. 279.
81


paid for mere passivity; learning an order had been
issued for his arrest, that same day he set out for
Boulogne, and reached England safely. Napoleon,
speaking of him later, said : His mind was cast in the
true mould; in my hands he would have done great
things. I knew how to appreciate his firmness of
character; I would have given it a good direction.”
From the early months of 1801 Georges was in London,
living in opulence ;’ and he was constantly plotting to
restore the Bourbons. His associates were Pichesrru. the
exiled Republican General and former conqueror of
Holland; the Comte d ? Artois, and his second son, the
Due de Berry.
At this same time there was discontent in the Republi-
can army, headed by General Moreau, who was jealous
of Napoleon's rise to power, and held at Grosbois a
regular court of malcontents.
Thiers 0 sums up cogently the reasoning of the con-
spirators in London, which led them to think the time
ripe tor a new rebelion. To Royalists the First Consul's
power was illegitimate; to revolutionists tyrannical; his
claims to support therefore were the maintenance of (a)
peace, and (b) order; the first went with the rupture of
the peace of Amiens in May, 1803, the second was endan-
gered by war; let Royalists, Jacobins and military mal-
contents unite, and the usurper Buonoparte was as good
as overthrown. It was very plausible; but Louis XVIII.,
Alison and Thiers, from V arsaw, prudently refused to
join the conspirators; his good-natured and imprudent
brother, Comte d'Artois, did join. Funds were obtained
from the British Cabinet, and communications estab-
lished with Hammond, Under-Secretary of State, and
English agents abroad.
The question now was how to get the support of
Moreau and his fellows. Alison says Fouehe, ex-Minis-
5. Thiers, IV., 269, “ Consulate and Empire.”
0. Ibid, p. 269-70.
82


ter of Police thought of Moreau’s uniting with Piche-
gru’s party, and worked for that end; Thiers simply
states that Pichegru, escaped from Sinnamari, was re-
garded by the conspirators as the best mediator to
Moreau, whose support they wished to obtain. But
Fouche certainly had some inkling of what was on foot,
even if his agent did not first suggest to the conspira-
tors that Pichegru might probably mediate between
them and Moreau. In 1803 he employed Abbe David,
and on his arrest, General Lajolais, to report) from Lon-
don all relevant details, and to arrange for Pichegru's
departure for Paris. Fouche meant, when time was
ripe, to disclose the plot, and thus win back Napoleon's
favour and his lost position as Minister of Police.
Things went well for Fouche.
Alison declares that no attempt on the First Consul’s
life was intended, and supports his statement by ask-
ing would Napoleon again offer to take Georges into his
service—as he did in 1804 —if Georges had plotted to
assasinate him? Yet Thiers gives details of such a plot;
Georges and 100 resolute men were to waylay Napoleon
on his way to St. Cloud or Malmaison and kill him and
his guard in a “quasi” battle, thus, sophistry told
them., winning back the throne of France for the Bour-
bons by deed of arms. Though Thiers' evidence is cir-
cumstantial, one is tempted to side with Alison, and
believe the sturdy and loyal Georges never thought of
such a base act as assassination. Yet if ye do believe
this, what was the plot ? How could they be rid of
Napoleon without killing him?
Georges preceded the princes to Paris to get together
a band of Chouans. Captain Wright landed him 4n a
smugglers’ cave at Biville in August, 1803, He reached
Paris by a secret route away from frequented roads.
During his stay in Paris, while he was finding it truly
difficult to collect a strong band of Chouans, and also
learning the measure of Napoleon's popularity, Piche-
gru was communicating with Moreau, petitioning him
83


to use his influence to get himself, the conqueror of
Holland, recalled to his beloved France. Moreau, says
Thiers, sent Lajolais to London to Piohegru to arrange
for his return. Lajolais, we must remember, was almost
certainly in the pay of Fouche; this fact accounts for
his glowing but ill-founded stories of Moreau’s readiness
to join the conspiracy and the state of France being ripe
for such an effort as they planned. On his report it was
determined Pichegru should proceed to Paris with M.
de Riviere and one of the Polignacs, and when de
Riviere gave the word the Comte d’Artois and the Due
de Berry should follow. In January, 1804, Pichegru
landed at Biville, and climbed the rope which connected
the hidden cave with the cliff top.
Pichegru’s first interview with Moreau on the Boule-
vard Madeleine was inopportunely interrupted by
Georges. At a second interview at Moreau’s home, the
republican Moreau absolutely refused to consider a
Bourbon restoration. The conspirators were in despair,
and prepared to leave Paris; the French nation were
staunch to Napoleon, and his policy of leaving the
Revolutionary land settlement as it was; the Chou an s
and Yen deans were content , or at least too weary of war
to join another revolt; moreover Napoleon had insti-
tuted searching enquiries concerning a suspected plot—
Fouche had warned him “ the air was full of poig-
nards. ’
On Fond ie proving to Napoleon that Pichegru was in
Paris, while the Minister of Police, Regnier, said he
was in London, Fouche was given charge of the matter.
Within a short time forty-five suspects were arrested.
From the cravens in the first batch of prisoners the
authorities learnt that Georges was in Paris, and heard
of the existence of the secret landing place at Biville.
Lozier, one of the prisoners, and Georges’ principal
lieutenant, tried to hang himself, and in a subsequent
fit of delirium said Moreau had sent a messenger to
Pichegru offering to head a movement to reinstate the
84


Bourbons; but that, when the* conspirators arrived from
England, he withdrew. (We can infer from this that
Lajolais must have drawn somewhat on his imagination
as to Moreau's attitude.)
After a secret council on, the night of 14th-loth Feb-
ruary, between the three consuls and Fouche, an order
was issued for Moreau’s arrest, and also for Lajol ais.
Moreau was arrested on 15th February, and confined
V 7 *
to the Temple, pending trial without jury in the
department of the Seine.
Picot, Georges’ servant, and Lozier made further
depositions declaring Polignac and de Riviere to be in
France, and as the Due de Berry expected Napoleon was
enraged, and swore to “ shoot the very first of these
princes who should fall into his hands.” Colonel
Savary watched in vain at Biville for the Due de
Berry, so Napoleon resolved to strike elsewhere. He
pretended to believe the youthful Due d’Enghein was
living near the French frontier, preparatory to an
invasion of France by the bridge of Strasbourg. A
double plot! He must act! The result was the seizure,
carrying off, mock trial, and summary execution of the
young prince.
Napoleon did <c show the Bourbon they were not
inviolate,” and his drastic action did put an end to
emigre plots ; but he committed an inexcusable crime.
His declaration that he believed France was about to be
invaded from two sides at once has deceived the most
ardent of his admirers —M. Thiers is one —for whom
(i Napoleon’s word is as impecable as his tactics.” No
unprejudiced observer could do aught but condemn this
unscrupulous political murder.
But this is anticipating events a little. The Due
d’Enghein died on March 20th. On February 28th
Pichegru was arrested, betrayed by the infamous
Leblanc for 100,000 crowns. Georges could not escape
from Paris, which was blockaded to keep him there; at
last, on March 9th, he was arrested in a cabriolet after
85


a fierce resistance, in which he killed a man and
wounded another. He deposed, quite frankly, that he
had come to Paris to attack the First Consul ... by
force . . . and to place a Bourbon in the room of the
First Consul.”
Pichegru underwent ten examinations, calm and
resolute. He would sign nothing, but promised to speak
out at his trial, and show “ the Machiavellian devices bv
0
which they had been trapped into the conspiracy, and
how, when their eyes were opened all they wanted was
to leave Paris, when the police trapped them. The day
after his emphasising this intention (April 6th) he was
found strangled in his cell. It seems probable that
Fouche feared the disclosures he promised, and employed
some wretch in the Temple to murder him.
On May 28th, the trial of Moreau, Georges, etc., com-
menced. Beforehand Georges had made a sad speech to
his comrades, but he finished on a note of noble resolu-
tion, bidding them to “ take the sublime example of
Louis XVI. as their model and guide.”
There was tremendous public interest in the trial,
Moreau was finally convicted on a trumpery charge of
having remotely aided the conspirators. The judges
dared not pass capital sentence as Napoleon wished (his
idea was then to overwhelm his rival with a pardon),
for “ the influence of Moreau in fetters almost equalled
that of the First Consul on the throne. ” Moreau and
three others were condemned to two years’ imprison-
ment, while Georges, Lozier, de Riviere, Lajolais,
Armand de Polignac, and thirteen others were con-
demned to death. Napoleon showed clemency after the
convictions, and Lajolais, Lozier, de Riviere, Armand
de Polignac and four others were allowed to live. The
rest, on 25th June, died on the Place de Greve. Napo-
leon offered Georges his life, but he refused to desert
his companions, and insisted on dying first that they
might know of a surety that he w r as faithful to death.
Georges was a fin© man, and everyone must pay tri-
86


but© to his character, even as Napoleon did, just before
his execution. “ There is one man among the con-
spirators I regret; that is Georges. . . . [He] refused
everything; he is a bar of iron. What can I now do?
He must undergo his fate, for such a man is dangerous
in a party; it is a necessity of my situation. r ’
This “conspiracy of Georges, as it is called, ended
a series of plots against Napoleon; he was now secure.
The Royalists would not stir again after the death of
the Due d’Enghein; and Napoleon’s treatment of
Moreau put wholesome fear into extreme Republicans.
True, Napoleon was! lenient to Moreau after his convic-
tion, and facilitated his departure for America; but the
fact that the First Consul did not hesitate to arrest the
second man in the State and try him with a herd of
Chou an conspirators taught a lesson not easily for-
gotten.
And for the Chouans-—secure on their farms, the
peasants) were grateful to the man who gave them peace
at home, and relief from the awful years of strife and
persecution. Even in Brittany, the bitter memories of
Carrier and Thurreau gradually faded, and normal,
prosperous days came again.


Commissioner Bigge's Report on
New South Wales, 1822.
By K. A. McKENZIE (Ormond).
The story of convict ism forms, a strange page in the
history of Australia, but is surrounded with peculiar
interest; partly because the colony into the conduct and
structure of which Mr. Commissioner Bigge enquired
so exhaustively was so unlike any society of to-day, and
with so few parallels in history; and partly because it is
the first page in a volume, now growing large, whose
title page was inscribed by Dampier and Cook.
The long rule of Lachlan Macquarie, who has been
characterised as “ the last of the tyrants, ” represents a.
kind of intermediate stage between the untempered
autocracy of Philip and Hunter, and the authority of
Brisbane, limited by a Legislative Assembly. The Bligh
mutiny had shown that there was another unruly
element in the colony besides the convicts —namely, the
N.S.W. Corps, Although th is turbulent corps was dis-
banded and replaced by Macquarie’s own regiment, its
members remained, many of them becoming opulent
colonists, notably John Macarthur. As the number of
free colonists increased it became necessary to alter the
nature of the Government. Macquarie’s insistence on
treating the colony as a purely military occupation, the
convicts being its sole raison d’etre, was bound up with
his neglect of free settlers, and with the emancipist
policy which forms the central interest of his adminis-
tration.
Macquarie was a man always intolerant of any
attempts to place limitations on his virtual dictator-
ship. One can imagine that his self-sufficiency would
not be flattered by the contents of a letter dated
January 30th, 1819, which he received from Earl


Bathurst. In this letter the Governor was informed
that the Prince Regent had issued a commission to John
Thomas Bigge, a London barrister, to inquire into the
judicial system, education, religious instruction, price
of commodities, distillation of spirits, revenue, and
the emanc i p i s t p r obi em, in the State of New South
Wales. Macquarie was instructed to create Bigge a
magistrate, with power to take evidence on oath, and to
have free access to all official documents. He was to
accept all Bigge’s recommendations:. The extent of the
Commissioner's powers is indicated in Bathurst’s con-
cluding words to the Governor : “ Should, however, anv
case occur, in which you may deem it advisable to take
upon yourself the heavy responsibility of declining to
adopt his suggestions, you will communicate to me with-
out delay the reasons of your Refusal for the special con-
sideration and Decision of His Royal Highness.”
In his instructions to Bigge, the Secretary of State,
in addition to desiring the investigation of the colony
in regard to its general conduct, informed the Commis-
sioner that the use of transportation as a deterrent of
crime had decreased, as now (1819) “ the Apprehension
entertained in this Country of its Severity,” had become
much diminished. Therefore Bigge was to consider
alterations which would make the establishment an
” Object of real Terror.”
The Commissioner landed at Sydney on September
26th, 1819, and remained in the colony, with the excep-
tion of four months spent in Van Diemen’s Land (Feb.
to June, 1820), until February 14th, 1821, pursuing his
investigations and collecting material for his lenghty
and detailed Report.
This important document, from, which we derive much
information concerning the period, commences with con-
sideration of the condition and treatment of convicts
during the passage to New South Wales. Then it pro-
ceeds in an orderly manner to deal with the debarkation
of the convicts, their employment, superintendence and


clothing and subsistence. A lengthy chapter is devoted
to the important question of remissions of punishment,
and their effects on the convicts. In conclusion, the Com-
missioner gives a series of recommendations for the
reform of the existing settlement, and for the guidance
of future establishments which he proposed to set up.
Following in more detail the course of the Report, we
shall begin with the debarkation, to the manner of
which Bigge attached considerable importance. When
convicts were landed they were mustered and addressed
by the. Governor, who “explicitly informs) them that as
no reference will be had to their past, their future con-
duct in their respective situations will alone entitle them
to reward or indulgence.”
There were two outlets for the employment of convicts
—employment in Government gangs, or assignment to
settlers. The distribution was made wholly without
reference to the crimes for which they were transported.
Bigge noted that the monopoly of the best mechanics and
laborers by the Government for Government works gave
great dissatisfaction. The grant of a convict mechanic
was only made to anyone the Governor wished to oblige
or distinguish. Buildings roads, bridges, and the
clearing of land were Government works, zealously pur-
sued by Macquarie. In 1819, 1395 convict mechanics
and labourers were employed in Sydney alone. The
convicts, said Bigge, derived no benefit from Govern-
ment labour, having no interest in improving or - aug-
menting it. They had no hope of their term expiring,
for if they showed themselves good workmen they knew
they would be retained by Government. The resulting
idleness was inadequately punished. There was no
check on the distribution of building materials, tools,
etc., naturally resulting in temptation to the convicts
to steal these. There was but slight control among the
road parties, where some of the most able-bodied, robust
men were employed, and where the idle Saturdays con-
duced to villainous practices. The only stimulus to


work and good behaviour among the men in Government
employ was the hope of temporary and luxurious indul-
gence, so that, where task work was the system, the
most skilful man got most time for indulgence and
reward, while the inexpert and well conducted man was
"uneasy and discontented. It was almost impos-
sible to prohibit the sale of drink to convicts, the desire
for which was the chief incentive to crime. The convicts
were not distinguished by dress or any marking, so that
the framing of any regulation to prevent the sale of
liquor was made very difficult Governor Macquarie
had increased the number of public-houses ; Bigge would
have decreased them.
The bad effect of detaining such numbers of convicts
in towns led Bigge to desire that the works on which
they were employed should be limited. In his opinion,
many unnecessary buildings were being constructed, a
process not good for the convicts, and very expensive
to the Crown. The Governor considered too much the
ornamentation and, too little the real and pressing needs
of the colony. Bigge records that, in spite of his advice
to the contrary, Macquarie continued his extravagance.
The Governor stated that the convicts had to be
retained in Government employ because the settlers
did not want them, but Bigge says this was not so, as the
settlers were eagerly desirous of obtaining expert
labour. Most settlers had been so often refused that they
had ceased to apply for convicts.
The superintendence of convicts in Government
employ had been in the hands of one William Hutchin-
son since 1814. This man had been himself a convict,
first at Sydney, latere at Norfolk Island, where by good
behaviour he gained >a. recommendation to Macquarie,
who entertained a high estimate of his merits and
integrity, an estimate in which, apparently, the Com-
missioner did not concur. Hutchinson's authority was
confined to Sydney and the stations near it.
91


The transportation of female convicts, often friendless
wom.cn, was a most harrowing phase of am unhappy sys-
tem. The distribution of these women was in the hands
of Hutchinson, himself an immoral man, and he could
form no estimate of the motives of applicants for female
convicts. But Bigge admits that so far as he could
discover, he could get no satisfactory proof of corrupt
motives in the distribution, and he never heard of any
complaints by the females.
The Commissioner gives an elaborate consideration of
the methods of issuing clothing and rations. Here
again he found the superintendence lacking. The chief
abuse arose from the laxity of commissariat officers,
which enabled overseers to draw more rations than there
were convicts in their gang.
In Hobart Town, Bigge noted with approval, there
prevailed more vigilance and method in every way.
The method by which convicts were assigned to settlers
1/ O
were as follows : —A settler signed an indenture, by
which he covenanted to clothe and maintain his convicts
for twelve months. The work required from a convict
was to labour for ten hours, throughout the year, for five
days a week, and six hours on Saturday.
Bigge observed the lack of cleanliness among the con-
victs on the farms; and writes, with his usual dignified
expression, that “ the article of soap is not one of those
-that a settler is compelled to furnish; and it is not often
purchased by a convict out of his wages.”
The control over convicts on farms was affected by
means of weekly musters by the magistrates and con-
%j f / - ■' O
stables. Macquarie issued a proclamation ordering
these officials to muster the district convicts every Sun-
day morning at ten, and to march them to Divine ser-
vice where possible; if not, to call the roll and dismiss
them. The congregation of a large number of convicts
in a town or other centre was generally productive of
evil. The intention of the Governor’s proclamation was


good, but it was rendered worse than useless by ineffi-
cient and insufficient magistrates.
It, was largely in connection with the magistracy that
Macquarie pursued his emancipist policy, which brought
him into conflict with the free settlers, and with his own
officers. In January, 1810, one Andrew Thomson, a
convict, was made a magistrate by Macquarie ; ‘ one of
those acts of Governor Macquarie that has been urged
most strongly against him by his enemies, and has been
most questioned by his friends.”
A case productive of more serious dispute between
the Governor and Bigge was that of Redfern, a young
surgeon, who had been tranported for his share in the
Nore mutiny. He was emancipated by Macquarie, and
afterwards raised to the magistracy. Bigge had cause
to believe that Redfern had appropriated Government
money in connection with dispensing medicines, yet he
could get no absolute proof. Macquarie attempted to
introduce Redfern into society, but the regimental offi-
cers refused to have anything to do with him, or with
other emancipists. Bigge records) that Redfern’s general
demeanour was forward and obtrusive, and showed
“ entire forgetfulness in himself, of that occurrence in
his life, which he will find it difficult to erase from the
memory or feelings of others. ”
Bigge fully appreciated Macquarie's motives in this
matter, but he was no friend to emancipists, and did
not hold, as the Governor did, that the colony was for
the exclusive benefit of convicts, and that the free popu-
lation were intruders. He considered that by raising
Redfern and such like to the magistracy the Governor
lowered the “ respect and estimation of the magisterial
office” —which was undoubtedly true.
e
The discontent caused by Macquarie’s efforts to secure
to emancipists the right to practise in the courts was
equally great, and occasioned quarrels with Ellis Bent,
the Judge-Advocate, who refused to hear emancipist
lawyers. The Governor controlled a majority in both
93


the courts, civil and criminal, and tried to control their
procedure, and thereby to further his emancipist policy.
The Commissioner describes at some length the Hun-
ter’s River Settlement, or Coal River (Newcastle), a
place of secondary punishment. The mining of coal
and the burning of lime from oyster shells were the
occupations of the convicts. The conditions for the
miners were very bad. Work was done in chain gangs,
and flogging was more frequently resorted to than in
other settlements.
Coal River was excellently controlled by Major Moris-
set, whom Bigge, consciously or unconsciously, con-
trasts with Macquarie. For Morisset, he says, directed
his means “ to the accomplishment of objects that were
immediately required for the purposes of the establish-
ment, and attending to the solidity and durability of
their construction rather than to their ornamental
effect.
The question of the “ Nature and Extent of Remis-
sions of Punishment ” was, of course, the most impor-
tant consideration with regard to the convicts, as on the
skilful handling of remissions depended much of their
reform.
There were three types of remissions granted by
Macquarie. First an absolute pardon for which Mac-
quarie provided, a convict under life sentence could not
apply until he had been at least ten years in the colony,
while those sentenced for terms had to serve three-
quarters) of the time. Secondly, conditional pardons, for
which also ten year’s probation were required in the case
of life convicts, and two-thirds time of those sentenced
for a term. Tickets of leave, the third and most com-
mon method, enabled a man to quit the compulsory
labour of Government, and to apply his labour to his
own benefit in any district that he may choose.” These
t • *
remissions were granted three years after the landing of
convicts.
94


The Governor deviated from these rules too fre-
quently. The general principle was the good conduct
of the convicts as attested by magistrates and chaplains.
The granting of pardons for services was bad, and pro-
duced a feeling that rewards of good conduct were be-
come the subjects of sale and barter. The evidence of
magistrates were often biassed in favour of certain indi-
viduals.
Bigge condemns the granting of tickets of leave imme-
diately after debarkation, as it defeated the object of
transportation, namely, punishment, with a view to
reform. Also it raised men so favoured to a position
of comparative equality with free colonists, and morti-
fied previous convicts who had not been so freely in-
dulged.
In Bigge’s opinion, “ men who have been convicts are
not fit[ persons to convey either the favours or the. com-
mands of the local Government ”
Convicts in Government employ were recommended to
the Governor for remissions of sentence by the chief
engineer, or the superintendent, Hutchinson. Many
cases of suspicion arose from Macquarie’s entrusting
such large powers and confidence to Hutchinson, who,
Bigge suspected, frequently managed applications for
tickets to suit his own purposes.
In Van Diemen’s Land the conditions were somewhat
different, for there Lieut.-Governor Sorrell had nearly all
very bad characters to deal with. But as labour was very
t/
scarce he made the experiment of selecting the best men
he could find among the convicts, and. after trying them
in public works, granted tickets of leave to those who
should be recommended by the inspector. Major Bell.
There was not much control over ticket of leave men
in New South Wales, but much more in Van Diemen’s
Land, where they were carefully watched by the police,
and were amenable to the magistrates for good be-
haviour, forfeiting tickets for misconduct. The ticket
of leave appeared to the Commissioner Wan excellent in-
95


strument of the reformation of convicts from the com-
bined effect that it produces in stimulating their in-
dustry and of restraining their misconduct. ” The con-
victs themselves regarded tickets of leave as a great
boon. A convict holding one of these remissions could
bring an action in the civil courts against free persons.
In 1820 there were 3617 male and female convicts
whose sentences had expired; 182 absolutely pardoned,
and 1170 conditionally pardoned. These emancipists
constituted the lower and middle order of settlers, hold-
ing altogether about 50,000 acres of land, which sup-
plied the most part of the colony’s grain.
Bigge quotes from evidence of two chaplains, the Rev.
Cartwright and Cowper, concerning the moral effect of
emancipation. They stated that there were instances of
temporary reform, but in very few cases was there an
entire change of principle. In Van Diemen’s Land the
moral standard was still lower.
In Bigge’s opinion the granting of pardons by Mac-
quarie was too indiscriminate and too liable to be influ-
enced by personal motives; and the preparatory periods
of labour too short, to have the effect of reformation
which the Governor was certainly desirous of bringing
about.
Bigge qualifies his condemnation of the emancipist
policy as pursued by Macquarie by a careful tribute to
the latter’s principles and humanity, which he heartily
commends. But in carrying out his policy, Macquarie
gave more attention to emancipists on public occasions
than to members of the free class. This consoled the
emancipists, but galled the free. The Governor should
have considered the latter effect of his actions. He was
always unfavourable to the free class; he forgot that the
best efforts for the solid improvement of the colony came
from them, that they had the best cultivated estates,
and most cattle. It was of no avail for Macquarie to
be so attentive to men, such as Greenway, Fitzgerald and
96


Redfern, if they were shunned by the rest of the com-
pany at any public function.
The Commissioner says fairly that whatever errors
Macquarie committed came from a humane disposition,
that made him view the crimes of convicts as misfor-
tunes, * 5 which they were to repair in hew South Wales
by success, rather than as violations of the law, for
which they were to atone to their country by the bitter-
ness of exile, or by the severities of toil and privation,
(p. 153). The Governor should have employed the con-
victs almost wholly, not on Government works in the
towns, but in agriculture,. which offered the best advan-
tages of reform, as well as stimulating the industry.
The remainder of the Report is devoted to a series of
recommendations, for the alteration of certain things in
the settlement in Sydney, and for the constitution of
other settlements the Commissioner deemed it advis-
able to found. The proposed changes are dealt with
in the same order as the preceding consideration of the
existing circumstances.
He insists upon a more thorough and accurate record
of the history, age, and circumstances of each convict;
that in the distribution reference may be had to their
character. A list should previously be prepared of per-
sons requiring servants, so that the distribution may be
made well and quickly. This duty should he assigned
to a responsible officer, appointed by the Crown, to en-
sure freedom from corrupt or partial views. Mechanics
and labourers should not be monopolised Govern-
ment, but given to settlers. This would obviate both
the practice of skilled workmen concealing their true
trades to avoid employment in the dreaded Government
gangs, and the undesirable concentration of convicts
in towns. Bigge commended the erection of barracks
for the lodging of convicts in Government employ, for
till 1819 no suitable buildings had been provided.
Men were lodged in scattered huts and houses, being
practically allowed their freedom, except during hours


of labour. After 1819, however, barracks were erected
at Sydney, Parramatta, and Windsor, and discipline
possible.
Tim Commissioner’s central idea in regard to the
direction of convict energy was to get cleared and cul-
tivated as much land as possible, as this labour made
for good discipline, and at the same time increased the
production of the colony.
There is no doubt that Mr. Commissioner Bigge,
lawyer though he was, was an extremely practical man!
with a keen eye for the possibilities which lay in the
i ich, tolling pasture lands ot the plains beyond the Blue
Mountains. His painstaking methods could evolve with
equal care a detailed scheme for the clothing and
rationing of convicts, or for the effectual foundation
and encouragement of the flocks and herds which to-day
form the staple industry of the plains around Bathurst.
r 4 description is given of John Macarthur's estate.
This enterprising man employed between ninety and a
hundred convicts in the management or his sheep and
cattle, or in growing such grain as he required for him-
self.
Bigge desired to encourage the taking up of land for
grazing by free persons, though there would be some
sacrifice; the outlay heavy, and the returns slow. But,
if the import duty on wool into Great Britain from New
South Wales were kept low, and the right sort of settlers
obtained, the results, Bigge confidently predicted,
would be extensive and beneficial. An allowance of good
labourers would be essential to the success of the graziers.
He shows by tabulation the rapid increase in the pro-
duction of wool, and emphasises by the quotation of
freight figures the necessity for the reduction of
duties. The freight in New South Wales, the carriage,
customs, commissions and brokerages in London,
amounted to 9Jd. per lb., the total charge on wool
brought from the colony to the London market. Some of
John Macarthur s best wool sold for 10s. Jd per lb..
98


while some Van Diemen 5 s Land wool was as low as 7d.
The heavy duty was therefore a discouragement to the
investment of capital.
An important change Bigge proposed was the estab-
lishment of separate colonies for the reception of bad
characters. He recommended Moreton Bay, Port Cur-
tis, and Port Bowen, to be used for the sole purposes
of penal restraint and discipline. He had not investi-
gated these places himself, but went by Oxley*s report.
Bigge was always very diffident about matters he had not
observed for himself.
He wished also to remove the Port Hunter Settle-
ment, which was too near Sydney, providing opportuni-
ties of escape, and which also locked up fertile lands
which should be thrown open to settlers.
The superintendent of convicts should be a man who
had never been convicted. He should keep more careful
records of the movements of all convicts, together with
their offences, their names being in alphabetical order,
to facilitate reference. To the same officer should be
addressed quarterly reports from the superintendents
of the new establishments.
In regard to female convicts, the Commissioner recom-
mended greater care in assignment, and the continu-
ance of their employment in picking, carding and
spinning wool. To this might be added the making of
linen and calico shirts, and straw hats for the male con-
victs destined for distant settlements.
Concerning the social efforts of Macquarie for emanci-
pists, the Commissioner considered they should be dis-
continued where the notice of them by the Governor
offended the feelings of others.
Such is the document which was directed by John
Thomas Bigge to The Right Honorable the Earl
Bathurst. ** It led to numerous reforms, of immense
value to the colony. Not the least result of Macquarie*s
long rule, and of the report upon the latter part of it
and its effects, was that the British Ministry ■ realised
i/


that Government by one man with autocratic powers was
no longer feasible in the colony.
In a letter of Macquarie’s to Earl Bathurst, dated
February 29th, 1820, are embodied at once the self-
sufficiency and the sincerity of Macquarie. He had put
his whole energy into what he believed to be the best
thing for the colony. H© was honourable and upright,
energetic and determined. But he failed. “ After the
arduous and harassing Duties I have had to perform
in this Colony for now upwards of Ten Years,” he
wrote, ‘ 1 the constant Counteraction I have experienced
here to my best measures, and the cruel and base Calum-
nies Circulated to the prejudice of my Character at
Home, I must confess, my Lord, I am now heartily tired
of my Situation here, and anxiously wish to retire from
public life as soon as possible. ’ 7
He felt keenly the indignity of having his measures
questioned, and, though we admire his sincerity and
zeal, we admit that in nearly every case Rigges sound
judgment was right. For the Commissioner never acted
without due deliberation; his views were large and long;
his sincerity as real as Macquarie's; and his painstaking
ability is manifested in every page of his detailed Re-
port, remarkable alike for its minute attention to de-
tail and its uniform dignity of expression.
100


Bacon's Rebellion.
By W. A. MERRYLESS (Queen’s).
Most British historians pay no attention to the Ameri-
can colonies from the time of their foundation to the
time immediately preceding the revolution. Contem-
porary England knew little of this extension of herself
beyond the sea. Politicians at home did not grasp the
meaning of colonies }they were, to them, a dump for un-
desirables and a source of great wealth to the mother
land, not an essential part of the same Empire. Colonies
they thought existed entirely for the benefit of the
motherland. They did not understand that these colon-
ists were Englishmen like themselves, with the same
love of liberty freed from all traditional bondage. Had
Englishmen at home taken the trouble to understand the
significance of events like Bacon’s rebellion, they could
not have failed to understand the spirit of the colonists.
No sane man who realised that spirit, would persevere
with schemes calculated to> rouse antagonism in its pos-
sessors. But - Englishmen did not worry about the
colonies, unless the customs of the Crown were not suffi-
cient, or the English merchant met with competition in
trade. The Horne Government paid no more attention
to Virginia than it was forced to.
When in 1619 the Virginia Company ceased to exer-
cise sovereign rights over the colony, the system of
government which they had set up remained. A Gover-
nor was sent from England to represent the Crown.
With his consent, the representative assembly was al-
lowed to manage all purely T internal affairs. In time,
the representation became nominal only. Ihe men with
large estates, with the connivance of the Governor, were
able to control affairs, contrary to the wishes of the
majority of the community 7 . V hen Governors had
once obtained a favourable assembly, they showed con-


siderable reluctance in dissolving’ it. Thus the assembly
elected fifteen years before was only dissolved in 1676
by Berkeley, because no other course was open to him.
The Navigation Acts of 1651 and 1660 were detri-
mental to the trade of the colonists. The chief product
of Virginia at this time was tobacco. These Acts forced
the colonists to export their tobacco direct to England,
and from there it was shipped to Europe. This, of
course, meant a considerable decrease in price, for not
°nly did it necessitate more handling, and longer
voyages, and therefore increased danger of loss, but both
the king and the merchants had to get a commission.
All exports and imports had to be carried in English
ships, half manned at least by Englishman ; Americans
were not considered as Englishmen. The effect of the
navigation laws most resented by the colonists was the
prevention of trade with the Spanish colonies.
In 1676 the Indians had again commenced their at-
tacks on the plantations. But the Governor, Sir Wm.
Berkeley, took no steps to repel them. Ci The Governor
alone could grant a licence to trade with the Indians/!
says Woodrow Wilson, “ and he did not grant it for
nothing. Whether it was because they were profitable
to him, that he refusel toi attack the Indians, we cannot
definitely say. The only other possible .explanation
seems to be that he was old, and therefore could not
take the field himself, but was also* jealous of the credit
that would accrue to anyone who should lead a cam-
paign against them. There seems, however, good
ground for the belief that it paid him not to attack.
When the outlying planters asked for protection, he
*aid that he could do nothing till the regular meeting
if the council, in March, 1676. In the meantime, accord-
ing to Wilson, scores of people had been murdered, and
plantation after plantation had been destroyed; as
nany as sixty were sacked in a single county, within
i little more than two weeks. When the Assembly did
neet, Berkeley played them false. The Assembly ordered
102


that forts should be built at the heads of the more impor-
tant rivers, to secure* the frontier populations, and keep
back the Indians, till an effective force could be raised.
To meet the expense this scheme would incur, a poll tax
was to be levied. In the meantime, a force of 500 men
was to be raised to repel the attacks. But Berkeley dis-
banded it before it could advance against the Indians.
The actions) of the Governor and Council alike raised
resentment throughout the colonv. Many planters voiced
the opinion that the scheme, although expensive, would
be futile. Among these was Nathaniel Bacon. Study
at the Inns of Court, and much travel in foreign lands,
had added to his gentler breeding the popular manners
and easy self-confidence of a man of the world,
«/
before he turned his back upon England and came,
with his young wife, to be a planter on James
River in Virginia. The proud, dignified bearing of this
young lawyer, now twenty-nine years of age, his tall,
dark figure, and the melancholy light of his eyes, in-
spired his associates! with confidence in him as a leader,
and seconded by his love of action, and probably bv his
%j 7 1 t ’ t j
desire to play a leading part in affairs, as well as his
love of law and order, made him the hero and leader
of the patriotic party, in opposition to the Governor.
Bacon swore a “ hot oath/' that if the redskins meddled
with him, he would harry them, commission or no
commission.
In April, five hundred persons, led by men of quality,
took up arms without the Governor’s commission, and
put themselves under the leadership of Bacon. They
complained of the danger and their_ grievances, espe-
cially the great and unequal taxes. They were thinking
specially of the poll tax imposed by the recent Assembly,
by which, they said, the poor sort had to pay as much
as he who had 200 acres. They issued a “ humble ap-
peal of the volunteers to all well-minded and charitable
people/' drawing attention to the poverty of the coun-
try; the methods of the Indians, which, in their opinion,
103


were such as to make forts a useless means of defence;
the absolute necessity of maintaining an army as well,
which, of course, would involve further expense; and
to the method of taxation. “ Judge, therefore/ 7 the
appeal runs, “all unprejudiced men, for to you only
do we appeal, whether anything of greater consequence
for the country’s good could be offered than with our
J O
persons and fortunes freely to redeem our country.”
In May they drew up a a Petition of your poor dis-
tressed subjects, in the upper parts of James River, in
Virginia, to Governor Berkeley.” The Indians, they
said, had burnt some alive, and destroyed the planta-
tions; therefore they “ request that they may be granted
a commission, to make choice of officers to lead this
party, now ready to take up arms in defence of their
lives and estates, not that the petitioners desire to
make any disturbance, to put the country to any
change.” This petition seems absolutely reasonable,
but Berkeley refused to grant their request. There
seems no reason for his doing so, unless it is that it
paid him to leave the Indians alone. It is possible
jealousy may have played some part. The aristocracy
scoffed at the idea of a man who, not having had “ two
years’ experience in this country,” thinking himself
wiser than the law, raised forces by beat of drum, to
obstruct the proceedings of the Assembly, to the terror
of His Majesty’s good subjects.
’ In Mav came the news that the Indians had attacked
Bacon’s upper plantation, and murdered his overseer,
and one of his favourite servants. Although he was a
member of the Governor’s council, and a magistrate,
nevertheless he led forth his little troop “ without law
or licence.” At the same time he sent to the Governor
for a commission. The only account of this expedition
is from the hand of one of the Governor’s officers, Phillip
Ludwell. He was writing with a strong bias against
Bacon, to sav the least, and the accuracy of some of his
statements are doubtful. We are, therefore, justified


in “ white-'washing ’ the Bacon he depicts, if we desire
to get a true idea of the character of Nathanael Bacon.
While the forts were being built, he says, Bacon, a man
of a little above a year’s experience in the country,
pointed out the cost, and collected a following. “ In an
instant he affected almost every corner of the country.”
This sentence is strong evidence for the justification of
Bacon’s action. He seized, he continues, two Indians
who had lived with the English, and put them to death,
and “ drove our neighbour friendly Indians away, who
are as necessary to us as dogs to hunt wolves.” Certainly
the English colonists did not treat the Indians as they
should have, but we nl,ay be sure that many of those
who professed to be loyal to the English were ready to
scalp them as soon as, they got the chance. Bacon may
have had evidence of the treachery of these Indians, or
else he may have considered that as there was some
suspicion of their loyalty, he was justified in making an
example of them. The fact that as many as “hardly
fifty ” were left, shows that he did not wish to make a
wholesale massacre of them. He would probably have
found plenty to support even had he undertaken this,
because the Indians seem to have been hated with that
terrible hatred which fear only can produce. Ludwell
goes on to state that Bacon marched with three hundred
men to the Occancches, 150 miles from Jamestown.
These natives, he says, assaulted and destroyed a fort of
the Susquehannah, and brought back seven Indian priso-
ners to Bacon, “who tortured them to death.” Bacon
and Per sides. King v of the Occancches, quarrelled over
the booty, and forty or fifty natives, and sixteen or
seventeen Englishmen were killed. If this were a fair
statement of what happened, it does not reflect much
credit on Bacon’s character, but as it was written by his
enemy, we may conclude that it strains the truth, to put
his actions in the worst light. He .may have played
one tribe against the other, but Bacon was not the man
to look on, as Ludwell implies he did. while they fought
105


it out, and then quarrel with the victor over the paltry
booty.
The Governor, instead of granting Bacon s request for
a commission, outlawed him and his followers.
Berkeley saw that the odds were against him, that the
community asi a whole was ready to l back Bacon against
his authority. He had the sense to recognise that to
struggle against such odds was useless, and the astute-
ness to perceive that if he gave way to the demands of
the people he would soon find means of having his re-
venge on Bacon. Bacon was not entirely deceived;
Berkeley failed to absolutely quieten his suspicions; but
he was powerless, as far as checking the Governor's
policy was concerned.
Berkeley dissolved the Assembly that had been elected
fifteen years before, and issued a summons for a new one.
Bacon was elected, despite the fact that he was, nomin-
ally, an outlaw. The Assembly met on June sth. Next
day Bacon entered Jamestown with a small bodyguard.
He was arrested by the order of the Governor, but
allowed parole, “ after which he made a free and full
submission to* the Governor in open court. He was
then sworn-in a member of the Council, and promised a
commission. Apparently Bacon had won. But Berkeley
had no intention of thus pardoning the man who had
set at nought his authority, but he that there
were more ways than one of taking revenge.
Up to this time Bacon’s actions had been all that
could be desired. Considering the extent of the support
extended to him, we can justly say that he had acted
with extreme moderation. Immediately he had defeated
the Indians he surrendered, although no doubt he knew
that the Governor was not able to harm him, owing to
popular opinion, lie had opposed the Governor’s orders
only in so far as they were detrimental to the interests of
the colonists. This is shown by “ The Virginians’ plea
for opposing the Indians without the Governor’s orders,


humbly offered as the test of their utmost intentions, to
«/ J
clear and vindicate them from all misapprehensions of
disloyalty and disobedience/ ’ Virginia, they said, \Vas
over-run and almost depopulated. “ The Governor
wished us to be still, till we were destroyed by those
S t/
heathens, or past recovery, on pain of being accounted
rebels and traitors, if we opposed them sooner. Our
taking up arms was purely intended to preserve our
very being, and not to injure any person, or to free
ourselves by the sword from any pressures in Govern-
ment, much less to alter it, a some would charge us most
unjustly with. 71 This declaration, sets out the sincere
views of Bacon and his followers.
One night, warned that his life was in danger, he fled.
There seems no reason for doubting this statement. If
we accept it, there is certainly no doubt that the danger
was from Berkeley. He returned on the 23rd June with
f J '
six hundred men. “The Governor, Council and bur-
gesses, with divers others, were strictly kept by Bacon
and about five hundred of the scum of the country, for
three days, until he had obtained his most unreasonable
%/ ■
and illegal demands. 11 When he surrounded the house
where the Governor and Council were sitting, the
Governor offered him the title of “ Commander-in-Chief
of all volunteer soldiers to go against the Indians/ 1 but
he refused it, and demanded to be made “ General of all
forces! in Virginia against the Indians, 11 At first sight
this looks like the demand of an ambitious man inflated
with success, but on consideration it appears to have
been a wise and necessary move on the part of Bacon.
0/ X
The Governor, by his astute policy, had been able to
detach many of Bacon’s former supporters. Bacon now
appeared to be in the wrong. He had outwardly been
treated with moderation by the Governor, but his rest-
tJ
less ambition urged him on to acquire new powers, as
illustrated in his exorbitant demand. So it would seem
to many. But Bacon's actions seem to have been forced
on him by the Governor. There can be no reason-
107


able doubt that his life had been in danger. So lie had
fled. If he had now waited, the Governor would gradu
ally have gathered enough support to hunt him down,
for gratitude is soon forgotten by the people. Thus
he struck at once, so as to get legal althority to have an
army at his back. His new title placed the regular
troops also under his command. While the Governor
had control of these he wasj not safe. These would form
the backbone, a force to be recruited from those sup-
porters the Governor had been able to detach, to 1 attack
Bacon in the rear, while he was engaged fighting the
Indians; that is to say, he would try to repeat the
scheme that had failed through lack of support earlier
in the year.
When the Governor heard this demand, he sent a
challenge to a duel, but Bacon, Ludwell says, refused
“ with new oaths, as if he thought God was delighted
in his ingenuity in that kind.” But when the Governor
was informed that one hundred guns were cocked and
laid on the chamber, he gave way.
On June 26th Bacon marched out of the city. He
marched against the Indians, and inflicted a crushing
defeat on the Insquehannocks, almost exterminating
them. As Bacon had foreseen, immediately he was gone,
the Governor repudiated all his promises, but without
the regular troops to form a basis he was unable to
gather a force, and was helpless. He merely declared
Bacon and his followers traitors and rebels. This last
act was more than Bacon could endure ; “ a war for pro-
tection turned to a civil war.” Bacon was disgusted
O
with the Governor, and) also with his supporters. He
foresaw that he was gradually being forced into a
false position; he was losing support, although he
was fighting to protect the community. It is the
tale of Simon de Montfort over again. He deter-
mined to drive out the Governor and take matters into
his own hands. Perhaps he was desirous of power, but
it seems that was really the only course open to
108


him. He was losing his support through the underhand
policy of the Governor, and determined to take charge,
until he could get a reply to an appeal to His Majesty.
His references to the Governor show what it was that
led him to take this step. In his appeal to the people
of Accomack he speaks of “how you have been deluded
and gulled by that abominable juggler, wdiose cheats and
base actions you have for a long time groaned under. ”
On August 3rd, Bacon issued a “ Declaration of the
People of Virginia, against the Governor and his wicked
and pernicious councillors and assistants, (Signed)
Nathaniel Bacon, General, by consent of the people.”
It stated that the Governor had raised unjust taxes for
favourites: for unjust gains had bartered and sold lives;
assumed a monopoly of the beaver trade; protected and
emboldened the Indians, countermanded and sent back
the army; and with the privity of his favourites he had
forged a commission without consent. He was given
four days to surrender, or his estates were to be confis-
cated. He fled immediately. On September 15th Bacon
issued a manifesto reiterating grievances, and stating
that they “cannot find in their hearts one single spot
of rebellion or treason.” Next day he despatched an
appeal to the King.
So far Bacon had been working to protect the com-
munity at large from the Indians, and himself from the
%/ O '
Governor. At first he was supported by practically all.
But the policy of the Governor began to detach the
wealthy planters. As the social status of those who were
his supporters decreased he began to give more promin-
ence to his democratic views—views which, it seems he
had always held, but which he had kept in the back-
ground while he was supported by those whom, he knew
were opposed to them. But as these supporters dropped
away he began to promulgate his reforming views.
Berkeley returned to Jamestown, probably at the in-
vitation and promise of support of some of the rich
planters, who were decidedly opposed to Bacon’s demo-
109


cratic ideas.. Bacon recaptured the city, and burnt it
to the giound. His object is not clear. It was not only
a crime but a blunder. He cut away the ground from
under his feet. He was no longer the champion of the
popular party, but merely a rebel, the leader of the
rabble, who had alienated his law-abiding supporters.
He may have struck through fear, thinking that the
Governor’s party would gradually become strong enough
to accomplish his overthrow, or he may have been dis-
gusted with the: treachery of the wealthy planters, or,
again, he may have allowed his radical hatred of the
Cxovei nor s party to overcome his good sense. The infor-
mation is so scanty that we cannot do more than sur-
mise. It remains the one blot on his character. With
the approach of autumn he was seized with trench fever,
and died on October Ist, 1676; some reports sav October
26th.
At last news of the state of Virginia, reached England.
On the 25th o± September the King issued a pardon to
all except Bacon. On October 3rd he appointed three
Commissioners to inquire into the rebellion, which, he
believed, was in a great measure occasioned by griev-
ances, unknown because of the great distance, ’ ’On
October 25th a sum of <£3oo was placed on Bacon’s
head.
Without a leader his party was helpless. Berkeley
seized the opportunity of having his revenge. Before
the Commissioners arrived he had hanged twenty of
Bacon s party, and it was with difficulty that he was
restrained from further executions. When Charles 11.
heard of it, next year, he exclaimed, “The old fool
has killed more men in Virginia than I for the murder
of my father/' and! issued orders, for his recall. When
he arrived the King refused to see him, and he died in
disgrace.
Gratitude certainly was not one of the strong points
of the Stuarts, but none was due to Berkeley. It
110


seems he was almost entirely to blame in Virginia. Of
course he had been appointed in the flush of the Restora-
tion. He was probably a stalwart cavalier, believing
in the Stuart Divine Right theory, and thinking that
passive obedience was due to him as the King's repre-
sentative. This fact, and his age, possibly explains his
actions to a certain extent, but they do not, according to
modern ideas, excuse them. A writer who appears to
have had some insight and sane opinions, writing on
April 25th, 16/6, says : “The most prudent counsels
and applications are most necessary to allay the strong
and growing discontent, and which the authority and
power lodged in the aged Governor and his divided
council are very unlikely to appear." There seems but
little doubt that he was a provincial tyrant, and that
most of the charges laid against him were true; but it
is equally certain that in his own opinion he was serving
his master faithfully.
Bacon appears to have been a true reformer, talented
in a high degree, but somewhat lacking in judgment. It
was the repeated treachery of the .Governor, which
caused him to turn the forces raised against the Indians
on the Government, and it was the gradual loss of his
wealthier supporters, which caused him to bring forward
his democratic views. He was a sincere patriot, but was
outmatched in diplomacy by the wily Governor.
American historians regard this as “one of the most
important episodes in our colonial history." It is, in
a sense, the counterpart of the English civil war. It
showed the independent spirit of the colonists, who were
ready to look after themselves if the Governor would not
and if he opposed them they were ready to turn him
out of the country. It was this spirit which, later,
brought them independence.


Lord Durham's Conception of
Colonial Self-Government.
By T. C. L. ROADKNIGHT.
Lord Durham was born in 1792 and died in 1840. In
January, 1838, he was appointed Governor-General of
the British Provinces in North America. His Report on
the State of Canada, from which the matter for this
essav is drawn, is dated 31st January, 1839.
The whole basis of his views on Responsible Govern-
ment was that a line could be drawn between matters of
Colonial or internal concern and matters of Imperial
concern, between the sphere of the Colonial and that of
the Imperial Government. He maintained that when-
ever the local circumstances of a colony will admit
the existence of a Colonial Parliament, that Parliament
ought to possess powers corresponding with those of the
British Parliament, with the necessary exception of
Imperial powers. For if it were to possess Imperial
powers, it would become an Imperial Parliament; and
as there cannot be two Imperial Parliaments in one Em-
pire, the British Empire would be dissolved.
Durham maintained that our Colonial Empire ought
to be a system of colonies, clustered round the hereditary
monarchy of England. The monarchy should possess all
the powers of Government with the exception of that of
taxation. If it possessed less, the Empire would cease
to be one body politic. He evidently contemplated the
retention of very considerable powers by the Imperial
Government, for he said: “The matters which concern
us are the constitution of the form of Government, the
regulation of foreign relations, and of trade with the
mother country, the other British colonies and foreign
nations, and the disposal of the public lands. These are


points on which the mother country requires a control.
A perfect subordination on the part of the colony on
these points is secured by the advantages which it finds
in the continuance of its connection with the Empire.”
It will be noted how' very limited were the powers
which Lord Durham proposed to give to the colonies
under responsible Government, and to what extent the
limitations have been swept away. The adoption of
Free Trade by Great Britain, not contemplated in Lord
Durham’s Report, had a most powerful effect in widen-
ing the sphere of colonial self-government. Of course he
took conditions as they were, and under those conditions
ty J
laid down limits to the freedom of the colony on the one
hand, and the interference of the mother country on the
other. He wrote in . the light of his own day, when
colonies were not dominions, when the small had not be-
come great, and could not stand alone. It would be
pettifogging to tie his memory to the exact words; but
it is a fair criticism ot say that, while he laid stress on
self-government as creating a national existence, he did
not seem fully to recognise that when once an oversea
community has been endowed with national institutions,
it is difficult, if not impossible, to set a limit to its
growth as a nation, or permanently to withhold any
subject as being outside its scope.
Lord John Russell, on the other hand, in a despatch
in 1839, contended that the Governor of a colony could
•
not at once serve two masters —on the one hand, the
Crown with its Imperial advisors; on the other hand, a
Colonial Ministry; and that it was impossible to draw
the line between matters of Imperial and matters of
Colonial concern. The evolution of colonial self-govern-
ment has proved the correctness of his view, that it is not
possible permanently to draw the line between internal
and Imperial matters.
Apart from a particular political movement, such as
the adoption of Free Trade—the effects of which Lord
113


Durham might or might not have foreseen—there is no
indication that he foresaw to what Responsible Govern-
ment would lead, and inevitably must lead. Cornewall
Lewis's reasoning is unanswerable. If the Government
of the dominant country substantially govern the Depen -
dancy, the representative body cannot substantially
govern it; and, conversely, if the Dependency be sub-
stantially governed by the representative body, it cannot
be substantially governed by the. Government of the
dominant country. A self-governing dependency (sup-
posing the dependency not to be virtually independent)
is a contradiction in terms.*’
After Responsible Government had been given to
Canada, the country was substantially governed by the
representative body of Canada, and ceased to be suo-
stantially governed by England. Lord Durham, to
judge from his words, seemed to think that the substan-
tial government could be divided, and that Canada,
while becoming a nation, could remain a subordinate
nation; but history has abundantly shown that, start-
ing from the grant of self-government, there can be but
one line of movement, from subordination to complete
equality. It is true, taking his reservations, that the
Constitution of Canada still depends upon Imperial
legislation; that the external relations of Canada in
political matters are still under Imperial control; that,
while the self-governing dominions have for half a cen-
tury and more been left to settle their own tarims, it has
V
never been admitted in principle that they can differen-
tiate at will; that control of the public lands in Canada
was not reserved to the Imperial Government because
that Government was in effect already pledged to con-
cede it. But the broad fact remains that Canadian self-
government of to-day is not what Lord Durham recoin-
Q •/
mended, and the Canada of to-day is more nearly an
• v •'
allied than a subordinate nation.
114


Though Lord Durham laid down in his Report far-
reaching principles of colonial administration, it must
always be borne in mind that he was primarily con-
cerned with the objects of a special mission. He was not
thinking of the whole world. He was not even thinking
of the whole British Empire. He had his eyes fixed upon
the British Provinces in North America, to which he
had been sent. Having this horizon, he propounded and
set himself the following question : Given a people living
at a distance from the central authority, -who are either
of British race—or, at any rate, of European origin,
bred up under British rule, and in some familiarity
with British privileges and institutions, what, under
such circumstances, is the best political constitution,
designed at once with a, view to giving contentment to
the distant community, and with a view to maintaining
and strengthening its connection with the central
authority ? His answer was that, with certain very impor-
tant and carefully defined reservations, the distant com-
munity should be left to govern itself on the lines on
which representative and responsible government is
understood and carried on in the United Kingdom.
It will be noted (1) that he prescribed for distant com-
munities ; (2) that he prescribed for communities which
were either British or Anglicised, and which already en-
joyed representative institutions; (3) that his prescrip-
tion was Responsible Government most carefully re-
stricted.
The first difficulty which faced Lord Durham, how to
hold together communities at a distance from each
other, is gradually becoming obsolete; and this particu-
lar problem is being superseded by new problems, and
new difficulties, which did not exist in his time, or of
which, in his mission and in his Report, he was not
called upon to take cognizance. It does not follow that
elimination of distance will necessarily produce unity
within the Empire; there are instances to the contrary,


which go to prove that distance may in some cases lend
enchantment, and, while the distant provinces of the
Empire are year by year being brought into closer touch
with each other, they are at the same time and by the
- 7 tj t j
same means being brought into closer touch with
foreign nations.
In the second place. Lord Durham was only concerned
with British communities, or, on his own showing, with
communities which were to be completely Anglicised,
and which already had some measure of British institu-
tions. Thus one-half of the British Empire was entirely
outside his ken. The cardinal feature of the British Em-
pire is that it consists of two wholly different spheres,
the sphere* of rule and the sphere of settlement, and to
the sphere of settlement alone Lord Durham’s Report
applies. He does not give us any guidance as to the
great problem how to hold together as parts of one politi-
cal system peoples and provinces, at present mt a dis-
tance from each other, when the provinces show the ut-
most differences in climate, when the people differ in
race, in colour, and in stages of development, when
some provinces are and must be, self-governing, while
others are despotically governed. This problem lay
outside the scope of his mission. But in trying to
answer the question how far the principled laid down in
his Report were or are applicable to> the whole system
of settlement in the British Empire, it is right and use-
ful to point out that his recommendations were prima-
rily directed to a case of a particular group of provinces
in a certain stage of development, and with special sur-
roundings, and that beyond all question, he looked upon
Responsible Government as a British prescription for a
British community, and not as a recipe for non-British
communities.
In the third place this colonial self-government which
Lord Durham expounded and prescribed, was, of the
most restricted character, falling far short of colonial


self-government as it exists at the present day. If we
give him credit for marking out very clearly and defi-
nitely the direction, with full intent that the road
should, as it went on, perpetually broaden out, we must
at the same time recognise that he had at best not found
a solution, but only a way which might eventually lead
to a solution. As far as his Report shows, he intended
to create a nation, but a nation which should be subor-
dinate; whereas the result of his Report —a result which,
whatever he may have intended, was absolutely inevit-
able —was to begin creating nations which should not be
subordinate. The problem, as he left it, was the con-
nection between two self-governing communities, one
superior and the other subordinate. The problem, as we
have it, is the connection between one older and several
younger self-governing communities, which are on or
are approaching the position of political equality.
Judging from his| Report, he seems to have contem-
plated that a nation could be created, endowed with
national institutions and inspired with national patriot-
ism, but that bounds could be placed to its nationhood.
Time had proved this was a fallacy; that it was not pos-
sible in the case of overseas dominions, while the ele-
ment of distance survived, and while the communities
in question were growing out of infancy to the adult
stage, to give self-government, but assign limits to the
self-government. The only limits are those which the
self-governing nation may itself assign, by handing
over some of its powers to a federation. The grant of
responsible government was the beginning of the end of
subordination, in the sensei of the mother country even-
tually retaining any substantial power over the self-
governing communities beyond the seas. So far as such
power has been retained since the time when responsible
Government was granted, the retention has been due not
to any definite division of authority, such as Lord Dur-
ham contemplated, but to the recognition by the self-


governing communities of the benefit derived from the
conditions which imply control. Security against
foreign invasion has been provided by the British
Fleet, enabling the younger peoples to grow into nations,
undisturbed from the outside. The Home people of the
Empire have in the main paid the foreign bill for the
colonies, and, further, have largely supplied thy
capital required for their peaceful development.
The analogy of the family holds for peoples at
for individuals. The younger the children are the
more they require to be fostered and protected, and
the more they are controlled. When they have been
started in the world, the need for fostering and protec-
tion grows less and less, and the control diminishes pari
passu. Lord Durham may have had this future in his
mind, but it is not foreshadowed in his Report. In that
Report he limited his outlook to the creation of subor-
dinate peoples, whereas the result of his recommendation
has been that equal nations have been or are being
evolved. It is since his time that the relation of part-
nership has little by little supplanted that of supremacy
and subordination, leaving, and, in the process strength-
ening, the link of common allegiance to the Crown.
The principles of colonial administration embodied
in Lord Durham/s Report are by no means of universal
application. He was not a preacher of self-government
for the whole world, or for the whole British Empire,
or for the coloured races, or for non-British white races,
or even for British peoples whatever may be their stage
of development. Yet to all times and to all sorts and
conditions of men he has preached the doctrine, that for
races, as for individuals, the one thing worth' living
for is to not to destroy; to build, up, not to pull
down; to unite small, disjointed elements into a single
whole; to reject absolutely and always the doctrine of
divide et impera, because it is a sign of weakness, not of
strength; to be strong and fear not; to speak unto the
peoples of the earth that they go forward,
118


It is as' a race of makers that the English will live to
all time, and it is as a prophet of a race of makers that
Lord Durham lives. Off Canada he wrote, “If in the
hidden decrees of that wisdom by which this world is
ruled, it is written that/ these countries are not for ever
to remain portions of the Empire, we owe it to our
honour to take good care that, when they separate from
us, they should not be the only countries on the Ameri-
can continent in which the Anglo-Saxon race shall be
found unfit to govern itself.”
If England continues to be inspired by what Lord
Durham taught so well, then as Great Britain has grown
into Greater Britain, so Greater Britain will grow into
Greatest Britain, to the glory of the Creator and to the
well-being of mankind.
119


Slavery in the American Colonies.
By J. T. STRACHAN (Newman).
To the civilised races of to-day the very sound of the
is "
word slavery is odious. Yet the American colonists were
people of British descent, possessing a conscience and
feelings. At first we might condemn them unreservedly,
but on a second thought, we recognise that such men
must have had some excuses for tolerating such a system.
If we concede that all mortals would have acted as did
Adam and Eve, then we can see, though we may not jus-
tify, what temptations and advantages of the system,
and what condition, si of the colonists obscured the moral
objections to slavery from the people of the period.
Spain, in her New World dominions, had established
a system of slavery of the worst type by which the native
population was destroyed and replaced by African
negroes. If the Englishmen followed their precedent
they deserve less moral censure than the Spaniards.
The latter were Catholics, and the Popes had repeatedly
condemned the whole system as opposed to the funda-
mental laws of Christianity, but the English, owning
no Papal jurisdiction, even claimed that a justification
for slavery could be found in the Scriptures. But even
if the idea of slavery was compatible with their religious
ideals, it would not have been introduced unless the
condition of the colonies and the inclinations of the
settlers favoured its institution, or unless it possessed
accompanying economic advantages. We c c s
it spread in America if we ask why it did not, at the
same time, form a part of the social life of England.
In the case of Virginia, not only were the settlers in-
sufficient in number to open up the new and extensive
regions at their disposal, but the} lac lee (.1 c t
enthusiasm. The early settlers in thi
0
the servants of proprietors for a period of seven years.


and were regarded in the same manner as, and lived
and worked under conditions similar to, those of the
villeins of feudal England. Convicted prisoners were
transported from England and sold by auction in Vir-
ginia into servitude for a number of years. In sub-
sequent years it was not only Virginia who* received this
influx of English prisoners, but most of the other
colonies.
When white men who were professed Christians, and
men of a race so tenacious of freedom, held their fellow-
countrymen in such abject relations to- themselves, we
scarce need wonder that races so much lower in the
social scale as the heathen Indians and negroes should be
despised and enslaved without compunction. In August,
1619, a Dutch merchant vessel landed twenty negroes at
Jamestown, and these, and their descendants unborn,
were sold into perpetual slavery. The number of slaves
in the colony, limited as it was to a few cargoes brought
in at intervals by Dutch traders, was long too small to
make the matter appear of much moment. More than
forty years elapsed before the colonists thought it neces-
sary to strengthen the system of slavery bv express enact-
ments. After the exclusion of the Dutch trade from the
colonies by the Navigation Acts, there were not above
three shiploads in seven years. Some replies of Berkeley
to a plantation committee of the Privy Council in 1671
show that out of a population of 40,000, there were 2000
black and 6000 Christian servants. t
In some of the other colonies we can date the introduc-
tion of slavery with certainty ; in others the institution
appears either to have been adopted from the foundation
of the colony or to have crept in gradually. That slavery
existed in Maryland from the earliest years of its estab-
lishment seems certain from an early Act of its
Assembly, which describes “the people as consisting
of all Christian inhabitants, slaves only excepted. The
1 ? J. E. CooKe, “ Virginia,” p. 367,
121


first slaves were imported from the Bermudas in 1634.
Their importation continued, and was encouraged. The
numbers of the slave classi must have* grown rapidly, l be-
cause in 1695 a capita tax was laid on all slaves brought
into the province.
If we turn to Massachussetts 2 we have the record of a
ship bringing a cargo* of slaves into that province from
the West Indies in 1638. In 1780 Governor Dudley
estimated that the whole number of slaves in Massachus-
setts was 550, of whom 200 had arrived between 1698
and 1707.
When the English captured New York 3 from the
Dutch, slavery was a recognised and established insti-
tution, which, needless to say, the English, although
they altered its status, did not abolish. The West India
Co. was pledged to furnish “ as many blacks as they
conveniently could/’ and down to 1664 most of the
slaves were the property of this company. By 1741 out
of 8000 inhabitants in New York 1500 were slaves.
*
In the earliest constitution of New Jersey, the “ Con-
cessions ” 4 from Lord Berkeley, slaves are included
among the members of a settler’s family. There are no
records of the exact number of slaves in New Jersey
during the early periods, and it is difficult to make any
estimate of their true aggregate, but the amount of
legislation for the governing of slaves seems to imply
that they formed no small nor unimportant part of the
community. Mr. Snell thinks that by 1690 nearly all
the inhabitants of Northern New Jersey possessed
slaves. 5
2 E. Washburn, “ Slavery as it Once Prevailed in Mass/'
(Lowell Inst., Leet's, 1869. Mass, and Its Early History,
Lect. 6.)
3 G W. Williams, “ History of Negro Races in America.
Vol. 1., ch. 13.
4. H. S. Cooley, “Slavery in N.J.," p. 9.
5. J. P. Snell, “History of Sussex and Warren Counties,”
N.J., p. 76. •
122


When the Carolina's were thrown open to settlement,
slavery was an accepted institution in the American
colonies and the new settlers, some of them from other
colonies, at once made slavery a part, and a very im-
portant part, of the social structure.
It was not until 1712 that there was an influx of slaves
in any large numbers. In 1671 Teamens shipped a
cargo of slaves for South Carolina from the Barbadoes.
The heat of the climate rendered labour difficult to the
whites, and from its first settlement South Carolina was
a slave state; besides which the settlers seem to have been
a somewhat improvident and shiftless set of people,
deriving their supplies for several years from the pro-
prietors, for which they appear never to have paid. It
was necessary for such settlers to have slaves, “ without
which,” it was early said, ‘ 4 a planter can never do any
great matter.” 6 Not only was the climate congenial to
the negro, but the temper of the people led them will-
ingly to avail themselves of this source of labour. In
this colony slavery was even included in the model con-
stitution drawn up by Locke in 1665. An actual induce-
ment was given to the pernicious system by an offer of
fifty acres of land for every slave imported. The result
was that the Carol in as became the centres of slavery,
and presented its worst aspects.
It is not, therefore, surprising that these settlers
waged war on the Indians simply in order to obtain
captives who could be sold as slaves. This hideous sys-
tem grew to such an extent that in 1683 the Proprietors
protested, but it had obtained such a grip on the habits
of the colonists that even West (the Governor) took part
in. the barbarous practice. This lawless movement, cul-
minating in a detestable raid by the settlers on the In-
dian towns in 1705, and in an organised attack by the
South Carolina militia in 1715, gave birth to a heritage
of truceless wars, accompanied by fierce reprisals on
6. G. Bancroft, “History of Y. 5.,” Vol. L, pt. 2, ch. 8.
123


outlying settlements by a relentless and deeply wronged
foe.
But the Carolina® were not *the only provinces which
enslaved the Indians.
After 1667 find instances of considerable importa-
tions of Indians into Virginia and New England from
the West Indies. But the first slave Indians were
taken in battle. A record of the Pequot War states that
“Ye prisoners were divided, some to those of the River
[Connecticut], and the rest to us. 7
That Indians formed an important class of the slave
community of New Jersey by 1682 is inferred from the
advertisements for runaway slaves in the newspapers of
the period. 8 But in none of the other colonies do In-
diansi appear to have been enslaved in such numbers as
they were in South Carolina. As late as 1708 the
natives composed one-fourth of the slaves in that pro-
vince. A case before the Supreme Court of New Jersey
in 1797, during which the right of holding Indians as
slaves was challenged, is worthy of mention. The Chief
Justice said, “ They [the Indians] have been go long re-
cognised as slaves in our law that it would be as great
a violation of the rights of property to establish a con-
trary doctrine as it w r ould in the case of the Africans;
and as useless to investigate the manner in which they
originally lost their freedom.’^
In the Carolina®, we have seen, the* Proprietors and
the colonists had no> objection to slavery. In New York
the system received substantial official encouragement.
We find different sentiments in the case of Massachus-
setts. In the Code of Laws, called the Body of Liberties,
adopted by the General Court of the State, is the fol-
lowing : “ There shall never be any bond, Slavery, Vil-
leinage, or Captivity amongst us unless it be lawful cap-
7. Mass. Hist. Soc. Coll. Series, IV., Yol. 111., p. 360.
8. J. A. Doyie, “English in America; Virgin Mary and Caio
lines,” ch. 12. . io
9. Quoted by H. S. Cooley, “Slavery m N.J., p. 12, Id.


tives taken in just wars, and such strangers as willingly
sell themselves or are sold to us. 77
In the same year as this law was adopted, 1641, the
arrival of a ship with two negroes brought from Africa
for sale soon decided what force it was to have. Upon
receiving information of the forcible abduction of the
negroes from their native country the magistrateis inter-
posed to prevent their sale. They said that they had no
cognizance of man-stealing, because it was committed
outside of their jurisdiction, but they compelled the
shipowner to give up the men, and sent them back to
Africa at the charge of the colony. An Act of 1646,
called “ to bear witness against the heineons and crying
sin of man-stealing, as also to prescribe their timely
redressi for what is past, and such a law for the future
as may sufficiently deter all others belonging to us to
have to do in such vile and most odious courses justly
abhorred of all good and just men. 7 ’ 10 The sentiments
expressed in the above actions were echoed by the
greater part of the colony. In 1767 a bill to restrain
the importing of slaves passed the General Court, but
not the Council. Seven years later, the same bill passed
both branches, but when it was vetoed by the Governor,
both Houses resolved that the selling and the enslav-
ing the human species is a direct violation of the natu-
ral rights alike vested in them by their Creator, and
utterly inconsistent with the avowed principles on
which this and the other States have carried on their
struggle for liberty. 77
Unfortunately, there were not such lofty motives in-
fluencing the colonists of Connecticut when they re-
stricted the number of slaves, which might be imported
by the imposition of import duties. On July Bth, 1715,
the importation of Indian slaves was prohibited. In the
following October the General Court made the decree
10. EJ. Washburn, “Slavery as it Once Prevailed in Mass/’
(Lowell’s Inst., Leet’s, 1869; Mass, and Its Early Hist.,
Lect. 6.)


permanent, since ‘■ divers conspiracies, outrages, bar-
barities, murders, burglaries, thefts and other notorious
crimes at sundry times, and especially of late, have been
perpetrated by Indians and other slaves. .. ’ All Indians
imported were forfeited, and a fine of fifty pounds was
imposed on the shipmaster or person bringing them in.
In thisi colony the objections to slavery wore economic,
and then they were raised not against the system, but at
first against the unsuitable class of slave, and, when the
slave class increased as far as the colonists’ economic
sense told them was safe, the objections were against
further; importation of slaves of any kind —not against
slavery.
The Proprietors of New Jersey encouraged slavery by
granting in the “ Concessions ” to every colonist with
the first Governor 75 acres for each slave owned by him,
and by 1663 30 acres, “ that the planting of the said
province may be more speedily promoted.” ll The tem-
per of the colonists appears to have differed from that of
the Proprietors. The “Fundamental Laws” agreed
upon by the Proprietors and settlers of New Jersey in
1667 contained a clause, “that all and every person
and persons inhabiting the said Province shall, as far
as in us lies, he free from oppression and slavery.” In
the instructions issued to Lord Cornbury, the first Royal
Governor, by Anne, he was especially directed to encou-
rage the trade of the Royal African Company of Eng-
land. The Queen was willing to recommend ” that
the Province “may have a sufficient supply of mer-
chantable negroes at moderate prices,” and the Gover-
nor was to “ take especial care ” to secure prompt pay-
ment for the same. ” 12 Apparently, the colonists did not
wish to foster the trade of the African Company, or else
the Governor was over zealous in his work, for in 1714 a
duty of ten pounds l3 “was placed on every slave irn-
11. H. S. Cooley, “ Slavery in N.J.,” p. 10.
12. Cooley, pps. 13, 14.
13. Ibid, pps. 17, 18.
126


ported. The objections of the Assembly appear to have
been purely economic. The law expired in 1721, and
when a Bill for the prohibition of the importation of
slaves was drawn up in 1744, it was rejected by the Pro-
vincial Council on the plea that there was a shortage of
labour. Another Bill for the imposition of a duty was
dropped in 1761, when Governor Hardy informed the
House that his instructions would not permit him to
assent to its adoption. Nevertheless, the Assembly suc-
ceeded in passing an Act in 1767, which was limited to
two years' operation, but was confirmed in 1769, and an
import duty of <£ls fixed."
t would be unfair to say that the persistency of the
New Jersey Assembly was actuated by economic motives
only, for the Quakers, among whom a strong abolition
movement had been formed, must have influenced the
decision in some measure. As early as 1688 the Quakers
of New Jersey and Pennsylvania urged the inconsis-
tency of buying, selling and holding men in slavery. l *
In 1696 it was decided at their annual meeting that the
Friends be recommended to cease importing slaves. In
1 38, as a result, it was stated that not for several
years had any slave been imported by a Friend, nor im-
ported slaves bought by 4 riends. The Philadelphia
Yearly Meeting in 1776 decided to “ deny the right of
membership to such as persisted in holding their fellow-
men as property." Two years later an Abolition Bill
was brought before the General Assembly. Governor
Livingston, in deferring the measure until less trouble-
some time, said he intended to push the matter till it
is effected, being convinced that the practice is utterly
inconsistent with the principles of Christianity and
humanity; and in Americans who have almost idolised
liberty, particularly odious and disgraceful. l6
14. T. Clarkson, “ Hist, of the Abolition of Slave Trade,” Yol
I. ch. 5.
15. Bancroft, “ History of U. 5.,” Yol. V., p. 411.


We shall now take a glance at the legal status of the
slave, in the Proprietary Colony of New Jersey, in the
“ Concessions/ 716 and in earlier legislation, either
slaves are treated in the same way as “ weaker ser-
vants/ 7 or slaves, apprentices, and servants are treated
as forming one class. Then special regulations were
made for the government of slaves, who now received
special punishments, and a special form of trial. Trials
for capital offences were to take place from 1695 before
three or more Justices of the Peace and five freeholders
who were owners of slaves, but the master might demand
trial by jury. l7 The exact manner of death was not
specified, but was to be according as “the aggravation
or enormity of the crimes shall merit and require. 77 As
a result some convicted slaves suffered lingering and
painful deaths. After the Negro Plot of 1741, 18 many
suffered by being burnt at the stake, especially in New
York. On the execution of a slave the Court was to as-
certain the value, which was raised by a poll-tax levied
on all slaves in the colony. 19 In North Carolina, by an
Act of 1714, the Court was directed “to take for evi-
dence the confessions of the offender, the oath of one or
more “ creditable witnesses/ 7 or such testimony of
negroes, mulattoes, or Indians, bond or free, as to them
shall seem convincing without solemnity of jury. 77 It
was an unwritten law that a slave could not testify
against a white man.
In 1667 a statute 20 of Virginia declared that children
were to be held bond “ according to the condition of the
mother. 77 In the same year the Assembly of that State
♦/ •'
declared that killing slaves by extremity of correction
should not be deemed felony, “ since it cannot be pre-
16. Vide page 10, note a.
17. H. S. Cooley, p. 39.
18. G. W. Williams, “ History of Negro Races in America,”
Vol. 1., ch. 13. .
19. J. S. Basset, “Slavery and Servitude in N. Carolina,” p. 26.
20. G. Chalmers, “Political Annals of the Present United
Colonies,” p. 536.


sinned that prepense malice should induce any man to
destroy his own estate. ? ' Likewise it was enacted “ that
all servants not being Christians, imported by shipping,
shall be slaves for life. ’ 7 We find a different spirit in
the law of New Jersey.
The first Royal Governor was required to get a law
passed protecting slaves from “ inhuman severity ” of
masters. It was made a capital offence to kill a slave,
and a fine was imposed if he received bodily injuries. 2l
In 1714 the Assembly declared that no negro, Indian or
mulatto, thereafter manumitted, should hold real estate
in his or her own right, in fee simple or fee bail,” but
the same should “ escheat to Her Majesty, her heirs and
successors.” A free negro was entitled to vote in the
State during early years. 22 In Virginia, in the time of
Culpeper (1682-84) slaves were forbidden the use of
arms, or to lift a hand against a Christian even in self-
defence. The legal status of the slave was lowest in the
Carolina®, Virginia and New York, and more on a level
with that of a freeman in Philadalphia and New Jersey,
v here it was determined in 1768 that a slave should be
tried as an ordinary freeman 2s
If the laws were to be administered differently for
different class of the population, it was natural that
special legislation would be devised for that class which
must be kept under. The laws against slaves were most
severe in Virginia and the Carolinas. Since the slave
was regarded as a mere chattel of the owner, it was
necessary to protect the property of the owner. The
tenth Capital Law of Connecticut, enacted on December
Ist, 1642, that if any man shall wilfully or forceably
steal away any mankind he shall be put to death.” 24 To
prevent the escape of slaves the freedom of their move-
ments was restricted. A law of October, 1690, declared
21. H. S. Cooley—as above, p. 51.
22. Ibid, p. 53.
23. Vide p. 12, note c.
24. Conn. Col., Rec., 111., p. 298,
129


that any slave found without a ticket or pass was a
runaway, and as such liable to be seized. In 1675 any-
one assisting a slave to escape was liable to penalty of
five pounds, with costs to the owner. Persons from a
neighbouring colony suspected of being fugitives, had to
produce a pass from a justice, “ signifying that they
are free persons," otherwise they were to be imprisoned
y 11 ay, 1723, no slave was allowed
out of doors after 9 p.m.
Another series of legislation sought to prevent disor-
der or uprisings on the part of the slaves. A law of
1703 prohibited “ any licensed inkeeper, victualler,
taverner, or retailer of strong drink," from iC suffering
anyone s sons, apprentices, servants or negroes to have
any manner of drink without special order from parents
or masters." 25 Consequent on the negro plot of 1741
came the prohibition of large and disorderly meetings
of slaves." The slave might use the same pleas and
offer the same evidence as a free man. 26
By a law of New Jersey in 1682, all trading with
slaves was forbidden under heavy penalties. 27 In May,
1708, the General Court of Connecticut decreed because
“ divers rude and evil-minded persons for the sake of
*., ■ 1 ,7 lie receive property stolen by slaves," that
the stolen property was to be returned and double its
value in addition, or, if lost, or the original disposed
of, treble its value; otherwise not over thirty stripes.
The slave was to receive the same number.
A slave always had an opportunity of becoming a
freeman. “ The conversion of negroes and Indians to
the Christian religion " was treated of in the instruc-
tions to Lord Cornbury, the first Royal Governor of New
Jersey. 2B Christian masters sometimes freed any slaves
25. Conn. Col., Rec. IV., 438.
26. B. C. Steiner, “ Slavery in Conn.,” p. 17.
27. H. S. Cooley, p. 35.
28. Vide p. 10, note b.
130


who were converted, but this depended entirely on the
good-will of the master. The Virginian Assembly
enacted in 1667 that slaves though converted and bap-
tised might not thereby become free. In 1738 the
General Assembly of Connecticut definitely laid down
the right and encouraged the practice of teaching slaves
the Christian religion. 2 $ Because free slaves are an
o *•
idle and slothful people, and prove very often a charge
to the place where they are,” it was decided in 1714
that the master was to pay the negro an annuity of
twenty pounds, “ with two securities in the sum of two
hundred pounds.” 30 In case slaves were manumitted by
the will of a deceased person, the executors were re-
quired to give the security. In 1769 a law 31 declared
that “ if the owner becomes insolvent, and so incapable
of providing for his slaves, who shall by sickness or
otherwise, be rendered incapable of maintaining them-
selves, they shall be relieved by the township the same
as white servants.” One channel of freedom was closed
in 1760 when slaves were forbidden to enlist without the
express sanction of their masters.
In the opening up of new territory, and in combat-
ting the shortage of labour, the system of slavery had
its undoubted advantages. The negroes and Indians
were especially suited to the warm climate of the South,
and without their aid it seems impossible that white
men could have cultivated such extensive areas. Inferior
to their masters in intellectual ability, and despised by
those whom they feared, the negroes were naturally ser-
vile, and more compliant than ordinary English
labourers would have been under similar conditions at
the same period. Though an uprising was feared in
New Jersey in 1734, the conspiracy was betrayed by a
drunken negro, and suppressed with considerable
29. B. C. Steiner, p. 16.
30. IT. S. Cooley, p. 46.
SI. Ibid, p. 52.


Another negro plot was revealed in New
lork in 1741, and the supposed conspirators burnt.
-But on the other hand, apparent as the necessity
might have seemed that the territories claimed by Eng-
lishmen were to be occupied, to-day we can see that there
would have been sufficient population without introduc-
ing t lie negro, and handing the Americans of to-day the
difficulty of dealing with the race problem. We must
remember that the morals of the Africans were of a very
low standard, and that association with them by
whites did not raise that standard, but tended towards
moral degradation on the part of the Europeans. Al-
though there are many instances of slaves being treated
with extreme cruelty, on the other hand there are others
of slaves who were treated with the utmost kindness and
consideration. Thus we discover that the condition of
some compares more than favourably with that of many
of the lower classes of London and New York in modern
times. Both the colonial institution of slavery and the
modern system of class servitude are open to the same
objection. The “ People of the Abyss,” as were the
negroes, are exploited heartlessly because they are re-
garded as so many wealth-producing machines which are
either to be starved or fed, not on humanitarian, but
merely on economic grounds. But, despite its modern
counterpart —for there are some who will uphold it—
we may condemn the whole basis of American slavery
as bad and unjust, totally at variance with all Christian
principles of liberty, and handing down a heritage of
evil.
32. Cooley, p. 42.
132


William Cobbett.
By W. K. HANCOCK.
About the year 1780 there lived at Farnham, in Sur-
rey, a young man twenty-one years old, William Cob-
bett by name, the son of the village publican. He earned
his living as a ploughboy, but he was not satisfied with
his quiet life; at the age of eleven he had denied himself
a meal to buy the “ Tale of a Tub.” Some years later
he had seen the sea at Portsmouth, and ever since he
had longed to go forth to seek his fortune. But on this
particular day he was very cheerful. He was going to a
fair, he had money in his pocket, and three lassies
were waiting to help him spend it. It chanced that his
way led him across the London road. In the distance he
could see the stage coach, and he waited to watch it
pass. But as it approached he stepped into the road
and hailed it. The coach stopped. William Cobbett
boarded it. The guard blew his horn, away went the
horses, and seventeen years elapsed before the young
man saw his native village again.
In London he got a position as an ” understrapping
quill driver,” 1 but he soon wearied of the work, and en-
listed in an infantry regiment. While he was in bar-
racks, Cobbett did his utmost to gain an education. The
paltry pay which was necessary to enable the soldier
to eke out his scanty rations he spent on books and
writing materials. In his “ Advice to Young Men,” he
describes how he lost a halfpenny which he had saved to
buy a herring. When lie discovered that it was gone
he ” buried his head under his miserable sheet and cried
like a child.” Cobbett never forgot these early experi-
ences, and throughout his life he had a great respect
1. The quotations in this essay are mainly taken from the excellent selections
of Mr. E. I. Carlyle.


for English grammar, which he paid such a price to
master.
About the year 1786 he joined the 54th Regiment at
Nova Scotia, and found there “ thousands of captains
and colonels without soldiers.” By dint of hard work
• /
he rose to the rank of sergeant-major, but it was not
long before he became dissatisfied with military life.
His blood boiled <c to see a true-hearted and intelligent
young private standing with his hand to his hat before
some drunken sot of an officer.” 2 He was even more
disgusted at the peculation which robbed the soldier of
his due, and with the aid of a corporal name! Bestland,
he began a secret and thorough examination. <c To
work we went, and while the rest were boozing and
snoring, we gutted no small part of the regimental
books, rolls, and other documents.” 5 In 1791 the
regiment returned to England, and though he might
have had a commission, Gobbett procured his discharge.
He at once informed the Secretary of War, Sir George
Yonge, that he had proofs of peculation committed by
his officers, and for the first time he came into conflict
with vested interests. The corruption which he thought
peculiar to his own regiment had spread its ramifica-
tions throughout the army. Clearly, an honest man
was a nuisance. Cobbett’s witness was refused his dis-
charge; the regimental books were left in the hands of
the accused; men were engaged to swear that he had
drunk confusion to the House of Hanover. It was plain
that no one but William Cobbett would suffer from the
court-matrial, and he discreetly sought safety by a
flight to France. His opponents in later years made
great capital out of this incident, and a cartoon pictures
the court official calling loudly for William Cobbett,
while an inset shows him speeding to his ship in an
open boat. He was not the stuff of which martyrs are
2. Political Register, December 6, 1817.
3. Political Register, Jmie 17, 1800.


made, nor was he prepared to run a risk unless there
was something to be gained thereby.
_ Y ■ / ,
From France he went to Philadalphia, where he
taught English to French emigres. Public opinion in
America was violently in favour of the Revolution, and
Cobbett was violently against it. His very violence in-
dicates his sincerity; with him a belief was always a
prejudice. It seems strange to think of the radical Cob-
bett as the monarchist of 1794. Of course he has been
accused of inconsistency, but in a way he was the most
consistent of men. His sympathy was always for the
weaker side; he was a humorous Don Quixote, always
tilting at windmills' —and sometimes with success.
Moreover, the idealist will usually be found on the side
of the minority; the faults of the party in power are, as
a rule, very patent, while the opposition can protest
the noblest aims without feeling the pressure of circum-
stances which often bring to nought the best of inten-
tions. So on this occasion Cobbett, who dearly loved a
fight, published a series of anti-Revolution pamphlets,
which show that the coarse style of Swift had had a
considerable influence on the diminutive reader of the
“. Tale of a ■Tub.” In 1796 he set up as a bookseller,
and scandalised Philadelphia by placing in his window
portraits of kings and queens, and nobles and bishops,
and even the hated George 111. He derived considerable
pleasure from the notoriety which he gained. “ Dear
father,” he wrote in his paper, “ when you used to send
me off to work in the morning, dressed in my blue
smock frock and woollen spattendashes . . . little did you
imagine that I should some day become so great as to
have four whole books published about me in the course
of one week.” But he went too far. In December, 1799,
he was heavily fined for libel, and early in 1800 he
sailed for England.
In England he strongly supported Pitt, being espe-
cially vehement against those who were still banding
135


together to secure that change which they have the
audacity to call reform.” But a closer view showed him
that there was much to criticise. He supported Wyndham
and Grenville in their opposition to the peace negotia-
tions of 1801, and they helped him to start the famous
Political Register, which was continued till 1835. The
resignation of Pitt in 1801 hastened on his change of
front, for lie could not understand the action of that
statesman in withdrawing from Parliament “ as if it
were beneath him to be anything less than the ruler of
the nation.” When Pitt returned to power in 1804 the
breach was complete, and knowing nothing of the atti-
tude of George 111., he bitterly blamed the Prime Minis-
ter for refusing to form a Win-the-War coalition.
At this time, too, Cobbett began to give his attention
to the abuses that hindered national efficiency. He
began a crusade against the maladministration of
public money. This turned his attention to other mat-
ters, and he pressed for reforms in the title system, the
Exchequer and the Poor Laws. He began to see, also,
that a party which opposes abuses is not necessarily
quite pure itself, and said that Fox alone preserved the
Whigs from contempt. His attacks on sinecures and
peculation led him further. Money was wasted while
taxation was* crushing, and the two evils should be dealt
with together. Nor was it satisfactory merely to attack
individuals. All Cabinets had been the same. He must
Sureh it was the system which was at
fault—and so he inevitably became a champion of Par-
liamentary Reform.
»/ ■ ■
At this point we may well take a glimpse at Cobbett’s
private life. He had bought a farm at Botley, near
Southampton, and spent there many happy days. A
description of him by Miss Mitfprd is well worth repro-
ducing : “There was something of Dandy Dinrnont
about him, with his unfailing good humour and good
spirits, his heartiness and love of field sports, and his
liking for a foray. He was a tall, stout man, fair and


sunburnt, with a bright smile . . . the most athletic
and vigorous man I have ever known. ... I never saw
hospitality more genuine, more simple.” Another thing
to his favour was his love of fishing. As a husband and
father he was exemplary. In his “ Advice to Young
Men,’' he gives an acount of how he trained his chil-
dren in honesty and affection, how 7 he taught them to
love their work, and to be kind to dumb creatures. It
is as well to note this side of his life; it helps us to
understand the man’s actions in public, and makes it
easier to discover the motive force behind his strenuous
career.
Here we may mention two signal services which Cob-
bett rendered to his country and to the study of history.
In 1802 he began to publish the Parliamentary Debates,
and that, too, though the venture was not a financial
success. About the same time he set his employee, John
Wright, to compiling the Parliamentary History.
We have now traced the development of Cobbett/s
opinions till about the year 1806. From a strong sup-
porter of the British Government he had first of all
grown into a mild critic of its methods; later he had
come to see the enormity of its corruption. This he
at first attributed to individuals, but soon he recognised
that it w r as the system which was at fault. From that
time he w 7 as no longer content to make mild criticisms
of abuses, but sought to attack the root of the evil.
It w 7 as as a radical that Gobbett mightly influenced
the British people. We have given a careful account of
the growlh of his opinions, and of his early life, because
this is the best means of sketching his character. We
• . •
have seen a man of great independence, a doughty
fighter, a* lover of controversy; a master of English who
wielded the weapons of satire, telling argument and
bitter invective with a virilitv that had not been known
*.■
since the days of Swift; a man, too, with a great en-
thusiasm for good, and a natural sympathy for the
■weaker side. We shall not give a chronological account
137


of his thirty years of political and social agitation, but
shall select some of the chief incidents in his career,
and examine the nature and influence of his work.
lie threw himself wholeheartedly into the cause of
Parliamentary Reform. One of the most flagrant mani-
festations of the rottenness of the old system was the
shameless advertising of the sale of seats in Parliament.
“ Politicians may endeavour to alarm us with cries of
revolution/ 7 he wrote in the Register, ” and divines
may preach to us about hell, but if the one can find any-
thing more disgraceful and the other more damnable
than what is described in these advertisements, I be-
seech them to exhibit it to our view. 7 ’ It was only to be
expected, also, that men electecS under a corrupt system
would themselves be corrupt. to bear in
mind the injunction of St. Paul that it is being worse
than a heathen to neglect one’s own kindred, most of the
public men of our day with filial and paternal and con-
jugal tenderness take care to make pretty decent pro-
vision fort their mothers and fathers, sisters and
brothers, wives and children. . . .” 4 It is not to be won-
dered that those in power disliked this plain speaking,
and the Government was waiting for a chance to punish
Cobbett, A pretext was found in an article which he
wrote, full of savage invective and bitter indignation, at
the suppression by German troops, with brutal punish-
ment, of a muntiny of soldiers, who were being deprived
of some of their pay. Cobbett was quite cheerful when
he knew that he would be brought to trial. “ They may
perhaps confine me for two years/’ he wrote to John
Wright, “ but that does not kill a man, and may per-
haps produce even good effects.” In 1810 he was
brought before court and convicted. But now his
nerve failed him. An interval elapsed before sentence
was passed, and during this time he attempted to make
peace with the Government by offering to give up the
4. Political Register, May 7, 1809.
138


Political Register, and similar activities. We can see
what swayed him. When Wright asked him to write a
strong article, he answered, “ If you had my affairs to-
man age, and six children about you, you would not
not imagine and think about writing something power-
ful.” Cobbett was afraid that his punishment would
mean destitution for his family. So it would seem that
a man who sets himself to fight the forces of interest and
evil cannot afford to get married. .
But Cobbett saw that the Government was only play-
ing with him, and broke off the negotiations. Later on
he denied that he had ever entered into them —at times
he could lie unblushingly. On July 9th, 1810, he was
fined <£7ooo, and imprisoned for twoi years. He was in
sore financial straits owing to his law expenses, and the
heavy fine. Moreover, his business methods were very
lax. He left the financial side of his business to Wright.
“ Damn Le Mai re. . . .-See the damned fellow and settle
somehow!” —-this is typical of him. It was owing to
these financial straits that he gave over to Hansard the
Parliamentary Debates, the Parliamentary History, and
the State Trials.
Cobbett was released in July, 1812. For a time his
influence was not so great. People were excited at the
victories won, and were not inclined to listen to him
when he maintained that the causes of distress were too
deep to be affected by the cessation of the war. But
when peace did not bring the expected relief, people
again turned to Cobbett. In order to make the Register
4 ‘ move swifter,’ 7 he circulated it among the poor people
at the price of 2d., and the circulation rose to 40,000.
In 1816 he published in the Register the 44 ild dress to
the Journeymen and Labourers, 77 in favour of Parlia-
mentary Reform. The effect was tremendous. The
fj _
energies of the masses were for the first time directed to
reform as their main object. They were taught that
the best means of righting their wrongs was to secure
139


real representation in Parliament. Of course the Con-
servatives were mightily enraged at the pernicious
sedition-monger, and the respectable press began
violently to attack Cobbett —to his great delight. The
attacks, naturally, were unfair. Cobbett/s work was not
destructive. Indeed, it was largely due to his Letter
> 7 • o t
to the Luddites " —a masterpiece of sympathetic ad-
vice—that the machinery riots did not exceed all
fj
bounds.
In 1816 the Habeas Corpus Act was suspended, and
Will iam Cobbett saw that Engl an d was no safe place
for him. He retired to America, “ not for the purpose
of writing what is libellous, but for the purpose of
writing what is not libellous." 5 There he continued to
write for his English public, till in 1819 the suspension
of the Habeas Corpus Act was removed, and it was pos-
sible to return. It would have been thought that his
sense of humour would have saved him from one
ludicrous mistake. Thomas Paine had never been
buried in sacredj ground, and Cobbett thought it would
be dramatic to bring the bones of the great pamphleteer
to England. But the spectacle of Cobbett carting round
the coffin as an object of veneration was too much for
British humour. He was mercilessly lampooned.
In dragging up your hones, Tom Paine,
Will Cobbett has done well.
You visit him on earth again,
He’ll visit yon in hell.
Indeed William was ever a good target for caricature
and skit.
We must not pass by one important aspect of his
work. He had sprung from working parents himself,
and it was education that had raised him to his position
of pm ver. He wished to extend this priceless gift to
more of his fellows, “ against whom the borough-
f>. Political Register, April 5, ISI7.


mongers have in a great degree closed the door of
learning/’ He therefore published in an unprecedentedly
cheap edition a History of the Laws and Constitution of
England, a History of the Church and Religion of Eng-
land, and a cheap Grammar. Ten thousand copies of
the last book were sold in three weeks. A fact like this
is the best answer to those who justify a vicious system
on the ground that the people are not fit for anything
better. It seems to show that the people to be fitted
for something better No man can condemn men till he
has done something to improve them. Cobbett was the
pioneer in a great work, and his labours have borne
more fruit than those of many Pr ime Ministers.
Of course, he suffered much at the hands of those who
regarded criticism as disloyalty. For instance, he
attacked abuses in the church. " Did Christ choose for
His Apostles men with scores of manors, scores of game-
keepers, and apparel the most sumptuous that can be
conceived ?” This was blasphemy! But he went on his
way unperturbed. In twelve sermons, full of grave
dignity, he laid down the moral principles which
formed the basis of his activities. He took his stand on
ethical grounds, and his words were convincing. “ Did
even the murderous spy exceed in iniquity the wretch
who steadily pursues a system of fraud on those by
whose labour he is enriched?” In sentences instinct
w ith indignation he pressed home the indictment against
the injustice of the industrial system. Cobbett is a
pioneer of reform in the factory as well as in the
electorate.
He made several attempts to secure a seat in Parlia-
ment. In 1819 he stood for Coventry. He w r as well
received at first, but would not resort to bribery; his
opponents spent money, and got the people satisfactorily
drunk. And so Cobbett was surrounded by a mob who
wmuld not give him a chance to speak, and even
laid violent hands on him. He amused himself by pull-
141


mg divers faces at them, and said that he never had
so good an opportunity to philosophise before/' 6 Later
on, he stood for Preston. Again lie was defeated, but
was no whit perturbed. t<: Gentlemen, I have done much
good to you by my ■ coming. 1 have sweated your
tyrants. I have bled them." But it was some time
before he related the experiment.
Cobbett followed the events leading up to the Reform
Bill of 1832 with great interest. His cutting criticisms
stung Grey's Government into prosecuting him. Cob-
bett handled his case with masterly ability, drew up a
damning indictment against the Whigs, and struck a
death-blow to politic ah prosecutions. In 1832 Lord John
Russell's Reform Bill was passed. The widening of the
franchise made the election of Cobbett possible, and lie
had no difficulty in being elected for Oldham.
But his days were numbered. He was assiduous in
his attendance at the House, and he fought the cause of
his beloved poor as doughtily as he had ever done. But
it may be questioned whether the writer who appealed to
the nation was not more powerful than the Parliamen-
tarian who on occasions voted with a minority of six.
We can never really answer the question, for Cobbett
only sat for a short time in the Commons. His strenuous
life had at last worn him out, and he died on June 18th,
1835.
The story of William Cobbett's life is the best com-
ment on his character. No man of his times stands
out with a greater completeness of detail. He is one
of the few men whom we can love for their faults, as well
as for their virtues. Who ever would be angry with his
conceit, his contentiousness, or even his occasional
mendacity ? It is said that even his enemies felt the
loss of him when he died. He was a bracing force that
helped to keep public life vigorous and healthy. His
power lay not in his fearless writing, his knowledge.
6. Political Register, March 25, 1820.


his clear crisp style, but in himself. He had something
that is far greater than intellect—a heart. The riddle
of the modern industrial state was to him something
r*'
more than an intellectual problem, a mere question of
statistics and theories. He thought in terms of men and
women. Everywhere in his writings we see that sensi-
tiveness to the sufferings of others, that pain, which is
love. Moreover, William Cobbett was a steady optimist
He was one of the happiest of men. Maybe it was be-
cause he understood so fully the sufferings and difficul-
ties of humanity that he had such a glorious faith in the
ultimate triumph of good —for faith cannot be built on
partial ignorance. “ Poor old Cobbett," said Heine,
who did not understand him in the slightest, “ I have no
love for thee . . . but I pity thee from my inmost soul,
as I see how thou strairiest in vain to break loose, and
get at those thieves who make off with their' booty before
thy very eyes. ..." If this were true of Cobbett, this
life would be the saddest of tragedies. Of course it is
not true of him. No man ever accomplishes all that he
would : but in his thirty years of fighting, with all the
odds against him, he dealt deadly blows at corruption
and selfishness and ignorance. He did more —he roused
the people to fight for themselves, and gave them a reali-
sation of their dignity as human beings. It should be
‘ / Poor Heine," rather than “ Poor Cobbett." For
William Cobbett realised as Heine did not, that a man
is not the slave of circumstances, but that character is
stronger than material things.
loh i) & Son. Printers, Drummond Street, Carlton (1219*2)
143


















