





HISTORICAL NOTES
ON THE
CHURCH AND PARISH
OF
St. Mark the Evangelist
FITZROY.
By an Old Parishioner.
1808.




PREFACE.
The following pages, compiled from Annual
Reports, Statements, and other Official Docu-
ments, and published at the suggestion of
several friends of the Church, are intended
chiefly for the Parishioners and members of
the congregation. It is necessary to explain
that there is much still left unpublished that
the compiler could not bring forward without
exposing himself to the charge of egotism ;
indeed, he thinks that charge will yet he made
in consequence of the repeated mention of his
name. This has been unavoidable with one
so long arid officially connected with the parish.
To omit to mention the name of any one taking
a prominent part would lead to a charge in
another direction. It is to be regretted that
an abler pen has not been engaged in the com-
pilation ; but such as it is, it is sent forth with
a feeling of assurance that it will find many
interested readers among the Parishioners.
Brewood House,
East Collinowood,
July , 1868.




St. Mark's, Fitzroy
“ Let Thy good angels, Lord! the place frequent—
Send from thy treasures of celestial grace
Those gifts thy Iloly Spirit oft has sent;
Send them, blest Father, on that chosen place;
Lift up Thy light serene on.those that seek thy face.’ *
“ St. Mark’s, Collingwood ! Who has
not heard of this parish 1 Throughout
the whole diocese, from Belfast to Gipps
Land, or Melbourne to the Murray, the
very name is as a household word.” Such
was the introduction to a sketch of this
parish in The. Church of England Record
for the year 1859, language well understood
by Church colonists ten years ago; but pro-
bably in the present day many of the con-
gregation will wonder why their now com-
paratively old parish and church should
have then attained so much notoriety. There
are, however, a few, but very few, good old
Church families left who well understand
why, and who perhaps, with a smile, will
recall to mind many of the circumstances
about to be narrated, tending to establish
the fameof this parishfor “parochial action,”
and the part they severally took, or the


neutral position they maintained in con-
nection therewith, from ten to fifteen years
ago. Stirring times they were, and extra-
ordinary withal. Many a “ parochial gale ”
has been experienced, and many a wordy
battle has been fought. Troubles parochial,
troubles financial, and troubles of every
shade and hue have been borne, and
more or less successfully overcome. But,
notwithstanding that “ storms have arisen ’’
among the parishioners, the welfare of
our beloved Church—to their honour be
it stated—has ever been the subject matter
in dispute by the contending parties, each
one striving in full belief that her best in-
terests would be subserved by the adoption
of his own ideas or plans. On this question
an allusion was once made by our good
Bishop, at a festive gathering in the school-
room some years ago, when his lordship re-
marked that he preferred the apparent strife
and contention of this parish to the cold-
ness, indifference, and apathy of too many
places. There are many who will endorse
his lordship’s remarks as correct, for where
there is much parochial action even of a
contentious or party character (which, how-
ever, it is well if it can be avoided) it is
evidence of the parishioners’ interest in the
affairs of their Church. Differences of
opinion may exist, as doubtless they did
then, and always will exist to the end of
time; but when all are actuated by a.sincere


desire to serve the Church in full belief of
her scriptural character and origin, it is not
surprising that they did most earnestly
contend for what they conceived to be right.
Many years, however, have elapsed since
those stirring times; a long calm appears to
have succeeded the storms, and the Church
is quietly pursuing the even tenour of her
way. Old feuds have been toned down,
the hatchet has been buried, opponents have
become supporters ; an immense debt—
such as no other church ever has had or
desires to have —has been paid off, and
peace is established! Often, even in the
present day, on meeting with some of the
old parishioners, many of whom are now;
scattered in various parts of the diocese, em
quiries and references are made to the events
of the past that give proof of the interest
they still feel in the welfare of their former
Church and parish. Old colonists are gene-
rally pleased to relate their reminiscenses of
the past, and to the Christian mind such re-
miniscenses must be considerably enhanced,
where, after years of turmoil, trouble and
anxiety, they witness the fruits of their
labours in large congregations, assembled in
commodious churches, with parsonages and
schools attached, dotted here and there
throughout the colony, presided over by duly
ordained clergymen and lay helpers, all busily
engaged in making known the glorious
gospel of pur Lord and Saviour to their.


fellow creatures. A calm reflection on so
glorions a work affords pleasure; although
there may be some sad alloy, as in all human
undertakings there must of necessity be,
from the frailty of our nature. But for all
this, in musing o’er the past of St. Mark’s
for nearly two decades,
“ I oft perceive
Fair trains of imagery before me rise,
Accompanied by feelings of delight,
Pure, or with some unpleasant sadness mixed;
And I am conscious of affecting thoughts
And dear remembrances, whose presence soothes
Or elevates the mind, intent to weigh
The good and evil of our mortal state.”
Though I may have unpleasant narratives
to pen, there is much that is otherwise,
and
“ Sweet it is, when memory brings
From her locked cell our bygone hours,
To muse o’er ancient, vanished things,
E’en as we muse o’er perished flowers.”
This musing, however, being rather a
digression, I will proceed with a sketch of
the parish, and commence by observing that
the nomenclature of the district in which it is
situate has undergone many changes, conse-
quently a brief notice of the same may not
be uninteresting or out of place. In the
first schedule of an act of the Legislature of
New South Wales, passed in Sydney on the
12th October, 1849, prior to the separation
of Port Phillip, and its creation into an in-
dependent colony, named after Her Majesty,


Victoria, the district contiguous to the
church is described as “the suburb of
Neivtown, otherwise called Collingwood, con-
sisting of 320 acres.” This, however, only
refers to land within the city of Melbourne,
which is not the ecclesiastical boundary of
the parish of St. Mark, but only forms a
portion of the same, the other portion being
comprised within the now densely-popu-
lated borough of East Collingwood, or, as
it was often called, Lower Collingwood, a
greater part of which borough was ecclesias-
tically cut off from St. Mark’s to form the
present parish of St. Philip in the year
18G3. So late as 1855, the parish of St.
Mark is also referred to in the Herald
and other Melbourne journals as being
“ formerly known as Newtown, a small
village in the vicinity of M elbourne, inhab-
ited chiefly by the industrious classes or
new araivals, and within the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of the minister of St. Peter’s
Church,” to which parish the whole of St.
Mark’s formerly belonged, but was separated
therefrom in the month of June, 1851.
Scarcely a vestige of the village of New-
town now remains. The narrow streets,
lanes, or rights-of-way were exceedingly
short and inconvenient, particularly in the
vicinity of the church, extending to Brun-
swick street, which latter terminated at
Moor street. In the centre of the crown of
the road of what is now Brunswick street


stood an apothecary’s shop, facing the
southern portion of that great artery. Many
of the streets were what is known as “ pud-
ding-bag,” i. e., blocked up at one end.
Being within the city they formed portion
of Gipps Ward, but in consequence of the
little attention paid to its so-called streets
and thoroughfares a separation was sought
for and obtained, and a new ward, called
Fitzroy was created. The benefits of this
step soon became apparent, and the require-
ments of the ward were brought before the
City Council. In 1854 a vote of £50,000
was obtained from the Legislature, and a bill
passed for enabling the Corporation to
make the necessary improvements, as the
preamble states, “in several parts deficient
of direct lines of communication, whereby,
the drainage and ventilation of most of
the public thoroughfares are rendered dif-
ficult, and in some cases impossible and
in a schedule to the act is a list of no less
than twenty-six streets proposed to be
opened. This work effected a complete
change, and, with the removal of the old
buildings, including a large portion of the
St. Mark’s girls’ schools, which extended to
near the crown of the road in George street,
and also a chapel built by the United Free
Methodists, caused the name of Newtown
to die out, and by common consent, not by
anylegalenactment, thenameof Coliingwood
became general. In course of time, how-


ever, continued murmurs were again ex-
pressed at the neglect of the City Council
of this ward, and another agitation sprang
up in favour of entire separation from the
city. In 1858 it was so separated under
Captain Clarke’s Act, and became a muni-
cipal district, governed by a chairman and
councillors. Later still, on the passing of
the Municipal Institutions Act, No. 184,
it became a borough, governed by a mayor
and councillors, &c.
At the census taken in 1851 this suburb
or village of Newtown, afterwards Gipps
and Fitzroy Wards, contained a population
of 3449 souls, occupying G7B houses; their
social condition being represented by 1309
married persons, and 2140 who were living
in “ a state of single blessedness,” the
greater part of whom were probably children
of tender age; but in those days, in conse-
quence of the great inequality of the sexes,
there were, doubtless, many “ mouldy
bachelors,” but very few “ maidens wither-
ing on the stalk,” as Wordsworth terms
them. Wives were scarce, and many a long
journey have some of the “ lords of crea-
tion ” made to obtain in the mother country
what they could not meet with in the colony.
The colonial-born residents of the district
numbered 845; 1794 were English, 10
Welsh, 414 Irish, 231 Scotch, and 165
hailed from other British dominions or
foreign countries. The Church of - Eng-


land was represented by 1818 persons,' by
far the largest of any religious body > the
next in point of numbers being the Wes-
leyans, who numbered 424. The Educa-
tional State of the parishioners shows that,
out of the total population of 3449, there
were 91 adults who could not read ; and the
total number, including children, who could
not read was 834.
Some idea of the progress since made
may be gathered by a comparison of the
above statistics with those issued by the
Registrar General for 1866. He gives
the population as 12,000 ; the number of
dwellings 2,800 ; and the estimated value
6f rateable property at £986,933. The
total borough receipts for the year mentioned
was £9,494.
It may be thought I am making a long
and tedious digression in thus dragging the
reader through the dark, uninteresting laby-
rinth of statistics, and the dull detail of dry
figures ; but a strong interest in the Church
and parish must be my apology, for
“ I love to linger on the track,
Where’er 1 have dwelt,
In after years to loiter back
To feel as once I felt; ”
and it is probable, before I have completed
my narrative, I may often have occasion to
make similar digressions, and carry my
readers back again to the past ; but X ask
their forbearance and proceed,


. In 1849 the village of Newtown had no
church nearer than the little church of St.
Peter’s on the hill, which had not been long
erected at a cost of about £2,500, of which
the late Rev. Daniel Newham was the in-
cumbent. The diligence displayed by this
rev. gentleman in the sphere allotted to
him must be well remembered by all who
knew him. Fully aware of the rising im-
portance of this portion of his parish, and
of the necessity existing for church and
school accommodation, application was
made by him, on behalf of the “ Colling-
wood school committee,” for assistance from
the Diocesan Society, towards the erection
of the present brick building known as the
girls’ school. A grant of £lOO was made
from its funds in aid of the undertaking,
payable “on the completion of the build-
ing within twelve months.” “This work,”
says the Society’s report, “ was carried on
with such energy by Mr. Newham and his
committee, that the grant was claimed and
paid in the month of May, 1849.” Shortly
after the erection of the schools, services
were held on the Lord’s Day, by the “ as-
sistant minister ” of St. Peter’s Church, the
Rev. S. E. Bloomfield, son of Sir Thomas
Bloomfield, of Brighton, England; the at-
tendance for some time was small indeed;
on many occasions not more than six or
seven adults could be counted present.


. In the month of June, 1850, the Rev.
J. A. Clowes (then a lay reader of St. Peter’s
awaiting ordination) was located in the
neighbourhood, and he immediately com-
menced a system of pastoral visitation in
his district, calling at evert/ dwelling in
order to find out the members of the Church.
He was most kindly received by all, and
the results of his labours were—crowded
services ; his people becamo warmly attach-
ed to him ; and it soon became evident that
something must be done to meet the wants
of those desirous of attending his ministry.
On many occasions large numbers were un-
able to get within the school, and stood
outside to listen through the windows of
the building.
The first public meeting towards providing
Church accommodation was held in the girls’
school-room, on the 14th April, 1852, the
Very Rev. H. B. Macartney, D. D., Dean,
presiding. The meeting was not a large
one, but was a tolerably influential one, and
among those present to advocate the cause
was the Honourable Hugh Culling Eardly
Childers, the present member for Pontefract
in England; G. W. Rusden, Esq., the
present clerk of our Victorian Parliaments ;
and J. T. Smith, Esq., then mayor of the
city, and now member for West Bourke.
The pith of that meeting is comprised in
the following resolution, proposed by his
worship the mayor, and seconded by the


Rev. J. A. Clowes—“That the present
church accommodation is quite inadequate
to the requirements of the parish, and that
subscriptions should be raised for the pur-
pose of building a church and taking all
necessary steps for that purpose.” And on
the motion of J. Hodgson, Esq., M.L.C.
(afterwards Major Hodgson), the following
gentlemen were appointed a committee for
the purpose of carrying out the above
objects :—Rev. J. A. Clowes, Messrs. J.
Blundell, J. Blackburn, sen., A. H. Con-
stable, F. AV. Marsden, A. T. Best, James
Bowler, C. Holmer, G. Shaw, H. Shaw, \Y.
U. Tripp, It. Willan, J. H. Day, E. Lead-
beater, Emanuel King, T. Rutherford, and
N. Kinsman, to which were added the names
of Chas. Baker and Thos. Reily. The contri-
butions at the meeting amounted to £4OO.
The very unsettled state of the colony, con-
sequent on the discovery of gold, prevented
much progress being made towards the
erection of the church; but in the mean-
time the great influx of the population, and
the very large number of children brought
into the parish, called aloud for additional
schools, and, through the exertions of the
Rev. J. A. Clowes and Messrs. Chas. Cook, A.
Brunton, and others, the present boys’ school
was erected at a cost of a little over £IOOO.
This gave additional accommodation for
public worship, but was soon found to be
quite inadequate:


Nothing further of special importance
took place from the date of the first meeting,
except the very necessary preliminary work
of collecting funds, &c., until the following
Easter Tuesday, of 1853, when the parent
church, St. Peter's, was “duly set apart
from all profane and common uses ”by
consecration, being the first church in the
diocese so set apart. In the evening of
that day a meeting of the parishioners of
St. Peter’s was held in the Diocesan
Grammar School, adjoining St. Peter’s
Church, for the purpose of taking measures
to assist in the erection of St. Mark’s
Church. The Right Rev. the Bishop pre-
sided, and the meeting was addressed by his
Lordship and the Revs. J. A. Clowes, D.
Seddon, H. H. P. Handfield, and Messrs.
R. H. Budd, R. Willan, A. Langstone, and
J. P. Bear. A statement setting forth the
spiritual wants of, and also the exertions that
had been made by, the inhabitants of St.
Mark’s hitherto was read to the meeting;
and resolutions were passed expressive of
the sympathy felt by the parishioners of St.
Peter’s for their brethren in St. Mark’s,
and their willingness to co-operate with
them in the attainment of their most im-
portant object. Subscriptions were pro-
mised at the close of the meeting amount-
ing to a little short of .£IOO, making the
total amount raised in St. Peter’s parish
about £4OO, inclusive of a munificent sub-.


scription from Mr. E. Grice of £250. It
seemed to be a fitting conclusion that a
day which had commenced by the conse-
cration of this church would terminate with
an effort made by the parishioners of St.
Peter’s to assist in extending to their
former fellow parishioners the advantages
which they themselves enjoyed. How
rarely do we find such a desire to extend
the advantages of the Church to destitute
districts now-a-days! Alas! in most
parishes there is too much parochial selfish-
ness, and neighbours are almost looked
upon with jealousy; instead of sympathy
and encouragment, as St. Mark’s was by the
parishioners of St. Peter’s, or as St. John’s
was by the parishioners of St. James’, about
the same time. A greater missionary
spirit is wanted among our trustees, war-
dens, and church committees, before the
Church can be extended to meet the re-
quirements of the population.
In a few weeks after the meeting at St.
Peter’s it was determined to commence the
erection of the proposed church. Previ-
ously, however, there had been much dis-
cussion as to the material of which it should
be built, and many attempts were made to
induce the committee to take one of the
four iron churches just then imported, or
expected, from home; the Bishop attended
one of the committee meetings, and was
understood to advocate this course, he having


received very favourable accounts of such
structures. With all due respect to his
Lordship, his advocacy of them did not in-
fluence the committee as a whole; and,
after much consideration at several meet-
ings, in order to settle the question, I pro-
posed that the church be built of blue-stone,
declaring a great aversion to such make-
shifts as iron churches for a rising and
important place like Collingwood. The
proposition was put to the meeting, and
carried, all appearing anxious to get rifl of
the further consideration of the “iron
apologies.” Designs for a church to be
built of stone were called for, and a premium
offered for the best and most approved
design; and several were sent in. It
having been stated that the committee had
decided to have a design made which would
embrace some of the points in the whole of
those sent in caused some dissatisfaction
among the competing architects, publicly
expressed in the newspapers of the day.
Our great civil holiday, and the birthday
of our colonial independence, was the time
appointed for laying the foundation-stone.
Accordingly, on “ Separation Day,” July
1, 1853, the ceremony was performed by the
Lord Bishop of Melbourne, in presence of
an assembly including the Dean, the Rev.
C. T. Perks, Rev. G. Studdart, and others
of the clergy of the neighbourhood, the
Right Worshipful the Mayor of the city,


and some members of the legislative and
city councils. After prayer, and an appro-
priate address by his Lordship, a parchment
scroll, inscribed as follows, was sealed in a
bottle, and deposited with the usual formu-
laries in the stone
This Foundation Stone
Of a Parish Church, dedicated to the worship of
Almighty God, and called
St. Mark's, in honour of St. Mark the Evangelist,
Was laid on the Ist day of July, 1853, by the Kight Kev.-
Charles Perry, D.D., Lord Bisnor or
the Diocese of Melbourne.
Charles Joseph La Trobe, Esq., being Lieutenant-
Governor of the Colony of Victoria, and
John Thomas Smith, Esq., being Mayor of the City of
Melbourne.
The Trustees of the Church were the Kev. James
Aaron Clowes, minister of the parish, Albert
Charles Ilest, James Blackburn, Richard Grice,
and Nathaniel Kinsman.
Appropriate addresses were delivered by
the Very Rev. the Dean and the Mayor,'
after which a collection was made, and up-
wards of £SO received. In the afternoon
of the same day a social tea meeting was
held in the adjoining school, at which 300
of the parishioners sat down. The visitors
and speakers on the occasion were the Dean,
the Revs. J. A. Clowes and S. L. Chase,'
M. T. Embling (Independent), and Mr.
N. Kinsman. Mr, John Lanktree, the
secretary of the church building com-
mittee, also gave a brief state of their pro-
ceedings, from which it appeared that, of
the estimated cost, £2OOO had been already
subscribed; £2OOO was expected to be re-
ceived from the, colonial treasury, and,


therefore, at least £2,500 remained to be
collected. He further observed, that the
committee felt the serious responsibility of
their position in commencing so great a
work, while so large a portion of the money
requisite for its completion was still unpro-
vided. They had, however, ventured to do
so, and they were determined not to relax
their efforts for its accomplishment, relying
on the divine blessing and the increased
liberality of Christian friends.
The site upon which the church is built
is situate in George street north, and was
purchased by the Bishop from the Hon. J.
Hodgson, M.L.C. The building proceeded
steadily after the laying of the foundation-
stone, until the eight heavy principals of
the roof had been elevated into position,
when, early on Sunday morning, the 17th
September, 1854, during an extraordinary
gale of wind, they were blown down and
dashed into fragments. Never will the
writer forget the dismay depicted on the
countenances of the congregation on that
Sabbath morning when they assembled for
worship in the adjoining school, and saw
the roof of the new church they had so
eagerly watched destroyed. The calamity,
however, re-kindled the generous sympathy
of the people at large; for not only Church-
men, but members, of other denominations,
cheerfully contributed, and several hundred
pounds were obtained in two or three days,


after which the work proceeded, and the
church was opened on the 21st January,
1855. The enthusiasm evinced by all
parties in connection with the opening ser-
vices is well worthy of a passing notice.
At a late hour on the previous Saturday
evening the floor was strewed with lime,
shavings, and rubbish, and only about half
of the pews were erected. The aid of the
trustees, committee, and others was called
in to sweep out and prepare for the morrow,
presenting a sight really amusing, to see
even the clergyman and the committee
with brooms and shovels working away
with a right goodwill to clean out the debris
and rubbish left by the workmen, and it
was midnight ere they had finished their
self-imposed task. • On the' day of the
opening three full choral services were
held, and collections .amounting to £l2O
11s. lid. were made in aid of the build-
ing fund, probably the largest collection
ever made in a church in the diocese.
The ministers officiating were : the Dean in
the morning, Rev. John Barlow in the after-
noon, and the Very Rev. the Archdeacon of
Geelong in the evening. For several weeks
the services were chorally rendered, but at
a meeting of the trustees on 21st Febru-
ary following the subject was introduced
and objected to, and the Rev. Mr. Clowes
said that he would have the service restored
to its former simplicity. The building,
J 3


which, is in the unadorned early English
style of architecture, is built of blue stone ;
the west side walls being externally sup-
ported by buttresses, and pierced with
diamond-paned lattice windows. On the
east side, nearly the length of the building,
there is a gallery, called by some, at the
time, “the architect’s folly,” from the fact
that it added an additional cost of near
£3OOO, and although lending much to the
beauty of the interior, the massive square
pillars, terminating in seven noble arches,
supporting the principals of the roof, render
both the gallery and the space underneath
almost useless on account of the obstruction
they present both to the eye and the ear of
the minister and people. Access to this
gallery is obtained by a sort of belfry en-
trance in Hodgson street, up a flight of
stone steps much too narrow and perpen-
dicular. The church was estimated to
afford accommodation for one thousand
worshippers when completed. The in-
terior is lofty, and fitted up with open stalls
of cedar, very neatly and well wrought, but
since much damaged by repeated alterations
in removal of pulpit, reading desk, and a
large number of seats. The chancel is
appropriately finished, and, in addition to
the three stained glass windows* presented
by Mr. Chas. Curtis, contains a set of
* Of these windows more bye-and-bye.


beautifully illuminated tablets, oh which
are written the creed, the Lord’s prayer, and
ten commandments. In front of the chancel,
rather out of place, is a white marble bap-
tismal font, the gift of Mr. R, Grice.
As the building now stands, it presents
the appearance of a staid, sombre-looking,
old parish church, hemmed in on all sides
by buildings so as almost to hide it from
view. The parish schools are unfortunately
in front and within a few feet of the walls
of the church. The original estimate was
stated in the Herald of July 5, 1852, to be
£2OOO ; this proved to be very fallacious
and wide of the actual cost, for up to 1859
a sum of £15,150 had been expended,
towards which £2OOO was received out of
the state-aid grant, the remainder being
raised by voluntary efforts, or borrowed.
Immediately after the opening of the
church, the trustees unfortunately found
themselves in no very enviable position.
In their last report, previous to the con-
secration, they say (reviewing their past
labours) “at one time a debt of about
£12,000 had been contracted ; dissensions,
strife, and dissatisfaction prevailed; the
congregation became very limited; com-
mercial prospects declined, and the state
and prosperity of the Church and trustees
were such as to become a bye-word in the
diocese.” Readers of the present day must
bear in mind the very extraordinary times


in which colonists then lived, and the dif-
ficulties surrounding church building com-
mittees, consequent upon the gold discover-
ies, and the effect those discoveries produced
upon the labour market and the price of
building materials. During the progress of
the work the trustees and building com-
mittee were placed in most embarrassing
positions; at almost every meeting they
held, their estimates appeared to be increas-
ing, and caused some murmuring breezes
to blow, some blaming the architect, others
blaming the leading men of the committee
and trustees. The undertaking the erection
of the parsonage on land, then without the
parish boundary, at such a critical time,
while the church was building, also seemed
to add fuel to the fire that had been
kindled, although for a time it smouldered.
A protest was sent in, of which the fol-
lowing is an extract: —
Rev. Sib and Gentlemen, —After hearing
the report read at our lato meeting, I determined
to enter my protest against that portion of it
relating to the site for the parsonage, for how-
ever eligible it may be as the site for a parson-
age, it is a most out-of-the-way and ineligible
one as the site of a parsonage for St. Mark’s
parish. I have all along objected to any pro-
posal that would cause our pastor to be non-
resident among his people, and I object that
such an important subject as selecting a site,


and entering into contracts without even con-
sulting the congregation, should be done by the
church building committee, who have no au-
thority or power for the same. » * #
Charles Baker.
This communication was read at the fol-
lowing meeting of committee, but, as it
appeared to be a censure upon them, it was
ruled “ out of order,” and they decided that
no record or mention of it should be made
in the minutes. At their next meeting,
an objection was raised to the confirmation
of the minutes, as not being complete, and
containing no allusion to the protest received
or the committee’s ruling thereon. From
this time forth much unpleasantness ensued,
in which unfortunately the clergymen was
involved.
Returning again to the church. Many,'
and continued efforts were made to raise
the means to discharge the heavy debt in-
curred. It is to be regretted that the
resort to bazaars and all the “ pious wicked-
ness ” of lotteries, post-offices, lucky bags,
etc., was adopted. The first was held in
the Mechanics’ Hall, Collins street, during
the building of the church, and the second
was held in the Old Exhibition Building,
at the close of 185 G or beginning of 1857.
A rather singular offer of assistance was
made during the canvass for subscriptions
for the erection of the church, by a Mr.


Rowe, the proprietor of an equestrian circus,'
who proposed to give a performance in aid
of the various religious denominations of
the city requiring aid for such • purpose ;
the offer, however, was respectfully declined
as far as St. Mark’s was concerned, but the
same gentleman afterwards gave a donation
of £2O, as will be seen by the published
list of subscriptions issued for 1855.
Having now arrived at a period when
a report of the church was published, it
will be well to note down such events as
may be considered of interest during each
year, and I therefore continue my remarks
for 1855. On the 29th of January, a
committee consisting of Messrs. J. Vale,
C. Curtis, C. Baker, T. Reilly, C. Rusliton,
W. Weir, H. Peck, M. P. Phillips, and W.
Mortley were appointed for the collection
of weekly subscriptions. Previous to the
opening of the church, all the business con-
nected with the parish was conducted by a
committee and trustees meeting together;
but on the opening of the church, the trus-
tees, according to the Act 8, William IV.,
assumed the management themselves, and
held their meetings separately, expecting
the committee would do the work of raising
subscriptions in the parish for stipend of
clergymen, ifcc. The committee appeared
to hesitate, and resolved upon asking the
trustees to “ define their duties,” and the
Rev. Mr. Clowes, being one of the trus-


tecs, was requested to explain them. It
was quite clear there was no harmony
between trustees and committee. At a
later meeting of the latter body, a com-
munication was sent to the trustees “ on
the subject of appointing one governing
body ” for the church, to which the follow-
ing reply was received : —“ The trustees of
St. Mark’s church propose simply to con-
fine themselves to the duties which the law
imposes and their responsibilities require.
They have no wish to govern, but simply
to raise all the money they can to pay off
the debt upon the church, and to avail
themselves of all the assistance they can
procure for this purpose.” Previous to
1855 no published financial statement had
ever been presented to the parishioners by
the trustees, the act not requiring them to
give any account until out of debt; and,
as large sums had been contributed for
several years, there was, as is generally the
case, a desire to know what was being done
with them, and many expressed a desire to
have the church’s affairs placed under the
management of annually-elected church-
wardens,* instead of remaining in the hands
of life-elected trustees, who were not le-
gally required to give any account of their
* See a long correspondence oil this subject between
Messrs. C. Curtis, C. Baker, and others, and the
Vicar-General, published in the Herald pf 14tl*
June, 1860.


stewardship until the church was out of
debt, and consecrated. The committee,
or a majority of them at least, finding
they could not work harmoniously with the
minister and trustees, resolved to call a
meeting, and report; and on the Bth
March, 1855, a pretty strong muster were
assembled in the school, the Hon. T. T.
a’Beckett, registrar of the diocese, being,
by invitation of the trustees, present,
though not a parishioner. A long list of
grievances was laid before the meeting; but
the trustees having all the force of law on
their side, as explained by Mr. a’Beckett,
the report of the committee was rejected.
Although a large number of the parishioners
urged the committee to the step they took,
they declined to come forward publicly at
the meeting. A tolerably full report of
this meeting, occupying over a column, ap-
peared in the Argus of March 9, of that
year, concluding with the following com-
ment : “ although much contrariety of
opinion existed, and diverse feelings were
expressed, (the meeting) was conducted
throughout with courtesy, if not with har-
mony."
Nothing further necessary to notice took
place during this year, except the un-
pleasant one of demands upon the trustees
for various amounts, being debts incurred
in connection with the church, the organ,
ifcc.; but the public meeting just alluded


to appears to have done good, for, on the
17th August, “the audited accounts of the
trustees were laid upon the table,” and
afterwards printed and circulated, thus
showing a desire on the part of the trustees
to meet the wishes of the parishioners.
On New Year’s Day, 1856, at a social
tea meeting held in the schools, after
entering at length into various particulars
connected with his six years’ labours
amongst the people of Collingwood, the
Kev. Mr. Clowes intimated that his health,
which for the past six months had been
gradually giving way, and increasing duties,
rendered it utterly impossible for him to
retain his present responsible post as pastor
of the populous parish of St. Mark, unless
his health materially improved, but he was
thankful to be able to say that he had not
“ laboured in vain nor spent his strength
for nought;” and on the 13th July follow-
ing, he announced to his co-trustees that he
was about to return to England on leave of
absence for eighteen months on account of
failing health, well known to have been
caused by over-exertion, care, and anxiety in
connection with the erection of the church,
and the perplexed state of the parish. In his
anxiety to serve the church, he unfortunately
allowed himself to be elected a trustee,
and treasurer to the building fund, and
took upon himself responsibilities and duties
that ought to have been borne by laymen.


On its becoming known that he was about
to leave, fresh troubles sprang up. Writs
were served upon him by the contractor for
pewing the church, for an account amounting
to £199 unsatisfied, and also by the con-
tractor for the parsonage fence, for £223
3s. 3d. The trustees ultimately agreed to
pay the former £IOO, which satisfied the
contractor; and towards the fence they
agreed to pay £IOO ; but, as this last con-
tract had been entered into with out consulting
the trustees, it was agreed that Mr.'Clowes
must pay the balance himself. This was a
serious loss to Mr. Clowes, and a warning
to clergymen against taking offices or en-
gaging in responsibilities in connection
with the secular or monetary affairs of a
parish, which unquestionably ought always
to be undertaken by the laity. Many a
time has that worthy pastor remarked,
“ Ah, Mr. —, you little know how my rest
is disturbed; the duties of treasurer, &c.,
impose upon me the necessity of poring
over pounds, shillings and pence, when I
ought to be studying my Bible ; and when
my people are quietly reposing on their beds
I am compelled to sit up and study for my
Sunday duty, and for their spiritual bene-
fit.” It was no wonder, after three or
four years of such incessant toil and worry,
and the unprecedented and excited state of
the times, that he should seek repose.
Placed in such a position, it was not un-


reasonable to suppose that his actions ;rild~ —
conduct would cause some to differ from
him, and perhaps none more so than the
writer. Many things were said and done
then that time has shown could not well
have been otherwise; and many an ad-
mission has since been made that they see
things in a different light now, and should
hesitate to act the same part again. Time,
that good old physician, has healed up
many a wound, and matured the judgment
of most.
In the month of September, Mr. Clowes,
with his wife, daughter, and Miss Eyles, a
lady staying at the parsonage, and well
known in the parish as a most devoted ser-
vant of her Divine Master in every good
work, particularly in the Sunday School
and District Visiting Society, left the
colony for England; but, as it was their
full intention to return hither, their fur-
niture was left in the parsonage. The
Rev. A. J. M'Causland, from St. Luke’s,
Emerald Hill, and Sandridge, was appointed
by the Bishop to occupy Mr. Clowes’ place
during his absence, and preached his first
sermon at St. Mark’s on 6th July, 1856.
Notwithstanding the unpleasant bickerings
that had taken place in the parish, the
Sunday (24th July, 1856) on which Mr.
Clowes preached his farewell sermon, from
Ephesians iii. 14 to end, the church was
crowded to excess, and the congregation


were much affected with his parting words.
In the evening of the same day there was
a confirmation. The usual valedictory tea
meeting was also held, and an address of
sympathy, accompanied by a purse of
money, was presented to him.
During the next month (October) the
trustees resolved, “ that steps be taken to
have the present parsonage sold and an-
other, on a less expensive scale, built on
the land given to St. Mark’s parish by Mr.
J. M. Smith,” * evidently convinced that a
mistake had been made in erecting the
present building so far away from the
church. A memorial to the executive,
praying them to sell the land on which the
parsonage stands, was prepared, and Mr.
John Lanktree, the indefatigable secretary
of the building committee and trustees, with
It. Grice, Esq., and the Bishop, waited on
the Hon. the President of the Board of
Land and Works on the subject: and it
was reported that the same was “ graciously
received,” and hopes entertained that a
favourable answer might be obtained; but
the question was for a time left in abey-
ance.
On the Oth. May, 1857, it was revived in
another place, the Church Assembly, when
* Mr. Smith gave about two acres at the corner of
Smith and Itose streets, as an endowment, to St.
Mark’s Church, only one allotment of winch has as
yet been let. It is high time it was made more pro-
ductive.


Dr. Tracy presented a petition, asking the
sanction of the Assembly, preparatory to
application to Parliament, to enable the
trustees to sell the ground on which the
present parsonage is erected, for the pur-
pose of erecting one on a more favourable
site,” thus proving there were good grounds
for the protest which was so ignominiously
rejected and ruled out of order by the
building committee. Mr. Woolley seconded
Dr. Tracy’s motion, and a debate ensued.
On the suggestion of the president (the
Bishop), and with the consent of the As-
sembly, Dr. Tracy amended his motion as
follows : “ That this Assembly, having taken
into consideration the petition of the trus-
tees of St. Mark’s Church, do sanction an
application to the Legislature for the sale
of the ground on which the present parson-
age is erected, for the purpose of erecting q
parsonage on a more favourable site.”
At the trustees’ meeting held on the 30th
October following, a letter from the Hon.
the President of the Board of Land and
Works was read, refusing to sanction tho
sale, as the law officers of the Crown were
of opinion that the request could not be
legally complied with, and so the subject
has ever since been at rest.
Proceeding in chronological order to note
the events as they took place, it must bo
remarked that the llev. Mr. McCausland
did not remain long at St. Mark’s, having


exchanged livings with the Rev. C. Searle,
of VVangaratta, and preached his last ser-
mon on January 11, 1857. Mr. and Mrs.
McCausland left Collingwood, before their
worth could be properly known or appre-
ciated by the people, for their new sphere
of labours ; but a sad bereavement overtook
the rev. gentleman. Mrs. McCausland,
who for some time had been in a very
delicate state of health, died on the road to
Wangaratta, and the Bishop and Mrs.
Perry, who were then making their autumnal
visit to that township, expecting to be
greeted by the cheerful face of Mrs. McCaus-
land, had their meeting saddened by finding
Mr. McCausland a widower.
The Rev. Mr. Searle entered upon his
duties at St. Mark’s on January 18, 1857,
about which time the second bazaar, already
alluded to, was being held or about to take
place, from the printed circular of which
is extracted the following foot-note :
“Munificent Offer. A gentleman has
expressed his intention of presenting as a do-
nation to the object for which the bazaar is to
be held, a sum equal in amount to that realised
by the bazaar, provided the latter be not less
than £500.”
The gentleman alluded to was Mr. Richard
Grice, who had already been such a liberal
donor towards the building fund. Every
effort was used to make the bazaar what is
termed “a success,” and the result was a


nett sum of £558 19s. Bd. ; but a sub-com-
mittee, who examined the accounts, reported
they had reason to think the amount
ought to be increased, as some items, which
should have been collected, did not appear
to have been collected, and when the bal-
ance sheet was presented, it was augmented
to £590 4s. Gd.” The non-publication of
the accounts of the trustees still was a
source of much grumbling and contention ;
up to this date (from 1853 to 1857) only
one report had been issued, and Mr. Clowes,
one of the trustees, having been absent
from the colony for more than six months,
the parishioners embraced the opportunity
of causing his place to be declared vacant,
and having a new trustee elected, who
would pledge himself to endeavour to get
an annual statement published, although
not required by the Act 8 William IV.
On the 21st April, 1857, the trustees
met, and resolved that “ a desire being
expressed by many of the subscribers to
the church that a new trustee should be
elected, a meeting be held on 7th May
next, for the purpose of removing Mr.
Clowes,” and at the meeting held on that
date it was resolved that a public meeting be
held on May 26, for the election of his succes-
sor. This meeting was expected to be a
stormy one, and at the appointed time a large
number of the subscribers assembled in the
boys’ school. The contending parties were


well represented, and the trustees, who at this
time were personally responsible for a debt
of £6,928, borrowed at 10 per cent., urged
upon the meeting the necessity of the trus-
tee to be elected sharing the responsibility
with them. One candidate had been in-
duced previously to come fonvard, who had
been considered one of the “ opposition,”
and who doubtless was opposed to many
proceedings that had taken place. The
following circular announcing his candida-
ture was issued to the subscribers :
Parisii or St. Mark’s, Collingwood,
27 Stanley st., May 13, 1857.
Sir, —A vacancy having occurred in the
Church Trust by the absence from the colony of
the Eev. J. A. Clowes, I have been induced by
some friends to come forward as a candidate,
but in complying I reserve to myself the right
of withdrawing should a more eligible person
solicit your votes or be offered to your notice.
During a residence of nearly eight years in the
parish, from the time of the Eev. Mr. Bloom-
field’s ministrations amongst us, I have ever
been closely connected with the Church of Eng-
land (before St. Mark’s was contemplated) ;
therefore I trust I shall not be considered pre-
sumptuous in yielding to the wish of friends by
offering myself as a candidate for the office of a
trustee of the parish church. I much regret
that of late differences exist which materially
impair our usefulness as a branch of Christ’s


Church, but should I be elected my best efforts
shall be used to promote the peace and welfare
of the Church and parish. With the exception
of the circulation of this notice, I do not intend
to take any steps to secure my election, nor do
I wish my friends to influence a single individual
in my favour.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
At the meeting in question, when the
above candidate had been duly proposed
and seconded, the following bit of cate-
chising took place: —
Q. Will you, if elected, enter into a bond,
sharing the responsibility of the debt on the
church? A. I will. ,
Q. And on the parsonago ? A. Yes ; I will.
Q. Will you sign the following document ?
“Wo, the undersigned, trustees of St. Mark’s
Church, do hereby severally and collectively
agree, and make ourselves responsible for all
bills of exchange bearing the signature of any
of the trustees of St. Mark’s Church, drawn
for the purpose of liquidating any debt, or loan,
on account of the building fund of St. Mark’s
Church?” A. I will.
, Those present at the meeting will re-
member how these answers were received.
No other candidate being proposed, he was
elected without further opposition, if such
it poilld be called, and on June 12, 1857,


was' introduced to ; hi3' co-trustees 'by Dr.
Tracy, at a meeting then held, and shortly
after he and Mr. Kinsman were appointed
managing trustees;
, Mention has already been made of tho
stained glass windows, and in order to give
an account of a most extraordinary sacri-
legious transaction that took place in con-
nection therewith, it will be necessary to
go back to the month of April. The win-
dow in question, as already stated, was
presented by a very liberal donor to the
Church, and contains three simple crosses,
two small and one larger one; “the design
for it was drawn and coloured by the archi-
tect of the church, and submitted to the min-
ister, the trustees, and the building com-
mittee, respectively, approved of, and ac-
cepted,” the donor stating, that if there
was any wish for alteration, he would be
happy to do it if applied to. A Mr.
Fletcher and some others, not known or
connected with the congregation, made
objection to it at the opening, but from
that period to April 7, 18G7, little or no-
thing had been heard against the design.
On that morning, in a purely accidental
way, a workman was observed with a ladder
engaged in surreptitiously taking out the
larger cross, and, on being interrogated on
the subject as to who authorised him so to
do, replied that Mr. gave him the
order; but, as this ■ gentleman w»S only a


seatholder, and not an officer of the church',
enquiry was forthwith made of the minister
temporarily officiating, who stated that he
had not authorised it, although he individu-
ally knew all about it! Application was
then made to one of the managing trustees,
and a still more extraordinary and question-
able reply was obtained: “he had not
ordered it. He did not know anything of
it as a trustee —he sanctioned it as an in-
dividual—he thus connived at persons doing
it as a trustee. He refused to name the
persons, as it was a secret.” He was then
asked by the donor (all in the presence of
witnesses) why this underhand conduct if
they were doing right? His reply was,
“ the end justifies the means ! Some parties
had determined to have the alteration made,
and it was resolved to do it secretly, and
then not let any one know how it was done,
or who ordered it.”
It must naturally be supposed that such
conduct would kindle a flame, and draw-
down upon the guilty parties the censure
of all right thinking men. Many letters
appeared in the Argus, all condemning the
conduct of those concerned. A few days
afterwards, a tea meeting that had been
previously arranged for the purpose of rais-
ing funds for lighting the church with gas
took place on April 17: After the good
things provided had been done ample justice
to, the business of the meeting took a singu-


lar turn* and there was oxygen in abund-
ance. The report of the gas committee,
having been read, was adopted. The donor
of the window then began to address the
meeting on the late outrage, but the rev.
chairman peremptorily forbade any dis-
cussion on matters unconnected with gas.
The meeting, however, thought otherwise,
and, by their consent, Dr. Tracy, one of the
trustees, to his honour be it stated, in mild
but energetic terms, denounced the unau-
thorised interference of the parties impli-
cated, and declared that the trustees were
totally ignorant of the proceeding—called
upon the chairman to give the names of the
guilty parties in the underhand and illegal act,
and concluded by moving that “ the window
(which had been partly damaged) be forth-
with restored to its original state, Mr. Cur-
tis having expressed, some months since,
his willingness to make any alteration
desired by any competent authority.” The
doctor was much applauded both during
and at the close of his excellent and con-
ciliatory speech, and, the motion having
been carried unanimously, the meeting re-
turned to the bond fide question of gas.
On the 12th June, the trustee who had
been connected with the illicit removal of
the cross from the chancel window tendered
his resignation, giving, as his. reason for
such a step, the receipt of “ a requisition
signed by fourteen individuals calling upon


him to resign; ” at the same time he handed
in a counter requisition, calling upon him
not to resign, signed by forty-four persons,
and certain correspondence between himself
and the requisitionists. On a consideration
of the same by the trustees, : it was resolved
not to accept the resignation, as a larger
number had signed the counter document. t
On the 30th October, another princely
gift was reported at the trustees’ meeting,
viz., that Mr. Grice “ had paid since last
meeting £1250 and all the interest due on
the church debt out of his own fund ; also
that £l5O had been paid out of the general
fund of the church, so that at that time
the debt was reduced to £5,520,” still a
very respectable sum to be divided between
the five trustees. At the close of the year
the balance sheet represented a further re-
duction, making the total debt £5,443.
The next event to be noticed is the re-
tirement during the first quarter of the year
1858 (February 14), of the Rev. C. Searle,
who was appointed to a new parish just
then created, St. Paul’s, Ballarat East, and
was succeeded at St. Mark’s by the late
Rev. James Linskea, of the White Hills,
Sandhurst, on the following Sunday, Feb-
ruary 21, although it was expected, and
even announced in the Record, that the
Rev. George Pollard would take the place
of Mr. Searle as Mr. Clowes’ locum tenens.
Mr. Linskea entered upon his duties with


much earnestness, not, however, without
.Having some dissatisfied ones amongst his
flock, but which, on a closer acquaintance,
became his most ardent admirers and sup-
porters, and he laboured on for a period of
several months, much good appearing to
result from his ministrations, particularly
in uniting the people more closely together.
To him is due the establishment of an
additional service in the parish, viz., at
Christchurch schools, Abbotsford, (erected
through the instrumentality of the Rev.
J. A. Clowes). Mr. Linskea preached the
opening sermon there on June 27, 1858, and
arranged for a continuation of services by
Mr. Kinsman and other laymen. During
Mr. Linskea’s stay at St Mark’s, another
example occurred of the evils of clergymen
having to do with the secular affairs of the
church, or allowing themselves to become
responsible for church debts. When at
the White Hills, he became responsible for
the payment of the harmonium, and, the
trustees of the church there not having
assumed the responsibility after Mr. Linskea
had left them, law proceedings were insti-
tuted, and a j udgment obtained against him,
and, failing to pay on principle, was cast
into prison for some days. A remonstrance
from one of the trustees of St. Mark’s to
the trustees of the church at the White
Hills was never answered. Much sympathy
was evinced towards the rev. gentleman


when the affair became known by Church*
men, both in Sandhurst and Collingwood, :
On January 11, 1858, a letter was re :
ceived from the Rev. Mr. Clowes, stating
that, in consequence of the continued illness
of his daughter, he had written to ; the
Bishop for a short extension of his leave of
absence ; and on August 25 a second letter
was received, dated June 8, 1858., contain-
ing his resignation of the incumbency of
St. Mark’s, in which he says, “ Bor a con-
siderable time past, the parish has been with-
out a stated pastor, which cannot fail in
being in some measure prejudicial to its
interests, and I have felt it my duty to
you and to the people to place my resig-
nation in the hands of the Bishop of Mel-
bourne. It is needless for me to say that
nothing but the conviction that such a
course was right, in the sight of God, would
have led me to it.” At the same time,
another letter was received from the Bishop,
“ requesting the trustees to take iinmediato
steps for the election of two representatives,
in whom the patronage of the living was to
be vested.” Up to this time, during Mr,
Linskea’s ministry, the parish appeared in
a fair way of settling down in peace and
quietness. Unfortunately, however, cir-
cumstances connected with the election of
the representatives just mentioned com-
pletely convulsed the parish and caused
much angry strife. A. meeting was con-


Vened for the 7th October in pursuance of
the Act of the Church Assembly, No. 3,
intituled “ An act to provide for the con-
stitution of ecclesiastical parishes in the
Diocese of Melbourne, the consecration of
churches, and the appointment of ministers
to the spiritual charge thereof.” No sooner
had the official notice of this meeting been
published, than a vigorous and rather pain-
ful contest ensued, not equalled by many
municipal and parliamentary elections. Sub-
scribers of £2 and upwards to the building
fund constituted the electors, and from the
length of time the church had been built,
many of them had left the parish and were
scattered all over the colony. They were
hunted up, and proxies procured by the
friends of the respective candidates. The
managing trustees, Messrs. Kinsman and
Baker, became candidates, unpledged to
support any particular clergymen, believing
the intention of the act was to avoid the
evils of a direct election, and leave it to the
judgment and discretion of the representa-
tives to exercise their power in a calm,
deliberate manner, uninfluenced by strong
party feeling, consequent upon a contested
election. On the other side were Messrs.
B. C. Luscombe and J. R. Dickson, who
were put forward, supported (in ignor-
ance of the intentions of the Act, as many
have since acknowledged) by a very large
number of the congregation, whose names,


attached' to a requisition in the local
papers, occupied two columns. These
last named gentlemen pledged themselves
to support the Rev. James Linskea, the
minister temporarily officiating. A very
strong party was formed for the purpose of
securing their election; meetings were held,
circulars issued, and a general canvass of the
parishioners and subscribers took place; and
it was fully expected that from the in-
activity of the friends of Messrs. Kinsman
and Baker that they would be defeated
and their opponents elected, ■ It is right to
state that the managing trustees abstained
on principle from resorting to the popular
electioneering practice of giving pledges,
and obtaining signatures of support; other-
wise, there is no doubt, had they adopted
that course, from their long connection
with the Church and parish, and the active
part they took in parochial work generally,
that they would have commanded. many of
the names that were given to the first appli-
cants for them; but, as a correspondent in
the local journal observed at the time, it
was premature thus to forestall the votes of
the electors before they had time to consider
the subject in all its bearings. At one meet-
ing held during the contest there were
over 250 persons present. Mr. A. T. Best
was called to the chair; and, after the
letter's from Mr. Clowes and the Bishop had
been read by Mr. Kinsman, the meeting


was addressed at some length by the sup-
porters of Messrs. Luscombe and Dickson,
and the following resolution proposed :
“That this meeting considers that the seat-
holders should have been represented in
the approaching election; and that, to
effect their just influence in the choice of
their pastor, it was necessary to obtain a
pledge from the representatives, to be
guided in their choice by the opinions of a
majority of the congregation.” The resolu-
tion was duly seconded and warmly sup-
ported, but the chairman (known to be
favourable to Messrs. Luscombe and Dick-
son) ruled it to be illegal, refused to put it
to the meeting, and vacated the chair; on
which Mr. Dickson was voted thereto,
when the motion was put and carried unani-
mously, with the exception of Mr. Best,
the original chairman, who honourably re-
fused to do that which would materially aid
his party, but which he conscientiously
believed to be illegal, and contrary to the
spirit of the act.
On this subject, an article appeared in
The Church of England Record, under the
head of Lay Patronage, which will not be in-
appropriately introduced at this point. The
writer says:—
“At St. Mark’s active steps are being taken
to elect Representatives who shall pledge them-
selves beforehand to, nominate a particular


rMinister, a proceeding we deeply lament, and
which we think will bo deplored by a very large
majority of the members of the Church through-
out tho Diocese.
“When the Appointment of Ministers Act was
passing through the Assembly, there was a
general, we might almost say a universal, desire
expressed so to frame its provisions as to prevent,
as much as possible, the nomination of a Minister
to an incumbency being made the subject of
personal solicitation, or a matter of contention
between parties, founded on personal predilec-
tions. It was admitted at all hands, that, if
this were not guarded against, the bill might bo
made the occasion of much scandal to the
Church at large, and materially to affect the
influence, and consequently the usefulness, of
the ministry. To prevent, as far as possible,
the creation of election “ contests,” the Assem-
bly, after much consideration, decided, that in
no case whatever should a large body of persons
have the right to appoint, the privilege of the
parishioners being limited to the selection of
representatives in whose character and judgment
they could confide, and on whom the whole
responsibility should be placed of filling up tho
vacant incumbency. It was admitted, indeed it
could not be denied, that oven this privilege
might be perverted—that secretly, if not openly,
an understanding might be come to between the
electors and tho representatives, but a hope was
expressed that tho good sense and good feeling


of the members of the Church generally would
be opposed to these covert arrangements, and
that they would not be carried out to any extent.
It was, however, we are persuaded, nover con-
templated, that under any circumstances what-
ever would there be any persons found to unite
in declaring openly their intention not to vote
for any representative who would not pledge
himself to nominate the minister they wished to
be appointed to the incumbency. Such a union,
however, has been formed in the parish of St.
Mark’s, and is at the present time producing,
in the minds of many of the members of the
congregation, a most painful feeling. It is
giving, moreover, a justification to all the argu-
ments that have been brought forward against
the principle of Lay patronage; and is drawing
closer upon the people at St. Mark’s the charge
of being enemies to the progress of Lay in-
fluence in the affairs of the Church throughout
the diocese.
“We would appeal to those who are taking
part in this movement, upon the lowest as well
as the highest grounds, to at once put an end to
it. The lowest ground is the obligation upon
the Laity of the Church, to respect the laws
that have been passed by its Assembly, in which
St. Mark’s, as well as every parish throughout
the diocese, is fairly represented. The Assembly
has decided, after the fullest consideration of
the matter, that the congregation, as a body,
should not nominate the minister, but should


appoint representatives for the purpose of select-
ing one. It must be seen at once, that if any
previous pledge be extracted from a representa-
tive that he will nominate a particular indivi-
dual, then the persons requiring that pledge aro
in fact the nominators. The representative is
merely the returning officer, as it were, of tho
‘candidate’ who gets the largest number of
votes from the congregation, and thus the whole
spirit of the Act is lost sight of, and its objects
completely defeated.
“ But there are far higher grounds than these
on which the objection to the transferring tho
choice of the representation by previous pledges
may he placed, viz., that it militates against
the influence of the minister when appointed,
and is calculated to prevent the nomination of
men whom it would be most desirable to pre-
sent to the vacant incumbency. Pledges to
nominate a particular individual involve tho
necessity of previous ‘ candidature,’ and there
are many ministers throughout the diocese
who, if invited to leave the post of duty they
are filling to supply the vacant cure, would be
willing to accede to the request, but who would
not allow themselves to be put forward as candi-
dates. To appear in that character would be to
bring themselves into competition in an offensive
manner with their clerical brethren, and, if un-
successful in the ‘ contest,’ to cause them to go
back to their own people with a feeling of per-
sonal mortification, and with the tie between


them and their Congregations te'rtibly weakened,
if not altogether destroyed; while if successful
they would enter upon their new sphere of duty
with the prejudices and passions of a large
number of their parishioners arrayed against
them. • We could trace this evil much further;
but we leave it to be reflected upon by our
readers, who will not fail to perceive that it ex-
tends far beyond tho point to which we have
limited it.
“ We are glad to find that at St. Mark’s there
are many persons who protest against the pro-
ceedings that wo have called attention to, and
refuse, if elected as representatives, to pledgo
themselves in any way as to their subsequent
proceedings. We hope that the result will show
that the majority of the members (tho elective
body) are opposed to the appointment of
pledged representatives. If they are chosen
unpledged, their trust will be a very responsible
one, but we doubt not they will in its perform-
ance justify the wisdom of leaving it to be per-
formed unfettered.
“There will always be some difficulty in
selecting a minister for a vacant incumbency;
and it will always require some tact, not only to
discover who would be willing to accept the
post if offered to them, but to guard the minis-
ter applied to from any mortification if he
should not be chosen, and to protect him
against the injury that might be done to him
in the minds of his people if his willingness to


leave them for another post of duty : were gene-
rally known.
“These are important matters, and will require
in dealing with them the exercise of sound
judgment and discretion; and this renders it of
more importance, that the representatives
chosen should be men of high character and
sound judgment; and that the influence of both
on • tho nomination • should be altogether free
and unrestrained.
“We shall watch with much interest the result
of tho St. Mark’s election, and hope it may not
be so conducted as to press upon tho members
of the Assembly the necessity of its amending
the Act under which it will have to be con-
ducted.”
The Editor of the same publication also'
gives the following report of proceedings
in reference to the election
“As the dayof election approachedtheinterest
in the result increased, and a degree of excite-
ment began to evince itself which it would have
required but little provocation to have worked
up into an election warfare. The blank walls of
Collingwood were the day before the election
posted with election placards, pointing out the
supposed advantages of selecting Messrs. Lus-
combe and Dickson, while the fact of Messrs.
Kinsman and Baker being altogether ‘ un-
pledged ’ was announced to the public through
tho same “posting” medium. It happened
that the day of tho election was that fixed


for the' election of Municipal Councillors for East
Collingwood, and that a most vigorous con-
test for the honours of councillorship had given
rise to an enormous issue of placards, mostly of
a humorous or satirical character, so that the
merits of a gentleman designated as ‘ Sam tho
Spinner,’ and a trio of candidates designated as
‘The Serious Family,’ came to be announced
side by side with the special fitness of Messrs.
Luscombe and Dickson as representatives of tho
contributors to St. Mark’s Church, to present a
minister to officiate within it. In addition to
election placards, a vigorous canvass had been
resorted to, and when the hour of election
arrived a strong feeling of interest had been
created. At 5 p.m. the business of the election
commenced, a large number of persons, including
among them a considerable proportion of
females, being present. Mr. A. T. Best was
appointed chairman, and Messrs. 11. Peck and
W. Weir were appointed scrutineers, after which
tho voting commenced, and was continued until
9 p.m., the proceedings throughout being most
orderly. All the gentlemen proposed as repre-
sentatives were present, and a good many
questions were put to the chairman from time
to time by various persons, as to the rights of
particular voters, and the Registrar of the Dio-
cese was also questioned on some points con-
nected with the “Appointment of Ministers
Act” on his offering himself to exercise his
right of voting; but all this was done with tho


utmost decorum; and, although every person
taking part in the proceedings seemed thoroughly
in earnest, there was nothing approaching to
acerbity or ill-temper manifested. For a con-
siderable time the voting was greatly in favour
of Messrs. Luscombe and Dickson, nearly
seventy votes having at a few minutes before
nine, when the polling closed, been recorded
in their favour against about forty given in
favour of Messrs. Baker and Kinsman; but at
this time Mr. Grice entered, and added to their
number fifty-two votes, to which he was en-
titled as a contributor to the church of the
munificent sum of £5,000; this, of course,
settled the election, much to the dissatisfaction
of those who were desirous of returning
Messrs. Luscombe and Dickson, who had, no
doubt, up to the time of Mr. Grice’s appear-
ance, felt quite confident that they would be
elected.
“A protest against the election was presented
to the Bishop by some gentlemen who were dis-
satisfied at the result, but some of the objections
urged were altogether untenable, and the other
objections, if they had been allowed, would not
have affected the majority in favour of Messrs.
Baker and Kinsman, who have therefore been
accepted by the Bishop as the duly elected repre-
sentatives of the contributors to St. Mark’s
Church, to present to him a duly qualified clerk
for induction to the vacant benefice.
“ Eighty-nine contributors voted at the elec-
tion ; fifty-nine, having collectively seventy-four
p


votes, voting for Messrs. Luscombe and Dickson,
and thirty, having ninety-six votes, voting for
Messrs. Baker and Kinsman. On the day of
election six contributors were added to the list
by the bishop, all of whom voted for Messrs.
Luscombe and Dickson.”
The result of the election, it is needless
to say, took all parties by surprise, and in
two days after (Saturday, 9th October), a
letter, of which the following is a copy,
evidently penned during excitement, and
while smarting under the effects of a defeat,
appeared in The Argus :
“ST. MARK’S CHURCH.
“To the Editor of the Argus.
“ Sir, —We beg to submit the following state-
ment of circumstances connected with the election
of patrons to choose a minister for St. Mark’s
Church, Collingwood, and respectfully to solicit
your insertion thereof.
“ At four o’clock on Thursday, 7th October, the
parishioners and voters met for the above pur-
pose in the school-room adjoining the church.
Mr. Best was called upon to preside, and Messrs.
Weir and Peck were elected scrutineers.
“Messrs. Dickson and Luscombe declared
themselves willing to act as representatives (if
elected) on behalf of the congregation. Mr.
Kinsman, who appeared for self, and Mr. Baker,
declared himself and colleague willing to accept
the same office, evidently in opposition to the
parishioners.


“The voting proceeded with perfect order
until ten minutes to nine o’clock p.m., within ten
minutes of the time for closing the poll, (five
hourshaving been devoted to receiving votes) the
election stood as follows :—For Messrs. Dick-
son and Luscombe, seventy-four votes, received
from fifty-nine voters, thirty-three of whom
were members of the congregation ; for Messrs.
Kinsman and Baker, forty votes, recorded by
twenty-eight voters, nine only of whom (includ-
ing the candidates) were members of the con-
gregation.
“At this stage of affairs {viz., ten minutes to
nine o'clock), Richard Grice, Esq., the most
liberal contributor to the church, and enrolled
on the list as entitled to fifty-two votes, but
who, when waited on by gentlemen, prior to the
election, for the purpose of ascertaining in whose
favour he intended to vote, had distinctly stated
that he should stand neutral throughout, and
not interfere in any way with the proceedings,
to the surprise of all present, entered the room
and recorded his fifty-two votes (an overwhelm-
ing influence) in favour of the unpopular candi-
dates, then placing them at the head of the poll
by a majority of seventeen, and neutralising the
efforts of the congregation and its committee.
“At the close of the election, the gentlemen
present formed themselves into a committee,
and drew up this statement of facts, considering
such a course due to the Rev. Mr. Linskea,
whose cause they had espoused, and to the
congregation, the members of whose committee


exerted themselves in an endeavour to secure to
the parishioners the right of electing the man of
their choice.
“ In conclusion, the members of this committee
desire to record their unanimous opinion, that
the conduct of Mr. Grice (a gentleman who had
won the hearts of every member of the congre-
gation) was upon this occasion in the highest
degree reprehensible—in the first place for
stating to one of the candidates that it was not
his intention to vote ; and in the second place
for stepping in at the eleventh hour, when it
was out of the power of the congregation to
record more votes (it being well known through-
out the evening that the popular candidates had
a majority of two to one), thereby virtually
presenting the parish of St. Mark with a pastor
of his own selection.
“Wo remain, Sir, your obedient servants,
‘ ‘ Signed—
“ William Weir It. C. Luscombe
“H. W. Peck Charles Curtis
“James It. Dickson Charles Cook
“ William Bryson W. Tullidge.”
“A. T. Best
In reply to the above letter, and the
attack upon Mr. Grice, there afterwards
appeared the following, from Theo. J. Sum-
ner, Esq. :
“ST. MARK’S CHURCH.
“ To the Editor of the Argus.
“ Sir, —In your issue of the 9th inst.,under this
heading, signed by nine gentlemen, appears a


letter, charging Mr. Grice with having violated
his promise made to several gentlemen, in re-
ference to the election of candidates for the
representation of tho congregation. As I have
no wish to inflict on the public a long letter on a
subject not generally interesting, I would simply
crave your permission to state that I was present
when the candidate referred to in the last para-
graph of the letter called on Mr. Grice ; that I
have a most distinct remembrance of the con-
versation ; and that Mr. Grice said nothing
whatever to debar him, as a man of honor, from
using his votes as he might think proper, al-
though he did state that he should prefer not to
interfere. Knowing this much of the matter, I
think it due to Mr. Grice to state it; and I also
think that the nine gentlemen, on reflection,
will find that they have, under the irritation of
a defeat, made statements respecting one of the
best friends of their church, under a false im-
pression or wrong information, and for which
they will feel they ought to apologise.
“I am, Sir, yours, most truly,
“Theo. Jno. Sumner.”
“ 11th October, 1858.”
The editor of The Argus, on the 12th
October, thought the election of sufficient
importance to devote a leading article to
the consideration of the subject, and as it
was written by one who could not have
been a partizan, and contains much good


sense and. sound reasonings his remarks are
here reproduced. He says t —.
“ The recent election of St. Mark’s, Colling-
wood, the results of which we published on Satur-
day, presents features of more than merely local
interest. If it is not the first, it is certainly the
most important instance that has yet occurred,
not merely in this colony, but in any country of
the nomination of a clergyman of the Church of
England by popular election. Under the act of
the Church Assembly, for the constitution of
ecclesiastical parishes, the Bishop has the right
of appointment to any parish only once in every
three vacancies. On the other occasions, the
laity choose their own minister. The mode of
election is the indirect method; that is, the
electors do not themselves vote upon the merits
of the different candidates, but appoint a com-
mittee to whom the task of selection is entrusted.
On the first vacancy after the erection of a
church, this electoral college, as we may call it,
is chosen by the subscribers. On subsequent
occasions, it is chosen partly by the subscribers
and partly by the parishioners. The case of
St. Mark’s belonged to the former class, and the
contributors to the church were required to
elect two persons for the sole and express pur-
pose of choosing a suitable minister for the
parish.
“ Ot the wisdom of this double election there
can be little room for doubt. It would obvi-
ously be unseemly to require clergymen to attend


public-meetings, to make speeches, give pledges,
and put in motion all the machinery of a con-
tested election. The constituencies, too, are,
from their very nature, unfit to decide upon the
comparative merits of such candidates. They
can form a satisfactoryjudgment of a candidate’s
integrity, and of hia general ability, but they
cannot be expected to distinguish the different
degrees of professional aptitude. For such in-
quiries a much smaller body is required, greater
calmness, a more complete and intense responsi-
bility, and that circumspection which the sense
of trusteeship invariably imposes. The con-
stituences, then, whether they be subscribers or
parishioners, select from themselves a committee
in whom they have confidence, and devolve upon
those representatives the duty of making the
necessary enquiries that so important an election
demands. The parishioners of St. Mark’s,
however, do not appear to have taken into
their account these considerations. They, or
some of them—for the numbers voting seem but
small—made up their minds that they would
have a particular clergyman, and, as they could
not alter the system of double election which
had been established, they had recourse to the
simple expedient of exacting pledges. They put
forward as candidates for the electoral college
two gentlemen whom they had persuaded to
promise to choose the favourite candidate. Con-
siderable irritation consequently seems to have
been felt upon the defeat of this notable device.
We published, on Saturday, a letter from some


indignant parishioners, expressing in strong
terms their disapprobation of the conduct of
Mr. Grice, by whose votes the delegates were
defeated, and the representatives chosen. From
a communication which appears in another
column,* it would seem that some misapprehen-
sion of facts exists, and that Mr. Grice did not
give the promise he is supposed by our corres-
pondents to have given. But without entering
at length into the personal question, as it affects
a gentleman whose name will be held in honour
in this colony so long as a princely yet modest
iberality commands respect, we desire to point
out that in this election the parishioners, as
such, had no legal right to interfere. The right
of appointing representatives lay with the con-
tributors to the church. Of these Mr. Grice
has been distinguished for his munificence. He
is said to have been entitled to fifty-two votes.
According to the Church Assembly act, which
gives to the contributor of £2 one vote, and to
the contributor of £lOO three votes, an ad-
ditional vote for every £lOO contributed, Mr.
Grice must have given at least five thousand
pounds to the church. The vote of such a man,
even if recorded in favour of ‘ the unpopular
candidates,’ can hardly be considered a griev-
ance, or as likely to injure the church of which
he has been so liberal a benefactor. But we
think that our correspondents, whatever mis-
understanding may have arisen between them
* Mr. Sumner’s Letter.


> 'v' / *
and Mr. Grice as to Ms neutrabtjyn.the electionr
are greatly in error in charging that' - gentlepjan:
with, by his vote, ‘virtually presenting the
parish of St. Mark with a pastor of his own
selection.’ They completely mistake the nature
and the object of the double election. That
system is neither designed nor adapted for the
purpose of mere patronage. Its very object is to
get rid of popular candidates, and to secure the
selection of the men who are really best qualified
for the office. A reference to the Act of the
Church Assembly will show how anxiously that
body sought to guard against the admission of
any other motive on the part of those entrusted
with the actual nomination except that of pro-
curing the best man that can be found. On the
day on which the representatives are to make
their choice, they are to assemble in the parish
church, Divine Service is to be performed, and,
immediately afterwards, the representatives are
to proceed to the election, and each of them is
to make a solemn declaration, ‘that he will
exercise his right of election to the best of his
judgment, without favour or affection, for the
glory of God, and for the well-being of the
Church.’ We are sure that the gentlemen who
engaged to act as the returning officers of the
congregation could not have been aware of the
promise which they would have been required
to make, and of the solemn sanction with which
that promise is guarded. For them, their defeat
is a fortunate occurrence, since it saves them
from the necessity of violating the pledges that


they ignorantly gave, and of frustrating the
objects of their election. The gentleman for
whom they were instructed to vote may, for
anything we know to the contrary, be the most
eligible candidate; but, if he be, he could be-
chosen by them only for that reason. If he be
not, no directions of their constituents could
justify them in appointing him.
“We have thus gone at length into this matter
not onty because it is of itself the commence-
ment of a new and remarkable experiment, but
also because it illustrates one of the most im-
portant political questions of the day. If a
parish chooses trustees to select its clergymen,
so does an electoral district elect a representa-
tive to make its laws. If a parish is unfit to
make a good selection of a duly qualified minister,
although it is perfectly competent to judge of
persons who will make a good selection, so a con-
stituency may select good legislators, although
it is unable to enact good laws. If a parish
obviously destroys the very aim and object of
the representative system, by electing trustees
whose sole duty it is formally to nominate the
person whose name is given to them, in no less
a degree does a constituency violate the same
great principle, when, instead of returning a
representative to Parliament, it sends a mes-
senger to register its opinions. If the represen-
tative of a parish is bound by an engagement
equivalent to the most solemn oath to exercise
an honest, independent, intelligent judgment,
in the choice of a clergyman, the representative


of an electoral district: is no less morally bound
tor use the same freedom of thought, and to
devote the same conscientious efforts to the
preparation of the laws. There is, unhappily,
a strong tendency in constituencies to ignore
these plain truths, and to introduce a system
of complete delegation. Unhappily, too, there
are candidates who do not regard as a degra-
dation the practice of taking orders from their
constituents. We hope that the manifest im-
propriety of the proceedings in St. Mark's may
induce some electors to reflect whether the
principal qualities to be desired in a candidate
aro a capacity to swallow all kinds and any
amount of pledges, or intelligence, uprightness,
and a sincere desire to promote the interests,
not of himself or of his party, but. of the entire
country.”
Following up: the subject in the Argus,
three letters appear in the issue of that
paper of the 13th October, 1858, comment-
ing upon the editorial article and Mr. Sum-
ner’s letter. The first is from Mr. A. T.
Best, one of the original trustees, in which
he defends the part he took: —
•‘I acted in the matter of the election,” he
gays, “the same as I had been distinctly told
Mr. Grice intended to do—that is perfectly neu-
trally.” * * * And at the close, he
says, “I think it is only just to myself to state,
that as chairman of the meeting to which your
remarks apply,. I vacated the chair rather than


put the motion of pledging to the meeting ; and
though there were two gentleman at least at that
meeting who ought to have supported me in my
decision of refusing to allow pledging to be
enforced, yet I received no support from any
one, and was allowed to vacate the chair without
a voice raised in favour of my resolution to
resign rather than allow pledging.”
Then comes a letter each from Mr. James
C. Dickson and Mr. It. C. Luscombe, the
two candidates who were pledged to sup-
port the Rev. Mr. Linskea. Both the
gentlemen attempt to defend the course
they had taken, and explain the circum-
stances under which they acted. They
appeared to think, because Mr. Grice had
stated “ that he would not interfere in the
election,” that he would not exercise his
right to vote. Mr. Grice did not interfere,
although often solicited on both sides to
use his influence, but with great judgment
and discretion he declined to interfere fur-
ther than to record his vote.
The Church of England Record, pub-
lished at Geelong, in November, 1858, also
came out with a leading article as fol-
lows :
“ST. MARK’S ELECTION.
“We have no wish to conceal our delight in the
result of the Election at St. Mark’s, Colling-
Wood, of Messrs. Kinsman and Baker, as repre-
sentatives of the contributors, for presenting a


duly qualified Clerk for installation to the bene-
fice recently vacated by the Rev. J. A. Clowes.
We are glad that our trumpet has already given
no uncertain sound, and flatter ourselves that
in a contest so nicely balanced, a ‘ word in sea-
son’was not without its influence on the final
state of the poll.
“Wedoiiot profess to take any interest in
the recent friendly trial of strength, as pre-
tending to judge of the merits of rival candi-
dates. We can fully believe that, under
ordinary cirumstances, Messrs. Luscombe and
Dickson would be able to form an accurate
judgment of the qualifications of a Christian
minister. Nor do we for a moment doubt that
the ‘Clerk’ to whom these gentlemen pledged
themselves is highly competent. It is much to
be regretted that a ‘ committee of the congre-
gation ’ should have been formed with a view to
carrying out a particular line of action, and
should be, after all, doomed to disappointment,
and think tit to lodge various unavailing protests
with the Bishop.
“Every member of the Church, and especially
of the Assembly, must have felt, at the outset
of this contest, that our legislation was under
trial. In our last number, it was shewn clearly
enough that by such proceedings ‘ the whole
spirit of the Act is lost sight of, and its objects
completely defeated.’ The facility with which'
flaws may be discovered in Acts of Parliament
is the subject of certain trite proverbial sayings,
and we began to fear that breaches of practicable


width might, at this early Stage, have been made
in our parapets. But we were re-assured by
the consideration that the wedge Was too much
runcated, that the end was not thin enough to
find an entrance. The attempt was too palpably
illegal for ultimate success, even if a majority
had been obtained.
“Did Messrs. Lusoombe and Dickson care-
fully ponder over the nature of the ‘pledge 1
that was demanded of them ? We will suppose
them to have been elected ; we will, moreover,
imagine their appointment to have been recog-
nised by the Bishop—in due time they select a
‘duly qualified clerk.’ Before proceeding to
their choice, they attend Divine Service, ac-
cording to Clause 33—they engage in the most
solemn act of devotion in His presence, ‘to
whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and
from whom no secrets are hid.' If any devo-
tional act would awaken tenderness of con-
science, it would assuredly be the receiving of
the Holy Communion. The Act provides that
immediately after this they proceed to the
election; but the declaration contained in
schedule E is first signed, in which each par-
ticular representative is required most solemnly
to open his heart and conscience, before God
and the Church :— ‘ I . ... declare that
I am a communicant of the Church of England
and Ireland, and that I will exercise my right
of election to the best of my judgment, without
favour or affection, for the glory of God and the
well-being of the Church.’


“Now, how is it possible for a representative
pledged to the election of a particular candidate
to make this solemn declaration ? What mean-
ing can there be in human language, if a pre-
viously declared preference of one candidate to
all others, known or unknown, does not imply
‘ favour and affection ’ of the most indisputable
kind ? The declaration in the schedule is not to
be ratified by oath. If such were the case, the
‘Committee’ would be coolly asking Messrs.
Luscombe and Dickson to perjure themselves.
But it seems to us that the mode of making
this declaration is at least equally binding on
the conscience with an oath, and we therefore
charitably hope that the required declaration
had escaped the notice of all parties concerned.
“ If there is a parish in this Diocese requiring
more than another, on the part of the incumbent
having cure of souls, the highest qualifications
that can adorn a Christian minister, it is St.
Mark’s. If he is eloquent and mighty in the
Scriptures, his light, as he stands in that pulpit,
will not be hidden under a bushel. If he is
laborious and successful in house to house visi-
tation, the net-work of street, alleys, and rights-
of-way, in that densely peopled neighbourhood,
will afford him ample scope. If he is endued
■with singular wisdom and tact, in blending
active spirits into harmonious co-operation, he
is just the man wanted at St. Mark’s. If he
have the faculty of inculcating the grace of
giving, it Will not be lost in that debt-incum-
bered parish. The representatives may feel


assured, that gifts and graces of the highest
order would find a fitting field in that benefice
now at their disposal, and that the duty im-
posed upon them is one requiring the greatest
care, and the highest exercise of spiritual wis-
dom. To enter upon such duties ‘ pledged !’—
to allow an inconsistency so fearful to stare at
the beholder from the walls and hoardings of
Collingwood ! —this would, indeed, be to impose
a burden on the conscience, from which a Chris-
tian man might well recoil.
“Wo have no fear for the issue of this con-
troversy. We believe that there are many of
God’s people in the Church of the diocese, and
in that parish in particular, who will continue
in prayer and supplication that a true man of
God may be appointed to that post—that a
large measure of the Spirit shall rest upon him
when appointed, and prosper his labours to the
glory of God, and the edification of His Church.
We do not take up our pen with a view to influ-
encing the choice of a minister for this vacancy;
whilst we write, the name may have been pre-
sented to the Bishop, and whoever the ‘ duly
qualified clerk ’ may be, we shall wish him God
speed, and pray that he may be largely blessed.
The ‘Appointment of Minister’s Act’ will be
consulted in other parishes, and arrangements
made for carrying out its provisions. It may be
long, we hope indefinitely long, before the
theory of ‘ pledged ’ representatives be again
propounded, but whatever irregularities be at-


tempted, we shall always make it our endeavour
to take our stand on the integrity of the law. ”
In the same number of the Record, in
which the foreging appeared, there was also
a letter from one “ who initiated the move-
ment ” in favour of Mr. Linskea’s appoint-
ment, and who also, it must not be forgot-
ten, was a liberal donor to St. Mark’s in
times past; but as the subject of his com-
munication is a mere recapitulation of what
has already been given in defence of the
course pursued by the friends of Messrs.
Luscombe and Dickson, it is not necessary
now to reproduce it. A second letter from
the same gentleman also appeared in the
following number of the Record, in which,
commenting upon the articles that had
previously appeared, he distinctly states
that Messrs. Luscombe and Dickson were
not pledged to the officiating minister, but
only to give due weight to the opinions of
a majority of the people ; and, on the other
hand, he charged the managing trustees,
Messrs. Kinsman and Baker, with being
known to be pledged against the reverend
gentleman ; urged an amendment of the
Church Act; and complained bitterly of its
provisions, whereby, as he put it before his
readers, “ the accident of wealth swamped
the consciences of the many ! ”
The representatives, shortly after their
election, proceeded to the discharge of the
E


very onerous and solemn responsibility im-
posed upon them, and among the clergy
suggested to their minds, when they met,
were the Rev. James Linskea, Rev. John
Barlow, of Castlemaine, Rev. A. Crawford
(now Archdeacon), and the Rev. R. B. Bar-
low. After due consideration,, it was re-
solved to offer the living to the Rev. J.
Barlow, who hesitated, and finally, declined
to accept it ; it was then offered to the
Rev. R. B. Barlow, of St. Mary’s, North
Melbourne, and accepted. Mr. Barlow had
been well known and respected at St.
Mark’s for many years previously, from
the 9th December, 1855, when he first
made their acquaintance by taking service
on that day ; and for many weeks during
Mr. Clowes’s ill health, previous to his de-
parture from the colony, he was appointed
to officiate regularly. The greatest opposi-
tion and almost insult were offered to the
representatives, and at one meeting, after
their election, a resolution was passed and
published in all the papers that the conduct
of Messrs. Baker and Kinsman, in not. ap-
pointing Mr. Linskea, was such that they
neither possessed or deserved the confidence
of the congregation of St. Mark’s, and that
it was the earnest wish of the meeting that
they resign their position as managing trus-
tees ! The resolution was never presented .
to them, or they would most probably have
complied with the request, if it could have


been shown tq be a genuine, expression of
any number of the parishioners.
On the 25th November, 1858, a farewell
address and a purse, of 100 sovereigns were
presenteii to the Rev. James Linskea. The
wording of the address was such as might
be expected under exciting circumstances,
but not calculated to be productive of good.
Not so, however, the reply.of the reverend
gentleman; for, while it acknowledged the
kindness shown him, there was not a mur-
mur or shadow of complaint at his not:
being elected as their minister, though he
kindly reciprocated the sorrow manifested
by many at parting. On the 28th Novem-
ber, 1858, he preached his farewell sermon,
from Phill. 2, 12 : “Wherefore, my be-
loved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in
my presence only, but now much more in
my absence, work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling.” On the follow-
ing Sunday the Rev. R. B. Barlow, 8.A.,
preached his first sermon - a? incumbent of
St. Mark’s, from 1 Cor. ii. and Ist verse:
“ And I, brethren, when I came to you,
came not with excellency of speech or of
wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony
of God.” The church was crowded, and a
deep impression was evidently made upon.
many present. Doubtless, numbers were
attracted by curiosity and excitement, ; but
it cannot be denied there were many friends
and admirers of Mr. Barlow in the parish


who hailed his appointment with joy.
During Mr. Linskea’s short stay, the results
of his ministrations where shown by a, con-
siderably increased numberof communicants,''
and on the last occasion of his administer-
ing that sacrament there were eighty-one
who partook of it, including a very large
number of young people who had just pre-
viously been confirmed. As the time came
round for Mr. Barlow to administer that
holy ordinance only twenty-four remained,
so great was the prejudice that had been
created by the election of representatives
and their appointment of a minister; but
it was gratifying to find that on the second
occasion the number was double, and on
the third nearly four times that number
remained, and they have since varied from
sixty to one hundred and seventeen! the
largest number present at one time, and
probably the largest number entered in any
preacher’s book in the colony. It was also
gratifying to find that many, who for a time
left the church, returned, and became
warmly attached to the minister. With
the settlement of Mr. Barlow at St. Mark’s
the parish seems to have been relieved of
those unfortunate broils and baneful con-
tentions that had previously marred its
prosperity and checked much good that
might otherwise have been effected.
Before leaving the year 1858, a year of
such exciting and unpleasant conflict of


parties, mention must be made of one old
companion and associate of the trustees,
that kept company with them during all
their parochial afflictions—viz., the debt.
The contending parties no doubt would
have been glad of its utter annihilation;
but it still survived, though its dimensions
at the end of the year were reduced to
£4,062 15s. ; or £1,381 15s. less than at
the corresponding period of 1857.
During the year 1859 a promise was
made by the parishioners to raise £2,000
conditionally on the trustees separating the
debt on the church and parsonage. The
trustees complied: but at the end of the
year they report, with regret, “ that a sum
of £l4l only was received, and that little
or no effort had been made to reduce the
burden ; ” also, “ a reference to the balance-
sheet for 1858, compared with that for
1859, exhibits a decrease in the debt of
£1,342 16s. 7d., towards which one of the
trustees—ll. Grice, Esq.—has given the
noble sum of £1,162, while the whole
parish has only contributed £IBO 16s. 7d.,
that amount being the balance of pew rents,
collections, &c., &c., after paying current
expensesand left the debt, at the close
of the year, at £2,719 18s. sd. During the
year attention was called to the necessity
for extensive repairs to church and parson-
age, and the members of the Parochial
Association began to meddle and make)


alterations in the church by removing the
pulpit and reading desk and a large num-
ber of the pews, on the plea of a difficulty
of hearing the minister having been expe-
rienced. The first plan they submitted to
the trustees was not approved; but, after
considering the question, they resolved that
“ they could not, under existing liabilities,
incur the expense (£75) of the proposed
alterations, but would give their sanction
to an improved plan if the work could be
executed without cost to the trustees.” An
improved (?) plan was procured, by which
the pulpit and reading desk were removed
from the north end of the church to the
middle of the western side-wall, and nearly
one half the pews turned round, by which
a large number of the congregation were
placed with their backs to the chancel.
Unfortunately, this outrageous work was
effected; not, however, without a strong
opposition from one of the managing
trustees. The collection of the offertory
from pew to pew was commenced this year,
in lieu of the collection at the doors; and
although it was predicted that it would
drive the people from the church, it does
not appear to have done so, for the Vestry,
in their report at the end of the year, offer
their congratulations “on the increased
attendance at church.”
The events of the year 18G0 commenced
by the resignation'of Ur. John Lanktreq


as a trustee of the'church—a gentleman
who, while he resided in the parish, ren-
dered very essential service as secretary to
the building committee and trustees, to
which latter body he was succeeded, as
secretary, by Mr. Baker, in 1858. Mr. F,
Cook was elected trustee in Mr. Lanktree’s
place. A survey of the church was also
made this year by Mr. L. Tayler, architect,
who presented a very elaborate report, in
which he estimated the necessary expendi-
ture for repairs and improvements at £275,
The trustees also reported that, during the
year, £1,173 12s. sd. had been paid in
liquidation of the debt, of which sum £B4B
had been given by the treasurer, Sir. R.
Grice, and £325 12s. sd. out of the ordi-
nary revenue of the church. The total
debt at the end of the year was £1546. A
purse of fifty-six sovereigns was also pre-
sented to the incumbent, the Rev. R. B.
Barlow, as a small tribute of the respect of
the parishioners. A sad bereavement at-
tended Sir. and Sirs. Barlow and family at
the close of this year. Death visited the
parsonage, and snatched away their little
daughter Alice, aged one year and eight
months, on the 10th October ; and, ere the
cold clods had time to settle in her grave,
the stern messenger returned, and grasped
another innocent in his cold embrace on
the 3rd November, taking away James
Bristow, the infant son of the incumbent,


Much sympathy was shown towards Mr.
and Mrs. Barlow by the parishioners, which,
to a fond and affectionate father and a
loving and devoted mother, such as they
are known to be, must have been a great
comfort to them in their affliction, and
second only to the blessed assurance that
their little ones were happy in eternity ere
they knew sin.
The repairs to the church, before so often
mentioned, were partially carried out during
the year 1861, at a cost of <£l7l 145., which
had been raised by the vestry, who also had
an additional sum of £65 7s. lodged in the
bank, for the purposes of cleaning, painting,
and otherwise renovating the interior of the
church. The efforts of the vestry in col-
lecting the above sums appear to have
caused them to collapse, for at the usual
annual meeting of the parishioners for the
reception of the accounts of the trustees,
the treasurer of the vestry reported that the
members of that body had allowed their
year of office to expire without drawing up
a report of their proceedings. • Their balance-;
sheet represented the sum of £289, raised
for repairs, church debt, and other pur-
poses. The trustees reported that “ the
debt has been reduced by £l6l 6s. 5d.,
leaving liabilities at the time (1861) at
£1,384 19s. 7d. The interest on this has
again been paid by R. Grice, Esq.also,
that, “ henceforth, St, Mark’s Church must


be supported entirely by the voluntary con-
tributions of the people, as, by a recent
decision of the Church Assembly, no portion
of the Government grant will be available
for the payment of stipends nf incumbents
in large and thickly populated parishes.”
At the commencement of 18G2, a curate
was appointed by the Bishop, to be under
the direction of the incumbent, for the
purpose of holding services and administer-
ing the sacrament at the school-room >at
Abbotsford, East Collingwood, and the Rev.
C. J. Martin entered upon his duties in that
capacity in the month of January, but only
remained to the end of the year, when he
was succeeded by the Rev. T. C. Cole, M.A.
This year was one of extraordinary interest,
joy, and prosperity. “ The good time
coming” had at last arrived, and every one
who had the least interest in the church
must have had their hearts filled with grati-
tude, the great event being the
EXTINCTION OF THE DEBT !
AND
CONSECRATION OF THE CHURCH'!! :
This was accomplished by the continued
and unprecedented liberality of R. Grice,
Esq., “who offered to give £7OO towards
the liquidation of the debt, amounting on
the 31st July to £1,200, if the balance was
advanced, without interest, by six (more or
less) persons, and the offer was to continue
in force until tlie 30th September,”- Such


a noble offer was not to be allowed to lapse;
it aroused trustees, minister, and • people,
and excited the greatest enthusiasm, not
only among the parishioners, but among
the members and friends of the Church in
neighbouring parishes. A vigorous col-
lection was commenced, and in ; less than
one month about £430 was received. Mr.'
Grice, seeing the object was so nearly
accomplished within the specified time,
voluntarily offered to extend it to the Ist Oc-
tober, by which time more than sufficient was
raised, and under much jubilation the church
declared out of debt. The secretaries of
the trustees and vestry, Messrs. C. Raker
and William Taylor, in publishing a list of
the subscriptions obtained, thus announce
the, completion of their' labours:—“ln
publishing the annexed list of subscriptions,
the trustees and vestry desire to tender
their thanks to those friends who have so
cheerfully and liberally contributed of their
means towards the liquidation of a debt
that, for many years, has been the cause of
much painful anxiety, not only to the trus-
tees themselves, but to the incumbent and
congregation. To those ladies and gentle-
men who so promptly and energetically
came forward, and gave their time to collect
the sum of £550 in the short space of about
five weeks, the thanks of the trustees are
especially due, and it is a cause of much
thankfulness that, by the blessing of Al-


mighty God on their labours, the church of
St. Mark is now out of debt.” The list of
subscriptions alluded to is a most interesting
one, as showing what can be done by small
sums when given by the many.. The number
of subscribers amounted to near five hun-
dred, and of these only nine subscriptions
were over XIO. The two largest donations
were by trustees —£50 and X 35 each—and
one of X2O, by Mr. It. Davis, of Brunswick
street, a very old and liberal attendant at
the church. The citizen soldiers of East
Collingwood also contributed X 7 12s. Gd.,
and X 23 is announced as a collection at St..
Peter’s Church, very kindly granted by the
Bev. H. H. P. Handheld and church-
wardens. The other events of the year
will be best told by reproducing the final
report of the trustees, which is as fol-
lows :
“With more than ordinary feelings of satis-
faction, the Trustees submit their seventh and
final Report of proceedings to the congregation
and parishioners, on the present occasion. At
no period since they assumed office, have they
had so much cause for thankfulness as at the
close of the past year. In their last report the
financial prospects of the church were far from
encouraging : notifications of repairs to Church
and Parsonage of an extensive character, in-
volving a considerable outlay; a falling off in
church fees, necessitating the stipend of the
Incumbent being supplemented by funds takeu


from the ordinary revenue of the church ; the
withdrawal of state aid; a declining revenue ;
an increased expenditure ; and a debt on the
church of £1,384 Is. 7d.; were subjects that
gave occasion for much anxious solicitude for
the future. In the good providence of God,
however, the year 1862, commencing as it did,
with such gloomy forebodings of financial trou-
bles, closed with prosperity far greater than the
most sanguine could have expected, much of
which is attributed to the activity of the mem-
bers of the Vestry, and verifies the words of
Holy Writ, ‘ Be not weary in well doing, for in
due season ye shall reap if ye faint not.’ Taking
file events in order, the Trustees desire to report,
that F. Cook, Esq., having left the parish, and
not being able to give that attention necessary
for the interests of the church; resigned his
office as a trustee, and at an election held on
11th August, for the purpose of filling the
vacancy, Mr. William Weir was duly elected
to fill his place.
1 ‘ The necessity for the renovation of the inte-
rior of the Church, and the inability of the
Trustees.to devote any portion of the futjds at
their disposal for that important purpose, having
been brought under the notice of the Vestry,
that body cheerfully assisted the Trustees, and
relieved them of all responsibility, by under-
taking the labour of collecting subscriptions
and superintending the work, which has been
satisfactorily accomplished, and the improved
and comfortable appearanee of the sacred edifice


must be apparent to all. The state of the Par-
sonage, and the limited accommodation it affords
your Minister, has also engaged the attention of
the Vestry, and although not able to carry out
their desires to completion, have been instru-,
mental in raising a portion of the requisite funds,
and thus enabled the Trustees to make applica-
tion for aid from funds at the disposal of the
Bishop and Council of the Diocese.
“ The Revenue of the Trustees, from all
sources (exclusive of £7OO from R. Grice, Esq.),
during the past year has been as follows :
“ Seat Rents
£297
5
0
“ Collections in Church
401
15
1
“ Subscriptions (principally re-
"ceived from and collected
by Yestry)
C39
14
10
“ Rent of Allotment of Land
10
0
0
“ Refunds, &c.
5
0
3
£1,353
15
2
Thus showing a large increase in every item,
except that of Sunday collections. In addition
to the above, Collections have been made in
church for various objects, as follow:
“ On Christmas Day, for the Poor £3
0
1
“ Good Friday, ,, , ... 1
3
8
“ One Wednesday evening, for the
Geelong Grammar School ... 10
3
2
And on the morning of 7th Sep-
tember, for Debt on Church 11
7
3
£25
14
2
But as these several amounts did not pass through
the Treasurer’s hands, they are not included in
his accounts.


“In consequence of the continued liberality
of R. Crice, Esq., who gave a promise of £7OO,
conditionally on £554 being provided, in a
given time, to pay off the liabilities of tho
Trustees, and that amount having been realised,
the church is now entirely free from debt, and
there remains a balance in the hands of the
Treasurer of £73 14s. lid. And here the
Trustees desire to tender their thanks to, and
recognise the unprecedented liberality, that
gentleman has shown to St. Mark’s during the
last seven or eight years; and they express a
hope, that the congregation and Wardens will
adopt some permanent means of testifying their
gratitude and respect for that gentleman during
their year of office.
‘ 1 The Consecration of the church this day by
the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of the diocese,
and the election and nomination of Wardens
about to take place, are events that ought to
call forth the thanks of every churchman in the
parish. With the latter the Trustees cease to
exist as a managing body; they desire, there-
fore, to close their final Report with a few words
in reference to the past.
“lt is, unfortunately, too true, that imme-
diately after the opening of the church, they
found themselves in no very enviable position-
A debt of about £12,000 had been contracted ;
dissensions, strife, and dissatisfaction prevailed ;
the congregation became very limited ; commer-
cial prosperity declined, and the state and pros-


pects of the church and Trustees were such as
to become a bye-word in the diocese. The 1 time
when they should be extricated from such un-
pleasant difficulties appeared far distant; By a
determination, however, not to allow their lia-
bilities to increase, but • principally through the
unbounded liberality of one of their number,
the debt has been gradually reduced, the
parishioners united, and, at the present time,
although it is a matter for regret that the
church has not been completed by the erection
of the spire and bell-turret, the Trustees have
the satisfaction of retiring from office without
leaving a burdensome debt on your parish
church, attended as it now is by a large Con-
gregation, united, they believe, in the bonds of
Christian love, one to another, and to their pre-
sent esteemed Incumbent, the Rev. Robert
Barlow. During so long a tenure of office, errors
of judgment may have been committed, but
their desire has ever been for the welfare of the
church, and they now congratulate the parish-
ioners that the time has arrived, and they are
able to declare the church out of debt, and
solemnly “ consecrated and set apart for the
public worship of Almighty God for ever,” ac-
cording to the ritual of our beloved Church.
With an earnest hope that the Churchwardens
to be elected will be liberally and cheerfully
supported, the Trustees hand over the manage-.
ment of the church, and trust the Divine bless-
ing will accompany the labours of' their suc-


cessors in all they may undertake for the
advancement, progress, and prosperity of the,
congregation and parishioners.
“ By order of the Trustees,
“Chas. Baker, Secretary.
“ Gth January, 1863.”
The foregoing report vyas presented to the
annual meeting on the evening of the day
of the consecration of the church, 6th
January, 1863, the Eight Rev. the Bishop
of Melbourne occupying the chair. His
Lordship congratulated the congregation on
the prosperous state of the church, and
recommended them to observe that day as
their anniversary. The report also stated
that “ On the following Thursday evening,
January 8 th, a meeting for the election of
churchwardens was held in the girls’
school, the Rev. Robert B. Barlow, incum-
bent, in the chair, who stated he had re-
ceceived a communication from the trustees,
announcing that they had nominated Mr.
Charles Baker as their warden ; and that
he, the chairman, nominated Mr. William
Taylor as minister’s warden for the year
1863. Mr. R. T. Clarke then proposed
‘That Mr. William Weir be the parish
warden,’ which was seconded by Mr. W. S.
Kimpton. Mr. Samuel Weir proposed, and
Mr. W. Taylor seconded, ‘ That Mr. Ebenezer
Greig be the parish warden.’ On being
put to the meeting, Sir. William Weir was
declared duly elected by a majority.”


TJje first churchwardens. had rather.. a
rosy time of it during their year of office,,
for they received from the trustees a
balance'of £73 to commence with, and at
the’close of the year, after giving collections ■
to the principal charitable institutions of
the city, Sunday-schools, diocesan, fund,
Ac., amounting to nearly £lOO, they
handed over a surplus of £47 to their suc-
cessors. A report 'of their proceedings was'
also presented to the parishioners, but has,
never yet been published. In simple jus-,
tice to them it ought to have been, and it'
may here be noted that, amongst other works
therein referred to, they expended a sum
of £350 in enlarging the parsonage, £lso'
of which was obtained out of the Govern-
ment grant, and the remainder collected or'
paid out of the ordinary revenue. The
pleasure of their term of office was.con-
siderably marred on their retirement by the
conduct of the auditors appointed to audit
their accounts. These gentlemen raised'
various objections, and, for a long time,
hesitated to certify to their correctness.
The late wardens declined to submit to their
dictum, or make any alterations. Mean-
while the churchwardens elect were clamor-
ous for the balance due to them, and
urged both parties to a settlement of
the difficulty. After some months' de-
lay it culminated in an appeal to the
parishioners, who expressed their entire
p


Satisfaction with the accounts, and the form
in which they had been presented. In
short, the meeting audited them. One ob-
jection raised by the auditors was the
omission of the fractional parts of a penny,
which the wardens (one of whom was a
professional accountant) had purposely not
taken into account, the total sum in dispute
amounting to one penny ! This was serious,
and almost enough to cause a “dead-lock
but, on the 7th of March the “crisis” was
brought to an end, not however without a
reflection being cast upon the first wardens,
by one of the most extraordinary certifi-
cates being attached to the balance-sheet
perhaps ever witnessed, and is a caution to
all future wardens, to “ take care of the
pence.” As a curiosity, it is here inserted:
—“ We have audited the within accounts,
and find them correct, as authorised by the
parishioners in public meeting on the 4th.
of March, 18G4, with the exception of offer-
tory collections, whichare short entered one
penny !”. It is unfortunate for the wardens
that their report has not been published, or
did not accompany the balance-sheet issued.
During this year, also, Mr. N. Kinsman,
the once active and zealous trustee, and one
of the representatives of the parish in the
Church Assembly, and who for some time
conducted service in the schoolroom at
Abbotsford, seceded from the Church,* and
* See sketch of St- Philip’s Parish, Church Neics,
17th July, 1866.


sent in his resignation of his seat in the
Assembly to the Bishop, but retained his
office as a trustee of the Church. The
members of the vestry and parishioners,
considering it inconsistent for members of
other denominations to hold the important
office of trustee of the Church, moved the
trustees to action. The proceedings taken
will be best explained by the following re-
port of a meeting and correspondence taken
from the Church Gazette of December,
1863
“ELECTION OF CHURCH TRUSTEE. '
“A meeting of more than ordinary interest and
importance, of the seatholders and subscribers to
St. Mark’s Church, Fitzroy, was held, pursuant
to notice, on Monday evening, 30th November,
in the school, for the purpose of electing a trus-
tee in the room of Mr. N. Kinsman, who by his
own act had put himself out of office, by seced-
ing from the Church of England, and accepting
a ‘ call ’ to become the pastor of a new denom-
ination called the ‘Free Church of Victoria,’at
the same time refusing to resign his trusteeship,
thereby leaving his co-trustees no other alterna-
tive but to declare his office as trustee vacant,
according to Act No. 2, Session 1858, of the
Church Assembly. Mr. H. S. Barlow was called
to the chair, and, having read the notice calling
the meeting, asked the secretary of the trustees
to read the clauses of the act, and some legal
opinions bearing upon the subject. Mr. Baker,


in complying with the request of the chairman,
stated that the action taken that evening did not
emanate from himself or his co-trustees, but
through them from the seatholders and subscri-
bers, who had called upon the trustees to fill up
the vacancy caused by Mr. Kinsman’s secession.
Mr. Baker then stated that, although an opinion
had been obtained so far back as December 12th,
1862, the trustees did not move in the matter,
believing that as Mr. Kinsman had resigned his
office as representative in the Church Assembly,
it was expected he would see the propriety of
resigning his office as trustee. The opinion given
by the Hon. T. T. a’Beckett, the Registrar of
the Diocese, he would read:—
‘ Bishop's Registry, December 19, 1862.
‘ Sir, — I am of opinion that the trustee of St.
Mark’s who has seceded from the Church, and
opened a place of public worship called “The
Free Church of Victoria,” has ceased to be quali-
fied to hold the office of trustee, and may be
removed from it by his co-trustees, or the Bishop,
as provided by the 4th clause of the act to which
you refer in your note of the 16th instant.
‘ I have the honour to be, &c.,
‘Thos. T. a’Beckett.’
‘W. Taylor, Esq., Honorary Secretary,
‘St. Mark’s Vestry, Fitzroy.’
“ About six months after this opinion was ob-
tained, the following requisition from certain
seatholders, &c., was received by the trustees :
‘ To the Trustees of St. Mark’s Church, Fitzroy.
‘ Gentlemen,
‘We, the undersigned members of the Church
pf England, attendants at St. Mark’s Church,


respectfully request that you will take steps
towards filling up the vacancy in the church
trust caused by the secession of N. Kins-
man, Esq.
‘We are, gentlemen, yours truly,’ .
[Here follow the signatures.]
“It was some weeks after the receipt of this
before the secretary of the trustees summoned
a meeting for its consideration, and it was in the
month of October that the trustees met, and,
after fully considering the case, and the evidence
brought forward, felt they had no alternative
but to declare Mr. Kinsman’s place vacant, as
prescribed by the act above quoted, which was
accordingly done, and the secretary ordered to
call a public meeting of the parties qualified to
vote for the purpose of electing a successor.
The 30th November was the time appointed for
the meeting, of which due notice was given, as
required. Previous to the meeting the secretary
and trustees were served with the following
protest:—
‘ Fitzroy, 5 Moor street, Nov. 19, 1863.
‘ To C. Baker, Esq.
‘ Having heard that a notice has been given
in St. Mark’s Church to elect a trustee in my
place, I hereby protest against the same as
illegal. I have not resigned or neglected my
duty; neither have I received notice of any
trustee meeting.
‘ I remain, yours truly. .
‘N. Kinsman.’
“ Clauses 2 to 5 of the Act No. 2, Session 1858,
of the Church Assembly, were then read, and
the chairman called upon the meeting for an ex-
pression of opinion, &c.


‘‘Mr. Kinsman then handed to the chairman
another protest, of which the following is a ver.
batim copy :
‘ Fitzroy, November 30, 1863.
‘ To the Chairman.
‘ Sir, —I hereby protest against the election of
a trustee for St. Mark’s in my place, as I have
not resigned or disqualified for retaining my
office.
‘N. Kinsman.’
“ In addressing the meeting Mr. Kinsman re-
ferred to his past services, and claimed to be the
founder of the church, which was disputed, two
gentlemen having, in writing, urged the Rev.
Mr. Clowes to take steps for the erection of a
church, and offering assistance before he came
to live in the parish. Air. Kinsman, however,
asserted his position, and expressed great at-
tachment to the church, and evidently felt what
he said. He wished well to the church; but
having received a call from the people to minister
to them, he had complied with their request.
“ No notice was taken of the protest after its
receipt by the chairman, and the points of ille-
gality were never alluded to. The meeting then
proceeded to the election of a person to fill the
vacancy, when Mr. William E. Morris and Mr.
Richard Thomas Clarke were duly proposed and
seconded, and, on being put to the vote, the
chairman declared the choice fell upon Mr.
Morris, upon which a division was called, which
ended in the same result. A vote of thanks to
Mr. Kinsman was proposed by Mr. J. Jackson,
and seconded by Mr. J. J. Moody, upon which


the following amendment was carried,. “That,
taking into consideration the services which
have in former days been rendered to the church
in this parish by Mr. N. Kinsman, this meeting
regrets he should have adopted such a course
as necessitated his removal from the office of
trustee.” The mover and seconder of the reso-
lution being Mr. W. E. Morris and Mr. E. Greig,
“ Since the above meeting was held, Mr. Kins-
man has forwarded the following letter to the
secretary of the trustees, which we have been
requested to publish for the information of the
congregation and Church at large, for it is a
subject of more than congregational interest.
The letter is as follows:
‘ Fitzroy, December 10, 1863.
‘ To C. Baker, Esq.
‘ Sir, —Having received an answer from the
Hon. the Chief Secretary, in reference to my
protest against what I consider an illegal act, I
beg to state that, should the case be decided in
my favour, I then propose sending in to my co-
trustees my resignation, as I have no desire to
hold the office ; hut did not like the treatment I
have received, and therefore protested in the
way I did; and as I have no desire to continue
as trustee, I shall then resign.
‘ I remain, your obedient servant,
‘N. Kinsman.’
The year 1804 commenced with the elec-
tion of Mr. W. S. Kimpton as parish
warden, Mr. H. S. Barlow as minister’s
warden, and Mr. E. Crisp as trustees’
warden. A full and elaborate report of
their proceedings was presented to the


parishioners at the close of the year, and
everything appears to have gone on har-
moniously with a revenue of £1,175 ss. 2d.
The report is most interesting, and is, per-
haps, the most complete one ever issued.
A Scripture reader, Mr. Maguire, had been
employed during the year in visiting, and
otherwise assisting the incumbent, with
very favourable results. At the annual
meeting, when the report was read, Mr.
Baker took the wardens to task for the non-
publication of the report of the previous
year already alluded to, and was assured
that nothing intentional was done by the
omission, and that it was only a matter of
expense.. Mr. Baker also opposed an in-
crease of £SO in the stipend, making it‘
£550; on account of the unfinished tower
and other repairs required to be done to the
church. Mr. W. E. Morris thought it more
advisable to consider the question of giving
the minister some additional help, rather
than that of raising the stipend. At the
close of .the .meeting Mr. Kimpton expressed
a strong desire to see the tower of the
church erected, and promised a liberal sub-
scription in aid of that object.
Messrs. W. S. Kimpton and H. S. Bar-
low, with Mr. De Burgh D’Arcy, were the
wardens for 1865. At the close of the
year they reported an increased revenue
amounting to £1,189 : ss. 9|d. ! but from
the balance-sheet a debt is shown to be due


io the treasurer of £52 ; the cause of this
evidently being the increase-in the stipend,
and a corresponding increase in the salaries
of some of the choristers ; the fitting up the
hitherto unused galleries at a cost of ,£205,
Ac. They report with regret that the re-
pairs to church and parsonage were trifling,-
“ owing to our chronic debt.” The report,
on the whole, is full and complete, and
affords information of great interest to the
parishioners ; among other items it men-
tions that £BO had been promised towards
the completion of the tower, and that a
movement had been set on foot for a new
organ, for which £45 had been promised ;
also that Mrs. James, a lady well known
for her genuine piety and love to the
Church, and who for some years conducted
the choirs at St. Paul’s and St. James’s
Churches, had offered to take charge of the
choir and preside at the organ at a nominal
salary. The churchyard also, which for
some time had been an eyesore, had been
suitably laid out and planted with trees and
shrubs.
Allusion has already been made to the
secession of Mr. Kinsman, and his re-
moval from office by his eo-trustees, and
the election of Mr. W. E. Morris in his
place. Although acting under legal advice,
it appears that the trustees acted illegally.
This will also be best explained by the fol-


lowing report from the Church Gazette for
September, 1865, pp. 178-9 :
“ILLEGAL DEPRIVATION OF TRUS-
TEESHIP.”
“ St. Makk’s, Fitzbov.— A meeting of more
than ordinary interest was held on the 23rd
August last, for the purpose of electing a trustee
in the place of Mr. N. Kinsman. In The Church
Gazette, of December 10, ISG3, it will be remem-
bered by our readers, a long report and corres-
pondence appeared of a meeting held on the 30 th
of November of that year, for the purpose of
electing a trustee in the room of Mr. N. Kins-
man, who, by his own act, had put himself out
of office, by seceding from the Church of
England and accepting a “call” to become the
pastor of a new denomination, called the “ Free
Church of Victoria.” As will be seen by re-
ference to that report, the trustees, acting
under the advice of the Hon. T. T. a’Beckett,
removed Mr. N. Kinsman, and called a meeting
to elect his successor, when Mr. W. E. Morris
was declared elected, and who has continued to
act in that capacity up to 10th July, 1805. Mr.
Kinsman, however, attended that meeting and
entered a protest, and he also forwarded a pro-
test to the Chief Secretary, which was acknow-
ledged as follows:
‘ Chief Secretary’s Office,
‘ Melbourne, 3rd December, 18(13.
‘ Sir, — lamdirected to acknowledge the receipt
of your protest against Mr. Morris’s election as.
a trustee of St, Mark’s Church and Parsonage,


In your place. The Hon. the Chief Secretary
has caused it to be noted, and when application is
made for the confirmation of the appointment of
the gentleman elected, the protest shall receive
due consideration.
‘ I am, Sir, your most obedient servant,
‘ J. Moore.’
‘ Mr. N. Kinsman, Fitzroy.’
“ The Trustees, believing they had acted per-
fectly legal in following the opinion given, took
no further notice of the protest until July last,
when they were informed, by direction of the
Lord Bishop, that it having come within the
knowledge of his Lordship that Mr. Kinsman
had protested against the legality of his co-trus-
tees’ proceedings in removing him from office,
he had taken counsel’s opinion, from which it
clearly appeared that Mr. Kinsman’s removal
was altogether void in law. The opinion was
enclosed, and is as follows :
‘ Mr. Kinsman having been appointed under
the provisions of 8 William IV. No. 5, Adam-
son Vol. 1., page 129. he is only removeable
under that Act. as by Section 4 of 25 Victoria,
No. 157, “he continues to hold office subject to
the provisions of that act.”
‘ The grounds of removal under No. 5 are those
specially mentioned in Section 3, and included
by the reference “ disqualified a 3 hereinbefore
mentioned,” which I think clearly refers to
Section 2.
‘ If Mr. Kinsman holds services or held services,
Sunday after Sunday, in an unlicensed building,
he could not be said to “ frequent the public
services of the Church,” and his acts would be
positive proof of the negative disqualification.


‘ The attempted removal was, I think, inoper-
ative, being under the new law instead of the old,
which in Section 3 points out the mode of re-
moval.
‘lf it be desired to remove him the preliminaries
required by that section should be carefully per-
formed, and notice should be given to Mr. Kins-
man as well as to the other trustees. The act
of removal would be, I think, a resolution car-
ried by a majority of the general meeting of
trustees, and evidenced by minutes signed by the
chairman. The meeting might act on any evi-
dence, but if the removal were disputed, legal
evidence of disqualification might have to be
given thereafter.
‘ When removed, a new trustee may be ap-
pointed under the new law and Acts of Assembly;
see Section 4, 25 Victoria, No. 157. Under that
section Mr. Kinsman might be compelled to con-
vey, as directed by the other trustees, and I
think equity would restrain him from any inter-
ference with such trustees, who might refuse
in any way to recognise him, and compel him
to hand over any property retained in or coming
to his hands as trustee.
‘ When the Governor in Council has approved
of trustees in whom land is vested, I think his
sanction to the appointment of any new trustees
should neither be sought nor given, any more
than to the changes of trusteeship under ordinary
settlements. His original approval is made a
condition precedent to the grant of public money,
but as there is nothing of which I am aware
making the money recoverable upon a change in
the trust, I think the trustees might lawfully
resign, or be removed immediately after the
grant. Having seen the land placed in proper
hands, I think it was intended that all future
responsibility should be assumed by those whose
fitness for the office he had approved.
‘ July 7th, 1803. ‘ Tno.% a’Bwkf.tt.’


“Under these circumstances the trustees had no
alternative but to call another meeting, and pro-
ceed under the old act of 8 Will. IV. (the act
under which Mr. Kinsman was elected), and,
notwithstanding that Mr. Kinsman continued to
be pastor of the “ Victorian Free Church ” from
1862 to the present time, he was apprised of the
meeting of the trustees, and attended, on 31st
July, 1865, and explained that he did not like
the treatment he had received, by being dis-
missed or prevented from preaching, and other
matters at Abbotsford (when the people there
guaranteed the payment for an ordained clergy-
t " % '* ' t '
man to the Rev. R. B. Barlow), which was
the cause of his acting as he had done ; at the
same time he had no desire to he obstructive,
and he therefore tendered the following resigna-
tion :
‘ Fitzroy, 5 Moor street,
• 31st July, 1865.
‘To the trustees of St. Mark’s Church and Par-
sonage.
‘ Gentlemen, — I beg most respectfully to tender
my resignation as trustee of St. Mark’s Church
and Parsonage.
‘ I remain, Gentlemen, yours truly,
‘N. Kinsman.’
“ It should he mentioned, however, that a pre-
vious resignation had been received, but the
trustees, holding that the election held in Nov.,
1863, was strictly correct, no action was taken
in reference thereto until the letter was received


from the Bishop’s Registrar, in July last. The
resignation was as follows :
‘ Fitzroy, 5 Moor street,
‘ 14th January, 1865.
‘ To C. Baker, Esq.
‘Dear Sir, —I hereby tender to my co-trus-
tees, through you, the Honorary Secretary, my
resignation as trustee of St. Mark's Church, and
will withdraw my protest from the Chief Secre-
tary as soon as legal steps are taken to elect
another trustee in my place.
‘ I remain, yours obediently,
‘ N. Kinsman.’
‘P.S. —I consider that, in honour, the £2O I
lent in 1854, and for which I hold Mr. Wilson’s
receipt, should be paid to me; this might be
done by bringing it before the meeting at the
election of trustee.’
“ As will be seen by the resignation of July 31,
and the chairman’s minute thereon, the trustees
called the meeting of 23rd ultimo, the Rev-. R,
B. Barlow being voted to the chair ; and after
the above correspondence had been read and the
circumstances explained, on the motion of Mr.
Willan, seconded by Mr. H. S. Barlow, Mr. W.
E. Morris was again elected to fill the vacancy
caused by Mr. Kinsman’s resignation. At the
close of the meeting Mr. Kinsman asked per-
mission to say a few words and referred to the
claim for £2O, mentioned in the postscript of
the above letter of the 14tli January, which was
for money advanced to the infant school. This
claim was brought before the trustees of the
Church, but they considered it wonld be wrong
to expend Church monies on school buildings.


After some conversation, and explanation from
Mr. Kinsman, it was understood that his claim
should be investigated, and the amount raised,
either by subscription or other means, to refund
the same. Several speakers regretted the cause
of Mr. Kinsman’s separation from them, but
expressed their pleasure that he had at last
resigned. By so doing he had relieved them
from proceeding in a manner not so pleasant.
“ From the following letter, handed in by Mr.
Kinsman, it will be seen that he has withdrawn
his protest from the Chief Secretary :
‘ Chief Secretary’s Office,
‘ Melbourne, August 10, 1860.
‘ S11:,—I have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the Ist instant, with-
drawing your protest against the appointment
of Mr. Morris as a trustee of St. Mark’s Church
and Parsonage, and in reply to inform you that
it has been transferred to the Crown Lands De-
partment.
‘ I have the honour to be, Sir,
‘ Your obedient servant,
‘ J. Mooee.’
“ From the above proceedings it will be seen
that trustees elected under the Act of the Colo-
nial Legislature, 8 Will. IV., can only be removed
under the provisions of that act, and not under
the Act of the Church Assembly of this diocese,
a circumstance worthy the attention of all in-
terested.”
Messrs. Kimpton and Barlow were again
re-elected wardens for 1866, with Mr. Wm.
Weir as trustees’ warden. They report a


falling revenue (£1,115), attributable to de-
creasing seat-rents, collections and dona-
tions, &c. During the year a very hand-
some present of two chairs for the chancel
was made to the church by Mr. E. Wild,
who also had the communion table reno-
vated. A very beautiful illuminated ad-
dress was also presented this year to one of
the trustees as a slight token of remem-
brance on his resigning a long official con-
nection with the church.
It is with much regret that I have again
to introduce to the reader an old but disa-
greeable acquaintance, who appears to have
re-established himself again in the parish,
viz., a Church Debt ! At the close of the
year 18GG the “balance due to the bank’’
amounted to £47, certainly not so large as
the “ balance due to treasurer” of the pre-
vious year, but sufficient to justify the de-
scription given it by the wardens as “ our
chronic debt.”
At the annual meeting held on 7th
January, 1867, after the report and balance-
sheet for 1860 had been presented, Mr. W.
E. Morris “ expressed pleasure at one item
in the accounts, namely, the sum of £23
15s. Gd., to the credit of the Tower Fund.
Mr. Kimpton had promised £SO, making
£73 15s. Gd. Other amounts had also
been promised, and he thought, with the
assistance of a committee, the erection of a
tower, with clock and bells, might be accom-


plished.” And so it might, if the commit-
tee would work, which they have not done ;
and the sooner they report progress (?) or
give place to others who will work, the more
likely is it that the object dear to the
hearts of many Churchmen in the parish
will be accomplished. The following are
the names of the committee : —The Incum-
bent, Messrs. H. S. Barlow, C. Baker, E.
Crisp, R. T. Clarke, R. Grice, Gill, E.
Hills, F. R. Jones, Maguire, J. J. Moody,
W. E .Morris, Shurey, Summers, Dr. Tracy,
S. Weir, and E. Wild, with power to add to
their number.
It is well known that some of these
names were put down as a compliment, and
without the knowledge or consent of the
parties ; therefore they are not to blame.
One or two meetings have been held, and a
very elaborate design for a tower obtained,
which would cost about £2,000. It is also
ascertained that the present portion of
the tower must be pulled down, as the
foundations are defective. One very valu-
able and energetic member is also absent
in England— Mr. W. E. Morris —but it is
hoped when he returns an earnest effort
will be made, and the reproach that has so
long hung over the congregation will be re-
moved.
I now come to the last report issued,
that for 1867. Mr. Kimpton was re-elected
for the fourth time parish warden, Mr. Crisp
G


trustees’ warden, and Mr. F. R. Jones as
minister’s warden. This report is a most
gloomy one, and represents a considerably
reduced revenue ; but it must be borne in
mind that this year was one of trial to all
churches and charitable institutions, in con-
sequence of the political crisis or “dead-
lock,” and the stoppage of payments by the
Government. Some extra expenses con-
nected with the wretched condition of the
parsonage, and an expenditure of £lO4 on
the organ, also no doubt tended to swell
the now three-year-old debt to a sum that
should arouse the parishioners and wardens
to action, as, if allowed to go on at such a
rate, may prove troublesome to get rid of.
In consequence of the serious falling off in
the collections for the Scripture Readers’
Fund, the wardens felt compelled in June to
inform Mr. Maguire that they could not be
responsible for his stipend. Mr. Maguire’s
services were, however, retained by the in-
cumbent on his own authority. The church-
wardens also express their regret at the
serious illness of their colleague, Mr. F. 11.
Jones, by which they were deprived of his
services since August, and it is my pain-
ful duty to place on record that death
ended his sufferings early in 1808, and he
entered into his rest after a very protracted
and painful illness, borne with the patience
and resignation of a true child of God.


I have now traced the progress of the
church from 1849 to 1868, and thrown to-
gether such facts and circumstances as my
own recollections, memos, and the official
records of the parish, will supply, as far as
the limited space I have will enable me to
do. There is much omitted, as those ac-
quainted with the parish will probably be
aware ; but as one officially connected during
the whole time, it would savour of egotism
for me to speak of. Suffice it to say, there
is not a more important parish in the whole
diocese than St. Mark’s. Situated in the
midst of a large population of the middle
and working classes, the influence of the
Church ought to be felt far and wide by
means of the various agencies she has, or
ought to have, at work. But such a parish
needs a good clerical staff. A couple of
curates, or one curate and a lay reader, with
the incumbent, would be fully occupied if
the parish is to be worked as it ought to be.
It is unreasonable to expect an incumbent
alone satisfactorily to visit, teach, organise,
and study sufficiently for the people’s
benefit. To attempt it would be to induce
poverty in the sermons, and a consequent
complaining that our clergy are below the
requirements of the age. To omit the visit-
ation of the parishioners leads to a neglect
of religious duty on the part of a large
number of the flock, and unless the clergy
are well acquainted with the private life,


liabits and manners, vices or virtues, of a
parish or people, he is unable effectually
to combat with the one or promote and en-
courage the other, and his preaching must
be something like “ drawing a bow at a
venture.” Lay agency is all very well, but
it does not carry the respect, obedience, and
weight that the ministerial office does, and
in some cases acts prejudicially to the
Church, and leads to dissent and schism,
and not unfrequently to false and ground-
less charges against the clergyman of neg-
lect of, or a desire to shirk, his duty. Lay
agency, to be effectual, must be followed up
by the visits of a clergyman, particularly in
towns and large centres of population.
And now let us ask what has the Church
done during the past eighteen or twenty
years in this parish r ( Some fruit ought
now to be visible after so many years of
hard, persevering labour. 1 think it can
be shewn that some fruit is to be seen ; to
wit, the erection and maintenance of the
church, schools and parsonage, the District
Visiting Society, missionary and other efforts
made to extend the ministrations of the
Church and the spread of the Gospel at
home and abroad, as well as in the lives
and conduct of many parishioners. It
would be invidious to mention names, but
I know of some, .and I believe there are
many in this colony who date their conver-
sion under God through the means His


Church has employed in this parish, either
from the simple lesson received in the Sun-
day schools, from the “ word spoken in
season ” during a pastoral visit, or the faith-
ful preaching of God’s word. On the
other hand, there is no denying the fact
that some who, “ having put their hand to
the plough, looked back,” and are not “ fit
for the kingdom of God.” Of such I say
no more. Many during the period alluded
to have passed away into eternity, who
before their departure gave abundant proof
of their title “ to be meet partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light.” Of
these I have a pleasure in speaking, and
some, who were engaged in the schools, or
officially connected with the Church, I
mention in order to perpetuate their names;
I cannot, however, give more than a few of
those coming under my own immediate
notice, and even in that I feel, like “ the
Pastor,” in Wordsworth, surrounded with
perplexity and difficulty in commencing,
and in his language ask—
“ Where shall I begin ?
Who shall be first selected from my flock,
Gathered together in their peaceful folds ?”
One of the earliest was Miss Rachael Ann
Blackburn, daughter of a trustee of the
church, a young lady loved and respected by
all who knew her for her amiable disposition
and Christian character. She was one of
the earliest lady teachers in the Sunday-


school, and the first to be cut off, by fever,
in the midst of her usefulness, in the year
1853, in the very bloom of youth, at the
early age of twenty years, she was followed
in twelve months after by her father, the
late Mr. James Blackburn, one of the first
trustees, at the age of fifty-one years,
long before he had an opportunity of wit-
nessing the work he had beeif engaged in
with so much zeal in connection with the
church brought to anything like comple-
tion.
At a much later period, an instance of
early piety may be mentioned in the case
of George Bailey, a most promising youth
in the Sunday school, whose death took
place in the year 1857, at the age of twelve
and a half years. He was a great favourite
in the Sunday school, and during his illness
many a young heart was drawn out in
sorrow and sympathy for him. His death-
bed hours, for one so young, were most
cheering, and the advantages of an early
religious training were fully realised by a
quiet submission to the will of God, and a
firm reliance in the merits of his dear Re-
deemer. His schoolfellows (many of whom
are still connected with the Church and
School), encouraged by the teachers, testi-
fied their respect and attachment by sub-
scribing their pence, and erecting to his
memory, and since maintaining in decent
order and repair, a tombstone over his


grave, in the Melbourne cemetery, bearing
the following inscription :
Sacr tit to the thtmorn of
GEORGE WILLIAM BA ILEY,
Tupil Teacher of St. Mark’s Boys’ School,
Who died 25th April, 1857,
Aged 12£ years.
Erected by bis Schoolfellows of theDayand Sunday
Schools, in token of their appreciation of
his remembrance.
“HE IS NOT DEAD BUT SLEEPETH.”
His death was followed by that of his
father, Mr. T. T. Bailey, an old Church
Building Committee-man of St. Mark’s, on
the 4th of November, 1859, in the forty-
seventh year of his age ; and eight years
after the death of Mr. Bailey, his daughter,
the late Mrs. Weir, wife of Mr. S. Weir,
lay reader, before mentioned, departed this
life on the Bth of September, 1867, in the
thirtieth year of her age. An extract from
a brief memoir of this truly Christian
woman, by the Rev. R. B. Barlow, appended
to a published funeral sermon by the Rev,
W. Hall, M.A., of Northcote, will be read
with interest. He says :
“On her arrival in the colony, which took
place in 1851, she became connected with the
parish of St. Mark, Collingwood ; and from that
till her death she continued a steady and at-
tached member of the congregation worshipping
in the parish church; but not merely did she
worship in the church, she was an active and
devoted Christian. Many of the poor will re-


member her as a teacher in our Sunday schools,
and as a visitor from house to house, and will
not soon forget the zeal with which she laboured
for the instruction of the young, and the com-
fort and relief of those in sickness and in want.
After her marriage, which took place in 1857,
she was obliged to relinquish her active labours
in the parish, and from that time devoted her-
self to the duties of her new position. The com-
fort of her husband and the care of her children
then became her great object. But the change
of her position brought no change of character.
The alteration in the sphere of duty affected not
her life. The light which had visited many an
abode of sorrow and sickness, and shined on
many a poor, dark soul, now burned brightly
within the limits of her quiet home ; her house
became the refuge of many a sufferer ; never did
she feel greater happiness than when adminis-
tering hospitality and shelter ; and many a
young girl has she saved from ruin, by her kind
and timely sympathy and advice. For nine
years her life passed on calmly, and, with one
exception, she had little to cause her sorrow.
One shadow, however, darkened her pathway,
and her gentle heart was made to bleed by the
death of twin children which God was pleased
to remove shortly after their birth. This sorrow
seemed to affect her much, and draw her heart
to heaven ; it served to raise her affections
more to that home where her little ones had
gone. ”


Contemporaneously with Mrs. Weir in
the Sunday-schools was the late Mrs. Hoey,
eldest daughter of Mr. W. Mortley, another
committee-man, well and honourably known
in the parish in connection with the work
of the building and organisation of the
church. Mrs. Hoey, when Miss Mortley,
was a most valued and respected teacher in
the Sunday schools. Shortly after her
marriage with Mr. Hoey, early in 1863, she
with her husband emb.oked for New Zea-
land, and settled in Dunedin. A few days
after the birth of their first child, in the
early part of 1861, she died, at the age of
twenty-five years, leaving an infantdanghter,
which survives her. Mr. Hoey also died
on the 9th of November, 1865. Previous
to the death of Mr. and Mrs. Hoey, a
brother of the latter, Mr. W. J. Mortley,
once connected with the Sabbath schools of
St. Mark’s, died, after a very protracted
and painful illness, on the 4th of June,
1863, in the twenty-second year of his age.
Here is an instance of the desolation caused
by death in two families in a few years ;
but how consoling to sorrowing friends to
know that all died in the faith of Christ
crucified, and that their mortal bodies were
committed to the silent tomb “ in sure and
certain hope of the resurrection to eternal
life through our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall change our vile body, that it may be
like His glorious body, according to the


mighty working whereby He is able to
subdue all things to himself.”
“ God of our fathers., hear,
Thou everlasting Friend
While we, on life’s cxtremest verge,
Our souls to Thee commend.
Of all the pious dead
May we the footsteps trace,
Till with them in the land of light
We dwell before Thy face.”
On the 28th January, 1860, occurred
the melancholy drowning in the Yarra of
Edwin Denby, a young communicant and
Sunday school teacher, full of promise for
usefulness, and esteemed for his gentle dis-
position and loveable spirit, at the early
age of nineteen years. The late Mrs.
Clowes, wife of the first incumbent, died at
Westleton vicarage, in England, after a
long and painful illness, on the 15th De-
cember, 1801. The Itev. James Linskea,
once officiating minister at St. Mark’s, died
at Maryborough on the 20th August, 18G2,
in the thirty-fourth year of his age. Mr. P.
M. Phillips, a committee-man who rendered
essential service in many ways to the
church, schools, district visiting and mis-
sionary societies, died at Maldon on the
ICth March, 1803, aged twenty-eight years;
and on the 23rd September of the same
year Mrs. Crisp, wife of one of the present
trustees and churchwardens, died, after
many years of sickness and suffering. Mr.
and Mrs. Crisp are among the earliest and


most consistent members of the Church.
During the years 18G4-5-6, I cannot call to
mind the death of any one officially con-
nected with the Church or parish; but in
1867, Mr. H. Williams, once a pupil in the
Sunday school, and afterwards secretary, died
at the age of 21 years, on the 31st July. On
the 14th October of the same year, Sirs.
Heales, wife of Mr. R. Heales, a most
humble-minded, unassuming, but earnest
and devoted servant of her Divine Master,
who for many years was mistress of the
Bishop’s school in Bourke street, and for
several years subsequently was engaged in
many good 'works and pious undertakings,
including the superintendence of the
Infants’ Sunday school at St. Mark’s, was
called to her rest, after a most painful and
.afflictive visitation. Mrs. Heales was a
frequent visitor at Bishopscourt ; not, I
believe, as a mere visitor, but in connection
with some charitable work in which Mrs.
Berry and other ladies were engaged ; and
after her death the bishop preached her
funeral sermon at St. Mark’s. Her charac-
ter may be briefly summed up in the words
of the following epitaph :
“ She was,
But words are wanting to say what;
Think what a Christian should be—
She was that. ”
Last of all, the late Mr. F. R. Jones, whose
death has been previously mentioned, was


a very valued Sunday school teacher, and
churchwarden for 18G7. These are some,
among others, who have taken a prominent
part in connection with the church and
schools, but gone to render an account of
their stewardship, and to hear the glorious
invitation—“ Come, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world.”
“ Shall their praise no more be known
When the loved are lost and gone ?
Shall their virtue not survive
To teach the mourners how to live,
And tread the bright hut thorny road
That leads to glory and to God ?
If humble thought or deed of mine
Can e’er avert it, be this line
Inscribed upon their narrow cell—
‘ Be what they were, and sleep as well.’”
My narrative is drawing to a close. I
regret I cannot give more than a passing
notice of the very important Sunday schools,
and of some of the teachers and children
that from time to time have passed through
or been connected with them, and from
which have issued a larger number of
clergymen, lay readers, and missionaries
than have, perhaps, gone from, any school
in the colony. The Rev. H. E. Windle,
the Rev. L. H. Rupp, the Rev. G. W. Kelly,
the Rev. A. Toomath, .and Mr. S. Weir,
Mr. H. S. Scott, Air. E. H. Dubois, Mr.
Parfit, and Mr. G. Davies, lay readers, were
teachers in the schools. The last-named,


Mr. Davies, was for some time engaged in
connection with the Chinese Mission in this
colony, and is now sojourning in China,
whither he has gone to acquire a more per-
fect knowledge of the language, with a view
to return and minister among the Chinese
in this land. Mr. Dubois has gone to the
Cape of Good Hope. These schools have
long been among the first and largest
in the colony for good order and ma-
nagement, and, according to the last
report (for 18G7), there had been an
average attendance of GOS children every
Sunday during the year; the highest
number present on one day being 722,
and the lowest 472. The staff of
teachers number 40, a number much too
small for the children attending. To Mr.
W. E. Morris the credit is due for bringing
the schools under such excellent discipline
and order. He held the office of superin-
tendent for several years up to the time of
his departure for England. Since which
time Mr. H. Barlow, who succeeded him,
has most effectually maintained the prestige
of the schools. Rewards or prizes, princi-
pally confined to books of a useful and in-
teresting character, are given to the child-
ren, who have to earn them by a certain
number of marks, an account of which is
regularly kept by each teacher, and tabu-
lated at the end of each year by the secre-
tary, when the merits of each scholar is as-


certained. The teachers meet every Thurs-
day evening for prayer, and instruction in
religious subjects in connection with the
lessons. On one Sunday in the month a
devotional meeting is held to implore a
blessing on their labours ; and once a quar-
ter they hold a social tea meeting, to which
each teacher is entitled to bring a friend.
These meetings are most useful and inter-
esting ; the addresses are generally given by
the incumbent, superintendent, teachers, or
some invited guest; and occasionally a
written essay is prepared and read by one
of the teachers, bearing upon topics con-
nected with Sunday schools, Church History,
itc., by which means a bond of union and
Christian fellowship is created, and the
interest and welfare of the schools main-
tained. The female teachers have, since July,
1865, been engaged in a good work that
deserves to be made generally known. As-
certaining that many dear- children were
often prevented from attending school for
want of decent clothing, they, in a true
Dorcas spirit, hold sewing meetings as often
as occasion requires for the purpose of
making garments for the poor scholars, out
of such cast-off clothing as may be given
to them, or from material purchased, or re-
ceived by them as donations, for that pur-
pose. ' This work originated with the boys
and girls of the three first classes, who,
(being aware that many of their schoolfel-


lows, not so fortunate as themselves, were
unable to attend for want of boots or other
clothing), with their teachers, agreed to
to contribute one penny or more per week,
to be expended in the purchase of boots, or
material to be made up into articles of
clothing. By this means seventeen families,
comprising thirty-six children, were sup-
plied with hats, dresses, and boots, free,
during the first twelve months at a cost,
exclusive of the teachers’ labour, of £G 4s.
10d., during which period a donation of
fifty-three yards of winsey was received
from Mr. Sargood. In 18G6, fifteen fami-
lies, comprising twenty-seven children, were
similarly relieved by sixteen dresses, four-
teen pairs of boots, and twelve hats, at a
cost of £5 14 s. 2d.; and last year, eight
families, comprising twenty-seven children,
received twelve dresses, four hats, and fif-
teen pairs of boots ; the children in some
cases receivingclnthingtwiee duringtheyear,
the expenditure being £i 3s. Gd. A dona-
tion of twenty yards of winsey was also
received from an anonymous donor. It is
the custom of the school to hold a pic-nic
every Easter, and a pleasing circumstance
has been related to me of the last. It was
found that some of the poorer children had
not clothing sufficiently tidy to appear in,
when the boys of the fourth class and the
girls of the first class contributed about
ten shillings in order that their poorer


schoolfellows might participate in the plea-
sures and festivities of that great holiday.
Miss Williams, a lady in every way quali-
fied, has the management of this good work,
and acts as superintendent of the sewing
meetings, secretary and treasurer, to whom
also all donations, in money or goods, may
be sent. Having been a pupil in the school
herself, but for many years past a most use-
ful teacher, she naturally feels attached to
the schools and children. One gentleman,
Mr. E. Hills, has been a most liberal
supporter, and has given the ladies much
encouragement by his timely free-will offer-
ings.
The missionary work of the teachers and
children deserve a favourable mention ;as
also the important and valuable aid given
by the ladies of the District Visiting Society.
I have extended my remarks perhaps to
a dreary length, but I cannot close without
recording a fact that one individual—and
that one not a member of the congregation,
or even a parishioner—has done more for
St. Mark’s than all the trustees, wardens,
teachers, and incumbents put together; and
the name of Mr. Richard Grice should ever
be held in grateful remembrance by the
present and future generations of parish-
ioners ; his contributions to church, par-
sonage, and schools must have exceeded
.£12,000. The erection of a tower, with a
peal of bells, or a new suite of schools to,


replace the present unsightly, obstructive,
inconvenient, and dilapidated buildings
would be fitting memorials of his extraor-
dinary liberality and kindness of heart. The
present school-buildings are an eyesore and
a nuisance. The erection of suitable build-
ings on the northern boundary of the play-
ground (if another site could not be ob-
tained,) might easily be accomplished by
steady perseverance ; and I fervently hope
there is sufficient spirit in the Epicopalians
of Fitzroy to take the matter up in earnest,
both with regard to the erection of the
tower and the removal of the present
schools.
And now my work is done ; my labour,
which has been one of love, is o’er. Pardon,
reader, what you think amiss or disapprove
of. I have not written for the general pub-
lic, but for the parishioners of St. Mark’s
and many co-workers, particularly those
who have borne the heat and burden of
the day during the earliest period of the
church’s history.
“Therefore, for what is here produced, I ask
Thy favour ; trusting that thou wilt not deem
The offering, though imperfect, premature.”
B.


Boundaries of St. Mark's Parish
WSLL/NGTON STREET.
Pastern Boundary—adjoining St. Philip's parish.
References to the Plan.
* St. Mark’s Church and Schools.
7. Parsonage.
l. Gore street. 2. George street. 3. Napier street. 4,
Young 1 street. 5. Fitzroy street. 6. Line of road com-
prising- Carlton street west of Nicholson street, Moor street,
and Stanley street east of Smith street.


The foregoing plan, and references thereto,
give only the principal thoroughfares ; the
smaller streets crossing those indicated are
numerous, but of no great importance. The
present boundaries are as follows :
Oii the West.— Rathdown street, from gate of the Carlton
Gardens opposite Palmer street, proceeding north as
far as top of Barkly street, Carlton.
On the Norik.— Down Barkly street into Nicholson street,
down Nicholson street into Kyrie street; down Byrie
street to Wellington street (when opened to Ityrie st.)
On the East.— Wellington street as far as Derby street.
On the South.— Up Derby street to Gertrude street; up
Gertrude street to Brunswick street: down Brunswick
street to Palmer street j through Palmer street to
Carlton Gardens; across Carlton Gardens to the gate
in Rathdown street.


