

HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE ANZACS' CAMPAIGN.
M ANY wonderful scenes were enacted in
the beautiful harbour of Mudros, Lem-
nos Island, in connection with the Gallipoli
campaign. It was from here that our gal-
lant troops sailed to storm the heights and
win imperishable renown. It was to this spot
that thousands were brought back wounded
and ill. It was here that many of our sol-
diers rested awhile from the trenches. And
Officers of the 3rd Australian General
Hospital.
'J’HE photograph was taken on board a trans-
port. Included in the group are Colonel
Piaschi (who was some time ago invalided to
England), Lieut.-Col. Jamieson, Major Morton,
Major Harris, Major Read (all of Sydney), and
Captain Gibson (Western Australia),
PANORAMIC VIEW OF
it was here that the troops again landed after
the evacuation of the Peninsula and prior to
returning to Egypt. No. 3 Australian General
Hospital was stationed at Mudros, and the
doctors and nurses, particularly in the early
part of the campaign, did work no less mag-
nificent than that of the soldiers at the front.
esting pictures to be published in the “Mail” Anzac Number on
April 25. The Anzac Number will not be a re-publication of
illustrations familiar to the public —the pictures will be new,
and will in thrilling manner fill up all gaps in the pictorial
record of the magnificent but ill-fated Gallipoli expedition.
Pictures Relating to the Gallipoli Operations:
April—December, 1915.
The series of photographs oa this and following pages will serve
as an introduction to a special collection of absorbingly inter-
Egyptians Constructing Railways at
Lemnos.
WHEN the British arrived Lemnos was
quickly transformed from a sleepy little
island into a place of intense activity. Rail-
ways and roads were constructed with amaz-
ing speed, and all sorts of difficult engineer-
ing feats were successfully accomplished.
PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE
Ihe 3rd A.G.H. cn Lemnos Island had the distinction of being the only general hospital under canvas, the ethers occupying palaces, hotels, and other large building.
The laying out of the hospital, accommodating 1700 patients, was a splendid piece of work.
Tlie Sydney Mail. April 5, 101G.
8


i\yi T inROS HARRfII IR I FIVIMO'R
me utveu nai\D\JUA, enmiNvjj.
T HE structure in the centre of this section of the
picture is a huge condenser, which supplied pure
water. The troops at first sank wells, but the water
obtained in this way was not good; indeed, it was
said to be responsible for a good deal of the sickness
from which many of the men suffered so severely.
T"\ ESCRIBING life on Lemnos Island after the evacuation c f
I a Gallipoli a soldier writes:—At Sarpi the Y.M.G.A. is run-
| J n j ng a marquee and a canteen. They n; ,: e recently landed
£15,000 worth of stores. At West Mudros the chaplain’s
department runs two canteens, and has a stone hall, where dur-
ing the day tea and refresnments are served, and every night
there is an entertainment of some sort. The day before Christ-
mas the taking's of the chaplain’s canteen were £5OO. When off
which runs the canteens at West Mudros is a military one, and
the Government is behind it. They are building stone halls a:
different camps, and doing all they can to make life pleasant
for the men. Chaplains began it, but the committee now has
representatives from all corps. But we’ll soon be back in Egypt,
We have a beauty here which cannot be matched in Australia. This
picturesqueness can be best expressed by saying we have “Medi-
terranean mornings.” There are one or two pictures in the
EARLY DAYS AT LEMNOS.
r JTIE main road through the 3rd A.G.H. The photo-
graph was taken soon after the establishment of
the hospital, when there was still a good deal to be
done. The picture affords an interesting comparison
with the panoramic view below', showing the hospital
complete, with everything in perfect order. The 3rd
■A.G.H. has recently been removed to Alexandria.
duty there are delightful rambles among the hills and in some
of the quaint Greek villages. By special leave one may even
visit the pretty town of Castro, which is the capital of the island.
At Therma there are hot mineral springs and 3 good bath-house.
The Greeks are making fortunes out of us. They overcharge
frightfully, but as the canteens carried on by tne chaplains and
the Y.M.C.A. sell at cost, and profits go to army funds, there is
no real need for men to buy from Greeks now. The committee
Sydney Gallery which illustrate what 1 mean. Turner is the
artist who best interprets these glorious scenes. Every morn-
ing a soft mist hangs over the waters of Mudros Bay. Througu
this the various colours of dawn are softened into pinks,
browns, and yellows, which are faint and flat, with no sharp-
ness. Through this medium you see the shadows of the moun-
tains and the shore cast in the greenish-blue water, and you
watch the Anglo-French fleet as through a very fine lace veil.
3RD AUSTRALIAN GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Colonel Fiaschi, of Sydney, who was in charge of the hospital, was invalided to England, and was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel de Crespigny, Major Kenneth Smith being second in command.
The hospital was equipped in a manner-that left nothing to be d sired.
9
The Sydney Mail. April 5, 1910.
THE ANZACS' CAMPAIGN.


card systems. All the assistance is supplied by the legal
profession, both branches of which, in addition, contribute
£lOO a year to assist in the clerical expenses of the
Bureau. This enables two stenographers to be con-
stantly employed, whilst three others give voluntary help,
and a fourth can be called upon when necessary. So
well satisfied are the military authorities with the
work accomplished that they now refer questions
of missing men to the Bureau. Up to the end of
February considerably over 3000 cases had been effect-
ively dealt with, whilst 2000 others were in the courso
of being investigated. One veiy important
aspect of the work is the fact that the Bureau
has succeeded in getting into communication
with the Red Crescent Society of Turkey and
the Greek Red Cross Society. Through the
Turkish society was recently received a lo ig
list of Australian prisoners of war in Con-
stantinople, the names of some of whom had
not previously appeared in any official list. The
whole work is exceedingly Interesting and
frequently intensely pathetic. It is trying at
times, but there is not a man in the office
who would give it up for anything else. That
the public appreciate what is being done for
them is evidenced by the great numbers of
grateful letters that are received. Many of
these are very human documents, overflowing
with gratitude and thankfulness. “May God
bless you and the Red Cross,” writes one
woman. “Would that all mothers were as
contented as you have made me to-day.”
“Yours is a splendid work,” writes another,
“and it must be a great consolation to you
to know that you are bringing so much com-
fort to so many homes in Australia.” “Al-
though the news you have sent us only con-
firms our worst fears,” writes still another,
“it is indeed a consolation to know that there
are others who car-e sufficiently about us and
ours to do all the splendid work you have
done to lighten our anguish.” Most of tnese
letters come from women, and all indicate
the wonderful courage of the mothers, the
wives, and the daughters of the nation, many
of whom have sacrificed the best life held
for them in their country’s cause. There
are sadness and patnos and tragedy through-
out the story, but never a word of grumbling
or complaint.
Industrial Undertakings.
THE problem of the returned soldier who
is incapacitated for heavy work is be-
ing met by the opening up of lighter
avenues of employment. Some months ago,
when it was realised that several disabled
men in the Randwick Hospital were capable
of and eager to utilise their long hours in
something more than reading and smoking,
arrangements were made to send an instruc-
tor to teach them now to do raffia work. Seve-
ral ladies also put themselves under this in-
structor, so that they were soon able to do
the teaching themselves. It was not long
ere the men became enthusiastic in the work.
They declared that it was the best thing tnat
had been done for them since their return.
The weary days in hospital, with nothing to
do, had so affected some of them that it was
retarding their progress towards convales-
cence, and was giving them too muen time t 0
brood. The raffia work was' simple, but it
achieved its object. Then came wood-carv-
ing and mat-making, the patients choosing
whichever they felt most pleasure in taking
up. But the society desired to do something-
more than assist the men to fill in their spare
time; it wished to fit them to take tneir part
in the workaday world on their discharge from
hospital, and to take it in such a way that they would
maintain their independence and be able to earn at least
a living wage. So a depot was opened for basket-making
at 223 George-street towards the end of last year. Here
an expert is in charge, and with a view to coping with
the expansion of tne industry half a dozen women are
being instructed by him in all phases pf the art, so that
they may be able to go out and impart their knowledge
to others, probably in the country centres or in other
towns. The way in which some of the men accommodate
tnemselves to the new circumstances and conditions is
truly wonderful. There is no grumbling or fault-finding;
there is simply among them a snrit of devout thankful-
ness for what is being done to help them. Their great fear
was that on returning to Australia, and especially in the
At the Information Bureau, 88 Pitt-street.
HERE comes an old, grey-headed man, a veteran of the Crimea, whose sons and grandsons at the
front number nearly a score. He seeks information regarding one who waslangerouslv ill.
It is the painful duty of the Bureau to tell him that his son has passed away. The old soldier
raises his bent figure to attention, removes his hat, and salutes, as two great tears well up in
his staring eyes and roll down his wrinkled cheeks. Without so much as a murmur he turns
and walks slowly out of the office.”
years to follow the declaration of peace, they would be-
come useless members of society. Certainly, if the Red
Cross gets its way, that snail never be. They shall never
bef forced into the backwash of life. In the course of a
few months other industries will be opened. Already a
sapper still in hospitall is looking forward to making
mechanical toys, a carpenter is very keen on taking up
picture-frame making, and another’ on making wooden
playthings, whilst a painter is confident that he will make
a success of colouring the toys and other playthings.
Wnat talent may not be found among these disabled men!
Take the keen-eyed bushman who never has known wnat
it is to be beaten, the young city man who has a genius
for engineering, the general handy-man who can tackle
any job and do it well, and the hundreds of others who
will come into this movement. Why should
they not found in Australia a series of in-
dustries that in the past have been the spe-
cial preserve of our enemies and our com-
mercial competitors? There is indeed a
future for them and their work.
Spinning.
ANOTHER industrial scheme that bids fair
to become an Important pne is that of
spinning. Months ago, when the sup-
ply of wool ran short, several spinning wheels
were built locally, and an expert was em-
ployed to teach the Red Cross workers how
to produce their own worsted. Fair quan-
tities of the finished article were turned out,
and these helped to tide over the shortage.
So impressed were many women by what had
been done that they decided to continue the
work, and now a regular depot is running (at
255 A George-street), where wool is being spun
by a number of workers under the direction
of instructors. As these workers become
proficient they will be able to pass on the
art to others, and in time a number of re-
turned soldiers, and probably also their
wives, will take up the work. Where any
country branch desires it a qualified instruc-
tor and two wheels are sent up at the ex-
pense of the society. Negotiations are in
progress for the manufacture of cheaper
wheels than those now in use, so that each
branch may be able to buy its own, and
arrangements have been made for a regular
supply of specially carded wool suitable for
spinning.
Sloyd Centres.
ANOTHER recent development has been
the establishment of men’s Sloyd cen-
tres. At least two of these are now
in working order in the suburbs, and others
axe expected to be formed shortly. No
actual work is done at the depots, but tim-
ber of all kinds is stored and handed out
to amateur ,carpenters and others who are
capable of making any useful article with it.
They take the timber home and spend their
evenings manufacturing crutches, deck-
chairs, splints, hospital cabinets, and other
requisites. Some of the work being turned
out is most creditable, the efforts of pro-?
fesslonal men who have had no training in
the handling of tools being surprising. The
demand for chairs, tables, etc., in connection
with the local convalescent homes and the
transports is big enough to keep a centre
going in every suburb, apart from the needs
of the hospitals abroad. In the country,
although no Sloyd depots have been formed,
a good deal of similar handiwork is done
and forwarded to Sydney. Some of the manual
classes at the schools are also confining tneir
work to necessary hospital articles.
{To be Continued in Our Next Issue.)
MEMBERS OF THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN VETERINARY SECTION IN EGYPT
THE Section altogether numbers abo ut 120.In the centre of the group is Catain Walters. Recently Veterinary Fund has been formed has formed (Australica-chambers, Rowe-stre,Sydney),as the A.V.S
"chewing sand " in Egypt for 15 monts , and Everyone hasapp l ied for transfer to the trenches, but all the appications have refused, the men being too useful where they are at present
(Continued from Page 6.)
South Wales.
Story of The Red Cross in New


Egyptians at Work.
Incinerator at the Australian Hospital, Mudros
An incinerator was soon found to be necessary for the destruction of rubbish, as a precaution against the spreading of sickness.
X-Ray Room at the 3rd A.G.H,
Field Kitchen of the 3rd A.G.H.
Aerated Water Factory at the 3rd A.G.H.
The men belong to the “factory” staff.
Patients Airing Their Bedding.
'T'HESE photographs were taken by a member of the 3rd A.G.H. staff. A large
portion of the equipment of this hospital w.as purchased with money snpol.ed
by the N.S.W. Division of the Red Cross Society. While the hospital waa in
Lemnos Island the Commandant received ample supplies of Red Cross goods, and
after supplying his own unit he was able to distribute large quantities amoa:;
other units of the A.I.F. A big tug was purchased for the purpose of unload-
ing Red Cross goods In the harbour of Mudros. The transport question had, up
to that time, been a matter of great difficulty. This tug was also utilised until
the evacuation for the purpose of carrying goods to the No. 1 Stationary Hospital
at Anzac.
10
April 5, 1916-
The Spdneij Mall,
HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE ANZACS’ CAMPAIGN.


Egyptians Engaged in Road-making at Mudros.
THEY are breaking metal to the regulation size. When the Australians first arrived there the
roads were few, and in anything but good order; within a few weeks there were many admirably
fermed thoroughfares. The Egyptians are slow workers individually, but work in big gangs, and so
get their tasks through quickly.
Colonel Fiaschi and Some of His Staff on the Island.
THE officer on the left in helmet with puggaree is Major Waugh (Parramatta); in helmet with.
out puggaree, Captain Stewart (Melbourne); in centre, Sister Phillips (Sydney) and Sister O'Neill,
Major Charles Read (Sydney) behind them; on the extreme right is Captain Matthews, the
figure beside him being Colonel Fiaschi.
UNLOADING EQUIPMENT AT SOUTH PIER, MUDROS, FOR THE 3rd A.G.H.
A CORRESPONDENT writing from Mudros just after the Gallipoli evacuation said.—“ The Australians
had a most unexpected peaceful Christmas-one day amid the noise and fury of battle, the next
in a good camp on a peaceful and beautiful island, to sleep without the noise of rattling bullets or the
occasional outburst of howitzers. How good it was to exchange intervals of trench duty for football
Convalescent Australians.
and boating; instead of serving guns in the firing-lin to serve Christmas puddings and cakes, gifts from
Australia! What a change! Instead of the constant fight with Master Turk we have fierce contests
between battalions for football supremacy. To these matches spectators come from all neighbouring
and hospitals; orderlies from the hospitals off duty .There is ‘barracking’ in real Sydney style.
Transferring Troops from a P. and O. Liner to a Sweeper,
11
April 3, 1916-
The Sydney Mail,
HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE ANZACS’ CAMPAIGN.


ON THE WESTERN FRONT: “A LIVING HELL.”
Newspaper Illustrations, Ltd. A VILLAGE STREET IN FLANDERS.
Scenes of ruin and desolation are, alas! too common in Flanders. Everywhere the hideousness of war is evidenced.
A LITTLE book, written by Prince Oscar, the Kaiser’s
fifth son, describing the great French offensive
in Champagne in October last, is of especial interest
just now in view of the German activity in the Verdun
region, where the horrors are said to have totally
eclipsed those of the Champagne fighting. The Prince
writes: —“It was not the attacks of the French infan-
try which made this battle so hideous for us, nor was
it the hand-to-hand struggles in the trenches, man
against man, where the German, possessing greater
physical strength, was easily the match of the in-
dividual Frenchman. What made the battle a living
hell was the work of the French artillery, enormous
in strength, with huge supplies of ammunition which
was spent lavishly. Life in the trenches became a
perpetual nightmare, and stamped as unforgettable
heroes the men who went through with it without
flinching. On to a comparatively smAii area tne
French on one day threw a hundred thousand shells.
We found a French document in which the command-
ing officer calculated that IB bombs must be the allow-
ance per metre of German trench, these 18 bombs to
be used, not in a day, but within one or two hours.
The rapidity of the artillery fire was, therefore, as
great as that of dinary machine-gun, but the
shells hurled agains'flf? were not infantry shells, but
grenades of every calibie. ‘Drum-fire’ is the name for
this sort of artillery fire, and its effects were simply
dreadful —unspeakable. The barbed wire was com-
pletely annihilated, was’wiped clean out of existence;
the trenches were flattened into mounds, their founda-
tions crumbled away. -.iTo known sort of earthworks
were able to witastaffT; ■ such fire for even a short
time. When such ‘dnm-fite’ began a huge wall of
smoke and chalk particles rose over our trenches,
cutting off the men from the, rest of the world. The
horror of the scene augmented by the ceaseless
rumbling, thundering, uhd clashing which filled the
air, and which, even miji j away, sounded like a heavy
thunderstorm. It see,.Vi impossible that any living
creature should sur- i . •.■jeh hellish turmoil. When
the firing '\hen its direction was
changed to g; m tveiAh infantry rr chance xd at-
tack us, then our br fusiliers, musketeers, grena-
diers crawled out of th nnels and pockets into which
the enemy’s grenades ploughed the earth, made
their way from amon; broken foundations, crumbling
cement, trickling sand .gs, and, grabbing their guns
and wiping the dirt from their eyes, they repulsed the
French attack. And this was done not once, hut
dozens of times.
t( (continues Prince Oscar) our men
were ordered to abandon a trench which was
suffering particularly from ‘drum-fire’ in order to
avoid unnecessary loss of life, and the crew from such
an abandoned trench was then placed in our second
line of entrenchments. It sometimes happened that
French infantrymen, under protection of their artil-
lery fire, reached and took such an empty trench, suc-
ceeding the more readily because they encountered no
obstacles. Our soldiers then spec g forth from their
cover and attacked the Frenc ith hand grenades
and bayonets. If for some rea or other this coun-
ter-attack was not made at ( but was ptpstpo °d
for an hour or two, we were so sure of su> < ess,
and it was then never secur ; >y us without avy
'n ■ *«»..• litxt*- hcc» ejapp .bed
amply sufficed the French, wh re exceedingl: -ver
at every sort of entrenchme work, to char, and
remodel the trench for th purposes, to instal
machine-guns, to place sand! barriers along both
sides, and to make sundry ota.-r changes. This done,
the ‘Frenchmen’s nest’ was complete.”
newspaper illustrations, Ltd,
A GERMAN TRENCH IN NORTHERN FRANCE.
Early in the week General Sir Douglas Haig reported:—"The Northumberland Fusiliers and the Royal Fusiliers after a mine explosion assaulted a German salient at St. Elci successfully, taking second line trenches
along a front of 600 yards. The en[?] sustained heavy casualties. We took 103 prisoners.”
12
April 5, 1916-
The Sydney Mail,
