

A •>
|y .■ . • \* / o/ /“■
Sli
Si SCONE. g|
■*? HISTORICAL SUMMARY i4|.
c<2>
■ <2> «j
• -<S>-
of TnK
<> ‘-Ipis?®
• ■■<3- .-<£>■ • \
PROCEEDINGS AND REPORTS ' 4
-4Q2>- ; : ■'
ete OP THK I A;;:-;:’' !
® :y
ll UNT E R RI VER YIN E Y AIM) ||;
ASSOCIATION,
•■<D- ■s&>'- •■ 1 3
EROM ITS ORIGIN ATIOX [
■O' O'. {: |
■ -<2> TO iTS i
■ ■ -<l2> ■
4| FIRST AX-W AL MEETING
■ 1 ;
■ <£>o ’
IN THE YEAE 1853,
<2>
• -<2> . S :
0> <£> •
•<£3> 1 ,45> ■
•<S> | <E> ■
■■ -<J> HOT 4 ®- ’
• <j> l <T> • ;
■ ~<Z> ■'&>'■'■.
SYDNEY: <£>-*. ;
I • W . R. PIT) DING TO N, '<s?* •
■ 185, GEORGE STREET. ■. ( r.
■ -<3> 4S>lm «'
I 185 L jififfc
! *?4al I.- - —A. '"iP‘s
. .. s' V, s s V V ® e .:' & V e Y % i ® V s ® V ■?; £m U: i
- : : f 1
Henry Parkes, EuHfiire * oral Printing Office, 173, George Street, Sydney.
t




H.L. WHITE,
BcILLTREES,
SCONE,
HISTOEICAL SUMMARY
OP THE
PROCEEDINGS AND REPORTS
OF THE
HUNT E R. RIY ER TINE YARD
ASSOCIATION,
FROM ITS ORIGINATION
FIRST ANNUAL MEETING
IN THE YEAR 1853.
SYDNEY:
W. R. PIDDINGTON,
485, GEORGE STREET.


HENRY PARKES, EMPIRE GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE,
490, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
), GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


HS3SS/£-iO(*9U
/ 9 ■ S'- n n 1 ’
/ . *"V> AW /
REPORT
THE HUNTER RIVER VINEYARD ASSOCIATION,
FOR THE YEAR 1854.
At the Yearly Meeting of the Hunter Eiver Vineyard Association,
held at the Northumberland Hotel, West Maitland, on Wednesday,
the 4th of May, 1853, James King, Esq., President, after the first
annual address, as given in the sequel, was read from the Chair, the
following were sanctioned as the amended Laws of the Association ;
REGULATIONS OF THE HUNTER RIVER VINEYARD ASSOCIATION, INSTITUTED
19th MAY, 1817, FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING THE CULTURE OF
THE VINE, AND TURNING ITS PRODUCTS TO THE MOST
PROFITABLE ACCOUNT.
I. —The Association shall consist of a President, Vice-President, Secretary,
Treasurer, and ordinary Members.
11. —There shall be held at Maitland, on the first Wednesday of May in every
year, a General Meeting of the Association; three members to constitute a
quorum.
111. —At the Annual General Meeting in every year, there shall be elected
by the majority of votes of the members present, a Standing Committee con-
sisting of three members including the President, for the general management
of the Society’s affairs: the President to be convener, and two members to
form a quorum.
IV. —No person shall be eligible as an ordinary member of the Association
who shall not be a cultivator of the vine, and bona fide a maker of wine.
V. —Candidates for admission, as members, shall be proposed and balloted for
at,any General Meeting of the Association ; but, previous to such proposal, it
shall be necessary that notice in writing to that effect shall have been given to
the Secretary by the proposer, at least two months before the date of balloting.
VI. —On admission, each ordinary member shall pay to the Secretary the sum
of twenty shillings, as the fee of admission ; and, on or before the day of such
Annual General Meeting, the further sum of twenty shillings as his annual
subscription.
VII. —lt shall be the imperative duty of evdry ordinary member, at leasts
once every year, to communicate, in writing, to the Secretary some specific
information or suggestions, such as may to him seem likely to forward the
objects of the Association ; all such written communications, having thCkigiia-
ture of the respective members attached, to be read at the next Annual General"
Meeting, and to be filed among the transactions of the Association.


Till.—Previous to the Annual General Meeting in each year, each Member
shall furnish for the use of the Association, at least four bottles of wine, the
produce of his vineyard ; besides, at his option and convenience, any additional
wine, and such other products of his vineyard or orchard as he may deem
deserving the Society’s notice; the wines to be properly labelled, and packed
in a box fitted with lock and hinges, and the key to be lodged with the Secre-
tary. Moreover, the wines thus furnished shall be accompanied by a statement
specifying the soil, aspect, mode of culture and managefnent of the vineyard,
and age of the vines producing them, the sort or sorts of grapes, the manipula-
tion and appliances used in the manufacture, the age of the wines furnished,
and the quantities made, disposed of, and on hand, and the circumstances under
which any product furnished may have been perfected.
IX.—The hour of commencing business at every Annual General Meeting
of the Association shall be twelve o’clock, noon, when the following shall be
the routine of business observed, viz.:—
1. —The President, if present, shall open the meeting with an address, noting
the progress of the Society’s affairs during the past year, and such
circumstances as shall to him seem to bear directly or indirectly on
the interests or objects of the Association.
2. —ln case of absence on the part of the President and Vice-President, the
members present, being a quorum, shall elect a President, pro tem-
pore, and the business of the day shall proceed forthwith under such
Presidency.
3. —The Report of the Standing Committee shall be read and considered, a
new Standing Committee appointed, and any other business disposed of.
4. —All written communications from members and others shall be read and
disposed of.
5. —The Treasurer’s Accounts shall be audited.
6. —The President for the ensuing year shall be elected, to come into office on
the next day thereafter; the existing President becoming the Vice-
President for the succeeding year.
7. —The wines and other products furnished shall be examined.
X. —At every Annual General Meeting of the Association, the routine busi-
ness shall be closed before three o’clock, p.m., when the members shall proceed
to lunch together, and when the untasted wines, etcetera, previously submitted
for examination, shall be placed on the table.
XI. —The lunch shall be provided for all the members out of the funds of the
Association; each member shall be at liberty to introduce a friend to the
lunch, and any extra expense thus incurred shall be defrayed equably by all the
members by whom friends have on the occasion been introduced.
XII. —Only a General Meeting shall be competent to sanction any measure
affecting the constitution of the Association; and no such measure shall be so
sanctioned which shall not have been proposed for consideration at the General
Meeting immediately preceding, and of which specific notice shall not have been
given to every member of the Association.
XIII. —lt shall be competent for any three members—by written application
specifying the object in view and the names of the applicants—to request the
President to convene a General Meeting of the Association ; and the President,
accordingly, shall cause notice of the same to be sent to all the other members,
at least a month previous to the day appointed for the meeting.
XIV. —Any one of the Association failing to comply with any of the Regu-
lations of the Society, without valid excuse, shall cease to be a member thereof.
XV. —Any winegrower wishing to become a member shall communicate his
desire, in writing, to some Member of the Association, for the purpose of being
proposed.
XVI. —lt shall be competent for any ordinary member to propose any dis-
tinguished individual, whose exertions may have been connected with the
and objects of the Association, for enrolment on the books of the
Society, as an honorary member ; his admission shall he determined in the same


manner as in the case of an ordinary member, and he will be exempted from the
operation of the rules of the Association, which are intended to apply only to
the other members.
XVII. —The Secretary shall be considered a member ex officio.
On consideration of the great value to the wine growers of this
country of the communications received and read by the President from
Baron Justus Yon Liebig, that distinguished chemist and philosopher
was unanimously elected an honorary member of the Association.
Among various matters of arrangement of less interest, it was com*
mitted in charge to the Standing Committee, “ To revise the printed
proceedings of the Association from its commencement, with the view
of methodising a collected statement of the Society’s progress to the
present year, and of having the same printed, out of the funds of the
Association.”
In pursuance of this charge, the Committee met subsequently ; and,
after examining cursorily the Proceedings and Reports of the Asso-
ciation from 1847 to 1853, resolved, “ That their Chairman should
first peruse carefully the whole of the matters therein contained, and
arrange the proceedings in a readable shape ; that each member, there-
after, should separately peruse the matter so arranged, and that, sub-
sequently, the whole should be revised again, jointly, with a view to
publication, after being laid in a revised form before a General Meeting
of the Association.”
Accordingly, the Committee have deemed their duty discharged, by
presenting for approval to the general body of the members the follow-
ing consecutive account of the Proceedings of the Association, as intro-
ductory to the first annual address of the President for the year 1853.
HENRY CARMICHAEL.
ANDREW LANG.
JAMES KING.


HISTORICAL SUMMARY OF THE PROCEEDINGS AND
REPORTS OF THE
HUNTER RIVER VINEYARD ASSOCIATION,
From its origination to its First Annual Meeting in the Year 1853.
The formation of the Hunter River Vineyard Association arose out
of the disorganization of an Agricultural Society which had been
formed in Maitland, ostensibly to promote the agricultural interests of
the district generally. Some vine growers had been solicited to join
this Society, and had naturally ventured to bring under the notice
of the members, the interests of vine culture as legitimately worthy
of consideration among their proceedings. Such efforts were unfa-
vourably met on the part of the leading members of this Society ; and
out of this state of things arose a proposition, to form a friendly
association among the vine growers of the district, with the specific
object of comparing notes with one another, at stated times, on the
subject of their peculiar pursuits ; and thence, throughout the
sphere of their immediate influence, promoting more effectively the
culture of the vine, and the evolvement of profitable products from its
associated labours.
The proposal originated with Mr. King, of Irrawang, and the
Meeting, which constituted the Association, was held at Maitland,
under his presidency, on the 19th May, 1847.
According to Regulations there sanctioned, the ordinary General
Meetings of the Association were to be held half-yearly, in May and
November. The first half-yearly Meeting of the Association was
held on the 3rd of November, 1847.


On this occasion the Report of the Committee for the half year
was read by the Honorary Secretary, as follows: —
Report of the Committee of the Hunter River Vineyard Association,
November 3rd, 1847.
Although the formation of the Hunter River Vineyard Association has been
altogether of a private and friendly nature, seeking solely to promote mutual
intercourse and information on the subject of vineyard culture and wine manage-
ment among the vine-growers of the Hunter River District, the committee have
been impressed with the importance of vine-culture as an eligible field for the
investment of capital on a large scale, and a most beneficial sphere for the
employment of colonial industry. The committee, therefore, deem it their duty,
at the very outset of the Society’s proceedings, to act in accordance with this
feeling, and to lay a written report of their transactions before their fellow
members.
Believing that the non-attendance, at the preliminary meeting, of a large
proportion of those originally invited to take part in the initiatory proceedings of
the Association might arise chiefly from fears of future failure in its management,
the committee thought it advisable to intimate by public advertisement, that the
roll of membership without ballot should still be open till the first Half-yearly
General Meeting, for the admission of such names as had been originally de-
signed to stand on the list. It was thought that sufficient time would thus be
allowed for mutual intercourse among the parties concerned, and that, in con-
sequence, all scruples on the score referred to would be easily obviated. Not-
withstanding this extension of time, however, fewer additional members than were
expected have accepted the invitation. It remains, therefore, for those who now
constitute the Association whilst, on the one hand, guarding judiciously
against the admission into their future proceedings of the elements of discord or
disorder—to conduct their meetings in so praiseworthy a spirit as shall not fail,
on the other hand, to gather ultimately within their circle every reputable and
intelligent vine-grower in the district.
In rendering to the Association this Report of their transactions, the committee
deem it their duty to notice the reception from one of its members of a series
of calculations connected with vine- culture, which seems well fitted to direct
towards the growth of the vine a far greater amount of capital than has hitherto
been invested in this department of colonial industry. From these calculations
it would appear that at the end of the third year vine-culture is capable of yielding
a return adequate to cover the current expenditure involved in bringing its
produce to market; and that, at the end of the seventh year, the produce of the
vineyard will be found capable of having repaid the original capital embarked
in the undertaking, with all intermediate outlay, and all legitimate interest
thereon ; and that there will thence accrue, thereafter, to the wine-grower, a
gross yearly return considerably more than double the amount of annual expen-
diture necessary for carrying on his operations.
Impressed with the importance of the bearing which the truth of such
statements must have on the future welfare of the colony, the committee sin-
cerely hope, that one result of the establishment of this Association will be to
adduce, at no distant period, out of the facts communicated by its members,
proofs indisputable of the essential correctness of these calculations.
At every Meeting of the Association, in the conversational discus-
sions among the members, and in the papers communicated by indi-
viduals, as “ Reports,” with their quota of wines, there has been much
interesting matter propounded; but to republish such matter, in its
original form, was considered not to be advisable. It has, therefore,


been thought more advisable to place the prominent matters here
alluded to on record—in the following shape :
1848.
Reports were this year communicated from several members of the
Association,
In one of these is recommended the Leasing of Lands, on terms
eminently advantageous to the tenant, and, in the end, equally so
to the landholder ; on some such arrangement as the following;—
1. —To make it an express stipulation in the Lease— I That, for every
twenty acres of land leased, one-half acre shall be planted
with Vines, under the direction of the landholder, and with
cuttings furnished by him.
2. —For the first hogshead of sound wine, produced from Vines so
planted, to remit a year’s rental of the twenty acres.
3. 1 —1 n time coming, to receive all the sound wine produced from this
half-acre, in payment of rent, so far as it goes, at a fair mar-
ket price.
4.—ln such cases, the lease not to be for less than seven years, the
calculation being That half an acre of vines on alluvial soil,
properly attended to, will, within the first four years, produce
wine at the rate of five hogsheads per annum ; and that under
very favourable circumstances, the subsequent years may ave-
rage produce at a much higher rate. In proof of the accuracy
of this, it is stated that the produce of a portion of vineyard
ground, for that year, had exceeded the rate of 1400 gallons
per acre.
In another Report, the following observations of great practical
value occur: —
One of the established laws of nature is—that chemical changes are acce-
lerated with a rapidity proportioned to the temperature of the mass subject
to such a change; consequently, wine in a warm climate will naturally arrive
at maturity sooner than in a colder one. Hence, from the heat of the climate,
the wine growers in this colony, particularly in this locality, will find their
wine comparatively soon at a given point of maturity, and will thereby be
enabled to send it sooner into the hands of the consumer. This, also, points
out the necessity of cool cellars, for the preservation of wine, in such a climate
as this ; whereas, in the higher latitudes, where wine is produced in Europe,
the prime consideration in the storing of wine is to protect it from frost.
There is another law affecting materially the operations of the wine maker,
in many stages of his process, from the fermentation of the juice to the dis-
posal of the wine in bottle, viz.: — Chemical action is active also in proportion to
the volume of the mass acted on, other conditions being the same. Hence it fol-
lows' that wine in a large mass, will meliorate more rapidly, and develope its
desirable qualities more completely than in a small one. It ought to be con-
tained, therefore, in large vessels till that effect be produced. It may take
only a few months, or it may take a series of years, to arrive at sufficient


’maturity. This depends on the original composition of the wine, the heat of
the climate, and other modifying causes.
When the wine has at length been sufficiently so perfected, it is necessary
to arrest or retard, if possible, this chemical process, which constitutes the
ripening to maturity. For that purpose, in accordance with the law already
stated, the mass must be reduced in bulk; and the most convenient mode of
accomplishing this, is that which is generally adopted—by drawing it off into
Common bottles, and packing them away in a cool cellar, to remain till the
wine shall arrive at perfect maturity. In this case, it may remain a longer or
a shorter period. But wine forms no exception to the universal law. That
quality which is common to all dead organic resolve themselves,
under ordinary circumstances, into their elementary forms—and which, in the
ease of wine, aids in its formation, will assuredly in time accomplish its de-
struction. The same chemical decomposition which formed the wine and pro-
moted its progress to maturity, will, in course of time, even in bottle, as
Certainly cause its deterioration and decay.
1849.
At the first half-yearly meeting of this year, a large amount of
interesting matter was brought forward.
A Petition was agreed to, signed by the President in the name of
the Association, and forwarded for presentation to the Legislative
Council, praying for the intercession of that Assembly with the Home
Government, with the view of effecting the abolition of differential
duties on wines, winch had been experienced to operate as an effectual
prohibition against the importation of Australian wines into the Lon-
don market.
At this Meeting several specimens of excellent brandy were
produced.
One specimen was stated to have been produced from the Gonais
grape. This grape was said to have yielded at the rate of 1200
gallons of wine from the acre of alluvial land. The yield of brandy
from such wine was stated to be 18 per cent, of proof spirit. In
another Report it was stated that in the preceding season the average
weight of grapes on each vine of the Scyraz variety amounted to 30
pounds. The vines were planted on alluvial land, on the banks of the
Paterson—five feet apart, with two stakes to each vine, dug with the
spade once a year, and gone through with the hoe as often as re-
quired to keep weeds down.
A specimen of superior grape jam was presented before this Meeting
of the Association. The fruit had been gathered after it had begun
to colour. The proportion of fine loaf sugar used was 25 per cent, by
weight, to the fruit. After different varieties of the grape had been
tried, during various seasons, the preference had been given to the


Isabella grape, as producing a much more richly flavoured article than
any other variety.
The peculiarities of the preceding season had led to great inequality
in the produce of different vineyards. In one “ Report,” the vines,
on the whole, are said to have been highly productive. There are
(it is observed) not more than five acres in bearing, and there was
made upwards of 4000 gallons of wine, 150 gallons of vinegar, and
at least 60 gallons of brandy.
On the other hand, the produce of one vineyard on the William
River, was stated to have been that season less than at the rate of
100 gallons per acre, that is, less than what is due to one-fourth of
its average capability. After suggesting that the discrepancies and
marked differences in the rate of produce of different vineyards might
be attributable to local causes, the proprietor calls the attention of his
fellow members to tbe subject of pruning, as a general cause, bearing
directly on the produce of every vineyard. The following remarks
on this head seem worthy of record.
Notwithstanding the practice of many centuries in the culture of the vine (it
is observed) the subject of pruning does not seem to have yet been made a
matter of scientific investigation ; although, clearly, upon the adjustment of the
process of pruning to the physiological conditions of the plant, must the perfection
of vine culture depend. To produce the best wine, the perfection of the grape is
absolutely necessary ; and to perfect the grape under the most favourable cir-
cumstances, the mode of pruning the vine must be definite and perfect.
That there is a perfect mode of pruning the vine, cannot be doubted, depend-
ing on the physiological conditions of the plant, taken in connection with the
ascertained atmospherical and terrestrial elements concerned in its growth, and
it may, perhaps, be reserved for the scientific vigneron of Australia to solve this
problem aright, for the guidance in future of all vineyard labourers throughout
the world. Meanwhile, the only attempt at reducing practice to rule in this
matter seems to be that given by Clement Hoare, a grower of the vine in Eng-
land ; and for the sake of furthering in some degree the objects of the Asso-
ciation, it is deemed likely to be serviceable to bring before its members the
result of Mr. Hoare’s experience on this subject, in the following shape :
Mr. Hoare rightfully considering that the art of pruning ought to be di-
rected to the precise object of producing the greatest quantity of thoroughly
matured fruit annually, without checking the growth of the vine, or injuring its
vital powers, instituted with that object in view throughout a period of ten
years, between 1826 and 1837, a series of experiments on vine pruning, which
enabled him to reduce the process to rule. From these experiments made
upon about forty vines of different sorts and of various ages, he deduces a
“ scale of the greatest quantity of grapes which any vine can perfectly mature,
in proportion to the circumference of its stem, measured just above the
ground.”
From this “scale,” as given in Mr. Hoare’s work, the following simple
formula embodying the result of his experiments, is submitted for the use of
the Association.
“ Let w represent in pounds the weight of the fruit thoroughly matured,
which any given vine may be pruned to produce to the greatest advantage ;


and g represent in inches the girth or circumference of its stem immediately
above the ground ; then w=\og— 2s. This formula may be expressed in words,
thus: If the number 25 be subtracted from ten times the girth expressed in
inches, the remaining number will express, in pounds, the weight of fruit which
any given vine will be found to bear most advantageously.”
In this formula it is taken for granted that no vine ought to be allowed to
bear fruit with a girth less than three inches; inasmuch as Mr. Hoare’s ex-
periments enabled him to assert, that for every pound weight of grapes gathered
from a vine before its stock was grown to that size, ten pounds wilL be lost
during the next five years, independently of the very severe cheek which is
given to its growth by premature bearing. If more grapes be allowed- to grow
on a vine than the quantity indicated by the formula, we have Mr. Hoare’s
assurance that they will not be brought to perfect maturity, and will conse-
quently be deficient in flavour for the table and in richness for wine : on the
other hand, though a less quantity be matured than the proportion thus indi-
cated, that the flavour will not thereby be increased, or the richness promoted.
The vine will be simply under cropped.
As a mode of practically applying the above result of his experience, Mr.
Hoare, in pruning, found it to be a good general rule, —to leave on each vine at
the rate of two fruit bearing buds for every pound weight of grapes contained
in w, the term of the formula which indicates its fruit bearing powers. On an
average, he calculates on half a pound weight as the product of each fruit bear-
ing bud; and, although knowing this average to be much too great, in general,
yet deems it requisite in pruning to leave the above specified proportion of
buds, in order to meet contingencies and casualties.
At the November Meeting of this year, public notice was taken of
the facilities afforded by the Government for the introduction into the
colony of German vine dressers and labourers; and a vote of thanks
passed on the subject to the Government for its conduct iu tliis
matter.
A vote of thanks was also given to Sir Thomas Mitchell, for the
publication of his Notes on the Cultivation of the Vine, &c., in Spain.
In one of the “ Reports” at this Meeting, too, evidence is given of
much activity on the part of the writer in furthering the interests of
the wine factors of the colony hi his individual capacity—as
follows: —
In order to bring the wine of this colony as quickly and as prominently as
possible into notice in certain quarters in England, a letter was a few days
ago addressed by me to the Right Honourable Earl Grey, Her Majesty’s Prin-
cipal Secretary of State for the Colonies, on the vast importance of increasing
by every practical means the exports of the colony, on which its progressive
prosperity depends—particularly by encouraging, by all legitimate ends, the
extensive culture of the vine, and by equalising the import duty in the United
Kingdom on wine here produced with that there imported from the Cape of
Good Hope.
This letter to Earl Grey was transmitted to his Lordship through
his Excellency the Governor, Sir Charles Fitz Roy, and was accom-
panied by a letter to his Excellency’s Private Secretary, soliciting the
Governor's attention particularly to the subject.


Another letter on the same subject, but varied in detail, was ad-
dressed to the Society of Arts and Manufactures, London.
The Governors and Directors of the Australian Agricultural Company, the
London Board of Directors of the Bank of Australasia (parties deeply inte-
rested in the exports of the colony), and a respectable mercantile firm in
London, have all been addressed by me on the same subject, at the same time
enclosing copies of my letter addressed to the Right Honourable Earl Grey.
And in order to enable the parties to estimate the matter thus submitted to
their consideration, every one of the communications already mentioned was
accompanied with a case containing samples of Australian wine, the product of
my vineyard.
1850.
At the first half-yearly Meeting of the Association, the merits of
Sir Thomas Mitchell were acknowledged by an expression of thanks,
for his exertions in aiding and improving the practical growth of the
vine in the colony. The merits, too, of the Australasian Botanic and
Horticultural Society of Sydney, in undertaking to take charge of, and
transmit, all productions, &c., of the colony, for presentation at the
Great Exhibition of all Nations, in London, 1851, were acknowledged
by a Resolution to that effect.
At this Meeting there was read an interesting letter from Baron
Liebig, on the importance of bringing the results of science to hear on
the management of various products, especially on the process of fer-
mentation, and, in consequence, a vote of thanks was passed in
acknowledgment of the value of such communications.
In reference to Baron Liebig, the following remarks are contained
in one of the Reports to this Meeting :
The inestimable writings of that distinguished philosopher (the result of
intense study, acute observation, original thinking, and hard labour) have done
more to develope the actual process of vegetable and that of animal life, and
those constituting the decay of organic bodies, or more correctly, the natural
regeneration and transformation of their elements, than the works of all the
writers before him put together ; therein exhibiting to his readers, in the most
unequivocal manner, definite principles, distinctly involved in the growth of
the grape vine, the ripening of the fruit, the phenomena of fermentation, and
in the process of making and maturation of wine—principles, the application of
which has never been recognised in the same manner by any other writer on
the subject.
A knowledge of those fixed principles, those immutable laws of nature —
without variableness or shadow of change—and of processes therefrom as uni-
formly resulting, must be of vast importance to all growers of the grape and
makers of wine, particularly in this part of the world, where comparatively
there is not even experience to guide ; for most assuredly, in proportion as
these principles are known and acted on by them in the routine of their opera-
tions, so will the products of their vineyards approach perfection. In the words
of Baron Liebig —“ Much has to be learned with reference to the adoption and
application of principles. We are, nevertheless, sure to arrive, by means of
these, at the real improvements to which mere empiricism never attains.”


On this occasion, notice was taken of the benefits reaped by the
vine cultivators of the colony from the introduction of German
labourers.
In reference to the Germans (it was observed) who have been lately intro-
duced into the colony, through the foresight and liberality of our local Govern-
ment, it seems befitting that, as members of this Association, we should put on
record our individual estimate of the benefits reaped from their location among
us. They have brought with them implements and practical facilities con-
nected with the working and management of vineyard ground, which will be
found most valuable in the round of our yearly operations. They have, hence,
actually placed us, as vine cultivators, considerably in advance of what we
were. Numbers of them, it is true, as was to be expected, have proved them-
selves troublesome servants, and have failed in giving satisfaction to their
employers. Yet much of this result is attributable to the fact, that the selec-
tion of men as vine dressers and wine coopers has not been such as the colonists
had reason to expect, and their distribution in the colony not by any means
calculated to satisfy their expectations as emigrants. Nevertheless they are
gradually finding their level; and the really useful and intelligent among them,
and the few proper wine coopers, are getting into such employment as will
ultimately prove satisfactory to them, and permanently beneficial to the
colony.
Li reference to tins subject, too, the comparative value of vine
culture in the colony, and to the fitness of our climate and circum-
stances for the production of wine, the following observations form
part of one of the “ Reports—
As to the assistance which these Germans, or any other mere vignerons from
the wine countries of Europe, can give us m the making of wine, we know enough
of the matter to put small value on such aid. The eternal laws which regulate
the production of alcohol, and the collateral compounds which result from the
decomposition of grape juice, can be studied with equal fervour, and it may be
with equal intelligence, in the districts of the Hunter and the William as in the
department of the Cote d’Or or on the banks of the Rhone or the Rhine ; and
Britons will not be true to their long-established character if, in New South Wales,
they fail in shortly shooting ahead of other nations, when their intellect is brought
fairly to bear on the best means of perfecting a product which has been sleeping
for ages amid the jog-trot trammels of inveterate custom, or only varied, it might
be for the worse, by the hap-hazard experiments of the merest empiricism. We
have, no doubt, peculiarities of general temperature and atmospherical condition
to contend against ; yet these our practice may be expected soon to enable us
to mould to our purposes; so that, from all that is yet gatherable out of our past
experience, in comparison with the imported experience in kind, in books, and
in living examplars, which we have hitherto had from Europe, there needs be
little hesitation in pronouncing New South Wales a land of eminent promise as
a wine-growing country. Our wines are now attracting attention in London ;
and if, with the aid of Government, and without jobbery or partiality, we
could effect that no wine should be sent thither from the colony for sale,
without first undergoing a strict examination here, and having on it, in conse-
quence, the brand of such scrutiny, we might well look forward to the estab-
lishment of a rich and permanent trade in wines with the merchants of the
mother country. As a prelude to this desirable end, it is most gratifying to note
that mainly through the meetings and movements of the members of this Asso-
ciation, there has of late been awakened throughout the colony a spirit of
growing interest in the importance of vine culture as a matter of pecuniary ad-
vantage. Even men who have hitherto put all their faith in fat bullocks, or


who have never before dreamed of valuing the territory otherwise than by its
capability, over a given surface, of feeding a given number of sheep, are now
pondering the propriety of planting vineyards, in the hope of reaping from the
produce a profitable result. Of course, the profits of vine-culture form the
substantial basis upon which to build its national importance. But if, in addi-
tion to the substantial strength of such basis, there be also brought forward the
social value of the employment, compared with other even more lucrative beats
of exertion, it does not seem out of place here —to urge on our fellow-colonists
the superiority of vine culture, as a means of employing capital with a view to
its pleasant as well as profitable investment. Instead of the distant station,
where the interests of the capitalist are subjected to damage from all the evils of
delegated superintendence, and where immorality and recklessness are insepa-
rable from the circumstances concomitant with almost utter isolation —how
different the concentrated value of a vineyard! where, within sight of his home-
stead forming a perennial source of interest to the intelligent proprietor,
and a daily attraction for pleasurable gratification to all the members of his
family—may there be raised an annual amount of vineyard produce capable of
affording a return to the capitalist as profitable as, in the management of stock,
could be derived from an area of many thousands of acres, situated, too, it may
be, some hundreds of miles from his dwelling, and involving, in the routine of
attention necesary to the result, scarcely a single operation or circumstance cal-
culated to ameliorate the social condition of those employed, or any feature or
phase of conduct which can be dignified with the epithet of civilized.
Since our last half yearly meeting, opportunity has been had of traversing an
extent of country on this side the Liverpool Range, between the Goulburn and
the Page, embracing about a thousand square miles —the whole area (with very
partial exceptions) an entire trap formation, and all eminently calculated for
the growth of the vine. Within the area thus traversed there may be estimated
about half a million of acres capable of vine culture. But, making ample
allowance for impracticable heights and inappropriate ranges, say that only a
tenth part of this extent, or 500,000 acres, were in actual culture under the
vine. This extent of territory in this case, at the rate of produce this year
obtained at one of our average vineyards, would yield upwards of twenty millions
of gallons of wine. And say that the wine were sold at a shilling a gallon, or about
two-pence per bottle, the value of the produce would be a million pounds sterling,
or about two-thirds of the value of the entire amount of the present exportable
resources of the colony. Statements such as this are worthy the attention of
British capitalists, although they claim slight attention from flockmasters here.
At all events, the large money-lending companies, into whose hands immense
tracts of unimproved territory have fallen, would do well to weigh the possibility
of reaping far larger returns, in the shape of vine produce, from the available
portions of their ample estates, than by merely taking advantage of the grazing
capabilities of their lands. Sheep may, no doubt, be grazed profitably over those
splendid runs which diverge seaward from the declivities of the Liverpool Range;
but how insignificant the returns from a given surface are those deduced from
mere grazing, compared with those derivable from the culture of the vine.
Beyond the great Liverpool Range, stretch plains of ample verge, the fit abode,
for centuries to come, of flocks and herds, and all the isolation and romantic
adventures of nomadic life. But the seaboard of this magnificent country
would seem better fitted for receiving, and maintaining in ample comfort, mil-
lions of our fellow countrymen of Great Britain, who at present find it difficult
to earn the means of bare existence, by their utmost efforts of industry and
skill. Hence, in traversing the country here brought under review, it was im-
possible to refrain from contemplating in prospect, in place of the present
solitary sheep walks and untenanted estates, which stretch their ample acres in
comparative uselessness seaward from the Blue Mountains, thousands of vine-
yards, gracing with luxurious verdure the slopes and valleys interminable which
characterise the formation of this yet unappreciated territory—tokens of course
of the co-existence and social intercourse of a busy and thriving population.
To this most desirable state of things there no doubt exists, at present, a
most serious barrier, in the actual desiccation of the soil, effected by the long


continued drought, and the apparently gradual falling off in the average supply
of rain throughout the year. Should there, indeed, be an actual decrease,
however small, in this average supply, the result must necessarily be, the ulti-
mate cessation of vegetable, and hence, of animal, life in the land. In other
words, New South Wales must gradually become uninhabitable. So long,
however, as we are surrounded by the ocean, and so long as the laws which are
known to influence evaporation and the deposition of moisture in connection
with known states of our atmosphere, shall maintain their sway, the gradual
disappearance of rain, or indefinite decrease in the average supply of moisture,
needs not be dreaded by the landholders of New South Wales. Summer and
winter—seed time and harvest—will, as assuredly in New South Wales as in
the most favoured of the isles of the sea, bring their cycle of corresponding correc-
tions, to meet the ceaseless perturbations, or seeming derangements, which
make up the round of those beautiful vicissitudes, that constitute the category
of the seasons. As surely as the swell of every successive wave fills briefly the
depression in space which has preceded it, so surely must the atmosphere drop
a certain amount of moisture exhaled ; and not till a calamity, participated in
by the entire surface of the globe—not till the present laws which regulate
meteorological phenomena throughout the entire earth—shall have been felt to
be altered or modified by circumstances of a cosrnical character, need the
dwellers in New South Wales despair of receiving their appropriate share of
water from the sky. Meanwhile, under the peculiarities of our atmospherical
condition, the attention of our landholders may rightfully be called to the
absolute necessity of husbanding that supply which Heaven, from time to time,
is placing at their command. At present, flockmasters find it necessary, for
procuring a supply of water for their sheep, to dig wells in the beds of the
various creeks where their principal stations are fixed ; and with the necessary
amount of labour expended, they never fail in obtaining a certain amount of
supply. But the husbandry of water must yet be set about on a more ample
scale. Along the whole extent of the Liverpool Range it is possible to have
reservoirs constructed, capable of even irrigating thoroughly and permanently
the whole of the lower country. And when this is done, Patrick’s Plains,
which are now a wilderness, may be made, in all time coming, “to rejoice and
blossom like the rose and Jerry’s Plains —where not only the oaks, without
a certain circuit from swamp influence, are all giving way, but even the gum
trees of the forest over the neighbouring uplands are breathing their last—may
yet
ln golden garniture,
Give annual token of undying bloom.
At the November meeting of this year, increasing interest attached
to the proceedings of the Association. The wines produced were of
superior quality, and unusually diversified in number and character.
Samples of excellent brandy and noyeau were, moreover, produced,
and specimens of capital olives.
Along with the samples of olives produced, the following paper on
the subject was furnished :
AUSTRALIAN OLIVES.
As olives are so generally associated with wine, a specimen of them preserved,
the growth of the colony, is presented by the subscriber to the Meeting of the
Hunter River Vineyard Association, held at Maitland in November, 1850.
These olives were grown in the season of 1848-49, and preserved at Irrawang,
now nearly two years since. They are yet in excellent preservation, and possess
all the fine gout of the most choice imported olives; but they are unusually small
in size, from the shrivelling dryness of that hot summer. Generally they grow


larger in the colony than this sample, but never to the size of the imported olives,
On the average of seasons, however, a very few trees on a farm will supply
enough fruit and oil for domestic use.
The following process was adopted in preserving them, which is effective, and
exceedingly simple. Immediately on the fruit being gathered, it was thrown into
a cold caustic solution of potash, made from wood ashes taken from the hearth,
and rendered caustic in the usual way by the addition of quick-lime. In this
ley the olives were allowed to remain until the bitter principle common to the
unprepared olive had nearly disappeared, which it did in the course of a few days.
The olives were then taken from the ley and thrown into pure water, renewing it
every day until the peculiar flavor of the alkali was no longer appreciable. The
fruit was then put into the small stone bottles, filling up the interstices with a
solution of muriate of soda (common salt), at a less density than the point of
saturation, and rendered slightly fragrant by previously macerating in it a few
sprigs of aromatic plants. The bottles were then tightly bunged and sealed.
These pickled olives have ever since been stored in the wine cellar for use.
Some were used occasionally; they seem rather to have improved in quality
than otherwise.
The result of this little experiment, unimportant as it may seem, renders it
apparent that every farm house in this extensive district, and in most parts of
the colony, may have abundance of cured olives for home use, at almost no
trouble or expense; and so far as their keeping qualities are concerned, they
might be exported to any part of the world.
But it is yet a matter of enquiry how far it would be prudent to plant the
olive extensively in New South Wales, with the view of remunerative return.
There seems to be still wanting some properly conducted experiments as to the
colony’s capability for its culture and its profitable growth. Growing plants
of many varieties of the olive have been from time to time imported into the
colony from Europe, and it has long been ascertained that the plant grows
freely in the country; still, compared with many other fruits, it is long in
coming into bearing. A healthy-growing young tree, of the large Spanish
olive, which I imported from Valparaiso about ten years ago, has not yet pro-
duced any fruit, with the exception of two or three berries ; and trees planted at
Irrawang sixteen years since, now of large size, and growing freely, have yet
yielded very little fruit; it is nevertheless confidently expected that they will
yet bear abundantly, having been covered with blossom these two last seasons.
In some localities the crop was abundant the season before last, while last year
it was generally a failure. The olive tree is readily propagated in the colony by
cuttings and layers ; a number of young healthy trees were produced some
years ago by sowing even the seeds contained in a bottle of French imported
pickled olives.
A sample of oil which I expressed in 1832, from olives grown in the Govern-
ment Garden, Sydney, on trees still in bearing, was sweet and limpid, apparently
possessing all the desirable qualities of the finest French or Italian olive oil.
I have trespassed on your attention to mention hurriedly these few particulars
touching the olive, in the expectation that some other member may favour the
association with the result of his more ample knowledge and experience in this
important culture ; for now, more than hitherto, every production of the coun-
try is of consequence ; highly so are such as will supply local consumption, and
thereby render unnecessary foreign supplies ; but more particularly important
is the production in the colony of articles of export and exchange, for on the
amount of these does the commercial prosperity and future position of this
country wholly depend.
JAMES KING.
On the part of another member, a paper was contributed, containing
observations of some practical value. He intimates his intention of
keeping his wine of 1850 in wood for three years, and on the authority
of his own experience, in connection with European practice, advises


generally the members to keep their wines under their own management,
in wood, much longer than was the existent practice. In regard to the
marketable value of our wines he observes, —
“ Unless a totally different system be adopted by the wine growers, in the
manufacture of their wines for the colonial markets, we shall remain entirely in
the back ground. Our aim must be, not only to meet the taste of the more
refined drinkers, but that also (which indeed is of more profit) of the general
consumer.
“ To arrive at this end, the wine growers must have recourse to the introduc-
tion of brandy, or of boiled must, to all wines intended for general consumption,
and the perfect maturity of the grape before pressing, must be specially
attended to.”
At this meeting a matter of historical importance was brought for-
ward by one of the members, wliich cannot be better told than in the
words of his own Report:—
In accordance with a resolution passed at the last half-yearly meeting of this
Association, to the effect “ That this Association feel bound to express their
gratification in noticing the liberal advertisement on the part of the Australian
Botanic and Horticultural Society, and trust that individual members will not
fail to avail themselves of the facilities hence afforded for transmitting wines to
the great meeting about to be held in London,” —I communicated with the
secretary of the above named Society, and in July last forwarded to his care—-
for transmission to the Grand Exhibition in terms of their advertisement—a
case containing specimens of red and white wines, of the vintage 1849.
Having been for three months in the bush, away from postal communication,
I was not aware, till very lately, that the design of the A. B. and H. Society, in
this matter, had been given up. It was not till last week that I felt myself
compelled to abandon the prospect of forwarding the case to its destination.
After learning at the office of the Colonial Secretary what steps had been taken
by the government here in relation to this matter, and after an interview on the
subject with the Collector of Customs, having found, under the only circum-
stances of transmission then available, the hazards of the ultimate reception and
safe and favourable exposition of the wine at the “ Exhibition” by her Majesty’s
Commissioners in London to be extreme, I deemed it advisable not to forward
the case at all. The case, therefore, remains still in Sydney.
This subject, however, seems to me of sufficient importance to be thus
brought before this meeting of our Association, inasmuch as, in all likelihood,
had we not, at our last half-yearly meeting, resolved to place our interests in
this matter, individually, under the care of the A. B. and H. Society, we would,
as a body of wine-growers deeply interested in bringing our industrial proceed-
ings before the notice of Europe, have entered into such arrangements as might
have enabled us, as members of the H. R. V. Association to appear with advan-
tage among the host of contributors to the grand Exhibition of Industry of all
Nations next year.
In having brought this matter, in which I have had personally so great a share,
thus prominently before this Association, it does not seem out ot place to ani-
madvert on the unfavourable position wherein New South Wales will be placed
by non-transmission to the Grand Exhibition of Industry ot all Nations of
the industrial products of the colony.
Earl Grey’s despatch to our Governor, of the 2nd April,lßso, concludes thus
—“ It is, I am sure, unnecessary for me to urge upon you the adoption of any
means in your power for furthering the important object in view, and I shall be
glad if you should be enabled, within the limited space of time which is allowed,


to forward any contributions from the colony under your Government.” And
his “ Circular,” of date 18th April last, after intimating that her Majesty’s com-
missioners had decided on apportioning within the scope of the Exhibition, four
thousand square feet of space to New South Wales, concludes as follows “If
any opportunity should offer of forwarding despatches from New South Wales,
so as to meet the mail steamers from China or India to this country, you will
not fail to avail yourself of it, to send me a duplicate of your reply to this
despatch.”
Thus, at all events, is sufficiently demonstrated the anxiety of the home Govern-,
ment, in providing amply for the display of New South Wales industry in the
Great Exhibition, and in urging the authorities here to take advantage of this
provision. Where the blame rightfully attaches of having let slip so golden an
opportunity of appearing to advantage among the industrious denizens of the
globe—let time and circumstances tell. The result, it is much to be feared,
bespeaks too truly the ruling passion of this colony’s inhabitants—indifference
to everything in the shape of public spirit and public interest, which may happen
to be unconnected with the paltry gratifications of the present moment. The
disposition, no doubt, will be to throw all the blame on the Executive Govern-
ment. Unquestionably the Executive Government was the proper channel of
communication between the colonists and her Majesty’s commissioners on this
grand occasion. No doubt it would have been highly to the credit of the Execu-
tive Government to have not only methodised and superintended the transmission
to the Royal Commissioners in London of the industrial products of New South
Wales, but to have also stirred up the people to somewhat like extra exertion in
the prospect of having so fair a chance of displaying the resources of the colony
before the eyes of the world. Sound policy might have dictated the propriety
on the part of the Executive of pressing forward to gain golden opinions, at so
auspicious a mbment, by responding promptly to the expressed wishes of the
home authorities on the one hand, and by rousing and guiding the sleeping
energies of the colonists on the other. And in this point of view, it may be
highly instructive, hereafter, to peruse Sir Charles Fitz Roy’s “ Reply” to the
“ Circular” of Earl Grey, quoted above. But to the colonists themselves does
the mass of blame most unequivocally belong. Theirs was the manifest duty to
bestir themselves. Theirs it was to press forward to the peaceful contest —the
most glorious rivalry earth has yet ever seen. The tilts and tournaments of other
times may still have their admirers among the yet unpruned scions of hereditary
heraldry. The din of arms —the pomp and glory of military movements —the
science and practice of modern warfare, may still exercise strong influence over
the arrangements of society and the aspirations of individual minds ; but who,
with philosophic feelings and the warm current of philanthropy in his veins can
turn his eye, even from the antipodes, to the Great Industral Exhibition of 1851,
in London, without perceiving that an entirely new era has begun ? Cobden
and his congress of peace makers are, no doubt, part and parcel of this coming
avatar. But this great congress of industry—this grand battle field of science
and art—this crusade for the establishment of man’s rightful destinies—this
panorama of the universal mind—will, in truth, be the practical commencement
of that reign of peace which, in the fulness of time, will “ cover the earth as the
waters cover the channels of the sea.”
Sincere, then, with every reflective well-wisher of this colony’s advancement
must be the regret that New South Wales should not hold a recognisable place
among that host of the noblest volunteers that have ever yet been mustered from
out the homes and hearths of social life. Why should not the banner of Aus-
tralia be seen waving, in modest but imposing consciousness of strength, amidst
the countless ensigns that will bear token from the ends of the earth of the com-
parative status which will henceforth be, assigned to the nations in any future
estimate that may be made of the balance of intellectual power? Henceforward
will the rank of a people be determined by another standard than that of brute
force or physical might, and New South Wales may yet have abundant cause to
regret her present forfeiture of that position of honour and honourable supe-


riority among surrounding colonies which on this great occasion she might have
rightfully taken.
-Facilis descensus Averno:—
Scd revocare gradmn, superasque evadere ad auras,
Hoc opus, hie labor est.
1851.
In one of the Reports to the first half-yearly meeting of the Asso-
ciation, this year, the following observations are made, which involve
matters of peculiar interest to all colonial wine growers :
It must be gratifying to the members of this, the first-formed Vineyard
Association in the colony, to notice that our proceedings have been so far
approved of as to induce the older wine-growers of the colony to form themselves
into a similar institution. The New South Wales Vineyard Association has
most judiciously formed itself on the model of ours, with this essential difference,
however, that of ranging itself under a permanent president. This difference
of constitution (which has enabled the members to give prominency as their
first president to William Macarthur, Esy., of Camden, than whom a better pre-
sident for such an association could not have been selected) necessarily involves
periodically a presidential message, which gives an air of dignity to their pro-
ceedings not contemplated in our arrangements.
Although the president’s first message to the members of this Association in
January last was it appears hastily prepared, it nevertheless contains matter of
great practical value to colonial wine growers. Indeed, any remark on the sub-
ject of winefacture from so reputed an authority must have been eagerly received
with deference and approval by the members of that Association. Among the
various matters brought before them by their president on that occasion was a
sample of wine in the fermentation of which he professed to have followed a par-
ticular arrangement. In reference to this arrangement I think it due to
myself to offer on the present occasion a few remarks, which I hope will not be
unacceptable to the members of this Association.
In the year 1847 Mr. William Macarthur paid a short visit to Irrawang. He
tasted the wine made there, and considered the red variety superior in some
respects to any red wine he had hitherto produced at Camden. I proceeded
with him to the cellar, where in tasting other samples we had varied conversa-
tion regarding wine making, &c. I communicated to Mr. Macarthur candidly
and unreservedly the particulars of all matters we touched on ; and remembering
at the same time that in his published treatise on the vine (in many respects a
valuable work) he had not in my opinion attached sufficient importance to heat
or temperature and the action of the atmosphere as influencing the process of
wine making, I ventured to impress on him the importance of modifying that
process, and our cellar operations generally, as much as possible with reference
to those powerful chemical agents. The colony however is highly indebted to
Mr. Macarthur for the exemplary perseverance he has exhibited in the culture
of the vine and in the manufacture of wine, the result of which he has made
public in various shapes. In the course of conversation Mr. Macarthur men-
tioned that he had failed in some instances in making wine from the Verdeilho
grape, the fruit being in the highest perfection; that although fermentation
had ceased, still the sweetness had not nearly disappeared. A portion of acid,
he observed, soon afterwards formed in the wine, which rendered it useless as
such, so that, to prevent a total loss, he had passed through the still in one
season many hundred gallons of such wine.
I immediately informed Mr. Macarthur that the same premature stoppage of
the fermentation had occurred with me, and with the same grape, too, under
similar circumstances; that I considered it to arise from deficient leaven in the
grape juice,with the presence of an overabundance oi grape sugar, and that as a


remedy I immediately added to such partially fermented wine or rich sugary
juice a quantity of the must or marc of a grape containing a superabundance of
leaven or ferment. The consequence of this mixture was that, on their being
mingled, decomposition soon commenced, and continued until the saccharine
liquor was ultimately attenuated to a perfect wine. Mr. Macarthur begged to
be informed how a grape containing an abundance of ferment was to be distin -
guished. I replied, a little experience would readily point that out: the Gouais,
for instance, I said was one of these. He seemed much gratified at these commu-
nications, which were to all appearance perfectly new to him. That they were
so I had every reason to believe, as I had never seen that mode of proceeding
recommended by any author on the subject. It was suggested by me to meet
the circumstances mentioned, through the application of what information I
possessed of the principles involved in the phenomena of fermentation and in
the process of wine making. The actual quantity of sugar peculiar to the
grape is readily detected in the juice by aid of the simple little instrument the
sagcharometer, which I have used for that purpose for years ; while the extent
of leaven—the nitrogenous ferment in the juice of any particular grape—is not
so easily discovered. Experiment as regards it has been my only guide.
It must also be highly flattering to the members of this Association to be
informed that Mr. Macarthur, an old and experienced wine grower, who
has been conducting vineyard and vintage operations in the colony for nearly
half a century, who has visited the wine growing countries of Europe in
quest of information, should thus pick up, as it were yesterday, what was valuable
information to him, in our locality, a comparatively young part of the colony,
where the culture of the vine had been so recently introduced. And great credit
is certainly due to Mr. Macarthur for turning it so properly to his advantage ; —as
we find in the following year after his visit to my vineyard, he actually adopted
the process there recommended to him and practised by me for years before,
with the very same grapes that were mentioned too in 1847, and with the same
favourable result.
The memorandum which accompanied one of Mr. Macarthur’s samples of wine
exhibited in January last in Sydney, at the first regular meeting of the New
South Wales Vineyard Association, shows that he adopted the arrangement.
It is as follows : —“No 7. Messrs. Macarthur. Gouais and Verdeilho, 1848 ;
grown upon vines twelve to fifteen years old, planted in a deep sandy soil, &c ;
manufactured as follows: Into a vat of masonry of the capacity of more than
900 gallons 400 gallons of the must of the Gouais grape of the specific gravity of
1090 were put to ferment. After the fermemtation had set strongly in, an equal
quantity of the must of the Verdeilho of the specific gravity of 1120 was added.
It should he observed that the first contained ferment in excess —the latter had too
little to ferment properly ; the object therefore was to correct their mutual defects
by mixing them.” Some sugar being added, “ the result was a perfectly dry
strong-bodied wine, and capable of being transported anywhere without risk
of deterioration.” This result was favourable indeed ; but the great advan-
tage of this mode of fermenting together musts naturally possessing different
chemical composition, which was recommended for Mr. Macarthur’s adoption,
and which he thus found to succeed so well at Camden, is not at all adverted
to (as it ought to have been) in his address to the members of the New South
Wales Vineyard Association. I will, therefore, shortly notice it.
Every one at all conversant with the chemistry of wine making, in its
modern aspect, is aware that when the must of the Gouais, or any similar grape
naturally deficient in sugar and abounding in leaven, is fermented alone, a
highly attenuated weak liquid wine is the result, completely destitute of sugar
and flavour, but still containing in solution a considerable portion of the leaven
in an unoxidized or undecayed state, consequently ever liable, at an elevated
temperature or by an exposure to the air of the atmosphere above 50° Fahren-
heit, to convert the alcohol of the wine into acetic acid, and thereby render the
whole into vinegar.*
* These views are in accordance with Baron Liebig’s modern theory of fermentation.


It is equally known, on the other hand, that when the must of the Verdeilho,
or any other over-ripe grape of high saccharine quality and at the same time de-
ficient of leaven, is fermented alone, the whole of the grape sugar is consequently
not converted into alcohol, but a portion of it remains in solution as a foreign
substance, like in effect to the colouring matter of red wine ; consequently ever
rendering the wine liable to contract acidity, particularly by exposure to the air
or to a high temperature. This particular derangement in the constituents of
wine, to my regret, I have experienced in many instances, both in white and red,
but particularly in red wine made from the Burgundy or Black Pineau grape.
This defect Mr. Macarthur characterises as a “ disease,” and he remarks, “We
have lost more wine at Camden from this disease than from any other cause,
and lam told it has been experienced elsewhere. It is only must, very rich in
the saccharine principle, which has been subject to this accident.” In short,
from the foregoing facts, and my individual experience in the matter, I am
inclined to the opinion that good wine cannot be produced from grape juice in
which either leaven or sugar greatly predominates; and this natural defect,
when it does occur, is only to be remedied, when noticed in time, by rightly
proportioning the quantity of each to be fermented together. This mode of
proceeding, pointed out and recommended by me to Mr. Macarthur in the
conversation already alluded to, with the view of preventing in future the losses
he then mentioned as having experienced at Camden, he readily avails himself
of, the very next vintage thereafter, by fermenting the poor juice of the Gouais
and the rich must of the Verdeilho grapes together, thereby producing a good
marketable wine, as has already been shown. This interesting result, however,
he only mentions casually, and singularly enough takes no notice in his mes-
sage that the possession of this valuable information—this tried and approved
arrangment—furnished him at once with the ready means of preventing the
“disease” in his wine for the future, and the consequent losses he might yet
have sustained; whereas Mr. Macarthur, as president of such an Association,
ought to have brought the matter prominently forward in his address from the
chair, for the sake of pointing out to all those who had suffered from the disease,
so simple a remedy for its prevention and cure. There are other interesting
portions of Mr. Macarthur’s message which merit the notice and consideration
of all wine growers.
In the same Eeport, too, evidence is given of much activity on the
part of the writer, in furthering, in his individual capacity, the interests
of wine-factors throughout the colony.
At the last half-yearly meeting of this Association it was mentioned that I
had forwarded samples of my wine to England, and as the result may be inte-
resting to the members, I readily place the correspondence at their disposal.
The Australian Agricultural Company having advertised in London their
land at Port Stephens for sale, I took occasion to address the Board of Governors
and Directors of that Company, calling their attention to the circumstance that
a great proportion of their land in that quarter was better suited for the pro-
duction of wine than any other commodity ; noticing at the same time its con-
tiguity to the sea, and the particular range of latitude which it embraces,
rendering its position favourable for that purpose ; whilst the soil, in many
parts formed from the disintegration of trap and porphyry, which on decompo-
sition by the vital process of the plant, yield largely elementary substances,
which it assimilates, and which are actually essential in the economy of the
vine for the production of fruit capable of being converted into perfect wine.
I submitted to the consideration of the London board of management how
far it might consequently be the interest of the company to promote the emi-
gration of people from the wine growing countries of Europe, to occupy and
cultivate a portion of their extensive possessions in New South Wales, remind-
ing them at the same time that the cultivation of grain in this colony being
merely to supply a limited local demand, could not with profit be carried on


extensively; whilst wine being an exportable article, a limit could scarcely be
assigned to the extent to which its cultivation might be carried.
1 then sent the board a case of samples of wine, the product of my vineyard,
to enable its members to judge of the quality of wine grown in the neighbour-
hood of their property, but beyond receiving an acknowledgment of the safe
arrival of the package I have yet received no reply. I have had the gratification,
however, to be verbally assured by A. W. Blane, Esq., deputy governor of
the Company (now at Port Stephens), and by Captain Westmacott, their pre-
sent commissioner and superintendent (both of whom tasted the samples in
London), that the wine arrived in excellent condition, and was much prized by
those who were judges of light wines.
At this meeting, testimony was borne by most of the members to the
increasing demand for colonial wines. Great desire was expressed that
the wines of the colony should be fairly tried in the London market.
Some of the members who had spent some time on the Continent of
Europe, expressed their opinion that such colonial wines as had been
produced at the meeting, would fully sustain a comparison with wines
of corresponding classes produced in France, Germany and Spain.
Regret was very generally uttered that the colony should have lost the
opportunity of being represented at the Great Exhibition of all
Nations, in London, then considered, as in all probability, open.
Accordant with this feeling, there was communicated, a Report, con-
taining the narration of particulars of proceedings in relation to the
case of wine which had, at a former meeting, been brought before the
notice of the Association as having been destined for presentation at
the Great Exliibition, in the following words :
At our last half-yearly meeting, I was led to lament the apathy of the
colonists, in not having pressed forward to occupy their appropriate place among
the nations, amidst that grand industrial banquet of the world, which is now, no
doubt, feasting the eyes of Europe, and filling its journals with instructive
lessons of international comparison and well-merited eulogia of individual
enterprise.
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.
How much to be deplored, the fact, that a colony whose national motto is
“ advancement,” should, on this occasion, have failed to watch so important a
tide in its affairs, and should thus have allowed the flood to sweep, untaken, from
its shores!
My observations, on this head, at our November meeting, were called forth
hy the very recent disappointment to which I had then been subjected, in having
been compelled to abandon the design of sending a case of this wine to London
for presentation at the Exhibition of the Industry of all Nations, in conse-
quence of finding, that no authorised medium of communication with the
royal commissioners had been established by the authorities here. So far back
as the month of July last year, this case of wine had been forwarded for
transmission to London, under charge of the Secretary of the Australian
Botanic and Horticultural Society. The abeyance of this Society, however,


rendered it necessary for me to seek, subsequently, some other agency of an
authoritative or responsible character, for placing it in the hands of the com-
missioners at home. As no such agency was found to exist, I had given up the
idea of sending the case to London, and had actually sold the wine in Sydney,
when the thought occurred, of sending it as a present to His Royal Highness
Prince Albert. By this means, it occurred to me, the main object—that
of bringing our colonial wine forward for public scrutiny—would be gained as
effectively as by sending it formally to the Grand Exhibition ; inasmuch as
His Royal Highness, with whom the idea of the Great Industral Exhibition is
reputed to have had its origin, would be likely, under these circumstances, to
give it a favourable reception. Accordingly, having had the good fortune to
recover the case, unopened, I deemed it advisable to communicate with the
Colonial Secretary on the subject, with the view of having it transmitted to his
Royal Highness, with the approval and under the sanction of His Excellency
the Governor; and, in consequence, placed the case at his disposal. Along
with the larger case for Prince Albert I sent a smaller case, containing samples
of each of the kinds of wine, for the acceptance of his Excellency himself.
My object, of course, was, that the Governor might have the opportunity of
judging of the character of the wine before sanctioning its transmission; with
the hope, at the same time, that should his Excellency see fit, he might,
peradventure, introduce the wine favourably to the notice of the Prince.
Observations to the following effect were embodied in the letter which
accompanied the case thus placed at the disposal of the Colonial Secretary :
“ That, in this matter, I could scarcely consider myself to be acting on my own
account. That the production of wine in the colony I considered a matter not
of colonial merely, but also of imperial importance, inasmuch as it bears
indirectly on the great question of Emigration ; and that, therefore, my act
was performed with a view to public not to merely personal benefit. That what
at present was chiefly wanted, for the encouragement of wine-growing, is the
overthrow of that vague prejudice against the acknowledgement of its value
which has hitherto been almost universally prevalent; so that, were an opinion
on sufficient authority pronounced in its favour, its success as a colonial staple
would be certain. That, on this ground, in the event of his Excellency feeling
himself justified in lending freely his sanction to the transmission of the case
in question to his Royal Highness Prince Albert, it might not be deemed
uninteresting, as a matter of experiment, to retain a bottle each of the red and
white wine, unopened, till an answer should be received from, London,
indicative of the opinion there entertained of the wine. That, in this case, an
authoritative opinion might be formed here with greater satisfaction, and
published from the colonial office with less hesitation, inasmuch as full
opportunity would thus have been obtained, for testing the capabilities of
colonial wines to bear the hazards of a voyage round the globe, and to cope
with the influences of time.”
Sorry am I, indeed, to confess my chagrin, in having been made to feel that I
had calculated too sanguinely on the amount of interest likely to be enter-
tained on this subject at head quarters here. The case for Prince Albert, his
Excellency recommended me to send through my agents to some person
in London —with instructions for its being forwarded to its destination—as he
had no means of sending it or of defraying the expense of the freight. But
whether his Excellency ever tasted the wine himself, or even received the case
intended by me for his private use, I have had no means of ascertaining ;
although assured, on the part of the Colonial Secretary, that the case was duly
forwarded to Government House. To me it appeared that the Governor would
not have done discredit to himself, by taking an extra interest in this affair ;
especially as, by so doing, he would have shown his anxiety to rectify the
oversight, of not having had an authoritative board in existance, to prove a
medium of communication between the colonists here and the commissioners
appointed by the Queen for promoting the Exhibition of the Works oflndustry
of All Nations in London. It was not to evade the expense of freight, that I
sought his interference. It was to secure the safe arrival at its destination, and


the favourable reception at head quarters, of a specimen of colonial produce,
the promotion of the production of which seemed to me worthy the attention
both of the imperial and the colonial governments.
For, without at all bringing the morale of vine culture into comparison with
the Arcadian blessedness of nomadic life —how stands the materiel of the
question ? Wool growing stands out in pompous relief in any picture that is
painted of colonial economics. The value of its produce is proclaimed, on all
hands, as the mainstay of the colony’s existence. Its annual amount of
export is chronicled with statistical wonderment. What—with all its apparent
wealth and prodigality—would Sydney be without it?—is the exclamation of
our leading orators. The idea of anything in the colony possessing value, when
brought into comparison with wool, is treated in the Legislative Council with
ridicule and sarcasm. But whilst the gross produce of the wool-gathering of
the colony is imposing enough, not much attention seems to be given to the
mode of its production. In the estimate of its value those who regulate
the affairs of the community ought not to lose sight of the fact—that the
growth of wool is profitable only because sheep are depastured on the waste
lands of the colony, Of course the turning of the tenantless wilderness into
lucrative sheep walks, is in the highest degree praiseworthy, The rearing of
sheep for the sake of their wool, in other words, is decidedly the most profitable
—that is, the very best mode of turning such waste lands to account. But in
the progress of society these lands must gradually cease to be recognised as
waste. What comparison, then, will that portion of the territory which has
become fitted for location bear, as to productive value, with that which now
holds so imposing a place in the eye of the colonial statistician ?
In the estimate made of the grazing capabilities of colonial waste lands, as
much land is allowed for the production of a pound weight of wool as would,
on a very moderate average, be capable, under vine culture, of producing a
yearly return of 500 gallons of wine. The value of land under vine culture,
therefore, compared with its value as waste land producing wool, is a thousand
to one in favour of the former. According to the authorised estimate of the
average grazing capabilities of the land, therefore, the value of the entire
annual return of wool from the whole territory of New South Wales proper, if
turned into an immense sheep walk, would fall considerably short of a million
pounds sterling. Of this immense territory, only about a fifth part is yet
alienated from the crown ; and of this alienated portion only a very small
proportion is under actual cultivation. Now were this small portion (say
150,000 acres) which is actually under cultivation, in full bearing as vineyard
ground—the value of the annual return from it, at the low average of a
shilling per gallon for the wine, would be considerably more than two million
pounds sterling.
It did not seem, therefore, to have been out of place for me—on the occasion
alluded to —to expect his Excellency the Governor, to take some extra interest
in the matter which I ventured to bring under his notice, in soliciting his
sanction to the official transmission of my case of wine to Prince Albert;
inasmuch, as I was thus, in my humble way, using my individual endeavours,
to the utmost of my ability, to turn the attention of the authorities in the
mother country, as well as of the colonial government, to a subject of such
signal importance—socially and politically—to both.
It was, at length, my good fortune to have the case of wine destined for his
Royal Highness Prince Albert shipped, under the agency of Mr. How, of
Lower George-street, on board the Commodore, Captain Broadfoot, which sailed
from Sydney on the 22nd of January last; and I have every reason to believe,
from the personal interest taken in the matter by the captain, that, barring
accidents, it will go safely to its destination. The result I hope to be able to
communicate to the members at some future meeting of the Association.
At the November meeting of this year, notice was taken of the faci-
lities afforded by Government for the introduction into the colony of


German vine dressers and labourers, and a vote of thanks passed on
the subject to the Government, for its conduct in this matter.
A vote of thanks, too, was given to Sir Thomas Mitchell, for the
publication of his notes on the cultivation of the vine, &c., in Spain.
At this half-yearly meeting, the following interesting correspond-
ence between Captain Ogilvie, of Merton, and Mr. King, of Irrawang,
was placed among the records of the Association.
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN MR. OGILVIE AND MR. KING.
To J. King , Esq.
My Dear Sir — l have discovered in my vines this year an insect of a very
destructive character, of which I send you a specimen enclosed. I have been
long aware of its mischievous operations, but was not acquainted with the insect
until lately—it may, perhaps be known to you; but I have not noticed any
mention of it in the transactions of your Society—and as it is a matter of great
importance to vine growers that it should be known, I take the risk of repeat-
ing what to you may be a twice told tale, rather than that it should remain
longer unknown. At the pruning the last two seasons we discovered in many
of the vines a small grub very like the maggot, in a nut; at the latter it had
greatly increased ; in some few vines we found as many as nine or ten, in them
the whole substance of the wood was destroyed, so that the stock could be
broken off easily with the hands, we found also that they bored rapidly into the
wood, and always downward towards the stock. During the latter part of the
pruning, I found the insect beginning to change its form, and the rudiments of
legs, &e., appearing ; I therefore had the wood sawn off containing the grubs
and kept it in a box, and in a few weeks the perfect insect, such as I send you,
was produced. We now find them in great numbers, not only on the vines,
but on the fruit and some forest trees also. You may detect their presence by
the bark being eaten generally in spots, and on the vines mostly on the wood
of last year, and round the root of the young shoots of the present year,
where the insect also is generally found, but it nearly resembles the bark
in colour, and lies so close that it is not readily seen; by looking carefully
over the vines, however, which I have made my vignerons do novv a second
time, we have found many hundreds, I think I may say thousands, without ex-
aggeration ; this season may be, and I think, must be unusually prolific of this
insect. But lam quite confident, that had all those we have destroyed been
left to propagate, the destruction of my vineyard must have been complete.
Now that we are aware of it, I think, by carefully examining the vines at the
time of taking off the superfluous shoots, and again at the tying up, and burn-
ing all the wood and cuttings after pruning, and using similar precautions that
will naturally present themselves, this pest may be kept down. At the pruning
I observed small punctures, as if made with a needle, in some of the shoots,
from which I conclude that the insect deposits its ova on the young shoots,
where the young maggot is hatched, and eats into the soft wood, and then bores
down as it increases in size and strength.
You are, I believe in the enjoyment of a good season ; here we are suffering
from drought, but not in an equal degree with the adjoining districts, but if
rain does not come soon we shall be very badly off.
I remain, dear Sir,
Very truly yours,
Merton, November 27, 1851. W. OGILVIE.
P.S.—I should mention that Mr. Bettington has found the same insect in
his vineyard at Oatlands, near Parramatta. Should it be already known to
you, you may probably be able to give me some useful information on the
subject. Mr. Bettington considers the insect to belong to the wattle.


To Captain W. Ogilvie, R.N., Merton.
My Dear Sir — l duly received the specimen of the insect which has been
damaging your vines, having just seen it before, but not in any considerable
number, nor was I aware until the receipt of your letter that it was such a for-
midable enemy to the vine grower. Will you allow me to lay your interesting
and valuable remarks before the next meeting of the Hunter lliver Vineyard
Association ; they may be useful to its members.
The grub you mention, or the insect in that form, I have noticed in my
vineyard, particularly during the last two dry seasons, hut not doing any
marked damage. Many of the vines, however, both young and old 'plants,
looked sickly last summer from the want of moisture, and I supposed that they
were consequently attacked by the grub, which rendered them the more so.
I never, however, noticed in the vineyard the winged state of the insect like the
specimen sent, although from your observations there is no question of its
existence also. Having at the last pruning of the vineyard cut away the limbs
containing the insect, as much as possible, by the aid of a little manure to the
weaker plants, and from the ample rains we have had in this quarter during the
last spring and winter, these vines have shot out this summer as vigorously as
ever, and with sufficient vital force to repel, in my opinion, the attacks of the
dire enemy for a long time to come.
The moment I received your letter I looked over a numbeY of my vines of
different varieties, but did not detect any of the insect or any symptoms of its
presence. Some years ago I saw a very similar insect on Mr. Caswell’s vines
at Tinelba, which that gentleman pointed out to me, doing great damage to the
young buds in spring; he was then very much annoyed at it, but I have heard
nothing of it since. It was smaller, of a lighter shade than your specimen, and
of a similar construction.
At the last meeting of the Vineyard Association, if I am not mistaken, Mr.
Kelman was remarking that some such insect had last spring done his vines
considerable damage ; and I think another member of the Association, at the
meeting before last, made the same remark regarding injury done in his vine-
yard from the same cause. The presence of the grub or the insect in that state
in their vineyards had been noticed by most of the members, and you will have
seen by the newspapers that it existed to an alarming extent in various parts of
the colony, particularly in the older vineyards in the county of Cumberland.
The only remedy I have seen suggested, and it was by a writer in the Sydney
Morning Herald newspaper, and which I conceive a very judicious one, if the
vines are old, and that is, to destroy by burning all the prunings as soon as
they are cut off, and to wholly lay the plants attacked by the grub. This, by
increasing the root and reducing the plant above ground, will produce a vine
full of strength and life, in which the insect could not exist.
I have no doubt whatever that if more rain fell in those localities where the
grub has been most destructive (water being a vehicle of nourishment for
plants), the vines would then be less subject to be attacked; but when there is
a decided deficiency of humidity, I think your judicious efforts in destroying
the insect would be much aided by a heavy dressing of well-decayed manure
applied to the vines, and litter thrown over the ground occupied by them, in
order to bring moisture to the surface, and to prevent its more rapid evaporation.
This would, in my opinion, greatly invigorate the growth of the vines, evidently
rendered languid from the want of rain and of moisture in the atmosphere, and
consequently more subject to be attacked by insects ; for it seems to be an
established law in nature, that when the vital action (either in vegetable or in
animal life) is by any cause whatever weakened or partially retarded, the subject
immediately becomes liable to disease, and to be attacked by animals seeking
food. The vine, although possessed of extreme vitality, forms no exception
to this universal law, as is sufficiently shown by the injury this insect and
others have already done to some of our vineyards in consequence of the dry-
ness of the atmosphere, the want of rain, and the resulting aridity of the soil,
weakening the vitality of the vine in some parts of the colony. I know of vine-
yards materially injured by white ants, and of others totally destroyed by the


same insects. This lam confident would not have been the case if the vines
could have drawn sufficient nourishment from the soil to enable them to keep
up the vital process in full force or activity, since it is well known that land,
otherwise of the richest and most fertile description, is rendered utterly barren
and unproductive from the deficiency of water, of which this colony affords
many striking examples, the nutritive matters of the soil being supplied to
plants only by its agency. Lessen the necessary supply, and the plant sickens
and becomes weak, from the want of food; it is then liable to be attacked by
insects, who feed on its substance ; if the necessary nutriment is not supplied
in time, the plant at last dies.
I consider, therefore that the attacks of insects, such as are here mentioned
and referred to in your letter, not the cause but the consequence of the weak-
ness in the vital energies of the vine—of a partial decay, which would, inde-
pendent of the insect at all, result in the total destruction of the plant, if the
cause is not naturally or artificially removed.
I am still experimenting to discover, if possible, the best sort of grape to
plant for wine. I have at last discarded all European recommendations in
favour of particular varieties, and I am endeavouring to find out what character
some of them really merit in this country alone. This can only be determined
by time and experience ; but my firm opinion now is, that the grape which
bears well, most regularly, and at the same time brings its fruit to the highest
perfection in this climate (no matter what its foreign character is), is the grape
that will produce the best wine, and be the most profitable to cultivate in the
country ; and that is the grape lam seeking for. These considerations are to
me of primary importance, and must be so to every wine grower in a country
where its growth is only being introduced. And next in consequence are the
necessary modifications in the process of wine making, to suit it to the pecu-
liarities of the climate. This, too, has had my anxious consideration. I wish
I could show you personally how far I have succeeded in my attempts, and
what improvement (if any) has taken place since you saw my early operations,
now a good many years ago. lam much gratified to learn from some of your
neighbours how admirably you have succeeded in producing superior wine. I
wish our Vineyard Association had the benefit of your experience, as I too
would thereby profit by it.
I am yours, most truly,
JAMES KING.
Irrawang, December 9, 1850.
To J. King, Esq.,
My Dear Sir —ln compliance with your request, I send you enclosed
other specimens of the insect (elephant beetle I understand it is called), which,
I am sorry to say, there is no difficulty in furnishing, for we still find a plentiful,
though certainly a diminished, supply. We are now going over the vines the
fourth time; the more I examine the vines, the more extensive I find the
damage they have sustained from this insect to be. In some, where only one
or two small perforations appear in the upper part of the stock, the injury in-
creases as you get downwards towards the roots, where the whole substance of
the root is destroyed, leaving only a shell, which appears sound on the outside,
and shows no indication of its state within, except from the stunted growth of
the plant.
One of the specimens enclosed, you will perceive, is in the transition state;
I took it from a vine in the state I have described yesterday, from the stock
below where the roots commence ; and regret to find by it that their develope-
ment is still going on, and that it will be necessary to keep up a vigilant search
for them until the end of the season.
I quite agree with you that a sickly state of the plant, from drought or other


causes, would render the vine more liable to the attacks of this or other insects;
but I do not think that any growth, however vigorous, would enable the vine
to rid itself of this insect after its lodgment were once made. Nothing could
exceed the vigour with which my vines came out last year, or the show they
made for fruit; and in the winter I gave nearly the whole vineyard a good
dressing of rotten dung, and broke up the ground with the prong hoe (the im-
plement used by the Germans), and they came out this year nearly as well; but
the very little moisture the ground contained being soon exhausted, and having
no rain to furnish a fresh supply, they now exhibit a stunted appearance, and
will yield very little fruit. There have also been other causes helping to pro-
duce these effects, namely, a very late frost (17th November) ; cold blighting
strong south-east winds while the vines were in blossom, alternating with a few
days of intense heat, destructive of all vegetation ; add to all this the depreda-
tions of the beetle, which I find so extensive that I have made up my mind to
the necessity of renewing some acres of the vineyard.
You are quite welcome to lay my letter before the Vineyard Association, or
to make any use of it you think proper. I feel an interest in the Association,
and was only prevented from offering myself as a member by the distance and
impossibility of attending its meetings.
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours, very truly,
W. OGILVIE.
Merton, 20th December, 1850.
1852.
At the Meeting of May, this year, a resolution was unanimously
passed to the eifect, That the Meetings of the Association in future
should be held yearly instead of half-yearly; and that the first Wednes-
day of May should be the day of Annual Meeting. It was besides
agreed that the Constitution of the Association should in some measure
be re-modelled. The Standing Committee was in consequence em-
powered to revise and alter the original code of regulations, so as to
meet the views of the members in this respect.
On this occasion, the great interest of the day lay in the conversa-
tional observations of the members. In the words of the newspaper
reporter, who has always been present at the meetings of the Society ;
“ Brief discussions of great interest occurred during the tasting of the
wines on points arising out of casual remarks; but most of them were
on technical matters, a report of which, unless certain to be literally
correct, might lead to misapprehension.”
In reference to the produce of the vineyards this year, it appears
that, on the whole, it was less than usual. One member attributed
this to the humidity of the air, which prevented the fruit from ripen-
ing. Another, to the cold of the season, which lasted on to November.
Another, as an instance of the decreased productiveness in his vine-
yard, stated —That whereas from three-quarters of an acre of what is


called the Black Spanish Grape, he had made 650 gallons of wine
the year preceding ; this last year he had made from the same plot
of vines only 550 gallons!
On this occasion, the report of this latter member possessed peculiar
value, as a statistical record of the quantity of produce derived in
successive years from different kinds of grapes. The statement com-
municated was as follows :
The “Tinta.” I have a small quantity of this grape, about a quarter of an
acre ; it is generally the first ripe. This year it was spoiled by rain, and had
to be made into brandy.
The “ Black Cluster” is the next to ripen. They were in very good order
this year, but the produce not so much as usual, but still a very good crop. I
have an acre of this kind, and the produce in 1849 was 500 gallons; in 1850,
500; in 1851, 450; and, in 1852, 300 gallons.
“ Gouais.” There was a larger crop of this kind than there has been for the
last four years, and the grapes were very fine. I have only three-eighths of an
acre of this grape, and the produce in 1849 was 300 gallons; in 1850, 350 ; in
1851, about 100 ; and, in 1852, 450 gallons. A sample of the first year, 1849,
has been produced at two meetings of the Association, and favourably spoken
of by the members.
“ Sehiraz.” There was a large crop of this grape this year, about the same
quantity as in 1849 ; when a number of the vines were cut, and the grapes of
each vine weighed, in the presence of Mr. Moore, of the Botanical Gardens,
Sydney, and the average on each vine was 301bs.
“ White Hermitage.” There was a very good crop of this kind, but not so
many as last year.
The “ Reisling” had a very light crop.
“ Black Hamburgh” had a light crop, but the grapes were very fine. Most
of them were sold in Maitland. I have one acre of this kind ; the produce of
the last three years has been—in 1849, 1800 gallons; in 1850, £,QO worth of
grapes were sold, and 300 gallons of wine made ; in 1851, upwards of jglOO
worth of grapes were sold, and 1200 gallons of wine made ; and, in 1852, j£4o
worth of grapes were sold, and one hogshead of wine made.
The produce of the vineyard this year (from five acres), which was all that
was cut for wine, was 2,600 gallons, and about 80 gallons of brandy. The
quantity of brandy madeVas 127 gallons, but part of this was from the lees of
the wine made last year, which is 520 gallons wine and 16 gallons brandy to
the acre.
From the great quantity of rain which fell during the last season the vine-
yard was not dug, as is usual once a year. The weeds and grass could scarcely
be kept down, nevertheless the crop has turned out very well. The vintage was
much earlier over this year than last; the grapes were all gathered in on the
sth of April this year, and on the 17th May last year, six weeks later.
At this Meeting was communicated the following continued history
of the wine which had been originally destined for presentation at the
Great Exhibition in London, in 1851.
On two former occasions, viz.—at the half-yearly Meeting of our Association,
in November, 1850, and at the subsequent meeting in May, last year, I was
led to show cause for reflecting, somewhat feelingly, on the probable stintedness
of industrial energy that was likely to characterise the display made by New
South Wales amidst that glorious assemblage of the world’s wonders—viewed
then in prospect —which seemed crowding from the uttermost ends of the earth,


for reception into the Crystal Palace. I cannot, therefore, well connect the
observations then made on this subject with those which subsequent circum-
stances suggest on the present occasion, without recapitulating some of the
matters then brought forward.
In deploring the want of foresight, on the part of the Executive, and of
public spirit on the part of the people generally, whereby there was lost so fit-
ting an opportunity of evolving and promoting the industrial interests of the
colonists, by the origination and superintendence of arrangements such as might
have drawn out the energies of the industrious on the one hand, and on the
other have led to the favourable development of their industry in the Grand
Exhibition, I more especially invoked notice to the importance of the oppor-
tunity, then afforded, of bringing favourably forward before the British people
the capacity of our soil and circumstances for the production of wine. On a
comparison of the merely material value of wool growing, hitherto esteemed the
great staple product of the colony, with what might result from the employment
of capital in vine culture, it was shown, that were the whole territory of New
South Wales proper turned into an immense sheep-walk, the value of the
entire annual return therefrom, in wool, at the authorised estimate of the
average grazing capabilities of the land, would fall considerably short of half
the value of the annual crop of wine derivable, at a fair average, from only that
small portion of the alienated part of the territory which is in actual cultivation
—on the supposition that the whole of that portion were in full bearing as
vineyard ground (a condition attainable within three years), and estimating
the price of the wine so derived at the low average of one shilling per gallon.
Circumstances connected with this view of the matter led me to think at the
time, and I still think so, that his Excellency the Governor-in-Chief
unwittingly let slip a singularly felicitous opportunity of adding to his
reputation, as head of the Executive in New South Wales, by failing personally
to take becoming interest and publicly to make any ostensible eifort in bringing
under the notice of the Home Government, on so auspicious an occasion
as that afforded by Earl Grey’s despatch of the 2nd April, 1850, and by his
circular of the 18th of the same month, the capabilities of the colony more
immediately under His Excellency’s government for the production of a com-
modity for which the British people expend annually, in a foreign market,
about a million pounds sterling. To me it seemed a matter of importance,
both to the imperial and colonial governments, from its manifest bearing on the
great question of emigration on the one hand, and its profitable employment
of otherwise profitless land on the other, that the attention of capitalists should
be turned to the possibility of New South Wales becoming a source whence the
British market might be stocked with saleable wines. Should a favorable
opinion regarding our wines be got on authority from London, it seemed to me
a necessary consequence that capital would thenceforward find its way to the
extensive promotion of vine culture in the colony; and that out of this would
grow all the blessings consequent on the enhancement in public estimation, and
the successful establishment as a profitable beat of industry, of an employ-
ment demanding the exercise of intelligence, and admitting of the application
of science on the part of the capitalist; and at the same time eminently
social in its bearing on the every day occupation of the children of toil.
What claims to affection, among right-minded men, could isolation and
nomadism have when brought into comparison with the “busy hum” and
“Bacchanal profusion” of vintage operations? Even the gorgeousness of
our gold fields—what is it, when weighed in the balance with the withering
influence of its suceessfulness on the patient industry and regular habits of a
prosperous population? Were it only as a matter of precaution against the
chances of progressive demoralisation, seemingly characteristic of a state of
society where denizenship should depend on success amidst the scrambling and
gambling of a gold field, it would be. well to have, in established repute among
us, some employment, such as vine-culture or cotton-growing, which the
natural'capabilities of our climate and soil should render sufficiently remunera-
tive to command towards it the application of capital, in spite of the allure-
ments connected with the gathering of golden “nuggets,” as well as in


antagony to the tendency towards comparative barbarism inherent in the pur-
suit of the golden fleece.
At the meeting of the Association held this time last year I mentioned that a
case of wine, which was meant originally to be forwarded to the Grand Exhibi-
tion in London, had been ultimately shipped for the acceptance of his Royal
Highness Prince Albert, in the end of the preceding January, and that I hoped
to be able to communicate the result to the members at some future meeting of
the Association. Although, therefore, the result, so far as it happens to be in
my power to communicate it, has already been made public in the Sydney
Morning Herald, of the 9th January last—-in the President’s address to the New
South Wales Vineyard Association —I still consider myself bound, in continua-
tion of my observations and proceedings in this matter, to place before the
members of this Association the following particulars.
Whilst busy amidst professional work, on one of the islands at the mouth of
the Manning, I had the pleasure of receiving the following communication :
“ Club, Sydney, Thursday Night,
“ 11th December, 1851.
“ Dear Sir —My brother, Colonel Macarthur, who arrived from London in
the Vimiera, last evening, has just put into my hands a variety of interesting
memoranda respecting the attention which has been drawn towards the speci-
mens of wine, the produce of this colony, forwarded to England last year.
Amongst them I find the following, taken down, I believe, at the U.S. Club,
from the lips of General Bowles, the Master of the Queen’s Household —
“ ‘ Fifteen bottles of white wine and fifteen of red, forwarded from Sydney
for the Exhibition, and grown upon an estate called Porphyry, were sent to the
Palace. The white wine was considered neither good nor bad ; but the red, a
sort of Burgundy or Hermitage, was considered excellent. It was tried at
several parties at the Palace, and deemed excellent at all of them, being allowed
to take its chance at table, and being left tq the opinion of the guests.’
“ It is very possible that intelligence of a judgment so favourable, and pro-
nounced in so high a quarter, may not have reached you through an earlier
channel, and I cannot deny myself the pleasure, although personally a stranger,
of being the means of transmitting it. Pray accept my sincere congratulations
on this gratifying testimonial of your success—a result which I trust will be
succeeded by more substantial rewards for your perseverance in endeavouring
to promote the cultivation of the vine in the Hunter District.
“ I remain, dear Sir,
“ Your faithful servant,
“WM. MACARTHUR.”
Of course, I could not but feel gratified by such a communication. I felt,
moreover, greatly indebted to Mr. Macarthur, for the promptitude and friend-
liness with which the information had been forwarded ; and at this moment I
am in a condition to appreciate, still more highly than I then did, the conduct
of Mr. Macarthur in this matter; inasmuch as, up to this hour, no other
channel has become available for rendering me acquainted with the particulars
herein narrated.
In addition to the information contained in the note here given, Mr. Mac-
arthur has stated in his address, as President, to the New South Wales Vineyard
Association, the following most important particulars : “ that the wine alluded
to had been placed on the table without any statement as to where it came from,
or what it was called ; and yet it was preferred next after the very best samples.”
On my return from the Manning, having previously received, in addition to
Mr. Macarthur’s communication on the subject, a note from his Excellency’s
Private Secretary, acquainting me simply with the reception by Prince Albert,
of the case of wine sent, and conveying to me through this medium the best
thanks of his Royal Highness for the same ; I was anxious to know whether
any notification characterising the wine might have been forwarded officially to


the colony. In consequence, I addressed a letter to the Colonial Secretary on
the subject, in which, after referring to certain facts and statements regarding
the wine of which the Colonial Secretary was cognizant, and directing his
notice to the “memorandum” on the subject, as published in the Herald
above referred to, I made most respectful enquiry—whether any such “ memo-
randum” respecting the wine in question, as that communicated by Colonel
Macarthur, might have been received by his Excellency from the home autho-
rities ; and whether his Excellency might have been pleased to allow of an
experiment in proof of the character of the wine, which had been suggested by
me on the occasion of originally sending the case for transmission to London.
To this letter the following is the Colonial Secretary’s reply:—
52-1630 “ Colonial Secretary’s Office,
“ Sydney, 26th February, 1852.
“ Reverend Sir —l beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
16th instant, and I am desired to acquaint you in reply that no memorandum
of the nature alluded to by you has been communicated to the Governor-
General respecting the wine presented by you to his Royal Highness Prince
Albert; nor has any other communication reached his Excellency than that
which has been announced to you by the,Private Secretary.
“2. I am, however, directed to take this opportunity of apprising you that
having very recently tasted the samples of each of the wines you were kind
enough to forward to him, his Excellency can very conscientiously corroborate
the favourable opinion of them (and particularly of the red wine) pronounced
at the royal table.
“ I have the honour to be,
“ Reverend Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant,
“ E. DBAS THOMSON.”
Here let me most distinctly disclaim the bringing of these particulars before
the members of this Association for a merely personal purpose. Of course, the
promotion of one’s individual interests is not to be overlooked amidst the
duties of ordinary life ; but the promotion of these interests is legitimate, only
when it is pursued without detriment to the interests of others ; whilst, in my
estimation, it occupies a high place among the duties of social morality, when,
instead of being not simply negative in its effects on our neighbour’s welfare,
it obviously and purposely involves surrounding interests as well. It is under
the feeling that I have been designedly practising, however imperfectly, this
higher species of social duty, that I have now ventured to submit these particu-
lars to the notice of my fellow members. Our ultimate object, as cultivators of
the vine, is to accomplish a product which shall compete favourably with the
corresponding productions of other countries in the market of the world; and
to me it seemed worth while, even in our present stage of practice in this de-
partment of industry, to ascertain, authoritatively, whether or not we might
have any chance of success, when brought into direct comparison with the
wine factors of Europe.
The result, I confess, has far exceeded my anticipations. Had the wine been
introduced as “ colonial wine," and had it earned the praise of being “ tolerably
fair” wine as such; this was the highest sort of encomium for which my
anticipations had prepared me. But to learn that wine of the character sent,
such as I can have no doubt of making in equal perfection, in any ordinarily
favourable season, bottled when only eighteen months old, and placed, imme-
diately after the jumbling of a four months’ voyage from the antipodes, in
juxta-position with the most exquisite wines of Europe, in the presence of such
judges as enjoy the privilege of sitting round the table of our gracious
sovereign—a wine which you yourselves, at your last meeting, pronounced then
to be “ too new yet, its character not being fairly developed" —to learn that


such a wine, under such circumstances, unknown, unpatronised, and unrecom-
mended, “ WAS YET PREFERRED NEXT AFTER THE VERY BEST SAMPLES,”
gives, in my estimation, great promise of importance to the future produce of
vineyard culture throughout this peculiarly viniferous territory.
In consequence of absence from this district, I was necessarily prevented
from being present at the last half yearly meeting of our Association. It
afforded me much pleasure, however, to peruse the proceedings of that meeting.
In particular, I feel bound to notice that the reconsideration and reception of
Mr. King’s preceding Report, met my entire acquiescence. It was greatly at
variance with my ideas of justice and rectitude that it had been objected to by
a majority of members at the meeting of May last. The proceeding was so
unexpected on my part that, although my sentiments on the subject then were
expressed in opposition to those of that majority at the time, I certainly did
not make so determined a show of opposition as I felt afterwards the case had
merited. The reports which have been laid before the meetings by its mem-
bers, have been the great means of giving efficiency to the working of the Asso-
ciation and of promoting the interests of winology throughout the colony ; and
among these reports, those of Mr. King have been pre-eminent for their talent
and scientific value. Under the seventh law of our constitution, the commu-
nication of such papers as have gone by the name of “ Reports” is stated to be
“ one of the important duties incumbent on members of this Association,” and
their being filed among the transactions of the Association is therein decreed.
Under such an arrangement the member who should present to this Associa-
tion a report so palpably reprehensible, either in point of sentiment or expres-
sion, as to merit rejection on the part of his fellow members, could not, it
seems to me, continue a member of the Association. The rejection of his
report is tantamount to a verdict of expulsion from the Society. But surely,
in rejecting Mr. King’s report, on the occasion referred to, it never entered
into the consideration of any member then voting—that he was lending himself
to the perpetration of so extreme a measure as this. I consider that report to
be altogether worthy of its author. Its mode of allusion to Mr. Macarthur
might no doubt have been more courteous; and in being so would have been
still more creditable to the writer as a gentleman. But, in as far as this is
concerned, the writer’s individual feelings were likely to be his sole guide. If
Mr. King felt that, on a public occasion, Mr. Macarthur had not dealt fairly
with him, as a man, the lex talionis might be wicked enough to influence tha
terms of his retort. In so far as in this case it may have done so, the evil of
such acerbity is not to be justified. Personalities or umbrage ought to find no
place amid literary or scientific discussions ; and it is, therefore, to be hoped
that in the intellectual raillery, which may yet, in this matter, grow out of the
bantering of the past, no unseemly bitterness of temper shall be allowed to
mingle.
The reading of the presidential messages of Mr. Macarthur to the New South
Wales Vineyard Association has impressed me with the idea —that there ought
to be more system introduced into the proceedings of both Societies. Some
such arrangement as the following, for instance, might be adopted with profit,
and improved upon. Members might be charged, in their communications
from meeting to meeting, to adduce facts —the result of their individual expe-
rience or experiments, in such a fashion as to admit of their being arranged
under some such classification as the following :
I. — Facts belonging to Vineyard Cultivation.
11. —Facts belonging to Winology and Winefacture.
Facts belonging to Vineyard Cultivation may be arranged under the heads
of: I. — Stocks. 2. — Soils and Situations. 3. — Cultivation.
Under the head 1, Stocks, would come Facts in proof of the comparative
value of different varieties of the vine.
Under the head 2, Soils and Situations, would come Facts in proof of
the comparative productiveness and suitableness of given soils and given
situations.
Under the head 3, Cultivation, would come Facts in proof of the com-
parative effects of specific modes of culture.


Facts belonging to Winology and Winefacture would be arranged under the
heads of : I.— Vintage. 2. — Fermentation. 3.— Cellar Manage-
ment.
Under 1, Vintage, would come Facts in detail of the comparative economy
and eligibility of given modes of gathering and managing the fruit till
the must is deposited in the fermenting vat.
Under 2, Fermentation, would come Facts in proof of the comparative
value of must from given sorts of grapes, and details of such conditions
and circumstances as should be found to influence the process of vinifi-
cation, favourably or otherwise.
Under 3, Cellar Management, would come Facts in proof of the com-
parative value of given plans of cellar construction, of given forms and
capacities of vats employed, and in illustration of the comparative mar-
ketable value found to result from specific modes of treatment in the
cellar produce ; as, for instance, by mixing, or othervyise attempting
to improve the wines in cask.
This is a crude and hastily-formed system of classification in reference to the
object proposed. But it may serve as a nucleus or type wherefrom some more
perfect arrangement may be made in future. When a convenient system of
classification shall have been agreed on—in committee or otherwise—a schedule
embracing the heads of classification might be printed under sanction of thp
Association, and it might be made a recommendation —or it might be made an
imperative test of membership- —for members at each meeting of the Associa-
tion to give in to the Secretary a Schedule of Facts, the result of his own
observations or experiments, classified under the printed heads of arrangement.
This would be a convenient and efficient mode of procuring a report from every
member of the Society, the details of which might, without much trouble, be
transferred into a sort of ledger prepared for the purpose by the Secretary, and
would become thus valuable records for the inspection and benefit of the members.
In this way, for instance, might the facts relating to the appearance and de-
velopment of the elephant beetle, which formed the burden of the interesting
communications between Mr. King and Mr. Ogilvie, laid before the last meet-
ing of the Association, be registered in some subdivision made under the head
Stocks; and thus, again, for instance, might the facts detailed by Mr. Macar-
thur, which have led to the altercation between that gentleman and Mr. King,
be registered under the head of fermentation.
Thus, in the course of time, might a large body of valuable Facts find re-
gistry, under sanction of the Society’s proceedings; and out of the explana-
tions and remarks which might from time to time be hazarded in the progress
of this registration, progressive improvements in colonial winology would in-
fallibly result.
With regard to this elephant beetle, by the bye, it is several years since I
happened to find the fellow at work in the heart of the vine stock. Facts re-
lating to his birth, progress, devastations, and death, if placed on record from
different quarters, might lead to the ascertainment of means for his extirpation,
or even thorough destruction. I found that the vines subject to his inroads
were in the neighbourhood of garden trees; and in the course of my survey in
the district of the Lower Manning, during last summer, I found my tent in-
vaded by these beetles from the indigenous vegetation around.
In connection with Facts, so registered as suggested above, there would, no
doubt, be brought to bear upon their explanation, from time to time, such
amount of philosophy as might exist among our fellowship. With regard to
the pruning of the vine, for instance, such facts as might be registered in detail
of the amount of productiveness gained in apportioning a given number of buds
to a given thickness of stock, in different varieties, might lead to a physiological
determination of the maximum of productive energy attainable under given cir-
cumstances. Like observations may be made in relation to what is known by
the name of summer pruning. A registry of Facts in detail of the results of
systematic experiments on this subject, under given conditions and circum-
stances, might be expected to enable the vegetable physiologist to lay down
definite rules on the subject.


And here it is competent for me to observe, in relation to the manner in
which the experienced President of the New South Wales Vineyard Association
has delivered himself in reference to these subjects in his “ Inaugural Address”
—that no individual opinion can be expected to carry with it authority in these
matters, saving in so far as it may be given as a deduction from observed or
ascertained facts, and may not be in opposition to any of the established laws
of physiology. Again, as enlightened members of such an Association as this,
it behoves us to know that the phenomena of fermentation are strictly those of
chemistry ; that the entire process of vinification is a series of chemical trans-
formations ; and that hence, to speak of facts connected with that process as
“ not to he accounted for upon any existing theory either of the practical wine
grower or the chemist ” —might rightfully subject us to remarks capable of
proving us at fault in accuracy and knowledge, as well as in philosophy. The
correct registration of matters of fact may thus be perceived to be the important
business connected with the stated meetings of our Association. Let facts be
correctly registered in the first place, and their explanation will follow. In-
deed the registration of correct facts is almost synonoraous with their theoretical
explanation, inasmuch as theory, properly so called, is nothing more than a
philosophical classification of facts.
Hence it will be readily perceived that Mr. Macarthur’s statement of the
case put forth for Mr. King’s consideration in his Address as President to the
New South Wales Vineyard Association, in January last, is extremely at fault
as a statement of matters of fact. Instead of running thus—“ Certain wines,
rich in the saccharine principle, ferment with extraordinary violence for a time
only ; then they suddenly change to a state of perfect quietude, remaining more
or less sweet. After an interval of more or less duration they acquire an acid
flavour, being distinctly sweet and acid at the same time, and remaining in this
state, with little or no change, for an indefinite period. * * *
When exposed in casks, with loose bungs, in the open air, they have in re-
peated instances parted with their acidity, becoming perfectly sound, but, as
will be anticipated from their long exposure, with greatly reduced strength ”
the “ statement,” besides specifying the temperature of the mass, at the various
times and stages noted, ought to have been made in the following form, viz.: —
“ A certain amount (viz., a gallons) of must, expressed from a certain (viz.,
the b) grape, of the specific gravity c, inclosed in an open vat (or in a close vat
of d dimensions), after having fermented e time, became suddenly quiescent
with the specific gravity f. After remaining quiescent g time, it was found to
have the specific gravity h, and to have k per cent, of I (a specific) acid in its
composition. After m time, having been exposed meanwhile to the free access
of the atmosphere through the bung-hole, it was found to be of the specific
gravity n, and had not an appreciable per centage of acid in its composition.”
Not till facts be stated in this form can scientific explanation of the pheno-
mena in question be expected.
In having thus been led to remark on parts of the addresses delivered at the
past meetings of the New South Wales Vineyard Association by their expe-
rienced President, let it not for a moment be thought that this is done in a spirit
of silly cavil or childish antagonism. Mr. Macarthur, as an experienced wine
grower, requires no eulogy at my hands. His doings and writings on this sub-
ject have long been before the public, and have deservedly gained for him the
respect and good opinion of every colonist who has betaken himself to them for
information or guidance. In this respect I also have reaped my share of
benefit from his labours, and am delighted, under present circumstances, in thus
having an opportunity of publicly acknowledging such obligations. Discussions
on matters of opinion—where true philosophy has influence, can always be con-
ducted without bitterness —where the objects sought and the interests at play are
of kindred character, as is the case with the New South Wales and the Hunter
River Vineyard the attendant rivalry is that of honour, not of
opposition. It is altogether legitimate, in a rivalry of this nature, that among
the members there should be exercised a friendly jealousy over each other’s
reputation. On this score, to point to imperfections is not so much evidence
of ungraciousness as proof of real kindliness of feeling. To warn against


foundering, when the skipper is evidently boring his way among the breakers,
without the consciousness of danger, or a knowledge of his chart, is surely not
so much the act of an enemy as it is the duty of a friend.
“ Aurem vellit et ndmonuit”, expresses a familiar act of freedom which Mr.
Macarthur is well aware has been admitted from early times among the re-
ceived evidences of good fellowship.
1853.
With the meeting of the Association, on Wednesday, the sth of
May, of this year, commenced the yearly meetings of the Society,
under the arrangement specified in the code of amended Regulations.
The Meeting was commenced by the President, James King, Esq.,
of Irrawang, who took the Chair, surrounded by the rest of the mem-
bers ; and, in accordance with the routine of business prescribed under
the Ninth Regulation, opened the Meeting by reading the following
Address :
TO THE MEMBERS OF THE HUNTER RIVER VINEYARD
ASSOCIATION.
Gentlemen —From the honourable situation which you have called me to
fill, it now devolves on me to open the proceedings of the present meeting with
an Address, wherein, to the best of my ability, ! have thrown together a few
general remarks touching the origin, objects, and progress of our Association,
to which I respectfully crave your indulgence, and for a few minutes also your
attention. They aim not at instruction ; were it so I would be assuming a
position which would be highly unbecoming, since we are all comparatively
unskilled beginners in the business which we are endeavouring by this Asso-
ciation to promote. Whilst the observations I propose to make lay claim to
your attention on no higher ground than as they may be the result of some
previous thought and attention on my part, they, at the same time, partly arise
out ot circumstances, which many of you are better qualified than myself to
note and explain.
The newly amended regulations of the Society, authorising the annual nomi-
nation ot a President, will, it is to be hoped, in the course of time, secure the
advantages to the Association of all our individual experience, embodied in
presidential addresses, in addition to our communications to the Secretary as
ordinary members ; so that there will be formed, in the onward proceedings of
our Association, a record of local experience calculated to be of high value in
its bearing on the progress of vine culture and wine facture in the district.
The cultivation ot the soil, conducted with intelligence and industry, in pro-
ducing any article ot exchangeable value, actually converts every acre of land
so employed into a lasting source of wealth. Even gold fields, however pro-
ductive in the outset, are necessarily of circumscribed limits and exhaustive
productiveness. Their working, from exposure, excitement, anxiety, and
tatigue, is injurious to the constitution of men ; and the sadly demoralising in-
fluence on the majority of those attracted thither will be traceable through
successive generations, even after gold digging has long ceased to be the pur-
suit ot their offspring. With agriculture no limit can well be assigned to its
extent, or its productiveness, either in abundance or duration. It constitutes
the only durable source of a country’s wealth. Poor and degenerated indeed
must that community eventually become which has only its mineral resources
to depend on ; for that which cannot be reproduced will not render a country
permanently great: whilst the physical health of an agricultural community,


and the play of social and domestic feelings attendant on rural occupations,
lead to a state of society promotive of comfort and happiness, and open to the
reception of all the influences and institutions of civilized life.
There can be no question whatever, therefore, that the object of this our
original Association will be eagerly sought after, and promoted with ardour
and ability by future generations, when the digging for gold in this country has
long ceased, and the present richness of its mines will only be known in its
then early history. The various locations of land on the rivers of New South
Wales and their tributaries, and hence inwards to the far interior, were ori-
ginally taken up and occupied with reference to those pastoral pursuits for
which the country is naturally so well suited, and which have hitherto been
so successfully carried on. These locations were consequently far apart; and
when some of the more intelligent and enterprising proprietors began to culti-
vate the grape vine and become growers of wine in addition to their other occu-
pations, their extreme distance from each other prevented that personal inter-
course, that interchange of ideas, and knowledge of each other’s progress in the
new culture, which are so desirable in promoting a favourable result.
This drawback, however, was partially obviated by the few vine cultivators
making occasional visits to each other’s vineyards. But this was not always
convenient or agreeable, ever involving time, labour, and expense. It was
consequently suggested by one of the present members of this Association
that the wine growers in the district should meet on stated periods, at some
point of mutual convenience, for the purpose of comparing samples of their
respective wines, and of submitting written statements of their vintage opera-
tions to the meetings.
A preliminary meeting with that view was accordingly held in Maitland,
when a committee was formed to draw out a code of rules and regulations, by
virtue of which the first meeting constituting this Association was held at
Maitland, in May, 1847- Half-yearly meetings have been held ever since till
the meeting in May last year. Hence the- origin and objects of our existing
Association.
In May this time twelve months, however, it was considered that its meetings
were rather too frequent for some of the members to attend regularly without
inconvenience. It was therefore proposed and agreed to, that the Society should
in future only have a stated general meeting once a year, and that in all time
coming a President should be annually elected, with prescribed duties. This
office for the last year you all know I have had the honour to fill.
The Association seems to have infused a spirit of emulation amongst its
members, judging from the marked improvement in the quality of their wines,
some of them in common with others having consequently had gold medals
awarded to them by the New South Wales Botanical and Horticultural Society,
and the highest testimonials having been received from England in favour of the
wines of Porphyry, a vineyard belonging to one of its members ; whilst the
publicity of its proceedings has tended to the advancement of vine culture in
the colony, and to the bringing into more general use and favour the wholesome
product of our home vineyards.
The wine growers in the older part of the colony soon saw the advantages of
our local institution. They immediately followed our example, and, adopting
its model, formed themselves into “The New South Wales Vineyard Associa-
tion.” This Association has taken a wider range of action, and has not re-
stricted membership to growers of wine, or to cultivators at all. Nevertheless
it includes amongst its members some of the most successful wine growers in
the colony.
Thus the culture of the vine is producing a valuable commodity of commer-
cial exchange, both as an article of domestic use, and of export; and the con-
viction of its importance as an appropriate agricultural pursuit in the colony,
was making rapid progress amongst us, when the recent discoveries of our gold
fields, by attracting so many people from their ordinary employments, and
raising the price of the labour of those who remained, has paralysed for the
present our vineyard operations, as well as nearly all the other existing indus-
trial pursuits in the colony—a drawback which it is to be hoped will soon be


gradually counteracted by the continual flow into the colony of the present
increasing stream of immigration. The many thousands who are annually
arriving cannot fail to find profitable and steady employment, altogether inde-
pendently of the gambling allurements of the gold mines, where the advantages
on the average to the labourer are so very questionable, whether here or at
Victoria.
The districts of the Hunter, and those of its tributaries, are well suited for
vine culture, as evinced by the very satisfactory proofs which have been exhi-
bited from time to time at the meetings of this Association. The introduction
of its culture, however, as a source of profit, is of comparatively recent occur-
rence, particularly in this locality ; whilst many circumstances have, moreover,
tended to retard its more general introduction. What, for instance, could be
more unfavourable to the progress of wine culture than the fact, that the landed
proprietors of the colony had emigrated from a country where no indigenous
wines are grown, and were consequently not practically acquainted with the
details of vine management, nor previously versed in the slightest degree in
vintage operations ; neither was it in their power to gather such information
on the subject as had been verified by local experience. Still, with these and
other drawbacks, it is gratifying to witness the progress that has been made by
unassisted efforts at this early stage, in the production of wine in this district,
as well as in the more early settled parts of the country; and it is to be hoped
that our exhibition to-day will further mark our onward tendency. With the
experience already here acquired, and aided by a knowledge of the principles
involved in the progress of wine making, it is not saying too much to affirm
that most of the present wine growers in the colony are better qualified for the
right management of the business here than any mere empirical practitioner
of the art just arrived from Europe, however successful he may have been in
his particular locality. There is no question that when chemical processes in
any position are carried on precisely under the same circumstances, they must
ever produce the same results ; at the same time it cannot be overlooked that
the complex actions involved in the vital process of vegetation, and in the sub-
sequent fermentation of its products, being ever subject to many subtle modi-
fying influences, must cause marked varieties in the results. Even the slightest
change in condition, so minute as scarcely to be perceived, will cause appre-
ciable differences. Hence the varied character discernible in wines, of which
scarcely two individuals or two localities are found to produce the same or
similar specimens. So far as the individuals are concerned, no doubt, that is
caused mainly by a want of knowledge of the principles and circumstances
which modify and influence chemical action, on which the production of the
qualities of wine so much depends ; and it is this want of familiarity with the
principles involved in chemical processes which so much retards the successful
introduction of such processes into a new country. Mechanical operations
(more palpable and less subject to subtle modifying iufluences) can be adopted
at once. A piece of machinery (a Dutch clock or a grinding mill for instance)
can be put up and immediately set a going anywhere, by almost any body, and
with the same results; whilst many important chemical operations can only be
successively introduced, under altered conditions, after much acute observation
and long experience in the particular locality ; but certainly more readily by
those who with practice possess a well-grounded theoretical knowledge of the
laws and influence which regulate and modify their action.
Hitherto (it is to be regretted) we have not induced any intelligent and tho-
roughly informed wine makers to emigrate to the colony. Under these cir-
cumstances, it is therefore necessary, in order to ensure success, that we should
not only attend personally to the practical business of wine making, but also
make ourselves intimately acquainted with the principles, conditions, and
influences affecting the process. By these means, I think, it is in our power
to aid ourselves, far more than by the assistance of any of the practical wine
makers yet imported into the colony, whose practice hitherto has been mere
empiricism in a particular locality ; so that, consequently, they can be ill
qualified to carry it on with success under changed circumstances. The
importation of German immigrants has, however, greatly aided us in the


manual operations of the vineyard. In the absence of that proper personal
assistance which is most to be desired, we have for our guidance, nevertheless,
meritorious treatises on vine culture and wine facture published in the colony
—partly the result of local experience and personal observation in wine growing
countries in Europe (on which account they cannot be too highly prized), and
partly, too, translated from the French and German ; besides many copies of
various works of great merit in French on the same subject. Some of these
productions, although they communicate much information that is highly
valuable, and, so far as mere mechanical operations are involved, no doubt
sufficiently correct, nevertheless exhibit rather a limited acquaintance with the
properties of substances, of the laws of chemistry, and consequently of the
principles involved in the making and maturation of wine. By way of illustra-
tion, it may be mentioned that one of these authors does not distinguish between
plaster of Paris and gypsum. Another supposes that plaster of Paris (gypsum
a,s the author calls it) is added to the must in making wine to absorb or neu-
tralise acid ; while in fact it precipitates water in a solid form ; gypsum would
not do the one or the other. Another writer does not seem to be aware of the
rationale of sulphur fumes applied to wine casks before filling them with wine,
but supposes that the burning of alcohol would have the same effect. Another
mentions that the ferment and the sugar of the grape are contained in different
cells in the fruit, that the crushing brings them in contact, and that hence
fermentation ensues. Another does not seem to be cognizant of the theory of
racking, or of the influence which the oxygen of the atmosphere exercises in
contact with wine, at different temperatures. Another says that logwood is
employed to colour compound wines ; whereas the fact is, tartaric acid almost
ipstantly destroys and precipitates the colouring matter of logwood, &c., &c.
As bearing on the subject in hand, and throwing out valuable practical
suggestions—suggestions which ought, in my humble opinion, to guide our
future operations—with your kind permission, I will read two letters which I
have had the honour to receive since our last meeting from that distinguished
philosopher, Baron Liebig ; who has done more to make men acquainted with
God’s doings, as revealed in His divine works of creation (without adventitious
aid, the everlasting and unequivocal records of His will and power) than all who
have lived since the days of Sir Isaac Newton.
Sir Isaac, we all know, threw a flood of light upon the mechanism of the
universe, which will ever illuminate his name; whilst Baron Liebig has
directed his great abilities, with wonderful results and imperishable fame, to
the developement of God’s laws as exhibited in organic creation, hitherto much
hid from the knowledge of mankind.
The production of these letters addressed to me, in the most frank and
friendly spirit, having reference principally to the wines of Irrawang vineyard,
as well as to my individual attempts at wine making, together with the notes
which I have now appended, relating necessarily thereto, throws unavoidably,
on my part, a degree of egotism into the matter which I would rather have
avoided; but which I hope you will make allowances for.
[translation.]
“ Giessen, 6th March, 1852.
“ Dear Sir —It is a long time since I owe you my thanks for your friendly
letter of October, 1850, and your kindness in forwarding me a sample of your wine
for more minute examination. I have duly received both your transmissions—
the one via London, the other via Hamburg. My time was so occupied last
year with other labours, that I could not, until now, institute my-experiments
with your wine. At the same time, with yours, I obtained a sample from
Colonel Macarthur, which I tested at the same time.
“The wine, Pineau Noir, Tinta, and Pineau Gris, indicates a specific gravity
•9920 ; produces, in 100 volumes, 16 - 20 of alcohol; in the same volumes, -505
free acid, 3 - 265 dry residue, and -498 of incombustible ashy constituents.
“ The other (white) sort, Irrawang, has a specific gravity -940 ; contains, in
100 volumes, 13’ volumes of alcohol; - 660 free acid ; 100 volumes yield, by


evaporation, 3*313 dry residue, which consists principally of saccharine matter,
and - /»63 ashy constituents.
“ These proportions are met with in Germany and France, in the most
choice wines. Both sorts contain more alcohol, and less free acid, than the
most esteemed Rhenish wines. The soil on which these wines are grown must
contain much calcareous matter, for they approach in flavour the wines of
Hungaria and Franconia.* The red wine has many properties in common
with Burgundy; two bottles of it, nevertheless, were turbid, and evidently not
sufficiently settled. It might be possible to procure a sale for this wine in
England and Russia, were you to succeed, by carefully conducted fermentation,
in producing a stronger bouquet. Should you be inclined to make the experi-
ment of adopting the mode of fermentation which is usually resorted to with
Bordeaux wines, a great improvement might result from it. The best Bordeaux
wines are not pressed, but the grapes are put along with their stalks into vats,
in which they are allowed to remain until the fermentation is completed. I
would advise you also to make this experiment with the white grapes.
“ As the wine of Irrawang contains an ample quantity of saccharine matter,
I deem it expedient that you should allow it to ferment at the highest possible
temperature. In Germany, where the wine is poor as to saccharine matter, and
rich in yeasty ingredients (a consequence of the use of strong animal manure)
it is necessary to proceed quite contrary to this, namely, to allow it to ferment
at a low temperature. I think, moreover, that by employing, as regards the
white wine, the method of fermentation adopted in Hungary, namely, at Tokay,
you would obtain a wine resembling Tokay. There they allow grapes dried on
the stalks to ferment together with undried grapes. The best Tokay is obtained
from 3 to 4 parts of dried pounded grapes, with one part of must from fresh
grapes.
“ The proportion of free acid in your wine is not considerable ; it might con-
tain even more without detriment to its quality. Since the bouquet is produced
principally by the formation of various kinds of ether, resulting from the
presence of free acid, it is possible that you tyould obtain a wine of stronger
bouquet, if you do not wait the full ripeness of the grapes, f According to the
* The soil of the vineyard at Irrawang contained, originally, very little calcareous
substance, although strata containing a large proportion of shells exist within a few chains of
it. It is supposed, however, that a sufficient quantity both of carbonate and sulphate of
lime, has from time to time been added, so as to render it well suited for the production of
wine. This addition has been made under the impression that only a small proportion of
lime in the soil is necessary, since a very minute quantity of that mineral can be assimilated
by the vine; much less, indeed, than silex is by cereals, the reed, or bamboo. On the other
hand, a calcareous soil, strictly so-called (notwithstanding the prevailing opinion to the
contrary), is not indispensable to the production of supeiior wine. In this respect the
presence of alkaline salts is much more necessary. In the absence of lime, therefore, when
the mechanical and chemical composition of any soil is otherwise suited for the growth of the
vine, I am of opinion that the minute proportion of calcareous matter, then so necessary an
ingredient in the food of the plant, may be readily and elfectively applied artificially.
I have also added to the soil of the vineyard at Irrawang, with marked advantage, consi-
derable quantities of wood ash, charcoal, and even the prunings of the vine cut small. The
vineyard of Terreela, of which the soil is sandy, it is my intention, this winter, to enrich by
a dressing of strong red clay, from the forest land, which the influence of the sun and at-
mosphere will soon intimately intermix with the sand.
Many of the clays in this locality are rich in valuable mineral constituents, which render
them naturally fertile, particularly those resulting from the disintegration of basaltic
whinstone and porphyry, or from alluvial deposit; but in many cases such soils are rendered
utterly barren by their impenetrable solidity, resisting the entrance of roots, air, and
moisture, and also by retaining water too long on their level or hollow surface. —J. K,
f In order to avoid the bad effects consequent on not allowing the grapes to be sufficiently
ripe before harvesting them (an error to often committed), I had for some time fallen rather
into the opposite extreme, by allowing them to remain too long on the plant before gathering
them ; conceiving that fruit intended for the press could not possibly be too free from acid,
or too rich in sugar. The wines made under these circumstances were those experimented
on by Baron Liebig. I soon saw the injurious effects of allowing the fruit to be over-ripe,
which I endeavoured to prevent by mixing must of opposite qualities, with favourable
results, as mentioned in my last wine report. Still, much of the wine then made, although
sound, was deficient of aroma. I suspected the over-ripeness of the fruit to be in some
manner the cause, and expressed my suspicions to that effect, having before made better wine


Specific
gravity.
Alcohol.
Free Acid.
Residue on
evaporation.
Residue on
combustion.
Verdeilho and La Follie...
•9890
17-15
•480
3-075
•2650
La Follie and Muscat
•9402
20.473
•600
5-510
•3000
White Muscat Lunel
•9970
19-53
•640
6-420
■2380
•9900
1768
•580
2-298
•2780
•1890
15'81
•275
2-810
•2060
Hungarian inode of fermentation you obtain a sweet wine ; by the application
of not quite ripe grapes, a wine resembling, if not surpassing in quality, the
noble Rhenish wine.
“ The wines of Colonel Macarthur are stronger than yours, namely, richer
in alcohol; they are in that respect proportionally too rich, which is no advan-
tage to their quality.
“ Since these Australian wines contain too little free acid, they would not
improve by laying, that is to say, by age.*
“ The wines of Colonel Macarthur contain —
“ The proportion of ashy constituents in your wines is on an average greater;
and it appears as if Colonel Macarthur cultivates a soil poorer in mineral con-
stituents, or that he has added sugar previous to its fermentation. The abun-
dance of ashy constituents renders the wine superior and more wholesome.
“In the new edition of my chemical letters I have inserted a passage from
your last letter, and I wish that the residents in your part of the world may act
up to the wish I have therein expressed, f
“For your kind transmission of seeds I thank you sincerely. I have dis-
tributed them in many botanical gardens in Germany. I likewise thank you
for the interesting minerals, and the two skins of the Ornithoryncus Paradoxus.
It will afford me great pleasure to hear from you from time to time.
“ With the expression of the most perfect regard,
“ I am yours sincerely,
“ To James King, Esq.,
“ Irrawang.
“DR. JUS. LIEBIG.
when less attention was paid to the condition of the fruit. During the last three vintages,
acting under these impressions, the wine was purposely made with the fruit on the whole
less ripe, or at least a portion of the must of such was mingled with the must of the more
ripe fruit, with a marked improvement in the quality of the product. At the same time, X
freely admit that the deficiency of free acid in the former samples of wine, and the great
advantage of its presence in all wines, did not occur to me until I received these instructive
letters from Baron Liebig, giving his opinion of the samples I had forwarded to Giessen for
his examination, with his valuable suggestions on the subject-of wine making, which I have
eagerly followed this last vintage.—J. K.
* This valuable practical observation has reference to the sample of wine then under
examination, not to Australian wines generally, although it is also applicable to such of them
as may be deficient of free acid; a defect, however, which seldom occurs in the wines of this
country, as the growers more generally err by gathering the fruit before it is sufficiently
ripe. I have, nevertheless, tasted dry old wines made in the colony, having a fine aromatic
perfume, of full body, and largely possessed of that peculiar ether (the oenanthic) produced
only by age, which constitutes the bouquet of fine wine, and were then of improving quality.
These wines were the produce of vineyards in this district, where the fruit must have been
harvested in proper condition, and the vintage on the whole conducted with consideration
and care. Even now, there is at Irrawang a small quantity of wine made by me in 1836,
upwards of seventeen years ago, which has all the while continued to improve. It is now
an excellent wine, resembling first growth Burgundy, a sample of which I hope to produce
to-day, when the wines are tasted.
All this is calculated to show that, with common care and attention to minute circum-
stances, our wines may.generally possess superior qualities; and if they do not, it is our
own fault, not that of the climate or of the soil.—J. K.
f See Baron Liebig’s Familiar Letters on Chemistry, last edition, London, 1851, of which
the author kindly presented me with a copy.—J. K.


the two cases of Australian wine which you had sent me. It has altorded me
a true pleasure to compare this wine with European wines.
“ I have obtained the following results:—
Irrawang Pinean JToir,)
Tinta, and P. Gris ... j
Irrawang White
Specific
gravity.
Per cent.
Alcohol.
Per cent.
Free Acid.
Per cent.
Ashes.
Residue on
evaporation.
•9920
•9400
16-20
13-00
•505
•660
•4987
•5630
3-265
3-313
“ In their contents of alcohol and in fixed constituents your wines are not
behind the best French and Rhenish wines. The best Rhenish wines (Hock)
[translation
“ Giessen, 16th April, 1852.
“ Dear Sir —l received yesterday your letter of the 12th August, 1851 (for-
warded by Messrs. Kirchner and Co.), and it has, therefore, been near nine
months on its way. A few weeks ago, I despatched a letter to you to the care
of Mr. Thomas Brown, London, in which I advised you that I had duly received
the two cases of Australian wine which you had sent me. It has afforded me
a true pleasure to compare this wine with European wines.
“ I have obtained the following results:—
“ In their contents of alcohol and in fixed constituents your wines are not
behind the best French and Rhenish wines. The best Rhenish wines (Hock)
do not contain above 13 per cent, of alcohol. The red Australian wine greatly
resembles a mixture of Burgundy and Claret, which it surpasses in strength;
it does not contain, however, the aroma or bouquet, in which claret in parti-
cular excels. These wines, however, appear to me capable of great ameliora-
tion in this respect by the method of fermentation; and well considered
experiments, based on solid observation, will doubtless lead you to improve
[enreoftfe] still more these excellent wines, and to bestow on them that quality
which the prevailing taste demands.
“ The strength or proportion of alcohol and saccharine matter, as you well
know, does not regulate the value of wine; but it is the perfect combination, or
a kind of equiponderance of its constituents, which is most esteemed and paid for
highest. In a first-class wine, neither alcohol, nor sugar, nor aroma, nor acid,
should predominate ; not one of these constituents should be discernable above
the rest —each of them producing in their due proportion the most desirable effect
on the tongue, &c. Your proposal of mixing the must of the Yerdeilho grape
with the juice of the Gouais is excellent, and quite adapted to point out the
way in which improvements may be effected. This proposition evinces how
much you have reflected on the process of wine making, and how thoroughly
you are acquainted with its principles.*
“ I perceive from your wine report, that at Camden the must is allowed to fer-
ment in vats of masonry. In France also these vats of masonry are made use
of; but when the stones are united with mortar made with lime, the latter
exercises an injurious influence on the wine. The lime destroys the tartaric
acid, which is of importance to the preservation of the wine, and the production
of bouquet; and when acetic acid is contained in the wine it dissolves the lime,
which in that ease communicates to the wine a perceptibly earthy flavour.
Nevertheless, I am sensible how difficult it is to suggest improvement without
knowing the locality, the condition of the grapes and must, and the climate. I
* It may possibly be remembered by some of the gentlemen present that in my report pre-
sented to this Association in May, 1851, I recommended the propriety of mixing the must of
grapes possessing opposite qualities, not with the object of compounding them, merely that
an average strength might be the result, but as a means of ensuring a more complete fer-
mentation of their constituents—the neutralisation of their antagonistic elements—thereby
so far preventing that acidity which is apt to be generated in imperfectly fermented wine.
A copy of that report I had forwarded to Giessen, for the perusal of Baron Liebig.
I cannot here refrain from observing that, although that recommendation of mine seemed
of slender import in the estimation of some of our colonial wine growers, Who, after all that
was said, really mistook its character and bearing, it is gratifying to have its merits thus
upheld by so high an authority as Baron Liebig.—J. K.


can only wish that you may proceed as you have hitherto done, directing your
efforts towards the improvement of the fermentation. You are sure to arrive at
the end you have proposed to yourself. It is true that difficulties are great, but
they are not insurmountable.
“ You have last year had a visit from a German traveller, Mr. Gerstaecker,
who, in the Augsburg Universal Gazette (which is read in Sydney), has described
his visit to the Hunter, and your great kindness and hospitality. Thus your
property on the Hunter, and all you have done for the culture of the vine, has
become known in an extended circle of Germany, and I have particularly
rejoiced over it, it appearing to me as if he spoke to me of a friend. Ger-
staecker’s description of the gold district is not so favourable as yours ; he says
that much gold is found, but that only a few gold diggers obtain an adequate
remuneration for their great trouble and labour. The discovery of gold in
Australia is useful, inasmuch as by it an army of colonists will be attracted
thither. Gold is a magnet which has an irresistible influence on mankind;
and Australia, where the law is in force, is infinitely preferable to California.
“You have afforded me great pleasure by the transmission of seeds from the
Botanical Gardens in Sydney, as well as of the minerals and other productions.
I have distributed the seeds amongst several Botanical Gardens in Germany,
where your presents are remembered with gratitude.
“ The eucalyptic oil I have not as yet analysed ; I will do so, however, this
summer, and inform you of the result. One of the crystallised minerals was a
salt of magnesia.
“ I have been last year for a few months in Scotland, where I have many
friends and pupils. lam partial to your country and to the people inhabiting
it—they have much in common with Germans. I can very well conceive the
longing which draws you towards your native land, and I wish you may enjoy
the happiness of beholding once more that beautiful Edinburgh from Calton
Hill. At fifty-four you are far from being too old to undertake this voyage,
and when you are again in Great Britain pray remember that you have a
friend at Giessen who will esteem himself happy to see you under his roof. I
have a son studying medicine, and who will this year conclude his studies ; he
has a great desire to make a voyage round the world, and it is not improbable
that he may one day pay you a visit at Irrawang.
“ Farewell, my dear sir, and be assured that your letters have impressed me
with as high a regard as affection for you.
“Yours, sincerely,
“DR. JUS. LIEBIG.
“ To James King, Esq.,
“ Irrawang.”
I will not occupy your time longer than merely to make a few concluding
remarks on the same subject, the result of personal observation.
With such information as I have been enabled to acquire, during nearly
twenty years’ experience at Irrawang, and the Turreela Vineyard, near Ray-
mond Terrace, in the culture of the vine, and in the making and management
of wine, I have endeavoured all the while to attain some knowledge of the
principles involved in those operations. In the manufacture of the vinous
product particularly, I have been guided, as far as they were familiar to me,
with the general laws of chemical science, ever keeping in view the known
influences which modify their action; and I have moreover been aided in
those labours by the proceedings of this Association, which have already
imparted much valuable local information.
Under these circumstances I think I may venture to make, with due diffi-
dence, the following limited general remarks on vine culture in New South
Wales. Not that lam qualified for the task, but because I think, under pre-
sent circumstances, I am called on to do so to the best of my ability.
Ample evidence exists to show that the climate of this country (with the


Black Bineau
Black Hermitage, after rain
Bambrusquat
1-102
1-072
1102
1-092
Shepherd’s
White Hermitage
1-105
1103
drawback of occasional unfavourable seasons), within a certain range of the
sea, is eminently suited for the growth of the grape vine, and the successful
production of marketable wine.
On account of the long periods of drought so often experienced in this
country, the rapidly evaporating influence common to the atmosphere, and the
consequently frequent deficiency of moisture in the soil, the vine may properly
be grown here on richer and deeper land than is employed or recommended for
that purpose on the continent of Europe.
At different periods I have planted three vineyards ; two of them at Irra-
wang—the one on forest land, the debris of pudding-stone and porphyry,
trenched, and wholly turned over, to the depth of at least thirty inches; the
other on the rich alluvial deposit which composes the bank of the River
William.
The other plantation, at Turreela, is land consisting almost wholly of sili-
cious sand.
In dry seasons the density of the must of the same variety of grape (as indi-
cated by Long’s saccharometer) is very nearly the same from all these soils
and situations.
Tho following were the specific gravities of the must at the last vintage at
Irrawang of six well known varieties of the grape, viz.—
On comparing notes with Mr. Carmichael, it was found that his estimate
of the specific gravity of the must of the same grape, grown on the same quality
of soil at Porphyry, was exactly the same as that grown at Irrawang.
Must of the above densities will produce on fermentation wine containing
from 17 to 23 per cent, of proof spirits. Such memoranda of the product of
the vineyards in Europe would afford valuable information to wine growers in
New South Wales ; not only the quantity of grape sugar there is contained in
the grape would be shown, by which the quantity of alcohol naturally in the
wine might be estimated, but they would also afford sufficient data by which the
quantity of brandy artificially added might be ascertained on examination here
of a sample of the wane.
The must produced by the forest land vineyard is generally of the greatest
specific gravity, and the produce of the sandy soil is next in density; but the
difference is very inconsiderable. In moist seasons, however, the produce of the
river bank vineyard possesses less go&t and a smaller amount of saccharine
matter than is produced by the others : but that deficiency is abundantly com-
pensated by the much greater quantity of fruit annually produced by the
alluvial land ; and there is no question that it will continue so to yield in all
seasons for many more years than land of any other description.
No cultivated soil, however, can be said to be exhaustless—to be ever fertile.
The continued removal of crops from its surface must in time abstract from it
a large proportion of those constituents essential to their production. When
they have been so reduced in quantity, and when mere mechanical turning over
and sub-division of the soil have at length failed to render it sufficiently pro-
ductive (for these operations, you well know, have a limit to their influence),
recourse must then be had to proper manuring, again to restore the ingredients
that have been so abstracted.*
* In reference to the difference of wines produced from different soils, it may be remarked
that the cropping of any given vineyard in reality alters its soil; so that the wine of each
successive year from the same soil must vary from this cause alone—independently of other
causes of variation. In my opinion, the effect of cropping or exhausting vineyard soil
is to diminish the nitrogenous elements in the fruit. Consequently, in the composition of
the perfect fruit, there is progressively a tendency towards a greater proportion of
sugar than of leaven. The resulting wine will thus be less attenuated. The wine will have


The vine, although long-lived, from its ability to extend its roots far in quest
of nourishment, is nevertheless, like other organic beings, subject from
deficiency of food to premature disease, decay, and death, and that deficiency
we must make good, sooner or later, in our vineyards, in order to prolong their
existence, in proportion as their soil has originally been poor or rich in the
elements essential to the growth of the vine.
With regard to the kinds of grape to be here cultivated, it is of the utmost
importance to select those which have proved themselves naturally suited to the
climate —by growing freely, being generally without spot or blemish, bearing
fruit abundantly every year, and bringing it to perfection.
In this way will varieties be found specifically adapted to every locality.* No
matter what their European reputation may be, they will produce that which
will eventually become the wine of the district, and, with the greatest pro-
bability, too, of affording the highest remunerative return. Such varieties, it
may reasonably be expected, will be aptly produced from the seeds of the most
approved grapes now cultivated in the colony. There are many imported
varieties of the grape already in our vineyards, and known to the producers of
superior wine in Europe, that have been found to be totally unsuited for this
climate.
Wine, being more the product of the soil in a favourable climate than that
of the particular grape which produces it, I am inclined to the opinion that the
matured fruit of any variety of grape grown on the same spot, under the
same circumstances, although the quantity of saccharine matter may vary a
little, will produce a similar wine; hence the primary importance of selecting
varieties congenial to the climate, as they only can be expected most generally
to yield fruit in perfection, and consequently the best wine the district can
produce.
From the paucity of hands at the time of the vintage, it is sometimes almost
impossible to prevent the over-ripening of some part of the crop, which is here
rapidly facilitated by the heat and dryness of the climate. To meet this cir-
cumstance, I have recommended the planting in separate plots such varieties
of the grape as are found to follow each other in the period of their maturity, so
as to give more time to the vintage ; and should one portion of the vineyard
become over-ripe, another portion may yield fruit less so, which may be
mingled with the other, and thereby ensure the more complete fermentation of
the whole. With few labourers, and without such an arrangement, much of
the vintage might be injured or actually lost. Varieties of the grape growing
apart in the same vineyard also ensures the crop against a total failure in
unfavourable seasohs, as some of the varieties generally escape its influence.
With regard to the making and maturation of the wine, from the compara-
tively short period in which it has been practised in the colony, the sum of that
invaluable knowledge derived from local experience must consequently be
small, particularly since it has all along been carried on (as already noticed)
by those having no previously well-grounded knowledge of the process.
We must, therefore, study the best writers on the subject; possess ourselves
greater body, in other words. Experience has established this as an acknowledged result,
which is usually ascribed to the greater age of the plant. In my opinion, the result is due
to the altered condition of the soil, not to the altered condition of the plant, otherwise
than as a consequence of this altered condition of soil. Manure, by restoring the fertilizing
elements of the soil, tends to re-establish the original proportions of the nitrogenous and
saccharine ingredients of the must; and hence leads to the production of a greater quantity
of more attenuated wine. Hence, manure is said to be noxious in its effects on the pro-
duction of wine—not, as is usually supposed, because it communicates any noxious flavour
to the fruit or the wine, but simply because it supplies a larger amount of leaven in the com-
position of the grape juice, which leads to the more rapid fermentation of the must and
to the greater attenuation of the wine.
* The colony is highly indebted to Mr. Busby (who is new resident in New Zealand) for
his indefatigable exertions in having visited many of the vineyards on the continent of
Europe, at his own private expense, for the purpose of collecting information and varieties
of the grape, which he afterwards gratuitously distributed and published in the colony at
his own risk.


of the local knowledge within our reach, which it is the object of this Asso-
ciation to disseminate ; and continue to apply with care and attention in the
conduct of our vintage operations, as far as we know, the principles involved in
the process, modifying, as far as is practicable, the influences here affecting it.
It is only thus that our endeavours can be expected to produce, under the
circumstances, the most favourable results. In the words of Baron Liebig,
“ the difficulties are great, but they are not insurmountable.”
Our wines, when sufficiently matured, must find a ready sale in this and the
neighbouring colonies, and it will yet be many years before that demand can be
sufficiently supplied from this quarter. Until then the wine growers of New
South Wales need seek no other outlet for the produce of their vineyards.
The difficulty in procuring an ample supply of bottles will prevent our being
able to exhibit that produce to the public in the most favourable state, and to
place it in the hands of the consumer in the most acceptable shape. This
drawback in the sale of our wines will continue until bottles aie manufactured
in the colony. Until then the wines of this country will not occupy that
position in the market which they would otherwise command.
I am gratified to be able to state that materials for the fabrication of bottles
(besides fuel) exists in exhaustless abundance in many parts of this district,
specimens of which in the immediate neighbourhood of my own* house, con-
sisting of basaltic whinstone (one of them in a vitrified state, having been the
subject of experiment) are now exhibited at the meeting.
There is another circumstance which has also hitherto materially operated
against the more general use of our wines in the colony, but which it is grati-
fying to notice is gradually becoming less apparent.
The majority of the inhabitants of this country having immigrated thereto,
naturally brought with them habits contracted in their native land. This
is especially the case in the use of stimulants. As the immigrants’ fatherland
was generally a colder climate than this, the habitudes of a large portion of
the population have originated in the climate of a higher latitude, where beve-
rages are intended to stimulate the system rather than to quench thirst—more
to produce animal excitement than the higher gratification consequent on using
an agreeable drink.
This habitual use, even in moderation, of the more potent stimulating
liquors, continues long after their arrival here ; and as the grosser sensations
and feelings which they excite become almost a natural desire, they are not
easily dispensed with. Hence that preference so generally given in the colony
to the more active stimulants, to ardent inflammatory spirits, and to brandied
intoxicating wines, rather than to the refreshing and exhiliarating light wines,
which afford liquid as well as moderate stimuli, and are more agreeaable to a
delicate taste, and far more wholesome and necessary in a warm climate.
Thus our pure light wines, possessing in many instances, as has been shown,
the esteemed qualities of the finest Rhenish and French growths, are only par-
tially estimated in the colony. The taste of the community, however, is
gradually becoming more acute and refined, ceasing to estimate the quality of
wines merely by their intoxicating effects ; whilst the choice wines of conti-
nental Europe and our finer samples of colonial growth (which are improving
every year) are consequently becoming better appreciated. Our indigenous wines
particularly are thus becoming more generally prized. They are admitted to be
suited to a better state of society in a warm climate, under circumstances where
a desire and appreciation of the finer qualities of wine are found to predominate,
apart altogether from the stimulating influence of the beverage ; and it is
gratifying to learn, by this criterion, that our social state in New South Wales
is decidedly improving, inasmuch as we know that the local consumption of
our wines has these some years been gradually on the increase.
In this respect the social state of the colony is keeping pace with that of the
mother country. The finer qualities of wines are daily becoming more in
demand in the British market—so much so, that Cyrus Redding, an eminent
authority in such matters, has lately stated in evidence before a committee of
the House of Commons that the taste for strong wines was going out of fashion
in England.


It is thus, in a moral aspect, gratifying to learn that the use of pure wines is
increasing instead of the spirituous compounds of that name. At the same time,
permit me to quote the opinion of Baron Liebig as to their wholesome quali-
ties ;—“ As a restorative, a means of refreshment, where the powers of life are
exhausted, of giving animation and energy where man has to struggle with
days of sorrow, as a means of correction and compensation where misproportion
occurs in nutrition, and the organism is deranged in its operations, and as a
means of protection against transient organic disturbances, wine is surpassed
by no product of nature or of art.”
There are higher considerations, gentlemen, than the production of wine in
the country, or the acquisition of a knowledge of such details in its manufac-
ture as may give it the highest possible value, which this Association, I am
happy to notice, is also calculated to promote; and these are—habits of
rational intercourse amongst its members, so much to be desired in every part
of the colony.
Persons immured in the wild interminable forests of a thinly inhabited
country, having necessarily little intercourse with each other, but intensely
occupied with and surrounded only by their own immediate concerns, are apt
to be rendered immoderately selfish, arrogant, and overbearing, with an absurd
estimate of themselves and their doings. To a greater or less extent these I
fear are the common results of a residence in the Austrslian “bush,” in which
our lot is cast; but that social correspondence, that sociality of meeting, of
reading communications, of talking and taking wine together, the product of
each other’s vineyards, which our Association has adopted from the first, and
still maintains, is, to a certain degree, calculated to counteract these effects,
and thereby renders its members more rational and acceptable members of
society.
At the same time it is proper to remark that the aim and consequent advan-
tages of this Association could not be carried out were its members to increase
beyond a very limited number; for then, the reaping of communications, the
tasting of samples of wine, and other business, could not be properly accom-
plished. Still, in the course of time, there will be, I hope, similar associations
having, with the same spirit, the like objects, on the Rivers William and Pater-
son, and on the Upper Hunter; as there are, even now, successful wine growers
in each of these localities, who are not members of this—the original—
institution.
I have now, gentlemen, only to thank you for your kind indulgence, and
patient attention to this rather lengthy address, and to solicit your aid and con-
sideration touching the other business of the meeting.
JAMES KING.


APPENDIX,
CONTAINING DETAILS OF SUCH VINEYARDS AS HAVE BEEN DESCRIBED
BY THE MEMBERS IN THEIR COMMUNICATIONS TO THE MEETINGS OF
THE ASSOCIATION, ARRANGED UNDER THE FOLLOWING HEADS, VIZ. :
1., SOIL AND SITUATION 11. VARIETIES CULTIVATED 111., MODE OF
CULTIVATION IV., VINTAGE OPERATIONS V., CELLAR MANAGEMENT.
1.-CAERWARRA VINEYARD, ON THE UPPER PATERSON,
The Soil. —An alluvial sand mixed with vegetable mould, resting on a bed of shingle,
at a depth varying from twenty to three and four feet. It contains a large amount of
potash. It consists of irregular slopes, facing every aspect. The slopes towards the east
are the best for the vine.
The Varieties Cultivated are the Cyras and Lambrusquat for red wine; the Verdeilho,
the Relating (large and small), and the Rosanne, for white wine.
Cultivation.— -The ground has not been trenched; from its loose texture trenching is not
necessary. The vines are planted in rows, five and six feet apart one way, and four feet the
other. Iron-bark supports are generally used. The vines, for the most part, are trained
like a gooseberry bush. Some varieties are, occasionally, when very luxuriant, trained in
the bower German fashion, with a view to give them more hearing wood, without crowding
the fruit. This style of pruning, it is found, cannot be maintained every year, as it is very
exhausting to the plant, hut answers admirably when the plant, from non-bearing, and
a previously moist season, has made a large quantity of wood. Manures are never required,
as the soil is very rich.
Vintage. —At the time of the vintage, the grapes are always allowed to he fully matured ;
in favourable seasons, to he considerably past maturity, before being gathered. Before
gathering, every rotten and unripe berry is carefully taken from the bunch, by the pickers.
From the variableness of the seasons, no correct estimate can be formed of the capabilities
of the different sorts of vines as to bearing. The greatest average amount of produce for
the whole vineyard has been at the rate of 800 gallons of wine per acre; the least, 50
gallons per acre, for the entire extent of 18 acres. From the juice of the white grapes, the
stalks and skins are always separated previous to fermentation. The skin alone, of the red
grape, is allowed to ferment for the sake of the colour. The stalks, in every case, are
carefully excluded. The must from the Verdeilho variety is found the best. All the wines
are considered to he improved by having a portion of the must from that variety fermented
with them.
Fermentation. —The fermentation is carried on in open vats—about 100 gallons of must
being a sufficient quantity to ferment in one vat. hfo specific time is appointed for its con-
tinuance in the vat. It has been found, however, that the best time to draw off is about
six hours after the head has fallen. For the red grapes it does not matter their remaining
for a day or two, so long as the head is kept submerged, to prevent its contracting acidity.
Cellar Management. —With regard to cellar management, it is found necessary only to
keep the casks constantly full, and to rack twice during the first year—in July and


December —but as the cellar at Oaerwarra was destroyed by fire lately, there has not been
sufficient experience in the management of older wines. Brandy is never used, from the
feeling that, if the wine is made from a sound and mature grape, it would be madness to
destroy its flavour and wholesome qualities, by adding brandy in any proportion. If the
grapes are not sound and mature, perhaps the best use they can be put to is the
manufacture of vinegar, which, if properly attended to, would, in all probability, pay the
vine-grower as well as wine.
lI.—CAMERALLYN VINEYARD ON THE RIVER ALLYN.
I.—This Vineyard has vines planted on forest land, on blady-grass land, and on brush
soil. The average produce, as to quantity and quality, has been in favour of the blady-gras*
land. The aspect most favourable is the eastern.
ll.—Between thirty and forty varieties of vine exist in the vineyard. Many of these
varieties are in small quantities and useless for wine-making. The following varieties,
however, may be noticed;—
s.—The Oporto or Black Nuremburg, is found to be an abundant bearer, but thin of
foliage ; and the fruit, which is delicate, is liable to be injured by excessive heat
of the sun.
2,—The Damascus, a large grape—is subject to be blighted, and is uncertain as to well
ripening; but, when perfect, is of fine flavour, and may be dried into very
tolerable raisins.
3.—The Pineau is found to he a small bearer, and very apt to be injured should the
season prove wet; it is a first-rate wine grape when well ripened.
4.—The Black Spanish, or Lamhrusquat, has been almost uniformly a most prolific
bearer. It is very late in ripening, hut makes a wine of much flavour, aud re-
sembling claret.
ft.—The Black Hermitage has never failed; it is a most abundant bearer, and makes a
wine which, in all likelihood, will be always most readily saleable.
6.—The Verdheilho, generally speaking, suits the soil of this vineyard ; it makes a wins
much liked, and, in the severest season, has only partially failed.
7.—Shepherd’s Seedling is most productive, has never failed, and makes a wine of good
body, although rather wanting in flavour.
S.—Tho Gouais, generally, has produced very largely. It has, however, occasionally
failed, and is liable to be injured (almost destroyed) by a wet season.
9,—The German Reisling has proved rather an uncertain variety; the wine from it has
a peculiar flavour, but by some people is much liked. This variety (procured from
Camden Vineyard) is, I am given to understand, very much cultivated throughout
Germany.
10. —The Sweet Water, Baxter’s Sherry, and the Muscat of Alexandria, nearly always
are entirely blighted.
11.—A large grape—name unknown —from Bushby’s collection, which is planted largely
in the vineyard, produces very well. As it ripens about the same time a*
Shepherd’s Seedling, they are generally mixed together at the vintage. Wine from
this mixture has maintained a good character at the age of 10 years.
Hl.—The vines are planted in rows six feet apart, and at intervals of four and six feet;


the latter distance is preferable. They are trained to single stakes. The vineyard is worked
with the plough, harrow, and souther, as much as possible.
IV. —The grapes are gathered when fully ripe ; because, when allowed to hang too long ,
they are apt to ferment and become acid on the vine. As soon as a vatfull is procured, they
are crushed between fluted rollers, and the mass is allowed to ferment till the juice has
become separate; when it is run off into casks and allowed to ferment ad libitum. The
residue is pressed by a screw, and the juice extracted added to the rest.
Y. —The vats are supposed to contain 300 gallons, and are open. The mass is kept in
the vat from 36 to 48 hours, or even longer, according to the progress of fermentation..
Vl.—The size of the casks must depend on the quantity of the variety of the wine; hut
there is the greatest economy in large casks, as regards cellar room, and it would seem that
the wine does better in large quantities.
KB.—The season of 1853 has been most peculiar and unproductive. The late frosts
injured the vines in the low grounds; hut the greatest injury was suffered from the
cold and heavy rains, when the bloom was just bursting, which washed away the farina
before the fruit had set. The consequence has been that the same vineyard which has pro-
duced 5000 gallons, barely gave 800 this season.
*HL—DUNMOEE VINEYARD, LOWER PATERSON.
IT.—GLENVIEW VINEYARD, NEAR IRRAWANG, GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
I.—The soil is a light loam on a stiff clay. The ground partly trenched to the depth of
two feet. The aspect is south east.
ll. —The sorts chiefly cultivated are Shepherd’s lleisling, the Gouais and the Black
Hamburgh.
lII.—In the formation of sparkling wines from Glenview Vineyard, sugar is added.
They are repeatedly racked, and fined as soon as perfectly still—then bottled, when bright.
V.—IRRAWANG VINEYARD, WILLIAM RIVER
The Soil is that resulting from the decomposition of porphyry and puddingstone; has
been turned over with the spade to two and a half feet deep, the top soil being placed at the
bottom; the soil varies considerably, some parts consisting of light sandy loam, at other
places, a rich black mould, with a considerable portion of clay and gravel in its compo-
sition ; the vines grow very freely, but it is not considered fit for them without being
trenched.
* Although these two vineyards, with some others, have not been described for insertion
in this Appendix by their respective proprietors, they merit notice here for the exemplary
care and attention which have been there bestowed—both on the cultivation of the vines
and on the cellar arrangements.
Dunmoie Vineyard is on alluvial land, and has been noted for the continuance of its
productive capabilities, even during the most unfavourable seasons,
Osterly Vineyard is partly on alluvial and partly on forest ground ; and is held, by its
proprietor, in surpassing estimation, for the magnificence of its fruit and the rare qualities
of its vinous products.


The Aspect is north and north-east, with considerable inclination in some parts.
The Mode of Culture is as follows: —The plants are in rows six feet apart, and
generally four feet apart in the rows, supported by a single stake four feet out of the ground ;
sometimes pruned short, and at other times long, according to the growth of the plant; but
the wine now shown was produced by vines cut to short spurs ; the ground between the
rows is stirred up and kept clean with a plough and scarifier, and that between the plants
in the rows with the spade and hoe; all extra shoots and fruit are removed, but the pruning
is so regulated as to prevent the removal of either in a great measure from being necessary ;
the pruning commences as soon as the leaves fall, but never carried on after the Ist of
August, nor is the soil of the vineyard ever moved about that date ; the sap then begins to
circulate, and would be apt in some seasons to flow from any wound made either in the roots
or branches, and thereby weaken the future growth of the plant. This experimental vine-
yard only consists of about six acres, but nearly nine acres more have been planted on
another spot, without requiring to be trenched, and about as much more is being prepared
for planting next season, when the same mode of culture is proposed to be followed.
The kind of Grape is that which is now called the Large Riesling by some, but as
the grape (its name unknown) was first noticed particularly by the late Mr. Shephard,
Nurseryman, Sydney, as a sort well suited for this climate, it is therefore called, at Irra-
wang Vineyard, “ Shephard’s Grape.” That sagacious cultivator planted a quantity of it,
and recommended it to every one. Upwards of two thousand cuttings of this favourite
grape was consequently procured from him when this vineyard was first planted. The
grape proves to be a hardy sort (which is merely saying that it suits the climate) ; it is a
good bearer of sweet high-flavoured fruit, of rather a small size; the season before last it
yielded, however, in this vineyard, at the rate of four hundred gallons of wine per acre; and
last season the same plants produced st the rate of five hundred gallons per acre. It is
almost the only white grape planted for wine in Irrawang Vineyard ; the fruit is apt to be
damaged by the hot winds, but is less liable to be injured by rain than many other sorts.
Making the Wine requires more care and judgment on the part of the wiue-grower than
any other branch of his business. Here the ripe fruit is cut and gathered first into glazed
earthen flat dishes, the unripe and damaged berries being then pinched off and thrown
away ; the bunches are then thrown into tight tubs, and carted to the wine-house; the
stalks are then removed by stirring the fruit briskly with a forked stick; the berries are
crushed by passing them between two rollers of wood ; the fruit is now reduced to a half
liquid mass, which is immediately thrown into tubs of about 150 gallons each, and there
allowed to ferment until it is fit to be drawn off into casks. There can be no fixed period
for the continuance of this process, since it is modified by the temperature of the place, the
temperature of the juice, state of the atmosphere, chemical composition of the juice, which
differs every season, the bulk of the mass operated on, &c. The fermentation now proceeds
more slowly in the casks, the wine having been partially cooled in the drawing off; when it
ceases altogether, the bungs are put in tight, taking care to keep the casks full. The skins,
&c., left in the tubs after the drawing off of the wine, are immediately pressed, the liquid
which flows from them is preserved apart from that which has been drawn from the tubs, as
an inferior wine. The skins, &c., are now removed from the press, a little water is thrown
over them to moisten them ; they are again submitted to pressure, and what liquor is now
squeezed from them is at a convenient time afterwards introduced into the still, from which
a little brandy is procured. When the wine becomes still in the casks, the insoluble ferment
settles at the bottom ; the clear wine is then drawn off into clean casks, and this is done as
often as there is any considerable deposit formed. There are many reasons why this drawing
off should only be done in the coolest weather, observing what has been already mentioned,
to keep the casks full. This is the process of wine making followed at Irrawang.
In the year 1836, Red Wine was made at Irrawang, from the Black I’ineau Grape, a hardy


variety, though a shy bearer. Within eighteen months, however, from the time when the
cuttings were put into the ground, the grapes were perfected which produced it.
The vine cuttings were planted at Irrawang, William Kiver, in September, 1834, in
trenched land, six feet by four apart, were trained to one stake, and pruned to spurs of two
eyes. The soil is free and open, being the debris of puddingstone and porphyry. When the
fruit was ripe, it was gathered and pressed in February, 1836. The juice was fermented
along with the skins in an open vat. When the fermentation became less rapid, as indicated
by the reduction of the temperature of the decomposing mass, the liquid portion (the wine)
was run into a cask, where, after the fermentative process was finished, it was allowed to
remain until the yeast formed had subsided. The clear wine was then drawn off to prevent
the precipitated yeast from again mingling with it, and thereby re-producing fermentation.
With the same view, and in order to oxidise any remaining leaven, the wine was, in the
following spring, again drawn off, exposed freely to the air, and run into another cask, where,
for the sake of allowing the remaining yeast and oxidised leaven to subside, it remained till
the winter of 1837, when it was fined and bottled. From that period to the present time the
wine has, in its progress to maturity, gradually undergone various chemical changes. It
has, consequently deposited in the bottle a portion of its tartar and its colour, lost some of
the grape sugar, increased in alcohol, and at times giving out carbonic acid ; all the while it
continued to develope more perfume and ethereal odour, and is now more agreeable and
mellow to the taste. Altogether, it has thus become a more perfect wine, without yet exhi-
biting any symptom of its having reached perfection, or rather that ultimate point of
maturity at which, in all wines, deterioration must commence. This wine is the produce of
the pure juice of the grape, without any addition whatever.
VI—KINROSS VINEYARD, ON THE LOWER HUNTER.
At Kinross there are two plots of vineyard ground—the first three acres in extent, on
ground chosen in 1833 by the late Mr. Shepherd, of Darling Nursery, Sydney; the second,
fully thirteen acres in extent, on an extensive table land of sand, about 40 feet above the
level of the river.
I.—The soil of the first vineyard plot is a fine loamy earth and sand, about eighteen
inches deep, with a subsoil of stiff clay, having a gentle slope to the north-east. One acre
planted in 1833 was trenched 30 inches deep; two acres planted in 1842, was ploughed to a
depth of about 16 inches. The difference is striking between the vines on the trenched
and those on the untrenched land, showing decidedly the great value of trenching land
where the subsoil is a stiff clay. In the case of the second plot, planted at various times
from 1844 to 1852, trenching is unnecessary, from the porous character of the soil for a
great depth.
ll.—The varieties planted in the first plot are the Gouais, Black Hambro’, and Black
Cluster. In the second plot the sorts planted are as follows, viz.:—3 acres of Shepherd’s
Keisling, 3 acres of Black Cluster, % acre of Shiraz, ].4 acre of Lambrusquat, acre
of Medoc, 1% acre of Madeira, 1% acre of White I’ineau, V/l Hermitage, % Tinta.
111. —The cuttings were 18 inches long, placed without manure in dug holes, forming
oblong spaces of 6 feet by feet. The ground has three ploughings a year by one horse.
The hoe is used round the stems. The branches are tied to stakes four feet in length. In
the spring the superflous branches, laterals, and suckers are broken off. In the winter the
plant is cut close, only four parent branches are left, of two or three eyes each, according to
the vigour of the plant. From want of labour no manure has been applied to Kinross
Vineyard, except in a small spot which was in great need of such aid.
IV.—The vintage usually commences about the middle of February, with the Black


Cluster. The other sorts are taken in succession, according to their state. The grapes,
gathered carefully at the vines into wooden baskets, are emptied into large flat tubs on a
cart, and drawn to the crushing room above the cellar. The stalks are here separated, and
the fruit is crushed by machine rollers. The mass thus crushed descends through openings
in the floor into the fermenting yats, of about 400 gallons capacity, in the cellar.
V.—The fermentation continues from about 86 to 150 hours, according to the tempe-
rature, which may vary from about 64° to 70°. No covering is used to the vats. When the
fermentation has almost totally subsided, the liquor is racked off into casks of 130 gallons,
and the residue is pressed by a 2% inch screw press.
Vl.—The liquid of the pressings is kept separate for about six months, when it has
generally undergone two rackings, and is equal to the must of the first run, and is then
put to it. The other portion, or first run of must, is closely bunged down as soon as the fer-
mentation is over.
According to the weather and convenience, the wine is racked off into clean casks about
June, when all sediment is carefully separated. This operation is repeated three times
within the first year, twice in the second, and once in after years. Care is taken to fill up
all casks about every three or four weeks. Kinross wine has never been disposed of at less
than two years old, in most cases not under three years old. The cellars are admirably
fitted for keeping the wine in proper order, being built of masonry, and having a depth
below the surface in one range of 9 feet, and in another of six feet six inches.
The average produce of the vineyard may be stated as follows, viz.: —The Black Cluster
Grape has yielded at the rate of 100 gallons per acre ; the Reisling at the rate of 600
gallons ; the Shiraz at the rate of 600 gallons; the Hedoc and White Pineau at the rate of 500
gallons. The other varieties have not been subjected to sufficient observation.
VII—KIRKTON VINEYARD. ON THE HUNTER, NEAR PATRICK’S PLAINS.
I.—The soil is a rich, reddish sand, with a clay subsoil at considerable depth. The
aspect is south east—the ground nearly level.
ll.—ln Kirkton Vineyard are vines of many varieties. The Red and White Hermitage
are the ipost esteemed. The Red Hermitage was planted in 1840, wide enough to allow a
cutting or layer to be afterwards planted between each vine, which has since been done.
lll.—The Vineyard is cultivated and kept clean by the plough between the rows, which
are about six feet apart, and the spaces between the vines (three feet), turned up by the
spade—the ground requires no trenching. The mode of pruning is as follows: —When the
vines were four years old four main branches were left, with spurs of two eyes to each, and
long branches of the young wood, with from five to ten buds, according to their strength,
trained horizontally to stakes four feet three inches above the ground, and tied to the same
during the winter, no summer tying being required after the fourth year.
* VIII—OSTERLY VINEYARD, ON THE LOWER HUNTER.
IX—PORPHYRY VINEYARD, ON THE RIGHT BANK 0E THE LOWER WILLIAM
RIVER.
I.—When this vineyard was formed in 1838, vine cuttings of almost every variety
* Vide foot note, page 50.


procurable were planted in a'nursery corner, which were subsequently, when rooted, trans-
planted together, without distinction of sorts. The idea entertained was, that each separat
locality throughout the colony would likely prove favourable to some peculiar variety or
varieties more than to others; and that the most likely way of forming the best vineyard
would be—after the experience of two or three years—to select for further cultivation only
such sorts as should thus be found best suited to the soil and situation.
Accordingly, the sorts now chosen and cultivated most extensively, are—for White
Wine, Shepherd’s Variety; and for Red Wine, the Pineau Noir. As it has been found that
wine made from the Yerdeilho and White Hermitage, when mixed with that from Shep-
herd’s Grape, yields a resulting wine, decidedly superior to that from Shepherd’s Grapo
alone, these two varieties of the grape are cultivated, though less extensively, with a view
to that result. As, moreover, wines made from the Red Hermitage and Lambrusquat
varieties have been found to yield a similarly beneficial result in being mixed with wine
made from the Pineau Voir, these two varieties of red grapes are also cultivated with a
view to a similar result.
11. and lII.—-The soil of Porphyry Vineyard is partly alluvial and partly results from
the debris of porphyry rock. The aspect ranges from a little to the north of east round by
north to north-by-wesi, with a declivity varying from linlo to equality. Only part of the
ground has been trenched. The untrenched part is on the alluvial bank of the river. The
process of preparation for the| introduction of cuttings was as follows: —1. The land was
thoroughly stumped, so that all roots should be eradicated, beneath the reach of the deepest
ordinary ploughing. 2. It was then ploughed and harrowed, all weeds and rubbish being
collected and burned on the land. 3. There was then carted and spread over the land a
dressing of stable-yard, stock-yard, and sheep-yard manure, mixed together. 4. It was then
cross ploughed and harrowed again. 5. The ground was then laid off in rows, with Gunter’s
chain, and furrows drawn by the plough at every tenth link. 6. Stakes were then driven in
throughout these furrows, in qincunx order, at every fifth link in the furrows ; and at each
stake parallellopiped holes were dug with the spade, two feet long, one foot broad, and about
eighteen to twenty-four inches deep. 7. The cuttings were then planted in the holes thus:
The cutting, from 20 to 30 inches long, was partly laid along the bottom of the hole, and
bent gradually upwards and towards the stake, whilst an attendant continued to fill in with
the top earth, finely pulverised and mixed with a compost incorporating a small quantity of
lime; the cutting being meanwhile so managed as to emerge from the ground at about an
inch from the stake, and to have the topmost bud. level with the general surface ; the soil,
in being filled in round the cutting, was carefully fastened by pressure with the foot. This
mode of planting has been found to succeed admirably. In one part of the vineyard, instead
of furrows opened by the plough, trenches were dug with the spade, a foot broad and three
spadefulls deep, throughout the whole extent of the row. Stakes were then driven in, as
before, and the cuttings managed in like manner, the top soil being thrown round them at
the bottom, and the trench being filled in with the lower earth to the general level.
In trenching for vineyard ground at Porphyry Point, in the first instance, the ordinary
mode ot trenching for garden purposes was observed, the depth being from 30 to 36 inches
Latterly, however, the following mode has been adopted. The trehch, having been opened
to the depth of at least 30 inches, has a layer of stones, from the adjacent ridge of porphyry
rock, laid in the bottom. On this layer of stones the top earth from the commencement of
the next trench is thrown. On the top of this earth are carted junks of trees that have
been laying for years on the ground. These junks are placed in couplets or triplets along
the trench, at a distance of from two to three rods apart, and are set fire to. When suffi-
ciently kindled to maintain ignition, under the circumstances, the undersoil from the newly
opened trench is heaped over them, and they are allowed to continue smouldering while the
trench work is going on. The next trench is treated in the same way, care being taken that


the junks are disposed throughout the trenches In quincunx order. After the trenching is
finished, and the smouldering has run its course, all the half-burned stuff is dug up from
the junk holes, and scattered throughout the ground. The ground is then levelled, and the
planting is effected in the same way as is specified in the case of the furrows drawn with the
plough, in the untrenched portion of the vineyard.
The latter mode of preparing vineyard ground is, no doubt, expensive; yet its advan-
tages are such as to render its adoption advisable, with all its expensiveness. The stones in
the bottom of the trenches, besides serving the purposes of drainage to the ground, become
a lasting source of manure to the vines, whose roots will be found, in course of time, to
permeate the whole substratum. The clay of the subsoil by being raised to a high tempera-
ture, is rendered capable of uniting with the alkaline ingredients of the ground ; whilst the
more excessively heated portions, in being spread throughout the soil, keep it open to the
vivifying influences of the atmosphere. In the effect produced, therefore, the extra expense
of such preparation of the soil may be viewed as a mere bagatelle.
IV., V., Vl.—The mode of management employed in the production of the white wine
was as follows: —The bunches of grapes, as cut in the vineyard, within a furlong of the
cellar, were then freed from unripe and damaged berries, and conveyed in tubs to the cellar,
where they were crushed in a semi-circular swivel machine, so constructed (wholly of wood)
as to separate readily—by the semi-circular motion, backwards and forwards, of a beater —
the berries from the stalk, crushing them thoroughly at the same time, and allowing the
pulp, juice, and skins, to pass through wooden bars not more than an eighth of an inch
asunder, whilst the stalks are retained in the body of the machine. The machine was
worked over a large receiving tub. Beneath the bars of the machine was suspended basket-
work, so as to intercept the grosser portion of the pulp, and such portions of the husks as
might pass through the bars during the working of the machine. When full, the receiving
tub was emptied, by means of buckets, into the fermenting vat, each bucketful, during the
process, being again passed through basket-work, with the view of allowing nothing but the
pure juice of the grape to enter into fermentation. Aftei* drawing the liquor from the
fermenting vat into cask,* the fermentation was allowed to continue till the action of the
ferment became feeble. The wine was then racked off, and about six per cent, of
concentrated must added to the mass. The concentration of the must was effected by boil-
ing slowly, in a common copper, till the quantity was reduced in the ratio of 5 to 3.
Of course, when the addition was made, the temperature of the wine and the must was the
same. About six months thereafter the whole was racked again: and subsequently it was
again racked, and fined with isinglass.
With regard to the red wine, the mode of management was as follows: —The grapes, as
in the case of the white wine, were picked in the vineyard—that is, the unripe and otherwise
objectionable berries were separated from the bunch—and the bunches thus were trans-
ferred, in tubs, to the swivel machine in the cellar. The must, as delivered from the
machine, consisting of the expressed juice, pulp, and skins, was then transferred to the
fermenting vat. During the first stage of fermentation the head was kept submerged by
means of a lid fitted to the inside of the vat, and prevented, by means of catches, from
rising as the liquor expanded; the intended object of this arrangement being to heighten
the colour of the wine by promoting a more thorough fermentation of the husks. It may,
however, be remarked, that to the thorough evolution of colour during fermentation, the
submersion of the head was subsequently found not to be essential. After the liquor was
devatted, and allowed gradually to reach an extremely feeble state of fermentation, it was
racked, and left untouched till next year; when two casks, of the same size, which gave
signs of leakage, were racked over together into a cask of double the size.
This process named in French decuvage, may be termed, correspondingly, in English,
devatting.




ERRATA.
Tage 11, line 3 : For If, read “ If.
Page 11, line 8 from bottom : For ends, read means.
In Page 21, the paragraph commencing In the same Report, too, Sgc, \
Ip Page 24, the paragraph commencing At the November Meeting, Sgc, >
In Page 25, the paragraph commencing A vote of thanks, Sgc. )
These paragraphs are to be omitted. They are awkward repetitions of matters previously mentioned,
which had been introduced in consequence of the disjointed mode of communication between the Printer, in
Sydney, and the Corrector of the Proofs, in the “ Bush.” Opportunity was not afforded of revising the "Work
as a whole before the separate sheets were printed off; aid, therefore, the awkwardness thus pointed out was
past remedy when noticed.
Page 23, line 6 from bottom ; For cxistance, read existence.
Page 35, line 7 from bottom : For bitterness—where , read bitterness. Where.
Page 40, line 8 of first Foot Note : For so-called, read so called.
Page 41, last line in Table, under head “ Specific Gravity For *lB9O, read *9890
Page 47, line 40 from bottom : For aboxit that date, read about after that date.
Page 54, line 2: For scparat, read separate.


