

PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
MACARTHUR
HISTORICAL SKETCH
ON OCCASION OF
70th Anniversary Of Church Baling


PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
MACARTHUR
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA
Historical Sketch
on Occasion of the
Church’s Seventieth Anniversary
1875-1945
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF ANNIVERSARY COMMITTEE
1945


MACARTHUR CHURCH, 1875—1945


Historical Sketch Of Church At Macarthur
ForeWord
Within the covers of this slim volume are recorded some
of the milestones in the history of Presbyterianism in
Macarthur, and here are mentioned a few of the achievements
in developmental work by the pioneers and those who walked
in their footsteps.
The records are inadequate for the purpose, some indeed
being- unavailable, but something will have been achieved
if this brief history establishes once more the truth that the
Macarthur Presbyterian Church is rich in its traditions, in
the faith and good works of countless Christian men and
women, and that in them is a source of inspiration to
Presbyterians of this day and generation.
Numerous interesting details have necessarily been
omitted from this historical sketch, but the outline of the
church’s activities from its inauguration has been provided.
Although the subject is that of the history of the present
church building, no apology is made for the early references
to the men and the time preceding 1875. It was in the 30
years period before that year that the solid, enduring
foundations of Presbyterianism were well and truly laid,
and to the sturdy pioneers goes the honour of the event
which now we commemorate.
R. A. S. McDONALD.
September, 1945.


Presbyterian Church, Macarthur
The Earliest Pioneers of Presbyterianism.
The story of the Macarthur Presbyterian Church is that
of the men —and the women —whose desire for the teachings
of the Christian Church in their midst was such that there
issued from them in the earliest days of this district a strong
appeal for a teacher of the gospel story. When Macarthur
was Eumeralla the colony was very young, but the spirit
and the religion of their fathers actuated the sturdy pioneers
in their call for that which was missing in their lives, and
the call that went forth was not to be denied.
Belfast and Portland, the twin coastal settlements of the
Victorian west, were in the early forties of the nineteenth
century friendly rivals for the services of a minister of the
Presbyterian Church. The appeal in 1841 to the Church in
Scotland was immediately answered, the Port Phillip district
(as Victoria was then known) being given the services of
three men, one of whom was the Rev. Alexander Laurie.
To Laurie went the distinction of being the first of the great
band of Presbyterian ministers whose work in Western
Victoria has over a full century become a byword. A great
scholar, a fine preacher and in every way a suitable man to
be to the pioneers a teacher and expounder of the Word of
God. Alexander Laurie worked in an immense parish; it ex-
tended from Portland over the whole of the present Hamilton
Presbytery and took in a great proportion of the Mortlake
Presbytery. This pioneer man of God spared himself not at
all, history recording that in one year he travelled something
like 3500 miles, which goes far to substantiate the claim
that he had “some ability to ride a horse.”


Laurie’s work at and from Portland, later from Belfast,
and still later from his original Portland headquarters, can
never be forgotten. His memorials are those countless
houses of worship erected since his time in which sons and
daughters of the pioneers worship with their families in
conditions far removed from those prevailing a century ago.
There is no record extant by which, it can be claimed
that Alexander Laurie included Eumeralla in his Itinerary,
but it seems certain that he did so, and that his immediate
successors did likewise at infrequent intervals. Laurie’s
retirement came in 1848.
Towards the end of 1848, the Rev. Thomas Richardson
arrived at Port Phillip from Tasmania and was soon after-
wards sent to reopen the Portland Church. His resignation
in less than three years was accompanied by the explanation
that there was a lack of confidence in him and of that en-
couragement in his labours which he reasonably expected.
The Rev. Andrew Ross was inducted three months after
the departure of his predecessor and remained to give fine
service for a term of five years, when he found it necessary
to relinquish his labours by reason of ophthalmia.
He was followed by the Rev. William Ridley, whose brief
stay was marked by praiseworthy attention to his manifold
duties. It is recorded that within 17 months the pastor
officiated at 121 baptisms.
On Ridley's departure there was a lengthy period during
which there was no religious ministry.
Portland Presbytery Formed.
Just as Portland had been a leader in permanent settle-
ment so was it regarded as being to the fore in approbation
of church union, as the congregation addressed to the three
Presbyterian groups in Melbourne —Established, United and
Free —an appeal for a minister from any one of them. This
was in 1858, with the approaching union still a year ahead.
However, it was from none of these but from the Presbyterian
Church of Ireland that the Rev. Samuel Kelso came —in
January, 1859. A tower of great strength to the church, he
entered the union with his church, from whence he was called
to occupy the Moderaforial chair. He accepted, in 1870, a


call to the Stawell church. It was in the first year of Kelso’s
ministry in this district that the Presbytery of Portland was
formed, the three charges being Hamilton, Portland and
Casterton.
It was at this point that there began the development of
the church in the Hamilton district. Hamilton had for 15
years been a preaching outpost of Portland, but action was
taken from time to time to advance the interests of the
Presbyterian cause. It was in 1854 that the site at present
occupied by the fine church of St. Andrew’s and other
buildings was purchased. The original church, to seat 200,
was completed in 1858.
The arrival of 31 years old Angus Macdonald was yet
another milestone in the history of Presbyterianism in the
district, which included Eumeralla, whose men and women of
Scottish blood had received but occasional visits (by reason
of great distances and many preaching places) from ministers.
True, good work had been performed by Laurie and his suc-
cessors and by such men as the catechist Malcolm Mclnnes
who for 17 years from 1852 worked in an ever widening
circle from the Branxholme district, bringing to the isolated
places the Word of God and its comfort.
The Rev. Angus Macdonald, however, brought the
promise of more regular services and from the time he was
inducted on April 14, 1857, by his brother, he preached not
only at Hamilton, but once monthly at Cavendish, and oc-
casionally at Eumeralla and Branxholme. On January 2,
1861, the Portland Presbytery met and appointed Mr. Mac-
donald Moderator. He was then requested to visit the dis-
trict around Eumeralla and Branxholme and report at the
next ordinary meeting on the steps to be taken to supply
religious ordinance there.
Branxholme Church Established.
lii May of the same year there was activity in Branx-
holme and a growing demand for the establishment of a
church there. Just five months later it was announced that
one, Ewen McNaughton (whose name was later to be as-
sociated with the beginnings of the Eumeralla church) had
lodged the successful tender of £ 368/4/ for the construction
of the church at Branxholme. The stone was laid in
November, 1861, and then, in June, 1862, trustees of the
church at Branxholme announced to presbytery that their
new church was quite ready for divine service.


For some months, during which the church was supplied
by various preachers, there was some dissension between
those favouring English in preaching, and those to whom
Gaelic only was acceptable. A minister with the required
versatility to please both groups was not for a time forth-
coming but a call was eventually addressed to the Rev. James
Mcßoberts, who had arrived in Australia in 1860 from the
Presbyterian Church of Ireland. Minister of Barrabool and
Duneed for three years he then accepted the call to Branx-
holme, and was inducted into the charge of the united con-
gregations of Branxholme and Eumeralla op Thursday, July
2, 1863.
James Mcßoberts, then, was the first of the ministers
of the Macarthur (Eumeralla) Church, and his was a fine
ministry. The young Irishman, admirably fitted for his task,
was a devoted pastor and his work among the Presbyterians
of his charge was efifective and appreciated. He held services
at Branxholme. Condah, Spring Creek, Hotspur, Macarthur,
at Byaduk and (near the close of his ministry) at Louth.
Two Sabbaths out of every three were devoted to preaching
at the Branxholme end of the parish, the Macarthur district
being visited on the third.
William Black, First Secretary
Rev. James McRoberts


Wooden Church at Macarthur.
Macarthur Presbyterians, at the time of Mr. Mcßoberts’
arrival, had a wooden church (used also as a school through-
out the week) behind the site of the present stone church
building. Contractor for the church was Mr, William Black,
a devout man whose son was to follow him in works of well
doing, and whose son’s son, too, was destined to help in the
progress of the church and its people. Prior to the erection
of the church building, the occasional services had taken
place at Mrs. Robertson's store and at Ewing’s Hotel.
At that time, the only Sabbath School at Macarthur was
a united one, and was held in the Presbyterian Church,
There was no local session until, after an application to
Presbytery by Mr. Mcßoberts, Revs. Angus Macdonald and
W. Graham, with an elder, Mr. Mclnnis, were appointed.
The history of the Macarthur Presbyterian Church Board
of Management dates from 1863, when Messrs. John Taylor,
Edward Hurst, Neil McKellar, Archibald Taylor and Donald
McKellar were appointed. Others among the earliest Board
members were Messrs. John Robertson, William Black,
Hector Watson and John Taylor. First secretary was Mr,
William Black, his early successors including Messrs. Hector
Watson and D. Robertson.
Not for many years did the organ take its place in the
church service, and history reveals that in the day of the
precentor Miss Helen Robertson was the first leader of sing-
ing in the Macarthur church. Then came Mr. Peter Christie,
of Byaduk, whose magnificent service over a great many
years took him to every part of the charge—to Byaduk, Mac-
arthur and even to Branxholme.
The growth of the church at Macarthur was such that
the wooden building which had been the spiritual home of
the people was no longer adequate. It was altogether too
small for the congregation. Subsequent deliberations cul-
minated in the resolve to erect a larger church a stone
church—which would be a permanent temple, and an en-
during symbol of the faith of the people.


William Melville
Rev. Charles Thompson
Foundation Stone of New Church Laid.
The foundation stone of the present church was laid in
1874 by Mr. William Carmichael, of Harton Hills. Although
records of the time are incomplete, and the names of many
associated with the erection of the new church are not now
known, the number included Messrs. William Melville of
Weerangourt, R. J. and John Taylor of Breakfast Creek,
and David Aitken, secretary of the church at the time.
The new church was opened early in 1875 but it was
ironic that the man who had worked to develop the spiritual
wellbeing of the community and had so far succeeded that a
new edifice had become necessary, was never able to preach
in it. Not long before it was opened Mr. Mcßoberts’ never
robust health commenced to fail. He grew worse and his
application for extended leave was willingly granted by his
people, who were close by him in his time of suflfering. His
early intention of returning to the Old Country for his
health’s sake did not reach fruition and although his resigna-
tion was accepted on October 1 6, 1875, he was compelled to
remain on his sickbed at the Manse at Branxholme, where
he died on February 25, 1876.


A tablet was placed in the Macarthur Church where it
may be seen to this day, a brief tribute to a zealous, con-
scientious and faithful preacher of the gospel whose ministry
to the people in their own homes was not the least notable
feature of a fruitful term as their pastor and friend.
A unanimous call to the Rev. Charles Thomson, M.A., on
March 15, 1876, was made and a stipend of £350 a year was
promised. Mr. Thomson, who was a young minister from
the Free Church of Scotland and a recent arrival in Australia,
was at first disinclined to accept. The congregation persisted
and he reconsidered his decision. He was ordained and in-
ducted to the charge on October 24, 1876.
Mr. Thomson took up services at Louth, in addition to
Branxhohne. Macarthur, Byaduk, Condah and Spring Creek,
where he regularly conducted services. It was during his
ministry that the organ was introduced to the churches of
the charge. Branxholme and Macarthur made the change
in 1878, that at Macarthur causing some little upset to a
number of people who resented the appearance of the instru-
ment. Some, indeed, left the church. First organist and
choir conductor at Macarthur was Dr. Kieser. He was the
forerunner of many organists, of both sexes, who have since
rendered magnificent service in leading church worship.
The ministry of the young pastor was not lengthy and
following his marriage in 1879 to Miss Bagley, the daughter
of the manse at Portland, he resigned on July 28, 1880. His
death 18 years later was preceded by fruitful ministries at
Burrumbeet and Windermere.
Rev. W. C. Wallace’s Long Ministry.
There followed a period of some months during whir'
the pulpit was ably supplied by the Rev. William Campbell
Wallace, M.A., another of the line of faithful men who was
to make his mark on the district and its people ,and to live
long in their memories as one closely identified with them
and their problems. At the time the congregation addressed
a call to him, Mr. Wallace was principal of the Hamilton
Ladies’ College. Accepting, Mr. Wallace was inducted at
Branxholme on August 9, 1881. He had, at that time, been
in Australia for 19 years, having come from Scotland. His
birthplace was Kilmarnock. He came to Victoria as a tutor.


was ordained and inducted at Staffordshire Reef and Pitfield,
transferred in 1866 to Moorabool from where, having re-
signed, he took charge of the Ladies' College at Hamilton,
For a full quarter of a century, Mr. Wallace conducted
his notable ministry and was to the people all things they
desired from a spiritual adviser, comforter in time of trouble,
and friend.
The church at Byaduk was opened in 1882, about which
time the Byaduk congregation was formed into a separate
part of the charge distinct from Macarthur and became re-
sponsible for £4O a year toward the minister’s stipend. There
was a corresponding drop in the amount of Macarthur’s
responsibility. Changing conditions governed the amount
of the stipend which varied considerably. It is recorded that
in 1889 it was increased by £3O to £3OO, Branxholme, Macar-
thur and Byaduk each being responsible for an extra £lO.
The death of many notable supporters of the church caused
a subsequent falling off, and others left the district.
The passing of Mr. William Melville, of Weerangourt,
was a sad blow to the church at Macarthur as for many
years he had been a regular attendant at worship, a loyal
supporter and a generous contributor. To its minister he
was a friend indeed. The vestry and minister’s room at
Macarthur was constructed in 1881 at his expense and a
legacy of £2OO was left at his death to the Macarthur con-
gregation.
Retirement of Devoted Pastor.
Through the years, Mr. Wallace's devoted ministry con-
tinued and the work of the church in Macarthur, as in the
other centres, prospered. However, in 1899, when an elec-
tion of elders was held in Branxholme and a similar effort
was made at Macarthur failure alone was the result. It was
in this year that Mr. Wallace became Moderator of the
Victorian General Assembly.
At the age of 70 in 1905, Mr. Wallace decided that the
time had come for him to retire and this he did. The love
and esteem of his congregation were shown in many ways
and he was made to feel that he had been to them a loved
pastor and a close friend. A widely read scholar with varied
interests, he had identified himself with his people in a


truly amazing- manner and he had tried, in a practical way,
to solve the many problems with which they were faced.
Many times after his retirement did he return to his people,
to be received warmly into their homes and to preach to
them again in the pulpits in which for 25 years he had
expounded to them the Word of God. His sudden death in
West Australia on January 13, 1912, terminated a career
marked throughout by welldoing and unselfish service.
Rev. W. C. Wallace
Rev. R. J. Houston
The Rev. Robert J. Houston, M.A., was the elect of the
congregation on Mr. Wallace’s retirement, and he was in-
ducted at Branxholme on April 19, 1906. A native of Glas-
gow, Mr. Houston came to Victoria as a boy in 1882,
matriculated from Geelong College and went on to the Mel-
bourne University where, at Ormond College, he did his Arts
course (with final honours) and theology. He was at Cobram
when he received and accepted the call to the Branxholme
charge.
First Assistant Engaged.
About this time the charge had grown to such an extent
that it was beyond the powers of the minister to cover it
with any degree of satisfaction and it was decided, in 1907,


to try the experiment of an assistant for the summer months.
An Ormond College student, Mr. G. A. Stewart, was engaged
and he resided at Macarthur where his work gave the utmost
satisfaction, and gained the greatest praise.
The development of the Macarthur portion of the charge
in 1908 was responsible for many discussions by the Macar-
thur Board of Management and it was decided to ascertain
what contribution members were prepared to make towards
an assistant and, also, what they would contribute to support
a resident ordained minister. Soon afterwards, Macarthur
expressed continued willingness to utilise the services of an
assistant to Mr. Houston —at the rate of £l2O a year —and
tentatively decided to seek an exit student. The outcome of
these discussions was that a congregational meeting unani-
mously agreed “that with the view of obtaining a resident
minister, we get the services of an exit student for 12 months,
and that the Byaduk and Louth committees be asked to confer
with Macarthur on the subject.”
Presbyterian Sunday School Opened.
Mr. Stewart’s successor as assistant was Mr. E. M. Baird
by whose aid the first entirely Presbyterian Sunday School
was opened, with Miss Young as superintendent and with
Misses Munt, Black and M. Twist and Mrs. Crowther as
assistants. There followed a series of assistants whose work
was deeply appreciated by the Macarthur Presbyterians. They
included Mr. L. B. Drury and Mr. G. A. Stewart (this time as
an exit student). During Mr. Stewart’s term he received his
licence from the Presbytery. Although he had to find his
own conveyance he was provided with a horse and harness.
His salary was at this time £l5O per annum. Mr. E. A. Swan,
8.A., succeeded Mr. Stewart, then coming the Rev. R. B.
Mearns and Mr. E. H. McL. Shugg, 8.A.; the latter received
a call to Rupanyup after receiving his licence while at Macar-
thur. He, in turn, was followed by Mr, F. Lyall Hume.
It was during this period of expansion of the work at
Macarthur that the church received from Mr. and Mrs. H. M.
Sargood, of Ripponhurst, a new organ which was both an
acceptable and handsome addition to the church furnishings,
and a mellow accompaniment to the congregational singing.
It is of incidental interest to note that the organist’s re-
muneration at that period was £4 per annum, the board not
seeing its way clear to grant an increase of £2 per annum.


The church building, although a substantial Milestone
structure, was causing some concern and the placing of a
rod through the west end of the building was authorised.
The lighting of the place of worship was not satisfactory and
an endeavour was made, as the records of the time had it,
“to obtain the revolving styles in the event of Mr. Barnacle’s
lamps not being suitable.”
The Macarthur Sunday School continued to grow and
on October 13, 1911, the board received from 'the school a
request for permission to build an infant school room, as
the infant class was far too large to be continued in the
vestry. The congregation generously supported the request,
the board made available the monies remaining in the Im-
provement Fund and a further opportunity for kindly
benefaction was taken by Mr. Sargood, who offered £lOO
for five years free of interest. The fine new classroom, of
modern design, was opened in 1912. One of the contractors
was Mr. Alexander Black, grandson of Mr. William Black,
who built the first church at Macarthur.
Division of Charge Deferred.
The board looked to further means of developing- the
church at Macarthur and it was unanimously agreed that
the division of the charge be discussed. It is noteworthy that
Macarthur was prepared to guarantee £125 towards the
minister’s stipend of £250, but other portions of the charge
did not consider the time ripe for division, and nothing was
done.
The presentation of a tray and communion cups was
made to the church in March, 1913, by Mr. J. Young. A year
later, a concession to the preacher was made in the thought-
ful provision of a jug and glass for the pulpit, for the first
time.
Little was heard at that time about union of the various
churches, but it is on record that relations between the
various bodies were harmonious and pleasant. History, how-
ever, does not state whether or not a suggestion by an
organist of the day was adopted. Mr. Drew, of Knebsworth,
it was who offered to officiate at the Presbyterian Church
organ on the understanding that the Church of England
and Presbyterian choirs combined and assisted at both
services.


Towards the end of 1915 the financial position of the
church was causing some concern, despite which efforts were
set in train to provide the assistant with a complete new
turnout. Central committee gave approval to an outfit
costing £45, of which £ll each was to be provided by Mac-
arthur, Branxholme and Byaduk, £5 by Condah, and £3 each
by Wallacedale and Louth.
Offer of Manse to Church.
The removal from the district, through illness, of Mr. A.
Morton Collins (the home missionary) practically coincided
with an event which was to shape the destiny of the Macar-
thur Presbyterian Church. On April 4, 1917, Dr. Crombie,
who had but a few weeks earlier been appointed an elder
of the church, gave an account to the board of the generous
gift of Mrs. L. B. Stoddart, of Ardonachie, of “the house
called Larneuk’’ to the church for a manse on condition that
an ordained minister be obtained.
The board then and there thanked Mrs. Stoddart for her
generous gift and assured her that they would do their
utmost to avail themselves of her gift by trying to engage
an ordained minister. There was no delay in taking the
necessary steps to procure a minister and to make Macar-
thur a separate part of the Branxholme charge. The secre-
taries of the Byaduk and Louth congregations were notified
of the proposal and a meeting of representatives of the three
congregations was held in the Byaduk church on May 9,
1917, at 2.30 p.m.
In July of the same year, Messrs. J. A. Ross and J. H.
Stimson, two great stalwarts of the Macarthur church, at-
tended a meeting of Presbytery to support the petition for
a separate charge. Prior to the Presbytery meeting, how-
ever, the delegates of the various churches of the Branx-
holme charge met in the vestry and discussed the position.
Everything was satisfactorily and amicably arranged, but
the Wallacedale delegate raised a difficulty when he said
that his church had an overdraft that they could not see their
w r ay to finance for 12 months. The Macarthur delegates
solved the problem by offering a loan of £lO for 12 months
free of interest. The only barrier surmounted, the delegates
returned to the Presbytery meeting with a united request
for the separation. The applicants were given a kind and


courteous reception, and the request was given the unanimous
approval of Presbytery. The Macarthur congregation stated
it was in favour of offering a stipend of £3OO a year with
the manse free.
Meeting of Three Churches.
On August 7, 1917, a meeting- of the committees of the
churches of Byaduk, Louth and Macarthur was attended by
Messrs. C. Fraser, D. Fraser, J. Christie, sen., J. A. Christie,
W. Christie, G. Christie, A, Suttie, L. Suttie, F. Cope, W.
Black, A. Black, sen., J. A. Ross, —. Tindall, P. J. Hanson
and J. H. Stimson. Mr. Stimson was appointed first secre-
tary of the central committee which was to consist of two
delegates from the Louth Church, three each from Byaduk
and Macarthur, and the secretary. Each church, despite
the Macarthur suggestion that the three subsidies to the
stipend be paid to the minister through the Macarthur
treasurer, paid its quota direct to the minister each quarter.
Following a decision that the session invite a minister
to preach on trial it was- agreed to pay not less than £285
per annum, with the manse free from rent.
The ministry of the Rev. R. J. Houston in Macarthur
was nearing its close, and he took the opportunity given by
the congregational meeting of October 2. 1917, to remind his
people of their future responsibilities. Incidentally, he was
able to render a satisfying account of his own excellent
stewardship and to state that 12 new names had been added
to the communion roll that year, of which most had gone
direct from the Sunday School. Mr. Houston said, inter alia,
“You are entering on a new era. In your new charge you
will find much to do and it will be needful for all to help
in the work that comes to your hand.”
His words were prophetic, for in the years ahead there
was to be found much to do, many difficulties to meet and
many obstacles to surmount. But, there were also to be
experienced the joys associated with the ministrations of a
succession of worthy men whose precept and example in the
community were to bear much fruit.


Rev. G. H. Elliott Inducted at Macarthur.
On December 6, 1917, the Rev. G. H. Elliott, was inducted.
It was an occasion memorable in the annals of Presbyterianism
in Macarthur. The official account of the induction stated,
“For a great number of years the Presbyterians of Macarthur
have longed for the time when a resident ordained minister
could be stationed here, but great difficulties were in the way.
Some of these were overcome and an incentive to further
effort —in the gift of a manse by Mrs. L. B. Stoddart, of
Ardonachie —impelled the members to united action, with
the result that the churches at Macarthur, Byaduk and Louth
were formed into the new charge of Macarthur and the Rev.
G. H. Elliott, of Burnie, Tasmania, received a unanimous call
to the charge. The induction service took place in the
Macarthur Church on December 6, 1917, when a very large
gathering of friends assembled in the church, amongst them
being some of the pioneers of Presbyterianism and also a
large number of members of sister churches. The Moderator
of the Hamilton Presbytery, Rev. Mr. Alexander (Coleraine),
Revs. Mearns (Casterton), Stewart (Hamilton) and Houston
(Branxholme) took part in the induction service which was
of a very impressive character.”
At the subsequent afternoon tea opportunity was taken
to present to the Rev, R. J. Houston a wallet of notes in some
small appreciation of his services as their pastor for the
preceding years.
Mr. J. A. Ross, a tireless member of the Macarthur board,
whose earnest endeavours had for a long time been directed
to securing an ordained resident minister for Macarthur re-
ceived from the board a volume of Milton’s poems with the
inscription, “In memory of this induction service—this great
event in the history of the church—which has been brought
to a successful issue largely by the good, persistent efforts
of Mr. Ross.”
Thus there began for Macarthur Presbyterians a new
era, and with it new responsibilities—but, also, a new sense
of strength. The obvious advantages of their own pastor
were immediately enjoyed, and the spiritual life of the
church was staunchly fostered by Mr. Elliott, who applied
himself with diligence to the needs of his people.


Church Bell Installed.
The purchase of a church bell was decided upon in Feb-
ruary, 1918, it being decided that a 16 inch bell weighing 116
lbs. would be suitable. Immediately following the decision
came a cheque for £l5 from Mr. T. H. Laidlaw for its pur-
chase. In thanking Mr. Laidlaw for his timely gift the
board, in remembrance of past kindnesses by a sister church
nearby, wrote also to the Anglican Church thanking them
for the use of their bell in the past, and offering the use of
the Presbyterian bell (when erected!) when their’s was out
of repair. To Mr. A. Black, jun., was given the task of
erecting of a belltower of sawn timber near the vestry in a
corner of the church ground.
The church was, at this time, rapidly acquiring useful
items of furniture and other facilities, one such being a
velvet lined cedar collection plate.
Following several discussions concerning the trusteeship
of the manse property a congregational meeting on March
31, 1918, decided that it should be vested in the Church Cor-
poration.
There developed spirited discussion concerning the
relative merits of the “Church Praise” and the “Church
Hymnary.” This was followed by the gift of a pulpit hymn
book by Mrs. J. A. Ross, and the Board’s subsequent purchase
of 100 copies of the hymnary, including music books for the
organist and the choir, 12 large size print and 75 small.
At this stage the first steps were taken to plan a scheme
of tree planting around the church with the object of the
general beautification of the church grounds.
In mid-1918 collections were buoyant and there was a
credit balance of something like £4O in the bank. There was,
however, much to do and there was no relaxation of effort.
It was found that the church and buildings were un-
insured and the position was immediately remedied. The
church building was insured for £750 (the stone portion for
£675 and the wooden part for £75). seats £55, the organ (while
in the stone portion of the building) £2O, the furnishings
£lO and the stable for £4o—a total of £9OO.


In the meantime the Great War had ended and the
Macarthur Church resolved on doing whatever was within
its power to fulfil its duty to returning men. To that end
Mr. Stimson was appointed congregational leader “to take
interest in our returned soldiers,’’
On February 10, 1919, the envelope system of giving
was first discussed but the subject, deferred from month to
month on numerous occasions, was destined to remain on
the shelf for some years.
Extensive Repairs to Church.
Extensive repairs to the church building became
necessary about this time and involved considerable outlay,
in spite of which the church inaugurated a period of more
generous financial treatment of its faithful servants. The
nominal salary of £4 annually for the organist was raised
to £6/10/, while the caretaker received from that point £lO
instead of the modest £7/10/ which had been his yearly
salary. The minister’s stipend was increased from the be-
ginning of 1920 from £285 to £3OO, Byaduk making up £8 and
Macarthur £7 of the extra sum involved.
The Assembly budget scheme of subscribing to the seven
funds of the church was unanimously adopted by a special
congregational meeting.
A strong appeal was made in 1920 to his congregation
by Mr. Elliott who said the Lord’s work had not prospered
as it should. He asked for a spirit of progress in the
spiritual and financial affairs of the church. There was,
however, a bright side, he pointed out, in that the communi-
cants’ roll—the thermometer of the spiritual feeling of the
church—was good. An encouraging factor was the high
standard of the work of the young people, Misses Brian and
Hanson being that year first ladies in Victoria in the Allen
Bequest Examination.
The minister’s appeal did not fall on stony ground, the
church deciding soon afterwards to launch a united effort to
wipe off the overdraft (which at that time was about £7O)
and to establish an Improvement Fund. An inspiring lead
was being given by the ladies of the church who were work-
ing steadfastly and were raising about £IOO annually for
missionary causes. The minister was not content and de


manded of his people increased efforts and, above all, for
increased warmth. “Who is on the Lord's side?” was his
challenge to them.
The interior of the church was from time to time being
adorned by the valuable gifts of its people and in 1921 Mr.
Guest presented a hymn board, the numbers for which were
provided by Mr. R. Robertson,
Tradition in the church was strongly developed, many
of its members being directly linked with the pioneers of
Presbyterianism in the district, and the appointment of Mr.
Lindsay Robertson to the Board of Management was wel-
comed by the other members who greeted him as the rep-
resentative of a family which had been connected with the
church ever since its establishment in Macarthur.
The decision to instal the telephone at the manse was
taken in Lebruary, 1924, the minister being responsible only
for the calls. The church paid the rental.
Commemoration of 50th Anniversary.
In 1924 many suggestions were put forward concerning
a fitting manner of celebrating the 50th anniversary of the
present church building. A new system of lighting was
supported by some but a congregational meeting on June 18
decided that the occasion could not be better commemorated
than by the extension of the Sunday School building by 25
feet. It was resolved not to conduct a fete to raise funds,
but to rely entirely on voluntary giving. Immediate and
strong support was given the proposal, £52 being provided
or promised before the close of the meeting.
Soon afterwards, the Gloria light was installed—in Aug-
ust, 1924 —three lights being placed in the main building and
one in the vestry.
It was fitting that the work on the Sunday School
extension was completed before the close of the ministry
of Mr. Elliott, who had worked staunchly and untiringly to
develop a spirit of warmth within the church. Although he
reminded his people, as opportunity offered, that they had
not always attained to that degree of spiritual attainment
he could have desired for them, he was able near the end
of his sojourn with them to speak feelingly of the unity of


the minister with his people, and with all the organisations
of the church. He was especially delighted with the develop-
ment of the Sunday School and spoke of the building ex-
tension as one of the happiest auguries for the future.
The contractor for the Sunday School additions was
Mr. H. N. Henricksen, of Byaduk, whose work cost £l3O.
After an effective ministry of nine years, Rev. G. H.
Elliott received a call to the church at Carngham, which he
accepted. He left Macarthur amid the sincere tributes of
his congregation.
Rev. G. H. Elliott
Rev. Raymond P. Simons
The Rev. Raymond P. Simons, who came to the Macar-
thur Church from Spalding, S.A., was accorded a warm wel-
come on May 1, 1926, when the congregation showed its
regard for one of its former pastors by presenting the Rev.
R. J. Houston with an Onkaparinga travelling rug.
The perennial discussion on the envelope system again
came up for discussion but once more it was deferred.
The Macarthur church benefited earH in 1927 by two
generous monetary gifts, the first of which came in Febru-
ary from the estate of Mr. D. Robertson, of Fernbank.


Within a month there was the gift of £2OO from Mr. H. M.
Sargood—one of several benefactions to the church—to be
used as the Board thought best. The Sargood gift was
converted to Government bonds.
Both the church and Sunday school were needful of
money being spent on them. Repairs to the church at this
time cost £BS and half the proceeds of a fete, £36, was put
aside for furnishings for the Sunday School.
The annual congregational meeting of 1927 was attended
by 30, a greater number than had attended some meetings
hitherto, but it was at the time recorded “that the meeting
clashed with a picture entertainment; there was only a
moderate attendance.’’ The envelope system came up for
discussion once more at this meeting, and was adopted by
the congregation. However, it was some little time before
it was actually put into practice.
Retirement of a Pioneer.
The church was always well served by its pioneers and
it was with deep regret, therefore, that the Board of
Management heard on November 5, 1927, that Mr. Alexander
sen., intended retiring at the end of the year as
treasurer and as a member of the Board. On December 10,
Mr. Black’s resignation was received and accepted with
regret, feeling reference being made to his magnificent record
of 51 years’ service to the Macarthur Church.
At the next congregational meeting the clerk of session
(Mr. W. Christie) paid a warm tribute to Mr. Black, whom
he complimented on the completion of 10 years as central
treasurer. Mr. Black was handed a wallet of notes as a
token of esteem from all sections of the congregation.
Mr. A. R. Kennon was appointed secretary of the long
deferred envelope scheme and, soon afterwards, he was ap-
pointed treasurer of the church in succession to Mr. Black.
On May 1, 1928, Mr. Janies A. Hanson, the present sec-
retary of the church, was appointed to the Board, taking
Mr. Black’s place there. Mr. Hanson, at that time, was
central treasurer of the charge.


In mid-1929 a variation of the minister’s transport ar-
rangements was made, Mr. Simons receiving £ 75 per annum
for travelling expenses while using his own car.
For a considerable time, the financial position of the
church had caused some concern and many were the dis-
cussions on various aspects of the matter. The general
position was deplored by the Board but nothing concrete
could be put forward until the ladies, at a congregational
meeting held on April 27, 1931, volunteered to wipe ofif the
overdraft if the men would undertake to keep the books
balanced in future!
The Passing of Joseph Henry Stimson.
The passing of Mr. J. H. Stimson, secretary of the church
for many years, Sunday school superintendent for a long
period, elder, and constant stalwart of the church, was a sad
event in 1531. Joseph Henry Stimson was first elected to
the Board in 1913 and in 1515 he was elected secretary, which
position he held until his death. Many were the tributes to
his ability and his faithfulness. Of him it was feelingly said.
“He never spared himself in the service of Christ and this
church.”
There was at this time a possibility that Bessiebelle
might join the charge, but it was ultimately decided that that
congregation did not desire to make the change.
Mr. Alexander Black, jun., was appointed to the Board
on October 6, 1931, and thus maintained the continuity of
three generations of the family in the service of the church
on the Board of Management. His grandfather was the
pioneer William Black, of revered memory, who had con-
structed Macarthur’s first church and had done much to
keep the work of the congregation on a high spiritual plane,
while helping guide the practical endeavours of the congre-
gation. There followed Alexander Black, sen., in over half
a century of earnest work, and then Alexander Black, jun.,
who is still closely and actively associated with the work
of the church.
By October 1931 the envelope system had been in
operation for some time and its benefits were clearly evident.
More than half the total collections came from the envelopes.


Late in 1933, the Rev. R. P. Simons, after a ministry «>f
seven years, accepted a call by the church at Benalla. Earnest
and vigorous, the influence of Mr. Simons on the church at
Macarthur was felt long after his departure for new fields.
His successor was the Rev. H. G. Dwyer, who was called
by Macarthur from the church at Strathalbyn, S.A. He brought
to his labours in his new charge sincere and unflagging zeal.
The young people of the church claimed much of his atten-
tion and time and the youth organisations were, at that
time, strong and active.
Half a Century of Service.
There occurred on March 15, 1934, the death of Mr.
Alexander Black, sen., after a lifetime spent in the service
of his church. The memorial minute recording his passing,
stated: “Mr. Alexander Black, sen., who has been associated
with this congregation for over 50 years, passed to his rest
on March 15, 1934, after having served on the Board and as
its treasurer and secretary for many years. This congregation
wishes to recognise and record its appreciation of his work
and service, and expresses to his bereaved relatives the
sympathy of the whole church."
In the same month the congregation was informed that
one of its vounger members, Mr. Andrew Leitch, had been
approved as a suitable candidate for the Presbyterian ministry.
As far as is known. Mr. Leitch was the first member of the
Macarthur congregation to enter the church as one of its
ministers.
The whole history of the church at Macarthur abounds
with the work and quiet well doing of hosts of its faithful
servants. The task of supplying floral decorations in the
church had for many years fallen on the shoulders of a tire-
less worker in Mrs. H. Smith who, at the beginning of 1935,
asked to be relieved of the work. It was recognised that the
burden of church decoration, month after month and year
after year, was one for the congregation as a whole and not
for one volunteer, and from that stage a roster was compiled
and the work proceeded happily under the plan of equitable
distribution of responsibility. Mrs. Smith, incidentally, car-
ried on as superintendent of the Sunday School from the
time of Mr, Stimson’s death and still guides the destinies of
the school with unabated zeal.


Turning Point in Finances.
The year 1935 marked a turning point in the financial
history of the church and there was noticeable a small but
perceptible improvement. The overdraft was reduced and
collections, it was reported, were the largest for six years.
In 1936 there appeared a welcome credit balance, and this
coincided with an improvement of the general tone of the
church, an encouragement to the minister, to his faithful
workers and to the congregation generally. At an annual
meeting, the congregation was moved to * express its ap-
preciation of the united efforts being made to develop the
potentialities of the church through its ogranisations. The
work among the young people was progressive and fruitful,
and a Board member (Mr. Alexander Black) is recorded to
have stated how fortunate was the church in having Miss
Annie Fraser as leader of the young people in their clubs.
A similar tribute was paid to Mr. L. Silke, a young member
of the congregation who, after a comparatively brief period
in Macacrthur, was an active leader of the youth work of
the church and became, a short time prior to his transfer
from the township, an elder of the church.
The structural weakness of the church was once more
causing the Board some anxious moments and the engineer
of the shire was called upon to produce a scheme for
strengthening the building. This he did by proposing the
use of iron bars and reinforcement of the foundations. About
this time, Mr. J. W. Robertson’s generosity resulted in the
whole of the church interior being completely renovated.
On September 9. 1937, there was unveiled a handsome
memorial window, the congregation’s visible tribute to the
memory of the pioneers of the church. Mr. Alexander Black,
the representative of one of the oldest Presbyterian families
of the district, performed the unveiling ceremony.
The church in the latter part of 1938 was possessed of
most of the facilities for all needs—mainly by reason of the
generous gifts of furnishings and appurtenances by sup-
porters throughout the district, and a valuable addition was
made by the Rev. H. G. Dwyer a brief while before his de-
parture to assume ministerial duties in the Woodend charge.
The minister asked the Board's permission to place in the
church a communion table, in memory of his father. This


offer was feelingly accepted. The table was duly installed,
and three chairs were provided by the Hanson family. A
baptismal font was given to the church by Mrs. J. Young
in memory of her husband, whose sister, incidentally, was
one of the church’s most active supporters in the early days.
Rev. H. G. Dwyer
Rev. Frank W. Rankin
Ministry Interrupted By War
There came to the Macarthur church from Heywood in
1939 the Rev. Frank W, Rankin. His stay in Macarthur
was for a comparatively short time, and was occasionally
interrupted by the military duties consequent upon his
acceptance of the position of chaplain. His ministry, brief
though it was, was sincere and effective. A veteran of World
War 1 for two years, he served for almost five years in Aus-
tralia in the war which has just now come to an end.
The Rev. H. W. R. Norwood became the fifth minister
of the charge by a wartime arrangement under which the
Macarthur Church was placed under the jurisdiction of the
Heywood charge. A fine exponent of the modern school of
theology, Mr. Norwood's work was characterised by a par-
ticularly effective personal contact with the people.


On Thursday, April 5, 1945, the Heywood-Macarthur
Session was constituted as such and met at Macarthur. It
wa; on that date recorded that no regular session meetings
had been held at Macarthur, there being no other elder than
Mr. James A. Hanson. Arrangements for the election of
two elders were made.
The two elders—Messrs. A. G. Turnbull and R. L.
Robertson—were duly elected on May 27, 1945.
Rev. H. W. R. Norwood


Macarthur Church in 1945.
At the time of the seventieth anniversary celebrations
in connection with the present Macarthnr church, the
organisation of the church is as follows:
Minister —Rev. H. W. R. Norwood.
Services are held on each Sabbath at Macarthnr, morning
and evening alternating.
Buildings comprise the stone church, the opening of which
is now being commemorated, with the addition of the
wooden vestry and minister’s room; also the Sunday
School, a substantial wooden structure, nearby.
Session —The Elders of the church are Messrs. A. G. Turn-
bull (1945), R. L. Robertson (1945) and James A.
Hanson, clerk (1934).
Board of Management —The Board is comprised of Messrs.
H. Smith, A. V. Fox, L. Kelley, J. Muir, A. E. Paton,
T. Gough. R. Brian, D. McDougall (up to the time of
his death early this month), J. Rose (treasurer) and
James A. Hanson (secretary).
Sunday Schcc! —Mrs. H. Smith (superintendent) and Mrs.
P. A. Muller.
P.W.M.U.— Mrs. J. A. Hanson (president), Mrs. C. Kelley
(vice-president), Mrs. N. MacFarlane (hon. secretary),.
Mrs. L. Kelley (hon. treasurer).
Young People’s Organisations —These have at times attained
high standing and have given promise of encouraging
development. The wartime cause of no resident minister
has contributed to the lapse of activity in the spheres
of the Presbyterian Girls’ Fellowship, and in the Tennis
Club. Both organisations, at present, have no activities
whatever.
Communicants’ Roll— Twenty-two communicants are at
present enrolled.


Chronology
The dates hereunder recorded are those of some of the
most significant events in the long history of the church at
Macarthur.
1863—Rev. James Mcßoberts inducted into the united con-
gregations of Branxholme and Eumeralla, Thursday,
July 2. Establishment of Macarthur Board of Man-
agement.
1874 William Carmichael lays foundation stone of the
present Macarthur Church.
1875 New church opened.
Resignation of Rev. James Mcßoberts, October 6.
1876 Death of Rev. James Mcßoberts, February 25, at
Branxholme Manse,
Rev. Charles Thomson, M.A., called March 15, ordained
and inducted October 24.
1878—Organ introduced at Macarthur.
1880— Rev. Charles Thomson resigns, July 28.
1881— Rev. William Campbell Wallace, M.A., called in July
and inducted at Branxholme August 9.
Vestry and minister’s room constructed through
generosity of the late William Melville,
1899—Attempt to appoint Elders at Macarthur fails.
1905 Rev. W. C. Wallace retires.
1906 Rev. Robert J. Houston, M.A., inducted at Branx-
holme on April 19.
1907 First assistant, G. A. Stewart, appointed.
1909 —Organ presented to the church by Mr. and Mrs.
H. M. Sargood.
1912—New Sunday School opened.
1917 Mrs. Stoddart offers Manse to Church.
Rev. G. H. Elliott, of Burnie, Tasmania, inducted at
Macarthur on December 6—the first resident minister.
1918— Church bell erected.
Manse property vested in Church Corporation.
1921 —Hymn board presented to church.
1925—Commemoration of 50th year of the Church Building.


1926 Rev - Raymond P. Simons, of Spalding, S.A., inducted,
in April.
1927 Donation of £2OO to church funds by Mr. H. M. Sargood.
Envelope system of giving adopted, July 13, but de-
ferred.
Alexander Black, sen., retires from treasurership and
from Board of Management after 51 years of service.
1931—James A. Hanson appointed secretary.
1933—Rev. Raymond P. Simons accepts call to Benalla.
Rev. H. G. Dwyer, of Strathalbyn charge, inducted at
Macarthur in September.
1937 Pioneers’ Memorial Window unveiled by Alexander
Black, December 5.
1938 Communion table presented by Rev. H. G. Dwyer to
the church.
1939 Rev. H. G. Dw}er receives call to Woodend church.
Rev. F. W. Rankin, of Heywood charge, inducted at
Macarthur (December).
1940 — Rev. F. W. Rankin called for military service as
chaplain.
Rev. H. W. R. Norwood, of Heywood, becomes fifth
minister of the charge under special wartime arrange-
ment.
1945—Election of two Elders to the Macarthur congregation
(May 27).
HAMILTON “SPECTATOR” PRINT.


/r ■&;
dbAC A. S/
\y£coA, Jcu^ /
A-e Ao
y*x4*s£&*A /€L*~^<~c*_^y
° A^cy-i^u^fj sCo-c^o
Jo
& CO -
—' / AiAA , 'J-A^y-’-^Ai. /, ~<Y
C-cH_wa_, O 6-t— C?w_- '^<7
be
'AJ) x^/bj
p-


