

Historic Souvenir
BACK TO MERINO
AND HENTY CENTENARY
CELEBRATIONS
NOVEMBER 11TH TO 15TH, 1937


Historic Souuenir
OF THE
BACK TO MERINO
AND HENTY CENTENARY
CELEBRATIONS
MERINO DOWNS HOMESTEAD
NOVEMBER 11TH TO 15TH, 1937




“BACK TO MERINO”
A Centenary Song
There’s a sentiment that grips us, there’s an echo in our ears.
While our thoughts go soaring backwards o’er a century of years.
Our imagination wanders to the blurred old cattle track,
While receiving kindly handshakes from old kinsmen coming back.
Coming back to old Merino —yes, the reason is you know,
That our District was established just a hundred years ago.
When the gallant Major Mitchell with his ever watchful team.
Found this spot enriched with pastures near the Wannon’s
winding stream,
Found this land of milk and honey—there’s a tribute we must pay
To the memory of the hero who has long since passed away.
There’s a sadness overawes us, we’re with sorrow overcast,
When we resurrect his portrait from the album of the past.
It was he who told the Hentys where the richest pastures grew.
And Merino Downs was chosen as the spot they journeyed to,
Here we claim with pride and justice—with respect to other towns.
That the birthplace of the grazier was at Merino Downs.
So to those who wish to know it, we can make a statement clear.
This was where the Hentys started on their pastoral career.
While we’re scanning through the index of the book of ancient
years.
There’s a graceful tribute owing to the early pioneers,
They, who opened up the district with the bullock dray and axe.
It was they we must remember, were the men who blazed the
tracks,
They who cleared the timbered patches of the she-oak and the
gum,
Strewing roses on the pathway of the settlers yet to come.
Let us gaze with pride and honor on the land our fathers stood,
While we fan the fleeting embers from the piles of blazing wood.
Prom the wood they placed together in the clearing of the land,
Handing down to us a heritage we scarcely understand,
How they carted all their produce in the quaint old bullock dray.
Do We realize the contrast in the transport of to-day.
Hence we herald forth a tribute to the men who paved the way.
They who set the seal to comfort we’re indulging in to-day.
Let us voice a special tribute to the gallant Major, who
Found this land of milk and honey, and a home for me and you.
Let us trust our children’s children in a hundred years to come.
Will do justice to this country of the “Wattle and the Gum.”
MOPOKE.
17/5/37.




Back to Merino and Henty
Centenary Celebrations
OFFICIALS
President: Mr. C. COULSON.
Vice-Presidents:
Cr. H. D. MITCHELL, Cr. K. D. LANE, Cr. H. J. NORTHCOTT.
Secretary: Mr. J. L. MILLER.
Treasurer: Mr. E. E. COX.
Assistant Secretaries:
Mr. G. J. PENDLEBURY, Mr. P. McINNES.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Mr. C. COULSON, President
Mr. R. McPARLANE Mr. J. E. HARRIS
Cr. K. D. LANE Mr. H. LARTER
Cr. H. J. NORTHCOTT Mr. G. J. PENDLEBURY
Mr. H. R. MALLETT Mr. E. A. DEUTSCHER
Mr. E. E. COX Mr. J. L. MILLER
BOOKLET COMMITTEE
Mr. H. LARTER Cr. H. J. NORTHCOTT
Mr. H. R. MALLETT Mr. J. B. MELDRUM
Mrs. H. R. MALLETT
SPORTS COMMITTEE
Mr. C. COULSON Mr. A. BATSTONE
Mr. G. J. PENDLEBURY Mr. E. H. GOODE
Mr. D. MILLER Mr. P. McINNES
Mr. E. E. COX Mr. J. L. MILLER
Mr. F. W. BURRELL
In the publication of this Souvenir Booklet, the Executive
Committee acknowledges with thanks the editorial work of the
Booklet Committee.


Back to Merino and Henty
Centenary Celebrations
GENERAL COMMITTEE
ANDERSON. Mr. P. C.
AYLMER, Mr, M.
BATSTONE, Mr. T.
EATSTONE, Mrs. T.
BOYD, Mr. A. G.
BOYD, Miss E.
BRYCE, Mr. W. R.
CONDON, Mr. B.
COOPER, Mr. W. J.
COULSON, Mrs. C.
COX, Mr. G.
COX, Mr. A. G.
COXON, Mr. F.
DAVIS, Mr. G.
DAVIS, Mrs. G.
DEUTSCHER, Mr. E. A.
DEUTSCHER. Mrs. E. A.
DEUTSCHER, Miss M.
ELLIOTT’. Mr. A.
ENSCOE, Mr. H. M.
ENSCOE, Mrs. H. J.
ENSCOE, Mrs. H. M.
ENSCOE, Mrs. L.
GLOVER, Mr. J.
GLOVER, Mrs. J.
GLOVER. Mr. P.
GOODE, Mr. E. H.
GREENLAW, Mr. D.
GREENLAW, Mrs. D.
HARRIS, Mr. C. W.
HARRIS, Mr. J. E.
HARVEY, Mrs. J.
HENRY, Mr. H. J.
KING, Mr. R.
KOHN, Mr. C.
KOHN, Mrs. H.
LANE, Mr. R.
LANE, Mrs, K. D.
LARTER, Mrs. H.
LARTER. Mr-. H.
McFARLANE, Mr. R.
MALLETT, Mr. H. R.
MALLETT, Mrs. H. R.
MELDRUM, Mr. J, B.
MILLER, Mr. D.
NOLTE, Mr. R.
NORTHCOTT, Mrs. H. J.
O'BRIEN, Mr. J. T.
PARSONS, Mr. C. G.
ROSS, Mr. D. S.
SEYMOUR, Mr. J. L.
TAIT, Mr. B. F
WHITE, Mrs. P.
WILDE, Mr. E.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF CELEBRATIONS
Front (from left): Cr. K. D. Lane, Cr. H. D. Mitchell, Mr. C.
Coulson (President), Cr. H. J. Northcott, and Mr. L. Miller
(Secretary).
Back (from left): Messrs. J. Harris, E. Deutscher, H. R.
Mallett, R. McFarlane, H. Larter, and E. E. Cox.
SOME MEMBERS OF GENERAL COMMITTEE IN
CHARGE OF CELEBRATIONS


Jubilee Commemoration Speech
by Francis Henty
THE following is a document of great historic value. It is
the full text of the speech by Francis Henty,, which was
delivered at the Jubilee Commemoration of the original
landing and settlement at Portland. It has been copied by a
contributor ifrom the original manuscript, supplied by Miss L.
Hlndson, who, in turn, obtained them from her grandfather’s
notes of 1884.
“This is the 50th anniversary of the permanent landing of my
late brother Edward on these shores, and is the occasion of our
meeting, for on this day fifty years ago I think we may take it
that the settlement of this colony really began. I was myself
intimately acquainted with my brother’s movements, shook hands
with him on board The Thistle prior to his departure from Laun-
ceston, and found him, at Portland on the second trip of The
Thistle, when I landed on the 13th December, 1834, or within
twenty-four days of my late brother Edward’s pioneer settlement.
I think I may be pardoned if I make some reference to those
early days of difficult navigation and settlement, when we only
had small sailing vessels to voyage in or carry stock across the sea.
The Thistle, for instance, was of only sixty tons and before the
time of steamships in this part of the world.
“My brother Edward’s first passage for stock was a very severe
one of no less than five weeks, almost continuous westerly gales.
The ship was often driven back, nearly wrecked on one occasion,
and losing half the stock, but the party finally landed without
loss of human life. My voyage on the second trip was a more
favorable one, as we had only one gale against us, which drove
us back to shelter under King Island. We eventually landed 13th
December, 1834, with all stock alive and well. I have previously
said that this is the 50th anniversary of the permanent landing
of my brother Edward, but you must understand that we had
been here on more than one occasion previously, or how was it
that he was satisfied that it offered the inducements he could
find for settlement. One year before (but I forget if it was 1832
or 1833) he went on a voyage in the ship Carnarvon, searching for
land on this continent, looking into every bay or refuge for shelter
between this and Spencer’s Gulf. The Carnarvon being a whaling
ship, was the only possible chance he could get to prosecute his
intentions of finding a place for settlement. The next year, 1835,
my father, not liking to give up the area of land his was entitled
to at West Australia without a personal sight of the place, was
determined to undertake the voyage with Edward in The Thistle,
to go and see and judge for himself. He did so, and examined
the land and was so disappointed that he made up his mind to
abandon the whole thing and try our fortunes at Portland.
“There being no longer any doubt as to my brother Edward
being pioneer and founder of this colony, you will I think all
8
Back to Merino and


admit that as he was captain of the ship, I was the first lieutenant,
to carry out the work of forming the establishment of the interior
on the Wannon, both at Merino Downs and Muntham, and becom-
ing one of the pioneers of this now great Colony of Victoria.”
Settlement at Merino Downs
In 1836 as Major Mitchell viewed the magnificent pastoral
country spread to the southward from Flagstaff 11111, he was so
impressed with its possibilities that thie entry “Australia Felix”
appears in his notes. It is in this well favored spot that Merino
is situated, and its wealth and prosperity are the results of Major
Mitchell’s glowing report.
As he travelled down the Glenelg, and thence through the
dense timber of Rifle Downs, and past where Branxholme now
stands, he directed his course towards the coast, where he was
very surprised to find a settlement founded by the Hfentys at
Portland Bay. Here, this truly pioneering family had established
a whaling station and small farm. Their treatment of Major
Mitchell and his travel-wfeary band was so hospitable that the
Major informed them of the rich land to the north.
Mr. Francis Henty relates meeting with Major Mitchell,
Surveyor-General of New South Wales: —
“It was the last week of August, 1836, that Major Mitchell first
made his appearance at Portland during my brother’s absence a
few miles away, settling a shepherd in a hut with a flock of sheep.
Of cojirse, we were surprised and could think of nothing but bush-
rangers, knowing that at this time there could be no one settled
nearer to us than where Melbourne now stands. But my cook,
who was an old Sydney man, recognised him as Major Mitchell,
Surveyor-General of New South Wales. Whatever he may have
pretended to have thought we were, he certainly was very chary
of allowing me to be polite to him, for he declined to allow me to
take his horse for him or his coat. After entering the house his
first exclamation was: ‘Ah, windows, too, in the bush, I declare.’
We were as polite and hospitable to him as our means permitted,
and after dinner he became more affable and friendly, and as we
had no spare bed but a cot we gave him that to sleep in, and I
can assure you he did not require rocking to sleep that night. In
the morning we took him; across the heath to see the open sea,
the Southern Ocean. As the Sally Ann, our tender with supplies
was then due, we requested him to stay that we might replenish
his supplies, to an extent which we could not do otherwise to the
full, as we were getting short ourselves. At this time we had not
gone more than about twenty miles from home with our sheep to
Mt. Eckersley, or North Downs, as we had named it, but on Major
Mitchell’s reports of the fine country of the Wannon only twenty-
five miles further, you may be sure we were not long in proceeding
to that magnificent land.”
After gathering herds and flocks to establish the new farm, the
Hentys set out on a direct route from Portland and finally settled
9
Henty Centenary Souvenir


at Merino Downs on August 3rd, 1837. An obelisk marks the spot
where the tent was pitched on the first night of their arrival.
Edward Henty later settled at Muntham, comprising 77,000 acres;
Frank Henty at Merino Downs; whilst John Henty occupied Sand-
ford and Runnymede.
During the lifetime of Edward and Francis Henty, the station
known as “Merino Downs” was owned and controlled as one
property. After the brothers had passed away the estate was
administered as formerly by their families until the year 1908,
when the station was subdivided into the properties now known
as Talisker, Wurt Wurt Koort, and Merino Downs, the last named
being that portion of the original surrounding the old homestead.
Since 1908, much of the land has been re-subdivided and
worked as dairy farms, either on the share system or under Closer
Settlement schemes, and finally since the war of 1914-1918, some
portions have been sold to the Government, which has allotted
some as small farms to returned soldiers, who are paying for same
over a long period.
MISS LOUISA HENTY
(Daughter of Francis Henty)


Henty Family
THOMAS HENTY:
Banker and landowner in West Tarring, Sussex. Family-
Seven boys—Stephen, George, John, William, Charles, Edward,
Francis —and one daughter—Jane. Hearing of the Swan River
settlement in Western Australia, where land was given away
according to property introduced, he decided to set his sons up
there, and in March, 1829, chartered and despatched the barque
Caroline with his three sons, James, Stephen, and John,
carrying twelve laborers, six women, fifteen children, ten horses,
ten cattle, and one hundred and fifty pure Merino sheep.
Mr. T. Henty, wife and family—Edward, Frank, Charles and
Jane —sailed from Sussex in October, 1831, in the “Forth of Allo-
way.” Arrived Van Dieman’s Land in 1832 and settled upon the
Tamar. In 1833 he visited Western Australia and advised sons
to give up settlement.
STEPHEN HENTY:
Arrived in Western Australia in October, 1829. Scoured the
country and entitled to 62,000 acres. Disappointed with land he
sailed to Van Dieman’s Land in 1831. Could not secure suitable
land there, so went back to Western Australia as manager. Arrived
Portland in June, 1836. Married to Miss J. Pace in 1836 in Western
Australia. Brought his wife to Portland from Launceston on
December 19th, 1836. Hearing about Wannon country from Major
Mitchell he visited these parts, exclaiming, “This is a Paradise.”
He at ones despatched John and Prank with sheep and they
STEPHEN HENTY
arrived on Downs August 3rd, 1837. Stephen visited Mount
Gambier in 1839. Made Justice of the Peace in 1842. Set up in
Portland as banker and trader. In 1847 Director of Port Phillip
Savings Bank. In 1870 resigned seat in Parliament for Western
Province. Born West Tarring, Sussex, England, December 3rd,
1811. Died Tarrlngton (Hamilton), December 18th, 1872.
11
Henty Centenary Souvenir


EDWARD HENTY:
Born West Tarring, March 14th, 1809. Arrived Van Dieman’s
Land on Tamar in 1832. Set out exploring along coast of what
is now Victoria looking for grazing land. Visited Western
Australia and Twofold Bay (S.A.). Visited whaling establishment
at Portland Bay and explored inland. Decided to settle there
and arrived November 19th, 1834, with 13 heifers, 5 pigs, 4 working
bullocks, 2 turkeys, 6 dogs, ploughs, plants, vines and seeds.
Decerfiber 6th, land ploughed and on February 19th, 1835, home
called “Richmond Cottage” was commenced. Edward, called
“The Pioneer,” married Miss Anna Gallic. Later he had Muntham
Station near Casterton, and after his death on August 14th, 1878,
his wife held 18,970 acres.
1845 —Justice of the Peace at Casterton.
1859 —Elected for Normanby.
1861 —Released pheasants at Bolwarra.
1863 —Elected to First Road Board.
1865—'Imported thrushes and blackbirds.
1876 —Drove first train to Portland.
Extract taken from “The Clarion,” the Victorian Number.
27th April, 1901“ Francis Henty joined Edward in December.
EDWARD HENTY
1834, and in December, 1836, Stephen Henty brought his bride
to the settlement, where Richmond Henty, the second white native
in Victoria, was born in August, 1837. Then John Henty came
from Launceston with a number of sheep and cattle, so that 1837
saw the four brothers, assisted by 30 laborers, fairly started on


their work as pastoral pioneers. And that pioneering work they
did well, even in the face of its insecurity; although they had
opened the Western District they were made to pay the Govern-
ment in after years top prices for their holdings, recovering only
a remission of £1738 of the purchase money, and even paying £IOO
an acre for the town of Portland, which they themselves had built.
“By 1840 they had six sheep stations, three along the coast
and three inland on the Merino Downs, and in the same year
they shipped 1700 bales of wool worth £30,000."
MRS. STEPHEN HENTY;
Born in Stokesby, Yorkshire, England, February Bth, 1817.
Arrived with her mother at Swan River, 1836, and married at
Fremantle in April, 1836, Left and went to Mr. T. Henty’s home
in Launceston. Arrived Portland in December, 1836. Regarding
her landing she says:—“lt was Sunday night (December 16th)
when we landed by moonlight. I was carried on shore through
the surf by a sailor. On reaching the homestead I found a
comfortable dwelling of four rooms with kitchen and dairy. A
bright fire was burning and the table was spread with a large
pot loaf, butter, piles of eggs, and tea. After a night’s rest I rose
at 10 a.m., when I saw my husband engaged landing stores, etc.”
Mrs. S. Henty lived with her married daughter (Mrs. Stapylton
Bree) at Hamilton, where she died on February 3rd. 1905, aged
89.
JOHN HENTY:
Born West Tarring, England, 1812. Arrived Swan River, 1829.
Did very little exploring and led rather a quiet life. Married
Elizabeth Whitfield. Arrived Victoria September Ist, 1836. John
Henty had what is called “Sandford House,” property under
Government lease from 1840-44, when he sold his rights to Jackson
Bros., whose nephew until recently had interest in property. Later
sold to J. Somerville and now in possession of A. Matheson. Portion
of present “Sandford House” built by John Henty. One daughter
married Dr. White, of Portland. In 1841 he resided in a hut on
present site of Merino Downs.
“Sandford House" is famous locally owing to Major Mitchell
passing through at a spot 200 yards from the present house. The
ford over which he crossed the Wannon is on this property.
Died 1868.
FRANCIS HENTY:
(Written by Miss Hindson)
My grandfather, Mr. Francis Henty, married Miss Mary Ann
Lawrence, daughter of Mr. William Lawrence, of Launceston. The
idea had been for my grandmother to live in Portland, while my
grandfather went inland to Merino Downs, but when she realised
what this would mean shb said if it were good enough for her
husband to live in a sod hut on the station it was good enough
for her. So she set out by bullock dray, which was the only form
of transport in those early days, for the station. The sod hut had
a door on each side, and when it rained the water poured in at


one side and out at the other, and stepping stones had to be used
for the occupants of the hut to keep their feet dry. The house,
which is now standing, was built about 1843, and so far as we
know the celebrated oak was planted by my grandfather, soon
after he reached Merino Downs in 1837 from an acorn brought
from his old home “Pieldplace,” in Sussex. Once a year the
bullock drays took the wool to Portland, and brought back the
stores, which had to last the year. My grandfather had a general
store on the property, where his employees could obtain necessary
goods.
FRANCIS HENTY
Names of some of the old hands employed at Merino Downs:—
John Stephen Andrews, better known as Jack Foster, born
13th October, 1833; died at Merino Downs, October, 1918. A sailor
of the Royal Navy; at the bombardment of Sebastopol, 1854. For
60 years a faithful employee of the Henty family. (The foregoing
information was taken from the tombstone erected to his memory
in the Merino Cemetery.)
William Percy Rooking, also his wife, Jane Eliza; C. V.
Edwards, senr.; T. Jenkins and his son, William; Archie McPhee;
Jimmy Edmunds; S. Remfry.
MANAGERS ON THE ESTATE:
Messrs, C. Lsithridge, P. Lawrence, French, A. M. McLeod,
Horsfall, P. Crossley (Overseers); Messrs. Widdlcombe, M. Minogue,
Jas. Harvey.
SUBDIVISION MANAGERS:
MERINO DOWNS—Messrs. Soutar, Turner, N. Smith, D. C.
Smith.
TALISKERi —Messrs. A, M. McLeod, H. V. McLeod, Jas. Harvey,
P. Bridgeman, W. Baird.
WURT WURT KOORT: Messrs. Gibb, Clyne, Sheppard, W.
Hogarth, P. C. Anderson.
BOOK-KEEPERS
Mjessrs. Walter and R. B. Page.


Mrs. A. M. McLEOD
(Daughter of Francis Henty)
THE LATE Mrs. HINDSON
(Daughter of Francis Henty)
INTRODUCTION OF MERINO SHEEP
AND STOCK
About the year 1823 or 1824 a friend named Mr. John Street
was induced by my father to emigrate to Sydney, and he made him
a present of ten of his sheep, nine ewes and a ram. Some lambs
were also dropped on the voyage. Mr. Street eventually settled at
Bathurst. As a result of the disposal by that gentleman of some of
his rams at very high prices (one bringing 100 guineas and the
sire leased for a similar sum, for the season), two or more lots
were consigned by my father to Sydney for sale, each lot con-
taining 80 to 100. Soon afterwards some New South Wales settlers
proceeded to England with the view of purchasing rams, and after
searching England and the Continent without success, they
eventually selected from my father’s flock, and took them to
Sydney. Two of the purchasers were Messrs. McArthur and
Lawson.
In Handheld's “History of Sussex,” these sheep are thus
referred to;—“In the year 1796 Thos. Henty, ESq., purchased the
demesne lands in the parish of West Tarring, consisting of 281
acres. The farm is now in a high state of cultivation. The breed
of Merino sheep has been brought to a high state of perfection
by Mr. Henty, and many from, his flock have been purchased by
Mr. McArthur and sent to New South Wales. The sheep were bred
up from King George the Third’s flock.”
As already stated it is from these sheep that the stock now
on the estate are principally descended, but of late sires have been
introduced from the leading Tasmanian and Colonial studs.
The cattle are pure Durhams, preferred to Herefords, for their


earlier maturity. The herd numbers about 2000. There are 500
breeding cows, including a pure herd of pedigreed stock, of
Muntham and Calvert blood. The bulls, ten in number, are all of
the most fashionable strains of blood procurable. Amongst those
at present in use are Elushir.gton, the Second, roan, bred by the
Hen. W. McCulloch, by Grand Duke of Oxford Third, dam of
Blushing Oxford, roan Duke of Muntham, Sixth Duke of Bruns-
wick, bred by the executors of the late Hon, N. Black, of Mt.
Noorat.
The Merino Downs horses have always earned a high reputa-
tion, as in both draught and thoroughbred sections their quality
is undoubted. Many of the latter have mads names for themselves
on the turf.
GROUP OF HIGH-GRADE CATTLE ON WURT WURT
KOORT ESTATE
SUCCULENT PASTURES ON TALISKER ESTATE


REMINISCENCES BY THE LATE
JAS. MALLETT
(Taken from “The Casterton News,” April 20th, 1896.)
“Pioneers of the West”
By BLUNT
Whilst wandering along the Coleraine road, about a mile from
Merino, I came to a small bootmaker’s shop kept by Mr. Jas.
Mallett. With him I got into conversation, and soon found that
he was one of the oldest residents in the district. My ear, there-
fore, was opened to the reminiscences he had to tell, and knowing
that these—even at the cost of reiteration—are always of value
when they relate to the far off days of the Colony’s history, I
here append the story in Mr. Mallett’s own words: —
“I landed in Portland in January, 1845, having come over from
Tasmania in the ship Minerva, owned by Henty Bros.; Captain
Forthorpe in charge. Portland at that time was only a small place,
but the scenery was much nicer than it is to-day, with a beautiful
slope down to the bay covered with native trees and shrubs. After
spending a few hours in Portland, I left for Muntham by one of
the wool teams. Our first camp was the Double corner about 2
miles out from Portland. We had not camped long when a great
gathering of blacks arrived. The next day we reached the second
river, now called Heywcod, and I think at that time Mr. David
Edgar kept the hotel there. There were no made roads or bridges
then, the crossings being formed by a few spars in the bottom of
the rivers. Our next day’s stage was to the Smoky River (Hots-
pur), where there was another large gathering of blacks. They
made a careful examination of what was on the drays. The loading
consisted of tea, sugar, flour, and broad palings, and I must not
forget to mention, a piano for Mrs. Edward Henty, which I think
was the first that came to the Wannon. We used to take long
stages, the bullocks being in good condition, as there was an
abundance of grass wherever we camped. There were eight very
large bullocks in each team, and their weight would average 8 to
10 cwts. each, and the loading would be from 25 to 30 cwts. on
each dray. The first place we came to on the third day's stage
was Emu Creek (Digby), where we camped for dinner. The hotel
was kept by Mr. Richard Lewis, who I think built it. Leaving
there, we came on to The Paddy Waterholes (Merino), the only
place there being an eating house kept by Paddy Curtain. We
camped where Mr. Fulton’s flour mill now stands. What is the
creek now was at that time a chain of waterholes, with reeds
and rushes, covered with wild fowl.
“On the fourth day we arrived at Merino Downs. The road
then from the waterholes to the Downs crossed the creek between
where the cemetery now is and Mclntyre Bros.’ land; we then
followed the creek up to the station, where we stayed for dinner.
After leaving there we crossed the Wannon at the sheep wash
crossing, now known as the Boiling Down, following the river
along the Big Hut Flat, so called because there was a shepherd’s


hut there, belonging to Mr. E. Henty. I think the hut was near
where Mr. Roulston’s house now stands. Wild turkeys were there
in great numbers, with plenty of other wild fowl. We called at the
Bluff Hut, where Mr. Walsh has his residence now, and being very
hungry we greatly enjoyed the shepherd’s fare, which consisted of
damper and mutton and iron-pot tea.
“Pushing on we arrived at Muntham in the evening. I was
rather disappointed when I saw the station, as I expected to see a
much larger place, but soon found that it was the largest station
there about, and there were several out stations belonging to it,
altogether about 12, which employed three men each—two shep-
herds and a hut-keeper. I could not say for certain what wages
were paid, but I think they were from £l4 to £lB per year. The
hut-keeper had to cook for the shepherds and shift the yards,
the hurdles being put up on transoms. He also had to sleep close
to the yard in a small watch-box to protect the sheep from, wild
dogs. At the homestead there were from 40 to 50 hands employed
—three overseers, Mr. Thos. Brennan, with his assistant, Mr. W.
Sissors, over the sheep, and Mr. Demolan over the horses and
cattle; Mr. Nolan was storekeeper; and a carpenter, blacksmith,
and wheelwright (the wheelright was Mr. Pitcher, senr., of Cole-
raine), and a great many stock-riders, as there were no fences in
those days. All that was required for station use was made on the
station, such as ploughs, harrows, carts, drays, etc.
The Henty Brothers were all clever men. There were four
brothers when I first came—Edward at Muntham, Frank at Merino
Downs, John at Sandford, and Stephen at Portland. The neigh-
bouring squatters were Arthur Pillue at Hillgay, William Robertson
(better known as poor man Robertson) at Struan, Winter Bros, at
Tahara and Murndal, Mr. Robertson at Wando Vale, White Bros,
at Konongwootong, and J. and G. Coldham at Grassdale. I
remember once Mr. John Coldham coming to Muntham, to borrow
a candle mould, when it became very wet and the floods arose, so
he had to stay three or four days before he could cross the rivfer
to get home. There were no kerosene lamps in those days, and
very few lucifers. People had to carry tinder boxes, flint and steel.
“The only store was one at Muntham kept by Mr. Henty for
the convenience of the men, whose requirements consisted chiefly
of blueshirts, Tam o’ Shanters, souwesters, cabbage tree hats, mole-
skin trousers, shepherd’s coats, boots and tobacco, etc. There were
then no churches or ministers, but I remember on one occasion
the Rev. J. G. Wilson, of Portland, coming to Muntham for a few
days and holding service, and another time Bishop Perry There
was a Doctor Byass living on the Wannon, and a shoemaker named
Rogers, who had two daughters. One married Mr. Lackman and
the other Mr. Frank Egan.
T *' £ * bout stock ’ there was a grand stud of horses, the Little
John and Wanderer breed, imported by Mr. Henty’s father. The
cattle were very large, and the sheep were Merinos. The price of
stock was very low. I remember a buyer (Mr. Mooney) wanting a
draft of 100 head of fat cattle, and Mr. Henty offered him the
pick of the run at £3 per head. The highest beast in the mob
would weight 1000. They were very large cattle and 6 to 7 years


old. The buyer would only offer £2/10/-, and Mr. Henty declined
the offer. The cattle were very wild and hard to yard, being
yarded only once a year at mustering time. The stockmen with
their long whips, 10 to 15 feet long, would bring a mob in sight
of the yards and there would be other men waiting there with
fresh horses for them. There were no gates to the stockyards, but
sllprails. When the men got the cattle in the yards, a couple
would jump off their horses to put up the rails. They might get
up one or two, but before they could get up the rest they would
be rushed at, and then perhaps all the cattle would get out again,
and re-yarding them would be more trouble than the first time.
At every mustering there used to be a great number of fat calves
killed. There being no sale for fat cattle or sheep, Mr. Henty
erected a boiling down apparatus at the place known as the Boiling
Down crossing near Henty, and many a mob of fat cattle I have
helped to drive there. As pigs became a nuisance, Mr. Henty had
them mustered, and what could not be brought into the yard were
shot or killed by the dogs.
“And now for the squatters’ amusements. Mr. Prank Henty
kept a pack of hounds, and occasionally he would bring them over
to Muntham with his huntsman (Buradale), who broke in Mir. P.
Henty’s great racehorse (Merino), and then the neighbouring
squatters would meet at Muntham and they would all go wild
dog hunting. They all wore hunting costume —red coat, etc., and
great sport they would have. As there were no fences or creeks to
cross they could keep up with the hounds, as they all had the
best of horses. I knew them, on one occasion to run a dingo 14
miles before they caught it.
“There used to be great fires every summer, owing to the
carelessness of the blacks, and very often they would light fires
maliciously, which would burn for miles, the grass being so thick
and long and no roads to stop them, and only the station hands to
put them out, they having no fire-beaters, but using green boughs
for the purpose. Once when the men Were away at a fire and it
swept down by the station garden, Mrs. Henty, her sister (Miss
Galley) and I managed to keep it from, getting into the garden.
“It used to be very difficult to travel in winter, when the rivers
were up. You would have to swim your horse over them. Mr.
Henty kept a punt on the Wannon between Muntham and Merino
Downs. It was a very small one, and would only carry two men.
I remember three men once got in and the punt upset, and one of
them was drowned. A stockman named Wm. Davis, but better
known as ‘Twicer,’ was also drowned about this time in the Gum
Creek. His horse came to the station with the saddle and bridle
on, and the station hands went to search for him. They found his
dog sitting on the bank of the creek, discovered his body in the
creek, and later burled it at the station.
“Shearing time used to cause a great stir. The sheep were all
washed. The first sheepwash at Muntham was on the Gum Creek,
in what is now called ‘the cattle paddock.’ They did not start to
shear so early as they do now. It would be after Christmas before
they finished. The blacks would gather in great numbers at the
sheenwashing, helping the first day, and when they got a chance


would drown a sheep, knowing that they would get the carcase for
a feast. After the first day the darkies would work no more, but
simply say ‘Merry jig mutton.’
“And now I will tell you what I had to do when I first went to
Muntham. Being only a boy my duties were rather light. I had
to wait at table and help Mr. Henty pick the fruit. There was a
very large garden, and he made his own wine and cidler, and at
Christmas and haymiking time he always gave it to his men.
I used to look after his saddle and gig horses, and when he went
riding or driving I went with him. My first journey back to Port-
land was when I rode down with Mr. Henty. Between Digby and
Hotspur his horse fell with him and broke one of his ribs, besides
bruising him severely. It thus took us a day longer to go down, as
Mr. Henty had to ride slowly owing to his injuries. The next time
I went to Portland, Mr. and Mrs. Henty drove and I rode. They
went down to the races, afterwards going over to the Port Fairy
races. I remember the morning we set off. Mr. Henty said:
‘Jimmy, we are going to Port Fairy to-day; you get all the things
in the gig for travelling.’ There was a tomahawk, small screw
wrench, bolts, spare reins and traces, with plenty of lashing in case
of breakages. There were the three conveyances going—Messrs.
Stephen’s, Frank’s and Edward’s —and we left Portland about
9 o’clock, getting on well till we reached the first river, where we
had to stop at the mouth to find a crossing. After a time we
crossed safely, and then drove along the hummocks, which was
very heavy travelling owing to the sand. When we arrived at the
second river, we thought to cross on the beach, but there was a
heavy surf coming In, and they were all afraid to venture. Mr.
Stephen, having an old horse named Boxer, that was used to the
surf, was the first to venture across. He had almost to gallop the
horse over, and close behind was Mr. Prank, with his carriage and
two horses, who also managed to get across. Then Mr. Edward
started to cross higher up, as his horses would not face the surf.
He got half way across when his horses went into a hole, and get-
ting frightdned would not pull. I had to go in on horseback and
take the out-rigger horse away, and get Mr. Stephen’s old horse
Boxer in its place before we could get the gig out. At last all being
safely over, we camped for lunch. We stayed there for about two
hours, then made another start. There being no road, only a
cattle track, we soon lost our way, Seeing a high hill, called the
Bald Hill, I was sent on to see if X could see any tracks. On
reaching the top I met a lady riding a splendid horse and following
her were three or four dogs, while she carried a brace of horse
pistols and a big dingo’s tail on her saddle. She asked who I was
and where I came from,, and I told her the Messrs. Henty had
lost their way. She came back with me, and directed them on
their way, and told them where to cross the third river. The lady
was a Mrs. Baxter, who had been out hunting with her dogs, and
had caught the dingo. We started on again, and had not gone far
when Mr, Edward capsized his gig, Mrs. Henty and he being
thrown out. Getting righted once more, we made another start,
but when wte got to the river the crossing was so bad that we had
to get the tomahawks and cut ti-tree and spars to make a tem-
porary crossing. We continued our way till we came to a small


cattle station known as Dr. Hickey’s. As it was dark we stayed
there for the night. The next morning we Went on to Port Fairy.
That is a short account of our first trip to the Port Fairy races.
“I remember once I was sent down to Portland with two horses
and harness to bring up a ration cart. As Mr. Galley was coming
up to Muntham, he drove. We left Portland about 9 o’clock iin
the morning, driving a horse of Mr. Stephen Henty’s, and his
groom, John Cole, was sent on ahead of us with our two horses as
far as the first river, and feed them. We reached the Glue Pot
with great difficulty. Getting our own horses in, we managed to
get to Eeywood that night. We made a start the next morning
for the Smoky River, and had not gone far when we got bogged,
and had to take the out-rigger horse off. We got another start
and going on to Major’s Heath, on the old road we capsized. We
got the out-rigger horse free; while the shaft horse was lying with
his head in a great mud hole. We had to lay a spar across the
hole to keep his head up, as he was almost smothering. He had
one leg over the shaft and could not get up. Then wle put the
other horse on to the back of the cart and pulled it back, when we
got the horse up; having then to wash harness and horses, we
were delayed three hours. Making another start we drove about
four miles when we had another capsize, which threw us both out,
breaking the side and shaft, so we were compelled to leave the
conveyance. Having a saddle and bridle, Mr. Galley rode one
horse and I, the other, bareback. When we came to the Smoky,
Mr. McDonald, the hotelkeeper, sent a man with a dray and four
bullocks to bring the cart on. Leaving it there we rode on to
Merino Downs, and the fourth day brought us to Muntham.
“What I have told you happened during my first stay at
Muntham, which extended a little over three years, at the expira-
tion of which, I returned to Portland to learn my trade.”
Early Merino Memories
Possibly the boys of the early settlers would hardly bother to
hunt the humble rabbit, if such had been present then, when the
district abounded in wallabies, kangaroos, wild turkeys, native
cats, wombats and dingoes which were to be found near the
Waterholes and up the sides of the valley then clothed in fine
specimens of blackwood and honeysuckle. The kangaroos did so
much damage to the first wheat crop along the hill on our northern
boundary that J. Egan gave the blacks “tucker” so that they would
camp around the fence, where with their dogs, they provided
excellent protection. Such was the scene when Harry and Ned
Fitzgibbons, Jack Greenaway, Will Hicks, Jim Boyd, Abe Maguire,
John Leake, Bill Haling, Bill, Joe and Alice Meade went out with
their guns and dogs after kangaroos. Another favored spot to
rout out the wombats was in a patch of scrub behind where Mr.
J. Boyd lives now.
Further afield and providing even greater thrills, and many
a wild ride, were the dingoes which made great depredations on
the flocks. It seems hard to realise that up till 1895 a bonus was
still offered for dingo scalps in this district.


Settlement at Merino
Soon after the Hentys had settled, others arrived and took up
land in the district, so that before long a small village took shape
in this sheltered valley on the track to Portland. The state of
this track in winter can be judged when Mr. Mallett’s father
stated that as he was driving to Portland it was necessary to place
a sapling under his horse’s head to stop it drowning in a bog into
which it had slipped.
At this time there was no creek such as we now know, but
rather a series of reed covered swamps and waterholes, which gave
the site its title of “Paddy’s Waterholes.” Paddy Curtain con-
ducted an eating house, which was much appreciated by the
teamsters who camped over night on their trips backwards and
forwards to the coast.
Teamsters and other travellers being in need of supplies,
repairs to waggons and equipment, shops were gradually estab-
lished. One of the oldest of these stood on present site of the
Bank, and was occupied by Mr. J. Wood, who conducted a (soot
repairing and saddlery business. Mr. Ford opened the first store
opposite the Farmer’s Arms, and later another store was opened
by Mr, M. Cussen. The township site was surveyed in 1857.
FARMER’S ARMS—Built for Thomas Henry Clarke, 1856.
MERINO INN—Built for Mr. T. Mackwood in 1870.
STORE —Opened by Mr. F. Ford, and also first Post Office,
about 1854.
BOOTMAKER —Mr. J, Wood, who had his shop on present
bank site.
BLACKSMITH —Mr. J. Hill, who conducted his business near
where Mr. Cox’s shop now is.
CARRIER—Mr. J. Lillie.
BUTCHER—Mr. C. Dolman, and business of Mr. Wilson is on
original site.
DOCTOR—Dr. Manly Wyllie.
MOCAMBORO INN—Conducted by Mr. Bilston.
BAKER—Mr. Eastick.
OLD-TIME OFFICERS OF ST. GEORGE’S MASONIC LODGE


Incidents in Our Early History
In the early 60’s a most disastrous fire swept through the
district to Hamilton, originating on Captain Clarke’s land, which is
now known as Silvester’s. Captain Clarke had about 20 acres of
crop on the hill, and one afternoon, as he went up to see what
progress the reapers were making, he noticed a snake go into a
stump. Trying to burn it out, the fire got out of his control and
swept into the crop and then to the stack of hay. A strong wind
arose, and by evening flames had swept Grassdale and Mumdal,
causing immense loss of stock on properties owned by Messrs.
Hicks, Leake and Boyd.
In the late 70’s thistles were very troublesome, so Mr. J. Tait
took a contract to clear a large area. At lunch time some embers
blew away from the fire, and burnt fiercely in the dry thistles,
travelling rapidly through Merino Downs, Struan, and Tahara,
until all the country to the Wannon River was a blackened mass.
During the gold rush of tht late 50’s, Chinese were forbidden
to land in Victoria as conflicts often took place between them
and the white miners. Great excitement prevailed in the township
when news was brought that some Chinese were camped out near
Mr. Tait’s, and that a bullock waggon was accompanying them to
carry their swags. These Chinese had landed in South Australia,
and had engaged the bullock driver to carry their swags to
Ballarat for £1 a head. By morning the Chinese had departed,
but with them all the poultry and livestock of the townsfolk.
BLACKS:
Game was so plentiful on the rises near the creek that the
“Waterholes” was a favorite camping ground for the blacks, who
built their mla-mias in the reeds which flourished in the valley.
Near where Mr. Sylvester’s house stands, there was a ferny rise
which provided an ideal spot for the corroborees.
Very little trouble seems to have been experienced from the
blacks, but they could never be depended on to assist the settlers
for any length of tlmle. The Hentys reported that the blacks were
always ready to assist when dipping time came for the sheep, but
if not closely watched, would surreptitiously hold one under water
so that it would drown and thus provide a feast next day.
King Billy, or “Old Mourbag” as he called himself, was a well
known identity to the early colonists. He was very proud of the
brass plate presented him by the Hentys, who had inscribed his
title upon it. King Billy passed to his rest in the early 60’s, and
was buried at Glenorchy.
Possibly the most dangerous period was when Captain Clarke
had invited the blacks from the surrounding districts to give a
grand corroboree for a captain friend of his, who visited him whilst
his ship waited at Portland for its wool cargo. For two days all
went wtell, and then on the; final day nearly 400 blacks were
gathered. When the corroboree commenced nearly all the white
residents of the district were present to watch proceedings.
Captain Clarke had promised the participants a feast, but by 10


o’clock the blacks were in so dangerous a condition that the whites
thought it would be discreet to withdraw, especially when warned
by “Old Peter” that there would be a "big fella fight.” Tribes from
Merino and Dartmoor were always antagonistic and led the fight,
which lasted long into the night. By morning the settlers Were
very relieved to find that the blacks had dispersed.
THE MILL:
Merino was justly proud of the enterprise of Mr. Fulton who
built the mill in 1857, and wheat from the surrounding districts
was carted in bullock drays to be gristed. Such was the fame of
Fulton’s flour that it was sent to all the surrounding settlements
and even exported from Portland. Gradually as new areas to the
north were developed the demand for local flour diminished, and
the Holmes brothers secured the mill in 1896 and carried on until
after the war, when the mill was closed down. So well was the
building constructed that it is as sound as the day it was built,
and is used as a Masonic Temple. In the early 60’s flour was £5
per bag.
COAL:
Keen interest was aroused when it was known that a substance
resembling black coal had been found by Mr. Lacy whilst sinking
a well at the flour mill. Later, coal was also found by Mr. J. Tait,
and a company was formed to exploit the new field. The assistant
Government Geologist, Mr. Sterling, gave a very favorable report,
and many bores were put down, but no very thick seams were
struck. An outcrop nearly half a mile long was discovered along
Palmer's Creek, and in 1924 bores were put down to a depth of
1005 feet near the cemetery, but the thickest seam was 14 inches.
SCHOOL:
As the settlement grew it was realised that education was
necessary for the children, and as a result a slab hut was erected
to serve the purpose of the first school. Mr. Hughes was the first
teacher, and the last of his scholars, Mr. J. Boyd, is still living
in Merino, and retains vivid memories of his first school days in
the building next to the property formerly owned by Mr. Fulton
and now by Mr. Dunn.
The next school was a private one conducted by Mr. A.
Kennedy, who charged a fee of 1'- per week. Then came the
Common School, which was a brick building erected near the
present Church of England hall. As the population of the district
increased, the need was felt for a larger building and more suitable
site, so the present building was erected in 1878. Mr. Carlington
was the first teacher. For a long time the school consisted of one
long room, with a “Black Hole” under the gallery. As the outlying
districts became settled it became necessary to enlarge the school.
Since that time additional schools have been opened at Glenorchy
and Talisker, within three miles of the school, so that the enrol-
ment has decreased to about one hundred. Amongst the many
scholars of the past who have made prominent names for them-
selves will always be remembered the late Sir Leo Cussen, who


gained a scholarship and continued his education at Hamilton
before taking up a course at the University.
Much of the early control of the schools was carried on by a
Board of Advice, formed in 1873, to administer the Education Act
in the schools from Casterton to Merino, The original members
were: —Messrs. P. Ford, J, Andison, J. Lillie, W. Enscoe, J. Jackson,
and W. Meldrum, who was Correspondent. Mr. D. Miller holds
No. 7 Certificate for Regular Attendance over a period of three
years.
Former school teachers were: —Mrs. Spowart, Messrs. Hughes,
Kennedy, Carlington, Nicholson, Smithwick, Dean, Clancy, Elliott,
Chequen, Lord, McCoy, Doggett, and Barter (present head-
master) .
STATE SCHOOL, MERINO
MAIL COACHES:
The only means of communication that the early settlers had
was by means of a rough track to Portland. The journey by
bullock dray often took a week, and in the winter the track was
almost impassable. Mr. Henry Barr was the first mailman to
Inaugurate a weekly mail service between Portland and Casterton.
Later, as the surrounding district became more settled and
opened up, Messrs. Roberts and Waglan secured all the mail
contracts as far inland as Hamilton. The local contract was sublet
to Mr. Jack Cawker, who carried the mail by coach to Portland,
whence it travelled by boat to Melbourne.
Cobb and Co’s, coaching house was originally at the Parmer’s
Arms, where there were extensive stables, but later the Merino
Inn was the agency. The coaching stations on the trip were
Casterton, Merino, Hotspur, Heywood, and Portland. During
summer months three or four horses made up the team, but later
when winter made the roads very difficult the number was
increased to six.


ROAD TRAFFIC AT TIME OF
THE FOUNDING OF MERINO:
Cartage of goods and requirements in those days went even
more directly from Portland, via Hotspur and Digby, and by a
back road which skirted Merino on the west and went northwards
towards the site of Casterton, The Portland Road Board was
eventually formed, and Captain Clarke was elected as MSerino
representative. He would ride to Portland and back in the one
day on an upstanding horse called the Schooner, which had to
carry his weight of 15 stone.
A road from Portland to Digby was formerly a back road at
west of Merino, breaking off the present Digby road between Digby
and Merino. The back road above Mocamboro had so much traffic
that George Yarra Bilston, of the Parmer’s Arms, built an hotel
on the site between the quarries and Mathieson’s at Mocamboro,
and the old site may still be seen. This old identity also ran a
service to Portland on alternate days.
VIEW OVERLOOKING PORTION OF MERINO TOWNSHIP
RAILWAY:
Prom early records it appears that there were two plans for
the railway line. One was that the line should pass through
Hamilton to Melbourne, and the alternative route was through
Branxholme to Portland. The advantage claimed for the latter
was that freights would be cheaper, owing to the fact that goods
could be landed direct at Portland.
After much agitation a Railway League was formed, and
members from Portland addressed a meeting of local residents at
the Parmer’s Arms hotel, where the following delegates were
elected:—Messrs. W. Cooper, F. Henty, T. Must, and E. Atkinson.
It was decided to petition for a line from Coleraine through Merino
to Branxholme and Portland, and Messrs. P. Henty, T. Silvester,
H. Elms, P, Ford, and R. Lewis were appointed to present a petition
to the Legislative Council and Assembly.
Through their efforts the plan was adopted, and after the


route was surveyed the earth works were constructed, but delays
occurred during the winter and with the huge cutting near Sand-
ford. No trains reached Merino until the line had been completed
as far as Mocamboro, where water could be obtained for the
tenders. There was much indigation locally when the first trains
ran through to Henty and did not stop at Merino owing to a
delay in appointing a station-master. The line was actually
opened in 1882, and the first train was driven to Portland by F.
Henty.
MERINO HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY:
Records to hand of Merino Horticultural Society dates from
November, 1891, where many familiar names of by-gone garden
lovers appear, with Mr. Frank Enscoe, secretary, later secretaries
being A. Cochrane, F. J. Meldrum, W. Kinsman, Newstead, A. Fox,
F. Burrell. During the war years the Society lapsed, and in 1920
was reformed by several of the old committee members. Two old
competitors, Mrs. W. H. Blackburn and Miss McKay, have com-
peted since the inception of the Society to the present time.
CALEDONIAN SOCIETY:
This Society holds a Highland gathering and sports meeting
annually on Boxing Day. The present one as a revival was formed
in 1926, with L. Gordon as President, and R. Lane, Secretary.
Three revival members—B, F. Tait, J. B. Meldrum, and N. Pickett
—are on the present Council of twelve. The Pipe Band is
affiliated with Society.
SOLDIERS’ AVENUE:
Planted in Annesely Street, 1932. under the auspices of the
School Committee, assisted by the Returned Soldiers. President—
J. C. Doggett; Hon. Secretary—J. Glover.
TREEPLANTERS’ ASSOCIATION;
Was formed in August, 1932; Mr. W. J. Boyd, President; P. W.
Dale, Hon. Secretary: with a large Committee. High Street was
planted with Oaks and Tristiana interspersed, with Mountain
Ash and Euc Ficifolia in sections.
During 1933 Henty Street was planted with an avenue of
Poplars, which were donated by Mrs. H. B. Shaw, who the fol-
lowing year generously supplied Scarlet Oaks for Bourke Street.
In 1935 Mr. and Mrs. O. A, Kelly donated the avenue of
Golden Poplars planted in Hare Street, thus completing the
planting of the main part of the township.
Present Officers:— H. R. Mallett, President; P. W. Dale, Hon.
Secretary.
BANK:
Twenty years before the close of the last century, the Bank of
Victoria decided to provide banking facilities for Merino and
district, and erected the very substantial premises well known in
the locality, but did not utilise such for a very long period. In the
early nineties, a representative of the Colonial Bank visited Merino


once each week from the Casterton branch, and about 1895 opened
a full time branch in the premises previously occupied by the Bank
of Victoria. This continued until 1918, when the National and
Colonial Banks amalgamated, the combined institution being
known as the National Bank of Australasia Limited. It is this
Bank which still provides banking facilities for Merino and district.
The first bank manager in Merino was appropriately named
Adamson; others who have occupied that position since are
Messrs. Prime Jasper McCormick, Basil Archer, R. J. Horwood,
S, M. Jamieson, Jas. R. Walter, R. H. Smith, and now E. E. Cox.
THE NATIONAL BANK
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE:
During the late 60’s the need was felt for a public hall in the
district, so a number of citizens formed themselves into a com-
mittee to secure funds to erect a Mechanics’ Institute. J. Tait
took a prominent lead in the matter, and it was mainly through
his efforts that a Crown grant was secured for the present site.
The original was constructed by Northcott and Diwell in 1870,
but apparently proved too small for the needs of the community, as
several additions were made between 1878-1888. In 1930 it was
decided to erect the present commodious hall, the architect
being D. Gray and the builder, H. James. As over £2500 was
required to finance the erection, the following public spirited
townspeople agreed to act as guarantors:—Miss C. McPhee, Messrs.
G. Allen, H. Enscoe, D, Greenlaw, G. Holmes, K. McWhae, B. Tait,
H. H. Rhodes, W. Templeton, and P. Wilson.
A modern electric lighting plant was installed, and the hall
and its appointments reflect great credit on all concerned.
The billiard room was built to accommodate a table presented
to the Returned Soldiers by Miss L. Henty in 1921.


MERINO PASTORAL AND
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY:
As the annual show of this Society demonstrates with its
varied collection of exhibits of stock, including choice dairy herds,
horse, sheep and pig sections, together with a large exhibit of
poultry from district breeders, not forgetting a dog exhibit of
various species, this Society puts on as good a show as may be
seen in the Western district. An additional attraction is the
display of farm, dairy, vegetables and horticultural exhibits, and
of special interest for the ladies is the cookery and fancy work
display and competition.
In the early days of settlement about 1870 there was then a
Society known as the Merino and Sandford P. and A. Society
holding shows alternately in these townships on a somewhat small
scale; but cream from a cow was not the main essential that it
is to-day. This Society encouraged cultivation of the soil also,
through ploughing matches. After a lapse of many decades the
local interest was revived again in 1920, mainly through the
energy of John Hughes, a police constable and lover of horse
events, which formed a principal feature. A committee which
consisted of but few of present members was formed, and the show
is new an annual event. Mr. C. Coulson, President of revived
Society Shew of 1922, is still member of committee; Mr. A. P.
Blackburn was then Secretary.
TALISKER ESTATE HOMESTEAD


Township Pioneers
During the celebrations there will be present many who have
forgotten the location of former, residents and institutions known
to them, therefore the following should be of interest. High Street
the principal shopping centre, is now part of the system, of roads
under tine control of the Country Roads Board. It had been
surveyed on the layout of the township site to a width of three
chains, the prospects evidently being that Merino would develop
into a large city. In the earlier days of Council control, the road
was a macadamised one made from white stone quarried from
neax the Tahara homestead, carted in boulders and broken on
the roadsides within the town boundary. With its clean white
surface it gave a good appearance. On either side of the street
pine trees were planted and grew to a great height.
About the time the Country Roads Board took over this street
a movement was on foot to try and induce that body to allow the
residents to have gardens planted in the middle of the street to
beautify it, thus reducing thie effect of its considerable width.
Roads were proposed on both sides of the street in front of the
business places, but efforts to dbtain the residents’ wishes werte
unavailing.
Let us start our inspection of the township in general from the
Court House, which stands at the corner of High Street and Bourke
Street. Until 1870 it housed the justices in the nearby township of
Digby, but was then removed to its present site. Next to the
Court House on the north side is the Post Office, a comparatively
new building, built by Mr. H. Kohn, senr., in 1889. The original
Post Office business was conducted by Mr. Frederick Ford in
connection with his gfeneral store, transferred then to a building
on the opposite side of the street. Both these old buildings were
only demolished in 1936, to be replaced by modern shops now on
the sites.
The Mechanics’ Institute adjoining the Post Office has had
additions at various times. It was built mainly through the efforts
WELL-KNOWN BUSINESS PLACES
Batstone’s Bakery (left) and Coulson Bros.’ General Store


of James Tait, who was instrumental in securing the Government
grant. J. Lillie was librarian and caretaker, and his successor was
T. D. Clarke.
Frederick Ford erected the first store about the year 1854. It
was later carried on by his son Benjamin, then by Coulson Bros.
The dwelling house adjoining was demolished at the same time
as the old store, and Batstone’s and Coulson’s premises now
occupy the old site. Next to this on the north side a boot shop was
erected by Coleman, and was later occupied by J. F. Clarke. This
business is carried cn by H. Miallett, a younger son of James Mel-
lett, bootmaker, who arrived with Henty in 1845. Further along
was a dwelling flat, one portion occupied by John Bollard after
Simpson, a saddler, left it.
Further on was a tinsmith’s shop, occupied by A. Murray,
about 1904, and later by W. Walpole, who moved to Portland. Both
uded the brick house adjoining as a residence. E. Deutscher,
apprentice to the latter, now has a business in Maud Street.
The brick building further north was used as a chemist’s shop
by Craven. The vacant block near the centre of the main street
is not built on owing to a difficulty in drainage. There were two
shops towards the north-east corner in the earlier days, one being
used by Israel Mating as a farrier’s shop and the other by W. D.
Meldrum as a wheelwright’s shop.
MELDRUM’S WELE-EQUIPPED GARAGE
Maud Street on its north side had its two large shady trees
planted to commemorate the Coronation of King Edward VII. The
shop on the opposite corner was once the site of Moore’s general
store; J. Tait, auctioneer and estate agent. He was succeeded by
W. Blackburn as bootmaker, general store and news agency. The
latter form of business is still carried on in the shop built after
the original was burnt in 1932. The site of the blacksmith’s shop
has been occupied from very early days by followers of that trade.
The shop was probably built by O’Brien, son-in-law and successor
of Hill, the first blacksmith, who performed his duties on the west


side of the street. It has been occupied in succession by J. May,
Jelbart Bros., Talt Bros. Illingworth, Guy, Carter, Ross, and its
present occupant, J. Glover.
The Commercial Hotel was not designed with such a large
frontage as at present. It consisted originally of the northern
half built by George Northcott. J. Cawker, a brother of the other
famous coach driver, afterwards had a lease and used to drive the
coach to Portland. Cobb and Co. were also connected with the
business done here. G. Northcott, and then his son H. Northcott,
carried on the business until C. Bryce, father of present owner, took
possession in 1895, and his son continues. A chemist’s shop owned
by Bryce is adjoining. A. McKay, a saddler, occupied the next
shop, and later a bakery business was carried on in the shop by
Chapman, then by O’Grady Bros, and D. Chittick. Now T. H,
Laidlaw and Co. Ltd., auctioneers, and P. O’Brien, tinsmith,
occupy the premises. R. Mackwood’s former general store and
Eastick’s bakery of the 70’s (later occupied by D, Kohn, then by
J. McDonald, J. P. Clarke, and finally E. Deutscher) was demolished
in 1935 and replaced by Wishart’s store. The present site of Dale’s
garage and the hotel yard was used for circus, buckjumping and
merry-go-round displays. It was here that “Professor” W. Rooking
and his vet. Jockey Maling ran their wild and woolly west show,
with piebald Jacky to make it picturesque, about the year 1900,.
The long brick building with the gable ends and old verandah was
built by J. Hore for Thomas Mackwood in 1870, and occupied as
an hotel by him for many years. It was afterwards occupied by
Duncan Mclntosh in 1893, then by his brother Jack, but has been
closed for business for a long period.
WELL-KNOWN HOSTEL—BRYCE’S COMMERCIAL
HOTEL
Across the street a butchering business was carried on by Pat
McCarthy, who later moved near Dwyer’s cottage, now site of
Goode’s business. Further along the main street a dressmaking


business was conducted by Miss M. McKay, the place formerly
being occupied by Gardiner, a bootmaker; adjoining was A. Malr’s
house. At the foot of the hill nearly opposite the railway crossing,
but on the main street frontage, Mr. Christopher Coulson had a
bootmaker’s and bakery shop, whilst T. Miller lived near-by. Pat-
terson’s butchery business was almost opposite.
The block at the north end of the township on the west side
was afterwards occupied by an early resident, W. Heaney, who,
with his wife, was engaged in a butcher’s and bakery business,
the former established in 1875 by J. Patterson. Crossing the street
leading to the old-time swimming hole, the whole section was
owned by M. Oussen. The laburnam trees he planted are still
standing, and you will find that there has been little building
since the early days. Before the establishment of the butter
factory, now the principal source of the township’s business, a
creamery under control of the Merino Co-Operative Butter Factory
Co. was receiving supplies of milk on a site here almost opposite
the hotel. Kohn’s timber yard and workshop were next, but now
P. Learmonth and Co. Ltd. auctioneers’ business absorbs these
sites and also the block adjoining the bank. D. Brock formerly
conducted the business.
MARKET DAY
Section of Crowd at Yards of P. Learmonth & Co. Ltd.
The site of the Bank was formerly that of a shoemaker’s
shop, built and used for shoemakir.g and saddlery by Jasper Wood
about 1850. The National Bank was built for directors of the Bank
of Victoria, and was taken over by present owners in 1885,
Opposite the Bank orchard on the other side of Maud Street
was the Merino flour mill, built in 1857 by James Pulton, senr,, and
later run by his son James. The contracting builder was Watkins.
It was the scene of activity in the early days, running night and
day shifts, grinding local wheat and that from Strathkellar and
Horsham districts. Owing to the climate changing, local wheat


proved unsuitable for flour. Holmes Bros, bought the business
about 1896, afterwards selling it to the Masonic Lodge, and it was
converted into their temple. The stock water trough in front of
the old mill has been used for that purpose for over twenty years,
the water being pumped by the windmill through pipes leading
from the well lower down and also from thfe wells that supplied
the mills with water. The salty taste of the water in the creek
may have been one reason why the water trough was erected, as,
by going under the railway bridge and down the creek about a
hundred yards the site may be seen where the bore was put down
to test for coal. The salt water mentioned still comes from, this
bore, and probably has medicinal qualities. Whilst in this vicinity
you may wonder where the famous old swimming hole is, as there
is little left to Indicate that at one time a water fall six or seven
feet deep with a water hole below it ever existed. Pish were to-
be caught in holes in the bank, and the pool was source of enjoy
ment during summer months.
The old store across the street on the south side of the
National Bank was also one of the early places of business, being
built and occupied for many years by M. Cussen. He had several
sons, one of whom, Leo, obtained one of the highest positions in
the State, that of Chief Justide Cussen. Later traders were
Mclntyre, Silberfeld, and Heazlewood. Further down the main
street was a general store built by John Lillie and later it changed
hands many times; some of its occupants were:—B. Ford, Silber-
feld, Grant and McEwan, Rothery, and now its present owner, O.
A. Kelly.
On the block adjoining Lillie's store a blacksmith’s business
was carried on by Hill, who was the first blacksmith in the town-
ship. John O’Brien, a scn-in-law of Hill’s, succeeded him in the
business, but later established a business next to Northcott’s Com-
mercial Hotel. James Gardiner also ran a blacksmith’s shop in
close proximity.
A nsw building to serve solely as Post OfSce was on the next
BUSINESS PREMISES OF Mr. E. H. GOODE (left) and
Mr. G. COX


block. It was a four-roomed building with large windows and a
verandah which was partly closed. The postal lobby was at the
left end of the verandah. Formerly the house was occupied by
Ur. Inverarity, and afterwards was used as a police residence, the
gaol and brick stables being at the back. The early postmistresses
were Miss Davis, Mrs. Chadwick in 1886, and Mrs. C'orteen, who
took over duties in the next office next to the Mechanics’ Hall.
Mr. G. Cox’s store was built on one corner of the original post office
block, and when the old office was demolished, that up-to-date
shop, now occupied by E. Goode, hairdresser and fruiterer, was
erected in 1936.
A butcher’s shop in the centre of the township was built in the
earliest days by Dolman, and was afterwards carried on by William
Enscoe for nearly half a century. Then J. W. Murrell, Livingstone,
and present owners, P. Wilson and Sons, occupied the shop. The
•small cottage now used as a milliner’s shop was the residence of
the builder of the present shop and attached residence.
Adjoining the butcher’s shop residence is the one-time sad-
dler’s shop, first used for that purpose by Francis, and later by G.
Northcott. In 1890 R. Mclnroy secured this business, and B. Tait,
the former’s apprentice, continued on with the new proprietor. In
1900 R. Mclnroy built a more up-to-date brick shop with dwelling
attached. B. P. Tait now carries on the same business in this shop.
'The fruit shop was built at the same time and has been conducted
ever since by a daughter of R. Mclnroy. Francis’ shop has been
used as a barber’s shop by Dowling, Parker and R. Jones, and later
as a store by A. Blackburn.
The Railway Hotel has not always had its present name; it
was generally known as the Parmer’s Arms. The original slab
edifice was built by Captain Clarke in the year 1857. It has seen
many proprietors, including T. Ross, George Yarra Bilston, Mrs.
Glarke (second wife of Captain Clarke), and many other occupants,
and present owner, R. McFarlane. After many alterations and
additions the building presents a modern appearance. The build-
ings used as tea rooms by McDonald’s was originally a hardware
RAILWAY HOTEL


shop owned by the partnership firm of Kohn and Campbell, con-
tractors and joiners, and built in 1873. The workshop stood on
the other side of the railway. When cut off by the railway in 1882
the owners shifted elsewhere, and the shop facing High Street was
used by W. D. Meldrum as a coach painting shop. Meldrum’s
business established in Merino in 1869 has had many alterations
and additions, and now the older and also the more modern
garage businesses are being carried on as Msldrum’s garage, by his
son and grandson.
Handbury’s butter factory buildings at the south end of High
Street were built on the site of he old shingle roofed building called
the “Pig and Whistle,’’ built by Jas. Tait and used as a store. It
was later used as an office by John Lillie, a local carrier; Guy also
had a blacksmith’s shop cn the west frontage; also E. Loft, M.
Bird, C. Brebner had a blacksmith’s shop which Handbury later
turned into stables. The site of the railway residences and the
open space at the back of same used to be the local cricket ground,
and near the two ancient gum trees that grew behind the railway
station the local sports meetings of the earlier days were held.
J. E. Handbury and Sons started their butter factorv enterprise in
1916.
MERINO BUTTER FACTORY
Owned by Messrs. J. E. Handbury and Son Pty. Ltd.
HENTY STATE SCHOOL
WURT W URT KOORT
HOMESTEAD


Recollections of Settlers Outside
the Town Boundary
There are so many vantage points to view the beautiful
scenery surrounding Merino that one has to think where to start.
We older residents who have visited the other States and also
other parts of the world know that our locality is as delightful as
any other we have seen. Is it any wonder that Major Mitchell
called this district "Australia Felix" and that Henty settled at
Merino Downs?
Those who have half a day to wander round might follow the
main road north and branch off to the right, where they will find
a hill overlooking a bridge on the rpad that leads to what was
formerly Struan, owned by Mr. Robinson, and later by Cameron
and Huxley. After the war the estate was bought by the Govern-
ment for soldier settlement. It is now called Paschendale after
the town in Belgium, where the Australians won such fame in the
World War. A visit to the soldier settlement will be of interest,
and across the Wannon another station, Hilgay, may be seen.
Generally the settlers have prospered, and their farms are set in
picturesque surroundings. From our first observation point we can
almost see Merino Downs homestead, which nestles away in the
long valley to the north. Formerly the land to the west, north and
north-eastern horizon belonged to Francis Henty, and extended
as far to the eastward as the present butter factory, which was
built on land acquired from this estate.
The green trees on the distant hilltop surround a large brick
homestead fcrmely occupied by Alexander McLeod, of Talisker,
who married Francis Henty’s daughter, Caroline, and is survived
by two daughters. Between Talisker and our vantage point lies
Laggan, the property of D. Mclntyre, who was one of the earliest
settlers and had five sens—Neil, Archie, Angus, and Dougald, who
were well known breeders of sheep and cattle and were highly
respected in the district. The grave of another son, John, may be
seen in an early private cemetery on the top of the hilltop just
above the bridge, and here also the daughter, Mrs. Brady, is
interred.
The present cemetery is located north from the township, and
graves of historic Importance may be seen. The first to be interred
there in 1862 was Miss Croker, from Merino Downs. Two others
from this homestead are Lawrence Shum Henty and Mrs. C.
McLeod, also the graves of some early servants. There are also
those of Maloney, King and others of the early pioneers.
Mrs. Brady, a well known lady and daughter of D. Mclntyre,
senr., lived for years in her home cn the road to Struan. The
family of one son, Angus, still resides in the vicinity. In the early
days the creek below the old homestead was a favored fishing and
picnic resort, and at a later date the area was tested for coal.
Towards the township was a large paddock owned by Charles
Wombwell, and it extended from that old garden site near the
creek to over the hilltop. The “inseparables,” Dave and Amos, his
sons, and their sister lived in a house on the hilltop. The property


to the south was the home of John O’Brien, the blacksmith, and
later of Bryan Fitzgerald. Dougald Mclntyre next occupied
Emerald Hill, as the homestead was named, and his family later
took up teaching or nursing as their professions. Two daughters
served as nurses in India during the Great War.
Adjoining the Mocamboro road was the property and home of
Robert Howarth. At the top of the hill on the eastern boundary is
the racecourse, whilst below is the home of the Mutch family, who
were early settlers and bookmakers in the district.
On the vacant corner as we return towards the town was the
home of Duncan Grant, and it will be remembered that his son
had a horse tread mill for threshing the corn. The horse was
enclosed in a frame box and spent its time walking up hill and
getting nowhere. Adjoining his home was the property of P.
Rraatz, who later went to Horsham, but finally returned to his
original farm. On the triangular block lived Tom Jenkins, an
early carpenter of P. Henty’s. Next to the south is Ned Pitzgibbon’s
home, and he was one of the original teamsters. Turning now
into a road running easterly on the hilltop we pass Jasper Woods’
old home site on the left, whilst on a vacant block across the road
was formerly the home of George Crawley, George and his brother
Jim were typical bushmen, and thought nothing of dividing a bag
of flour and carrying it to their camp in the bush often nine miles
away. Their favorite sport was to hunt the kangaroos and run
down the wild horses which were plentiful in the bush.
Over the small bridge past the hills where J. Egan grew some
of the first wheat crops is the home of Alex (Sandy) McNicol, an
early shepherd on Rifle Downs, whilst further to the left is the
site of J. Kerr’s home. Further east past J. Crawley’s home, J.
Jones lived, and when 10 years of age he was engaged with Colton
to drive bullocks to Portland, and later was a pit sawyer.
Peter Wombwell, a brother of the proprietor of the world
famed Wombwell’s Menagerie, lived here also. On the corner at
OLD POST OFFICE and COULSON ’ S OLD STORE


the turn of the road to Coleraine is the old boot shot of James
Mallett, whose early experiences when employed by Edward Henty
are given elsewhere in this book.
Prom this elevation we can see the road to Coleraine leading
past the butter factory, which draws its supplies mainly from the
closer settlement farms at Tahara and Talisker. At first the land
was mainly used for rearing and fattening cattle and sheep, but
such men as Gid Nicol, G. Moxon, Bushel Bros., G. Allen, D.
McLeod, Quinn, Hay, and Pye improved its possibilities as a dairy-
ing centre, and it is to these men that the settlement owes much
of its prosperity. The Noltes in particular did a fair amount of
tilling of the soil also.
Down near the creek on the right is the original site of the
building and property owned by John Leake, whilst opposite lived
the Drummonds. Over the bridge is the late John King’s farm
whilst to our right on the slope Oder the creek are quite a number
of soldier settlers’ farms established about 1919 on portion of
Glenorchy Estate, which belonged to the Johnstone family and
extended almost to Digby. Prior to its present use part of it was
cultivated and sown with wheat or oats, which yielded up to TO
bushels to the acre.
At the head of the gully up the creek, J. Short, an old settler,
had a farm, but this was later acquired by Edwin Husson. It is
Mr. J. SHORT
One of Merino’s earliest settlers.
interesting to note that Short
was alleged to have been
wounded by the notorious
bushranger, Morgan. On the
corner in front of us is the
home site of Dugald Mclntyre,
who with J. Clarke took up
large areas of land near Too-
woomba in Queensland, but
droughts were so prevalent
that they returned to Merino.
To our right towards the
township was the home of
John McPhee, whilst J. Hill,
the blacksmith, lived on the
hilltop to the south. Below
this on the west was J. Kerr’s
farm, which had a large
orchard surrounded by a furze
hedge. Rabbits abounded here
in 1882, and provided many an
afternoon’s sport for the boys
of the settlement.
From this hilltop looking southward a road may be seen about
half a mile away, and at the end of the long lane was the home
of Bob Hicks. The road continues on up the hill to Grassdale,
formerly Coleman’s property, and a beautiful scenic drive may be
had between the subdivided blocks of the early Glenorchy estate.
The top road to Grassdale divided the main portion of Glenorchy


estate from that on the east side known as Glenllvet, formerly
owned by J, Mcßae. The homestead is situated at the foot of the
high red hill in the distance.
All the land to the horizon excluding Silvester’s property and
a few holdings in the foreground comprised the Glenorchy estate.
J. Pearson was the original owner, and his sons John and Joe,
mentioned by Featherstonehaugh in “After Many Days,” were great
horsemen and rode the King Alfred bred horses. Succeeding
managers for Johnston were Elms, J. Smith, and J. McNicol, son
of a former manager of Tahara, Donald and Alex Grant, whilst
John and Thomas Davis were two well known overseers.
On the level ground past the hilltop the road passes the large
woolshed where thousands of sheep were shorn. The homestead
of the Glenlivet overseers was a large brick building about half a
mile in the paddock to the east. Below on the creek were the sheep
yards and dip, and it was here that what may have developed into
a tragedy occurred in early eighties.
The Msldrum family and two sisters of Davis of the homestead
were fishing at the creek. The day being very warm, Bob Meldrum
.saw some clear looking water in a large tank, which had been
used to prepare arsenic for the sheep dip. Filling a bottle with the
cool water, he returned to the rest of the party, who became very
ill shortly after drinking it. The Davis girls went to their brother’s
farm, and when the doctor arrived the children were saved from
any serious consequences. The news soon spread to the township,
and Mr, Enscoe getting a distorted account that his son was
drowned, galloped to the homestead, to find his family all well.
The shook seriously affected his health for some time.
Billy O’Brien lived on the hill to the south, and his chief
means of conveyance was a bullock dray with solid wooden pole
and two wheels. Many and varied were his expressions as he
drove his bullock team down the hill. Over the road from Hicks
•on the sharp angled block lived the road contractor Sam Genge
and his son-in-law, Alf Yewers.
VIEW OF PORTION OF HIGH STREET
(Looking South)


On ths rise nearby to the south-west was the home of the late
Archie McFhee, who was the stud groom for Frank Hsnty since
boyhood. In the middle distance about half a mile south was the
home of James Eoyd, senr., whose sen Jim, new ninety years of
age, is still hale and hearty, and supplied much of the information
regarding Merino's early history. Following the lane eastward we
pass the old home of John Lillie, an early storekeeper, whilst on
cur left is the home and property of James Fulton, the early
flour miller. R. Fulton, a brother, went in for breeding Clydes-
dales and thoroughbreds on the property now owned by R, Dunn
and formerly by Alex Ross. In the house lower down lived “Sonny”
Elston, as he is still known, although now approaching eighty
years of age. ICe is reputed to be the first white child born in
Merino, and was a well known athlete in earlier days. On the
nearby hill the first school in Merino was built, and Mr. Hughes
was the first schoolmaster. J. Boyd, an early scholar, still points
out a briar bush which was in the school yard.
Almost directly over the hill from Elston's was the old bark
hut where Bob Miller lived in the early days. Many of his sons
and their families reside in the district. On the corner of the
block below ths Mcßae family had their heme.
The tall row of poplars cn the road to Glenorchy sheltered
the home of James Heaney, the read contractor, and the old
garden below Silvester’s surrounded the original heme of Bombay
Smith, a very early Council land valuer.
Silvester, of Springdale, is dealt with in a separate section, so
we look right over this fins homestead towards the lighter
timbered country to the south-west. There lived several families,,
including Annetts, Peters, and Scarboroughs. The latter were
well known teamsters, and supplied much of the firewood for the
township. The early road from Portland was in this vicinity in
the early days, being far west from the present Digby road. Nearer
the township on the east side of the Digby road lived the Kings
and Berms, and the eld garden trees may still be seen. Nearby on
the opposite side of the road was Turner’s home. Further west in
the scrubby country several families lived in the early days, but
gradually settled in the better country to the eastward, or left for
other parts. Among these settlers we remember John and Andrew
Dwyer, P. Coulson, F. Kraatz, H. Lang, P. McCarthy, Foran, W.
Mcßae, Smith, Cornfcrd, and H. Kohn. Now we come to the road
leading to these various homes; really it is a branch of the back
road to Casterton at the quarries above the Mocamboro hill. A
little furthtr north may bo seen old bricks on the site of an early
hotel built by George Yarra Bilston, who claimed to be the first
white child born at Port Phillip settlement. The steep Mocamboro
hill provided many exciting trips with the early teams, and Jim
Brebner, a well known contractor, had a cart tip over on top of
him. Jim’s vocabulary was very lurid, and it is asserted that his
remarks to his team on this occasion could be heard in the
township.


The Churches
ANGLICAN:
Originally services were conducted under an archway of trees
where Mrs. Husson’s house now stands, by the first Vicar, the Rev.
P. T. C. Russell, who was appointed to this large parish In 1850.
Services were later held in the old Vicarage, now occupied by Mrs.
Blackburn; afterwards in the school building known as the
Common School, till the present church was built in 1866, The late
Dr. Russell labored in this parish for 24 years. He was returning
from a long trip in the parish when he was seized with a paralytic
stroke. He was alone and driving a pair of quiet ponies, and was
still some miles from the parsonage, with at least one pair of gates
to open. Fortunately he succeeded in accomplishing the task and
reached home safely. For some weeks the patient was kept very
quiet; then a sea trip was recommended by his medical adviser,
which was made possible by his many friends and admirers, who
subscribed the sum of £lOOO, a further sum of £5OO being sent to
him while abroad. When returning to Victoria he died and was
buried at sea.
The Rev. Jas. Macfarlane was appointed in his place, and
remained Vicar to this parish for 21 years. During his tenure, St.
Peter’s, Merino, was cleared of debt, and consecrated by Bishop
Thornton, of Ballarat, on October 29th, 1884.
The Church Committee elected in 1877 was Messrs. T. D.
Clarke, W. Enscoe, W, Francis, J. Fulton, P. Henty, C. Leithrldge,
T, Mackwood, Jas. Mallett, Geo. Northcott, and T. W. Silvester.
Other churches built in the parish were St. John’s, Digby, 1871;
ST.PETER’S CHURCH OF ENGLAND (MERINO)


St, Paul’s, Gum. Creek, 1877, later moved to Henty in 1901. Henty
having acquired a new brick church through the generosity of the
late Miss Henty, the Gum Creek church was again moved, to
Paschendale soldier settlement in 1937 and re-dedlcated by Bishop
Johnston, February 17, 1937.
The new Henty church was erected in 1936 by Mr. Chas.
Anderson at a cost of £BOO, being a legacy from, the late Miss
Henty, daughter of the late Francis Henty, pioneer of this district.
The foundation stone was laid by his grand-daughter, Mrs. G. A.
Silvester, on 11th October, 1936. The newly erected church was
consecrated by the Right Rev. W. H. Johnson, Bishop of Ballarat,
on Monday, December 14th, 1936, the Vicar of the Parish then
being Rev. K. P, Goodisson.
Tablet in Henty church bears the following:—“A.M.D.C. and
in loving memory, Francis Henty, 1815-1891, who landed at
Portland, 13th December, 1834, and settled at Merino Downs, 3rd
August, 1837, and his wife, Mary Ann Lawrence, 1819-1881, with
their children —Lawrence Shum, 1845-1877; Louisa, 1847-1924,
Fieldplace, Kew; Caroline, Mrs. A. McLeod, 1849-1914, Talisker;
Alice, 1852-1932; Mrs. John Hindson, of Canterbury and Sorrento.
Lead-light windows erected by the children of the above Caroline
and Alice, in honored memory of these heroic pioneers.”
Names of clergy:—Rev. Dr. F. T. C. Russell, 1850 to 1874; Rev.
J. Macfarlane, 1874 to 1893 Rev. E. H, Davis, 1894 to 1898; Rev. R.
J. E. Hayman, 1887; Rev. W. W. Pobjoy, 1894; Rev. J, D. Davidson,
1898 to 1906; Rev. M. C, James (now Bishop of St. Arnaud), 1906
to 1915; Rev. Edward Schweiger (now Dean of Bendigo), 1911 to
1915; Rev. F. Caffin, relieving above during 1914 and 1915; Rev. F.
T. C. Reynolds, 1915 to 1919; Rev, J. A. Macqueen (now Canon),
1919 to 1921; Rev. A. S. Nicholas, 1921 to 1924; Canon Howard
Carr, 1924 to 1925; Rev. Prank Girdler, 1925 to 1928; Rev. Auguste
Wilson, 1928 to 1929; Rev. A, G. T. Kewley, 1929 to 1933; Rev. P.
S. Legg, 1933 to 1934; Rev. K. P. Goodisson, 1935 to 1937; Rev. John
Hall, Th.L., P.R.G.S., present Vicar.
The church bell was presented to the Church by Mr. and Mrs.
A. M. McLeod in 1906.
The Parish Hall was erected in 1907.
METHODIST CHURCH AND PARSONAGE, MERINO


METHODIST CHURCH:
First Methodist services were held in 1865, and Hev. J. J.
Watsford was minister in 1867. The church was opened in 1870,
whilst the brick parsonage was built in 1875. The Rev. Henry
Howard, who rose to great heights in the ecclesiastical world was
-once a minister in this church. He ultimately occupied a dis-
tinguished position in England, and ended his ministry at the
Fifth Avenue Church in New York.
Ministers —Hunter, Howard, Seacomb, Salloway, Dunstan.
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH:
Services were first held in a room of the Parmer’s Arms hotel
and later in the Common School. The present church was built
in 1868, when Dr. Turnbull preached the opening sermon. The
Rev. W. G. Gillespie was the first resident minister, and Miss Kate
McNicol (now Mrs. Scott) was the first to be married in the
church. Her father was the late Mr. A. McNicol, who was mailman
between Digby and Merino.
Early ministers were: —Rev. W. C. Naismith, 1889; Rev. Grif-
fiths Jones, 1890; Rev. Thomson, 1896; Rev. Andrew Barber, 1899;
Rev. Sam H. McGowan, 1900; Rev. Williams, 1906; Rev. T. J.
Riddle, 1910; Rev. J. W. Buchan, 1914 Rev. J. P. Schussler, 1918;
Rev. H. Saw, 1924; Mr. J. Booth; Mr. Headon; Mr. Bieeson; Mr.
Barrow.
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH:
The first services used to be held in a small wooden building
in the present church grounds till 1880, when the old church was
built. Services were conducted by Priests from, Hamilton, namely,
Fr. Kavanagh, Pr. Pennelly, and Fr. Parrelly. Later, Fr. Marshall
was the first Parish Priest of Casterton, which included Merino.
He was appointed in 1875. The new church was built in 1935, and
dedicated by the Right Rev. Dr. Foley, D.D., on the 10th February,
1935.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
Merino, in its picturesque
setting.
44
Back to Merino and


ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH, MERINO
ST. PAUL’S CHURCH OF ENGLAND, HENTY


Merino Park
The Merino Park was founded in the year 1889, principally
through the efforts of the late Jas. Talt, who took a very live
interest in this town. The park is ideally situated, and contains
16 acres. It is used by the Football and Cricket Clubs, Sporting
Committees; the P. and A. Society also hold their show in the park.
The public of Merino and district justly appreciate the efforts of
the founder and trustees’ foresight in securing such an ideal spot
as a recreation ground for the future inhabitants.
Trustees appointed in 1889 were W. H. Blackburn, H. Kohn,
junr., B. Pulton, B. Ford, T. E. Silvester, G. Northcott, junr., W.
C. Talt, and W. Ehscoe, junr. The late Mr. Blackburn was secretary
for many years, and took a great interest in the planting of trees
in the park. Later, Mr. T. D. Clarke was secretary, till he moved
to Grassdale in the year 1930, when the present secretary, Mir. G.
B. Silvester, was appointed.
On the occasion of the Coronation of King George VI. and
Queen Elizabeth, May 12th, 1937, trees were planted for (the Kang),
by B. P. Tait; (The Queen), Miss B. Tait; (Mr. W. H. Blackburn),
by Mrs. N. McPhee; (The Citizens), by T. D. Clarke, aged 90;
(Park Trustees), H. Kohn; (Treeplanters), Mrs. H. R. Mallett.
Present Trustees: —Messrs. H. M. Ehscoe, H. Kohn, H. J.
Henry, H. R. Mallett, A. C. Ross, G. B. Silvester, B. P. Tait.
GROUP OF HEALTHY YOUNG SCHOLARS AT THE
TALISKER SCHOOL


Our Soldiers
MERINO’S APPRECIATION EXPRESSED
IN GRANITE
UNVEILING CEREMONY BY HIS EXCELLENCY SIR ARTHUR
STANLEY, K.C.M.G., GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA, DECEMBER
28th, 1918.
Saturday was Merino’s momentous day—the day on which the
Soldiers’ Memorial was unveiled by His Excellency Sir Arthur
Stanley, in the presence of 1,500 people. The decorations in the
streets and Mechanics’ Hall were excellent, and reflected great
credit upon those who carried them out.
About 3 p.m. the Vice-Regal party was met by a mounted
escort of returned soldiers, and on alighting from the car the party
passed between lines of uniformed returned men, who were
subsequently inspected and spoken to by His Excellency. On the
platform were His Excellency the Governor and Lady Stanley,
Hon. H. J. M, Campbell, M.L.A. (member for Glenelg), Hon. W.
Hutchison, M.L.A., Mr. and Mrs. Winter Cooke, Cr. J Little
(President Glenelg Shire), Cr. H. H. Rhodes, President Memorial
Committee and Mrs. H. Mallett, Honorary Secretary, and Rev. J.
Macqueen, who read the address of welcome to the Governor. His
Excellency stepped forward amidst applause, and expressed his
thanks to those who had presented the address to him, and for
the kind sentiments expressed to himself and Lady Stanley. He
referred to the patriotism of the Merino and district inhabitants
in augurating such a movement so successfully, in erecting such
a lasting memorial. His Excellency then said he would perform
the duty of unveiling the monument in memory of all the men
who had gone abroad, also those who would never return. He then
removed the Union Jack which covered the monument. After a
few interesting remarks His Excellency said it had given Lady
Stanley and himself much pleasure in visiting this thriving and
picturesque district. The Hon. Hutchison proposed a vote of thanks
to Their Excellencies, for being present on that occasion. He
referred to Her Ladyship as President of The Australian Red
Cross, Victorian Division, and the valuable services rendered in
that direction. The Hon. H. J. M. Campbell seconded the vote.
He expressed his pleasure at being present on such a memorable
occasion. It was the first memorial of its kind to be unveiled in
his electorate. Digby was another little town in his electorate
which was first to plant an avenue of honor in memory of our
brave boys, and now their example had been followed all over the
State. The vote was then carried with acclamation.
An adjournment was then made to the Mechanics’ Hall, where
Their Excellencies were received by Mrs. G. L. Northcott (President
of the Merino Branch of Red Cross Society), who presented
members and other distinguished visitors.


The party were then entertained at afternoon tea, served by
Red Cross and district ladies.
Cr. H. H. Rhodes (President), Mrs. H. R. Mallett (Hon.
secretary and Treasurer). Committee —Mrs. G. L. Northcott, Mrs.
C. Kraatz, Messrs. D. W. Brock, J. Mclntyre, A. C. Ross, T. E.
Silvester, R. Dunstan, T. D. Clarke, J. Byrnes, H. Wood, L. Koch,
N. Flowers, Rev. J. A. Macqueen, Rev. J. P. Schussler.
Soldiers’ Monument
ERECTED AT THE INTERSECTION OF BOURKE and
HIGH STREETS
This substantial monument has a base of rustic Harcourt
granite resting on a foundation of reinforced concrete The
polished die of Wando Vale granite is a fine piece of work and the
names of those who fell and who enlisted are beautifully engraved
in gilded half inch letters.
The total height of the monument from the base to the top
of the flag pole is 20 feet.
The following inscription is engraved on the monument:—
HONOR THE BRAVE
Erected by the Residents of Merino and District in
Honor of those Brave Men who so gallantly answered
the Empire’s Call and fought in the Great War.
Then followed the names of the fallen, as officially received:—
On Front of Stone:
C. WELLNER D. HURLEY
S. KOHN T. RANSOM
A. CAMPBELL P. BUCKLE
G. LAING E. LARKIN
E. HOLMES A. MALLETT
C. McCRAE T. DAVIS
V. KING J. McALPINE
R. McCABE R. BUCKLE
Unveiled by Sir Arthur Stanley, K.C.M.G., Governor of
Victoria, December 28th, 1918.
On Side of Stone:
R. EDWARDS F. MELDRUM
K. LANE, M.M. J, DAVIS
N. PICKETT R. EVANS
A. ELSTON W. TIEMAN
P. VERNON G. RHODES
H. DAVIS W. BUCKLEY
J. MALLETT J. MELDRUM
J. KOHN G. RICHARDS
D. ROSS T. BYRNES
H. AISBETT C. MILLER
B. WILSON R. WARRINER
T. BUCKLEY C. PITZGIBBON
P. HAYES A. EDWARDS
W. TURNBULL C. CAMERON


J. DONOHUE R. GRINHAM, D.C.M.
C. HANSON A. FLOWERS
•C. KING H. NORTHCOTT
F. MILLER, M.M. W. RANKIN
P. WARRINER L. MCDONALD, D.C.M.
H. DALTON W. ROSS
J. O’BRIEN C. CAMPBELL
R. WARD K. FLOWERS
A. BLACKBURN G. TIEMAN
J. CAMPBELL A. LOWE
S. JENKINS H. McLEOD
E. McCABE W. BURCHILL
R. ELLIOTT R. FORBES
Dr. MORTON W. AYLING
:m. nolte a. coulson
G. CLARKE G. ELSTON
J. COULSON T. BYRNES
H. ROWE D. WOODSTOCK
E. FITZGIBBON D. McINTOSH
E. FAHEY A. MOON
J. FITZGIBBON E. HUSSON
H. WOODALL
A. COX Nurses:
C. GRANT (Navy) G. MEADE
S. CAMPBELL E. McINTYRE
G. SILVESTER J. McINTYRE
The monument was erected by W. T. Dale, of Casterton, at
cost of £277.
SOLDIERS’ MONUMENT IN HIGH STREET
Dedicated to those who served and fell in the Great War.
49
Henty Centenary Souvenir


Vice-Regal Visit to Merino by
Lord Hopetoun
MAY 5th, 1892
(Copied from “The Casterton News,” May, 1892.)
An auspicious day for Merino, being the first time in its history
that the township had been visited by a representative of Royalty,
and it is only fair to state the citizens appreciated the honor. Upon
the official notice from Mr. Shiels (the Premier) of the Vice-
Regal visit Mr. W. Enscoe took matters in hand, and a committee
was formed, comprising Messrs. Enscoe, H. Northcott, H. Kohn, W.
Meldrum, P. Ford, B. Silberfeld and others. It was decided to erect
an arch across the street and decorate the buildings with ever-
greens and flags. Just before the appointed hour the street was
filled with excited people, whilst the school children were lined
up in front of the Mechanics' Hall. About 12.15 p.m. the distin-
guished party arrived; this was the signal for much cheering.
The children sang “God Save the Queen,” upon the conclusion of
which His Excellency expressed his appreciation. An adjournment
was made to the Mechanics’ Hall. Mr. H. Northcott then read an
address of welcome to His Excellency, the Earl of Hopetoun,
Governor of Victoria, to which His Excellency suitably replied.
The party then proceeded to the Commercial Hotel, where
refreshments were provided, and tire usual toasts honored, after
which the Vice-Regal party left for Coleraine. The Governor
and Capt. Willoughby were on horseback, and the “Premier,” Mr.
Shiels, was driven by Mr. T, Cawker in a four in hand drag.
VIEW OF PORTION OF HIGH STREET
(Looking North)


Merino Red Cross Society
In August, 1914, a daily working bee was held for a fortnight
and a number of ladies attended regularly to make up garments
for the troops. A box of comforts, numbering 125 garments, was
forwarded to Federal Government House on August 31st, these
goods being paid for by local contributions. In February, 1915, a
meeting was called with the object of forming a local branch of
The Australian Red Cross Society. Mrs. G. L. Northcott was
elected President, and Mrs. J. McCormick, Honorary Secretary
and Treasurer; Committee —Mesdames T. Buckle, T. Clarke, W.
Heaney, T. Hicks, J. Joyce, H. Mallett, A. Ross, T. Silvester, A.
Shanklin, H. Woods, C. Kraatz, H. Kohn, Misses Silvester,
Shanklin, and Mclntyre. On the removal from the district of Mrs.
McCormick, Miss Silvester (now Mrs. O. A. Kelly) was elected
Secretary, and the following year the present Secretary, Mrs.
Mallett, was appointed. The Treasurers were Mrs. T. Silvester,
senr., Mrs. Kraatz and Mrs. G. Cox; Mrs. H. Kohn being Vice-
President.
During 1914 and 1919, 4534 garments, etc., were forwarded to
headquarters and Patriotic League, and the sum of £892, ending
with a balance of £5l, which was forwarded to the Brighton Hostel.
Four members have received their 20 Years’ Medal —Mesdames
Cox, Buckle, Kelly, and Mallett.
Lodges
A.N.A.
Dr. Carty Salmon, M.L.A., President of the Board of Directors,
and Mr. Wainwright, General Secretary, arrived in Merino to open
the local branch, which has prospered since 1895. Officers elected
were: —President —Mr. J. F. C. Dean; Vice-President —Mr. A.
McLeod: Treasurer —Mr. D. E. Doyle; Secretary—Mr. A. Cochrane;
Assistant Secretary—Mr. E. H. Prime; Committee —Messrs. J.
Scarborough, G. Northcott, A. McPhee, W. Heaney. The first
meeting was held in the Commercial Hotel.
MASONIC:
In 1861 the following members—Messrs. Clarke, Clay, Ford,
Reed, Dr. Inverarity—decided to form a lodge in Merino and call
it St. George. The first meetings were held in Bilston’s and then
Bryce’s, but later in the old mill, which has been remodelled to
suit the purpose, and is in excellent condition to-day after being
erected for 80 years. The massive beams and walls are a credit
to the builders of the past.
Masonic Lodge, 1861—F. Ford, Dr. Inverarity (Master), A. Von
Bowden, T. D. Clarke, J. Richardson, J. McConachy, J. Reid, J.
Stock, G. Bilston, J. Joyce, W. McWilliam, C. McCann, D. McCal-
lum, A. McArthur, A. McEachern, H. Dickson, R. Garton.


Sporting
RACECOURSE—IB7B:
The first races were held through the main street of the
township, when a circuit was made round where the school now"
stands, whilst the finish was near Mackwood’s. Later, a racecourse
was marked out on The Heath, a site some 2 or 3 miles south-west
of the township, but as this was inconvenient, Mr. A. Mclntyre
provided the land for the present course on the top of Mocamboro
Hill. Later the area was acquired by the late Mr. Herbert Enscoe,.
and is still in the possession of the family.
Prominent names associated with racing are those of G.
Northcott, J. Leake, J. Patterson, M. Cussen, junr., T. Cross, J..
Dwyer, A Pyffe, J. Tait, A. C. Ross, C. Kohn, M. Dwyer, J. Harvey,
H. J. Enscoe, and W. Dwyer.
THE STRATHDOWNIE FOOTBALL
MEDALS—IB94:
Probably at no time in the history of football in Merino was.
more public interest shown than during the battle for these medals,
given by Mr. McParlane, of Strathdownie, and to be played for by
teams representing Merino, Digby, Sandford, and Strathdownie.
Transport of players to Strathdownie matches necessitated
the local club leaving for Casterton in the dark, stabling their
horses, and taking a large drag of Ben. Jeffreys (who acted as
umpire) and a four-horse team, and after play, slushing back
through the swamps in cold and wet weather at that time to
Casterton, and arriving at Merino at midnight or in early hours
of next morning. So evenly contested were the games that Digby
and Merino, standing at 18 points each, played their final on.
Merino ground in July, and the locals won, being 1 goal 6 behinds
to nil. It rained in torrents during the game, with a high wind.
For Merino, J. Norris, A. Cochrane, A. C. Ross, M. Heaney, M.
Brennick, W. and F. Meldrum, also J. Elston, G. Scarborough, J.
Hollard, and J. Miller played good games; and for Digby, Sloss,
Burrell, Cotter, Slmkin, Barker, Smith, Walter, Dougheney, and'
Hbwarth. A. Cochrane was captain of Merino; P. J. Meldrum,, hon.
secretary; and other players were J. Mallett, C. V. Edwards, H.
Davis, H. Burrell, T. Bourke.
FOOTBALL:
Records from ,1927 show that the local team has taken a.
prominent part in the Glenelg and District Football League. Mr.
F. Burrell was President from 1927-1932 with the exception of
1929, when Mr. J. Harvey occupied the position.
In 1933 it was decided to form a Merino and District League,
and this continues to the present. Mr. D. S. Boss was President,
in 1933, Mr. P. Burrell in 1934, Mr. J. McDonald in 1935 and 1936,.
and Mr. R, McParlane in 1937.
Merino were premiers in 1933 and 1935. During this period.


Mr. E. Goode has occupied the position of Secretary, and it is.
mainly through his efforts that the club is in such a satisfactory
position.
History of Shire of Glenelg
(South Riding)
Created District Road Board, September 2nd, 1863.
Proclaimed Shire, June 30th, 1864.
Subdivided into three Ridings, October 23rd, 1871.
Re-subdivided into four Ridings, May 31st, 1906.
In 1872 Councillors of South Riding were:—T. W. Silvester,,
elected March, 1869; J. H. Jackson, elected December, 1869; M.
Cussen, elected August, 1870. Secretary—J. G. Clapham; Engineer-
—J. Carruthers.
In 1888 South Riding representatives were: —J. H. Jackson,.
W. Enscoe (President), R. Mitchell.
Francis Henty was the first member of the original Road.
Board, which included six members.
First Engineer and Rate Collector —W. Leonard.
Messrs. G. Smith, Thos. H. Clarke, Edmund Lauder were
Valuers in each Riding.
First meetings were held in Caledonian Union Hotel at.
Sandford.
Population of South Riding in 1888 was 350.
The following have represented the South Riding since the:
foregoing was recorded: —
T. E. Silvester, son of T. W. Silvester.
W. Rhodes, C. Rhodes, H. H. Rhodes (three generations).
G. Northcott, senr., G. Northcott, H. J. Northcott (grandsons)..
R. Mitchell, A. Mitchell, H. D. Mitchell (three generations).
J. J. Roulston, P. Holzgrefe, C. Bryce, D. W. Brock, E. Temple-
ton, A. C. Ross, K. D. Lane.
The present representatives are K. D. Lane, H. J. Northcott,.
and H. D. Mitchell.


Butter Factory
In 1910 the Merino Co-Operative Butter Factory Co. Ltd. was
not proving a financial success, so the Chairman of Directors, Mf.
A. M. McLeod, approached the late Mr. J. E. Handbury, of Messrs.
J. E. Handbury and Sons, with a view to purchase. After inspect-
ing the property, Mr. Handbury was so impressed with the district
that he agreed upon a lease for three years, with the option of
purchase.
The plant was modernised, and it is recorded that the first
output was only 4 tons, but through successful management and
support from the suppliers, the output has now risen to 27 tons
a week.
The first twenty years of management occasioned continuous
alterations and additions to the plant, to adopt the most modern
appliances. In 1931, Mr. H. E. Handbury, who had succeeded his
father as Managing Director of the Company, decided upon
remodelling the entire factory to cope with the growth of dairying
in the Merino district and the largely increased supplies. Con-
sequently the factory was rebuilt, and ail the latest and most
up-to date butter factory equipment installed. This was done at
an expense of £6,000.
Since the factory was taken over by Messrs. J. E. Handbury
.and Sons, 12,722 tons of butter have been produced.
To-day, Merino Downs brand of butter is the hall-mark of
quality. It is the common stipulation with interstate merchants
when ordering Victorian butter to request: “It must be Merino.”
In the overseas markets, London butter merchants to day stipulate
Merino Downs butter when ordering from Australia. This, of
course, very creditably reflects upon the dairying sense of the
dairymen of the district.
To-day, Merino Downs butter factory, established on the most
progressive lines, is a world-wide tribute to the capabilities of the
district, and an outstanding advertisement of the foresight of the
early settlers who took up their homes in the district in view of its
possibilities.
Previous managers were: —Chas. Johnson, H. Sunderland, J.
Montgomery, and D. Greenlaw (manager for J. E. Handbury and
.Sons),


Settlers
JIM BOYD:
Was born in County Mackelkelmamny in Ireland. He left-
Ireland in the Runnymede, and after six or seven months, he and
his parents landed at Portland in 1852. From Portland, the father,
Mr. A. Boyd, was engaged on Hilgay Station on the Wannon. Mi - ,
Pellew owned the station. The Land Board threw open new land,
and the father bought an area in 1853. He was bullock driving at
the age of 12 and then wool carting. He bought a team and drove
bullock drays all over the country until 1884, then went with Mr.
D. McLeod to Western Australia in 1911, and returned in 1915 and
has resided in Mierino ever since. His sisters and brothers were
well known in the district.
Settlers when Mr. Boyd arrived in 1855: —J. Greenaway, near
Dunn’s; J. Egan, bought P. Curtain out; J. Leake, toward factory
on right; A. Maquire, near Cox’s quarter acre; J. Frost, near
Wilson’s quarter acre; Captain Clarke.
MR. CHAS. BRYCE:
Mr. Chas. Bryce was born at Adelaide, S.A., in 1849, and with
his parents went to the gold diggings at dunes, where he was
educated. Later he made his home in Merino, and married a
daughter of the late William Rhodes, a pioneer and landowner of
this district. In 1895 Mr. Bryce took over the Commercial Hotel,
which has been conducted by his family ever since, his son Wil-
liam having taken over the hotel from his father in 1913. Built by
G. Northoott in 1856, the Commercial has had extensive additions,,
and to-day is a commodious two-storey modern building.
MR. X. D. CLARKE.
Was one of our oldest residents, and an outstanding person-
ality as he arrived with his father, Captain Clarke, who built the
Farmer’s Arms hotel in 1857. Somewhat of an athlete in his.
early days, he was also a recognised cricketer, and later gained
much fame as a chess player. Mr. Clarke took a keen interest in
district affairs during the past 70 years, and was reporter for the
Hamilton “Spectator” over a very lengthy period. His books of
Press cuttings date back to the seventies, and were of great value
in compiling this publication. For many years he occupied the
position of librarian of the Mechanics’ Institute, and was also
poundkeeper. His death occurred in October, 1937, at the age of
90 years.


MR. C. COULSON;
Mr. C. Coulson came to Australia in the year 1856 aboard the
ship General Hewitt, and landed at Portland, He came out as a
.stud groom to Rifle Downs Station. After some years spent on
Rifle Downs and Ardarchy Stations, he selected land, and, with his
sons, engaged in wool growing for some years, also doing much
.carrying from Portland to Merino. He died in 1898. Prior to
leaving England he was a groom In the Royal mews at Buckingham,
Palace, and there his four children were born.
His son Christopher, who was 8 years of age when he came to
Australia, later set up in business in Merino. His son Chris., who
is to-day the well known proprietor of the business of Couison
"Bros., first started business with the late Mr. Ben Ford, and later
in 190.9 he and his late brother George founded the present
business.
MRS. ANDREW DWYER:
Came with her parents, brothers and sisters from Scotland,
leaving there on the Ist of August, 1853, in the sailing vessel The
New Zealander. They arrived at Portland on the 3rd of December,
and at once proceeded to Nangeela Station, Casterton, then in the
possession of the late Mr. Angus Macpherson. Travelling to Cas-
terton by bullock dray in charge of the late Mr, Patrick Lyons, of
Sandford, they saw the blacks for the first time. In 1861 her
parents acquired land at Dwyer’s Creek. She later married Mr.
.Andrew Dwyer, her first married home being at Gypsy Valley,
Afterwards her husband selected the land and made a home on
the property known as “Birkenlea,” about 4 miles from Merino.
Mr. Dwyer passed away not long after, In 1876, leaving a widow
with five young children. She, with the true pioneering spirit,
.shouldered her burden and took up the task of rearing her little
ones, bravely carrying on. The late Mrs. Dwyer died at her son’s
home at Tahara West in 1922.
MR. JOHN DWYER,
Mr. John Dwyer was born in County Clare, Ireland, and came
to Australia in bis 18th year. in. the early days he Was on Retreat
Station, Casterton, and from there he went to Gipsy Valley, later
taking up land at Dwyer’s Creek. Mrs. John Dwyer landed in
Melbourne in 1866, and came to Merino, where she resided till
her death.
WILLIAM ENSCOE, J.F.:
Was born in Bath, England, and came to this colony as a boy
in 1854. His first experience of business life commenced in 1856
when he started droving and horse-breaking, prom 1862 until
56
Back to Merino and


1870 he carried on business as a butcher, and finally bought a
section of land where he built his shop and dwelling. He owned
nearly 1000 acres of land close to the township was President of
the Glenelg Shire Council; chairman of Board of Health, and a
Justice of the Peace for the Western Bailiwick.
MR. HACK:
Mr. Hack, maternal grandfather of Messrs. Chas., Chris.,.
Henry, Fred., and Chap. Nolte, landed at Adelaide in 1844, first
shepherding sheep at Mosquito Plains, and later being in charge
of the sheep-wash at Merino Downs. At one time he dropped his
watch into the wash, where it remained for one week. That watch
is to-day in the possession of Mr. Chris. Nolte, senr., and still,
keeps good time.
MR. JAMES JACKSON:
When he was nine years old, he, with his parents and brother,
left Ireland and arrived at Sydney. Later he was head stockman,
and broke in horses on Mr. Edward Henty’s station. Mrs. Jackson,
(formerly Anne White) came from Ireland to Portland when 18
years old. She was married and went to Muntham. They lived
there for 10 years, four sons being born there. He and his wife
then moved to Sandford for a short period, when they made a
home at Gum Creek. There was a school-house at Gum Creek in
those days, and Church services were held there till the building
was blown down in a hurricane. Afterwards a service was held in.
a house on Mr. Jackson’s property. A year or so later the school
was built at Henty. Mr. Cuthbert Fetherstonhaugh was on Mun-
tham while Mr. and Mrs. Jackson lived there. He left in 1862.
Some years after he published a book named “After Many Days.”
MR. JOHN KING:
Mr. John King, who had been manager of Retreat Station for
13 years, came to Merino with his wife and infant son in 1857 and
established the property now so well and favorably known as
“Blink Bonnie.” After the death of her husband, Mrs. King
carried on the farm with the assistance of her two sons till John
was old enough to shoulder the burden, which he did most
successfully. The flat adjoining the house has produced wonderful
crops of oats and is very fertile,
MR. H. KOHN:
Mr. Heinrich Kohn, a native of Heliogoland, came to Merino
about 1870, having selected land to the west of the township, but.
soon moved into the township and engaged in his trade of
57
Henty Centenary Souvenir


carpenter and builder about the township and district. One of
our most prominent edifices, the Post Office, was built by him in
1889. Together with building, he also had a timber yard and
undertaking business. He reared a large family, well known for
their interest in the general welfare of the district, especially the
Presbyterian Church. He died in 1898, aged 66.
THE LATE ME. and MBS. FREDERICK KRAATZ:
Frederick Kraatz came to Victoria in the year 1859 by sailing
ship. It took eighteen weeks on the voyage from Hull, England.
For a short time he resided at Murtoa, but in the early sixties took
up land called Bowtell’s Creek at Merino. He often journeyed to
Portland by bullock dray for loads of merchandise, groceries and
general loading for the local store, then owned by Cussen, In 1867
he married a Geelong girl of 19 years. This lady was a native of
Trawalla, near Ballarat, and spent her early days on the gold-
fields, often washing for gold. In 1870 Mr. Kraatz selected land at
.Horsham, and a year later moved there. This was where the
pioneering and hard work was done, opening up new country,
grubbing and levelling the ground before a crop could be grown.
The shortage of water was a grave problem. Often it was carted
many miles, both for stock and home use. The oven had to be dug
into the bank of a crab hole, and the baking done there till a
house could be built. This was brought from Dwyer’s Creek. After
years of hard work, but good seasons, they returned to Merino and
lived there happily for many years. After the death of her
husband in 1913, Mrs. Kraatz moved to Ballarat, and lived there
till her home call came in 1937.
D. McINTYRE;
In 1853 Dugald Mclntyre, his wife, six sons and three
daughters arrived in Victoria from Lockgilphead, in Argyleshire.
For a few years he settled near Hotspur, but later acquired land
from the Crown at Merino in 1855, and called the property Laggan.
The family took an active part in district affairs, the father being
the first member of the Presbyterian Church here. It is interesting
to note that the family had a private cemetery on the estate,
where several members of the family are buried. The inscription
above the gate-way to the cemetery is “Pro Ardua,” meaning
“After hard fighting,” and is typical of the pioneering spirit.
The families of two sons, Angus and Dugald, still have interests in
Merino, the daughters of the former still living on the estate.
Dugald Mclntyre died in 1873, and his wife in 1863.
MISS C. McPHEE.
Next to Mallett’s in H. Scarborough’s paddock was the early
home of Mr. John McPhee, who came from Scotland in 1853,


taking six months for the voyage to Australia. He went from
Portland to Mr. Jackson's property, Sandford House, and was
engaged as a shepherd. There his eldest son was born. He went
from, there to Wando Station, and later to Pine Hills for eleven
years. Next he purchased land at Mferino and settled there. Miss
O. McPhee was born at Merino in 1865, and at the age of four
years accompanied her family to Dergholm to her father’s pro-
perty, living there until her parent’s death in 1911. She returned
to Merino and built her present home, “Inverness,” and lives
there in retirement with her brother John. The family have held
land since 1864, and can claim to be early pioneers. Miss McPhee
is interested in the Presbyterian Church.
MR. JAS. MALLETT:
In 1834 Jas. Mallett was bom at Derwent, Tasmania, and camje
to Portland in the ship Minerva. At the age of eleven he went
direct to Muntham. After a few years, he returned to Portland to
learn the boot trade. After serving his apprenticeship he returned
to Muntham for a few years. In 1856 at St. Stephen’s, Portland,
he married Eliza Seaborn. This was the first marriage celebrated
in that church. His wife was born in Adelaide in 1838, her parents
having come from Devonshire, England, in 1836, in the ship Tam
o’Shanter (Captain Gillies in charge). In 1841 he moved to Port-
land. Mr. and Mrs. Mallett lived at Mt. Clay, near Narrawong, for
a few years, finally settling in Merino in 1865, where he started,
boot making. He continued till the time of his death in 1901. He
reached the age of 67 years, and his wife lived to the age of 94
years and passed away at Portland in 1932.
MR. and MRS. MATING:
Mr. and Mrs. Mallng, with two children, arrived at Portland
by sailing ship Eliza in the year 1853, and eventually settled in
Merino in 1857. Mrs. Mallng was well known as a kind and
capable nurse, in which capacity she carried on for many years,
as well as rearing a family of four sons and seven daughters. Mr.
Maling carried on a business of farrier. A grandson and grand-
daughter, several great grandchildren and one great great grand-
son still reside in the district. One grand-daughter, now Mrs.
Young, of Hamilton, served as a nurse in the Great War.
MR. W. D. MELDRUM.
Born at Cross Gates, near Dumfermline, Scotland, and arrived
in Australia at ten years of age with several older brothers, who
engaged in lime burning for a time. His brothers paid to appren-
tice him to a firm of wheelwrights who did much of Cobb and
59
Henty Centenary Souvenir


Co’s. work. He went to New Zealand for a few years, returned to
Victoria and married. He came up country to Dunkeld, and later
to Merino, where he worked with J. O’Brien, blacksmith. He
visited Casterton with a view of opening there, but considered it
a sand bank. He established a business in Merino in 1869. The
shop was at the south-west end of the township on the Digby side,
but was cut off by the railway in 1882 and rebuilt. The later
building has been worked up into a modern garage. He was inter-
ested in all township welfare. Correspondent for the Board of
Advice (School) for 25 years, and died in 1900, aged 89 years.
MR. H. NOLTE.
Mr. H. Nolle, senr., grandfather of present generation, came
to Hamilton in 1852.
When Tahara was run as a station in the early days, one
boundary started at what is now the junction roads of Hamilton
and Coleraine, better known as “Stoney Ford.” A shepherd was
..stationed there and looked after the gate which was the entrance
to the property. At that time there were no subdivision fences on
the property. The original Tahara homestead was built by George
Northcott and his son Henry, who were also the contractors for
the old Mechanics’ Hall, and thle Anglican and Presbyterian
■Churches of Merino.
GEORGE NORTHCOTT:
Who was a native of Devonshire, England, came to Victoria
in 1854; landed in Portland, started business at his trade as a
builder there, and followed it for two years. In 1856 he removed to
.Merino, and purchased a half acre section of land on which he
built the Commercial Hotel, which was an agency and coaching
stables for Cobb and Co.
MR. T. W. SILVESTER, J.P.:
(Copied from “The Casterton News,” June, 1892.)
Mr. T. W. Silvester, as one of the pioneers, was privileged to
participate in Merino’s development from the early days. He
came to the colony in the early 50’s. He first went to Mt. Gambier,
later moving to Springbank Estate as manager for Mr. Jas. Kirby.
.Afterwards going to Portland, he spent several years in business.


Later he went to Caupaul Station, in conjunction with the late
Mr. P. Moore, but the investment proved anything but a profitable
speculation owing to the operations of the Land Act in 1865.
Succeeding howtsver in securing some good land in the vicinity
of Merino he laid the foundation stone of the snug and valuable
property known as Springdale. For some years Mr. Silvester held
a seat at the Glenelg Shire Council table, representing the south-
ern end of the Shire in company with the late Mr. M. Cussen. He
also for a long period filled the position of Justice of the Peace.
In both capacities he gained the respect of the community. At the
time of his death the deceased gentleman had attained the age
of 68 years. He was the second son of the late Rev. Thos. Sil-
vester, Vicar of Bucks, England, and is survived by a widow and
grown-up family of three sons and three daughters. One son,
Ellis, represented the South Riding in the Council.
MR. JAMES TAIT;
Born at Watten, Scotland, in 1831, and came to Australia in
the ship Priam, which arrived in 1852. He went to the gold fields
for some years, but in 1862 he came to Merino, where he was
employed in Mr. Ford’s first store. He followed many business
activities, becoming a licensed auctioneer in 1874; he also had a
small store. Mainly owing to his efforts the court house was
removed from Digby to its present site, and later he was instru-
mental in securing the land for the present Mechanics’ Institute.
As is stated above the entrance, the public park was dedicated
to the memory of this esteemed pioneer. Mr. Tait died in 1920,
leaving a large grown-up family of three girls and five boys, most
of whom followed blacksmithing trade, and were well known
figures on the athletic field.
MEDICAL PROFESSION:
Drs. Wyley, Inverarity, Jones, Parks, J. B. Marr, Morton,
Crook, Moodie, G. Sleeman, W. Collopy, Harding Porter, and
present, Dr. lan Matthews.


HENTY CAIRN ON MERINO
DOWNS
The Inscription reads: “Here,
on, 3rd August, 1837, Francis
Henly set up the first camp
on his station, Merino Downs.”
Wholly set up and printed at the office of “The Casterton News,”
Casterton, Vic.


Back to Merino and Henty
Centenary Celebrations
NOVEMBER 11th to 15th, 1937
Programme
THURSDAY, 11th NOVEMBER
AFTERNOON—
-2.30 p.m.—Official Reception.
EVENING—
-8 p.m.—Campfire Concert Community Singing; General
Entertaining: Fireworks Display; Coleraine Brass Band;
Merino Pipe Band.
FRIDAY, 12th NOVEMBER
MORNING—
-10.15 a.m. —Organised Tour of District; Picnic Luncheon at
Merino Downs.
AFTERNOON—
Unveiling of Henty Memorial Cairn at Merino Downs
by Sir H. S. W. Lawson, K.C.M.G.; Picnic and Historical
Lectures by Mr. Little and others.
EVENING—
Plain and Fancy Dress Old-Time Dance.
SATURDAY, 13th NOVEMBER
MERINO PASTORAL and AGRICULTURAL SHOW.
EVENING—
Grand Concert in Merino Mechanics’ Hall.
SUNDAY, 14th NOVEMBER
MORNING—
Church Services in all Churches by former Clergymen.
EVENING—
Combined Sacred Concert in Mechanics’ Hall.
MONDAY, 15th NOVEMBER
MORNING-
-10 a.m.—Back to School.
11.15 a.m. —Grand Procession, leaving School, featuring
Decorated Vehicles, Etc., Fancy Costumes, Etc.
AFTERNOON—
Grand Sports Programme in Merino Park; Steer Riding.
EVENING—
Grand Centenary Ball.
