

PE.TH
14>-Nc
HISTORICAL ACCOUNTS
NEW SOUTH WALES,
QUEENSLAND,
Cfje Hear=Boofc of Australia♦
PRINTED FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION
. V \ IX THE
COURT OF “THE YEARBOOK OF AUSTRALIA,”
CENTENNIAL INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
MELBOURNE.
i o c r
■?0 0 V
*
A/, 5 t/ ?7
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
TASMANIA,
VICTORIA, and
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
§'
VOMPJLEDF.XRRESSL VFOR \
H»> v I'-


f '■ ■ t *
.
' r■' • ■ i* ' ■ ■ I y- '
* .
X
Extract fkom thk speech of The Hon. SIB HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G., Premier of new South
Wares, at Bega, on the 7th January, 1888.
“ I kuow that I forecast no shadowy picture when I tell you that these young Australian States will in the
course of a 'very short time—another generation will do it—-take their rank among the nations of the world.
T, for one, fervently hope—l pray so earnestly as I pray for myself—that our connection with the grand old
State from which we sprang may long continue. I can conceive of no higher distinction for the young
Australian commonwealth than that of being affiliated to old England by some delicate but sufficiently binding
ties, taking a noble, world-embracing course of progress under the same grand old flag. But, whether that be
so or not, one thing is beyond all doubt—namely, that we shall be a great power, and it is for you to
see that the foundation of a great national fabric is laid in solid rock, and by pure and elevated motives;
to see that the spirit which inspires your legislation and your administration in every act of your political
life is pure and durable.”
--l-- J
/' r * N I -J. l 1 - ■
mSM
r m.n ■ ,
, ' *£.: - - , . -


historical account of Ncto iooutf) M.alcs.
(Compiled expressly for 3Ti)c ¥ear-Boolt Of Rustralia.)
Although other portions of the Australian continent
were visited by Europeans much earlier, it was until the
year 1770 that the coast of what is now New South Wales
was discovered, when Captain Cook entered Botany Bay
in the “Endeavor” on the 28th April, landing on the
same day in company with Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and
others. On May 1, Forby Sutherland, one of the seamen
of the “ Endeavor,” was buried near the watering place,
the south point being named Point Sutherland by Capt.
Cook from this incident. A few days later, on May 6,
Capt. Cook set sail from his anchorage in Botany Bay, and
at noon was abreast of a harbor which he named Port
Jackson, after Sir George Jackson, Secretary to the
Admiralty.
Coasting along the eastern seaboard, he finally reached
the northern extremity of the continent at Cape York,
and on the 21st August of the same year landed on a
small island in its vicinity, and took formal possession of
the whole eastern coast, from lat. 38° to lat. 10° SO' S., on
behalf of H.M. King George 111., at the same time be-
stowing on it the appellation of New South Wales.
It having been determined upon by the British Govern-
ment to send a number of convicts to Botany Bay, six
transports carrying 664 male and 192 female criminals,
and three storeships, sailed from Portsmouth on the 13th
May, 1787, accompanied by the warships “ Sirius ” and
“ Supply,” the whole expedition being under the command
of Capt. Phillip, of the “ Sirius,” who was authorized by
the Government to found a colony. The fleet of eleven
ships, with 1,030 persons, arrived in Botany Bay on the
20th January, 1788, having lost 32 souls by death during
the voyage, and six days later came to an anchor in
Port Jackson, when formal possession of the territory
was taken by Governor Phillip, and the British colors
hoisted. On the same day, the French ships “Astrolabe ”
and “Boussole,” commanded by La Perouse and L’Angle,
anchored in Botany Bay.
On the 13th February, Norfolk Island was established
as a dependency of the colony, under Lieut. King, after-
wards Capt. King and Governor of New South Wales and
Van Diemen's Land. The entire live stock of the colony
in May of this year was found to consist of 2 bulls, 5
cows, 1 horse, 3 mares, 3 colts, 29 sheep, 19 goats, 74 pigs,
5 rabbits, 18 turkeys, 29 geese, 35 ducks, and 210 fowls.
June 4 being His Majesty’s birthday, a grand dinner was
given by the Governor, when the name and boundaries
of the first county in the colony were fixed. It was called
Cumberland.
In June, 1789, the Hawkesbury River was discovered
by Governor Phillip, in company with Capts. Hunter,
Collins, Johnston, and others; and detachments of some
companies arrived which had been raised in England for
the service of the colony, and were called the New South
Wales Corps. In November, an observatory was com-
menced at the west point of Sydney Cove, together with
a residence for Lieut. Dawes, the officer in charge. The
first harvest in the colony was reaped at Rose Hill (Par-
ramatta) in December of this year.
On the 26th September, 1791, Lieut.-Governor King,
who had left the colony for England the previous year,
arrived in the “ Gorgon ” in charge of the Territorial
Seal, and His Majesty's gracious permission to grant
pardons, absolute or conditional. Shortly after, on
November 1, Governor Phillip was dangerously wounded
in the breast by a spear thrown by one of a party
of natives he was endeavoring to conciliate. On
February 24, 1792, Lieut-Governor Grose arrived from
England, and on December 11, Governor Phillip departed
thither, handing over the Government of the colony to
the late arrival.
Meanwhile, building and agriculture were being carried
on apace, and in 1793 the Government purchased from
the settlers 1,200 bushels of wheat, this being the fir*t
sale made. In December, 1794, Lieut.-Governor Grose
sailed for England, handing over charge of the colony
to Captain Paterson, of the New South Wales Corps, who
was superseded by Governor Hunter on the arrival of the
latter on the 7th September, 1795. The chronicles of the
next year record the important discovery of coal at Port
Stephens. In August, 1797, the colonial ship “ Cumber-
land ” was piratically seized and carried oil by convicts.
The three years 1796, 1797, and 1798, were remarkable
for successful explorations of both the coast and the
interior, Flinders and Bass distinguishing tliemselves
by their discoveries.
On Governor Hunter embarking for England on the
28th September, 1800, the Government of the colony
devolved upon Capt. Phillip Gidley King, late Lieut.-
Governor of Norfolk Island. Property of all kinds had
rapidly been increasing in value during the last three
years, and now reached such ridiculously high prices as
£9O for a horse, £BO for a cow, £7 10s. for a Cape sheep,
£1 Is. for a goose. 16s. per lb. for tea, &c., &c. These rates
were not caused by the scarcity of the commodities, but
through the movements of a ring of traders, mostly of
the official, civil, and military classes, who obtained the
control of most of the goods which arrived, as well as the
agricultural produce of the colony which was for dis-
posal, and were then able to demand arbitrary prices
from the consumer.
In 1803, the first Australian newspaper, the Sydney
Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser , was instituted
and published by Mr. George Howes. In 1804, there was an
imeute among the convicts at Castle Hill, which was put
down by the military, when many of the leading insurgents
were hanged. The year 1806 is memorable for a most
disastrous flood at the Hawkesbury on March 20, which
inundated nearly the whole of the settlement, many
persons perishing, and whole families being ruined. The
consequences to the colony were little short of a famine.
Food of all kinds rose rapidly in price, bread of very in-
ferior quality selling for 2s. 3d. per lb.
On the sth August of this year Captain William Bligh
arrived, and relieved Governor King of his rule, the
latter at once taking his departure for England. At this
time the population of New South Wales numbered
7,200, with 1,084 more at Norfolk Island ; the area of
land occupied was 48,855 acres, of which 12,860 acres were
under crop ; and the live stock consisted of 438 horses,
3,264 cattle, 16,501 sheep, 14,300 pigs, and 2,900 goats.
Governor Bligh's tenure of office was marked by great
antagonism between himself and the wealthier class of
free settlers, as well as the military officers, and he was
specially severe with Capt. MacArthur, the first introducer
of sheep to the colony for wool-growing. This state of
things finally led to the arrest and deposition of the
Governor on January 26, 1808, by Major Johnston, com-
manding the 102nd or New South Wales Corps, who as
senior military officer then took upon himself the duties
of government. As soon as this had occurred, Capt.
Macarthur was appointed Colonial Secretary, and the
other responsible posts under Government were filled by
those who were favorable to the chief actors in this
small rebellion, the former occupants being superseded.
This condition of affairs only continued until July 28th,
when Lieut.-Colonel Foveaux returned from England
with the appointment of Lieut.-Governor, and at once
superseded Major Johnston. Not wishing to identify
himself with either party, Foveaux simply carried on the
government of the colony until Colonel Pearson arrived
from Van Diemen's Land on January Ist, 1809, and
superseded him. He also kept aloof from the late party
quarrels, deeming it wiser to await the instructions of
the Home Government, and meanwhile keeping Governor
Bligh under arrest at Government House, in default of
his accepting the offer of the command of the “ Porpoise,”
and agreeing to proceed to England with the utmost
despatch. On the 4th February, Governor Bligh signified
his willingness to leave in the “ Porpoise ” and sail for
England as demanded ; and the following month saw
the departure of Major Johnston for England, to meet
any charges that might be laid against him, and he was
accompanied by Captain Macarthur. Bligh, instead of
sailing directly for England, went to Van Diemen’s
Land, with the view of arousing popular feeling in his
favor; but finding himself thwarted by the Lieut-
Governor, Colonel Collins, continued to hover off the
coast until the arrival of Colonel Lachlan Macquarie as
Governor on December 28th of the same year, accom-
panied by the first battalion of the 73rd Regiment, under
the command of Colonel O’Connell, who had been ap-
pointed Lieut.-Governor.
The new Governor’s first work was to re-instate all the
officers who had been removed when Bligh was placed
under arrest, and to order the officers and men of the
New South Wales Corps to hold themselves in readiness


to proceed to England. Despatches were sent inviting
Bligh to return to Sydney, and in a few weeks he did so,
when he was received according to his naval rank of
commodore. He finally left the colony on the 7th May,
and the result of the enquiry at home was that Lieut.-
Colonel Johnston was cashiered the service, and Captain
Macarthur debarred from returning to the colony for
eight years, for the part which they respectively took in
connection with the deposition of Bligh.
Under Governor Macquarie's rule, the material pro-
gress of New South Wales was very great. Roads and
bridges were constructed with vigor, the work of ex-
ploration was carried out in an able and steady manner,
and Sydney was transformed from a mere collection of
huts into a busy town.
In 1813, the expenditure of the colony amounted to
£235,000, and in 1814 to £231,362, which w T as reduced to
£150,000 in 1816. In this year (1813) the first successful
attempt was made by Blaxland, Wentworth, and Lawson
to cross the Blue Mountains, winch had hitherto baffled
all efforts in this direction. They reached a point about
1J mile beyond what is now known as Katoomba, the
spot being marked by a tree, which is still in existence. In
this year also, a market and half-yearly fair were estab-
lished in Parramatta, and in 1816, the foundation-stone of
the Macquarie tower and lighthouse was laid by the
Governor ; while the Bank of New South Wales was
established on April Bth of the following year. The
Benevolent Society of New South Wales was brought into
existence on June 4th, 1818, and in the same year the Go-
vernor visited Newcastle on a tour of inspection. In
1819, the Sydney Savings Bank was established, and
the country west of the Blue Mountains received the
name of Westmoreland. In 1820, the foundation-stone
of the Georgian Public School was laid by Governor
Macquarie, who also visited Bathurst, and marked and
named Campbelltown on the Ist December.
The population of Sydney had risen this year to up-
wards of 7,000, about a third of the entire population of
the colony; and several thriving manufactures, such as
woollen cloths, earthenware, salt, caudles, soap, hats. &c.,
were being carried on there. The next year saw the
opening of the Sydney Benevolent Asylum by the
Governor on the Ist October, after which he sailed
on a tour of inspection to the northern settlements
on the Ist November. Some idea may be formed
of the prosperity and increase of the colony by
the following returns for October, 1821, which include
Van Diemen’s Land as part of New South Wales
Population, including the military, 38,778; cattle,
102,939 ; sheep, 290,158; pigs, 33,906; horses, 4,564;
land cleared and in tillage, 32,267 acres.
Six days after the departure of Governor Macquarie
from Sydney, Major-General Sir Thomas Brisbane, K.C.8.,
arrived, and his commission as Governor of New South
Wales and its dependencies was published and read in the
capital on the Ist December, 1821. Macquarie and
his family did not, however, take their departure for
England until February 12th, 1822, the late Governor
employing his time meanwhile in making a tour of the
colony. Major-General Sir Thomas Brisbane, the sixth
Governor of New South Wales, entered upon his duties
under most favorable circumstances. He found the
colony in a flourishing condition, its productions rapidly
increasing, and its population receiving accessions of men
of capital and energy almost daily, while his advent was
hailed by the colonists of all classes with the greatest
satisfaction. Unfortunately, however, he showed himself
to be totally unfitted to cope with the exigencies of a
young and thriving colony, in which there were two
classes bitterly antagonistic to each other, and each
striving to gain the ear of the Governor by every ex-
pedient possible. On the one side he was beset by a petty
oligarchy of exclusives, who regarded themselves as the
only persons whose claims to grants of land, convict
labor, or social recognition by the Governor ought to be
considered at all, while on the other side he was worried
by the demands for legal rights and social recognition on
the part of numbers of wealthy emancipists, backed up
as they were by the public voice, whenever the last
could make itself heard. So uncongenial did Sir Thomas
Brisbane consider his position in Sydney, that he made
Parramatta his head-quarters, where he spent most of
his time superintending the erection of an observatory,
and devoting himself to scientific pursuits, much to the
satisfaction of the small class of exclusives above-men-
tioned, who now did pretty much as they liked.
On the 13th August, 1823, the Australian Religious
Tract Society was instituted at Sydney, and on the
29th of the same month, the 3rd Segment (the Buffs)
arrived in the capital; while the Royal Veteran Com-
pany was disbanded on the the 24th September.
Governor Brisbane’s administration, however, vas
marked by events of the deepest importance to the
colonists and their descendants—events, the effects of
which will continue to be felt for ages. These were as
follows :—the concession of the first instalment of self-
government by the institution of a Legislative Council
on August 11,1824 ; the formal acknowledgment of the
liberty of the press on October 1 of the same year; the
discovery of an overland route to Port Philiip, and the
formation of settlements at Moreton Bay and other
places ; and the commencement of a steady flow of emi-
gration from the United Kingdom, owing, in a great
degree, to the steps taken by a native of the colony, Mr.
William Charles Wentworth, to disseminate in England
information relative to the condition and prospects of
Australia.
On March 5, 1824, Francis Forbes, Esq., the first Cuief
Justice of New South Wales, arrived in Sydney, and the
48th Regiment embarked for Madras, while one month
later Sax Banister, Esq., the first Attorney-General, and
William Balcombe, Esq., the first Colonial Treasurer,
reached the capital. August 1 saw the arrival of the
first Solicitor-General, Mr. John Stephen, as well as that
of Mr. William Carter, the first Master in Chancery; on
the 18th, the Rev. Thomas Reddall was appointed
Director-General of Public Schools, and on the 28th of
the same month, Mr. G. G. Mills, Registrar of the Supreme
Court, arrived in Sydney. On October 14, the Austra-
lian 'newspaper was first published, and during this
year an exploring expedition towards the south was
undertaken by Messrs. Hume and Hovell, who penetrated
to Port Phillip and subsequently returned.
Sir Thomas Brisbane’s administration lasted somewhat
less than four years, and, early in December 1826, he
sailed for England, after having resigned the reins of
government into the hands of Colonel Stewart, of the
Buffs. The Returns for this year for the colony show a
Revenue of £71,682 ; and Expenditure of £82,000 ; value
of Imports, £300,000 ; population, 33,675 ; sheep, 237,622;
cattle, 134,519; land under cultivation, 45,614 acres;
wool exported, 411,600 lb. In whaling alone, the mer-
chants of Sydney had this year nearly thirty ships en-
gaged, whilst many others were employed in the island
trade, and the pearl and seal fisheries.
On the 18th December, 1825, the seventh Governor of
New South Wales arrived in the person of Lieut.-Geueral
Ralph Darling, relieving Colonel Stewart of the position
he had held for about three weeks. The new Governor
inaugurated his tenure of office by purging all the de-
partments of the public services of the emancipist and
convict elements which had been introduced by Mac-
quarie, and continued to a considerable extent by Sir
Thomas Brisbane. This measure, of course, raised up a
bitter feeling among the large class of emancipists, and
the Governor and his policy were assailed in very strong
terms in the columns of the “ Australian ” newspaper,
whilst the organ of the Government lauded both to the
skies.
The extraordinary success which had attended those
engaged in pastoral pursuits served to attract the envy
and emulation of both other colonists and new arrivals,
the consequence being that a perfect mania set in for
the possession of live stock. Unfortunately for the
speculators for rapid fortunes, the weather was beyond
their control, and, from the close of 1826, a drought of
three yearn’ duration commenced, which caused a finan-
cial crash of the most disastrous character. Distress and
ruin fell upon scores of respectable people who had been
considered wealthy but a few months before. Owing to
these untoward circumstances, the free male adults who
arrived in 1828 and 1829 did not exceed 250 in each year,
whilst the number fell in 1830 to 166. In 1831, again,
there was a slight increase to 185. But, unfortunately
for the colony, it so happened that these years which
brought so few free emigrants saw the introduction of a
larger number of convicts than had ever been previously
sent in a like time ; fully 3,000, of whom five-sixths
were men, being poured into the country.
In 1828, an expedition of discovery left Sydney in
charge of Captain Charles Sturt and Mr. Hamilton
Hume, and on the 4th of February of the next year
reached the bank of a fine river, which was named the


Darling. A few months after the return of this band of
explorers, Captain Sturt set out on another expedition,
accompanied this time by Mr. George Macleay, as second
in command, and struck the Murrumbidgee, which they
sailed down until its junction with the Lachlan was
reached, and finally until they were shot into the broad
and noble Murray River, which they so named after the
then Secretary to the Colonies, Sir George Murray.
They at length found themselves on the shores of En-
counter Bay, and not being able to reach St. Vincent’s
Gulf, where succor awaited them, they determined to
retrace their route by the Murray, and started on their
return journey on the 14th January, 1830, reaching
Sydney on the 25th May following, after having under-
gone almost insuperable privations and labors.
The introduction of steam navigation into Australian
waters took place in 1831, when the steamer “ Sophia
Jane,’’ 154 tons register, was brought out from England
by Lieutenant Biddulph, R.N., and two small colonial-
built steamers, named the “ Surprise ” and “ William the
Fourth,” were launched. Shortly afterward, the first
•olonial steam company was lormed, under the title of
the Australian Steam Conveyance Company. In 1831,
also, the system of free grants to private individuals was
finally put a stop to by orders from the Imperial Govern-
ment, by which in future no lands were to be disposed of
except by public auction, at an upset price of not less
than ss. per acre. The population of the colony this year
was 51,155; export of wool, 1,401,284 lb; value of total
exports, £324,168; imports, £490,152; Expenditure,
£103,228 ; Revenue, £121,066.
On the 22nd October, 1831, Governor Darling em-
barked for Canton, on his way to England, his term
of office having expired, and was succeeded by
Major-General Richard Bourke, who arrived in Port
Jackson on the 2nd December following, Colonel Patrick
Lindsay having assumed the office of Lieut.-Governor
pending his arrival. During this year, Major (after-
wards Sir Thomas) Mitchell, the Surveyor-General, un-
dertook an expedition to the northward in search of a
great river, said to exist in this direction, and reached
the rivers Gwydir, Namoi, and Peel. He set out
from Sydney on the 24th November, his drays and
men having preceded him some time before to-
wards the river Hunter. Three hundred miles had to
be traversed ere the expedition would pass the line to
which the squatter population had already extended
itself in that direction. In due course he reached
the Hunter, and overtook his party of about fifteen
souls, which consisted of convicts with the exception of
a soldier or two. Besides these he had two gentlemen,
assistant surveyors, to accompany him, Mr. White and
Mr. Finch. In addition to a supply of muskets, pistols,
and sky-rockets, Mitchell says : —“ Of tilted carts we had
two, so constructed that they could be drawn either by
one or two horses. They were also so light that they
could be moved across difficult passes by the men alone.
Three stronger carts or drays were loaded with our stock
of provisions, consisting of flour, pork (which had been
boned in order to diminish the bulk as much as possible),
tea, tobacco, sugar and soap. We had, besides, a number
of pack-saddles for the draught animals, that, in case of
necessity, we might be able to carry forward the loads
by such means. Several pack-horses were also attached
to the party. I had been induced to prefer wheel-
carriages for an explorating journey, first, from the level
nature of the interior country; secondly, from the
greater facility and certainty they afforded of starting
early, and as the necessity for laying all our stores in
separate loads on animals’ backs could thus be avoided.
The latter method being further exposed to interruptions
on the way by the derangement of loads, or galling the
animals’ backs, one inexperienced man being thus likely
to impede the progress of the whole party. For the
navigation of rivers, two portable boats of canvas had
been prepared by Mr. Eager, of the King’s dockyards at
Sydney. Wo carried the canvas only with models of the
ribs, and tools, having carpenters who could complete
them as occasion required.” Arrived at the Peel River,
Mitchell engaged a black guide at the last squatter’s
station, and then crossing over to the further bank,
entered on the yet unexplored region, the Peel stretching
away westward, its course traced by the lines of large
blue gum-trees. On the 16th December they reached
the Namoi, and ranged along the northern boundaries
of the Liverpool Plains. Having in vain attempted a
course northwards, past a rocky hill which they called
the Pic of Tangulda, and having passed a small river
which they named the Maule, they returned to the
Namoi, and, leaving the cattle and drays under a guard
at a camp, embarked on this river in their canvas boats,
only to discover their total unfitness for sailing on Aus-
tralian waters. They were quickly stove in by snags, so
that the party was compelled to send back for the cattle
and drays. Following the course of the river in a north-
westerly direction, they passed the western extremity of
the Nandewar Range on their right, and then holding a
northern route, they reached the river Gwydir on the
3th January, 1832. Determining to follow down the
Gwydir to its junction, they set out again a week later,
after Major Mitchell had explored the way some dis-
tance on horseback. Mr. Finch, who was far behind,
bringing up fresh additions to their stores, was left to
find his way by the tracks of their wheels. Hastening
forward north-west, Mitchell’s party soon came upon
another deep and rapid river, the Karaula ; crossing
which Mitchell went on with a reconnoitering band to
trace the course of this new river. After about twenty
miles of travel, they came upon the Gwydir again, falling
into a large river, which they at once recognised as the
Darling, or rather in that latitude, the Barwon.
“ Thus,” says Mitchell, “ I now overlooked, from a bank
of seventy feet high, a river as broad as the Thames at
Putney, on which the goodly waves, perfectly free from
fallen timber, danced in full liberty. Thus termi-
nated our excursion to explore this last-discovered
stream. Into this river we had traced the Gwydir ; the
junction of the Namoi also could not be far distant; and
even that of the Castlereagh was only about seventy
miles to the south-west.” Intending to proceed still
farther north in the exploration of the country, they re-
turned to the camp, where they were met with news
which completely changed their intentions. They found
that a party of natives had been there, who were much
inclined to steal, and had evidently been watching the
expedition ever since it had entered the district. Shortly
after their return, Mr. Finch, who had been bringing up
further supplies, arrived, and, as Major Mitchell says,
announced that “ two of his men had been killed, and all
the supplies, cattle, and equipments had fallen into the
hands of the natives. This catastrophe occurred at the
Ponds of Goroloi, beyond Mount Frazer, which Mr.
Pinch had reached after having been distressed, even
more than our party had been at the same place, for
want of water. This privation had first occasioned the
loss of his horse and several other animals, so that his
party had been able to convey the supplies to the ponds,
by carrying forward from the dry camp only a portion
at a time on the remaining bullocks. Mr. Finch at
length succeeded in thus lodging nil the stores at these
ponds, but being unable to remove them farther without
the assistance of my cattle, he left them there, and pro-
ceeded forward on foot along our track with one man,
in expectation of falling in with my party at no great
distance in advance. After ascertaining that we were
not so near as he hoped, and having reached the
Gwydir, and traced our route along its banks, until he
again recognised Mount Frazer, he returned at the end
of the second day, when he found neither his tents nor
his men to receive him, but a heap of various articles,
such as bags, trunks, harness, tea and sugar, canisters,
&c., piled over the dead bodies of his men, whose legs
he at length perceived projecting. The tents had been
cut in pieces, tobacco and other articles lay about, and
most of the flour had been carried off, although some
bags still remained in the cart. The two bullocks con-
tinued feeding near. This spectacle must have been
most appalling to Mr. Pinch, uncertain, as he must have
been, whether the eyes of the natives were not then upon
him, while neither he nor his man possessed any moans
of defence. Taking a piece of pork and some flour, he
hastened from the dismal scene, and, by travelling all
day, and passing the nights without fire, he provi-
dentially escaped the natives, and had at length reached
our camp. Thus terminated my hopes of exploring the
country beyond the Karaula, and I could not but feel
thankful for the providential circumstance of Mr.
Finch’s arrival, at the very moment when I was about
to proceed on that undertaking, trusting that I should
find, on returning to this depot, the supplies which I
expected him to bring. Wo had now, on the contrary,
an additional demand on our much-exhausted stock of
provisions. The season when the rain might be expected
was approaching, and we had behind us 200 miles of


country subject to inundation, without a hill to which
we could, in such a case, repair. The soil was likely to
become impassable after two days’ rain, and our cart
wheels were represented by the carpenters to be almost
unserviceable. These considerations, and the hostile
disposition of the natives in our rear, not only deterred
me from crossing the Karaula, but seemed to require my
particular attention homewards.” As they proceeded
homewards, Mitchell saw fires kindled, and strong bodies
of natives again and again came into view. On arriving
at Pinch’s camp, they found a single cart and the two
dead bodies of their companions now in a high state of
decomposition. The bullocks were no longer there ; the
natives had revisited the camp, and carried away the
remainder of the flour and the canvas of the tent. The
bodies lay under a heap of saddles, yokes, harness, pack-
saddles, trunks, canisters, &c. The savages appeared
to have been ignorant of the uses of tea, sugar, and
tobacco, as these were scattered about, destroyed by the
late rains. A spade, a steelyard, and a hammer were
left, although iron had been so much in request that
they had drawn one of the iron pins of the cart. Having
buried the bodies, conscious that they were being
watched by the natives, smoke arising from various parts
around, they continued their route. The rains having
set in, the plains thence to the Namoi were deep
in mud, and made it difficult to advance, but on the 26th
Pebruary they reached that river, and crossed it on the
38th. The remaining distance to Sydney was through a
tolerably well-settled country.
Wine was also received in Sydney from the Bathurst
district, made from the grapes grown there, and the coal
works at Newcastle were opened in December, 1831.
In 1833, the right of emancipists to sit as jurors was
legally determined in their favor. In April, 1834, new
assignment regulations were published, resulting in
the overthrow of a monopoly by which, heretofore,
the proprietors and lessees of large tracts of land had
engrossed a disproportionate amount of convict labor,
to the prejudice of those of smaller means. During the
next year, Sir Thomas Mitchell set out at the head of
another exploring party, and reached the river Darling.
One of his followers, Mr. Richard Cunningham, botanist,
was murdered by blacks after having lost himself in
the bush, whilst in pursuit of those products of nature
which enriched his science. In 1835, also, seventeen
counties were proclaimed, and the agitation which had
existed for some time in favour of Representative Gov-
ernment greatly increased. Governor Bourke was
Knighted in the course of this year, Archdeacon Brough-
ton created Bishop of Australia, and the Right Rev. Jo! in
Bede Folding, Bishop of Hiero-Csesarea and Vicar-
Apostolic of the Australian colonies, arrived in Sydney.
On the 15th March, 1836, Sir Thomas Mitchell started
on a second exploration of the Darling, from which he
subsequently returned on the 3rd November following,
having discovered the river Glenelg and added largely to
the previous knowledge of the country generally. In
this year the Legislative Council passed the important
Church Act of New South Wales, by which religious
equality was firmly and permanently established in the
colony.
In September, 1837, Sir Richard Bourke’s resignation,
which he had previously tendered, was accepted with
deep regret by the Imperial Government, and Sir George
Gipps became his successor, arriving in Sydney on the
33rd February, 1838, Colonel Snodgrass having under-
taken the duties of Lieut.-Governor in the interim. To
show their appreciation of Governor Bourke’s many and
important public services, the colonists determined to
erect a statue of him, and large subscriptions at once
poured in for the purpose. 1837 saw the completion of
the aqueduct from Botany to Sydney, commenced in
1827, and showed a total population of 76,000, of which
65,000 were free, and 21,000 convicts. In 1838, reporters
for the press and the public generally were first admitted
at the proceedings of the Legislative Council, -which were
now published at large in the newspapers ; while the
system of assigning convicts terminated with the close of
the year.
The year 1839 opened with the publication of the
report of the Parliamentary Committee on Transporta-
tion, wherein it was recommended that the transportation
of convicts to New South Wales and the settled districts
of Van Diemen’s Land should cease ; that convicts should
only be sent to settlements where there were no free
peop’e, and that such settlements should be used cx-
clusively for this class of criminals; and that convicts
who were punished abroad should be compelled to leave
the settlement to which they had been sent, alter the ex-
piry of their sentence, the Government furnishing them
with the means of doing so. At the same time that a
section of the colonists advocated the continuance of
transportation, it was generally considered ami petitioned
that one-half the expenses of the maintenance and
coercion of the convicts should be contributed by the
Home Government.
During this year Governor Gipps propounded a scheme
of public instruction, based on the “Irish National Sys-
tem,” and a sum of £3,000 was placed on the Estimates
for the purpose of carrying the same into effect. A
severe drought prevailed in the colony, and the neces-
saries of life became so scarce and dear, that a public
subscription was raised with which to purchase food,
and distribute the same amongst the poorest and most
distressed classes. Bushranging was very rife, and
statistics showed an increase of crime to the extent of
fifty per cent. In the commencement of 1840, Mr. John
Kennedy Hume, resident in the Yass district, was shot
dead in cold blood by one of a party of bushrangers, who
were afterwards attacked by a number of settlers,
headed by Mr. Henry O’Brien, when some were shot, and
the principal of the gang taken prisoner and executed at
Goulburn. In this year an Act was passed appointing a
Commission under the title of a Court of Claims, to
revise the claims put forward by some individuals to
large tracts of land in New Zealand, the results of which
were that the claimants were either found to be entitled
only to a small fraction of the area they asserted
they had purchased, or, in some instances, the claim*
were altogether disallowed. The colony was also divided
into three districts; the northern, comprising all the
country in the neighborhood of Moreton Bay; the
middle, consisting of New South Wales proper; and the
southern, contained in the newly-settled district of Port
Phillip, where, moreover, the price of land was fixed at
£1 per acre without competition, whilst in the other two
the minimum was twelve shillings, with sales by auction.
The entire revenue of the colony was £682,473 ; total
disbursements, £561,023 ; value of imports, £3,014,189;
exports, £1,399,692 ; while 17 vessels, with a total
carrying capacity of 1,196 tons, were built and registered
in the colony during the year.
In 1841, the Governor announced at the opening of
the Council that, henceforth, New Zealand formed a sepa-
rate Government. A general census was completed in
the course of this year, from which it was shown that
the total population of New South Wales, including the
province of Port Phillip, was 130,856 ; of which number
87,298 were males, and 43,558 females.
In February, 1842, a petition to the Imperial Govern-
ment prayingfor representative government, was adopted
at a meeting in Sydney, presided over by the sheriff,
and on the 11th April following, the statue of Governor
Bourke was inaugurated in the presence of a vast public as-
semblage of all classes. In the following month, the Legis-
lative Council assembled, during the sitting of which a
bill was passed incorporating the town of Sydney, when
the qualification of voters was made to consist in the
occupancy of a house or warehouse of the annual value
of £25, for twelve months preceding the enrolment, no
person being entitled to vote, however, who was not a
resident householder in the city, or within seven miles of
its boundaries. The qualification of an alderman, coun-
cillor, auditor, or assessor was real estate of the value of
£l.OOO. or property rated in the annual value of £5O. In
November the municipal elections took place, the first
aldermen chosen for the city being Robert Owen, John
Hosking, George Allen. Thomas Broughton, Francis
Mitchell, and J. R. Wilshire, of whom Hosking was
elected Mayor. The Richmond River was discovered in
this year, and the term “ squatter ” was first used in its
present significance as applying to those owners of ex-
tensive flocks and herds who rented lands from the Crown
for grazing purposes. Tobacco was also first manufac-
tured in the colony. An earthquake shock was expe-
rienced in various parts of the colony on the 28th
October, and towards the close of the year the new Imperial
Act, regulating the disposal of waste lands, was received
at Sydney. By this measure the auction system was
universally brought into operation; the lands were
divided into town, suburban, and country lots ; and £1
per acre was fixed as the minimum price for country lots
in all parts of the colony.


On the first day of 1843 the new Act to provide for the
Government of New South Wales, whereby the right of
representation was conceded to the colonists, was re-
ceived in Sydney, having passed the Imperial Parlia-
ment and received the Eoyal assent the previous July.
The new act provided for the establishment of a Council,
to consist of thirty-six members, of wdiom twenty-four
were to be elected by the people, including six members
for Port Phillip, and of the remainder, six wore to be
Government officers, and the other six Crown nominees.
On the Ist August, the first Representative Legislature
of New South Wales met, when Alexander Macloay was
elected Speaker. The monetary distress which had for
some time weighed down the energies of the colony, was
now increased by the failure of the Bank of Australia, and a
select committee of the Council reported that there were
thirteen hundred mechanics and laborers out of employ-
ment in Sydney alone. At this critical time, Mrs. Caroline
Chisholm commenced her philanthropical labors in aid of
the poorer classes, by making arrangements for locating
thirty families at Illawarra, on land granted to them on
clearing leases, the proprietor of the soil supplying the
tenants with provisions for the first five months of their
occupancy.
The year 1844 saw the commencement of the contest
between the Executive Government and the squatters,
the former having issued a proclamation in April, alter-
ing the terms on which licenses to occupy Crown Lands
were granted, and declaring that parties occupying
stations in separate districts, notwithstanding that the
same might be contiguous, should not only be required,
in future, to take out separate: licenses for each such dis-
trict, but also to pay the established fee of £lO for the
same. A meeting of squatters was then held at the
Royal Hotel, for the purpose of protesting against the
proposed regulations, when a society was formed under
the designation of the “ Pastoral Association of New
South Wales,” to secure the due protection of the pasto-
ral interests ; and at the annual meeting of the Council,
Wentworth opened the subject of Colonial Grievances.
In the course of the Session, the Hon. Prancis Scott,
M.P. for Roxburghshire, was appointed parliamentary
agent to represent the colony in the House of Commons,
at a salary of £5OO a year. During the year the first
Jewish Synagogue in Sydney was opened and consecrated.
Sir James Dowling, the Chief Justice, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Sir Alfred Stephen. The government of Nor-
folk Island passed from New South Wales to Van Die-
men’s Land, and the value of the exports exceeded that
of the imports for the first time in the history of the
colony.
In September of this year, Dr. Ludwig Leichhardt
undertook an expedition of exploration from Moreton
Bay to Port Essiugton, in the course of which the rivers
Mackenzie, Cape, Burdekin, Clarke, Lynd, Condamine,
Dawson, Van Diemen, Macarthur, Wickham, and Roper,
were met with and named, the little band of explorers
finally reaching Port Essington on the 17th December,
1845, and returning to Sydney by sea on the 29th March,
1846, with the loss of one man, Gilbert, who had been mor-
tally speared in an attack on the camp by aborigines on
the 28th June previous. To reward the explorers, a
public subscription amounting to more than £1,500 was
raised, which was supplemented by a vote of £l,OOO by
the Legislative Council, and all classes pressed forward
to testify their joy at the re-appearance of men whose
safety had long been doubted. At the latter end of 1845,
another campaign was undertaken for the purpose of
further exploring the Australian wilds, and Sir Thomas
Mitchell was, for the fourth time, chosen to load the
party. During the thirteen months’ absence of the expe-
dition, Sir Thomas penetrated so far north as lat.
24° 12' 37", reaching the banks of a fine river, which he
judged to fall into the Gulf of Carpentaria, and naming
the same the Victoria, in honor of Her Majesty. He
brought to light a vast extent of new and fertile country,
traversed the Fitzroy Downs, and increased his know-
ledge of the waterways of the continent by exploring the
rivers Barwon, Narran, Balonne, Culgoa, Maranoa, Sal-
vator, and Claude.
In May, 1846, a company was formed for constructing
railways from Sydney to Goulbum, to the Hawkesbury,
and to the Nepean, under the title of the Great Southern
and Western Railway Company, the capital of which was
to be one million, in fifty thousand shares, three-fourths
of which were to be reserved for sale to British capital-
ists. In the same mouth the Legislative Council met for
the despatch of business, and rejected the Crown Lands
Bill, when the Governor prorogued the House till the
25th August, meanwhile retiring from the colony and
the contest on the 10th July, when he was presented
with a farewell address, bearing five thousand seven
hundred and fifty-five signatures. Thus retired a
Governor, a worthy successor to him who preceded hiss.
Gipps was succeeded on the 2nd August by the new
Governor, Sir Charles Fitzroy, shortly after whose
advent the question of transportation was brought before
the Council, a despatch having been received by the
Governor from the Secretary of State, in which it was
proposed to renew the introduction of convicts. Whilst
the Council was in favor of the measure, the prevailing
sentiment throughout the country was one of detesta-
tion ; and anti-transportation meetings and memorials
were got up all over the colony, so that, finally in the
month of August, 1847, Cowper, in his place in the
Council, carried a resolution by eleven to seven, dis-
approving of a return to the system of transportation
and assignment. In July, 1847, the new squatting
regulations were received in the colony, by which the
public lands were divided into three classes—the settled,
the intermediate, and the unsettled. The settled lands
comprised the nineteen original counties, together with
the counties of East and West Macquarie, all land within
twenty-five miles of Melbourne, fifteen miles of Geelong,
and ten of several other towns, including Bathurst, all
lands within three miles of the sea, and within two miles
of the Glenelg, the Clarence and the Richmond rivers.
The intermediate districts comprised, with the exception
of those parts included in the settled areas, the counties
of Bourke, Normanby, Grant, and Auckland, the district
of Gippsland, and any counties which might be fixed
and proclaimed before the 31st December, 1848. The
unsettled districts comprehended all the remaining por-
tions of New South Wales. The Governor was empowered
to grant, in the unsettled districts, leases for pastoral
purposes for terms not exceeding fourteen years ; in the
intermediate districts, for eight years ; and in the settled,
for one year, subject to different provisions in each of
the three cases. In October of this year, Dr. Leichhardt
set out for Moreton Bay to proceed on that expedition of
exploration from which he never returned, his intention
being to endeavor to reach the Swan River in Western
Australia; and on the 7th December, Lady Mary Fitz-
roy, the wife of the Governor, was thrown out of her
carriage at Parramatta, and killed almost instantane-
ously. The population of the colony was 205,009; number
of acres under crop, 164,784; value of imports, £1,982,022;
and of exports, £1,870,046.
In the early part of 1848, Edward Kennedy returned to
Sydney, after completing the exploration of the Victoria,
one of the rivers discovered by Sir Thomas Mitchell in
his last expedition. He traced it as far as lat. 27° 66',
lon. 142°, where the stream became lost amid sandy,
barren ground. His party had been absent about tw'elve
months. He set out again about the beginning of May,
at the head of an expedition, with the view of exploring
Cape York Peninsula, for which purpose he went by sea
to Rockingham Bay, and on the Ist June commenced his
land journey towards Cape York. Early beset with the
impracticability of the country, he had first to leave part
of his supplies behind, next part of his men, and finally
attempted to make his way to Port Albany in company
with one black named Jacky Jacky. When in sight of
the sea in the neighborhood of this settlement, he was
attacked by blacks and speared so badly that he died
within an hour or two, Jacky Jacky finding his way to
Port Albany thirteen days later. Of the expedition, only
two white survivors were rescued, Mr. Carron, the
naturalist, and ariother, who had been left at Weymouth
Bay by Kennedy in his onward march.
On the Bth June, 1849, the “Harkaway” arrived in
Sydney with two hundred and twelve male convicts on
board, when an immense anti-convict demonstration was
made at the Circular Quay, and a protest drawn up for
presentation to the Governor, in which it was requested
that the prisoners in the “Harkaway” be immediately
sent back to England. Finding the Governor deaf to
this application, another meeting was called, when a
petition to the Queen was adopted, praying that the
Right Hon. Earl Grey, Secretary of State for the colonies,
might be removed from Her Majesty’s Councils, and that
the government of the colony might be carried on by
Ministers chosen from, and responsible to, the colonists
themselves.


On the 4th September, a bill to incorporate the Sydney
Railway Company was read a second time. In April,
1850, a despatch was received by the Governor from the
Secretary of State, in which he was informed that no
more couviots, after those which were already on the
way, would be sent to any part of New South Wales, in
consequence of the address from the Legislative Council.
During the session of the Council, which was prorogued
in October, the act for the establishment of the Sydney
University was passed, a project of which Wentworth
had been the originator, and in which he was. from the
initiation, the prime mover .In July, the first sod of the
Sydney and Goulburn Railway was turned by the Hon.
Mrs. Keith Stuart, the Governor’s daughter. The
Governor became very unpopular towards the close of
the year, when his despatches to the Imperial Govern-
ment on the anti-transportation demonstrations were
seen by the colonists, and further large and enthusiastic
meetings were held to protest against any further influx
of criminals to any part of the colony. In December,
the “Act for the better government of Her Majesty's
Australian Colonies” was received in Sydney, in which
Port Phillip, now named Victoria, was granted colonial
independence.
At the final session of the Legislative Council in 1851,
the Electoral Bill was passed, by which the new appor-
tionment of members was effected, the number of the
representatives being fixed at thirty-six, shortly after
which, on the 2nd May. the first representative legisla-
ture of New South Wales came to a termination after an
existence of eight years. This last month was also
remarkable for an event which was destined to effect a
complete revolution in all the interests and relations of
the colony. Edward Hammond Hargraves at this time
succeeded in discovering gold in the vicinity of Bathurst.
The consequent rush to the auriferous regions, and the
general unsettling of the population, affected the price of
provisions, and in a fortnight flour rose from £2O to £3O
per ton. Towards the end of June. the first gold to the
value of £3,500, was sent home in one ship. The effect
of this discovery on the question of transportation was
naturally to strengthen the hands of those inimical to
the measure, inasmuch as, doubtless, hundreds of men in
the United Kingdom would not hesitate to undergo a
brief term of punishment in order to find themselves
later on settled in a country where the precious metal
was to be found in large quantities ; and when, in July,
a report was received of a recent speech of Earl Grey in
the House of Lords in favour of a continuance of the
measure, the Council of the Australian League met and
drew up a petition to the Queen, giving forcible expres-
sion to the wishes of the colonists, and praying her to
dismiss that nobleman from her Councils.
At the inauguration of the new Legislature on the 14th
October, Fitzroy, in his opening speech, announced that
he had been appointed Governor-General over all Her
Majesty’s Australian possessions. On the 10th Decem-
ber, the Governor-General transmitted to the Council a
copy of a despatch which he bad just received from the
Secretary of State, forwarding an Order in Council re-
voking, so far as New South Wales was concerned, the
Order in Council of the 4th September, 1841, appointing
places to which felons and other offenders might be con-
veyed. The distemper, known as the “ Cumberland
disease,” made great ravages among the cattle in the
course of this year. In March, the first railway contract
was accepted, being for the substructure of a portion of
the line between Ashfield and Haslem's Lock. With re-
gard to the discovery of gold, the Rev. W. B. Clarke, the
well-known geologist, proved that he had at various
times publicly stated that the colony contained aurife-
rous deposits, and claimed the credit of being the
first to announce the existence of the precious metal in
Australia. A census was taken this year, showing the
population of the colony, exclusive of Port Phillip, to be
187,243, of whom 108,691 were males, and 78,552 females :
184,550 free, a;:d 2,693 bond.
In the month of January, 1852, an expedition, under
Mr. Hovenden Hely, set out in search of the missing
explorer, Leichhardt, but returned after an unsuccessful
search of some six months. In June, the village of
Gundagai was almost totally destroyed by a flood, in
which seventy-seven of the inhabitants lost their lives ;
and in October the Sydney University was inaugurated,
the Rev. E. T. Hamilton. M.A., being elected Provost.
The first mail steamer, the “Chusan,” arrived in the
colony, vid the Cape of Good Hope, in August, having
made the passage in 79 days. This was the first resultof
an engagement between the Home Government and the
P. and 0. Company for a bi-monthly communication.
Port Jackson was now made a free port, an act for
abolishing harbor dues, entry and clearance fees, light-
house and water-police dues having become law. The
gross revenue this year was upwards of half a million.
In 1853 the new goldfields regulations came into
operation, and caused very great dissatisfaction. On
the 21st December, 1853, the new Constitution Bill passed
the Council. This measure established two deliberative
chambers, a Legislative Council of not less than 21
naturalized or natural-born English subjects, and a
Legislative Assembly to consist of 54 members. During
this session, the Council voted Hargraves £lO,OOO, as a
reward for the discovery of gold, and £l.OOO to the Eev.
W. B. Clarke, as a mark of the appreciation in which the
country held the geological reports addressed by him at
various times to the Government. A pension of £lOO a
year was also voted to the mother of the explorer Leich-
hardt. In the course of this year, Her Majesty's Govern-
ment sanctioned the establishment of a branch of the
Royal Mint at Sydney, and the new works for the
defence of the harbor at Pinchgut Island, Lady Mac-
quarie’s Point, and elsewhere, were commenced. The
sum of £200.000 was also appropriated this year for the
purposes of immigration.
In the earlj y part of 1854, the new Constitution Bill
was sent home in charge of Wentworth, the author of it,
and Thomson, the Colonial Secretary, one of its warmest
supporters, who were charged with the duty of concili-
ating for the Bill the favour of Parliament and the
Government. At the meeting of the Council in June,
the Governor announced that Her Majesty had been
pleased to sanction the establishment of a branch of the
Royal Mint in Sydney, as prayed for in the address of
the House of the i9th December, 1851, and in the course
of the session the endowment was provided for any
affiliated colleges that might be established in connection
with the Sydney University. The question of immigra-
tion was also dealt with, and further sums remitted for
that important object, while a sum of £6,000 was voted
the Governor in augmentation of his salary, to defray
the increased expenses of his office from the Ist June,
1851, to Ist June, 1854 ; and a series of resolutions were
carried laudatory of the Governor’s success in his ad-
ministration, extending over a period of more than eight
years, and which was now fast drawing to a close.
Among the Acts passed during this session was one em-
powering the Government to treat with the several
railway companies for the purchase of their works.
During this year the Sydney Grammar School was
founded and endowed, the Governor-General made a
voyage to Port Curtis, and Alexander Cuthill, an old-
established and much respected medical practitioner of
Sydney, who was shot by an insane person, left a legacy
of £1(1,000 to the Asylum for Destitute Children.
The year 1855 opened with the departure of Fitzroy
and the installation of his successor, Sir William Denison.
Before embarking on the 28th January, Fitzroy was
presented with an address from the inhabitants of the
colony at large, accompanied by a munificent testimonial
of £2.000 in money. As a consequence of the Russian
war, then raging, steam communication with the colony-
ceased, the company which had the contract for carrying
the mails alleging that, after the commencement of
hostilities, they lost by their contract at the rate of
£40,000 a year; while, at the same time, the House voted
£50,000 for the new defence works, projected by the Gover-
nor, at Kissing Point and elsewhere. In October, the
new Constitution, which returned with the confirmation
of the Imperial Parliament, was received in the colony.
The mode in which the contract for the performance of
the sewerage works of the City of Sydney was carried out
occupied a good deal of the attention of the Council and
the public during this year, and the report of a select
committee proved beyond question a large amount of
fraud and corruption in the affair. In the course of the
session of the House, a resolution was passed increasing
the Governor-General's salary from £5,000 to £7,000, and
on the 19th December the Council was prorogued, and
the new Constitution formally inaugurated by the Gov-
ernor-General being newly sworn in under a commission
from Her Majesty, revoking that under which he had
hold his authority, and re-appointing him Governor-in-
Chief of New South Wales.


In July of this year a new exploring expedition set out
«nder the leadership of Mr. Gregory, the expense of
which was borne by the Imperial Government. His
instructions were to sail for the Victoria River, and
ascend as far as navigable, after which they were to land
and proceed as far as practicable towards the head of the
river, when further movements were left to the discre-
tion of the leader. In September the railway to Parra-
matta was formally opened, the Sydney Mint having been
started in the previous May, in which month, also. Dr.
Barker arrived as second Bishop of Sydney and Metro-
politan of the Protestant Episcopal Church, in succession
to Dr. Broughton, who had died in England in the
beginning of 1853. Sir Thomas Mitchell, the indefati-
gable and successful explorer, the historian, the poet, and
the man of science, died in October from bronchitis,
produced by exposure during a recent surveying expedi-
tion. The total revenue of the colony was £1,643,403,
and the gross expenditure £1,660,688.
The year 1856 opened with the establishment of respon-
sible government, and Stuart Alexander Donaldson
became Chief Secretary and Premier ; Manning, Attor-
ney-General ; Darvall, Solicitor - General; Nichols,
Auditor-General; and Thomas Holt, Treasurer. Sir
Alfred Stephen assumed the position of President of the
Council, and Mr. (now Sir) Daniel Cooper was elected
Speaker of the Assembly. The Ministry, however, was
very short-lived; for, owing to what they considered a
want of support, they tendered their resignations on the
21st August, and Cowper was entrusted with the task of
forming a new administration, which he speedily did by
taking the position of Chief Secretary himself, and asso-
ciating with himself Robert Campbell as Treasurer,
Murray as Minister of Lands and Works, Martin (now
Sir James) as Attorney-General, and Lutwyche as
Solicitor-General. The new Ministry was even more un-
fortunate than its predecessor, as a vote of want of con-
fidence was carried against it in September, and it there-
upon resigned, when Parker essayed his hand, his col-
leagues being Donaldson, Treasurer ; Hay, Minister of
Lands and Works; Darvall, Attorney-General. Deas
Thomson was appointed Vice-President of the Executive
Council. A census taken in the course of the year
showed the population of Sydney proper to bo 53,118 ;
that of the suburbs, 28,209,
In September, 1857, the Parker Ministry resigned',
having been defeated on their Electoral Bill, and made
way for Cowper as Premier; Jones as Treasurer;
Murray, Secretary for Lands and Works ; and Martin,
Attorney-General. This was the first strong ministry
which had taken office, but owing to their defeat on a
bill to increase the assessment on stock and the
rent of the Crown Lands, the House was dissolved by
proclamation in the following December. During this
year the Pitcairn islanders, the descendants of the muti-
neers of the “ Bounty,” were finally established at Nor-
folk Island, their late island abode being no longer
adequate to the maintenance of the increased numbers
of the community. Extensive floods took place about
the middle of the year at the Hunter, the Hawkesbury,
and other parts of the colony; and two dreadful ship-
wrecks occurred in the immediate neighborhood of Port
Jackson Heads. The first, on the 21st August, was that
of the “Dunbar,” from London, when out of a total
number of 12U souls, only one man came ashore alive.
Many of the passengers belonged to the most respectable
class in the colony, and the obsequies of all those whose
bodies were recovered at once took the form of a public
funeral, when business was suspended throughout the city.
The second wreck was that of the “ Catherine Adamson.”
also from England, when twenty-one lives were lost, in-
cluding several persons well known and much respected
in the colony. The live stock this year amounted to
180.000 horses ; 2,148,700 cattle; 8,139,000 sheep ; and
109.000 swine.
The new parliament assembled in March, 1858, and the
session was soon after marked by a collision between the
Legislature and the head of the Executive, the opening
speech of the latter mentioning his intention of sending
some of the troops away from the colony, in order to be
of service in assisting to quell the Indian Mutiny, and
the House adopting a reply deprecating the removal of
this force as inexpedient and injudicious. At the end of
the year the new Electoral Bill became law. wherein vote
by ballot was instituted, the number of members of the
Assembly was increased to eighty, and the franchise ex-
tended to every adult male of six months’ residence in
any electorate. In October, telegraphic communication
was established between Sydney, Melbourne, and Ade-
laide, vid Albury ; and, in November, a mixed flock of 280
llamas, alpacas, and vicunas was landed in Sydney from
South America, the importer of this new stock being Mr.
Charles Ledger, an Englishman established in Peru. The
Murrumbidgee was for the first time traversed by a
steamer as far as Gundagai, an important step towards
opening up the interior of Australia. In April, 1859,
Parliament was dissolved preparatory to the elections
under the new Electoral Act, and shortly after the open-
ing of the subsequent session the Ministry resigned, a
resolution of Parkes declaring that the duties on tea and
sugar oughtto be forthwith repealed, havingbeen carried
against them. No one else being able to form a Ministry,
the former Government kept their seam on the ministerial
benches, and succeeded in carrying a motion rescinding
the resolution relative to the tea and sugar duties.
This year saw the separation of Moreton Bay from the
colony of New South Wales. The Cowper Ministry,
being defeated on their Education Bill, resigned, and
Forster formed a weak government, which went out of
office in February, 1860, giving way to Robertson as
Secretary for Lands, with Cowper as Chief Secretary,
with a seat in the Upper House. In 1859,Captain Cadell
ascended the Darling in a steamer for a distance of 600
miles, and telegraphic communication with Van Diemen’s
Land was effected. The early part of 1860 was marked
by most disastrous floods in all parts of the colony,
causing immense losses in stock and crops ; but the dis-
covery of a rich goldfield at the Snowy River tended
somewhat to lighten the gloomy prospect.
On the 22nd January, 1861, Sir William Denison relin-
quished the reins of government and left the colony,
leaving Colonel J. F. Kempt as locum tenens until the
arrival of Sir John Young on the 22nd March following,
when the latter was sworn in as Governor-General. In
January of this year, a great rush took place to Lambing
Flat, which was discovered to be a gold-field ; and the
Volunteer movement was first initiated. Shortly after
the occupation of Lambing Flat by the miners, the white
diggers and the Chinese came into violent collision, the
former being desirous of driving the latter from the
ground, and matter’s became so grave that a force of
military and police was despatched to the spot, when a
series of encounters took place between the representa-
tives of law and order and the rioters, in which serious
loss of life and injury to the person ensued before any
kind of tranquillity was restored to the locality. During
this year the Land Bill of Mr. (now Sir John) Robertson,
popularly known as Robertson’s Land Bill, passed the
Legislature and became law. A despatch was also received
from the Imperial Government in October, declining to
confer the title of Governor-General upon any future
Governor of New South Wales.
Theyear 1862 opened with considerable excitement in the
colony, caused by the arrival of the first English cricket-
ing team, which culminated on the last days of January,
when the visitors played against twenty-two of the
colonials in the Domain in Sydney, and came off vic-
torious by forty-eight runs. In January, the new Publi-
cans Act also came into operation, and the Chinese
Immigration Restriction Act in the following February.
In July, a movement was instituted in Sydney for raising
subscriptions for the relief of the distressed operatives in
the manufacturing districts in England, and by the
following September £17,100 had been remitted home,
whilst at the final meeting of the committee of this
Lancashire Relief Fund, held in January, 1864, it was
stated that the contributions sent from the colony for the
relief of the sufferers amounted to the handsome total of
£22.288. In October, 1862, the lessee of the Pitt-street
Tramway commenced running passenger cars and goods
trucks, and in the following January, the Sydney Money
Order Office was established. The first colonial-built
screw steamer was launched in Sydney in February, 1863,
and named the “ Commodore Burnett; ” and in May the
Volunteer Naval Brigade was organized. On the Bth
October the Cowper Ministry tendered their resigna-
tions, having been defeated on a vote in Committee of
Ways and Means, and Mr. (the late Sir James) Martin
formed a now Government on the 20th following,his col-
leagues being Messrs. W. Forster, Eager, Wilson, Holroyd,
and Faucett. Numerous bands of bushrangers had long
harassed the country districts, especially in the west, with
their depredations, often accompanied by murder; and
strenuous efforts were made by the authorities to cope


with the desperadoes, a number of whom were shot at
different times by those they attacked, while others were
captured and brought to the scaffold. The value of total
imports this year was £8,319,576 ; exports, £6,936,839 ;
revenue, £1,550,047 ; expenditure, £2,064,299.
In January, 1864, the Free Trade Association of New
South Wales was formed, and in the next month the
northern districts were visited by disastrous floods, fol-
lowed by others later on in the year, which ruined the
crops and caused the loss of several lives. In November,
the Martin Ministry was defeated on a motion of want of
confidence moved by the Hon. Charles Cowper, where-
upon the House was dissolved on the recommendation of
the Premier (Mr. Martin), who was subsequently rejected
by the electors of East Sydney, together with his col-
league, Mr. W. Forster.
In January of 1865, the Fifth Parliament of New South
Wales was opened by the Governor, when Mr. Cowper
moved an amendment to the address in reply to His
Excellency’s speech, expressing a want of confidence in
the Martin Ministry, which was carried ; whereupon the
Ministry resigned, and Mr. Cowper undertook the task of
forming a new one, with himself as Colonial Secretary ;
Mr. Robertson, Secretary for Lands ; Mr. Arnold, Secre-
tary for Public Works ; Mr. Smart, Colonial Treasurer ;
Mr. Darvall, Attorney-General; and Mr. Hargrave,
Solicitor-General. In July the Stamp Duties Act came
into operation, and in December the Premier proposed an
ad valorem duty of 5 per cent., which was accepted by the
Assembly. St. Mary's Roman Catholic Cathedral was burnt
down in June of this year, and in the following October
there died at Bathurst the gifted Daniel H. Deniehy,
orator and critic. During the year bushranging was
carried on with as much audacity as ever, in spite of the
violent deaths of such prominent desperadoes as Ben
Hall, Gilbert, Morgan, and others, who were shot by the
police at various times when resisting capture. The
Mayor of Sydney was allowed £I,OOO towards the ex-
penses of his office for the first time this year.
A few days after the opening of 1866, the Cowper
Government resigned, having been defeated on a motion
for declaring the seat of Mr. Burdekin(who had accepted
office as Treasurer) vacant; whereupon Mr. Martin once
more formed a Cabinet, having for ids associates Messrs.
Parkes, Byrnes, Wilson. Eager, Isaacs, and Docker. The
principal legislative measure of the year was the Public
Schools Bill of Mr. (now Sir Henry) Parkes, which
passed both Houses in December. In the previous month,
a bill to authorize the Government to take up the Pitt-
street Tramway had passed the Assembly, and still
earlier (in April), a despatch was received from the
Imperial Government making the Sydney sovereigns a
legal tender. Terrific gales of wind visited the coast
during July, causing many shipwrecks and distressing
loss of life.
The year 1867 commenced with the appointment of the
Council of Education under the Public Schools Act, con-
sisting of the Honorables George Allen, W. M. Arnold,
James Martin, Henry Parkes, and Professor Smith ; and
the removal of the Pitt-street Tramway rails. A few
days later, news arrived in Sydney that the bodies of four
police constables had been found in the bush at Jindera,
who, it was subsequently ascertained, had been mur-
dered by two bushrangers named Clarke. These latter
were captured in April, and suffered the extreme penalty
in the Juno following, rewards amounting in the aggre-
gate to £5,000 having been offered for their apprehension.
In May, the ship “Vernon” was declared by proclama-
tion to be an Industrial School, and on the 24th Decem-
ber His Excellency Sir John Young, who had governed
the colony for six years and nine months with great ac-
ceptance to all classes of the community, left Sydney
for Europe, General Sir Trevor Chute taking the oath of
Administrator of the Government until the arrival of
his successor, Earl Belmore. This year was marked by
the occurrence of most disastrous floods in many parts of
the colony, entailing immense losses and widespread
distress. The Revenue was now £2,034,490 ; Expendi-
ture, £2.249,521 ; value of total Imports, £6,599,804;
Exports. £6.880,715.
On the 7th January, 1868, Earl Belmore arrived in
Sydney, and on the 21st of the same month H.R.H.
Prince Alfred entered Port Jackson, in command of the
“ Galatea,” and was the subject of numerous entertain-
ments of welcome, until he finally left for England on the
6th April. Unfortunately, the round of festivities was
sadly marred by the dastardly attempt at his assassina-
tion by a man named O’Farrcll, who shot the Prince in
the back on the 12th March, whilst he was attending the
Sailors’ Home picnic at Clontarf. The ball was success-
fully extracted two days later, and the Prince was
happily able to re-appear in public on the 27th of the
same month, whilst his would-be murderer was executed,
after tidal and condemnation, in the following April.
On the 13th October, Parliament re-assembled, and the
Martin Ministry tendered their resignations a week later,
Mr. Robertson having moved an amendment to the
Address in reply to the Governor’s speech, which, on
division, was only lost by the casting vote of the Speaker
in favor of the 'Government. The Governor having
sent for Mr. Robertson, that gentleman accepted office
as Premier, his colleagues being Messrs. Samuel, W.
Forster, Sutherland, Josephson, Eager and Sir W. Manning.
Shortly after the opening of 1869, St. Mary’s tempo
rary R.C. Cathedral, in Sydney, was totally destroyed by
fire ; and on the 11th March following, the Duke of
Edinburgh paid his second visit to the city in H.M.S.
“ Galatea.” His stay, however, was only a short one, as
he took his departure on the 3rd of the succeeding month
for New Zealand and other ports, but returned seventeen
months later, and finally left on the 16th November,
1870. On the 30th September, the Free Public Library
was opened as a Government Institution, the books of
the Australian Library having been purchased for the
purpose from the proprietors and shareholders of the
latter, which now ceased to exist. Parliament was dis-
solved on the 15th November of the same year, and the
first session of the new Legislature opened on the 27th
January, 1870, Mr. Robertson having meanwhile retired
from the Government, and Mr. Cowper having accepted
the position of Colonial Secretary and Premier. On the
7th December, this Ministry resigned, and Sir James
Martin succeeded in forming an Administration, which
was sworn in nine days later, and comprised Sir James
Martin, John Robertson, G. W. Lord, W. C. Windeyer,
J. B. Wilson, J. Byrnes, and J. Docker. August of this
year saw the withdrawal of the Imperial troops from
doing duty in Sydney, and on the 23rd of that month
they left the colony, two days before which event the
Intercolonial Exhibition at Prince Alfred Park was
opened by the Governor. Floods of a very disastrous
character again devastated large portions of New South
Wales, causing immense loss of property and widespread
distress in the country districts. One of the most noted
bushrangers of the colony, Thunderbolt, was shot dead
by a constable in May.
On the 2nd April, 1871, a census of the colony was
taken, which gave thepopulation at 503,981 souls; on the
13th of the same month a meeting of citizens was held,
and a petition drawn up for presentation to the Governor
and both Houses of Parliament, praying for the annexa-
tion of the Fiji Islands ; and two days later the Governor
opened the Great Northern Railway to Scone. In May,
the Military and Naval Forces Regulation Bill and the
Stamp Duties Amendment Bill were passed, and the next
month saw the passage of a vote of £30,000 for works of
fortification and defence. The returns were now :
Revenue, £2,908,153 ; expenditure, £3.006,576; value of
imports, £9,609,508 ; exports, £11,245,032.
The commencement of 1872 was signalled by the
destruction of the Prince of Wales Opera House by fire,
and on the 21st February the governorship of Earl Bel-
more came to an end, and he embarked for England, Sir
Alfred Stephen being sworn in as Administrator, which
office he held until the arrival of the incoming Governor,
Sir Hercules Robinson, on the 3rd June. On the 29th
April, the Martin Ministry handed in their resignations,
and on the failure of Mr. W. Forster to form a new one,
Mr. Parkes was entrusted with His Excellency’s commis-
sion, and successfully performed the task by the 14th
May, his colleagues being Messrs. Samuel, Piddington,
Parnell, Sutherland, Lloyd, Butler, and Innes.
Towards the end of June, the first telegrams were sent
from Sydney for direct transmission to England across
the continent of Australia; and on the Ist July, the
Governor opened the Great Western Railway to Mac-
quarie Plains, making a tour of the northern districts a
little later on. Two men, named Nichols and Lester,
were executed in June of this year for the perpetration
of several cold-blooded murders, their victims having
been enticed by them on board a small boat by promises
of employment at places up the Parramatta River, and
then deliberately put to death for the sake of their per-
sonal property.


At the close of February, 1873, Sydney and its suburbs
were visited by unprecedentedly heavy rains, flooding
the lower portions of the city. The remains of Mr. W.
C. Wentworth, which had been brought from England,
were accorded a public funeral on the 6th May, in pur-
suance of a resolution of the Assembly, when all the
principal houses of business were closed. In June, the
President of the Legislative Council, Sir Terence A.
Murray, died; and in the following October, the News-
paper Postage Abolition Bill was passed, and the House
approved of the course the Government had taken in
entering into an agreement by width a mail service to
England vid San Francisco was arranged. Sir Alfred
Stephen having retired this year from the Cldef Justice-
ship, Sir James Martin was appointed Ids successor, and
took his seat in the Supreme Court for the first time on
the 19th November. On the 27th of the same month, a
series of resolutions, submitted by Mr. Parkes, passed the
House, providing for a Department of Justice and Public
Instruction, with a responsible Minister at its head, and
for the abolition of the office of Solicitor-General.
On the 28th November, 1874. Parliament was dissolved,
the Government having been defeated three days earlier
on the Governor's minute respecting the release of the
bushranger Gardiner; and on the 27th January, 1875,
the first session of the eighth Parliament was opened, the
Government being defeated on the following day on the
address, whereupon Mr. Parkes tendered the resigna-
tions of himself and colleagues. After Sir William Man-
ning had failed to form an Administration, Mr. Robertson
was sent for, and succeeded in his endeavours, his
associates in the Ministry being Messrs. AV. Forster,
Docker, Dailey, Lackey, Garrett, Burns, and J. Lucas.
During this session the principal measures passed were
the Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill, and the
Lauds Act Amendment Bill. The Speaker of the Legis-
lative Assembly, Hon. AV. M. Arnold, was accidentally
drowned in the Paterson River in the beginning of
March, and Mr. G. AV. Allen was chosen to fill the
vacancy. On the 20th August, Captain Goodonough,
R.N., Commodore on the Australian Station, died from
the effects of a poisoned arrow wound received from a
native while on a visit to Santa Cruz Island, on the
12th of the same month, and was buried at the St.
Leonards Cemetery, in the presence of about ten thousand
people ; and on the 20th October. Sir Charles Cowper,
Agent-General of the colony, died at his post in
England. The following month saw the arrival in Syd-
ney of the “ Vasco da Gamma,” the first temporary vessel
of the new Pacific Mail Service. On the 20th February,
1876, the English mails were conveyed for the first time
overland from Melbourne to Sydney, the time occupied in
transit being 42 hours ; , and in the following April a ten
mouths’ drought broke up with rainfall.
The Robertson Government came to an end on the
15th March, 1877, having been defeated on two or three
motions, and Mr. Parkes formed a new Ministry, com-
prising himself, Messrs. Piddington, Driver, Hoskins,
Samuel, F. B. Suttor, Lloyd, and AViudeyer. This did
not, however, last five months, but gave way in August
to a return of another Robertson Administration, the
members of which, besides the Premier, were Messrs.
Docker, Long, Combes, Baker, Garrett, Lackey, Davies,
and Dailey. On account of the Assembly refusing to
suspend the Standing Orders to grant Supplies, this last
Ministry resigned on the 20th of the following month,
when Mr. Stuart was sent for by the Governor to under-
take the formation of a cabinet. Being unsuccessful in
his endeavors, recourse was" had to Air. S. C. Brown,
who also failed, so Parliament was dissolved on the 12th
October, with the view of obtaining the verdict of the
country. The result of the elections was that the
Robertson Ministry retained office, being in a measure
reorganized by Mr. Baker's acceptance of the Lands
Department in place of Air. Garrett, resigned, Air. Jacob
becoming Alinister for Alines. The dead-lock, however,
continued, and after Sir Henry Parkes had resigned his
commission to form a Government on the 13th December,
Mr. Farnell successfully accomplished the task, his col-
leagues being Messrs. Fitzpatrick, Sutherland, AV. H.
Suttor, Leary, J. F. Burns, and AV. J. Foster. In June of
this year, Alessrs. Parkes and Robertson received the
Order of K.C.M.G. from Her Alajesty.
The year 1878 was notable for the decision of the
Assembly to open the Museum and Free Public Library
on Sundays ; the death of the Rev. AV. B. Clarke, M.A.,
one of the first geologists of the day, on the ICth June,
and that of Ur. Lang, a man identified with the fortunes
of the colony for forty years, on the Bth August, a public
funeral being accorded his remains two days later; and,
finally, the agitation against the employment of the Chi-
nese. Tlie Government Land Bill having been negatived
on the second reading on the 6th December, the Farnell
Administration resigned the next day, the result being
the formation of a coalition Ministry by Sir Henry Parkes,
with Sir John Robertson in the Upper House, with them
being Messrs. Watson, Hoskins, Baker, Samuel, F. Suttor,
Lackey, and Windeyer, after Sir John Robertson had
failed in his endeavors to form a Government himself.
On the 19th March, 1879, Sir Hercules Robinson, the
most popular Governor the colony had ever had, left
Sydney on the termination of his Administration, to the
great regret of all classes of the community, and Sir
Alfred Stephen was sworn in the next day as Lieut.-
Governor, which position he held until the arrival of
Lord Augustus Loftus on the 3rd August following. The
present tramway system was inaugurated on the 16th
September, steam instead of horse traction being substi-
tuted about a week later, and on the next day the Sydney
International Exhibition was opened in the Garden
Palace, and had a most successful run until the 20th
April, 1880, when it was finally closed. On the Ist Sep-
tember, the Great Southern line was opened to Gerogery.
The Legislative Assembly was dissolved on the 9th
November, and the new Parliament opened on the 15th
of the ensuing mouth.
A census was taken throughout the colony on the 3rd
April, 1881, but owing to the untoward destruction of the
Garden Palace by fire, with all its contents, on the 22nd
September, 1882, and the fact that the compilation of the
census was being undertaken in that building, the
detailed records in connection with the same were un-
fortunately destroyed in the conflagration. This census
gave the population of the colony at 751,468, of which
number 411,149 were males, and 340,319 females. Small-
pox made its appearance in 1881 in Sydney, spreading
with alarming rapidity, so much so that most stringent
rules of isolation were carried out, with the view of
stamping out the fell disease. It was not, however, until
the following year that the city could be declared free
from the scourge, whilst for some considerably further
length of time it was introduced into the port by shipping
from Hongkong, although, happily, it has been confined
to the quarantine grounds. The Chinese Restriction Bill
and the Licensing Bill were passed in the last month of
1881, which also saw the departure of the Premier, Sir
Henry Parkes, on a visit to England. The detached
squadron arrived in Port Jackson on the 14th of the
previous July, with the two eldest sons of the Prince of
AVales, who were serving as midshipmen on board the
“ Bacchante,” and left again on the 10th of the next
month for Brisbane and other ports of call.
In 1882, New South AVales commenced to have a navy
of her own, H.M.S. “ AVolvoreue” being presented to the
colony by Her Maiesty the Queen on the 16th January.
On the Ist August, Henry Kendall, facile princeps the
bard of Australia, died in Sydney. The Garden Palace
was destroyed by fire, as before mentioned, on the 22nd
September, the estimated loss being about £250,000; but
as many of the most valuable public records and the
magnificent collection of minerals belonging to the
Department of Alines were sacrificed in the conflagration,
no money value can properly assess a loss which is in
some respects irreparable. On the 26th of the same
month, Air. Copeland’s motion for throwing open the Art
Gallery on Sundays was carried in the Legislative As-
sembly, and on the 11th November following the magnifi-
cent steamer “Austral,” belonging to the Orient
Company, sank whilst at her moorings in Sydney
Harbour, five lives being lost on the occasion. She was
raised again, however, in March, 1883. and shortly after left
for England, practically nothing the worse for her sub-
mergence. At the kitter end of November, 1882, Parlia-
ment was dissolved, the Government having been
defeated on their Land Bill; and the result of the
subsequent appeal to the country that the
Alinistry was not in accord with public opinion, the
members thereof tendered their resignations after the
assembling of Parliament on the 3rd January following,
when Air. Alexander Stuart formed an Administration,
with Sir Patrick Jennings and Alessrs. G. H. Reid, Dailey,
Cohen, Dibbs, Copeland and J. P. Abbott as colleagues.


The commencement of 1883 was marked by continued
controversy in Parliamentary circles —the land question
proving itself to be one of paramount importance. Among
the more decisive actions which preceded subsequent
amendments in the law was a sudden withdrawal from
auction of about a million acres which had. been adver-
tised for sale. Agitations of various kinds ensued, and
it became apparent that the country was dissatisfied
with the Land Law of 1861, and with its amendments.
The question of extending education to all classes
also found force during the early months, and initiative
steps were made with respect to the establishment of
a system of popular technical instruction, which was
finally established in July. On 27th April'the Statute
Book of the Colony received the addition of the Crim-
inal Law Consolidation Act, which repealed many
flagrant penal provisions, and, upon the whole,
effected a radical change in the New South Wales code.
The colony was connected by rail with Victoria on 14th
June ; upon which occasion it was shown that during the
ensuing few years direct railroad communication would
be established between Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney,
and Brisbane. In view of the increasing population and
of the demand for breadstuffs, the Sydney Corn and Pro-
duce Exchange was shortly afterwards inaugurated.
During October the third session of the eleventh Par-
liament was opened, and one of its first acts was to
invite a supply of 150,000 tons of colonial-manufactured
steel rails, with a view of opening up the local indus-
tries of the colony. The latter months of the year are
chiefly memorable on account of unprecedented heat,
continued drought, and for numerous discoveries of
minerals and precious stones in parts of the territory
which had been hitherto looked upon as comparatively
barren.
Sir John Robertson was elected leader of the Opposi-
tion during February, 1884, and acrimonious debates
succeeded for a considerable time, although but little
Parliamentary progress was made. The opening of this
year was chiefly remarkable for a continuance of the
great mineral and precious metal discoveries of 1883 —
particularly at Silverton and Broken Hill. The yields
proved to be of fabulous extent; assaying from 60,000 to
20,000 ounces of silver to the ton. A census was taken
showing that there were 214,016 names of adults on the
electoral rolls. A universal depression threw thousands
of persons out of employment, and the force of public
clamoring resulted in a reduction of the assisted immi-
gration vote from £75,000 to £50,000. On 24th Septem-
ber the Colonial Treasurer propounded the startling
proposal of loan estimates of no less than £14,688,808,
including £13,313,000 for railways, railway works, and
trial surveys. In keeping with views which had been
expressed some years previously by Governor Sir Her-
cules Robinson, schemes were laid down which would
open up a network of trunk and branch lines through-
out the colony. A temporary lull took place, however,
in Parliamentary matters owing to the forced retire-
ment for a time of the Premier, Mr. Stuart, from severe
illness. Attention was turned to British interests in
New Guinea, and Sir Peter Scratchley left Sydney as
High Commissioner in Papua on behalf of Great Britain.
The colony appeared, from statistics, to have steadily
developed, in spite of all depression and bad seasons,
and an improved state of affairs was confidently looked
for by reason of the drastic amendments which had been
effected in the Land Act.
The leading opening event of 1885 was the publication
of the new Crown Lands Regulations, from which so much
good was anticipated; but which, subsequent events
proved, were not equal to the country’s requirements.
The Government, under the Hon. G. R. Dibbs’ leader-
ship, followed with the memorable action of discon-
tinuing the Bank of New South Wales’ monopoly of the
public banking account, and in lieu of it they trans-
ferred the colony’s deposits to the Associated Banks ; a
step, which though seemingly of but little significance,
has not been without a permanent effect. The 97th
anniversary of the colony’s foundation was celebrated
with much enthusiasm on 26th January ; and on 12th
February, the Hon. W. B. Dailey made the memorable
offer of a contingent of New South Wales armed and
mounted troops to aid the Imperial forces in the Soudan.
The offer was accepted by England, and the contingent
left Sydney on 3rd March on board of the troopships
“ Iberia ” and “ Australasian.” This event marked an era
in the colony’s history, and from that period the spirit of
military ardor has been kept actively alive, and has
spread to the sister colonies. Attention from time to
time was, during the middle of the year, turned to the
future prospects of New Guinea, and several expedition-
ary forces were despatched to explore the country with
a view of opening it up for Australian enter-
prise. The number of colonists had increased in New
South Wales from January to March, nearly 23,000 over
those in Victoria, and the immigration question again
sorely taxed public consideration. In July, Archbishop
Moran, the Catholic Archbishop of Sydney, was elevated
to the position of the first Australasian Cardinal.
Lord Augustus Loftus having completed his term at
Government House, his successor, Lord Carrington,
arrived in Sydney and was publicly welcomed on 12th
December, 1885, with much enthusiasm.
The year 1886 opened with evidences of increasing
activity in mining matters in several parts of the colony.
On the 25th of January the first Federal Council was
held at Hobart, in Tasmania, and, although New South
Wales declined to send a representative, some interest
was evinced in its proceedings.
Parliament met for the transaction of business on the
27th of the same month, and the new Government
formed by Sir John Robertson at the close of 1885 gave
a brief outline of its intended policy. Early in February
the Ministry was subjected to a motion expressing want
of confidence, and was defeated. An attempt to form a
coalition Government was unsuccessful. Sir Patrick
Jennings managed subsequently, however, to construct a
Cabinet from his own party.
On the 31st of May of this year a terrible shipping
disaster occurred on the coast near the southern ex-
tremity of the colony. The Ly-ee-moon, one of the
Australasian Steam Navigation Company’s fleet, while on
the voyage from Melbourne to Sydney with a full com-
plement of passengers, struck the rocks at Green Cape,
and almost immediately afterwards became a complete
wreck. A loss of over 70 lives resulted, which caused
considerable sensation throughout the colonies.
The announcement by the Treasurer in October that
the deficit in connection with the revenue had been
increased during the year to over two millions sterling,
created a large amount of uneasiness in the community,
and led to meetings inimical to the Government.
Early in January 1887 the Jennings Ministry resigned,
a result due ostensibly to a dispute between the Premier
and one of his Cabinet. Sir Henry Parkes was invited
by His Excellency to form a Ministry. This he carried
into effect, and finding the condition of the Assembly
such that the work of legislation would be unnecessarily
impeded advised a dissolution. The appeal to the
country which followed was decisive and unmistakeable.
The previous administration had favoured a protective
tariff, and had even carried a measure, the incidence of
which was entirely in this direction. The question,
therefore, to be decided by the electorates was whether
such was to continue or a return to be made to the
principles of freetrade. By an overwhelming majority
the electors asserted that freetrade represented the
voice of the people, and the newly, formed Government
returned triumphant in all the important districts. On
the Bth March the first session of the thirteenth Parlia-
ment was opened, and towards the close of the month
the Treasurer submitted a statement of the public
accounts to the Assembly explaining the Government
proposals for getting rid of the large deficit.
On the 23rd of this month the most appalling accident
that has ever taken place in connection with mining in
Australia occurred at the Bulli Company’s colliery in
the Illawarra district, and resulted in the loss of over 80
lives. The catastrophe was subsequently found to have
been caused by an explosion of gas in one of the more
dangerous sections of the mine.
In May an address of congratulation to Her Gracious
Majesty the Queen on the attainment of the Jubilee
year of her reign was adopted in both Houses of Parlia-
ment. and on the 20th and 21st of June public rejoicings
were hold throughout tlie colony. The metropolis and
the more important townships were brilliantly illumi-
nated, and on the second evening a display of fireworks
on a magnificent scale was given on the harbour in con-
nection with the shipping, men-of-war and batteries.
As the year drew to a close one of the principal sub-
jects of interest was the near approach of the Centenary
of Australian Colonisation, and the various preparations
for its due celebration.


historical Account of (^umtslan'a.
(Compiled expressly for JTfjc Year-Book of Eustralia.)
ALTHOUGH it is most probable that both Dutcn and Por-
tuguese navigators touched on the coast of Queensland
before the visit of Captain Cook, who earned undying
fame by bringing the vast Australian Continent under
the parental wing of England, it was his discovery
at least which drew attention to this unknown land, and
was the immediate forerunner of the rapid movement of
colonization which makes it at the present day one of the
most rising and valuable dependencies of the British
Empire. It was on the 17th May, 1770, that he opened
up the waters of a large bay on the eastern coast of
Australia, and dropped anchor therein on board his ship
the “ Endeavor,” giving it the name of Moreton Bay.
in honor of his great patron, the Earl of Moreton, at
that time President of the Royal Society, through whose
assistance and countenance, indeed, he had been enabled
to set out on, and prosecute his voyage of exploration.
Flinders, again, in July, 1799, entered Moreton Bay whilst
exploring the north-eastern coast of Australia, but, sin-
gularly enough, he failed to discover the existence of the
Brisbane or any other rivers, although he was under the
impression that he had made a minute examination of
the coast-lino ; but ■when it is remembered that in his
journey northward he had, shortly before, passed the
Clarence River, in perfect ignorance of it, our surprise
must bo considerably lessened. It is to Governor Hunter
that the credit of Flinders’ expedition must be given,
as he was desirous of gaining further and more accurate
information with regard to two inlets which had been
marked by Captain Cook on his chart, so the sloop
“ Norfolk,” of only 24 tons, was manned by volunteers
from the naval ships then in Port Jackson, and des-
patched under the command of Flinders. Entering
Glasshouse Bay, he anchored about two miles from the
shore, and met the first natives, who, from being friendly
at first, at length became so troublesome as to draw the
fire of the explorers, from which circumstance Flinders
named the locality Point Skirmish. After a short stay,
sail was again made, and Hervey’s Bay reached, the
vicinity of which he explored, and then retraced his
course to Sydney, without having procured any really
important information. He made a further, better, and
more protracted journey round the Queensland coast in
1802, in the “ Investigator,” under the direction of the
Admiralty authorities, during which he ascertained that
the navigation of Torres Strait was thoroughly practica-
ble, and arrived at Sydney again in June, 1803, in pos-
session of much valuable information, which was further
supplemented by the explorations of Lieutenant King
in 1817, who examined and mapped the eastern coast of
Queensland, also by Imperial instructions.
It was not, however, until 1823 that any attempt was
made to take advantage of the vast virgin tracts of
country which lay to the northward of Port Macquarie,
which at that time constituted the northernmost line of
settlement of the colony of New South Wales. In this
year, in consequence of the Commissioner, Mr. Bigge,
having recommended that some new convict settlement
should be formed, either at Port Bowen, Port Curtis, or
Moreton Bay, to relieve those convict establishments in
the colony which were overburdened with prisoners, an
expedition was fitted out and despatched from Sydney
on the 23rd October, under the leadership of Mr. Oxley,
the Surveyor-General, with instructions from the Colonial
Government to select a suitable site for the purpose.
Arrived safely in Moreton Bay in the “ Mermaid,” Mr.
Oxley entered the Brisbane River on the 2nd December
following, and explored its course in a boat for some fifty
miles from its mouth, naming it at the same time in
honor of the Governor of New South Wales, Sir Thomas
Brisbane. Although it appears that some runaway con-
victs had found out the existence of the river at an
earlier period, and indeed one of them accompanied
Oxley when he reached it from the sea, the latter may
fairly be called the discoverer of this fine piece of water.
The Surveyor-General also prosecuted Ids researches
northward, discovering the river Boyne, and entering
Wide Bay and Port Curtis (the last of which Flinders
had named), and having explored and named the river
Bremer, a tributary of the Brisbane, he returned to
Sydney to report progress.
His report favoring the establishment of a penal set-
tlement in Moreton Bay, he was entrusted with the
undertaking, which lie succeeded in candying out to a
successful issue in September, 1824, by forming a station
at Redcliffe Point. This position not being found suit-
able, a more eligible spot was selected on the bank of
the river Brisbane, and a convict establishment was
commenced on almost the present site of the city of
Brisbane. Here it was that, in 1825, the first batch of
the most desperate and incorrigible felons was landed,
placed in charge of military commandants, and rigorously
governed up to the period when the district became
open to free immigration and colonization, their principal
occupation consisting in making roads and improving
the means of inland communication.
Although the aborigines were hostile, and ever on the
alert to cut off stragglers, exploration of the surrounding
country was carried on by the successive military officers
in charge, and by means of their enterprising investi-
gations much valuable information was collected as
to the adaptability of the land for free industrial set-
tlement. In 1825, an officer of the 67th Regiment, then
in Sydney, was commissioned to thoroughly explore the
river Brisbane, from which undertaking most favorable
reports of the country resulted, and, in 1827, the noted
traveller, Allan Cunningham, journeyed overland from
Sydney to the latitude of Brisbane, and discovered those
magnificent rolling downs to which he gave Governor
Darling's name, whither the pioneer squatters, three
years later, drove their flocks of sheep and speedily took
it up and occupied it as pasture land. Again, in 1829,
Allan Cunningham further supplemented his discoveries
by connecting the penal settlement at Brisbane with the
Darling Downs by means of a route he traversed, in
which he had to cross the great Dividing Range of Moun-
tains, and the first drays carried supplies to these pasture
lauds rid Cunningham’s Gap in 1840. In the same way
that, to the enterprise of the squatters is due the open-
ing up of the country between the Darling Downs and
the coast, so was it in the more northerly districts in
later days, when practical routes had to be found out for
the transit of their supplies to their stations, and the
result of their industry—the wool—to points of em-
barkation, and, further, that the ports of Maryborough,
Rockhampton, Port Curtis, and others, were esta-
blished and settled, leading finally to the adoption of
every favorable inlet of the coast-line as a maritime
township, of yearly increasing importance. To carry
the history of colonization still further, it was to these
very men in charge of the drays that we owe the selec-
tion of many of the inland townships, first chosen by
them as their camping-grounds by the side of water,
followed quickly by the inevitable grogshop, with a
general store perhaps attached, then a post-office, lock-
up with its guardian trooper, and an irregular growth of
wooden cabins.
The first commandant in charge of the convict depot
was Captain Miller, who was succeeded by Captains Bishop,
Logan, Chenil, Fyans, Major Cotton, and Lieutenants
Gravett and Gorman. Those officers possessed almost
absolute power, and, from the character of the men in their
charge, the history of the settlement is of a uniform tur-
bulent description, without being of any particular histori-
cal value. In August, 1837, the first steamer, the “ James
Watt,” cast anchor in Moreton Bay, and two years later
convict immigration was brought to a close. In 1842
the country was thrown open to free settlement, and the
first steamer belonging to the Australasian Steam Navi-
gation Company arrived The removal of the convict
establishment led to the influx of many who had been
settlers in the southern portions of New South Wales,
who were attracted by the opportunities which such a
new field of enterprise opened out for successful venture.
In the following year, the first land sale was held in
Brisbane, and the Moreton Bay district was permitted a
share of representation in the Legislative Council at
Sydney, by being included in an electorate which con-
tained more than 500 miles of coast-line, with a propor-
tionate distance inland, and the head polling-place of
which was at Raymond Terrace, on the Hunter River.
Among those whose names may be mentioned as
having done the greatest services towards the explora-
tion of the colony at various times during the early
days, and in different directions, are Sir Thomas Mitchell,
Surveyor-General of New South Wales; Kennedy; Leich-


hardt, who never returned from his last expedition ; and
Augustus Gregory, who, in 1858, succeeded in making
his way overland from the Leichhardt district in Queens-
land to Adelaide, and afterwards became the Surveyor-
General of the former colony. In 1846, Moreton Bay
was surveyed and defined by Captain Wickham, R.N.,
the representative of the New South Wales Government
iu the district; and the first newspaper, called the
Moreton Bay Courier, was established in the squatting
interest to advocate a return to the convict system, in
opposition to the bulk of the settlers, who were totally
opposed to the same; whilst an attempt was made, at
fh« instance of the Imperial authorities, to establish a
colony at Port Curtis, which resulted in a complete
failure. A body of officials was sent up from Sydney in
the “ Lord Auckland,” and when they had made all their
preparations to land, which they intended to do in a
most imposing manner, the ship struck on a reef, and
the water made such rapid inroads that their disembar-
kation resolved itself into a very sorry affair. After a
stay under canvas of some three or four months, on
short supplies and exposed to the incessant hostility of
the natives, this expedition was recalled on a change in
the home government, and nothing further came of the
attempt. In this year the entire population of the
Moreton Bay district was 2,257, which increased to 10,000
in 1851, and to 17,082 in 1866.
In 1849, three ships arrived in Moreton Bay with a
number of superior immigrants, sent out under the aus-
pices of Dr. Lang, and this stimulated the settlers to
endeavor to obtain separation from New South Wales,
as they had long had to complain bitterly of the neglect
they suffered from at the hands of the Sydney authori-
ties, whose policy was one of centralization. But while
the whole community was united in the desire for a
separate government, the squatters desired to see the
district return to a convict one, when they would have
better opportunities of supplying themselves with that
labor of which they were so much in want for the
proper conduct of their stations; whereas the larger
body—the settlers—were totally opposed to a movement
which would throw large numbers of the criminal classes
in their midst, and lead to unknown social degradation.
The fight between these two factions was long and
bitter, and petition after petition was drawn up to the
Queen by both sides, but the settlers’ cause slowly but
surely progressed in strength and vitality, and the pre-
sence of Dr. Lang in the district at the beginning of
1851 added a large amount of moral force to the advo-
cacy of those who cried out for separation, free from the
convict element. The squatters, foreseeing the hope-
lessness of their scheme, struck their colors a little
later, and joined their forces to the other side, when the
united pressure was brought to bear to break down the
vehement opposition of New South Wales, where the
chief bones of contention were the squaring of accounts
and the adjustment of the line of boundary.
In 1850, the first bank was opened at Moreton Bay,
and in 1854 the first shipment of cotton from Brisbane
took place. In 1856, just when the Secretary of State
for the Colonies. Mr. Labouchere, had declared he consi-
dered it was now time that a partition of Now South
Wales should take place, and the Moreton Bay district
be allowed separation, a change in the homo cabinet
took place which prevented him from giving effect to his
inclinations. Meanwhile, the colonists neither abated
their efforts for the accomplishment of the end they
had in view, nor ceased to progress in prosperity and in
the development of the country, and in 1858 Rockhamp-
ton was made a port of entry, Brisbane being proclaimed
a municipality in April of the following year.
Towards the close of the latter year, the colonists were
overjoyed to receive the good news that the new colony
of Queensland, which the Queen had herself so named,
had at length been proclaimed in London on the 3rd
Juno, and, further, that the first governor. Sir George Fer-
guson Bowen, was on his way out. He arrived in Sydney in
November, and the separation of Moreton Bay was for-
mally proclaimed there on the Ist December, although
the ceremony did not take place in Brisbane until the
10th December, 1859, on which date Governor Bowen
landed there from H.M.S. “Cordelia.” The rejoicings in
the colony were most enthusiastic, testifying to the in-
tense pleasure and satisfaction with winch self-govern-
ment was received, as well as to the loyalty of the colo-
nists to the throne. The first Colonial Secretary was the
Hon. R. G. Wyndham Herbert, who had come out with
Sir G-eorge Bowen; Mr. Ratcliffe Bring, who had for some
time been Crown Prosecutor, being made Attorney-
General ; and Mr. Kobert Ramsay Mackenzie, an old
colonist, Colonial Treasurer.
In January, 1860, the Queensland electorates were pro-
claimed, and in the ensuing April, the first parliament-
ary elections for Queensland took place, the Order in
Council providing that a form of Government should be
adopted on the same lines as that of New South Wales
as far as circumstances would permit. There was, there-
fore, to be an Executive Council, the members of which
were to be nominated by the Governor but responsible
to the Legislature, and two Legislative Chambers—the
Council, nominated by the Governor on behalf of the
Crown, and the Assembly, a purely elective body com-
posed of twenty-six members, whose sole qualification
should be that their names were recorded on one of the
electoral rolls of the colony. The elective franchise was
so low as to be, practically, one of manhood suffrage and a
six months’ residence, for all natural-born or naturalized
Englishmen of the age of twenty-one and upwards.
The first Parliament commenced its sitting on the
22nd May, and continued for the three following years,
the three members of the Executive Council being re-
turned to the Legislative Assembly and becoming
responsible ministers. The following list of the Acts
and Ordinances of the Parliament of Queensland will
show the amount of business transacted by that body
during the first session, and their fitness for the work
No. I.—An Act to provide a suitable Quorum for the
Legislative Assembly of Queensland. (Assented to,
11th Juno, 1860.)
No. 2.—An Act to indemnify the Collector and Officers
of Customs in respect to the omitting to collect the
Duty payable upon Gold in the Colony of Queens-
land, and to repeal an Act of the Legislative Council
and Legislative Assembly of New South Wales,
intituled “An Act for granting a Duty upon Gold.”
(Assented to, 10th July, 1860.)
No. 3.—An Act to limit the Number of Persons holding
Office under the Crown, who, under the Constitution
Act, 17 Vic., No. 41, may be declared capable of
being elected Members of the Legislative Assembly.
(Assented to, 17th July, 1860.)
No. 4. —An Act to discontinue Grants from the Revenue
iu Aid of Religion. (Assented to, 7th August, 1860.)
No. s.—An Act to appoint Commissioners for the Adjust-
ment of Accounts with the Colony of New South
Wales. (Assented to, 25th August, 1860.)
No. 6. —An Act for taking an Account of the Population
in 1861. (Assented to, 25th August, 1860.)
No. 7. —An Act to provide for Primary Education in
Queensland. (Assented to, 7th September, 1860.)
No. B.—An Act to provide for the Establishment of
Grammar Schocds in Queensland. (Assented to, 7th
September, 1860.)
No. 9.—An Act to authorize the Appropriation out of
the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Queensland of
certain Sums to make good the Supplies granted for
the Service of the Year 1860. (Assented to, 11th
September, 1860.)
No. 10. —An Act to abolish the Collection of Electoral
Lists. (Assented to, 11th September, 1860.)
No. 11. —An Act to give a Lien on Wool, and to make
Mortgages of Sheep, Cattle, and Horses. (Assented
to, 11th September, 1860.)
No. 12.—An Act for regulating the Occupation of Un-
occupied Crown Lauds in the Unsettled Districts.
(Assented to, 17th September, 1860.)
No. 13.—An Act to regulate the Occupation of Land
applied for by Tender. (Assented to, 17th Septem-
ber, 1860.)
No. 14.—An Act for the Prevention of Scab and other
Diseases in Sheep. (Assented to, 17th Sept., 1860.)
No. 15.—An Act to regulate the Exportation of Gun-
powder and Warilke Stores from the Colony of
Queensland. (Assented to, 17th September, 1860.)
No. 16.—An Act to provide for the leasing of Crown
Lands previously occupied. (Assented to, 17th Sep-
tember, 1860.)
No. 17.—An Act to provide for the Alienation of Crown
Lands. (Assented to, 17th September, 1860.)
No. IS.—An Act to authorize the Appropriation out of
the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Queensland of
certain sums to make good the Supplies granted for
the Service of the year 1860-1. (Assented to, 18th
September, I 860.)


The first of these Acts and Ordinances which requires
to be noticed is the Act to discontinue grants from the
revenue in aid of religion. Fortunately, this most im-
portant question presented itself to the Legislature of
Queensland in a very simple form. Under the previously
existing system of New South Wales, the whole burden
upon the revenue for the salaries of ministers of the
Roman Catholic, Episcopalian, Presbyterian, and Wes-
leyan Methodist communions did not exceed £750 a
year; and while all were willing that the recipients of
that amount should retain the salaries they were respec-
tively receiving under the previous system during their
lives, the voice of the public strongly demanded the
entire discontinuance of State support for religion for
the future. A preliminary motion had been made by
one of the members who advocated the system of State
support, to the effect that the sum appropriated for dis-
tribution among the clergy of the different communions
should be increased to £4,000 a year; but, this motion
having been lost by a large majority, whereby the pulse
of the Assembly was felt, the Government made a virtue
of necessity arid introduced the bill, which was passed
almost without opposition, as a Government measure.
The Acts to provide for primary education and for the
establishment of grammar schools enacted that a Board,
to be presided over by a minister of the Crown, was to
be incorporated, to carry out a system of national edu-
cation, similar to the one established in New South
Wales ; with a provision, however, for the assistance of
schools under denominational management, and of
which the property might not be vested in the Board.
As regards grammar schools, it was enacted that, in the
event of not less than £l,OOO being raised in any locality
for the establishment of such a school, the Government
should grant double that amount for the same purpose ;
and that when fees for three years had been pledged to
an amount of not less than £260 per annum, the Govern-
ment should grant £5OO per annum for the general sup-
port of the school. Under these arrangements, there
would be a primary school, partially endowed by the
State, for the common branches of an English education,
in every small centre of population ; and in every town
with a population of from 2,000 to 4,000 souls there
would be, in due time, a grammar school for superior
education under popular management.
In August, 1860, an expedition, at the head of which
were Mr. G. E. Dalrymple, Commissioner of Crown Lands,
and Mr. J. W. Smith, R.N., set out with the object of
surveying the embouchure of the Burdekin River, which
Leichhardt had come across in one of his journeys, when
they discovered the harbor of Port Denison, besides
accomplishing the purpose for which they had been
despatched. On the 7th April, 1861, the first census of
Queensland took place, when the population was found
to be 30,069, consisting of 18,121 males, and 11,938
females, and on the 29th of the previous October the
first exhibition was opened at Brisbane.
On the 22nd May, 1863, the first Parliament of Queens-
land was dissolved, and the second opened in the follow-
ing July, Mr. Herbert continuing in office as Colonial
Secretary, and his colleagues being Messrs. R. Pring,
T. de L. Moffatt, A. Macalister, and J. Bramston.
In February, 1864, the sod of the first Queensland rail-
way was turned, and in the ensuing July the pastoral
district of Cook was proclaimed.
The principal Acts which passed the Legislature during
this year were the Additional Members Bill and the
Immigration Act. On the Ist January, 1864, the second
census was taken, which gave the population at 61,467,
of which number 37,425 were males, and 24,042 females.
These figures are exclusive of the black aborigines, and
show an increase of 31,408 persons above the population
when taken at the census of 1861.
On the 31st July, 1565, the first Queensland railway was
opened, and the spread of colonization had increased so
much that there were sheep stations as far as 700 miles
west of Brisbane, and 800 miles to the north of Rockhamp-
ton. On the Ist February, 1866, the Herbert Ministry was
merged into one formed by Mr. A. Macalister, which
lasted only until the following July, when Mr. Herbert
came back to power for three weeks, after which Mr.
Macalister formed an administration, his colleagues being
Messrs. C. Lilley, J. I). McLean. J. P. Bell, J. Watts, G.
Raff, and St. G. R. Gore. The principal legislative
measure passed this year was “ The Leasing Act of 1866,”
which offered further inducements for the occupation of
the public lands. During this year the young colony
suffered from a severe monetary depression, causing many
bankruptcies, great losses among the pastoral classes,
and the failure of the local bank. The Revenue for the
year was £592.968, and the Expendi ure, £696,828. The
second Parliament was dissolved in May, 1867, and the
third opened on the 7th August following, the first Royal
Agricultural Exhibition having been opened at Too-
woomba on the 11th of the previous month. Shortly
after the opening of the third Parliament, the Macalister
Government retired in favor of a Ministry at the head
of which was Mr. R. R. Mackenzie, associated with
Messrs. A. H. Palmer, R. Pring, E. W. Lamb, and T. L. M.
Prior. On the 4th January, 1868, Sir George Bowen, the
first Governor of Queensland, left Brisbane at the termi-
nation of his tenure of office, and Colonel Maurice
Charles O’Connell acted as Administrator until the arrival
of Colonel Samuel Wensley Blackall, the succeeding
Governor, on the 14th August following. The Duke of
Edinburgh visited Brisbane in February, in H.M.S.
“Galatea,” of which he was in command, and laid the
foundation-stone of the Brisbane Grammar School on
the last day of the month. Parliament having been
dissolved by the new Governor shortly after his arrival,
the new Chamber met on the 18th November following,
and the Mackenzie Ministry was replaced a week later
by another, which held office until May, 1870, at the head
of which was Mr. G. Lillcy, and the remaining members
of which were Messrs. T. B. Stephens, T. H. Fitzgerald,
A. Macalister, R. Pring and J. Douglas. On the Ist
February, 1869, the Brisbane Grammar School was
opened, arid during the second session of the Parliament
“ The Pastoral Leases Act” was passed, by which an ex-
tended and more secure tenure was granted to the Crown
lessees, for the encouragement of pastoral enterprise.
Tlie population of the colony, on the 31st December,
1870, was estimated at 115,567 ; the Revenue for the year
was £743,058 ; Expenditure, £764,491; value of Imports,
£1,577,339; Exports, £2,633,732 ; number of horses,
83,358 ; cattle, 1,076,630 ; sheep, 8,163,818 ; pigs, 30,992;
while the total extent of land under crop was 62,210
acres. Governor Blackall died on the 2nd January,
1871, having been taken ill in the latter part of the pre-
vious year, and was succeeded by the Marquis of Nor-
manby in the following August, Col. Sir Maurice Charles
O'Connell having filled the position of Administrator
during the interim. The sixth Parliament of Queens-
land assembled on the 7th November, 1871. Opals
were discovered in the northern part of the colony in
April of the following year, and the Queensland National
Bank was opened on the 2nd of June. In 1874, the
Marquis of Normanby was relieved of his functions on
promotion to New Zealand, and Mr. (how Sir) W. W.
Cairns took the oath of office on the 23rd January, 1875,
Sir Maurice O’Connell having again acted as Administra-
tor in the interval. On the Bth September the Education.
Act passed the Legislature.
On the 14th March, 1877, Governor Cairns left Brisbane
to take up his appointment as Governor of South Aus-
tralia, and on the loth April Sir Arthur Kennedy ar-
rived as his successor and took the oath. In October
of this year the first woollen factory in Queensland was
opened, and on the 31st December the population num-
bered 203,084; the Revenue for the year was £1,559,111 ;
Expenditure, £1.566,723; and the value of Exports
amounted to £4,361.275. There was a very severe d rought
throughout the colony in the years 1877 and 1878, which
caused great depression, not only among the pastoral
and agricultural classes, but alsoln the mining d istricts.
In November of 1878. a general Parliamentary election
commenced, and in November. 1880, Governor Kennedy
returned to Brisbane from a trip to England on private
affairs. In August, 1881, the two sons of the Prince of
Wales, Prince Edward and Prince George, arrived in
Brisbane, while serving as midshipmen on board H.M.S.
“ Bacchante,” of the detached squadron, and were heartily
welcomed and made much of.
In April of the year 1883, New Guinea was annexed to
the colony, pending the confirmation of the Imperial
Government, which was, however, withheld; and on the
2nd of May, Sir Arthur Kennedy retired from the Go-
vernment of the colony and left Brisbane, dying on the
voyage to England, Sir Arther Palmer being sworn in as
Administrator, which office he held until the arrival of
Sir Anthony Musgrave, who had been nominated as the
succeeding Governor.


In the early part of 1884, the continuous and heavy
rainfall caused floods in several of the northern rivers ;
in February, severe gales were experienced on portions
of the coast, doing much damage to shipping and other
property.
Satisfactory results from some of the goldfields tended
this year to bring mining matters more prominently
before the public mind, and led to increased specu-
lation throughout the community.
In March, the railway line to Clermont was opened,
and in April, the first sod of the new line from Cooktown
was turned.
The Polynesian labour question received the attention
of the Government in April, and more stringent regu-
lations were issued to meet the various abuses that had
gained a place in the system.
During this year, the effects of continued drought in
many parts of the interior, especially in the Downs
district, were very marked, causing much loss to
pastoralists.
At a sale of property in the metropolis, in July, the
amount realised reached a value at the rate of £47,500
per acre.
The attention of the Legislature during the greater
part of the year was given to the consideration of a new
Land Bill, and the passing of it into law.
Heavy rains visited the northern and central portions
of the colony during the early part of 1885, dissipating,
in many places, the effects of a somewhat protracted
period of dry weather.
In May, the first sod of the extension of the southern
railway line, from Stanthorpe to the New South Wales
border, was turned, amid rejoicing, at the near prospect
of direct communication between Sydney and Brisbane.
A loan of £2,750,000 was projected by the Government,
this year, and floated on the London market, the average
price obtained being £97 19s. 4d, a result exceeded only
in former years by that of 1870.
A committee was formed, in London, in October, to
promote, and bring about, the separation of the northern
part of the colony.
During the last month of the year, a branch of the
Australian Geographical Society was successfully estab-
lished in Brisbane.
In March, 1886, a loan of £1,500,000, bearing interest
at 4 per cent., was successfully floated in London ; the
average price realised being £lO5 7s. 9£d., a result much
more favorable to the colony than any monetary trans-
actions of previous years.
Among the subjects which claimed a share of public
attention during the year, and received consideration
from the Legislature, was the movement for separation
on the part of the North. The matter was also brought
under the notice of the Imperial authorities, but, so far
without result.
The discovery of gold in the northern part of Western
Australia, gave rise to some excitement among the
mining population, and a rush of diggers from some of
the goldfields took place.
A noticeable feature in connection with mining matters
during this year, was the decided inclination on the part
of the English public to invest in colonial gold-mining
speculations—a result, doubtless, brought about by the
Colonial and Indian Exhibition.
At the beginning of the last quarter of the year, heavy
rains were experienced in the south part of the colony,
west of the Dividing Range, and many of the rivers were
in flood.
The population on the 31st December of this year wag
estimated at 343.768.
Towards the close of January, 1887, the south-eastern
portion of the colony suffered from very disastrous
floods. Homesteads were overwhelmed, stock swept
away to perish, and several lives lost. Many of the
settlers in the valleys of the Brisbane and Logan rivers,
who had by their industry risen to positions of compara-
tive independence, were reduced, by this sudden
calamity, to poverty and want. The lower parts of the
city of Brisbane, and its suburbs, were completely sub-
merged, the waters attaining a higher level than the
flood of 1864. Heavy rains visited the eastern seaboard
generally about this time, extending into various parts
of the interior. The change led, subsequently, to a
break-up of the drought, which had prevailed to a
greater or less extent throughout the colonies of the east
coast.
At an influential meeting, held in Brisbane, on the
23rd May of this year, it was decided, in furtherance of
a proposal agreed to in April, 1886, to inaugurate the
erection of an Anglican Cathedral for the city and
diocese, as a memorial of the Queen’s Jubilee.
The movement for the establishment of a University
came before the public mind in June of this year, numer-
ous petitions being up to prove its desirability. It re-
ceived the support of a large number of graduates,
undergraduates, and others.
The Jubilee of Her Majesty the Queen was observed
amid great rejoicing. Brisbane and many of the princi-
pal towns were illuminated at night and the school
children throughout the colony entertained in various
ways.
Towards the close of the year the near approach of
the Centenary of British colonisation of the Continent
attracted some attention, and the representation of the
colony officially, at the Melbourne Centennial Exhibition,
was determined upon.


historical Account
(Compiled expressly for J
Thk settlement of South Australia as a British colony
was consequent upon the discoveries of Captain Sturt,
who found himself, in 1830, in sight of the beautiful
range of hills which skirt the plains of Adelaide, having
proceeded from New South Wales down the Murray
River, with a party of fellow explorers, in two small
boats. The next year a committee of gentlemen in
London opened negotiations with the Imperial Govern-
ment with the view of obtaining certain concessions,
but, the attempt failing, it was not until 1834 that an
Act passed the Imperial Parliament, giving to an asso-
ciation, called the “ South Australian Association,” power
to frame laws, establish courts, appoint officers, chaplains,
and clergymen of the Church of England or Scotland,
and to levy duties and taxes. Three or four Commis-
sioners were to be appointed by the Crown to carry the
Act into execution, and the Crown Lands in the colony
were to be surveyed and open for purchase by British
subjects, or let on rent for three years, the purchase-
money and rent to be employed in conducting the emigra-
tion of poor people from Great Britain or Ireland to the
South Australian territory. The first Commissioners
appointed were Colonel Torrens (Chairman), and Messrs.
G. F. Angas, E. Barnard, W. Hutt, J. G. Shaw Lefevre,
W. A. Mackinuon, S. Mills, J. Montefiore, G. Palmer, G.
Barnes, and E. Hill.
The first Governor of South Australia was Captain
(afterwards Sir John) Hindmarsh, 8.N., whose appoint-
ment was gazetted in London on the 4th February, 1836,
Mr. (afterwards Sir) James Hurtle Fisher being appointed
Resident Commissioner for the sale of Crown Lauds, and
Colonel Light, Surveyor-General. The Governor reached
Holdfast Bay on the 28th December of the same year,
and, landing the same day, read the Orders in Council
constituting South Australia a British Province, and his
own commission as Governor.
In consequence of dissensions which arose between
tbe Governor and the Resident Commissioner, as to their
relative powers, Captain Hindmarsh was recalled in July,
1838, and succeeded by Colonel Gawler in October of the
same year, Mr. Fisher’s services being, at the same time
dispensed with. Under Colonel Gawler’s administration
the infant colony fell into great financial embarrassment,
owing to the labor being all employed in the city, in-
stead of in the development of the resources of the land,
and to the commencement of immense public works, to
pay for which the Governor drew his bills on Her Majesty’s
Treasury. These were dishonored, as the primary
understanding had been that the colony was to be self-
supporting, but the money was subsequently advanced
as a loan, and thus the difficulty was overcome. The
result, however, of Colonel Gawler’s management was
that he was superseded, without notice, by Captain George
Grey, on the 10th May, 1841.
With the appointment of Captain Grey, the manage-
ment of the colony by the South Australian Commissioners
in London ceased, the Home Governmenttakingit entirely
into their own hands. Under Governor Grey, the expen-
diture which, in 1841, had been £lOO,OOO, was reduced in
1842 to £34,000. At the beginning of 1843, 300,000
acres of land had been selected ; the population in the
town and suburbs was about 8,500, and in the country
districts upwards of 6,000; there were 360,000 sheep,
2,000 horses, and 24,000 cattle in the colony.
Colonel Robe succeeded Captain Grey on the 25th Octo-
ber, 1845, and his administration was marked by a com-
plete want of sympathy between himself and the colonists,
so that it was a relief for both sides when he was followed
by Sir Henry Edward Fox Young in August, 1848, who
entered heartily into all those schemes which were likely
to benefit the colony, and under whose government the
Murray River was opened for navigation in 1853 by
Captain Cadell in the steamer “ Lady Augusta,” which
safely pursued her course to Swan Hill, 1,300 miles distant
from Adelaide. During Sir Henry Young’s period of
office, the gold discoveries in New South Wales and Vic-
toria took place, the immediate result to South Australia
being the almost complete evacuation of the colony by
the adult male population, who sold all they possessed,
and started off for the diggings. The banks in Adelaide
were nearly drained of all the gold they held in re-
serve, and at the culminating point of the crisis, it is
understood that the amount of specie held by them,
of Australia*
f)t ¥car-Booft of Eustralla.)
unitedly, did not much exceed £20,000. Shortly after
this, a vessel arrived at Port Adelaide from Melbourne
with a number of returned diggers on board, who had
brought back with them to the colony gold-dust to tbe
value of £60,000. In order to grapple with the diffi-
culties at once, the Government established an escort for
the conveyance of gold from the diggings to Adelaide,
and passed tbe celebrated Bullion Act, which provided
for the appointment of an assayer, whose duty it should
be to receive, melt, assay, and stamp all crude gold
brought to him for that purpose ; that the gold, when
assayed, should be delivered to one of the banks, to the
order of its owner, at a standard of purity equal to that
of gold coined by the English Mint; that the banks
might issue their own notes against such gold, calcula-
ting it at the rate of £3 11s. per ounce, and that such
notes should be a legal tender; that the banks might
redeem such notes by the tender of the stamped ingots :
and that the Act itself should cease at the expiration of
twelve months. This Act was followed within the year
by a Bill for the coining of gold tokens, until sovereigns
from home could be substituted. The Bill was passed,
a local mint was established, and the tokens were issued
in due form. They represented twenty shillings each,
the standard being fixed, as in the case of the ingots, at
£ 3 11 s. per ounce. Erom the opening of the Assay Office in
February, 1852, to December of the same year, the gold
sent in to be converted into ingots amounted in value to
£1,395,208.
In 1851 the first constitution was granted to the colony,
and on the 20th August of that year the new Council,
consisting of eight persons nominated by the Governor,
and sixteen persons elected by the country, was assem-
bled by Sir Henry Young. The qualification for member-
ship was freehold property of the annual value of £2OO,
or of the total value of £2,000. The voting qualification
was also founded upon a property basis, and persons hold-
ing property in different districts were entitled to vote
in each district in which the same was situated. Tbe
new Act reserved a Civil List of £13,000 to Her Majesty,
and the Council was to last for five years, subject to pro-
rogation or dissolution by the Governor. No further
control was given to the Legislature over that part of
the land revenue which was administered by direction of
the Queen.
Sir Henry Young was succeeded in the government in
June, 1855, by Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, before
whose arrival and after the departure of Young, Mr. B.
T. Finniss, for many years Colonial Secretary, assumed
the position of Acting-Governor. During Sir Richard
Mac Donnell’s administration the colony made rapid
strides of progress. Roads were improved and bridges
formed ; surveys for railways were carried on to a large
extent and railway traffic inaugurated ; telegraph lines
throughout tbe country were established, as well as
telegraphic communication with Sydney and Melbourne ;
the city of Adelaide was supplied with water ; numerous
buildings for public purposes were constructed by the
Executive, including a new hospital. Parliament house,
Government house, Government offices, mounted-police
barracks, and an Institute with a free library ; the
Murray was navigated as far as Albury, and the first
steamer taken a considerable distance up the Darling by
Captain Cadell, with whom was Sir Richard Mac Donnel l;
the new mining district of Wallaroo, on Yorke's Penin-
sula, was discovered; and the far north was explored by
Sir Richard Mac Donnell. Major Freeling, Major Warbur-
tou, Messrs. Stuart, Goyder, Babbage and others. Besides,
and, perhaps, above all these advantages, a new Constitu-
tion was granted to the colony in 1856, the leading fea-
ture of which was a Parliament consisting of a
Legislative Council and House of Assembly. The
former was composed of eighteen members, six of whom
had to retire every four years, their successors being
elected for twelve years. The House of Assembly con-
sisted of thirty-six members, who were elected for three
years; the qualification of a voter being that he should
be twenty-one years of age, and on the electoral roll for
six months, the qualification for membership being the
same. The Council was also elective, and not subject to
dissolution by the Governor; the qualifications for a
member being that he should be not less than thirty
years of age, a natural-born or naturalized British sub-


ject, and a resident in the province for three years ;
whilst those for a voter were that he must be twenty-one
years old, a natural-born or naturalized subject, have
been on the electoral roll for six months, and have
a freehold of £5O value, or a leasehold of £2O annual
value, with three years unexpired, or a dwelling-house of
£25 annual value.
The first responsible Ministry (which took office on the
24th October, 1856,) consisted of B. T. Finniss, Chief
Secretary; R. D. Hanson, Attorney-General; R. R. Tor-
rens, Treasurer; C. Bonney, Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Immigration ; and Captain Freeling (the Sur-
veyor-General), Commissioner of Public Works. James
Hurtle Fisher was appointed President of the Council,
and George Strickland Kingston, first Speaker of the
House of Assembly. Parliament did not meet until
April 22nd, 1857, and on the 11th August following, the
Finniss Ministry resigned, and the Hon. J. Baker formed
a new one, his colleagues being Messrs. E. C. Gwynne, J.
Hart, W. Milne. A. Blyth, and J. T. Bagot. This ad-
i; inistration only lasted for ten days, and was succeeded
by one of which R. R. Torrens was Chief Secretary, and
his colleagues Messrs. R. B. Andrews, J. B. Hughes, M.
M‘Dermott, and S. Davenport. This Ministry was almost
as short-lived as the preceding one. its existence ter-
minating at the end of twenty-nine days, when it made
way for a combination Government of Messrs. Hanson
and W. Younghusband, associated with Messrs. J. Hart,
F. S. Dutton, and T. Reynolds, which held office uninter-
ruptedly from September 30th, 1857, until May 9th, 1860.
In 1857, the Real Property Act of Mr. (afterwards Sir)
R. R. Torrens was introduced into the House of Assembly,
and came into operation on the 2nd July, 1858. Besides
the especially favorable feature of economy in its modus
opernndi, its great principle is the conveying Of title by
registration, and not by the accumulation of deeds.
Another important principle of the system is, that a
certificate of title issued out of the Lands Titles Office
is indefeasible to a land fide purchaser, except in case of
misdescription of boundaries ; and in the event of loss or
destruction of a certificate of title, the Registrar-General
may, on satisfactory evidence being given of such loss or
destruction, issue a fresh certificate, which shall be an
exact copy of the original in the registry book, and this
is valid and available for all purposes.
And having now brought the history of the colony
uown to 1860, the same would not be complete without
mention being made of the several exploring expeditions
which were undertaken during the twenty years before.
On July 18th, 1840, Edward John Eyre, who occupied the
position of Resident Magistrate and Protector of the
Aborigines at Moorundee, set out from Adelaide at the
head of a party, with the view of exploring the unknown
country lying between South Australia and "Western
Australia, and encountering unexpected difficulties, he
sent his party back from Streaky Bay, and formed the bold
resolution of attempting to push his way through to King
George’s Sound, in Western Australia, his companions
being one white man (Baxter) and three blacks. After
almost insurmountable sufferings, he crossed the Great
Australian Bight, and reached King George’s Sound with
his black boy Wylie on the Bth July, his white follower
having been murdered at the end of April by two of his
black companions, who then deserted. Eyre’s perilous
journey was almost barren of result from a commercial
standpoint, the country which he traversed being totally
useless for pastoral or agricultural purposes, although the
hind to the eastward of Fowler’s Bay has since been occu-
pied for grazing pursuits. But however unremunerative
the exploration may have been, the pluck, perseverance,
and dogged obstinacy which Eyre displayed are none the
less worthy of admiration. Some thirty years after Eyre's
feat, John Forrest, a hardy young West Australian ex-
plorer, accomplished it from the opposite direction, traver-
sing the distance at the head of a little band with but
small trouble or privation. He camped over and over
again on the same ground as Eyre had formerly done, and
which he recognised atonce, as it appeared just as if it had
not been in any way disturbed since Eyre and his black
boy left it. In August, 1844, Captain Sturt took the field,
his intention being to solve the question of an existence
of a central sea in the continent, and returned on the 19th
January, 1846, after an absence of eighteen months, in
which he had penetrated as far as latitude 24° 40' S., and
longitude 138° E., and had discovered what is now known
as Cooper’s Creek, stretching away to the south-east
farther than the eye could soe. Several exploratory
expeditions were undertaken by the South Australian
Government during the years 1857 to 1859, but they all
converged upon the same region that had been previously
visited by Eyre and Sturt —Lake Torrens —beyond which
it seemed impossible to penetrate.
In the beginning of May, 1859, Mr. Stuart, Sturt's
former companion and draughtsman, commenced the
first of those expeditions into the northern interior,
which eventually led him right through the middle of
the continent to the shores of the Indian ocean. After
three unsuccessful attempts, in which he had added
greatly to the geographical knowledge of the interior
at the expense of almost superhuman difficulties, the
Government placed £2,500 on the Estimates to fit Stuart
out for a further attempt to cross from sea to sea, but
although he reached as far north as 17° 40' S., in fine
rich alluvial country of great extent, to which he gave
the name of Sturt's Plains, he had to write, “It certainly
is a great disappointment to me in not being able to get
through ; but I believe that I have left nothing untried
that it has been in mypower to do. I have tried to make
the gulf and river (Victoria, of Gregory) both before
rain fell, and immediately after it had fallen, but the
results were the same —unsuccessful.” He was compelled
to return, and arrived again in Adelaide on the 23rd
September, 1861, having been absent about ten months.
Undaunted by his past want of fortune, in less than two
months another expedition was equipped, the Govern-
ment and the public not being slow to appreciate his en-
thusiasm, and he was ready to enter upon his fifth, and,
as it proved, his successful attempt to cross the continent.
Leaving Adelaide on the 26th October, after months of
hard toil and privation, he was delighted and gratified at
beholding the water’s of the Indian ocean in Van Die-
man's Gulf on the 24th July. 1862. His second in com-
mand of the expedition was Mr. W. Keckwick. On
Stuart’s return, the South Australian Government
awarded him £3.000, having, in 1859, granted him a
lease of 1,000 square miles of pastoral country in the
north free of rent for a period of seven years.
On the 16th August, 1861, McKinlay was despatched
from Adelaide by the South Australian Government in
search of Burke and Wills, the Victorian explorers, but
having been anticipated by Mr. Howitt, who brought
their remains to Melbourne, he made a dash to the north-
ward, and succeeded in crossing over to the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, from whence he proceeded to Port Denison, and
returned by sea to South Australia.
Resuming our thread of the constitutional and general
history of the colony which we had brought down to
1860, on the 9th May of that year Mr. Reynolds dis-
placed Mr. Hanson’s Ministry, the colleagues of the
former being Messrs. Waterhouse, Strangways, Bagott,
and Hay, the last seeking retirement from political
life the following year in the Chief-Justiceship of the
colony. This government lasted until October, 1861, Mr.
Waterhouse having retired in the previous February in
consequence of ill-health, which, however, did not pre-
vent him from undertaking the responsibilities of form-
ing a new ministry, which consisted of Messrs. Stow,
Reynolds, Strangways, and Lindsay, with himself at the
head. Sir Richard Mac Donnell left the colony in 1862, and
was succeeded in March of that year by Sir Dominic Daly,
a man of great official experience, an excellent adminis-
trator, and a very popular governor. The year before, a
census of the population had been taken, giving a total
of 126,830 (not including aboriginals), of which 65,048
were males, and 61,782 females. The Waterhouse Minis-
try resigned in July, 1863, in consequence of a vote of
censure having been carried against them, on the motion
of Mr. Dutton, who now became head of the new admin-
istration, which, however, was compelled to resign after
having been only ten days in office, when Mr. Ayers
essayed his hand, his associates being Messrs. Andrews
Hart, Glyde, and Santo. This government lasted until
July, 1864, when it was reconstructed by the substitution
of Messrs. Stow and Milne in place of Messrs. Andrews
and Glyde. At this period, considerable excitement pre-
vailed in the Legislature and the colony on the squatting
question. Many of the early leases of the squatters
were about falling in, and had to be renewed in conform-
ity with the provisions of a local Act. The Govern-
ment had appointed the Surveyor-General to value the
pastoral runs, in order to fix the rent for the renewed
term, and his valuations were thought by the squatters to
be greatly in excess of what was fair and reasonable. The
consequence was that several administrations followed


each other in rapid succession, none of which obtained
the confidence of the House for any length of time, and
in October, 1865, Mr. Hart became Chief Secretary, with
a Ministry composed of Messrs. Boucaut, Duffield, Glyde,
and English.
In consequence of the success of Mr. Stuart in cross-
ing the Australian continent, and the favourable report
given by him of the character of the country upon the
northern coast, the South Australian Government having
obtained the protectorate of the new territory, resolved
to undertake the experiment of colonizing it, and on the
24th April, 1864, an official staff tooktheir departure from
Port Adelaide to prepare the way for the settlement of
the new colony, with Mr. B. T. Pinniss as Government
Resident. The expedition resulted in a pronounced failure,
the site of the proposed town being fixed at Escape Cliffs,
in Adam Bay, against the protests and remonstrances of
Mr. Pinniss’ officers, and gentlemen who represented the
selectors. Mr. Pinniss having been recalled to Adelaide,
the undertaking lingered on in a most unsatisfactory
condition until Mr. Goyder, the Surveyor-General, was
despatched at the head of a surveying expedition in 1869,
and he selected the site of Port Darwin as the head-
quarters of the settlement, shortly after which Captain
Douglas was appointed Government Resident of the
territory.
Sir Dominic Daly having died on the 19th February,
1868, whilst administering the government of the colony,
Lieut.-Colonel Hamley became Acting-Governor, in
virtue of being senior officer in command of Her
Majesty's forces, until the arrival of the Right Honorable
Sir James Fergusson, Bart., who assumed the govern-
ment jn February, 1869. During Governor Fergus-
son’s administration, the overland telegraph between
Adelaide and Port Darwin became an accomplished
fact; it was commenced in 1870 and completed in
August, 1872, the work having been placed in the hands
of Mr. Todd for execution. At the same time the British-
Australian cable was laid between Singapore and Port
Darwin, via Java, thus bringing the continent of Aus-
tralia into telegraphic communication with the rest of
the civilized world. In April of 1871, the census of the
colony was again taken, when it was found that the popu-
lation numbered 185,626, of which 96,408 were males, and
90,218 females. These returns did not include the
aborigines, of whom there numbered 3,369, as far as could
be ascertained.
In the year 1872 an Act was passed (amended in
1874), under which the whole of the waste lands of the
colony south of the 26th parallel of south latitude formed
one area, from which, as fast as it was surveyed and
declared open to the public, intending purchasers could
make their selections. All waste lands, other than town-
ship and suburban, had a fixed value put upon them by
the Commissioner of Crown Lands of not less than £1 per
acre, and no one could select more than 640 acres, or one
square mile. In this year the revenue of the colony was
£697,442, and the expenditure, £700,200, the value of
imports being £2,801,671, and exports, £3,738.623, whilst
the amount of land alienated was 414,745 acres.
In the interval between the departure of Sir James
Fergusson in December, 1872, and the arrival of his suc-
cessor, the administration of affairs was in the hands of
Sir R. D. Hanson, the Chief Justice, who resigned to
Sir Anthony Musgrave, the incoming Governor, on the
9th June, 1873.
In 1874 an Act was passed to incorporate and endow
the University of Adelaide, and in the following year an
Act to amend the law relating to Public Education
received the Royal assent, as well as another decla' ing
Port Darwin to be a free port. In June of the latter
year Mr. Blyth’s Ministry, which had held office since
July, 1873, went out, making way for Mr. Boucaut, with
his colleagues Messrs. W. Morgan, S. J. Way, John Col-
ton, W. A. E. West-Erskine, and E. Ward. This adminis-
tration lasted until March, 1876, when Mr. Boucaut re-
constructed it, by substituting Messrs. G. C. Hawker,
C. Mann, A. Blyth, T. Playford, and W. Everard for the
former cabinet, but only succeeded in keeping his Minis-
try together until the ensuing June, when Mr. J. Col-
ton’s came into power, with him being associated Sir
Henry Ayers and Messrs. J. C. Bray, R. D. Ross, J. Carr,
and E. Ward. In March of this year the usual census
was taken, when the population of the colony (exclusive
of aborigines) was shown to be 213.271. of which num-
ber 110,491 were males and 102,780 females. The revenue
for this year was £1,320,206 ; the expenditure, £1,323,337;
value of imports, £4.576,183, exports, £4,816,170;
number of acres of land under cultivation, 1,514,916 ;
while the live stock consisted of 106,903 horses, 219,441
cattle, and 6,133,291 sheep. Sir Richard Davies Hanson,
Chief Justice, died on the; 4th March, and was succeeded
by Mr. Samuel James Way on the 18th of the same
month.
On the 29th January, 1877, Sir Anthony Musgrave
retired from the government of the colony, and the Hon.
Samuel James Way became Administrator until the
arrival of the incoming Governor, except for a period of
about seven weeks, during which time Sir William Wel-
lington Cairns wielded the authority. Sir William
Francis Drummond Jervois, a distinguished officer of
Engineers, took the oath as Governor on the 2nd October,
1877 ; shortly after which (26th October), Mr. Colton’s
Ministry went out of office, and was succeeded by
another of Mr. Boucaut’s Cabinets, the remaining mem-
bers of which were Messrs. W. Morgan, C. Mann. T.
Blayford. G. C. Hawker, and N. Blyth. During the
Colton Administration, the line of telegraph from
Adelaide to Western Australia was completed, an im-
proved national system of education was initiated, and
there was a greatly increased activity in the construction
of railways and other important public works. An Act
was also passed to consolidate and amend the laws
relating to the Crown lands in the colony, which widely
liberalized the terms upon which agricultural, pastoral,
and mineral lands could be acquired. Soon after Sir
William Jervois’ arrival, he drew up a report on the
defences of the colony, with proposals for carrying out a
system of fortification, which was thereupon adopted and
the work commenced.
On the 25th September, 1878, Mr. Boucaut was ap-
pointed a judge of the Supreme Court, and Mr. W.
Morgan was then charged with the reconstruction of
the Cabinet, when Mr. N. Blyth gave way to Mr. B. Rees
(who was shortly followed by Mr. T. King), and Mr. W.
H. Bundey became the other fresh minister. The princi-
pal legislation of the late Government consisted in an
Act to amend the Crown Lands Consolidation Act, an
Act for the establishment of a permanent Military
Force, and an Act to amend the Beal Property Act of
1861.
In 1879 the foundation-stone of the University was
laid, and the Academy of Music opened. Among the
principal legislative measures of 1880 were the Public
Trustee Bill, providing for the care and management of
estates of deceased persons ; the amended Land Bill,
granting further time to selectors to complete their
purchases ; the Settled Estates Bill, providing means for
dealing with entailed land, which had hitherto, in many
cases, been vacant and unproductive through inability
to grant leases thereof, or to give good titles to intending
purchasers ; and a Bill providing for a retiring allowance
to such judges of the Supreme Court as might become
infirm after serving a period of twenty years on the
bench.
On the 4th January, 1881, a special session of Parlia-
ment was convened in order to pass a Bill authorizing
the making of agreements with the colonies of Hew
South Wales and Victoria relative to the Borders Duties,
and later on in the year an Act was passed to regulate
and restrict Chinese immigration, and another to further
amend the Constitution Act. The National Art Gallery
in Adelaide was opened in this year, and the Torrens
Dam completed. In the census taken on the 3rd April,
the population of South Australia (including the Northern
Territory), was found to be 279,865, of which number
149.530 were males, and 130,335 females, these figures not
including aborigines. The revenue of the colony for the
year ending December 31, 1881, was £2,171,987; ex-
penditure, £2,054,284; value of imports, £5,224,064,
exports, £4,407,757 ; total number of acres of land under
cultivation for the years 1881-82, 2,613.903; while the
live stock on April 3rd, 1881, consisted of 148,219 horses,
283,315 cattle, 6,443,904 sheep, and 126,654 pigs.
In July of 1881, the Morgan Ministry gave way to
another, the members of which were Messrs. J. C. Bray,
L. Glyde, J. W. Downer, A. Catt, J. G. Ramsay, and J. L.
Parsons. In April, 1882, the University was opened, and
in the following October, the National Picture Gallery ;
whilst January of the year 1883 saw the retirement of Sir
William Jervois from the government of the colony, which
was assumed on the ensuing mouth by his successor, Sir
William Cleaver Francis Robinson, late Governor of
Western Australia.


Xu the early part of this year the conservation of
water in the drier portions of the colony received the
attention of the Government, and operations to this end
were initiated in the direction of the New South Wales
border about forty miles east from Terowie. By this
means routes would be opened to the Mount Brown gold-
fields and the country on the banks of the Diamantina,
in Queensland. Investigations were also started in the
Gambier District and inland from Denial Bay.
During the first half of the year the preliminary meet-
ings in connection with the proposed J übilee Exhibition
were held, and received influential support. Bailway
construction was pushed forward with energy, and,
before the close of the year, two sections of the line
from Adelaide to Naime were opened for traffic.
On the sth June, 1884, the eleventh Parliament since
the passing of the Constitution Act was opened. The
Colton Government took office on the 16th June, 1884.
In the year 1885 a marked commercial depression existed.
Cumulative effects from previous years seemed to con-
verge, and produce stagnation throughout the land. The
low price of copper, which at one period of its history
was the staple product of the colony, also added to the
general effect. In this year South Australia, following
the example of New South Wales, offered to the mother
country a contingent for service in the Soudan cam-
paign, and enthusiastically welcomed the Contingent of
the latter colony when it called at Port Adelaide on its
way to the Red Sea. England gracefully declined the
proffered assistance of South Australia.
At this period a very distinct advance was made by
Parliament towards increased restrictions in the tariff,
with the view of providing work for the unemployed.
Among works of a public character carried out during
1885 were railway extension, chiefly in the direction of
the Victorian border; the construction of works in con-
nection with the water-supply of several townships,
notably Burra and Crystal Brook; the maturing of
schemes for additional conservation of water in the
valley of the Torrens, to augment the metropolitan
supply, and for a similar purpose in the more populous
portion of Yorke’s Peninsula; the boring, with the aid
of the diamond-drill, for an artesian supply' in some of
the worst-watered portions of the colony; and the
progress made with the new parliamentary buildings.
Though no advance of a phenomenal nature in any one
of the departments representing public interests can be
pointed to, sufficient was done during the year to main-
tain the reputation for progress borne in the past.
The navigation of the Murray was somewhat improved.
The defences of the colony received the attention of the
military authorities, and the placing of these on a more
satisfactory basis furnished employment to many' who
were previously without work.
In the early part of 1886 a severe shock was felt by the
community generally through the sudden collapse of the
Commercial Bank of South Australia.
At the end of April a loan of £1,332,000, at 4 per cent,
interest, was placed on the London market at a minimum
of £99. Tenders were received for over two millions
sterling, the average being about £99 9s. 6d. At this
time tenders were accepted for the erection of the
Jubilee Exhibition Building.
The discovery of gold in the Kimberley District in the
early portion of the year produced excitement in the
mining population throughout Australia. That section
of the population, ever on the watch for chances of
making rapid fortunes, as in the golden times following
the first discovery of the precious metal in New South
Wales and Victoria, was attracted by the exaggerated
rumors from the new El Dorado, and an exodus to the
gold-field, but only to a limited extent, was the result.
Gold was undoubtedly obtained, the auriferous character
of the country having been previously favorably reported
upon by Mr. Hardman, the Government Geologist of
Western Australia. As a gold-field, however, it has not,
up to the present, been a success. The complete explora-
tion of this portion of the western colony remains for
future pioneers. The majority of those drawn to the
diggings returned before the end of the year.
In October of 1886 gold was found on the Teetulpa
run, a few miles east from Wankaringa. The reports of
the warden on the discovery were of a very encouraging
nature, and soon a straggling population was collected
in the vicinity eager to secure leases in the auriferous
territory. The mining district of Silverton and Broken
Hill, in New South Wales, which lies a short distance to
the east, added considerably to the rush. For a short
time the silver-mining of the Barrier country was com-
paratively deserted. This field, though not comparable
with some of the gold-producing areas of the adjoining
colonies of Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland,
has, nevertheless, produced very fair results, and main-
tains a small mining population. Phenomenal finds
of gold were not frequent, but the general effect on
trade and business throughout the colony was beneficial.
Enterprise was stimulated, and a healthy vigor imparted
to various industries.
The fiftieth anniversary of the proclamation of South
Australia as a colony was observed on the 28th December
with more than ordinary rejoicings, the chief scene
of interest on the occasion being at Glenelg and around
the shores of Holdfast Bay.
The year 1887 opened with evidences of continued
activity on the part of those entrusted with carrying out
the preliminary arrangements for the Jubilee Exhibition.
Among the first acts of the Government in January of
this year was the appointment of a Land Board as
provided by the Crown Lands Act, passed during 1886.
The principal duties of this body lie in dealing with all
applications for, and leases of, unoccupied Crown Lauds.
In the early part of the same month railway communica-
tion was established between Adelaide and Melbourne,
thus creating a permanent bond of union and a rapid
means of conveyance between not only the capitals
of South Australia and Victoria, but even between that
of the former and Sydney. There is no doubt that this
was an event of immense importance, and one the
benefits of which will become more apparent with the
advancement of the various colonial interests. It was
fitting that the achievement of this object should have
been effected in the Jubilee year of the colony, and
those who look into the future will see in it one of
the evidences of a tendency towards that massing of
forces which at no remote period will place federated
Australia in the front rank of nations.
Parliament was dissolved in the early part of the year,
and an appeal made to the various constituences. The
principal questions discussed and determined by the
voice of the people were whether the revenue could
be increased by protection or not, and the result of the
election clearly proved that the protectionist party is
fast gaining ground in South Australia. Many of the
old members lost their seats through their pronounced
views in opposition to a protective policy. Another
question was whether there should be payment of
members, and on this matter South Australia appears to
have declared in the affirmative.
Amongst other important events which mark this year
may be mentioned the visit of the Premier of the colony,
Hon. J. W. Downer, Q.C., Attorney-General, to England,
to attend a meeting of delegates from all the colonies,
at which most important matters to Australasia, and
South Australia in particular, were discussed. The
Premier’s action was most severely criticised during the
recent election campaign by the various candidates, and
his leaving his own election as a positive certainty was
unique and unprecedented in parliamentary history, but,
when due weight is given to the great importance'of the
occasion, and to the zeal displayed by the Premier in all
things since his arrival in the old country, as evidenced
by the almost daily cablegrams in the public press, in
all matters affecting the welfare of South Australia, no
one can say but that his actions throughout have been
most patriotic and loyal, and Her Majesty the Queen has
thought well to confer the honor of knighthood upon him
for his work in the past and his zeal and earnestness
displayed at the conference now sitting, and it is an
honor which every South Australian will candidly admit
is only a fitting and suitable ending to such an import-
ant year, not only in the life of Sir John Downer, but in
the history of the colony at large.
During the Premier’s visit to England he negotiated
successfully with an English syndicate to take up large
tracts of country for wattle-planting. This will be of
lasting benefit to South Australia, using as it will
country, until lately, looked upon as utterly useless and
non-productive in every way. Coupled to this, and also
largely influenced by the untiring zeal of the Premier,
may be added the taking of large tracts of country for
irrigation purposes by the American firm of Chaffey
Brothers.


The first session of the twelfth Parliament was opened
on June 2nd, and shortly afterwards the Government,
under the premiership of Sir W. J. Downer, came to an
end, being replaced by one formed under the leader-
ship of the Hon. Thomas Playford. The remaining
members of the administration were, Chief Secretary,
J. G. Ramsay ; Attorney-General, C. C. Kingston ; Com-
missioner of Public Works, A. Catt; Commissioner of
Crown Lauds, J. Coles ; Minister of Education, J. C. F.
Johnson,
On the 16th June the Narracoorte and Mount Gambler
railway was formally opened in the presence of His
Excellency the Governor.
The jubilee of Her Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria
and of the foundation of the colony coincided within a
few months. Both events were celebrated on the 21st
of June, by the opening at Adelaide of the Exhibition,
for which so much preparation had previously been
made. The event which had been looked forward
to by thousands, not only within the colony but through-
out Australia, reached and even surpassed the expecta-
tions of its most ardent supporters. It marks a distinct
page in the history of South Australian colonisation, and
has served to a large extent to neutralise the effects of
the great wave of depression that has left its imprint
throughout the commercial world. The proceedings
were attended by a considerable amount of ceremony,
and in the presence of a large and brilliant assemblage.
His Excellency, Sir William Robinson, declared the
Exhibition open. A message by cable from the building
to Windsor Castle announced the fact to the Queen.
A history of the enterprise, with the difficulties which
had to be encountered, together with brief references to
the events being celebrated, was contained in an in-
augral address, by Mr. E. T. Smith, Vice-President of
the Commission. It was also noticed that from the un-
furling of the British flag on the shores of Holdfast Bay,
by the pioneers of the colony fifty years before, its pro-
gress had been steadily onwards, until at the present
time there is all the evidence of substantial prosperity,
and a prospect of even a brighter career in the future.
The celebration of the colony’s jubilee included also a
very pleasing ceremony at Glenelg, on the site of the old
gum tree under which the proclamation of the colony
was read in December, 1836. Here some young plants
of the eucalyptus tribe were placed in the ground to
commemorate the historical tree. Among those present
were a few who had stood there half a century before,
and saw the infant colony launched upon the bosom of
time.
Among matters which engaged the attention of the
Legislature during 1886, were a revision of the tariff,
irrigation, retrenchment in the public service, amend-
ment of the land laws, naval defence, and railway
management.
Throughout the year, but more particularly towards
its close, an increased tendency was manifest in the
community to speculation in mining enterprise. These
were for the most part of a genuine character, the bubble
element, which in former years had wrought so much
disaster among the unsuspecting and unwary, being
conspicuously absent.
The rising tide of prosperity which came with 1887
continued into 1888, and gave an impetus to commerce and
trade that will make the centenary of Australian colo-
nisation more than a numeral landmark in the history of
the colony.


historical Account of Tasmania.
(Compiled exprettly for ?T{)t ¥car-®ooft Of EuStraliS.)
Ijf November of tlio year 1642, Abel Jans Tasman, who
bad set out from Batavia at the head of an expedition
fitted out to explore the “ Great South Land,” as New
Holland was called, sighted Tasmania, and named it
Anthony Van Diemen’s Land, in honor of the Governor-
General of Batavia. To Tasman, therefore, is due the
honor of discovering the island. Anchoring in Fred-
erick Hendrik Bay on the Ist of December ensuing,
parties went ashore on the two following days, and left a
flag on a stall to commemorate the visit; after which
Tasman’s expedition loft the newly-discovered land.
The next visitor was Captain Marion, of the “Mascann
and Castries,” who arrived from Mauritius in search of the
“ Southern Continent” and anchored on the 4th March,
1772, in the same Frederick Hendrik Bay in which Tasman
had taken shelter. On landing, Captain Marion’s party
was opposed by the natives, and in the collision which
ensued, the French fired their muskets, with fatal result
to one savage.
A year later on, Captain Tobias Furneaux touched at
Van Diemen’s Land in the “ Adventure,” when forming
part of an expedition under Captain Cook, which had
left Great Britain for the purpose of exploring the ice-
bound Antarctic regions. The visit was purely accidental,
the vessels having become separated during a fog;
shortly after which the “Adventure” made the South-
West Cape on the 9th March, afterwards naming Adven-
ture Bay, and sailing along the eastern coast to latitude
40° 50'. From Furneaux’s observations, his conviction
was “that there was no strait between Now Holland and
Van Diemen’s Land, but a very deep bay.”
Captain Cook paid a short visit to the island in the
“ Resolution.” on his third and last voyage to the Pacific
in 1777 ; and again, in July, 1789, Captain John Henry
Cox, in the brig “ Mercury,” discovered Oyster Bay on
the eastern side; whilst Captain William Bligh, after-
wards Governor of New South Wales, entered Adventure
Bay in 1792 with the “Providence” and “Assistant”
under his command, having previously touched at the
island in 1788, when on his voyage to Tahiti to procure the
bread-fruit tree for conveyance to the West India Islands.
In 1792 there were also other visitors beside Bligh, as
Rear-Admiral D’Entrecasteaux in the “Recherche,” and
Captain Huon Kermandee in the “Esperance” discovered
the channel which bears the former officer’s name on the
20th April, and left after a month’s stay, but returned
in the first month of the following year to complete their
observations, which included the entry and naming of
the Rivers Huon and Derwent and an examination of
the different harbors.
Proceeding on to the year 1794, Captain John Hayes
then entered Storm Bay and D’Entrecasteaux’s Channel
in the private ships “ Duke ” and “ Duchess,” and sailing
up the Derwent much farther than the Frenchmen,
named and surveyed various places along the littoral.
In October, 1798, Flinders and Bass examined a large por-
tion of the coast in the sloop “Norfolk,” of 25 tons,
which had been lent to them for the purpose by Governor
Hunter, of New South Wales: in the course of which
they sailed round from Cape Portland to the Derwent,
naming Port Waterhouse, Port Dalrymple, Circular Head,
Cape Grim, Mount Heemskirk, Mount Zeehaan, Point
Hibbs, and other prominent coast marks, and surveying
and charting the whole of their discoveries. Lastly, in
1802, Captain Baudin in the French ship “ G6ographe ”
and Captain Hamelin in the “ Naturalists ” visited the
island, and made a careful suiwcy of the eastern coast;
determining many hitherto doubtful positions, and adding
largely to the previous general knowledge of the country.
The establishment of a settlement in Van Diemen’s
Land was at first chiefly intended to relieve Port Jack-
son of the most turbulent and unruly of her convict
classes, the numbers of which had become so large as to
endanger authority ; and in August of 1803. Lieutenant
Bowen, in the “Lady Nelson,” landed at Risdon on the
east bank of the Derwent; his party consisting of a few
soldiers and prisoners, and Dr. Mountgarrat, as surgeon.
This small band was increased in the following year by
the arrival of Lieutenant-Governor Collins at the head of
a body of officials, and in charge of 367 male convicts
from Port Phillip, which had been abandoned as unsuit-
able on Collins’ representations. They landed at Sulli-
van’s Cove, the situation of the camp at Risdon having
been found undesirable, whilst a small party of prisoners,
under Colonel Patterson, was sent from Port Jackson to
the Tamar, and formed a settlement at York Town. The
names of the principal persons in Collins’ party were
Lieutenant-Governor Collins ; Rev. R. Knopwood, chap-
lain ; E. Bromley, surgeon-superintendent; W. Anson,
colonial surgeon; M. Boden and W. Hopley, assistant -
surgeons; P. H. Humphrey, mineralogist; Lieutenant
Fosbrook, deputy-commissary-general; G. P. Harris,
deputy-surveyor; John Clarke and William Patterson,
superintendents of convicts; and Lieutenants W. Sladen,
J. M. Johnson, and Edward Lord, with the military guard.
Such were the pioneers of this important colony.
Collins, the first Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen’s
Land, and previously judge-advocate of New South
Wales, fixed on Hobart Town as the site of his settle-
ment, naming it after his patron, Lord Hobart; while
Colonel Paterson, in 1806, removed the greater part of
his establishment from York Town to the country above
the North and South Esk, where there were extensive
plains suitable alike for tillage and pasture, and almost
without a tree. Paterson traced the Tamar and investi-
gated the valley of Launceston, both of which names he
bestowed in honor of Governor King, who was of
Cornish family, and ho proposed to establish a seaport
town for the northern section of the island, which was
called Port Dalrymple. In 1808, the greater part of the
settlers in Norfolk Island were removed to Van Diemen’s
Land, much against tlieir wish, 254 arriving on the 15th
October. On the determination of the Government being
announced, the Norfolk Islanders manifested the greatest
repugnance; indeed, the elder people declared they would
not leave the country, although they soon found they
were powerless to contend against the official fiat. They
were offered the choice of a settlement in Van Diemen’s
Land or New South Wales, and the large majority selected
the former country, receiving from the Government
whatever would best reconcile them to the change.
Vessels were sent for their transport, their land holdings
were doubled and freed from all conditions and reserva-
tions, they obtained cattle on loan, and received rations
from the public stores, as new settlers. That the rising
generation were benefited by the change can hardly be
doubted ; but the effect, generally, on the parents was
painful. Compared to Norfolk Island, Van Diemen’s
Land seemed blank and barren ; besides which, the culti-
vation of the soil had to be begun anew. Divided into
three classes, according to their origin or wealth, the new
settlers were located partly in the vicinity of Hobart
Town, at Pittwater and New Norfolk, and partly at Nor-
folk Plains. The ordinary grant was thirty, forty, or
fifty acres, until a later period; a large holding was
neither possessed nor desired. Many cared for nothing
but those immediate benefits which they could claim as
immigrant farmers ; and whilst they drew their rations
from the Government stores, they sold their newly-
acquired property for a few bottles of rum, so that it was
a current remark that a keg of spirits was then of more
value than an ordinary farm. The hopeless and dissipated
state of these people is marked in every document of
those times. Their frail houses soon showed every sign
of decay, and their ground was exhausted by continual
cropping. Thus those exhilarating influences of youth
and vigor, which are usually the first steps in coloniza-
tion, were here wanting, and any civilizing agency rarely
counteracted the social evils which were prevalent. The
transactions of those early days are scarcely colonial.
Full of debauch and outrage, they mark a period of social
disorganization—the dark ages in the history of every
country in which the lower man has been his own master,
and far removed from the directing influences of public
opinion, which cannot be corrupted nor controlled.
There were, however, amongst the settlers from Norfolk
Island, a few who rose to affluence, and were distinguished
from the great majority by their diligence and enterprise ;
but in glancing down the list of names it is remarkable
how few have retained their position. The settlement was
early involved in great difficulties. Looking, as it did, to
the elder colony of Port Jackson for supplies, these
were at first forwarded in small quantities, but were
soon altogether interrupted, in consequence of floods
in New South Wales, which brought the poor to ex-
treme destitution. The kangaroo hunters were now


the chief purveyors of food, for which the Commissariat
allowed Is. 6d. per lb., and the foundations of some fortunes
were laid by persons whose servants were faithful and
expert. V few coarse biscuits were distributed as long
as they lasted, but the substitute for bread was the dried
aud pounded flesh of the kangaroo. This state of things
led to a lax supervision over the convicts, and was the
initiation of those lawless habits which later on brought
the colony to the verge of ruin.
Collins died in Hobart Town on the 24th March, 1810,
having administered the government for a little over six
years, during which period the progress of the colony
was barely perceptible, mainly owing to the trials
through which it had had to pass. Early in the year in
which he died, the Governor established a newspaper
called The Derwent Star and Van Diemen's Land Intelli-
gencer, which, though but a quarto leaf, was much too
large for the young settlement. On the death of Collins,
Lieutenant Edward Lord administered affairs until the
arrival of Captain Murray, who gave way in February,
1812, to Colonel Geils, who acted as Lieutenant-Gov-
ernor until the arrival of Colonel T. Davey, the second
Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen's Land, on the 4th
February, 1813. During this year the ports were opened
for general commerce, and houses of trade were estab-
lished ; while the succeeding seasons saw the resources
of the colony gradually developed, Macquarie Harbor
and Fort Davey discovered, the whale fishery consider-
ably enlarged, corn exported, the plough introduced, a
mill erected, and in 1816 the issue of the first number of
the Hobart Town Gazette and Southern Reporter.
In February of 1817, the foundation of St. David’s
church was laid, and in April of the same year Colonel
William Sorrell, third Lieutenant-Governor, landed in
Hobart Town and relieved his predecessor of his duties.
On assumption of office, Sorrell set himself so vigorously
to work to put down bushrauging, which had increased
to an enormous extent, that in less than three months
the greater number of the evil-doers were either put to
death or made prisoners. The arrival of many immi-
grants. among whom were numbers of settlers direct
from Great Britain, now led to the exploration of the
country, in which.the Governor took an active part, and
the interior of the colony being quiet, tickets of occu-
pation were granted to settlers, who were thus enabled
to establish large herds and flocks on the lands of the
Crown. In 1820, meat to the value of £lO,OOO, and wheat
valued at over £20,000, were exported to Sydney by the
Crown, at a purchased rate from the owners of 6d. per
lb. aud 10s. per bushel, respectively. At the close of 1821
the population of the island numbered 7,400, who pos-
sessed 15,000 cultivated acres of land, 35.000 cattle,
170,000 sheep, 550 horses, and 5,000 pigs.
During this year, Macquarie, whose administration of
Hew South Wales was drawing to a close, paid a visit to
Van Diemen’s Land, from Sydney, and made a tour of
inspection through a large portion of the island, giving
names to many settlements and townships on his route.
In 1819, Van Diemen’s Land wool became an article of
export, but it was not until 1823 that any large quantity
was sent away, when five hundred and fifty bales were
shipped in the “ Doveron,” and a like quantity in other
vessels. The establishment of the Van Diemen’s Land
Bank in this year was an effectual remedy for the many
financial difficulties winch had long beset the colonists,
owing to the want of circulating coin, and which each
trader had in a certain measure supplied by the issue of
his own notes or bills. Sir Thomas Brisbane gave a char-
ter to the projectors of the Van Diemen’s Land Bank, the
capital of which was divided into shares of 200 dollars, and
its direction committed to a local board ; and the issues
of individuals were finally suppressed by Act of Council.
On the 12th May, 1824, Colonel George Arthur, fourth
Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen’s Land, arrived in
the Derwent, and inaugurated his government by setting
himself to raise the moral standard of the settlers, and by
a steady discouragement of all violations of social
decorum. Coincident, with the arrival of Arthur, the
Chief Justice, John Lewes Fodder, brought from Great
Britain the charter of the Supreme Court, which was
opened for business on the 24th May following, when
Joseph Tice Gellibrand presented his commission as
Attorney-General. Daring the next year General Dar-
ling, the Governor of New South Wales, visited Hobart
Town, and proclaimed the independence of Van Diemen’s
Land on the 3rd December, Arthur thus becoming the
first Governor of the colony, and Legislative and Execu-
tive Councils being appointed, consisting of officers of
the Government.
Towards the close of 1826, the Van Diemen’s Land
Company and the New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land Establishments were formed. By the charter of
the former, they were authorized to employ their capital
in cultivation and sheep-farming ; to lend money on
mortgage and to persons engaged in fisheries; and to
undertake public works on security of tolls; but they
were debarred from banking and commerce. The Com-
pany received a grant of 250,000 acres, to be taken on
the north-west coast in one square block ; bounded by
Bass's Strait on the north, on the westward by the ocean,
and by a line drawn trom shore to shore. This land was
valued to the Company at 2s. 6d. per acre, and the whole
quit-rent charged was £468 165., redeemable at twenty
years’ purchase—£9,s7s. In the measurement one-
fourth was allowed for useless land. The employment of
convicts entitled the Company to remission of quit-rents ;
£l6 annually for each man. The stated objects of the
Company were not, however, carried out fully in prac-
tice, as, by a presumed oversight in drawing up the cove-
nant with the Imperial authorities, the rule which made
the outlay of capital the condition of a grant was
omitted. The public works promised by the proprietors
were never undertaken, and their establishment was but
a larger farm than others in the island. The New South
Wales and Van Diemen's Land Establismnent received a
grant of 40,000 acres; their engagement being to improve
the stock of Van Diemen’s Land, and to introduce valu-
able horses. But although these two Companies did not
fully carry out the original intention, there is nodoubt that
to them the colony is chiefly indebted for the introduction
of high-class stock, and the opening up of new country.
On the 25th July, 1828. the Constitutional Act became
law, superseding that which had been passed by the
British Legislature in 1823. Under this later Act, the
number of members of the Council was increased from
five or seven to ten or fifteen; the oath of secresy was
abolished; drafts of Acts were to be gazetted ; a law
could not be made by the Crown or the Governor alone;
two-thirds of the Council had to be present; although
previous duties were confirmed, no new tax could be im-
posed, except for local purposes expressed in the bill;
ordinances had to be conformable to English laws; all
statutes in operation at the date of the Act were applied
to the colony, all others might be adopted; a member
might draft a bill, which the Governor had to lay, ver-
batim, on the Council table, with his reasons, if any, for
refusing to propose it; a member might record his pro-
test, and a majority was necessary to pass a measure ; the
members were to be appointed by the Crown, and vacan-
cies filled up by the Governor; they-had to be resident;
ex officio they were magistrates.
In 1827, a Mechanics’ Institute was formed in Hobart
Town, Dr. James Boss, called the “ Birkbeck of Tasma-
nia,” delivering the first lecture on the 17th July, on the
Science of Mechanics. In 1828, the King's Orphan
School was established; and in 1829 the Van Diemen’s
Land Society was projected, for the purpose of collecting
and diffusing information respecting the natural history
produce, mineral wealth, statistics, condition, and capa-
bilities of Van Diemen’s Land. The projector of this
association was John Henderson, a surgeon, from Cal-
cutta. During these last two years, the Van Diemen's
Land Bank became a joint-stock company, the Tasmanian
Bank and the Derwent Bank were inaugurated at Hobart
Town, and the Cornwall Bank was established by the
merchants of Launceston. The cultivation of wheat in
Van Diemen’s Land increased from twenty to thirty
thousand acres during this same period, and the average
price of the grain at Hobart Town was Bs. per bushel.
In order to prevent the increase of dogs, of which
there were large numbers which had formerly belonged
to the aboriginal tribes, a tax of 6s. to £1 on each was im-
posed in 1830. In January, 1831, a modification in the land
laws took place, by which all land was to be sold by public
sale, at an upset price of ss. per acre, precious metals
being reserved, and indigenous produce for public works.
Owing to the numerous atrocities committed by the
aborigines, and their systematic destruction of premises
by fire, the Governor determined, in 1830,t0 enter upon a
series of operations with the object of ultimately secu-
ring the whole of the black population, and the cam-
paign commenced on the 7th October of that year with
an effort to drive the Oyster Bay and Big River tribes
within the County of Buckingham, and to capture them


there. The forces consisted of nearly five thousand men,
composed of the military, the constabulary, and a large
number of settlers and convicts, but after weeks of
harassing marches and countermarches, the plan turned
out a complete failure, and the force was disbanded at the
end of the following month, nearly £30,000 having been
expended, with the result of two prisoners captured.
Thus ended what was called the Black War. After this,
Mr. Robinson, a builder at Hobart Town, offered to secure
the aboriginal tribes by means of peaceful persuasion
only, and being warmly encouraged by Governor Arthur,
was completely successful, and brought them into Hobart
Town at different times, after which they were conveyed
to Flinders Island. During the year 1830, an ordinance
was passed permitting tire judge to allow a jury in civil
cases, whenever it was desired by either party, in which
case twenty-four names were to be submitted, from which
each party struck out six, and the remaining twelve con-
stituted the jury.
In October, 1836, Governor Arthur left Van Diemen's
Land after an administration of the colony of twelve
years’ duration, and in evidence of the progress that had
taken place, the population was now 40,000 ; the revenue,
£106,639 ; value of imports, £583,646 ; value of exports,
£320,679 ; and the number of colonial vessels, 71.
On the 6th January, 1837, Sir John Franklin assumed
the reins of Government, Lieutenant-Colonel Kenneth
Snodgrass, C. 8., having acted as Lieutenant-Governor
in the interim. Franklin’s administration was not
noticeable for any remarkable events in the progress of
the colony, and, owing to a disagreement between him-
self and Mr. Montagu, the Colonial Secretary, in which
the latter was much in fault and was in consequence dis-
missed from his post, but on his arrival in England gained
the ear of the Secretary of State. Lord Stanley, who sent out
Sir John Eardiey Eardley-Wilmot, Bart., to succeed him,
and he arrive 1 in Hobart Town in August, 1843, before
Franklin had received his official notice of recall.
Charged with the development of a gigantic scheme of
penal discipline, founded on erroneous data, and imper-
fectly sustained by material resources, Wilmot was in-
volved in the discredit of its failure. The colonists
objecting to the enormous burden cast on them by the
maintenance of the large number of convicts transported
to their shores, their six representatives in the Council
refused to vote the Estimates, and finally resigned their
seats. The duties on sugar, tea, and foreign goods were
raised from 5 to 15 per cent., but for some time produced
less than they had realized before, and the finances of
the colony came to a very low ebb. The result was the
recall of Eardley-Wilmot, who, however, died soon
after his retirement, in February 3rd. 1847, and was ac-
corded a public funeral in Hobart Town.
Charles Joseph Latrobe, Esq., superseded Wilmot, as
Administrator, on the 13th October, 1846. and was
relieved of his duties on the 26th January, 1847, by Sir
William Thomas Denison, who then took the oath as
Governor; and during the next year the Queen re-
instated the “Patriotic Six” who had resigned their
seats in the Council under Wilmot. In 1850 a Bill,
authorizing a Legislative Council to consist of one-third
nominees and the remainder chosen by the people,
received the Royal assent, and on the 30th December,
1851, the new legislature met for the first time. Mr. Dry
being unanimously elected Speaker, when it pronounced
the unchangeable opposition of the House to transporta-
tion, which had been largely continued in spite of the
repeated remonstrances of the colonists, and contrary to
the promise of Earl Grey in 1847. These persevering
efforts were at length crowned with success in 1853, and
transportation to the island ceased from the 10th Febru-
ary of that year, by the declaration of the Secretary of
State, the Duke of Newcastle. In the following year the
name of the colony was changed from Van Diemen’s Land,
with all its convict associations and penal memories, to
its present title, after its discoverer, on an address of the
Legislative Council to the Imperial authorities.
On the Bth January, 1855, Sir H. E. Fox Young, Kht.,
first Governor-in-Chief, relieved Sir W. T. Denison of his
gubernatorial office, and shortly after this event, the
colony was accorded the privileges of Responsible Govern-
ment, and the election of representatives took place.
The first Ministry entered office on the Ist November,
1856, and lasted until the 26th February, 1857. Mr. W.
T. N. Champ was Colonial Secretary and Premier, and
Mr. T. D. Chapman, Colonial Treasurer. On the 12th
March of the last-named year, gas was first used in
Hobart Town. The next Ministry was that of Mr. T. G.
Gregson, Colonial Secretary and Premier, with whom Mr.
C. Meredith was associated as Colonial Treasurer. Their
term of office was of the briefest, however, as they were
followed by Mr. W. P. Weston as Premier on the 25th
April following, Mr. P. M. Innes being the Colonial
Treasurer. On the 12th of the next month Mr. Smith suc-
ceeded Mr. Weston as Premier and Attorney-General, and
his administration continued in power until the Ist
November, 1860, when Mr. W. P. Weston came back as
Premier, without office, Mr. Henty filling the position of
Colonial Secretary. This continued until the 2nd April,
1861, when Mr. Weston resigned, and Mr. Chapman
accepted the position of Premier, without office, until
the Ist November, 1862, when he became Colonial Treasurer
also, in succession to Mr. P. M. Innes.
On the 10th December, 1861. Sir Henry Young retired
from the government of the colony, and Colonel (now
Sir) T. Gore-Browne, C. 8., became his successor. During
Governor Young's term, the colony was divided into
municipalities, the electric telegraph wires were brought
into use, and railway enterprise was initiated. In 1862,
the first issue of the Hobart Town Mercury took place.
Mr. Whyte's Ministry followed that of Mr. Chapman on
the 20th J anuary, 1863, and continued its administration
until the 24th November, 1866, Mr. Whyte holding the
office of Colonial Secretary, and Mr. O. Meredith that of
Colonial Treasurer. Sir Richard Dry then came into
power as Colonial Secretary and Premier, with Mr. Chap-
man as Treasurer, and held his office until the Ist
August, 1869, when he died. Meanwhile Governor Gore-
Browne had retired from his post on the 29th December,
1868, when Lieutenant-Colonel W. C. Trevor, C. 8.,
became Administrator, a position which he held until Mr.
(now Sir) O. Du Cane was sworn in on the 15th January,
1869. After the death of Sir Richard Dry, Sir J. M.
Wilson became Colonial Secretary and Premier.
Mr. F. M. lunes's Ministry succeeded that of Sir J. M.
Wilson on the 4th November, 1872, Mr. Innes taking the
office of Treasurer as well as of Premier, and Mr. J. R. Scott
that of Colonial Secretary. An alteration took place on
the 4th August following, however, when Mr. A. Kenner-
ley became Premier.
On the 28th November, 1874, Governor Du Cane re-
tired, and was succeeded by Mr. (now Sir) Frederick A.
Weld on the 13th January, 1875, Sir F. Smith, Chief
Justice, having administered the government in the
interim. During Du Cane’s period of office, the Launces-
ton and Western Railway was opened to traffic. The
Kennerley Ministry retained office until the luth July,
1876, their last year being rendered memorable by the
opening of the Hobart Town waterworks on the 23rd
February. Mr. T. Reibey followed as Premier and
Colonial Secretary, his associates being Messrs. C. Mere-
dith, Treasurer ; C. H. Bromby, Attorney-General; and
C. O’Reilly, Minister of Lands and Works. Their term
of office was only a year, as they had to resign soon after
the general elections and the meeting of the new Parlia-
ment in July, 1877. Mr. P. O. Fysh then became Premier
on the 15th August, his colleagues being Messrs. W.
Moore, Colonial Secretary ;W. R. Giblin, Treasurer; A.
Dobson, Attorney-General; N. J. Brown, Minister of Lauds
and W T orks ; and Dr. J. W. Agnew in the Legislative
Council. On the 9th August, 1878, Mr. W. R. Giblin
assumed the position of Premier, as well as that of
Treasurer, but this Ministry was superseded on the 20th
December following by an administration composed of
Dr. W. L. Crowther, Premier; Mr. T. Reibey, Colonial
Secretary ; Mr. D. Lewis, Treasurer ; Mr. J. S. Dodds,
Attorney-General; and Mr.C. O’Reilly, Minister of Lands
and Works. On the 30th October, 1879, Mr. W. R. Giblin
formed a Coalition Ministry consisting of himself as
Premier and Attorney-General; with Mr. W. Moore as
Chief Secretary.
A census of the population of Tasmania was taken on
each of the following dates, with the results as appended
thereto : —Jalfuary Ist, 1842—50,216 ; January Ist, 1848
—70,164 ; March Ist. 1851—70,130 ; March 31st, 1857
81,492 ; April 7th, 1861—89.977 ; February 7th, 1870—
99,328 ; April 3rd, 1881—115,705.
In April, 1880, Governor Weld retired, and was suc-
ceeded on the 7th December, 1881, by Major Sir Geo.
Cumiue Strahan; Sir Francis Smith, Chief Justice, and
Lieutenant-General Sir J. Henry Lefroy having admin-
istered the government during the interval, the former
to the 21st October, 1880, and the latter for the remainder
of the time.


During Governor Strahan’s administration of the
Government, the colony advanced more perceptibly in
material prosperity than at any former time; but this
condition was in a great measure the result of previous
mineral discoveries which were now producing large
returns. The tin mine at Mount Bischoff, in the north-
western part of the island, and the “ Tasmania ” gold
mine on the west side of the Tamar River, proved
exceptionally prolific, yielding immense treasure to the
fortunate shareholders. Mr. James Smith, subsequently
a M.L.C., discovered tin at the celebrated Bischoff mine
in December, 1871. It was the first tin mine worked in
Tasmania ; but lying far back from the settled country,
without roads to facilitate operations, some years elapsed
before the mine came to be practically developed. It is
now connected with the harbour of Emu Bay by a rail-
way 48 miles in length, constructed by the Van Diemen’s
Land Company as a private undertaking. About 30,000
tons of tin ore have been obtained from the Mount
Bischoff mine, and nearly three-quarters of a million
sterling have been distributed in dividends. In June,
1877, the famous quartz reef now known as the Tasmania
Gold Mine was discovered on the West Tamar, near
Launceston. The value of the gold produced is about
equal to the value of the tin taken from Mount Bischoff.
Both of these mines are still in active operation, with an
undiminished annual yield. Altogether, during the last
15 years, the gold raised in Tasmania from various
sources amounted in value to upwards of £1,000,000;
and the value of tin raised and exported during the
same period amounted to something over £5,000,000.
The mining industry has, therefore, been a considerable
factor to the present prosperous condition of the colony.
In the north-eastern division of the island are extensive
deposits of tin, which are worked with profit by a con-
siderable number of miners, and a few gold-mining
companies are also at work there. There are exten-
sive coal deposits in the Eingal district, where several
companies are starting operations. The coal is used on
the railways and for household purposes. Recently the
Linda goldfield, near the West Coast, has attracted much
attention. It is said to be very similar in quality and
productiveness to the Mount Morgan deposits.
It was not until a very late period in the history of
Tasmania that the Legislature of the country gave its
assent to a Public Works policy, similar to that which
had been adopted years before with successful results in
New Zealand and the colonies of Australia. An English
company had constructed the main line railway, which
runs from Launceston in the north, to Hobart in the
south ; and a local company had constructed the Western
line, from Launceston to Deloraine, by means of capital
partly subscribed by the shareholders and partly supplied
by the Government, who held a lien on the owners of
property in the districts through which the railway ran
as security for the interest involved, but the line was
subsequently taken over by the Government. Beyond
these two lines, none were constructed in the colony
until 1883-4, when the Western line was extended to
Formby, at the estuary of the Mersey River. Since that
period, a line was opened to St. Mary’s, near the east
coast; and railways to Scottsdale in the north, and up
the valley of the Derwent in the south, are in course of
construction, while several others in various parts of the
colony are being surveyed, the money for their construc-
tion having been granted by Parliament. At the same
time, during the last few years, good macadamised roads
have been made into many parts of the interior, but
more especially into the agricultural districts, which lie
in the northern parts of the island, and in the Huon
district, south of Hobart. These roads are being ex-
tended annually into the rich forest lands of the Crown,
where settlement is now rapidly advancing. Consequent
upon such progressive measures as these, the public debt
increased from £1,589,705, in 1877, to £4,269,970, in 1887,
of which latter amount there is, however, a considerable
sum unexpended—available for the railways and other
public works which are now being executed.
The Coalition Ministry, formed by the Hon. W. R.
Giblin, in 1879, enjoyed the confidence of both the Par-
liament and the people for several years ; but changes
in the personnel of its members frequently occurred. In
December, 1882, the Hon. C. O'Reilly retired, and was
succeeded in the Lands and Works Office by the Hon. N.
J. Brown. In August, 1884, Mr. Giblin resigned the
Premiership in consequence of failing health, and the
Hon. Adye Douglas was called upon to reorganise the
Cabinet. Mr. Douglas carried out his important mission
while Parliament was in session. He accepted the
appointment of Premier and Chief Secretary ; Mr. W..
H. Burgess was appointed Treasurer, in place of Mr.
Dodds, who became Attorney-General; and Mr. Brown
retained his portfolio of Lands and Works. The Ministry,,
thus reconstructed, followed on the lines of Mr. Giblin’s
administration, taking up the measures that were before
the Houses at the stages to which they had advanced
prior to the brief adjournment which had been rendered
necessary for the re-election of the new members of the
Cabinet. . Thus the progressive measures initiated by
Mr. Giblin’s Ministry were not disturbed. Again, in
March, 1886, Mr. Douglas resigned the Premiership in
consequence of a general desire that he should go to
Loudon as Agent-General. This change resulted in the
appointment of the Hon. Dr. Agnew, as Premier and
Chief Secretary, while the other members of the Cabinet
remained undisturbed, and the Government still retained
a good working majority in Parliament.
In 1886 there was a general election for the House of
Assembly, in order to bring into operation a new law
relating to the franchise, whereby the voting power of
the people was increased to an extent almost amounting
to manhood suffrage ; and, at the same time, there was a
redistribution of seats provided for, with a small increase
of members. The Legislative Council was increased
from 16 to 18 members, and the House of Assembly from
32 to 36 members. The Government (still known as the
Coalition Ministry) commanded a majority in the new
Parliament, nearly half of whom were fresh members.
On two occasions the Opposition attempted to oust
Ministers on distinct motions of want of confidence, but
failed. Other events, however, materially weakened the
hands of the Government. Mr. Douglas, an able sup-
porter, was absent in England; Mr. Giblin had retired
from political life, on Ins appointment as Judge of the
Supreme Court; and, lastly, Mr. Dodds, the Attorney-
General, resigned his seat, having been appointed to
represent Tasmania at the Imperial Conference held in
London in 1886. The latter move proved fatal to the
Agnew Administration. There were only three lawyers
left in the House of Assembly, one of whom belonged to
the Opposition party, and another was a young man.
only recently admitted to the Bar. There was, there-
fore, no choice available in the selection of a new
Attorney-General. Mr. R. J. Lucas was the only remaining
lawyer in the House. The Attorney-General’s portfolio
was offered to him. but he declined to accept office
except on certain conditions, which Ministers could not
agree to. The Premier was at the same time most
anxious to be relieved from the cares of office, and the
Minister of Lands and Works was about to be appointed
Agent-General in succession to Mr. Douglas. Under
these adverse circumstances. Ministers resolved to call
their supporters together in order to consider the situation.
It was now discovered that Mr. Lucas’ hesitancy to accept
the Attorney-Generalship arose from a misunderstanding,
which was at once put right, and he was appointed to
the vacant office. The Hon. H. I. Rooke was also
appointed Chief Secretary, while Dr. Agnew retained
the Premiership. When Mr. Lucas sought re-election,,
as Minister of the Crown, his constituents rejected him.
This unfortunate circumstance ended in the resignation
of the Agnew Ministry, during the Parliamentary recess,
in March, 1887. Mr. Braddon, who had been leader of
the Opposition, was sent for, and the following Cabinet
was formed Hons. P. O. Pysh, Premier and Chief
Secretary ; B. S. Bird, Treasurer; E. C. N. Braddon,
Minister of Lands and Works ; and A. I. Clark, Attorney-
General. The latter had not been a member of the
House for some years, until he was elected to the seat for
South Hobart, vacated by Mr. Dodds.
Governor Sir G. C. Strahan left Tasmania rather
suddenly, on the 28th October, 1886, in consequence of
impaired health. He died in England shortly afterwards.
On His Excellency’s departure, His Honor Judge Giblin
became administrator of the Government, Chief Justice
Dobson being absent in the home country. This was the
first instance in which a native-born Tasmanian held
office as the Queen’s representative. Mr. Giblin con-
tinued to do duty as A cting-Governor, and sole Judge of
the Supreme Court, until the Chief Justice, Sir William
Lambert Dobson, returned in November, 1886, when His
Honor Mr. Giblin had to obtain leave of absence in order
to restore his mental and physical energies, which had
been severely overstrained by an excess of official work.


His Honor never regained strength, and died at his home
in Hobart, on 17th January, 1887, at the early age of 46
years. Mr. Giblin’s retirement from political life was
felt as a national misfortune —and now his premature
death, involving the loss of his faithful services on the
Bench, was still more keenly felt. He was a man who
had endeared himself to a wide circle of friends, and to
the community generally, for his many public services
and private virtues.
Sir Lambert Dobson continued to administer the
government of the colony until the arrival of Governor
Strahan's successor, Sir Robert George Crookshank
Hamilton, well known in the United Kingdom as Under-
secretary for Ireland, after the ill-fated Mr. Burke had
been assassinated in Phoenix Park. His Excellency Sir
Robert and Lady Hamilton arrived at Hobart, with their
family, on 11th March, 1887. The new Governor was
received at the capital, and throughout the country,
with the warmest demonstrations of personal esteem,
-on account of the fame he had acquired as the friend of
freedom in connection with the government of Ireland.
Numerous addresses and replies were exchanged between
His Excellency and the public bodies, many of whom
expressed this sentiment, coupled with that of devoted
loyalty to the Throne. Governor Hamilton arrived
in the colony at a time of slight depression—but it was
-only the result of too much activity in 1882 and 1883.
In those years the mining industry had been strained to
such an extreme point, and money for public works had
been so liberally granted by Parliament, that a glow of
prosperity shed its influence on all branches of trade and
•commerce. Landed property advanced in price to a
remarkable extent, especially in the towns. Allotments
were sold for building purposes at hundreds per
cent, more than their value two or three years before ;
houses of a superior description went up rapidly at
Hobart and Launceston ; and, altogether, the country
was in a flourishing condition. In 1883, the revenue
derived from a very moderate Customs tariff, had in-
creased 50 per cent, in four years, and most of the other
sources of revenue had increased in the same proportion ;
so that the Treasurer found himself with such a sub-
stantial balance that he was forced to exclaim. “ What
shall we do with it ?” During the two prosperous years,
large reductions were made in taxation. The carriage
tax, and stamp duties on certain instruments, were
abolished ; the real estates duty was reduced from 9d. to
6d, in the £ on the annual value of property ; and
reductions were made in the Customs duties on various
items, equal to about £30,000 a year. As matters turned
cut, it would have been better policy to allow the surplus
to accumulate, or to expend it on public works ; for,
while the expenditure increased yearly, it was found
that the revenue, reduced as it had been by such large
remissions, was inadequate to cover increasing liabilities.
The property tax was again raised to 9d. in 1885, and
still, at the close of 1886, there was a deficit of £20,533.
The deficiency in the revenue did not represent a
falling off. On the contrary, the returns were steadily
increasing each half-year, until that for the six months
ending 30th June, 1887, exhibited the largest revenue
that had ever been collected in the colony; but the
expenditure had advanced at a more rapid rate—and
this caused a balance on the wrong side. The general
revenue had increased in ten years from £327,016, in 1876,
to £568,924 in 1886. The expenditure had increased
during the same period from £341,889, in 1876, to
£584,756, in 1886. In 1876, the imports were £1,133,003 ;
in 1886. they were £1,756,667. In 1876, the exports were
£1,130,983 ; in 1886, they were £1,331,540 —thus showing
an increase during the decade of £623,664 in the one,
and of £200,557 in the other. In 1876, there were 332,658
acres of land in cultivation in the colony; in 1886,
there were 446,391 acres in cultivation, or upwards of a
third more in ten years. The population had increased
from 105,484 in 1876, to 137,211 in 1886. Under these
circumstances, it is generally believed that the little
island colony is in a highly prosperous condition at the
present time. The newly-formed Government, however,
held a different view ; and when Parliament was called
upon to meet in July, 1887, Mr. Bird, the Treasurer,
startled the country by announcing, in his financial
statement, that, at the close of the financial year, there
would be a deficit of some £160,000. In order to bring
the revenue up to the expenditure, Ministers proposed
measures which aroused the indignation of the country.
These included duties on certain salaries; on income,
the amount to be arrived at by an estimate of the value
of the house in which the taxpayer lived; on absentees,
double the amount of property tax paid by residents ;
on commercial travellers, selling for business houses out-
side the colony, £25 a year ; on doctors and lawyers of
less than five years’ standing, £lO a year ; on merchants,
shopkeepers, tradesmen, manufacturers, and farmers, a
direct duty per annum, varying from £25 to £2 10s.; a
poll-tax of £lO on every Chinese; an increased tax upon
the real and personal estate of deceased persons ; a tax of
3d. in the pound upon pensions ; a change in the real
estate duties from annual to unimproved capital value ;
and other direct taxes, so as to secure contributions
from every person in the community, except the actual
pauper. In addition to these taxes, the Customs duties
were to be raised —on tea, from 3d. to 6d. per lb. ;
on opium, from 10s. to £1 per lb.; and on spirits, from
12s. to 15s. per gallon. It was contended that there was
nothing in the financial condition of the colony to war-
rant such excessive taxation ; and that, with an in-
creasing revenue, a certain amount of economy, and the
proposed increase of Customs duties, with a tax on the
capital value on property, the Treasurer would be able
to balance his accounts at an early date. Ministers,
however, supported by a majority of members in the
House of Assembly, carried all their measures, with slight
alterations. But, when the Bill providing for the above-
named direct taxes went to the Legislative Council, it
was all but unanimously thrown out. Ministers then
hastily withdrew their Customs Bill, much to the re-
gret of those who opposed the other measures, for it
was considered that no hardship would be inflicted
thereby. Thus, an increase of about £25,000 in the
Customs revenue was abandoned by the Government,
although both Houses were willing to pass the Bill. Up-
wards of £300,000 were voted for public works, and the
session of 1887 closed without any effort on the part of
the Government to augment an inadequate revenue—
created, not by depression, but excessive expenditure.
The Bill for restricting Chinese immigration, by a
licence fee of £lO per head on landing, has passed both
Houses, and is now in operafion.


historical Account of Utctoria.
(Compiled expressly for 0)0
Tub date of the earliest discovery of any part of the
present colony of Victoria, is 19th April, 1770, when
Captain Cook came upon the coast at Ram Head, close to
Cape Howe, at the extreme eastern boundary, whilst on
his journey northward, when he visited Botany Bay. It
was not until the 15th February, 1802, that Port Phillip
was discovered by Lieutenant Murray, in the government
brig “ Lady Nelson,” when he named the inlet Port King,
in honor of the then Governor at Sydney, a name which
was subsequently changed to Port Phillip at Governor
King’s request, in compliment to his predecessor, the
first Governor. The following year a convict settlement
was formed under the charge of Lieut.-Colonel Collins,
but abandoned the next on account of its unsuitability
for the purpose, and it was not until the exploring ex-
pedition of Hume and Hovell to Port Phillip in 1824, that
any part of the interior of the country was visited by
white men. No further attention appears to have been
paid towards the colonization of the land until 1833,
when Mr. Thomas Henty, of Launceston, visited the
Portland Bay district and occupied it for sheep-farming
purposes in the following year. In 1835 two colonizing
expeditions set out from Launceston, Van Diemen’s
Land, for Port Phillip, one under the leadership of
John Batman, the other under John Pasooe Fawkner,
and arrived at their destination in the order named,
when the former adventurer entered into an agreement
with the aborigines of the country, under which he was
to become the possessor of some 600,000 acres of land for
about £2OO worth of merchandise. Unfortunately for
himself and the association of landowners he had formed,
the Imperial authorities were altogether deaf to his
claims, except in the remission of purchase money for
land to the extent of £7,000, by way of compensation;
and a proclamation was issued by the Sydney Govern-
ment, dated 26th August, 1835, claiming all the territory
in dispute, and declaring all bargaining with the natives
for land to be illegal. In remarking above that no white
man had visited the country before the expedition of
Hume and Hovell, exception must be made with respect
to William Buckley, a convict soldier, who, forming one
of the party under Lieut.-Colonel Collins, escaped into
the busli in 1803, and lived with a tribe of aborigines
until 1835, when he made himself known to Batman’s
party and recounted his strange adventures. He appears
to have all but despaired of ever again meeting his own
countrymen, and had lost all reckoning of time’s flight
since he and they had parted company. With the marks
of age and infirmity, which were the only reminders of
the many years which had passed away, he felt he could
scarcely hope to live the remainder of his life otherwise
than among the aborigines of the soil. He made his
escape with two other prisoners, the total of their pos-
sessions being a small quantity of rations, a gun, several
tin pots and a kettle. This last, however, being found
too heavy to carry about, was thrown away on the even-
ing of the first day’s journey—a circumstance which
becomes invested with a certain amount of interest
when it is stated that this utensil was found many years
later by some colonists who were clearing the land for
agricultural purposes. Directing their course along the
eastern coast of Port Phillip, the escaped prisoners
crossed the river Yarra, rounded the head of the harbor,
and toiled over the plains westward to the Yowang
Hills, or Station Peake Range of Flinders. Impelled by
hunger, from thence they descended to the sea-coast of
Geelong Harbor, in the hope of securing a meal of shell-
fish, at least. Supplied with food in this precarious
manner, they passed round to Indented Head, and from
Swan Island came in view of the ship “ Calcutta,” which
had brought them to Australia, as she lay at anchor on
the opposite side of the harbor. Exhausted as they
wore with hunger and fatigue, they determined, if pos-
sible, to give themselves up, and vainly endeavored to
attract the attention of some one on board. Failing
this, Buckley’s two companions determined to attempt a
return, he himself electing to remain where he was,
although his solitary position was far from enviable.
His companions were, however, never seen again after
they bade him adieu, and, doubtless, perished cither
from hunger or at the hands of the aborigines. Shortly
after the first summer of Buckley’s wanderings, he was
seen and taken possession of by a tribe of natives, who
¥rar-Booit of australiaj
appear to have treated him with some consideration,,
owing to an accident of fortune. It was a superstitious
belief among the aborigines of Australia that white
people were the embodied spirits of deceased members
of their own race, and shortly before Buckley’s appear-
ance a chief of the tribe which seized him had died and
been buried near a rude hut which Buckley had built,
a piece of a native spear being left to mark the grave.
Buckley having seen and appropriated this weapon, was
carrying it in his hand when first observed by the tribe,
and was, consequently, joyfully hailed as being no other
than their deceased chief come to life again. With short
intervals of solitude, Buckley remained with this one
tribe during the whole period of his exile, learning their
language and taking one of the females for his wife.
Thus the years rolled on until 1835, Buckley losing all
accurate note of time, although he inferred that a long
period must have passed, as he noticed the young native
children of his earliest days with the tribe grown up to
manhood. In this last year he was told that some white
people had been seen, and a plan had been arranged to
murder them for the sake of their possessions. Resolving
to counteract this nefarious scheme, Buckley made his
appearance at the encampment of the whites, who turned
out to be a portion of John Batman’s band of adven-
turers.
In 1836 Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Surveyor-General of
Mew South Wales, set out on an exploring expedition
into the northern and western interior of the new coun-
try, and named it Australia Felix, in recognition of the
beautiful scenery he had met with in almost continuous
succession throughout his journey. On the Ist October
of the same year, Captain Lonsdale arrived in Port
Phillip from Sydney, with authority as Police Magis-
trate ; and in March, 1837, Governor Sir Richard Bourke
paid the infant settlement a visit, naming and planning
the towns of Melbourne, Geelong, and Portland; whilst
the first sale of allotments in the first-named township
took place on the spot on the Ist June following, the
prices averaging about £35 per half-acre lot.
In the year 1839, Captain Lonsdale was superseded, as
local head of the community, by Mr. Charles Joseph La
Trobe, who, under the new title of Superintendent,
arrived at Melbourne on the Ist October, and continued
the administration for the following fifteen years, Lons-
dale becoming Secretary of the now Local Government,
and, like his chief, holding office during all the colony’s
transactions from its small to its great developments.
The jurisdiction of the new Government was restricted
to an area but little more than half that of the present
colony; namely, the territory lying to the southward of
36° S. latitude, and between 141° and 146° E. longitude.
Meanwhile, the first census of colonists had been taken
in 1836, which gave the population as 177 persons, 142 of
whom were males, and 35 females ; but in 1841, these
numbers had increased to 11,738 persons.
By an Imperial Act for the Australian colonies, which
came into operation in 1843, the Port Phillip settlement
was officially recognised as the Southern District of New
South Wales, anil as such, was allowed to send six
representatives to the Legislative Assembly at Sydney.
The boundaries which were on this occasion fixed for the
Port Phillip district are the same winch constitute those
of the present colony of Victoria. In October of this
year, Sir George Gipps, the Governor of the colony, paid
a visit to Melbourne, which city and Geelong now
entered upon municipal existence. The measure of re-
presentation which the Southern District had been given
had not. however, by any means satisfied the colonists,
and each succeeding year was marked by agitation for
complete separation from New South Wales, to which
Dr. Lang threw in the weight of his support; and no
doubt the colonists viewed with satisfaction the arrival
of the first Bishop of Melbourne in the year 1848, who
had been appointed from England. Soon, however, their
most ardent wishes were to be fulfilled, for, on the Ist
July, 1851, the Australian Colonies Act of 1850 came into
operation, and the Southern District of New South Wales
ceased to exist, only to re-appear as a separate colony
bearing the name of Victoria, by the express wish of the
Queen. The census of the 2nd March preceding showed
that it contained at that time above 77,000 colonists, of


whom Melbourne possessed 23,000; while the import and
■export commerce, collectively, for the preceding year
(1850). amounted to nearly £2,000,000.
No inconsiderable amount of ceremonial attended the
inauguration of the new colony, the principal of which
was the swearing in of the late superintendent,
La Trobe, as Lieut.-Governor and, to make the year a
still happier one, Ballarat was discovered to be a gold-
field in September, although the precious metal bad
been found a month earlier at Anderson’s Creek, a short
distance to the eastward of Melbourne. The first Legis-
lative Council for the colony assembled in November of
■the same year, the official members of which were W.
Lonsdale, Colonial Secretary ; W. F. Stawell, Attorney-
-General; R. Barry, Solicitor-General; C.H Ebden, Audi-
tor-General ; and R. W. Pohlman, Chairman of the Court
of Requests; the total number of members being 30, ot
which J. F. Palmer was elected Speaker. The electoral
franchise was now £lO, instead of £2O, as heretofore.
The first effect of the discovery of the gold mines was
to reduce the value of real property, every one being
desirous of disposing of his possessions in order to pro-
vide for a journey to the Eldorado ; whilst, on the other
hand, merchandise and food substances rose to abnormal
prices. The rates of carriage to the Bendigo goldfields,
100 miles from Melbourne, reached successively £BO,
£lOO, and £l2O per ton ; and contracts were said to have
been freely made at still higher rates, even up to £l6O
per ton. Flour, which could be purchased in Melbourne
at £24 per ton, was sold at Bendigo for £2O per bag of
200 lbs., or at the rate of £2OO for the ton of 2000 lbs. in
weight. A great accession of population also took
place, many of the new arrivals belonging to a most
undesirable class, being ticket-of-leave and conditional-
pardon men from Tasmania. To protect the colony
from this calamity, the Legislature passed the Convicts’
Prevention Act in 1852, ordaining that no holder of a
pardon of any kind, other than a perfectly free one,
should be admitted to Victoria; and also, that all per-
sons arriving from Tasmania must prove themselves to
be free, otherwise they would be assumed to be convict,
and be treated accordingly. On the 21st June, 1854,
Sir Char es Hotham succeeded La Trobe as Governor of
Victoria, and, in the following December, a riot took
place among the diggers at Ballarat, who resisted the
collection of the gold mining license fee of £llos. per
month, and erected a stockade on Bakery Hill, which
necessitated the despatch of a body of military from
Melbourne to storm and take it. This imeutp led to
the adoption of new and more liberal regulations
as regards mining, and the issue of a Miner’s Right to
each digger, at a cost of £1 a year, conferring upon
him both the mining privileges and the franchise.
On the 12th September, the first railway in the colony,
from Melbourne to Hobson’s Bay, was opened for
traffic, and on the 23rd November, 1855, the new consti-
tution for self-government was proclaimed, Sir Charles
Hotham dying on the last day of the year. The popula-
tion had now risen to 330,000, and the import and export
commerce to no less than £25,000,000 for the year.
On the death of Sir Charles Hotham, Major-General
Macarthur, commanding the military forces in Victoria,
became Acting-Governor, a position which he occupied
until the arrival of Sir Henry Barkly, the succeeding
Governor, in November, 1857. But, ere the appointment
of Sir Charles Hotham, the Legislature, in view of the
■ enormous income of the colony, and the consequent
high importance of the office, raised the gubernatorial
salary to £15,000 per annum, an amount second only to
that of the Governor-General of India, although a sum
not more than was demanded by the extravagance of
those expensive times.
The year 1856, which is notable as the date on which
the first Parliament under the new Constitution assem-
bled for the despatch of business, saw the inauguration
of the Melbourne University, which had been founded in
1863, at the instance of Mr. Childers, then a member of
the colony’s administration. The Legislature of Victoria
now consisted of two elective chambers, with responsi-
ble ministers, and met on the 21st November. Member-
ship of the Upper House was based upon the high quali-
fication of £5OOO of real estate. The Ministry which,
with Mr. Haines as Premier, had continued in office
from the old form of government until after the opening
of the new Constitution, had only a short life, as it was
defeated in March, 1857, over a vote of £270,000 for
immigration purposes, and made way for an administra-
tion under Mr. O’Shanassy, which, however, only lasted
for six weeks, after which Mr. Haines resumed his former
position, and kept it for almost an entire year, when he
had to give way again for the opponent he had ousted.
Meanwhile, in 1856, the first elections under the Ballot
Act had taken place, and in 1857 manhood suffrage was
passed, and the number of members of the Assembly was
increased from sixty to seventy-eight. In 1860, during
the premiership of Mr. Nicholson, the Land Sales Act
was passed, which prevented any further operations of
the “ Orders in Council,” although not expressly repeal-
ing them. In the following year, Mr. O’Shannassy be-
came Premier in succession to Mr. Heales, and set about
the final settlement of the long protracted Public Lands
question, which finally blossomed into a comprehensive
measure, the Land Law of 1862, which took out of the
squatting category all the land of the colony suitable
for agriculture. Of the total area of Victoria, four and
three-quarter millions of acres had been already sold, and
one million six hundred thousand acres appropriated for
commonage. There were still ten and a half millions
of acres suitable for agriculture, and of the remaining
thirty-eight and a half millions of acres, about twenty-
five millions were suitable for pasturage. In 1861,
Australia was first crossed, from sea to sea (Port Phillip
to the Gulf of Carpentaria), by Burke and Wills, who
unfortunately died of starvation, at Cooper’s Creek, on
their return journey.
In June of 1863, the O’Shannassy ministry resigned,
and Mr. 51‘Culloch was entrusted by the Governor with
the formation of a new one. in which he was successful, his
colleagues being Messrs. Heales, Higinbotham, Verdon,
Hervey, Francis, Sullivan, Grant, Michie, and Fellows.
Shortly after this, on the 9th September, Sir Charles R.
Darling succeeded Sir H. Barkly, but only to two-thirds
of his salary, the same having been reduced by the
Colonial Legislature from £15,000 to £lO,OOO, in con-
sideration of the greatly reduced expense of living from
that of a few years earlier. Meanwhile, the bodies of
Burke and Wills, the explorers, had been recovered from
the bush, and brought into Melbourne, and on the 21st
January they were accorded a public funeral. In April
of 1865, the boundary disputes between Victoria and
New South Wales, which had been carried on since the
former had been given her independence, were amicably
settled, and in the month previous an important Land Act
was passed. During the M'Culloch ministry there was
continued strife between the Legislative Council and the
Assembly, the latter passing the new Government Tariff,
in January, 1865, which was rejected by the former,
whereupon the Governor, in July, raised money for the
public service in what was deemed by the Imperial autho-
rities an unconstitutional manner, and which led to his
recall in April, 1866. The crisis continuing, an appeal to
the Queen was proposed in October, 1865, and the Parlia-
ment was dissolved in the December following, with the
view of obtaining the verdict of the country. M’Culloch
coming into power again, in the new House, the Assembly
voted a sum of £20,000 to Lady Darling, just previous to
the departure of Sir Charles, in May, 1866, when Brigadier-
General Carey administered the government until the
arrival of the new Governor, Sir John H. T. Manners
Sutton (afterwards Viscount Canterbury), on the 13th
August following. In October, of the same year, His
Excellency opened the Intercolonial Exhibition, in Mel-
bourne, and, in August of 1867, the Legislative Council
refused its assent to the vote of £20,000 to Lady Darling,
which caused further acrimonious disputes between the
two Houses of the Legislature and led to the dissolution
of Parliament in the following December.
Meanwhile, the Duke of Edinburgh had arrived in
Hobson’s Bay, in command of H.M.S. “Galatea,” on the
23rd November previous, when everybody forgot their
differences in giving a hearty welcome to the Queen’s
second son, who was the object of much feasting, and
during whose stay Melbourne was en file.
Shortly after the opening of the new Assembly, in
March. 1868, the Ministry tendered their resignations,
as the Governor objected to the insertion of the grant to
Lady Darling in the Appropriation Bill, and a new ad-
ministration was formed, with C. Sladen as Chief Secre-
tary, and Messrs. T. H. Fellows, M. A. Macdonnell, E.
Langton, D. Gillies, M. O’Grady, W. Bayles, and 6. B.
Kerferd, his associates, which assumed office on the 6th
May, but had to retire in the following July, in favor of
M’Cullooh, with Messrs. J. M. Grant, J. F. Sullivan, G.
Higinbotham, W. M. K.Vale. G. P. Smith, J. J. Casey,


C. E. Jones, and G. Y. Smith, who had come to an
arrangement about the Darling grant. In May of this
year the first woollen and paper manufactories were
established.
The M'Culloch Ministry only hold office until Septem-
ber of the next year, when they were superseded by
Messrs. J. A. Maopherson, li. Byrne, J. M‘Kean, M. A.
Macdonnell, I. G. Reeves, E. Cohen, J. T. Smith, P.
Longmore, and C. J. Jenner, of whom the first-named
gentleman became Chief Secretary, Graham Berry suc-
ceeding Byrne as Treasurer in January of 1870. Owing
to the strength of the Opposition, this Ministry was not
able to carry out the Government in a satisfactory man-
ner, so a coalition administration was formed between
M'Cullooh and Macpherson in April, 1870, with the for-
mer as Chief Secretary, whose colleagues were Messrs. A.
Michie, J. G. Francis, T. T. a'Beckett, W. Wilson, 11. J.
Wrixon, W. Bates, and A. Mackay. In the next month
M'Culloch was knighted by Her Majesty, and on the Bth
September following the Industrial Museum at Melbourne
was opened. During June of this year Mr. (now Sir) C.
Gavan Duffy, in the Assembly, revived and discussed his
scheme for the federation of the Australian colonies,
which he had originally brought before the public in
1857. In January of 1871 the House was dissolved, and
the new Assembly met in the following April, shortly
after which the M‘Culloch-Macpherson Government went
out of office and Mr. Gavan Duffy was charged with the
formation of a new administration, in which he succeeded
on the 19th June, his colleagues being Messrs. J. M.
Grant, Graham Berry, M. O'Grady, P. Longmore, W.
M’Lellan, H. Spensley, R. Walsh, and W. A. C. a’Beckett.
According to the census taken this year, the population
of the colony numbered 731,528, of whom 401,050 were
males and 330,478 females; the aborigines amounting to
only 1,330. Mr. Gavan Duffy's Ministry resigned in June,
1873, on an adverse vote, and Mr. J. G. Francis accepted
the post of Chief Secretary, and completed his cabinet
with Messrs. E. Langdon, J. J. Casey, J. W. Stephen, A.
Mao'iay, D. Gillies, G. B. Kerferd, E. Cohen, A. Fraser,
and R. Ramsay. This was the first year that members
of the Legislature received payment for their services, a
vote of £3OO for each being carried.
Viscount Canterbury having relinquished the reins of
Government on the 3rd March, 1873, Sir W. F. Stawell
Chief Justice, became Acting-Governor until the end of
the same month, when Sir George Ferguson was sworn
in as the new Governor. The Francis Ministry having
retired from office on the last day of July, 1874, after a
general election two months earlier, which entailed a
ministerial crisis, Mr. Kerferd succeeded in forming an
administration, with Messrs. J. J. Casey, D. Gilles, R. S.
Anderson, B. Cohen, A. Mackay, J. Service, R. Ramsay,
and T.Macdermott as his colleagues. This Ministry suc-
ceeded in carrying the country with them until the
Treasurer, Mr. Service, brought in his budget of 1875, in
which the probable expenditure was put down at
£4,500,000, and a deficit was shown of about £340,000.
To meet this Mr. Service proposed a moderate free-
trade policy, with reduction of taxation, and a loan, and
as the Parliament refused to entertain these measures,
the Government resigned in August, Sir William Stawell,
the Acting-Governor, having refused to grant a dissolu-
tion. Mr. Graham Berry, the front of the opposition,
and a pronounced protectionist, was summoned to form
an administration, which he succeeded in doing by asso-
ciating himself with Messrs. J. Munro, F. Longmore, J.
Woods, W. C. Smith, Peter Lalor, J. B. Patterson, R. Le
Poer Trench, J. M. Grant, and W. A. C. a'Beckett. His
programme consisted in a continuance of the protection-
ist policy of the colony, and the intention of taxing the
richer colonists heavily to supply the requirements of
government. This financial coup d'itat turned out a
failure, and he was defeated, whereupon he resigned in
October, and a new Coalition Ministry was formed by Sir
James McCulloch, the other members of which were
Messrs. J. A. Macpherson, G. B. Kerferd, D. Gillies, R.
Ramsay, R. S. Anderson, J. Madden, W. McLellan, and
J. J ones. In the following month, McCulloch announced
the intention was to raise funds by imposing taxes on in-
come, land, and realized property, and in June of 1876 he
passed his income-tax bill by a majority of three. Between
March and June of this year, the Government was involved
in a series of disputes with a mercantile firm, which, it was
alleged, was in the habit of undervaluing their imported
goods when paying duty on them, and recourse was had
to the grave measure of opening the firm’s letters, with
the view of obtaining a knowledge of the original invoices
they might contain.
In May, 1877, a general election took place, which re-
sulted in a triumph for the protectionists, and necessi-
tated the resignation of McCulloch’s Ministry the same
month, when Mr. Graham Berry once more became
Chief Secretrary and Treasurer, his colleagues being
Messrs. F. Longmore, W. C. Smith, J. B. Patterson, J. M.
Grant, Peter Lalor, J. Woods, and R. Le Poer Trench,
the last of whom was succeeded by Sir Bryan O’Loghlen
in March, 1878. In October of 1877, a Land-tax was
enacted, but at the end of this month the Legislative
Council rejected Mr. Berry's appropriation, defence, and
Exhibition bills. The tension between the Council and
and Assembly continuing, the Council dismissed County
Court and other judges in January, 1878, over 120 civil
servants losing their appointments on the Bth of this
month, a day which has since been appropriately named
Black Wednesday.” The Council refusing to vote sup-
plies, the Lower House overruled the other, and ordered
public creditors to be paid on its sole vote in February,
the Governor, Sir George Bowen, giving the Ministry his
support. The result was in favour of the Berry Admin-
istration, and the House of Assembly and the Council
had to suffer a defeat. On February 27, 1879, the Mar-
quis of Normanby relieved Sir George Bowen of his
gubernatorial duties. A change of Ministry took
place in March, 1880, when Mr. James Service came
to the front as Premier and Treasurer, associating
with himself Messrs. R. Ramsay, G. B. Kerferd, J.
Madden, D. Gillies, J. Gavan Duffy, T. Bent, R.
Clark, H. Cuthbert, J. G. Francis, and R. S. Anderson ;
but this did not last beyond the following August, when
Mr. Graham Berry came back to his old position, supported
by Messrs. W. M. K. Vale, R. Richardson, J. B. Patterson,
W. C. Smith, A. T. Clark, H. R. Williams, and G. D.
Langridge. This Administration was in power when the
Great International Exhibition in Melbourne was opened
by the Governor on the Ist October, 1880, and saw its close
on the 30th April, 1881, ere they gave up office in July of
the last-mentioned year to Sir Bryan O’Loghlen as
Attorney-General and Treasurer, with Messrs. J.M. Grant,
T. Bent, F. S. Dobson, J. H. Graves, C. Young, H. Bolton,
W. L. Maddden, R. Burrowes, J. Mcßain, and L. L.
Smith as colleagues.
At the census taken on the 3rd April of this year, the
population of the colony numbered 862,346, of which
12,128 were Chinese and 780 aborigines, leaving a balance
of 849,438 people, of whom 439.754 were males, and
409,684 females. In the same year the Revenue of the
colony was £5,186.011, and the Expenditure, £5,108,642.
In March of 1882, a great scare was created in Mel-
bourne by the disclosures of a man named Henry Bryant,
who falsely stated that the Russian Admiral, then on a
visit to the colonies, had employed him to furnish full
particulars touching the defences, &c., of the capital.
Bryant’s specious tale was proved to have no foundation
in fact, and he afterwards came into the hands of the
police for passing valueless cheques. In the August fol-
lowing, a man named P. A. C. O’Farrell attempted the
assassination of the R. C. Archbishop Goold, but was
happily unsuccessful, and in the next month a new comet
made its appearance and was visible to the naked eye for
three or four months. On the 30th November, the first
elections under the Legislative Council Reform Act were
held, and resulted in the return of the residue of the
eighteen members required to bring up the body from
thirty to forty-two. The last month of the year was
marked by two disastrous accidents —the railway collision
on the Hawthorne line, near Melbourne, and the fearful
catastrophe at the New Australasian Company’s mine,
Creswick, in the latter of which twenty-seven lives were
lost.
Parliament was dissolved in the beginning of February
of the year 1883 at the solicitation of Sir Bryan
O'Loghlen, the Premier, and the new House assembled on
the Ist March, after the elections, which had resulted un-
favourably to the Ministry. Mr. Service’s amendment
to the Address in reply to the Governor's opening speech
having been carried against the Government, Sir Bryan
O’Loghlen tendered the resignations of himself and col-
leagues on the 7th of the same month, when Mr. Service
was sent for. and he at once formed a Coalition Ministry
with Mr. Graham Berry, the other members of which
were Messrs. G. B. Kerferd, D. Gillies, R. S. Anderson,
A. L. Tucker, G. D. Langridge, J. F. Levien, A. Deakin,
and F. T. Sargood.


In November of this year, very heavy rains, accom-
panied, in some cases, by electric phenomena, visited the
greater part of the colony, the downfall on the water-
shed and in the basin of the Yarra, being exceptionally
severe. Some of the low lands were inundated, causing
great damage to property.
According to official returns, the total population at
the end of December was 931,790.
In the beginning of 1884 an important change was
made in the management of the railways. These were
placed under a Board of Commissioners, to whom were
entrusted the working and all matters of detail. A
Public Service Board was also appointed, the functions of
which embraced the oversight of the whole Civil Service.
During the early part of the year the term of office as
Governor, of the Marquis of Normanby, came to a close,
and in April he left the colony to return to England, Sir
William Stawell acting as locum tenens until the arrival
of his successor, Sir Henry Brougham Loch, in July.
On the 10th of June the third session of the twelfth
Parliament was opened by the Acting-Governor. The
Intercolonial Conference, held in Sydney towards the
■close of 1883, to consider the annexation of New Guinea
and the Pacific Islands, and the federation of the
Australian colonies, was touched upon in the vice-regal
address. Reference was also made to the extension of
settlement through the passing of the Mallee Pastoral
Lessees’ Act, a measure which received a place in the
Statute Book during the previous session. Among the
remaining subjects, to which the attention of the
Assembly was directed, were the conservation of water,
irrigation, extension of the railway system, the utilisation
of waste Crown Lands, and the defences of the colony.
A block of land in Collins-street was sold at the rate
of £875 per foot, in June of this year.
At the close of September, the population of the
metropolis and suburbs, within a radius of 10 miles, was
given officially as 304,409.
On the 2nd of January, 1885, the Act passed by the
Legislature for the regulation of the Public Service came
into operation.
In the early part of February the attention of the
whole of the Australian colonies was directed to the en-
gagements of the British forces in the Soudan, by the
acceptance on the part of the Imperial authorities of a
contingent of volunteers from New South Wales. A
similar offer of aid to the mother country was made by
this colony, and though not availed of, the expression of
loyalty to the British Throne and its institutions, and
the readiness of the colonists to act with promptitude,
were duly acknowledged and appreciated.
At a large public meeting held in Melbourne, in June,
resolutions were enthusiastically passed in favor of some
form of federation, with the view of maintaining the
integrity of the Empire and bringing its parts into a
closer bond of union.
On the 17th of June, the fourth session of the twelfth
Parliament commenced its deliberations, the sitting con-
tinuing to the 18th of December following.
In the early part of January, 1886, much damage was
done to property in the neighborhood of Heytesbury
Forest by bush fires, many settlers being rendered desti-
tute.
On the 18th of February the Service-Berry Ministry,
which had been in power since March, 1883, retired, and
was succeeded by another Coalition Government, formed
by Mr. Duncan Gillies, who assumed the control of
Finance and Railways. Associated with him were Mr.
Alfred Deakin as Chief Secretary and Commissioner of
Water Supply, Mr, H. J. Wrixon as Attorney-General,
Mr. Henry Cuthbert as Minister for Justice, Mr. James
Lorimer as Minister of Defence, Mr. C. H. Pearson as
President of the Board of Land and Works and Minister
of Agriculture, Mr. W. P. Walker as Commissioner of
Trade and Customs. Mr. John Nimmo as Commissioner
of Public Works, Mr. F. T. Derham as Postmaster-
General, and Mr. M. H. Davies without a portfolio. Par-
liament was dissolved on the 19th of the same month,
and an appeal was made to the various constituencies.
In August a seam of coal, between 5 and 6 feet thick,
was discovered at Hazelwood, in South Gippsland.
On the first day of October the memorial stone of the
new Houses of Parliament was laid by His Excellency
the Governor, with some ceremony. In his address on
the occasion, reference was made by the Minister for
Works to the rapid strides of the city since the building
was commenced, and to the splendid character of the
edifice itself.
The population of the colony at the close of the year
was estimated at 1,033,062.
Early in 1887, the attention of the Government was
directed towards the preliminary arrangements for the
Great Exhibition to be held the following year at Mel-
bourne, to celebrate the centenary of the colonisation of
Australia, and shortly afterwards the first section of a
Royal Commission in connection with it was appointed.
At the Imperial Conference, held in London during the
first half of the year, the colony was represented by Mr.
Deakin, Chief Secretary, and Mr. Lorimer, Minister of
Defence.
On the 15th February the direct railway line from the
metropolis to Ballarat was extended to Bacchus Marsh,
the opening ceremony being performed by the Governor,
Sir H. B. Loch.
The question of Antarctic exploration came for con-
sideration before the members of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, and the Royal Society of Victoria,
during the year, and the desirability of sending an expe-
dition to the South Polar Seas, for scientific and economic
purposes, was affirmed. The scheme received popular
support, and was warmly approved by the Government.
In May, a very serious collision occurred between an
express and an ordinary train, near the Windsor Railway
Station, whereby several persons were killed and many
more severely injured.
On the 7th of June the second session of the thirteenth
Parliament was opened, allusion being made in the address
of the Governor to the rejoicings throughout the British
Empire, on the occasion of the Queen’s Jubilee. Notice
was also taken of the position of the colony in the Im-
perial Conference, a result due to the attention to duty of
its representatives. It was also announced that measures
would be submitted to the Assembly in the coming
session, for amending the Education and Public Service
Acts, the management of State forests, the laws relating
to shipping, and the Local Government Act, and for the
permanent endowment of the State School system from
the Crown Lands. Brief reference was also made in the
address to the prosperity of the past year, and the general
well-being of the people.
Among matters of ecclesiastical import were the arrival
and installation of the Anglican Bishop, the Right Rev.
Dr. Goe, in April, and of Dr. Carr, the Roman Catholic
Archbishop, in June.
The Jubilee year of the reign of Queen Victoria was
celebrated on the 20th and 21st June, amid great rejoic-
ing, and every evidence of loyalty to the British Throne.
These days were proclaimed public holidays, and at night
the principle centres of population throughout the length
and breadth of the land were illuminated, the display in
the metropolis being dazzling and brilliant in its effect,
and far surpassing any previous file in the history of the
colony. Public bodies and private citizens alike vied
with each other in doing honor to Her Gracious Majesty,
and in evidencing their loyalty for the institutions that
form one of the pillars of a nation’s greatness.
Melbourne was again illuminated on the 28th of the
same month —Coronation Day.
As the close of the year approached, the arrangement*
in connection with the Exhibition, to be held in Mel-
bourne, in honor of the Centenary of the colonisation of
Australia, became matured, and greater activity in trade
matters was ooservable. A tendency was also evident
towards increased speculation in mining properties and
scrip generally. This was perhaps more prominent in
regard to shares in silver mining companies, a result
probably due in some measure to the proved richness of
the deposits in the Silverton and Broken Hill districts,
near the western boundary of New South Wales.


historical Account of SSEcstcrn Australia
(Compiled exprestly for JTj)f
THE first European visitor to the shores of Western Aus-
tralia was a Portuguese of the name of Menezes, who
touohed on the West Coast in the year 1527, anil gave the
name of Ahrolhos to the group of islets which lie off
Champion Bay. Following him came the Dutchman
Houtman, who added his own name to the Ahrolhos in
1538; and, in 1616, the Dutch ship “ Endraght” entered
Shark Bay, and her pilot, Peter Doore, bestowed his name
on the island at the mouth, now known as Doore Island.
Dirk Hartog next called the island to the west of Shark
Bay after himself, and its northernmost point Cape Dis-
covery, which has since been altered to Cape Inscription,
from an inscription placed there by this Dutchman.
Edel gave his name to the district round Shark Bay in
1619, and in 1622, Cape Leeuwin was so named from the
ship from on board of which it was first seen.
De Witt, in the “Karicn,” next gave his name to the land
in the north in 1628, and Pelsart in 1629 was shipwrecked
upon Houtman’s Ahrolhos. Tasman touched on the north
coast in 1642, and also on later occasions; and Dampier
in 1689 was despatched in the “ Roebuck” to make an ex-
amination of the coast, and named several islands and
coast places, among which Dampier’s Archipelago and
Land and Shark Bay may be mentioned. The Swan
River was discovered and named in 1697 by Vlaming,
who introduced into Europe the black swan, unknown
there before.
From this date until 1791, no one seems to have visited
Western Australia, but Vancouver in that year entered
King George’s Sound, and named it after his Sovereign.
In 1798, Flinders and Bass visited the west; and in 1802
the former sailed out of King George’s Sound in the “In-
vestigator,” and turning eastwards, discovered Fowler’s
Bay, which he so named. In 1801, two French corvettes,
the “Geographe” and “Naturaliste,” with the galliotto
“ Casuarina,” sighted Port Leeuwin, and the coast in the
vicinity still bears the names of the vessels and their officers,
as well as the Vasse River which was named after a Dutch
sailor of the expedition who was drowned off its mouth.
Sailing northwards, they coasted along Endraght Land,
De Witt’s Land, and Shark Bay, giving names as they pro-
ceeded, after which they entered the Swan River, which
they explored as far as the islands above Perth Water,
which were named after M. Hierrisen, a junior officer.
The survey of the northern coast was undertaken by
Captain King from 1820 to 1824, and in 1826 the Governor
of New South Wales sent a party of about 75 soldiers and
convicts to occupy King George's Sound in order to fore-
stall the French, whose intention it was understood to be
to take possession of the country. In 1827, H.M.S. “Success”
was despatched to the neighborhood of the Swan River
with the view of ascertaining the best place for a settle-
ment there, and the glowing accounts of the country
which Captain Stirling and the Colonial Botanist, Mr.
Frazer, brought back with them to Sydney caused the
Governor to recommend the formation of a settlement
there. Meanwhile, Captain Fremantle, in H.M.S. “Chal-
lenger,” had already claimed on behalf of his country the
land which now bears his name, besides exploring be-
tween Cockbum Sound and the Canning River.
In pursuance of the instructions of the Governor of
New South Wales, Captain Stirling again set sail from
Sydney for the Swan River, and landed from the “ Par-
melia” on the Ist June, 1829, from which date the true
history of the colony commences.
The staff of Captain Stilling, now Lieut.-Govemor,
consisted of Peter Brown. Colonial Secretary; Lieutenant
J. S. Roe, R.N., Surveyor; C. Sutherland, Assistant-
Surveyor; H. Morgan, Storekeeper; W. Shilton,
Clerk to the Secretary; and J. Drummond, Agri-
culturist ; Assistant-Surgeon Tully Daley, of the 63rd
Reg., having died on the passage. Besides these, there
were ten artisans and mechanics, and the wives, children,
and servants of the members of the staff. In J uly, a
light company of the 63rd Regiment arrived in the
“Sulphur,” and the Rev. J. B. Wittenoom, first Colonial
Chaplain, soon after made his appearance.
On the sth of August of the same year, the first emi-
grant ship, the “ Calista,” arrived with about 100 passen-
gers of all classes, and from that time a number of vessels
came to port in quick succession, bringing settlers of all
classes, trades’, and occupations, besides live stock and
goods; so that as early as January of the next year the
¥far-Boofe of australta.)
Lieutenant-Governor was in a position to return the
population as numbering 850; property of the assessed
value of £41,550; 39 locations effected; 204 cattle; 57
horses; 1,096 sheep; and 106 pigs.
This prosperous state of immigration was kept up and
increased throughout the year 1830, and in 1831 Captain
Stirling returned temporarily to England, when he was
appointed Governor and Commander-in-Chief of H.M.’s
Settlements on the West Coast of Australia, and, by-
letters patent, Vice-Admiral, with authority from Cape
Londonderry (lat. 13° 44' S.) to West Cape Howe, in lat.
35° 8' S., and from Dirk Hartog Island (lon. 112° 62' E.)
to lon. 129° E. He was also authorized to appoint an
Executive Council, to make provision for the defence of
the colony, to divide it into districts, counties, and town-
ships, and to dispose of the land according to instructions.
This Council, with slight modifications, has been con-
tinued to the present day. The members of the first
Council were Captain Irwin (commanding the troops),
the Colonial Secretary, the Surveyor-General, and the
Advocate-General, Hr. G. F. Moore. The Commissioner
of the Civil Court and Chairman of Quarter Sessions was
Mr. W. H. Mackie. The first Resident Magistrates were
also appointed by the Governor in the more settled dis-
tricts, G. Leake being gazetted to Fremantle, H. Whit-
field to Guildford, Colonel J. Molloy to Augusta, and Sir
R. Spencer to Albany. A Legislative Council was' also
formed, consisting of the members of the Executive Coun-
cil, two nominated members, and the Governor as Presi-
dent, Mr. Luke S. Leake being at the same time elected
Speaker, a position which he still holds as Sir Luke S. Leake.
The Imperial Government, wishing to anticipate any
desire of France to settle in the country, offered land at
eighteenpence per acre in return for property introduced,
and allotments as w-ell for every immigrant; and in the
year 1832, 1,349,209 acres had been disposed of on these
terms, causing the dispersion over a wide area of a very-
small population, and leading to much trouble, waste of
time in surveys, and confusion. The Governor himself
received 100,000 acres in lieu of a salary, although when,
later on, the latter was fixed at £BOO per annum, he
was ultimately paid from the date of his appointment.
Owing to the general want of system, and errors in
administration, coupled with a rapid increase of immi-
grants to the infant colony, food became scarce. The
kangaroo was hunted for his flesh, which became a
regular article of diet, and this, again, brought the set-
tlers in contact with the natives over whose hunting-
grounds the former were intruding, taking from the abori-
gines both food and raiment. Fighting and permanent
feuds were the natural results. Kangaroo meat sold for
lOd. per lb., when beef was Is. 6d. and mutton Is. 6d.,
bread being at one time as high as 2s. 2d. per 4 lb. loaf.
These adverse circumstances, together with the bad
name which the port of Fremantle obtained, owifigto the
many losses of vessels, and the rise to ss. per acre in the
price of land, led many immigrants to abandon their
undertakings, and carry their capital and labor to more
inviting lands. Meanwhile, the Governor and his sub-
ordinates were actively engaged exploring the country,
and an amount of valuable information was yearly accru-
ing, which all tended to show that the colony was more
suitable generally for pastoral than agricultural pursuits.
Settlements were also made at Augusta. Leschenault,
Kelmscott, Guildford, and in the Avon Valley, and the
north side of the Perth water was fixed upon as the site
of the capital of the colony. Among the more notable
members of these exploring parties, not omitting the
Governor, may be mentioned the Surveyor-General Roe,
Captain Thomas Bannister, who explored between the
Swan and King George’s Sound, Collie, and Dale, J. G.
Bussell, who examined the country between the Black-
wood and the Vasse. and to the west of these rivers, Mr.
Alfred Hillman, Mr. G. F. Moore, Mr. Thomas Turner,
Mr. John Butler, Mr. C. R. B. Norcott, Superintendent of
Police, Mr. F. Ludlow, Mr. Patrick Taylor, Lieutenants
H. W. Bunbury, Grey, Lushington, G. B. Egerton War-
burton, and others.
With these undertakings the years passed, until, in
1839, Mr. John Hutt w-as appointed Governor. In 1840
there were only 2,354 settlers in the colony, while the price
of land had been raised to £1 per acre, in pursuance of
the then fashionable Wakefield system, which, however.


was not fully carried into effect. Small efforts at immi-
gration were made, and in 1841, in the interest both of
the settlor and farmer, remission on the purchase of land
was granted to anyone who succeeded in training a
native to be a useful farm servant. A society was also
formed for diffusing knowledge concerning the colony,
and, later on, the West Australian Company was started
for the purpose of selling farms in 100 acre blocks at
£1 per acre, at their settlement at Australind, near Les-
chenault. Unfortunately, this company in London soon
broke up, and nothing further came of the undertaking.
Meanwhile, Colonel Clark had succeeded Mr. Hutt in
the Governorship in 1846, and he again was followed by
Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin in the following year, who
made way in 1848 for Captain Fitzgerald.
On the accession of the last-named Governor, as the
agricultural interest and trade generally were in a very
depressed condition, a large portion of the colonists sent
home a petition to the Imperial Government praying that
convicts might be introduced into the country, as a
means of bringing labor and money into the colony, and
supplying a market for produce. As the Home Govern-
ment was then in want of a place of transportation for
this class of criminals, the request was assented to, and
the first batch of convicts arrived on the Ist June, 1850.
But part of the agreement under which the Imperial
Government made Western Australia a convict settle-
ment was that an equal number of free settlers to con-
victs should be introduced, and accordingly, a month
after tiie arrival of the first convicts, a shipment of 219
free immigrants landed from the “ Sophia,” followed by a
detachment of Sappers and Miners the next year. Some 176
juvenile immigrants were also sent out at this time, but,
as the colonists expressed themselves averse to this plan,
it was not proceeded with any further.
The introduction of convicts proved of great value to
the colony at this time by reason of the money spent on
their establishments and guards, and the labor in which
they were employed; whilst, on the other hand, it raised
the criminal statistics considerably, and later on placed a
number of men in the community who, as expirees, were
entitled to every advantage possessed by the free settlers,
with the exception that they might not sit as members of
the Legislative Council, nor practise in the courts of laws.
From 1860 to 1869 inclusive, the convictions in the
Supremo Court show 264 of the convict class against 53
free, but still, in the face of this, the material benefit
derived from the introduction of convicts must fairly out-
weigh the disadvantages, when it is taken into considera-
tion that most of the roads, bridges, and public works
owe their construction to the labors of this class.
Returning to the early part of Governor Fitzgerald’s
tenure of office, in spite of all the drawbacks from which
the colony had suffered, there had been a steady increase
in population and production, and the settlers then num-
bered 6,661; the area of land under cultivation in cereals
was 4,122 acres, the imports were £45,411, and the ex-
ports £25,598; whilst the live stock consisted of 141,123
sheep, 10,919 cattle, 2,095 horses, about 3,000 pigs, and
1,431 goats. Victoria District was opened up during
Governor Fitzgerald’s term of office, and a convict depot
formed there, and later on at Lynton, Port Gregory.
The Messrs. Gregory reported the discovery of coal on the
Upper Irwin (for which they received a land grant of
2,500 acres), as well as lead and copper on the Murchison
River. Guano was also discovered on the islands, and
shells of the pearl oyster; while the first shipment of
horses to India was made in 1851, and an export trade in
timber commenced.
On 20th August, 1852, the “ Australian,” the pioneer
vessel of the Australian Royal Mail Company, arrived in
King George’s Sound; an overland mail service was
started between Perth and Albany; the first steamboat
was run on the Swan River; and a Savings Bank was es-
tablished.
Governor Kennedy assumed the reins of Government
in 1855, and found a considerable amount of dissatisfac-
tion amongst the colonists with the Executive, owing to
interferences and restrictions, the high price of land, and
an outstanding debt; and a demand for Representative
Government would have been clamorously urged, had it
not been feared it would have resulted in tlxe total re-
moval of the convicts from the colony. In spite, how-
ever, of all obstacles to prosperity, the imports for 1857
were double those for 1850, and the income was larger by
£8,498. In 1859, the regular troops were withdrawn
from the colony, and a force of Enrolled Pensioners or-
ganized; while companies of Volunteers were raised at
Perth, Fremantle, and York.
Following Governor Kennedy came Governor Hampton
in 1862—a year memorable on account of the tremendous
floods which visited the country, destroying many
bridges, inundating the lowlands, and causing great loss
and expense. In 1864, the area of settled country was
further extended, sheep being taken to Esperance Bay on
the south coast, and to Shark Bay and Dirk Hartog
Island on the west; while during the next year, the pearl
fishing industry was extended from Shark Bay to Nickol
Bay. During Governor Hampton’s administration of the
colony, he exerted his best energies towards economizing
the cost of Government, and to the carrying out of useful
public works. In 1867, Messrs. J. G. C. Carr, J. G. Lee
Steere, W. Bateman, S. Phillips, and J. W. Hardey, who
had been selected by vote, were nominated by the Go-
vernor as unofficial members of the Legislative Council;
and in the next year a petition was presented in favor of
a Representative Constitution. In the latter year, the last
batch of convicts arrived, some of whom were Fenians.
In 1869 Governor Weld commenced his tenure of office,
and during the following year the colony was divided
into electoral districts, the Legislative Council being
composed of five nominee members and ten elected mem-
bers, to which, subsequently, one of the former and two of
the latter were added. This movement not realizing all
the advantages which the settlers had anticipated, an
Opposition was organized, the forms of the Imperial Par-
liament adopted, and the Colonial Secretary assumed the
duties of Prime Minister and Treasurer. About this time
a loan for £25,000 was floated, public works were being
energetically carried out, bold and hardy explorers were
penetrating into the hidden lands of the interior, and
a material advance was being made in the prosperity of
the colony.
Early in 1869, Baron von Mueller, of the Melbourne
Botanical Gardens, suggested to the Government of
Western Australia that an expedition should be under-
taken from the colony for the purpose of ascertaining, if
possible, the fate of the explorer Leichhardt. Reports
had reached Perth from natives in the Eastern districts,
who had stated that about twenty years previously a
party of white men had been murdered ; and these re-
ports had been confirmed by a native guide of a gentle-
man when on a trip eastward in search of sheep-runs,
who had told his white employer that he had been on the
very spot where the murders had been carried out, and
had seen the remains of the victims. As his story was so
circumstantial, and he volunteered to conduct a party to
the locality in question, the Government felt it incum-
bent on them to make an effort to ascertain the truth of
the statement, and accepted Baron von Mueller’s offer as
leader of an expedition. As the equipment of the ex-
ploring party was being proceeded with, however, a letter
was received from the Baron expressing his inability to
take the lead as proposed, and Mr. John Forrest, who
had been previously appointed second in command, was
nominated to the vacant position. The party consisted
of six persons altogether, made up of Mr. John Forrest,
Mr. George Monger as second in command, Mr. Malcolm
Hamersley as third in command, David Morgan, proba-
tion prisoner, as shoeing smith, and two natives —Tommy
Windich and Jemmy Mungaro, the last of whom was the
native who had volunteered to lead the band to the spot
where he asserted the murders had been perpetrated.
The journey was begun from Perth on the 15th April,
1869, and the capital city was returned to on 6th August
following, the expedition having thus been absent 113
days, during which time it had travelled by computation
over 2,000 miles. The route eastwards was through
Newcastle, passed Mount Churchman, Lake Barlee, then
a chain of salt lakes, and as far as about lat. 28° 41' S.,
lon. 122° 50' E., the return being on a somewhat more
westerly course from the departure from Lake Barlee,
and as regarded the mystery of the fate of Leichhardt,
the results were barren. Forrest’s next expedition was
from Perth, along the southern coast-line, to Adelaide ;
a route only once before travelled by a white man, when
Eyre made his disastrous, but heroic, journey from Ade-
laide westwards in 1840-41. With John Forrest were
Alexander, his brother, as second in command; 11.
McLarty, a police constable ; W. Osborne, a farrier ; and
two natives. Starting on the 30th March, 1870, the party
arrived safely at Adelaide five months later, completing
a journey which it had taken Eyre more than twelve
months to accomplish, and furnishing a mass of valuable


information on a tract of country, the physical features
of which had been hitherto almost unknown. Once
again, on the 18th March, 1874, Mr. John Forrest set out
on an exploring expedition, having as his subordinates his
brother Alexander, James Sweeny (farrier), James
Kennedy (police constable), and two natives ; the chief
object being to obtain information concerning the im-
mense tract of country from which flow the Murchison,
Gascoigne, Ashburton, De Grey, Fitzroy, and other
rivers falling into the sea on the western and northern
shores of this territory. The route followed was mainly
between the 25th and 27th parallels of south latitude
until the Peake Station of the overland telegraph service,
between Adelaide and Port Darwin, was reached on the
30th September following, whence the journey to Ade-
laide was made by easy stages, and the entry into the
capital took place on the 3rd November. Forrest re-
ported that the season was an exceptionally dry one, and
therefore the difficulties they had to contend with were
much increased ; that the country from near Champion
Bay to the head of the Murchison was admirably suited
for pastoral settlement; but from the latter point to the
boundary of the colony, the general character of the land
was a gently undulating spinifex desert, lightly wooded
with acacia and other snrall trees, and, except in a few
creeks, with an absence of any large timber.
In the month of August, 1872, the advisableness of ex-
ploring the interior between Central Mount Stuart and
Perth was brought before the Government of South
Australia in such a way as practically to leave no course
open to them except acquiescence. The public urged
the matter, the press were equally determined, and in
the most liberal maimer Mr. (now Sir Thomas) Elder
placed his camels at the disposal of the Goverment, and
offered to provide native drivers, both free of expense.
The Government accepted the proposal, and Colonel
P. Egerton Warburton was named as leader of the expe-
dition, a sufficient number of camels and horses for
transport service being placed at his disposal. Through
various causes the arrangements thus made broke down;
hut Mr. Elder, who was bent upon the undertaking,
resolved to carry it out independently of the Government,
and, in conjunction with Mr. Walter W. Hughes, who
volunteered to share the expense with him, he entrusted
Colonel Warburton with the chief command, authorizing
him to organize such a party, and procure such an outfit,
as he deemed necessary for the successful accomplish-
ment of the object in view'. Starting from Adelaide on
the 21st September, 1872, and passing through Beltana
Station, Colonel Warburton and party reached Charlotte
Waters on the 26th November, where they were hospi-
tably entertained by the official in charge of the telegraph
station, and, resuming their march, they arrived at Alice
Springs (1,120 miles from Adelaide) on the 21st Decem-
ber following, this being the point whence the journey
westward was to be commenced. Owing to misappre-
hension regarding a rainy season, the expedition was
delayed at Alice Springs for four months, and only
started thence on the 15th April, 1873, the party con-
sisting of Colonel P. Egerton Warburton, in command;
his son, Richard Egerton Warburton, second in com-
mand; J. W. Lewis; Denis White, cook; Sahleh and
Halleem, two Afghan camel drivers; and Charley, a
native lad. They had 17 camels in all, and six months’
provisions. Almost from the commencement, the ex-
plorers had great difficulties to contend with, not the
least of which was a very dry season, leaving most of
the waterholes empty of the necessary element. Time
after time they were turned back from this cause, which
also led to the breaking down and loss of several of their
camels. Had their attempt, however, been made with
horses, they would have been compelled to have given it
up almost from the earliest days. Their route lay in a
north-westerly direction from Alice Springs in lat. 23°
iV S., up to lat. 20° S., a constant battle having to be
maintained against physical weakness caused by the dis-
tressing want of water, added to a journey through an
inhospitable wilderness in which the principal vegetable
growth was the poroupine-spinifex, uneatable even by
camels, who are, moreover, compelled to thread their
way painfully through its mazes, never planting a foot
on the stools, if they can possibly avoid them. It is one
of the most cheerless objects an explorer can meet, and
it is, perhaps, unnecessary to say that the country it
loves to dwell in is utterly useless for pastoral purposes.
On reaching lat. 20° S., lon. 128° E., the party had to
retrace their steps in a southerly direction, as no trace
of water was to be seen and nothing but an arid spinifex
wilderness met the view. From lat. 20° 30', a westerly
course was taken, constant search being kept up for
native wells, many of which, however, were found to be
dry, until the northernmost point, a little above the 20th
parallel of latitude, was reached in the beginning of
October, whence the final push was made to strike the
Oakover River by a south-westerly route. This was
accomplished on the 11th December in lat. 21° 11'23",
three camels only remaining to the party out of 17 with
which they started, but without loss to human life,
although the leader and his son were prostrate from
weakness. From this place, Lewis and one Afghan were
sent, two days later, on two camels to look out for the
first station they could find where succour might be pro-
cured, and they returned on the 29th of the same month
with an ample supply for all their wants, and with six
horses to carry them down. The expedition reached
Roebourne on the 26th January, 1874, and Perth two
months later, where the members of it were accorded the
same hearty reception which they had received at every
town en route. They had travelled by land a journey of
about 4,000 miles, including distances forwards and
backwards, with the loss of 15 out of 17 camels, and the
sight of one of the eyes of the leader of the expedition.
In 1874, a petition for Responsible Government having
been presented to the Governor by the Legislative
Council, the latter was dissolved, anil a new one formed,
wherein were three members opposed to that measure.
Further important extensions in the industrial and
public works of the colony took place at this time, and
ushered in the advent of Governor Robinson (now Sir
William C. F. Robinson, K.C.M.G.), in 1875 ; the Imperial
Government at the same time declining to concede the
wished-for Responsible Government, on the ground that
the colony was not yet prepared for such a change. A
further sum of £26,000 was contracted for in 1876, for the
completion of the Mines Railway, which had been com-
menced shortly before Governor Robinson’s arrival; and
a sum of £lB,OOO was appropriated out of revenue for the
purpose of completing the telegraph line to Eucla.
The year 1877 saw the arrival of Major-General
Sir Harry St. George Ord. K.C.M.G., C. 8., as Governor,
the principal events of whose administration were the
opening of a railway from Geraldton to Northampton;
the establishment of a fortnightly mail service with
Europe ; the raising of a loan of £200,000, principally for
railway construction between Fremantle. Perth, and the
Eastern Districts ; the increase of the Volunteer Force by
a company at Albany, and the formation of a Naval
Artillery Corps; the occupation of the Gascoyne Dis-
trict ; and the abandonment of the proposed harbor im-
provements at Fremantle on account of an adverse report
from Sir John Coode.
In April, 1880. Sir W. C. F. Robinson returned as Governor
to the colony. On the 21st November, 1881, the Perth Inter-
national Exhibition was opened by the Governor, and
finally closed on the 3rd January, 1882 about 18,000 per-
sons having visited it during the interval. The popula-
tion of the colony on the 31st December, 1883, was 31,700,
of which number 18,005 were males, and 13,695 females.
These returns are exclusive of the aborigines, who are
estimated at about 2,000. The revenue for 1883 was
£284,363 10s. 7d.; expenditure, £240,566 2s. lid. ; value
of imports. £516,846; of exports, £447,010 Is.; land under
cultivation, 58,111 acres; whilst the live stock at the
same time consisted of 32,884 horses; 64.558 cattle;
1,315.155 sheep; and 18,612 pigs. Sir William Robinson
quitted Western Australia for the Governorship of South
Australia in February, 1883, leaving the reins of govern-
ment in the hands of Chief Justice Wrenfordsley until
the arrival of Mr. Frederick Napier Broome, the succeed-
ing Governor, who assumed the government in June,
1883, and shortly afterwards received the honor of Knight-
hood. His short administration has witnessed the sign-
ing of the contract for the construction of a land-grant
railway from Beverley to Albany upon certain proposals
made by the late Mr. Anthony Hordern, of Sydney; the
raising of a loan of £525,000 for the construction of public
works, among which are included harbor works at Fre-
mantle, the extension of the telegraph from Roebourne to
Kimberley, and the construction of various branches of
railway. This year was specially signalized by the
establishment of an Immigration Board, £20,000 having
been voted for that purpose.


In the early part of 1884, railway matters engaged
public attention, the late Mr. Hordern’s scheme being
under consideration, and a proposal having been received
from a syndicate of English capitalists for the construc-
tion of a railway from York to Geraldton on the land-
grant principle. In March the Eastern Railway Line
was completed to Chidlow's Wells, about twenty miles
east of Guildford.
Towards the close of April the North-western D strict
was visited by copious rainfall.
During 1885 an important discovery was made in the
territory known as the Kimberley District. Here gold
was found in small quantities, with indications which
warranted further investigation. A portion of this
hitherto almost unknown region had previously been
explored and examined by Mr. Hardman, the Govern-
ment Geologist, who gave it as his opinion that gold
would subsequently be discovered in its numerous
gullies. The gold-bearing country is situated on the
upper waters of the Elvira River, a stream which flows
into the Ord, and lies to the east of Mount Barrett.
Part of the interest attaching to the discovery is due,
without doubt, to the fact of its being the first in the
colony. The development of the mining industry in
this part of Australia is placed at considerable disadvan-
tage on account of the distance from commercial centres
and the difficulty and expense incurred in reaching the
diggings.
The balancing of the revenue and expenditure at the
close of the year showed that the finances of the colony
were on a satisfactory basis. This result enabled the
Executive to undertake various public works, and served
to give an impetus to trade generally.
Early in 1866 the reports from the new gold-field in
the Kimberley District were of an encouraging nature,
and a rush of diggers from the various Australian
colonies ensued. A large quantity of gold was un-
doubtedly unearthed, but, as a gold-field, it could not be
ranked with the rich auriferous areas of the colonies of
the east coast.
Prominent among the subjects which engaged the
attention of the Legislative Council during the year was
the framing and passing of new land regulations. The
objects in view were : To increase the revenue from the
waste lands of the colony ; to check reckless alienation
of the public estate ; and to guarantee increased security
of tenure to pastoral lessees. These regulations received
the approval of the Imperial authorities, and came into
operation in the early part of the following year.
During the first months of 1887, the oft-recurring sub-
ject of Responsible Government engaged public atten-
tion, and furnished a question for discussion between
the liberal and conservative sections of the press.
In April of this year a hurricane of extraordinary
violence visited the north-west coast, causing an im-
mense amount of destruction among the pearling-fleet,
and a large loss of life, and crippling for a time an
important industry.
At the opening of the Legislative Council on the 17th
June, the Governor referred in his address to the neces-
sity for an improvement of the law in favor of the
aborigines ; he also alluded to the sound condition of the
public finances. Among the remaining subjects touched
upon in the address was the question of a further loan
for public works.
On the 7th of June a resolution moved by Mr. Parker
in the Council in favour of the introduction of responsible
government, was affirmed by a large majority.
3 1508 00687893 3


WHAT IS
of Australia ?
IT is a work dealing with the whole of Australia and
Tasmania, and is a perfect compendium of information
relating to the Social, Political, and Commercial Life of the
Colonies.
Commenced in the year 1882 as a book of 160 pages,
it has steadily grown until it has reached nearly 900 pages
demy octavo, and contains the
following sections
Calendars and General Infer
mation
Statistics
Sporting
Events Relating to the Past
Year
Viticulture
Administrative and Legislative
Ecclesiastical
Literary, Scientific, & Kindred
Institutions
Educational
Legal
Local Information
Agricultural and Pastoral
Land
Medical
Military and Naval
Municipalities
Mineral
Postal, Money Order, Tele-
graphic, Gazetteers, &c.
Commercial
Banking, Building Societies,
and Insurance.
Railways and Tramways
Public Debts
In the volumes published
are to be found exhaustive His
during the past five years
ories and Reviews and Prize
Histories
Essays, written by experts on special subjects.
The book is published in Twenty Editions—viz., three
editions in each of the six colonies at 6d. ; is., and 7s. 6d.
respectively, and a special edition for both England and
America—and the popularity of the work is such that the
issue, already extending into many thousands, is completely
sold out every year.
PUBLISHERS
London - - Truhner S' Co., 57 I/udgate Hill.
Adelaide -E. S. Wigg S' ® on i Eundle Street.
Beisbane- - of Jlustralta, Jib., 118 Queen St. : Brisbane.
Hobaet - - Itfic of Jlustratia, Jib.
Melbouene - ‘fie of £b., 83 Swanston Street W
Sydney - - of Jltt strati a, 374 George Street.
Peeth - - - Sands S' MeDougall, St. George's Terrace.


, y... y*r -y
.y- : y ■':■;■
■■■ -.m- *• ,■ „ ■ ... . h *? W ■■■ ■:. -■ P '
i .ja >- 'jj ■-' v-fm
d . ■ .. ■. -■ - ■ i> S -- ' - jf 0
,itC Z "> *", * §» ‘ -Jjf ■ *■
£JM- -
s' y - ;& ii ■
jr.tztJ ' ■* >. JL}* * k *.
~ $ ‘iir y -■ / --* - adf -> - .Jf #■ #■ *% j
'■ J " J , " id , . r ■■ ~■■■..» -s» ~y , ,- .-.-■
■->■ ✓ •* r > , «i/ -s -i." . ■**■- ■ -< - •-- # a $ vS#^
>"■■■,;,> ■ ~- - ‘**xr» -</;.• i
-‘ ■' /**• s .'" *> >■: ’ -> / "J# j. - *'
• ' • . . , , ■ ' ,
'/::- *jjA:. *- ! ■‘’•' Ss? -'■ ,='■'■' - - -9' -
—' : ‘ —-—— —*■—*
A •<■ " •• ,# *■’ *> <& & *'.. ~. -* , •* .; 'Jf.'o. *i
■*o’’3& - W *•' *’<»**’.iSc. ,
I"". - ' ~- ' ' . - y
.
