

Np
230.66
C 515
\
%
itfiert©
OUR JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.
STEPHEN CHEEK,
< *
IN AUSTRALIA .
Price One Penny.
\ \
‘ i
BIRMINGHAM:
THE PUBLISHING COMMITTEE OF CHURCHES OF CHRIST
BOOK ROOM,
GEOFFREY BUILDINGS, JOHN BRIGHT ST.
■.a
>s -*r


33ibl& * •
* * Hdvocate.
PLEADING FOR A COMPLETE RETURN TO THE
FAITH AND PRACTICE OF THE CHURCH OF
CHRIST AS PERFECTED BY THE APOSTLES.
Edited by LANCELOT OLIVER.
Published Every Friday. PRICE ONE PENNY,
Post Free, i^d.
THREE COPIES, Post Free, 13/- per annum.
Bteppincf-Btones.
A MONTHLY MAGAZINE DEVOTED TO PROMOTING
CHRIST’S WORK AM(JNG THE YOUNG.
Edited by E. (L SWANN.
PRICE TWOPENCE, Post Paid.
Bunbearo.
ILLUSTRATED MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR THE YOUNG.
Edited by Mrs. TICKLE.
PRICE ONE HALFPENNY.
SIX COPIES, Post Free, *3/- per year.
A Discount of 25% on Parcels of 50 and upwards.
Orders for any of the above to
Book Room, Geoffrey Buildings,
John Bright Street, Birmingham.


PREFATORY NOTE.
The following pages are a reprint from the issues
of The Bible Advocate. The writer, Stephen Cheek,
who entered into rest some years ago, was increas-
ingly esteemed for his work’s sake by the churches of
Christ in Australia, with whom his first acquaint-
ance is here set forth. This pamphlet is not intended
to stir up acrimonious discussion. We shall be glad,
however, if it is carefully and prayerfully read by
those who may differ from the churches of Christ on
the relation of baptism to remission of sins, on the
view that only baptized believers are scripturally
admitted to the Lord’s table, and on their teaching
with reference to the work of the Holy Spirit. We
think most will agree that Mr. Cheek’s way of treat-
ing the matter was manly and Christian. He en-
deavourd to get a correct knowledge of the people
and their teaching, and to test their position, not
by his own preconceptions, but by the Word of God.
It is a great pity this is not done in all similar cases ;
both because it is the right thing in itself, and
because it would almost certainly lead to unity.
L. Oliver.
Binninyham,
Feb., 1908.


OUR JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.
STEPHEN CHEEK.*
“He lead’eth me ! oh, blessed thought,
Oh, words with heavenly comfort fraught.’'
Such inquiries as the following have from
time to time been received by letter from
respected friends :
“ We have heard that you have joined the J)is-
ciples, but we do not believe it. Will you please
contradict it in Truth in Lore
“ I hear that you have joined the Campbellites.
Is the report true? ”
“ Mr. tells me that you preach baptism for
the remission of sins ; but I replied that I did not
believe it.’’
“I presume that you'have not yet attained to
the position of the Campbellites.”
To such inquiries as the foregoing I have
not as yet been able to reply with the fulness
which I desire, and which the subject de-
mands ; but will now seek, in deference to the
wishes of many, and in the interests of the
truth, to give an outline, as full as space will
permit, of the path in which, step by step, I
have been led, seeking and contending for the
truth as in Jesus.
*An Australian evangelist’s experience, here pre-
sented as likely to be helpful in understanding the
different positions of the churches and brethren
referred to. The “ Churches of Christ ” and the
“ Brethren ” have often misunderstood each other in
this country also.


OF THE EARLY YEARS
of my evangelistic labours it is not necessary
at present to speak, suffice it to say that about
the middle of 1878 I found myself, after a
careful and earnest study of the oracles of
God, convinced that unimmersed persons
have no claim to a place
AT THE EOKO’S TABLE
as members of His body; and although this
conviction was opposite to what I had form-
erly taught and practised, yet I was satisfied
that it was far better to own, and forsake,
that which was now found to be unscriptural
than to remain longer in it.
Step cautiously taken.
Before firmly resolving that I would never
teach, practise, nor in any way participate in,
the mixture of
BAPTIZED AND UNBAFTIZED
persons as members of the “ one body,” 1 had,
however, reflected upon the consequences such
a resolution might involve: how that the
taking such a position might involve a separa-
tion from some whom I had learned to love;
and the humiliation of an admission that in
the past I had, in that particular, been at
fault. Nor had I forgotten the possibility
and danger of taking a hasty step, which
might afterwards have to be retraced, bring-
ing with it shame and sorrow; and so, under
a deep consciousness of the danger of hasty
resolves, and believing that “ in the multitude
of counsellors there is safety,” I did not arrive
at this decision until I had spent several
mouths in communication with brethren,


much my elders in the ministry of the Word,
and whose age and experience warranted me
in supposing that if any Scripture could he
found to justify “ mixed communion,” they
would certainly he able and willing to tell me
where to find it. Of the replies which I
received, the following is a sample:
“ December sth, 1877.
“ My clear Bro., —In reply to yours of Nov. 20th,
on the subject of baptism, I may say, looking at the
Acts of the Apostles, where we get the formation of
the church, there can he no doubt but in those times
no one was admitted into the assembly but those who
were baptized ; even now, there is no question as to
the Scripturalness of baptism before the privileges
at the table of the Lord. But there is a difference as
to the subjects for the rite, and mode of administer-
ing the same. Now, whilst seeing the above, I would
make a difference in cases, because of bad teaching,
ignorance of the Word of God on the subject, and so
many minds are prejudiced against the truth.”
Here I saw, or thought I saw, that the
words, “Z would make a difference in cases,”
contained an assumption of power which was
not only unscriptural, but the limits of which
it would be impossible to define; while the
former part of the letter, regarding the for-
mation of the church, as given in Acts, just
accorded with, and confirmed the result of,
my owp close investigations of the New Testa-
ment.
Further Testimony.
Another eminent advocate of “ mixed com-
munion ” afterwards wrote:
“ It is as certain as words can make it that there
was no such thing as an unimmersed Christian in
apostolic days. And nothing could be more satis-
factory than two incidental remarks, viz. : —I. Cor.
i. 13: ‘Or were ye baptized in the name of Paul ? ’
and Acts xix. 3: ‘Unto what, then, were ye bap-
tized ? ’ ”


Effect of such Admissions.
Candid admissions, of which the above are
fair specimens, coming as they did from ex-
perienced men among the “ brethren,” by no
means tended to show that the scruples and
doubts on the question of “ mixed com-
munion ” had been groundless in the first
instance: nor that the step afterwards taken
in reference to the matter had been unwar-
ranted : but rather the reverse.
Investigations by Others.
While I had been engaged in these in-
quiries, which had resulted in the conviction
that I must sever myself from “ mixed com-
munion ” as a thing utterly unsanctioned by
the Word of God, brethren in other places
had been investigating the same subject, and
with the same result. Hut although we had
simultaneously reached this point, yet it was
not till
SEVERAL MONTHS LATER
that we became really separated from those
assemblies which advocated and practised
that we had now found to be wrong.
Ties to be severed.
The many truths held by those brethren ;
their firm protest against sectism; the sim-
plicity of the form and order of worship;
their unflinching opposition to the one-man
system ; their freedom from clerical bondage ;
and the remembrance and force of old asso-
ciations ; an aversion to divisions ; and other
things, weighed very heavily in promoting a
desire to be still united, and made us cling to
the hope


THAT THEY WOULD YET CONSENT
to yield to the teaching of the New Testament
in regard to fellowship, and that we should
not need, therefore, to be severed.
Other Errors discovered later.
I may here remark that at that stage we
had not perceived that the faith-alone system
was fundamentally wrong; and that, not
only did they not vkeach the design of
baptism, hut denied it, both in teaching and
in practice.
AND CLAIMED,
That a man is saved by faith
alone (Eph. ii. 8, 9).
That a man is justified by
faith alone.
That a man has “remission of
sins ” by faith alone.
That a man is “buried with
Christ ” by faith alone, and that
baptism merely symbolizes his
burial.
That a man is “ risen with
Christ ” by faith alone.
That a man is a Christian by
faith alone.
That a man is a “ Son of God "
by believing alone.
ALTHOUGH IT IS WRITTEN
“He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved” (Mark
xvi. 16).
“Ye see then how that by
works a man is justified, and not
by faith only " (Jas. ii. 24).
“ Repent and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins ”
(Acts ii. 38).
“ We are buried with him hy
baptism ” (Rom. vi. 4).
“ Buried with him in baptism ”
(Col. ii 12).
“Wherein also (in baptism)
ye are risen with him ” (Col. ii.
12).
“ For as many of you as have
been baptized into Christ have
put on Christ ’’ (Gal. iii. 27).
“As many as received him,
to them -gave he power to become
the Sons of God ” (John i. 12;
John iii. 5).
But, as already said, we had not at the
time seen the nnsoundness of such a theory,
and were therefore


WILLING TO HAVE REMAINED
in the same position and fellowship, if only
there could have been a general understand-
ing arrived at, that no unimmersed persons
should be received at the Lord’s table.
Further Efforts for Unity.
It was in this mind that, early in January,
1879, I attended a conference of believers at
Kentishbury, Tasmania, and in the intervals
between the general sessions of the confer-
ence, brought this subject, on two occasions,
before the preaching brethren there assem-
bled, notifying the step I had taken, the
reasons therefor, and urging upon my fellow-
labourers
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNANIMITY
of action in a matter so weighty; for I was
persuaded that if the preachers would submit
to the teachings of the New Testament, and,
in accordance therewith, “ all speak the same
thing,” there would be little or no difficulty
in the way of a universal adoption of the same
scriptural principles among all the assemblies
where we were wont to labour, and with
which I strongly desired to be united, if pos-
sible. My hopes, however, were
DOOMED TO DISAPPOINTMENT,
for most vigorously did those brethren oppose
the adoption of the principles advanced,
although the opposition was from different
and contradictory standpoints ; one affirming
that a church had no power to receive nor.
refuse, that that was the Lord’s prerogative,
while another as firmly maintained that the
church had this power: and yet, after all
this combination of


SKI.F-( O\T|{ADl ( TOJt Y OI’I’OSITIO.V,
it was conceded that the Tsew Testament
showed only the baptized admitted to the
fellowship of the church, and that I had
the letter of the Word (whatever tha,t meant)
on my side. Tims, to my sorrow, I saw that
the adoption of what was acknowledged to
bo scriptural was refused, on the ground of
expediency; and we, who had decided to
follow the truth at all costs, soon saw that
those who opposed the scriptural teaching
on this matter, and taught otherwise, could
no more he communed with than those who
were actually unbaptized.
Gracious Gradual Guidance.
This was not just at the first contemplated,
and there was yet much more to learn; and
in looking back, I would record with thank-
fulness to God how graciously He leads all
who are willing to be led by Him. When
we first raised our Voices in protest against
“ mixed fellowship,” could we have beheld
what would be the logical outcome of the
first step, and thfe conclusion to which
Scripture, when it once got us in its grasp,
would lead us, the multitude and magnitude
of the results involved might have caused
us to shrink back, fearful of taking even the
first step ; but graciously did He throw light
upon the path, as though lifting the curtain
before us sufficiently for one step at a time.
Further Results.
The result of further knowledge acquired
was, that we declared ourselves separate from
all assemblies which tolerated mixed fellow-
ship ; not merely separated from the indi-
vidual members thereof who were unim-


mersed, but separated from the assemblies in
their corporate form; for we saw that bap-
tized believers who, having become possessed
of light and knowledge sufficient to lead
them to obey the Gospel themselves, yet
countenanced and endorsed disobedience to
the Gospel by fellowshipping with those who
had not been baptized into the “ one body,”
were equally guilty, if not more so, than
those who were actually unimmersed, and
that an
ASSEMBLY WHICH THUS REVOKED
one of the fundamental points in the
” Unity of the Spirit,” had no substantial
claim to recognition as a Church of Christ.
Thus scripturally taught, our convictions
were acted out by several assemblies in
Victoria and Tasmania simultaneously
taking the firm stand alluded to.
BUT ALL THIS TIME
what was our relation and attitude towards
the Churches of Christ, miscalled “ Camp-
bellitesP” the reader will ask. I will state
presently. But first a few words
About this term —“ Campbellites.”
When a body of people consent to be
called by the name of a man, by adopting
and OAvning his name as distinctive of their
party, as for example : Wesleyans, Lutherans,
etc., then there is no discourtesy or impro-
priety in our thus speaking of them, or to
them. But in the case before us it is different.
CAMPBELL WAS A MAN
who, in his day and generation, fought
valiantly in the battle of truth against error,


and was eminently owned of God. Those
of the Disciples of Christ who are acquainted
with his works, justly revere his memory
as that of a man who rendered signal service
in the Redeemer’s cause; but, far from
adopting or owning his name as a party
designation, they regard it, when thus used,
as an opprobrious and offensive epithet, and
cling to the name that is above every name —
Christ.
I AM PERSUADED
that those esteemed friends, from whose
letters quotations stand at the commence-
ment of this article, in using the term
“ Campbellite,” did so with no bad intention,
but rather from a want of knowing better;
but there are others who have no such
excuse, and to such, should this meet their
eye, I would say, “ Friend, remember, in
your persistently forcing upon a people
a name which you know they reject, you
show your vulgarity, your littleness of
mind, and the deplorable weakness of your
cause, which calls for advocacy of such a
character.”
Back to our Story
Now, this digression finished, back to our
story.
Up to this period', we had regarded the
Disciples of Christ with strong dislike. We
had heard strange things of them, not from
the world, or we would not have heeded,
but from brethren highly esteemed; that
they denied the personality of the Holy
Spirit, and they believed in water instead of
the blood cleansing from sin, and other
charges of lesser magnitude.


These charges, coming, as we thought,
from reliable authority, were believed as
though veritable facts, and the Disciples
shunned accordingly.
After we had taken the stand
ON THE QUESTION OF FELLOWSHIP
which I have alluded to, we soon found,
however, that charges just as strange, and
misrepresentations just as gross, as the above
afterwards proved to be, fell to our own lot
from those who had maligned the Disciples.
simple Reasoning and Sure Results.
This forced us to become reasoners; ami
we reasoned thus:—lf those men, that we
learned to trust and love, will now mis-
represent us because we have differed from
them, is it not possible that the accusations
we used to hear against the Disciples may
be worth inquiring into? At any rate, we
thought it would be both manly and Christian
to hear both, sides as soon as opportunity
offered. I concluded that
THE SAFE WAY TO JUDGE
of the tenets held by a people was not by
conversation with an individual member, who
possibly might be so erratic or ill-informed
as to be incapable of fairly expressing what
was, or was not, held by the body, but
rather to consult the writings of such men
as were acknowledged as teachers among
them. So judging, I sought the writings
of men who were thus acknowledged, such
as Lard, Errett, Campbell, McGarvey, Milli-
gan, Richardson, King, Haley, 0. A. Carr,
and others. The result was, I found, that
the most serious


CHANGES MADE WERE UNFOUNDED
RUMOURS.
I judge that, if these men believed such
errors as were imputed to them, they would
naturally seek to induce others to the same
belief, and would certainly propagate those
ideas in their literature. But I found tbem
not.
Mr. Tennent accuses Mr.] Carr,
1 read a pamphlet written by Mr. E. (J.
Tennent (then of Hobart Town, but now a
minister of the Presbyterians at West Tamar,
Tasmania), in which he sought to expose the
errors of 0. A. Carr, evangelist, at that time
in Hobart Town. In
SEEKING TO CONVICT MR. CARR
of denying the personality of the Spirit, he
quoted from C.’s writings, as follows:
Mr. 0. A. Carr says—
The Holy Spirit is a Person , and is represented
as having authority. The Saviour said that those
taught should be baptized into (eis) the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit
(Matt, xxviii. 19, 20).
1. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, all
co-operate in conversion and sanctification.
2. The Holy Spirit revealed the mind or will of
God to the Apostles and Prophets, and also gave
them miraculous gifts.—The Apostles gave miracu-
lous gifts to others (Acts viii. 19).
3. The Holy Spirit convicts of sin, of righteous-
ness, and of judgment (John xvi. 7-11).
4. We are begotten, or quickened, or made alive,
by the Spirit (Eph. ii., John vi. 63) through the
Word of God, which is the sword of the Spirit
GJames i. 18; I. Peter i. 22, 23).
5. The Holy Scriptures are the words of the
Spirit, and we must not separate the Spirit from
Jlis Word (John xvii.). -


6. The power and work of the Holy Spirit accom-
pany the Gospel, when faithfully preached l ; hence
the Apostles were to simply preach the Gospel, and
it is the power of’God unto salvation.
7. The Holy Spirit’s power can be resisted (Acts
vii. 51).
8. By the Holy Spirit we learn all we know of the
Saviour (I. Cor. xii.).
9. The Holy Spirit dwells in the Christian (Rom.
viii. 9-11).
10. The Holy Spirit does not dwell in the sinner
(John xiv. 17).
11. The Holy Spirit is promised to all who believe
and obey the Saviour (Acts ii. 38).
12. He comforts the Christian and bears witness
with his spirit that he is a child of God ; helps his
infirmities, and intercedes with groanings unutter-
able (Rom. viii.).
13. Except you have the Spirit of Christ, you are
none of his (Rom. viii.).
How far these expressions deny the Scrip-
tural teachings concerning the Spirit, I leave
every reader to judge; adding only that I
could hut marvel at the folly which could
select such quotations to prove that Mr. Carr
or the Disciples denied the personality
of the Spirit. I found that what they denied
was, not the personality of the Spirit, but that
mysticism which teaches that the Holy Spirit
converts,, hears witness to, and leads men hy
some mysterious means or influence other
than the Word of truth. I found that they
taught, as we do, that through the Word of
God the Spirit hears witness to us, and that
to be “ led by the Spirit ” is not merely to
follow an imagination, feeling, or inclination
—but to obey the Word.
More about the Accusations.
On the subject of cleansing from sin by
the water of baptism, I also found that the


charge was without foundation, and that the
teaching of the Disciples was that the “ blood
of Jesus Christ” atones for, and (Jeanses from,
all sin, but that the sinner must needs be
brought into contact with, or relation to, that
cleansing blood, and that in order to do this
the Saviour has instituted (1) faith, (2) re-
pentance, and (')) baptism into His death—
(see Mark xvi. lb; Acts ii. 88; Bom. vi. 8, 4,
17, 18).
Here is an extract from a sermon entitled,
“ The Belatiou of Baptism to the Blood of
Christ,” by Gr. L. Surber, an eminent preacher
among the disciples :
“ Some have the idea—or say they have—that we
believe in water salvation. To my mind such a state-
ment is horrible ! And to every man who believes
that the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin, it
must be an offence.”
The following is an extract
FROM A. CAMPBELL: -
“ It is not the first act of begetting, nor the last
act of being born, but the whole process of conver-
sion in the figure of generation, to which we have
directed the attention of our readers. For, as often
before stated, our opponents deceive themselves and
their hearers by representing us as ascribing to the
word immersion „ and the act of immersion, all that
they call regeneration. While, therefore, we con-
tend that being ‘born again,’ and being immersed
are, in the Apostle’s style, two names for the same
action, we are far from supposing or teaching that,
in forming the new man, there is nothing necessary
but to be born.
“The outward act (in baptism), then, is but the
symbol of the transition, inward and spiritual , by
which our souls are bathed in that ocean of love
which purifies our person, and makes them one with
the Lord. Without this, being born of water, or
being connected with a church, is nothing. Hence,
without previous knowledge, faith and repentance,
immersion is a mere outward and unprofitable cere-
mony.”—Cumpbell-ltiee Debate, paye 493.


This is substantially the same as the views
of baptism already given as held by the dis-
ciples ; and here I saw
THAT THEY WERE ABLE TO DO
what the brethren we had parted from could
not, and did not, viz., to preach all the Word.
And 1 remembered that when young in the
faith 1 had asked a very earnest evangelist
among the brethren how he understood and
how he would treat such passages as Acts
ii. 68, “ Repent and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the re-
mission of sins,” etc., and Acts xxii. 16,
“ Arise, and be baptized and wash away thy
sins,” etc., and how he replied, with a gesture
of impatience, almost bordering upon anger,
“ NEVER MIND SUCH VERSES AS THOSE,
there are plenty Avithout them. ‘He that
believeth,’ ‘ Whosoever believeth,’ ‘ All that
believe,’ and so on, you don’t need to meddle
Avith such verses as Acts ii. 38, and Acts xxii.
16.”
Well, as far back as that, though the sub-
ject was thus disposed of, I still could not
help thinking that the verses which had
seemed to trouble my beloved friend surely
meant something; that surely God had a pur-
pose in placing them there, although it was
not till long afterwards that I understood hoAv
that, by taking the Gospel just as the Apostles
preached it, there was
NO NEED TO EVADE ANY VERSE,
but that it was quite simple, Scriptural, and
proper, to say to convicted sinners, as did
Peter in Acts ii. 38, “ Repent and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ,


for the remission of sins,” etc., or to say to a
penitent believer, as did Ananias to Saul in
Acts xxii. 16, “ Arise and be baptized, and
wash away thy sins,” etc. It comes so easy
now. There is no need to evade, omit, oppose,
or conceal any verse.
Conclusions, and Further Contests.
So far, the investigation of the charges
against the Disciples of Christ had led to the
conclusion that they had been misunderstood
and misrepresented, and I desired to have a
closer acquaintance with them, an oppor-
tunity for which, however, did not occur till
some time later, as will be seen further on.
MEANWHILE, WAR RAGED
on the communion question. A teacher in
connection with the brethren meeting at the
Assembly Hall, Melbourne, issued a small
pamphlet attacking and denouncing the posi-
tion assumed by the assemblies which had
abandoned “ mixed communion,” in which he
gave a number of Scripture quotations
SO PALPABLY INAPPLICABLE
to the question, and giving the pamphlet such
a specious, yet sophistical character, as to
provoke censure from even his own friends.
Of this pamphlet I circulated a number of
copies, willing that brethren who had for-
saken “mixed communion” should, as well
as others, see the best that could be written in
its defence.
Some time later, after numerous requests,
I wrote a review of the said Melbourne
pamphlet, which review, under the title,
“ CASTING DOWN IMAGINATIONS,”


and containing 32 pages, was published in
January, 1880, and has since been very ex-
tensively circulated, and to many enquiring
minds it proved helpful in a marked degree.
What others did—and did not.
Some time after this, a brother in connec-
tion with the church at Taradale, knowing
something of the wide difference of teaching
and practice on the communion question
existing between the disciples of Christ and
the brethren at Assembly Hall, resolved to
submit the question to a Scriptural and very
simple kind of test, by
SELECTING Till?EE MEMBERS
on each side, to each of which six he sent a
paper of printed “ Queries,” which, in a very
concise form, embraced the whole of the ques-
tion in dispute, and of which the following
is a fac-simile :
Does the New Testament command \
baptism in water? /
Is the command to all believers, or \ chan Verse
some only? / — up er e ‘
What text authorizes the making! it-™-
of exceptions? |....cnap.. .. verse.
Give one instance of an unbaptized \ v
person being in the early church ?/'' ‘ ap erse '
Can you prove that the rule of those )
days is not the rule for these ? f ''' ‘ P
Of the above paper a copy was sent to
Mr. H., Mr, S., and Mr. T., of the disciples,
and to Mr. C., Mr. M., and Mr. Y.-N., of the
Assembly Hall brethren, with a request that
each would fill in answers on blank lines, and
return the paper. The three disciples
promptly


Answer to 1st Question...
... Yes!
Answer to 2nd ,,
... To all (Acts ii. 38).
Answer to 3rd ,,
... None!
Answer to 4th ,,
... No instance !
Answer to 5th ,,
... No one can !
■RETURNED ANSWERS AS FOLLOWS :
These answers were received as being in
accordance with Scripture.
“We cannot tell.”
Of the three Assembly Hall brethren, Mr.
Y.-N. never replied. After some delay, Mr.
C, wrote, stating that before he answered the
“ Queries,” he wished to be told, “ Has Mr.
Cheek anything to do with sending these
queriesP” To this he received a prompt
reply, and then wrote a second time, saying,
“ I DECLINE TO ANSWE If YOU It QUEItIES.”
Mr. M. also, after some delay, wrote saying,
“ I decline to answer.”
Comment upon this is unnecessary.
Amongst the Disciples.
The opportunity previously alluded to for
further acquaintance with the disciples pre-
sented itself when, in June, 1880, I visited
Wedderburn. Here I found a church of
these once-avoided people, but before co-
operating with them determined to be fully
satisfied that their faith and practice w r ere in
accordance with the Word of God. At a
meeting of the church, held shortly after my
arrival, I was present, with two other breth-
ren associated with me, and all the points of


SUPPOSED DIFFERENCE OR DIFFICULTY
were fully investigated, and the result was
highly satisfactory, and may he well stated
in words quoted from a report of the matter
furnished by one of the leading brethren
there, and published in the Australian Chris-
tian Advocate of August, 1880:
“ Meetings for conference between the church
ami these dear brethren made manifest the fact that
we are in reality one in spirit and in mind.”
After a time our acquaintance began to
extend, and a desire for union and co-opera-
tion of a wider and more general character
began to grow.
HOW A UNION CAME AROUT
between the assemblies at Castlemaine,
Drummond, Elphinstone, Newstead, and
Taradale, with which I had laboured and
worshipped, and the disciples meeting in
Castlemaine, Barker’s Creek, and surrounding
places, will be learned from the following
extract from a report of the matter written by
Bro. W. W. Davey, and published in the
Australian Christian Watchman , of July,
1881.
Deferring to myself, and the churches I
was identified with, the writer says :
“ Both he and they, on account of circumstances
which cannot be here detailed, were under misappre-
hensions as to the position and teaching of the
Churches of Christ in Victoria, which had been
previously established; and therefore have until
recently remained separate from them.
“ Bro. Cheek andi myself became personally ac-
quainted aljout a year ago, and have since had con-
versations together respecting the importance of
our mutual recognition of each other as fellow-
labourers ; and of the assemblies amongst whom we
labour, recognizing each other as Churches of Christ


iu fellowship, as one body. But as there were differ-
ences of opinion between us on some points which
seemed important, a conference was ultimately
proposed.
“This conference was held at Castlemaine, on
Wednesday, May 18th, when fifteen brethren, as
representatives of the several assemblies, met in a
most cordial spirit and discussed these differences ;
and after about four hours spent in earnest, prayer-
ful examination of them in the light of New Testa-
ment teaching, they had almost vanished away.
But lest there should be any after-difficulty from a
want of thoroughness in understanding each other,
a second conference was held at Taradalo, on Mon-
day, June 6th. That an increased interest was felt
in this second conference was made manifest by the
presence of thirty-one brethren as representatives.
. . . The result of this second conference was a
unanimous affirmation of certain resolutions which
recognized our oneness as Churches of Christ, and a
cordial acceptance of each other as brethren and
fellow-labourers in the ‘one body.’ ”
Whilst these conferences in V ictoria had
resulted in the way shown above, similar in-
vestigations had been made in Tasmania,
with the same happy termination.
Bro Moysey visits Esperance.
Pro. G. 13. Moysey, who was labouring 1
with the Church of Christ in Hobart, visited
Port Esperance, to confer with the lea-ding
brethren there, in order to discover the nature
and extent of differences between the two
churches.
The result of Pro. M.’s visit will be best
told in his own words, extracted from his
report of same, published in August number
of the Australian Christian Watchman :
“ Wc soon found that on fundamentals—as to
what wo must believe, and be, and do, in order to
salvation—we were one; there was no difference.


“ lu regard to matters on which there were differ-
ences of opinion, it was soon seen that they were not
of such a nature as to bar Christian fellowship -
that in regard to such points wo must cherish and
manifest mutual forbearance and consideration, and
that in speaking on disputed points, especially in
public, we should each, as nearly as possible, let the
Scriptures themselves speak ; thus w© should all
‘ speak the same thing,’ and, as each believes the
whole of the Scriptures, no objection can be made
to the free quotation of Scriptures which are sup-
posed to teach conflicting sentiments. And finally,
in case a hearer occasionally finds a little grit, or
sand, or other unpalatable or indigestible substance
in the spiritual bread presented, he is not to
certainly conclude that the brother meant to poison
him, but to put it down to the imperfection of the
human mill in which the precious corn was ground,
or that of the trough in which the flour was
kneaded.”
Conclusions and Counsels.
And now, having sought to give an answer
to the questions at the head of this paper, and
to give an outline of the step-by-step proceed-
ings by which we attained the present position
—a few closing words.
DISCIPLES OF CHRIST,
once despised and rejected by us, you are not
so now ! Finding you built upon the right
foundation, we rejoice in your fellowship.
You have plenty of faults, but we love you
because you love our Master, and have con-
tended earnestly for His truth. Our hearts
and hands would go out to you everywhere in
fraternal greetings ; shoulder to shoulder we
now march with you, contending earnestly
for the faith which was once delivered unto
the saints —
“ The battle is indeed the Lord’s,
But soon will end the story.
When Christ will come with His rewards,
His crowns of fadeless glory.”


And now, to the mixed-communion
BRETHREN LEFT BEHIND
(miscalled Plymouth Brethren), we just tarry
in our march to wave to you the message, in
loving entreaty, “ Come thou with us, and we
will do thee good, for the Lord hath spoken
good concerning Israel.” Put away prejudice
if you can, it is a fearful foe. Be candid and
willing to investigate. Search the Scriptures,
whether these things are so. You have all
along been making a great mistake.
THE GREAT LAWGIVER
of the Aew Dispensation says, ”He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” He
wants you to preach it so; but you’ve always
been reading it, “ He that believeth and is
saved may be baptized.” Rest assured that
what Christ says in one passage He cannot
unsay in another. He has given the pattern
of but one church, with
ONE LORD, ONE FAITH, ONE BAPTISM.
And lastly, to any reader whose eyes this
may chance to meet. Where do you stand ?
Are you perplexed by the confusion existing
in the religious 'world ? and with a believing
heart honestly desire to follow the Lord ac-
ceptably? Then away back to the fountain
head, to the original pattern. “ lieginniny
at Jerusalem ” (Luke xxiv. 27). The way in
which men came into the Church of Christ
then, must be the way, the only way, now.
For the pattern of the first church read care-
fully the second chapter of Acts. Here vou
have the starting point. And if your heart


believes, then obey from the heart the form of
doctrine delivered; then you will stand on
the immutable foundation. May every reader
be profited by
OUR JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.
-jo •
• (oU
C 515
3 1508 02030237 3
(Ni, do pm ]


A CHRISTIAN.
NOT WANTED—YET NEEDED.
A BUNCH OF GRAPES.
SALVATION.
A WEDDING INCIDENT.
SALVATION NOW.
A FATHER’S SACRIFICE.
. THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL
A NOBLE YOUTH.
THINGS MOST SURELY BE-
ALABAMA.
LIEVED AMONG US.
CHURCHES OF CHRIST.
THE MIRAGE.
CHRISTIANITY.
GRACE.
DIED FOR ME.
“WHOSOEVER.”
1 SHALL HAVE TIME ENOUGH.
WHAT’S IN A NAME?
Some Useful and Stirring
Iceaflets
ON QOSPEL THEMES.
The “ENVELOPE” Series (KS§)
2/6 per 1,000,
Carriage Paid on 2,000
The “BOOKLET” Series (?sss)
0
Price 5/- per 1,000,
Carriage Paid.
BRIEF -STATEMENT OF THE PLAN OF SALVATION.
BAPTISM.
CHRIST AND THE PENITENT THIEF.
DOES GOD MEAN WHAT HE SAYS?
IS BAPTISM PART OF THE NEW BIRTH?
LONG SOUGHT AND EASILY FOUND.
MARKS OF THE CHURCH.
NEW TESTAMENT REVIVALS.
REMISSION OF SINS.
THE CONVERSION OF A CABINET OFFICER.
THE JEWISH SABBATH ABOLISHED.
THE PATH OF SAFETY.
WHY WE KEEP SUNDAY.
WHAT IS SAVING FAITH?
Book Room, Geoffrey Buildings,
John Bright Street, Birmingham.


valuable and instructive
]Pamphlets
ON IMPORTANT SCRIPTURE TOPICS.
Rightly Dividing the Word of Truth i|d.
Christian Discipleship i|d.
Christ’s Body—The Church i|d.
Baptism, Sprinkling, and Pouring versus
Immersion .v. 3d.
Remission of Sins i^d.
friendly on the Elements of
Christianity i|d.
Progressive Emancipation |d.
Talks on the Work of the Holy Spirit i^d.
Hitherto; or, Our Journey to Jerusalem.. i|d.
The Apostles of Christ i|d.
Messiah’s Great Commission i|d.
Faith and Practice of Certain Churches
of Christ i^d.
Why Baptize the Little Ones ? 2d.
Will the Old Book Stand ? i±d.
The Resurrection of Saints and Sinners .. i4d.
Our Position and Plea i^d.
The Cry of the Children id.
Communion at the Lord’s Table i|d.
Preparation for Gospel Preaching i|d.
Roger’s Reasons i|d.
ASSORTED PARCELS OF THE ABOVE
I POST FREE, ,
12 for 1/3,28 for 2/-, 80 for 3/9,100 for 1/- ;j
THE PUBLISHING COMMITTEE '
OF CHURCHES OF CHRIST, BOOK ROOM,
GEOFFREY BUILDINGS,
JOHN BRIGHT ST., BIRMINGHAM.
* /:* ■ -
tw ' S /
