

per H p^rm
■ Rcixiftious PA M>S I
/ c?
Sox is
[Pi"








HO MAETUEOS:
GREAT LEADING LINES
and
WITH A DISPENSATIONAL DIAGRAM,
The Author of ' Seven Prophetic Scenes,’ the 'Ten Virgins,’
'Spiritualism! What is it?’ Ac.
PRAHRAN:
Printed and Published at Cambridge Lodge, Grattan-st.,
in the Colony Victoria, Australia




INTRODUCTION.
Every attempt to illustrate and explain the word
of God , w in itselj commendable; especially ,
50 mwcA neglected portion , the Prophecies.
Author , therefore , deems it unnecessary to
apologize for presenting this work to the public.
A saving knowledge of the mind 0/ GW
revealed in the Holy Bible , is' 0/ paramount
importance; and these leading lines are intended
to help the Reader of that Divine Book to under-
stand the character of God's dealings and ways
with mankind , during the different Dispensa-
tions; and to shew the correct teaching and true
application of certain portions of scripture.
In watching the development of the Pro-
phecies, there are seen unutterable dignity and
infinite perfections in God who gave them to us;


and to the watching Christian, these must incite
sentiments of the most profound veneration, and
enable him to trust in that word with an
affiance not to be shaken by any opposing influ-
ence.
The prophetic students of late years have
given much light upon the Prophecies. The
field, nevertheless , is extensive, indeed, and every
ray of light shed upon the sacred page affords
rich and lofty pleasure to him who sheds that
light, as well as to him who walks in it; and some
of these rays are here collected, and placed upon
the silent page, for other minds to read, and
other hearts to enjoy.
The Author of this book is indebted to
various, (some unknown,) writers on prophecy
for some of the information herein contained;
and his chief aim, is to publish a useful Hand-
book of the leading lines c/past and future events,
that shall glorify God. And may He make it
a blessing to all who read it, and answer, soon, the
prayer, “ Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.”
J. P Pfrost,
Praliran, June, 1877.


GOD IS ALL IN ALL


•' » 0


THE
GREAT LEADING LINES
SCRIPTURE AND PROPHECY.
PARADISE,
The first subject of these leading lines, is sup-
posed to have stood in Eden in Chaldea, at the
conflux of the Tigris, or Hiddekel, and the
Euphrates, or a little below it. Two of the
rivers of Moses by name are found there; and
below, the stream is parted into two large divi-
sions, the eastern one of which may have been
the Gihon, and the western the Pison. No other
fancied place for the site of Paradise, has such
strong proofs for its situation, as the names of
these rivers give to the above site.
In its primeval state. Paradise, was doubtless,
surpassingly beautiful, as its name imports.
Here, Adam aud Eve spent their time of happy
innocence, where they had manifold delights,
and enjoyed intimate fellowship with God. How
long this state of happiness was enjoyed by them
is not known; but it. came to a sad, sad end;
and Adam and Eve who had “dominion over


the fish of the sea, and the fowl of the air, and
over every living thing that moveth upon the
earth/’ were, in consequence of their disobedi-
ence, driven out from the presence of God, to
“till the ground whence Adam was taken,”
and they, too soon, experienced death, the pen-
alty of their transgression. Gen. v. 5. _ Thus,
the first Dispensation of time, was followed by
judgment; and Adam’s expulsion from Paradise
into a state of alienation from God, of hard
toiling among thorns and thistles, is the com-
mencement of that period of the
THE WORLD AFTER THE FALL.
Of this Dispensation, Genesis the iv—ix gives
the history, which began with the birth, trade,
and religion of Cain and Abel. One of the ill
effects of the Fall is the murder of righteous
Abel, by his brother Cain.
In respect of place, the world is distinguished
into the lower world of earth and air, the world
of spheres and stars, the world of angels, and
the highest world of spirits departed, called the
third heaven. In scripture, world denotes, (1)
The earth and all things therein, or the heavens
and what they contain; or the habitable part of
the earth; (2) Men, all or an indefinite number,
who dwell on the earth; <3) The carnal corrup-
tion that prevails on earth, or a worldly, earthly


state and condition “Tins world,” in Titus ii. 12,
denotes this earth in its present carnal and cor-
rupt state. In John xviii. 36, the Lord says, “My
kingdom is not of this world,” i.e., is not of an
earthly, carnal, or corrupt state. But his kingdom,
for which we are taught to pray, “ Th} 7 kingdom
come,” will he established on earth, and it will
be a universal kingdom of blessedness.
This period of time was remarkable for—
1. The revival of religion in the days of Seth,
one of Adam’s sons, (born a.m. 131,) whose
posterity followed the true worship and service
of God, for a long time. Of this revival it is
written, “Then began men to call upon the name
of the Lord.” Gen. iv. 26.
2. The translation of Enoch, which occurred
about the year 1087, who predicted the Lord’s
return in the following words; “Behold, the
Lord cometh with ten thousands of His saints.”
3. The gigantic size and longevity of some
of the world’s inhabitants.
4. The building of the Ark by JS T oah
5. The wickedness that prevailed, for the earth
was corrupt and filled with violence; as it is
written, “ And God looked upon the earth, and,
behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh has corrupted
his way upon the earth. And God said unto
Noah, the end of all things is come up before
me; for the earth is filled with violence through


them; and behold, I will destroy them with the
earth.” And here we see man’s failure in the
worship and service of God, by the posterity of
Seth mingling with the wicked descendants of
Cain, and bringing upon themselves the flood.
This Dispensation ended in judgment: the
Lord sweeping from off* the face of the earth,
the world of the ungodly by the deluge, sudden-
ly and awfully, as by a besom of destruction.
THE WORLD UNDER NOAH.
“And it came to pass in the six hundreth and
first year, in the first month, the first day of the
month, the waters were dried up from off the
earth, .... And in the second month, on
the seven and twentieth day of the month, was
the earth dried. And Noah, his wife and family,
and every living creature went forth out of the
ark. Ihen Noah built an altar unto the Lord.
And the Lord smelled a sweet savour. And the
Lord blessed Noah and his sons, establishing his
covenant with him and with his seed after him,
delivering into his hand every living creature,
setting in the cloyd his bow as a token of that
covenant between him and the earth.” Gen. viii.
ix.
“Noah lived three hundred and fifty years
after the flood.” “And the descendants of Noah
and his three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth,


overspread the whole earth, and by them were the
nations divided on the earth after the flood.
Gen. ix, x.
It is worthy of notice that every Dispensation
appears to be followed by judgment; thereby
proving man’s failure in his obedience to God.
However long Paradise was enjoyed in its prime-
val state, it was closed by Adam’s expulsion,
which was judgment for his disobedience. And,
although in the days of Seth the people began
to call upon the name of the Lord, and as a con-
sequence, it is believed a revival of pure religion
took place; there was a falling away, so much
so, that “ God saw that the wickedness of man
was great in the earth, and that every imagina-
tion of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually;” and because the earth was “ filled
with violence,” God destroyed it by a flood
Gen. vi, 5. So both the Paradisaical and the
Noarchic Dispensations were followed by judg-
ment. And judgment ever follows the disobedi-
ence of men and nations in a less or greater
degree According to the scriptures, the Gospel
Dispensation, too, will be closed by the “ great
tribulation;” and the Millennial Age of a thou-
sand years of blessedness will be followed by
Satan being let loose and going with Gog and
Magog* to war against the camps of the saints.
* Countries in the latitude of, and adjoining- Tartara.


THE FOURTH DISPENSATION,
OR, WORLD DIVIDED INTO NATIONS.
The language of the whole earth at this period
was one. And nothing seems so conspicuous in
this age, as men wishing to make a name lor
themselves;and that they mightbe no more “scat-
tered abroad upon the face of the whole earth,”
they built a city and tower as a common centre,
independently of God. “And the Lord came
down to see the city and the tower of Babel; which
the children of men builded.” In the building
of the tower the Lord confounded their language,
and thereby ’’they were scattered abroad, thence
over the face of the whole earth.” Gen. xi.
Here again judgment follows man’s rash inde-
pendence.
From Joshua xxiv 2: Deut. xxxii 17; and
Cor. x 20; it is seen that the world after the
flood, fell into a state of infidelity, and the inha-
bitants made sacrifices to devils.
Abram received a command from God to go
out of his country, from his kindred, and from
his father’s house to another land. The Lord
blessed him and made him. a promise, and there-
by he became a vessel of promise, and the “root”
of the “olive tree.” He was to walk as a pilgrim
of faith before the Almighty God.
The world at this period was distinctly divided


into two classes, the nations of the world , and
the elect family of God.
By referring to the Diagram, the reader will
see a checkered column commencing at the call
of Abram, appears to the right upon the Dia-
gram. This column, representing the class, the
elect family of God , passes onward, and t ermi-
nates only when the promise unto the fathers is
fulfilled in Millennial glory.
The transfer of Joseph to Egypt (A.M. 2275)
is marked upon the Diagram. An event ordered
by the Almighty, that Joseph (a type of Christ)
might preserve the lives of his father and breth-
ren, as seen in Gen. xlv 5-8. Then .the xlvi,
chapter gives an account of the house of Jacob
going to Egypt, and the reception Joseph gave
them. But, alas! how soon the scene changed,
and in a few years the elect family of God be-
came slaves in the land of Egypt. Nevertheless,
the Lord’s hand was with them. Nothing could
crush them, and they retained their separate
character before the Lord.
For four hundred years they were afflicted.
Gen. xv 13. And at the close of that period,
the Lord brought them out with a mighty hand
and judged the Egyptians. And now the chosen
nation takes its place, separate from the nations
of the world , and is the vine brought out of
Egypt. Ps. Ixxx 8.


About the period, (A.M. 2513) as marked on
the Diagram, the glory of the Lord descends in
the pillar of a cloud and abode with the people,
until they were carried captive to Babylon,
when it departed. See Diagram.
To this Dispensation of time followed
THE AGE OF LAW,
Which begins by the covenant being given from
mount Sinai. Upon this mountain the glory of
Jehovah descended: and it was from its sum-
mit that the moral Law was proclaimed to the
Hebrews, amidst terrible flames of fire. It was
on this mountain Moses had a long and almost
immediate fellowship with God. Here too, God
spoke to Elijah.
From the giving of the Law from Mount Sinai,
the Bible is chiefly occupied with the history of
Israel. This people, selected out of all the
nations to hand down to posterity a knowledge
of the true and living God, signally failed; for
they were, indeed, a disobedient and stiffnecked
people. Through their ill-manners the Lord led
them, as wanderers, through the wilderness,
forty years. Their journey in the land was first
under Joshua, then under the judges, and then
under Samuel, the first of the line of Prophets.
At this period, marked by a crown on the Dia-
gram, Israel forgot their rightfull sovereign,


Jehovah, and desired a king, like unto all the
nations, 1 Sam. viii 5 ; and Samuel, David, and
Solomon reigned in succession over the Lord’s
inheritance. But in the days of Rehoboam, the
kingdom is rent asunder on account of the idola-
tries of Solomon his father, and the ten tribes
became subject to Jeroboam. The two tribes,
Judah and Benjamin retain their allegiance to
the royal house of David. The Jewish nation,
as represented on the Diagram, becomes divided.
The division on the right of the column that
represents the Israelite nation, is that of the tribes
of Judah and Benjamin, shewing their being
taken to Babylon, and their return to Judea and
to Jerusalem, prior to the Messiah coming; their
dispersion after their rejection of Christ; their
passage through the tribulation into the Millen-
nial glory. The left column shews the ten
tribes carried into captivity; their passage
among the Gentiles where they are still lost;
and their disunion with the two tribes, Judah
and Benjamin, until after the tribulation, when
they will return to Canaan, at the beginning of
the Millennium. Elijah’s rapture, or translation
to heaven (a.m. 3101.) before the judgment of
God on the ten tribes, with which they were
visited, because of their fearful idolatry, is simi-
lar to that of the Church or Bride of the Lamb,
before the Great Tribulation, which is yet
future and pending.


Elijah who was one of the two that were seen
with Christ in the transfiguration, is supposed to
be one of the two witnesses of the Revelation.
It is believed by many Biblical students that
both Enoch and Elijah will again appear on
earth to oppose and confound the Antichrist.
In the concluding words of the Old Testament
we read, “Behold I will send you Elijah the
prophet before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the
heart of the fathers to the children, and the
heart of the children to their fathers, lest I
come and smite the earth with a curse.” Our
Lord in answer to the question, “Why then say
the scribes that Elias (Elijah) must first come?”
Says truly, “ Elias shall first come and restore
all things'. ;” and then immediately says, “Elias
is come already.” His disciples understood
him to speak of John the Baptist. But if the
Saviour spake of John the Baptist, it could only
mean that he had come already, simply, as his
representative; for John did not restore all
things; and it was predicted that John was to
go before Christ only iu the spirit and power of
Elias.
The Jews of the present day preserve the
expectation of Elijah’s reappearance, by placing
a cup of wine at their annual passover feast, in
readiness for his anticipated arrival. Ridley
Herschell, a jew, thus describes their passover-
* ■■ - :


feast. “In the celebration of the Passover, two
large cups are filled with wine. One of these is
taken by the master of the house, and a bless-
ing pronounced. After this blessing, the head
of the family gives the cup to all those sitting
around. He then brings forth the hidden cake,
and distributes a piece to each. The second
cup of wine called Elijah’s cup, is then placed
before him: the door is opened, and a solemn
pause of expectation ensues. It is at this
moment that the Jews expect that the coming
of Elijah will take place, to announce the glad
tidings that the Messiah is at hand. Well do I
remember the interest with which, when a boy,
I looked towards the door: hoping that Elijah
might really enter; for. notwithstanding, the
disappointment year after year his arrival is still
confidently expected.”
The ten tribes are carried captive to Syria,
under Hoshea, their last king. They are dis-
persed among the nations of the East, and are
now to be found in Affganistan and its neigh-
bouring countries, whence they have never
returned. But according to Ezek. xxxvii, 22 ;
Isaiah xi, 11-16; xxvii, 12, 13 ;lxvi, 20; Jer. lii,
18, and other passages, God will yet deliver
them from their captivity, and unite them with
the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and make
them again one nation in the land upon the
mountains of Israel. On this Paul speaks con-


fidently in Acts xxvi, of the “ twelve tribes” as
“instantly serving God night and day,” in
hope of the fulfilment of the promises made
unto the fathers.
The place of responsibility toward God, at this
period, is occupied solely by Judah; but, alas!
how soon was this thrown off, and the course of
130 years, Judah’s idolatry reached its culmina-
ting point, and she is delivered into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon (a.m. 3398.),
(2 Chron. xxxvi.), and the glory of the Lord
that had accompanied them from Egypt and
abode with them since takes its departure, and
a Gentile king becomes the possessor of the
throne of the whole world.
THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES
marked on the Diagram now commenced and
spanned over a space, from the first Gentile
king down to the Tribulation, which began in
the reign of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.
During these times of the Gentiles the Jews re-
tain their tribal character, amid the varied
trials and persecutions,—a striking proof of
God’s preserving care over them. Jeremiah v.
19, shews that they were to be servants of
strangers. Because of their revolting and
iniquities their good things where holden from
them and they were scattered among the nations,
as dependants upon the Gentiles. The Pro-


phecy of Daniel gives the history of the four
great Empires, Babylon, Media and Persia,
Greece, and Rome, under the figure of four
great beasts, see chap. vii. The Babylonian
Empire having passed away, the Persian domi-
nian succeeded. Jeremiah’s seventy years
being accomplished, certain remnants of the
tribes of Benjamin and Judah went up to Jeru-
salem under Cyrus, to rebuild the house of the
Lord and the walls of the city. In Nehemiah
and Ezra there is a written account of the diffi-
culties of their work. But in spite of all they
were re-established in their city under Gentile
supremacy, and continued so until the advent of
the Messiah, which occurred during the reign of
the Roman, or fourth Empire. The reader may
see lines crossing the Diagram denoting the
Messiah’s advent and crucifixion. To these
remnants who had returned under Cyrus the
Messiah came, “but his own received him not.”
By them was he rejected, and through them
crucified. His ascension (marked on the dia-
gram), to the right hand of God brings us to.
THE PRESENT PERIOD,
which as noted on the Diagram, commences
with the Kingdom of Heaven.
The Kingdom of Heaven, and the church dur-
ing its stay npon the earth, when the grace of
God reigns in the hearts of his people, are
different in many important respects and are not


the one and same thing; and the subject of
“The Kingdom,” generally, is very full and
comprehensive.
The kingdom spoken of in the Old Testa-
ment is something future. In Daniel, ii, 44,
The Kingdom is future. “And in the days of
these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom which shall never be destroyed, and
the kingdom shall not be left to other people,
but it shall break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.” So in
the vii. chapter and 14, 27. It is believed by
many that while the Son of Man was on earth
he began His reign in His people’s hearts, which
has continued to the present time, and will con-
tinue ; and that he did not attempt to set up a
kingdom on earth; indeed, when they sought to
make Him a king he refused, and went and hid
Himself. John vi. 15. But although John the
Baptist and his Divine Master were both re-
jected by the Jews. John the Baptist was the
forerunner of the Messiah, and the Lord Jesus
came to the Jews as their king. For the wise
men said, “ Where is he that is born king of the
Jews?” (Matt. ii. 2.) and this was confirmed by
Christ applying to Himself the words of the
Prophet, “ Thy king cometh,” saying they were
fulfilled in His day. [Matt. xxi. 5.]
The rejection of Christ brought in a peculiar
aspect of the kingdom, viz., the intended king to


be rejected and sent back to heaven; and yet the
kingdom to go on, brings in a deep and myste-
rious state of things. And the Lord said to His
disciples, “It is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. (Matt.
xiii. 11.) All that God has declared shall yet
take place. Christ brought in the kingdom;
but His being rejected altered its character for
the time being, and postponed its establishment
in power and glory. Now we have the “king-
dom and patience,” by and by, it will be the
“kingdom in power.” Now it is a sort of inter-
regnum. The king is now spoken of as a noble-
man going forth to receive a kingdom, and to
return. (Luke xix. 12.) He came and was
rejected; and he is gone to be invested, as it
were with further powers, and will come again,
and execute judgment on His enemies. In the
meanwhile the kingdom is going on, in a peculiar
form—its subjects waiting for its glory, and the
return of its king. For Christ Himself is
waiting till His enemies be made His footstool-
(Heb. x. 13; Ps. cx. 1.)
The terms, “kingdom of heaven,” and
“kingdom of God,” cannot be used indiscrimin-
ately. It appears that the term, “kingdom of
God” * is a general term for the kingdom, and
* Distinguished on the Diagram by the waved lines. See
Luke vii 28; Mark i 15; Matt, xii 28, The Kingdom goes
on through the Tribulation to its power and glory.


at any time; while “kingdom of heaven”f is
more restricted; and being used only in St.
Matthew’s Gospel, seems to give it the aspect
of the kingdom to the Jews. They were look-
ing for an earthly kingdom, and yet from
Christ they heard again and again of the king-
dom of heaven, no doubt to correct their
earthly thoughts. The kingdom of heaven,
then, has been described as ‘the authority of
the Lord in heaven acknowledged upon the
earth.’ Heaven is God’s throne, and the Lord
Jesus is set down at God’s right hand. To what
the kingdom is ‘likened’ while its king is absent,
is gained in the Parables. (Matt, xiii.)
Thus it is seen, Christ brought in the king-
dom when on earth. He said to the Pharasees.
(Matt. xii. 28.) “It is come unto you.” He
gave them also a glimpse of the kingdom in
power on the mount: “The kingdom of God
come with power.” (Mark ix. 1.) Peter says,
“We were eye witnesses of his majesty For
he received from God the Father, honor and
glory.” (2 Peter, i.) But he was rejected.
The Jews said, “We will not have this man
to reign over us,” while the Gentiles on their
part “crucified the Lord of Glory.” He be-
came the man who went into a far country,
f Distinguished by the cobweb printing. See Matt, xi
12; xxiii 13; xvi 19; xxi 43,


(heaven) to receive a kingdom and return.
While He is away, it is still the “kingdom of
heaven,” the rule of heaven without a visible
king, the true subjects waiting in patience for
the power and the glory. Evil comes in and
mixes with the good. Evil persons take shelter
under its patronage. The Lord returns to the
earth, purges out of His kingdom all things that
offend (Matt, xiii, 41), and sets up His king-
dom in power and glory. It becomes then, the
kingdom of the Son of Man, Christ reigning as
a man. Eventually the kingdom is given up to
the Father (Cor. xv, 24, 28,), and God is all
in all.
At the beginning of this period, John the fore-
runner of the Christ appears and introduces the
Messiah. The Messiah fulfills the Law, “ comes
to His own, but his own receive him not.” (John
ii 11.) “He was despised and rejected of men,
* * * was taken from prison and judgment * * *
cut off out of the land of the living, * * * made
his grave with the wicked, and the rich in his
death. (Isaiah liii, 4-9.)
Shortly after the cutting off of the Messiah,
the little band of the faithful followers of the
Lord are separated from their Jewish con-
nexions, and were soon formed into the
Church, as marked in the kingdom of heaven,
on the Diagram. The tribes of Judah and
Benjamin were scattered among Gentile nations,


as seen by the chequered line on the right hand
of that representing the ten tribes in the Times
of the Gentiles , whose times are still running
out their course. These two tribes are found
principally in the civilized nations, and are pre.
served separate and distinct from them, and
they still remain “ a nation meted out and trod-
den down,” and will, until the time comes for
them, under the shelter of some maratime
power to return to their own land. (Isaiah xviii.)
The Lord was a man of sorrows and ac-
quainted with grief; and the Church, (those
who live the life of Christ,) takes the place of
suffering and rejection while on earth; and
having “turned to God from idols to serve the
living and true God, and to wait for his son
from heaven ,” (1 Thess. i 9, 10.), she walks as
a pilgrim and a stranger through the world,
sharing the patience of Christ, until his parting
promise, “I will come again, and receive you
unto myself,” is fulfilled. (John xiv. 3.)
The present time is remarkable for the
lethargy, or Laodicean state overwhelming the
churches. This state appears to be universal.
Throughout Christendom there is a death-like
state —a morbed drowsiness, apparently immov-
able by all living Boanerges. The worldliness
of those who should be the light of the world is
as extensive. And the state of the world, of the
churches in the world, and of the tares in the


church, are all indicative of the coming change
the end of this dispensation.
The world’s conversion by the preaching of
the gospel has been, and is, by some, now, the
favorite theme of the pulpit. But in the whole
history of the church, never were there less
signs of this; on the contrary, never was the
church shrouded in such darkness as now —a
darkness that is felt. Worldliness, alas! is
written on our foreheads, and needs no one to
proclaim it. There is a union with the world,
instead of a separation from it. This worldly
state has paralyzed the church, and from it she
can never return to its primitive purity. And
this union with the world characterizes Christ-
endom in the mass. And what will be the end
of such a state? Excision. For what says the
Scripture? “Toward thee goodness if thou con-
tinue in goodness: otherwise, thou also shalt be
cut off.” The church has failed in her mission.
The spiritual harlotry of that which bears the
name of Christ, and pretends to be his spouse,
with the kings and gods of the earth, and the
consequent corruption of the earth’s inhabitants,
is the grand dominant characteristic of Christ-
endom. Laodiceanism has overcome Christen-
dom, and the Lord will spew her out as an un-
clean thing. What a prospect! How different
from the dreams of increasing light, and pro-
gress and blessing, indulged by many! —from


the idea of the world’s conversion! How ter-
rible the surprise !• What a picture is that of
Ezekiel xiii, 10-14! Because; even because
they have seduced my people, saying, “ Peace,
and there was no peace, &c. Although these
words were spoken of the prophets of Israel
who prophesied concerning Jerusalem, and who
saw visions of peace for her when there was no
peace; is it not a picture of Christendom ?Is
there nothing in the passage that ought to be a
warning to us? When God says Christendom
shall be cut off, and men say that it shall
flourish yet more and more, till the whole world
be converted and the millenium introduced, is it
less grevious in his eyes for a false peace to be
preached to Christendom, than it was for false
prophets to see visions of peace for Jerusalem,
when there was none? Will a wall cemented
with such untempered mortar be more enduring
in the present dispensation than the last? Does
not our Lord, speaking of His day, the day of
His coming judgment, say, that “as a snare
shall it come on all them that dwell on the face
of the whole world? Does not Paul tell us,
“When they shall say, Peace and safety; then
sudden destruction corneth upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall
not escape? Does not Babylon’s overthrow
take place in the moment of her proudest exul-
tations, and fullest fancied security? “For she


saith in her heart, “I sit a queen and am no
widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore
shall her plagues come in one day, death and
mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly
burned with fire; for strong is the Lord God
who judgeth her.” And is not the word to Sar-
dis quite as solemn ? “If therefore thou shalt
not watch, I will come on thee as a thief and
thou shalt not know what hour I will come
upon thee.” Reader, he that hath an ear to
hear, let him hear.
Living, as we now are, in an important period
of the career of the Church, a few thoughts on
some of the subjects pertaining to our time will
be given, characterised as
COMING EVENTS.
Although many Christians believe there is no
event to transpire between the present moment
and the Lord’s return, there are a great many
who do. One of the events earnestly looked
for, is the return of a portion of the tribes of
Judah and Benjamin in unbelief, under the
auspices af the Antichrist, whom they will re-
ceive in the character of the Messiah. Who-
ever he be, he will establish them once more in
Jerusalem and restore to them the ordinances
of their religious worship. When this occurs,
Jehovah again recognises them as his people and
the Gentile’s day is at an end.


Shortly after the crucifixion of the Lord the
latter rain was withheld from that land, and for
more than eighteen-hundred years that land had
no latter rain, and the land became desolate,
and could not be cultivated. In Joel ii, 23, it
is predicted that the “latter rain shall be added
to the former, and that rain, the real latter
rain has been, within these last few years
(1873), added to the former rain, and the land
now is being colonized and cultivated by the
Jews already returned, and two harvests of corn
are grown in one year, and everything else in
accordance; so that the little seaport town of
Jaffa, is visited by ships from all parts of
Europe, for corn, wine, and oil, there produced.
The reader will find a remarkable passage in
Ezek. xxxvi. 8. “But ye, O mountains of
Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and
yield your fruit to my people Israel,” for
they are at hand to come. Thus the Lord
has prepared the land, and many have
already returned in expectation of their Messiah
to come, who, they believe, will be some person
of kingly authority, and for whom, they are
constantly praying that he may come in this
“our day" And whilst the world is hastening
its preparation to welcome the antichrist, Jeho-
vah is remembering His ancient people. He
has given them favor, is giving them favor, and
will give them favor in the eyes of the nations,


so that the way shall he prepared for their
return to their land. Recent events have all
conspired to render it more and more likely
that this great event; the restoration of the
children of Israel to Palestine in all the
rites and ceremonies of the Jewish reli-
gion, will shortly take place. Israelites are
everywhere more cared for, and acquiring
greater influence amongst the nations;
and there are many political considerations
the Lord might use, which would speedily
induce those nations to aid them in their return
to their own country. They have wealth
enough to buy it. They have influence enough
to procure the purchase. There are amongst
them great numbers longing to return. All
things seem prepared. Nothing appears want-
ing, but some political necessity, to move the
statesmen and rulers of the earth in the right
direction. This great Jewish national event
will soon come.
At the present moment many prophetic
students are in lively expectation of the appear-
ance of the Anti-Christ , an event that will
occur at the commencement of the last of
Daniel’s seventy weeks, (7 years,) Dan. ix.;
when the covenant between him and the
returned Jews will be ratified. In the first
half of this week of years, time, times, and
half, the Anti-christ will, by flatteries and de-


ception. establish them in their long-loved city,
Jerusalem. But in the midst ,of the week, he
will develope himself as the Anti-christ for
time, times, and half. (Dan. ix, 27.)
During the first three and half years, the fol-
lowing events are expected.
1. The confirmation of a seven years’
covenant between the Antichrist and the re-
turn of the Jews. The moment this act is per-
formed, calculations may safely be made.
From that point the days of Christ’s tarrying
are specially numbered. Watch, then, for ye
know when the Lord will appear.
2. The renewal of the Jewish ordinances
and temple worship at Jerusalem.
3. The complete drying up of the Turkish
Empire.
4, The second coming of Christ.
This second coming of Christ is the parousia
or first phase of his return and will be a pro-
per, personal coming, as is seen in many
passages of Scripture. “As it was in the
a ys of Noah and Lot, so shall also the com-
ino- of the Son of Man be.” “Watch, there-
fore, for ye know not what hour your Lord
doth come.” (Matt, xxiv.) “If I go
I (Jesus myself) will come again and receive
you unto myself.” “I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you.” (John xiv.)
2. His coming will be for His saints, to


meet them in the air. “The Lord Himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the archangel and with the trump
of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first;
then we who are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever
be with the Lord. (1 Thess iv. 16, 17.) This
is the first phase of the Lord’s return; i.e., the
first stage in His descent from heaven, when the
saints will be caught up to meet Him in the air,
and, as the Bride, will be presented to the
Father. During this absence of the Church,
the tribulation transpires, at the close of which,
the second phase or stage will take place and
he comes to the earth bringing with him his
saints.
The first stage of the Lord’s return will
evidently be in a time of apparent peace and
prosperity, when the world will have no expec-
tation of any such event; when there will be
all the avocations of life pursued, and marrying
and giving in marriage. The professing church
fast asleep in Laodiceanism. What a wondrous
change then! The despised, illused, rejected,
forgotten ones, rise to meet their Lord in glory.
What a day of separation! Two of a house-
hold, they may be, an affectionate brother and
sister, who have hung upon one mother’s breasts,
played together upon the same hearth; one


caught up to meet the Lord in the air, the other
left. O! what bitter lamentation; the husband
taken from his wife; the sister from her brother,
the maiden from her beloved one. What a
day! of joy and sorrow, one taken away to
glory, the other left to pass through the Great
Tribulation. O, Reader, escape for thy life;
the time draweth nigh, very nigh; it is even at
your door.
This gathering of God’s elect, who shall be
rescued from the midst of approaching evil, is
pre-eminently the great expected event of the
present time. (1873.) “And he shall send
His angels with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather together His elect from
the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other.” The period of the translation of the
elect is the midnight of this world—her night
of deepest and darkest gloom. “And at mid-
night there was a cry made, Behold the Bride-
groom cometh.” “I tell you, in that night,
there shall be two in one bed; the one shall be
taken, and the other left.”*
* Who are the two, who at that time, are found together in the field.,
grinding at the mill, in one bedl Would the one living in constant ex-
pectation of the Lord’s return be so closely united to the irreligious?
Surely not! The expression is a solemn one, and conveys the solemn
thought, that of the two Christians living together, one might reject the
personal coming of Christ, and, therefore, be left behind to pass through
the Tribulation to Glory. Read the Author’s ‘‘Ten Virgins.


“0 Christians! give ear,
For the time draws near-
Soon must the tie be riv’n
And friends side by side,
God’s hand shall divide,
And one from th’ other be driv’n.
And the thoughtless fair,
Who breath’d the same prayer,
Oft as her husband knelt,
Shall find he has tied,
And start from her bed,
To feel as she never felt.
Hark! 0, what a cry !
Will then rend the sky,
“ Open thou to us, 0 Lord! ”
0 ye faithless, let,
Ere the door be shut,
That cry in faith be heard,”
This first phase of the Lord’s return, consti
tutes the First Resurrection, and takes place at
the beginning of “The day of vengeance of our
God, and prior to the Millennium. In Luke xiv.
14, we have an important, if not humiliating,
lesson taught us, which of all, perhaps the most
difficult to receive. The Lord there teaches his
followers, when they make a feast, to call “the
poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind:” and for
this benevolent action, they should be “recom-
pensed at the resurrection of the just.” Here I
would remark, that the resurrection of the just, is
distinct from the resurrection of the wicked.*
There is an important passage in John v. 28, 29;
“ Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming in
* To have a part in the first Resurrection is a reward to those who
look for his return.


the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice and shall come forth; they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damna-
tion. ”f Our Lord here speaks of two resurrec-
tions to transpire in the same hour. These two
resurrections are characterized by the sources
from which they flow, life from one, judgment
from the other. The resurrection of life (thejust);
and the resurrection of judgment (the wicked).
A nd although these are to transpire in the same
hour: yet the time elapsing between the two
resurrections, may be a thousand years, which we
learn from another passage, is the time. See Kev.
xx, 5. The expression, “ For the hour is coming,’
in its import, is similar to the expression, ‘the day
of the Lord,’ ‘ the day of judgment,’ ‘the last
dayj &c. In all these, the day does not mean,
simply a period of twenty-four hours; but a
lengthened period, as the gospel day means the
whole period in which the gospel is preached, or
as George the Third’s day; meaning thereby
the duration of his reign. 'And “ the day of the
Lord,” may mean the whole period from the
coming of Christ to receive his saints, to the time
when “ he shall have delivered up the kingdom
to God, even the Father; when he shall have put
down all rule, and all authority and power.” In
t Judgment; this is the simple meaning of the original kriseos.


the 25 v, it is written, “ Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live.” This hour had begun
when Jesus spake these words, and has lasted
more than eighteen hundred years: for the period
in which “ dead souls” are quickened, has not
yet terminated. So the hour in which all “that
are in the graves shall hear his voice and come
forth,” may include a long period; “ the resur-
rection of life ” taking place in the beginning of
the hour, when the Lord shall descend in the air
to meet his saints [the church] before the mil-
lennium; and the 4 resurrection of judgment’ at
the close of the hour —the end of the thousand
years after the millennium. If you look in the
preceding chapter at the 23 v., you will find
another hour , which means the period of the
Gospel, and that has lasted nearly two thousand
years. There is then, an hour coming, not
merely of sixty minutes, in the which the
‘resurrection of life,’ and the ‘resurrection of
judgment’ will be accomplished. What this
period actually is, which intervenes, between the
two resurrections, we learn from Rev. xx. ‘And
I saw, etc-, and ‘ they lived and reigned with
Christ a thousand years.’ ‘This is the first
resurrection.’ Mark, the rest of the dead lived
not again for a thousand years. Ihere, in the
11—13 v., we read the rest of the dead shall be


brought to judgment, which is, doubtless, the
last resurrection; “ And the sea gave up the
dead which were in it, and death and hell de-
livered up the dead which were in them.” No-
thing can be plainer than that the resurrection
of the just will take place prior to the millen-
nium—at the beginning of the hour. Nothing
can be more simple to the unprejudiced mind.
In I Cor. xv, the resurrection is the principal
subject of which St. Paul treats. At the 23 v.
it is written, “Every man in his own order,
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are
Christ’s at his coming.” There is not a word
here of any who are not Christ’s; “they that
are Christ’s.’ And the resurrection of ‘they
that are Christ’s takes place at his coming, when
they will meet him in the air. This is also
conclusive that the Church will meet the Lord
prior to the judgments falling upon the earth.
The resurrection of the dead is at another
time, and on another principle.
Again, in 1 Thess. iv, 13-15, you read, ‘But
1 would not have you to be ignorant, brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sor-
row not, even as others which have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God
bring with him. For this we say unto you by
the word of the Lord, that we which are alive
and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall


not prevent them whieh are asleep.’ The Thes-
salonians, to whom St. Paul addressed these
words, appear to manifest some concern for
those of their Brethren who had died in the
Lord, lest they should not share the joy of the
living saints at the coming of the Lord. The
Lord assures them ‘ that we which are alive and
remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not
prevent them which are asleep.’ Here then we
have a positive proof that the dead in Christ
rise and accompany the then living saints, and
shall meet the Lord in the air as he descends to-
wards the earth.
Nor is it enough to know that the church will
be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, prior
to the millennium; but that the Church will be
taken from the earth before the judgments which
are to fall upon the wicked, and by which the
millennium will be ushered in.
If you read with carefulness the book of
Revelation, you will see that the church is no
more seen or earth, nor anywhere but in heaven
from the end of chapter iii, till in chapter xix,
when Christ comes forth from heaven, and the
armies which were in heaven follow in his train,
saying, ‘ Alleluia, as the voice of a great multi-
tude, as the voice of many waters, as the voice
of mighty thunderings.’ Rev. xix, 6.
We learn then from the scriptures, that the
Lord’s return will be personal, and at the first


stage of his appearing the church* will be caught
up to meet him in the air, which is the First
Resurrection. And that this event will be at
the commencement of the ‘ day of vengeance of
our God,’ and before those fearful judgments
recorded in the Revelation from the iii to the xix
chapter will fall upon the inhabitants of the
earth.
This, then, of all scenes brought before you,
is one thrillingly important, in which you may
or may not feel interested. A scene you may
witness; for the ‘coming of the Lord draweth
nigh If you are a Christian, your position
is that of waiting, looking for, and loving the
appearing of the Lord. Let earnest prayer be
your exercise; and the enjoying of the cleansing
power of the atoning blood, be your privilege.
If not a Christian, seek without procrastination,
that salvation, to which you are so constantly
invited to come.
“ Come all the world, come sinner thou;
All things in Christ are ready now.”
And may you, reader, participate in the First
Resurrection.
As the result of this separation, there will be,
* That is. those who have died in the Lord, will rise from their graves
and those Christians or saints who are alive and remain, will all be
caught up.
§ How soon it may take place, is not known. It may transpire at
any moment.


doubtless, an extensive revival of religion; per-
haps, such as never was known. This is not
merely presumed, because of the solemn effect
then upon the mind of those left behind; but,
from what is shown in the prophecies about the
First seal, and the innumerable palm-bearing
multitude; and the first angel message with the
everlasting gospel, and the countless martyrs in
the Revelation. Again in the xiv chapter after
the 144000 wise virgins are caught up to the
heavenly Zion, the harvest is then reaped,
which is generally allowed to signify the in-
gathering of the saints at Christ’s descent on
the earth, and is identical with the “Great
multitude.” (Rev. vii.)
Immediately after the Church is removed from
the earth, the great let or hindrance to the de-
velopment of the “ Wicked One,” there will be
WAR IN HEAVEN,
as it is written; “ And there was war in heaven
Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels,
and prevailed not, neither was their place found
any more in heaven. And the great dragon
was cast out; that old serpent, called the Devil,
and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he
was cast out into the earth, and his angels were
cast out with him.”
This war in heaven furnishes a solution to the
otherwise inexplicable mystery of Anti-


chrisms unprecedented power. Satan who is at
present “The Prince of the power of the air,
and leader of the wicked spirits in heavenly
places/'’ (Eph ii, 2; vi, 12), having even acces s
to the presence of God, ( I Kings xxii; Job ii.
Rev. xii, 10.), is to be expelled from the aeriel
regions and restricted to this earth as the sphere
of his operations. O! Reader take the warning
voice; “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and
of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knoweth he
hath but a short time.” (Rev. xii, 12.)
The church, the great hindrance, to the de -
velopment of the “Wicked One,” being removed
and the dragon cast out of heaven to the earth;
he (the Antichrist,) at this juncture of events,
enters the scene as the Messiah to the Jews, and
he, energized by the Devil at the dividing of the
week, develops himself as the Antichrist, and
then commences
THE GREAT TRIBULATION.
Of this period (see Diagram) the Saviour
himself says, “For then shall be great tribulation,
such as was not since the beginning of the world
to this time, no nor ever shall be.*’ Matt. xxiv.
Notice a few events that will happen during
the time, times , and dividing of time , or the last
three and a half years of the seven years’ cove-
nant, between the Antichrist and the Jews at
Jerusalem.


1. The flight of many of the saints into the
wilderness, (Perhaps America). “And to the
woman were given two wings of a great eagle,
that she might fly into the wilderness, into her
place, where she is nourished for a time, times,
and a half time, from the face of the serpent.”
Rev. xii, 14.
2. The fall of Babylon. Rev. xiii. Babylon,
or the Harlot, is generally allowed to denote the
Papal Hierarchy.
3. The division of the entire territory of the
old Roman Empire into ten kingdoms, repre-
sented by the ten toes of Nebuchadnezzar’s
Great Image, &c.
4. The development of the Antichrist, as
shewn in the following passages. “In the midst
of the week, he (the Antichrist) shall cause
the sacrifice and oblations to cease; and for the
overspreading of abominations. (Dan. ix, 27.)
He shall wear out the saints of the Most High,
and think to change times and laws; and they
shall be given into his hands.” (Dan. vii, 25.)
“It shall be for a time, times , and a half’., and
when he shall have accomplished to scatter
the power of the holy people, all these things
shall be finished.” (Dan. xii, 7.)
5. The prophesying of the two witnesses,
supposed to be Moses and Elias, seen at the
transfiguration, is thus spoken of. “ And I will
give power unto my two witnesses, and they


three score days and when they shall have
finished their testimony; the Beast ,
.shall
kill them. (Rev. xi, 3.)
shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and
6. The tormenting of men by supernatural
locusts, horses, &c., &c. Rev. ix.
7. The darkening of the constellations, which
includes, a great earthquake, afflicting sores,
saltwater turned into blood, intolerable heat,
Europe covered with darkness, Euphrates dried
up, and unparelled earthquake and hailstorm,
and the battle of Armageddon. Rev. xvi.
8. The battle of Armageddon. Of all the
judgments which will fall upon the world during
“the Tribulation,” under the various seals, vials,
trumpets, &c., as given in the Revelation, the
closing scene is the battle of Armageddon.
Armageddon is a Hebrew name given to the
place of Antichrist’s future and final struggle
and overthrow. Its name alludes to Megiddo,
where Barak with 10,000 almost unarmed men
dispirited and entirely routed the mighty hosts
of Canaan. Its name may be interpreted, “the
destruction of troops. ” Here the Beast, False
Prophet, and the kings of the earth and their
armies will be arrayed against Christ, the King
of kings, and Lord of lords. Antichrist having
put the assembled nations in battle array, one
against another, and all against God ; then shall
the Lord go forth, and fight against those


nations as when he fought in the day of battle,”
and shall overthrow the mighty hosts, and hurl
the Antichrist and the False Prophet into the
lake of fire: the heavens will then open, and
Christ will descend, bringing his saints with him.
Zech. xiv, 2.
9. The visible manifestation of Christ,
or His coming with His saints. This is His
second phase or stage to the earth, the Epipha-
neia, shining forth, as the sun in his glory.
“The Lord my God shall come and all the
saints with thee. Zech. xix, 15. And Enoch,
also, the seventh from Adam prophesied of
these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with
two thousand of His saints to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly deeds which
they have ungodly committed.” Jude xiv, 4.
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the
Mount of Olives.” Zech. xiv, 4. “And we
shall reign on the earth.” Rev. v, 10. The
end of the Antichrist and the False Prophet.
And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white
horse: and he that sat upon him was called
Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth
judge and make war,” And the armies
which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.
And I saw the Beast, and the kings of the earth,
and their armies gathered together to make war


against him that sat on the horse, and against
his army. And the beast was taken, and with
him the false prophet These were cast
alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.
Rev. xix. See Diagam.
THE BINDING OF SATAN.
Upwards of six thousand years have
passed away since Adam fell from his
purity through the subtle temptation of the
Devil, and during these years he has tempted
men to sin, and to commit horrible deeds, with
unabated zeal and increasing malice. But his
day is limited, and the day of judgment draweth
nio-h. Through him “the whole creation has
O O
and still groans and travails in pain. Its eman-
cipation draws nigh. For, although, up to this
moment Satan inhabits heaven, or, as some say,
heavenly places, he will be bound, his power of
doing evil destroyed, and he will deceive the
nations no more for a thousand years. The
command is gone forth from the God of all
power; and an angel (perhaps the angel that
opened the bottomless pit, Rev. ix, 1,2., de-
scended from heaven, “having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.”
Now begins a terrible and yet sublime scene.
Great as has been the power of Satan, and
greater manifestations of that power may yet be
witnessed, there is One, who by his word of
authority could say, “Get thee behind me


Satan,” is able by his word to paralyze the
Devil, and bind him; yea, and shut him up in
hell, and keep him there. “ And he, the angel,
laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which
is the Devil and Satan, and cast him into the
bottomless pit and shut him up and set a seal
upon him.” Rev. xx, 2, 3. This grand and awful
scene will transpire in the invisible world. What
mighty power will then be exhibted by Almighty
God! Conceive if you can the exultations of the
Hosts of heaven, and the dismay of the Legions
of fallen, evil angels. The effects of this invisi-
ble scene will soon be felt on earth, and hallelu-
jahs will be uttered by restored man. Hail happy
period of Satan’s imprisonment, and the world’s
MILLENNIAL AGE!
This is the blessed period or Dispensation, for
which the Lord himself has taught us to pray in
that sublime and comprehensive prayer, called
the “Lords’s Prayer.” That kingdom is yet
future.
That the kingdoms of this world shall become
the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ; and
that the will of God shall be done on earth as it
is in heaven, is fully received; but taking the
word of God as our guide, there does not appear
the slightest ground for believing that the preach-
ing of the Gospel in the present Dispensation
will effect this. The purpose of God in the
Gospel Dispensation, is seen in Acts xv, 14; and


Matt, xxiv, 14.
In the first passage it is shewn to be elective;
a Dispensation of taking out. So that the Tab-
ernacle of David is in ruins; or while Jerusalem
is trodden down of the Gentiles, God is taking
out from the Gentiles , a people for his name.
“Simeon hath declared how God at the first did
visit the Gentiles to take out from them a people
for his name.” This taking out is a kind of first
fruits. James i, 18. But after this the Lord says,
“I will return and will build again the tabernacle
of David.”
In the passage in Matthew, the purpose of God
given there, shows that the Gospel is to be
preached for a testimony against all nations, and
then shall the end come; that is, the end of the
age or dispensation. Read verse 3.
The Scriptures teach us to expect a period of
universal blessedness in the last days; that Jesus
will come at the commencement of this period of
blessedness; and that he will reign personally
with his ransomed church (who love his appear-
ing) over the earth, during this period of His
glory.
The attentive reader of scripture, must have
seen that the two subjects which form the great
theme of prophetic testimony, are the “sufferings
of Christ, and the glory that should follow.”
They prophesied of a suffering and a reigning
Messiah; they point to a period of suffering and


glory. The period of suffering has passed. His
birth, life, crucifixion, resurrection, ascension,
are all as things that are past; but His return
and reigning in glory with his saints over the
earth, are yet future; and when we look at the
signs of our times, it appears a future even at the
door.
The very thought of the “Millennial Age”
produces mingled feelings of love, joy, and peace
in the minds of all those who are waiting for, and
looking and loving the appearing of the Lord.
As has been noticed, the previous dispensations
have been followed by judgments; and it is also
worthy of observation, that each dispensation
surpasses its preceding in the expansion of good-
ness, and approaching to a state of perfect love.
The Gospel dispensation has greatly surpassed
that of the Law; and the Millennial dispensation
will far surpass that; and then the Heavenly will
infinitely surpass the Millennial. Joyful as the
prospect of the Millennial Age is, the Heavenly
state is far more exceedingly so.
There are several events which will character-
ize the Millennial Age, viz.—■
I. Christ having received the kingdom has
returned.
2. Satan is bound.
3. The ten tribes have returned; and Israel
united, has his cup of blessing filled.
4. The Gentile nations rejoice with Israel.


5 The knowledge of the Loi d covers the earth
and all nations worship the King, the Lord of
Hosts.
6, Creation herself, is delivered from her
groanings and pain, and every thing that has
breath, praises the Lord. “The mountains and
hills break forth into singing, and all the trees
of the field clap their hands.”
0 glorious day ! Hasten happy time! ”
The happy effects produced by the Coming
Millennium are indescribable. Nevertheless,
listen, O Reader! “All the ends of the world
shall remember and turn unto the Lord; and all
the kindreds of the nations shall worship before
thee. For the kingdom is the Lord’s, and He is
governor among the nations.” Listen !! “ The
meek shall eat and be satisfied.” Where are the
meek now? In the midst of wolves; cheated,
robbed, pining in garrets and cellars, and expo-
sed to cruel death. Ps. xxii. Listen, oh, Listen!!!
It is written, “he shall deliver the needy, when
he crieth; the poor, alas! and him that hath no
helper. He shall spare the poor and needy, and
shall save the souls of the needy. He shall
redeem their souls from deceit and violence; and
precious shall their blood be in his sight.”
Christ the King, seen in his glory and majesty.
Israel filled with joy and praise. All nations
coming up to worship at Zion. Abundance of
peace. The fathers alive again from the dead in


glorified bodies. At such effects as these, can
the bursts of Jewish praises in the Psalms be
wondered at? Well may the children of Zion
be joyful in their king. Their song seems to
swell louder and louder until the last Psalms are
one hallelujah, praise ye the Lord.
Listen! more yet. Then, there will be no
more war; No: universal peace will reign. All
the out-cast and dispersed gathered home.
Beauty instead of ashes; oil of joy for mourning;
garments of salvation; robes of righteousness;
decked with ornaments; righteousness and praise
spring up; men’s lives as the days of a tree
(lengthened, perhaps, to a thousand years); no
sighing, no weeping, no sorrow. O what-a glo-
rious millennial rest of the earth! Then , truly,
“shall the earth yield her increase, and God, even
our God shall bless us.”
For further Millennial blessing, read, Ps. ii, 6;
viii, 1 ; x f 16, 18; xxii; xxiv, 10; ixxii; Is. ii, 1-
5; xi; Ixii, 3; Ixv, 18, 19; Jer. xxiii, 5,6; Ezek.
xxxvi, 35; xxxiii, 26.
We now turn from this blessed Millennial
Picture, and for a moment look at what succeeds
it. Alas! this transcendently glorious Dispen-
sation is followed by the loosening of Satan for
THE LITTLE SEASON.
Satan is unbound, loosened from his
imprisonment. None the better for prison con-
finement. This Season, though a “little season,”


is of such a nature, as calculated to produce the
most profound and thoughtful solemnity. It is
written, “ Satan shall be loosed out of his prison,
and shall go out to deceive the nations which
are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and
Magog, to gather them together to battle; the
number of whom is as the sand of the sea.”
It is evident that Satan will not loose any of
his maliciousness by his imprisonment; No, he
will then go forth and exert the most baneful
and hellish influence upon the nations, and
speedily cause revolt from the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, Having deceived the nations again, he
will make war with the saints at Jerusalem; but
his destruction is certain. And they went up on
the breadth of the earth, and compassed the en-
campment of the saints about, and the beloved
city; and fire came down out of heaven (from
God) and devoured them. And the devil that
deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where both the Beast and False-
Prophet are, and they shall be tormented day
and night for ever and ever.” Rev. xx, 7-10.
The history of the people in all ages of the
world, afford ample illustration of his dreadful
power of corrupting. Satan deceived our first
parents in Eden; corrupted the world after the
Flood, and was Israel’s great enemy, notwith-
standing the purposes of God concerning them.
It was he who sowed tares among the good seed;


and all the evils which are seen in the church,
are but the polluted crop of that seed. As then,
Satan, when governor of the world prior to the
millennium, exerted such diabolical influence
over men, so will he, when loosened from his
imprisonment, go forth to war against the saints
at Jerusalem. But his overthrow will be imme-
diate and final; and he and his host will be
brought to destruction by the “ Lion of the tribe
of Judah.” See diagram.
Immediately after this scene, the final judgment
of the wicked takes place, and He to whom all
judgment has been committed sits upon the
Great White Throne. John v. 22. The sea,
death, and hades are then emptied of their
inhabitants, and every man is judged according
to his works.” The books then opened tell out
their tale, and the victims of this fearful judg-
ment pass away into the lake of fire, (See on
the Diagram notices of these events.) under the
fearful and awfully tremendous sentence, “ De-
part ye cursed into everlasting fire”
Can anything be more severe than such a
sentence? The place of their torment Is called
“ outer darkness, a lake of fire, blackness, the
mist of darkness, a furnace of fire.” Their
punishment will be inflicted by fire, unquench-
able fire/ How dreadful/ When any part of
our flesh is but touched by fire, how exquisite
is the torment we feel! It is the most intoler.


able pain the body can endure. What then
must be the punishment of the lost when cast
into a lake of fire? The exquisite sense of that
punishment will be manifested by their “ weep-
ing and gnashing of teeth.” And then the
thought of the perpetuity of their punishment,
brought upon them by neglecting their salvation,
will surely give poignancy to their torment.
May God save the reader from such a hell.
Satan, and all evil removed away for ever,
God introduces the
ETERNAL STATE
of blessedness. “Behold I make all things new.”
Here are engulphed for ever, all time distinc-
tions of Jew and Gentile, rich and poor. Peter
describes it as “the New Heavens and New
Earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.” The
mediatorial kingdom of the Lamb has now
passed away, and the time has fuliy come for
the manifestation of the Sons of God. God
himself dwells among men, and the former
things are passed away. In this Eternal State,
the Church retains her identity as “The Taber-
nacle of God.” (2 Peter, iii, 13; Rev. xxi, 1-9;
Rom. viii, 19; 1 Cor. xv, 28. )
Lastly. When all the saints are happy, there
will be no more intercession. When all the
wicked have disappeared, there will be no more
government. When God has made all things
new, perfection will exist. When all shall be


accomplished, and made subject to God, then
there shall be an eternal blessing. Then, all
will be peace, and God will be all in all.
By these leading lines I have endeavoured to
place before thee, my reader, some of the teach-
ings of Scripture. Allow me, in the last place,
to draw thy attention to the vast importance of
the subject of the Lord’s return, which is the
hope of the Church. John says, “Every man
that hath this hope (the Lord’s return) in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure.” This is
its practical tendency, purifying himself, from
the world, from ungodliness, and taking his pro-
per position, waiting for the Lord’s return.”
Art thou a Christian? Hast thou experienced
the new birth, change of heart? of which, Our
Lord says “Marvel not ye must be born again.”
If so, art thou believing in the Lord’s personal
return? Art thou waiting for that? To such,
I say, let not the probability of the near ap-
proach of the great day absorb all thy care.
There are many who know not these things;
many who are not- looking for, nor loving the
appearing of the Lord. Forget not these.
Slacken not thy efforts in letting thy light on
these subjects shine before them. Let the fear-
ful judgments of the day of the tribulation, the
awful loss of precious souls move thee to fresh
exertions for their spiritual and eternal welfare.


The Lord is pleased to use instrumentality; yea
even a ram’s horn. O then ! Whatsoever thy
hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might.
Time is short. There may be but a very short
time between this minute and the Lord’s return.
Who can say it will not be the next moment?
“ Work, then, whilst it is day, for the night
cometh.”
But my reader, art thou outside the vail;
outside the church? If thou art in thy sins,
unforgiven; what can I, what shall I say to thee?
Thou hast heard the Gospel; thou hast had
invitations; thou hast had warnings. The Holy
Spirit has convinced thee of sin, and thou hast
felt alarm; thou hast had desires for salvation,
and perhaps hast wished to be a Christian. O!
wilt thou still live in a state of condemnation,
with the wrath of God ready to be poured out
upon thee? Thou hast sinned, thou hast rebelled
against God thy maker, and become an heir of
eternal fire. Hast thou any reason to urge why
God should spare thee, in the day when Heap-
pears to execute His judgments on the wicked?
If God spared not the angels that sinned; but cast
them down to hell, and delivered them unto
chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment;
why should He spare thee? If God “spared not
the old world, bringing in the flood upon the
whole of the ungodly;” why should He spare
thee? And if He turned the “cities of the Plain”


into ashes, condemning them with an overthrow,
making them an ensample unto those who, after,
live ungodlily; why should He spare thee? So
sure as these judgments were once poured out,
just as certainly are thy judgments now prepar-
ing, and will shortly come upon thee. If thou
repent not, thou shalt likewise perish. Dost thou
believe it?
But is there no way of escape for thee? O,
yes, there is. Jesus is the way, the truth, and
the life. He has done it all for thee. In Him
there is an inexhaustible store of love and mercy.
Thou hast only to feel thy need of salvation,
then believe; for in Him there is
“ Enough for each, enough for all,
Enough for evermore.”
O come, come to Jesus, He will have mercy.
“Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved ” Amen.
Ffrost, Printer, Grattan Street Prahran, Melbourne,






