





HOBGOBLINS:
.A. SECIE-AIF
Tales j Poems, & Sketches.
By Unohoo and Udontnohoo.
ADELAIDE:
ERE ARSON & BROTHER, PU BLIS HERS


PREFACE.
It was a matter of considerable debate between the
Authors of “Hobgoblins” whether the book should be
furnished with a preface, or merely cast, without intro-
duction, upon the consideration of the public. The
arguments in favor of a preface prevailed, as it was found
necessary in one or two matters for the writers to say a
word to the readers, which could not have been said in
any other portion of their work. Commencing with the
belief that a Christmas hook should contain only matter
that is light and varied, the Authors endeavoured to
select subjects in which too great similarity should not be
traced, and also aimed at variety, as far as possible, in
their treatment. They also strove, in what they under-
took, to make the matter light and readable.
The table of contents, it will be seen, is made up of
tales, poems, and sketches. The tales are sketchy in
their character, and, for the most part, were written
during half-hours of freedom from other work ; they can-
not, therefore, be put forward as the deliberate product
of hours of leisure, and, of course, cannot be classed for
criticism in the same category with such literary produc-
tions. The poems, with which the prose selections are
interspersed, are all from the pen of Unohoo, in addition
to one or two contributions to be found in the other
department of the bdolr. A few of the poetical selections
have previously appeared in the press, and are now
republished.
For the design on the covers, the producers of
“Hobgoblins” have to express large indebtedness to a
well-known amateur sketcher, whose cartoons in the


i
v l
X V iTir 1 m 1 I ) £
w
I fS
I& ~ w I
Portonian have long been a source of strong attraction to
those who care to see a comic idea clad in appropriate
dress.
The sketch has been lithographed at an establishment
in Adelaide ; and as the literary work has been produced
by Adelaideans, and the printing and publishing in local
establishments, the production may safely be pronounced
thoroughly South Australian.
Objection has frequently been taken to advertisements
appearing in books published in the Australian Colonies.
It will be seen that there are a few advertisements included
within the covers of “Hobgoblins”; but, while it ha«
been found absolutely necessary to have them, owing to
the cost of producing a book here, they have been con-
fined within comparatively small bounds.
The Authors and Publishers in putting forward their
book with all its imperfections—and they must be many
—upon its head, have only to conclude their preface by
wishing the public
A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
jSsßb


CHRISTMAS AT THE ANTIPODES.
WELCOME.
UNOHOO.
OLD Father Christmas, disrobe thee now,
And cast thy garments of fur away ;
Thou com’st not now where snowflakes fall,
And V r intry clouds hide the face of day.
No blazing fires on the well-swept hearth,
Will tempt the stranger, who tarries still;
No crystal capping of frosted ice
Doth crown the crest of the wooded hill.
The glassy stream, with its fringe of sedge,
Is never bound by thy Wintry chain ;
Its ripples slow, which the wild duck makes,
Do reach its banks to return again.
The grand old trees, with their sturdy stems,
Are leaf-clad still in the Christmastide,
No dazzling robe of the soft white snow
Doth ever their tender blossoms hide.
In fact, Old Father, thou’st reached a clime
Where the fruits do ripen in Autumn heats,
And the sheep unshorn, with a thirsty cry,
the shade of the gums for the shearer bleats.
I tell thee, Father, we never miss
The long dark days with the Wintry blast;
Our Christmas carols are often sung
Where the clear moon’s beams are upon us cast.
Our lads and lasses do venture forth,
With joyous shouts in the evening air ;
And the aged folks, with their old-time thoughts,
Have never a fear, and not a care.
’Tis pleasant here in the Christmas week
To join the sports of the festive throng,
As the evening breeze, with its cooling wing,
Doth waft the happy shouts along.
Old Father Christmas ! we welcome thee
From the frozen regions, where thou dost dwell,
And take thy gifts with a willing hand,
And hear the stories that thou wouldst tell.
We will fill thy wallet with blessings full.
To bear to our dear ones across the sea;
%*
%
k
And know that the thought of what thou dost hold
Will treble the blessing they’ll give to thee.


HOBGOBLINS;
AN IMAGINATIVE STORY.
UDONI’NOHOO.
HILE life lasts, and the ordinary powers of
memory are vouchsafed to me, I shall never forget
the Christmas Eve that I spent in the hamlet of
Feuellon, Province of Languedoc, in the year 1840.
Being young then and desirous of seeing as much of
the world as was possible, I had been travelling for some
months by easy stages over several of the principal
countries in the south of Europe, and had found the
journeying beneficial as far as my health was concerned ;
and as I carried a portfolio and took delight in sketching
from nature, I found myself during the trip in many of
the wildest portions of the south.
Travelling in the south of France in 1840 was not by
any means what it is now. Heavy vehicles were the
only conveyances between the principal towns, out of
the common track none were to be had; so that travellers
were bound either to go on horseback, or make their
journey by a slower fashion on foot. I had chosen the
former.
I had had a long day’s ride through a very desolate
part of the country, and my horse had begun to stumble
with fatigue as I entered a little valley, in which lay a
ruined castle, an apparently dilapidated auberge, and
half a dozen peasants’ huts of the poorest description.
The journey which had been accomplished had given me
no promise of finding much civilization here, but I did
not imagine that the place would have been quite so
desolate as it appeared in the expiring light of day.
There was not even the usual crossed chapel, to be
found in most villages. The castle appeared to be the


only building which had any pretensions, and it, in the
distance, seemed to be a deserted ruin. My spirits accor-
dingly fell as I rode into the village, for, uninviting as it
was, I felt that I was bound to remain over-night, both
in consequence of my horse, and owing to the distance to
the next village being considerable.
I rode up to the first house in my way and knocked,
but after thundering at the door for some time, without
making my presence known within, I gave up the effort,
and passsd on to the next. My success was the same at
the next house, and the next, and still the next.
There was not a human being moving, and in none of the
dwellings did there appear a flicker of fire or candle,
though the dusk was fast deepening into night.
I was making my way across to the auberge, which
stood on the hill, under the wing of the ancient gray
castle, when an old man emerged from a small house,
detached from those I had visited, and upon the other
side of the way. I hailed his appearance with a certain
feeling of relief, for I had begun to have strange mis-
givings as to the character of the place where I had sought
to shelter for the night. Addressing him in my best
French, I asked him if there were any families living in
the village.
He looked exceedingly frightened, and answered,
“None.”
“ Who keeps the auberge ?” was my next question.
“ No one, Monsieur,” was his reply as he gave another
frightened look at myself and my horse.
“ Is it not open, then, and furnished for travellers V'
“It is open, and it is furnished, Monsieur, but no on©
keeps it.”
I felt bewildered by the answer.
“ Strange that no one should keep the auberge,” I said
“Why is it deserted ? ”
“ Why is the whole village deserted, Monsieur ? ” said
the peasant, looking up into my face, his long white hair


HOBGOBLINS.
unnaturally long as it seemed to me—flowing over his
shoulders. ** Know you not that this is Feuellon ? ”
I am quite aware of lhat, my good fellow ; I came a
considerable distance to-day to reach Feuellon, but cer-
tainly did not expect to find it deserted.”
The man turned from me without another word,
and walked in the direction of the old castle. I called
after him several times, but whether he heard me or not
he did not pay any heed ; and as I drew up before the
auberge to reconnoitre it, he entered the great yawning
dilapidated gates leading to the baronial courtyard, and
disappeared from my view.
My first thought on finding the auberge also empty,
though open, was to spur my horse and galop out of the
I
I
desolate street, in which I had already spent too much
was a long ride to the next
village deterred me from following up the resolve. I
bethought me that it was absolutely necessary to get infor-
mation from the old man as to where I could quarter for
the night, and so, putting my horse into a canter, I passed
through the ivy-covered archway into the courtyard, and
raised as loud a shout as possible, in order to bring him
quickly to the front. The echo of my call had hardly
ceased in the old courtyard before he appeared, issuing
from one of the most dilapidated apartments in the
castle, and approached me. A scowl had taken the place
of the look of affright which I had first observed distort-
ing his features.
i
i
“ Where cm T be put up for the night ?” I asked.
li Well, Monsieur, if you dare to stay in Feuellon you
can put up at the auberge. There will be no charge. It
is deserted.”
u I don’t mind the charge ; but why do you speak of
my ‘ daring 5 to remain in the village. Why should I
not ?”
“ Because this is Feuellon, and Feuellon is haunted.”
As the old man spoke, the look of terror, which I had
at first observed npon his countenance, returned in full
force.


“ Oh, haunted ?” I said, feeling reassured, as I was not
generally inclined to be superstitious. “Is that the
cause of the desolation ? Well, I don’t mind putting up
at the adberge if there is any kind of accommodation to
be had there ; and if you will stay by me till myself and
my horse have been attended to, you shall be duly
rewarded.”
The villager assented rather reluctantly to my propo-
sition, and led the way to the door of the auberge, where
I dismounted and gave him my horse.
I paced about through the desolate rooms, in which
were a few articles of furniture of the kind found at that
period in French country inns; but, otherwise, I could
not see a vestige of anything which argued that the place
had been lately inhabited; and when my temporary
servant joined me, he produced a tinder-box, and in an
incredibly short space of time lighted a fire. Then going
to a cupboard, the inside of which he seemed to be well
acquainted with, he produced some meat and vegetables,
which he began to prepare for supper. These viands
were soon on the table, and two places laid, for I had
suggested that the man should spend the evening in my
company, and try some wine of a high quality, which I
had carried with me on my travels.
We both ate and drank heartily by the light of a large
tallow candle, which sputtered in the middle of the table,
and under the influence of the wine, my newly-found
acquaintance became communicative. He told me that
only a year before, the whole of the family at the auberge
had died within one week, of some malady quite beyond
the ken of the doctors. They were a very healthy family,
and numbered eleven in all, and not one of the deaths
could be accounted for by any natural means. During the
time they lay ill, and at intervals since, mysterious voices
had been heard in the lower apartments of the auberge,
and in the village in its vicinity. Heartrending cries had
been known to issue apparently from the castle chambers ;
but no one had been able to discover from what they had
proceeded. Strange appearances had been noticed at


night in the street, and some of the peasants had heard
mysterious whisperings, about whose import or meaning
they did not dare enquire. At last, one by one, the
families living in the village had left it, till my informant
was the only person remaining ; and he had not cared to
stay, only that he was too poverty-stricken to go hence.
The information which I elicited was not of a reassur-
ing kind ; and instead of serving to raise my spirits, it
rather tended to depress them, although family events —
the death of a brother and two sisters within six weeks —
had already reduced them low enough.
There was no bed in the auberge that I cared to make
use of, so throwing a little more wood on the fire, 1 leant
back in my chair, intending to make a night of it as comforta-
bly as possible under the circumstances. My companion
followed the example set him, and we were soon fast asleep.
I know that I was, for I had had a long and wearisome
ride ; and, before falling asleep, I noticed my friend with
both eyes closed, and in a state of complete tranquility.
Tdo not know how long I must have slept. The period
did not appear a great one. 1 awoke with a start, and,
although all was silent, felt convinced that I must have
been aroused by a piercing shriek somewhere in the
house. The first impulse upon me was to arouse my
friend, but on my attention being directed to his chair, a
cold perspiration burst over me.
It was not the old man who sat there now, but a
personage about his stature, with sinister visage and cat-
like eyes. I could neither see his hands nor his feet,
though it was apparent that he was made in the form of a
man. He appeared to have long ears, springing from the
natural point in the head, but so long as to resemble
horns, and from top to toe there was no color about him
but a deep red Though his eyes were half open he
appeared to be asleep—asleep in the same chair in which
I had so lately seen the mysterious villager.
As I have said before, I was not superstitious, but the
effect produced upon me by this peculiar introduction was
to cause me to cry out with alarm, and I had hardly done


so, when the candle, which had burnt very low, suddenly
became extinguished, and once more I heard, apparently
in a distant apartment, a piercing unearthly kind of cry*
In a moment of boldness I felt for the chair in which the
strange visitor sat. It was empty 1
I suppose it will not be wondered that, after all I had
heard and seen, my hair should manifest a desire to stand
on end. That was, however, the case, and even at this
distance of time 1 am not ashamed to own it. The
dilemma wasa very awkward one. I was in darkness, and
had not provided myself with the means for renewing the
light.
Remembering that the old man had laid his tinder-box
on the table, I began to grope for it; but had hardly
stretched out my hand when ray wrist was encircled by
cold, damp, death-like fingers, and pushed with conside-
rable force backwards.
“ Who are you?” I cried, half in anger and half in
fear.
The shout re-echoed through the house, and seemed
to be answered in every room ; but otherwise all was still
about me, and as far as the ear could detect, there was no
living person present but myself.
Without waiting for a further taste of such experiences,
I drew my cloak about me, gr isped my hat which lay near,
and hurried into ihe street. The wind, which had been
boisterous enough in the evening, had increased in strength
and blew in short icy blasts, as the moon, which was light-
ing in the Christmas morning, sailed through fleecy
tempestuous-looking clouds, affording butacold and dreary
light.
Whatever the strange impulse was which was upon me,
it guided my steps up the hill in the direction of the old
castle, a place to which, with the full possession of my
senses, I should scarcely have gone to escape from mys-
terious noises.
A horse’s hoof-strokes upon the hard road, and the
clangor of mail trappings sounded in my ears as I ap-


proaclied. The horse appeared to draw near to the walls,
but as I entered the great bare archway, through which the
wind now moaned dirge-like music, the hoof-strokes
suddenly ceased, and all was still. Impelled by some
unaccountable force, I passed across the courtyard toward
an aperture leading into one of the rooms, still remaining
in the ruin, and from which the red glare of a fire now
issued. As I proceeded, an icy blast swept past me, making
me shiver; and looking round I beheld the figure of a man
clad in a grey coat of chain armour. He was going in the
same direction I was heading, and as the moonbeams played
upon him, I noticed that the face wore a greenish-grey
color, just like that of a corpse which has been s< me time
coffined. I was very nearly beyond feehng the effects of
fright; for although I chose, I knew not whv, to visit this
* •• *
desolate place' at so unnatural an hour, my blood seemed
perfectly cold in my veins, so much was I terrified at
what I saw and heard. The figure passed me without
making a sound or uttering a word, and disappeared in a
corner of the courtyard, where there seemed to be neither
door nor window to admit of the passage of flesh and
blood. I felt confident that my scoffing at superstition
must have been without proper foundation, and that the
grey appearance which 1 had seen was none other than
the ghost of Sir
, said by the people of I.anguedoc
to appear on certain specified occasions, and at peculiar
changes of the weather. f Jhe story is that the noble-
man, who was one of the inhabitants of the castle in the
da}’B of moats and drawbridges, went out on a journey
and was murdered in sight of the battlements on his re-
turn, by a conspiracy, in which his wife was leagued; and
that whenever the apparition was seen, it appeared to be
returning to the ruin.
In spite of ray perturbation of mind, I approached the
open gap in the wall, in which a kind of window at one
time had been placed, and looked through to ascertain
the cause of the lurid glare proceeding from the
apartment.


The sight which met my gaze caused me to spring back.
Although I had expected to see strange things, the
perspiration started to my forehead and rolled down it in
cold drops. From a yawning chasm in the floor, which
led I knew not and dared not guess whither, issued red
forked flames, and over them an immense cauldron hung,
filled with some liquid which had a smell unlike anything
I had ever experienced. It seemed to me an unhealthy
odour. I had a presentiment that I could not breathe it
and live. Around the fire were a crowd of beings of
various degrees of ugliness. Some were fresher and
better formed; others nearly approached the hideous ;
while a few surpassed all my conceptions of the horrid.
Their color was a dark red, like that of the strange being
by whom I had been so startled at the auberge. The
fiendish yells, the scoffing laughter, the gibberings that
sounded confusedly above the storm without and the roar
of the flames within, were dreadful to listen to —dreadful
in the ears of one who cared only for things within the
ken of humanity, and desired not to make unlawful
enquiries in the regions within the vail.
While I stood there, stricken with amazement, I noticed
for the first time a peculiar being, with a familiar face, in
the centre of the group. His long hair, which was white
in reality, was now changed to a reddish hue by the
flames, and from his position he seemed to exercise au-
thority of a more than ordinary kind. It was the
mysterious villager, who had advised me to put up at the
auberge on the previous evening. Suddenly, at a sign
from the old man, the company in the ruin, ceased their
varied noises, and began what appeared to be a kind of
incantation dance, at the same time keeping up a low
monotonous song, in a key which approximated to no
natural tone. This was at intervals interrupted by
hideous voices from below; and then I heard in the
distance the wail of a woman. It sounded at first low and
faint, but increased gradually, as if the being who raised
it was drawing nearer. Then followed a sound of chains
clanking, and suddenly a beautiful woman, robed in white,


her hair streaming in the wind, appeared. I saw not
where she had entered the strange enclosure, but she was
surrounded by men whose faces wore the pallor of the
grave, and on whose clothes and hands were great blotches
of blood. She had a rope about her neck, and her hands
were fastened together with a massive chain. The wail of
the woman did not cease when she entered. She appeared
to be travel-stained and weary ; and cried bitterly as she
gazed upon the flames and the cauldron, while I noticed
that tears fell upon her garments—tears of blood.
The woman’s entrance w r as the signal for a burst of
fiendish laughter, and the gibberings were continued with
tenfold intensity, as the cauldron gave out a still heavier
and more deathly odour. At a motion from the old
man, the new comers were brought near to the cauldron.
Then 1 heard him ask, u Who is their accuser ?” and
answering, <c lam,”in tones sonorous and solemn, the
knight in chain armour, his features as ghastly as when he
glided past me in the courtyard, stood in the midst of the
company. He pointed solemnly to the tears of blood
that the woman was weeping, and to the spots of gore
that disfigured the features of the men. A moment more
and he disappeared as suddenly as he had come. The old
man made another gesture, and with a yell, such as never
before had sounded in my ears, the beings who danced round
the cauldron laid hands on the men who were
with the woman, and cast them into the flames.
I saw them sink out of sight, and heard despairing
shrieks, growing fainter and fainter till they died away in
the distance.
The woman was then caught by a multitude of hands,
and dragged toward the cauldron, from which smoke and
steam rose in great volumes. She shrieked piteously, but
her cries only seemed to increase the ferocity of those in
whose hands she was. She struggled to free herself, but
her efforts seemed to be quite unavailing.
At this point I could bear to remain silent no longer. I
uttered a great shout, and rushed forward. But the
picture on which I had gazed with so much interest and


horror had vanished. All that remained were the grey
walls of the ruin. The wind was still moaning through
the ivy, and the moon still cast her cold rays over the
walls. But for the storm the stillness would have been
profound.
My fright was complete. I seemed then for the first
time to see the position in which I was placed, and turn-
ing away, ran across the courtyard and down to the
auberge. My horse was standing before the door ready
saddled, and beside him the old man who I thought had
played so important a part in the proceedings of the night
previous. I certainly had not expected to see him ; but
taking my horse as hastily as possible, I proffered him
a piece of coin. He refused it, saying that at some future
time I would know his reason.
“ TV here were you all night?” I could not help asking.
“In the auberge, Monsieur, where you left me. I did
not move from my chair. ”
I felt for a moment inclined to indulge in flat contra-
diction ; but as even here I cared not to remain I changed
my mind, and putting spurs to my horse, galloped out
of the village without another question.
The nearest town was the seaport of M , and to
reach it I had a two hours’ ride over rough bleak
country. Meeting a friend there, I told him of the ad-
venture that had befallen me.
“Why, my dear fellow,” was his remark when I had
finished, “ you have seen what many people talk about
here, but none care to experience. You have abode a night
in Feuellon, and that is what no otherliving being has done
for three years. It is supposed to be haunted by hob-
goblins, and there is not one of the inhabitants of the
province sufficiently free from superstition to trust him-
self there.”
“And what do you say to the old man,” I asked,
“ you seem to forget him ? ”


My acquaintance drew himself up in a style peculiarly
French, and looking hard at me with an expression of
seriousness, replied, “ Take my word for it, my friend,
you met no flesh and blood last night at Feuellon. That
which you encountered was no fit object for human eyes
to see.”


FELO-DE-SE.
UNOHOO.
THOSE words are harsh. The crime was great
To take upon himself his fate,
To fling the life his Maker gave
Into a dark dishonored grave ;
The gift that God alone could make,
And had alone the right to take,
Cast back to Him, with stain and mark
Of sin and guilt that made it dark
As once ’twas fair.
All this I feel; but why degrade
The casket God himself hath made
In His own image ? Man’s decree
Says, “ Man, we fix the crime on thee;
Thou’st cast thy soul before thy God,
Because thou’st felt His chast’ning rod ;
Thy unrepentant soul must meet
Its God before the Judgment-seat
For that foul sin.”
Thy lifeless clay and memory
Must now await our own decree.
Our judgment is, that in thy pride
Thou didst arrest life’s flowing tide,
And, knowing all thy act would bring
Upon thy soul when it took wing,
Thou did’st the deed. Thou’rt guilty now
That one dark stain is on thy brow—
wilful act !
’Tis done. Will someone write and tell
His loved ones how the deed befel ?
How, far off in another land,
He died by his own guilty hand ?
ill


FELO-DE-SE
(That hand, once at his mother’s knee
Was clasp’d in prayerful piety,
While she perchance a blessing sped
To Heav’n o’er that beloved head
That now lies low.)
They said he had a sister. Where
Lies his grave ? Will someone dare
To lead that sister to the place,
And looking in her woe-worn face,
Inform her of her brother’s end —
Without a hope, without a friend,
A suicide I Will someone write
And tell her, when the day was bright
He left it all.
But spite of all his guilt and shame
They might have gently spared his name ;
Spared him in this: —That no sane man
Would calmly shorten life’s brief span
And rush into an unknown world
To which his soul would sure be hurl’d
With that deep stain unwashed, and past
Repentance, as of life, the last
Sad scene.
Spared the shame ; but not for sake
Of him, but those whose hearts might break
With weight of woe, dishonor, scorn
From those who know not how they mourn
Who lose a son : by fate so dread
That blasts the living and the dead,
And makes the mother kneel and pray
That God might take herself away
To His abode.


DEB ODTSB BID*.
Beyond the world where all is gloom
Without him whose untimely doom
Has cast a shadow o’er her fate.
And made her life a burden great
To bear on the lone earth,
Whose beauties seem but little worth
How he has gone —she knows not where ;
To think, alas! she scarce can dare
So dread the thought.
DEE ODER SIDE.
(AFTER HANS BREITMANN.)
UNOHOO.
You may dalk of your vorks und your labors,
Und sneer at the people who brays,
Bot I’ll dells you a sdory, mein heathens,
Yot shows you der dings odtr ways.
-NT
Mein friends, dey was out in a fessel,
Und windt it was plow fery fast,
Und der zails dey was all split to beices,
Und schmash wendt der fesseFs main mast.
Der gap tain was dronk as a drooper,
Der zailors vas tipsy as sows,
Und der rest of der beoples was rolling
Apout in der wash at der bows.
Der zailors were swearing and cussing,
Blaspheming mit horrible oats,
Der gaptain he swored dem all zilent,
Und said dey must out mit der boats.
Dey out mit der boats, dem zailors,
Und sdarted to pull on der way,
Vorgetting der pious young sdranger
Yot wendt in der gabin to pray.


DIB ODVK bed*.
Der windt it was howl like a demon,
Und der waves dey was foam mit der rage |
For dat schip was wedged in der rock points
As safe as a rat in a gage.
Unt midst all der roar of der billows,
Unt far over der howl of der gale,
Der prayers ®f dat pious young sdranger
Sped on past der foam-crest so pale.
Der ship’s boat plunged down in der gulphings
Und rose on der billows’ high crest,
Mit a lunge and a lurch dat was awful,
TJnd made der heart shrink in der breast.
Till up in der heavens dere shuddered
A long wailing cry of despair,
Und down to der depths of der ocean
Wendt dat boat mit its burden of care.
Next morning der Storm Fiend repented,
Und dragged off his loud howling waves,
Dat hungered still after dat fessel
As dey thundered far into de caves.
A little boat pulled to der fessel,
Und full on der deck dere was laid.
Mit serene look of trust on his features
Der stranger young man vot had prayed.
Awoke from his tenderful dreaming,
He gazed mit an eye dat was bright,
Mit de wordts, “Oh! 1 knew dat Our Father
Would see me out into der light.
So der men dat was swearing und drinking
Was down in der ocean graves laid,
Und der only young man dat was rescued
Vaa der stranger young man —for he prayed.


WAFEY SUMMERS:
A TALE OF TWO CHRISTMASES.
udontnohoo.
Chapter I. — A Disappointment.
FEAR, Miss Summers, I cannot allow you to go for
a holiday at Christmas,” said Mrs. Hummocks to
JL the governess at the breakfast-table. “ The younger
children have been so awfully troublesome of late, that I
really dread the responsibility if you were away for a
11 week ; and as for the young ladies, I am not likely to
have much of their assistance, as we are to have some
visitors, and the time of my daughters will bo fully taken
up.”
“And even if we had no visitors at all to entertain,”
said Miss Hummocks, a great full-faced sensible-looking
girl, with a temper in her eyes and mouth ; “ you know,
Mamma, that I at least hate having anything to do with
children, and the family here especially.” |
“So do I,” said the second Miss Hummocks, a whey- -I
faced girl, in whose was not the sign of color
beyond a brownish tinge, but who, like her sister, other-
wise manifested signs both of health and condition. “I
think the children here are like no others, they are such
a bother, and I only wonder how Miss Summers manages
with them. I wouldn’t take the management of them for
a week for I don’t know what.”
‘‘ I have no intention that either of you shall be
troubled,” said Mrs. Hummocks, drawing herself up and
speaking with a half sneer, ‘ ‘ and for that reason I cannot
allow Miss Summers to leave.”
“Do you think, then, Mrs. Hummocks, that I cannot
go even for a short stay,” Wafey asked, as if she still had
reason for a little hope.
“ I fear you cannot, Miss Summers,” was the reply of
Mrs. Hummocks, who spoke as if she thought she already
had said enough. <l I could never bear the trouble of
the children, and you see what 1 would have to expect
from my stepdaughters.”
Wafey’s fate for this Christmas was sealed. She heaved
a deep sigh. Perhaps we should rather say a suppressed


WAFBT SUMMERS.
sob escaped her as Mrs. Hummocks, by her last words,
rolled upon her “ human heart ” another stone. She had
had many disappointments, but had not had reason pre-
viously to take them to heart, as holidays were not of
much interest to her. On this occasion she was differ-
ently placed, having almost accepted an invitation for a
few weeks from the only friend she had in the Colony,
Mrs. Warland, a lady living at Gumtree City. She
therefore felt much disappointed at the sudden resolve
of Mrs. Hummocks that she should stay at the station.
J|]» > Hummocks, who sat at the table just as lie had
returned from a morning ride over his had not said
a word yet. He looked first at one of his daughters,
then at the other, and then at his wife, as he saw a look
of gloom which Wafey could not conceal stealing across
her face*
“ What’s to hinder the girls from helping you to look
after the children, and letting Miss Summers go ; the
children aint surely such a bother as all of you try to
make out,” he at last said.
“ You don’t know anything about them, my dear, said
Mrs. Hummocks, “but at any rate the matter is settled.
Besides, Mr. Leslie and Mr. Bickerton, who need to be
specially looked after”—and she gave a quick glance at
the young ladies, who smiled and blushed ( there are
several of our neighbors coming at Christmas, and so
there will be too much, to do, without M!iss Summers, who
will be wanted to help us to entertain our guests as well
as possible.”
<» Well, my dear, I suppose it must be so, said the
“ head of the house,” as he felt himself effectually put
down by the “ weaker vessel.”
“ Miss Summers, I want to show you how I wish the
festoons put upon the bed in the spare room, so we will
excuse ourselves,” said Mrs. Hummocks, and she went
out of the breakfast-room, followed by the governess.
“ Well, girls,” said Mr. Hummocks, “ I really think
you might have so arranged as to let Miss Summers go
away for a few days this Christmas. She has had a long
spell here without a holiday.”
“You’re always taking Miss Summers’ part, Fa, said
Miss Hummocks; “ one would think a governess wasn’t
paid to attend to children and do without holidays.
“ It’s quite impossible, Pa,” said her hopeful sister.
“ We can’t attend to both the children and the gentlemen
that Ma has asked here. Miss Summers can surely wait
r *>■*
till another time.”


“ All right,” said the easy-going squatter, “ you’ll have
your own way. I suppose it is another case of man-
hunting that Mrs. Hummocks has put you on to ; ” and
he went out from the presence of his daughters.
The object of all this talk was a pretty brown-haired
girl, in her twentieth year, whose parents had died when
she was sixteen, and who had during the last four years
been out in the world as a governess- She was an only
child, but as her parents were for a great portion of their
wedded life struggling with worldly difficulties, they bare-
ly found themselves able to give her that education with
which she afterwards had to earn her bread. They
had come to Australia to better their condition, but had
not taken the “tide in the affairs of men” near enough the
flood, and so had not been “ led on to fortune.” At the
death of her parents, Wafey had but one friend in all the
Colonies, a lady who had previously been an associate of
her mother. This lady, a Mrs. Warland, was in nearly
as reduced circumstances as herself, but nevertheless, had
invited Wafey to remain with her till she should find a
situation ; and during the intending governess’s stay had
treated her with marked kindness. It was from Mrs,
Warland, as we have said, that Wafey received the invi-
tation to spend Christmas ; and she had been led by Mrs.
Hummocks to hope that at least she might have a few days’
liberty, after having been hard at work with the children
for three years. She was therefore very much dis-
appointed ; and in the solitude of her own chamber,
tears stole from her dark-brown eyes and trickled down
the pure red and white of her cheeks, over the ringlets
that fell in masses round her shoulders. The solitary
little fit of weeping over, however, she prepared herself
to face her duty, and returned to the society of the
children with a serene face.
I n
The Hummocks family were not remarkable either for
refined taste or good breeding. Mr. H ■— had com-
menced his colonial Hfe an adventurer, with an education
just sufficient to enable him to write his own name, chalk
figures upon the door of his woolshed, and read the
market quotations in the papers. After becoming some-
what settled, he married a woman of his own rank, as
letterless as himself, but still well-fitted for the life she
required to lead. Her two daughters (whom we have
already seen) were brought up with a few more advantages
than had been vouchsafed to their mother, but even in
their case there was no lavish waste of culture. In fact,


WAJPBT SUMMERS,
when their education was completed, they could have
broken a horse much better than they could have written
a theme. Mr. Hummocks continued to make money, and
became quite an important man in the Colony. He lost
bis wife, and having buried her decently and mourned the
requsite time over the loss, took to his bosom the fashion-
able daughter of a retired butcher, who like many another
had risen to fortune and fame in the space of a very few
years. Miss Smith—or Smyth as her father called himself
since he had risen to be one of our aristocracy—was a
raw-boned, large-featured, loud-mouthed woman, with no
pretensions to beauty \ but as that was evidently not
wanted by her partner in life when he made the selection,
she managed after becoming the second Mrs. Hummocks
to run a°moderately successful career. All things went
smoothly with her except when occasionally she came into
collision in household matters with her stepdaughters;
but at these times, owing to the young ladies’ tempers
being hardly angelic, and her own farfrom accommodating,
life at the station was chequered with intestine broils.
Accordingly, Mrs. Hummocks began to feel the presence
of her stepdaughters irksome, and to trot the young
ladies out in the matrimonial market whenever the
presence of a marriageable man gave her the opportunity.
She lost no chance of inviting eligible matches to stay at
the station, and when last at the sea-side had given
parties almost every week. Just before leaving Seaweed
Bay to return home to the midst of their flocks and herds,
a young gentleman, only back from Cambridge, had been
introduced to the Hummocks family. His late father
had been a merchant, doing a colossal business, and as he
became its possessor at his parent’s death, the knowing
ones looked upon him as a match for any man’s daughter.
Owing to the presence of this young gentleman, the
family —excepting the governess and children, who were
at home —were almost tempted to prolong their stay at
the seaside, in order to have a little more of his society,
and perhaps catch him <c for better or for worse.” How-
ever, in consequence of a dispute between mother and
daughters, the prolongation was not attempted j but Mrs.
Hummocks started home with promises from Arthur
Leslie, and also from Ned Bickerton, who had introduced
him, that they would pay Mopoke Flat a visit, and take
part in the fun which she proposed to provide on their
behalf, , , , .
Thus it was that Mrs. Hummocks expected to be put
to no end of trouble in the entertainment of her guests,


and found it quite impossible to allow the governess to be
absent from Mopoke Flat during the festive time.
Chapter II. —Arthur Leslie.
The Christmas week came, and with it the day appoin-
ted for the arrival of the two visitors. All had been
bustle and confusion about the station for the past week,
as Mrs. Hummocks was determined if possible to astonish
the new comers by a lavish display.
Johnny, Mrs. Hummocks’ eldest hopeful, had been
packed off, very much against his will, with saddle horses
to the four o’clock train—fully two hours before it was
due—to meet these all-important guests.
Wafey’s patience had been sorely tried for some hours
in assisting the Miss Hummocks in their apparently
endless toilet. One moment she would be endeavoring
to compel a refractory pair of stays to close, which were
at least two inches too small for the wearer ; and in the
next, with a brush and pomade, trying to make scanty
coarse hair appear like luxuriant silken locks. At last*
when she was almost about to despair of the toilet ever
being an accomplished fact, she had the satisfaction of
seeing the young ladies sail down stairs to the drawing-
room, apparently satisfied with their appearance the
elder wearing a green dress, with red ribbons* and the
younger having her form squeezed into a yellow muslin,
looped up with numerous blue bows.
With a glad sigh of relief Wafey flew up to her own
room, and taking her hat and a book prepared to go out,
first seeing that the children were being dressed by the
old nurse. She hurried across the shrubbery, and
passing through a gate leading to the horse-paddock was
soon scampering along through the underwood in the
direction of the river that flowed over a deep bed at the
bottom of the hills. She soon reached a favorite spot
overhanging the stream, where she was wont to spend
many an hour when school was over, immersed in the
pages of one of her favorite authors. When she did not
read there, she dreamt dreams of the past, and many a
sorrowful memory was now associated with the spot. It
was a lovely nook. f lhe soft ground was shut in by the
underwood, and over all the great gum trees stretched
out their giant arms. Everything around was green,
and but for the occasional chime of a bullock-bell ascend-
ing from the side of the creek, or the footsteps of a
f
-4“


frightened horse above on the hills the silence there
would never have been broken.
Wafey sat herself down in her favorite seat, with her
back against a great tree, and opening her book was soon
wandering in fancy in distant lands.
Suddenly she was startled by the smashing and crash-
ing of dry branches and underwood, and ere she could
rise from her seat a young man burst from the thick scrub,
jumping over a fallen tree that lay within a few paces of
her. He had a free open countenance, with light hair,
thrown carelessly off his forehead ; a well-built frame ;
and large good-humored blue eyes—which were now
opened at their widest, in astonishment, to see a young
lady so daintily dressed in what he afterwards termed so
heathenish a place. On recovering his breath he
politely raised his hat and apologised for his abrupt intru-
sion upon her studies, at the same time glancing at the
book in Wafey’s hand.
“ But really,” said he, “ it was quite a leap for life to
get out of that brushwood, for if I had not made a
violent effort I believe I would have had to remain till a
team of bullocks came to pull me out.”
Wafey could not help smiling at the rueful look he
gave his scratched hands and the rent in his coat.
“ I wish to goodness I had done what Ned advised, and
waited till some one came to meet us at the railway ; but
I never can wait patiently, and now I have my deserts,”
and he again glanced at his dilapidation.
“ What place are you then looking for ?”
11 My friend and I came down by the train to go to
Hummocks’ station, and no one meeting us I thought I
would try and find it on foot. But where in the deuce—
I beg pardon—in the world I have got to, I cannot tell ;
for 1 can’t find a vestige of a homestead, or anything else,
indeed, but trees and scrub.”
“ Perhaps I can assist ymu by guiding you, if you will
trust yourself to my care, as I am just returning to the
Hummocks homestead. ”
‘‘lndeed ; 1 could not have a more agreeable guide.”
Wafey took up her hat and book, and under her gui-
dance the impenetrable woods disappeared, and they
were soon in sight of the home station. During the walk
the stranger hazarded many conjectures as to who his
pretty guide was ; but she, on her part, from his appear-
ance and conversation, rightly guessed that it was Arthur
Leslie.


«2 WAPBT SUMMERS,
Chapter 111.— Temper.
The two Miss Hummocks sat in the drawing-room,
waiting with the greatest impatience for the expected
arrivals. At last the hour passed which in the ordinary
course of circumstances should have sufficed for bringing
them from the train to Mopoke Flat, and the young ladies
began to doubt that the gentlemen would come, and
hazarded all sorts of ill-humored guesses as to the cause
of the disappointment. The anxious pair had at last
made up their minds that the expected guests had been
detained to a later train, and that Johnny would remain
at the railway station to wait for them, when, on a distant
hill over which the path to the neighbouring township
ran, they imagined they saw two horsemen coming toward
the station—one of them leading a horse besides the
animal he rode. The sight surprised them, and taking
down their father’s telescope, they examined the party
from the verandah. Their eyesight had been true, for
there were, sure enough, only a couple of horsemen, Johnny
and a stranger. The circumstance was very perplexing,
nor could any light be thrown upon it by Mrs. Hum-
mocks. The young ladies were consequently in none of
the best of humors as the hoof-strokes of the three horses
; **
sounded in the yard.
Mr. Bickerton, however, was received with a smiling
face, while very anxious enquiries were made for Mr.
Leslie, whose presence was the more desirable both to
Mrs. Hummocks and her daughters.
“Indeed,” said the new comer, “ I expected that Les-
lie would have been here before me. He was rather
imuatient, and because the horses were not at the station,
started on foot. I thought it better to wait, as I don’t
care for country walks. lam surprised that we should
have passed him.”
“ I suppose, Johnny, you have been at some of your
tricks again, letting the horses go ? ” asked Miss
Hummocks. . , (T
“No,” replied the young gentleman in question; 1
was there in lots of time —too soon in fact but I went
away for a ride, and the train arrived before I got back.
When Ned Bickerton was shown to his room he be-
thought him, as it opened on a verandah, that he would
treat himself to a smoke before going into the society of
the ladies, guessing that he might not have another chance
for that day. He accordingly strolled out, and seeing a
pretty greenery at one end cf the verandah, stretched
Ck ft ‘
V
I
I ii :
t i
I


himself lazily upon a bench and began to indulge in the
favorite weed. He had not been long there when the
solitude of the place was disturbed by a female voice,
pitched in a very high angry key, shouting, “ You deserve
well to get a horsewhip taken to you, Johnny, for not
waiting till the train came in.”
“You couldn’t expect a fellow to stay all day at that
place?” replied the individual addressed.
“You know we never asked you to stay all day, you
bad boy. Wait till Pa comes home.”
“Oh ! indeed S I aint afraid of Fa. He won’t touch me
because you send a fellow two hours too early to the train
to meet your beaux.”
“ What is that you say ? ”
“ Oh, never mind. You won’t catch either of them
though—you aint good-looking enough.”
The words were followed by a heavy blow, and a howl
from Johnny as he ran away, threatening to tell his
mother. He had evidently received some severe chastise-
ment.
Bickerton felt a certain amount of curiosity to see who
used her voice at so elevated a pitch, and peeping through
the evergreens he beheld the angelic creatures who
had received him so lately with mincing smiles.
The appearance of their faces was sadly changed, for
passion was now seated in each countenance. It was
impossible to learn who had administered the blow which
had caused Johnny’s retreat, but as VI is a Hummocks was
armed with a great stick, he concluded that she had been
the principal performer.
Just then a little girl ran up and delivered a hasty
message, in which Bickerton caught the words, “Mother
says Mr. Leslie’s here. ”
The young ladies looked at each other with a long
stare.
“ What’s to be done ? ” asked the eldest. “We must
go to our room ; I expect my hair is as rough as possible ;
oh, that Johnny would anger a saint.”
“Nevermind,” put in the younger, as she strutted
around with an affected air, tossing her head, u He's at
last come."
And suddenly the actors in this little drama glided off
the stage.
When the ladies, with faces smoothed and hair un-
ruffled, reached the door, they joined Mrs. Hummocks,


who was watching the approach of Arthur Leslie and the
governess from the direction of the river.
“I wonder how he can have met her?” Miss Hum-
mocks asked, without expecting a reply.
“Perhaps she threw herself in his way,” suggested
Susan. “She meddles with matters that don’t concern
her whenever she has the least opportunity. 5
“ Hush ! Susan. I wonder to hear you talk so, 5 in-
terrupted Mrs. Hummocks. “ Miss Summers is only our
governess, and it is quite out of the question that she
should dare to throw herself in the way of any of our visi-
tors with any serious intentions,”
“ I don’t know,” pursued Miss Susan.
“Well, then, you ought to know,” said her stepmother,
“and I hope you will not make such a foolish suggestion
again.”
Under the circumstances there would have been a
storm, but the near approach of the visitor prevented any
outbreak.
“ Why, Mr. Leslie,” said Mrs. Hummocks, as the
young gentleman advanced and shook hands with the
party, “ we were beginning to fear that you were lost.
“ And I really think I should have been, Mrs. Hum-
mocks, but for my fortunate meeting with my very kind
and obliging guide,” said Leslie, and he looked towards
Wafey. '(here was very little in the remark, but it was
evident from the glances which passed between the sisters,
that they did not relish it.
“It was indeed fortunate,” said Mrs. Hummocks,
looking haughtily at poor Wafey, “that our governess
should have been near to guide you.”
Wafey colored up, as she could not help feeling bitterly
her dependent position. The two Miss Hummocks, who
were slightly behind Mr. Leslie, turned their heads aside
and laughed.
“You have some rough underwood not very far from
here,” Leslie continued; “I came in for a slight experi-
ence of it in my walk, and have three or four rents in my
coat. ”
“ Oh, never mind, Mr. Leslie, we will soon have it re-
paired for you. Miss Summers,” said Mrs. Hummocks,
“ you might get a needle and thread, and sew it for Mr.
Leslie.”
Wafey could not help but feel the indignity cast upon
her. She blushed deeply and hung down her head, while
the young ladies again indulged in a laugh to themselves.


Leslie saw the slight that was intended, and replied
quickly, “I assure you, Mrs. Hummocks, I could not
think of allowing any of the ladies to trouble themselves,
when I have been careless enough to tear my coat. I
always do my mending myself. ”
And the party proceeded within.
Chapter IV. —Strategic Movements.
All was bustle on Christmas morning at Mopoke Flat.
At an early hour Johnny had paid a visit to the horse-
paddock, and brought in about twenty saddle horses,
besides the pair which Mr. Hummocks drove on family
excursions. The young drover had all that were required
run into the stable, where the station dust was being
brushed off them, and those which were not wanted were
standing in small mobs about the yard. Arthur and hied
were able to make themselves somewhat useful; but ed
went about what he did in a style that argued on his part
a strong love of ease.
Wafey seemed to be übiquitous. She was to be seen at
every point where an 3’thing was to be done, and from the
smallest of the children to Mrs. Hummocks and her step-
daughters, “Miss Summers” appeared to be on every
tongue.
Mrs. Hummocks took upon herself the arrangement of
the party. Mr. Hummocks with the children and a
large portion of the commissariat went to the falls in the
old carriage, which had not been out of its shed since its
owner was last at church, and as he lived fifteen miles
from the nearest place of worship, the period of disuse
had been long, 'ihe station, like a number of others, was
visited at intervals by the Rev. David Doake, who spent
all his time riding from homestead to homestead, giving
each a turn on Sundays. Mr. Doake had just arrived at
Mr. Hummocks’ gates on the previous evening on his
favorite and only hack —which the residents called Moses
—and having been asked to join the picnic party, he had
turned out the faithful and not particularly well-fed
quadruped, and accepted a seat in the buggy in which
Mrs. Hummocks also drove the Miss Davidsons —two old
maids on the shady side of forty who kept a school
in the township. It was intended that the Miss
Hummocks’ and the governess should ride, under the
escort of Bickerton, Leslie, and Johnny ; while the riding
party would be considerably added to by the three Miss
Hartleys and their two brothers —who had arrived early


in the morning—joining it. Several of the families
belonging to the neighboring stations were to meet the
Mopoke Flat party at The Falls. .
The Miss Hummocks’ and the Miss Hartleys made their
appearance after the vehicles had left the yard. They
wore habits for riding, and as Hed, Arthur, and the
Hartleys had the riding horses out it appeared as if the
time had come to make a start.
Arthur did not, however, seem to think that all were
ready. He had a secret desire that Miss Summers should
be of the party, and as he saw her running about giving
directions to the servants, he concluded that she did not
intend to go. . , . , ,
“la Miss Summers not going with us he enquired of
Miss Hartley, in a manner intended to be careless.
“ Oh, I think so, ” she replied. “ Susy, is not Miss
Summers going ?”
“Of course,” said the amiable Susy, “ but she
always likes to be behind.”
“ Not her own fault, perhaps,” put in Miss Hartley,
“ too much to do, eh ?”
tVJI/ JLII livil VV vlv# VAA »
The question was intended for Miss Susy, but she did
not hear it.
The party, minus Miss Summers, had not gone more
than a mile from the homestead when Arthur, who had
been buried in thought, suddenly pulled up with a look
of consternation. .
“ Why, bless me,” he exclaimed, “ I’ve left it behind.
“ What ?” came from several persons at once, but he
did not enlighten them.
“ I must really go back, but do not wait for me,” he
said, as he turned his horse round and w r entoff at a gallop,
that soon landed him back again at the station. Ihe
fact was, as the reader may have seen, that Arthur —
though he had not been much in the society of the
governess —had become so fond of it that he did not care
for that of any one else. Since his first conversation
with her his thoughts had been constantly about her.
As very often happens, the first impression of her which
his mind had received was such as soon to produce a
lasting and favorable notion of her both in his head and
heart ; and although Miss Susan had put on airs, which
she thought sufficient to captivate any ordinary swain,
they had had very little effect on him, beyond giving him
the notion that she must be very affected.
Miss bummers, on her part, had noticed the little deli-
cate attentions which Arthur had paid her, and felt


pleased to receive them from such a source. Indeed, had
she interrogated her heart very closely, it would have
had to answer that a certain meddlesome little fellow had
shot an arrow or two which had hit their mark, and that
she did not look upon the young Cambridge graduate with
altogether uninterested eyes. Just as the rest of the
party left the yard, Johnny approached her.
“ Miss Summers, all the rest are gone now, and I want
to be off too ; won’t you soon be ready ?” he said in an
impatient tone.
The governess felt a sick disappointed feeling come
over her as she heard how she had been deserted by all
but young Hummocks, who had evidently been ordered
to wait.
“You need not stay for mo, Johnny,” she said, “I
know the way well enough, and shall be able to overtake
you very soon.”
“All right,” shouted the young bumpkin, evidently
glad to be free from any sort of responsibility, and he
galloped out of the yard.
He had not gone far, and Wafey was about to mount
an old white mare, which ought to have “ gone to the
dogs” in reality long before, and which they called
“ Slipshod,” as Arthur rode into the yard. She was very
much surprised, and at once conjectured something was
wrong.
“ What’s the matter, Mr. Leslie,” she said, is any
one hurt ?” ....
“Oh no; but when we had got a little distance I
thought I missed something, and rode back leaving the
others ; but I found it just as I got here and he
laughed. .
‘ ‘ What a pity you did not find it before, said Wafey
not noticing the mischievous look in his
“ I don’t mind. An extra gallop was nothing.”
“ But you have missed your party.”
“ I could easily overtake them if I wished to.
The emphasis on the latter words made Wafey look up.
Her eyes met l\ rthur’s ; and something in his look caused
her to blush vividly. She turned quickly and picking up
her whip—a thing much needed with the animal that had
been allotted to her —prepared to mount; but Arthur
gently arrested her.
“ Just one moment, Miss Summers,” he said ; and
she was surprised to see him changing her saddle to his
horse.


‘ ‘ What are you doing, Mr. Leslie ?”
*‘ I am only endeavoring to give you a better horse to
ride.’
“Oh but you must not. I cannot ride your horse.”
“ Cannot ?” —and Arthur paused.
“ I mean must not. They would be vexed to see me
on Rover and you riding Slipshod.”
“ But they will not see me on Slipshod, as I would not
mount such a decrepid old brute. ”
“ What will you do then V }
“I saw that pony, Fidgetty, left in the paddock, and
111 get the man to bring him in,” and he rushed off to the
stable and, with the help of some silver, caused the old
stockman to move as if he had new life in him.
Just then he felt a light touch on his arm, and turning
saw Wafey with an anxious upturned face.
“ Mr. Leslie, please don’t ride Fidgetty; he’s so
vicious. He will throw you and perhaps hurt you very
severely.”
He caught the little hand that had lingered for a
moment unconsciously on his arm, and pressing it
tenderly in his, said “ Don’t be alarmed for me, Miss
Summers; lam a pretty good horseman, and I think I
can manage this one. Besides, if I rode Slipshod I
should be left by you far behind, and that would not do,”
and he laughed lightly. Seeing, however, that Wafey
did not look satisfied, he added in a serious voice, u I
promise you I will take every care.”
Again Wafey caught a look in his face that made her
blush and lower her head.
“ Come,” he continued, “ and I’ll assist you to mount,”
and he turned to where the horse stood. He placed Wafey
in the saddle and adjusted her reins—lingering over the
task much longer than was necessary.
Fidgetty was then brought, and Wafey saw by the way
her companion took the reins and sprang into the saddle
that he knew well what he was about.
They rode off, and the old stockman gazing after them,
grunted—
‘ * A very fine pair, a very fine pair ; but you’ve got the
wrong bird, young gent. Wait till Missus sees it.”
Chapter V. —The Picnic.
Mrs. Hummocks gazed, and rubbed her eyes, and gazed
again, as she saw Miss Summers and Arthur ride up alone
to the little underwood above the falls, and overlooking
the lake, where the vehicles had made a halt. The others


comprising the riding party had gone on a slight detour,
and had not jet put in an appearance. Of course she
smiled and saluted her visitor with all appearance of good
humor; but when the governess dismounted and ap-
proached the camp, she could easily see that Mrs.
Hummocks was “ put out.”
u How is it, Miss Summers, that I see you come alone
with Mr. Leslie? I must say, it does not look quite the
correct thing for one in your position. Where are the
others, and why did you leave them ? ”
“ I expected to have seen them here, for they started
before me, Mrs. Hummocks.”
“ Oh, indeed ; then you waited till they were gone?”
and Mrs. Hummocks’ tone was very haughty.
u I was not ready when they started,” faltered Wafey,
feeling ready to cry.
“At any rate, Miss Summers, you will oblige me by
being more retired, and not endeavouring to extort quite
so much attention from my guests,” and Mrs. Hummocks
moved off.
She did not perceive till she had gone a few steps that
Arthur was leaning against a tree at a little distance.
She could not tell if he had heard her; but hoped not, as
he took no notice.
With fine weather, and a goodly number of young
people thrown together, an Australian picnic is a very
enjoyable affair. Those who were to participate in this
arrived in several large parties about the same hour.
The vehicles were drawn close together, the horses
were picketed on the neighbouring ground, and those
not engaged as Miss Summers was in laying out the
repast, amused themselves with strolling to where only
a little streamlet now ran down the rocks, or sauntering
in the bush, or along the borders of the lake.
After the picnic had been eaten, a dance was im-
provised, one of the gentlemen contributing the music
with a violin he was known to carry on nearly every bush
excursion he undertook. Mr. Snapper’s boat upon the
lake was also made use of, according to arrangement, and
a large party rowed to the other side, but nearly stuck on
the return journey, owing to the laziness of Ned Bicker-
ton and some of the others, who came to the conclusion
that rowing was too nearly like hard work to be much of
a recreation. Miss Hummocks had “set her cap” at Ned
Bickerton ; but poor Ned, easy-going soul, had as much
thought of getting married as he had of swallowing the
moon.


When the day closed, all seemed to have enjoyed
themselves ; but there were four persons who were not
quite happy in their minds. One was Mrs. Hummocks,
who was annoyed at her daughter Susan’s failure to gain
young Leslie’s more close attention. Another was Susan
herself, piqued at Leslie’s blindness to her charms. Poor
Wafey was very unhappy, as Mrs. Hummocks had caused
her to feel her dependent position, and think she had been
too forward in her behaviour. And lastly, Arthur was
greatly concerned to find that Wafey had markedly
avoided him all day. In fact, once when he came to help
her to clear the things after the picnic, she had begged him
almost with tears in her eyes to leave her and join the
others. He felt puzzled to account for her strange beha-
viour, and determined to have an explanation and know
if he was aught to blame.
The bell which had been brought to summon the com-
pany rang out a peal, and although some may have
thought the events of a lifetime might have been settled
by a few extra minutes, and grumbled in their hearts that
it had not held its peace for a little while longer, all
were soon gathered around the head-quarters. The scene
was again bustle and confusion. Horses and traps were
being got ready, ladies were being put into the right
vehicles or lifted into their saddles, while the children
were making a careful search to see that the spoons were
not missing, and that the corkscrew had not been left
behind.
In spite of the confusion, and the constant demands of
Miss Susan to be put on horseback and otherwise attended
to, Arthur had his eye on Miss Summers, and saw Mrs.
Hummocks call her aside and give her some peremptory
orders. Wafey then went to her horse, and having been
assisted into the saddle by Mr. Hummocks, who seemed
to object to something that was to be done, she at last
cantered off alone at an impatient sign from Mrs. Hum-
mocks. Arthur watched the departure in mute
astonishment, then mounted his horse with the
intention of following, when Mrs. Hummocks inter-
rupted him with a sweet smile, and asked him to
see to the horseing of some of the young ladies.
There was nothing for it but to acquiesce, which Arthur
did with not the best grace. Mrs. Hummocks gave a
triumphant glance at her eldest daughter, as much as to
say, ‘ ‘ Did not I manage that well ? ”
However, the matter was not completely arranged, for


Arthur, as he went towards the horses, met Ned Bickerton,
and a new idea struck him.
“ Oh, Ned, old fellow,” he said, “ do the agreeable for
me to those girls over there, and I’ll do as much for
some day. I have a headache and want to get home.”
Ned laughed.
“ All right, Arthur, I see how the wind blows ; the
magnet is to go down by the river.”
1 ‘ What do you mean ? ”
“I heard Mrs. H. tell the governess to hurry home
about something or other and to go by the river, which is
shorter than the way we came.”
Arthur wrung his friend’s hand, and jumping into the
saddle was soon out of sight, while Ned went to help to
see the ladies into their saddles.
Chapter VI. — Happiness and Pain.
Wafey turned down as she was told by the river side.
She guessed that she had been sent that way so that no
one following would be likely to iind her. She felt very
sad and low spirited, and was wondering what Arthur
would think of her queer behaviour to him all day,
when a horse’s hoof-strokes on the sward caused her to
look round. To her astonishment Arthur galloped up.
“ Oh, Mr. Leslie,” she said, “how did you happen to
come this way ?”
“I came,” replied Arthur with a slight laugh, “ after
a certain runaway, to see her safe home.”
She was terrified at the thought of what Mrs. Hum-
mocks would say to this interview, and with an imploring
look, said, “Mr. Leslie, you really must go back or I will.
You must go back ; you cannot come with me. Do, do
go !” and in her eagerness she dropped her reins and
clasped her hands.
Arthur was astonished.
“■Why must I go back ; is my company disagreeable ?
“ No, no ; not that. But they will be angry with me.
If you have any regard for my peace do ret .”
“ Take care ! ” shouted Arthur, and he started forward
to catch her horse’s rein ; but was too late. The horse
put his foot in a hole, and coming down on his knees,
caused Wafey, who was sitting carelessly, to be thrown
from her saddle to a little distance, where she lay motion-
less.


Arthur sprang from his horse in an agony, and raised
her head to his shoulders; but her face was colorless and
her eyes closed.
“ Wafey, Wafey, are you hurt ? Speak, for God’s
sake, or I shall go mad,” and snatching her up in his
arms he bore her to the river side. Then kneeling
beside her he bathed her temples with water, while calling
her by every endearing name to speak to him, and
passionately kissing her unconscious lips. Presently, as
if in answer to that agonising call, she wonderingly opened
her eyes. As she met his look of love a thrill of happi-
ness passed through her, and closing them again she
fainted once more.
Arthur was alarmed at the relapse, and wished to pro-
cure help; but none could be got for miles distant, and he
dare not leave her.
But she soon opened her eyes again with a more con-
scious look, and enquired “ Where am I ? What has
been the matter ?”
“You were thrown, darling, from your horse. Are vou
much hurt ?”
“My head aches badly, but there is nothing more, I
think and she tried to stand, but staggered, and would
have fallen only that Arthur caught her.
“ You must sit down for a bit, Wafey, ” said ho in a
tone of authority.
The mention of her Christian name did not escape her,
but she made no remark, and sat down. Arthur’s next
sentence brought back her old fear.
“Itis a good thing I followed you,” said he, “if you
are such a careless horsewoman as to let go your reins.”
“ Oh, we must go at once,” said Wafey rising, “ 1 was
sent to give orders about this evening.”
Arthur did not offer to detain her, as for her sake he
wished to return. The horses, being strangely quiet,
were browsing near with trailing bridles, so he had little
trouble in catching them. Then lifting Wafey into her
saddle, he cautioned her to be more careful with her reins,
and urging their horses into a canter they started for the
home station. After being for some time occupied in
thought Wafey broke the silence.
“ Please, Arthur, don’t say anything of my fall to Mrs.
Hummocks, as she might be angry. ”
“ISo; I will not,” and Arthur’s face glowed with
pleasure at the mention of his Christian name.
Wafey saw the glow but did not guess the reason, as


WIFST SUMMERS.
■43
she was not aware that the name that was familiar to her
heart had slipped from her tongue.
When they rode up to the station many had arrived,
among others the Miss Hummocks’, but not their mother,
so Wafey slipped in and began busying herself, as there
was plenty to do.
In the evening there was dancing to wind up Christmas
Day, and Arthur thought for Wafey’s sake that he had
better pay a little attention to the Miss Hummocks’,
as he now began to see “ how the cat jumped.” He
danced several times with Miss Susan, much to
her satisfaction; but, towards the break-up, sought
Wafey for one dance. She tried to excuse herself by
saying she had not danced the whole evening.
Her excuses, however, would not do; Arthur
insisted, and nothing loth, she consented to be whirled
out among the waltzers.
After several turns they drew near the conservatory.
Arthur stopped and led her into the garden, saying, “ I
have not had a chat with you all the evening. ”
“Ho,” she replied quickly, “and I wanted to speak
to you.”
“ Did you ; what did you want to say ? ”
Wafey paused. They were standing by a grotto in a
retired part of the garden.
“I wanted to thank you, Mr. Leslie,” she said, “for
your kindness to me to-day when 1 was thrown.”
Her lover took her hand in his, and gazing into her
face asked,
“ Why can’t you call me Arthur again ? ”
“ I did not call you that before.”
“Yes, you did once, when you asked me not to mention
your fall, and I should like to hear you call me it again.”
“Oh, no ; it would not be right, Mr. Leslie,” and
Wafey attempted to withdraw her hand; but he held it
firmly, and drew her toward him.
“ Wafey, what if I make it right and *’
“ Miss Summers ! Miss Summers I Where are you ?”
came at this moment from Mrs. Hummocks. Arthur
stamped his foot and muttered something unmentionable,
as Wafey bounded off to answer the summons,
“Here, Mrs. Hummocks.”
“ Will you oblige me by attending to your duties, and
not be out here at this hour of the night.”
Wafey went into the house, wondering what duties she
had to perform at that hour. Finding nothing to do, she


WAFEY SUMMERS.
went to her room, there to indulge in conjectures
ss to what would have been the finish of Arthur s sent-
ence if they had not been interrupted, and to wonder
how Mrs. Hummocks came out there ; for she did not
know that that lady had set a close watch on all her move-
ments the whole evening, and had seen her leave the
room with Arthur.
J ust then, a knock was given at the door, and one of
the maids entered.
“ Please, Miss, the Missus wants you in the library.”
Wafey went down with a foreboding of evil on her
mind. Mrs. Hummocks was standing by the table in a
commanding attitude when W afey entered.
“ I sent for you, Miss Summers,” said she in a severe
tone, “ to tell you I think you had better leave this house,
as I really could not have the responsibility of such an
imprudent and forward young lady on my shoulders.”
Wafey was speechless with astonishment as to what Mrs.
Hummocks could mean. ... _
“I am surprised and disappointed in you,’ Mrs. H.
continued. “ I thought you a better bred girl, but your
behaviour is dreadful. ”
“How?” faltered Wafey, and her voice sounded
strange to herself.
“How!” and Mrs. Hummocks raised her hands and
eyes to the ceiling —“ I should be ashamed to see one of
my stepdaughters go on with a young gentleman as you
have with Mr. Leslie. You waylay him from the railway
station here, and stop behind the riding party, asking
him to come back for you, and send messages for him to
follow you home ; and worst of all, to seek you in the
garden at such a late hour. He must be perfectly dis-
gusted at your behaviour. Such a young person will not
do for my children j so Miss feuramers, oblige me by
packing up your things to-niglit ready to start early to-
morrow. And you need not send word to Mr. Leslie to
drive you to the train. I will provide you a coachman.
With these cutting words she left the room. Wafey
was stunned by the torrent of reproaches and began to
wonder if they were true. She went unconsciously to
her room, gathered her few things, put on her hat and
sat down oii one of her boxes in a state of stupefaction,
wondering what was to become of her. At five the next
morning a message came to say the dray was ready to take
her and her boxes to the station. She went, as if in a
dream, and was dragged away from her late home, and
from the being that she loved best in the world.


So ended Wafey’s Christmas. Her future seemed dark
and overcast. The distant horizon was draped with
frowning clouds.
Chapter VII. — Darkness and Sunshine.
All next day Arthur wondered where Wafey could be
hiding herself, and not till the next day was he enlightened
as to her departure, and then by the talking of the chil-
dren. He overheard Johnny and his little sister Kate
speaking in the yard.
“Johnny,” said Kate, “do you know how long Miss
Summers will be away V
“ She ain’t coming back at all,” was the reply.
“Not coming back ! Why V*
“ Because Ma does not think her good enough to teach
you kids. She says she is too forward, and so she packed
her off.”
“And where has she gone to ?”
“Oh, to old mother what’s-her-name, I suppose, where
she came from;” and the boy went off.
Arthur gave a long low whistle of surprise and disgust,
for he shrewdly guessed that the cause of the dismissal
was himself. He walked about for some time in a boiling
passion, revolving plans for the future in his mind. He
resolved to find the object of the revengeful trick ; and,
if possible, finish the sentence he had commenced when
Mrs. Hummocks interrupted him in the garden . Then he
thought Wafey, as his wife, would be lifted above her
tormentors. But how to find out whither she had gone.
Johnny knew, if he would tell. Arthur sought him
out and delighted him by mending his stockwhip for him
and giving him money to buy a top. And while pleasing
him, A rthur led him unwittingly to speak of the gover-
ness’ departure, and gained from him what he knew of it
from the talk of his mother and sisters, and also that
Wafey had gone to Mrs. Warland’s, at Gum Tree City.
Arthur did not waste much time in making excuses for
his sudden departure, as he was too much disgusted with
the conduct of Mrs. Hummocks. The girls were greatly
disappointed at his going ; but one comfort was, he wa»
not taking Ned Bickerton with him.
He started for Gumtree City, and there, by the
help of a Directory, found Mrs. Warland’s. He at once
called and asked for Miss Summers, and was received by
Mrs. Warland, a kind good-natured matron, who told him
that Miss Summers was there, but very ill. She had


WAFKT SUMMBBS.
arrived early one morning, and was barely in the house
when she fainted. She had been in a fever since, often
wandering in her mind. She asked him if he knew why
Wafey had left Mopoke Flat, and he hesitated at first to
reply ; but, seeing how anxious she was for Wafey, he
thought it best to confide in her, and so told her boldly
most”of the events which had passed.
Mrs. Warland was surprised at Mrs. Hummocks
behavior, but said she had never liked her much. Arthur
asked if he might call to hear how Wafey was getting on,
and on being given permission he left.
For weeks and weeks Wafey’s life hung in the balance,
and Arthur grew worn and pallid with care and anxiety
for the patient. He insisted on sending several doctors
to attend at his own cost, quelling Mrs. Warland’s rebel-
lion by reminding her that he was the indirect cause of
Wafey’s misfortune.
Mrs. Warland grew to like Arthur, and secretly hoped
that her little Wafey, as she called her, might some day
be his wife. She however determined not to interfere.
After six weary weeks Wafey was moved to a sofa, the
mere shadow of her former self. The doctors would not
yet allow her to see any stranger ; but at last Arthur was
admitted to her presence, and he was shocked to see the
great alteration sickness had made. Being warned not to
talk, he sat silently beside her and took her hand in his.
She, on her part, would have talked, but he would not
allow it, but she was quite content to sit there and know
that he was near. Months passed before she was strong.
One day Arthur called and found her alone, engaged in
arranging some flowers for the table. She blushed as he
entered, and saying Mrs. Warland was out and so were
the children, tried to keep up a common-place conversa-
tion. But Arthur evidently did not intend to help her,
so the conversation fell through, and she grew nervous
and fidgetty. ,
At last, rising from his seat, he went to the table ana
pulled a pink moss rose bud from the bunch, regardless
of disarranging it. He then took hand, and said
u You have been long enough over those flowers. Come
and sit by me ; I want to speak to you,’ and he drew
her to the sofa beside him.
“ Wafey,” and his voice trembled, “ will you accept
this rosebud from me—knowing the meaning of it—
knowing that I offer with it my heart and name, asking
you to be my own dear wife.”
She was silent.


“Wafey, will you?” And he held the flower toward
her. But she felt that she had no power to move or
speak, and her heart beat violently.
“ Wafey, Wafey, have you then misunderstood me all
these months, or am I deceived in thinking you might
return my love.”
Yet Wafey could not command voice or limb. She
was overcome with joy.
Arthur folded his arms upon the table, and let his head
sink with a groan, for he thought she was only keeping
back for an instant the answer that she did not love at
all. Presently he felt the flower taken from his hand,
and turning, saw Wafey raise it to her lips.
“ Wafey, Wafey ; tell me what you mean,” he gasped
in a husky voice.
“ I’ll keep the rose.”
Arthur snatched her to him. “ Then you must keep
me too, darling; not one without the other.”
But there was no reason for the injunction, for there
was no sign of demurrer in Wafey’s face.
, When Mrs. Warland returned, she saw at a glance what
had occurred, and so was not surprised when Arthur led
Wafey to her, and asked for her motherly consent to a
union which she looked upon with unbounded pleasure.
Chapter YIII. —The Conclusion.
Within the next few days, Arthur asked Wafey to de-
cide when they should be married. He wished the
marriage at once, but Wafey thought it would be too soon
and desired to have it nearer Christmas, which would be
some months hence. Arthur at first objected to the de-
lay, but subsequently gave in on condition that she should
not again go out as a governess, but stay a little longer with
Mrs. Warland, who wanted her, and then pay a visit to
his aunt —his only living relative —who had sent a kind
invitation. Wafey consented to the arrangement, and
time flew fast as she stayed at M , with Mrs. Leslie.
At last the period came round for the marriage, and Mrs.
Leslie insisted on the wedding being from her house, and
asked Mrs. Warland with their family to stay there till it
was over. Arthur on his part was busy seeing his own
house newly done up and furnished afresh.
The day was bright and clear, with a cool wind just
one of those days of southerly breezes and cloudless skies
so enjoyable in our own land. The wedding was
quiet, as Wafey wished. She looked charming, with the
soft folds of a white satin falling about her graceful


figure. The dress and veil were a gift from her future
aunt. The veil seemed to love to lie against her silken
curls, and float about her like a bright cloud of protection
and hope. She felt very, very happy as the knot was tied,
and silently thanked her God for his protection while she
was a waif upon the world.
* Tf * * * * *
■3
Christmas is again at hand, and Arthur and Wafey are
debating about giving a Christmas party. They have now
been married two months. Arthur desires to ask the
Hummocks’, as he secretly wishes to show them his pretty
wife. At last all is settled, and the invitations are sent;
many who were at the memorable picnic last year
being asked, also the Hummocks’, as Wafey does not wish
to bear ill-will towards them.
Mrs. Hummocks is astonished to receive the invitation.
She had heard of the marriage and does not wonder at
the party, but certainly did not expect to be asked.
After consulting with her daughters, they determine that
if Mrs. Arthur Leslie will let bygones be bygones, they
will go and enjoy a merry Christmas ; and as for Arthur,
that “ there were as good fish in the sea as ever were
caught. ”
The ball was a success. All seemed to enjoy themselves.
Wafey met the Hummocks’ more cordially than they de-
served ; but she had a forgiving spirit, and was too much
under the influence of the blessed time to bear resent-
ment against anyone. She was pronounced on all hands
a charming hostess, and many a one in his heart envied
Arthur his pretty bride.
When all were gone, Arthur and Wafey stood side by
side at the open window, where the bright moonlight was
streaming in. He put his arm around her, and drew her
towards him, as she laid her head upon his shoulder.
“ Well, Wafey, have you had a merry and a happy
Christmas I ”
“Oh, so happy, so happy, dear Arthur! ” and she
heaved a happy little sigh, as she thought what Christmas
could be aught but happy with her dear husband at her
side.
The frowning clouds had all drawn their drapery from
the sky, and now she gazed with eyes of hope and heart
aglow into a deep starry distance, blue and serene.


THE LANGUAGE OF THE EYES.
UNOHOO.
WHEN hearts are full of hidden woe,
And brows are seamed with care,
A grief too great for tears to fall,
Akin to blank despair ;
When words unuttered fill the heart
With sorrow-laden sighs,
How deep a meaning dwells upon
The Language of the Eyes.
When parting friends, hand joined in hand,
Communing with their grief,
Seek in their bygone memories
A shadow of relief ;
When soft and faint the word “ farewell ”
Comes to the lips and dies,
It lives again, and softly speaks
The Language of the Eyes.
When harsh words check the sunny smile
And pale the flushing cheek,
A chilling spell comes o’er the tongue,
The lips refuse to speak,
And fail to plead for pardon sweet —
Unbidden tears arise,
And speak a fervent, mute appeal,
The Language of the Eyes.
When joy bids happy smiles return,
And chases gloom away,
And hope comes o’er the night of care,
Like gleam of dawning day,
Each fitting fancy smooths the brow,
And soon the teardrop dries,
And grateful thoughts are spoken in
The Language of the Eyes.
When deep affliction falls on man
In all his strength and pride,
The power to utter loud his thoughts,
The gift of speech denied,
How eloquent that gleaming look
That forth in glances flies —
That deeply meaning searching gaze,
The Language of the Eyes.


secret love dwells in the soul
By some unheeded spell,
Imprisoned there by some sad doubt
It fears and dares not tell,
It still betrays its hiding place
When taken by surprise,
"^ 1 rrn * n r some heedless moment speaks
The Language of the eyes.
hen faces pale and hands grow cold
Beneath the grasp of Death,
And like a weak and flickering flame
Comes forth the failing breath,
We gaze upon the dying one
Whose love we so much prize,
And see the soul’s last fond farewell,
The Language of the Eyes.
And when the soul has winged its flight
r To realms beyond the skies,
Ihe saddened mourners speak
The Language of the Eyes. °
It hath a mute and touching speech
That never, never lies ;
Deception cannot rest upon
The Language of the Eyes.
Its fountain is the heart within,
And truth its source supplies ;
No eloquence can e’er surpass
The Language of the Eyes.
THE PHANTOM HAND.
►
TJNOHOO.
A H 1? thron S> where jest and song
L 1 Dr ribald import passed,
I stood alone and held mine own
VVhere sin and shame were classed.
The ribald jest—the crime contest—
The sin a glory made ;
No novelty were they to me,
I knew sin’s stock-in-trade.
I never shrunk—the wine was drunk
I held the goblet high, ’
The wine 1 quaffed, then loudly laughed
Above each frantic cry,


I
r
THE PHANTOM HAND.
When through the gloom that dimmed the room
From where I took my stand,
There cleft the air, a dazzling, fair
And awful Phantom B and.
Hoim else could see what seemed to me
A Shape defined and clear ;
I could but stare, my eyes hard glare
Betrayed my sudden fear.
4k i
It cleft the air, that Phantom fair,
A Hand of purest white ;
I dared not move, I could but prove
Its dim and misty might.
My goblet fell— by potent spell
The Hand had dashed it down ;
It seized me then, and from that den
It led me to the town.
How deep my awe ! no form I saw
That owned the Phantom Hand !
The grasp was chill, an awful thrill
My trembling frame had spanned.
And from that time, in ev’ry clime
Where’er I choose to stray,
That Phantom clasp, in chilly grasp,
Retained an awful sway.
Upon me when in some dark den
I drowned despair and grief,
It oft appeared, and swiftly cleared
The way to safe relief.
No matter whence, it led me hence
To purer air and free ;
A Phantom Guide that seemed to glide
To realms of purity.
I never knew whence came that true
And faithful guiding Hand,
Its gentle grasp seemed like the clasp
Of one from Spirit Land.
I once knew one, whose race was run
Ere life’s bright morn had fled ;
That lire is gone, and still we mourn
A friend among the dead.
m
if J
Can it be true, that she I knew
Had left the Spirit Lar-d,
To trace my path through sin and wrath
With her dear, tender Hand \
* * * *


HAMLET.
That man, thus guarded by a Hand
So smooth and white and fair,
Rejected once its loving aid,
And sought the sinner’s lair.
Hot words arose, then came hard blows,
And curses loud and long ;
While many fell too late to tell
Their sorrow for the wrong.
Upon his breast there flew to rest
A blood-red thirsty blade ;
He could not fly, no friend was nigh
To give him saving aid.
When like a dart, ’twixt blade and heart,
Swift came the Phantom Hand ;
But resting there, that Thing of Air
Was cloven by the brand.
He died —and smoothing soft his brow
That White Hand gently swept,
Across the pallid, upturned face :
It lingered whilst we wept.
Then sinking softly on his head,
Impalpable, but clear,
It closed the staring eyes at last,
Nor more did reappear.
HAMLET
FROM BEHIND THE SCENES.
UDONTNOHOO.
U T IYE and learn ! ” That’s it; that’s the very identi-
I J cal saying that at this moment suits me to a nicety.
To think that with an uncle in the property department, a
father in the scene-shifting line, and a second cousin (on
the mother’s side) a full-blown u super” at Covent garden
for fifteen years, that I should have come out to this
blessed colony, and not have known the plot of Mr. W.
Shakespeare’s “ Hamlet.” And yet, my kind friends, such
is the true state of the case. Confession, they say, is good
for the soul. Let me confess that I used to have some
notions about that play. One was, that it was one of the
finest cut-throat tragedies I had ever seen. Another was,
that every actor that had a new pair of boots or took a
benefit, appeared in the part of the Melancholy Dane.
bij j


HAMLET.
For a third idea, I thought the first Gravedigger must be
a very comic fellow, and Horatio one of the dryest old
sticks that ever was skinflint enough to refuse to afford
himself a decent suit of clothes. And I must confess I
also thought that this same Horatio came originally from
Paris ; that Hamlet was sent over in an open boat into
England ; and that the Ghost, each evening, came up
either from the lower regions, or else from the lord knows
where, or some such likelj locality. 1 used to think, too,
that when the Queen began begging and praying of the
Black Prince not to make such a darned fool of himself—
ulooking on this picture aad then on that ” —that the
old woman really meant it ; and as for Ophelia, that she
really went mad as a hatter, and managed 'positively to get
drowned as dead as a door nail. I did not know much about
the King, but I gave him credit at least for kingly notions
and a large washing ; and used to wipe many a tear away
with the back of my hand at the frequent disturbances of
poor Yorrick’s skull in the Elsinore general cemetery.
Lastly, I persuaded myself, after many an, evening in the
pit and not a few in the gallery, that Hamlet always died
gracefully and well, and went out of the world as any
leading character should do at the end of any proper and
law-abiding play. But as I said at the commencement,
we must all “ live and learn;” and there never was a
time in my life when I could say I had been sold to the
same extent —especially over such a thing as a play.
You must know I’m now living with my mother’s bro-
ther’s wife’s husband’s sister’s second cousin, who carries
out the united duties of errand boy and “generally useful”
at the Royal. I was telling him some nights agone what I
knew of the old play. Jupiter Stiggins was his name.
“ Stiggins,” says I, “so and so was done fine, and t’other
thing was put forward in first-rate order.” “ Why, Cherry -
bum,” he says, “it strikes mo as how you knows nothing;
but don’t let that trouble you, old man, you shan’t be
ignorant no more if J upiter Stiggins can help you. Let
us go and see for ourselves;” and sure enough we did go.
Hamlet had been walking out of the hoardings, and
inviting people to go to the Royal and see him act, for more
than a week ; and when Stiggins and I got up under the
gas-lamps by the box door, we were jammed in a pretty
considerable crowd, right under the noses of two very
oily-looking men, with their necks rolled in about twenty
folds of muffler.
“Foller me,” said my friend, in the true accents
of the Surrey side of the water, and he dived up a


HAMLET.
dirty lane, through considerable piles of mud and
a shockingly heavy smell of oysters. I followed him, and
as we waded on he said, just casually, “ Did yer see any-
body ?”
“ No, Stiggins,” said I, trembling visibly (if there
had been daylight and anybody looking), for it was
so dark and the place such a queer one, I did not know
whom we might meet.
“Then, says he, as he floundered on, apparently careless
about the mud and not seeming to notice the oysters,
“You have just passed Hamlet and the Ghost.”
“Oh, lor, Stiggins!” I said in great agitation, looking at
the dead wall on both sides of me, expecting the old fellow
that I had seen so often revisiting the glimpses of the
moon, to walk out and lay hold on me, and introduce me
to his undutiful son. JBut Stiggins made no further
remark. He led me on through doors and gates, over
wooden goblets and amongst empty paint pots, till at last
he stopped behind something that looked remarkably like
the dirtiest wall in a painter’s shop,
“ There now, Oherrybura,” he says, patting me on the
shoulder, “ wait and see what ye shall see.”
“Stiggins,” says I, “Jupiter! Where was the
Gho ? ” but he was gone. There was soon a
great noise in front with music and whistling, and
crying “up with the rag,” so I thought I would not have
long to wait. I was just ruminating over the question of
Hamlet and the Ghost in the lane, wondering where they
had risen from or gone to, when my hair suddenly stood
on end, for they were before me. How they had come
in I could not tell. That was not the way I had seen
them last. The Ghost had his vizor up, and instead of
the roll that had so often terrified me in days of yore, he
carried this time only an umbrella; while Hamlet had
his hair tucked up into a ball, as if nature had never
given him those black shaggy locks so often shaken at the
gallery and pit in moments of passion.
“ Look you here,” says Hamlet in a hoarse voice,
taking the Ghost by the arm, “ Look you here, old man,
raise me ten bob a week, or darn me if you shall get ten
lines out of me this blessed night.”
“ What a way to treat a ghost,” I says, shaking in my
shoes.
“ Come, old horse,” says the Ghost, “listen to reason.
You see the miserable houses; you see the heavy ex-
penses. People are all growling, but I can’t see what I’m
to do. The Queen says, if her crown aint regilded and


repapered before next week, she’s darned if she plays for
me another night ; and as for the King, I don’t know
what to make of him, nohow. Then there’s ”
Oh, never mind them, I know they have worked you
till you haven’t the spirit you used to have ; but that’s
nothing to me. I’m leading man here ;I suppose you’ll
admit that.”
“ My dear old buffer, who doubts you,” said the Ghost,
as he carefully laid his umbrella in a corner, and proceeded
to pat Hamlet on the back, while the sound of the clank-
ing of armour put me into a frantic description of
quandary.
The interview was cut short with a noise of people rush-
ing about. The three strange fellows that come on upon
the battlements at Elsinore loafed past me, one of them
smoking a verv high-smelling cigar ; a thing that I never
expected a guard upon parade to do, even in such a bar -
barous place as Denmark, though I had seen it in the
Volunteers. And in midst of all up went the curtain.
Hamlet came out from the side, and after holding a
conference with the guards, went in again ; then he made
another appearance, and had a scold with the Ghost.
The old fellow from below had dropped the umbrella and
found his identical roll of paper, which he kept pointed
before him, as he walked out in a very solemn and
melancholy manner from a corner where I had seen him
for some time taking counsel with the prompter. I
couldn’t help thinking both Hamlet and the Ghost
were great shams, for they met for all the world as
if they hadn’t seen each other for at least six months.
Ko one would have imagined—not even Shakespeare
himself that the gentleman and the spirit had communed
so very lately. When the Ghost said (C A jew ! ajew ! ”
and disappeared from Hamlet, I thought I had seen the
last of him myself for some time; but I was mistaken,
for he passed me the next moment, and before my hair
got down again upon my head, I heard him calling at the
top of his voice, “ Come now, where’s the Queen Mother ?
Don’t keep us waiting.”
xou mind your own business, and let the Queen
Mother mind hers,” was shrieked in a female voice from
some place up aloft, the whereabouts of which I was
quite at a loss to know.
It could not have been the Queen, for soon she was
moving about in all the glitter and glare, with
a melancholy smile on her not very fair features,
and the identical crown which certainly did


HAMLET
look a little dingy—sitting very heavily on her
poor head. Theie was a look of gin in her face, and
a very spirituous expression about her eye. Then out
came Ophelia, and while I stood gazing in admiration at
her as she ranged about, a cough, that reminded me
forcibly of the presence of my grandmother, sounded at
my elbow, and told me that one of the most antiquated
females it had ever been my lot to witness was at that
moment beside me,
“ Ahem ! Ahem ! Oh lor, sir,” says she, looking at me
with as sweet a smile as a woman of sixty could well put
on in such circumstances, “ ain’t the draughts here un-
merciful to them as has the misfortune to be afflicted with
the rheumaticks.”
a. M
“Very,” I said, flattering her by imitating her
style, u I presume, mum, as how you are your-
self afflicted that way ; Elsinore is such a queer, cold
kind of place,” for 1 said to myself, “ here’s another of
them, and if she’s anything to Hamlet, all the better j 1.11
let her see that I knows something.”
‘ ‘ Elsinore ! ” says the old party, and she looked at me
as if she had an idea that she had had the pleasure of an
introduction to a confirmed lunatic.
“I thought as how you belonged to Elsinore,” I said, as
jjiy eyes wandered over her antiquated garments and
down the gingham of her capacious umbrella, that
quivered visibly each time she hit it on the floor. _
“ It seems, young man, you don’t know me,” said the
old party. “ Why I’m the mother of Opheliar ! Do you
mean ter say as how you’ve been about and haven t seen
me before?” ~
“ The mother of Opheliar—Opheliar’s mother ! 1 said,
without remembering her a bit amid my recollections ;
I{ of course, who could have seen Opheliar without know-
ing her mother, and who could have once seen her
mother without knowing her again. She’s a nice girl,
Opheliar ; a very nice girl.
u That you may well say, sir, she’s a real treasure ; but
she doesn’t get the best treatment from Mr. Jonnes, who
is the ghost and also the manager, and has the fixing of
the salaries.”
“ And do you tell me she gets a salary ? ”
“ I should just think she do, poor dear ; if it wur not
for that I don’t know how either herself or her mother
would manage to live, after the way her poor misguided
father left me this time ten year.”
“Do you know, mum,” I said in all good faith, tna


first time I saw Opheliar I thought as how she was drunk;
and every time since, when I sees her, I comes to the same
conclusion.”
“Drunk, sir? drunk, did you say? Was that the
word you made use of ? That I, the mother of the poor
girl should hear the likes of that said about her, and
before my face too ! Get out, you low-lived curmudgeon,
or I’ll ; ” but as she shook her gingham in my face,
the scene was changed, for suddenly we were joined by
the King of Denmark; and as Ophelia’s mother, quite
unawed by the crown he wore upon his brow, and the
robes which he had twisted up into a knot and stuck in
his belt for convenience of locomotion, tapped him on the
shoulder and madeffriends with him on the spot, I thought
it time to shift my quarters.
I reached a place where there was a considerable
appearance of paint-pots and a high smell of beer ; but
there was no getting a clear view of anything, except a
canvass partition, and that effectually closed me out from
the stage. I heard the slow music, which I guessed must
be played for Ophelia, who, poor girl, had gone to the
water and been drowned ; the jokes of the Gravediggers,
and the boisterous merriment of the audience reached my
ears ; then after a while I could hear nothing but swords
clashing, and then there was a lull. Determined to see
what was happening or if the proceedings were over, I
pushed aside a piece of scenery, and obtained a view of
the last scene. I would not have missed it for anything.
Hamlet was dying in the most majestic and solemn style.
There was no slavish imitation there of the quiet dying of
Kean or Macready, but every movement of the face, every
writhe under pain could be seen, and was intended to be
seen, b}*- both the pit and gallery. At last I heard the
words, “ the rest is silence,” and the curtain fell amid
thunders of applause.
There was then a general stampede. The King,
who had been most effectually done for by a deed
of step-parricide, got up as if nothing had happened
and beat a retreat past me, humming some words to
the tune of “ Yankee Doodle.” The other dead men also
made off in the same direction, and 1 heard the shrill
voice of the Queen Mother somewhere up by the roof,
sounding as if she had only had poisoned gin. Last of
all Hamlet strode past, arm in arm with Ophelia, while
the mother of that resurrected young lady walked at a
convenient distance behind.
The applause still continued, and there was whistling in


HAMLET.
the pit and thundering in the gallery, which would not
cease, and seemed to get louder every minute. At last I
was startled by the sudden appearance of the Ghost, who
trotted across the stage at about nineteen knots to the
hour, and called to the prompter to pipe all hands to
duty. A little bell was rung, and immediately there was
a startling transformation. The melancholy Prince
rushed past me in a most undignified style, and without
even looking for a soft place flopped down on his back to
go straight off again, without beat of drum, to “ that
bourne from which no traveller returns.” The King
appeared with a large piece of bread and cheese and a pot
of beer, which he deposited behind the scenes ; and then
threw himself into the posture into which he had fallen
when butchered so much after the manner of pig-sticking.
I looked out and saw that the stage was again occupied,
and that the people of the Court of Denmark were lying
oyer it at sixes and sevens. A great light in front, and
thie boisterous applause of the house, told me that the
curtain was once more up, and after two or three cheers it
went down again with a rush, and the gas was lowered.
All was over. “ And this,” I said to myself, “is Mr.
W. Shakespeare’s ‘ Hamlet,’ viewed from behind the
scenes.”
As I stood wondering what I should see next, Stiggins
approached me and tapped me on the shoulder. I followed
him into a little room close by, and before I had tune
to ask him what we had come there for, he had said to its
only inmate, “Mr. Artaxerxes Smith, I brought this
young friend of mine just to see you, as he have come
purposely to-night for your Hamlet.”
It was certainly Hamlet that smiled at me with a self-
satisfied leer and a condescending nod ; but he was again
sadly changed. He now stood before me with his sable
robes surmounting a pair of modern trousers; with one
boot off and the other on. Hia beautiful head of black
curls that I had seen him in years past shake at the pit
and gallery were gone, and he now walked about in a
shock head of red hair, covered by a very imdignified-
looking “ belltopper,” that appeared to have been fated
to be constantly, sat on, and to be a receptacle for no end
of grease. As I said good night, and hurried with
Stiggins up the lane and through the high smell of
oysters, the thought struck me that if I wished to see
Mr. W. Shakespeare’s “Hamlet” again, I would not be a
spectator behind the scenes.


ONLY A COUSIN’S
A WARNING TO THE AMOROUS.
by unohoo.
Tfc LL me not that Cupid careth
Naught for those of kindred tie;
.For he aimeth oft at random
When his love-tipped arrows fly.
When, perhaps, thou little deemeth
That exposed is thy heart,
Then thou art most like to suffer
Wounds inflicted by his dart.
Thinkest thou, because thy cousin
Claims relationship with thee,
That thy heart is proof against her,
And for ever to be free ?
Tis a false and dark delusion,
Fraught with peril to thy peace,
For no danger thou perceiveth
In thy mother’s fairest niece.
She is to thee like a sister,
/N | • t « _ /
Claiming but a brother’s love,
Sharing all thy joys and sorrows,
-Peaceful, gentle as a dove.
Meeting thee with kisses softer
Than the rosebuds opening leaf;
Throwing her dear arms around thee,
Whiter than a lily wreath.
Talking, in sweet tones of music,
Words that thrill thy bosom’s core;
Never dreaming of thy peril—
’Tis a cousin, nothing more.
But th' uTt end thy soul enraptured
More than thou dost care to tell,
Till thou art most vainly struggling
To cast off the pleasing spell.
When her dear eyes beam upon thee
With affection’s holy light,
And thy heart is quickly beating—
Love’s emotion at its height—
Then thou say’st, with agitation
That can scarce controlled be,
Pressing her fair form unto thee—
( Tell me, sweetest, lov’st thou me t”
w'»


And thou wait’st with expectation,
Mingled love, and hope, and fear
She will say, in sweet amazement,
“ Am I not thy cousin, dear ?”
WOMAN’S INFLUENCE.
UNOHOO.
A specimen of fine writing a la London Jourual, sliglitly altered.
AS the warm, invigorating beams of the morning
sun shed their benign influence upon the young
tree, renewing its leaves, adding strength to its
limbs, and causing the sustaining sap to flow in
their wonted channels for the great good of the whole, so
do the welting slaps of a strong muscular mother fall direct
upon the tender flesh of the youth whom she deigns to
spank. Could woman but know how man, despite his
boasted energy and independence, yearns for the solitary
shadow of her love to ease his rugged path and sew his
scattered buttons, she could work the oracle splendidly
for the benefit of the milliner. A pure lasting affection
is the guiding star that directs the traveller over the
Q O
weary desert of life, past the grub and club of tempta-
tion that beset his path into the pleasant oasis of home ;
that keeps him in clean shirts, and leaves never a hole in
his socks. She stirs up his flagging energies and gruel,
braces his sinking heart and waistcoat, and sends him
forth a mended and a wiser man. A man with such a
goal as this before him, like a beacon-light in the fair
unwavering hand of hope, heeds not the darksome things
that float towards him on the current of his coffee, and
doesn’t break the pledge oftener than the occasion re-
quires. Like a brave swimmer he gallantly breasts the
curling waves of trouble that foam impotently around
him, and pays his tailor twice a year ; for with his heart
fixed on the bright bar of the Insolvent Court he boldly
stems the tide of debt, and urges his onward way,
encouraged by the Statute of Limitations like a beacon-
light to clear his path, and prove how strong is the
mystical power of Woman’s Wagaries.
A word from Lips of Love can move
A man to spend his only cheque ;
A loved ones’s temptings often prove
A rock on which his wealth will wreck.
The power of Love no man can tell
Who hath not known its magic wand ;
But those beneath its tender spell,
The bound of prudence go beyond.


THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN Q_.
UNOHOO.
PIRITUALLSM, though having much of the
mysterious and a considerable amount of the
KJ supernatural about it, never seduced me from the
paths of materialism. Table-turning I understand
only in the light of frustrating an enemies machina-
tions, commonly called “turning the tables,” by which
operation we understand the case of a “ biter bit.”
Turning an honest penny seems to me a far more difficult
feat now-a-days than the furniture business, which the
spirits of the nether world are such adepts in. I have
read the story of Mary, the Maid of the Mill, and—don’t
believe it. Bulwer’s Strange Story is a strange story to
me, and that is all. Tales of ghosts and hobgoblins
never made my hair go through the undignified and
semi-impossible performance of standing on end ; and as
far as I know, the only means by which the “ drops of
perspiration ” can be made to “ damp my pallid brow ”
are the hostile appearance of my outraged bootmaker, and
the advent of a regular Australian roaster. So you must
understand that, unlike some susceptible and peculiarly
constituted individuals, I do not believe that “The Real
is governed by the Ideal,” vid ßulwer Lytton. Never-
theless, although I have had the courage when a lad to go
to the churchyard on a darksome night, when the wind
was whispering its weird wailings amongst the tall sepul-
chrahlooking cypresses, and have plucked a blood-red
flower from the grave of a suicide without a tremor, just
to establish my reputation for courage, I cannot listen
to the mournful howling of a dog baying the moon
without a shudder.
I can account for that in this way. When I was but a
little child, we had in the old house at Enfield an Irish
servant, whose mind was imbued with all the strange
• superstitious fancies of her strangely superstitious
race, and she used to fill my childish imagination with
tales of banshees and ghosts, until I crept to my cane
cot with a heart chilled with fear, and an ear painfully
susceptible to unaccountable noises. 1 remember dis-
tinctly a tale she told me one night, when the wind
whistled and moaned mournfully about the house, and
sent fearfully humanlike moans through the cracks and
crevices of the old house, whose Large lofty rooms and
long gloomy passages seemed the very abode of ghosts and


THE HAUNTED HOUSE.
goblins. After telling me a barrowing tale of suicide,
murder, and misery, in an ancient Irish family, whose
troubles were always foreshadowed by the howling of
their old deerhound, she solemnly expressed her belief
that our race was guarded by the soul of Gelert, the
hound, whom Llewellyn, our Welsh ancestor, so hastily
killed and so deeply sorrowed for, as told in the well-
known ballad —“ The spearman heard the bugle sound/’
Just then the wind died away in a low wailing whisper,
and there arose in the stillness of midnight a prolonged
heart-chilling howl from our noble old staghound, Bethgel-
ert, who was supposed to have descended from the faithful
hero of Llewellyn’s tragic story. Steadily rose the howl
of the hound, till his very life seemed to flow away in
the long softening cadence as it rose heavenward like the
wail of a lost soul mourning over an earthly wanderer
from the paths of virtue, and about to suffer the agonies
itself endured.
*• Hush! Whisht, me poor bhoy. Tis ould Gelert tellin
the lasht moments ov one that is dear to ye, core of me
heart. ’Tis one of yez will be in the blessed heavens
before the mornin’. Marrk my words, an’ see if they
don’t come true.”
Again rose that long quavering wail, till my very soul
froze with the dread of death. Next day came the news
that my little cousin, miles away in the big town, had
died in the night, and strange to say, her soul had fled
heavenward as the howl of the hound cleft the midnight
air, and swept wailing after the pure soul in its flight
toward the silent stars.
From that hour I have never been able to throw off the
depressing feelings that come over me as the baying of a
dog on moonlight nights breaks upon my ear. I get ner-
vous, start at the slightest sound, and feel the dread of
some calamity creeping over me. I have tried to laugh
myself out of the notion. I have reasoned the matter
over, but in spite of all, the howl of a hound will drive
a cold chill to my heart, and make me wish for the light
of morning and the news of friends far away.
With the exception of that weakness —for weakness I
call it—l have no fear of the supernatural. Old Gelert
remained with us for many years, and was intimately con-
nected with the strange visitation I am about to relate.
He was a noble hound, of a breed now rarely seen, and
his race had been in our family for several generations.
There was something strange about the grand old dog.
He had a kind of thoughtful dignity of bearing, and


THE HAUNTED HOUSE.
rarely mixed with others of his species, as if he knew his
illustrious descent. I could relate many an anecdote of
his faithfulness, dauntless courage, and almost human in-
telligence ; but it is my province now to deal with other
matters in this our tale.
When I was a lad of ten, my father occupied a responsi-
ble position under Government, and lived till my
mother’s death in the dear old house at E , where my
earliest recollections began. When he married again, my
stepmother persuaded him to leave the dear old house we
loved so much, and take a house nearer to his place of
business : and to our childish regret he did so. Poor
old Gelert, when his sagacity told him what was going on,
mourned about the familiar scenes with a saddened air,
that made him seem almost human in his sorrow ; and for
months after we left, the faithful hound would pay periodi-
cal visits to our far-off house, as if he could never give it
up entirely.
My father took a house on the outskirts of Q , a
little village near a large seaport town, and childlike, ray
sisters and myself soon got reconciled to our new abode.
It was a peculiarly constructed house, with a flat roof
somewhat after the Eastern fashion, and long passages
wherein the slightest footstep found a hollow echo, that at
night sounded singularly strange. The house stood alone
on a hill, and in front was a broad terrace, from whence
sloped a wide path darkly shaded by close rows of dreary-
looking cypresses, which gave it the appearance of an
Eastern graveyard. At night the wind seemed to climb
up the steep path between the cypress-rows, and stop
wavering at the house-front, till at last it swept mourn-
ing and wailing around the place like a lost soul seeking
rest where all was closed against it, fearing to enter, yet
dreading to leave.
Rarely did a servant remain long with us, for they
seemed possessed with a dread of the place, and many a
lighthearted maid grew pale aud nervous after remaining
a few weeks in charge of the premises when my parents
were away on a visit, till at last the inevitable warning
to leave came, 1 ‘ because it was so lonely. ”
Strange rumours got abroad, and it was whispered that
unearthly noises none could account for were heard at
midnight, in the White House on the Cypress Hill.
A young lady who came on a visit, startled the whole
household with her shrieks one night, and could never
afterwards be prevailed upon to relate the cause, nor be
persuaded to stay overnight again in the Green bedroom.


TOT HA.UNTBD HOUSB.
«
Old Gelert, who would have flown afc a lion then, used to
howl moat dismally on certain occasions, and more than
once ran cowering and shivering with sheer fright into my
father’s bedroom, from whence he would not stir till day-
light.
At last it became so serious, that my father sat up one
night to watch, and the next morning we found him pale
and deathlike, lying in the passage without sense or
motion.
My stepmother wished to leave the place, but he reso-
lutely refused until the mystery was unravelled. On the
morning that we found him in the passage, he refused to
tell us what he had seen or heard, until he made further
investigations.
One night we w'ere all sitting in my father’s study,
talking over the rumours which were afloat about the
house, when we heard rapid footsteps on the stone-terrace
under the drawing-room window, then a pause, followed
by a violent scuffling struggle ; the drawing-room window-
sash was then apparently dashed open with such violence
that it shook the house, and a heavy fall was heard in the
room. The door leading to the passage seemed to be
opened with a deafening crash, and several people seemed
to rush along the floor, whilst the light rustle of a woman’s
garments could be heard as she passed our door.
We rushed out in a body, and all was silence; not a
window opened, not a door unlocked. Night after night
the same noises were heard, until at last my father deter-
mined to watch in the drawing-room, with a loaded
pistol and old Gelert as a guard.
Jlist in the stillness of the night the same heavy tread
was heard, the same crash of the opened window followed,
and as the lamp flickered and died out, a noise as of a fall
shook the building from roof to foundation, Gelert
crouched trembling on the centre of the floor, and although
the flash of the pistol my father fired lit the whole apart-
ment, not a soul but himself could be seen in the room. The
violent opening of the door followed, and the hasty
tramp and rustle along the corridor succeeded, till all was
still again. A beautiful spaniel of my mother’s was found
next morning dead in the passage, frightfully convulsed or
distorted as though excessive fear had sent its life out,
and the bullet my father fired had struck the window,
and made a fracture most strangely resembling a death’s
head.
My father still determined to find out the secret of the
visitations, and again watched, pistol in hand, but Gelert


THB HAUNTED HOUSE.
could not be induced to enter the room. At the same
time as on the previous night the noises commenced, and
my father shouting aloud fired in the direction of the
footsteps, with no more effect than attended his former
attempt to discover the perpetrators of the mischief.
Next morning a beautiful picture of my little brother
was found with a bullet wound over the heart. From that
day he sickened, and precisely at the hour corresponding
with that in which the shot must have been tired, he
died. On his breast, just over the heart, was found a
dark stain exactly the size of a bullet wound, and as he
closed his eyes he placed his finger on the spot and said,
“ Oh, Papa, something pains me here and so he died.
My father, in spite of the warnings he had received,
still persisted in his endeavors to find out the cause of
the disturbing noises, and again he stood sentry at mid-
night.
The noise that night seemed louder than ever, and he
fired at something that glimmered white and ghostly in
the centre of the room. A strong chill struck his heart
as he did so, and a dull feeling of impending trouble
came over him. In the morning the right hand of a
beautiful statue of Fate which stood on a side table was
discovered severed at the wrist by the bullet, and it was
found where it had fallen on an open book, the forefinger
resting on the name of his mother inscribed on the title
page.
The next mail brought the news of her death at the
very minute the hand fell, and my father, who loved her
dearly, never mentioned her name from that day.
It seemed as if some dread power was at work to inflict
summary vengeance upon the bold man who dared to
seek to penetrate into the mysteries he had no right to
fathom, and he no longer sought to resist the fate that
seemed so much against him.
We left the house, and for some time the place was
empty ; but the Captain of a merchant vessel, a daredevil
sort of fellow, at last entered into possession. Fre a
month had elapsed his nearest and dearest were lost to
him, and he left the house declaring that it was haunted
by evil spirits.
From that time no person could be got to live there
and the whole building fell to ruin. Not a villager would
pass at night, and the whole wore a deserted look of
wretchedness and decay that it bears to this hour. We
afterwards heard that before we resided there, several
tenants had left on account of the dreadful disturbances,


and all who had resided within its walls had suffered
painful losses in their family circles.
In conclusion, I may say that the truth of the main in-
cidents in this story can be vouched for by the villagers of
Q— —, and the house may now be seen, a white ghastly
ruin, with its once well-tended garden overgrown with
wild weeds, and the grove of cypresses bending mourn-
fully over the sad decay of what was once perhaps a fine
residence, where happy families had passed away peace-
ful lives, until some dread event occurred to bring destruc-
tion upon all who dared to tread its passages.
Some have said that through the peculiar construc-
tion of the edifice, the wind when blowing from a certain
point caused the noises which might have been mistaken
for footsteps, and that the imagination, coupled with
accidental coincidences, furnished the rest; but I do not
desire to argue the question. I simply relate the history
of the manifestations as they occurred. The results are
too sad for me to dwell upon, for my people have suffered
severely since, and we cannot but trace our sorrow to our
connection with the Haunted House of Q ——,
ONLY A TEAR.
UNOHOO.
ONLY a tear from an infant eye,
Falling soft on a broken toy ;
Born of a fancy, bred of a sigh,
Breathed on the wreck of a faded joy.
Only a tear from a maiden fair,
Dimming the eyes that are blue and bright;
Drawn from a heart scarce known to care,
Too young and guileless, too pure and light.
Only a tear from the eye of age,
Along the furrowed and time-worn cheek ;
Only a blot upon hist’ry’s page,
From a fainting heart and a spirit weak.
Only a tear ! but oh, how deep
The well of sorrow from whence it sprung.
Only a tear ! but many weep
Tears of blood from a heart o’erstrung.
Only a tear ! but a maiden’s heart
Hath grief too sacred for human eye,
Only a tear ! but when we part
With hope, ’tis known in a broken sigh.


Only a tear! Why the tear-drops fall
Like molten lead on a heart of ice,
Cold with sorrow—a funeral pall
That never covers the dead hopes twice.
Only a tear ! Why, a life of love,
And all the horrors of human fear,
And all the feelings ’neath heaven above
Have been expressed in a single tear.
Only a tear! Why, to some that means
A weight of woe and a blighted life.
Only a tear ! It can tell of scenes
Of awful pain and of sinful strife.
Only a tear ! On the tomb of man
A tear has dropped like a spark of pain.
Only a tear! Since the world began
There’s nought can tell such a sad refrain.
Only a tear ! Why a world of woe,
A mm a m *
A wealth of j oy, and a sea of fear,
A life of things we can never know,
Are told in a tear —a simple tear.
CHILDREN IN THE WOOD.
THE COLONIAL VERSION
UDONTNOHOO.
OT a great number of years ago there lived in a
scrubby part of the Colony of South Australia
A- i a man and his wife. The man was neither
particularly brave, exceedingly generous, nor even
honorable to a shade; and the mother’s character
added to his, laid the pair open to be accredited with the
now fashionable title of well-to-do but dishonest parents.
This being the case, we need hardly mention that they
were not beloved by all who knew them, and it is
questionable whether they were perfectly happy when
they became possessed of two children—who, for the
purposes of the narrative, must of course be a boy and a
girl. To use the words of a gifted American, these
children “ were born at a very early age,” and shortly
afterwards their father was seized with the malady which
doctors call habeas corpus , and the wife attending upon
him catching it, both died, leaving the care of the children
to their uncle, a pawnbroker of this City.
That the old proverb—“ Where there’s a will there’s a


CHILDREN IN THE WOOD.
way might be fulfilled, they called in one of our Q.C s.,
and devised all their property, real and personal, to their
children, or in the event of their chileren’s death, to the
model pawnbroker who took them in. This was a very
unwise step, but one very much required for the purposes
of the story ; for when you get together two exceedingly
innocent children, a wicked uncle, and a will, it is abso-
lutely necessary to give the uncle a chance of becoming a
thorough villain. After having as soon as possible for-
gotten the departed parents, only dropping a few tears
into his supper beer on one occasion, the well-to-do pawn-
broker was suddenly struck with a happy thought, and
taking out his check-book wrote half-a-dozen cheques and
immediately tore them up again. They were on the bank
which had the orphans’ money, but he recollected when
too late to save the paper, that another signature would
be required to draw it out, which he could not get till his
nephew was twenty-one. Another idea then struck him
forcibly, but not sufficiently so to cause him any injury.
He was not a likely man to take charge of an Orphan
Asylum, and the idea which struck him so forcibly as to
enter his head was to get rid of the poor orphans some way
orother, no matter how. With this object in view, the wicked
uncle bought them two perambulators, and had them “care-
fully ” wheeled about the principal streets for six hours
in each day, to the no small damage of their complexions
and the shins of the fashionable public. This had not
any serious effect upon the little ones who, as if to spite
the benevolent pawnbroker, always came back to the sign
of the three balls with smiling faces. The idea gave way
to yet another more frightful in its character. On the
principle of throwing out a sprat to catch a whale, the
uncle next desired to try slow poisoning, and on sundry
occasions paid one and sixpence each to the nursegirls for
tea meeting tickets, in order that the little things might die
from the effects of dileterious sweetmeats, or from eating
current buns with too large a supply of raisins. But
though they emerged from the dissipation of the tea meet-
ings with a checkered complexion and rather corrugated
visage, the babes did not die. The uncle had thought
the tea meeting edibles would have so seriously affected
them as to have not only worked their own destruction,
but covered their perambulators with a rash. He was,
however, to some extent disappointed. At length, look-
ing at the matter from a certain point of view, an idea
still happier and still more terrible struck the knight of
the gilded pills ; and he told the nursemaids that they


CHILDREN IN THE
might take the children, without the family vehicles, to
a certain square furnished with seats, the common resort
of policemen and other idlers. After some dressing and
the production of a lot of bran new millinery, we need
hardly say the maids went out. Now it happend that
although the said square was a prosy enough place, Cupid,
for some reason or other best known to himself, hovered
over it frequently. On the present occasion he was
somewhere near, and the girls had hardly taken their seats,
when two guardians of the public peace came along—one
to see if the fountain had gone home to Europe, and the
other to watch him acquiring the information. The scene
was too ravishing for description, and hour after hour
passed away—the policemen and the girls in the seventh
heaven, and the children making dirt pies in a purely
terrestrial sphere. When the short dream of love was
over, the little ones were gone ; and even the apple-man
with the wooden leg, who had watched the scene, and
cursed his deformity for keeping him out of the police
force, could not tell whither they had gone. The maids
went home with sorrowful faces to tell their tale, and
although the cruel uncle laughed in his sleeve —whatever
part of his face that may be—there was weeping and
wailing in all his house. He advertised in the Gazette
for the lost ones, carefully misdescribing them, wrote
a letter to the newspapers telling the public the depth of
his sorrow, and pulled down his rate of interest forty per
cent,, “on and after that date.” Nineteen years passed
away, and he gave a great party to his friends. He did
not tell them the reason, but it was because he was then
to become possessed of the fortunes of the Babes. The
feast was on, and the host had begun to talk a little thick
—owing to the potency of certain spirited guests at his
table—when the door opened and the children entered and
stood in the gas-light. The boy’s pantaloons were slightly
short for his present stature, and the girl’s dress was both
small and old-fashioned ; bat to conserve the interests of
all parties and bring the ta!e to a proper conclusion, we
feel bound to keep the children in the same attire in
which they wandered away. There is, by-the-bye, only
one change required to be made in each. The boy, from a very
early age, unlike his prototyoe, would chew and smoke
tobacco ; and the girl insisted as soon as she could toddle
on being mistress of a chignon and walking with the
Grecian bend. The wicked uncle did not die on the spot,
which makes his crime still more heinous than it other-
wise would be in the sight of thinking men at Christmas.


He, however, in after years hanged himself, owing to
some monetary pressure, and went out of the world ; we
believe t( unwept; ” we certainly think “ unhonored ; ”
and it is more than probable, from the high interest he
charged the poets, also “ unsung.” The children had
been saved by a charitable institution ; and if such things
had existed of old in England, there would have been
no death to record there. The robin would not have had
the “ melancholy satisfaction ” of strewing a grave with
leaves.
PARTING.
UNOHOO.
Oh! sad is the hour that compels us to part [heart;
With a friend, who, when gone, leaves a void in the
When the view of the future is gloomy and bare,
And hope is obscured by the vapor of care.
When the Lake of Remembrance reflects but a gleam
Of the light that once brightened life’s fast-rolling stream,
And sorrow’s chill fingers have planted their trace,
Like the outline of age, on the once happy face ;
How the tears of regret will bedim the dark eyes,
And the heart speaks its meaning in eloquent sighs, [will,
When the hand clasped in hand, all unchecked by the
Conveys to the other an answering thrill,
That flies to the lips as they echo the knell
Of the heart in the tear-laden, voiceless farewell.
But still through the grief that o’ershadows the heart,
In the whispered good-bye and the effort to part,
There lingers a spell that will brighten the way,
Like the pale gleam of sunlight at closing of day.
Tis the knowledge that truth has bekindled the eye,
And affection’s soft accents spoke out in the sigh.
**********
But ah ! when the parting on one side is cold,
And the springs of affection are chilled and controlled ;
When the warm hand is held in the calm passive clasp,
And meets with no pressure, no answering grasp,
When the voice has no ring of regret in its tone,
The eyes no fond light in reply to their own ;
The hand will fall listlessly down to the side,
And the heart so repelled will rebound in its pride ;
Then the shadows of grief o’er the future will roll,
And the dark wings of sorrow o’ershadow the soul;
For the heart’s best emotion when checked and repelled,
Finds the hopes of its dreaming for ever dispelled.
&
I
Adelaide: Printed at the Advertiser Office,


•)
4.
[advertisements.]
rnHOSE who have read tlie world must know
'*■ How much depends on outward show ;
How many of the wisest—best,
Have been passed o’er if poorly drest
But who would choose to go attired
In shabby garments made of shoddy,
While Moss has everything required
To suit the wants of every body ?
<
‘I
Material of each various kind,
With fashionable taste designed,
Well cut and soundly put together,
And warranted to stand the weather.
At prices to each pocket suited;
This statement cannot be refuted.
Should any doubt that this is done,
Let him repair to Humber One.
J. MOSS,
No. 1, BUNDLE STREET.


fiß&ssaoF?ax
TEA WAREHOUSE,
No. 67, Rundle Street, Adelaide.
*
v
GROCERY, CONDIMENTS, AND PARISIAN
AND ITALIAN WAREHOUSEMEN'S
GOODS
Of the Best known Brands and Late Shipments.
C. E. & Co. take the present opportunity of thank-
ing their old Customers for their past favors, and
assure new ones that nothing shall be wanting on
their part to give them satisfaction also.
ELLIB EDWARDS & CO.’S
FOR
At the Counter ; same in Chests, Halves, and Boxes
HAMS equal to Finest Imported
SUGARS. BAGOT’S EXTRACT, COFFEES, AND
GENERAL GROCERIES.
ORDERS invited from all parts of the Colony.
Prompt attention, and BEST VALUE given.
ELLIS EDWARDS & CO.,
24, Hindley Street,
Opposite Theatre Royal.


WEBB, VARDOK, k PRITCHARD,
GENERAL
Printers nnl Fahlis]brs,
Machine Rulers, Bookbinders,
ETC., ETC.,
® 4
*
t
4i, KIM© WILLIAM iTHIEET,
Jfffcjlaiiu.
FAST PRINTING MACHINERY.
Driven by Atmospheric Gas Engine, and all the requisites
necessary for producing
7288T-0&ASB W@SS
25, Currie Street, Adelaide.
Fancy Labels, Cards, Billheads, Maps, Plans, Ac.,
Executed with Neatness and Dispatch.
*oSO£o°


Carte de Visite Portraits.
CANNOT BE SURPASSED.
ENLARGEMENTS OF ALL DESCRIPTIONS.
Early appointments solicited to pre-
vent delay.
S. SOLOMON, Manager.


■ '<
MY BOTTIEB
- ti'go* l >■ •
Who made me view my feet with pride,
While cats and dogs came far and wide,
And in my hoots their features eyed %
My Brandon.
Who quickly eased me of my corn,
When I his boots had brieflv worn,
V '
Until I scarce knew how ’twas gone 2
My Brandon
Who makes my shoes a glove-like fit,
Till friends in downright envy sit,
Because my feet make such a hit 1
My Brandon.
Who ne’er was equalled in the trade
By other men who boots have made,
And ne’er of failure was afraid
AREHOUSE,
7s, miNOLE SHEET.


1873,! CHRISTMAS. (1873,
Ladies who are preparing for the Festivities
of the Season can buy
COSTUME DRESSES - - -at 9/11
Worth 14/9.
Millinery Bonnets and Hats - Cheap
GREAT VARIETY OF FANCY GOODS
Dress Silks, Japanese Silk—Brocaded and
Plain, and a variety of other Suitable
Fabrics.
The Wonderful Yosemite, spoken of in
poetic effusions ; Cheap.
Striped and Checked Muslins.
French Muslins, Printed, Plain, and Fancy;
all prices.
Parasols and Sun Umbrellas
Gentlemen’s Silk and Holland Coats.
Solar Hats, also Felt and other makes.
Clothing, ready-made or to order, at
very reasonable prices
Every variety in Ties, Collars, Shirts,
and Gloves.
P.S. —Persons preparing for Housekeeping
can purchase the requisite Drapery as
Cheap as they can , at
JAMES WHITING’S
66, KING WILLIAM STREET.


FREA RSON & BRO
KING WILLIAM
and
Rr im n ! rr< £< rr< rD rr< nr< q
Li I\ >j uu O x rxoo ao<
M
■ ▼
ADELAIDE ,
ARE AUSTRALIAN AGENTS FOR
“THE HUB” and "NEW YORK
COACHMAKERS’ MAGAZINE"
(published monthly).
“ THE MANUFACTURERS AND
BUILDERS." A Periodical adapted
for all classes of Mechanics, etc.,
and Published Monthly in New
York.


THE AUSTRALIAN
Y ' v u * “ v. '* •
morma stamps
FOB
PRINTING BY HAND
PAPER, WOOD, GLASS, LINEN, or on ANY
EVEN SURFACE.
™' ’*|WV3KJHk'F’ ZHttBBOXUEJPXZOXT OS' I % I
Boots & Shoos oil band, ox Made to Order.
■ r\KX J *“ V ||| f
hf* \ ** IOIL Ifi \jjr Xy Ji'll
_•?.>■ .. NS, .> - jn> r \Mf*’ | ,Jy jfcl / , -jit,
«* 'Ziff P\* JA * /’ .. <£u 'iL— %*P ■■ .... r ,-| " r V ■• <i► * . ! ~#
i2|fU |4y|| A ItitA WS. n F -WiL':J
v -Iq/j *%rJ frjjPw CjßC# i irn J . ■ •*
r
The “ Home News” and all English
Periodicals by every English Mail.
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY NEWSPAPERS
FORWARDED TO ANY ADDRESS.
I &”The strictest attention paid to business of any kind
entrusted to their care.
FREARSON & BROTHER,
ADELAIDE.


ESTABLISHED 1857.
Rundle and P
F(
Al
READY-MADE
IY
ulteney Streets,
)R
CLOTHING.
S** l .Jfe


“ADVERTISE R”
GENERAL STEAM
King William Street, Adelaide.
ercbt^,
Ilnurs,
ETC., ETC.,
PRINTED IN EVERY STYLE AT THE SHORTEST NOTICE.
New Machines and Presses f New InJcs and Papers.
COUITTBT ORDERS
By Letter or Telegram at once attended to.


CI T V
Central Binding Offices,
S4WIII f!4©l.
ALFRED WADDY
MUSIC BINDING,
AT MODERATE PRICES.
MOROCCO AND CALF BINDINGS
IN EITHER
Aldine, Arabesque, a la Janseniste, Cambridge,
Fonthill, Grolier, Harleian, or Monastic
style of Art.
Public and Private Libraries
KEPT IN THOROUGH REPAIR,
And the Binding Contracted for on Liberal Terms
PAPER KXJXjIlSrca-.


PATENT GAS STOVES.
No longer the heat we mourn ;
No longer the furnace red
Will cast on the slaving kitchen hands
The breath that they so much dread,
“ Heat, heat, heat!
While the Sun pours down at noon
Heat, heat, heat!
’Neath the silver rays of the moon !”
No longer ’mid furnace fires
Need this be the cry of the slave,
Who sighs as he walks the kitchen,
And almost yearns for his grave.
The workman with plan in hand
Moves as the great world moves,
And called by these cries of the tortured cooks,
Comes Broad with his Patent Stoves.
They are clean; they are small in their cost;
The “fire” is nought but in name;
Yout needn’t have it unless in use,
And then ’tis the gas’s flame.
’Twill be warm in the winter’s cold ;
’Twill be cool ’mid the summer’s heat;
And while it cooks in superior style,
Its appearance is small and neat.
If the thing of the hour you want,
Don’t lose your time on the road,
But send for a Patent Gas-flame Stove
Introduced and made by Broad.
MANUFACTORY ,
IiJATTSOIT STREET,
Adelaide.
Orders by Post or otherwise promptly
attended to.
k
<1
7T
|
i
I
•i \ .
» . f
m 1
[ f j»
* I


'it
K
u. 1 4 I
J
I
W. & T. RHODES,
No. 7, bundle street. No. 7,
pral and J ur L :[rnnmon^rs.
THE ADVANTAGES
They can offer to both Wholesale and Retail customers
are
MGDSRATg PRICES,
As they import largely direct from England
'
It
VARIED & EXTENSIVE STOCK
In all departments of Builders’ Ironmongery and House-
hold Furnishings.
Glass, Earthenware, & China,
In Great Variety ; in Assorted Crates or otherwise.
TINWARE
Manufactured extensively on the premises, and supplied
in any quantity. Estimates given for laying on water or
Gas.
SEW MB MMEHMES
OF ALL THE
Approved makes, including the unequalled “ SINGER
FAMILY TREADLE MACHINE” and the “HOUSE-
HOLD ” American Lockstitch Hand Machine, for which
they are the SOLE AGENTS for South Australia.
Hand Machines ... ... ••• from 35a.
Every Machine guaranteed, and time payment if required.
"W, SZ> T. HI ODES,
StWtß© MACHINE ®EP@T*
No. 7, BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE
ADELAIDE : PRINTED AT THE “ ADVERTISER” OFFICE.


■j '
f
t
■'-,*' I
{g f


! j
|
1 I, ' v •* . '..'if, -.A ■ , f , ■* . , “ ", ,1
< . j ;j t , 1 S S - ' ' ■ t- -
:ir ': i 1
J
i .„
:
i
{ ■%
■, . .•••*- >>& ' V ■%/- .■■■;>:%■'.s-m.- ■-■■;• ;.-: ■ - ; :->vo vy y . ■■ ■ ; y . ■ . y yy-y^v;
: . :■ - y, • *m ' : . -. - ■: -;-yw yy-'y.yy - ■: j-.r -yv y .■ ■.--v: \ ,.- ■ •• ■ ■:■■■. ■
.-■ V ' , . - - ; ' t . • .■ 1 • ' ' ■ "4 ‘ 1 ’ y ■■■:■ : :: 5 ■' ' ' ■ • ■■.}';[
Tyyy *v ■-■ ,.r : yyiy *:y.; ;y . . ■:■■■■■; -y.; y yvy; ' ,...' ,•; ' y,y - - . y - ': *.
I i ' •■ ' ■■:■•■'■ » ' ' ' ■ *! ' ‘ ■■ ' ■ . , i '■
t 1
1
W
w
3
1
-i-;,
,
M
- S3 ... •■••■<■ ■.
c
4
■
J
m
1
■ sgr. ■
9
■
! ,
1
1
3
i 1
B
t
J
? ■
JM.
?. jpGr
t
J.; ■ v ■■ $. : : 1 'in ■' . ■ ■-' /T ' ; 0 - ■ • . ■ ; ■' v
II
1 1 ■ ■ ' , , ■ .y ••■ ■ ,,.- ■■ ' ' ■ y ■ :
1 1
h
I 1
I
1
.If-
1 ’B
• . ■ , '
t
1
\lf
• 1
Ll ‘ ;■ fc
I
!
•
■ • ■ •■. ■ . ..
_


