

i ( ■ me I
t ' -
HOD—G—CRAFT
—Block by S. R. Delmont, Ltd,
“Old Jack” With 5,118 Pieces of Bushwood
Old Jack Salutes The Trees
Many a tree is found in the wood,
And every tree for its use is good,
In the wealth of wood since the world began,
The trees have offered their gifts to man.
God has given the beautiful woods to be used,
But how often we see the bushwoods abused,
It is wasted and burnt without thought or care.
Regardless of the beauty hidden there;
But Hod-G-Craft shows what bushwoods are worth,
There is nothing more beautiful on the face of the
earth.
I have lived for years away in the North,
That is how I come to know the worth
Of the hardwoods growing north of Quorn,
I have loved them all since the day I was born
The gnarled old bark of the Beefwood tree,
And the beauty beneath appeals to me,
The Wattle, Myall, Needlewood and Gidgee,
The Bloodwood, Corkwood, Mulga and Ebony,
But Casurina has marvellous tone,
For colour and beauty it stands alone.
And now as my sun sinks in the west,
I thank God for the gifts with which I am blessed.
I have proved beyond doubt that trees are sublime,
We are finding their worth with the march of time
I get pleasure explaining how bushwoods are
blended
I hope I can go on ’till this life is ended.
And as the morning gilds the boughs
Of the old gum trees at the front of my house,
I open the window and make Salute,
God bless thy branches and feed thy root,
Thou hast lived before, live after me,
Thou Ancient, Faithful, Friendly Tree.
—“OLD JACK”
I LOVE Them All
I LOVE the silence of the chilly dawn.
When darkness melts and day is bora,
And crimson clouds in splendour lie
Like wings unfurled across the sky.
I LOVE the trees that stand all day,
Tired not from June ’till May,
They are sometimes dressed in rustling leaves,
Or waving bare arms in the breeze.
I LOVE the Summer with its nice long days,
And the stock all resting from the sun’s fierce fays,
And then the evening’s balmy breeze,
To freshen the leaves of the sun-scorched trees.
I LOVE the Autumn with its golden leaves
Tumbling down from, the limbs of the trees.
It shows that they have done their work,
It is against God’s nature to let them shirk
I LOVE the Winter with its driving rain
Dashing against the window pane,
It gives us the moisture we need to grow
All the seed that we care to sow.
I LOVE the coming of the Spring,
How sweet the larks and swallows sing,
And flowers gay and blossoms fair,
Floating perfume through the air.
I LOVE to linger ’till the silvery light
Pales into the coming night,
And watch the stars come one by one
To Light the earth when day is done.
I LOVE these things, I love them all,
There is none too great, and none too small,
But above them all I love a friend,
And I will always do so until the end.
—“OLD JACK
A Sentimental Journey To Wilpena
“My Friends” as you journey from here today.
You will pass all my landmarks on your way—
Landmarks that I hold most dear,
But, I have not seen them for many a year.
They will lead you to my Heaven on earth,
I have loved it all since the day of my birth.
Perhaps the word Heaven should be defined,
So, if you look in your dictionary you will find
That Heaven is a place of great bliss,
Now, Wilpena Station is surely this.
It is also a region in the atmosphere,
Where the clouds float most of the year.
I have stood with my arms stretched to the sky
And felt the cloutfe go drifting by,
And my arms extending until I could feel
I was embracing the world in a grip of steel
I have built my Cathedral up in the Pound,
The hills are sacred for miles around.
I would love to travel with you today,
The spirit can go but the flesh must stay.
So, as you drive along just think of me,
My heart is beating in every tree.
And the creeks, and hills, and the plain,
All come to my mind again.
As I travel with you to my home up there,
Where all is peace and I have not a care.
Things that are terrestrial here,
Suddenly become Celestial there.
Up through that gorge is a glorious sight,
I have walked through in the dead of night.
There, a marvellous stillness fills the air,
I have felt it, so I know it is there.
And when this sublunary life shall have passed
away,
If I could rest there until the Judgement Day,
It would be all I desire from here below,
And when the time comes I am ready to go.
So now, my friends, you must be on your way
Let us hope we may meet again some day
And when you leave up there, just say a prayer
For one who should be —but is not—there.
—“OLD JACK”
Day Dreams
As I walk in the hills in my dreams,
Admiring the trees and the rippling streams,
I see the strength of God’s own hand,
Showing us the beauty of this fair land.
And as I climb to the dizzy heights,
And look around at the wonderful sights
I feel my Creator is by my side,
As I gaze out there far and wide.
The wonderful colours blended there,
Show us beauty everywhere,
The glorious brown of the hills up here,
And the lovely green of the plains down there,
And up here in the hazy blue.
And the trees in the creeks a different hue,
All go to make a picture unsurpassed
It seems we have found Heaven at last.
And now as I return to the plain,
To mingle with my loved ones once again
And live the life of pride and joy,
Just as we did when I was a boy.
My only religion is brotherly love,
And my only tuition comes from above,
And when Charity, and Faith, and Love are
combined,
What a wonderful combination we find.
We can go through life, light-hearted and carefree,
It will the same for you, as it is for me.
And when we leave this old world behind,
Let us hope that we shall find
Joy and happiness for evermore,
Where we live together on that Eternal Shore.
—“OLD JACK”
With Compliments and Love from
“Old Jack,”
Box 55, Quorn,
South Australia.
