





HOISTING OUR FLAG
ON THE
ANZAC REDOUBT,
AND
OTHER WAR RHYMES
AND
VARIOUS VERSES
" PATRIUS
Newcastle s
DAVIES a CANNINGTON. LTD., FEDERAL PRINTING WORKS,


PREFACE.
Acceding- to the expressed desire of a number of my life-long
friends that I would put into print the verses herein contained, I am
now doing so with much diffidence and without any claim for merit
or otherwise, but solely to put same in a compact, readable form for
private distribution amongst aforesaid friends, and with the following
brief introduction, or explanation.
Some of these lines were originally written and published over
3 0 years ago, at the time of the Soudan Campaign and the despatch of
the first contingent of troops to leave Australia for foreign shores to
fight the Empire’s battles. By slight alterations and revision these
particular verses have, after this lapse of time, been made applicable
to the present day.
Little I thought, when first penning these earlier lines, that I
would find use for them thirty odd years later, in connection with the
present disastrous world-wide war, and that our own dearly beloved
son would be one of the first to enlist (Aug., 1914) in the greater
Australian contingents to leave these shores, and after taking part in
the ever memorable landing of the “Anzacs” at Gallipoli on April
25th, 1915, would be one of the first officers to fall, mortally wounded,
while leading the men under his command into the Turkish enemies’
trenches two days later, April 27th, 1915. Yet such happened. He
was laid to rest in the old cemetery at Cairo, Egypt, and his dust now
mingles with that of the illustrious dead of ages past in that ancient
and historic land, and to our departed hero son, my friends of the past
and bygone years and the younger ones of the present day, the contents
of this booklet are affectionately dedicated. And should it prove useful
in augmenting any Patriotic or War Comforts’ Fund, or aid in securing
recruits for the purpose of re-inforcing our Army at the Front, it will
afford much pleasure and satisfaction to the author.
“PATRIUS.”
Newcastle, N.S.W.,
October, 1917,


CONTENTS.
PATRIOTIC AND WAR RHYMES
Hoisting our Flag on the Anzac Redoubt ............ 5
The Strength of the Weak 9
“Carry On” 10
Under Which Flag—British or German? 11
The Landing of the “Anzacs” .. . . . . .... 12
Our Heroes’ Graves in Egypt 13
Australia at the Front . . . . . . . . . 14
Australia to the Front . . . . . . 16
The Air Raids 17
Wanted . . . . . . 18
Our Boys in the Trench . . . . . . 19
Excerpts from Lines on War . . . . 20
The “U” Boats (German Submarines) 22
The Trail of the “Casualty” Lists 23
Some “Kultured” Hun Atrocities of the Present War—l9l7 25
Enlist —An Appeal for Relief to the First Division 26
An Ode to the Arch Conspirator of the War 28
VARIOUS VERSES*
A Lock of Hair . . .. . 29
To Baby Lillie 31
In Memoriam —Prof. W. Denton . . . .. 32
A Travellers’ View of Port Curtis 33
Life . . . . . . .. . . . . .. .. 34
The Old Coaching Days . . . . . .. , . 35
A Carol of the Chimes of Liberty .................. 37
The Birthplace or Home of Music 39
A Song of the Surf . . . . .. .. .. .. 40




Patriotic and War Rhymes*
HOISTING OUR FLAG ON THE ANZAC REDOUBT.
Vide Press news: Sept. 20-25/17. —“Fearful losses were Inflicted by
the Australians, who penetrated the most formidable defences and won
one of the most brilliant victories of the war.”
A Special Correspondent “was permitted to be on the spot to watch
the Australians fighting- their greatest battle in the war.”
“The Australians, in storming Anzac Redoubt, screened a standard-
bearer, who planted the Commonwealth Flag on the summit amidst his
cheering comrades.”
“During the subsequent halt before further attacks, the Australians
coolly smoked and read newspapers, which an officer had brought up
through-the barrage, to pass the time.”
How one thrills with emotion when reading above
Of these “dare devil billjims” that all of us love;
Re the work of these “Anzacs” near Polygon Wood,
Who in many hot battles have valiantly stood;
These bronzed living statues the King lately viewed
At a sports time parade, when old games they renewed,
Like old time Greek heroes at a strength testing bout,
Who raised the Flag later on “Anzac Redoubt.”
These heroes and veterans of doughty past deeds
Have added fresh laurels to a fame nought impedes,
While the world yet remembers with gratified pride
Their endurance and courage before so well tried
In the East, on Gallipoli’s fire welcomed sheen,
In the West, Bullecourt, Pozieres and Moraine,
Their baptism of fire brought their bravery out,
And its lasted right up to the “Anzac Redoubt.”
In the nick of good trim, after having a rest,
They now in good fettle, felt quite at their best;
Had in view an objective they next had to make,
Which our shells did not shift, and the boys vowed to take;
They had watched it some time with greed in their eyes,
And swore they’d not rest till they made it a prize.
’Twas a Hill with a farm and some guns thereabout,
And they fittingly named it the “Anzac Redoubt.”
They were never in doubt they would reach this new height.
And now on their mettle, put up a good fight;
jNor were ever more anxious to get into grips,
To clear from this Farm every d liable Fritz.
They thus waited the signal, “Advance to attack,”
With nerves at high tension, or else all-a-rack,
Some passed the time calmly, some prayed most devout,
For success in the taking of “Anzac Redoubt.”


With the sky all a-fire with red and green flares,
The attack was preceded, as in such affairs,
By a withering bombardment of all sorts of shell;
Great star shells and rockets, which swished and then fell
In long tails of sparks of bright amber lined ray,
Making gorgeous, yet awe-some Hell’s-flrework display,
Shells phosphoric exploding in reddish brown spout,
Was the “prelude” to taking the “Anzac Redoubt.”
Early morn had now come with daybreak in sight,
On horizon appeared a semi-circle of light,
Sign time was approaching for work to be done,
’Twas sure a good omen, this bright rising sun,
The Australian Emblem, which meant victory won
From the treacherous German, the much hated Hun;
And so it proved later, when resting about,
After planting our Flag on the “Anzac Redoubt.
A sudden increase in the noise, and they knew
The time had arrived for attack to ensue,
For which they had waited throughout the long night,
The “barrage” had lifted with coming of light;
The “whizz-bangs” and “slim-jims” screamed all sorts of notes,
Thunder claps all at once from a hundred guns throats,
The barking of “heavies” now opened the route,^
And blazed them a track to the “Anzac Redoubt.
They jumped off “over top” at five-forty a.in.,
The smattering machine guns were nothing to them,
Through chaos of shell holes and fast clutching wire,
Smashed concreted “pill boxes” and concerted fire.
The scattering of shrapnel, exploding gas shells
Pandemonium of sounds in a thousand fresh yel s,
Was what they passed through as their way they now fought,
Inch by inch, yard by yard, to the “Anzac Redoubt.
Then man to man battles, revolver in hand,
Through “dug-outs” and “block-house,” demanding a Stand
And surrender,” “Clear out, there’s no time to lose.
As prisoners or death is what Huns had to choose,
Soon terror struck soldiers, with no guidance or lead,
Poured out of their trenches and started to plead
For the mercy some got, whilst some were knocked out
By the men who were making for “Anzac Redoubt.
Hun bombers in craters tried a bombing attack,
But our boys on the edge, these bombs hurled right back.
What was left in the hole quickly gave up the game,
“Hands up,” cried “Kamerad,” and prisoners became.
Some followed the “barrage” through smoke misty screen,
Got ahead ’mongst the “whizz-bangs,” quite plain to be seen,
Seemed surprised, turned around, and walked calmly back,
Dodged death and reached safety, then stuck to the track.


It is seldom our men get fights, man to man,
Far away the Bosche snipes you as hard as he can;
Nearer still he will bomb you, turn on you his gun,
But, when close up to strike, he’ll surrender or run.
And so thus it was, when our boys neared their goal,
The nerve shattered Huns, who’d already paid toll,
Dropped guns and surrendered and quickly cleared out
Prom their concreted “Pill-box” near “Anzac Redoubt.”
They drove back the Germans to Polygon Wood,
Close up to objective at last they now stood,
These unconquered Anzacs, of whom its been said
They’d get on with their job though the sky opened red,
And rained fire down upon them by way of a bath,
And would tweak Satan’ nose if he stood in their path;
As such type as these were the men who now fought
Their way to the top of the “Anzac Redoubt.”
This dauntless brigade had now battled right through,
All the way to their goal quite close into view,
And here mounted the summit before ten a.m.,
All the able, and wounded if fit to join men,
Like an eagle of conquest with plumage fresh preened,
The standard was raised and the bearer was screened,
As the colors were hoisted aloft with a shout,
And our star spangled Flag flew on “Anzac Redoubt.”
Then the cheers of our men told of victory won,
Their objective was gained, and their day well begun;
With their courage as great, now this goal they had reached.
As that famed April morn when the boat loads were beached
On Gallipoli’s rocky and storm-beaten shore,
When was put up a record ne’er equalled before;
From the steppes of Gabe Tepe the Turks were cleared out.
Like the Germans now shifted from “Anzac Redoubt.”
This point now obtained there was sounded “at ease,”
And the men to their joy got a “go as you please”
For a spell, till they started a further assault
On the Polygon Wood, when they’d finish their halt;
They sat in the trenches and lounged in shell holes,
Ate, drank, and smoked calmly, to full of their souls
Of the good things they’d gathered from dug-outs of Huns,
Or read newspapers brought them to relieve any glums.
Then yarned to each other and told many tales,
Related one Sergeant, “Two Germans I hailed,
Who, when told to surrender, just fired at close range,”
An action which quickly produced quite a change;
“I clubbed one big fellow, he fell down —to stay—
Tlie other a mere kid, I sent out of the way;
I hadn’t the heart, after what I’d gone through,
Thought p’raps he’d a mother expecting him, too.”


’Twas another bronzed Sergeant’s seventh time “over top,”
At Gallipoli, Pozieres, the ’Court ’mongst the lot;
Had seen nothing to equal the present attack,
“Just the game that I like,” said this burly Anzac.
And his troubles all vanished, remembering how
He’d helped hoist the Flag on the hill there just now;
Had the time of his life, as he helped in the rout,
While lighting his way to the “Anzac Redoubt.”
Some of the elder ones’ minds drifted far
As they quietly smoked the Huns’ captured cigar;
They forgot any pains while thinking of how
They’d relate to their loved ones what happened just now,
How they’d shame all the “Hang-backs” with zero cold feet
When they heard the true tales of the great Hun defeat,
And thrill all their hearts with stories about
How they planted their Flag on the “Anzac Redoubt.”
News item a few days later: —
LONDON, Tuesday, 28/9/17. —The Australians gained all
objectives in the general advance, including Polygon Mound.
They captured the Racecourse and Polygon Mound,
Cleared dug-outs and block-houses where any were found;
These “dare-devil bill-jims” were still on the go,
Seized Hun machine guns, and turned ’em on foe.
These dashing Australians will come out on top,
No barrage could check them, much less make them stop;
They had gained all objectives for which they set out,
After hoisting their Flag on the “Anzac Redoubt.”
Why were there no joy bells, no banners hung out,
To celebrate victory, of which there’s no doubt,
In which took a part, English, Scottish and Welsh,
Combined in the final our strong foe to squelch.
The game well contested, no move made in vain,
From point unto point we made it quite plain
Our side was “all in” and the other “all out,”
After taking and passing the “Anzac Redoubt.”
Sept., 1917.


THE STRENGTH OF THE WEAK.
An Appeal to Unrecruited Eligibles.
Though only a weakling, he felt he must go,
As others more fit were apparently slow;
He shouldered his gun and went bravely away
To help the boys keep the Hun devils at bay.
Three times he enlisted, and thrice was sent back
As unfit for service, too weak for his pack.
At last he succeeded, and so put to shame
Eligible men who were not near so game;
He went through his training as well as the best,
And entered the front line along with the rest.
But climatic changes and freezing wet days
Plays up with the strong, and the weak one oft pays;
Bong spells in the trenches, the mud and the mire,
Exposed all the time to the enemies fire.
No men coming forward to give them a rest,
They must still “carry on” and give of their best
Until Nature steps in and cries a quick “Halt,”
When soon its apparent there’s something at fault,
And sickness o’ertakes them, against which they fight,
Till strength peters out and they sink out of sight,
And fill up a line in the casualty list,
”Mong “missing,” or victims of “German mailed fist.”
Our hero got sick and was fit for the base,
But told to keep on, as in most every case;
The shortage of men allowed none to retire
Who could keep their feet or their guns they could fire.
You’ve heard how this boy in his dug-out was found,
With bayonet fixed and his gun pointed round
To the enemies’ front, awaiting the “charge.”
With strength, ah, so weak, but his heart still so large,
The “charge” came on later, but he heard it not,
In that awful advance he fired no shot.
He was missed by his mates when they got far ahead,
And returning to dug-out, they found him there —dead;
Not killed by the enemies’ shot, or by shell,
But a cause must be shown in records, so —well
He died of some illness —or so said the list.
From official reports culled, such was the gist,
But listen, you lads, if you’re wanting the truth,
If not satisfied, we can furnish the proof;
Twas want of more rest that helped stop this boy’s breath
And being overworked, that most led to his death;
The reason was this, that he got ne’er a spell
From the nerve-racking strain in this cruel state of helk
No fresh reinforcements came marching his way,
He had to keep going from day on to day,
Uptil war-worn and weary and sore-sick at heart,
While bravely as ever still playing his part.
He reported at last unfit to go on,
With hardly a leg he could firm stand upon;


But, being unwounded, nor yet out o£ pace,
And no reserves coming to take up his place,
He was given “not out” by the A.C.0.,
With every man wanted who had any show
Of doing his duty. He stiffened his back,
And stayed with his mates to help meet the attack,
And thus this brave lad was permitted to die
’Cause strong healthy “hang-backs” heard not the boys’ cry
For men, that would give just the help that was needed,
The saving of lives is thus often impeded.
Now lads, if you’re fit, show you’ve still got some love
For those who are acting as pictured above;
Take up the fight of the weak and the ailing,
Give them the relief that will stop them from failing;
Be “a good sportsman” and go, help to resist
This onslaught of Huns with their treach’rous mailed fist.
These wolves in sheep’s clothing, with fangs of the beast,
Murderers of women, to say but the least,
Who shoot nurses, kill wounded and harmless old men,
Why spy at your door and break bread with you, then
Turn traitor and rend you, if given the chance,
And would spit young babies on end of a lance.
Help bring this great war to a triumphant end,
Go, join the new units we constantly send
To keep up the strength of divisions who fight
For King and for Country, for Freedom and Right,
For you and your kindred and all you hold dear,
Till again the track of progression is “clear,”
And the old Union Jack floats proudly in sight,
The unbeaten emblem of Right against Might.
Aug., 1917.
“CARRY ON.”
Don’t you hear the boys a-calling
’Midst the dead that near them lie,
As around their mates are falling,
Fighting there for you and I;
Against great odds they’ve won much fame.
Though short of men, still play the game,
And “CARRY ON.”
Chorus;
“Carry on,” let naught retard us,
Courage still brave Allies all;
Carry on till vict’ry crowns us
And ensures the tyrants fall.
The world knows well our boys are sports.
At all games they’re in the swim;
Of championships they’ve won all sorts,
Their honour cup is full to brim.
The game now on they’ll finish when
We play our part and send them men
To “CARRY ON.”


Though ranks grow weak and lines are thin,
This, our fight for right ’gainst might,
Must never cease until we win
The vict’ry we have in sight.
Then send the help for which they call,
And fill the gaps made as they fall,
And “CARRY ON.”
Think of your mates among the slain
And of the curs that downed ’em.
Let not their blood be shed in vain,
Be a true pal—avenge them.
Pick up the gun of one who fell,
Help them to beat this “Spawn of Hell,
And “CARRY ON.”
Aug., 1917.
The above lines have been set to music composed by
Dawson, L.A.8., Newcastle.
UNDER WHICH FLAG—BRITISH OR GERMAN?
A Question of Loyalty.
Under which of these Flags are you willing to fight?
The one with an unsullied name,
Or the other which, having no semblance of right,
Set the rest of the Avorld aflame;
The one which, though now may be tattered and patched,
Is free from dishonor or stain;
other, with skull and cross bones now attached,
Through murders and robbing the slain.
The one which protects all the weak from a fall
And pits right against vindictive might;
The other that crushes the weak to the wall,
Tears up treaties and rules by affright,
With horrid inventions of devilish design
As it ruthlessly batters its way,
The weak have no course but to die or resign,
And nothing is left but to pay.
The one that is British and free from all guile,
And from servitude sets slaves free,
Or the German, that covers up all that's vile
On the land, in air, or at sea;
It murders, and sacks, and glories in burning,
These facts one can easy assert;
Shells ships that hold wounded, then openly spurning
To succour the ones that are hurt.
Could you honor the Flag with record so black,
With crimes we know sadly are true;
If not, then still cherish the old Union Jack,
That covers and watches o’er .you:
Symbol of fear to the cruel oppressor
And succour in uneven fight,
Emblem of Hate to the brutal aggressor,
And of Love in all that i'S right.
Aug., 1917.


THE LANDING OF THE “ANZACS."
’Twas a fateful April morn,
Just as break of day was born,
That a nation’s seal was set on Southern race,
By our boys who crossed the sea
From their homes of liberty,
And to hist’ry gave the name of “Anzac” place;
For though we knew ere then
How brave could be our men,
’Twas a seeming hopeless task they had to face.
Silently they made the shore,
Knowing not what was in store,
Of this they never had the slightest doubt;
They’d do the job as set,
A footing they would get,
And from those heights would drive the Turkish out„
Knowing well that high up there,
Perched like eagles in the air,
Lurked the foe whom they had sworn to put to rout.
They leapt out from boat to shore
Into traps at which they swore,
While entanglements of spikes and wire snares
And pit falls in which they fell,
Making moments that were Hell,
Were things that caught our brave men unawares.
Shells and bullets flew around,
Shrapnel burst quite near the ground,
Lighting up the morn with ghastly flares.
But, undaunted on they sped
For the tow’ring cliffs o’er head,
Like great embattled walls or feudal tower;
And with no time to take breath,
Climbed those walls of certain death,
To battle with a much superior power;
And from Turkish trenches flew,
All but those our soldiers slew,
That charge of “Anzac” bay’nets made ’em cower.
Ah! it was nobly done,
Those trenches that were won,
On the crest of Gabe Tepe’s rugged height,
Carved a world enduring name,
One of never-dying fame,
That of “Anzac” and as heroes that could fight;
And how proudly we received
News that proved us not deceived,
In the breed to which we knew they’d prove their right.
Feb., 1917.


OUR HEROES’ GRAVES IN EGYPT
When Egypt held in bondage tight
The Israelites by force of might,
God, in His own mysterious way,
Showed where relief for them would lay;
And from oppression set them free,
’Twas for such work ours crossed the sea,
Our boys from young Australia.
Elapsed has many a thousand year,
Still is this world obsessed by fear
Of bloody sword and massive guns,
And nations ruined by treach’rous Huns,
To _ free such from a yoke that galled,
This young land helped when Britain called,
Our boys in far Australia.
They pitched their camp in foreign lands,
’Midst Egypt’s ruins, desert sands,
And soon were trained to meet the foe
Where’er ’twas found theyM need to go;
To Gabe Tepe’s fearsome heights,
Or deserts where the Arab fights,
Went ours from young Australia.
Their dust now mingles with the loam
Where mighty Pharoahs used to roam.
Whose hist’ry is writ in ages
A thousand years between the pages;
Thus, old and new have come together,
By reason of the great endeavour
Of boys from young Australia.
Oh! Egypt, land of mystic age
And tombs of great antiquity,
In Pyramids of awesome gauge,
With Sphinx in close proximity,
Thou cannot still claim only old;
Young heroes now thy tombs enfold —
Our sons from young Australia.
Feb., 1917.


AUSTRALIA AT THE FRONT,
Australia’s Flag on high is nailed
By patriotic sons,
Who, to the field of war have sailed
To face the foemen’s guns.
May vict’ry settle on “our pitch,”
Our foes a “knock out” get
From Britain great Empire, on which
The sun must never set.
Chorus:
Our brave Australian boys
Will nobly “play the game,”
And to these sunny skies
Will bring illustrious fame.
Her sons have rallied to the call
To help the Motherland,
And ready are to fight or fall,
A steadfast, loyal band.
Thus succour does old England get
Prom her colonial boys,
They’ll show they’ve not forgotten yet
Old home and kindred ties.
Bravo, Australians, “Grand,”
“Well played in every way,”
We shout o’er all this land
When news comes of your fray.
God will defend our noble corps
And bless their chivalry,
No German steel will make them pause,
They’re bound for vict’ry.
Though great may be the foeman’s might,
This war will only end,
When to the law of perfect right
The Kaiser’s knee shall bend.
Our brave Australian lads
Will also have “Der Tag,”
And give a helping hand
To down the pirate’s flag.


Our offered help but spoke the words
Of all within these parts,
The news of Belgium’s plight so stirred
All true and loyal hearts.
Thus quickly to the front we went,
With men as brave as free,
On high the Austral Flag was sent
For King and Liberty.
Our brave heroic band,
Who fairly “play the game,”
Will bring this Southern land
A brave and honored name.
Long may it float above our land
In spotless honor clean,
This ensign of a noble band
In righteous cause now seen.
The world now shouts Australia’s name,
Their foeman they have matched;
Our starry flag has won much fame.
With “Anzac’s” name attached.
Our brave and steadfast band
Who nobly “play the game,”
Back to this Southern land
Will bring undying fame.
Australia’s sons at battle’s front
Carved an immortal name,
In fearless fight have borne the brunt
And won undying fame.
In air, on sea, in firing line,
Quite proud we are to know
Their record’s proving one so fine,
As to the front they go.
Our brave Australian boys,
When done with foreign parts,
Will back ’neath Southern skies
Find “Welcome” in our hearts.
-Re-written Sept., 1917.


AUSTRAUA TO THE FRONT,
A Patriotic Song,
We in this land of sunny health
Must seeds of greatness sow,
For in this land of untold wealth
Such seeds are sure to grow.
We want no weeds of canc’rous growth
From seeds of had intent,
There is no room for wasteful sloth
In this young continent.
Chorus;
Then shout Australia’s name,
The seeds of greatness sow,
This land of wealth and fame
On to the front must go.
For as we reap just what we sow,
The harvest must be free
From all that tends to spoil the crop
Or shackle liberty.
Australia can’t, and won’t, “go slow,”
Naught must her progress stay;
She heeds no danger, fears no foe,
And shirks not any fray.
Chorus: Then shout Australia’s name, etc,
Her sons have always “played the game
In sport and in the trench,
Let naught be done to soil her name
Or sap her growing strength.
Her onward march must never know
A “backwash,” “baulk,” or “rot,”
Her forward tide must ever flow
Until she gains the top.
Chorus; Then shout Australia s
name, etc.
Not only in the war-wracked parts,
But those of restful peace;
In commerce, trade, and all the arts
Our efforts must not cease.
To build and conquer, strive, surpass,
Improve our land and show
In all that proves a nation’s “class,”
We to the front will go.
Chorus: Then shout Australia’s
name, etc.
Her foes may on her progress frown,
All, jealous of her power;
The brightest gem of Britain’s crown
Before them will not cower.
Fair land of beauty, riches, health,
Of never clouded sun,
Of liberty, unbounded wealth,
On to the front, then—-on.
Chorus: Then shout Australia’s
name, etc


THE AIR RAIDS.
Some bombs were dropped in the East end of London; many
women and children were killed. A German aeroplane bombed a French
Military Hospital, killing- 19 and wounding- 26. It repeatedly flew over
the Hospital at intervals for 20 minutes, and hit the building every
time. —Vide Daily Press News.
A raid! a raid! and signals warn the people to take cover,
As high above, like birds on wing, the baby-killers hover,
And start their dev’lish work again where but civilian dwells,
Dropping their high explosive bombs and planting poison shells.
Destruction, fire, and slaughter now quick follow in their wake,
And there’s no room to question, but it’s done for murder’s sake.
Then when the raid is ended and their murd’ring work is done.
It makes a “flag wag holiday” for slaughter-loving Hun.
Amidst the smash and rubble left behind, Avhat sights we view,
The maimed and tortured bodies were scenes which quickly drew
Groans of anguish from the heart of every person there
And vows of swift revenge on these assassins in the air.
But help was quick forthcoming, cars and ambulances flew,
And to the sorely stricken parts much aid they quickly drew
To help the work of rescue ’mongst those wounded or in pain,
And gather up the remnants of the mutilated slain
And scraps of little children, for on one stretcher lay
All that remained of three or four the brutes destroyed that day.
Then on to the infirmary until was filled each cot,
In Children's ward the beds were full, each with a tiny tot.
Their curly heads now bandaged and moaning with their pain,
Their hands and faces yellow with the high explosive stain.
The babies cried for “Mummy”—all words of mine must fail
To picture scenes, the sight of which made bravest hearts to
quail.
Some wounded “Ausie” soldiers in “Blighty” for repairs,
Saw those mangled children being passed up the ward room
stairs,
And said, “Poor little blighters,” as their eyes on these mites fell,
When we get back again to Prance we’ll give these Germans hel 7
They spare not even hospitals, those sanctuaries of pain,
And soon some wounded heroes are numbered with the slain;
As high above they gravitate to freely plant their bomb,
And wounded men asphixiate with deadly gas therefrom,
And to and fro pass overhead, increasing roll of dead.
That such can be, one scarce believes, but so the cables read,
Vide recent prints of daily press you’ll see the published truth,
In zones of peace,, as well as stress, these murder bombs they
loose.
“Why did they do it, daddy, mum did no harm,” so said
A young child to her father, whose wife now lay there dead.
“God only knows,” he answered, “But by heaven I only hope
The fiends that have killed her will feel the hangman’s rope.”
But doubt it not, for it’s well known, the planners of such crime
Are myrmidons and vassals of the Hohenzollern line.
Sept., 1917.


WANTED.
(A few Advts suitable for the “Wanted Column” in
any Newspaper.)
Wanted:
Shells by thousands to batter, bang and bast
And smash the Boche’s front line, “so ours” can make a dash
To move a section forward, with bayonets well in hand,
Into the German trenches, ’cross fire-swept “No Man’s Land.”
Chorus:
Shells, and more shells, to blast a way to victory,
Men, and more men, such as are making history;
Cash, and more cash, your savings now release,
Guns, and more guns, to force our terms of peace.
Wanted:
Men, and more men, to battle this thing through,
Remember what we’ve learnt from experiences true;
The closer one gets to the poison-belching Hun,
The quicker they surrender, or else cut up and run.
Wanted:
Heaps more money, our vict’ry to haste,
And not one slice of bread must any one now waste;
For every piece so saved helps the man behind the gun,
And helps to deal a “knock out” to another “blanky Hun.”
Wanted:
Guns of ev’ry sort, from largest to the least,
To “jump in quick, and bite quick,” this Hunnish savage beast;
To shake the vaults of heaven and this message to them tell:
Their thunder will not cease, ’till we’ve sent ’em back to hell.
Wanted:
Red Cross nurses, those Angelic aids of love,
And Sisters of Mercy, as in our heaven above;
Heroines with courage, facing danger all the time,
In shell-struck ambulance or quite near the firing-line.
Wanted:
The good people, who safely stay at home,
To think of the boys, who so far have had to roam;
And those who cannot fight for those they hold most dear,
To pay, and still pay, and bring our vict’ry near.
Wanted:
To make it well known that, to beat our brutal foe,
We must do our very best and stop this “going slow”;
Our small domestic squabbles and petty trade disputes,
Should surely be “hung up” till we scotch these German brutes
It means “the iron sacrifice of body, will and soul,”
“A steel hard will” for vict’ry, or else we’ll pay the toll,
Such as that enacted from each devastated land
This modern Hun has entered with his mittened iron-hand.


Chorus:
Shells, and more shells, to blast a way to vict’ry ;
Men, and more men, such as are making hist’ry;
Cash, and more cash, your savings now release,
Guns, and more guns, compelling lasting peace.
Sept., 1917.
OUR BOYS IN THE TRENCH.
A War Chest Appeal, Sept., 1917.
We’re told the War Chest’s empty
And funds are much too low,
So let us up and fill it
With a very lib’ral flow
Of cash to buy some comforts,
And thus afford some strength
To noble boys still fighting
Away there in their trench.
We all can give some trifle,
Can sacrifice some need,
And help fill up the War Chest,
Don’t let us vainly plead.
They value much these comforts.
Away there ’mongst the French,
That the War Chest Fund provides
Our boys with, in their trench.
All money so collected
Is put to but one use,
To help the fighting soldier
Discomforts to reduce.
So to this Fund give freely,
Be generous in your strength
For boys that are still fighting,
Away there in the trench.
Awhile ago, on French Day,
We shouted “Vive La France,”
And our record for free giving
Again did much enhance.
Then, let us do no less now
Than we did for the French,
Send comforts to our own boys
Still fighting in the trench.
Sept., 1917.


Excerpts from Lines on
WAR.
Oh! war, inglorious, desolating war,
Thy gaping cannons boom again afar,
And wholesale butchery once more goes on,
Wrecking the peacefulness of everyone;
More misery and death in store for those
Round whom thy frightful ravages do close.
% ❖ * *
Great nations now with shot and shell
And horrors fresh exhumed from hell,
Unlicensed outrage, cruel lust,
Aside has all sane reason thrust.
Until forsooth one surely had
The picture of a world gone mad,
Masses of men dragooned to fight
Those who are brothers in God’s sight,
With murdTous bomb and poisonous gas,
Until the toll of slain surpass
All other wars of bygone past.
And, when the carnage ends at last,
What see we as we look around
The field of battle, on the ground
The writhing frames, distorted features,
The shrieks and cries of dying creatures,
The groans of wounded, heaps of slain,
Left lying on the smoking plain.
Their couch, the cold earth wet with gore,
Their fun’ral chant, the battles roar,
Pond homes destroyed and cities bared,
Not even lives of women spared;
The ruins of burnt and ravaged town,
Historic buildings battered down,
The ancient church of rare design
Made target for big guns in line.
The shrieking shells, the shrapnel hiss,
That carry death, and seldom miss,
All making pictures fit to draw
Hell’s curses on such bloody war.
$ ❖ ❖ * ❖
God’s word to man says: “Love, do good to all.
Never in anger on thy neighbour fall.”
But man, through rank depravity of will,
Is cruel, selfish and revengeful still;
And raising up on high his blood-stained sword,
Slaughters a brother for glory of the Lord.
List to the mournful tolling of the bell,
’Tis for death of some great general;
Now to the joyous peal of bells,
This news of some great victory tells:
Thus, hand in hand Death and Yict’ry go,
Joy brought to some, to others naught but woe;
Greater he who bloodless vict’ries gain,
Than he who wins it by the thousands slain.


Raise up the pall from battle field
And see what pictures it will yield,
Here where the battle was begun,
And now the work of slaughter’s done.
What sick’ning sights now meet the view,
See those processions, two by two,
As wounded comrades are removed
To have their painful tortures soothed.
The dead are lying there to rot,
No time to bury such a lot;
Besides, they are but soldiers dead,
On whom the God of War has fed.
They are but soldiers who have died,
And now are lying side by side
Bike sheaves of wheat but newly mown,
Fair product of the seed as sown.
*****
Ah! sure this war should be the last,
And relegated to the past
Such scenes as are depicted here;
This world should not be ruled by force,
But Justice, Liberty and Love,
And Mercy as in heaven above.
******
The only room for consolation
In these sad scenes of desolation,
Is that they prove we still possessed
Soldiers as brave as e’re assessed,
Heroes who won Victoria Crosses
By gallant actions, which embosses
Such records with a deeper line.
The A.M.C., while shrapnel burst,
Think only of the wounded first
And carry to the Red Cross base
And safety every wounded case,_
Where doctors wait to do the trimming,
And nursing sisters, noble women,
Work hard to save the soldier’s life,
For mother, sis’ or loving wife.
Oh! War God, grown in mis’ry hoary.
Thou travesty of seeming glory,
Insatiate monster never filled, _
Not yet appeased with thy millions killed,
Soon may thy reign come to an end
And man no more to thy sway bend.
The time will come when man will see
That thousands should not slaughtered be,
At dictum of some despot power,
The caprice of some idle hour.
That ’cause two nations quarrel make.
Their lives and fortunes they should stake,
Settled they’ll be without blood spilt.


As we grow in enlightenment,
As we draw near the Infinite,
A spark of which burns ever bright
In all that lives, raising higher
Our nature by its holy fire.
We are but parts of one stupendous whole
Whose body Nature is and God the Soul.’'
1885 —Revised. 1917.
THE “U” BOATS (German Submarines).
™ou ™° nstrous shape of dev’lish power,
with little seen but conning tower,
As skulking ’neath the wavelet’s foam
Ihou underneath the sea doth roam
With periscope exposed to spy
Some unarmed vessel passing by.
Oh! what unholy, fiendish work,
All open warfare thou dost shirk;
Submerge, ye coward, submerge.
You glory in the blood you’ve spilled
Ot women and of children killed
It seems to be thy pet desire
To set some noble ship on fire,
And with torpedoes, murd’rous shell,
Send unwarned victims—well,
To, may be heaven, or may be hell,
One does not know, so cannot tell:
Submerge, thou fiend, submerge
But, when a gun-boat happens by,
How quietly then you choose to lie,
Just ’neath the water’s surface seen,’
A seaplane sights the submarine;
A well-aimed shot and she is struck.
A mess is made of upper truck.
Disabled now, she quickly sinks,
Good-bye, thou slimy mass of stinks;
Submerge and stay submerged.
Feb., 1917.


THE TRAIL OF THE “CASUALTY” LISTS.
In casualty lists we very often read
The names of many “dead” and “wounded” men,
Whilst “missing” heads the list of many others, and
Tells all that’s known about them until then;
And many sorrowing friends now long for actual facts
Of those about whom possibly there’s doubt
As to whether they still live, have really lost their lives,
Or prisoners are until the war’s fought out.
Little do we think, when these lists we careless scan,
Of tragedies that oft beneath them lie,
The trouble that is brought to many happy homes
Through losses which these lists oftimes supply;
The uncertainty and fear, if wounded, will he live,
If only “missing,” p’raps then, later on,
There will return “her man,” or some sturdy only son
A mother had been used to lean upon.
Later, “missing” ones are oft classed again as ‘ dead,
But some have unexpectedly returned
Back to their stricken home, where friends have mourned
their
loss . ,
Through some mistake or “mix-up undiscerned.
Some have their minds unhinged oft by a sudden shock,
And forgetting all, they get^ astray somehow,
And mem’ry being lost, lose identity as well,
Which often clears what looks a mystery now.
The painful facts unfolded now in prosy lines to you
Are substantial, not fictionally true,
But lately came to view, and the story told to me
Was much as now related unto you,
About a soldier wounded very badly at the tront.
And later on the fatal wire was sped
That told a loving mother she’d lost her only son,
Whom she and others mourned some time as dead.
But a “cot case” he returned, and to hospital was sent,
He kept this fact a secret from his mother
He wished so much to spare her further needless pain,
Being doubtful he’d ever more recover; „
Already he’d been posted both “missing and as dead,
Was likely to be really so quite soon,
And decided it was best to let his record rest,
So lay and waited calmly there his doom.
This hero for himself had not a single thought,
Making little of his own infernal luck;
He got on “a cruel pitch,” got badly knocked about,
And went “out” with the usual British pluck
He lay in bed there thinking, not for a moment dreaming
Of another dark’ning shadow looming near.
O’er one he tried to save from further grief and pain
And soon would meet again, his mother dear.


e ,^ asr ' when walking out in mourning’s sombre ray
w ® be “ et a n “ rßing triend J' ust passing by, ?
Who was very much surprised to see her friend in blank
«*r mstil , g .. asked the reason why ’
Her friend Teplied ™ mourni “« "»w as dead,
a. «x menu replied, no longer need you grieve
Re urn now to your home, take off your sombre garb
And your son to you I quickly will retrieved’ '
The nurse had recognised him, as in his cot he lav
wondered why the mother did not call, 7 ’
FacSThaf nrohalVl Why the SOU held back
* acts that probably his mother would apnall
The mother did as told, and to hospital replied
With nurse to see her son, “back from the grave ”
And was feeling overjoyed, her grief now pacified ’
As she looked upon her son once more, ?o brave.
Sh A Tl ?m nl - y S , aw l the P ain be r boy had long endured
cj h „of/ ovingly she smoothed his furrowed brow
He cnnm ? a drink ’ and after wondered why
He could not seem to take it anyhow.
e gazed down in his face, the love light in her eyes
He lovingly returned the look she gave, 7 ’
B A^m. 6 n° Slg ?- of taking the drink she offered him
As though waiting to be tended like a babe.
I cannot take it, mother, I’ve neither arms nor legs ’’
Were words in broken accents he now said
’Twere llelter th US | except my head and heart,
bettei mother dear, you saw me dead.”
11'she iiSenedTohr I™‘T" 1 ™‘T" W stralMd llerTes could
hue listened to the words her son then snoke
“ Sodm fall bow much his words conveyed’-
e swayed, and then fell—dead—as her heart broke
J ust picture, if you can, the feelings of this man
This arm and legless hero there in bed-
AnytMnkoVLwV 0 f i 0n t bUt a mom ® nta « you please,.
At thi + • f n hls heart must then have bled
ot - to
SmXIT Pl ‘ ght ‘°
A And°alw Pami ? e ! , . | ed ease ’ with all comforts that can please
And all the privileges of your kind
Witt' heafth’ T- whoare not 80 rioiUy blest
These creatures iw ZJ A SOUl ? d body ancl san ® mind.
•" wan.
“e timaS are dlllte “ tad ’


Help to brighten up their days, the gloom clouds clear away
With love’s sunlight, that drives away all cares.
Just knock at their hearts’ door, enter with a kindly word,
Let them entertain an angel unawares.
If needful, too, forget some vain and useless want
Look around you and some good work try to seek,
Try to make a better use of your lucky, glorious strength,
And a pleasure find in helping more the weak.
Oct., 1917.
SOME “KULTURED” HUN ATROCITIES OF THE
PRESENT WAR—I9I7.
Search well the records of the ages gone,
And fail you will entirely to light upon
Crimes of a hue so inky black and vile
As those which now the present war defile.
Horrors that often makes our reason doubt
The truth of much we daily read about, _
But living evidence, alas, is much too plain
To question facts quite easy to obtain.
The ruthless schemes of hellish frightfulness
That now our foemen’s minds do so obsess,
Who for fresh horrors ever are alert
And reigns of terror boldly now assert,
q-nace will permit the naming of but few
Atrocities these Goths have lately brought to view.
First there’s the “Flammerwerfer” (liquid fire),
Accursed product of Satan’s devilish ire,
Phosphoric shells and horrors of a like descent
The Devil, in his graciousness, so kindly lent
His co-conspirator, it’s easy to assert
To evil ends both much that’s good divert.
The Dum-dum bullets, bayonets with jagged edge,
The use of both we can to enemies allege,
Exploding gas shells, too, we can append
To list, of which apparently there is no end.
The murd’rous Zeppelin and baby-killing plane,
Numbering civilians among the hurt
Dropping their poison-reeking germs of foul
Encased in sugar coats so that the taste will p ease,
The fouling of the wells of aqua pura
With filthy microbes and contagion, surer
To strike with deadly aim their victims with
Than bullets, and with less a chance to live;
Their U-boats, submarines of super power,
With little shown above but conning tower,
But underneath designed from fore to aft
As a pirate and a murder-reeking craft, _
Vomiting their deadly shells at inoffensive foes,
Drowning or killing many, though they no force oppose


ESiI;SS?-
Shpn b bUla -? C f aS Well direct murd’rous fire
Shel hospitals, and cause the wounded to exni^’
~-“3 :s.“,
But measures similar at last were forced o
Compelled thereto in fairness for thoL! t
U^n b r mihtTVa? W /r° r "t™.
For peoples he has injured with t *° rced to show concern
world yearns earth > for whlch the whole
6/10/17.
ENLIST.
An Appeal for Relief to the First Division.
Content 1 ?^ 11 With SOuls 80 dead,
Content to see their country bled
Of manhood in its prime
Who listen to the clarion cry
Of men who in the trenches die
And yet not fall in line.
wu SUrely Can t be funk or fear
When even women volunteer
In regiments to fight;
It cannot be the lack of pay,
To stint is not Australia’s way,
The pay is always right.
Why, then, such cause to press and plead
The urgency of present need
To answer duty’s call;
If only for their “cobbers’ ” sake
I Tuf ien I Sh ° Uld flll the ga P s and take
Ihe place of those who fall.


Why should the men who’ve borne the brunt
Of fighting at the battle front
Now plead, expostulate,
For men to reinforce the ranks;
They are not here for work or swank,
But to recuperate.
These men returned were not afraid,
They rallied to their country’s aid
Soon as the war begun;
Were ’mongst the first their names to sign
For passes to the firing line,
Talk now of battles won.
When fightings’ o’er and victory won,
Who’ll proudly talk of duty done
He who at home remained?
The shirker who till now hangs back,
Or he who boldly did his whack
And Royal honours gained.
Nfow, men, it can’t be hard to choose
Tween what you’d win and what you d lose
Enlist and prove it true;
It means a name that wins respect,
Or one to which you might object,
The choice is left to you.
The First Division needs a rest,
The men who’ve given of their best
Away in firing line;
Relief’s required for a spell
From year’s hot work in trench s hell,
And change to peaceful clime.
Look at the record they can show!
It fairly thrills our blood to know
How they’ve achieved such fame,
For this our land, where’er they’ve been,
In honour, spotless, bright and clean,
They’ve nobly “played the game.
Think of the men who gave their lives
For sister, mother, sweetheart, wives,
Who now their loss bemoan;
Think of those left, sign on and give
Relief that will release them with
Furlough to “Home, Sweet Home.
6/10/17.


AN ODE TO THE ARCH CONSPIRATOR OF THE WAR.
ssr
Which mood™™ t 0 document
?fcSt a n"afh? h r f eet h fhe ma<! i eslre *« «>n Q uest,
Will yet lead to thydown,a,? t W »’• ‘ f Wert >«*
Of thou and the myrmidons an/,,! T ® defeat and utter rout
The freedom loyingTattas “l, b “ r
Upon such terms as thou in thv slaved om’s yoke
power, y exalted and supposed almighty
th ,°T should ’ st exact;
From the budding h nations suffer longer
By reason of their weakness Ben com Pelled to bear
The mighty *° th °"'
What carest ir °? c , lad militar y rule,
It matters not to thee f a ]ffi can st reign!
Thou thinkest not of others ™ W 8 aflame ’
belf is thy one and only love;
By CbSemy oTood eqUalled onl y
in e t r pio r impud —
THEE and GOD. ruling of His Universe,
A mortal wL P li t s ei b t athed e hS°m blaspliemous or Profane,
And pi ung e d the world into a velv ImlTrT p?' 1 S ° Ul in blood
Whose crimes would shame the xZ e i* °£ gloom and sorrow,
M you tean
4 6 deslroyinfworf ° f ETil that a - ia ‘ a «». in thy son.
A?d fhm, m ?l ely y lll 00lIa <=t toll in full
to be° ÜBI ”° W the hteh an(i miehty’ potentate you claim
7’" p™erf” 6 hBa,J in humble sham e to One of
For th UlSt - make toll atonement
misery thou hast brought upon an unoffending
Ana es 6 bIo ? d of murdered millions
Crie/o 9 u™r vL’SSnfJ’ °' Wid ° Wed and orptaned souls,
H?wm a ”repiy m ‘ ne " Sai ‘ h the
Oct, 1917.


Various Verses.
A LOCK OF HAIR.
A wounded soldier, dying- in hospital, was noticed to set particular
store on a small bag hung round his neck by a piece of ribbon.
Questioned about it, he stated it contained a lock of his dead sweetheart s
hair This incident, together with the historic and romantic incident in
connection with the life of the Poet Rosetti, is embodied in the following
lines:—
You ask what’s in that bag,
Now but a faded rag,
Is’t a treasure so very rich and rare,
That I show such delight,
Whene’er it’s in my sight,
And so guard it with never-ending care.
No, ’tis not dust of gold,
But more value tenfold,
No money could again replace what’s there;
I’d guard it being lost,
Although my life it cost,
To keep it I would any danger dare.
Yes, it is a simple thing,
Upon which I should fling,
The love and adoration of my life
So is the wedding ring
A very simple thing,
Which makes a maid a proud and happy wife.
No two were more united
Before my life was blighted,
The happy days passed by serenely fair.
This to her mem’ry binds me,
Now never more I shall see
On earth the one who owned this lock of hair.
She placed it in my hands
As I left for other lands,
And these words murmured sweetly in my ear:
Take with you part of me,
And when far across the sea,
Think of me, and no danger will you fear.


It’s laid next to my heart,
The blood from which I’d part
As a trifle of a much less concern.
Temptations I’ve pass’d through,
But made my love more true
At thought of her to whom I’d soon return.
Ah! she was pure and true
As globes- of glist’ning dew,
Which in some lands of health untainted fall.
I knew that she was mine,
Would gladly wait my time;
Alas! that time came not to me at all.
She was taken from my side,
And of death became a bride,
How cruel, to reap a flower so fair
The scythe was very kind
To leave a part behind,
This lock of my dead darling’s nut brown hair.
Although from me she’s torn,
I know to where she’s born,’
I go to meet my guardian angel there
You know now truly why,
I valued none too high,
This precious lock of my dead darling’s hair.
As my eyes on this I cast,
It reminds me of the past,
Th . e h °urs of my now shortened life.
And think that p’raps ’twas best,
That now she’s far more blest,
Than though she had become my loving wife.
And now my life is spent,
; To go I’m quite content,
I’ve done my bit for country and for King
I m through with earthly strife,
, Tve battled through this life,
I’ll miss those coming battles in the spring.
Rosetti loved one fair,
Of charming beauty rare,
And oft to her he wrote in verse and song -
In which he told his love,
She, too, was called above,
Tis true, those whom the Gods love most die young.
She wished when she was dead
His verses ’neath her head,
So buried them, but not long to remain -
For when the poet’s name
Reached pinnacles of fame,
These precious verses were exhumed again


When lifted was her head,
The hair not being dead,
Had grown, and round the verses fast entwined,
As though the love divine,
In each inspirative line,
Could death defy, and yet caresses find.
So when I lay at rest,
Place this upon my breast,
Just here near where you feel my heart-beats start
So ’twill grow, that when we meet
I can then place at her feet,
Her lock of hair entwined around my heart.
1884 —Re-written 1917.
TO BABY LILLIE.
Dear childish, prattling Lillie,
A life but just begun,
May you pure and spotless be
When through life’s course you’ve run.
Sweet, merry, bright eyed Lillie,
Thou art correctly named;
The flower called the Lily
For innocence is famed.
And I pray you’ll ever be,
Type of a message given,
“Let such children come to me,
Such are the heirs to heaven.”
1885.


IN MEMORIAL.
Prof. W. Denton.
Published in Queensland on Oct. 20th, 1883.
Lines In memorlam to my friend, Professor Wm. Denton, an
American Geologist, Psychometrist, Science Lecturer, and author of
The Soul of Things” and other works, one of Nature’s noblemen,
whose unwavering advocacy of the cause of truth, exemplary life, and
fearless, outspoken public utterances, have written him a name in letters
ineffaceably engraved in the hearts of all who knew nim, and who passed
irom this life in the midst of one of the most important periods of his
life, whilst exploring in the interior of the Island of New Guinea,
recently annexed by the British. His remains were buried where the
foot oi white man to the present has scarcely trod; but his dauntless
spirit soared away to the beautiful home prepared by his life-work
in the higher spheres of existence, from whence he still helps forward
hiearth life f reform and P l^^6BB through faithful instruments still
He has gone!
No more his genial face,
Shall public platform grace,
A face illumined by the light of truth,
A body lithe as that of any youth.
A noble man in search of knowledge bent
So, to enrich mankind his life he spent.
He has gone!
No more his voice is heard,
In fearless unfaltering word,
Telling all present who could hear
To fight for truth and nothing fear,
To never mind the Devil’s ban,
But in all, through all, act the man.
He has gone!
He, who while on this earth
Was never valued for his worth;
He, who in eloquent address
Sought wrong to right and evil to repress,
Struck boldly at the root of things;
So myths and falsehoods fled as though on wings.
He has gone!
He, who to science lent
And lost a life in science spent;
He clothed the dry old earth in fresh attire,
Told us we stood upon a sea of fire,
And myst’rids of ages past explained
In pictured words for which he was so famed.
He has gone!
Who knows but what ’tis best,
For now we know he’s doubly blest,
He lived, well knowing he would live again,
A life immortal, free from earthly pain;
He leaves behind him many a sorrowing heart
Soothed by the knowledge, that well he played his


A TRAVELLER'S VIEW OF PORT CURTIS.
The following lines have been kindly handed to us for publication
bv a gentleman who, travelling through this district, was much charmed
with the natural beauty of our harbour and township, and in poetic
verse nictures its present, and what he predicts its future condition.
We only hope his verses will turn out as truly prophetic as they are
poetic, and the future prosperity of Gladstone is assured. —Local News,
1 88 5."'
List to a passing stranger’s lay,
While travelling North, en route :
I chanced to drop into a Bay,
Of Gladstone it turned out.
And much surprised, indeed, was I
To see such beauty there,
No harbour ’neath the Queensland sky
E’er with it can compare.
reared
Nor’ West by North, Mount Larcomb
Her rocky head on high,
The Lioness and Lion ’peared
Plain sculptured ’gainst the sky.
The Narrows calmly lay at rest
Beneath the evening sky,
The sun was sinking in the West,
The day had just passed by.
As sets the glowing orb of day,
A tinge of rubied gold
Spreads o’er the waters of the Bay,
Till hid by dark night’s fold.
Soon to the Bast the darkness parts :
The moon appears in sight,
And she, so dear to lovers’ hearts,
Soon smiles away the night.
Now Luna’s throned above as Queen
More beauties meet the eye:
A sea of glitt’ring silv’ry sheen,
’Neath diamond studded sky.
The quiet splendour of the view
So charms me as I gaze,
I look and think will it come true,
This dream of future days.
An answer came from one all know,
I felt Dame Nature’s kiss
Of welcome, as in measure slow,
She spoke words such as this;


“Naught in Nature e’er was planned
Without an object clear,
Thus, in the shaping of this land,
This harbour was placed here.
“Now look you through this magic lense
'Twill make of you a seer,
It carries you a century hence,
Tell me what see you here?”
A change, a great and mighty change
Now bursts upon the view;
As far as e’er the eye can range
All different, all new.
Ships of all nations fill the Bay,
Small boats glide to and fro,
Large steamers at the wharves now lay,
Past does the commerce grow.
The railway runs out to the West,
A thousand miles or more;
Ah! Gladstone, in your beauty rest,
Your greatness is in store.
The hand of Nature wrote your name,
Bright does your future gleam,
Help to upbuild Fair Queensland’s fame,
And realise my dream.
LIFE.
Half lives are passed with endless aims,
With no ambitious goal,
Their record blurred with guilty stains;
These think not of a soul.
Life is an onward upward march.
Progressing, without end,
And he who shows the cleanest slate
Goes first, you may depend.
Earth life is but a candle-light
Held opposite the sun,
If what we understand is right
Of life that is to come.
A life progressive in the spheres
Of happiness and love;
Not countable by numbered years,
There is no time above.
But stages of progressive march
Of good deeds that are done,
As upward to the royal arch
All have the course to run.
1885.


THE OLD COACHING DAYS.
(Reminiscences.)
I speak of the reign of the old stage coach,
The driver of which was a king—
Of the road —his old box rattled along,
And his horses drove with a swing.
Much would depend on the state of the track,
Would the trip be rough or pleasant;
Coach rocked like a boat or bumped with a thump,
If ruts in the road were present.
And then, as it crossed the high mountain range
Would twist and would swerve round the track,
And slither or slide, and too quickly glide,
Down the side of steep Razorback.
And fastened at rear to steady its course,
Like sheet anchor to ship at sea;
And dragging behind, in a dust that blinds,
Was the limb of a fair sized tree.
And the box seat journey on winter nights!
Though well muffled from top to toe,
One felt the bite of the sharp morning air,
And was frost covered, white as snow.
At other times of great heat and a drought,
When the bush fires got a good hold,
And the roar of the fires, as heard behind,
A tale of destruction foretold.
The driver would lash his horses to speed
The coach out of danger’s way,
While smoke and sparks followed quickly behind,
I’ve never forgotten that day.
On some of the roads one often could get
A pot-shot at stray kangaroo,
A rabbit or hare, or other such fare,
Would make a nice supper for two.
At the journey’s end or the bush town pub,
Where the coach puts up for the night,
The passengers, cramped on the box all day,
Were glad of the chance to alight.
Then the “wayback” lunches none would despise
As one pulled up for change or rest,
Tail soup of the ’roo, or rich rabbit stew,
Was always absorbed with a zest.


Brush turkey, or bustard by way of change,
Or slices off big river cods,
With damper just cooked and fresh billy tea,
Was fare that was fit for the gods.
And the rainy season, which caused many halts
When flood waters covered the track,
With rivers all full and the creeks overflown,
And the mails sent ahead —a-pack.
When the mail man perforce swam the rivers,
Risking lives of both horse and self,
As he crossed through the swift running current
Not a soul near to render help.
Later on, then the coach and the horses
Splashed through miles of the flood soaked land
Until checked at the usual crossing,
With creek waters still out of hand.
And the job then of fording the river
Meant a tug and pure feat of strength,
Mustering help from all round the district,
And a rope of good ample length.
Which was fastened to coachpole or forefront
Crossing creek to the other side,
Then round tree stump to get a good purchase.
Gripped well against fast running tide.
Horses swam, with coach floating after,
Pulled well by each strong brawny arm
Till safely it lands beyond danger,
At times causing greatest alarm.
The rough corduroy jolting of some roads
And crossing of long black soil plains,
At no time a pleasure, and less so—if
’Twas sticky through recent fresh rains.
In parts settled one met pleasant changes,
Past farms and wheat fields standing ripe
Waiting reaping and thrashing, then making
Into bread—-the staff of our life.
Or through station stocked fully with cattle
And sheep, the main stay of this land,
Or through orchards of ripe juicy cherries
Pit to pluck, quite close to one’s hand.
Tray ling now, in this age of inventions,
With steel roads and fast iron horse,
With its cars of luxurious comforts,
One knows the old mode’s run its course.


But one misses the old coach-time pleasures
When trav’ling through unspoilt domains.
One revelled in natural glories,
Where none now in places remains.
The primeval bush of the native,
The green stalked, sweet wattle strewn track,
The scent of the blue gum and bush woods,
Floods mind as one looks away back.
With memories that ne’er will be stifled,
’Twas worth the old risky times’ trip,
There’s parts where such pleasure still lingers,
’Way back where the steel rails don’t grip.
Experience et docet —that although
Modern life has brought us some rest
At the cost of both nerve and some muscle,
The old life suits old folks the best.
Sept., 1917.
A CAROL OF THE CHIMES OF LIBERTY.
The bright star of Liberty shines now on high,
The rod of oppression is broke;
The freedom of man can be hailed as nigh
With “rights” which reformers bespoke.
The day has now past, that dark bitter hour,
When mankind bowed down its head
To doctrines of evil or Satanic power,
With the hell of its fiery dread.
Gone is that time, that dark age is now past,
Knowledge lifts boldly her head;
Hell’s disappeared with its brimstony blast,
The Devil, its King, is dead.
No more shall its horrors and terrible fears
Cause mourners to weep in despair,
And widows and orphans to shed bitter tears,
For dear ones they think have gone there.
The terrors are gone that such doctrines brought
Since knowledge stept in with her broom,
Which swept to the winds such mythical thought.
And sensible reason gave room.
No more shall the stake and the faggot be lit
To burn the brave and the tried;
No more the tribunal of priests shall e’er sit
With torturous rack beside,


Gone is the time when Church swayed such powef
With inquisitors, conclaves and courts,
Which tried and condemned at every hour
All those who gave vent to their thoughts.
Then prosper the cause of thought that is free,
Unshackled by dogma or creed;
All may be righteous, whate’er their faith be,
Without help of chalice or bead.
Fling broadcast the light that shines on thy path
And boldly the truth dare to face;
That light and the truth which so surely hath
Routed evil and bettered our race.
Freedom from bondage and bloodthirsty strife,
From pois’nous tobacco and rum,
And all the base passions which blacken our life,
The work of reform has begun.
Oh! let us be honest and upright and fair,
And always the truth dare to tell;
With consciences free as the birds in the air,
Or the deer that bound through the dell.
Let now the bright sun of Liberty smile
Throughout the civilised world,
And never again her fair name must we soil,
Or the flag of freedom be furled.
The time has now come when right shall be might,
And every land shall be free
Prom bondage or serfdom, and liberty bright
Shall shine from sea unto sea.
Freedom from serfdom and freedom of thought,
Prom despotic autocrat will
Are “Rights” our reformers dearly have bought,
And “Rights” we are fighting for still.
Work then for Liberty, dare to be true,
Your colours float boldly on high;
Strike out for the right, though numbers be few,
The day of man’s freedom is nigh.
The Goddess of Liberty sits on the throne,
Intelligence smiles round her feet;
Knowledge will soon have asserted its own
And falsehood be hurled from its seat,
Queensland, 1885.
Re-written 1917.


THE BIRTHPLACE OR HOME OF MUSIC
In the eternal realms, where Love supernal dwells
In its infinity,
Music and song abounds, with its entrancing sounds
Waking sublimity;
Harmony ever there, filling translucent air
With tuneful melody,
Music divine, sublime, not for a given time
But an eternity.
High in transplendent spheres, where are no doubts or fears
Music is born,
Sent to mankind on earth, from there its place of birth,
To help reform
Man from this lower state, to one of higher rate
In music’s zone,
What pleasure has so blest, so soothed the savage breast,
As music’s tone.
List to those joyful notes, sung from Angelic throats,
Celestial song;
Swelling in cadence sweet, both hearts and voice meat
In chorus long,
Singing in perfect chord, perfect in every word,
No discord there;
Where Love and joy abound is no discordant sound
Not there, as here.
Down from its place of birth comes music to the earth
Joy to impart;
Message of love it brings, tidings of better things
Whisp’ring to hearts,
That we shall live again, that death is but a name
For immortality.
Swell on, sweet music then, Angels were once but men
Passed to reality.
Higher to heavenly spheres, passing death’s hopes and fears
And life’s exposures,
’Mid scenes so bright and fair, in this diviner air,
Dwell earth’s composers;
Sweet music giving birth, pouring upon the earth
Their inspiration
In most harmonious chords, until the earth applauds
With approbation.


A SONG OF THE SURF.
Heigh-ho for a dip in the briny sea,
Fighting the waves with the limbs all free,
Battling against the incoming surf,
There’s no other pleasure to equal its worth,
As the rollers catch and the breakers toss
The surfer back on the sea weeds’ floss,
Hurrah for the joy of the rolling surf.
And the strong swim out past the second line,
And the long “plane” back to the shore is fine,
With a spice of danger as sharks are seen
Cruising about where swimmers have been;
And the rollers catch and the breakers dash
The surfer back to the shore in a flash,
Hurrah for the lure of the breaking surf.
And the cry for help as a man’s “swept out”
By the undertow, and there’s work about,
And the line’s quick carried through boiling surf,
And a life is saved, p’raps of use on earth,
As the rollers catch and the breakers green
Land them safely back on the sandy sheen,
Hurrah for the call of the booming surf.
How refreshing, the roll on its billowy fold
And the tonic to health worth a mint of gold;
It strengthens the muscles, develops the form,
And brightens our lives in the early morn,
As the rollers caught and the breakers bore
The surfer back to the sandy shore,
Hurrah for the healthful, massaging surf.
Then, heigh-ho for a dip in the salty sea,
Beating the breakers with limbs all free,
Diving right through the inrolling surf,
There’s no pleasure like it elsewhere on earth;
As the rollers catch and the breakers toss
The surfer back on the sea weeds’ floss,
Hurrah for the lure of the restless surf.
Oct. 16th, 1917,
