

Ftotttf-




HOLY TONGA
THE VAGABOND.
REPRINTED FROM THE MELBOURNE “LEADER.”




CHAPTER I.
TO NUKUALOFA.
If Samoa is the land of the “Sacred fowl,” the Kingdom of Tonga,
taking its name from the principal island of Tongatahu, is “ Holy.”
Church and State have always gone hand in hand together here, as
in all time and places from the days of Melchisidec to the present.
Church domination is scotched hut not killed even in Australia. The
intrepid Dutchman, Jansen Tasman, in 1643 discovered the Tongan
group, giving the principal islands Dutch names, even as he meant
to perpetuate the family name of his sweetheart in calling the smallest
of our Australian colonies Yan Dieman’s Land. We have done justice
to the memory of the gallant Dutch sailor and wiped out memories of
old “Yan Demonians ”by adopting the name Tasmania. Tasman
does not appear to have made any particular investigations in the
Tongan group, except from a navigator’s point of view. He was a
sailor and nothing more. Captain James Cook, on the other hand,
was not only the greatest navigator England has ever known, but one
of the closest and most accurate observers amongst travellers of every
age, from Herodotus to Stanley. When, in 1873 the Leichardt, with
the Queensland Government party on board, steamed into the estuary
of the Endeavour Kiver and Cooktown was founded, Captain Cook’s
charts were used, and found to be perfectly accurate in all essentials,
although made 100 years before. And the description of native
dances and customs in Cook’s Voyages , with little alteration, might be
copied out and applied to social observances of the present day in the
South Sea Islands.
Captain James Cook remained some time in the Tongan group.
He gives accounts of the temples of the gods and of the king Poulaho,
the Tui Tonga, supposed to be of divine descent, whose will in religious
as in secular matters was supreme. The first fruits of the earth were
yearly offered to him. In every respect he was treated differently to
other men. In Samoa it was held to be a disgrace to Malietoa not
to have been tattooed. In Tonga the sacred king was not tattooed,
nor was he subjected to other Mosaic regulations customary in so
many islands in the Pacific. The manner of his birth and marriage
and burial were fixed differently to other people. The Tui Tonga was
spoken of differently, and, as in the case of the Samoan high chiefs,


certain words were exclusively reserved for him, and only used in his
regard. The traditions of these sacred monarchs, it is said, go back
for 150 generations. Their memories are perpetuated in rows of tombs
at Hihio. Holy Tonga was held to he the “ hub ”of the South
Pacific universe, and its sacred kings the greatest men on earth. The
highest chiefs saluted their sovereign’s foot with head and hand, and
dare not stand nor eat nor drink in the royal presence. But Captain
Cook found Poulaho a very modest and kindly man. He put on no
‘ ‘ side ’ ’ with the English officer, but made himself a frequent and
pleasant visitor on board the Resolution. “ The King,” according
to Captain Cook, “ was very soon reconciled to our manner of cookery.
But still I believe he dined thus frequently with me more for the sake
of what we gave him to drink than for what we set before him to eat.
For he had taken a liking to our wine, could empty his bottle as well
as most men, and was as cheerful over it.” Many will agree that
the Tui Tonga in this showed little signs of holiness; but others,
besides arguing that to take your wine cheerfully is the true sign of
a gentleman of descent, may refer to that passage in Holy Writ in
which it is stated that wine rejoiceth the heart of Hod and man.
Captain Cook was so much pleased with his treatment in Tonga
that he gave the group the name of the “Friendly Islands,” a most
inappropriate title, as after events showed. He almost apologises for
their great propensity to thieving, writing:—“Amongst a multitude
there must be a number of ill disposed people, and we hourly
experienced it. There was hardly anything that they did not attempt
to steal. All our care and attention did not prevent their plundering
us in every quarter, and that in the most daring and insolent manner.
They once at noonday ventured to aim at taking an anchor from off
the Discovery’s bows, and they would certainly have succeeded if the
fluke had not hooked one of the chain plates in lowering down the
ship’s side, from which they could not disengage it by hand, and
tackles were things they were unacquainted with.” Certainly as
daring a piece of attempted robbery this as one can read of ; and the
account afterwards given by James Mariner, that a plot had been
formed at Haapai to massacre Captain Cook and his officers at a
torchlight dance given ashore, which entertainment is graphically
described in his Voyages , shows that the people were totally unworthy
of the name bestowed upon them. This plan was given up for fear
those on boaid the ships, the Resolution and the Discovery, might
take alarm and heave away from shore. Then it was agreed that the


massacre should take place at a grand banquet to be given to the
white men, which is also described in the Voyages. But there was a
dispute amongst the chiefs as to the moment to begin the bloody
business; no one, I expect, wished to commence “belling the cat.”
The third time they intended to “ mak’ siccar,” but the two English
ships sailed away from Haapai to Tongatabu without opportunity
offering. Yet injustice is perhaps done to the people of Tonga as a
whole in supposing that they would all have assisted in the massacre
of the Englishmen. The chief Finau, or Finoo, of Haapai, the grand-
father of the present King Gieorge of Tonga, who was the instigator
of the plot against Captain Cook, was afterwards a rebel against the
Tui Tonga , the sacred king, who was murdered by Finau’s brother.
I am glad to think that the old monarch who dined and took his wine
cheerfully like a gentleman in the captain’s cabin of the Eesolution
was not a traitor and murderer at heart.
I wonder enterprising publishers do not issue reprints of the old
books of travel. What boy reads Cook's Voyages nowadays ? Is not
Robinson Crusoe itself out of vogue ? How many people in Melbourne
have heard of Mariner’s Tonga ? Captain Kidd, in Auckland, is the
only private citizen I know of in Australasia who possesses a copy of
this rare work. There are two editions in the Melbourne Public
Library, 60 to 70 years old. Mariner’s adventures are full of romance,
and their perusal especially interesting to travellers who can read
between the lines. Mariner served as captain’s clerk on board the
Port-au-Prince, nominally a whaler but in reality a privateer, which
sailed from Gravesend in February, 1805. This vessel followed the
track of Dampier and Anson round Cape Horn, and then sailed up the
West Coast of South America, emulating the exploits of Francis Drake.
Not only treasure ships, but towns, were attacked and taken.
Churches were spoiled. True Protestant Iconoclasts, the men of the
Port-au-Prince smashed to pieces the gold and silver images on the
church altars. But they did not leave the pieces behind. There was
some fighting, but the mission of the Port-au-Prince was plunder, not
bloodshed. And spoil, as it seems to us now, was often very meanly
obtained. Thus the Port-au-Prince, flying American colors, would lie
off Coquimbo or Payta like a harmless merchantman, and entice
citizens on board. Then, giving out that contraband goods were for
sale, the same citizens would be tempted to go ashore for and return
with money to buy wonderful bargains. Then the hatches would be
clapped on them, and the money brought not only “annexed,” but


more demanded as a ransom. The doings of the Port-au-Prince were
simply acts of piracy, and although she carried letters of marque , her
men were no better than those who sailed under the “ Jolly Roger,”
the pirates and buccaneers who made the name of Englishman hated
and feared on the Spanish Main and in the South Seas. It was all
very well then for national purposes to consider Spaniards and Portu-
guese the cruelest of all people, and to talk about “ The Inquisition
Dogs and the Devildom of Spain;” but I don’t think Morgan’s
buccaneers or the crew of the Port-au-Prince were much better. For
in Mariner’s account there is only a simple record of the doings of the
vessel in the way of plunder, and one has to read between the lines to
know the “ devildom” the English were guilty of.
The captain and his clerk were ashore at a small town in Peru
not worth sacking, and the people friendly. They were obtaining
provisions, and dined at the house of their compradore. A young
Spanish girl, aged 14 years, the daughter of their host, attacked
Mariner on account of the piratical doings of the Port-au-Prince.
“Was it true that they had sacked a church ? And threatened to
break into a convent ? Madre di Dios! Then God would punish
them. The ship would never return to England, nor the captain, nor
his clerk, nor the crew, ever see their native land again!” The
plucky child’s prophecy nearly came true. Shortly afterwards the
Port-au-Prince, sailing westward, lost her captain. The command
devolved upon the sailing master, who wished to follow the honest
avocation of whaling, instead—of privateering and piracy. So he
kept still further west, sailing through the South Seas along the track
voyaged by Captain Cook, and away from the temptation of falling in
with Spanish treasure ships or the danger of being taken by Spanish
men-of-war. The men, says Mariner, were very much discontented
with this and almost in open mutiny. But they had already a large
amount of treasure on board to be divided when they reached
England, so they stuck to the ship and killed whales and boiled down
the oil, till in November, 1806, they reached the “ Friendly Islands”
and anchored inside the reef at Lifuka, in the Haapai group, at the
spot where the Resolution and the Discovery anchored 29 years before.
Finau was as friendly to them as he had been to Captain Cook, but on
the first of December the Port-au-Prince was rushed by the natives,
the captain and a large number of his men massacred, but Mariner
and five others spared, he himself becoming in time a great favourite
with Finau, and with his companions assisting that chief in the civil


war which was going on in the Tongan group, which ended in Finau’s
grandson becoming sole king, like the sacred Tui Tonga of old, head of
Church and State in “ Holy Tonga.”
Mariner’s history of his captivity in Tonga for some years is the
most reliable and interesting account of life in these islands. There
were no missionaries on the islands in his day. After Tasman and
Captain Cook, La Perouse was the third known navigator to touch
there, in 1789. Captain Edwards, in H.M.S. Pandora, was here in
1791, searching for the escaped mutineers of the Bounty, who, luckily
for them, were in their island seclusion at Pitcairn. Two years after-
wards the French Admiral, D’Entrecasteaux, in search of La Perouse,
stayed at Tonga for some weeks, having several disturbances with the
natives, many of whom were killed and some of the French crew
wounded. Then the beachcomber, the runaway European sailor and
English convict, appeared upon the scene. Mariner recounts how the
first white resident in Tonga was an escaped Sydney convict named
Morgan, who lived happily with and was “ respected ” by the natives
till the mission vessel, the Duff, arrived from Tahiti in 1797, with 10
“missionaries” of the London Missionary Society. After that there
were perpetual quarrels amongst the white people in Tonga, the
beachcombers and the missionaries naturally being antagonistic.
The natives, according to Mariner, knew nothing of the presumed
sacred mission held by part of the white men. They thought they
like the beachcombers —simply came to live in Tonga because they
liked the country better, and the ten missionaries had no greater
power to command respect in their personal attributes. They were
uneducated mechanics a cabinetmaker, a weaver, a carpenter, a
shoemaker, a hatter, a tailor, a shopkeeper, two cotton weavers and a
labourer —all young men put ashore in an unknown country, ignorant
of the language. The idea, according to a missionary account, seems
to have been that these uneducated, unmarried artisans and tradesmen
should “ form a model village of society, whose superior neatness,
comfort and industry would convince the savages that men so moral
must necessarily possess a better religion than themselves.” The ex-
periment naturally failed, though commenced under the most promising
aspect.
The strangest experiment this in missionary work ever known.
No wonder the Tongans did not endow them with any sacerdotal
character. The ten missionaries made no attempt to preach the Word.
They quarrelled with Morgan and two other escaped convicts, and in


a short time quarrelled amongst themselves and separated. The
bricklayer took a native wife, adopted native habits, and became a
petty chief amongst the rebels, headed by Finau. Every chief in
Tonga was glad to have a white man attached to his household. The
missionaries had perhaps to work, but not so hard as they would
at their own avocations in England. But when the civil war was
raging the missionaries had to take sides in the fight. The brick-
layer only was lucky in being on the winning side, and so was
rewarded. On the old king’s side three missionaries were killed, and
the others afterwards remained in fear of their lives for some months,
till in January, 1800, an English ship bound for Port Jackson touched
at Tonga, and took them on board. Christianity, as represented by
these ignorant imitators of the Apostles, was snuffed out in Tonga for
the next 22 years, and Mariner’s is the only reliable account of the
early life of the people; and although they were cannibals and
bloodthirsty, and killed women and tortured prisoners, they were,
according to his account, not a bad lot of people to live amongst. In
the ordinary affairs of life the word “ Friendly” really applied to
their character. Finau would have massacred Captain Cook and his
men for the sake of the plunder of the Pesolution and Discovery.
The Port-au-Prince was looted for the object of gain, and the captain
and others killed merely to effect that; and, taking into consideration
the “ lights ” of the Heathen and the lights of the civilised English-
men, the massacre at Haapai was not worse than the deeds done by
the crew of the Port-au-Prince on the coasts of Chili and Peru, and
which called forth the fulfilled prophecy of the little Spanish maiden.
After this glimpse of Tongan history my readers may be prepared
to accompany me to the Holy Tonga of to-day. Years ago I visited
the Friendly Islands in a sailing vessel. Now, the Australian
traveller can take either the Hnion S.S. Co.’s monthly boat from
Auckland, or the Richmond, belonging to Messrs. Donald and Eden-
borough, from the same port. I sail to Tonga in the Wainui, with
Captain Crawshaw and Purser Walker and Mr. M‘K , one of
Sargood and Co.’s travellers, a gentleman who risks his health and
life in the tropics, in obtaining orders for soft goods and accumulating
riches for his firm. I have only one fault to find with the Wainui, as
with other of the Hnion Co.’s boats. The cuisine is too good; you have
too many dishes, and are tempted to eat more than you need, which is
a very bad thing at sea in the tropics. The particular ill which flesh
is heir to, known as “ liver,” is the result in 99 cases out of 100, not


of drinking, but of over-eating. The reason the old beachcombers in
the South Seas live so long is that if they take an undue quantity of
square gin their food otherwise is plain and simple. In the tropics it
is a good thing if you can make a meal off one dish —good corned beef
the best. On a well-found passenger ship it is necessary, of course, to
have courses to suit various palates, as in a club you have various
brands of liquor. But on the Union Co.’s boats, as on the P. and 0.
and the Orient and the White Star lines, there is generally too much
to eat. It is seldom that we dine in the same way ashore. So, Prank,
take away that curry from my elbow, get behind me and tempt me
not I And, Captain Crawshaw, why will you insist upon passing me
the nuts ? And you, Mr. Percy M'Arthur, you are seasick, and cham-
pagne is good for you. But why press it on the old man with the
after results to him of coals of fire where the liver should be.
We are a very merry party in the smoke room at night. With
the commander I can exchange reminiscences of the Gippsland Lakes
and Bairnsdale, and with the purser of the North British Pailway, on
which he was a station-master, worked hard as Scotch railway men
are worked. He blesses the memory of Captain Cook for discovering
Australasia for the British race. But Parser Walker deserves the
change and all the other good things which may yet, I hope, come to
him. With Mac. I talk of Glasgow, and with Mr. Giles and his
brother of life in the New Hebrides and Northern Queensland. We
pass Pylstaart Island on the night of the fourth day out from
Auckland, a lone rocky islet, an ancient volcano, 100 miles south of
Tongatabu. Tasman gave Pylstaart its Dutch name, which says
Mr. Walker “ sounds like that of a new brand of lager beer.” It is
uninhabited now, but I read in the New Zealand Herald that fourteen
years ago “ Pylstaart’s Island was occupied by 300 Tongans, whose
residence there obliged the missionaries ruling the roost at Tonga-
tabu to make an annual trip in quest of the regular tribute to the
Church. The story goes that the particular missionary upon whom
this duty devolved (Mr. Newell) found it rather irksome, and therefore
persuaded the people to leave their ancient home and betake themselves
to Tonga for good, so that their dollars might be the more readily ac-
cessible. At any rate they went, found their new location to disagree
with their health, and ever since have been praying to be sent back. It
is said that Mr. Baker intends at last to listen to their prayer and re-
move the remnant of exiles to their own sea-bound isle.” Mr. Baker
is the Premier and, under King George, high ruler of Holy Tonga.


Eua, the second largest island of the Tongan group, lying some-
-12 miles from Tongatabu, is also, I imagine, of volcanic origin.
Captain Cook lay in a bight to the north of this island, which he called
“ English Road.” Tasman christened it “ Middleburg.” The great
navigator highly praises Eua. From its flat mountain top, 600 feet
above sea level, to the shore the land slopes gently, covered with trees
and vegetation. It is said to resemble parts of the New Zealand
coast, but cocoanuts do not grow in Maoriland. Captain Cook was
very friendly with the chief here, and started sheep farming on this
island by landing a ram and two ewes, which he had brought from
the Gape of Grood Hope. It is rather strange that Cook should have
specially noticed the pastoral capabilities of Eua, and have slighted
those of Australia. What became of the sheep left by him one cannot
say, but one may guess that they were soon killed and eaten. Eua,
however, of later days has been converted into a sheep run, Messrs.
Parker Brothers, formerly New Zealand squatters, having a lease of
it for 50 years at a rent of Is. fid. an acre. Every acre on Eua will
more than keep a sheep. The Parkers had 40,000 sheep here at one
time, but scab got into the flock and 20,000 sheep were last year killed
and thrown into the sea. I meet one of the Parker Brothers, a
gentleman who is a typical colonist, and not at all of the South Sea
stamp. It is strange to find revived in the tropics the troubles of the
squatter kings of Australia. It reminds me of tales of the early days
in the Western district of Victoria when some men made fortunes and
others were ruined through the scab appearing in their own and their
neighbours’ flocks. Charles Peade got hold of one of these stories, and
worked it up in Never too Late to Mend. I tell Mr. Parker of an old
man I saw in Portland Benevolent Asylum, who declared to me that
he would have been as wealthy as the if the latter’s scabby sheep
had not been driven on to his country, infecting his whole flock and
sending him to ruin. Perhaps, however, this was only a fiction,
inspired by long years of drink, which ended in a pauper asylum.
Tongatabu, named by Tasman Amsterdam Island, still retains
souvenirs of the Dutch mariner in Van Dieman Poad, Van Dieman
Point and Maria Bay—the latter named after his sweetheart, Fraulein
Van Dieman, who was also the sponsor of Maria Island in Tasmania,
a name abhorred by convicts and their friends. We round Van
Dieman Point to enter Maria Bay. The white surf is beating over
great masses of reef which lie in the bay, which is also dotted with
scores of little islets. On shore one only sees the top of the cocoanut


palms. For Tongatabu is of coral formation, only a few feet above
the surface of the water. The first that you discover of these coral
islands is the highest tree top, unless you get on to the surrounding
reef. Yery quaint and curious do these palm trees look, apparently
growing out of the water. There are no land marks to guide one in
entering the harbour of Tongatabu, and the navigation amongst the
reefs is most intricate. There is a Government pilot here named
“Friday,” but the steamers never wait for his arrival on board,
Captain Crawshaw wisely preferring to trust to his own skill and
memory. We skirt reefs and round islets and rocks till we are well
in the inner circle, and Nukualofa rises before us—the capital of Holy
Tonga, the residence of the King and Government, and the most
striking of all the European settlements in the South Seas. For at a
glance you see that everything is Europeanised here. From the
mound 50 feet in height, the summit of the island, called Mount Zion,
where the Wesleyan Church looks down upon the town to the spire of
the Catholic Church, a mile along the beach, everything is European.
But the view is picturesque. If things in Tonga have been Euro-
peanised, they have not been vulgarised. Nukualofa strikes you at
once as a prosperous and successful place. It has no advantages of
situation owing to the perfect flatness of the island. There is no
background, no distance to the view, but the foreground makes the
prettiest picture imaginable.
To the right is the “palace ” of King George, a handsome two-
storeyed wooden house, with verandahs and balconies running round
the building. It is the sort of residence you see in the distant suburbs
of San Francisco, Menlo Park to wit, the homes of the wealthy and
cultured Californian. As a palace it is more suitable to the wants
of royalty in this climate than that of Buckingham or Versailles would
be. Next to the palace, in the same block, and enclosed by the same
wall is King George’s State Church, a double towered handsome
erection, which would be a credit to any town in Australia. Then
there is a line of Government buildings and warehouses, a glimpse of
private dwelling-houses embowered in trees, the establishments of
McArthur and Co. and the German firm, and, bounding the western
beach, the Catholic Church and Convent. There are flags everywhere,
the British over the English Consulate and McArthur’s, the German
on other buildings and vessels in the bay, and the red cross of Tonga
on the palace, the wharf and every possible place where there is an
excuse to fly it. Whether this ensign was derived from the Kosi-


crucian symbol I cannot say, but it is very simple and very striking,
although a Victorian steerage passenger on board scoffs at it with,
“What price Red Cross jams?” Every building at Nukualofa is
painted a glaring white, and that and the surrounding greenery first
strike the traveller. This seems not only the cleanest place, but the
greenest place in the world. Tongatabu is the real Emerald Isle.
The ground is all covered with thick grass, which extends to the very
verge of the shore. There are as many shades of verdure here as in
Ceylon, and if the houses are European the vegetation is not. The
swaying cocoa palms and banana trees are tropical, lovely in their form
as in colour, and so are the brown-skinned supple natives who cluster
on the wharf, apparently to greet us.
Before I left Auckland I had a long conversation on Tongan
affairs with my old friend, Captain Olive, late of the Royal Marines,
afterwards A.D.O. to Sir Arthur Gordon, as “white” a man as ever
set foot on Fijian soil and, like many other good white men, lost his
money there. I was refreshing my memory on old subjects, and was
glad to get the opinion of one who knew more about many of them
than I did. “ Yoxi will find Tonga now,” said the stalwart captain,
“ the most successful community in the Pacific. Nukualofa is a show
place. You can’t beat it. And the whole place is prosperous. Now
one man does not do everything, but it is a great deal owing to the
action of one man that Tonga is in its present state. You will hear a
great deal said against Mr. Baker. I’m not going into the religious
part of the question. I look at it from a practical point of view.
Mr. Baker has been running the kingdom of Tonga, and he’s made
a success of it. Tonga has no debt, the only country in the world
possessing a king without a national debt! It is peaceful and
prosperous. Look at Samoa ! Wouldn’t it have been a good thing
if there had been a Shirley Baker there ? From a mere business
point Mr. Baker is to be commended, and we who know him and his
family very well in Auckland do not believe all that is stated against
him by the missionaries with whom he has quarrelled. They may
have been right. He may have been right. Both may have been
wrong. It cannot be denied that he has established a reign of law
and order in Tonga, and we must only judge by results. At least
that is the only view I, as a layman, can take of it. Is Tonga pros-
perous ? That’s the question. I say from what I know that it is.
You will see for yourself.”


The great stone jetty—nearly a quarter of a mile long—with a
wooden wharf at the end, alongside which our steamer is moored, is
one evidence of the advancement of Tonga in the facilities its capital
gives to maritime commerce. A Custom House officer with a regu-
lation cap and badge is another. He might have been transported
bodily from Williamstown. It has been said that the first duty of a
Hovernment is to impose taxes, the second to collect them. Tonga is
not a protectionist kingdom; its tariff has only been framed for the
purposes of revenue. But this is strictly collected. The tariff is one
of the great reasons of the unpopularity of the present Premier, the
Eev. Shirley Waldemar Baker. German and English beachcombers
who lived on the natives object to pay the duty on square gin and
lager beer. Now if there is a justifiable customs tariff which even the
most rabid free-trader must endorse it is on liquor. Others will agree
that this should be supplemented by an excise duty on the products of
breweries and distilleries. I cannot sympathise with the Tongan
beachcombers in their denunciation of the customs duties. It is not
an unmitigated blessing to a community to be able to get drunk cheap.
The curse of Great Britain is that in all its large cities the working
man can get intoxicated for less money than it takes to procure a square
meal. The free drink traffic too, has been one of the curses of the
Pacific. So lam very pleased to see that in Tonga strong liquor pays
its tithe to the State. When affairs in Samoa are settled, an excise
duty on alcoholic drinks should be imposed to raise revenue for local
purposes. The Germans and beachcombers then will have to pay
most of the taxes.
The next evidence of the advancement and civilisation of Tonga
is in the presence on board of Major Alexander M. Campbell, Collector
of Customs and Postmaster-General and Eeceiver-General of the
kingdom. He is also Commandant of Artillery, which comprises the
Defence Force of Tonga, rivals Mr. Ellery as a meteorologist, and fills
up his spare moments in photography considerably above the
“amateur” stage. People who do not like Mr. Campbell, referring
to his multiplicity of office, call him “ Pooh-Bah;” others, who admire
him, say he is an Admirable Crichton. I find him a hard-working,
courteous young gentleman who served his Queen and country in
Natal and in Fiji, and who has lately done good work in organising
the Government service in Tonga. Mr. Campbell and two landing
waiters are the only two white men in the civil service, all the rest of
the work outside theirs being done by native clerks, who have a full


and complete knowledge of how much power they ought to put into a
“ Government stroke.” It is rather astonishing, however, to find
native shorthand writers here, and to receive official communications
from the head representatives of the Tongan Customs written with a
typewriter on paper embossed with the Eoyal Arms of Tonga. The
quarterings of King George are composed of the Dove of Peace facing
the crossed swords of the Eosicrucians, three stars on another field, with
a crown on the fourth quarter. As a democrat Ido not recognise this
Eoyal Arms business as any proof of considerable progress in Tonga.
Still as an outward and visible sign of authority it has, no doubt,
been a great comfort and moral support to King George, and has
impressed his subjects with a belief in the Divine right of kings to
rule, or let their Premiers rule for them.


CHAPTER 11.
KING AND PEOPLE.
We step from the steamer on to the jetty at Nukualofa amongst the
crowd of brown-skinned natives, supple of limb, handsome in features,
and mostly with reddish and yellow tinted hair. This arises from the
application of coral lime for the purposes of cleanliness. Some of them
have still whitened pows, which give a strange contrast to their dark
skins. They are all clothed in the kilt of the South Seas, the sulu or
lava-lava, and all wear also singlets or shirts, and some old tunics.
For, according to the present sumptuary laws of Holy Tonga, each
man and woman must be clothed, not only with a lower but an upper
garment. It is sinful here to go about naked in the light of day. The
beachcombing traders should bless the missionaries and the present
Premier, the Pev. Shirley W. Baker, for this regulation, as it pro-
motes the sale of soft goods, and is, no doubt, the cause of the presence
here of Messrs. Sargood’s traveller. There is a great difference
between the utter and accentuated nudity of the Papuan and the
overclothing of the body under the present regime in Tonga. Gone
are the days of which the poet wrote, taking his text from Mariner’s
long a :—
In summer garments be our limbs arrayed,
Around our waists the tappa’s white display’d ;
Thick wreaths shall form our coronal, like spring’s
And round our necks shall glance the hooni strings ;
So shall their brighter hues contrast the glow
Of the dusk bosoms that beat high below.
In Samoa one may still see this primitive condition of dress.
There alone in the South Seas still exists :
The gentle island, and the genial soil,
The friendly hearts, the feasts without a toil,
The courteous manners but from Nature caught,
The wealth unhoarded, and the love unbought.
In Tonga true religion and soft goods have destroyed such primal
innocence. There are no maidens to welcome us on the jetty here as
on the shore inside the crater of Apolima. None but men, I under-
stand, are allowed to come to the steamer’s side, and the majority of
those here are convicts, felons or misdemeanants, serving longer or
shorter terms for offences against the laws of Holy Tonga. In no place


in the world does it seem to he so easy to get in gaol as here. And in
no place in the world is prison life made so easy. The convict is made
a nsef ul member of society here. He costs the State nothing. Profit is
in fact made out of his offence. Punishment in Tonga takes the form
of hard labour on the roads or public works. Por serious crimes this
may be for a term of years. For minor offences fines are imposed,
which are worked out by the misdemeanant, his labour being valued at
the current rate of wages. All but the very worst class of prisoners
can reside in their own homes, turning up to work at the appointed
times and places like ordinary labourers. They have to feed them-
selves, and cost the State nothing except for supervision. The pro-
blem of prison labour has been solved in Tonga, whilst it is still a
debatable question in the civilised world. It does not seem to be
considered much of a disgrace to be working on the roads here, or in
unloading the steamer, for which purpose this gang of prisoners is on
the jetty. They are all happy looking and contented, and shake
hands laughingly with the new chum, who is unaware of their
character, and is rejoiced at his first sight of South Sea natives. So
he greets them with a hand shake and “ How do, Johnny? ”
At the end of the jetty there is a great stone tank built to keep
turtles in, but the traffic in these amphibious creatures has not been
profitable. Tonga depends upon the production of copra and the ex-
portation of bananas and oranges to New Zealand and Sydney. This
island of Tongatabu principally exports bananas. There is a busy
time on the wharf when the homeward-bound boats are being loaded
with bananas, but the busy time is after all a light time to the
labourers. Prisoners as well as officials know the value of the Govern-
ment stroke here as in Pentridge. No one is in a hurry in Tonga, and
Captain Crawshaw and Purser Walker only waste their energies in
trying to hasten the unloading and loading of the Wainui, or the
clearance at the Customs. Why should people hurry here ? When offe
reaches the end of the jetty and stands on the soil of Tongatabu, there
is little to show that toil or commerce or hard work of any description
have anything to do with the condition of life here. The prisoners
putting goods into the bonded warehouse take their time and do not
strain their backs. Others bringing along bananas on the trolly
laugh and sing like schoolboys at play. The tram line comes from
the end of the wharf to some distance inland. Labour—that is,
exertion —is much saved in Tonga. The tram line is seen running
straight from the sea, but where are the roads ? All the way along


the shore, to the verge of the tide marks, is a space of greenery, grass
soft and velvety heneath the feet as Mr. Guilfoyle’s pet lawn in our
Botanic Garden. Here and there one may see a faint track where
footsteps have followed one another. One, too, may occasionally see
the mark of a buggy wheel. Otherwise this Bund or Esplanade at
Nukualofa is a green strip of park, adorned here and there with beau-
tiful trees. And between the blocks into which this settlement is
divided, and between the plantations in the country outside, are the
same strips of greenery, forming the roads of Tonga. You know they
are roads because they are between fences. Otherwise you might be
driving along a succession of well-kept lawns. There is nothing like
this in the whole world ; nowhere else can one find such verdure.
The cause is not only in the fertility of the soil and the great rainfall,
but in the fact that every morning the grass roads of Tonga are
clipped and cut by the prisoners with their long “ cane knives.” By
an early hour on each day, except the Sabbath, the public paths of
Tonga are in as good condition as the lawn of Melbourne Government
House.
These grass-grown roads are a surprise to all, as well as a beauty
and a joy for ever. But a greater surprise to the South Sea traveller
is that there is no “ beach ” in the usual acceptation of the term in the
Pacific. In other parts, wherever Europeans are settled, the seaport
towns are fringes of stores and grog shops close to the water line, with
little wooden piers running out in every direction on which to land
goods and thirsty sailors. This was the condition of the settlements
at Levuka in Eiji, and Apia in Samoa, and there was a commencement
of a “beach” at Havannah Harbour in the New Hebrides till the
French cleared away. But at Nukualofa, this capital of Holy Tonga,
one at first sees nothing but green esplanade, and palace, and churches,
and white Government offices, and groves of cocoa palms. There are
no drinking places to attract Jack ashore. Looking at the peaceful
surroundings one cannot imagine that any sailors’ sprees have ever
occurred here. Holy Tonga has evidently never been “painted red,”
according to the modern American reading. It is as respectable as
the upper part of Collins Street, or the most aristocratic quarter of
London. If you want to buy things at a store you must go and look
for it. There are no outward signs of retail commerce in many of the
houses where soft goods and tobacco and lager beer may be bought.
Clever Mr. Barnard’s is the only establishment which is anything like
what we should recognize as a store. I have to thank him for the offer


of a room in his house during my stay in Tongatahu. There is a so-
called hotel where drinks may he obtained. But no one ever stops
and few drink there. For the old residents of Holy Tonga all buy
their liquor wholesale, and the primitive hospitable customs described
by Mariner are kept up amongst the white people to the extent that
they visit and drink ad libitum at each other’s houses. But the absence
of the “beach” characteristics here prove that seafaring waifs and
strangers generally are not welcomed and seldom come to Nukualofa.
Now, as this island is well worth visiting, it is a pity there is not a
decent hotel where one can tarry.
I walk along the green esplanade to the British Consulate. There
is no American representative here in Tonga, so I place myself at once
under the protection of England’s representative. There is no saying
what breaches of the Tongan Decalogue I may unconsciously commit,
so I wish to make things smooth with Mr. Leefe, British Vice-Consul
and Deputy Commissioner. This gentleman knew me years back in
Fiji, and, although at that time I was under the ban of authority, as
represented by Sir Arthur Cordon, has, 1 am sure, no reason why he
should not be kind and courteous to me now. Mr. Leefe’s reception is
all one could wish for. Personally the British Vice-Consul in his
flannel suit and brass buttons if anything magnifies his office, but the
Consulate is unworthy of its occupant, and of the might and majesty
of Great Britain. It is only a native house, divided into three rooms,
and although one finds herein traces of refinement and culture, still,
it is inconvenient and uncomfortable. Mr. Leefe talks to me about old
days in Fiji, but is reticent about the present condition of affairs in
Tonga, and what he does say lam not at liberty to repeat. “ But,”
says Mr. Leefe, “ you call upon Mr. George Brown. He will tell you
all about the troubles and the persecution going on now.” lam
rather pleased to find that the Pev. George Brown, genex-al secretary to
the Wesleyan Missionary Society in Sydney, is now in Tonga. .I am
sure that he will tell me a great deal, perhaps even more than I can
put in print. With this reverend gentleman I have an old acquain-
tance. I was in Fiji when he was brought down from New Britain to
answer charges made against him of having killed several natives in
self-defence. Sir Arthur Gordon stopped the proceedings, holding that
under the circumstances the missionary was quite justified in leading
his followers against a hostile tribe, the chief of which had threatened
to take the reverend gentleman’s head to hang up in his house as a
rare ornament. One may say that he did not want “ cold missionary


on the sideboard,” but missionary’s collared head. Amongst my other
curiosities I preserve two cards inscribed “Reverend Lorimer Fison,
Fiji,” and “Reverend George Brown, New Britain.” Mr. Fison’s
bears the strange remark in pencil concerning Mr. Brown, “A man
Judge Gorrie would have hanged.” I am very glad that Mr. Brown
escaped this fate, otherwise I feel that I should lose much interesting
matter in Tonga.
But first I feel bound to call upon Tongan Majesty. Kings and
viceroys and governors are not much in my line. I frankly confess I
have not much respect for “ Exalted Rank,” as such. If I wish to see
King George of Tonga it is to make “ copy” out of him for the benefit
of my readers, even as I take the individual beachcomber or mission-
ary as interesting types. George 1., Dei Gratia, King of Holy Tonga,
is the oldest living monarch. His age is stated to be somewhere
between 90 and 100. He may have reached the century, as the
natives here were very ignorant as to their ages, keeping no account
of days and years. King George is a relic of the past, as he is the
grandson of the chief Finau, whom Captain Cook thought was such
a good friend, but who, according to Mariner, was plotting to massacre
the Englishmen, even as he afterwards did the crew of the Port-au-
Prince. Mariner mentions King George as being a grown youth in
1807. Taking this as meaning 18 years of age, His Tongan Majesty
may now well be 100. King George’s native name was Taufaahau,
but when he became a Christian he was baptised George by the loyal
Wesleyans of the day, and his spouse, in accordance, was called
Charlotte. King George became sole king of Holy Tonga by right of
conquest. Whatever “Exalted Rank” he may have possessed was
confined to Haapai. The old Tui Tonga, the sacred king, Captain Cook’s
friend, who took his liquor so kindly, having been killed by King
George’s ancestor, Finau, there was for many years civil war through-
out the different islands of the group. King George appears to have
become a Christian 50 years ago, whether from the motives which
inspired Constantine and Cakobau, or from pure religious feeling, one
cannot say. The young King may easily have been convinced that
behind the missionaries there was the power of England, which it was
w r ell to conciliate. To become a Christian would give him all the
moral support of the missionaries and often material support. George,
superior in mind as in body to the majority of the Tongans, may well
have been disgusted with the idolatry and cannibalism of his ancestors.
When he became a Christian all his followers, as a matter of course,


also adopted the new religion. In the 10 years’ desultory fighting
which followed King George found his Christianity pay. The
Wesleyan missionaries supported him in every manner. The Tongan
King’s manner of conquest was laudable in that the “ Christians were
fighting against the heathen in self-defence.” British men-of-war
were occasionally dragged into the disputes to, of course, help King
George, Captain Croker, of H.M.S. Favourite, losing his life here in
1840, in a quarrel in which he certainly ought not to have taken a
part.
In judging of Tongan affairs of to-day, it must be remembered
that George is king and the inhabitants Christian by conquest. The
light of the gospel, it has been well said, “ burnt with rather a lurid
glare ” in those days. The secular and ecclesiastical arms were
combined. George considered himself head of the Church, like
English monarchs are supposed to be, or like the sacred kings of
Tonga of old. George was a Wesleyan Christian, and all Tonga
must join that form of religion. Strange as it may seem, the
Catholics here complain that in the old days they were much per-
secuted, and that but for the appearance of a French man-of-war in
Tongan waters, the Marists would have been driven from the islands.
The Protestants, however, complain of the “ unchristian-like rivalry
of the Popish priests.” I quite agree that religious rivalry of any
kind is highly to be deprecated in missionary work, but this is an
argument which the London Missionary and the Wesleyan Society
might very well use against each other in Samoa and elsewhere.
King George could make his heathen subjects become Protestant by
stripes and imprisonment, but he had to leave the Catholic converts
alone, as France protects the interests of her priests in the Pacific,
although within the home boundaries of the Gallic Republic Pome’s
followers have little recognition. George was both priest and king,
praying and preaching to the people whom he ruled. In 18'47 one
missionary writes that “ King George offered up a prayer with such
touching earnestness that the congregation was moved to tears and
sobs.” An arbitrary monarch is sure to be applauded whatever role
he undertakes; still, one has reason to believe that King George was
a finished preacher, eloquent and with dignified address. Was such
a man —a warrior who had conquered all Tonga, a king who had
made his people Christian, a Protestant powerful in prayer and
eloquent in the pulpit—likely to submit to the dictation of an outside
body like the Sydney Wesleyan Conference ? The troubles here, not


by any means over, are, I believe, simply caused by tbe rulers of the
Wesleyan community omitting to recognise tbe fact that in King
George of Tonga they had a far different man to deal with than
Cakobau of Fiji. Without the Tongan king’s aid Wesleyanism would
not have been established as the State religion of the country. It
would have been wise to wait till his death before attempting to
exercise powers which would conflict with those the king had for so
long considered his special prerogative.
I think of Cakobau, Dei Gratia and the will of Thurston, Butters
and Co., King, as I look upon George, King of Tonga, sitting in the
verandah of his palace—the last link with the past of Pacific history
and of heathendom. For this old monarch in his youth must have
shared in the bloody wars of his grandfather, Finau, and without
doubt took part in the cruel cannibal feasts described by Mariner.
Whether king or subject, George of Tonga strikes everyone at once as
a Grand Old Man. Like his nephew, my old friend Maafu, he is tall
and stalwart, physically a true ruler of men. In his youth one can
imagine the power in his face as well as in his limbs. But King
George has not, and never could have had, the charfh of expression,
the sweet dignity, possessed by my friend Mataafa, King of Samoa.
Ordinarily the Tongan monarch wears a costume similar to that of his
subjects, a shirt and a sulu, or kilt. This suits him admirably, setting
off his strong brown limbs. His dark face is toned down by the grey
hair and beard. Decidedly a handsome old man, handsomer in this
simple costume than in the blue and gold uniform which he assumes
on State occasions to impress and overawe his people. George of
Tonga is still a strong hale man. Night and morning he takes his
swim in the sea, diving from the little pier jutting into the bay in front
of the palace. Otherwise he spends most of his time sitting on the
verandah, reading official correspondence or the Bible by the aid of
strong spectacles. George of Tonga is, according to his lights, a good
old man, although perhaps at times a stubborn old man. The longer
he lives the better it will be for Tonga. But King George has a great
shock whilst I am here in the death of his wife, Queen Charlotte, his
fond and faithful companion for 60 years, a truly devout Christian lady.
There is mourning and lamentation on the death of Queen
Charlotte throughout Holy Tonga. But mourning here, as amongst
the Celtic races, is turned into feasting and wassail. There is a
gigantic wake in Nukualofa. Even as in Ireland, Scotland and Wales


ancient customs of the people have survived centuries of Christian
rule, so in Holy Tonga the heathen habits of the natives break out
on the occasion of a royal death. The Queen is dead, so the poor King
must he comforted by gifts of food from his faithful people. That
was the ancient theory—a remnant of the time when food was the one
thing needful for primal man. The “ funeral baked meats” in Tonga
are of wonderful proportions. From all the inland villages, and from
all the other islands of the group, deputations march and sail to
Nukualofa, bearing gifts of pigs and lava root. All day long they
march past the palace, carrying whole pigs slung on poles. Death
and roasting have, however, converted the fat animals into pork.
The lava roots are borne high in triumph. When the palace is
reached the men, all clad in smoked tappa and with blackened faces,
halt and sing a dirgeful verse in token of their sympathy with the
King. It is not a Wesleyan hymn, but a remnant of their ancient
worship which the poet has translated as—
Let’s feast to-night ! to-morrow we depart.
Strike up the dance ! the kava bowl fill high !
Drain every drop ! to-morrow we may die.
But old King George does not show himself to his sympathising
people. He sits in the verandah on the other side of his palace, and
in spirit turns his face to the wall. He may hear the mournful strains
of his subjects, but he will see them not. According to ancient
custom the king himself should receive the gifts of his people ; now
the chief magistrates sit on the verandah of the “Treasury” and
acknowledge and thank the villagers who place the pigs and lava
roots on the ground before them. It is one of the most picturesque
sights I have witnessed in the South Seas. Company after company
of stalwart Tongans, marching by fours, singing in time and tune,
deposit their gifts on the grass of the Esplanade. There are great
pigs and little pigs, singed brown and ornamented with flowers,
wreathed round the bodies and stuck in the mouths ; very ludicrous is
the appearance of this heap of roast pork, but at the same time very
toothsome looking. The people sitting round under the trees take
great interest in the division of the spoil, for the pork and lava root
are only received by the chiefs on behalf of King George, to be given
away again. All over Nukualofa there is to-night feasting on roast
pig and drinking from the lava cup, and a general high old time
because Queen Charlotte has been gathered to her fathers. One
Tongan chief, whom I question as to the hold ancient customs have on


the people, says that these funeral festivities are quite of a Christian
character, quoting King David as an authority and guide to be
followed.
Queen Charlotte lived in a kiosk or pavilion in the palace com-
pound. Lived there, I expect, much in the native fashion, surrounded
by a female retinue. King George, too, although he sits in a chair
on the verandah, does not I think make much use of his palace. I
remember when, some three and a-half years ago, I was at Eaton
Hall with a party of distinguished Australians, that some of the ladies
were very anxious indeed to see the sleeping chamber of a real live
duchess. They had their wish, and informed me afterwards that
there were better bedrooms in Toorak. The only inspection of the
Duke of Westminster’s private rooms which I felt justified in making, on
the invitation of the house steward, was of the billiard room. I know
a far better one in South Yarra. When we found that there was
only a small billiard room and no smoking room at Eaton Hall, the
eminent New South Wales counsel, learned in the law, and myself
agreed that we could give the owner a few useful hints as to how to
spend his £1,200 a day. At Tonga I do not ask to see the Eoyal
sleeping apartments. I fancy George Hex camps in the kiosk, with
his native attendants around him. He would certainly be out of place
lying on a four-post bedstead surrounded with European toilet ad-
juncts. Alphonse Daudet, in that charming but sad tale, Jac/c,
points out that social differences, habits and customs make the
separations in life. This is so in civilisation, but not in the Pacific
Islands. George of Tonga is king, not because he has a “palace”
and occasionally wears European clothes, but because he was a warrior,
and a conqueror, and ruler of men. To live in the fashion of his
ancestors would be not only natural, but would in fact endear him
more to his people than the imitation of European customs in which
he indulges on State occasions, and which customs are only irksome
to him. Even the sitting on a chair for any length of time is trouble-
some to Tongan Majesty, who crosses one leg over the other at right
angles as if squatted on the ground. There is a suppleness of limb
evidenced in this which tells of years of custom before chairs and
Christianity became fashionable in Tonga. I could not maintain this
attitude for five minutes.
In a state of civilisation it is possible for a gently-bred child like
Daudet’s Jack to be turned into a rude drunken boor by association.


But it is, or seems to be, an. impossibility for natives, even chiefs and
kings, to acquire and retain the practice of European customs. The
Royalty of Honolulu returns to the habits of his race in living in his
“bath-house,” surrounded by hula dancers and fortune-tellers. The
late Royalty of Fiji I saw lying in the smallest hut in his compound,
covered with a blanket none the cleanest. Maafu, Prince of Tonga,
who was Viceroy of the Windward Islands, a nephew of. King George,
and a better educated man than his uncle, was also given to relapses
into native habits, although he would sometimes put on a blue naval
uniform and patent leather shoes when he called on Sir Arthur
Gordon, at Levuka. Maafu’s relapses which annoyed me took such
a form as a liking for roast dog. The catholicity of his taste in strong
liquors was also astonishing in one who had been brought up a
Wesleyan. Maafu at Loma Loma had a chamber fitted up in
’European fashion. There was an elegant walnut bedstead; there
was a suite to match; there was a toilet service of beautiful and
costly china. But the bedstead, wardrobe and chairs were being
eaten by the white ants. The cheval glass was cracked; half the
chinaware was broken; the bed was laden with cartridges, pipes,
whips, and canes. Rifles and revolvers and swords were stowed in one
corner. In another, illustrated books and cheap lithographs were
mixed up with photographs of distinguished people. There was dust
and rust over everything. Maafu slept in another room on a pile of
mats, as his ancestors had done, but he had a sort of delight in the
possession of this old curiosity shop, and showed his bed to strangers
with pride, and generally let you know that he was acquainted with
the uses of everything in his collection. But it was much easier to
walk into the sea or into his private waterhole at the back than to
bother in using a china basin for washing. The papalangis had queer
ways in doing things, but they certainly made very excellent whips,
good for chastising servants, and Maafu pointed to some heavy,* brass-
bound cart whips, such as might be used by a drayman of Barclay and
Perkins, and which had been shipped to Fiji with a general cargo,
when there was not a single wheeled vehicle in the land. But Maafu,
bought these whips from a store on the beach at Levuka for a high
price, and kept his household in order therewith.
I think of old days at Loma Loma, of the contrast between Maafu
in his blue uniform and when sailing the Xarifa clad only in a sulu.
Of the constrast too between the smart young Tongan lasses at work
at school, quickest in mental arithmetic of any children I have ever


known, demure as nuns under the glance of the missionary, and later
in the day when dancing a meke, mocking the stranger with lively
chaff. King George calls these times to my mind as I see him a
centenarian still alive whilst his nephew has followed Cakohau to
“his own place.” George of Tonga in his heart perhaps feels that
this “palace” is as incongruous as Maafu did his grand bedstead.
It is to him like the show rooms at Eaton Hall, and other residences
of possessors of wealth and “ Exalted Hank.” It is very nice to sit on
the verandah no doubt, but I am sure the old gentleman feels very
much out of place inside the house. A kilt is a costume not adapted to
an arm chair or a sofa, and bare brown legs and feet are not in
accord with Brussels carpets and panelled walls. When he has got
his royal clothes on, and nothing is left in the box, George Rex may
feel that he is living up to the sideboard in the diningroom or the
elegant covered chairs in the drawingroom. For the palace is a
handsomely-furnished residence. The ordinary living rooms are quite
English. The brown holland covers to the chairs in the drawingroom
remind one of some English rectory. But the busts of the Emperor
William of Germany, and of Frederick the Noble, his son, in the hall,
and the life-sized equestrian picture of the old Emperor, which faces
one at the head of the stairs, speak of foreign influence. Politically
Germany has always been the best friend of Tonga, England here,
as in Egypt and Samoa, having managed to make herself despised.
Hence these mementoes of German royalty. Altogether as strange a
house as you can imagine is the “ palace ” of King George of Tonga.
Outside are the tropical surroundings, and the bare-legged old King
sitting on the verandah. Inside the hall looks like the entrance to
some German Schloss. But the drawingroom is respectable and
English, showing signs of a lady’s care. The explanation is found in
the presence of Miss Baker, the daughter of the Premier, and the
acting “ daughter of the house,” who acts as hostess, and receives
visitors for King George in the absence of her father. If the King
of Tonga had not someone to act as chatelaine I am afraid his palace
furniture would soon be spoilt by neglect. Miss Baker’s presence and
her English tongue counteract the evidences of German influence in
the hall, and in speaking to an English lady, albeit one born in Tonga,
I forget for a time that this highly respectable drawingroom is not in
Kew or St. Kilda, and that outside on the verandah sits the bare-
legged old King George admiring the scenery. Under the present
circumstances he is in the right place.


CHAPTER 111.
CHUECH AND STATE.
Mayor of the Palace as well as Premier of Tonga is the Eeverend
Shirley Waldemar Baker. He and members of his family reside with
King George, and I imagine get a great deal more material satisfaction
ont of the Eoyal residence than the Tongan monarch does. ‘ ‘ Mr.
Shirley Baker,” said Captain Olive to me in Auckland, “is the most
remarkable man in the Pacific. He is even a bigger man than Sir John
Thurston.” After my present visit to Tonga, I agree with this remark,
although his Excellency Sir John Bates Thurston, K.C.M.G., Governor
of Fiji, is, without doubt, one of the most remarkable men in the
Southern Hemisphere. He has risen from the position of second mate
of a mission schooner to be ruler of the colony where he first landed
as a beachcomber. Sir John Thurston, like Mr. Shirley Baker,
attempted to “ run ” a kingdom in the Pacific. But Cakobau was not
a success, or at least his Government was not. Fiji was ceded to
England, the old king of the Cannibal Islands, according to the Blue
Book, recommending his late favourite to Sir Hercules Eobinson in
the words, “ Mr. Thurston is a very good man. You are not to believe
what the missionaries say against him.” And that official belief was
not placed in the slanders heaped on Sir John Thurston is proved by
the fact of his occupying his present position.
The other day my friend, Captain G., whilst talking of old
acquaintances in the province of Garbieh, in Lower Egypt, 'quoted to
me the vernacular expression of the Arabs —Kellem doghery zel el
Inglees —“Speak truth like the English.” Amongst all native races,
the English people have been known as speaking the truth and
keeping their word. Especially has that been so in the South Seas,
where the phrase, Man-a-ivee-wee is applied to the Frenchman as a term
of contempt, and where the German is hated and feared. English-
speaking sailors and' traders are always trusted before those of any
other nationality. As a rule it may be said that they do speak the
truth, and are therefore respected. According to Mariner, even the
escaped convict Morgan was “respected” by the natives of Tonga.
But anyone going to Tonga of recent days and interviewing the


missionaries and Mr. Shirley Baker would come to the conclusion that
English people as represented by them do not by any means speak the
truth, but that on one side or the other there is and has been a
considerable amount of lying. On religious questions, no doubt, there
is in everyone a certain amount of mental colour-blindness which
causes people to take different views of a subject, and in all honesty
to contradict each other’s statements. But there are questions of fact
which it is impossible to disagree upon and at the same time speak the
truth. All over the civilised world Mr. Shirley Baker has been held
up to public scorn as a persecutor of the faithful, and worse. The
Wesleyans have followed him with that bitter hatred only to be found
in those possessed with the odium theologicum. If one believed all that
they have said and written of the Premier of Tonga, he must indeed
be a very bad man—none worse in the world.
Once on the verandah of Menzies’ I met a well-known Melbourne
citizen, and dropped into conversation on South Sea matters. My
companion volunteered the statement that “ Shirley Baker is an
infernal scoundrel.” “Do you know him ? ” I asked. “No ! but I
know those who do.” So public opinion is formed. And when you
are behind the scenes you get very indignant at such canards. The
Premier of Tonga does not by any means look the character which the
religious world has given him. Nearer 60 than 50, with broad, high
forehead, waving hair and slight whisker of the fashion of 40 years
ago, Mr. Shirley Baker in appearance is essentially an Englishman.
Intellectual power is blended with humour. He reminds me of a few
noted men of my acquaintance —the Pev. Morley Punshon ; Mr. John
Smith, the criminal lawyer, who defended William Palmer, the
Rugeley poisoner; Mr. Harry Edwards, late of Melbourne ; and the
Rev. Henry Burton, Rural Dean of Shropshire. Mr. Shirley Baker
looks the man who would be quite at home in an English rectory.
There is more of the kindly man of the world than the cleric about
him. He has a face which would look well under a barrister’s wig.
You can imagine that he would be a good cross-examiner and an able
pleader ; one who would easily detect humbug in others. Not a zealot
and not a martyr, and, therefore, one who would not be a persecutor.
Mr. Shirley Baker would not, I am sure, want to die for his opinions,
and therefore he would not want other people to die for theirs. The
principal thing which strikes me in the interviews I have with him at
the Palace and at his office is the tolerance and moderation of language
of King Gieorge’s Premier when speaking of his opponents. He dis-


plays no petty animosity or weak virulence. I begin to see that be is
a strong man and administrator in that he speaks of the attacks made
upon him with a laugh and as not worth answering. Mr. Shirley
Baker takes a higher stand than his opponents in that he does not
descend to the tu quoque of abuse.
I may hint here that I am bidden to “ sit at meat with the king.”
But neither from Monarch nor Premier nor Missionary could I accept
the slightest hospitality. I do not know what I may have to say
about each, and keep perfectly unfettered and unbiassed by any con-
siderations which the reception of any courtesies might enforce upon
me. My attitude in this manner rather offends the Tongan Premier ;
perhaps he is accustomed to look upon every newspaper man as a foe,
but I cannot complain of his reception. “Anything you want to see
you shall see ; anywhere you want to go you shall go. You will hear
my character from Messrs. Leefe and Brown and the beachcombers.
My answer is myself, and that for long years I was a missionary and
head of the Wesleyan Church here until I resigned to become Prime
Minister of King George and institute the reign of law here. Ido not
wish to claim too much credit. The King and Mr. Watkin have sup-
ported and aided me in everything. But my life’s work has been
Tonga. I lived happy years here. My children were born here.
Two of them nearly died here to save their father.” Mr. Shirley
Baker’s eye glances lovingly upon his son, whose arm still hangs
helplessly by his side, crippled for ever by the gunshot wound he
received in January, 1887, when the second Miss Baker was also
severely wounded in attempting to screen her father from the shots of
the would be assassins. This attempted murder was reported to have
been incited by the malcontent Wesleyans in the community. No one
has yet quite got to the real reason why four escaped convicts should
have made this attack on the Premier of Tonga. If incited by the
Wesleyan natives these suffered enough for it, as under the idea that
there was an organised conspiracy on foot, King George sent to
Haapai for his own particular followers, who, when they landed on
Tongatabu, in spite of the royal command, scattered themselves over
the island, and plundered and beat the Wesleyans, whom they con-
sidered were the King’s enemies. The consequence was that nearly all
the remaining Wesleyans in Tonga joined the Free Church. But
for the action of the Sydney Wesleyan Conference in supporting and
keeping up at great financial loss the battle of the churches in this
group, Holy Tonga would now be at peace.


Mr. Baker hands me the report of Sir Charles Mitchell, Governor
of Fiji and High Commissioner for the Western Pacific, on “ Recent
Disturbances in, and the Affairs of Tonga,” presented to both Houses
of Parliament in July, 1887. I knew Sir Charles Mitchell before he
came to Polynesia. His record in South Africa, showing that he was
one of the best men in the service, entitled him to promotion. In due
time he might, under the old condition of things at the Colonial Office,
ave been Governor of Victoria. lam sure he would have been a
popular Governor. For Sir Charles Mitchell is a level-headed,
unassuming gentleman, who reminds me more of Sir William Jervois
than any other colonial potentate I have met. Knowing the thorough
fairness and impartiality in all things of the late Governor of Fiji I am
very pleased to get his report and to quote the following extracts,
which are pointed out to me :—“ Sir Charles Mitchell,” says Mr.
Baker, “is, you will see, not very favourably disposed towards me.
With so much one-sided evidence Ido not see how he could be. You
will see he even hints that he might be justified in ‘ deporting ’ me,
although in his letter to the King he says:—‘l know that Mr. Baker
has rendered great and valuable service to the Tongan Government
and that your Majesty regards him with feelings of friendship and
esteem. I believe that if your Majesty should decide to follow the
advice I have ventured to offer, Mr. Baker would be the most able
and fitting instrument for carrying into effect your orders thereupon.’
Sir Charles might have deported me, but —however, read what he
says.”
“For many years past there has been agrowing desire on the
part of the King, chiefs, and people of Tonga to assume a more
independent position in the Wesleyan body than that hitherto accorded
to them. I find in the year 1874, the secretary of the Tongan Govern-
ment addressing the New South Wales and Queensland Conference,
to which Tonga was attached as a missionary district, a letter on this
subject. The Conference appears to have taken this letter into con-
sideration, and to have made some small concession in the direction
required ; that is to say, that, in lieu of the independence asked for, it
allowed the formation of a home mission contingent fund, and the
admission of the laity to a voice in its distribution. It is to this
inadequate treatment of a well founded complaint that I attribute all the
subsequent disputes , and the eventual secession of the Tongan Wesleyan body.
I cannot think that this Conference could have been well informed as
to the grave discontent that even then existed in the minds of both


King and people by reason of so large a sum of money leaving Tonga
every year without the people who subscribed it having any real voice
in its disposal.
“ In 1879 the Australasian Wesleyan Missionary Society Board of
Management sent a committee to Tonga to inquire into Mr. Baker’s
conduct, and its report was considered at the New South Wales and
Queensland Conference of 1880, the result being the recall of Mr. Baker
from Tonga, much apparently to the annoyance of the King, who there-
upon wrote to the Conference to again ask that Tonga should be con-
stituted an independent district. The consideration of this request was
relegated to the General Australasian Methodist Conference, to be held
in Adelaide in 1881. The King had in the meantime (December, 1880)
issued a proclamation, in which, after expressing his determination that
independence should be obtained by the Tongan Wesleyan Church,
he called upon his chiefs, and people who were related to him or
connected with his Government, to abstain from subscribing to or
aiding the Church. The substance of this the King appears to have
conveyed in his speech to his Parliament shortly afterwards. Mr.
Baker about this time (April, 1881) accepted the Premiership of
the Tongan Government, after having appeared before the New
South Wales Conference in January, 1881, and resigned his ap-
pointment as a Wesleyan missionary. Mr. Moulton, who had
been a missionary in Tonga for many years, and who had a few
months previously returned from an absence of some three years,
was now appointed chairman of the Tongan district in the place
■of Mr. Watkin, who had been appointed chairman in succes-
sion to Mr. Baker, the former gentleman being withdrawn from
Tonga and appointed to a station in New South Wales. I may here
state that for several years previous to 1882 the subscriptions of the
islanders in support of their mission were very large, amounting, in
fact, to several thousand pounds in each year. Out of this the
expenses of the mission were defrayed, but there still remained a very
■ considerable sum that was spent away from Tonga; notably in 1876
this surplus is admitted to have reached £2,000 to £3,000. The King
and his supporters had therefore a very real grievance , which grievance
would, as I said before, I think, have been rectified had the Con-
ference which considered the appeal of 1874 acted in the spirit of the
Adelaide Conference of 1881. But it was then too late; the King had
the idea of absolute separation firmly fixed in his mind; he had the
impression that he had not been fairly treated by the New South


Wales Conference. Mr. Baker, who had probably used his influence
to restrain the King’s action before 1881, was no longer the district
chairman, nor even a missionary of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga,
and, it may well be believed, was now using his influence in another
direction ; and, to crown all, the Conference had directed Mr. Watkin,
who was high in the king’s favour, to leave Tonga.”
11 There,” says Mr. Baker, “ you have the secret of all the troubles
here, and of the abuse heaped upon me. This is the report of the
Queen’s representative, mind. The words are not mine, or I could
put it to you a little stronger. I would show that here the Wesleyan
Church has attempted to usurp as much authority as the Church of
Home did in the old days, and has been as dangerous to individual
liberty. I would not attempt to compare myself to the Protestant
reformers, but in establishing the Free Church of Tonga, I and Mr.
Watkin have but done what John Wesley himself did in Great
Britain. And King George has but done what Henry the Eighth
did for Protestant England, but from far different motives. The
King, for the sake of his people, would not submit to the dictation of
an outside body like the New South Wales Conference. No one can
defend the sending away of such large sums of money to Australia.
I know you may say that some of this money was raised during my
term of office as Chairman of this district. One year I raised a large
sum to show the Wesleyan authorities that we were not only in a
position to be independent, but that we could assist in outside work.
I offered if we were made a separate District to undertake missionary
work in New Ireland and New Britain. From our College here we
would send native pastors who, I think, would have done just as much
good as Mr. George Brown. The culminating folly of the Sydney
authorities was in removing Mr. Watkin, who had been here nearly
all his life, and whom the King and people loved, and appointing Mr.
Moulton, for whom the King, with good cause, had a bitter dislike.”
It is strange to find history repeating itself in the South Seas—
the old quarrel as to who is to be head of the Church revived in
Tonga. Looking at it from King George’s point of view, one can
sympathise with the old monarch by whose aid Tonga is Christian,
who gave the Wesleyans land and privileges, and who made his
people follow the faith of the Methodists. In his mature years to
have ministers forced upon him whom he disliked, to have his trusted
friends removed, and to know that yearly hundreds and thousands of
pounds were sent out of his kingdom to enrich the coffers of the


Australian Wesleyans, and increase the salary of its pastors, must
indeed have been a hard blow to the grandson of Finau, the fighting
King of powerful will who had made Tonga one. I can fancy the old
man paraphrasing Shakespeare and saying, “ No Wesleyan missionary
shall e’er have tax or tithe in Tonga.” It is urged that all he has
done has been at the instigation of Mr. Baker. Ido not think so, but
agree with Sir Chas. Mitchell, who, in his report, says;—“l may
remark that I saw no indication in any of the many interviews I had
with the King of mental incapacity, or of his being under Mr. Baker’s
control. On the contrary, his mind appeared to me to be clear, his
manner decisive, and his whole bearing that of a man of strong will
and independent character.” King George, to my mind, has not only
a strong will but a stubborn will. He is beyond his time. He should
have lived in the days when there were no missionaries to dispute his
supremacy, and when he would have ruled the land where
Nature and nature’s goddess—woman—woos
To lands where, save their conscience, none accuse;
Where all partake the earth without dispute.
And bread itself is gathered as a fruit;
Where none contest the fields, the woods, the streams;
The goldless age where gold disturbs no dreams,
Inhabits or inhabited the shore,
Till Europe taught them better than before;
Bestow’d her customs, and amended theirs,
But left her vices also to their heirs.
The worst vice of all which Europe has bestowed upon Tonga is
the odium theologicum. Everyone in the kingdom seems permeated
with it; and it will be so as long as the Wesleyans persist in carrying
on the unchristian struggle for supremacy. That is how I feel com-
pelled to put it to the Kev. George Brown at my interviews with him
in the handsome and commodious Wesleyan manse at Nukualofa,
which, however, wants a little painting and renovating. Tonga,
however, now does not pay working expenses. Money is now drawn
from Australia to pay the salaries of the white missionaries and few
native pastors, and so the mission buildings are a little neglected.
Wesleyanism in Tonga is, in fact, extinct and dead as a faith,
surviving only in the churches, and manses, and other buildings still
held as the leasehold property of the Wesleyans of Australia. For to
my astonishment I find that the Wesleyan body still has a substantial
hold in Tonga in the possession of material wealth in the shape of
land and houses. According to the laws of Tonga there can be no
alienation of land, but the 99 years’ leases granted by the King are
valuable titles. I do not know Mr, Henry F. Symonds, who two


years ago was British. Vice-Consul in Tonga, but he appears to have
been a very obedient servant of the Wesleyan community. Appealed
to by the President of the Wesleyan Conference in Sydney, he replied
that he would do his utmost on their behalf. As representative of the
power of England, he therefore claimed possession for their owners,
the Wesleyans of Sydney, British subjects, of all churches throughout
Tonga, the congregations of which had seceded en masse in January,
1885, to the Free Church. The situation in Tonga now is just as if at
the English Reformation all the churches and abbeys of Rome had
been left in possession of that power, whilst the Protestants had to set
to work to build new churches and colleges. This fight for the
possession of the land seems to have been thought an all-important
one in Tonga. Under the pressure of British authority the Wesleyans
have regained possession of their property in Tonga, and the people
have been taxed to build new churches in which they can worship
according to the rites of the Tongan Free Methodist Churcli, which
differ in no perceptible way from those of the Wesleyan community.
The Reverend Greorge Brown is general secretary of missions in
Sydney. He is in Tonga on a special mission to rake up grievances
against Mr. Shirley Baker and maintain the cry of “persecution.”
At least, so it appears from his conversation. He calls upon me, as the
heathen did upon Balaam, to also curse the Premier of Tonga. Very
ghoulish does Mr. Brown look as he narrates his opinion of Mr.
Baker and his doings. He is not at all like the popular idea of
a missionary, or a teacher of religion of any kind. But you can
never tell. They get up in all sorts of ways in these times. I re-
member when a little, sunburnt, rather insignificant-looking man, in
dungaree trousers and a flannel shirt, came on board Donald M’Leod’s
schooner in the Banks group. “ Who are you ?” said Donald, after
exchanging salutations. “I’m Bishop Selwyn,” was the replv.
“You’re a liar. You don’t play that onto me,” said bluff
Donald to the Bishop, thinking that the hierarch of Melanesia was at
most but the second mate of the mission ship. Mr. Greorge Brown
does not assume clerical costume. He has a sharp, rat-terrier look.
He is evidently of the church militant, and rejoices in fighting. To
me his conversation is entirely political, varied with reminiscences
of mutual acquaintances in the South Seas, from Mr. Hugh Romilly
to the Rev. Lorimer Fison. “Did you ever see Fison shoot?” asks
Mr. Brown. “ Ever see him after quail or snipe ?” I confess that I
knew more of Mr. Fison as a Fijian missionary than as a sportsman.


“Ah!” says Mr. Brown, admiringly, “he’d wipe your eye at that
game.” I remember that Mr. Brown in New Britain was himself
noted as a good shot, hut that was at larger game than snipe or quail.
Also, I wonder what Exeter Hall would say at these missionary
utterances ?
At two long interviews I listen to “Brown on Baker.” The
“ player,” myself, so to speak, “in hand.” The law of libel will not
permit me to narrate what I hear. There is not a single crime on the
face of the earth of which the Tongan Premier is not accused, either
directly or by implication. The virulence is too evident, and causes a re-
action of feeling. I cannot believe that Mr. Baker is a murderer and
robber on a gigantic scale. Looking at the two men, one calm, debonair
and dignified, almost impartial in speaking of his own doings, the other
bitter and venomous, you imagine that these things might be true if the
positions were reversed. “ You cannot, Mr. Brown, expect me to print
what you say ; you cannot expect the public to believe it on your bare
word. If your charges are true —if there is any ground for truth —
you must be able to bring some sort of evidence in support of their
truth.” “That’s the worst of it,” says Mr. Brown, naively, “we can’t
prove them, but you may rely upon what I say. There are millions
of Wesleyans all over the world who will applaud what you say if you
will take the right view, and I am sure you will be with us.” This
offered bribe of popularity is also naive and amusing, although to
some the notion that by smiting one man, who could not well retaliate,
you could make friends with millions might be enticing. “ But, read
these,” says Mr. Brown, handing me two pamphlets from a large pile
in the corner of the library, “ these will give you all the particulars
you want.” This, again, is very naive, for an old hand in journalism
cannot accept ex parte statements of missionaries like those contained
in The Secession and Persecution in Tonga , and The Persecution in Tonga
as Narrated by Onlookers —the latter being a compilation of extracts
from newspapers in Eiji, New Zealand, and Australia, containing the
letters of “ Our Own Correspondents,” the Wesleyan missionaries them-
selves. For, as Mr. Baker pointed out to me, the only educated men
in the islands, and naturally the only newspaper correspondents, were
the Wesleyan missionaries, interested parties, who filled the colonial
journals with absurd' and one-sided reports. My attention is also
drawn to the statement of Sir Charles Mitchell, that the “newspaper
accounts of the persecution were full of exaggerations.” Also, it is
pointed out to me that not only in Tonga and Fiji are “ Our Own Cor-


respondents” missionaries, but that in Australia four powerful daily
journals are edited by ex-Wesleyan preachers, who have been fore-
most in attacking the Premier of Tonga. Sir Charles Mitchell may
well be satirical on “the means used to excite public opinion.”
The Rev. George Brown is an ungrateful man. He wishes to make
use of the press, and yet he will not acknowledge the obligations he is
under to my Brethren of the Pen. Thus he gives me a cutting from
a certain Melbourne journal, the Sabbatarian organ, which it is
notorious is edited by a Wesleyan clergyman. This contains a sensa-
tional article, headed “ Exiles for Conscience Sake,” relating the woes
of the “ Reverend” David Tonga and his wife, reputed to have been
banished from their native place on account of their religious con-
victions. This paper also contains a report of a speech given in
Melbourne by Mr. George Brown himself in support of the cause of the
“ exiles.” This Mr. Brown characterises as “ Rubbish; I never said
this; the fellow was not present when I was speaking.” Mr. Brown has
written this strong opinion across the newspaper cutting he gives me,
which I keep as a curiosity, showing the opinion of a Wesleyan on the
reliability of a Wesleyan organ. Ido not dispute the fact that the speech
was “rubbish,” but I do think Mr. Brown ungrateful in attacking
the “fellow” who reported the said speech and the journal which
printed it. But I am even more astonished when Mr. Brown makes
an attack on two New Zealand journals, the proprietors and conductors
of which I know to be men of honour, an attack so glaringly absurd
that it defeats itself. “ You know, I suppose,” says Mr. Brown, “ that
Baker has bought the Auckland Herald and the Auckland Star ? ”
I replied that I was not aware of this fact, but that if so the Tongan
Premier possesses two very valuable properties. “Oh ! I don’t mean
that he has purchased them, but bought them over ; we can’t get any
of our letters in now.” That the gentlemen I know so well should re-
fuse to insert libellous matter, which they were well satisfied had no
foundation in truth, seems very natural, but that they should therefore
be accused of taking bribes is a sad instance of the Rev. George
Brown’s state of mind, and of the credence to be placed on any of his
statements regarding Mr. Shirley Baker. I cannot truly apply the
Arab proverb here, Kellem doghery zel el Inglees .
But at the bottom of all the gross exaggeration of the missionary
statements there is a substratum of truth in regard to the persecution of
thefew remaining adherents of the Wesleyan Church. There is a > doubt
that many of these were cruelly used, not so much for “ cm science


sake ”as that they opposed the King’s will; also, after the attack
upon Mr. Baker, they were supposed to be in a conspiracy against the
Government. And, to my mind, there is no doubt that the native
Wesleyans were incited against the Government, meaning Mr. Baker,
by Mr. Moulton and others. For Mr. Baker, as King George’s trusted
Premier, in the eyes of the people should be respected next to the
King. In attacking one you attack the other. The Wesleyan tactics
only resulted in King George hardening his heart, and in making
things so unpleasant to the Wesleyans that they have most of them
joined the Free Church. The “ persecution ” might have been cruel,
but it was after all nothing to what the early heathen suffered when
King George was converting them to Christianity. There was, how-
ever, one case at Haapai, which, I am told, rivalled that of the
“ Black Hole ”of Calcutta. The “ Reverend ” David Tonga and his
wife, with many others, were confined for many days in the smallest
of habitations. The Reverend J. James, the present Wesleyan pastor
at Nukualofa, adjures me to visit this place and describe it. And Mr.
James is an earnest young gentleman, of far broader views than Mr.
Brown, who has had some experience of life in Northern Queensland,
and whose opinions I am inclined to respect, so I promise him I will
visit this Tongan “ Black Hole.” But first I have to listen to a sad
tale of persecution which comes from an outlying district whilst I am
in the mission house.


CHAPTER IV.
NATURE AND LAW.
The Rev. Mr. James is an earnest, but still a very mild, young gentle-
man of the “ Private Secretary ” stamp. He outwardly is a typical
Church of England curate of later days, the curate, however, of
Evangelical or High Church tendencies. In his modest well-worn
black suit and blue glasses, which give him a superlatively mild look,
Mr. James is a very great contrast to the Rev. George Brown of
terrier appearance, who seems perpetually eager and anxious to worry
somebody or something. The blue glasses gave Mr. James something
of the look of my friend Mr. H., the well-known manager of a well-
known London publishing house, satirised by Mr. Rider Haggard in
his weakest work; satirised, so people say, because the said firm
would not pay the popular romance writer a very large sum for She.
All who know Mr. H. will agree that the description was ungenerous
and unjust. lam attracted to Mr. James, in spite of his calling and
his clerical costume, by the subtle resemblance to my old friend, whom
I last met at dinner at that most splendid of all London clubs, The
National Liberal, on the Thames Embankment, where I enlightened
him and some other leaders of advanced thought in England on the
workings of our public school system in Australia. I was justified, I
thought, in claiming for this system that it gives as good an educa-
tional foundation to the child of the poorest as the child of the
wealthiest can receive, and that it has done more than anything else to
make our people worthy to inherit the heritage bequeathed to them
by the pioneers of 1851, and make them, child for child, and man for
man throughout all classes, better behaved, kinder and more generous
than those in the Old World.
I think of this conversation, held a few months back, on the
advantages of education, free, secular, and compulsory, in which the
Churches have neither part nor lot, when conversing with this young
Wesleyan missionary on the educational system of Tonga, in which
the Church has always taken the foremost part. The fact that in
Tonga the education of the people has been left in the hands of the
missionaries is sufficient to account for the general low state of
education of the people, taking education to mean knowledge. The
missionaries here, as elsewhere in the South Pacific, made a grammar


and alphabet of the native language, and to that extent may be said
to have invented it. The people have not been taught English, and
are therefore ignorant of everything which the English language and
English literature might teach them. This policy has reacted upon
the Wesleyans at the present juncture. If the natives here had been
acquainted with English, if their services had been held in our
language, they might have had some sort of affection and fidelity
towards the Wesleyan Church and the local governing body in
Australia; but when King Greorge and his willing aider and abettor
raised the cry of “ Tonga for the Tongans ” in ecclesiastical as well as
in secular matters, the people had nothing at all to bind them towards
the Wesleyans of Australia. It cannot be denied that the result of
the missionary tactics has been to keep the people of Tonga, as of all
the Pacific Isles, in ignorance; yet I must do the Wesleyan mission-
aries of Tonga credit in testifying to the fact that several useful works
in geography, history, and general knowledge have been translated
into this language from the English. Mr. Brown and Mr, James are
busy making a collection of these as their contribution towards the
South Sea curiosities in the Dunedin Exhibition. I should much like
to have a collection of these books for my own private use, but they
appear to be very scarce. I am afraid that under the new system of
“Tonga for the Tongans” very little will be done in further enlight-
ening the people as to any of the affairs of the outside world. The
people here are likely to remain, as they are now, as ignorant as Hans
Andersen’s Duckling, who thought that the world extended “Far
across the other side of the garden, quite into the parson’s field.”
The people of Tonga have always been happily contented with their
home and with themselves. They are naturally arrogant. They con-
sider themselves the very salt of the Pacific Earth. They have been
called “the snobs of the Pacific.” I will not quite endorse this
remark, although I find the Tongan generally to be as cheeky and
impudent as the Maori. He considers himself to be better than the
white man. When the Tongan is in a position to bully a white man
he never loses the oportunity. The Tongan police in Fiji were the
most insolent of their class. I remember also in Loma Loma how half
a dozen so-called policemen arrested and beat two English sailors for
simply singing at night on the beach. I accompanied Mr. Charles
Hennings, the youngest brother of our ever popular Victorian artist,
Mr. John Hennings, in a visit to the calaboose to bail the sailors out.
One may be sure that I felt pretty indignant at such treatment to men
of my own colour. This was not a white man’s country.


The white man in Tonga, unless protected by his consul, is not, I
think, likely to receive much consideration from the hands of the
native officials. When Mr. Brown complains to me that he has been
rudely treated by native magistrates, I remember that it is the Tongan
nature. In recent days Mr. Brown and his fellow Wesleyan mission-
aries lorded it over the Tongans as much as the priests of Borne ever
did over the most ignorant Bitziimmers. Now that their authority
has passed away in the overthrow of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga,
the native authorities are perhaps only too pleased to snub those who
previously snubbed them. It is human nature, as well as Tongan
nature. The “ persecution ” also may be put down to much the same
motives, as well as to the wish on the part of the persecutors to obey
the will of the King. The horrible tale of ‘‘persecution” which
Messrs. Brown and James pour into my ears is the result of the wish
of one party concerned to annoy the white Wesleyan missionaries, as
well as to harass their native brethren. With a very grave face, Mr.
Brown translates to me the letter of the native pastor, giving the
details of this “persecution.” He fixes me with just such a glance as
a terrier would a rat, or a rattlesnake a bird, and rivets my attention.
“Listen to this,” says the missionary secretary, “this is what we
have to endure, and all through that man Baker. Ah, ah ! ” and Mr.
Brown gives a growl which seems to testify to a wish to tear the
Tongan Premier to pieces. The letter is from a faithful follower of
the Wesleyan faith and the Wesleyan loaves and fishes. It describes
how the Buie, or head man of a certain village, came to the Wesleyan
Church when service was being held, and, striking the posts of the
door, accused the few worshippers of being traitors to the King, and
generally called them bad names and then went away. “You hear
this?” says Mr. Brown. “Well, we shall have a complaint to Baker,
and what redress do you think we shall get? Nothing.” And Mr.
Brown again looks as if he wished to rend someone in twain. Now
all this seems to me wretchedly puerile. The “persecution”
complained of is so very childish that I can scarcely forbear laughing.
But long training enables me to keep serious when listening to absurd-
ities, and I look grave whilst Mr, Brown explains to me the ‘ ‘ Law of
the Six.” This law, Mr. Brown points out, Sir Charles Mitchell
advised King George to repeal, but the old King was not to be
“bluffed,” and replied, or Mr. Baker indited the letter for him, “ I am
not willing it should be repealed.”


The “Law of the Six” is a regulation of the Tongan Parliament,
passed in 1885. I read that—“ In order to prevent the disturbances
•which spring from the ecclesiastical arrangements of the present time,
the King and the Tongan Parliament enact as follows: I.—lt is
forbidden to a religious body to preach a sermon in a town where
there are fewer than six adults in all, men or women, natives of the
town; anyone breaking this law shall, on conviction, be fined 20
dollars. 2. —It will not be allowable for anyone to go and take charge
of a church in any place if there are fewer than 30 adults, according
to the Constitution; but the people who will be allowed to go and
take charge of a place are ministers, assistant ministers, and hired
local preachers, whose names are on the roll of the church [literally,
great book]. On breach of this law it will be allowable to lords of
manors or heads of towns to expel him, and to take his land, and give
it to one who has none, but pays taxes.” As soon as this communi-
cation reached Mr. Moulton, the then Wesleyan minister, he at once
wrote to the Premier, acknowledging the receipt of the letter enclosing
the copy of the regulations prohibiting preaching where there are
fewer than six adults, and forbidding the sending agents to take
charge of a church where there are fewer than 30. He added : “I
beg to enter my protest in the name of the Wesleyan Church against
both these regulations, as being a direct contravention of our Saviour’s
command to preach the Gospel to every creature—as being contrary to
the great law of religious liberty, which prevails all over the civilised
world —as being a breach of the Constitution of Tonga, and of the
liberty secured thereby, and also the treaty with Great Britain—and
further, as an infringement of the rights hitherto enjoyed by the
Wesleyan Church, and on which the leases were granted.” When
acknowledging the receipt of this letter the Premier tersely said : “I
beg leave to respectfully differ from the remarks contained therein.”
Others may agree with him.
Looking at this question from a different point of view to that of
the Wesleyan missionary, I cannot but think that the “Law of the
Six ” is a wise and sensible order, although, as Sir Charles Mitchell
points out, “ This law was meant and used to force the Wesleyans into
obedience to the King’s will.” But without such a law the Wesleyans
could, and did, march in bodies from town to town and keep up a
perpetual religious strife. That is how Mr. Baker puts it to me, also
pointing out that in Australia municipal bodies have stopped the
Sunday processions of the Salvation Army, which that body may just


as well style a “ persecution.” The present curse of Tonga without
doubt is religious strife. Outsiders can be under no doubt as to the
party responsible for maintaining it. If the Wesleyans would but
accept the situation and withdraw gracefully, leaving Tonga to the
Free Church and the Eoman Catholics, the land would be at peace.
As it is, the Wesleyans attract the malcontents to their fold, the
Wesleyan Church in each village acting as a spiritual Cave of Adullam.
Any member of the Free Church who may revolt at “discipline”
joins the Wesleyans, and so religious animosity is kept up. The
trouble is the same here as at Samoa, two Protestant bodies competing
for members. The Rev. Mr. Clarke, at Apia, complained bitterly to
me that when any of the London Missionary Society’s followers
rebelled against “discipline” they went and joined the Wesleyans.
I daresay this rule also worked the other way. Roman Catholicism in
all its teachings is so different that there is but a small percentage of
conversion to, or secession therefrom. But Protestant missionary
work is ever much alike, and the Wesleyan and the Tongan Free
Churches are exactly alike in their mode of worship and work. So
impartial judges may well wonder why the “field” cannot be left to
the National Church to carry on the Christian work, instead of a
perpetual unchristian controversy being maintained by Mr. George
Brown and those whom he inspires. To Mr. James’s credit be it said
that he does not by any means seem as full of the odium theologicum
as the missionary secretary, but I think he is desirous to pursue his
work as a Wesleyan minister, in Christian harmony with all men. I
think Mr. Shirley Baker would meet him on these lines.
I do not visit the old church on Mount Zion, which dominates the
town. There are few worshippers here now, the majority of the
natives of Nukualofa attending the Free Church, a magnificent native
building erected on the green in front of the old mission residence.
This is another cause of offence to Mr. Brown. “ Would anyone with
the spirit of a man,” he asks, “put up a new church at our very
door?” Here again I think the New Britain hero is illogical. The
Wesleyans in Tonga have possession of all the old ecclesiastical
buildings, raised by the exertions of the people of Tonga be it
remembered, and which are yet held to be the leasehold property of
alien British Wesleyans. So the people of the Free Church have been
compelled to raise new edifices in which to worship, and there being
an eligible site near the Wesleyan mission house, it cannot be
wondered that Mr. Baker took advantage of it. lam shown this new


church by “ Jack,” Mr. Baker’s body-guard, who is detailed to act as
my guide. Jack is a stalwart Tong an, armed with a revolver, who is
the sworn personal attendant of the Premier, and is prepared, as he
tells me, to shoot anjmne who might again attempt to injure his
master. Jack is a good-natured fellow, and very proud of the church
in which he worships. This is a very fine specimen of native work.
The thatched roof is ornamented with wonderful patterns worked in
sinnet cord made from cocoanut fibre. The uprights and rafters are
also hound together by this cord, not a nail being used. This building
will hold over 1000 worshippers, and taking it as an evidence of faith,
seems to me of much more importance than the trials endured by the
“persecuted” Wesleyans. To a great extent lam told that this
church was erected by the voluntary labour of the people, and, if so,
it is an outward and visible sign of their belief in the justice of King
G-eorge’s decree establishing the Free Church, and of their zeal in
getting rid of foreign ecclesiastical domination. Ido not know a finer
native church than this in the Pacific. When I ascend the pulpit and
address an imaginary congregation, I find the acoustic properties
excellent. Jack is much amused, although he does not understand
what I say. If so, perhaps he would be more amused.
The Eev. J. B. Watkin, the head of the Free Church of Tonga,
has a nice new two-storeyed house opposite to the palace compound. I
shall, lam told, meet this reverend gentleman at Yavau. It is Miss
Baker who shows me the King’s chapel, which stands in the palace
grounds. Its double tower, and clock, and peal of bells make it
altogether the most prominent feature of Nukualofa. Inside, the
pews, with carved backs and sides, are of the ordinary British type,
but more highly varnished and ornamented. There is a small organ
which Miss Baker plays, an orthodox altar, altar rails, and pulpit.
The workmanship from floor to ceiling is excellent. This would be
considered a beautiful place of worship in any of the Melbourne
suburbs, the wood-carving being thoroughly artistic. There is nothing
in the King’s chapel to distinguish it from any other church, except
the seats on the dais at the right hand side of the altar. These are
ordinarily clothed in brown holland. When the coverings are removed
you see these straight, high backed, carved chairs padded with scarlet
velvet and surmounted by royal crowns in gilt work and the motto of
Tonga, Koe Otua ma Toga Jco hoku tofia. The centre seat is the highest,
and here on great days of the religious year King George sits in his
blue uniform and has service held for his benefit. He does not, how-


ever, a la the mad King of Bavaria, reserve this building for his sole
benefit. His people, or at least a certain number of them, can attend
and worship with their royal master. This royal chapel has been
rather an expensive piece of work, and Mr. Brown speaks contempt-
uously of it. But then it is not devoted to the propagation of Wesley-
anism. Admitting that it is a hobby, better far that Tonga’s king
should take up this harmless one than others in which European
monarchs indulge to their own and subjects’ injury. Opposite to the
door of this royal chapel is a monument to Prince Wellington, a
deceased favourite grandson of the King. The palace and church
standing side by side evidence the rule of King Gleorge of Tonga in
religious as well as in secular matters. I have to thank Miss Baker
for her kind attention in explaining matters to me. This is not the
young lady who was wounded in shielding her father from his would-
be assassins in January, 1887. She still resides in Auckland, where
she was sent to restore her health. The younger sister, my guide,
who was born in Tonga, seems very happy here, and says the place is
just as healthy as New Zealand.
Am on gat my many literary curiosities I preserve a set of the Acts
of the Fijian Parliament. These commence, “ Cakobau, by the Grace
of God and the will of the people, King,” and end with “James
Stewart Butters, Speaker.” Cakobau Rex, Dei gratia or otherwise,
has gone to his place. Mr. J. S. Butters, as remarkable a man in his
way as his once colleague Sir John B. Thurston, survives to aid in giving
the world such sweet blessings as Jackson’s Reef, to delight the pious
members of the Caledonian Society with his manly presence, and to
champion the cause of the Melbourne Hospital nurses. Mr. J. S. Butters
is as wonderful physically as the lady known in society as “She.” The
“ Constitution of Tonga,” a copy of which Mr. Baker gives me, is also
a very remarkable document. It was first “ granted by His Majesty
King George” in November, 1875, and “finally amended” in
December, 1888. American citizens will be pleased that it commences
with a “ Declaration of Rights.” Some unkind people used to say
that the American Declaration of Independence that ‘ ‘ all men are
born free and equal” should have the sequitur “bar Chinamen and
niggers.” Other unkind people will say that the first section of the
Tongan Declaration of Rights should include the proviso, “bar
Wesleyans.” It runs : “Section I.—Seeing it appears to be the will
of God for man to be free as He has made of one blood all nations of
men therefore shall the people of Tonga be for ever free and all


people who reside or may reside in this kingdom. And the lives and
bodies and time of all people shall be free to possess and acquire
property all doing as they like with the fruit of their hands and using
their own property as they may deem fit. Section 2. —No one shall
be obliged to work as a servant to another excepting he is willing to
do so saving in breaches of the law. And any slave running away
from any country to Tonga—if he is not running away from the law
of any land in consequence of being a murderer thief or guilty of any
crime or debt —shall at once be free on putting foot on Tongan soil
for no one shall ever continue to be a slave under the protection of the
Flag of Tonga.”
After this come clauses which concern Europeans: “Section 4.
—There shall be but one law in Tonga one for the chiefs and
commoners and Europeans and Tongans. No law will be enacted for
any special class to the detriment of another class but one law equally
the same for all persons residing in this land. Section 5.—A1l men
are free to perform their worship and to worship God as they may
deem fit in accordance with the dictates of their own consciences and
to assemble to perform their worship in such places as they may
appoint to do so. But it shall not be lawful for them to construe this
privilege [liberty] to commit evil and licentious acts under the name
of worship—acts which are not in accordance with the law and peace
of the land. Section 6.—The Sabbath day shall be sacred in Tonga
for ever and it shall not be lawful to work or artifice or play games
or trade on the Sabbath. And any agreement made or document
witnessed on this day shall be counted void and will not be protected
by the Government. Section 7. —It shall be lawful for all people to
speak write and print their minds and opinions and no law shall be
enacted to forbid this for ever. There shall be freedom of speech and
newspapers [press] for ever. But this does not nullify the law relative
to libel and the law for the protection of his Majesty and the Eoyal
family.”
The clause that “ There shall be but one law in Tonga for
Europeans and Tongans,” sounds well at first, but when you come to
see the administration of Tongan laws, is not so promising to those
who are not of a strictly moral and religious turn of mind. The
Society of Fanatics, which is making the name of the “Lord’s Day ”
execrated in Melbourne, would be quite at home in Tonga. The
clause “It shall not be lawful to work or artifice or play games or
trade on the Sabbath” is as comprehensive as the Act of Parliament


of the pious Stuart King, not yet, I believe, repealed, although it has
fallen into abeyance. Any foreigner might be brought before Tongan
justice for breaking this law, and many foreigners might be brought
before Tongan justice for breaking the stringent moral code. Mariner,
in his account of life in the Friendly Islands at the commencement of
this century, praises the chastity of both the married and unmarried
women. The result of 50 years of Wesleyan missionary work is that
the women have acquired quite another character. Whether this is
owing to the study of the Old Testament and the idches of the Hebrew
kings, or to the fact that the missionaries paid more attention to
Godliness, as evidenced by attendance at church and contributions to
the funds, than to moral cleanliness, one cannot say. Some suggest
that the great change in the character of the Tongan women from
being heathen and chaste to Christian and shameless first arose from
the fact that the missionaries, like certain members of the Social
Purity Society, commenced prying into moral slips and exposing
backsliders after the old Scottish fashion, and otherwise subjecting
them to church discipline. Moral offences, which were before spoken
of with bated breadth, became common topics of conversation. Famili-
arity with such subjects bred contempt for the punishment and
indulgence for the crime. Mr. Shirley Baker is, I suppose, the framer
of the penal code of Tonga. He has adopted the old missionary
“ discipline,” and offences against morality are severely punished by
fine or imprisonment; but both parties to the offence are punished,
the man as well as the woman. It is this impartiality which might
make Tonga an unhealthy place for some Europeans to reside in, but Mr.
Yarley, lam sure, would be delighted with Tonga. The administration
of the penal code causes a great amount of prying into affairs which
had better be left hid, and possibly also leads to a great deal of black-
mail.
Jack escorts me to the Police Court, one of the buildings on the
green esplanade facing the sea. Taking into consideration the
surroundings and population of Nukualofa, this in comparison with
our Melbourne City Court is a model of convenience. Everything is
en regie. The police magistrate is on the bench, two clerks below, one
taking down the evidence in shorthand, a police inspector prosecutes
for the crown, other police officers are in attendance, and occasionally
call out “Silence in the court!” in Tongan. The magistrates and
clerks are in white shirts and pants and black coats. The policemen
are in pants and uniform tunics. All wear boots. Their costume
altogether is much more punctilious than one often sees in Australian


courts of justice, but these natives with European clothes look much
blacker and in greater contrast to white people than in their sulus.
Just in the same way I should look utterly ridiculous in a lava lava.
But for the colour of the officials and the native language one might
be in a European court of justice. Everything is the same, from the
“Take the book in your right hand” and “That the evidence you
shall give to the court,” etc., to the severe shake of the head of the
magistrate and the lecture he gives to prisoners before fining them.
Tongan officialdom is not quite natural ; it is imprisoned by its con-
sciousness or by its European clothes. But then, are our local justices
of the peace natural on the bench ? There are happily none of the
Great Unpaid here at Tonga, to pack the bench on behalf of
fraudulent free-traders or ladies afflicted with kleptomania , or other
“ ladies ” prosecuted by the police for much the same offences as I
hear within the Tongan police court to-day.
There is a crowd of women and young children sitting cross-
legged outside the open doors of the Court. Two or three Europeans
are on benches inside. One young girl is sitting on the floor. She
might have been a model for the poet who wrote :
There sat the gentle savage of the wild,
In growth a woman, though in years a child
As childhood dates within our colder clime,
Where nought is ripen’d rapidly save crime ;
The infant of an infant world, as pure
From nature —lovely, warm and premature;
Dusky like night, but night with all her stars
Or cavern sparkling with its native spars ;
With eyes that were a language and a spell,
A form like Aphrodite’s in her shell,
With all her loves around her on the deep,
Voluptuous as the first approach of sleep ;
Yet full of life—for through her tropic cheek
The blush would make its way and all but speak ;
The sun-born blood suffused her neck, and threw
O’er her clear nut-brown skin a lucid hue
Like coral reddening through the darkened wave
Which draws the diver to the crimson cave.
Such was this daughter of the Southern seas,
Herself a billow in her energies,
To bear the bark of others’ happiness,
Nor feel a sorrow till her joy grew less.
This Tongan girl seems more natural than even Kisa or Jacky of
Samoa. I feel that I can take her as a model for all that is good and
pure in native womanhood. Alas ! I soon find that my imagination
is playing me false. The girl is told to stand up by a policeman and
enter the dock, and is charged with common immorality. All my


poetry vanishes to the winds. The details are listened to with great
glee by the women and children outside, whose laughter occasionally
brings a reproof from the policemen. Christian influence and the
reign of law in Tonga have not certainly advanced purity. The girl
herself and her partner in guilt are sworn and questioned by the
magistrate, the examination of the accused here being more thorough
even than in France. Both take the matter laughingly and without
shame, and when they are each fined 100 dol. leave the court without
any emotion. The other women and children look on this couple
admiringly. They will not pay the money, but will work out the fine
on the roads or Government works, their labour being assessed at the
rate of a shilling a day. 400 days’ labour to work out the sentence
for an offence against morality, but which in Australia would not be
one against the law! Yerily, the w~ay of the transgressor is hard in
Tonga.
There are 14 cases of adultery tried in this Nukualofa Police
Court on the morning lam here. There are 13 convictions, and 26
people fined, greatly to the benefit of the Tongan revenue, but
neither purity nor modesty are benefited thereby. I complain of this
to Mr. Baker, but he tells me it is really necessary to put down
immorality with a strong hand. It is a warning to the white residents
as well as to the natives. In Tonga, however, Ido not see so many half-
castes as in Samoa, and the half-castes here do not seem to be so
happy as in Samoa. lam told that they generally are not equal to
the natives, and are not to be trusted. “They hate their fathers for
being white, and despise their mothers for being dark.” In this
matter of breaches of the seventh commandment Mr. Baker insists
that the Tongans must be kept in hand. The women are too amiable.
He quotes to me the opinion of a correspondent of the New Zealand
Herald : —“ Let those who decry the present form of government, and
ridicule and condemn the labour of Mr. Baker and his coadjutors,
reflect for a moment upon the probable consequences of its overthrow.
Tonga would become the Alsatia of the Pacific. Look at its present
condition. Squalor and drunkenness are non-existent, crime is rare
and almost exclusively confined to petty larcenies and breaches of the
moral code which elsewhere would go unpunished; education is so general
that everyone can read and write, and the comforts and necessaries of
life are so evenly distributed that no one lacks aught. Nearly every
youth has his horse, few households are without a cart as well, and
every woman seems to own a sewing machine. Houses are easily
constructed; the material is abundant and costs nothing; land may be


leased at a nominal rental, and the soil is so generous that it scarcely
requires to he tickled with a hoe to laugh with a harvest. Not even
the incorrigibly lazy can starve ; for the cocoanut and other fruits may
always be plucked at will, and every man’s house is ever open to the
visitor —European or native—who may enter unasked and share what
is going. They cannot understand why Europeans are not similarly
communistic, and attribute it to selfishness on their part. Of course
this state of things tends to encourage indolence, and it explains why
the cotton industry fails in Tonga. Native labour costs too much to
leave any margin of profit.” I myself can add nothing to these
opinions of the talented author of The Summer Isles of Eden.


CHAPTER V.
TO HAAPAL
Life in Tonga is certainly airy and free in spite of all the laws, in the
meshes of which you may at any moment he entrapped. Pacific
nature is still superior to the apparently hard laws of the missionaries
and of Mr. Shirley Baker. The place breathes happiness. There is
a scent of orange blossoms in the air as you walk about the streets.
There is a subtle perfume of sandalwood oil as you pass crowds of
girls laughing and talking in pure lightness of heart and love of life.
You can recognise that at one time Tonga must have been quite as
charming a place to live in as some parts of Samoa are at the present
day. The Wesleyan missionaries and the beachcombers complain that
the Government of Tonga is a complete despotism, but the people seem
happy under this despotism. Nominally it is a limited monarchy, but
practically King George rules supreme, or Mr. Shirley Baker rules for
him. The Tongan Legislature, which passes Acts of Parliament, is
called and prorogued whenever the King likes. There is only one
native chief who has much power or influence inside or outside the
House, and that is William Tungi, who occupies the position of
“ Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.” Tungi, I am told, is a
possible future King of Tonga. He is a “dark horse,” no one
knowing whether he is a real friend to Mr. Shirley Baker, or whether
he might not be persuaded, at the death of King George, to turn
round on the Premier. This is what I hear from the Wesleyan
missionaries and others who have hopes of Tungi. I shall see him in
Yavau.
Before leaving Tongatabu the traveller should pay a visit to the
strange ruins—last trace of a primal race and a primal religion—which
are found in the centre of the island. There is no trouble in getting
about here. Mr. Baker places his buggy at my disposal, so does Mr.
Campbell, so does the courteous manager of McArthur and Co.’s
interests. Any decent stranger will find himself taken by the hand
and well treated in Tonga, although at first the absence of any decent
hotel will seem to him to evidence a lack of hospitality. The fact that
one can travel on horseback, or in wheeled vehicles, all over Tongatabu


enables one to “do” tbis island in a very short time. To counter-
balance the advantages of the roads, there is the disadvantage that
there is no fresh water here, no stream worth the name. The rainfall
fills the tanks, and there is never any lack of water ; but the country
being so flat there is no watershed, and consequently there are no
creeks nor rivers. Europeans in Tonga cannot enjoy the luxurious
baths in shady streams which help to make life in Samoa endurable.
It is a pleasant drive to the great cromlech, the chief evidence of a by-
gone people who possessed religious ideas far different to those of the
conquering Polynesians who succeeded them. For this cromlech, with
its heavy side pillars (Boaz and Jakin) and huge slab of stone on the
top, morticed or countersunk into the uprights, is distinctly of the
same character as the crondechs devoted in old days to sun worship in
Brittany, in Britain, and in Central America. I speak only of the
ruins I have seen. At Easter Island it is w r ell known that there are
ruins of a more extensive character. At Ponapi, or Ascension Island,
there are the remains of a Marae which, according to the accounts
given me by Messrs. George Punnet and Ellis, are exactly the same
as the old Druidical circles, the best modern description of which is
found in that strange romance, One Traveller Returns , by Messrs.
Christie Murray and Henry Herman. It is not easy to get to Easter
or Ascension Islands. Here in Tongatabu, however, within a few
pleasant days’ sail of Auckland, the colonial archaeologist can obtain a
good text for scientific investigation as to the origin of the early races
of the Pacific. As at the Pyramids of Egypt, it is a question as to
how* the stones were brought and fixed into their places.
One great advantage of travelling by the Union Company’s boats
from Auckland is that they touch at the three principal islands of the
Friendly Group. A day spent at each on the outward and homeward-
bound trips gives the passing traveller a good idea of life in Holy
Tonga. If Tongatabu itself but possessed a decent hostelry, I would
advise intending voyagers in the South Seas to stop there a month.
People wishing to avoid the cold winter weather in the Australian
southern colonies, and to enjoy health and tranquility amongst new
surroundings can, however, with great comfort tarry at Haapai; and
the voyage thither is interesting.
TheWainui steams out of the harbour of Nukualofa through a
different passage to that by which we entered. I count no less than
19 little islands which we pass before we clear the reef. At times we
appear to be steering straight on to the breakers and to destruction.
The white waves curling over the coral barrier, which protects this


island from tlie encroachments of the sea, seem to roar in eager expec-
tation of a coming wreck. We have no pilot on board. “ But,” says
Captain Crawshaw, “ where a commander of a Union Company’s boat
has been once he can go again. There is not a place in New Zealand,
or Australia, or the South Seas where we need a pilot.” From per-
sonal knowledge of many of the good old shellbacks in this service, I
do not think that this is “blow,” but a justifiable statement of facts.
The young master of the Wainui is cool and confident as we steam by
ragged reefs and foaming breakers, until, without any apparent change,
we are in deep water. There are patches of reef to the right and to
the left, but we have left the treacherous green waves behind, and
sail through a deej) blue ocean. A very pretty bit of navigation this
which arouses my admiration, there being no landmarks nor bearings
to guide the captain on his course. Then north by east the course is
set for Haapai, and we steam on through the night, past many islands
and shoals and reefs which make navigation in this archipelago
difficult and dangerous, even with the best of charts, compasses, and
chronometers. It is seamanship which tells here, as in the days of
Captain Cook, on whose course we are following. The scientific
mariner who often wrecks his ship because his chronometer is out of
gear should not sail in the South Seas; he should keep to the Western
Ocean, where he can run a course of 3,000 miles without hitting any-
thing, except, it may be, an iceberg. But, steaming through this
archipelago of the Friendly Islands, where a slight deviation from our
course would put us on an island or a reef, one recognises more than
ever the wonderful capacities of the Great Navigator who, without
chart or pilot, sailed these unknown seas in vessels which our present
navigators would scorn.
We pass the Namuka Group, the principal island of which Cook
named Annamooka. This had previously been discovered by Tasman,
and named Rotterdam. It is surrounded by islets, sandbanks, and
breakers. Many of these are constantly changing form or disappear-
ing altogether through volcanic action, which has been, and is, very
active in the Friendly Group. On the old charts of 25 years ago there
are shoals and reefs marked which do not now exist, but others have
sprung into existence. Falcon Island, which previously was a mere
shoal surrounded by a reef, on the 13th of October, 1885, rose 295 feet
out of the water, becoming a prominent landmark; on the other hand,
Tofoa and Kao appear to have sunk, or the surveys made in 1852 were
grossly inaccurate. Tofoa is an ancient, active volcano, noted as such


by Captain Cook, and which has lately been in eruption ; the smoke
and fire can be seen at night by voyagers from Tongatabu. It is day-
light when we steam into the roadstead of Lifuka, the principal island
of the Haapai Group. The similarity in the name to Levuka, in Fiji,
at once strikes one, but no Pacific philologist can tell me the why or
wherefore. A long, low shore, a foreground of white sand, a fringe of
cocoa palms, thicker vegetation beyond, brown thatched roofs of
native houses, white European houses surrounded by white palisades
•—this is Pangai Town as seen from the vessel’s deck ; seawards a
line of coral reefs, a score of little islands dotted about on the dark
turquoise bosom of the ocean —Kao, 45 miles away, showing up
prominently. A schooner, flying the red cross of Tonga, lies at anchor
near the shore. The flags of England and Germany are run up on the
staffs in front of the house on the beach. We display the royal mail
ensign as we cast anchor. Then we are boarded by the one white
official in Haapai, who is harbourmaster, postmaster and customs
officer rolled into one. He is followed by the principal trader here,
Mr. Middlemass. Soon, from canoes and boats, other white traders
board the Wainui. The monthly arrival of this steamer is the great
event in social and commercial life here. Schooners trade to and fro
between Tongatabu and Yavau and Haapai, and the means of inter-
insular communication are easy; but the New Zealand boat brings a
touch of civilisation and iced liquors to Haapai, which the residents
cannot otherwise obtain.
Said Mr. George Brown to me, in Nukualofa, “You remember
Mango Island ? The telephone from the wharf, the nice path to the
homestead, the best in Fiji, everything so neat and arousing your
admiration.” I replied that I thought Captain Hill’s residence at
Eambi the most to be admired in the Fijian Group. But what had
this to do with Tonga? “If you went off the path at Mango, you
would find native huts in all their dirt, such a contrast to the other
surroundings. Tonga is the same. Nukualofa is the show place,
there is everything here to strike a stranger. But wait till you see
the other islands, then you’ll find out the difference. Baker humbugs
the passing traveller with the sight of the King’s palace, and the
King’s church, and the Government buildings, and the guard, and the
band. But you look at Haapai and Yavau, and don’t forget to visit
the prison—the ‘ Black Hole.’ ” I did not think Mr. Brown quite just
in citing Mango Island for a malodorous comparison. Also, there was
a ready reply that, if the people of Haapai and Yavau did not live up


to the standard of the capital, Nukualofa, the same thing might very
easily he said about the provincial inhabitants of any civilised country.
Again, if they fell lamentably short in decency of manners and
customs, as the missionaries had been here 60 years, the fault might
be said to lay with them. I am, however, prepared to he disenchanted
at Haapai, yet Pangai Town from the sea looks peaceful, and
prosperous, and picturesque. A greater tranquility seems to rest here
than at the Tongan capital. There are not the outward and visible
signs of Government and authority, as at Nukualofa, to suggest
unpleasant ideas of fine and imprisonment. As Mr. Brown puts it, I
feel I can do without the King’s guard and the Eoyal band if the
outlying islands can show me anything interesting in their stead. The
only thing I have yet heard of is the “ Black Hole,” the scene of
the horrible sufferings of the “ Eev.” David Tonga and his wife and
others, during the “persecution,” of which so much was written in a
certain section of the Australian press, and in the reports compiled by
the missionaries. I have promised Mr. Brown and Mr. James that I
will visit and describe this prison.
We land in the ship’s boat. My companions are Captain
Crawshaw, Mr. Percy McArthur, Mr. Giles, Mr. M’Kinlay, and an old
German Jew, a wine doctor from Auckland. Mr. Giles is an old
resident of Tonga, has been Acting British Consul, and is, I imagine,
much more friendly to the Wesleyan missionaries than to Mr. Baker ;
but, as he knows Tongan perfectly, he is an admirable cicerone. Mr.
McArthur goes off with his camera to take some “shots” at the
picturesque. Mr. Giles asks the way to the prison from a few natives
who idly gather on the beach. It has been so well described to me,
however, that I could not fail to recognise it by the coat of black paint
on one side. It is an old store or warehouse, built of weatherboards
on posts three feet above the ground, and with galvanised iron roof.
It is divided into two compartments. At one end a private family is
breakfasting, children and kittens feeding together amicably.
Tongans, like all the native races of the Pacific, are very fond of
cats. I asked Captain Crawshaw to come with me to take the
dimensions of this “ Black Hole.” It is measured carefully. It is 25
feet long by 17 feet in width. Prom floor to ceiling the height is 9
feet 3 inches. The flat ceiling is of boards protecting the room from
the heat engendered by the iron roofing. A broken glass window is
boarded up, but there is lots of space between these boards for
ventilation, as between the boards of the walls and those of the


flooring, three feet above the ground. When you remember that the
prisoners were natives accustomed to sleep in the closest of quarters,
and that many of the 30 were children, it is evident that they had as
much space as many steerage passengers are allowed, or that allotted
to sailors in the forecastles of vessels. Mr. Brown and his fellows have
protested too much in this case, as in every other they have brought
under my notice. The only one of our crowd Ido not appeal to is the
German Jew, whose eyes look curiously as we measure the room.
“Vat you do that?” he asks. As none reply, he suggests, “ Going to
puy it ? You open store, eh ? You vant puy some vine ?” The old
man’s black teeth look so vicious when he attempts a smile, which I
suppose he thinks ingratiating, that I am glad to see him sent off on a
false errand to McArthur’s store.
We take a walk along the beach, and meet Pere Eeiter, a Marist
priest, who looks very picturesque in his black beard and black
soutaine. The Eoman Catholics have a church on this island, as well
as the Free and Wesleyan communities. We visit both these churches,
the former new and with everything “ live ” about it, the latter going
to decay, and with only a handful of worshippers. The King’s
“palace” here, a large handsome native house, is also inspected.
Here King George tarries when he visits Haapai, I daresay feeling a
great deal more at home therein than at his other palace at Nukualofa.
Haapai is King George’s native place, the stronghold of the clan of
which his grandfather, Finau, was at first only a chief, although a
chief of great note and influence. The Eesolution was the first
English ship which ever visited this island. Here Captain Cook met
with his most friendly reception. In Cook's Voyages it is written
“ During the whole stay of our navigators the time was spent in a
reciprocation of presents, civilities, and solemnities. On the part of the
natives were displayed single combats with clubs, wrestling and boxing
matches, female combatants, dances performed by men, and night
entertainments of singing and dancing. The English, on the other
hand, gave pleasure to the Indians by exercising the marines, and
exicted their astonishment by the exhibition of fireworks.” Evidences
of the massacre of the crew of the Port-au-Prince are shown us in the
small cannon, buried in the sand on the beach, which belonged to that
vessel. -Liooking at this, I speculate as to what became of the treasure
which the Port-au-Prince carried. The Tongans looted the ship of all
they thought of value, and it afterwards went to pieces in a storm.
But the gold and silver specie and the other spoil of the piratical


doings of the Port-au-Prince on the coast of South America would he
of no value to them. I wonder if after all the ingenuous Mariner,
with the assistance of some of the early convict beachcombers,
managed to secure and hide the treasure. Ido not think it would
have been possible for them to take it from the island at that time.
Possibly there is yet a valuable treasure trove to be found in Haapai,
even as I believe the most valuable of all known in recent days still
exists in the cache of La Perouse, on Yanikoro, Captain Donald
M'Leod writes me that he will make another attempt to discover this
latter.
Mr. Giles has left us to attend to his business. None of us talk
much Tongan, so when we are joined by a coloured gentleman in a
black coat, white pants and boots, we are not exactly sure whether he is a
police inspector or a clergyman. In either case he is not wanted, so we
despatch him after the German Jew. There are very few people about at
this early hour. We naturally want to see the inhabitants, so when I
come to the lalli , the town alarum, under a thatched shed, I commence
to beat it. The lalli is a great hollow log in the form of a trough,
which when beaten gives out a deep, loud, muffled sound. That
fetches them ! The natives come running to the spot to see what is
the matter. There are young women, clothed in long kilts of calico
and bodices of coloured stuffs; or rolls of tappa serve the same
purpose. The wearing of this native material is a sign of wealth in
its possessor, as tappa is generally dearer than calico. They have
flowers twined in their hair and stuck behind their ears, and garlands
of leaves around their necks. • The scarlet hibiscus contrasts admirably
with the dark complexion of the girls. Some cultured friends of mine
would no doubt insist that this love of flowers implies innate refine-
ment and a sense of poetry, subtle and undefined, but still there.
Nothing of the sort. It is a mere sensuous love of colour, the lust of
the eye and the ever powerful vanity of the woman, the pride of life,
which causes them to pluck all pretty things wherewith to adorn
themselves. The true poet would leave beautiful flowers, whether
wildlings of nature or cultured with care, to live out their life, and not
pluck them for the selfish enjoyment of the moment. Most of the
South Sea women have this love for flowers, but I do not endow their
wearers with any poetic feelings or much intelligence on that account.
These girls have also a tinge of colour in their hair, caused by the
application of the lassi, coral lime. They are mostly young and good-
looking, and with supple figures. They flirt at and ogle Mr. M’Kinlay


in a manner which makes him, as a married man, blush with emotion.
The men follow the girls. They, too, have all singlets or old shirts as well
as kilts. According to the laws of Tonga no one must show his manly
torso to the light of day. As an old labour trader I flatter myself that
I know how to deal with strange natives. I introduce myself to, and
shake bands with, the old gentleman whom I call “ Johnny.” Then
I introduce them to my companions—“ Johnny, this is the captain of
the steamer; this is the representative of Colonel Sargood,” and soon
we make acquaintance all around. “Captain” and “ steamer ” are
words which are understood, and so we get consideration. The sight
of my watch amuses the girls as it would children in Australia. We
stroll on through the grass-grown streets of the village. From the
brown huts there come friendly salutations and invitations to enter.
These native houses are some good, some better, some indifferent.
They are not so clean as the Samoan residences, but then the Tongans
are inferior to the Samoans in manners and in other personal attri-
butes, although without doubt they are generally cleverer. But there
is nothing here to justify the Rev. George Brown’s criticisms. The
sanitary arrangements of every house in Haapai, as in all Tonga, are
carefully attended to. Pains and penalties are exacted here for every
breach of this Mosaic code. In this respect Tonga sets an example to
Melbourne, where commissions and experts make reports, and amateur
scientists volunteer advice, and yet where nothing is done , not even to
enforce the proper carrying out of the imperfect sanitary system
Victoria’s capital possesses.
In front of nearly every brown hut a horse is hobbled. Carts
standing near give each compound somewhat of the appearance of a
gipsy encampment. Here and there a bullock or a cow is tethered.
As the day advances, one meets carts driving along the green roads,
or natives scampering about on horseback as freely as around Hono-
lulu. Yet every horse here is taxed, and if it carries a saddle it pays
double. This is logical and fair. The man who wants a horse to
assist in his work on his plantation should not pay as much as the man
who keeps it for lazy indulgence. From this point of view I would
support a stiff tax on racehorses in Australia. Half of the horses in
Haapai suffer from sore hocks and painful swellings, the effects of
cuts received when riding over the coral reef M T hich connects this
island of Bifuka with the adjacent one Foua to the northwards. This,
again, is connected with Hadno, and one can pass thither from Lifuka
dryshod at low tide. But the natives are so lazy that they will not


take the trouble to walk, but ride their horses over the reefs. The
poor animals get sadly cut about the feet and legs, and the coral
poisons the wounds, and must give them great suffering. At one time
I studied the veterinary art, but in years of wanderings to and fro
have forgotten all I learnt. I cannot give these poor horses any relief,
but I feel for them. If to the other many edicts of the King and
Parliament of Tonga Mr. Shirley Baker would add one prohibiting
any horse being ridden over the reefs he would confer a boon on many
poor brutes. These people, with their sensuous love of colour and a
passion for decorating themselves with flowers, have not the feeling
nor the intelligence to recognise or care for the sufferings they inflict
on their horses.
We wander on into the bush, or what Australian strangers would
nail the bush. But of Haapai now the description of Captain Cook
still holds good. “He was struck with admiration when he surveyed
the beauty and cultivation of the islands. He thought himself trans-
ported into the most fertile plains of Europe. The roads occupied no
larger a space than was absolutely necessary, and the fences did not
take up above four inches each. Even such a small portion of ground
was not wholly lost, for many of the fences themselves contained
useful trees or plants. There was not an inch of waste ground. The
scene was everywhere the same, and nature, assisted by a little art,
nowhere assumes more splendid appearance than in these islands.”
We are in the country, waving fronds of cocoa palms to shade us from
the morning sun, broad banana leaves spread across the path, other tropi-
cal trees and shrubs complete the “bush ” appearance. Yet every tree
has its uses, every tree and shrub is “cultivated” in that the ground
around each is cleared, and so air and sun do their work. Long
generations of tilling the soil have made these Tongans as expert as
any gardeners in the world. They could even teach the dwellers in
that new Victorian Utopia, Mildura. Not that the work here is hard.
The soil is easily worked; weeding, if done_daily, is an easy occupation.
In the banana groves and the yam patches we see gangs of young
girls- and young men at what they make the easiest of labour. They
laugh and sing in lightness of heart. The passing stranger is to them
a fresh source of joy. We endeavour to converse with them, whilst
they criticise our appearance. The people, whom Mr. Brown would
have us believe are ground down by taxation and the burden of
sumptuary laws, seem just as happy, and well fed, and altogether
prosperous as any in the world.


Hedges of orange bushes are being planted in Haapai by order
of Mr. Baker, who wisely forsees that the future exports of Tonga will
be largely increased by the fruit trade growing up between these
islands and New Zealand. There are many flowers and shrubs by the
side of the paths which would delight a botanist, but only delight our
eyes. The “sensitive plant” is a common weed here. Anon we come
to a grove of taller trees. The soil now is poor and sandy. The roar
of the surf increases. We pass through a clump of pandanus trees,
screw pines, and the ocean is before us. We have walked right across
the island, and are now’ on the eastern shores of Lifuka. Not so long
since this coast was raised bodily 20 feet by an earthquake, which also
produced a great tidal wave. It is low water, and we can see the dry
reefs which connect all the islands. The white surf is beating far
away. On the coral rocks many natives are gathering shellfish.
Lying on the sandy bank, which at one time was the tide limit, and
watching the distant white waves and the deep torquoise seas, and the
brown-skinned natives leaping from rock to rock or running on the
sands in pure enjoyment of life, with your senses lulled and soothed
by the song of the surf, a great peace enters your soul and you long
to lie here for ever, and like the eaters of the Lotus, forget the world
and its petty strifes and cares. Haapai, to my mind, will always
bring memories synonymous with content.
Some, there are, w r ho after life’s fitful fever sleep well near the
screw pines in this Eastern shore. God’s Acre is here in the shape
of the private burying ground of the chiefs. There is a cleared space
of some extent. The rounded graves are all ornamented with shells,
and coral, and small black pebbles brought from the island volcano of
Tofoa, 50 miles away. Fresh-cut flowers are on many of the graves,
an evidence of the loving care of the survivors. Ido not know if this
is a relic of the early pagan customs of Tonga, which perhaps were not so
pagan as the early missionaries made people believe. In Cook's Voyages
it is reported: “With respect to the religion of these Indians they
have very proper sentiments concerning the immateriality and
immortality of the soul. They do not worship anything which is the
work of their own hands, or any visible part of the creation.” I
imagine, however, that the early inhabitants of Tonga were sun
worshippers. I believe in respecting the dead by all outward and
visible signs, and flowers on a grave or coffin seem to me to be a sign
of deeper poetic feeling than when gathered to adorn a woman and
flatter her vanity. And so lam very pleased with these graves at


Haapai, and feel tliat I would like to rest here in peace, with the
knowledge that each morn sweet maidens placed fresh-cut flowers
overhead.
We return to Pangai Town. The houses are situated along the
beach, but, as at Nukualofa, there is no “beach” here. There are
four European firms here —McArthur and Company ; the German
Company, the same as at Samoa; Mr. Middlemass; and another
German. On Tongatabu, plantations have been carried on by the
German firm and McArthur’s, but at Haapai copra is the chief export.
On these low coral islands the cocoanut grows luxuriantly and bears
abundantly. The sea breeze which blows right across the islands of
Haapai brings the saline air, without which the cocoanut cannot live.
There are several European copra traders in this group, but no
“beachcombers.” Everyone here is most respectable. Mr. Petersen,
the Norseman, who comes riding into town, is the very pink of Pacific
fashion. In his snowy white shirt and pants, and blue sash, and
Panama hat with silk puggaree, Petersen looks a very hero of
romance, a corsair, or pirate of the operatic stage, instead of a
quiet copra trader. One imagines that he will step forward and with
uplifted hand declaim —
Oh, better far to live and die
Under the brave black flag, say I.
Petersen takes off his hat to us with a flourish which bespeaks his
foreign birth and breeding. With his long moustache and flowing
hair he is counterfeit presentment of Mr. William Cody, otherwise
“Buffalo Bill,” the idol of the sewing machine girls of New York and
of the high dames of London society. We are threatened in Australia
with a “Wild West” eruption. If that show comes to our shores I
will guarantee there will be 100 Australian stockmen who will easily
ride the wildest buck-jumper amongst Buffalo Bill’s hrotichos. But
here we are at the Haapai Hotel, where good Mrs. Macgregor, from
Perth, gives us a hearty Scotch welcome, and where in conversation
and reminiscences of places and things in the Highlands I get my
ideas mixed up with the “ Fair Maid” and “Hal of the Wynd,” and
the Eev. Dr. Mercer and Presbyterian charity.


CHAPTER VI.
TO YAYAU.
I have met strange people in strange, out-of-the-way places in various
parts of the world. I have also met people not at all strange, but who
became so by their surroundings. The young lady, daughter of a
well-known Sydney divine, who played the piano in a dancing saloon
on a North Queensland goldfield, was commonplace enough, but, as
with the fly in amber, you wanted to know how she got there. I
knew an Oxford scholar who kept a “lambing down” shanty in
Central Queensland. In Fiji, an ex-officer of the Guards eked out a
livelihood by carving tortoiseshell. In Nukualofa there is a “ remit-
tance man” who is an educated mystery. Tired with other joys, he
has taken to gin and South Pacific life. But Melbourne itself would
furnish enough examples of stranger people in strange places if some
modern Asmodeus would show them to us. We know all about the
successful ones in colonial life, and often these are as strange as the
failures. But the latter are hidden from the public gaze. They hide
their wounds. Women in Australia, as in the Old World, suffer the
most in the struggle for existence. Mrs. Armour, Miss Sutherland
and Miss Beckx meet with many sad cases in their charitable peregrina-
tions. Many have been brought before me. I know one case of an
educated lady, deserted by her husband, who gains her living by
scrubbing, and cooking, and washing as a “ general ” in a suburban
boarding-house. Not three people know her or her story. She has
the energy and the pluck to work ; but the life must be an awful one
to her. When I think of it and similar cases I feel that the half
savage woman of the South Sea Islands has, in most instances, a far
better life of it than her white sisters.
Here, in Haapai, the least visited of all the islands of the Tongan
Group, it seems to me passing strange to find a douce, sonsie Scotch
body, like Mrs. Macgregor, from Perth, running a very decent hotel.
Here she becomes a curiosity and her house a curiosity. The portal
of the garden gate is formed of the jaws of an immense whale. “ In-
side that gate,” says Mrs. Macgregor, “no native is ever allowed to set
foot except my own servants.” The house is a long biiilding, with
verandah after the Australian bush and Indian bungalow styles, but


neither in the colonies nor Hindostan could be found such a wealth of
flowers, and creepers, and shrubs as is seen here. At once you are
struck with the air of refinement which cultivated nature thus gives to
humble habitations. Not that Mrs. Macgregor’s, taking into consider-
ation the time and place, is by any means humble. In an Australian
bush township it would be a mansion. The rooms are panelled with
varnished wood, and adorned with cases of South Sea curios, and
shells, and photographs of island scenery, and contemporary celebrities.
Amongst the latter it seems strange to find the likenesses of Miss Myra
Kemble and Sir George Bowen. The former, I hope, will soon have
her photograph exhibited amongst the celebrities in London shop
windows. Mrs. Macgregor, who came hither from New Zealand, tells
me many tales of the veteran colonial Governor. I, too, have some
reminiscences of Sir George which the conservative world of Melbourne
will never know of. It is a very pleasant hour indeed that I pass at
Mrs. Macgregor’s. We play a game of billiards, for there is a billiard
table, but no bar here. But there is a little drawing-room, with a
piano, and neat bedrooms leading therefrom, which seemed to me for
all the world fitted for a young married couple to occupy. But that
my time is limited I would tarry here a month, and receive the kind
attention of Mrs. Macgregor and her equally sonsie daughter, and
ride about the island, and sail about the reefs, and feed on fish and
fowls and fruit, and have a perfect rest without fear of rusting. The
raison d'etre of Mrs. Macgregor’s house at Haapai will always remain
a mystery to me. At Nukualofa or at Apia this establishment, with
its Scotch cleanliness and order, would be a great boon to travellers:
at Haapai it is unknown.
Whilst Purser Walker is bustling about the beach collecting his
freights I have a long talk with Mr. Middlemass about old whaling
days. The pursuit of the leviathan of the deep is the most exciting of
all pastimes. The harpooner, with his “ Lay me on, lads ! Lay me
on! Three seas more and a long dart,” is the most swagger of all men
who go down to the sea in ships. At least I have always found him
so. Whales are now getting scarce about the Tongan Islands. The
increase in the ocean traffic, the large steamers, both passenger and
men-of-war, now in these seas has to an extent scared away the bulky
yet timorous cetaceans ; but, Mr. Middlemass, an old Dundee whaler,
generally manages to get two or three good fish in the year. Whaling
is profitable as well as exciting, in fact more profitable than store-
keeping, and in Haapai it seems to me that whaling is not only a more


manly, but altogether a higher-toned occupation than much of the
commerce indulged in both by the English and German firms here. I
do not know much about the mysteries of trade generally. Business,
I am told, consists in buying a thing for 6d., and selling it for Is.
next day. If you can sell it for Is. 6d. you are a first-class man of
business, and will become a power in the land you live in.
Commerce is like an elephant’s trunk, which can remove enormous
weights, and yet pick up a pin. There is nothing too great or too
small for the modern money-spinner to make a profit out of. Messrs.
McArthur and Co. buy copra on a large scale in Tonga as in Samoa,
but they keep retail as well as wholesale stores. The purchasing of
shiploads of copra and the consignment of the vessels to Lisbon “for
orders ” necessitate an amount of commercial capacity and knowledge
of the markets of the world; but to run a baker’s shop at Haapai,
and sell quartern loaves and penny buns to the natives, does at first
seem a little beneath the dignity of the English merchant prince.
However, it is much more worthy to deal in bread than in brandy, and
to retail buns than to sell square gin. Still it is very amusing to see
the Tongan lads come galloping up to this store on horseback to take
away their morning loaves of hot bread. Other younger children,
with pennies saved from the church collection, loaf around the
verandah eating hot currant buns. Natives here evidently cannot
bake. They cannot even make damper. But the taste for European
bread has become part of their nature. It is a delicacy to them,
greatly superior to yam and taro. In the cultivation of this taste it
may be said that Messrs. McArthur have in Tonga assisted in the
promotion of true civilisation, and increased the demand for New
Zealand flour. The law commands these people to wear kilts and
coverings for the upper parts of their body; vanity leads them to
colours, and so fancy calicoes are sold. Appetite craves for the bread
and buns of the foreigner, and to pay for their outward adornments
and inward comforts they must work in collecting copra. So it may
be held that as labor are est or are, religion is at Haapai piomoted
through the medium of Manchester goods and quartern loaves, and
profit being likewise made for a godly firm there is a distinct gain to
Christianity all round. Selah !
In the afternoon we stroll again through the country. Young
children run away from us in sham terror, but are soon persuaded by
our amicable gestures to stop and talk to the papalangis. They shake


hands with us prettily, and accept, without scruple, small presents of
money, which will soon be converted into penny buns. And then they
commence to sing to us, as we lie in the shade of a banana clump.
The poet’s idyll is realised —
And sweetly now those untaught melodies
Broke the luxurious silence of the skies,
The sweet siesta of a summer day,
The tropic afternoon of Toobonai.
When every flower was bloom and air was balm
And the first breath began to stir the palm,
The first yet voiceless wind to urge the wave,
All gently to refresh the thirsty cave.
But Captain Crawshaw will not wait whilst we weave idyllic
fancies ’neath the bananas and palms. The Wainui must get clear of
the reefs of Haapai before nightfall. Getting out is not always quite
so easy as getting in. Around Haapai there are some nasty patches of
shoal and sunken reefs, across which the waters hardly break. So our
commander mounts to the maintop, and issues his steering orders from
there until we are quite clear of all possibility of danger. We have
taken some German passengers on board at Lifuka, who, as well as
Father Eeiter, are bound to Yavau. As an Alsatian the Marist priest
naturally knows German, and naturally, as a Catholic cleric, he
devotes himself to making friends ; and so there is such a chattering
of High and Low Dutch and a drinking of lager beer in the saloon,
and more chattering and smoking of rank cigars on deck, that I begin
to wonder if I am on an English ship, and if I have any right in
Tongan waters, which a German is bound to respect. The honest
Germans, no doubt, say that Pere Eeiter is a good fellow, even as the
Jesuit Father , of Melbourne, gets the repute from so many on
account of his bon camaraderie. But I remember that a rule of the
Church is to “be all things to all men.” I am glad, however, that
Pere Eeiter has taken up with the Germans, and is making friends
with the Mammon of Unrighteousness and the most powerful body of
Europeans in the group.
We steam on through the night. Nature at sea never slumbers.
The earth may at times sleep. The music of the woods may be hushed
at eventide, and with darkness man, and bird, and beast may repose.
The sun means life, and animation, and work, and strife to biped and
quadruped. Dark nights to most means rest and sweet oblivion ; but
old ocean never rests. Its waves are ever heaving and tossing, and in
anger oppose aught which impedes their progress. The great master


of all pressmen, Charles Dickens, describes the unrest of the ocean
waves when the winds are free from the earth’s cramped prison—
“On, on, on they roll, and darker grows the night and louder howl
the winds, and more clamorous or fierce become the million voices of
the sea !” But when the wind is still the voices of the sea are not
silent. No longer clamorous or fierce, they are yet heard, though
muffled and subdued; and when the glory of the sun has departed
and the mystery of night is around us, the voices of the sea sink
deeper into the heart. The rippling waves, the never-ceasing roll of
the waters swaying our vessel from side to side, the phosphorescent
lights which gleam in our wake, the fitful gleam of the shifting moon-
beams, all impress the imagination with far greater force than aught
can during the sunlight. And in these Southern Seas imagination is
far stronger than in the cold North. Poetry is nurtured by the sun.
So I lean over the vessel’s side and dream poems which perhaps to
others, if put into print, would seem very ordinary prose. So I spare
my readers!
Onwards we steam through the night! Eight bells are struck as
high land is sighted ahead. Soon we are in the midst of the islands of
the Yavau Group, which, different to those of Tongatabu and Haapai,
are of volcanic origin. Instead of low shores rising but a few feet
above high water mark, at Yavau there are bold headlands, and
every islet of the archipelago is clearly defined. It is like steaming-
into Sydney harbour. But there are no lights to guide the mariner
here. The cliffs cast great shadows upon the waters, and shore and
sea are delusively blended together; but there is deep water, 40
fathoms, to the very edge of the rocks, and no danger when one has a
skilful pilot in command like Captain Crawshaw. This sailing in and
out of Yavau must remind him of his old experiences on the Gippsland
lakes and rivers. The entrance to the harbour of Neiafu is as narrow
as the mouths of the Mitchell and Tambo. This is the first time I
have been here, but I thoroughly agree with Mr. Giles that it is the
best harbour in the Pacific, better even than Pango Pango in Samoa,
which has become the property of the United States, for Pango
Pango is so thoroughly land-locked with high hills that a large vessel
having sailed in could never get out again without the assistance of
steam power; but here in Neiafu, in Tonga, whilst there is protection
against storms and hurricanes on every side, the trade winds will not
only take a vessel in but take it out again. And this is not only a
good harbour, but it possesses a good wharf, for the red light of which


we steer, and are soon moored alongside, when, although it is in the
middle of the night, we are boarded by some German residents, who
come to learn the news, and who, with much drinking of lager, give
us news of the earthquake which has lately disturbed the pneumo-
gastric nerves of the inhabitants. As at Haapai the arrival of the
steamer is the great event of the month at Vavau, and the people make
the most of it and never wish to go to bed whilst it is here.
The morning light shows us the beauty of Neiafu. High land is
all around, reminding one of Nagasaki in Japan. Wooded hills, which
spring from the water’s edge, surround what seems to be a beautiful
lake some four miles long by two in width ; but, as at Savannah
Harbour in the New Hebrides, and Noumea in New Caledonia, this is
formed by a smaller island facing the larger one of Vavau. At the
eastern end there is a very narrow boat passage. The western passage
by which we entered is also narrow, but there is deep water at the
point. On every side there are white-painted signal beacons, guides
for steering and sailing, for all the world like those on the Queensland
rivers. As we came in during the night these were of little use to us,
but it shows that the Harbours Department of the Tongan Government
does its work properly. The large wharf at which we are moored is
approached by a roadway made of coral, the foreshore being filled up
and reclaimed by prison labour. There is a good warehouse at the end
of the causeway, and a little further on another prominent building,
the Customhouse and Post Office, over which the Ped Cross of Tonga
is hoisted at 9 a.m. punctually. For the absurdity of special hours of
duty is carried out to its utmost here. The Customs Department does
not commence work till the regulation European hour. Twice a month
the New Zealand steamer calls here, and that is the only time the
Deputy-Collector has anything to do; but, no matter when the boat
arrives, not till 9 a.m. can goods be landed, not till 9 a.m. can the
Wainui load her cargo of oranges. For half the fruit export of Vavau
is shipped on Government account, so the Deputy-Collector must be on
hand to check the returns with Purser Walker—but not till 9 a.m.
In New Caledonia the French people would have nearly completed
their day’s work by this hour. A striking instance of the evil of red-
tapeism comes before me. On one occasion at Vavau the wharf at 6
o’clock was filled with, cases of oranges for export to New Zealand.
There was no earthly reason except the “rules of the service ” why
work should not have commenced then. It began to rain heavily soon
after 6, and so for three hours the oranges were soaking, with the
result that many would be rotten before arrival at Auckland.


The Deputy-Collector of Customs and Postmaster of Vavau is
like his superior, Major Campbell, a Highlander. He is, says Purser
Walker, “a flower of the lustiest manhood of the world.” Added to
that, lie is a very good-natured little gentleman, who must find life
very dull and monotonous here. Yavau is beautiful, but not lively.
There is no more picturesque place in the Pacific, and there are few
quieter. There is no “beach” at Yavau. On the sloping banks
brown thatched native houses peep through the orange trees. Here
and there are the white weatherboard, iron-roofed houses of the
European residents. There are large warehouses, and boats, and
wharves of the German firm and McArthur and Co., and there is one
very fine wooden house, with a verandah and cupola, which for many
years has been the residence of the Governor of Yavau, who at the
same time has been the Crown Prince of Tonga. There have been
four of them, the last, Prince Lefoni, a great grandson of the King,
having died a few months back. There has been a fatality attached
to the bearers of the title “Crown Prince,” and the Tongans are
getting superstitious about it. When they get a new Crown Prince
established at Vavau it is to be hoped they will paint the “palace,”
as it sadly wants it. Many democrats, however, would be rejoiced to
see the expenditure of money on the new wharf, and the warehouse,
and post office, for the use of the public and the public good, whilst
the Governor’s residence is left to be put in order when further funds
come in to the Exchequer. As a rule, in British colonies the reverse is
generally the case.
Nearly all the European residents ashore come on board the
steamer to greet us. The Germans here greatly preponderate. The
German firm has a large number of employees in its commerce and copra
buying, and there are a number of small German traders and beach-
combers. I make acquaintance with the Wolfgramms, and with Mr.
Kronfeldt, late of Ballarat; and with another of the children of Yiddish,
Mr. Moses David, whose young German wife is very anxious respecting
the ailments of the baby. I don’t think our advice is of much account,
but I am glad to say that in a few days Nature does its work unaided,
except by loving maternal care, and the little sufferer is all right
again. After this consultation Mr. Moses David produces a bottle of
the wine he has bought from his countryman from Auckland. Very
innocently indeed our good-natured host remarked, “This goes Avell
mit a little prandy.” I say I think I will take the brandy alone.
That one child of Yiddish should impose on another in this manner is


a striking proof how the obligations of the Thorah are slackening in
the Southern Hemisphere. That Mr. Moses David should he imposed
upon is an added grief to me, as he is one of the best tempered and
kindest of his race. The fact that he has a European wife, too, greatly
adds to his character, and makes him a superior man to others in the
South Seas, who have formed ties with semi-savages, in some cases
shamelessly abandoning their lawful partners.
The above does not by any means apply to those who are mated
with ladies of Samoan extraction, many of whom are found in this
northern group of the Friendly Islands. Samoa is 800 miles away,
hut there has always been intercourse between the two peoples. The
establishment of steam communication by the Union Company has
caused a considerable passenger traffic to spring up between Tonga
and Samoa. The malangas , so to speak, are extended. These native
passengers, with bundles of mats for luggage and bags of oranges for
provisions, sleep on deck, and between frequent intervals of seasickness
sing hymns and flirt. The natives of Vavau appear to live on love
and oranges. Here, far away from the capital of Holy Tonga, the
stringent moral code does not appear to be so strictly enforced. The
people flirt, and make love, and suck oranges, and are happy. From
morn till afternoon, and afternoon till night, oranges are eaten by
young and old. The whole island seems to be one oi’ange grove, the
whole country is littered with orange peel. What a place to start a
marmalade factory in 1 While a steamer lies at Vavau the whole of
the energies of the Tongan population are devoted to attempts to sell
the passengers kits of oranges at the reasonable rate of Is. per 100,
basket of twisted palm leaf included. This charge is merely to pay
for the labour of collection, as when ashore the traveller has no
necessity to buy oranges. They are as common and appear to be
as free to all as blackberries in English lanes. There are orange
trees everywhere, great trees whose branches are bowed down by
the weight of the golden globes. Ido not think it is an exaggeration
to say that there are millions of oranges in Vavau. The sward
is littered with the freshly fallen fruit. If you are too lazy to
stoop, you raise your hand and can pluck them overhead. All the
year round the trees appear to be bearing, and the air is filled
with a subtle essence, the combined perfume of the flowers and the
fruit. I write sward because the roads here, as at Nukualofa, are
simply long stretches of greenery, overhung with cocoa palms and
orange trees; the verdure soothes the eye, the perfume charms the


other sense, tbe shade and silence make the soul tranquil. A walk
through the groves of Yavau brings the same charm to the stranger
that the Grove of Daphne held for the Greek and other worshippers
of Diana and Apollo. The naiads here are the brown-skinned
maidens who flit across the vistas, and wave greetings to the papalangi.
The girls vanish into the brown huts which are scattered about ’neath
the trees. Anon a band of little children appear. Laughingly they
follow me, and we pelt each other with oranges, which they catch with
truer hold than I now can, although I was a smart “point” in my day.
When a herd of porkers crosses the path I show the children a little
bowling ala Worrall, at which they are highly delighted. The swine
bring the only incongruous element into the surroundings. The
“ unclean beast ” is associated from childhood with things unpoetical,
but in Tonga the pigs act as scavengers. Perhaps, too, that is the
reason they were kept in Judea of old. It was alwa} r s a deep mystery
to me in my Christian childhood why the Jews kept herds of swine
when they were not allowed to eat the flesh of these animals.
Perhaps, however, they acted as pork merchants for the surrounding
communities. But the Mosaic law was quite right. Pork in hot
countries is not healthy. Its introduction into Tonga has been followed
by a decline in morality.
I hope many Australians will follow my voyages to Tonga and
Samoa, as they have to other places from Beaconsfield to Belfast.
To these travellers at Yavau I give the advice—take horse, and ride
across the island, and then mount the hill above the township, and
see the glorious panorama of the Yavau Archipelago lying beneath
you. It is like the view from the summit of Thursday Island, only
the foliage on the shores here is greener and more abundant than can
be seen in Torres Straits. But lam not in Tonga merely in search of
the picturesque. Here, as in Samoa, I am studying attentively the
political problems, the solution of which will in the future so greatly
affect the interests of Australasia; and in Tonga the political question, at
present, is bound up with the religious one. lam sorry that wherever
I go I am called upon by the Wesleyan authorities to curse Mr.
Shirley Baker. I hate theological bitterness. Every sect has amongst
its adherents honourable, if mistaken, men whom we should respect;
and so they can claim from us respect for their sect or creed, when
they do not interfere with things essential to moral freedom. That
is the way the old Romans—Pilate, Gallio, Festus and Co.—looked at it.
X respect a great many true ladies and gentlemen who belong to the


Wesleyan persuasion. Every student of contemporaneous English
history must acknowledge the wonderful amount of moral good effected
by the movement headed by John and Charles Wesley. In Wales
especially, with its alien church, Methodism was a blessing to the
people in awaking a sense of spiritual or moral life amongst the
poetical Celts. I have known and respected many a Wesleyan
“preacher” working in the slate quarries of Caernarvonshire and
Merioneth, in the coal “valleys” of South Wales, and in the Black
Country of Staffordshire ; but I cannot respect the Reverend E. E.
Crosby, 8.A., chief of the Wesleyan misssion in Tonga, the envoy of
an alien organisation, the New South Wales and Queensland
Conference, which assumes the control of Tongan church matters,
and persists in keeping Mr. Crosby here in defiance of the wish of
King George, to whom he is personally obnoxious; and, as I wish
to strongly impress upon my Wesleyan friends, a man obnoxious to
the King of Tonga means one obnoxious to 95 per cent, of the people.


CHAPTER VIL
AT YAYAU.
At Yavau I meet the Eev. J. B. Watkin, president of the Free
Church of Tonga. Until five years ago this gentleman was a clergy-
man of the Wesleyan Church, a part of his life having been spent as
a missionary in Tonga, where he earned the love and esteem of King
George and his people. When, in 1881, Mr. Watkin was removed from
Tonga, and appointed to a “station’'in New South Wales, King
George was wroth. Mr. Watkin was afterwards reinstated at Yavau
as superintendent, but Mr. Moulton, the obnoxious, was retained
as chairman at Nukualofa, the capital. If Mr. Moulton had not
been so appointed, and if Mr. Watkin in his stead had been appointed
chairman, a position he had held for a short time after Mr. Shirley
Baker resigned, I think Tonga might have remained Wesleyan to this
day. For if King George has confidence in Mr. Baker as his Prime
Minister, he has love for Mr. Watkin as his spiritual guide. King
George, I think, judges men aright. Mr. Watkin comes of a family
noted, in the old world and in Australia, for steadfast work in the
cause of religion. In heading the Free Church movement Ido not
think he was actuated by ambition, but by a true regard for the
spiritual welfare of Tonga and its people. Personally, Mr. Watkin is
a mild man, over 50, and looking his years. He is dressed in a clerical
black suit, which seems strangely out of place in this climate. But
King George has a conservative idea that clergymen should always
appear in their black costume, the badge of their craft. He himself
often assumes a black suit, and white linen, in which he looks less
royal than in lava-lava and flannel shirt. Mr. Watkin, therefore,
humours the King’s wish in wearing black, to his own discomfort. A
good, courteous, and kind man, Mr. Watkin in non-essentials would, I
think, always give way ; not, however, from the collie dog tempera-
ment, but from the truer instinct embodied in the lines :
We are each and all another’s,
And the heart that gives most freely of its riches hath the more.
Mr. Watkin has not an evil word to say against anyone. He and the
Eev. Mr. James, the new Wesleyan pastor at Nukualofa, are the two
best Christians I have met in the group.


The religious bitterness in Tonga is, in fact, kept up entirely from
Australia. If the New South Wales Conference no longer paid Mr.
Crosby’s salary, that gentleman would not remain here at Yavau to
endeavour, without success, to entice the adherents of the Free Church
to join the Wesleyans, and to say evil things against Mr. Baker and
King George, and fan the animosity of the latter against the Wesleyan
body. For there is no doubt that the old King of Tonga is very
bitter against that religious body with which he was so long connected.
And this feeling has extended to hatred to England; for the Consular
representatives of England in Tonga appear to have been always
willing to support the Wesleyan claims for the church sites, and church
furniture, and “trustee funds,” which King George says, injustice,
were the property of the chiefs and people, and not of the alien
Australian Conference. It is absurd that there should be some 50
church sites occupied by 50 native churches, all unoccupied and
useless, and which, overgrown with bush, are nuisances to the
villages. The statements made in English and Australian newspapers
of the persecution in Tonga have also greatly aroused the ire of the
old King, who writes to the missionaries—“ When I went to Samoa,
and went to Niua, and compelled them to become Wesleyans, you were
pleased ; and I fought with Tonga also, and killed a great many to make
them Wesleyans , and you praised me and exalted me to the skies ; but
when I command them to become Free Church you are angry, and say
lam a murderer; but who jean say that I have killed any one because
he does not wish to become Free Church ?” The visit of Sir Charles
Mitchell in H.M.S. Diamond in 1887 was also a bitter cause of offence
to King George. One can feel a sympathy with this old warrior when
he says, “After the arrival of the vessel of war with the Governor of
Fiji to judge Tonga, my mind was fully made up never to join a church
which had brought a man-of-war to interfere with us.” This action
of the Wesleyan community, in instigating the British authorities to
interfere in Tonga, is exactly on a par with that of the German Trading
Company which instigated the interference of the German men-of-war
in Samoa. King George of Tonga detests England as much as King
Malietoa of Samoa does Germany; and, but for Mr. Shirley Baker,
there is a great probability that Tonga would ere this have been
annexed by Germany.
But when the King is dead, what will his successor say ? Who is
going to be the next monarch of Tonga ? If you ask William Tungi
he will tell you he is to be King, in which case I think civilisation


would not advance in Tonga. According to the Constitution of Tonga,
the Crown and throne are to be possessed for ever by King George
and his male heirs. Failing these, the female descendants of King
George and their heirs are to possess the throne. Failing these, it is
to go to William Tungi and to his heirs. Now, all the male des-
cendants in the direct male line from King George are dead, the last
being Prince Lefoni, or Laifoni, who has Just died at Yavau. feut
Mr. Baker tells me there is a great grandson by female descent, who
will be nominated Crown Prince by the King, and who will be
educated up to his position. Whoever King George nominates as his
successor we may be sure will be accepted by the people. William
Tungi is in Yavau at the present time on a malanga. There has been
a big katoanga and karaivanga , much feasting and dancing at Yavau on
account of the Prince’s death and the nomination of a new governor.
The Poyal band has been brought up here on the Wainui to add
state to the proceedings. 1,500 pigs have been slaughtered and eaten.
The kora bowl has been kept flowing. Tungi, who in esse is Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly, as well as a king in posse , has done his
share in the feasting, and appears to be suffering a recovery. I
cannot get an interview with him until noon, as he is sleeping till near
that hour. Tungi’s temporary quarters are at a wooden house with a
thatched roof. This is surrounded by a number of huts, the quarters
of his followers, for Tungi travels with a “tail.” The place is not
over clean, but the Tongan Speaker does not seem to mind such a
trifling matter, but is seated comfortably on the hard floor, gnawing
some poultry bones, which he throws away as we enter. The two
female attendants, who are young and comely, remove the plentiful
debris. Tungi wipes his greasy fingers on his fat thighs, and then
looks up at us with a query in his wicked black eyes. “What the
devil does this papalangi want ?”
Tungi has an aquiline nose, which, with his piercing eyes,
relieve him from an appearance of gross stupidity. He is very obese,
the fat swelling into wrinkles on his wrists and legs, like those of a
prize baby. He looks sensual and wicked, and strikes me as the very
model of a black Tiberius. With all his fat, Tungi, I imagine, is an
ambitious man ; but, as long as George Tubou lives, the powerful will
of the old King keeps Tungi in his place. Remove King George and
Mr. Shirley Baker from the scene, however, and Tungi would be a
power, and Ido not think he would be a power for good. He may
yet be heard of in connection with Tongan politics, so I study him, as


I studied General Boulanger two years ago ; but Tungi is not such a
pleasant study as le brav ’ General. The Tongan Speaker, in return,
studies me, turning my card over and over in his hand, as if wondering
what to do with it. Tungi “allows” that he may be King, but not
Crown Prince or Governor of Vavau. That is not lucky. He, Tungi,
does not wish to die like the others. Will we drink kava ? Or angona
papalangi , the white man’s liquor? We are not thirsty! Well, we
must take a kava root with us, and come and see him again in the
afternoon. Shall we bring a bottle, two bottles, with us ? Why, yes !
Tungi laughs for the first time. He knows, I expect, that the liquor
from the Wainui is good. Mr M’Kinlay carries the kava root on board
to give to our carpenter, who has acquired a taste for island refresh-
ment in this form. But we do not return to see the possible future
King of Tonga. I admit to having had a malanga with Kalakaua Hex
of Hawaii. But Tungi is too cheap. I sincerely trust he will never
get a chance of grabbing the Tongan throne.
Tungi is one of the old school, who in his semi-nakedness
considers himself the equal of any white man in clothes. As far as
comfort in this climate is concerned he is right; but the former
Governors of Vavau kept up a semblance of state in their surroundings
and apparel. David Unga, the King’s son, who, like his cousin, my
old friend Maafu, was a man of fine stature and presence, had, it is
said, a magnificent uniform made in Sydney, which cost £200! Fifteen
years ago the following account is given of the domestic arrangements
of the then Governor of Vavau : —“David’s house would be regarded
in the Australian colonies as a fitting residence for any high official
below the rank of Viceroy. It is constructed of imported materials,
all the interior being panelled and polished. The furniture of every
room, imported from New South Wales, is elegant and costly. In the
centre of the building is a large dining hall, with stained glass doors at
either end, which is only used on state occasions. Here the table is
laid with every requisite —fine linen, plate, and cut glass. The cook is
a Chinaman, the butler a negro. A better or more elegantly served
dinner one would scarcely expect in Sydney; everything was in
profusion, even to champagne and sodawater. Prince David, like all
his colleagues, apes the manner of any English officer. One remark
he made was very characteristic of the man. My friend perceived on
a Sunday afternoon that he did not leave the house, although all his
people were at church for the second time. He inquired the reason,
and the Governor of Vavau replied, ‘I have been this morning,—too


much, church is not good. I have been told that English gentlemen
do not go to church more than once a day. We got our religion and
laws from the English. Why then should we not imitate their
religious customs?’” Prince David ought to have travelled with
Captain Logan, and he would have found out what it is to have church
service twice a day. Fifteen years ago the traveller at Yavau might
have had a good time dining with the Prince. But he and his two
successors are dead, and the gilt is off the “ palace ” and its sur-
roundings. The Chinaman cook and the negro butler are no more.
The champagne and the sodawater are “gone away with the lager
beer.” The only malanya open to one here now is to drink kava or
square gin with Tungi, and that I avoid.
We visit God’s Acre at Yavau. It is not so well kept nor so
picturesque as the cemetery at Apia. The principal grave is that of
the recently deceased Prince Laifoni. This occupies a cleared raised
space, covered with sand, coral, and gravel, with a circle of black stones
from the volcano of Tofoa. Fresh flowers are placed in glasses around
the grave. As yet there is no headstone here. Near at hand, enclosed
in iron railings, is a tomb bearing an inscription, “ Sacred to the
memory of ” the wife and two children of the Eev. Mr. Adams, a
pioneer missionary in Yavau. There is a convent school here, which
will attract the attention of good Catholics. The French Sisters are
favourites with everyone in Tonga as in Samoa. “ Sister Mary,” with
whom I have the pleasure of travelling, has quite an ovation from her
old pupils, many of whom are mated to Germans ; and these Germans,
to their credit be it said, think as much of the nuns as if they were
their own countrywomen. And they talk better French to the Sisters
than I can, which makes me again annoyed at the superiority of the
German race in general knowledge. But old George, of Bendigo,
restores my amour propre by swearing to a few beachcombers that 30
years ago I was a mate of his on Bendigo. It is no use persisting that
I was not one of the Argonauts of the Fifties. When lam solemnly
asked if I mean “to turn my back on my old mates,” I can con-
scientiously swear that I will do no such thing. So George persists in
his declaration that I was a digger on Bendigo. As there were no finer
men in this generation than the early gold-diggers I am flattered at
this accusation; but, pleasing though it is, George, my apochryphal
“ mate,” cannot entice me into the groves where, somewhere or another,
there is a “pub ” concealed, at which pyjama-clad beachcombers drink
and get drunk with the same ease and simplicity as in Australia ; biit


as high, drinking here is combined with plain living there is not so
much harm done to the beachcombers’ livers. It may be noted that
the square gin of Holland has not the same deleterious effect upon the
dipsomaniac in the South Seas as that curse of Australia, colonial beer,
has upon the rising generation in our large cities.
Travellers in Holy Tonga will find the greatest charm in the
Yavau Archipelago. To those who may follow me in my South Sea
malangas I give this advice —take the Union Company’s boat to Lifuka,
Haapai; then charter a local schooner, sail about that group, and then
on to Yavau. There are some very smart little crafts which fly the Red
Cross of Tonga, and in fine weather, sailing is much more delightful
than steaming. In the Friendly Islands one need not be out of sight
of land for more than a few hours at a time. The island volcanoes of
Tofoa and Lette can be visited before making the Yavau Group. The
traveller, arrived there, should not bother his head about politics, or
wonder at the large Wesleyan mission-house, with its garden and
tennis ground, when the church has not a handful of worshippers. I
would advise him to make friends with some of the chiefs, and live a
life vaka Tonga , after the manner of the country. But he should not
without caution sleep in the native houses. In Samoa this is
practicable. As I have pointed out, the Samoans are the cleanest of
all native races. But in Tonga there are Egyptian plagues. Still a
native house might be hired, and cleaned, and purified fit for white
occupation. Making this his head-quarters, the traveller should
sail about the archipelago, fishing and camping out, and having
generally such a good time that the memory of it would remain green
in his heart for ever. I can imagine such a person singing, in the
words of New Zealand’s poet—
Out on the beach, when night was creeping—
Robed in shadows—across the dome,
We watched the waves, as shoreward leaping
They fringed the sand with streaks of foam.
Ocean’s heart, with its ceaseless throbbing,
Beat ’gainst billows that rose and fell;
Sometimes singing, and sometimes sobbing,
Sea ghosts came on each foaming swell.
Sailing about Yavau the voyager can dream of an old story, a
legend as poetic as that of Hero and Leander, the locale of which he
can, if a good swimmer, easily explore. The legend of ■ ‘ Neuha s
Cave ” tells a tale of woman’s unselfish love, such as we find
prominency in the traditions of every age, ana under every circum-
stance, since Eve shared the apple with Adam. It also tells the tale


of woman’s forethought, which it must he admitted, is never very ap-
parent, and perhaps is only found when working out the dictates of
her love. A woman will suffer for those she loves, even die for them,
and has, according to tradition, done so time after time in all countries.
But to fear the evil which may come upon the man she loves, and,
thus foreseeing it, to provide for his safety when the critical moment
shall arrive, and, more than all, to keep secret what she knows and
how she is acting, forms the slightly incredible part of this legend.
However, my lady readers may think otherwise. This is the story.
The first portion has at various times and by different authors been
embellished with sundry and numerous details in order to make the
tale, according to their ideas, complete. To give only the exact and
reliable facts of the narrative, I will simply state that “ once upon
a time ” a deadly quarrel arose in the Tongan Islands; whether
amongst the native tribes, or by the invasion of a foreign enemy from
adjacent islands, or from civilised Europe, matters not. Amongst the
defenders of the Yavau Islands was a gallant youth, who was loved
by a dusky maiden, as it falls to the lot of a lucky few to be adored.
The defenders fought, were beaten, and fled. On their arrival at the
homes they had bravely sought to protect, the noble youth, who might
be described as the bravest of the brave, was welcomed by his fond
bride—
With dark and brilliant skin, and dewy eye
Shining with love, and hope, and constancy.
Neuha —the fond, the faithful, the adored—
Her heart on Torquil’s like a torrent poured ;
And smiled, and wept, and near and nearer clasped,
As if to be assured ’twas him she grasped ;
Shuddered to see his yet warm wound, and then
To find it trivial, smiled and wept again.
But their troubles were far from at an end. The conquerors
pursued. Weak and disabled, the vanquished ones were unable to
fight. Again they fled. They took to their canoes, and made for a
small island in the bay, easy to defend. When near, Neuha bade the
men who rowed the canoe in which she and her lover sat join the others,
in order to strengthen their forces. They were persuaded to go, and
she was left alone with the man she loved. Her supple arms forced
the canoe quickly through the water, but the enemy was gaining.
Then she paddled towards a barren rock, which rose gaunt and shelter-
less from the sea. When her lover saw the defenceless goal for which
she strove he upbraided her, and asked why she had brought him
there to meet his death. Smiling confidently, she bade him follow
her, and as they approached the rock, lay down the oars and plunged


into the sea. He dare not hesitate. His foes were upon him and called
out to him to yield; he dived into the water after his mistress, and
rose no more. The pursuers looked anxiously around, but no sign of
either was to be seen; the sharp sides of the rock made it impossible
for anyone to laud. The empty canoe that had borne the two lovers
drifted away, and the ocean was undisturbed by a single trace of the
fugitives, and so the pursuers turned away. Neuha and her lover
must be dead !
What had become of them ? When the girl dived into the water,
closely followed by the young warrior, she swam down deep into the
sea, then suddenly turning rose again and landed safely within a sea-
locked cave. Here she carefully tended her lover. Drawing from her
bosom a small piece of wood, kept dry by many leaves, and amongst
which she had hidden a piece of flint, with Torquil’s knife she struck
fire, and soon the cave was warm and bright. With the wood she
made a torch, and, seeking one of the inner recesses of the cave,
returned with fruit of all kinds. The next day, as soon as the light
penetrated through the water to the cave, the girl swam to the surface
and looked about. Nothing was to be seen, the enemy had gone and
all was safe. In a cleft of the rock she discovered their canoe, and re-
turning once more for Torquil she took him back to their island home.
There he told of his wonderful escape, and she, how fearing when the
disturbance began that something might happen to her lover, had
gone day by day and taken fruit, and wood, and other necessaries to
this wondrous cave. Neuha had discovered this retreat through
hearing how, generations before, a young chief diving for turtle by
accident found his way to this cave. How in after times, during a
bitter war, the daughter of a rival chief was taken captive, and the
young man falling in love with her had conveyed her to this cave, and
there kept her till the feud was over. He then took all his tribe to
this spot, and diving into the water returned with the lady. His
comrades thinking at first that he was mad, and would either be eaten
by sharks or drowned, now believed him to be a god and she a
goddess. But he undeceived them, they returned to their homes, and
if it had not happened in Tonga the girl, in narrating these facts, might
have added, “ lived happily ever afterwards.” The traveller to Vavau
can see Neuha’s cave if he be a good swimmer and has a good heart,
and, with one of the daughters of the land to guide him, can live for
the moment a latter-day idyll. I admit that I only see the rock.


Altogether Vavau is not only the best of all the harbours in the
Pacific, but the most picturesque. The scores of little islands which
surround it are all beautiful in outline ; each one stands out bold and
steep in the midst of the waters which dash against its rocky base,
wearing away a complete circle therein. Here and there on these
islets is a sandy shore, where one can land and climb up the cliffs to
inland villages ; here and there the precipices are fluted and worn
into caves like those at Cape Bridgewater; what seems but a little
chasm in the cliff may be the entrance to a water cave of surpassing
loveliness, if its beauties are lit up by the magnesium light. A week
spent in sailing about the Vavau Archipelago might extend to a
fortnight, and that again to a month, before the traveller, satiated
with island experiences, would think of catching the return steamer
thence to Auckland. Few, lam sure, who follow my advice in South
Sea travel but will be sorry, as I am, to say good-bye to Vavau
and to Holy Tonga, and will long for the time when they can have
another such malanga,
To burst all links of habit, there to wander far away,
On from island unto island, at the gateways of the day.
TH E' E N D./^




