





HOMEWARD BOUND
" EURIPIDES"
JUNE-JULY, 19! 6
jdHelhtmrne i
ARBUCKIyE, WADDEEE & FAWCKNER, PRINTERS,
20-22 McKillop Street.




Editorial.
HIS magazine is being published to serve as a record of the
viVJ voyage of the s.s. "Euripides," which left Devonport,
England, on the 24th of June, 1916.
The Prime Minister of Australia (the Right Hon. W. M.
Hughes), Mrs. Hughes, Miss Helen Hughes, and the personal staff
of the Prime Minister were on board.
Arrived at Cape town on July the 13th; arrived at Durban on
July the 16th.
The people of Durban were exceedingly kind, and bombarded
the boat with oranges, which caused quite a lot of amusement. No
effort was spared to make our stay here as enjoyable as possible.
Hospitality was given most lavishly, and everybody has very happy
recollections of their etay in this port. A reception was held at
the Town Hall, and the Governor-General of South Africa gave
an address. The Durban Red Cross Society had fruit, books and
papers sent on board, which action was greatly appreciated.
Left Durban on the 18th inst., and arrived at Fremantle on the
31st inst. Arrived at Adelaide on the sth August. A very warm
welcome home was given by the people.
Left Adelaide on the 6th inst., and arrived at Melbourne on the
Bth inst. Here the contributions for the magazine were taken on
shore to be printed, as the press on board was not large enough
to do the work.
With best wishes for your speedy recovery and very good luck.


Some Amusing Incidents.
LIEUT. W. E. HART, AUSTRALIAN FLYING CORPS
In the early days of aviation, when an aeroplane 'was a great
novelty, I had quite a lot of amusing experiences in connection with
the sport. At that time but a very few people in Australia had
ever seen an aeroplane, and an aviator—well, he was quite a "rara
avis," if I may so term him, a little joke which I can still "put
over" occasionally. When people inquire as to the cause of my big
smash of some years ago, and the consequent injuries, I often
reply, "Oh, I had a drop too much that day." One cannot help
occasionally overhearing the remark, "Why, I didn't know Hart
drank." For my reputation's sake I have to explain that it was
not that kind of "drop" at all.
While giving an exhibition one day, just before the flight was
timed to take place, I strolled outside the grounds to view the usual
crowd of "deadheads."
No one recognised me, and I said to one old chap, "Why don't
you go inside and see the show." His reply explains the exhibi-
tion flyer's main grievance. "Well, if he don't go no 'igher than
the fence, it ain't worth while payin' to see 'im, an', if he does,
I can see 'im fer nuthin'."
When Guillaux, the French exhibition flyer, first came to
Sydney to give his novel and sensational performance, one of the
local aviators opened the show by giving some really good
"straight out and home" flights, considering the old type of
machine he was using. Guillaux then performed nose dives, verti-
cal banks, loops, etc., and apparently tried to emulate a tumbler
pigeon, whereupon an old chap to whom flying was apparently
quite new was heard to remark, "Gee! has it all over him.
Why, this French bloke can't even fly straight."
Another amusing experience I had was at Newcastle some years
ago, when mine was, I suppose, the only "flying license" in Aus-
tralia. Driving my car along the Hamilton Road at a good deal
over the speed limit, I suddenly came upon a constable, who
signalled me to stop. Pulling up, I inquired the cause of the
trouble, saying, "I wasn't going fast, was I?" "Fast!" he said.
"The limit's fifteen, and you were doing fifty." "Now, Sergeant,
not so fast as that, maybe?" "Fast!" he said. "You were simply
flying." "Fortunately I have a license, Sergeant," I said. "You
may have a license to drive, but you haven't got a license to fly,"
he said. "Where is your license?" and he pulled out his pocket-
book suggestivelv.
When I handed him my flying license—well, fortunate for me
he was a bit of a humorist, and there was no prosecution.
To all people who have achieved a more or less full portion of
notoriety in the public eye, the following experience is possible.
Having taken a moving picture film of Sydney from an aeroplane,
I was one day visiting Cootamundra, and, meeting some friends,


24/7/16.
First Prize—Knowles
£1
o
0
Second & Third Prizes—Andrews &
Hobbs 0
15
0
25/7/16.
First Prize—Boyde
£1
0
0
Second Prize—Driscoll
0
10
0
Third Prize—Brinkman & Kennedy
0
5
0
Booby Prize—Collins
0
3
6
26/7/16.
First Prize—Clarke
£1
0
0
Second Prize—Teadiman & Ashton
0
10
0
Third Prize—Burn & Molloy
0
5
0
Booby Prize—Edwards
0
3
6
Total
£5
12
0
they proved anxious to see it screened. Fortunately the film was
in my car, and the local cinema being open, we wandered along
to see if the proprietor would screen it that evening. We found
the proprietor absent, but the operator was easily found, and when
the situation was explained, jumped at the novelty, and said it
would most certainly be put on. Then the operator explained how
interested he was in aviation. "Why," he said, "I used to go up
with Billy Hart time after time." He proceeded, seeing us highly
interested, to> give thrilling accounts of weird and perilous hap-
penings in the course of these flights, which, had they been quite
accurate, would have made me the wonder of the ages. Then he
imparted a note of pathos into the story by getting on to Billy's
days in hospital, and incidently remarked that the said Billy had
prayed him to go up on the eventful day of his bad fall. Accord-
ing to his story, he was more than mother and father to Billy, and
soothed him when all efforts were in vain. Getting slightly tired,
I said, "I cannot quite place you." "No," he answered, "and your
face is not even familiar to me." I murmured that I was "Billy,"
and on that the misguided chap flew for his darkened hall to hide
his confusion. I was no more his best friend in the world.
Prize Winners of Whist Drives
Patient: "Will I be able to play the piano with my hands after
the operation ?"
Surgeon: "Certainly. Why not?"
Patient: "Well, you are cleverer than I thought, as I could not
do it before."
5


Reflections and Anticipations.
A.L.W., July 25th, 1916.
In writing an article for a ship's magazine, I suppose one really
ought to stick to matters connected with that ship and her occu-
pants —officers, crew, passengers, etc.
Well, this temporary floating "home from home" of ours not
being at present blessed with a nondescrift crowd of lady passen-
gers (bless their little hearts!) as in normal times, we are
unfortunately debarred from every vestige of the spicy gossip that
is usually available and is SO' dear to the feminine heart. Remains
then to review "mere man"—ourselves to wit—as contemplated by
ourselves. A dry subject, my masters; demnition dry and hard is
man when right away from the petticoats and etceteras!
First let me take the Old Man. "What's the matter with
farver?" He's all right—emphatically right. He knows his job,
and he ain't no fresh water lubber either. We all take off our
hats to the skipper as a tribute to his skill in dodging the murderous
sardine tins lurking underneath, and our respect is certainly not
lessened by knowing that, when occasion arises, he will go down, if
needs must, with the old flag still flying.
From what one can see as a novice, the Boss appears to have
gathered together a pretty average decent bunch o' cusses to run
the ship with him, and we have to thank them one and all for a
smoothly-worked and comfortable trip so far.
One of his promising hopefuls, by the way, will end up an
admiral if he lives long enough. Of course it will take time. He
has to go through the cooking process—not nearly half-baked yet—
and must lose for good and all that mistaken impression that he is
destined to carry the whole world on his shoulders. Being very
young still, there is hope yet for his fond mamma.
Now, everyone of us is proud to be aboard with such a distin-
guished shipmate as the Prime Minister of our great country. We
congratulate him on his labours for Empire in various parts of the
Empire, and on his share in advertising Australia to the world.
Australia needs advertisement. Outside her borders far too little
is known of her potentialities and resources. These latter have so
far hardly been touched, only the surface scratched, as it were.
In time to come this huge continent must, in the natural order of
development, take her place as one of thei great nations of the earth.
Our job is to do our bit towards that development, each in his own
humble sphere. Every man on this ship who has fought and bled
for Australia must remember that his "bit" does not stop there.
He is in the position of trustee of an estate—he has to devote him-
self to the improvement of that estate. He, individually, is a
trustee of a magnificent birthright, and it is up to him to assist by
every means in his power to develop and expand the fruits of his
heritage. We must live up to our national motto "Advance Aus-


tralia." There shall be no going back. There can be no standing
still. "Advance" is our watchword, and go ever onward and
forward we must.
There will necessarily be a sporting spirit of competition about
us. We are not the only pebble on the beach, but simply one of
numerous sister nations, each working out her own destiny in
liberty and freedom, the whole forming, together with the old bird
in the northern seas, that family brood known as the British
Empire.
Let us see to it that in growing up we do not lag behind our
sisters. Our crying need is for population to open up the country
and fill the vast spaces hitherto left virgin. First of all it is the
duty of the Government to provide land and assistance towards
seed and stock to the returned soldiers who have been "through
it," in order that we may retain our heritage. These men have
deserved well of their country, and they are the men who are
needed to marry and rear large families, and so spread the seed of
the pioneer throughout the land. Let the Government see to it.
The huge amount of money so spent will be invested on works
reproductive a thousand fold in years to come. Let us not hesi-
tate but remember that we are trustees.
When our own soldiers are settled, there should begin a huge
immigration campaign. But it must be a workable campaign,
conducted with due intelligence and caution. We have no room
for the scum of older countries. We offer them of our best, and
we have a right to something better than their worst. A workable
scheme can surely be devised by which we secure the right class—
those who will go out and till the soil. That is the only class
towards whom the Government should extend assistance in immi-
gration—the producing class. As our home production grows, so
will our manufactories grow, our coal, iron, steel, ship-building
and other huge industries.
Yes, Australia is a great country, but she needs self-assurance
and confidence in her own independence. Also she needs more of
a natural spirit to be inculcated into the minds of the youngsters
at school. They should be taught to regard Australia as the great-
est country in the world, and to be for ever striving to render her
more so.
Catch 'em young and train them up in the right path—that way
greatness lies, "fair dinkum."
During the early advances of the Anzacs in Gallipoli two officers
at the foot of the Sphinx were having a billy of tea and a biscuit,
when they were disturbed by a private who fell from the top and
almost rolled on top of them.
First Officer: "Where the devil did you come from, man?"
Private: "From Ballarat, sir."


Photograph by D. Jar vis Kindly lent by "Weekly Times"


A Turnip Tragedy.
With the unanimous approval of officers and men, Private
Reuben Ayres was appointed No. 1 Platoon cook in the trenches.
Prior to the war Reuben conducted, with no mean degree of
success, the business of provision merchant and greengrocer in a
small Derbyshire village. In his dimly-lit little shop the sights
and odours of the various comestibles raised in his breast a mild
feeling of ecstasy. The operations of weighing quantities of tea
and sugar were treated by him as if performing some mystic right
calling down blessing on humanity. To him all manner of food
was the Alpha and Omega of human existence.
In the intervals of time not spent in his shop, behind which he
lived, he had become possessed of a mild little woman who, in due
course, provided him with a couple of mild children. But to him
still the mystery of human life was as nothing compared to, as
an example, the birth and subsequent growth of a vegetable
marrow in all its comeliness. In his little garden he developed
passions of enthusiasm over fat pods of peas and flourishing potato
tops, the red of carrots satisfied his sense of colour, and the succu-
lent roundness of the melon was his ideal in grace of line.
With his cronies, in solemn conclave over pipes and mugs "t
the village inn, he would give remarkable examples of abnormal
vegetable and animal growth, the which he culled from Tit-bits and
such like high order of literature. On other subjects, such as
international complications, he would observe an uninterested
silence, as of one concerned only with the things in life which
matter.
So his life meandered peacefully along. His business worries
were nil, and his wife and children held a vague part in his sense
of actuality, mainly through hie spouse's cooking abilities and his
children's capacity for bestowing of large quantities of foodstuffs.
Then war broke out, and the village worthies foregathered every
evening, and in course of time decided positively that the war was
just and necessary, although dealing, possibly, unjustly with the
youth of the village in necessitating their services as soldiers.
Enthusiasm . ran high, and finally Reuben, in disgust at being
debarred from his former popular topics, deserted his corner seat
and became a subscriber to Gardening.
In the spring of 1915 he was perusing the current issue of this
enthralling work, and started to read an article of very glowing
nature concerning the root and plant growths of those districts of
France and Belgium disputed by the opposing armies. This article
gave him at once a direct interest in the war, and the pictures of
fields covered with wonderful growths of root-crops, and the possi-
bilities of their being damaged by reckless gunnery, and the depra-
dations of marauders, roused in him a sense of injustice. This
feeling was further accentuated by an article in a magazine left in
his shop by a Londoner passing through, which described the quan-


tities and qualities of the goods handled by the A.S.C. Till this
time Reuben had never connected armies with food, but regarded
them in a dim way as being an attribute of a civilised nation or
State, and not bound down by normal rules.
Having arrived at this state of progressive thought, the little
man once more frequented his accustomed seat in the inn, and
from the father of a boy who used to write home vividly describ-
ing trench life, and in particular the quality of rations provided,
he developed a huge interest in the problem of food as affecting
warfare. At this juncture the village was visited by a perfervid
recruiting orator, and to the surprise of all Reuben was the first
to volunteer.
His progress as a recruit was a despair to all his instructors,
who gradually gave up the attempt of teaching him drill and the
system of causing bullets to arrive at a given mark. But his
manner of peeling potatoes and performing deft manual operations
on recalcitrant sides of beef established in his platoon sergeant a
degree of recompense for his numerous failings.
One day the battalion left for the front, and by the sergeant's
entreaty Private Reuben Ayres was allowed by the O.C. Company
to accompany it. Arriving in Belgium after a train journey from
Boulogne by night, Reuben, with eager eye, surveyed the field after
field of rootcrops, and enthusiasm once more raised itself in his
breast. Again, while the battalion was halted by the side of the
road, an A.S.C. convoy of provision wagonsi passed, and the mingled
smells of bacon and bread and cheese and other familiar odours
excited him tremendously.
In due course the battalion took over its appointed line of fire
trenches, and Reuben was (both on account of his interest in food
and bis nonchalant manner of pointing his loaded rifle towards
anyone he was addressing) appointed cook to the platoon.
In a mild sort of manner he realised that the men across the
road were Germans and enemies, but as the trenches were good,
and there was practically no artillery action, he quite placidly and
satisfactorily performed his appointed task. Never was water more
carefully boiled, bacon more delicately browned than that of No.
1 Platoon.
So the first spell in the trenches passed, and the battalion went
back to its rest camp, and Reuben in his spare time haunted divi-
sional trains and gloated over the white and green of turnips.
Returning to the trenches, he was informed of the presence
between the lines of a fine patch of turnips, and at once became
seized of an idea that they would provide a digestive fillip decidedly
advantageous to the quality of his cookery. Obtaining permission
to go out with a patrol, he brought back some most excellent speci-
mens, which were much appreciated, and straightway he reckoned
on providing this fare till the turnips ran out. He calculated that
they would last two months at least, never dreaming that anyone
would wantonly damage or destroy such beautiful products of the
earth.


Now the day .after the turnip patrol Reuben was placidly making
tea for the midday meal, when suddenly the enemy artillery found
they had a few shells to waste, and started pouring them across.
Hearing the whistle and burst, Reuben was somewhat cognisant of
a change in his conceptions of war, and suddenly the reality of it
became apparent, as his tin, with its boiling contents, was neatly
punctured by a fragment of shell, with the consequent loss of the
water and the extinction of his fire. Unformed desires to in some
way render payment to the originator of this unforeseen conduct
came into his mind, but the shelling stopping, he became calm again,
and getting a fresh tin and more water prepared the accustomed
meal, dreamily thinking of the turnips still awaiting him.
Towards dusk he was gazing fondly >at them through a periscope,
when suddenly, before his horrified eyes, the whole surface of the
ground shuddered and heaved, and a shower of earth, mixed with
barbed wire, posts and his turnip patch, ascended towards heaven
with a dull rumble. In the burst of this German mine, which
failed to reach our trench, the whole patch of nestling spheres had
been either mangled or buried, and the state of. chaos and the
reckless destruction of food turned the little man sick at this
hideous example of the horrors of war. His feelings turned to
hate and loathing for the villains capable of such wanton wicked-
ness, and in the counter attack to thrust the enemy from the new
crater he performed wondrous deeds of execution.
Sergeant Reuben Ayres is now Battalion Bombing Sergeant, and,
for his exploits in the first big bombing encounter of the battalion,
has been warmly complimented by the C.0., who is a firm believe",
in ruthless warfare.
Murmurs of a Mess Orderly.
The .thousand and one troubles which aggravate the "Slave of a
Troopship" commence with his appointment to that very distin-
guished position (considered by many to be a very "cushy job").
When accepting this appointment, one must be prepared to fore-
go the pleasure of the few extra minutes in his cot (or hammock)
after reveille (and here it would be as well to add a kindly word
for our bugler, who never sounds it before time).
Next you must necessarily be immune from attacks of mal-de-
mer, possess the patience of a saint, and yet suffer from severe
attacks of kleptomania —not the name of a new kind of soap. Our
S.M.O. —this particular M denotes Mess—has under consideration
a guaranteed cure for this complaint.
Now to commence a day's troubles. Your first greeting in the
morning is "Why, the don't you make a noise when you get
up?" etc., and to escape further greetings you beat a hasty retreat


to the bath, followed closely by a few flying boots and slippers, etc.
Then you have time to meditate how strange your little noise should
rouse your comrade, yet revielle didn't. Probably your comrade
was dreaming he was a soldier once more, and heard the "welcome"
call in his sleep.
No Mess Orderly should attempt to draw "dry rations" until
he has donned his "sea boots" or taken a pair of stilts to navigate
the alley way. A splendid opportunity is offered to an enterpris-
ing individual to institute a ferry service there.
You must take great care to set the table noiselessly so as not
to awaken your comrades, after which you can join in the game
of hid© and seek with the baker. When you find him, your bread
is the reward.
Now if you find that during the night someone has "borrowed,"
without permission or even a promise to return, some of your mess
gear, such gear must be obtained in the same manner from an-
other mess observing the "standing order" not to be caught.
There is very -little competition for first place at th© galley to
draw breakfast, and for the following half-hour you are expected
to serve it out to your messmates, with intervals of two or three
minutes between each one you serve.
During these intervals you attempt to eat your own breakfast,
but don't complain of indigestion or chronic dyspepsia afterwards.
Breakfast over, you are free —to clear away, wash up, sweep and
mop, polish the knives, and set the table for inspection (10 a.m.),
at which time it's a cert you will hear the long-standing complaint
—viz., "No hot water yesterday, sir." Yesterday all the M.O.'s
took a little exercise by carrying their hot water from the fo'castle
back to the well deck aft! It is as well, in order to secure an
early position with your dixies for dinner, to place them at the cook-
house at breakfast time, but as the ship always lists to the port
side, don't be surprised to find that your dixie has slipped back
four or five feet. As to how other dixies arrange themselves on
the cookhouse side of yours is certainly a trick of the Mess Orderlies'
trade. Can "Pony" O. explain how his dixie has not moved since
we left Durban ?
Another little grievance (which concerns ourselves) is to have to
suffer the indignity of having your mess gear overhauled and
inspected three or four times a day. "Someone's pinched my
dixie." "Who 'boned' 83's carving knife?" Another may want
to count your mugs, knives, or forks, etc. Of course you cheer-
fully submit to these little indignities, and solace yourself with the
thought "How nice it is not to be proud."
SIG. H. PRICE,
Bth Battalion A.I.P.


Der Hun.
Hans Dudelheim voss braver more
Dan any man's dot voss;
All by liimsellst he burn a church,
Undt get der Iron Cross.
Some women undt some children too
Anoder day he shot,
Undt so, for making {'rightfulness
Once more der cross he got.
He flew to England one dark night,
Another cross to vin,
Undt killed some women mit a bomb
Dropped from a Zeppelin.
For hiding mit a maxim gun
Inside an ambulance,
An extra large size cross he von —
Der noble-minded Hans.
He went into a cellar vonce,
Mit comrades eight or nine;
Undt got the Iron Cross again
For drinking all the vins.
So vinning crosses all der times,
He went his Kultured vay;
His chest was covered mit them,
He von dem tvice a day.
Undt when he had no more room for more
He hung dem on his back,
Undt also down his trouser legs,
Undt in his haversack.
Until beneath the load he fell
(Der veight voss tons undt tons),
Undt so to Krupp's dey took him, schnelll
Undt made him into guns.


Promenade Deck Gossip.
The speaker struck an attitude and calmly lit a "fag,"
His admirers gathered round him, for they vowed he was a "dag."
He moved a lifebelt casually, and viewed two slippered feet,
His colors, plumes and numerals looked dandified and neat.
An ugly-looking clump of scars (the same are no disgrace)
Were shown, as if a broomstick bomb had burst upon his face.
His nose was hooked and prominent, just like a parrot's beak,
He'd a most affected "nasal twang" whene'er he chose to apeak.
His manner was aggressive, and suggested Wooloomooloo,
The toughs of far-famed Collingwood or wayback "strike me blue."
His mouth was shaped diagonal-wise—a fag was ever in
the right-hand side, whose under lip drooped slightly towards the
chin.
The smoke came through his nostrils, for he did the drawback well
To perfection, when some Anzac tales he set his mind to tell.
A sport he was undoubtedly, and bossed a "two-up school,"
And ran a Crown and Anchor board, which proved he was no fool.
His pockets bulged with cigarettes, whilst one was in reserve
Behind an ear both long and lopped, which showed a Grecian curve.
His mates were patient listeners, for in truth they had to be,
And couldn't contradict him, they had not been there to see
The landing where he got his wounds, when Anzac ran with blood.
"Them, Dinkums, wos malingerers an' fairly up ta mud."
He wouldn't have 'em on his mind, they came when all was done,
But would give his own opinion straight to every "mother son."
He screwed his lips and spat afar, then "with a cough began
To relate his deeds of valour, somewhat thus the story ran:
He was nearly drowned to start with, for a wheez-bang smashed
the boat,
The shellcase only missed him by a fluke, and tore his coat,
But got ashore and chased the Turks, who dropped their arms and
fled,
After leaving heaps of prisoners and at least two thousand dead.
A stranger interjected (who was thoughtful in his way,
And scarcely spoke a dozen words throughout the live long day),
Saying, "I was in the landin', an' am quite prepared to swear
By all the Powers above us, mate, that yew wos never thair.
Yew came wi' Reinforcements, lad, tha' 96th, I know,
An' malingered at that Hairydrum* wile us blokes run that' show.
*Aerodrome.


Them marks you wears is soovineers a' Kyro,f so I'm told,
In a mix-up wi' tha' Red Caps. Wye, yer feet wos alius cold.
It makes mee sick to- 'ear yew gasbags skite a wot yer dun,
Av' all tha' Turks yer gobbled an' tha' D.C.M.'s yer won,
'Ow bravely yer reesponderrd to yer bleedin' country's call,
When ninety-nine pur sent, ov yer wos never thair at all."
The sporting hero fairly roared, but wisely fizzled out.
His game was up, his bolt was shot, he'd proved a brainless lout.
The silence grew monotonous, as every "peanut" thought
That the best of stories emanate from those who've never fought.
But the bugle interrupted, when it blew the cookhouse door,
And our friends adjourned for dinner, leaving fag butts on the
floor.
(End of Story.)
f Cairo.
The Moral : Good Advice.
To my story hangs a moral which you'll pick up at a glance:
Heed not the bragging warrior should you meet with him by
chance.
He pulls us down on every side, can fight a pint of beer
More bravely than a Turk or Hun, as facts have shown us clear.
The boys who do the fighting get enough of living Hell,
And neither care to think of it nor blood-red tales to tell.
No. 398 PTE. E. ST. INCS BELSTON,
C. Co., 28th Battalion, A.I.F.
Woodlakine, W.A.
Reflections.
We're scrapped and sailing homeward,
And our fighting days are done,
For they've gathered in the crippled and the blind,
And I loaf upon the hatchway,
Or I lie out in the sun,
While my thoughts are of the graves we've left behind.
In the shadows of the ridges
There's a hush upon the land
Where the battle-cry of "Imshi!" used to ring;
And some lonely little crosses,
With their mounds built up of sand,
Remind us of the songs they once did sing.


Do they muster round their camp-fires
When the moon is on the wane,
And the breeze steals through the olives whisp'ringly ?
Do they call upon the comrades, that they ne'er shall see again,
As they gaze with wistful eyes across the sea ?
Do they wait for us at Courtney's,
Where the thorny bushes grow,
Where the tideless sea, that's lapping at the shore ?
Yes, they wait for us and wonder,
Till at last they seem to know,
And they whisper that we're coming back no more.
And they charge the rugged hill-tops
'Ere the morning light doth gleam,
To the shout of "Imshi Galla!" loud and clear;
And they cross the ridge at Walker's,
As a struggling, ghostly stream,
And find their rest again in Chalaick Dere.
There's the sound of moving squadrons,
There's the ring of trumpet call,
There's the noise of marching troops, both night and day;
But their rest remains unbroken,
Where a golden sun doth fall,
By the graves, across the ocean, far away.
Y. R. PEACOCKE,
Ist L.H.F.A.
An English Colonel visited some of the dug-outs of his battalion,
when his curiosity was aroused by the letters K.Y.8.N.0.H. on a
board over a dug-out. Calling one of the occupants, he asked him
the meaning of the words.
Private (trembling): "Oh, oh, nothing, sir."
Colonel: "What rot! It must mean something. If you don't
find out quickly I will deal with you."
Private (shaking) : "Well —er —sir, I didn't do it, but it means
'Keep your bally nose out of here.' "
First Private: "I see the old Major has gone at last."
Second Ditto: "What! A sniper or shrapnel?"
First Ditto : "Lord, no. The boys were lowering him into his
dug-out when the rope broke."
16


On Hospital Visitors.
To see this class of human at its best, you need to become a
patient in a military hospital. This can be accomplished in various
ways, the one most in vogue being an early morning canter in
advance of the front line trenches. (This is a practical certainty.)
If, however, your unit is still in training at home, get a tin of
metal polish and a rag, and try to clean the buttons of the police-
man on point duty in any busy London thoroughfare. This is
just as certain a method, but there is the possibility of your not
being able to notice or feel interested in anything for the first
month or two after admittance.
Having, then, become a patient, and received a red tie, you
proceed to lay your, plans.
It is essential that you are very chummy with the ward sister,
and be her star patient. This is at times a difficult matter, as
ward sisters are quite a class of their own, and need special study,
but by being painfully polite and always keeping your locker tidy,
you may generally be assured of a high plaoe in her esteem. I
mention this because she will usually bring your first visitor, and
if you have played your cards properly, you will hear her murmur
as she approaches, "I must take you to see this patient. He is
such a nice man."
Your cue. Lift your eyes from your book and gaze steadily at
a spot on the ward ceiling, slightly creasing your brows thje
while. This gives the impression that you were a student of divinity
before enlisting. A word of warning. If you are reading "The
Girl Who Took the Wrong Turning," be careful to have a brown
paper cover round it marked "The Lives of the Saints.
I will now describe the various types. This, your first, will be
of the Inquisitive Class. She will question you minutely about
every phase of your past life, and has a long string of questions
evidently learnt by heart. I say this because, when she asks you
if you are married, be your reply in the negative or affirmative,
she invariably follows with "How many children have you?
Yes, she is a most embarrassing person, but I prefer her to her
direct opposite, the Communicative Type. This sort is usually four
feet three inches high, with thick shoes, black stockings, short r
with sundry pieces of fluff on, man's coat, boater hat, cotton gloves
ventilated here and there, and a simulation gold curb bangle.
She will begin by giving you the reason, with details, of her
unmarried state, and, after a short resume of her parents' history
on both sides, will continue with an accurate account of her life
from birth until breakfast-time that morning, finishing with the
question, "Now, don't you think it is good of me to come and talk
to you like this?" If you answer this poser tactfully and without
venom, she will open her black bag, and carefully licking her
thumb and forefinger, dive inside and fetch out for you a penny-


worth of acid drops in a paper bag, apologising casually for half
an ounce or so of face powder that has become mixed with them.
I will pass over the small boy who offers you a selection from an
armful of "Comic Cuts," "The Boys' Friend," and "Home Chat,"
and come to "The Person with the Baby."
_ How are you, mister? I 'ad some bananas when I come in, but
I've give 'em all away. Listen, baby's saying 'Good afternoon' to
yer. Shake 'ands with the gentleman, ducky. Yes, 'es only two
years old. Tell the gentleman how doggy goes!"
"Ma, ma."
"Now tell 'im 'ow pussy goes!"
"Ma, ma."
"What does the moo-cow say?"
"Ma, ma."
Then she puts the prodigy down and, while she is telling you
how well he mends clocks, the little devil has gone to your locker
and broken the two eggs you were saving for tea. This usually
severs diplomatic relations.
These, then, are three main classes. There is a fourth, namely,
the person you are really pleased to see, who, whether she be
elderly and quiet or young and sparkling, really interests and
amuses. When you find them, treasure them as sacred things, but
don't—when talking of the young and sparkling one—refer to her
as your cousin. Nobody will believe you.
1576 SGT. HARRY W. KING,
16th Battalion, A.I.F.
Stand To !
(Pencilled Reserve Gully after being hauled out of bed on a "stall").
At the scene of operations,
There to aid your country's cause,
Where dear comrades or relations,
Bravely fighting, fell in scores.
Not too bad your first impression—-
Extremely novel, spanking new.
Later comes a fresh expression:
Stand To!
In the trenches when you're fighting,
Exchanging cards with Jacko Turk,
Things appear a bit exciting,
Rather interesting work;
Till, in hours of early morning
A message to your post comes through,
While mates for want of sleep are yawning:
Stand To!


When in peace you're calmly sleeping
With your full equipment on,
Weary from that vigil keeping or dreaming of the days long ago.
Someone grasps a foot to wake you,
And on your ankle puts a screw,
Callously he then will shake you:
Stand To!
When you shift to other quarters
To do a little "beach fatigue,"
'Tis lovely by the rolling waters
That meet your gaze for many a league;
You think at last you are out of danger,
Afloat upon the Aegean blue,
But, hark ! as in a dream though, stranger:
Stand To!
When the cruel war is over,
To home and friends you'll soon return,
Gracious ! won't you be in clover,
That for which you daily yearn.
Some frosty night so indiscreetly
You spring. The wife says "What ails you?"
With chattering teeth you answer sweetly :
Stand To!
When you're visiting the dear one,
If asked, you'll gladly stay the night.
How you longed to be near one
So sweet and loving, just alright.
You tell her Dad to call you early.
The maiden asks what will you do.
You answer to that shy-faced girlie:
Stand To!
No. 398, PTE. E. ST. IVES BILSTON,
C 2 Coy., 28th Battalion, A.I.F.
While at Woodcote Park Convalescent Camp (Epsom, Surrey),
the presence of one of the "knuts" of the A.I.F. was requested at
the Orderly Room to explain the reason for being one hour late at
tatto. Captain S asked him what little girl kept him late?
"Bluegum" replied that when he arrived at Victoria Station the
band was playing "God save the King," and he had to stand to
attention, and missed the train. Case dismissed.


Shorty's Burst of Energy.
Shorty was ill, very ill in fact. As he himself expressed it,
"fed up and far from home." He had been ashore at Capetown
after three weeks' afloat, and consequently made up for lost time.
He sat on the mess-stool with his head in his hands, a picture of
misery, or, as Lofty, his chum, said, "Like a young sailor cut
down in his prime." They were clearing up decks for the ten
o'clock rounds, but Shorty didn't seem to recognise the fact.
"Come on, Shorty, get a bloomin' move on. You can't stop
here all day. Get your breakfast, slick."
"Don't want none; me melon's nearly busting," said Shorty,
with a baleful stare out of a cold, cod-fishy eye,
"Get on deck and cool the bloomin' thing, then. You're delay-
ing the harmony considerable down here."
H© shifted about a foot down the mess-stool, while they scrubbed
around him.
"Who's© the blighter that told me port wine was the only drink
worth having in this 'ere burg? I'd strafe him, I would. Look
here, I want to know how I left the last pub in a mo'car, and
lobbed alongside the starboard gangway in a 'ansom cab. I don't
know nothing about transhipping. It's uncanny, that's what it
is. If poor old Nelson could wake up and see the British Navy
riding around in taxis and 'ansom cabs, he'd say, 'Let me die
again, quick; the Navy's gone -adrift considerable since they served
out jam and served out milk in lieu of Stockholm tar.' Disgrace-
ful, I calls it. Me pay-day; where's it? Gone. Me- appetite;
where's it? Ditto. My sleepitite; where's it? Likewise. Even
me sense of recollections gone as well. Oh, for a life on the feathery
foam. Go easy with that confounded scrubber, you blitherin'
fathead. I'll give y©r a dingbat -alongside the bung-ole, Me
best number one's only clobber I've got to go ashore in sunny
Australia with. Ah for the land of wattle and gum, the 'ome of
the bloomin' 'ro-o, seven small wives and a starvin' chil'. I mean
seven starving wives and a—oh ! hang it, you know what I mean.
And after a good, kind paymaster in Angleterre paying us up to
th-e end of the voyage, not a d. to have a pint of Carlton with in
Melbourne, all through a pair of sparkling eyes and a bottle or
two- or three of port. Something will have to be done. The
colonel says' we can't play bouse-on-top or cr-own-and-anchor, and
they won't stand me- raffling 'arf a quid for thirty bob. I thought
you said soldiers was green lofty; they're- -a bloomin' sight
shrewder than you o-r me. They won't bite. Perhaps they have
tried the same game themselves. The only thing I can see is to
work; but what work, I says. Ther-e ain't none. Nothing to do
all day, and about twenty 'ands to help yer."
"What about starting a dobeing firm, Shorty?"


"Bloomin' good idea. Anybody come in with me? I want some
poor blighter what's a victim of circumstances like myself, and
then he'll lash out and help to fill the coffers of the) Shorty family."
"Righto, Shorty, I'm on." It was Jim who spoke. "Only, no
going ashore and busting up the swag before we get to Melbourne."
"Good enough, Jim, square dinkum. Shake on it, partner,"
and they strolled away, arm in arm, to wet it up with ginger beer,
the strongest thing then obtainable at the canteen. H.B.
Officers and Men on board the "Euripides."
A.I.F. OFFICERS.
Major Miller A.P.C.
Captain D. B. Ross 7th Battalion
Captain Forsythe 2nd Battalion
Captain Garrett 2list Battalion
Captain E. R. B. Pike A.L.H.
Captain Medlyn A.A.M.C.
Lieutenant Green 6th Battalion
Lieutenant Gilmore 6th Battalion
Lieutenant Bailey A.L.H.
Lieutenant Collins 16th Battalion
Lieutenant Hart Flying Corps
Lieutenant Mallinson Bth Battalion
Lieutenant Bromley ' A.S.C.
Lieutenant Bray A.L.H.
PASSENGERS.
Lieutenant Robinson.
Mrs. Tracey.
Mr. Harvey.
SHIP'S STAFF.
O.C. Troops—Colonel Courtney, J. H., Y.D. ... Transport Staff
Adjutant —Captain Soott, S. S Transport Staff
S.M.Q. —Major Read, C 3rd A.G.H.
Ship's S.M.—W. O. Wynn, S. A Ist L.H.
Ship's Q.M. —W.O. Evans, IT 14th Battalion
Ship's Orderly Sergeant. —Sgt. Benjamin, L. ... A.I.F. A.H.S.
Ship's Orderly Room Sgt.—Sgt. Conochie, J. llt-h Battalion and
A.I.F. A.H.S.
Sgt. W. Field 6th Battalion
Ship's Provost Sgt.—Sgt. Bravington 4th L.H.
Sgt. Poole, F. W 17th Battalion
Ship's Pioneer Sgt.—Sgt. Sheers, J 7th F.A.B.


SYDNEY.
138 C.S.M. Wilton 4tli A.I.E.
189 Private Weams 35th
676 Private Wright 2nd ■
1776 Private Wardel l F.E.
705 L.-Corporal Wainwright l®t
342 S.M. Wyan
2219 Private Wright 18th A.I.F.
128 Private Weintman 18th
21 L.-Corporal Bower 18th •
1114 Private Stephens 4th
806 Private Lister 28th
3220 Private Cam 6th AIM.
2823 Private Daily-Cooper 6th E. Amb.
1603 Private Morley 'lll l A.I.F.
1821 Private McKenzie Pioneer
1758 Private McKurdy 13th A.I.F.
1752 Private MePharson 17th —■
1032 Private Norman 2nd ■ —
319 Private Newton 7th A.L.H.
282 Private O'Leary Ist A.I.F.
921 Private Oliver Ist A.L.H.
3891 Private O'Brian 18th A.I.F.
4262 Private Oppel 2nd
1059 Private Paulin Ist
1618 Private Power 2nd
1776 Private Peacock Ist
36 Private Pashley 18th
2197 Sergeant Ramsey 2nd A.L.H.
424 Private Radford Ist A.I.F.
4251 Private Raynes 2nd
1575 Private Rowe 3rd
807 Private Lawther 36th A.I.F.
987 Private Longworth 2nd
751 Q.M.S. Lascron 13th
3854 S.M. Leonard 19th
1797 Private McLeish 2nd
521 Private Maxwell 13th
1984 Private McPherson 19th
623 Sergeant Montgomery 2nd A.L.H.
1999 Private McKeller 2nd A.I.F.
1192 Private Murphy 4th
1243 Private Smith Ist
1893 Sergeant Shears 7th A.M.B.
345 Sapper Spencer R.A.A.
674 Private Sharman 2nd Div. Sig.
2816 Private Sindell 28th A.I.F.
670 Private Scott 20th
2263 Private Suffolk sth


327 Private Smith 19th A.I.P.
1579 Private Teasdale Ist
3209 L.-Corporal Tediman Ist —•
1188 Private Tacey 4th
1837 Private Taylor 4th
350 Private Tann 2nd
2687 Private Vickors 4tli
2 Sergeant Withworth 3rd
1402 Private Weir 3rd
.2239 Private Wilton 4th
127'8 Private Wall 35th
922 Corporal Wheeler 2nd
443 Private Gavin 35th Battalion
1649 Private Gamidge 35th Battalion
928 Private Gorey 3rd
4606 Gunner Garland Ist A.F.A.
3758 Private Glanville Ist Pioneer
561 Private Gibbs 20th A.I.F.
1044 Private Grice 4th
4093 Private Green, W Ist F. Amb.
1418 Corporal Geary ! ... Bth A.S.C.
1100 L.-Corporal Geelan Ist A.I.F.
515 Corporal Goolan 16th A.I.F
238 Sergeant Green 7th A.L.H.
361 Private Hunter 19th A.I.F.
2144 Private Humphreys 3rd
.2152 Private Hoyle 2nd
1189 Private Hartly Ist
3083 Private Hilton 3rd
1130 Private Hobbs 3rd
738 Private Hope 13th
267 Private Herron 13th
866 Private Hore 7th L.H.
1195 Private Houston 13th A.I.F.
2153 Private Jackson 2nd
179 Private Johnson 13th -—■
1562 Private Kennedy 13th
1596 Private Knoles 18th -—•
912 Private Keeler 20th
1376 Private Kirkby 17th
1953 Private Kirk 18th
131 Private H. E. C. Clarke 20th A.I.F
1081 Private A. V. Corker 3rd
397 Private A. V. Cambell 35th
51 Private W. H. Courtney 33rd
9423 Private W. C. Colier 14th
3160 Private T. Collins Ist
1725 Private J. T. Cooper 3rd
1331 Private S. Crawford 3rd


515 Private L. Davies Ist A.I.F.
1472 Private S. V. Donnelly Ist
4454 Corporal C. Donald 3rd
116 Private T. Duffy 3rd
572 L.-Corporal J. W. Davis Ist
22 L.-Corporal R. Davis 19th
7700 L.-Corporal J. A. Duff 2nd A.S.C..
3834 L.-Corporal G. H. Darby 18th A.I.F.
855 L.-Corporal T. A. Dillon 18th
2948 Corporal H. T. Edbrooke sth F. Arab.
1537 Private F. Edwards 4th
62 Sergeant E. Evans 19th
1645 Private H. A. Fisher 35th
,1172 Private J. T. Fulmar Ist A.I.F.
6 Sergeant F. Fairlands Ist L.H.F. Amb.
11 Private F. Fleming sth F.A.B. Hdqrs.
4440 Corporal C. S. Feon 17th A.1.F..
857 Sergeant R. C. Farr 20th
2742 Private W. A. Grant Ist
11478 Gunner F. W. Green 20th
2423 Private T.VW. Althorpe ... 3rd Battalion
976 Driver E. Archibald 6th A.S.C.
521 Sapper H. S. Anthony 2nd Sig. Corps
183 Private W. Acres 18th A.I.F.
1316 Private J. Bayfield 2nd A.I.F.
1802 Private P. J. Baker 2nd
897 Sergeant J. Brinkman 3rd
1512 Private A. B. Belling 3rd
355 Private C. C. Bell 18th
169 Sergeant H. B. Brown Ist D.A.H.G.
478 Private H. J. Badger 13th A.LF.
449 Private J. T. Booth 3rd -
395 Private A. C. Bawkwell ... 3rd
3699 Private H. J. Bowey
1571 Private L. W. Beckett Ist
811 Private A. J. Bashford ... 18th -
160 Private T. Baldwin 19th
541 Sergeant C. T. Campion 3rd
844 Private F. Cahn ~... 18th
199 Private A. J. Clayton 18th
355 Corporal W. Clarke 13th
432 Corporal C..0. Curtis ... ... 17th
602 Private W. Costello 13th
1530 Private H. W. Cooper: 13th
2124 Private G. E. Collins 17th
1575 Corporal C. W. Carden ... ...' Bth AS C
2575 Private R. W. Crooks LOT A T TT<
192 Private Reid ATT?
541 Private Reeves .... 3rd _


- jiS - --
' . ***'/' J!P,.
l *' h iffllB8ffrir fllh_ "'•» - •*
BOYS OF THE AUSTRALIAN NAVY AND ARMY.
Petty Officer Donnelly (second from left in third row) of H.M.A.S. "Sydney" was the first
man to board the "Emden" after she had hauled down her fla£ to the "Sydney."


903 Sergeant Reddan 13th A.I.F.
1766 Sergeant Robertson 20th
2201 Sergeant Ross Ist
306 L.-Corporal Redmon 18th
87 Sergeant Robertson Ist •
794 Private Rosewain 7th -
934 Private Richards 4th -
3917 Private Roach 17th
110 Private Stone 9th -
688 Private Scott 2nd
1241 Private Smith 35th -
875 Private Sanderson Ist
172 Private Simpson 6th A.L.H.
3303 Private Somerville 4th A.I.F.
BRISBANE
Private N. Schomatoff 9th Battalion
Corporal H. R. Banks 9th
Private J. Nicholls
Private J. M. Sharp
L.-Corporal H. J. Dearalet
L.-Corporal T. Bryden
Private S. W. White 26th Battalion
Private E. Saddler
Private J. E. Ogden
Private C. H. Nelleman
Private R. Pale
Private C. E. McDonald 35th Battalion:
Private M. E. Lloyd
Private A. Beattie _
Private H. Carter 15th Battalion
Corporal J. J. M. McKain _
Private D. E. Morgan
Private F. W. Hipwell Ist Pioneer Batt.
Private B. Clague 2nd
Private W. Bruce Ist
Private: A. J. Rummel sth L.H.
Private W. Seddon 2nd L H
Private E. R. Brown Bth A.S C.
Private G. G. Harris 9th Battalion
Private T. H. Collins 2nd L.H. (N.S.W.)
Private Wainwright sth
Private O'Flanagan
Private R. T. McQuire 15th Battalion
Private F. Sharpe
Private Banner 9th A F A


VICTORIA-
TT . . 2nd F.C.E.
Driver H. A. Angus , A T F
Sergeant G. S. C. Aspinall 14th
Private T. Auhl
Private S. R. Adams
Private A. Adams „ ,
Private L. W. Booth , , g
Sergeant R. R- Bravington F C E
Corporal A. Bryan " , AF A
Bombardier V. Braddon 10 ' A
Gunner a E. Baker 6th A I.F.
Sergeant W. Buchanan 9lh A g. C .
Private W. D. Boyd •• ••• A jj,
Private J.
Private J. E. Bell ' Zf Z
Private C. Byrant ,
Private C. Collins .
Corporal T. Chad wick ZZZZ
Sapper L. A. Coulsen 6th h .C.L.
Private J. J. Cullinger 6( £ A.I.F.
Private J. Conner Battalion
Private W. T. Davenport
Private J. H. Durham
Private J. De Boe
C.S.M. H. Evans
A.-Sergeant W. E. Field
Private J. Y. Graham i 4'
Private C. Grime
Sergeant W. J. Gavin • 13th A.L.H.
Private S. J. Hulme 23r< J Battalion
Private H. O. Hayhow 37th
Driver J. A. Hearne 2nd D A.C.
Driver C. D. M. Hallett Z i
Private W. Hatton sth Battalion
Private J. Hayes "77
Private G. R. Harrison Bth Battalion
Corporal R. J. Hyde 7th
Private R. Hutchings 7th
Private H. J. Heron 7th
Private E. L. Harry 7th
Private R. Jacobs 2nd
Private T. Jones Bth
Private R. J. Johnson 6th
Sapper R. C. James 4th L.H.
Private P. J. Kennedy 23rd A.I.F.
Private W. J. Little 7th
Private H. Lennon 6th
Private A. J. Lewis 7th


SaGk row left -Capt.Garrett, Lieut. Collins, Capt. Ross. Lieut. Bailey, Lieut. Mallinson.
Sitting, left to right Lieut. Green, Capt. Pike, Capt. Scott, Capt. Douglas, Major Miller,
Capt. Forsythe, Lieut. Bray.
Front row, left to ri^ht- Lieut. Gilmour, Lieut. Hart, Capt. Medlyp,


Gunner F. Linney 6th A.F.A.
Sapper L. J. Mason Bth A.L.H.
Private S. May 6th Battalion
Private G. J. Morris 3rd
Private M. W. Murphy i sth
Private M. J. McAree 7th
Private R. F. Morton 21st
Private G. McTaggart Bth
Private W. McGarvie Bth
Trooper W. Norman 4th L.H.
Corporal W. Mitty 4th •
Driver P. W. G. Nelson 10th A.S.C.
Private A. Nelson Bth Battalion
Sapper W. O'Connor sth F.C.A.
Private J. Oldham 7th A.I.F.
Sergeant R. Price Bth Battalion
Private P. Pasini 14th
Sergeant G. Parrott ... 6th
Gunner W. A. Peters 10th A.F.A.
Trooper J. T. Phelan 9th A.L.H.
Sergeant F. R. Pollock Bth Battalion
Private R. Peterson 24th
Gunner H. Rawson Ist B.A.C.
Private W. Robinson 22nd Battalion
Private A. R. Riley Bth
Private W. L. Rogers Bth
Private T. Rouhan Bth
Private H. L. Read 6th
Private J. T. Rosendale Bth
Private H. Smith Bth) A.F.A.
Trooper O. S. Sharp© Bth L.H.
Sergeant D. Sweeney 2nd Pioneers
Private E. J. Shaw 6th Battalion
Private W. Smith 9th A.S.C.
Private J. F. Smart 7th Battalion
L.-Corporal A. Smith 7th Battalion
Private A. E. Paplin Ist Mining Battalion
Sergeant S. R. Prevan 7th Battalion
Sergeant A. L. Waldron 7th Battalion
Gunner A. Urquhart 2nd A.F.A.
Gunner H. Wilson 4th A.F.A.
Private A. J. Walker 24th Battalion
Sergeant A. J. Watt 23rd
Sergeant S. C. Wilson 6th
Corporal C. F. Swan Headquarters F.A.B.
L.-Corporal H. J. Tegg 14th Battalion
Private J. Armstrong 28th
Private H. J. Whiting 14th
Private J. L. Wallace 25th
29


Private D. McGough 16th Battalion
Signaller D. James , 6th L.H.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Private W. E. Andrews 17th Battalion
Private C. W. Smith 17th
Private F. Flail 17th
Private J. A. P. White 17th
L.-Corporal C. D. Lush 17th
Private E. L. Hallam 16th
Private T. J. McGough 16th
Corporal J. T. Robertson 16th
Private C. Archer 16th
Private E. J. Rose 12th
Private W. Driscoll 12th
Private L. W. A. Soott 10th
Private S. E. Graves 10th -
Private E. Aspinall 10th
Private D. McMahon 10th
Private H. J. Stanley 10th
Private W. J. Weyler 10th
Private J. O'Connell 10th
Private E. Gabriel 10th
Private R. A. Orchard 2nd F.A.
Private A. McKenzie 3rd F.C.E.
Trooper W. E. Field 3rd L.H.
Trooper P. Byrne 27th Battalion
Sergeant C. J. Williams ... 40th
Bmdr. J. L. Perry Bth A.F.A.
Private E. R. Stevens 4th A.M.C.
Private S. Hall 27th Battalion
TASMANIA
Private W. L. Staoet 12th Battalion
Private H. J. Windred 12th
Sergeant J. T. Harrison 15th
Private D. T. Chilcott 12th
Private A. G. Thomas 12th
Private C. E. Edmondson 12th
L.-Corporal F. T. Henshaw 12th
Private G. G. Connolly 12th
Private W. Denny 12th
Private A. Crouch 12th
Private W. R. Gibson 12th
Gunner C. Barrow 103 rd Howitzer Staff
Sapper H. L. Bowden 3rd F.C.E.
Private A. Laycock Ist C.C.H.


Private L. C. Dalley Cooper 6th F. Amb.
Trooper C. M. Butter Ist L.H.
Trooper J. Kearney 3rd L.H.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Sergeant Stark 16th Battalion
Private Kewan 16th
Private E. Edwards 16th
Sergeant A. W. King 16th
Private) F. G. Kite 16th
Private H. Brock 28th
Private E. Bilson 28th
Private M. F. Esmond 28th
Private T. Nicholson 28th
Private H. E. Green 28th
Private E. Goulatt 28th
Private W. G. Foster 28th
Private D. Carra 16th
Private J. J. Gillett 16th
Sergeant W. Holyoake 12th
Private A. Cam 12th
Private) Braithwaite 11th
Sergeant J. T. Williams 11th
L.-Corporal C. Pahl - 11th
Private J. J. Jolley 11th
L.-Corporal S. W. Williams 11th
S.-Sergeant J. Cdnochie 11th
Sergeant G. Boyland 3rd Mining Corps
Sergeant A. F. Berryman R.A.G.A.
Trooper C. Field 10th L.H.
Sergeant F. Hungerford 10th
Trooper S. Caves 10th
Trooper G. G. Lloyd 10th
Corporal W. Puzey Bth Battalion, A.F.A.
Corporal J. E. Molloy 10th L.H.
Trooper C. O. Lawrence 10th L.H.
Private M. Wood 28th Battalion
Private H. K. Leahy 44th
VICTORIAN NAVAL RATINGS.
Donnelly, J. H Ist P.O.
Ashton„ H. H A.B.
Brew, H Sig.
Corrie, R A.B.
Oliver, W. A Lab. Seaman
Soper, J. W Lab. Seaman
Cosham, C A B
Km, A ' ;;; A ; B ;


Harte, A A.B.
Kent, E. H A.B.
Morton, G. E Lab. Seaman
Parkes, F. W A.B.
McClure, J O.S.
Meeking, E Boy
McKenzie, J Shipwright
Molloy, W ••• A.B.
Uden, C. W A.B.
Clifford, W Stoker
Taylor, J. (proceeded on leave at Fremantle) A.B.
Hyde, S. C. (proceeded on leave at Fremantle) A.B.
Wainwright, G. S. (missed ship at Capetown) P.O.
A.M.C. Staff.
MEDICAL OFFICER.
Major E. S. Mills A.I.F. Adm. Hdqrs. Staff
MATRON.
Sister G. Moberly A.C.D.
NURSES.
Sister Scully Ist A.G.H.
Sister B. Campbell hst A.G.H.
Sister M. Nash 2nd A.G.H.
Staff Nurse F. Fletcher A.C.D.
Miss E. Ferguson ... Civilian Nurse
MASSEUSE.
W.O. A. P. Ahern 10th A.G.H.
Corporal E. K. Cilento Ist C.C.S.
NURSING ORDERLIES.
S.-Sergeant E. Whitehouse (dispenser) 2nd A.G.H.
Sergeant Clark A.1.F., Hdqrs.
Private R. A. Martin S.M.R.
Private L. V. Solomon 2nd' F. Amb.
Private A. A. Carr 6th F. Amb.
Private H. Morrison A.C.D.
Private W. M. Stumbles Ist F. Amb.
Private A. W. Ferguson 3rd F. Amb.
Private H. J. Pashen 3rd F. Amlb.
Private E. R. Stephens 4th F. Amb.
32




