

HOME LETTERS
OF A
SOLDIER-STUDENT
JOHN GILBERT JACOB
(Private 50th Batt. A.1.F.)
KILLED IN ACTION, JULY 7th, 1918, AT
HAMEL, NEAR VILLERS BRETONNEUX
VOLUME 1
ADELAIDE : G. HASSELL <© SON
1919




HOME LETTERS
OF A
SOLDIER'STUDENT


GILBERT JACOB
1916


HOME LETTERS
OF A
SOLDIER-STUDENT
JOHN GILBERT JACOB
<Private 50th Batt. A.I.F.>
KILLED IN ACTION, JULY 7th, 1918, AT
HAMEL, NEAR VILLERS BRETONNEUX
ADELAIDE : G. HASSELL <£) SON
1919


"Great hearts are glad
When it is time to give."


TO
MARY ANNETTE
<NETTA>
FOR REMEMBRANCE
AND
FOR INSPIRATION


SONNET
THE SOLDIER INVOKES HIS MUSE TO SING
Come, leave thy Sacred Well and sing to me,-
Though meet to sing beneath thy leafy grove—
Add joy to joy, as music e'er shall love —
Though here the banks of mud amd blasted tree
Would mock the sunshine's flood so pure and free:
Or, when the stars in shining splendour move,
The shrill gazonka's whining shriek above,-
Yet, hither to my sap and sing to me!
Forget the hatred of this life of wrong.
Nor heed the ceaseless clamour of the Huns,-
But only hear the night-bird chirp the while.
And see the little daisy's lonely smile,-
And down the tumult of the strife with song
And singing, still the terror of the guns!
<Written in the trenches on February 3rd, 1918,
for his mother's birthday.)


Home Letters of a Soldier-Student
“I with uncovered head
Salute the sacred dead,
Who went and who return not. —Say not so!
'Tis not the grapes of Canaan that repay,
But the high faith that failed not by the way;
Virtue treads paths that end not in the grave;
No ban of endless night exiles the brave;
And to the saner mind
We rather seem the dead that stayed behind.”
J. R. Lowell.
Troopship Aeneas, April, 1916.
Rear Mother,
After being tossed by the storm, and then rolling
and pitching less violently on the ocean swell,
our souls were revived by the southerly breeze, and
after we had in the distance passed the coast of
strange lands, and watched the dim outline of the
hills, on Sunday morning, April 16, our good ship
made fast in Fremantle Harbour. Next day we
went ashore. We walked through the streets and
over the hill; we enjoyed a swim in the baths, and
afterwards a ham sandwich before joining our ship.
We are now sailing on again, the bow making great
white waves on the deep blue Indian Sea. It is even-


ing, too, and the moon is fine, shining on the water,
and we sail straight for the evening star. On Friday
morning we noticed an appearance on the horizon
resembling an old-time sugar loaf. Gradually as
we drew nearer and the clouds lifted and the sun
got higher, we saw distant mountains and great
ranges stretching to the right and to the left of us.
Soon we could watch the clouds rising from the
deep valleys. Then between us and the distant
peaks arose out of the sea the nearer coastline of
our new land. As we approached, we could discern
buildings and a couple of red roofs near the shore.
Then there were queer boats, thousands of them,
fishing. On the shore there were now to be seen
fine great buildings, with bright green lawns.
Watching the strange scenes, we soon entered the
big gate of the harbour of Colombo. On Saturday
afternoon we went ashore. I was in the rearguard,
and so marched through the city with bayonet fixed.
All the people turned out and watched us go by.
Next morning we were allowed to dive off the ship
into the sea, which looks like soup. There were also
in the water many turnip peelings, etc., from the
ship. In the afternoon we had another fine
swim, which was most refreshing, and did me
a lot of good. At sunset we weighed an-
chor, and as we steamed westward we passed manv
small craft seeking the harbour for the night and


shelter from the approaching storm. These catama-
rans generally have sails made of old coal sacks;
nevertheless they are often quite picturesque at a
little distance. One day our big ship stopped, and
the calmness of the ocean was most impressive as
we all stood at attention while one of our mates was
left behind in the deep. As the sun sparkled on the
blue rippling sea one had to think what a beautiful
resting place. Then the throb of the engines started
again.
Later, Egypt. We finished our voyage at Suez. We
reached there about midnight, and remained at
anchor all the next day, May 13. Next day we went
alongside the wharf, and soon there was a busy
scene. Swarms of niggers in every variety of dress,
working side by side with the soldiers, carrying
boxes, etc., up and down. The men were marched
up and into the trains after their baggage was loaded.
The whole shipload had moved off in three trains
soon after noon; but it was evening when we
arrived at Tel-el-kebir, and dark when we reached
the desolation camp. Our first few days in Egypt
were most prodigiously hot, and we were kept in
most uncomfortable quarters. Water was terribly
scarce, and we were fed on corned beef and beastly
biscuits that were as dry as they were hard. We
marched on the desert, in the sand and over stones,
without a drink, in the blazing sun. The stunted
bushes in the hollows were scarcely noticeable for


the dust and flies, and the desolation seemed
endless. But it did not last long. Our measles blew
away, and we were released in a few days. Our
quarters now are most comfortable, and the grub
improves every day, and we are getting used to
the place, and are in splendid health. At the Exhi-
bition at home we used to march down by the_ river
at sunrise on the still mornings. This morning it
was still, but it was into the desert that we marched
as the Lord of Day arose. Yet though it was a
tented field and there were bugles sounding in the
distance, and the battalions were forming up where
earthworks told of ancient battles, still nothing
could disturb the peacefulness of the scene or mar
the beauty of the desert. When the desert is good-
tempered not only is it picturesque on a grand_scale,
with its palm trees and smiling green fields in the
distance, but every different kind of grass and
shrub growing in the sand seems wonderful. There
is every shade of green, although some plants have
no leaves, and nearly every plant has a blossom,
red. yellow, or blue. All the little hills and ridges
are made of pebbles mixed with sand, and every
pebble is curious and quite pretty if you look at it
closely. It is a pretty place, but to-morrow we are
going to see the Pyramids, and soon we are going to
look at the sights of a cooler climate.


Rollestone Camp, Salisbury,
England, June 18, 1916.
Dear Mother,
Hurrah! for merry England and her bright blue
summer sky. Although we have only been here
two days, we seem to have been living for weeks in
a paradise of green, acres of green grass, trees, and
hedges. It is green all the way from here to Drake’s
bowling green at Plymouth, and beyond that down
to the very water’s edge, where the seaweed grows;
all the way except where the flowers hide the
grass or where the dark red roofs of the little cot-
tages cover the hollows between the hills, and
between our huts where the buttercups and daisies
grow, I have told you before about Egypt and our
camp at Tel-el-kebir, and about our nine hours’
journey in open trucks across the delta of the Nile;
but I must pass briefly over our voyage from Alex-
andria to Plymouth. The train took us to the wharf,
and we were soon aboard the great Cunard Fran-
conia. The harbour was full of ships. There were
battleships and more transports, as well as great
sailing ships and steamers. The Franconia was fast
was well as steady, and well appointed with cabins
and big wide decks, several of which we were
allowed to use. Our food, too, was good, and
though the fresh sea air sharpened our appetites
we had enough. There was much of interest to see


in the Mediterranean. Mountains and islands, often
dim and rising above the mist, as dim as our recol-
lections of their classical associations. We passed
vessels constantly all the way, and it was a great
sight to see our little escort come plunging towards
us in the waves. We saw the mountains of Spain,
and watched the sun set behind them through the
mist. On coming up after dark we saw the lights
of Gibraltar reaching up the hill away amongst the
stars, and watched the great searchlights as we
passed under a perfect blaze of illumination. It was
biting cold, so we went down to bed, and when we
came up in the morning we were out in the open
Atlantic. As we got near to the Channel we passed
a flotilla of mine sweepers, and were met by a
destroyer to escort us to the promised land. She came
near enough for us to see her name was Hope, and
we watched expectantly, but when time came to go to
sleep we were still “proceeding” onward through
the mist. In the morning 1 woke early. The great
engines were silent, the ship was still. Where
were we? Getting out of bed, B. stumbled over me
as he came into the dark cabin. He had seen Turn-
chapel right through the porthole. We were in the
Sound. A little while and I was on deck. It was
quite light up there, though it was a dull morn-
ing, and wasn’t it biting cold! And what did we
see before us? I did not know which side to look


first. We were surrounded by beauty. It seemed
to penetrate like the chill air to my very bones
There was the hill, a great green hill; there was the
white lighthouse and a church spire rising above
the town that was grey in the misty morning among
the green fields. There was Hope lying at anchor
beneath another hill, with green lawns and trees
coming right down to the water’s edge. There were
real trees —no weird palms, nor were there plots of
grass with mud banks between them, but green
fields that stretched unbroken over the sloping hills,
only marked off from the crops by hedges as crooked
almost as the winding road that wound over the
hill, or the zigzag path that led down to the shore,
I gazed all morning at the scene; I could hardly
take my eyes away, and I can see it clearly now; but
it is hard yet to find fitting words with which to
speak of it. We watched the clouds gradually break
and show the bright blue sky. Then the sun shone
out. It showed one green hill covered with golden-
blossomed furze, moss on the broken cliffs, and sea-
weed on the rocks. The sunshine passed over the
distant slopes and flooded the fields with gladness,
the fallow as well as the growing corn. It shone on
the city, and showed up the white buildings near the
shore, with the green lawns in front of them. Then
it crept over the island and the hill covered with
trees. If the trees were green before, now they


were every varying shade, blending in the morning
sunshine. We watched it, and then saw the first
sunbeam light up the brown sails of a fishing boat
making for the open sea. Then it shone on more
boats, some with old patched sails that only looked
the more picturesque as they passed the old Norg.
sailing ship, a four-master, lying in the Sound,
with her colours painted on her hull. Then came
the destroyers and low torpedo boats out of Daven-
port, and passed the little village in the far corner of
the sound. They seemed to add a grim glory to
the quaint old scene. But I must not forget the
birds, real white gulls, swarming round our ship
and following the brown-sailed fishing boats. As
we waited on the top deck the morning gradually
became more bright and sunny, till scarce a cloud
floated over the sky. At midday came our turn to
leave, and we stepped off on to the Plymouth boat
Sir Francis Drake.
At ten past two we were travelling on again
to a still unknown destination We travelled
through the' city, past the backyards of the
houses. They were small yards, perhaps, but full
of cabbages and green peas and beans, and there
were black currants and fruit trees in profusion.
Not only in the backyards of the houses, but there
were broad beans and potatoes growing along the
railway line from the very beginning, like they do in
Victoria. The old town has spread over hills and


valleys alike. We passed through high cuttings,
which, steep as they were, were yet covered with
grass and flowers. Then we passed high over the
streets, with row.s of chimney pots. The streets
were clean and quiet, different from the African
cities; and white girls waved flags from the wind-
ows. It was not long before the city meiged into
the country. There were vegetable gardens and
orchards, and cows feeding in small fields of grass
and flowers, perhaps surrounded by a hedge. Then
the view extended as we climbed the hills. There
were crops as well as meadows, and small forests
stretching away over the steep slopes. The hills
of Devon presented a scene of ever-changing de-
light. Our only trouble was, as we sped along, we
could not look both ways at once and eat our dinner
at the same time. But we were hungry, and oui
tin of bully, being kept in a cool place now,
was delicious, so we did our best.
What struck me more than anything was the
perfect harmony of everything we saw. Egypt
is a land of contrast green fields among
the great stretches of desert, beautiful flowers
and pebbles all over and among the deso-
lation, splendid gardens and mansions and temples,
etc, Here nothing was out of place; no signs
of luxury. Could there be any misery i The
little towns we passed were as picturesque as their
surroundings. When we stopped at a station there


was an orchard opposite us, with some shy girls
among the apple trees. On the fence the fat, rosy
children were laughing all the time. Quite as natu-
ral. surely, was the little church among the trees.
It seemed no wonder, then, that the men of Devon
could fight, and of Dorset, too. And how fine to
help them against a foe who believes in law, order,
and clean villages, instead of our freedom and the
love that we know is found is those crooked little
thatched cottages, with their red roses hanging on
the walls. It was the more interesting to have a
map in the train, so that we could follow the stations.
It was quite exciting where the lines branched, as
we did not know where we were going. A little
past Salisbury we turned to the north, and reached
Amesbury at about 9 o’clock. There we detrained,
and as the sun was setting over the plain we were
marched along the country road through the quaint
old village, once a great Roman centre, and passed
the two-storied thatched cottages that come right up
to the street, with geraniums in the windows, or
perhaps a little bed with a rosebush on either side of
the doorstep. There was the old church, with the
stopped clock, and the great trees and crumbling
tombstones. I have an idea the monastery of Ames-
bury used to be behind the old wall next the church
We crossed the stone bridge over the river, and
passed by the open cornfields. Amongst the grass


by the roadside was a small yellow flower—there
was just enough light left to distinguish it it was
a real buttercup! At the top of a ridge between two
roads, standing out clear against the skyline, stood
the ruins of the old Druid sanctuary of Stonehenge.
Here we turned off the road and marched across the
soft green lawn, and the sound of the tramping
column ceased. When we reached our huts it was
quite dark, for though the moon was full dark
clouds had once again obscured the sky. Thus we
came to Rollestone.
Rollestone Camp, July 3, 1916.
My dear D ,
I must tell you about the first Sunday morning
we were here, when we went to the village church
at Shrewton. It is a beautiful walk of about a
couple of miles, and the new-cut hay smelt fine.
Amid its native picturesque surroundings the beau-
tiful Church of England morning service appeared
in all its beauty. Any question of theology was of
no importance in this sacred spot. The next Sunday
in the evening we went to the Methodist Chapel,
and heard an Australian give his first simple sermon.
After this service we went on a little further, till we
came to the Baptist’s Zion Chapel. There they were
sitting on the grass by the roadside in front of the
door, on the bank of a little brook, and the golden


sunshine gleamed through the branches of the elm
trees on the other side of the stream. The speaker,
a brave young Tommy, told us how his spiritual life
had been strengthened by the temptations of the
camp. Then we went for a walk, and spoke to some
children, and turned homewards as the light began
to fade. At the side of the road was a milestone
inscribed in the ancient way, and it was strange to
read the inscription: LONDON, LXXX. In front
of us was a triangular paddock with a hedge of
enormous trees, about three rows deep. I don’t
know what they were, but near the stile there were
oaks. We went down the lane till we came to the
stile, then we climbed over, and across the meadow
where the cows were feeding near the brook knee-
deep in the grass and buttercups and daisies.
Before we came to the other road we had to get
through the “hedge” again. It was a most won-
derful place, and as we walked beneath those great
trees in the still evening we had to walk softly, as if
we were in some old temple, and were afraid of
breaking its sacred calm. We passed through the
village of Orcheston, and we came to some beautiful
cottages, with geraniums, and one with a very high
thatched roof with pretty old windows that looked
ecclesiastical in origin, and there were texts written
over them on the wall. It was very mysterious, and
when an old man in a brown coat with big buttons


came out of it and said “Good e — n j n g’ w f
not ask him what the old building had been f° r
would quite have spoilt the charm of it to know.
July 10,1916.
D T r smw l ?o r have so much to write nowadays, and
so much to do, and to -ad I must try andante
more rapidly. It is wonderful o e
firing line and the factories. While on guard y
terday and to-day I've read a great deal. Ive been
very much struck with the English We-, perhaps
due to the isolation of the voyage. English politics
are most interesting, and, of course, wor P
are at a crisis now. And it is summer, and the sun-
shine seems to penetrate into the new . •
accounts of sacrifice and courage. The nation is
striving towards one end. 1 lie spino }
sacrifice is very manifest. Our friendship with
France is also splendid, and it is sigm ca
where our line is united with theirs we stand im
day. After a good dinner we cleared out foi
a walk in the country. We passed the Fargo Hos-
pital, through the clover and the >ellow and purple
Powers, then down the main road towards London.
We passed the spot near where a gallant aviator
was killed, then we came to the famous Stonehenge.


We went into the enclosure, and wandered round
the ancient temple, and sat on the green grass. It
is like a beautiful lawn round the great rocks, full
of daisies and a few buttercups. (I had to turn a
back somersault.) At the slaughtering stone we
wished; it had a pool of water on it, and looked
good for wishing. Then we went on down the road
by the brook, and sat a little by a briar bush, and
watched two bunnies, Peter and Benjamin. Down
by the water we saw a good fish in the sandy shal-
low, and heard the sound of ducks swimming in the
wood beyond. We watched some big fish with golden
spots swim backwards very slowly, with their tails
half out of the water, among the bullrushes. We
went through a thick clump of trees, and saw three
birds’ nests, holding our hands well above our heads
to escape the “hitty-pitties,” which do bite. We
had to turn back at length, for we were not on an
embankment, but an island. It was too late for tea,
and there was no going home now, so we went on
till we came to the mill dam, where there was a
path under a glorious row of elms along the
edge of a sloping field where the rye grass had just
been cut and was lying where the mower had left it.
The big trees sheltered the dam, which reflected
them well in the evening sunlight. Then we came
to an old mill of some sort and pretty houses covered
with creepers and vines. Here four pretty girls


welcomed us with smiles into the town the back way.
There were little ones, swinging on a gate.
Yesterday afternoon we went for anothei
walk. Half-way to the village we turned ott
where there is a cart track and a bit of hedge
between the crops. The crops were fine. i e
oats were just on the point of spreading out,
but the head was still all bunched together at
the top of the stalk, and shone a silvery green
in the sun. The wheat, of course, with its lull
ear, was more inclined to yellow, a richei green.
But best of all was the barley. It is different from
our barley. Its head hangs down beautifully, and
the tips of its long beard are almost crimson, which
gives a splendid effect when the breeze makes a
tinted wave across the magic sea of ears- the free
and happy barley.” We went through the village
again and across the bridge near Ye Olde Locke
Uppe,” into the older Maddington, where theie aie
some of the best steep-roofed, white-washed, two-
storied little square-thatched cottages, every one
with geraniums in the window. We went to Had-
dington Church, first built about 1200, and rebuilt
in time of Drake. Some of the old stones remain.
It was very interesting, and all its surroundings
were most picturesque. The approach to it is by a
narrow path from a lane, or there is a gate leading
from an old garden, where there is a fine house
with tiles brown with age, and walls covered with


roses. On the little path that goes between the
green old graves was a clump of scarlet poppies.
Before those sombre walls did that cluster signify
the “life that shall endless be.” Outside the old wall
we sat for a little while under a spreading chestnut
tree. Sure enough we could hear the ring of a
hammer on an anvil nearby. Further along we met
a couple of pals, and some Tommies gave us all a
ride home on a very unsprung waggon. To-night we
heard a lawyer chap preach, and he was very fine
We had “O Worship,” “Lead, Kindly,” and “The
Day Thou Gavest.” I must just mention that last
night I saw the man in the moon with a twinkle
in one eye and a smile all over his red face. May
you also keep smiling.
Yours, Gir.
Gib.
England, July 14, 1916.
Dear Mother,
To-day we were to be in London, the great power
centre of the world. We were to catch Sunday’s
express to Birmingham, and go to Lemington Spa
t°. see E.’s grannie. We had an invitation to lunch
with Mrs. C. at Oxford on our way back. All our
leave, however, has been stopped, and we are prob-
ably going to France to-morrow. We will then have
been serving just four months. We have been here
now longer than anywhere, and were getting quite


attached to our little home. We have seen nothing
of industrial England, but we have seen this little
spot well. We have watched the corn begin to
ripen, but we must go while the fields are still full of
flowers, and before autumn touches the trees. It
has been grand to be in England. E. and I are both
in splendid health, and who would not gladly give up
all for England and for France.
Yours ever, Gib.
Gib.
Shorneclifif, July 25.
Dear Mother,
We are spending the afternoon at this pleasur-
able seaside place. Sometime after tea I believe we
are going for a trip across the Channel. We never
got quite to London, but to within twenty-five
miles of it this morning, before we shunted
back the other way. It was quite early this
morning when we turned out for our chop
and cup of tea. The moon was casting a faint
shadow, and the mighty Jove was high up in the sky
It was a grand sight when, through the mist that
hung on the horizon, the red morning star appeared,
Then, as dawn approached, the mist itself was
tinged with red, and Lucifer shone clear above. At
sunrise our long column was half-hidden in the mist
that filled the valley where Stonehenge looks down,
a nd in the dust which the marching raised on the


well-trampled pathway across the downs. Very
soon the sun was shining warm, but not for long,
however; the sky soon clouded over, but the dull-
ness of the day did not, I think, detract from the
beauty of the scenery. The soft green and brown
shades of the fields were all the more lovely be-
neath the grey sky, and a slight haze only enhanced
the splendour of distant trees and hills. If it were
not easy to separate the square tower of a church
from the tops of the trees by which it was sur-
rounded, yet it only made more impressive the har-
mony of the sacred edifice, with its surroundings—
the sacred temples of Nature. But the dullness of
the day was also a test of gaiety. Even to-day
Nature could not but smile. The effect was most
wonderful of the gold amid the brown in the
meadows, of the yellow mustard covering the turnip
field, the blaze of scarlet poppies in the corner of
the wheat crop. Perhaps the sweetest of all were
the fields that were white with daisies, or, when we
passed a cottage with its thatch covered with moss,
and its red cluster of roses. We never reached the
smoky cities. Even the largest of the towns we
passed through seemed lost among the profusion of
the fields and trees. You would have liked to see
the hopfields in Kent, and the orchards of apples
and cherries. I saw two great windmills built after
the style of the Netherlands. Last night we found


on a map the place where the 50th were reported to
be. This morning we knew they had taken part
when we read: “The Anzacs attained with distinc-
tion.” We are still “not fully trained,” so are sure
to go to a base camp in France for a few weeks. I
hope soon to be beyond Pozieres in that great fight
for England’s liberty. May you also, Mother, be of
good cheer.
Gib.
France, August 1, 1916.
Dear Mother,
At last we have come to sunny France. It has
been much warmer here than it was in old England,
and we have to work a bit. The whole atmosphere
is different. They are teaching us to be bloodthirsty.
They seem to know there is war here, and it is cer-
tainly encouraging to be taught points by one who
has been there. I have discovered where the papers
you sent had gone. When we arrived at the 4th
Division Base Depot all the rubbish tins were
blocked with “Chronicles” and “Observers.” The
scenery here is somewhat different from England.
The haystacks are round instead of rectangular.
Besides green crops there are fields of ripening
corn and stocks of sheaves. The country is
niore varied than where we were, and there
ar e trees all round the camp, which, though it


is sandy, reminds me more of Largs or Somerton
than Tel-el-kebir. We parade on a potato patch
among the woods sometimes, and sometimes have
a lecture in the fine amphitheatre formed by the
little hills among the trees. It quite reminded me
of the Prince of Wales (lecture room at Adelaide
University). On Sunday we went to the Scotch
church parade, and had a very fine service from an
old parson who had been under fire. He sat down
and played the piano himself, and preached on the
text: “Oh, come, let us sing," and then we sang
“Lead, kindly Light.” It is the earnestness of
men like these that makes our camp better. There
is more true discipline and less beer and saluting
by numbers, and we have learned more in a week
than ever before. I guarantee I could keep the
cows out of the cabbage patch now. With best
wishes for all under the old gum tree.
Yours, Gib.
Gib.
Base Depot, France, August 17.
Dear Mother,
We are still here, and it is a beautiful summer
day, for the summer has scarcely yet turned to
autumn, and it is still much like our spring time.
Mr. Pickwick used to like August best in England.
I never finished reading Pickwick, though I read a
good deal of it in the Mediterranean. It made me


quite eager to reach England, and my expectations
were not disappointed a bit. I could understand
why England was the home of so many great men.
I was sorry to have to leave nearly all my literature
over in England, but have still got more than I can
ever read. I found “In Memoriam ”on Sunday in
my greatcoat pocket, and 1 read the part about the
wild bells. If only for the ring of the words,
aren’t those verses grand? Sure, soon those bells
shall ring that thousand years of peace. What
happy bells they will be, and what a noble peace to
last so long. Lloyd George says the way pictures
will help to make us brave enough. I am in A Coy.
now, and have just sewn my colours on—the two
good blue colours, sitting on our straw beds in a
little French village in a beautiful valley, with an
ever chattering brook by the mill just at the end of
the road. E. has gone away for a few days to load
shells—this is the first night we have been separated.
But I like my new mates in No. 1 platoon very
much. They are a diflrerent sort altogether—mostly
old hands. I’m in pretty good trim now, and in the
best of spirits. The tin band cheers us up, so don’t
worry about me. Nothing can hurt me, and I shall
be * ■ '?
“Fearless and unperplexed
When I wage battle next,
What weapons to select, what armour to indue.”
Yours ever, Gib.
Gib.


(On receiving news of the sudden death of his
father.)
France. August, 1916.
Dear Netta,
I am writing you to-day to wish you many happy,
happy returns of to-morrow. I was going to write
to Daddy on his birthday, as it was also the great
war day. But when we got half way to the Y.M,-,
Ernie said to come for a walk, and I went with him.
I thought I would find something more to say if I
went for a walk and watched the sunset, but Ernie
told me it was no use to write. So we went away
on to the top of the hill where there is an old French
windmill with its great bare arms stretched out to
catch the wind, which, with time, has stripped them
bare. The camp ends there, and there are crops,
both green and golden, and poppies growing all
among the stubble. The whole of the hills and
valleys were covered with bright patches of varied
colours, and where the sandhills begin was the pine
wood and the big camp. It was all very pretty in
the evening sunlight. We watched the sun set
behind a low cloud, then, being tired, we went home
to our little tent to bed. I was thinking the other
day about our garden at home, and how the little
almond trees would be blossoming now, with the
dew on them in the morning. But I was going to


tell Daddy how every land is beautiful to those who
love beautiful things, while places we have known
and left behind, only become more beautiful; foi I
can never think that our summer flowers are dead
and faded, though the winter has brought fresh
ones. I was going to write to Daddy, that I was
used to going to strange lands, and was sure that I
would find a brighter home whenever I had to leave
the poppy fields of France. But now I can only
tell you I am sure that Daddy has found a beautiful
land, as the land he has left is beautiful; that he can-
not be far from us, as I never seem far away from
you. I have not written all I meant to, but I must
write to Mummie, and it is now time for the service
at the Y.M. This morning we learnt bayonet fight-
ing instead of church parade. Perhaps God will
steady my hand so that I may come back and help
you. I feel more confident of it now.
Your loving brother, Gib.
Gib.
Orpington, September 9, 1916.
Dear Mother,
As I have been ordered to lie very still this after-
noon, I had better begin at the commencement and
tell you what I have been doing the past week, and
how I came to get to Blighty. We marched out
about sunset last Saturday, and while we were still
moving down the road, the red, new moon sank


behind the dark bank of cloud behind us. Then
we waited till it got dark. It was partly due to the
darkness that I did not see La Baselle, but mostly
because there was nothing left to see. But occasion-
ally the star-shells on the horizon showed up some
grim skeleton of trees that showed where a wood
had been. I got a shovel at the “dump.” and then
we climbed a long the “sap,” which was pretty
rough, and which we saw sometimes by a star.
Jupiter and the Pole star stone without falling, but
there was no danger of them giving our show away.
We, being much under strength, had to dig out a
support trench nearly half a mile behind where the
rest of the 13th Brigade were to make an advance
in the morning. It was about midnight when we
came to the white tape that showed where used to be
the trench that our chaps jumped out from to ad-
vance just three weeks before. Young G., who is
one of our officers, put me in position, and I had
just got my coat off, when we were both covered
with smoking earth, and some of Fritz’s rubbish
shifted our tape altogether out of position, but we
soon got it back and started digging and ducking, I
was working in a big hole made by a shell that had
filled up the old trench, so digging out the old
trench. I soon had a bit of cover, but then I came
to sandbags and things we did not want to come to,
and digging was like forty nightmares. When the


morning star was high and warned daylight was not
far off, and most of the men had fallen asleep in the
trench they had dug, I still was far from the bottom,
and could scarcely longer lift the shovel, so I was
mighty glad to be sent with a party for water, al-
though my bit of the trench was never properly
finished. It began to get light as we were coming
back from the “dump” with our water-cans. Then
the barrage started. I caught some glimpses of the
fireworks as we passed shallow points, which were
all too frequent. At last we crouched down and
took cover, while the ground shook with the burst-
ing shells; but I pulled my tin hat tight on and went
to sleep. When I awoke, and we went on, I struck
a strange trench after about two yards, and thought
we were lost. It was our own trench we had dug in
the night, and we had been almost home all the time.
In spite of the shells, we had finished our job with-
out a casualty, but Fritz was beginning to shoot a
}ot of stuff in our direction. I think he had got an
idea we were there. We were very lucky that it was
a fine morning, and when the sun shone in, it was
jery pleasant sitting in the bottom of the trench.
I read a small book I had for a little while, but I had
to keep turning it upside down to keep the showers
2* dirt out. But we were not left long in peace,
they began by passing the picks and shovels down
to our end. The 49th chaps had taken a couple of


lines of trenches, and wanted them as they had no
tools of their own to dig in with, and were in danger
of losing the position. Then we were ordered to
take our rifles and bandoliers and five tools each.
That was a wretched journey. It was worse than
any obstacle race; apart from our ghastly load,
which I did not know how to carry, there were the
bursting shells. And it ended more disastrously
than the last obstacle race I was in. Often the
sap was all blown away. One chap near the front
got hit, and fell, picks and all into the bottom of the
ditch. We had to get over him the best we could.
Another time I went right over the knees in thick
mud, and was told to keep my head down low. At
last we were told we would have to cut across
country. We had a spell to get breath, and I left
a pick and shovel behind, and then I thought of the
brilliant scheme of tying the rest together with a
cord I had in my gasperator bag. When we hopped
over, the going was quite easy. We were told it was
not far, but when they opened rifle fire on us from
behind, we ducked into a hole, and wondered where
we were. Our party consisted now of two or three
men and a corporal. We did not know where the
rest were. We decided to try getting over a bank
just to our left. The corporal went first, and called
out to come on as he disappeared. The others fol-
lowed him over a little gap in the bank, while the


bullets came from behind. I was cunning, and went
a yard to the right, and spoilt their aim. There was
a "deep trench with a couple of fellows crouching in
the bottom. There was a chorus of “get down
quick.” 1 did my best to do so, and holding the
tools clear, I slid feet first into the trench, at least
I got half way, for I caught my breeches on a
bayonet and stopped half way. The corporal had
to pull it out before I could reach safety. I had my
field dressing out in no time, and some kind chaps
tied both bandages, one on my left side about the
waist, and the other a good bit higher up at the side
of my back. I put my coat on again, and wandered
down the trench, but I could not find a stretcher-
bearer. For a moment I hesitated, but when I saw
our Captain run across with his shovels and jump
into the trench, I took courage, though it looked
like cowardice, hopped over and ran. I passed a
lot more of our chaps in a shell hole, and finally
reached a dressing station in an old German dugout,
without stopping anything. I was tied up afresh,
and treated most kindly, though there was no room
to sit down. The A.M.C. chaps wanted to know
when they would be relieved —they had been there
a week. ’ I told them the Jocks were coming soon,
for sure. Then we set off across that long winding
path that stretched before us across the wilderness,
and that had been made by the feet of the heavy-


laden stretcher-bearers. I followed behind the next
party that set out. They moved slowly, one of them
carrying a white flag tied to a crooked stick. I had
a fine opportunity of observing the latest and most
uninteresting of battlefields. Mouquet Farm lay to
the rear, but I could not see where it was. As far
as I could see on every side was an unbroken stretch
of desolation, torn up a thousand times by the burst-
ing shells. Nothing else could be seen, unless it was
another little party like our own, half a mile ahead
of us. It was worse than the desert, though, like
in the desert, there were some tiny yellow flowers
as we got further away. Everything seemed to
mock them. I stuck one in my coat and tried to
whistle, but I felt so tearful that the third note
stuck in my throat every time, and I had lost my
goggles. We picked up a wounded stretcher-bearer
on the way, and it was pitiful to see him “duck” in
terror every minute whenever a shell burst near,
while our fellows took no notice of them—their
load was too heavy. We passed the skeleton of
Pozieres cemetery. Some of the steel crosses, that
are common in France, were still recognizable, and a
flag with a Red Cross tied to the remains of a wood,
indicated another dressing station. Another half-inch
and I would have probably stayed there for good,
but all my vital parts were missed, and I am glad I
did not stay at that spot. Really, I suppose it was


i strange thing, but when at last I reached the horse
imbalance and climbed in, at the time it seemed
juite natural, when Ernest got in next and sat along-
side with his leg tied up. We got separated when
we changed to the motors, and I’ve not seen or
leard of him since. I know nothing of the rest of
}ur battalion, but it is an extraordinary comfort to
ne not to be wondering what has become of him.
He will be wild, I guess, when he hears I’ve got to
Blighty with my scratch. We had a tin of coffee
together last. It was warm, with petrol in it, but it
was grand. It was where we had the coffee that
we saw the little strings of Jocks going up across
the broken fields. The Canadians gave us hot tea
at Albert. I have loved the Canadians ever since.
Aiter waiting here a bit, I was dressed and sent
away. At the next place I had some hot soup, and
was sent on again. At the Casualty Clearing
Station, when I told him it was not Fritz’s
bayonet that got me in the back, the corporal
wrote me out an enormous blue crime sheet,
ft rather took me aback, but the doctor tore
it up and simply sent me to bed, so I shall
probably not come home to gaol, that
would be an interesting and ignominious experience.
On Monday morning there were showers mixed
with the sunshine, but before breakfast I was put
to a beautiful train, with glass windows, and I


had nothing to do all day but lie down and watch
the scenery. They do their harvesting in France in
truly primitive style, something like the way we did
our bit of barley last year. We went right past
Etaples, where we lived so long. The big hospitals
there were all full. There were 400 of us taken to one
C.C.S. on Sunday. We went right through to
Boulogne, where I was taken to No. 3 Canadian
Stationary Hospital, just a little late for tea. I
must not now write about the hospital at Boulogne,
about the boys there, or the little sisters, but when I
found that this was another Canadian hospital I
could not but be glad. I was quite surprised on
1 uesday evening, when they gave me a Blighty
shirt and a cap—the great hope of so many—and I
had so recently come across. However, after tea.
I was duly labelled for Dover, and put on board a
beautiful ship, where we had some more tea. We
passed a big shipment of N.Z.’s and a few Aus-
tralians on the pier. They did look fresh and new
after our battalions. We did not sail till about
sunrise, and we had a calm passage across. Wed-
nesday was another glorious day in England, and
the country looked just the same, except the hops
were in blossom, and blackberries and hawthorns
ripening. We had a delightful trip up from Dover.
The Ontario Military Hospital, which is reckoned
one of the best in England, and is an enormous new


place, is not far from where they fetched down the
Zeps. last Sunday. It is about 15 miles from Lon-
don, in Kent. Our long wards are built of asbestos*
and glass—the upper part of the wall is glass, and all
opens so that I can see the green trees and ted
hawthorn out in the field. Beyond them the tiains
go past along a green embankment. 1 hen there are
the soldier boys inside; I’ll have to write a book
about them—the one-armed Black Watch, and the
one with a bandage round his head, who sleeps next
to him, the Tynesider and the Canadians on
crutches. And we have the kindest and most at-
tentive of all M.O.’s. He fetched around plums
for us all this morning. And the tiny sisters with
their big smiles and pretty Canadian accent what
shall I say of them? I shall say nothing, for the
best I could say would not be good enough. T have
been treated well, too, by the Australian Red Cross.
The first day the sergeant took our names, and gave
us cable forms. I sent in a message for you. He
gave us shaving tools, and every mortal kind of
thing we could want, so I am perfectly happy and
contented still to lie in bed and read the news. My
wound does not hurt at all, and I must be getting
fat, they feed me so well. May I conclude with
an old text, “Look before you leap.”
Yours, Gib.
Gib.


Ontario Hospital, September 28.
Dear Mother,
lam getting quite well again now. Charles came
to see me to-day, when I was pulling on my socks
for the first time for two and a half weeks. We
sat in the sun and talked all the afternoon. Autumn
is coming at last, but we have had a lot of bright,
glorious weather. The colours of the trees and
fields are getting richer —the dandelions are still
golden, but on the great house across the wide val-
ley, the creepers covering the walls are already dark
red. I have had a good time here. I have been re-
freshed, and filled with a new hope by the rest and
change of life. I have watched the progress of our
victory. If we only keep on the fight for the right
after the war, in that lasting peace, then, indeed, it al-
most seems the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, or
perhaps it is only the effect of the bayonet that has
made my heart lighter.
Crieff, Scotland, October 10, 1916. On Thurs-
day I left Orpington for London, and thence
to Ludgershall. After waiting there for two
days and being examined and paid, I finally left
on Saturday morning for Birmingham en route
for Scotland. I had an interesting journey from
Birmingham to Stafford. I helped a Welsh chap,
with shell-shock, into the train with his parcels, and
we got amongst a number of civilians. He could


not speak much, but managed to commandeer all
the flowers in the compartment for the hospital
where he was going. He was an old soldier, and
had also been'through this war. He had many
wounds, and had been unable to speak at all for a
long time. He made great friends with a Welsh
woman with flowers, who had been to see her
wounded son. It is good to see the kindness oj
people, even in a railway train; folks are biought
closer together by a common interest -the great
battle—and by a common bond of grief. The
scenery all the way was fine with the approach ot
autumn on the landscape. I decided to stop at
Carlisle that night, and found my way to the Sol-
diers’ Rest”— a queer building that looked if it
once might have been a town hall. About 6 o’clock
the next morning, without waiting to explore C ar-
lisle, T went over to Scotland in company with a
sailor. I lent Jock my corkscrew, and he shared
his breakfast with me. He was one of the new navy
men, and used to be on a trawler. He wanted to
know all about Australian fisheries and dockyards.
I arrived in Perth in time for church. I did not
know the way to the kirk, but followed a string ot
very respectable looking folk, but when they turned
one by one, this way, and that, some to the right,
and some to the left, I became quite confused. At
length I, too, turned down a side street and came


upon a substantial stone church with a stone pave-
ment all round it. I went in, and, being a stranger,
was sent up with the children into the gallery, from
where I got a good view. Down below were the
elders in black coats and white ties grouped around
the altar beneath the high pulpit, where the “meen-
ister” stood, and in a clear voice gave out the num-
ber of the hymn. We had some good tunes, and the
whole service was very impressive. I had not at-
tended any sort of religious ceremony for two
months, and had not heard an organ for six. I
don’t know what kind of kirk it was—l think some
Scotch variety. I found myself stranded in a
strange Scotch city on the Sabbath day, no trains,
no restaurants, no shops. But I went for a walk,
and looked at the many fine buildings. I got some
food at the ice cream shop—a small boy told me
about it. Some boys also told me the school teacher
kept the temperance pub., and I found her reading
a great book of verses. She promised to give me a
bed, and I went for a long walk over the mountains.
Monday was a very nice morning, and after some
very good porridge, fetched by a beautiful girl,
sister of the school teacher, I came on to Crieflf by
the 9.15 train. Later, London, 19th. I cannot now
attempt to describe Criefif, or my stay there, which
was as near as I can conceive to perfection. Some
other time I shall try to write an account of my


holiday. George will be able to tell yon all about
Scotland. I spent one whole day at Oxford with
Dr. and Mrs. Carpenter. lam enjoying myself
immensely.
Yours ever, Gib.
Gib.
November, 1916.
Dear Mother,
I must write you a description of what I saw in
my holidays, and give you some account of my
wanderings. 1 told you last time how I was dis-
charged from hospital, and went to Scotland and
climbed up the great hill at Perth, and looked down
on the city on the banks of the Tay, that went wind-
ing away among the green fields in the valley flooded
with sunshine. Next day I came to Crieff, which is
built on the slopes of the Knock, which towers up
above the town like the old Wombat Hill in Vic-
toria. From the summit of the Knock we can look
out on the Strathern, and the trees and great moun-
tains among which I spent those seven happy days
breathing the free air that blew over the heather-
clad top of the hill, and made me wild with delight.
Down in the valley is the forest with the great thick
bushes of heather, quite different from the short
heather that covers the wild hill-top like a lawn.
Then there is the wooded rise, the clusters of great
oaks and beeches and elms, where the old Roman


camp used to be ; and where I had my lunch among
the moss and toadies under an ancient greenwood
tree. In spite of the invaders’ camp, I call it the
Forest of Arden. Then the open fields slope down
to the river, which was brimmed by the autumn
rain. On its banks I picked a tiny wild pansy and
startled the pheasants, though I was on peace intent.
I also saw a strange animal, with a long tail, dive
into the water and disappear. I think it was a
platypus. I climbed over half a dozen stiles as I
followed up the stream, till I came to the old castle
with the spiral stairs. I penetrated into its gloomy
caverns that used to secure the simple comfort of
some savage laird. In the warm glow of a great
log fire I imagined the chieftain’s banquet spread
on a stormy night in the room where the rain was
now dripping from the stone roof to the floor. Yet
outside or up the spiral steps were the blue sky and
dear bright sun. Wandering across the fields again,
I came to the ancient chapel and the strange library,
whose books the folks both sides of the river have
borrowed for centuries. I was shown the books,
and enjoyed the modern hospitality of the old gran-
ny’s cup of tea. Across the winding Earn the broad
slopes stretched away to the south behind the big
hill forming a branch of the valley. I went up there
along the road one day in the rain under the great
avenue of chestnut trees. T did not go as far as


the next village, but turned in at the gate of another
castle. Here was another avenue of enormous
trees.' but the road was narrower and neglected,
strewn with sticks fallen from the branches that
covered it in. But nothing kept out the rain, and
at times the cold wind developed almost into a
tempest. There were many great trees in the park.
Under the greatest of all was a timid held of deei.
that ran away. The road seemed unending, but I
pushed on against the blast, while the rain was
somehow getting into my very boots and filling them
up. At last I came to the castle. There was a
great wall of rock covered with ivy; on the othet
side of the road there was a steep wooded slope,
almost a precipice. In front of me the road was
blocked by a herd of fierce-looking cattle. My
courage was almost failing as I pushed past the van-
guard of the flock and turned the big doorway
and through it to a paved courtyard. Looking
over a low wall, I saw a garden lying below, but
the wind and driving rain made an extensive view
impossible. To the left was a massive building of
very ancient appearance, but the walls seemed none
the worse for the lapse of ages, and the doorway
was securely barred by great steel gates. The mas-
sive chain and lock were quite formidable. I scanned
it carefully before turning away. While I was try-
ing to make out the date inscribed above the door-


way, the storm blew fiercer than before, and a small
gate in the great barrier silently swung open. For
a moment I watched for it to bang to again on its
hidden hinges, but it paused as if it had been opened
by the hands of some mysterious invisible attend-
ant. I had heard of strangers coming upon such a
castle before, and had a vision of a fine meal set
before me by the same invisible hands. I thought
I had better not indulge in the wine, which might
be “doped,” but I thought it would be ungrateful not
to enter, even at the invitation of the west wind,
so I take courage and advance into the quadrangle
I had seen through the bars. In the centre of the
cobble stones was the famous old-style lamp post.
Across the square was a more modern-looking
building with a lot of windows with drawn blinds,
except one blind which was half up. The narrow
steep steps leading up the back of the old keep
looked uninviting, so I looked out on the open side.
How can my pen describe the most beautiful garden
in the world. There lay below, almost at my feet,
the consummation of human art wrought in living
colours. I was sheltered from the storm now, and
could extend my wondering gaze to the limit of the
botanical triumphs. Now, of course, most of its glory
was gone. The delicate plants were beaten to the
ground, and the petals of the roses were scattered.
The marvellously tonsured yews and allegorical


statues gave the garden an ancient, stately appear-
ance. I even thought it had a royal appearance,
and almost expected to see the red queen coining
down the diagonal path or round the curve of the
lawn. It certainly attracted me. I tried the iron
gate. It opened quite easily, and I went through
where I got a better view. The more I looked, the
more I was enticed. I descended first one flight of
steps, then another in the pouring rain. I could
find no shelter. The thick bushes were soaked
through. I was soon wandering through the
strange garden. I was afraid of marking the neat
gravel paths with my footprints, so I walked on the
grass, fearing all the time I should break its level
surface. My feet now squashed at every step. I
passed the marvellous multiplex sundial in the
centre, and wandered among the shrubby trees in
the background. It was from here I observed a
dark figure on the tower promenade of the castle.
I watched it descend the stately steps, and I had a
feeling that I was no longer alone in the garden.
It, indeed, seemed haunted by some forboding
monster unseen. Assuming boldness, however, I
returned steathily towards the castle by the lefthand
path, but I stopped dead when I discovered that the
cloaked figure was coming crossways down the next
broad traverse. Standing behind a shrub, my first
impulse was to make a dash for the big gate the


traverse led to. I guessed rightly that there was a
gate in the great archway, but I discovered after-
wards it was securely locked. But I did not fall into
such an easy trap. I retreated, not caring now how
my feet cut into the gravel. It seemed a long way,
but I got round the curve of the hedge without
glancing back, and I got over the fence somehow
without catching my greatcoat in the barbed wire.
T felt I had avoided a checkmate, and had escaped
from the garden, but could not escape from the
magic spell. Walking through the wet grass, I got
on to a road which took me past the gateway of the
castle again. Here I passed the baker’s cart, while
the baker himself was shutting to the great heavy
door and securing it on the outside. Even the fierce
oxen, which were now straggling down the road, did
not deter me. I was past them in no time, and did
not pause till I came on the herd of deer once more.
As I paused to watch them “Nutkin” ran across the
path and up a tree. I followed him through the
park and watched him climb a big oak tree, starting
from the outer branches. I believe his home was
there, but he led me away into a bog, and I saw the
rascal no more; but I got out of the bog, and came
in full view of a beautiful lake lying in peace among
the great trees. The tempest seemed not to trouble
it, and sailing on the still water were ten white
swans. As I watched their pure, stately forms, I


once again was free from the enchantment of the
queer garden which, I afterwards discovered, de-
longed to a duchess, and Queen Victoria herself fre-
quently resided at the castle. But the spell was
broken, and I enjoyed my walk back to the town
with the rain at my back. It was not till I had put
on my dry socks, that I learned I should have paid
a shilling at the house opposite the magnificent gate
through which I first entered so boldly into the park.
Perhaps I have deviated a little, but it is all part of
the scenery, and I saw the abode of the wealthy
duchess for no more than I paid to explore the
mansion of the savage Mac of earlier days, or to
cross the bridge built by Agricola. The great
mountain himself, who comes next in the view, says
that, “the country is free to all who can make their
way among the woods, across the river, or up his
own steep sides.”
On the other side of the great hill stretches
the main valley of the Earn; it is narrower
now, and the fields are crossed by great avenues
of trees. There are trees, too, all along the
road which was strewn with falling chestnuts and
yellow leaves. On one side of the road there is
a park in which there is a hollow filled with water.
The other side of this lake, a hill rises steep covered
with trees which were touched with all the richness
of early autumn, every shade of brown and yellow,


set off by a profusion of green foliage. We have
these autumn colours in our orchards at home, but
not in such wild unordered masses. In the midst
of this steep plantation, looking over the loch, is the
private residence of the man who minds the park,
and under some big elm trees, turning to gold, were
a few contented cows feeding. There was one
splendid tree covered with yellow leaves that looked
like a wattle. Then I came to Comrie, an old style
Scotch village. There was the “auld kirk” in the
centre, with its clock and white-washed wall abut-
ting on the street, and its many white-washed cot-
tages. There was McTavish’s shop where he sold
chinaware. There was a policeman opposite the
pub. talking to the old carter, and the street was
filled with children coming home from school, but
there were no soldiers, no signs of war. I do not
mean the country was not affected by the war, but
the village seemed to come under the rustic spell
of its surroundings. The hills were calm and undis-
turbed by the quarrels of men as they had always
been. But the old man with the scythe was think-
ing most of his boy in France. He told me he had
just sent Jock a section of honey as a treat, and
wondered how he would enjoy it. I walked right
through the village, and sat on the queer old stone
bridge and watched the dead leaves carried down by
the stream. Comrie is the town of the three


streams. There are branches from the north and
south, and from the brimming river.
Another day I went further up the gully. I
had a bike. I hunted over a wooded hill
for a “stone circle” that was marked on the
map, and only found it when I had given up
the search. Two stones standing on end in
the middle of a turnip crop on the flat. It was a
grand place for the ancient savages to have their
“templum,” The open field, through which ran
another little clear stream of water, was surrounded
on every side by the hills. A thick forest covered
some of them, and there were sloping fields of hay
above the turnips, right to the foot of the great
towering heather-clad mountain. The road follows
the river between the mountains, and I went through
the gorge undismayed by the fuminous stone tank
till I came to the loch. Beyond the golfers’ course
the space between the two highland ridges is com-
pletely filled with fresh water, except for a bit of
an island famous as the home of some savage mur-
derers of olden days. Those were grand old days
the savages only murdered their own friends.
The mountain above where the aged golfers were
playing is famous, too. It was down its steep mossy
slopes that old St. Fillan used to slide when he was
guardian of the place. There is a fine road along
the edge of the lake, and I went like fun, only
43
Soldier-Student


stopping when it came on to rain to eat my dinner,
which was to be kept dry. I sat by the edge of the
water, and refreshed myself from the cold waves.
It was such a lake, I imagined, where Sir Walter’s
famous lady used to sail in her little dinghy. The
rain stopped, and I went on past Lochearnhead to
the other side, and finished my dinner on Queen
Victoria’s seat. 1 think the Queen used to sit there
to admire the view. It was certainly worth her
while. I very much liked the road on the other side
of the loch. It was one of those more unfrequented
roads which it seems natural for an Australian to
delight in. It was a good road for a cycle, if not for
a motor —many little hills and a thousand small
bridges over tiny rushing burns. The road almost
dodged amongst the big trees and the rocks, often
running right to the edge of the lake. The moun-
tains on the right, with their rough sides covered
with bracken and furze, seemed to go up to the sky,
and overruled the whole landscape. I only remem-
ber one house on this side, and you can judge its
character from the fact that there was a regular
zoological garden to contain the “dawgs,” and all
fishing was preserved. But I must not forget the
view of the whitewashed cottages, with the roses
round the door, on the other side from the Queen’s
seat. There I left the lake among its trees and
mountains. When I got to Comrie again I took


the other road, which wanders away among the
fields and hedges. The finest sight was when cross-
ing the foot of the big hill, to look back at the view
of Crieff. It looked an ideal city, almost built on
the slope, with the great knock lifting its noble head
above it. Even the spires of the churches that the
inhabitants had built seemed to stoop in subjection
to their own bracken-covered hill, which reaches up
to the free fresh air of heaven as it stands with its
easy dignity. When looking from the top of the
knock I could hear the merry sounds of the school
children at play, borne upwards by the wind, and
the distant bell rang, and all was quiet again. You
would like the wee Scotch kiddies; they are bon.
But now the children are at work again. Look in
the other direction, behind the hill, down into the
great hollow that separates us from the highlands
those great steep treeless hills, where the braoken
has given place to heather and moss. There is no
town there, only another great estate, with a fine
house and a gateway and lodge to match. I got a
fine view of it about sunset from the_ other side. It
was the more wonderful, because it was almost
momentary, just as I was turning on the top of the
down grade on the bike. I was not permitted to
gaze long, as the hill was steep and very wet, and
there was a strong wind behind from the north.
Yet I have a remarkable impression of some stately


stonework, fields, and haystacks, a little stream and
the trees, and a shower passing across the valley,
with those great encircling hills behind, and the light
of the setting sun. There had been a rainbow ahead
of me as I climbed the hill, and now the light of
evening drew me down into the valley. I was glad
I went that way, for I saw the old Roman bridge by
the mill and walked over it. It is covered with
grass and ivy. The light was almost failing as I
went round the back of the knock, but that is the
time for cycling on a quiet leafy road. Before I
got home to tea the cool fresh air had penetrated
to the inmost of my being. It was the Sabbath Day
the day I went to the Sma’ Glen, and before I got
home many were going to the kirk again. But I
must tell you about the Sma’ Glen. It is a little
gully only in comparison with the great hills which
it divides. It is the entrance up into the highlands.
The cold wind bringing showers from the north
was so strong I could hardly ride down the hill.
The showers as they came made a thousand little
streams rushing down the mountain side, and once
the rainbow stood above the mountain top. I saw
the stone where the old saint used to sit. I have
forgotten his name, unless it was St. Dunstan. At
the entrance of the pass is an old Roman fort. It
was on the main road, and I could see where they
had made their position very strong. From here


we look down on the stream. The Almond is
swollen by the rain, and as it rushed down its stony
bed the white water looked very pretty from above.
Just below the old fortress some green fit
bordered it. But the stream alone seemed to divide
the two great ridges that sloped up from its banks,
and it seemed to defy anyone who would entet the
pass from below.
It was in the morning I went to church and
save all the young school gents come in with
their top-hats and gloves. And I heard the
choirboys sing. They were Scotch boys, every one.
It was there that Toby used to sing, and now that
he has fallen the Scotch boys sang his chant. His
father played it on the organ while his mother and
I stood and sang “Te Deum Laudamus.” It was a
beautiful Sabbath morning after the heavy pouring
rain. But the next morning was brighter still. As
I said farewell to my kind friends the sun shone
out with all ancient Phoebus’ splendour. He touched
the highest peaks with his rays, and they shone out
among the lingering clouds, and I left them clothed
in snow. It was the last touch needed to_ set off
those seven glorious days among those bonnie green
hills and vales, now flooded with sunshine. And
now I come to my last page, for my time, too, is at
an end. I have not written what I set out to write.
I have told only half my tale. Too much has come


between, and much of what I have seen is inde-
scribable. I cannot now tell of the rest of my wan-
derings and complete my holiday; but I have written
about Edinburgh and Oxford and London to vari-
ous folks. At some other time, perhaps, I shall
write you more of merry London and the “sweete
Themmes." The memories of what T have seen shall
go with me. I did think that the wild mountains,
the quiet splendour of Isis’ city, the great temples,
the music, and the art of London had destroyed
the charm of these southern fields and villages; but
no. They may lack in grandeur or in stateliness, but
their beauty still remains, like the beauty of a
flower after looking at gorgeous paintings. The
scenery is sensitive, but its harmony is ever unde-
stroyed. When I came back from my adventures
from seeing the most beautiful garden in the world,
from seeing the Thames and the central city of the
Empire, there were the steep slopes of the green
rolling downs, brown and yellow leaves falling from
most of the trees, leaving only the ivy and ever-
green shrubs and a few scattered fir trees, except
down where the stream went winding among the
green meadows; the elm trees there were green and
slightly touched with gold, and the roses lingered
at the cottage door, and the chrysanthemums, more
sober than the blooms of spring. The hawthorns,
leafless, kept their dark red berries still. There I


saw it all, the loveliest village of the plain, as the
sun came out before he set, and shone through the
cool mist that filled the vale and cast on all an
autumn glow. Now the last leaves have fallen from
the elms, but the meadows are getting greener every
day. The evergreen shrubs that surround the
“decent church” are more conspicuous now. But 1
have seen them all white with snow, and now Jack
Frost is painting them in the moonlight till
“Phoebus lingering in his car” in the morning shall
drive him away. It is something like winter, I
reckon, when all the mud is frozen hard and the
hoar frost sparkles in the sun. Hiems recurrit iners,
and we must go and face the mud till that “Aprille
with his showres soote” cometh round again.
Yours ever, Gin.
Gib.
London, November 5. 1916.
Dear Mother,
I am haying four days’ leave from Codford. I
went down to Harefield to see Ernie, who has been
sent there and is doing well. I must tell you how
I took a chum to the opera. I had an idea on Friday
of going to the world famous waxworks (opera
waxia), but, picking up a Morning Post at tea-
time, I saw there was grand opera at Aldwich, and
Faust” that night. T asked a sergeant having tea
where Aldwich was. He did not know, but Tommy,


pointing with his fork, said it was just round here.
Moreover, he said he was going that way directly.
I had set my heart on “Faust,” so we set off in
the dark together, and Tommy's pal came with us.
Tommy wished he could have come to the opera,
and I, being a bit shy of the great theatre, wished I
had a companion. Finding his deterrant was purely
a financial one, I asked him to come and show me
the way in the dark. They both seemed delighted,
and so we caught a ’bus. We sat in the rain on the
top, and I paid a penny each. When after a while
we came to the terminus I was disgusted to find we
had been going in the wrong direction. I was deter-
mined, however, and enquired the way myself. We
had a miserable walk down the whole length of the
Strand in the rain. When we arrived there I asked
at a window in a great hall what tickets they had.
Nothing under 8/, exclusive of war tax, and I had
two broke companions. While I was deliberating,
however, a very respectable young lady approached
us, and asked if one of us would come with her, as
she had a spare reserved seat and her companion
had not turned up. As I knew my companions did
not care too much for the show, and needed more
to find somewhere to sleep, I thought it was a rare
scheme. But I was too slow; one of my companions
whose ’bus fare I had paid volunteered like a shot,
and accompanied the beautiful lady, who said we


might get cheaper seats in the back street. I was
still determined on the show, and we just managed
to get standing room at half a crown each and war
tax. Even from our position the play was simply
grand; but I could not escape from the feeling that
I was accompanied by one of those miserable beings
who, apart from being a deserter from His
Majesty’s Army, was cadging a living from the
generosity of overseas troops and the kindhearted-
ness of English ladies. I had only the poor satisfac-
tion of knowing that he was unable to appreciate the
scenes over which his very presence cast a gloom.
I believe his criticism of the grand tragedy after-
wards came from his heart. He said: “It was rather
tame, wasn’t it?” But I went home to my cheap,
snug bed, happy and well pleased. The recollection
of my cowardly, unappreciative companion has
almost gone already, while I shall never forget Lon-
don’s grand opera, or the lovely Marguerite, with
her sweet voice, standing in her long white gown,
triumphant over the power of the evil one. And
the picture helps me to keep my faith shining when
otherwise I might be depressed by the great tra-
gedies of this fair earth. The next day I came out
to Hampstead, and had dinner with Mrs. Mitchell,
who has persuaded me to stay here ever since. It
is now the Sabbath morn, and I am going to the kirk
with them directly.


Later —We had a special memorial service at the
Roslyn Hill Chapel. It was written by Mr. Har-
grove. In this church they are going to erect a
memorial to Stopford Brooke, for he used to preach
a great deal there, and his own church no longer
exists. We had a splendid sermon by Mr. Gow,
whom I first met at Oxford. He is a lecturer at
Manchester College. Among the congregation was
Miss Brooke Herford, to whom I was introduced.
Her father used to be the minister. Mr. Gow read
an article by a soldier, who said we live not by
munitions alone or sympathy, but by fellowship. He
said what the soldier wished was that the people at
home should have such an esteem of our country
that we should not ignore its faults, but strive to
rectify them. lam sure what he said is true. lam
encouraged more than anything by reading about
men and women who are fighting our battle for
England and Australia at home. Those at home
have opportunities that we have not of showing
their love, not only for their country, but for all our
highest and noblest national ideals. On Sunday
Miss Mitchell took me to the old lawyers’ church in
the Inner Temple. It is a very beautiful chapel
which used to belong to the knights. There are the
effigies of the old Crusaders. They lie in their battle
togs with their legs crossed. Those were the good
old days of individualistic war. To fight was part


of their religion. Before they went to battle they
used to pray in their old temple that with divine help
they might live and die for some great cause, and
yet keep their character unstained. On Sunday
evening I went to see Cousin Denise again. T talked
about the war and politics, etc., with her and her
husband all night, and stayed till the next morning.
Denise’s husband is an architect and a reject, and
wants to come out to Australia. It is a great treat
to me to sit by the fire in an ordinary civil home once
again. Next day I went crazy on architecture and
antiquities, especially of an ecclesiastical character.
I went to see St. Bartholomew the Great. It is the
best Norman edifice in England. A captain told
me where to stand to get the best view. There were
lovely lilies on the altar at the other end. I believe
they were L. Longiflora. The famous tomb of the
old builder was unfortunately sandbagged, and we
had to give 6d. to pay for the sandbagging. Strafe
den Kaiser. In the noisy city, near the goods station,
and the Butchers’ Row. and the War Hospital, it
was very beautiful and impressive among the mas-
sive arches of those ancient sacred stones. I had to
come back again in the afternoon to see inside the
old Charterhouse. It is a sort of destitute asylum
lor old men. Soldiers are invited to see the old
buildings at certain times, and one of the officials
seemed delighted to show me round. In one of the


halls I saw memorials of Wesley, whose picture T
saw at Oxford. I think, in Trinity. Then we went
into the chapel, where the fifty-two comfortable old
men must go once a day. There I read the inscrip-
tion, which is the motto of the place, “Deo dante
dedi.”
I saw many other churches in that old city, and
some T went inside of. I saw St. Ethelreda and Bow
and the Temple, where Campbell used to preach,
and at last came to St. Paul’s, and heard the close
of the evening service under its great dusky arches.
I shall write something about St. Paul’s in another
letter. I tried to find Bow again when the hour
was going to chime, but got lost at the critical
moment. I believe T forgot about the anthem at the
Lawyers’ Church. It was a very beautiful anthem,
mostly solo and duet for two small boys. It was
very effective in that ancient temple, the sweet young
voices of those heroes—the Templers, surely, of the
future, singing their hymns. At the finish all the
choir joined in, and their voices filled the little
temple with their song of praise. You will think I
am cracked altogether on churches; but I really do
not go much by them; they only fill me with sad-
ness. It is the same all through this beaufiful
country. The characteristic of tbe scenery here is
the spire of the parish church towering above the
trees or surmounting the hilltop. It is the centre


round which the villages are built; but, coming into
the village, it is not the centre round which the
people live. The obscure chapel is often more im-
portant, and the service that seemed most to repre-
sent the village life was held out under an elm
tree on a summer’s evening. I was very much
impressed by the women in London. It is strange,
perhaps, but London is above all the city of women.
I have told you how I liked the theatre and saw the
beautiful lady. The building I liked best of all was
the Police Court. On the top of its high dome is the
figure of a woman. It is a symbolic figure holding
a balance in her left hand, and in her right she holds
a sword. There is a splendid view from the gate-
way of the market place, where they sell the meat.
You can see the cross on the top of St. Paul s lifted
up above the great city; but in front of it, above the
other buildings, too, is Old Bailey’s dome, with the
sword pointing to the sky, not held by a Tommy
or an armoured knight, but uplifted in a woman s
outstretched hand. So much for the big city,
was going there again on Friday, but I just see that
all leave is stopped. I shall probably go later.
Yours, Gib.
Gib,
Codford, December 4. 1916.
Dear Mother,
I was going to write yon a long letter last night,


Sunday, and tell you something about my pals here;
but while I was " sitting talking with one of my
newest friends, a sergeant came and called us away
to march to the village, where something unusual
was happening. There we waited about in the
street for a couple of hours while the rank and file
had their Sunday night’s thirst quenched with ale.
At 9 o’clock the doors were closed, and we fell in
again, but were not sent home. We waited till our
commander and a lot of other officers had some
refreshment in another room. The only incident
approaching a disturbance was when a highly
intoxicated red tape field officer, using language he
had picked up somewhere, ordered our captain to
double up when he was in no fit condition to do so;
while we waited in the freezing night, wondering
what we were there for, till Sirius was high and
clear above the hill. When I got home again the
lights were long since out, our stove was burning
low; but I could see by the pale moonlight that the
hut was almost empty —all my mates had gone away
to France. We get used to making friends and
parting, but still we like to say farewell. There
was Pedler, the cornet player, the farmer’s son;
little Mac, the school teacher, and his pal Barney
O’Conner, from the wayback, the man who came
farthest to enlist, and has nothing to grumble about,
except, of course, saluting; and there is the boy who


left school to enlist. But we are all going the same
way, lam going in a day or two. lam strong and
well again now, and in good spirits. I often hear
the tin band calling, calling, and before Christmas,
that happy Christmas, I expect to be marching again
with the bedraggled battalion, with all that is left of
the old platoon. I was writing yesterday to Lady
Bunting, of London, who seems to be a half-second-
cousin of mine. Grannie Jacob was her grand-
mother’s half-sister. Her husband was a knight and
editor of the Contemporary Review. She heard
about me from Mrs. Mitchell.
Codford, November 8, 1916.
Dear Netta,
When I was up in London the other day I thought
1 would try and buy something there for you, but I
got muddled up among the great shops. The
windows fairly dazzle with their gold and other
things that glitter. I liked the picture shops best,
but in the crowd it was hard to think which were
best to buy. I never could decide which one was
most typical of the great city or which the most suit-
able to send you for Christmas. When it was nearly
time to go home I came to a bookshop. There I
wanted to buy everything. There were so many
different kinds that there I became bewildered again.
I needed to stay quietly and choose the things, but


I had been wandering and hurrying, so that all my
patience was gone. I hope you get the little books
that I at last chose and sent. The little book of
Oxford is just to show you the pretty places I saw
there. We saw the views in every direction from
the top of the Sheldonian. The good dome of this
building was built by an astronomer, who afterwards
built St. Paul’s. I went to St. Paul’s after the book-
shop. I got there just as the daylight was failing
and the boys were singing Amen. It was very
beautiful, and I soon regained my peace of mind.
When the service was over, I walked down the great
building, listening to the organ, which increased in
sound as I came under the dome, till it seemed to
fill the whole cathedral. Then it ceased, and I went
away and left the great dim building. I walked
down among all those grand old buildings again, and
in the quiet moonlight I said good-bye to the great
city, and went back to camp. I was going back to
the station across Kensington Gardens, but I was
tired of rushing about, and contented myself with
thinking of the old garden and gum-tree at home.
Next time Santa Claus comes round I guess we will
all be in that happy land where the gum-trees grow;
but now we must make ourselves happy in our
strange circumstances, and hope for the good times.
Good-bye, Chuck,
Chuck,


France, February 12.
Dear Mrs. H. ,
I had a letter from Mother yesterday, written on
Christmas Day at the beach. They took the babies
down to the seaside. It is very good to be remem-
bered in such happy places, and reminded of the old
Christmas spirit. My Christmas Day 25th of
January—was brightened by a box of presents,
packed by two little girls in the West. Mother told
me, too, about the Sunday School break-up, and
how she went to the evening service. lam glad the
day went off so well, and that you all sat in a great
circle. I am so glad, too, that you went for our
walk down by the river. Mother and George also
went there, and had tea at the kiosk. It i eminded
me of lovely Sunday afternoons when we could not
keep our youngsters shut up in a dingy room to
learn about God, but took them over the bridge to
give them some Nature study in the fiesh air ano a
little of our friendship. I do remember with great
delight the days we spent at Port I
remembered riding down there in the moonlight
—it was not so ghastly then and T mended the
bike with a hairpin. There was a special bril-
liance in the sunshine on the bright blue sea
the day we rode home, and in the beauty of
the white sandhills and green paddocks and the
ploughed fields; while the vineyards wore their


autumn dress —there is nothing like the vines in
England. I have lost another of my old friends—
the best of all the High School boys. But my loss
can scarcely make me downhearted. I started to
write to him once, but never finished the letter. Then
I heard he had been transferred, and tried to find
his new address, which I at last discovered in the
A.H.S. Magazine, and the same evening some one
told me he was killed. Then I thought of our visit
to his native town (Port Elliot) with the Christian
Union students, the day he left Australia, and how
we swam in the great breakers of the ocean near
which he lived as a boy; and I remembered again
all the songs we used to sing, for he was our Arts
organist, and used to play “Gaudeamus” and all the
Arts songs. And I can hear him now going down
the street singing “Here we are again.” I was glad
his crew beat mine on the river, and he gave me
first drink out of his prize cup. We did English at
the ’Varsity together. Fancy learning “Lycidas”
with a friend who has fallen. And one night we
remained after lecture to discuss Wordsworth’s
“Ode on Intimations.” It is strange how I was
thinking of the same ode when I wrote the first page
of this just before I heard of my friend’s death.
I was very glad to get the school magazine the same
time as your letter. Reading the review of the old
year, it seemed not only a year of war, but for some


a year of school—an epoch-making year in their
young lives. The class notes showed a splendid
school spirit. I wish there were some such spirit in
the army —of enthusiasm, of comradeship, and
devotion. If Dorothy goes to the University, I hope
she will join the Christian Union. I shall never
forget the first year of Bible study I did, the more
so now the man who used to lead us so beautifully
in prayer has fallen in the good fight. I had an-
other good military friend. He was a fine fellow,
and was made sergeant of our platoon. He made
me feel glad I had come over when first I joined
the platoon, and the other day in the dark dug-out
he welcomed me back. With him I did not mind
being on the dangerous post. We became very good
friends one day. It was the day I found him
wounded on the snow. I had never bandaged any-
one before, but when I watched him smile with my
bandage on his head I felt I had not come in vain.
How proud we were to bear him on our shoulders
off the snow in the pale moonlight, for night fell
before we reached the warm dressing station.
Three boys from another company helped take him
there. Our greatcoats were on the stretcher, but we
did not mind the cold, and went home with glad
hearts when they told us our patient was comfort-
able, and being sent away. But he never reached
Blighty. He reached the springtime sooner than


that, but for me there is ever a bright patch upon
the snow.
39th C.C.S., France, December 26, 1916.
Dear Mother,
We had a queer Christmas yesterday; but, for a
war Christmas, we had plenty of comfort—a tent
to keep out the rain, about a dozen blankets, and a
bottle of beer. Who can estimate the luxury of
these in a country such as this? I stayed in bed
all day, and am celebrating the “day after” in the
conventional manner. lam here with measles. This
is a kind of infectious disease hospital. I have
been here five days, and shall probably miss the next
stunt, a fact which might please you more than me.
Though I am still in bed, I am not troubled with
anything much but a cough. After dinner in this
country it is too dusk to see the lines for writing.
Candles are the only consolation in this land in the
winter. On Christmas Day 1 was put off sick diet
on to ordinary stew, and I quite enjoyed it. We also
had beer and cake for tea. I got a fine Christmas
box from the Australian Red Cross. It had heath
and wattle on it, and baronia, a great red flower,
and patriotic flags, with greetings. Inside the tin
were smokes and toffee and cards. As I do not
care for tobacco, I had to eat the toffee, and then
try the cards. It was more than a year since I had


played patience, so it was quite strenuous exercise
trying to remember how to do it. My new Christ-
mas present evoked quite a lot of pleasant memories
of olden days, for I have never played cards in the
army. I forgot about the pouring ram and the
roar of the guns outside, and my mind went back to
the land where the sun-flowers never fade. It
seemed strangely mixed up with the enchanting land
in the old broken Jap. book, and strangely mixed,
too, with fairyland. When I first went to England
under the spell of the skylarks’ singing, I wondered
how I had lived so near to heaven and never knew.
Now I wondered more, for I seemed to have lived
for years long ago in fairyland—that curious place
where frost and snow are never known, where the
guns never seem to roar. The magpies wandered
among the sunflowers and queer chrysanthemums in
search of worms; pretty spiders (orchids) came
growing up under the gum trees; the dodo and peli-
can came floating through the air. There was no
mud anywhere. When it rained it only made the
golden croci grow. But the roses were the wrong
colour. The ace of diamonds had painted them red.
My temperature must have gone up again, and the
memory of some old sickness, some fairy tale dis
torted by pain long ago, filled me now with peculiar
delight. But all this was gone the next day, when
I remembered that patience needed two packs of
cards. -


France, Sunday, March 11, 1917.
Dear Mother,
We are still “resting,” and line it is to be away
from the sound of the guns and the fear of the
shells. It has been a beautiful day. 1 sat in the
sun this morning, and finished my book about the
shell girls, which I like very much. This evening I
received an Inquirer from London, and read it as 1
wandered down the road towards the sunset, and
listened to the blackbirds singing in the leafless
wood. Then I came back to service. We had a
good sermon on “the great Cross” and “the little
wooden crosses” so common out here, and about
“loving the things for which they died.” Then we
sang “For all the saints,” and finished with “Abide
with me.” When it was time to go home the moon
was not yet up, but the sky was clear. Sirius and
Orion ruled the still night. In the calmness the
trees seemed less sad. They seemed full of buds
that ere long would break. Last Sunday we had a
church parade. I was in the brigade choir, and
when we sang “Stand up for Jesus” it quite re-
minded me of the old Morphelt Street Brigade. But
we could not get as much noise out of the 13th.
In the afternoon I went to see Den at the next
village. We spent the evening with Randall and
his signallers. They lit a great fire in a tin, and we
all sat round it and sang, and passed round some


biscuits. Tt was quite late when I walked home
again, and there I found all your letters. Ernie
had been on a pilgrimage elsewhere. He has
cleared out altogether now, and is in some queer
hospital for crook legs. T also met Charles last
week; he was spending a few days in the opposite
village. He is lance-corporal. I have been back in
the ranks in this army for a year now. T felt ter-
ribly disappointed the other day when they called
for applications to learn to fly at Oxford—all but
privates may apply. However, it is better to be
bottom dog. Some day T shall learn philosophy at
Oxford instead. Wren was an astronomer at
Oxford, and built the great Sheldonian—then took
to architecture. I am very glad you all liked the
little books T sent, and the story of the wise men, Tt
was our Brigade’s birthday to-day, and we had
Christmas pudding. It was “Lion” brand, and so
very good. T think T never told you how T managed
to finish reading “Thomas Wingfold” just before
leaving England. T enjoyed it very much. Tt re-
minded me of the “North Wind.” And at the end,
too, T remembered it was written by the same cranky
mind as “Princess and Curdie”—about the first book
T ever read by myself, and the best. I had never
thought of George being in England so soon as this,
but I got your letter of January 4, 1917, via Crief,
to-day, and you say he has gone, We are all at it


again. But it is for the right, and God helps us keep
true. So you must be cheerful and keep hoping.
Your ever-loving boy, Gib.
Gib.
Dug-out, France, March 31, 1917.
Dearest Mother,
Many happy returns of the day. This letter will
perhaps be in time for the returns. But I hope you
are having a happy birthday to-day. It is the last
day of winter for me, and lam glad. Already the
skylarks seem to have more joy in their voices,
though they always sing. Mrs. Wiggs’ philosophy
is true. Even in the worst muddy places, some birds
always sing. But next month all the “Smale fowles
maken melodic,” and as old Chaucer used to say,
keep one eye open all night. T enjoyed reading both
Lorna’s little books that she sent me for my birth-
day, and am looking forward to finishing them.
Our dug-out is not a bad one, and is inhabited to-
day by Manthorpe and me. He is a sergeant now.
and I am very glad he has been put into our platoon,
which is a new one. He is a jolly good chap.
Though I have grown, as you write, into such a
great man and lump of a soldier (perhaps), I never
seem such. I still believe in the Spirit of the Child,
and believe more than ever the motto; “Except ye
turn and become as a little child.” And I still
remember “they that are slow to anger are better


GIBBIE
1896


than the mighty” and “he that ruleth his spirit than
he that taketh a city.” Will you give my love to little
Net?
Your ever-loving boy, Gib.
Gib.
P.S.—Easter Sunday. Things have changed
somewhat, nevertheless I will send this as a birth-
day greeting, which I was unable to post before.
We took the village on Monday. Armitage’s com-
pany, with D., took the village, and he was killed,
T was a bayonet man; we shot the snipers. Of
course I hurt my leg (on a bayonet) as we were
being relieved by the 49th at night. Now T am in the
Royal Surrey Hospital, with a lovely lady playing
sweet music on an instrument, and afternoon tea
with cake. Heaven may be more beautiful if gum
trees grow wild. But this is not my last letter.
Maybe I will perish by the bayonet next time.
England, Good Friday. April 6, 1917.
Dear Mother,
T had breakfast in bed this morning—two plates
of porridge, with milk and sugar, an Easter egg with
salt and pepper, and unlimited bread and butter
and tea. From the warm room the snow falling
ontide the glass window looked almost pretty. But
it was a beautiful day yesterday when we came
across the fresh clean sea and sat on the deck in


the sunshine. It is a beautiful great room where
T am now, that might have been an art gallery, with
oak floor and great palms and blue pot plants. I
think it is a Red Cross Hospital. It is at Guildford,
wherever that is, and seems to be run by the Surrey
V.A.D. Anyhow, there are many good women to
look after us, and we lack for nothing. I need not
tell you how we went into action and took the
village, and covered ourselves with mud and glory
—you would not understand the glory of it
perhaps. It is enough that I was deliveied
from the battle as usual by an unseen hand,
and caught my leg on an unseen bayonet. It
belonged to one of the famous 49th, who had just
come to relieve us after a hard day; and so I was
sent back to the camp with the rest all that
remained of them —of our battalion. On a day
when everything conceivably disgusting occurred,
how could'l have more disgustingly hurt myself?
Still, while I was waiting for tea I thought I had
better get my leg tied up, and the wretched fellow
sent me on without any tea; but I got some break-
fast at Pozieres. Will write more soon. Best love
to all.
Yours, Gib.
Gib.
P S. —I think Ross Manthorpe is captured.


Guildford, Surrey, April 14.
Dear Mother,
It is Sunday again, and I am still in bed. But
my wound is perfectly clean, and is healing quickly.
Meanwhile our great battle is receding into the past,
and l am recovering from the shock of my re-entry
into civilization. Our new offensive has eclipsed all
previous war, and the friendship of our latest ally
gives us a new interest and a new hope. Later.
I got your letter this morning. You wrote from the
verandah on a most beautiful Australian summer
morning; I •am now replying sitting out in the sun-
shine on a beautiful English spring afternoon. 1
have been out in a bath chair all day. It is too late
and warm now for the fresh scents of the morning.
All the hillside is green, though the trees look dead;
but the air is full of the song of birds, and the trees
at close view are covered with buds. The songs of
the blackbirds make me think far more than they
ever did in Flers that the fig trees and vines are
sprouting and the almonds turning green. I think it
is Zephyrus at last, “inspiring the tendre croppes
with his sorte breeth.” Just here there are two
small boys, with white collars and red caps, digging
away for all they are worth with spade and fork,
making a place to grow beans on the land round our
“school.” We live in the country school for girls.
Every bit of spare ground is being dug up to plant


spuds and beans. We are going to win the war.
Thanks very much for Mr. West’s speech you sent.
He is one of our good old teachers. His eldest
son used to have our higher class at A.H.S. It
seems very hard to have lost so many of the finest
of our young teachers. I saw Capt. Kayser’s grave
the other day, though I had not time to go over to it
—a white cross in the midst of the desolate up-
heaved earth. He used to teach me, you know, at
school. He was no Hun. He used to teach us
about the gum trees and the growth of freedom in
England, and I remembered when I saw his cross
how he used to recite “The Revenge,” and taught
us to say “Flower in the crannied wall.” Then there
are all my own companions, boys I used to study
English with— all the great English po?ts. I have
often thought about Mr. West’s concluding verse
about the mariner, the young mariner. They had
faith not like our bon unionists, who afraid their
good cause will suffer, go not on the great adventure
for the fundamental cause of Right. They trusted
the future, and went down to the haven gladly.
Surely the future will provide men to go out into
even the furthest parts of the land with the same
enthusiasm and the same spirit of adventure; and
women, too, encouraged by the grand old pioneers,
when the cause for which they have died is won.
If ever I come home again it will be my great ambi-


tion “to carry on with the good work” which they
have left. 27th. We had a concert in our ward
the other night in honour of Anzac Day. I had not
heard a concert since last November, and this
seemed to me one of the finest 1 had ever heard.
We had the stage decorated with green and Austra-
lian flags, and the sun shone on them through the
windows. I started walking yesterday. It was
the most glorious day we have had. In the after-
noon I went for a drive in the dog carriage. One
of the Red Cross ladies has a sort of wheeled chair
with a pony, and takes some one every day. She
took me to the top of the hill, and showed me some
grand views, and pointed out the spires of the
Charterhouse, and on the top of the highest hill
amongst the trees the spot where the Pilgrims used
to “go on pilgrimage.” I shall send you in exchange
for Mr. West’s speech a verse out of a newspaper I
picked up on a hillside in France. There are many
fine things in the papers over here—too many for
sending them home. The press has been revived.
They reckon it is the press militant rather than the
church militant that is the great national force of
to-day. All the churches are still too much bound
by their old forms to be able to meet the new situ-
ation. The same journal that this cutting is from
showed the other day how the effect of the great
American service at St. Paul’s was marred because


they could not find a really suitable prayer in the
whole book. Then it made a fine appeal to the
Church to “come over and help us’' to make old
England a new England. It must awake to the new
spirit of Freedom, and forget the old theological dis
cussions in its zeal for national unity and the res.!
principles of Christianity. I have been interested,
however, in reading about the great religious revival
over in France. I have not seen anything of it my-
self, but I can quite believe all they claim. There
are a great many other things you would be inter-
ested in in this country. It is strange to be so near
the heart of all these great revolutions. In the midst
of the economy campaign the woman’s movement has
become quite different. They are having a great
baby campaign all over England. They are inventing
and constructing co-operative kitchens all over the
country, with scientific cooks. They are at last
going to put another three million acres of the
country under crop. Everyone is growing his own
beans, and they are trying to abolish afternoon tea.
It was a change to read of the sea battle the other
night, when Evans, one of Scott s gallant gentlemen,
and another chap beat six German boats. The
wounded helmsman brought his boat round and ran
into a Fritz to sink her. When a great lot of the
enemy rushed on to our boat they were met and
conquered by a middy of nineteen years, who had


lost an eye already. The middy had been a London
boy scout, and had been wounded just two years
before at the Landing. But I have been reading and
writing too much, and am not getting on with my
sock. Much love for you and the girls. Gib,
Gib.
Guildford, Surrey, Friday, April 80, 1917.
Dear Day,
T have just taken to knitting again, as it seems I
am always going to be in bed. I have a thin mixture
of blue and brown, which is much too beautiful for
soldiers’ socks. T have got quite out of practice of
knitting, as well as having “trench” hands. I re-
ceived a beautiful long letter from you the other
day, and will endeavour to reply to it. Thank you
very much for it. and also for wishing me a merrv
Christmas, though, as you say, it does seem a long
while yet till Christmas. Many others also have
written about Christmas. They were all written in
October. 1916, All say there will be no peace bv
then. Some think there will be no Christmas, and
few think it will be merry. These days I reckon we
need Christmas most, and it is fine to receive greet-
ings long before. We look forward. True, I did
not have much gay feasting on Christmas Day. T
remained in bed in the isolation camp, and had my
first taste of that “ordinary” unalterable stew : .
which composed our dinner for the next couple of


weeks as well. But even such a day has its smiles
and happiness and memories of past festivities and
thoughts of home. I thought of you getting up
early to pick sunflowers and deck the house witn
roses. The Spirit of Christmas loves to come to
the homes that seem empty, where sorrow and
anxiety have been, and leave the sprinklings of his
touch upon the threshold, which give peace as
the world giveth. And as we think of past Christ-
mas times and holidays we think also of the chil -
dren. We hope all the little ones will be happy
playing in the sunshine and on the seashore. There
is always Hope at Christmas. In autumn, when the
red leaves fall from the trees and the rosebuds
struggle against the frost, ami the snow begins
covering all the earth with its ghastly pallor,
matched only by the dull, unbroken stretch of sky.
what are we to look forward to, then, if not to
Christmas, that happy time when we may laugh at
the cold and suffering? Because Love is able to
endure all things and to overcome all things. In the
winter we must fill our minds with joy and merri-
ment, as at Easter we think of the long days of
suffering that have been overcome by gladness which
precedes the spring, when the sun shines warm and
the small birds sing, not the sweet patient songs they
used to sing in France, but profuse strains of un-
premeditated twittering. I think that before Christ-


mas we shall have begun a thousand years of peace,
and I wish you now the happiest Christmas of all.
You also mention about the political trouble in
Australia and the result of the referendum. It is
all very difficult and disheartening; but I dont
think Australia is going to the bad altogether and
turned down what is right. It is mostly they have
failed to realize the situation. They have not yet
been stirred. And there are many motives com-
mendable that caused people to say No. It is the
same with the soldiers. We don’t wish for any
“men from Australia.” “We are enoughwe have
enough malingerers. Most of our men have been
sadly disillusioned. They expected to be treated
fair, as gentlemen almost; they see the shocking
muddling and fooling and the waste of man-power as
well as other things. They understand very few of
the operations, and have very little idea of the real
issue. I often wonder what it is. No one cares for
Victory, all they want is Peace the soonei the
better. They want to get home anyhow, and they
congratulate anyone who was not carried away by
the windy recruiting speeches. It made me think
the other day, not that I was sorry I was there, but
I was sorry I had advocated bringing anyone there
who had never thought it his duty. I felt I did not
want to be there again. I would do anything to
get out of it. That feeling has taken a long time


to go. Of course, it really is they do not understand,
and reason will not work in unnatural circum-
stances. We had a very interesting debate the other
day on Conscription, and I made my first speech
since being of age. Great interest is taken in
the question. The padre was keen on con-
verting me. We gave some convincing speeches;
the audience was most attentive. The opposition
could only rake up a few arguments, mostly incor-
rect, and nearly all very poor. I don’t think there
could have been a clearer case. We did not finish
till the next night, when I was on duty, and they
nearly all voted “No.” This, of course, was only a
mock debate. Since I have been writing this letter
1 have read a speech which, I think, shows where
our great trouble really is. It was by Mr. Fisher,
the Minister of Education in the House of Com-
mons. The good work of our troops and sailors, the
quickness with which they learn their job, and the
sense they show in action—he puts down to the
splendid primary education system. But we have
not yet realized the value of secondary education.
The great majority of the people have none of it.
The war has both illustrated the value of education
and the need of more of it. He wanted the Esti-
mates increased by nearly 4.10 per cent., and is
going to fetch in some new schemes. The extra
money is to increase the teachers’ salaries, which are


very poor. The greatest thing I have learned in the
war. is, I think, the large amount of stupidity of
the men. I would have blamed them for more, but
I have been reading in the papers about the Ger-
mans—and our men, with all their defects and fail-
ings, are yet so noble I cannot say anything worse
of them. I have been so used to the society of
students, and always read the writings of people
who love reading and writing. I had failed to realize
the vast mass of people who have their interest in
football, and put their trust in horses, and take-
pleasure in beer. Because the majority of the people
voted wrong it does not mean they have turned bad.
It is the first time in history such a question has
been put to people, and they have no understanding
of national questions. It does not disturb my belief
in democracy and in referendums. It will be better
in the future. I have not much hope of reforming
people, even by war. especially the Fritzes. I used
to think you could teach people a thing or two. They
are mentally lazy, that is the trouble, and therefore
morally cowards and spiritually dead. We must let
the dead bury their dead, or, if they prefer, to cook
them. Long after Jesus said “Love your enemies”
He said “Love one'another,” and there come times
when even that seemed too difficult. But I have
hope, still great hopes. There are always the
children. We are going to try and treat them more


fairly, even if their parents do not trouble about
them. We are going to have more and better educa-
tion—not German training. We have learned our
lesson. Mr. Fisher is going to have them teach
children under five years, and teach them to sing
better. He is going to teach them between twelve
and fourteen something better than the three R’s.
He realizes the great importance of secondary
education for all “who can profit by it.” and is going
to institute ’Varsity scholarships. We have begun
secondary education in Australia, and its value has
been proved already. Soon it will turn the elections,
and it will cleanse our cities. Enough of politics.
I have seen the snaps you sent. They are great.
The picture of the little girl under the wattle tree
is really bon. You hope it will be more hopeful
by the time I get your letter. It is very hopeful.
It is spring. It is lovely weather. There is some-
thing else in the newspapers to-day besides the
battles and victories and hope of victories; it is the
return of the Pilgrims. Yesterday King George pro-
ceeded to St. Paul’s to give thanks to Almighty
God. He sat with all the Yankee heads, and sang
with them the Battle Hymn to the tune of the great
organ, and the sun shone in the window, and a
great beam of light lit up the mighty dome. The
Pilgrims went away in sorrow; they have returned
to help us, and we have welcomed them with joy.


We have never been so full of hope. Our ward
to-day is gay, decorated with daffodils picked this
morning in the woods, real Fnglish daffodils. In
the centre of the room, growing in a pot, are some
pot daffies—fine glorious blossoms on long stalks
among the broad leaves. To-morrow lam to get up
for a bit! Next day I have been asked out to
tea. But I must get on with my sock.
Your loving brother, Gib.
Gib.
Red Cross Hospital, Guildford, May 1, 191 <.
Dear Mother,
George came to see me yesterday afternoon, it
was long since I had seen him; but he has not
grown much, nor does he look very different after
all his travelling round and round the world. It
was quite a warm evening, and we sat outside and
talked—we had so much to talk about—until I had
to go to bed. I guess I will be just about better
in time to go back to France when he goes. He wants
to claim me for his battalion. After dinner yes-
terday we paid a visit to the “Colonel s house. The
Colonel is one of our “fellow soldiers,” and has
done rather well at the game. Of course, he is away
at the wars, but some of our fellows are welcomed
there every Tuesday by the resident staff. We went
in a motor car driven by a lady. At the edge of the
town we went through a gate into fair grounds.


The spreading chestnuts and other trees were just
budding into green. As we drove along the wind-
ing gravel the green beneath the trees was lit with
daffodils and primroses. Then we came to an
ancient house, and in front of it. white-clothed
tables spread on a croquet lawn beneath a great
sycamore tree, and half a dozen figures in blue—
the first of the party, who had walked over. We
were welcomed by Martin, who, with his black coat
and sideboards, looked every inch of his good old
English profession. The exterior of the fine old
building was far from its best. The roses had not
yet wakened; but the well-clipped ivy and the
stopped clock gave an appearance of antiquity
rather than delapidation. The housemaid took us
inside to see the beautifully furnished rooms and the
many ancient works of art with which the walls
were decorated. It certainly was a beautiful house.
It had one time been a monastery; I guess before
the Reformation, for there was a date somewhere
near that time over the mantel in the drawing room.
The rooms were_ not very large, but filled with
treasures, and their luxuriousness was tempered by
the antiquity and art of the many adornments. The
most gorgeous thing in the house was a bowl of
crimson tupils that, with some golden ones, had
been gathered in the woods. There was a fine view
through the window. Across the corner of the town


the hills began, and in the foreground a queer old
tree near the end of the lawn, with its great trunk
erect, its crooked branches, tiny cones, and tufted
green. We could not play the “grand,” but from the
lawn below came the sweet strains of the phono
graph. One of our chaps was greatly struck by the
antiques, the old prints and fine pictures; another
appreciated far more the music outside, and was
impatient to get down there again; while some of
the Tommies lingered on the couches with the silken
cushions, or preferred to play at billiards. I liked
best the old pine and the budding sycamore and
the green field with the golden patch of daffodils.
We picked armfuls of daffies down by the drive,
and I found a white violet at the edge of the wood,
where I went on crutches. We had tea outside,
and I playyed a big round of croquet, hopping. It
was a lovely day, though there was no clear sun-
shine, In London they say: “It was bright as ever
May Day of old.” May 3. My leg is better now.
The doctor says I am to go on furlough soon.
Everything should be “bonza” then, and I expect
to have a good trip. I only hope you continue to
have a good time in your little house in the great
hills garden. Give my best love to Day and Net.
Your loving Gibbie.
Gibbie.


Guildford, May 8, 1917.
Dear Daisy,
I received your good letter from Elliot yesterday.
It came toute suite via Crieff. What remembrances
it doth recall. lam glad you had such a holiday
down there. Arcadia is a fine place to stay. Ido
remember the twins you mention, but I had for-
gotten them. I had not been in the army then—
that great crowd where there are no children. There
are lots of kiddies in England. On Sunday two
wee girls fetched flowers and gave me and another
chap some bon narcissi. They are like daffodils,
with large pure white petals and short coloured
“pheasant’s eye” trumpet and lovely scent. We have
daffies and dandelions in profusion. lam able to
walk now. Yesterday we went down to the river
and rowed up to the first lock. It was very beauti-
ful. We went winding up the stream alongside the
towpath with green fields on either side, often below
the level of the water. All manner of trees just
bursting into green and silver. Clusters of butter-
cups beneath the trees, and tiny white daisies scat-
tered all over the grass. We got right away from
the town where not even the pretty houses, but only
trees, covered the hills. The long winding Wey, as
we paddled along, might have been the ancient shin-
ing Thames, reflecting the sky and the warm sun-
light, and rippled by the summer breeze. There


were three of us, a Canadian, and a one-legged Jock.
All this is very different from our common job;
yet I have decided to send you an account of our
battle. The battle where our greatest high school
hero fell. It is for the security of this country we
are fighting and the freedom of the world. I have
not the language to do the occasion justice, nor do
I know sufficient to give a good historical account
of it, but I must make some record of it. I have
written most of it. It has relieved my feelings.
Battle of Noreuil. Attack began in grey dawn on
April 2.
It was already freezing when we finally marched
across the open fields. Soon by the dim light of the
sinking moon we made out the forms of men lying
on the ground. They were in a line at intervals of
a few paces, and there was a similar line beyond.
Some of them had been lying thus silent for two or
three hours. For the lines stretched into the dark-
ness away across the fields, and there were still more
lines we could hardly discern. At length, however,
we came to an end of the line—or was it only a gap
in it? It was our part of the line. With whispers
each man took his place and dropped on one knee
till all were in the correct position, then he stretched
himself full on the ground with all his gear for
battle, each loaded his rifle, fixed his bayonet, and


lay still. Though the ground was frozen on the
surface, and the scanty grass was covered thick with
hoar frost, yet the march had warmed us, and we
were glad to rest. We were glad it was a fine night
with only a gentle breeze. I watched the red moon
set. It sank slowly among a few thin clouds, then,
for a little while, the night was darkest before the
dawn. It was a strange experience. We had often
done it before in daylight for practice, and in strong
winds that froze us through, but there was a strange
stillness now—a hush in the darkness. I had ceased
to trouble much about the attack, and tried repeat-
ing things to fill in time. Anything that came into
my mind, “ ’Twas brillig and the slithy toves,” the
Lord’s Prayer, the “Daffodils,” and I know not
what. I little thought how soon I would see the
daffodils in England. Then I thought of Marcellus
keeping watch. “But look, the Dawn with russet
mantle clad walks o’er the top of yon high eastward
hill.” I only wished there were some great hill,
some Mount Lofty in the east over which the day
would dawn, but the last glow of the red moon had
scarcely faded from the west, when the day’s first
faint light appeared in the sky beyond the next ridge,
which was a couple of miles away, the hollow
between being just big enough to hide a small un-
known village. But in spite of the new day ap-
proaching, I watched the west behind us. Yes, I


saw the first flash, then some more quickly followed.
They seemed silent as distant sheet-lightning in
summer, but only for a moment, however long it
seemed. There was a rush of shells, a flash in front
of us, and the sharp burst of shrapnel, but no one
even winked. We knew they were our side. The
battle had begun. We all got up and walked on as
if we had suddenly got tired of lying there. We
went on alright for a bit. keeping a good line, then
we moved a bit to the right, then to the left, then
both ways at once, then nothing was clear for a bit.
I was left in the middle of a gap. Orders came
from both ways, but I could hear neither for the
barrage. The front line met opposition of some
sort, they got down and fired; I joined them and
fired into the darkness. Then they moved on, or
they moved sideways, or backwards, or somewhere.
The line broke altogether. I tried to keep in touch
with the right, but the left got out of sight. I
seemed to be ahead of the others, and lost my direc-
tion, then, as I lay flat. I made out a couple of small
machine-gun trenches just in front of me. I would
have taken one on my own, but not two. I simply
kept up the fire to keep the machine gunners’ heads
down. Both positions may have been clear, but I
did not like them. In the meantime the barrage
had moved steadily on and was intensified through
the village. It had been a wonderful sight from the


beginning. The continuous flashes of the shells and
flares of every sort and shade, blue, green, and red.
all along the line, and now I saw one of the finest
sights I have ever seen. I must have caught sight
of it for a moment, but it is hard to tell it now from
a dream. By the light of the barrage I saw the
village for the first time, a field of ruined walls
down in the hollow. Right under the line of flashes
another straight line through the village—the line
of men. They were D Company and C.. Armitage’s
men. For a moment I saw them by a bright flash,
but the image is still clear, and never to be for-
gotten. I kept up a hot fire on my position for
about one shot, and decided to give them a bomb.
Then a German stick bomb appeared a few feet
from my head. It did not explode, but I shifted
back a bit near some other chaps. The trench was
certainly infested. I got the pin out of my bomb,
took a short run, and did a mighty throw. Then
I chased my tin hat which fell off. The bomb ex-
ploded just this side of Fritz’s parapet. I picked up
my rifle and followed the other chaps, who moved
away to the right and advanced down a bit of a
sunken road. They were mostly machine gunners
who follow on behind. Our company had all that
part of the line which lay next to the village on the
right. The foremost of the party pushed on, and
put down their heavy gun near the top of a rise,


and I lay with them with my rifle. Then something
else hit the ground alongside me—a rifle bullet—a
miss, and the enemy started shelling. We were h
a dangerous place. I did not know whethei to go
on at the double. I hardly knew where I was. T
went back to where some others had stopped in a bit
of a ditch, the gutter of a road. The others never
came back, but one or two that were wounded. I
helped one of them to tie his foot up and cut his
boot so that he could get it on again. It was begin-
ning to get light; then I found we were on the road
on the map where we were going to the at-
tack from. We and the enemy seemed all mixed up.
Most of the men were ammunition carriers. I
sneaked down to a fallen tree to “observe tin ough
the dry twigs; not 50 yards away there were three
or four men only half concealed in a trench. _ One
was evidently observing, too, and was pointing
vehemently. In the dim light I reckoned theii tin
hats were the wrong kind, but they had not seen me
yet. I got another chap to look, then I thought my
head had fallen off or they had hit my tin hat or
something. My mate said, “Got ’im.” with his muzzle
close to my ear; then we both fired. Tater, we
found three snipers at that spot each with a bullet
through his head and a loaded rifle on the parapet.
The enemy had quite a strong position here, de-
fended by a lot of men who were doing deadly work.


We made some badly organized attacks, but got in
a little good shooting. I made one grey helmet
spin high up in the air. It would have made a good
souvenir, but I don’t trouble much about souvenirs.
One fellow took a helmet from a prisoner he was
fetching down the road, and put it on his own head,
I missed him, Tt is a good thing lam not a very
sure shot at a couple of hundred. I tried to organize
a better attack. I was “bayonet man” in our bomb-
ing team. The “first thrower” was there, but he
speaks Russian when excited. The others were
mostly fatigues, but I learned the enemy in the dis-
tance were prisoners, and arranged with Stokes’
mortar, just up the road, to give them half a
dozen to begin with. We would exterminate them,
but it did not come off. The mortar stopped firing
after a couple, and they fetched the prisoners down
the road. To our infinite disgust, our doomed
victims put their hands in their pockets for their
souvenirs, and came running from their holes to
join the band of prisoners. Our corporal came
along then and I went with him and helped to carry
some of the machine gun ammunition. As I crossed
the open on the way to the front line, left away be-
hind as usual, I came to the brook. It had more
barbed wire in it than water. Looking for a place
to cross, I passed near a wounded man trying to
crawl on his back. I knew my job, yet I stopped to


speak to the poor chap in that cold cruel wind. He
told a strange tale. He had been wounded in the
arm, and was taken prisoner with a dozen others.
As they were being hurried away, he heard a re-
volver shot from behind, and fell with a bullet
through his leg. They had left him there to perish.
He showed me another dangerous place where they
had cut off a lot more of our men and captured
them. They were A Coy. When I had tried to tie
both ends of his wound up with the one field pad he
had left in his pocket, 1 dragged the unfortunate
liberated prisoner behind an old hut out of the wind
and left him. I crossed over a bridge and tried to
run to make up time, and because some one was
having pots at me. We could not get our company
back, but we blocked the gap in the line. The major
came up and took charge of the situation. When he
said, “Come with me,” I followed him without stop-
ping to get a shovel, but even then, I soon dropped
back near the rear of the line. He held a great
revolver up in front of him, and I fixed my bayonet
again, but I could not help thinking of the practice
fight when he had pointed to me and said, “You’re
dead,” and I lay down and spent the rest of the
day making a little cross out of some sticks to mark
the spot where my bones were laid. We went right
through the village, now desolate, just a big group
of broken walls, nor did we meet anybody there.


We entered our new trench from the other end.
The plan of battle had not been to dig a continuous
trench, but a number of small isolated positions with
a Lewis gun in each, the whole new line only being
held by a small garrison. When, however, the ad-
vancing waves reached their objective, to their sur-
prise, they found a shallow trench almost along the
line they were to take up. What the enemy had in
mind in commencing this trench is not known, nor
could our men pause to consider on account of the
hostile machine gun fire playing on the position.
Thus we came to construct a line of trench, deepen-
ing the excavation commenced by the enemy, and
taking shelter in it. Whatever was the motive of
the Hun, he knew the exact position of his own
work, and so used his heavy guns with terrible
effect. At the same time he made a bomb attack from
a position of advantage at the right of the line
we were consolidating, but the opposition to the
bombers was not organized, and there was no officer
on the flank. It was Armitage, always ready where
there are difficulties, who went immediately to the
point of danger. The bomb attack was repulsed
by our rifle grenades, but Armitage was shot by a
sniper through the forehead. Then passed away
our best soldier. He had led his men so well
through the village, settled them in the new line,
and defended it when first threatened, so that our


men were never driven out of it again. He was
one who never shirked the hottest place, and has
always done the best work in face of the enemy.
Most think it unfair that he was not given a
V.C., but he never received a decoration. He was
always too busy to look for it, and lam glad. It
was no reckless daring made him noble. He had
higher qualities that no medal can honour. More
than a soldier, he was a gentleman in spite of his
discipline, and he had his reward —as much as
mortals can give—he was not only respected, but
also loved by all his men and all the men of his
battalion. We held the right of the line all day
without loss. We were too near the crest of the
ridge to be hit by the light guns the other side, but
that made it possible for the Hun to advance close
to us without being seen. There was much snow in
the afternoon, and with night the wind dropped
below freezing, but we had no counter attack. As
the light failed, our bombardment of the fields in
front of us was incessant, but what their target was
or why no enemy attack reached our line, I am not
in a position to know. Darkness set in, there would
be no attack till the morning, but what a night! All
my grub had been submerged, and the trench mud
with which it was soaked was very cold. So I set
to work again to improve the trench. Some heavy
machine guns were fetched up, and the reserves


came and took over our part of the trench. VV e
moved further away to the left, getting out of the
trench part of the way. I wondered how I could
stick it till the next night. I knew it was a bad
part of the trench we had come to. I was tired and
last to get into the trench, but I was about first to
get out again, for we were told to go on back to
our camp. It was then I hurt my leg. though I was
only a minute in the trench. Soon I was limping
home in the dark behind all the rest, tired, wet, and
covered from head to foot in mud. What a day it
had been. How long it seemed since we had
marched out before the dawn. How much worse
it would be'to be left soaking in the mud till the
next night. The next night I slept in a bed at
Boulogne. But the day did not finish with our
straggling home across the fields —one more incident.
I got my leg tied up back at the camp. I was
labelled and put straight into an ambulance. Driv-
ing away, we began recounting our experiences. I
started to tell of the crudest thing I had seen, the
prisoner the Huns had shot and left to die in the
snow. “And that’s true, too,” a voice came from a
stretcher under the seat. Incredible as it seemed,
it w r as my old friend I had tried to bandage in the
morning. He had been found and fetched in at
last, and now was free again. Thus finishes the day
of my first attack. Now 7 a new dawn has broken,


and summer has burst upon us. I will enclose a
violet I picked to-day on a bank alongside the “Pil-
grims’ Way” on top of the ridge.
Good-bye, Gib.
Gib.
Perham Downs, Tuesday, June 5, 1917.
Dear Mother,
I have come back again to camp after all my de-
lightful wanderings, but I don’t care, it is beautiful
here. The weather is still gloriously brilliant.
When I came yesterday there was a gay crowd
assembed on the green flat for sports. The smell
of the grass carried by the west breeze was lovely.
The band was playing, too, and such a sunshine. I
met Clifford among the crowd, and we went to
Ludgershull together and had tea. I don’t think I
have told you before how I met old Mrs. Wake-
field of Uxbridge. I bought a red rag rose from
her for a penny for some soldiers’ fund. Her hus-
band’s uncle, you know, discovered “South Australia
and Melbourne” and a few such places. Netta
can tell you all about the old chap, I guess. I gave
the red rose to John Yeatman, another Australian-
born civilian whom I met the same day. I went the
wrong road, and got into Harefield by mistake and
my bike broke and had to be taken to a hospital for
a bit. Moreover, it came on to rain, so I went and
hunted for Park Terrace where I had heard Mignon


was living. She was playing tennis with some army
doctors, but little John took me in and gave me some
tea. When the bike was mended and the rain had
gone, I set out to find the tennis court —there were
not many in the village. I saw some officers going
home, and caught Mignon almost at her own gate.
We had supper together, and I did not set out on
my way till about 9 o’clock, but I found some
lodgings all right before it was dark. Next day I
went to church, it being the Sabbath, at one of the
most wonderful and beautiful of places. The top
of the Hill at Harrow. The church has a fine spire
and a Union Jack, both above the trees, and the view
from there is for miles on every side. The great
city on one side, Windsor Castle on the other, and
beyond, the red roofed town and the cricket ground,
the open country, the meadows and hedges, and
trees. I shall start to-morrow perhaps to write
a fuller account of all that part of England I have
seen, and all of those people of hers I made the
acquaintance of in my touring. I could make many
criticisms of the country. Still I make bold to say
this is the prettiest island in the world. I have sent
from London a lot of pictures I obtained of the
country. Some are good, some lam not pleased
with. None give an idea of England now. I sent
also a book of songs of this country. The “Call of
the Road,” and some others are awfully fine. 1


think they would go well on the old piano in your
cottage. It is got up by an uncle of George Davies,
one of my fallen heroes. Good-night, mother dear.
Your loving boy, Gibbie.
Gibbie.
England, June, 1917.
Dear Netta,
It will soon be your birthday, so for the occasion
I shall write you as faithful an account as I can of
my recent wanderings in this land. I have already
sent some picture cards that must serve sufficiently
for illustrations, and you will be able to follow my
travels on any map of England. It was a wet morn-
ing in London on the 22nd May, but I was fed up
with the citv. Us crowd had no lure for me. It
was too full already. The day before, I had been
where folk had piled their dwellings one upon an-
other, row upon row, as if they had pooled then
existence for the cheapness thereof, 01 to keep
warm in winter like the bees. Just a glimpse of the
beauty of Hyde Park at sunset after the rain had
filled me with a longing to flee away from these
enclosing walls men had built to dwell in- aw ay into
some wilderness where the trees and lawns are un-
confined. So 1 turned my back to the gieat city.
Before 1 reached the terminus of the tramlines,
there appeared before me a block railway bridge
crossing over the main road. It looked not like a


portal to the free land of nature. What it was
a portal to Ido not know. The tramlines went
beneath it, but I turned down an unobtrusive street
to the left, and in a moment it seemed the city had
gone. I was in a quiet untrafficked lane winding be-
tween its hedges. I was passing fields, with rain
still upon the grass, and high foliage shut out the
view. Soon I was on a broad level road again lead-
ing now straight for the country. There was a row
of trees along it, and where it crossed a stream there
was a white railing at the bridge. There were some
cottages, too, with flower beds. At one there was a
sign “Cut Flowers.” “Tea for Cyclists.” It had
not the look of a busy tea garden, but a kind-hearted
woman made me some tea, and I ate a bit of cake I
had in my pocket. She wished some day to come to
Australia and bring the little girl, who just came
in from school; and after that, it was the wish of
almost all I met. The woman’s brother was in our
navy. “Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my
song." I kept to the main pavement for a few vil-
lages. My road would turn to the south near
Staines, but I turned too soon at the cross roads. I
soon saw I was off ray road, but I went on—they
were beautiful country roads. I could keep some-
thing of the direction, the roads would always turn
somewhere. Soon my rule was, never turn back. I
had hardly settled this, when I came to a red-let-


tered board, “Take this road as you find it. Use
it at your peril, and a sheet of water barred my
way, but there was a gravel track along the edge of
the water with broad pools in its centre. On the
left was a hedge of beautiful trees. It was too al-
luring. I would not turn back. I ventured by the
pools, and it soon was a splendid path, though autos
never wandered there. It was no swamp either, or
a lake, but a broad running stream. Close to the
low reeds was a white swan. It must be the
Thames. I had forgotten about the Thames. It
seemed to be running the wrong way, but there it
was. I followed down stream till I came to a lock.
There was a notice there. “Oxford 60, London 32.
There was a boathouse and the lock-keeper's pretty
cottage. It was called Chertsey Lock, and below
was Chertsey Bridge, high in the centre with half
a dozen noble arches of stone and a stone parapet.
1 paused in the centre of the bridge, then turned
back. Up the stream the water was falling over the
broad weir, and alongside of it was the pretty lock,
and on either side trees. But down stream the
broad shining river curved to the left round a great
meadow. The other side was a tree-covered rise.
The river flowed round at its foot, but the grass of
the meadow was all mingled with flowers right down
to the water’s edge. By the green bank, starred with
gold, were two more snow-white swans. Beneath


the blue sky all was bathed in sunshine. I turned
back, and near the stunted trees, and the hollow
trunk of an ancient poplar growing up again, I lay
on the bank in the sun among the buttercups. There
was a gentle breeze across the stream, and from it
I breathed new life indeed. Soon a boat appeared
in sight with rowers gaily dressed in blue and white
and red ties. New Zealanders they were-—three of
them recovering from their recent wars. I rested,
drank of the healing water, crossed over the bridge,
and with a glad heart left the joyous scene, and now
I came to the woodlands. I was away from the
direct south-west road. My rule was simply follow
the sun and never turn back. They were beautiful
roads, more like a broad cycle track than a country
highway. There is little heavy traffic on them and
no motors now. They led me all amongst the trees.
I don’t know what the trees were planted for, they
did not even look like plantations, nor were they
hedged off in parks. Here was a wilderness I had
not expected to see. There were beeches, and elms,
and oaks, and clumps of pine, their varied shade
making the road a natural avenue. The red pines
are pretty in winter wdien the other trees are leaf-
less, but they are finer when their companions are
garbed in the fresh green of springtime Their tall
fantastic trunks and crooked branches, their dark
red bark and dark green foliage contrast with the


spreading trees around them, and make the land-
scape enchanting. They are often like a tall
straight-stemmed stringy bark; but the road never
seemed to wander thus for long. There were often
fences, walls, and cottages, there were homesteads
back amongst the trees, and perhaps a clearing
where the gamekeeper kept his cow, but I don’t re-
member many villages, and soon I came to even
more of a wilderness. Here there were no villages
at all, and no cultivation or pasture. It seemed poor
sort of soil. The other side of the railway and the
canal there was nothing but a few camps and such
military places. There were some sandhills covered
with some kind of stunted pines, and a good deal of
furze. The canal was very pretty with the golden
sunshine on it. The few reeds by its bank made it
look more like a natural swamp than a trim canal.
I rested in the shade of a small oak. It was rather
strange in such a place to see our ornamental garden
trees growing wild. When I got into better country,
1 came to Farnborough, which is a fair town. 1 did
not know Cliff lived there in the Flying Corps, or
I would have tried to dig him up. 1 had tea there
at a canteen, and a lady told me the road through
the gauze. Never was there such a blaze of gold,
though the frost had made a lot of the bushes
brown. Only near the horizon towards which the
golden sun was sinking were there pine-covered


hills; but the yellow field came to an abrupt end not
far to the left of the road where there was a great
wall of trees—a red pine plantation. Another fascin-
ating road, marked “To Fleet” led off into the heart
of the forest. I could not resist it, grand as was the
sunset on the moor. I would seek the village in the
forest depths for the night and return this way in
the morning—how beautiful the gauze would be
then. I penetrated the great belt of pines, but the
village was right on the other side. There was no
room for a traveller at the hotel, so 1 thought of the
place in the depth of the wood where they had been
cutting down the pines, and where there were piles
of branches. The ground had dried, and it was a
beautiful fine evening. I returned to where the
lumbermen had been labouring, there was the boy
again. He was a curious fellow, a poultry-keeper,
his brother an Australian. T had spoken to him
before, he had shown me the way to the village;
but he utterly destroyed the solitude. He came with
me to the next village. I could not sit down alone
on the pine needles and read my newspaper in the
twilight saying I was not going anywhere after
all. I was too nervous. T did not know what
savages, what wild beasts or insects infested these
forests, or what storms might arise. The boy, as
we rode along, told me how his brother was robbed
and swindled in Australia. The country changed


again before I came to an inn. The landlady sent
me on to the next. Over the hill was the village of
Hartley Row. I missed the Crown and went to
the Oak Tree, for there was a whole row of public
houses, but of no avail. I was sent back to the
Crown, where they had travellers, and the black-
coated barman could suggest nothing, he did not
think there was room at any of the beer shops.
There were no pine trees here, but there were great
forests of oaks. It was 10 miles to a big town, and
it was getting dark. 1 would take the road into the
wood and seek shelter from an oak tree after all.
but such adventure was not for me. The black-
coated gentleman’s last despairing remark was, that
the hotel, a flash place, charged hotel prices. I
thought of the “Cecil” and again of the oak trees,
and of a small pile of notes that had to last me 14
days, but finally put up with the luxury of the hotel.
I admired the beautiful old house and the simple
country girls, I enjoyed the bacon and eggs, and the
marmalade, and paid them 4/6. I must tell you
how I passed Stonehenge. It is a wonderful hill to
cycle down in the evening, straight and steep. It
forks on the other side, and on the spur between the
roads are the ancient sacred stones —the most in-
spiring of all British monuments, but it was familiar
to me. I have written of it before. At Rollestone I
found George, not in a penitentiary, but isolated


owing to contact with infectious disease, so I spent
the night in his tent protected an armed guard.
It was Empire Day when I went to Salisbury. The
Australian flag floated above the pretty church at
Shrewton. It was a beautiful day, there had been
a few spots of rain, but it had quite cleared up,
though the morning was wonderfully fresh. The
sky is not often so blue in England as it was that
day, or the white clouds so majestic. Never is the
foliage of the deciduous trees so bright as in the
heart of May. After a splendid lunch at the Salis-
bury Guest House, and a little music, I set out to see
the Cathedral. The gateway to the Close, as you
approach is most picturesque, but what a scene
opens out as you pass inside and leave the busy town
behind. There were the great elm trees in the
sunshine, underneath them wide green lawns, and
the broad gravel path. In the centre of all was the
great grey cathedral with its spire lifted up into the
blue heavens, made a deeper blue by the great white
clouds that slowly moved across them. The build-
ings that surrounded these sacred precincts were in
keeping too with the place; old houses covered with
creepers stood behind a wealth of flowers. One
house I passed had a Union Jack hanging from the
window. I paused beneath it, and looking back to
the gateway I had entered, I beheld a picturesque
procession come beneath the old stone arch. First


there rode two heralds with banners on their trum-
pets, they were dressed in khaki. Then two con-
stables in blue. Next was the carriage with four
horses, driven by a yellow-liveried coachman, and
more horsemen brought up the rear. They wheeled
round and drew up before a beautiful house with
stone steps. The heralds blew their trumpets, and
a yellow footman climbed down to open the car-
riage door. There stepped forth a figure clad in
scarlet robes. The judge of the quarter sessions
had arrived in the city. Later, the trumpets
blew again, and he proceeded to the courthouse in
the market-place. But I turned to the stately
cathedral, and crossed the lawn all starred with tiny
daisies, and there were buttercups, too, in places—
bright golden buttercups on the green turf. Near
the shadow of the spire there was a woman kneeling
in the grass. I stopped to speak to her. She was
pulling out the buttercups. Twelve years, she sajd,
she had bent over that sacred lawn and gathered in
her lowly harvest of gold, but she could not get rid
of them all, and how beautiful were the few she had
missed, looking up between those great elms and
that sublime structure of stone. lam not able to
describe the glorious building itseli. You must
find pictures of it. You will see how the lofty spire
with the cross on the top of it is built up on all the
rest, but they will never show the depths of the


sky it reaches to, nor the freshness of the elms that
surround it in spring. The claustrum was most
beautiful with the sunshine casting shadows on the
ancient stones, but not the least of its beauty for me
was due to the square of lawn in the centre, and its
three cypress trees. They were spreading cypresses,
and did not look funereal in the bright sunshine.
We saw the chapter house with its central pillar and
beautiful multiple arch, and we went into the
bishop’s garden, and saw the mulberry tree that
dates from Shakespeare’s time. Fancy finding an
old mulberry tree. It was a beautiful garden against
such a beautiful and such a sacred building. Not
only were the grey time-worn stones set off by the
trees and lawns out in the sunshine, but there were
beautiful white lillies in the inner sanctum itself,
and before I left I heard the great arches filled with
the mystic sacred music. There was no homely
sermon, nothing commonplace, the strains of the
chanting were as inexplicable as the majestic se-
clusion of its visible surroundings. Five miles
away, where the road crosses a hill, I paused to
look back. The spot is memorable on account of
the amphitheatrum, a fine semi-circular valley just
below the road, and in the distance was set that
beautiful city and the sacred spire rising from the
centre of it. A striking contrast was the Abbey
Church at Romsey. I climbed to the top of the


square tower, and as the big clock struck seven,
stood beneath the great Union Jack floating in the
western breeze. The interior of the Abbey was
very impressive, but very different from Salisbury.
There were the bold Roman arches with their bare
massive stones. The dusk made its simplicity more
majestic. I had no time to observe any detail as
the closing hour was seven, but before I went out
through the little back door, I paused to listen to
the caretaker playing the harmonium, and filling the
ancient building with the strains of an old familiar
hymn. Before I went to bed that night, 1 looked out
of the window and watched the thin moon sink be-
hind the old stone tower. At sunset that night I
went for a joy ride, pure and simple. I climbed a
hill nearly to Southampton, but could not get a view
of the sea. It was very pretty coming home again
towards the sun, though 1 got a thousand beetles
in my eye. I never saw the sea in all my wander-
ings, but I often remembered this is an island in the
cold North Sea, which makes music round its shores
like the music of the cold South Sea on our own
dear shore. It was a bright sunny morning, and
proceeding S.W. against the wind I came to the
New Forest. There was no mistaking it, by its
looking as though it had always been there. The
beautiful road plunged into the heart of it; the
green lawn beneath the trees came right to the edge


of the road as it comes to the bank of a stream,
and it was covered there with violets. There were
great oaks, and small straggly oaks, and beeches,
and elms, all crowded together, and a tangled under-
growth of holly. Sometimes the holly was so thick
it was hard to force a way between. I watched two
squirrels run across the road. Pausing there to
watch them, I saw Nutkin coming on behind, a little
chap, but he did not care, he climbed an oak and
crossed above my head, jumping to the branches of
another that was touching it the other side. An-
other followed him, and they joined their com-
panions. Then I went on and came out on to a
wild hill-top scraggled with furze, and looked down
on the wooded vale where the hunter Rufus loved to
chase the rabbits. The hill was covered with just
low brown heather and a few scattered clumps of
furze that were frozen brown, yet had a frequent
glimmer of gold brought to them by the spring.
There were a few thorn bushes, too. and the great
quercus just above the road with a couple of holly
shrubs reaching up to its farthest spreading
branches, making the shaded lawn around its
trunk the more enchanting. I rested there and ate
a couple of your good Australian peaches while I
admired the view, and what a view it was! Beyond
the white road not a sign of human life. The brown
moor sloped away, and there were more hills, some-


times wooded, sometimes with not more than a bush,
a wild and useless place right away to the southern
coast. It must have been the coast, though the sea
could not be seen. I thought I saw a lighthouse on
a distant cliff. As I crossed the moor, the road took
me down against the wind, and it made me sing as
T had not sung since on our own V ictor road. I came
to a few r cows feeding near a cottage with blue
smoke slowly ascending, and the smell of a wood
fire, you know it, but it is not known to the English.
Do you know the smell of furze burning? In the
afternoon that day I passed near the village of
Woodlands, where they were burning furze that had
been almost killed by the frost in winter. This was
different country with cornfields and orchards, pine
trees, and cottages with beautiful, though often now
neglected, flowerbeds. In one garden there was a
woman drawing water, I was hot and sunburnt,
and I asked her for a drink. What a beautiful well
of water it was. When I first spoke to her, the
good woman took me for her daughter’s husband s
cousin, or somebody. At Ringwood that day I had
dined with a Welshman who had a peg-leg. He was
very interesting, and he said he would have sworn I
had been born and bred in that part of Hants,
especially when he heard me speak, so I felt at
home, but I soon got lost, and had to ride across
the great Downs —none more beautiful in England,


the steam-ploughers said, who at first thought I
was spying, then grew friendly, and put me on the
road at the Great Avenue of Beeches past the old
house out of which Alfred the Great was kicked for
burning the cakes. It had been a glorious day, I had
got sunburnt, and had smelt the burning furze, 1 had
passed beneath the shade of trees, where the steep
road-bank was a lovely garden with violets and cow-
slips mingled with the green, and on the top of it a
hedge with buds of hawthorn almost breaking,
sometimes slowly toiling upwards, sometimes moving
so softly that the birds in the hedge were not afraid,
and sometimes as swift as the wind, pine trees
quickly giving place to orchards where the blossoms
had not fully blown away, or slowing up again
where the lazy cows were feeding on the meadow
by the stream. Now it was evening, I had left
the valley of the Stour, and as I gained the summit
of the ridge the red sun was just sinking behind
the dark, low bank of cloud. There, in the wide
valley before me, lay Sherborne, the city of Dorset,
the most beautiful city I have seen, the cathedral
in the centre with all the old houses clustered round
covered with creepers and interspersed with lawns
and trees, and surrounded by the sloping fields and
pasture. There seemed nothing there out of place,
and all was harmonized with the hills in the red light
of the sun that disappeared as I dropped down into


the heart of the ancient city. The house I slept in
was said to be five hundred years old, and my
window looked out on the little square and the
strange old city “Crosse” with its drinking fountain.
The effect of this square is increased by the streets
which lead into it, which though pretty, are very
narrow, the queer shops often encroaching above
the pavement. I was up early in the morning. At
the corner of the hotel is a narrow arch leading to
the cathedral. 1 met the verger there with his
broom and pail. The arch, he said, was famous as
the city itself. In his verger’s book, he said, there
was an entry of 17/ paid to one of his predecessors
for taking from that arch all the bodies of the rebels
hanged by the cruel Jeffreys. Another earlier item
in the book was 25/ paid to the village blacksmith
for a clock. The verger told me I could see inside
the great building later on, so I walked around out-
side. In front is a lawn and a neat avenue of trees,
a gravel path, and a statue of the great Digby him-
self. Then there were more gardens, but at the
side it is closed in by some old alms-houses and
other pretty buildings. Adjoining the back of the
cathedral is the King’s School. They were doing
their early morning geometry, but I wandered into
the schoolyard through the wide arch with the two
beautiful trees beside it, and talked to the man who
was mowing the schoolmaster’s lawn. After break-


fast I went and found the ruins of the castle, which
was once the strongest in England. It is just on the
edge of the city. It was Cromwell who battered it
down, and it is more beautiful far than it ever could
have been before. Its pride has been broken, but
its grandeur remains, and the ivy has covered the
broken walls. The moat was full of tall nettles, and
in the centre of the green courtyard was a great
tree. Two of the cave-like halls were used as
stables by some horses, but it seemed more like some
fairies’ dwelling place, such was the destruction of
those days, and such is the effect of nature’s hand.
Fancy Cromwell fighting there. I think his must
have been the finest army that ever fought for
England. That was a war indeed; and as I came
away across the sloping field, what a blaze of butter-
cups. Sunday morning was wet at Wellington, but
as soon as I had had my breakfast 1 went down to
the pretty house where Wyn and her baby lived.
There she was at the window with the little boy—
the upper window in the creeper-covered wall. I
had found her the night before, but David had been
asleep. I spent the morning there with them till the
weather cleared up. and the wee boy was once more
put to sleep. How fine it was to be there, lam not
able to say. Wyn said it was ripping, but it was
more than that to me. As it was the Sabbath day
I could not see the famous woollen mills, so when


the rain cleared before midday, and the hedges and
shrubs, the lilacs and laburnums looked more beauti-
ful than ever, I said good-bye and continued on.
The country had been lovely the day before in the
glow of the sunset, but now the air was fresher;
I no longer felt the sunburn on my tace, and the
rain, it seemed, had given to the trees and hedges a
more infinite and altogether indescribable beauty.
I went through Taunton again, which is a big busy
place with electric trams more modern looking than
host of the towns, and I kept to the broad tar-paved
road with the double telegraph. Not far from
Taunton I met a sundowner making for Plymouth
As he had had no breakfast and I had fetched
some sandwiches with me, we had dinner together
by a bridge; but it was a poor meal for two, nor
could I get any more at the next town where all the
shops were shut. I came back past the old silk
factory covered with creepers like the rest of t c
houses of that town, and across the beautifu
gardens, where I talked with some Australians
dressed in blue who were lying m the sunshine on
the lawns. A beautiful blue sky morning, and m
the top of the gardens the great cathedral with its
square clock tower. 1 went inside and saw the tomb
where Alfred’s brothers lay, and the old man showed
me what looked like an obsolete mangle that he had
found vears ago in some loft; it was the blacksmith s


scrap-iron clock that had ticked the city’s time away
c enturies ago. I went on to Yeovil to have dinner.
At the dinner shop I met Grandpa, who spoke the
Somerset dialect properly. He was a food-hog.
He was having a war bun and a cup of tea, but ad-
mitted having had the limit at another shop in the
same town. During dinner my tyre burst, and my
new friend took me to a shop to get it mended; no
good, it was Saturday, the boss was just closing-
dow n over W hitsuntide, I would have to come again
the middle of next week. But Grandpa knew an-
othei shop that w r as open, he was a cyclist “him-
self, he sez, but he smashed he coming'down a hill
and fell off. Soon after I picked up a companion
on the road. He was very decent and shouted ginger
beer, but he was a bit ahead at the top of the “bonza”
hill, when my tyre burst again, and I watched
him fade into the distance. I had not grown wise
at Yeovil, but 1 had learnt a dodge, and mended
the big hole with a bit of stamp paper. At Taunton,
however, I bought a tube of solution for 3d. The
next town was Bridgewater, and to me was rather
disappointing, though there was a flint stone church
with a fine spire. It is in the flat country, and you
come to it by the level —strata vie. It is on a muddy
creek up which the coal barges come from the sea
I stopped in the centre of the town to post a card to
you for fun, the fun being that my tyre burst again


while 1 was writing it. and it was hard to keep an
even temper, moreover, it was fresh, and id had
only half a dinner. All the shops I tried were
firmly locked. 1 walked to the trough at the edge
of the town to put my patch on, but I was too hasty
with my job, which was watched by a crowd ot
youngsters, for 1 had scarce got clear of the cheer-
ing throng, now rapidly increasing, when it burst
again with a terrible bang. In a moment 1 was
surrounded by three whole Sunday schools ot
kiddies. Thev appear to have good congregations
at their schools in these English towns. 1 had not
to go much further along the good road befoie got
some dinner, or rather tea, at a pretty cottage
where cool drinks, etc., were supplied to boys on bi-
cycles by a Tommy’s wife. She was a kind soul,
and filled the pot again out of the black kettle that
was singing on the stove. She wished it all was
over, and so did the little girl who wore her father’s
badge. It was down hill all the way to Bristol, but
it looked like a dirty night setting in, and 1
wondered where 1 would find shelter. It was the
only place I had feared coming to alone, but I saw
a notice about a Y.M. “Dugout near the centre,
and a soldier showed me the way to it, where I was
made very welcome. 1 will not ciiticize its central
position, but it was a fine new place, and I just had
time to remove the traces of the road with hot water


before the Sunday evening sing-song began. So,
though it was long after church time, I did not pass
the Sabbath without a service, and I wrote letters
till midnight. It rained all night, but began to clear
in the morning. I walked round to the cathedral,
there was a service in progress, and I did not stay
to enter. Alongside was an ancient school, and in
front beautiful gardens, or perhaps, what we call
a square. When it grew fine I set off again, going-
first to Clifton Bridge. It was a steep climb, but
was worth it, and I only wished I had more time.
I rode across the swaying road between the two
tree-covered precipices far above the plying ships
on the muddy stream, and tried to translate the in-
scription, which I have forgotten. I hurried away
again to catch the midday train at Filming, but I was
late and went the wrong road and then got lost
altogether, and there was no train again till even-
ing. At a cottage near the siding I got some beer
and cake. I ate quantities of the seed cake the old
lady put before me, because I thought it would be
good for business for her, and there seemed no
restrictions, but she said she had a son at the war
and pitied the poor soldiers, and could not charge
me more than a penny for the cake; it was a good
natured place. When later, I asked the station girl
about stopping the train which does not always stop,
she offered me her cup of tea. I had imagined the


bead of the channel like the head of our gulf with
white sand and bright blue sea, and was . (^ sa P'
pointed at seeing only a wide muddy river with the
tide running out. As it was so late I booked a
ticket through to Cardiff, so that 1 would be ab e
to penetrate the further into this unknown country
before dark, and before it was time to turn back
aaain I landed in Cardiff at six, and was soon able
to observe the hills to the north, and made for the
»ap in them—beautiful green hills covered with
woods. At Llandoff I got on to the great iaff
Valley Road. It became more and more crowded,
especially with children and many women folk,
always carrying an infant, W elsh fashion, m a shaw ,
[ W as run into by a swarm of boys on bicycles, and
my excursion nearly ended abruptly. Then I was
overtaken by a storm, and such a storm as 1 usually
associate with Malay or the South Sea. It was at ter
I left the beer shop, where I had sheltered from the
storm, that I fell in with an Englishman, and we
dodged the children together, who, having no other
play-ground between the narrowing mountains, now
swarmed into the street. 1 his man persuaded me to
go home with him by promising to show me the
mines in the morning. What he saved me from in
finding lodgings in that strange valley on a Welsh-
man’s holiday I do not know. Ihe houses are
mostly clustered together for warmth, but my friend


lived well up on the side of a hill in one of a row
of thirty cottages known as Valley View, with thirty
narrow yards full of beans and spuds behind and an
open “allotment space” in front. The view was
enchanting at midnight and pretty at sunrise. There
were coal pits and blocks of cottages, and above
them the fresh green hilltops. My friend was as
good as his word, and showed me as much as he
could of the mine, and then came with me some
distance to set me on my way. It was a fine day
again for a ride over the hills. We climbed from
Aberdare up above the pits and dumps and rows of
cottages on to the fresh green hilltop, and then
down into the next valley to M T (which
I cannot spell). It was the same as the first but more
so, and there were great smoky smelters on the
opposite hillside. We passed the old castle going
down hill, and did not stop long in the crowded city,
but climbed past the smelters to Danlas Top, where
I said farewell to my companion, and soon got out
of Glamorgan. I had not gone far when I passed a
cyclist with a scroll of paper sitting meditating on
the bank above the road. I took him for a poet. At
the next hill he overtook me, and we rode together.
He said he loved to get: a puncture in a beautiful
place if he had plenty of time. He had taken a
fortnight to ride from the other side of England.
He had been a cricketer, and had plaved against


Australia, He was indeed a newspaper man, and,
having been trained in the science of building, had
written articles for the most distrusted journal in
London on every cathedral in England. He was
withal a philosopher who believed not in the philo-
sophy of books. Then our ways diverged. He
turned off to a little mining town, once the most
squalid in the island, now free from abject poverty,
but not yet contented, where they were expecting
him to discourse on politics. I continued on over
unknown hills. 1 had made one more English
friend. It was not often I had the opportunity of
showing any kindness to the people 1 met on the
road, but just here 1 met two English deserters, who
asked me for a drink. 1 hey were hot and
fleeing on foot from their slavery, and I had the
satisfaction of pointing out to them a stream of
clear sparkling water not far from the roadside.
I rode the rest of the way alone. It was some-
where there we had another sudden storm. I hid
behind a thorn bush, and did not get much of the
rain, but it rushed in torrents from the hillsides.
The exit from the mountains was down a steep hill
some miles in length, and it was no easy descent,
for 1 had to force my way through a seething crowd.
The folk had poured out of their mountain valleys
for a holiday down to the meadows, and the city, on
the great rushing river, which broadened again into


a lake; and now they were streaming up the long
winding hill with armsful of buttercups or bluebells
they had gathered by the roadside or in the fields
surrounding the city. The women all carried
babies; the girls were tired; the small boys chased
each other from side to side of the road. My hands
grew tired on the brake. I had tea in a crowded
restaurant at Abergavenny, and then rode on in the
evening to Hereford. I was glad to be out on the
quiet roads of England once again, and wander
through the pastoral lands, where the cows were
grazing peacefully, and the day’s shearing was
nearly done. It was at Hereford that night I met
the police officer. His tales would fill a book. His
was the finest job of all, but lie wished the King
would let him fight. Some day he hoped to get a
job in Australia and make his fame; he knew all
there was to know of England. In the morning I
went for a walk through Hereford. I had noticed
the Cathedral off a small back street the night
before, and was inclined to think some of the other
denominations had raised better buildings, so I
followed the sign down a narrow way to the gar-
dens. It was an “inexpressive” morning, and the
gardens were delightful. In the centre a beautiful
lawn, the rest a harmony of shrubs, flowers, and
trees; beyond the gardens the broad river and the
cattle feeding among the buttercups; all beneath


the lovely blue and the floating clouds. Nor was
that all the scene. Where the gardens joined the
city, with all their living wealth of Nature lying
before it. was the magnificent house of God the
folk had budded of stone. So it was with a fine
feeling I entered it. and so perhaps I thought it
most beautiful inside. I generally like the outsides
best. It had no tall spire, but it had a grand appear-
ance from the aspect of the leafy elms, with its
back to the town. Then be sure it was a lovely ride
to Leadbury, where I had lunch, and met the bag-
man who grumbled at bacon and eggs. It was the
sixty-third time, he said, they could give him
nothing else, T. here was at that time a war in
Europe. I saw no church that I remember there,
but there was a remarkable market hall, a beautiful
old structure built on piles above the market place.
The whole village had an antique and picturesque
appearance, set in the midst of that beautiful pas-
toral land. I would criticize its rusticity severely
were it not for the loveliness of its wild profusion.
Returning to England from Wales, I found the
hawthorn in full bloom, every bud had burst; the
wide, straggling hedges were everywhere white. The
fields were bright, too, with buttercups and the
silvery domes of dandelion seeds. There were elm
trees everywhere, and sometimes apples as wild and
natural in their neglect as the oaks; moss on their


branches, and mistletoe hanging from their boughs,
and all overgrown with weeds and grass. The
chestnut blossom was falling, and was strewn
thickly, pink and white, on the roads. All the way
from Hereford I saw only one patch of green corn
and one patch of beautiful broad beans. It was
much the same going on to Worcester—the city of
the faithful. I had tea at the Faithful City Tea
Rooms, looking out on their fine cathedral. Some
more sightseers came in there, too, after visiting the
same holy building. They were the only people I
met in England who did not say “Good-day,” ex-
cept the faithful clergy 1 encountered in the
claustrum. Inside this cathedral was some fine
white marble-work; one statue of a bishop was par-
ticularly lifelike, and reminded me of the Mar-
tineau at Oxford. I crossed the broad river near
the cathedral, and then followed it down, and
crossed its famous tributary, the Avon, at Tewkes-
bury, where they join. I passed another cathedral
there, but just stopped to admire a fine arch at one
end of it, from the road. It was a wonderful even-
ing, and I went on to the Gloucester Bridge by the
time the sun was sinking. The cathedral there had
the sunset glow upon it, but it disappointed me. I
had seen too many churches already. Nor could I
find a place to sleep, though I searched the city. At
last I found the most modern temperance hotel in


England. Setting out for London, I now came to
Cheltenham, near the foot of the hills, and not far
from Hatfield, where England once was governed
from. It is not a country town, judging by its
splendour and pomp. They must be Londoners that
live there. I quickly hastened away, not wishing to
dine in the Strand. I climbed up on to the Cots-
wold Hills, and had my luncheon in a tea garden,
where I could look away over all the country I
had traversed the previous day, across the city
where I slept, and away to the mountains of Wales.
Then came a glorious" ride through the hills, past
orchards and gardens, and more cultivated land and
quaint old-time villages. Perhaps Broadway was
the prettiest. I only paused in one place to write a
letter to a little girl I know, and then rode the next
ten miles in three-quarters of an hour. That brought
me to the Avon again at the place where Shake-
peare was born. I had a drink at the fountain over
which he wrote: “Honest water hath left no man in
the mire.” It was a very interesting and pretty
place, and the river was lovely. From there I went
to Banbury Cross. I think it was near there I smelt
the beans through the hedge on either side of the
road. There was still some daylight, so I went on,
though a crony told me there was no town for
twenty miles. Just at dark I came to a village with
a pub. called the King’s Head (on a penny, you


know), which was very nice, and no food restric-
tions. It was a real good country place, but I forget
the name of it. Next day I rode round by Wood-
stock, where one of the great nobles has a big park
full of forests. It seemed to be out of bounds, so I
did not stop to look at it, but pushed on to Oxford,
and had lunch with Mrs. Carpenter. Never have I
seen haunts of men more beautiful. In the autumn
it was lovely with its rich-coloured leaves and green
lawns and fine old buildings; now it was a city
ablaze with flowers; tulips and purple iris, and all
those wonderful shrubs, red and snow-white haws,
lilac and golden laburnum in gay profusion; the
chestnuts were in blossom, and the elm trees shone
with the brilliance of the spring-time. I crossed the
Isis by that most wonderful bridge again, and sped
onwards in the bright sunshine. I crossed the
river again at Shillingford, and paused in wonder
on the bridge. No river could be so lovely as the
“Sweet Thames, the silver streaming Thames.” At
sunset that evening I had left the road, and was
rowing up the beautiful river in a skiff at a place
called Henley-on-the-Thames. Perhaps you can
imagine my delight. I slept that night in a beautiful
room looking out over the river and the lovely great
trees on the opposite bank. The moon was rising
above them when I went to bed. Next day I passed
through Windsor, and saw the palace of the King,


and Eton, where the school is for the sons of the
gentry. There was a lot of pretty woodland near
there where Canadians were cutting trees. I did
not care much for Uxbridge, where they were hold-
ing a market. I bought a red flower from old Mrs.
Wakefield, whose uncle discovered the top end of
our Gulf. I gave the flower to young John Yate-
man, for an accident brought me to a place called
Harefield, and I remembered that Mignon lived
there with her little boy. A sudden shower kept me
there talking to John, who has grown a bon nipper,
until his mother came home from playing tennis.
Then I stayed longer, and had supper with them,
going on in the evening. It was a veiy interesting
place where at last I found a bed in a very won-
derful old house looking out on a broad street with
ancient shops. It was the watchmaker s, and there
were two small boys there who took a great interest
in Australian birds, and had won bird-books offered
by our Government. At the top of the street next
the church was Ye Okie Cocoa Tree, a dinkum
coffee tavern, the one place in England where I
ought to have stayed, but did not see it till the
morning, when I was on my way to Harrow. It
was the Sabbath Day, and I went to church on the
top of the hill. There is another gentlemen’s
school there, but I did not go to their church. The
choirbovs I talked to went to the board school there.


Looking from the front of the wonderful church on
the hill. I could see Windsor and all the beautiful
country. Behind I looked out over the whole great
wonderful city of London. My joyride was at an
end. This is a poor account of the good adventures
I am having, but when I come home I will tell you
more about them. They are better than the battles.
END OF VOLUME 1
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
G. Hasshll Sc Son, Currie Street, Adelaide
