

HOME LETTERS
OF A
SOLDIER-STUDENT
JOHN GILBERT JACOB
<Private 50th Batt. A.I.F.>
KILLED IN ACTION, JULY 7th, 1918, AT
HAMEL, NEAR VILLERS BRETONNEUX
VOLUME 2
ADELAIDE: G. HASSELL & SON
1919




HOME LETTERS
OF A
SOLDIER-STUDENT


GILBERT JACOB
1917


HOME LETTERS
OF A
SOLDIER-STUDENT
JOHN GILBERT JACOB
<Private 50th Batt. A.I.F.>
KILLED IN ACTION, JULY 7th, 1918, AT
HAMEL, NEAR VILLERS BRETONNEUX
VOLUME 2
ADELAIDE : G. HASSELL 'S) SON
1919




Home Letters of a Soldier-Student
Perham Downs, Sunday, June 17, 1917.
Dear Mother,
I have just received a letter from Mrs. H on
May 2, saying how she and Gabrielle had been to see
you at “Raewood” and how snug you were settled
there in the midst of the hills in autumn. And I, so
recently complaining of the cold, am here sweltering
in the English heat. The sun is very hot, but it is
more oppressive in their buildings than outside.
They have no idea of ventilation in this country.
Yesterday was a “snorter.” 1 went for a swim in the
evening with George and Herb. There is a deep
pond in a hollow a couple of miles across the downs.
I had not had a swim since I was in Ceylon. It was
fine, indeed, though the air was more or less filled
with knats and aeroplanes at sunset. We parted
at the pond as the red sun went behind the low
dark cloud behind the pines, and went in opposite
directions. It was about the wildest place I have
seen on the downs. There were a lot of young pines
growing wild among the thick matted grass, and


the hills were quite steep. I stayed out on the last
hill as long as I dared, and looked back over the
valley, with its church among the trees and lights
of the barrack city of Tidworth, and watched the
dark storm-cloud. It was a beautiful evening after
such a hot day and after such a swim. W hen I
got home the lights had been put out. but I was just
able to read Mrs. Harris’ letter by the twilight at
the door. I hope soon to get another from you,
since you knew I was in hospital. Ihe latest I heai
from Ernie is that he expects to take to the law
again in Adelaide. He ought to be glad to get home
again but T suppose he is only sorry to miss the
finish of the war. It is a relief to me. anyhowto
think 1 will not be leaving him in the lurch in going
over to George's battalion. We had a good sermon
last Sunday on the text from Numbers: "Better go
back to the land of Egypt.” It is nearly as hot
here, certainly; but T don’t mind going to branee
again now. We shall avenge the wee kiddies Fritz
has been murdering and smashing in oui big city
here. We are fighting for the kiddies mostly, and it
is sure now we are fighting to finish the war. The
Grand Alliance shall win. too. with Dr. Wilson as
head prophet of freedom. 1 don t mind so much
about the men that are strong and able to have their
fight, and T think the padre was right this morning,
too, when he said there were a lot of terrible men


in the A.I.F. But I don’t think the women are as
bad, and I don’t like to read of them being injured
by the enemy. The country here is still beautiful,
but more golden. The corn is still green, but the
grass is gradually turning brown. They will mow
it for hay, and it will be green again. The clover is
pink, and the trees a darker green. There are poppies
again in the cornfields, but cannot be seen from far.
And there are the wild roses, so like the ones at
home, but not flowering so profusely. I can find the
bushes now, though I missed them often among the
hawthorn in May. I found the first rose at the
end of my holidays on June 1. I send you a petal
for luck. It must be a year now since I came here
first. What a wonderful year it has been. What a
beautiful country this is! True, it is not as gor-
geous as our land of the red gums and wattles, but
it is alw-ays pretty, and T love it as the land of my
grandfathers. Thinking of this land as we used to
in France, as home, it is fine to come back to it, and
fine to fight for it. I have seen it all the year, except
for a great blank space in the middle of it. I saw
the full light of the summer, the deep green of the
trees; I have seen the harvest ripen, the hawthorns
turn to red, the leaves grow brighter and brighter
with each setting sun, and fall blown by the keener
breeze, and their dark boughs, leaving only the
roses and chrysanthemums rich against the ivy and


the pines. There was the wet and fog and mists,
foreshadows of the winter. Then the sun upon the
snow, the world clothed in white, never without a
touch of green; the hoar frost on the bare blanches
and the hard frozen ground on the cold starlight
mornings. I saw the dark nights, but the stars so
bright that Jupiter cast a shadow. Then there is a
space for me to pause to contemplate the whirl ot
changing brightness day by day, and the ceaseless
skylarks’ song. Next the sun was battling with
snowstorms. The sun grew strong, and conquered
The soft fresh tints of spring were irresistible and
with a rush covered the earth with a flood of bril-
liant green. Now we are at the full heat of summer,
and at noonday as we march we tread upon a thou-
sand golden buttercups. The sun is king of every
day. I have just watched him sink behind the
Seven Trees. The bright streak of cloud above the
hill was inhabited to-night by a speck, and not a
bird, for it looped the loop. 1 ell Daisy I was
rewarded for sitting here late the other night after
I had written to her, for I saw Venus for the first
time not far to the left of the hilltop. I think
it is'not clear enough to-night. I might get time
this week to write about my joy-ride through Eng-
land in the spring time. I hope Netta is finding
some good friends at B. School, and some good
things to study. Good night.


Pine-Tree Hill, Sunday, July 1, 1917.
Dearest Mother,
This is a sort of New Year’s Day, so I have come
up to the top of the hill to watch the sunset. It is
very beautiful from here. The western side of the
hill is almost abrupt for a couple of hundred feet
or more. The fields below, with a few hedges and
trees, stretch away to the horizon. I remember
writing about the sunset just fifty-two weeks ago
from the hill where George lives now at Rolle-
stone. What a year it has been since those first
great guns began to speak. But now we are win-
ning, the Grand Alliance—the world—is winning.
Now there is Venus above the dark and crimson
streaks of cloud. I have only seen her once before;
then it was above the hill 1 am sitting on. There are
seven trees, though I could not count them till I
was right here. One is forked, and two are quite
dead. Now all the trumpets are playing the "Last
Post,” and 1 must go to bed soon. There is a black-
bird somewhere, I can hear. The breeze is too
dilly for the pen. and it is fresh now after all the
rain. I caught cold, but am better again. Now the
cloud has faded and covered the Evening Star.
Good-night, Mother.
Your loving boy, Gir.


Monday, July 2.
On Saturday I met George and Herb, at Bulford
village. We had tea there, and sat on the grass and
talked and examined the old church. It is quite a
curious old building, with some beautiful cut beams
to the roof. It seems I am not able to go over to
the 19th of 27th Battalion, but when we get back in
France we will, no doubt, be able to arrange for a
transfer. I am now in the hefty class, and will be
put on a draft pretty soon. For the last thirteen
weeks I have had a fairly good time. lam sending
part of my account of holidays in England to Netta
to-day. It would be a pity to have it all submarined
in a lump. It is not meant for a book, though I
put in headings to make it easier to write. I know I
cannot do it justice, but it is a good exercise for me.
I am thereby memorizing my whole impressions of
the country. Even if it is lost, it should be perma-
nent in my mind now. I hope 1 shall get some more
written before I go across again. I can only give
the outstanding details that I can remember. I had
no private secretary to take down the names of the
villages, for instance, as I passed them. I got such
fine letters the other day from you and Lorna and
Mrs. V . I wrote Mrs. V when I met Ran-
dall in France last winter. (A boy is playing
“Sweet and Low” on the phonograph.) Lorna put
in some snaps of you and the dear babes and brave


Mount George, and you sent some of the tops of the
gums to clear my cold away. I often think the
Great Rock on Mount George beats all the ancient
stones of England. It often makes me glad to think
you. at any rate, have such a glorious "land to live
in. I have much to make me happy now, and am in
jolly good trim. A lot of the fellows I know. I
am still with Franklin, the school teacher, and I
have met my old Gardens friend, the cowherd,
again. It would astonish you how much he thinks
of Mrs. V . May the Peace which the world
cannot give he with you all.
/un) Tti.pa.(T<re<roM
Perham Downs, July 9, 1917.
Dear Mother,
You see I am still in this dear land. This
morning I was indeed malingering in a soft job, but
now I am ready, aye ready, but for an extra pair
of boot laces. I have to get them from the quarter-
master. Mr. S , the former Gardens cowboy,
recommended me to the C.S.M. for a position of
clerk, as being “so learned a family.” The job was
to last two or three weeks, but it has finished to-day.
I have been “combed out.” and am now in No. 4,
the last camp at the top, where Charles used to live
last year. My former friends have gone. They


went earlv this morning, and ] now occupy the place
where they used to sleep. 1 scarcely know anyone
in this lot. My neighbour is reading a book from
the same church library as we have been reading.
They are a rum collection of books. 1 hey look like
volumes some old fellow did not want. Franklin,
the school teacher, read the complete poetical works
of Scott, and then started on Shakespeare, the
only book I could find to read was a life of Steven-
son Nor am T sorrv I had so restricted a choice,
I hope to finish it. The other volumes in the hut
seem mostly dc pietotc or meditations of some one
or other, with the covers torn off. The weather is
clearing now ; after almost two days of dismal rain
old Sol has come out, and it is a fine evening once
Wednesday. I have been busy the last day
or two. I took one whole morning to change my
boot laces, and am now fully equipped. 1 have
washed a shirt and some socks. 1 have bathed
myself and had my hair cut and got my pay. U e
have been for a couple of route marches, and had
two or three kit inspections. We got up early for
a final saluting parade, so we are fit and fully
trained. It is an inspiring thing to see our mixed
crowd, with navvies and middle-aged farmers more
or less broken by a couple of years of war, smar-
tened up and made new soldiers once more by an


hour of saluting with their putties off on a chilly
summer morning. They are giving us a lot of
ceremonial drill now, too. I think we will be able
to resume this open fighting that is coming soon, and
make old Fritz run. Our discipline is simply lovely.
They are a queer lot in this country. They are
making a terrible fuss because Fritz has been drop-
ping some bombs on them; and they are having
races and beer on the strength of it. I may send
you the account of the State beer business at Car-
lisle, which is rather interesting, as so many people
think it such an iniquity. I stayed in that town one
night. That is where I saw the chrysanthemums.
On Saturday I went to meet George again at
Fideldean (pronounced Farldeen), where the chest-
nut tree is. I was late, and he was not there; but
I expect to see him again at the base at Le Havre.
However, I had a very delightful walk, after being
in the office studying red tape. There were some
lovely lilies that scented the village streets. It is
hard to describe how pretty it was coming across
the desert behind the butts in the evening. There
were poppies near the cornfields, and some yellow
flowers and purple thistles. There were flowers
among the ripening brown grass all the way. In
the waste valley the stalks of grass were almost
shoulder high. But the north wind on the wild hill-
tops was best of all. From the wide solitude I came


to Tidworth, with its rows and lines of great brick
barracks. I came past the officers’ messes; they
were very pretty and different from anything else
in England- —red brick buildings with queer Indian
names, and covered with creepers. There were
ramblers and sweet peas and strange tropical plants.
The comparative newness of the buildings and gar-
den paths gave an Australian appearance, yet theie
was something peculiarly English in the names.
Good-night.
Y ours ever, Gib.
Base, France. July 22, 1917.
Dear Mother,
It has been a fine day for Sunday. I did not seem
to have any Sabbath last week; I missed church and
everything else, even my tea, through listening to
a band, and trying to read, and watch the French
people at the same time. But to-day began bettei ,
I was awakened early by the cold. It was a dull
misty dawn, but the blackbirds were already singing
like mad, as if it was going to be a gorgeous day;
and so it turned out. The blackbirds sing the same
old songs here as they did at home. It is good to
Jiear them. After breakfast—and I enjoyed my
tea and bit of bacon —the sun dispelled the mist, and
drove it from the valley in which we live. Aot a
cloud all day. We had a church parade, and I read


Milton in the sun. 1 have turned classical again.
For dinner we had plums and some rice and lettuces.
Afterwards I found Herb., and we marched with
some others to a wood. It was a wonderful wood,
and we sat in the aisle, ft was more like a temple
—with tall pillars and a wide central vaulted aisle—
than a forest or plantation, which it really was. I be-
lieve they were beech trees, but taller altogether
than they grow in England. We were men of all
divisions, and we sat in States, so that we met men
of our own parts of the country in different bat-
talions. Three padres presided, and the chief item
of the afternoon was for each man to write on a
wee bit of paper the prettiest place he had seen, and
why, and the padres read them out. There were
quite a number. Of course, the prettiest place is
Bridgewater, because of the white gums and wattles
and the “‘wee hoose” by the old apple trees. Can the
Eden of Mesopotamia compare with it? The prize
was given to a man who had seen the Scottish hills
mirrored in a lake. He had seen twofold the glory
and remained sober withal.. The second prize was
for this place (Harfleur), and it is pretty. It was
given to Weary Willy, who said it was a home from
home, the malingerer’s paradise. Now the sun has
gone again; Herb, has gone to bed long ago; I must
go home. It is a beautiful, peaceful evening, with now
and then a distant blackbird’s note. I deserved to lose


the prize this afternoon for forgetting the magpie.
But I will give up writing descriptions; I shall never
attain to the eloquence so many used this afternoon
It did me good indeed to hear so much fine im-
promptu writing. Or, if I write more, 1 must tty
harder to do better. Our fellows all have a great
eye for beauty. Now I wish you all m our dear
land peace such as passeth understanding here.
Good-night.
July 31, 1917.
Dear Mother, . , <
I came back to the battalion again on Sunday, and
I marched all the morning to the tune of the old
schoolboys’ band. There are still many of my old
friends here, and it is pleasing to see them again.
And—such is fate—there are some of George s pals
here in our company. He keeps getting left behind,
and I don’t know now whether he will come to our
battalion at all. This is a pretty country, a little
different from France, with scattered farmhouses,
but covered all over with beans and maize and
ripening corn. I came over (what seemed like)
Mount Lofty the other night in the train. As the
half-moon set it was bon to see the strmgies and
the sheaoaks and the pines, and even the white stems
of the young red gums. There were the plains
away below, beneath the mist, and, beyond, what


appeared to be the sea but was not. The “mallee”
on the delta of the Nile was not half so fine. And
above was the old plough and the Pole Star and
those other queer constellations. It was very beau-
tiful and cool, and I had to whistle “Now the day”
softly as we went along and all the men lay sleeping,
though 1 knew they would roar at my voice in the
morning, f invented a new verse about the soldier.
When I came here the blackbird was still singing.
I said in my last to you how the blackbirds were
singing in the morning. I read afterwards it is
quite abnormal for them to sing here so late. They
reckon it is extraordinary and a portent of glad
times to come soon, and I think somehow it is, too,
and these dear birds may do much to comfort us.
We arrived here on Sunday, but we had a sermon
on Monday by the Archdeacon. Like Great Grand-
dad, we have to hear him when he comes, you know,
and even he could not have been more moving, I
think, at any rate, to any man who had ever had a
mother. I went to a prayer meeting in the evening.
They do have such things in this country sometimes.
I joined the fellowship of the Y.M.C.A. a while
ago, and have been going in a bit for the more public
form of religion. It is not bad to discuss the prin-
ciples of Christianity with such a crowd as we had
the other night—Howitzer Tommies, men with kilts
or slouch hats, and every sort of soldier, about a


score of them. 1 kept meeting old pals on the road.
It is very fine to find fellows eveiywheie that ie
member you and stop to speak, and it is good to see
old friends again. But there are ever the brave ones
we miss, and it makes our feelings run high Ihe
S B's told me the man I respected most had died.
He was an old Yorkshire chap that never could
learn to form fours. I made friends with him on
the boat He knew the book I was reading, lie
used to love Dickens’ tales, and after he had gone
into what he thought was certain death at the double
he was a wonderful man to know. I am in No. 1
Section again, and George Gordon is still in it. i
met him the first day I went to camp, and we have
been friends ever since. He says I used to be a
little bloke then. And Cpl. Moore is our com-
mander. He went to the A.H.S. once, and I met
him the first day I joined the battalion last yeai, and
he had no blanket. Neither of us have one now.
But it is summertime, and we have a house to live in.
Sunday Evening, August 19.
Dear Mother,
I have been waiting for bad weather to write you,
but none comes. It has been another lovely bright
day. It is the anniversary to-day of when L tirst
joined the battalion. I have been a private m it
for twelve months. It has been a wonderful year.


I am sure 1 have learned a great deal in it, and
gained in many tangible ways, and how many in-
tangible. On Saturday afternoon George and I
went for a drive; we had a picnic, but so different
from the picnics Ernie will tell you we used to have
on the ice six months ago. It is marvellous how
beautiful all that country is now, covered with tall,
rank grass, and full of Jock’s thistles and blue corn-
flowers and such scarlet poppies. I always like the
poppies best. It was most beautiful to see it all, and
inspiring. This evening we two went for a walk,
and picked blackberries growing by the brook. They
were not much good, not like the brambles on the
banks of Cox’s Creek. But you would be very
interested in this scenery, with’ its old, old pollard
willows almost an olive green; the thatched farm-
houses, the little patches of green, and stooks of
fresh-cut corn, and quaint old windmills going round
and round. I am so glad George has come over
here, and we are together again. lam glad, too, to
hear from Den. that he has got his star at last. Tt
will mean more comfort for him; he will have a
batman and he will get better pay. Last night there
were some High School boys over here who recog-
nized me, and I discovered that our little corporal,
whom they had come to see, was an old boy. He
went to the school since I left, and knew Den. well.
He is a fine chap, and has an M.H. He is a pupil


teacher, and started Arts the year I came away.
George brought a lot of good pals over with him,
so we are doing well. Spriggo and my other
friends are still alright. We sent a cable to you
to-day; I hope it has turned up before you get this.
After we came back from our walk we went to a
sing-song, and now the Evening Star is taking
command, for the nights are drawing in, and I can-
not see to write much longer. I often see the
Evening Star, just after sunset now, and I still hear
the blackbirds sing. Nothing can destroy these
things of beauty. Keep hoping, keep your faith
shining; love shall never fail. A 1 ay Net. and Day.
have glad hearts, too, in the springtime.
Your ever-loving boy, Gm.
September 9, 1917.
Dear Lorna, . _ ,
It is a beautiful sunny afternoon, and George and
I are sitting on the stump of an old apple tree up
on the hill where we can hear only the breeze that
makes the trees glisten, and the water falling o\er
the dam behind the hedge; so 1 am just writing to
let you know how we are getting on, and how we
are "enjoying the sunshine. Yesterday we went for
a bathe in the creek, ft was a bit fiesh, but good
and deep with a strong current, and made us feel
bonza after. W A e had afternoon tea out of doors, and


then went for a walk past the old water-wheel and
picked blackberries. Strolling on in the evening
we came to a small village with red-tiled-roofed
cottages, and church with a crooked steeple with a
rooster on the top of it. It was quite a fine church
of the early seventeenth century. It had a slate
roof, and the high tapering steeple had quite a
decided kink in it. We rested there awhile. This
morning we went to a bit of a service away out in
a great paddock the other side of a wood. The
mist of the night before had cleared, and the glori-
ous sun shone out and filled the world with an
atmosphere of hope as it showed up the first sign of
autumn colour in the trees. There were many red
poppies and a few golden buttercups that are still
lingering and enjoying the brightness of the
morning.
September 10, 1917.
Dear Mother,
1 have not written you for a good while. 1 have
received many letters, but have been unable to reply
to them. Some have been well nigh deleted alto-
gether in my pocket, but are the more appreciated.
George and T went into the line together last time.
I put on my blue socks, nor took them ofif for 101
hours ; they were good. The war made me think
of Armageddon of prophecy—of the cataclysm of


the nations that loomed like an impossible phantom
ahead of an unstable society—when as a schoolboy I
learned the history of civilization. In a way it made
the experience the more terrible, and yet not. It
helps one to get a larger view, though only a dim
view, from before. It helps one to remember a
greater conflict, momentous as this warfare is—the
conflict of ideals, that is obscured by the dust of
battle. We used to realize that even from such a
downfall of the nations there would arise a race
more noble still. It was when we two, and old
Hurrel from the West Coast, were living like wom-
bats in a hole, that we received your letters. Daisy
sent a bit of golden wattle, herald of the spring,
while it seemed that already the slow winter was
rushing upon us. And you and Netta wrote about
the dewdrops, how in your country, at our home,
even so dismal a thing as a dewdrop on a cobweb
sparkled in the sunshine. The great Day Star in
our homeland can make even the raindrop on a
bare apple tree blaze like an opal. What, then,
cannot the power of God accomplish? You sent
me, too, the photo from Port Elliot, of the Univer-
sity students. I had forgotten about it. although 1
believe I paid for it long ago. I cannot even remem-
ber the names of half the ladies in it. T wish I
had taken more trouble to learn them. T hardly
realized then what it was worth to me. What a


fine group of friends it is. It reminded me I used
to be a philosopher, and once I was a different sort
of wombat when I was the crankiest of all the
cheerful students that ran the satirical newspaper
at Daylesford 1 often remember the marvellous
good times T have had and how much I had learned
of so much beauty before I left home, and it makes
me thankful indeed. And how much cannot be
taken away! I had a fine letter, too. from Nellie
when I was in the trenches, telling me about the wee
girls at Temple Cloud and about the Bible study
circle at the 'Varsity, and the visit of old Dr. Baton
—the man with the wonderful smile. I heard him
tell a story at Daylesford of little Tagoo, the crippled
boy, who grew to have a smile like Jesus used to
have. It was a wonderful story, told to the children
in church, and it was on the same day that I learned
the 58th Chapter Isaiah: “Thou shalt be like a
watered garden, and like a spring of water whose
waters fail not. In the same wretched hole I
also received a fine long letter from Mrs. H. .
V ith the bits of wattle you sent, we were well able
to celebrate Wattle Day. It was a beautiful day,
and did not even rain. It began with glorious bright
moonlight. I had not noticed how bright the moon
was till midnight. But then from a new place I
realized the wonder once more of the heavens, and
T was reminded that the nations are but as the drop


of a bucket. We seemed to be in a world of peace
once more that morning, and Nature herself was
not disturbed, her beauty as immoveable as the
firmament above. After a good sleep we had a bath
in the morning. It was grand; and in the after-
noon I went for a long walk. It was most interest-
ing. George went with the crowd in a ’bus, but I
walked with a cart, and put the brake on going
down the hills. The hawthorns were red all along
the hedges, and the harvest was ripening in the
fields. We passed through changing scenes, past
orchards, corn and hops and beans, along the main
highways and through big towns, and along wind-
ing country lanes. It seemed unending, and the
sun was set by the time we reached our new home
by the old windmill that was still going slowly
round and round.
On Sunday we had the evening off, and went to
a service in a French schoolroom. It was the anni-
versary of my first big fight when we took the farm,
and we had a service of commemoration, and sang
“For All the Saints.” The padre reckons they are
saints —the men that fell that day; and perhaps
many did fight far better than they knew, and gave
all they had without the joy of knowing it. Any-
way, it was a fine hymn to sing, and it was fine,
after another vear, to have a service to remember
all those who' fell. It has been a hard year at


times, but it has been full of great experiences, and,
I reckon, almost worth an ordinary lifetime, even if
it has made some of us more than one year older.
It has brought us one year nearer to the great
peace that shall make all our present sufferings as
nought. We are having some lovely weather here
now, and are enjoying a good spell. George and I
are so glad to be together. I had hardly realized
before how lost I was without a true friend who
“doubleth joy and cutteth grief in halves.” We
even share our letters in the reading and writing
thereof. The other day we received a parcel from
Miss Grace M. , with some ginger cake in it,
and just as we were going to have it for our tea
Herb, and his friend came in. They had walked
many miles to find our battalion.
France, September 12, 1917.
Dear Net.,
It is September now, the “Hunter’s Moon,” you
know, and the “free and happy” is smiling. This
afternoon we had a holiday, with sports. To begin
with, we had a fine luncheon—mashed potatoes and
beans and a tin of sardines with olive oil—and we
put some daily sauce on to it all to make a salad.
Afterwards we had a crust of bread, and plum jam
and cheese. Then we went out to the field where
the sports were to be held, on the bank of the


river. The recent fine days had dried the ground,
and the flat was in beautiful condition, and green
as any lawn, and the bright sun shone out, making
the dav glorious; and all the troops were out to
enjoy themselves, and the Froggies to watch, or to
sell things. It was a good chance to see all the
fellows we knew from the different companies, and
was quite a pleasant diversion. Thank you so much,
Net., for your fine letter that I got in our little
mu dhole, and for the bit of wattle you sent with it.
It is bonza to think that while here w intei
threatens us, round the corner of the eaith- and
it is only a little earth in the heavens —there is the
springtime. Somehow, your bit of yellow flower
made it not so far to our gay land that is ahvays
there. It is a good thing there is always a bright
side to the earth, and there is always summer some-
where. But 1 am glad ours is the gay land, where
the flowers are bright in the sun, and even the
queer birds laugh and sing for joy. With a rainbow
caught in a cobweb, no wonder the wee kooka-
burras were learning to laugh.
October 1. 1917.
Dear Mother,
Denis told me last Monday T had better see a
doctor about a bit of rash on my face.. You
hear from him how he found me This is just a


line to let you know ! am in the 2nd Australian
General Hospital, and hope to go on to the Skin
Hospital to-morrow to get my hide repaired. Thurs-
day, Ith. 1 have at last arrived at a place where
they can treat my disease. This afternoon I had
some olive oil or something put on my face,, and
I now have my head in a great bandage, so I should
soon be healed now; in fact, my sore places had of
themselves begun to disappear. I have been so long
coming here that Sister could hardly get the ban-
dages on to the right places. 1 do not mean that
this malady has caused me much pain or discom-
foit, foi it has not; rather it has been the means
of pleasure and enjoyment. First I spent some
days sitting in the sun, because I could not share
m the ceremonial drill that was the order of the
day. It is nothing for me to miss this, as T learned
it all more than ten years ago. Then I went to
a hospital, where I came across an absorbing book.
J used to stay in bed, or sit out in the sunshine
and sea breezes, in my pyjamas, and read so much
that I used to dream whole pages and paragraphs
at night. It is a change, however, from dreaming
m pictures, especially when you can’t make out the
meaning of the longer words. Fancy, in October,
in this country, sitting outside after tea in pyjamas!
It was glorious weather we were having, with
bright moonlight nights. I stayed in my tent, how-


ever, at night. Fritz killed two horses and a cow
in the next paddock but one. Had I been unlucky
enough to stay at that hospital 1 believe those sea
breezes would have cured me altogether without
coming here. It was fine to be on the broad, open
beach, where none intrudes, and to hear the music
of the ocean’s roar. The tide was out, and it was
a long way across the sands to where the waves
were breaking. I could not reach them, but it
made me shout; it made me feel 1 was a boy again.
But for two halfpence in my pocket, 1 would have
turned a somersault. Only one thing disappointed
me—the first notice I saw, “No Swimming." But
never mind. Were I allowed swimming and to
buy figs at 3d. each, 1 might be cured too soon
altogether. And now it has changed to wet and
stormy. ... I stopped writing to go for my
supper. 1 was just in time to run for my bowl
and spoon and get a drop of soup. Supper is a
most delightful institution. We can get it without
a ticket any time during an hour and a half in the
evening. The other meals are different. We get a
ticket each, and then wind, in one long procession,
getting gradually nearer to the wdelder of the
mighty ladle. This establishment is so vast it is
indeed a “triumph” of organization. And we are
such a motley crowd, with our heads and faces all
tied up. We have our cup of tea at 4 o’clock, so I


did enjoy my soup to-night, and I found it had
cleared up, so I went for a run on the beach and
a stroll on the grand piazza. October 14. It is very
glorious down by the seaside this afternoon, and I
am enjoying the music of the sea and a sermon by
Rev. Sands on the “New Orthodoxy.” I had to get
a board from a wrecked bathing box to make a
seat, for it was nowhere dry enough to sit. The
summer indeed is ended. The week has been wet
and stormy. We put our clocks back to winter time
last Sunday. But it is not yet winter. This autumn
is a beautiful season. The storm clouds have cleared
away, and the hurricane has gone. J forget whether
I told you what a good time I had with Dennie one
night back in our last billets. He came just at tea-
time, when I had a cup of tea and a biscuit and a
half. So we went into the town and bought some
tomatoes, and took them to a joint, and got. them
fried with some eggs and ate them with bread
and butter. He told me about the bread and butter
their chaps had up in the line for a surprise. Den.
quite did me good with his enthusiasm. He was
almost as enthusiastic about his battalion as when he
first joined it. We brought some f ruit, too, and ate it
in an out-of-the-way spot. The ladies in the shops
always gave me all the parcels to carry, till I could
hardly carry any more. Of course, they thought I
was Den.’s batman. It was a bit awkward for him


to be seen with me in the streets, but still we had a
bonza time, and he told me all about his trip to
Blighty. He enjoyed himself immensely. I nave
put up a record in reading lately. 1 read a whole
book in a day and a half. It was a school yam,
and —I am afraid you will be shocked a gir s
school in America. Did you ever read Jean Web
ster? I have just read two of hers. There is a
lot of literary and mentally scientific interest at-
tached to them. They are masterpieces of style and
deal with social institutions in America. 1 think
thev must be the work of a true woman. Do you
know anything about her? I like knowing some-
thing of the life of a writer whose books 1 lead.
There was a red-haired Scotchwoman in one book
that reminded me of you; she was so terribly glad
when the big house got burned down with all hei
hundred and one babies in it. Monday lbth. it is
a beautiful day again, despite the thundering storm
in the night. There was such a tumult of rain and
thunder that I was amazed at the calm sunshine
when I came out of my tent this morning, and 1
took my latest book of verses down to the beach
instead of doing any more writing lam reading
t G Whittier as an antidote to the orthodoxy of
last night’s service. I went to the Anglican Hut,
and enioyed it very much. I had just finished some
writing, when they asked me to go out, as they


were preparing the room for a service. So I went
down by the sea. It was most beautiful. The sun
had set awhile, and the tide was away out. Just
a few sails on the smooth sea. and a wonderful
music all the time from the white line of foam
beyond the wet beach, which reflected all the bright-
ness of the evening glow. And through the “glow”
itself there shone the Evening Star. So much
reading of school stories has made me think of my
old companions and what has become of them. But
now I thought of the lines we used to learn to-
gether :
So sings the Day Star in his ocean bed,
And yet anon repairs his drooping- head,
And tricks his beams, and with new spangled ore
Flames in the forehead of the Morning Star.”
Aly Lycidas and I learned those lines together, and
we have admired Venus together too. But I left
the sea to sing to the mermaids or whoever else
would listen, and I went to the church. It was
very High Church, and very beautiful. The hut
had been transformed; the walls were neatly draped
in green, and there was everything, including knee-
cushions, that a church can desire, except a stained
window. 1 he light had failed, so there were candles
stuck in bottles and stood about on biscuit boxes,
and candles burning on the flower table. And the
flowers—real perennial asters and some white


daisies. Of course, the priest was in full robe
and there was high-class intonation. VVe had the
proper Ancient and Modern Hymnal, so I knew the
hymns. They chose my favourites, too. lhe Lana
dian padre, a splendid great man with a fine twang
in his speech, preached, as usual, on a popular
hymn. What heretical song do you think he chose.
It was “Nearer, my God.” and he added the as
verse which is not printed. He did not say the
authoress was an actress or an infidel, but went so
far as to acknowledge that she was a very beautiful
woman, although her mother had picked up her
husband in a prison. He said too. that the Wan-
derer” was old Tacob himself, and his laddei the
“Steps unto Heaven.” I was interrupted a page ago
to carry down a stove. You see, even autumn has
its advantages, and we have a fire going here in the
hut to-night; and, you see, I can still do jumping.
Yesterday, getting ready for the wash, I handled a
ton or two of dirty shirts; but I like tbe hght jobs
better now that I am growing old. I had a fine
job the other day, cleaning all the sick gentlemen s
boots. I would make a good batman for Den ,
think or perhaps George will be able to get a
commission! too. This afternoon I went on to help
Sister tying up the jaws, etc., of the troops. There
was a real dinkum sunset to-night. The sun was
waiting half down when I came round the cornel,


and it vanished almost before the little church bell
could toll again. The western clouds were mostly
dark with red streaks behind; but in the east the
clouds were buff, and great banks of cumuli, and
behind them the blue. Never have I seen these skies
put forth such a clear, brilliant blue. And it grew
almost brighter as the buff clouds changed to a
bright pink. But both colours faded quickly, and
later, as the earth grew dark, they became white
again, and sank on the horizon. I tried to run
across the beach, but the tide was out again, and
I got tired half-way to the sea. The five-sailed
cutter seemed a long way off; but I got right down
to the little wavelets, and read them some of the
antidote. Old “Greenleaf” is good. His verses
seemed full of the sea and the hills and the fresh
air. I was glad I had got his book. 1 came to this
on the beach this morning:
“Tfie west winds blow, and singing low,
I hear the glad streams run:
The windows of my soul I throw
Wide open to the sun.”
I had not thought about him being another Ameri-
can ; but, there, his philosophy is identical with that
of the girl in the last book. They say it in very
different ways; they were differently brought up,
but they say the same thing exactly. Whittier’s
“Wherever Through the Ages” was the favourite


of the students’ hymns,, but 1 have never heard it
sung by soldiers. I shall be a Quaker yet. When
it had grown too dark to read and I had watched a
quaint string of fisher folk, with their grub hoes
go hurrying by, I came back across the flat beach
fnd left the sea to sleep. When I looked back from
the piazza, across the dark sea, and among the black
storm clouds, blazed the bright Peace Star, reflected
as a line of light by the wet sand Now all the
clouds are gone, and Jove is king of the sky Since
last winter I have not seen the stars so brilliant a.
they are to-night. I have not told you much about
this hospital. They are all real bon Australian
Sisters, which, of course, is very nice; but it is a
Tommy hospital, with an Anglican-Canadian padre.
The mixture of nations is always one of the most
interesting features of a hospital. But never have
struck such hundreds of Tommies. I reckon it is
quite a valuable experience to become acquainted
with the famous English soldier we used to read
about so much in the textbooks, and I know one or
two of them fairly intimately. What a difference
that will make to the dry study of English history
The book I was reading over at the other hospital
was a fine study in English character. It was Ire
Channings.” It took me back to England. I had
not previously realized what an impression my last
trip to England had made on me. It was anothei


school yarn. I hope you do not weary of my love of
learning. The centre figure of its scene is an old
cathedral. I could see again half a dozen of them,
clearly, in a flood of golden sunshine, surrounded
by green trees and beautiful old houses, and the
blue over-arch of sky. They are a wonderful pic-
ture now. There is that fresh scent of grass and
buttercups, very faint—more of freshness than of
scent—almost imaginary, and quite unlike any of
the most persuasive scents of Australia. I have
seen the college school, too, with the young gentle-
men at work before breakfast. I have seen the head
master’s house, and the old cloister, and the Bishop’s
mulberry tree. Do you wonder at my enjoying
such a book? And then there is the beautiful pic-
ture of family life. Some of us needed a war to
make us appreciate its beauty, with enough sorrow
and enough self-sacrifice to show the unnecessity
of war and the high sense of honour, at school and
in the home. When I see those ancient emblems
there now I must believe it lives still on some of the
sacred spots of English soil.
I can’t read much about the war, but I have an
idea that George and the old Hungrv Half Hundred
and a few others dealed old Fritz a deathblow the
other day. It makes me very hopeful, anyhow.
Perhaps by the time you get this you will hear the
Christmas bells of Peace. It seems a terrible time


since 1 have had a letter from anyone, hut these wet
nights I must try to write a few a Merry Christmas.
Good night, Mother, and much love.
France, October 12, 1917.
Dear Netta,
I have been trying to write you a letter the whole
week; hut, somehow, whenever 1 have had a bit of
time T have been too bad-tempered, or it has been
too inviting to go and play on the beach. 1 made
one attempt to write a long and cheerful letter and
forego my supper, which, like other meals in hos-
pital, takes a long time to procure. I had no sooner
laboured half a page, full of fault, than the light
went out, so I had my bit of soup. But afterwards
I was listless and could scarcely settle to read. The
stiff chairs seemed comfortless. 1 began to wander
round almost in despair, when someone vacated the
armchair, and I nearly fell into it. First T dozed
in luxury while the light was out again—l suppose
Fritz was over, or the current had failed. But it
came on again, and I fell to reading my book. I
alwavs call it your hook. It is the Tank, story about
“Dear Enemy,” and it was because you wrote you
had been reading it that it caught my eye in the Red
Cross library on Sunday. Though it made me sad
at first for those poor orphan kiddies—and I was
amazed that such letters could pass the censor—yet


I began to like the queer red-headed girl and the
Scotch doctor, and then I began to find it funny. 1
sat in the corner one night and rocked and roared
with laughter. That is a splendid piece about the
monkey with the toothache. It is further on where
it begins to get pathetic, and T was almost crying,
and it made me roar again. It is “some” book in-
deed. Last night I came to the climax. It is
alright when she kicks the wretched politician bloke
out. And then the fire! I never stirred from that
armchair till I had read every word. And I had
just time to go and say good-night to the big sea
and wild west wind without being chased indoors
by the beastly policeman. It is a lovely story, and
I have enjoyed it very much. When I took it back to
change it I reckoned I would not be able to get an-
other like it. After vainly looking, I cast about for
something dry and classical for a change. An essay
on “Loneliness” was too fat, as I may be healed by
to-morrow. The name “Webster” on a book seemed
familiar, and, taking it down, I beheld the precur-
sory “Daddy Long Legs." with pictures in it drawn
evidently by the red-headed Sally Mcßride, and
about the same asylum before the reformation. I
did not think I could bear to read it, however funny,
and knowing the happy ending. Glancing through,
I saw the name of Airs. Lippet, and that the letters
were written by Judy instead of to her. To me she


had a shadowy background of misery. I would get
mixed. It would spoil the splendid first that really
comes second. As I was putting it up again the
Sister who had charge of the library, looking-
through her catalogue, exclaimed ' “Have you read
‘Daddy Long Legs’ ?’’ I had to say “No; but I
will.” She had enjoyed it every word, so I gave
her our “Dear Enemy” to enjoy in exchange. In
the big hut they were crowding for a concert and
fuming, a thousand pipe-fires at once. I sat on a
tall rickety form at the back, and had a look at the
new book till the music should start. It was not
about the misery of an orphan, but the loveliest
schoolgirl. I hardly liked to read her private letters
that were not to me. I did not notice the concert —
they say it was funny, but there was no good music;
nor did I notice it was raining. I wish you would
let me know just what sort of books these are. I
have never given much time to fiction. I fear that
I have discovered lately a morbid appreciation of
sentimental novels that I should scorn to read. Is
my taste bad ? I know the first “Enemy” one was
almost your recommendation, and much of the in-
terest is psychological and philanthropic. I used to
be a psychologist, you know. Rut this other? Per-
haps there is a redeeming literary interest as well as
the frivolous personal interest. I know I have
already abandoned my firm intention of buying an


asylum with my deferred pay at Unley Park or
Mount Barker, in favour of 88,000 sheets of yellow
paper, a Manox pen, and a packet of melon seeds
to sow at Bridgewater. There is a lot of good philo-
sophy in “Daddy Long Legs,” too. She says it is
the “little things” that make us wild. All we need
is to say “It’s nothing,” and they would not matter.
I wish I could write letters like that girl. I have
not even Latin prose to worry me. nor have I lived
in a ’sylum. I wish I could draw such pictures, too.
I would make a good one of myself, in my new
Scotch coat, which was once a greatcoat, but has
shrunk to a tight frock coat, and my grey panta-
loons, my head all bandaged, too. A hot compres-
sion on my left jaw, cold linanient on my right,
and brimstone and treacle rubbed into my hair.
Lights out. Gib.
Somewhere in France,
Friday, October 26, 1917.
A Merry Xmas. Mother dear! If there is no
sight of Peace to make you glad, yet be glad in
spite of it, for the Peace will come. If it has not
been a cheap or easy Peace, it will be a Great Peace.
If it is hard to be gay when winter is coming, I sav
“A Merry Xmas” again. Spring comes after the
snow. Of course, at home there is no snow, and the
weather is all beautiful; so it is in every country, if


only the people would go the right way to enjoy it.
And they will learn to. It shall all be beautiful, even
the snow at Xmas. I am now in a detail camp. 1
am cured of my skin disease —spotted jaw or what-
ever it was —and I have been turned out of the 25th
and sent to a convalescent camp. T had never been
to one before in all my hospital experience, and
thought I would like it. But they did not keep me
a day, but sent me here, which is next door. I
guess I will set out for the Base to-morrow. The
Base, Monday Night. We had breakfast early this
morning, and afterwards I read newspapers in the
sunshine at the back of the canteen. There was a
bed of daisy bushes there, and straggling through
them, and supported by them, were chrysanthe-
mums, all colours, getting brighter and richer, like
they do when the other flowers begin to fade with
the autumn. They made a patch of brightness near
the tent where I was living. But Ino sooner went
to finish this letter than we were all sent out for a
walk. We went down to the cliffs, overlooking the
beautiful blue sea, and came back through the town
(Treport). In sheltered parts the trees had still a
few autumn tints, but for the most part the squares
were full of bare, cheerless boughs after the gales.
J have to go back a bit to the night before. I was
going to tell you how I went down to the cliffs just
after sunset, when the west wind was blowing


strong, 1 walked along the lonely brink as it got dark,
and got wet with the spray from the breakers far
below. It was a grand adventure, but it almost
made me afraid. Further on I came to civilization
again and a Y.M.C.A., and was just in time for a
concert. I was soon cured like a haddock in the
fumes of the sacred weed. It was moonlight when
I came out into the fresh air again, and I went home
by a winding country road. It was very beautiful.
The moonlight was not darkened by the almost
leafless trees by the roadside. I suppose it was
the fresh air, but I thought France had never
seemed so beautiful. I am afraid it often looks
best in the dark. In lands where they are indigen-
ous, the deciduous trees present a strange appear-
ance growing in forests in the winter. And in the
city squares they let us see the city’s ugliness. But
no one appreciates the bare forms of the trees them-
selves more than I do, and they have a special fas-
cination in the moonlight. Flow can I write about
coming back here? We were just in time for tea.
It seemed like coming home again. I was put into
the same tent, and we had tea in the big bright
dining hall. All were Australians now. There
were the familiar faces of the chaps that have
always stayed at the Base. They are all of higher
rank now than when I knew them first, but that
makes no difference to old friends. There were the


same beautiful trees on the hills, only in their autumn
leaves more beautiful still, as the sun went down;
and when the glow faded from the clouds the
Evening Star was very bright above the trees on
the hilltop. It was then, after tea. that I met Mills,
who had come from the Battalion, and 1 asked him
if he knew anything about George ( his brother, who
fell on September 26, in Flanders, near Ypres). He
told me it was more than a month since he had
died, and he himself had buried him, and they had
put a little cross above his grave. Mills has been
awfully decent to me ever since. T have made
another friend. He is an invalid now, and I expect
will be going back to Australia. You don’t know
how line it is to be here. Not only is it a place 1
have been in before, but it is a proper Australian
place, and we are looked after well. It is not merely
that we get plenty of dinner. There are those that
say the Y.M.’s and billiard rooms in the base camps
are not a good thing and make us discontented; but
they don’t know the value of little things. We have
Australian Y.M.’s here, and I think they are lovely
huts. I went down on Sunday night. I had not a
bean to buy a mug of tea. but I did not want any.
I was content to look at the pictures, the cheerful
lights hung with little red kerchiefs with a border
of white lace. There were chrysanthemum cur-
tains to the windows, and withal real crysies and


marigolds arranged on the tables, and in a jar at
the end of the room a mass of autumn leaves! And
the library! It is like our bookshelf at home, only
bigger. I wanted to read them all. Just the array
of the writers took me back to another great world.
The next day, when I had been paid, I took a book,
and then interrupted the blue library girl’s letter to
play her at ping-pong. But enough of these wild
and whirling words. You must excuse this inco-
herent rigmarole; and I will repeat. Mother, A
Merry Christmas, for to whom more than the dear
spirit of Christmas must the poor and sorrowing
look for blessing. A Merry Christmas to us all.
wherever we be, and God bless us every one.
Your ever-loving boy, Gibuie.
Monday, 29th.
Dearest Mother.
The rain has cleared away, and the night is fine
again. The sunset was as brilliant as the autumn
leaves, and the Evening Star goes down bright behind
the hill of trees. It is the old familiar hill, where
the trees have turned to autumn. For I have left
the hospital and come back to the Base again (Le
Havre). I got back last night, and they told me
about George. Of course, you knew long ago. I
can have no doubt of it now, and can do nothing


but write this to you. Nothing could have sur-
prised me less; but it made an end to my anxiety.
I told you I was left out of the big attack for
military reasons the first time. It was while they
were holding the line, the day before the first great
attack, that the whole of my gun section was wiped
out by a shell, and George was with them. It was
a small incident in the greatest of battles. They
put a little wooden cross on his grave before they
drove the enemy back. But from its deep meaning
we must find comfort, much comfort, for the great-
ness of that little sign comes from within. May it ever
remind 11s of Him who said “Let not your heart be
troubled.” For Jesus has taught us the value of
self-sacrifice, and that Love can conquer both Death
and Darkness too. Harold Spencer and George
Carter were both killed as well, and Mor ice and
Phillips were w r ounded. I am next on the gun, and
Kerin, who was left out with me. I think Harold
and Carter both have some kiddies in the West. I
used to share my sardines with them.
October 31, 19IT'.
Dear Net.,
Here it is the end of October and I have not
written you greeting for Xmas ! But I will go down
to-night and get something pretty to send you; for
we must be glad at Xmas, though our dear earth is


torn and bleeding, though her great cities are filled
with darkness and sorrow, and so many hearts are
broken. We cannot be together this Xmas Day, nor
shall we ever all gather together to make holiday in
this life. But, Net., it is not because Love is lost
between us. 1 hey tell me dear old George has been
called away, and his poor body has been broken.
But his spirit was not crushed by old Fritz; he is
fighting on, but in a nobler battle, and in a braver,
more glorious company, with truer comrades, and
more loving leaders, in a world of sunshine and
flowers like this is. But the wars there are not like
the wars that have been in this world. The battles
the dear lads we have loved, and still love, are
fighting, and the victories they are winning, are not
for their king and their country, but for God. It is
more like just labouring in our dear Heavenly
Father's garden, where the flowers are ever gay and
bright as the stars. They are more splendid vic-
tories, Net., than the ones we win in France. They
are more than conquerors. For just to rule one’s
own spirit, you know, is greater than taking a city.
And they are happier there, because they have all
the wee children to help them; and be sure they have
Xmas, too, and the jolly Christmas spirit is with
them more than he is with us. So grieve not, little
woman, at Xmas time, or if hard things or disap-
pointments or loneliness come to you, may the dear


Father make you brave and comfort you; for it
was He who sent the Christmas Babe so long ago
to make this old world glad. And 1 know you will
try to make the others happy, too. You can do so
much for Mum and Day, and all of them. You are
right there at home, and you are young and brave;
you know all the good things you have learned in
going to school; you have the hills and the wild
flowers to help you; and you can play music on the
old piano. I wonder can you play any of the
carols ? And do you know those queer verses about
the old musician who said:
“The Evil is null, is nought, is silence implying sound;
While the Good shall be Good, with for Evil so much
Good more;
On Earth the broken arc, in Heaven the perfect round.”
So a Merry Xmas, Net., a Merry Xmas to you all.
Your loving brother. Gib.
France, November 7, 1917.
Dear Mother,
The sun hath come out again and chaseth the
clouds away. The wet leaves, where they are still
left, glisten in the brilliance of the sunshine, and the
colouring of the trees is made richer by the bright
expanse of blue and the clouds that are fleeing away.
The leaves falling from the trees allow us to see


through and beyond them. We can see the beauti-
ful lake that fills the upper part of our valley •
whether it is a lake or a pond or a millpond. I do not
know, but we can see it sparkle through the
branches, and there are waterfowl that swim when it
1S still and sheltered from the west wind. Yet in the
summer I hardly knew that there was any sheet of
water there. We begin to see the pine trees, too—
not the red trunks that are so conspicuous in the
spring time, but their dark unchanging green; they
are coming into their own again. Tn contrast to the
pines is the bright green, almost yellow, in the sun-
shine, of the meadows-on the hillside, where the
cows are feeding, and of the grass that is now seen
beneath the orchard. And now we get a glimpse of
some thatched shanties through the trees, and the
moss that covers them is becoming greener, too.
Down the gully the brown trees still hide the little
town, all but the tall steeple that rises above it. and
contrasts its stateliness with the bare poplar in the
hollow. But, the sky is clouded again.
Hurrah! the sun shineth again. It was only a pass-
ing shower, and T got a newspaper and read it in-
doors, in an armchair, in fact. I read of the triumph
of the Canadians, and how Fritz came over and
killed some of the Yankees. Thus by sacrifice for
the great cause on this soil, our great nations have
been united (or is it re-united?) And it is true.


We know it is so. Our common sorrow, our com-
mon sacrifice for what we think is right, draws us
nearer to one another. Then never mind how much
we have to give. If this is the end of war, we must
be united at the beginning of the great Peace.
Though the ridge is hard to gain and the Dagos are
being beaten back, and the winter is coming on, yet
when I read how the peoples are being drawn to-
gether, it helps me to say “Never mind.” It is a
good lesson the old world is being taught, and. what-
ever happens, the new world shall come and shall
be the more glorious. I have been staying at the
Base here quite a while, and have been able to finish
my book of prose. I have been reading “Alton
Locke,” the tailor of London, and the boy that
wrote:
“O Mary, go and call the cattle home,
And call the cattle home,
And call the cattle home,
Across the sands of Dee.
The western wind was wild and dark wi' foam,
And all alone went she.”
Where have I seen that before? And the verse at
the end of the book seemed familiar, too. Then
I remembered where I had seen them. You know I
fetched a copy of the same book away with me,
and I gave it to a pal, as I had no time to read it—
it was big George Pedler; he is badly wounded


now—and he copied those last verses out, and I saw
them in his notebook. “Weep, weep, weep, and
weep"—but I will not write them. I enjoyed read-
ing the hook very much, though I was afraid all
the time I would not be able to finish it. The tale
is sad enough, indeed, but its whole setting is so
different from our sorrows and our hardships.
Fancy living all one’s days in that awful city! ft
made this wretched land seem more beautiful: it
made me seem more free. This is a grand life, or if
there is any misery in it, I have a buckshee educa-
tion to rely on, and twenty years of sunshine, and
all the love from home, and all the power of a
simple faith. Then the story took me to another
time, to the problems and struggles of an earlier
day. The world has learned much since then. Con-
ditions are better now, and there is more freedom
in our new lands. That must give us hope at this
time. Have you noticed the latest developments
in English politics ? You probably can follow these
things better than I can. I mean the inclusion of
mental labourers into the unions of the industrial
class, and the entry of co-operative movement into
politics. The importance of co-operation is being
realized at last. Do you know there is greater mor-
tality now among the infants of London than in the
English Army? But I can see these things chang-
ing, and I believe our wars are helping make a new


spirit in the old land. Many old ideas have been
broken down already, and folks are becoming braver
to make improvements. We have been forced to
apply science to destruction; vve have been forced
to practise economy. So we are learning to apply
science to the solution of economic problems.
Already Mr. Ford has made the English a new
plough, and they are making use of their waste land
and planting gardens. We shall yet beat our
bayonets into pruning hooks. After reading Kings-
ley I am going to study the New 1 estament in
English. I haven’t much else to take with me, ex-
cept Isaiah and your “In Memoriam’ and George s
little Goldsmith that he lent me to read. I got
Wordsworth’s Sonnets to read to-night, but there is
not much time left. I will have to take it back
to-morrow, and the little Milton, too, have
had from the library since the summer. I have
liked reading “Comus” very much, but I must hang
on to it no longer. I believe our battalion is having
a spell now, so 1 may get near a library again. I
haven’t much enthusiasm left but for studying.
Though I may have to earn my living again. I may
live to be an historian yet. I am learning the inside
of history now. I drew my goatskin to-day.
have some new boots —good Aussie ones—and a
fine warm tunic, so I am ready for the winter again.
I suppose I have written too long already; but T


know the censor won't mind, as it is to you. It is
just time for the service in the little Church of
England Chapel before going to bed, so good-night.
Gibbie.
November 8, 1917.
Dear Netta,
I thank you very much for your letter of August
8. and the programme of the service you had at
Stirling. T went to the Salvation Army Church on
Sunday night, so that is why I am sending you this
queer writing paper. T don’t really believe in their
religion, but they are very brave and enthusiastic,
and our side of the room won on Sunday, because
we sang the loudest. I have turned a Quaker my-
self, and T sometimes have a meeting of my own.
I was so interested to hear you are trying to get
into A.H.S. T can’t think of you as a High School
girl at all. 1 wonder whether you will really get
your certificate, though you will be nearly as old as
I was when I went there first. lam not going to
write you a sermon about school now, for you
should get this in holidays. You must write me a
dinkum letter for fun in good writing in the holi-
days, and tell me a bit about going to school as well
as holidays. I never wrote any letters when T went
to school, but they are good practice in writing and
in words. 1 suppose you will be studying words


at school, and how they are used in different lan-
guages. You must not be afraid of them, even if
they take a lot of time when you might be reading
interesting books. Never mind! When you have
studied writings of words you will come to appre-
ciate the books you read all the more. I find great
interest now in reading all manner of books. I have
just been reading one by the writer of “Water
Babies,” about a tailor who wrote those verses,
“Mary, go and call the cattle.” He taught himself
to be a writer, and it says in the book: “You learn
nothing but what you teach yourself.” So remem-
ber to teach yourself about words and handwriting.
But I am forgetting all the languages and the know-
ledge that I have learned, and I sometimes fear what
I will be able to do when I come home if I am kept
out here much longer and forget everything. It
is a terrible thing not to have a job that you can do,
and I shall have to make a living for us all some-
how. If you are beginning to learn classics, I shall
try to construct you a letter in Latin and get the
minister to censor it. But I have already forgotten
Creek altogether. All I can ever think of is
/?/>e'<£os, /?/>e<£os elf>i which always seems too true.
But then I remember Tapaacreo-Ou) too. which means
never mind So, never mind! and when you are
teaching yourself to learn ail manner of things,


don t forget to teach yourself games of skipping
and hockey and all that helps to make the spirit
brave, and always be learning to know the girls
at school. Friendship, you know, always “doubleth
joy and cutteth grief in halves.” Mother says she
thinks you will have to he going to live back near
the city again. I hope you will find a nice place
wherever you go, and some nice neighbours, too.
Then you will have to send me some diagrams and
pictures about it, and tell me what sort of garden
you are going to have. But I might be coming home
by then. You see, we will be conquering soon. I
am glad you told me about the sunny morning and
the extra pretty willow trees just breaking again
into the spring. Never forget to watch for all that
is beautiful, and you will learn to find pretty places
everywhere. Even this land of clouds and showers
would have a grandeur of its own, if only there
were peace—if only there were peace! There was a
fine sunrise the other morning. Before the sun was
up there was a great rainbow against the yellow
clouds. And now the glorious winter is coming we
see the stars in the morning. Jupiter and old Sirius
as brilliant as ever when the great clouds uncover
them. Well, Net., hurray! I guess the train will
be going on soon. He good and buck up.
Your ever faithful brother, Gin.


Sunday Evening, November 11, 1917.
Dearest Mother,
It is a lovely night; the beauty has returned to
the swamp or the fen lands, or whatever they call
these paddocks. I am so glad I went into the service
at the church hut to-night. I went into the village
this afternoon with a couple of other fellows, and
we had some tea there, and came back by dark, and
3 intended to spend the wet night in the tent here
with a candle and a political magazine; but even
with them I had not got rid of my loneliness, and
the tent was crowded with noisy men, so I put on
my soldier’s waterproof cloak and cleared out on
my own. It came on to rain a bit, but I was re-
warded. There was a rift in the clouds that
darkened all the sky, and through it shone the Even-
ing Star, only for a little while, but 1 have seldom
seen her shine so brightly in this land of clouds. It
was a beautiful service in the little canteen room.
We had some of the most beautiful of ancient and
modern hymns: “Lead, Kindly Light,’’ to the old
tune. The sermon was by a Canadian minister on
Moses’ text about the eagle that he saw teaching its
young one to fly—letting it fall from the nest, and
then catching it again on her back. Like the wee
eaglet, we do not always understand the signi-
ficance of the things that'befall us. Rut there is a
great purpose behind all these things, a plan that


we only know in part. In conclusion, he quoted
from Mrs. Howe’s “Battle Hymn.” I can never
remember that wonderful verse where he started:
“I have seen it in the watch fires.” There was a
very beautiful picture in the room of Mary the
virgin, with some autumn lilies. It was on the wall
between the Union Jack and a representation of the
Last Supper. It was a communion service to-night;
but what of that? Was it not in the same town
seven weeks ago that Den. and I had our last stir
per together, on the very night that poor old George
was called away to see face to face—or was it the
next morning early?. Even to sing “God Save the
King” seemed more fitting than usual to-night, and
the clergyman’s handshake was hearty. When I
turned home again down our great shady avenue all
the night had cleared and the clouds were almost
gone. It is one of those rare nights when the stars
are so clear. I could watch Jupiter, already high,
and all the rest of them, through the trees, for not a
leaf is left upon them. And every puddle in the
road reflected the stars. There were a few flashes
on the horizon, but the roaring of the guns seemed
to have been silenced to-night, and all was calm.
I passed some limbers on the road. I think they
were some of Denie’s division coming out. But I
reckon Den. is still away in Blighty. I have heaU
nothing more of him yet. but may find someone


here who knows him or get some letters when I
reach the battalion. Saturday, 17th. Dear me!
What a time I am getting this posted. But I hope
there will be a mail soon. lam back in the batta-
lion now, and they are supposed to be resting; but
we are on the march. We marched yesterday, and
to-day and to-morrow, and all next week; Indeed,
it is "more like a move than a march, though we
carry a veritable arsenal as well as our furniture.
It has been good weather so far, cool, misty and
dry, and I can still carry my load all right; only when
we come to a long hill can I not make the speed with
it. Neither George or I could ever make the speed
uphill with a big load, but I can ahvays catch up
when we get to the top. Poor old George was
sorry he ever came to France —what is the use of
dissembling?—but it was not the marching or the
hardships or the mud he could not stand, nor was
he afraid of the Hun. It was only the humbug he
could not stand. I have found a word for it at last,
and I like to think dear old George is free from it
now. And it was the great enemy of our race
that freed him from it, old Fritz himself. George
Kidman, the 5.8., told me to-day how he passed
away. Kidman was with them at the time, and
though his hat was hit he was the only one unhurt —
even the little sergeant lost his eye. But George
was asleep or dozing at the time, and when the


shell came he never moved—-the end was instan-
taneous, and he was spared from all the ghastly
fighting in the mud, and freed from the tyranny of
a soldier’s life. It is fine to get back and see some
of the old boys again. There was ce bon Tol-
parofif and Steve A. and Scotty Gordon, my oldest
pal. Little White, from the Bay, and Burney,
whose mother kept the lollie shop, and big red-
headed Beeching, who went to school with Den.,
and had to stay in England because he was only a
boy. And there was old Hurrell from the West
Coast, and lots more of my crazy pals. Tom E. is
away, but he is to come back to our company and be
our captain. He comes from Knightsbridge, you
know, and is a good fellow. Also we have F.’s
young brother back as second in command. But I
am burning borrowed candle, and have burned it to
the end : so good-night, Mother dear.
Vour loving boy, Gin.
Somewhere in France,
December 5. 1917.
Dear Old Mummie.
This is just a wee note to say how bright the
Evening Star is shining. There she is now. blazing
through the window. But outside the heavens are
glorious indeed. The pond is already frozen over
—the village pool of stagnant waters—and Venus


casts a bright streak of light across the ice among
the dark reflections of the leafless trees. I have
just been for a walk to the end of our paddock
among the bare, silent apple trees. It is a still,
calm night, without a breath of wind and without
a cloud, without even a haze to hide the glory of tne
firmament. The mighty Jove is there, too, on the
opposite side, but he is far outdone by the kindly
goddess as she stoops towards the earth. The dim
Pole Star is there too. and the old Plough down
over the fields. As I was watching in the stillness
the village bell rang out the hour. Six times the
clear note tolled, and then six times again. It
always strikes twice. Perhaps the two faces are a
few minutes different. It reminded me of Tenny-
son’s beautiful lines, “Crossing the Bar. I must
just say also that I received your letters of October
10 and 11, and two from my old pal Ernie. 1 am
so glad some of the boys are getting back. You
were all in the gladness of the springtime, and you
told me about the blackbird building by the old
ivy room. 1 have been doing well for letters lately.
East night 1 got some cjuite recent ones from Eng-
land, from poor old Den. He seems to be very
much better and doing well. He wrote to cheer
me up, and not without a deal of success. Miss
Mitchell also wrote such a nice letter to say how
Den. was getting better, and how bright and cheer-


ful he always was. You must be as glad as I am
that he is over there for the rest of the winter.
It is a very great comfort to me at present. For
the cold. too. that is setting in I am well provided
with Netta's scarf and Fan’s cap and mittens, and
gloves, etc. I will fear no evil, and may you he
comforted, too. May the Southern Cross keep
watching over you and keep you free from every
harmful fear. The bright star has set now, so good
night, with love for Puss. Net., and all.
Somewhere,
Sunday Evening, December 23, 1917.
Dearest Mother.
I was just making my bed down to begin writing
this afternoon, when some one shouted “Letters.”
and 1 have been reading ever since. I was hardly
expecting any mail, but there was a re-directed
packet of such exceeding fine letters for me. They
were all old ones, from July to November, and were
from all parts of the world, France and London
and South Africa and Australia. Quite a number
were from Miss Grace M., saying how Den. was
getting on from time to time. How good she has
been in going to see him and in writing! I am so
glad she has been writing to you; she writes such
nice letters, and so does her mother. There was a
letter from her. too. to-night, written with so much


kindness when she had heard from Charles how
dear old George had fallen at Ypres and given all
he had for the great cause. Only last night I had
a Xmas card from her, and the week before she sent
me two beautiful pairs of socks. And I had two
splendid parcels of “good cheer” from Den. and
Miss Grace together. Den. is a millionaire now. you
know, so she bought and packed the things for him.
1 did enjoy the almonds and raisins; California
raisins they were, and such beautiful kernels. T
must send the list of all the goodies, so that you mav
see how I have been living in luxury. A feature
was soup, mock turtle, for Tuesday! Soup of the
evening. Everything was so well chosen and so
neatly and securely packed. I have indeed been
doing well for mail of late. My only trouble is to
get enough candle to write replies. * I have never
yet acquired speed in writing. I had another pretty
card, with a bit of holly, last night from Mrs. Cle-
ment H.. and such a nice letter. T read them by
the blaze of a grand fire the Prussians made. She
has no one of her own left in the great fight now
John and Ernie have gone home.
New Tears Eve, 1917,
Dear Mother,
It comes to the end of another year, and I have
been having my annual wash to start the next with


clean hands. I washed my tea towel and handker-
chief, too, in the dish of “river water I fetched from
the bridge and boiled on the firepot. They froze
hai d in the north wind before I could bring them in,
Rut I was rewarded; the sky, which had been
thoroughly dismal all the day, had cleared a bit with
the nightful, and now the cloudbank sank away, and
just before .1 came in left the Evening Star bright
and clear. 1 shall go and look for Sirius, too.
directly. lam glad to have seen the Evening Star
so bright on the last evening. What a year it has
been ! And those, flashes like distant lightning still
light the dull horizon, and there is still that sound
of the guns. I thought there would have been Peace
for the .New \ear. Ihe bells shall ring more war in.
Yes, we shall fight on again. But the bells can ring
their joy; tor. Mother, we are fighting for Peace,
and Peace that we have fought for will be worthy
Peace. We are all fighting together, too, and we
shall not give in. The great republics that have
joined in sacrifice this year shall win out a Peace
that shall endure—a thousand years of Peace. I
must read the passage in your little book about the
vnd bells befoie 1 go to bed. So good night.
Mother. The morn shall bring the New Year.
Your loving boy. Gir.


Sunday, January 6. It is the clay °f piayei t
dav, prayer for the great cause that vvt iiay •
And all your letters came tomight ; I thou ht d Y
ivnulrl Thev were written on October 20, amid ail
that blaze of golden wattle, about the same time as
I was trying to write you about the same things.
Your courage, Mother, puts me to shame, and my
terror of the gazonkas, that are the »“ lers J r 'jj
But I will fear them not again, foi the p’™ will
surely hold my hand. It is two years since 1 went to
Shady Grove on the New Year Sunday when I
found the lucky clover leaf under the willow tree.
Though it is fading away, T have it still as a
memento of the text, “Serve the Lord a in
and truth;” and the same warrior it was who said
“Be strong and of a good courage. It is all we
have to do while we dwell m this place. Dear
George’s service, his sacrifice, was simple and sm
cS S He gave all he had. And, as Miss Mitchell
wrote, it was fine of him to come over again He
has done his job well, and we must be glad 1 still
have great hope. With the very winter—l love the
sharp killing frost that makes the road hard for our
feet with its very frost the Lord may smite the
foe and break all his teeth. The letters to-night
were from you all. Thank you all for your love
and encouragement. Good night again, Mother.


France, January 1, 1918.
Dear Mrs. H ,
Thank you so much for your letter written when
the almond tree was blossoming. It came with
several other splendid letters just before Xmas day.
lam so fond of those almond trees, and how J wish
that the snowdrift that the north wind piles around
our door were the sweet almond blossom falling
once again. But the sunshine can make even the
snowdrift sparkle. It is a beautiful bright day, so
different from yesterday, which was dismal indeed.
The sun came out and shone on the old church in the
village, on its massive brick walls and steep roof.
The slates still remain on part of it—the only slates
that the village can boast—and on these slates the
snow was still collected. The old church is on a
knoll above the cross-roads, and is the dominant
figure of the village from here. In the radiance of
the morning sun, with its bit of snow, it looked
majestic, even in its ruin. We were just setting
out for a walk in the clear cold sunshine when old
Fritz came over; but we brought him down. The
troops were making holiday, so when one ran to-
ward the spot where Fritz crashed we all ran. Men
sprang up from all directions in their thousands,
hurrying, streaming across the white fields all out
of breath. But when a hare started in the midst of
them they shouted wilder than schoolboys in vaca-


tion. They surrounded it completely, and closed
on it in battalions, drove it into ambush amongst
the wire, chasing and grabbing at it; but it beat them
all. Ten thousand soldiers could not catch a hare!
and we pressed on to where the smoke was rising
now. The aviator had descended in safety and
blown up his machine, but yielded to some snow
fighters, who lobbed him on his square bald head,
and led him away in triumph. We had gu'
tites when we got home again, and went for our
walk after dinner. We had rather a nice day for
Xmas, too. It was not so cold, and finished up
with snow. We had no parade, either, and it was
a great treat—the first time for a week—to have no
pain in my feet the whole day. On Sun-
ing Scottie and 1 went to the sing-song. Ernie
would remember Scottie. 1 enjoyed the service
much. We had a text from Browning:
“Thoughts hardly to be packed into a narrow act,
Fancies that broke through language and escaped;
All l could never be. all men ignored in me—
This I was worth to God whose wheel the pitcher
shaped.”
He was thinking of the Old Year, but I had been
thinking of "Rabbi Ben,” about the
“Sting that bids nor sit nor stand, but go.”
when your feet get warm at last, through walking
in the snow, too delightful the feel then. They had


a hard time of it at home; their anxiety is so much
greater than ours, it makes us ashamed of our dis-
content and complaining. They were all so brave,
it is fine to read their letters. Each spoke of how
beautiful it was at Raywood in the springtime. I
was so glad. By all the surroundings of beauty
and of kindness and sympathy, our sorrow is raised
to something grand. Amid the eternal beauties of
Nature we think less of this mortal life, that passes
away soon in any case, as does the grass; but Potter
and clay endure. I was myself at the same time in
the most beautiful place I know in France when
they told me about George; but it was autumn for
me, with all the glory of the year just lingering in
the trees. All the leaves perish when they are most
beautiful, but the trees themselves just rest awhile,
and I know from last year how they burst forth
more splendid than ever. What a vision, indeed,
of the spring I have to look forward to! “When
that Aprille with his showres soote.” 1 It is a
vision of the “Pilgrim’s Way” itself, and I never
wonder, like last winter, whether these dead and
broken trees will ever burst their buds again.
We have come away from the desolation where I
began this letter, and it is very beautiful here. It
is not so cold, but this evening I was wandering
round the field thinking what a dismal misty day it
was, when I suddenly noticed a great red light


out beyond the props of the hop fields. It was the
sun had come out to set. It never was so large and
golden, and before it was half emerged from the
clouds that had hidden it all day it was alieady
sinking behind the rising fields. And then I noticed
the beauty of it all through the evening mists. The
two willows by the pond and all the bare tiees and
brown hedges round the fields, the tufted poplars at
the gate near where we were camped at the end o
September just when the hops were finished. There
was the clock tower of the church and the historic
hill behind. The cottages remind me of the cottages
of Wilts, with their whitewash and thatch. There
was the mill, with its brown sails that always re-
mind me of Flanders, and our own moss-covered
barn where we live. It was built in 54, and is a
splendid piece of work, and the finest house I have
lived in for many a day. The orders are here to
quit before dawn, so I must sleep. I am not down-
hearted yet, nor overcome by the weather.
"No! at noon-day, in the bustle of man’s work time,
Greet the Unseen with a cheer.”
France, January 7.
Dear Netta,
In your little letter you sent your greetings for my
companions. I told them round the fire while we


ate Day’s gingerbreads. And 1 give your greetings
to the blazing fire. It is a good thing we are not
allowed to change our religion, else I would alter
mine to F.W. (fire worshipper). I have developed
a strange fascination for a fire. It often seems
the only cheerful thing. You send your love, little
girl, for all the flowers, but, Nettie, there are no
flowers on the snow. A few queer crows is all there
is, or we see them come trooping, trooping in end-
less streams from the east, I suppose from Fritz.
1 was up first on Xmas, and put on my empty sock,
and I was first to go for wood—the Yule log, you
know—to cook the Christmas dinner. Instead of
half a ruin, 1 fetched a cherry tree that the faith-
less Fritz had hewn down in his wantonness from
one of those poor desolated gardens full of snow.
1 he aster bushes looked all dead and withered, and
fat but forlorn looking robins hopped on the
snowed-up gooseberries. They are dull birds, here,
you know, not like our little scarlets. The only
bright thing there was a dry bush of asparagus
with red berries still on it. The only glories are
the stars and Venus and Jupiter, and, hurray! I
need give them no greeting from you, for you will
be seeing them yourself when it is morning here.
Your little golly I shall value and pin into my coat
when Igo over the top. So be good and cheer up,
and have another look at the bowl of roses for me.


January 11, 1918,
having a spell to-day, so I can write you
a bk more. I was very glad to get your further
letters. It seemed like irony that Netta postscribed
a motto: “Never mind the weather. All morning
we had been drilling in a blizzard, and then I was
on guard, and it came a frosty night But it wa.
splendid with the bright planets and those frosty
winds are counsellors that do feelingly persuade.
Indeed, they mock our warfare and our foolishness,
and they may teach us lessons that we need to
learn The pinch of winter may even yet bring
us peace. No ; I will never mind the weather! Next
day, when we were marching, heavy laden, up the
hill against the snowstorm. I thought of little Netta s
motto, and of the lad I knew who used to sing it,
and since was numbered with the slain, and 1 put
all my weight into it, and we got there ‘ all to-
gether.” We are brought into contact with Nature
and the weather in a new way out here. We must
learn “gladly to endure, and to live beneath the
sky. And there is something of permanence about
the seasons and the sky—or is it an eternity of
changing?—that makes us think less of this mortal
life of ours, to think less of its uncertainty, and
live rather the eternal life of the soul even now;
S 9 that with the old heathen Horace, it is even


''sweet to die.’’ I shall never settle down to endur-
ing these winters. I still have hope. I always think
it is not for much longer, and when you write of
the weather of the golden sunshine and flowers, I
shall be back soon, and love them the more. Of
course, it is disappointing as the war is prolonged
again and again; but it becomes more and more
clear what we fight for, and that we shall win,
that the Yanks shall fly to victory. And when these
great issues are called in question, a long time seems
only a little while, at least it is not so long—a
moment in the eternity to which those issues belong.
I forget whether I mentioned our old year’s ser-
mon, with the text from “Rabbi Ben” (Browning’s).
It is a grand philosophy. I don’t know how well
you know it; I learnt “Rabbi Ben” the last year I
was at school, when we lived at Kingswood, with
all the almond blossom and the fig trees. But it
takes a lot to learn the meaning of that brave
verse:
Then welcome each rebuff
That turns earth’s smoothness rough;
Each sting that bids nor sit nor stand, but go.
Be our joys three parts pain—
Strive, and hold cheap the strain;
Learn, nor account the pang; dare, never grudge the
throe.
Isn’t it fine, and how often have I gained comfort


on a rough night from the “Epilogue to
“Asolando.” This is a lot of rubbish about the
weather, but these are years that bring the philo-
sophic mind, you know. Netta wrote such a nice
letter; she is getting quite a linguist. 1 wonder is
she really going to the old A.H.S. this year. She
seems such a little scholar, but T suppose it will not
seem long till she is an undergrad. But I reckon I
will graduate before her. I defy old britz to pre-
vent me. When we reached this land of green
fields and red berries, church spires, and moss-
covered barns, it was a beautiful sunshiny day, so I
repeat the motto: “Never mind the weather.”
January 14, 1918.
Dearest Mother.
I have posted a reply to yours of November 25
that came yesterday. But your other letter came
to-night, with the beautiful card and picture of
George. The little card is such a good idea for a
memento, and it has been so nicely done. It is very
neat, and has the Happy Warrior, too. It is grand
to turn “necessity to glorious gain,” and happy as a
lover in some awful moment. What a beautiful
thought it is. It is raining and raining all night,
and the western wind is wild and dark. It is lovely
to be in a fine dry hut in a comfortable bed with
a candle. We had a bath, too, to-day. and Birdie


came round to see that the water was hot, and that
there were clean clothes; so it was tres bonza. He
came up to the hut, too. and brought some papers.
One was the same as I had already salvaged from
the rubbish dump with Lloyd George’s speech, but
there was the comment in it as well. I have read
it with much interest. To-night T have been read-
ing Mr. Wells on the Bolsheviks. This war seems
to be developing into Armageddon indeed. We will
have to hang on till the Yanks can come and save
the world with their might. But I shall never settle
down to this life as permanent, determined to en-
dure winter after winter in exile, for I always have
hope. I live by hope; I always think it will not be
long till our foe is defeated. In spite of all the
pessimists, there always seems so much to hope
for, and things unheard of happen so often now;
the future holds possibilities of such promise. We
had to salvage the Y.M. to-day after the storm —
piano and all were blown away. But the rain
stopped, and to-nigh Venus broke through the
clouds. Now she is set, but all the clouds are gone,
and the bit of moon holds sway in a still clear sky
—a hush in full splendour after the rough weather.
Now Sirius is up, and the frost is setting in again.
I must get into blankets and sleep. My bit of cough
is better, and I am sleeping well, and my appetite
is insatiable. Lights out. Good night. Much love.


February 1, 1918.
Dear Mother,
This is just a note to say I am still well and still
happy, but I cannot get any writing in at all. I
have been doing well for mail—letters, photos, and
parcels. The weather has been remarkable, really
delightful. What splendid news, too, I have been
getting. Oh, how glad lam that old Den. is going
home again, even if it is only for a few months. He
has done well, and how glad he will be. I am
expecting to get leave soon.
February 3, 1918.
I have been writing you a sonnet for your birth-
day, as I have nothing else to send, or, l ather, fitting
it together for my own amusement. It is a vain
plea, and not much of a success, but it belongs to
the trenches, and as its method of construction is
perhaps unique, you may be interested to have it. I
scarcely hope this can reach you by the end of
March, but I add my best wishes for your birth-
day, and wish you many happy returns of it.
Friday, February 8, 1918.
Dear Mother, .
Hurray! I have got some ink again. One of the
new reinforcements gave me a pellet. He is a
student of commerce, and was a Hindmarsh High


School boy, so I have a cobber with a fountain pen!
And, hurray ! I have regained all my mirth. I have
been working all day in the daylight and the breeze,
and it has done me good. We have come to live in a
bit of a wood; such beautiful trees, bare of course,
so you can see them in all their unshattered perfec-
tion. And such a sweet bird was singing in one of
the trees this evening. It sounded like a Joev. And
there was quite a bright sunset, the dull clouds all
touched with red. My appetite has improved a
thousand-fold. I did enjoy a good cup of tea the
Y ; M. gave me to-night. They have a good hut here,
with their beautiful pictures of girls and flowers and
dogs hung in it. Do you know Y.M. pictures ? On
such a night it all has the appearance of comfort
and cheerfulness. 12th. I began awhile back to
write you a long letter, but have not been able to
get on with it at all, and I must start again. I have
not even had time to make a note of letters in my
little book for about a month, and I forget all the
things I was going to write. We were living under
rather miserable conditions for a bit, and the most
miserable part of it was that I could not get any
letters written, especially as I had so many good
ones to reply to. They were splendid letters indeed,
and cheered me such a lot, and helped me not to
mind; but it was all the more wretched to leave
them unacknowledged. For a few days I was not


well, and that spoilt everything; but I did not miss a
trip any more than I missed a fatigue last winter, and
now I am better. My appetite is good again, and I
can work without getting weary. My “moral” is
pretty good, too. Working on a quiet front gives a
lot of confidence. I can work under machine gun
fire withut ducking at all, and never mind the shells
much, especially in daylight. There is one day I
was going to tell you about. It was when I went out
in the morning for my bit of bacon. It was such a
beautiful, fresh bright morning, with blue sky,and
there were great white clouds that came floating
over, and were reflected in the streams and pools of
water. There was a bit of green grass, too, on the
bank where we were living. It was the first time,
you see, that I had seen daylight for a week. I had
been living like a wombat, creeping out at night, and
hiding away in a dark hole in the daytime, where I
used to sleep next to Beeching, who used to sit
alongside Denie at school. We had some most beau-
tiful nights, however. We watched Sirius rise
across a pool of water, and then what a galaxy thete
was. I wonder were they so fine from where you
are. Sirius, and then Orion and Aldebaran and the
great V.. with Jupiter up above all near to the dim
Pleiades. Orion looked fine reflected in a shellhole.
We watched the moon rise, too, behind old Fritz,
and we got our letters there and read them in the


moonlight. One letter had been eleven months in
coming. Denie sent a picture of his ward at Xmas
time, and said how he was going home. You don’t
know how glad it made me feel. It makes such a
difference to me. I have no one to worry about
now. He can look after you. I only hope he will
soon get his discharge and get a good job at once.
And I had such a nice letter from Mrs. Carpenter,
who was making me some socks and a jerkin for
the cold, and which I have since been wearing.
14th. Hurray! We have had a bath and are once
more clean. Scottie and I nicked off to the bath
after we got home, and were late for tea. He
missed the last bath, so was taking no risks, and I
had been a month. It was lovely, I can tell you.
And I saw a newspaper this evening, the first I
had read for a long time. Mr. Wilson says we are
fighting for peace founded on justice and right, and
no peace of shreds and patches. And the' Kaiser,
he is fighting for victory and a German peace.
There was an article on Ab. Lincoln on his birthday,
and how he hung on for what they were fighting for
till at length they won. 1 think the Yanks mean to
win this time, too. Patience is a great thing in win-
ning a war, so I am not worrying that the Ameri-
cans do not start fighting, but I am confident in the
accumulation of their power. I have just been look-
ing at Mrs. Carpenter’s letter again by candlelight.


I cannot reply to it, as I have to clean my cartridges,
but to-morrow I will make a note of the verses and
send you the letter, as I think you would like to see
it. She quotes also from Stopford Brooke. I can-
not even get time to read through your little book
of verses. I was so glad to get it the other day, and
glad of the letter in it, -which filled a big gap, and
said you had got my letters. Charles came over on
Sunday. He looks so well. We are hoping for a
day or two together over in Blighty before long.
Much love to all of vou.
Gib.
France. February 11, 1918.
Dear Netta,
I was so glad to get all your letters to-night from
the new little home —yours and Day. s, and Mother s.
I am so pleased about your going to the A.H.S.
after all, in spite of spelling. You must not let
the words get you beat. Keep sticking at the stupid
old spelling, and find out all the hard words you
don’t know, and keep writing them in your letters.
Boss them round like Humpty Dumpty. And there
are Latin words, too. Don’t let them bluff you,
though one word has the meaning of two or three.
You will have to watch at the spelling of them. I
knew about the new home before, for Mother wrote
a fine letter and told me all about it, and it quite


cheered me up. I only wish I could get more time
to read it again and write a longer letter in reply. I
think it is indeed the sort of garden I would like—
lots of long grass and weeds and snails. When
Den. gets home in the autumn he will be able to
stir the garden up. It will be a change for him, and
will do him good. Your letters said about the sun-
flowers. I always think that sunflowers grow in
fairyland. I have hardly seen a flower since the
bonza chrysanthemums last November, except on
Saturday, when I found a tiny daisy when we were
digging. Still the grass about here is beautifully
green, and I think we shall have an early spring.
The weather has been so warm, and the buds of
the trees are swelling already, and some of the
bushes in the swamps are actually bursting into bud.
The blackbirds, too, keep singing, and the daylight
is getting longer, and before it is time to get up we
can hear all the birds out in the trees, as if it were
summer.
February 22 (Gilbert's birthday).
Dearest Mother,
Thank you so much for the little present that
came for me this evening—the clean handkerchief
and your good letter tied up in that old book of Mr.
V . I am glad to have Mr. Virgoe’s book with
his name on it. Many of your letters lately have


mentioned Randall. 1 seem to miss the boy so nai-
rowly; his loss has been a great sorrow to me. But
not all sorrow, for, as your clipping says, death
has surely been dethroned, and it makes us feel
that honour has come back, and nobleness does walk
in our ways again. Are we not all learning now,
with old Browning, to “Greet the unseen with a
cheer”? The book you sent seems very beautiful
reading. 1 can t quite make out whether the pages
are really to be attributed to Ryecroft or to Gissing,
but I have read the first few pages with delight,
though 1 admit a certain longing that it awakens.
Jt belongs before the war, but it belongs, too, to a
peace that follows a long conflict and suffering.
It is filled with a love of beauty, the beauty of
Nature, that is made more beautiful by a real hatred
of the unlovely, with the contentment that follows
long years of discontent. But I must go on duty
now. Later. Another parcel came for me. It was
a beautiful pair of brown socks and a tin of short-
bread and some butter-scotch. They were both un-
commonly good and both Scotch, so were just the
thing to share with Scottie Gordon, the oldest and
truest of my war friends, whose birthday it was
yesterday. We have ever been kindred spirits. He
lost one of his brothers over here, too, on January
2, and another of them was torpedoed on the same
day! while the third, or rather fourth, little Jock is


away in the Balkan muddle. The torpedoed one
has been rescued and invalided home to Dundee.
But enough of the bits that other mothers have to
bear. The days are lengthening fast, and we are
getting some of those beautiful evenings now that I
remember writing of last year at this time, when
we moved back a bit from the line. We were lucky
for once, and had a day off to-day. That makes this
year much better than last, for I don’t think I had a
day off from fatigue at all last winter. But nearly
the whole platoon was let off this morning, and we
all had a bath and clean clothes. We went for a
drive in the afternoon with a team of six. It was
just such an afternoon as when George and I went
for a drive together in August, but instead of going
up into the wilderness as we did than, we went back
amid the fair fields and civilization, and instead of
jolting on a load of boards we rode on a pile of
blankets that were to be fumigated and cleaned.
There was a blue mist hanging round the landscape
of bare trees that made them the more beautiful.
We saw the green fields and bright patches of
sprouting corn and the quaint homely cottages that
have not been wrecked by war, and we saw the
“cockies” themselves at their labours, and their
womenfolk helping them, while the children were
running and playing in the farmyards and the quiet
streets. 26th. Your two letters of December 21


came to-day. One of them had in it the account
of your procession. It is a stirring thing, the great
army of women. One of your statesmen said that
the Englishwomen have ever been the finest in the
world. I don’t know, but I do think this war has
had a greater influence on the girls we have left be-
hind than on anybody. And they are left still. I
think we can look to them in confidence to rebuild
our broken world, and to build it better than it was
before. Your referendum has shown the ignorance,
the stupidity, and the temerity of a multitude; the
enthusiasm of your procession could do nothing
against these sinister forces. The people only
jeered, of course. For they are things that take a
long time to conquer, but they surely can be con-
quered. The great war has shown us many of our
weaknesses. But it must, therefore, help to make
us stronger, and largely by the impulse it has given
to the movement of the women. The old women in
England are enfranchised now, and perhaps that
will serve to put a bit more life into the sleepy
House of Commons. You must not trouble about
the troops being turned down, or anything. It is on
the malingerers that the ignominy falls. I do not
think we will get any more hardships over here if
they do not come. We might win without them.
. . . It has come the last day of winter, and we
have left the wood where we were living, but not


before some of the trees had burst into blossom.
The numerous oaks in our wood are still unper-
turbed by the coming change of season, but the elms
have burst their buds. At first I could not recognize
them for elms; they look so different from the Eng-
lish ones, not that they are a different kind, but here
they grow so tall always, the branches being lopped
off for firewood. Now we have come to the other
side of the hill. That is a great thing. Straight
after tea I was able to stroll out and look across the
valley. I was just in time to see the last bit of red
of the sun sink into the war-grey of the horizon.
To-day the wind had changed to north, so it was
very cold, and there were glorious clouds in the
sun-lit sky, white clouds across the blue, and dark
black clouds with silver linings more dazzling than
silver. There had even been a slight shower of
snow, but such snow as belonged rather to March
weather. Towards evening the snow quietened, and
it was still. Those beautiful evenings have come
again. I remember writing about these evenings
about a year ago, when we had come out to a some-
what similar place. It seems so beautiful then to
go plodding home after a day of toil, as the plough-
men and their horses do as the light begins to fail,
or to go out for a breath of fresh air before turn-
ing in, when the sweet blackbird is piping in the
dark, still trees. It is indeed the most beautiful


time of all the day. How hateful then, to fix on
all your gear and weapons, and go slinking into the
mist so that no man may see your works The
mist came down to-night, and slowly filled the val-
leys, showing the rows of dark trees, and ve g
the young crops in the fields. On all the small
hills stood the windmill, with its sails going slow y
round, and more slow. What symbols they of peace
fulness, while behind, the sunset glow became ever
softer as it faded away with the darkness. I did
not stand and watch it long, for in the rising mist
appeared the form of a square church tower among
the dark trees. So I wandered down toward it in-
stead of coming home and writing letters. March 3.
We have been having a spell for a bit. March has
come with March weather. The north wind is bitte
cold, and the snow sweeps frozen along the naici
ground. I have read Harold Begbie’s article to-
day on the tragedies of Russia. The soul of a great
people is being overthrown. It has been under-
mined and ruined by vodka and by the deficiency of
the churches, which have left the ntujeks to drown
therein. I hope the inefficiency of the English
churches will not bring us to similar ruin 1 don t
think so. Our national problems are small still com-
pared with the great crippled giant the other side of
Fritz, and we must learn therefrom and beware, yet
not be downhearted. I came across a quotation the


other day in reading—unless I dreamt it—for I can-
not find it again, and it said: “As the buds shall
burst, so the nations shall live in righteousness.”
Good night, Mother.
March 3.
I have been delighting myself with your bit of
soap—the Castile soap you sent in the good parcel
that came so quickly. It has taken away the stains
from my hands tontc suite, and goes well for shav-
ing, too. I sometimes think what it would be like
to wash in rain-tank-water. I had a great game
of football last night after tea —summer time, you
know. It was a beautiful evening. And this morn-
ing we had a bath and clean clothes. It was great.
I have been reading more of Ryecroft. I have just
come to the end of his autumn part. While I am
reading of the glory of the last day of autumn, here
I am at the beginning of another spring, at the sweet
bursting of a new year. I was in town to-day on
some work, and had lunch at a restaurant, with a
apple after it, and then went to the Y.M. read-
ing room. I had the room to myself; even my chum
was scared away by the quietness.. It was a bright
room, with such fine pictures. I fancy I have men-
tioned them before—the great lion that seeks his
meat in the wilderness, the mist on the Scottish
hills, and the old panel of the goldfish, and many


more. There was such an unknown stillness there I
could not write a thing myself for wonder.
Sunday, 24.
We havfe been having a real Sunday to-day. lam
so glad. It has been such a glorious day, as bright
as any spring day at home, and so fresh and clean
Even as it comes towards evening there is not a
cloud. We had church parade this morning; but
there is very little of the formal parade in ou.
service now, which makes it much nicer. \ve nad
our own Capt. Buckley to preach, and lie spoke we .
He made us all feel what a great cause it is we are
fighting* for. Then he saidt Live up to the things
we are fighting for by the cleanness of our lives."
He is very disappointed that he is unable to carry on
the classes. They were just showing so much pro-
mise. Next Sunday he was going to start us all
with a more definite purpose to strive in our half of
the brigade against the forces of darkness. But his
work will not be all undone. He has made a gieat
impression, and the movement he has started will
not be all destroyed because it is checked awhile.
There will be many of us this Easter, I think, who
will be striving harder to push on toward the mark
We had a splendid bath this afternoon. How fine
it is to get our bodies clean! Perhaps you wonder
at my remarking on things so commonplace as a


service at the church or the having of a bath, but
a church parade is so rare now, and a bath to us is
such a luxury! Nor is there much else to take an
interest in. except the weather and the bursting of
the buds. Yes, the hedges and bushes are showing
up green everywhere, and the butterflies coming
out gay amongst them already. Down by the baths
some plum trees are all in blossom. 1 hope to write
to you for your birthday next Sunday, for it is
Easter Day. I’m afraid J’m getting egotistical,
always writing of myself; but the weather makes
me so glad about these things, and I feel so well
and so happy withal. And I know you wonder how
I’m doing. I suppose you will be having Easter
weather, too. How glad you will be to see the end
of the long summer. The earth will be getting
green again. And the flowers—the cosmos and
chrysanthemums and crocuses. Net. will have a
holiday from school, and it will be your birthday,
and Den. s, and there will be rejoicing; and I will
rejoice with you. Now it is growing dark, and old
Sirius is shining blue once more. Now is the time
the blackbirds pipe their hardest. Good night,
Mother dear, good night.
Your ever-loving boy, Gibbie.


(Extract from a letter to a young lady.)
France, March 23, 1918.
My dear Miss H ,
I am writing to you this beautiful calm evening
because it is just a year ago since you wrote to me.
You must wonder I take so long to reply; but I
will enclose your envelope, which will explain some-
thing. I was away last summer, and your letter did
not reach me till a few weeks ago, and then it came
to me at night while I was on guard in our most
advanced shellholes, and I read it by the bright
moon. I thought then of the first such shellhole I
had known, when I watched with your dear Sgt.
M , and watched in confidence, though it was
the first night of the snow. It was in my mind to
write to you when first I heard that he had died.
I had a green envelope 1 meant to use, for I thought
you might like to receive one more. I have kept
one for you ever since, and now I hope it will not
remind you with too much sadness of those that
used to come to you. It is often hard to find time
for writing, and it is so hard to find language to
express my feelings. The fighting came so soon
last spring, when I was wounded. There has been
little peace for us since then—we have not had our
spell. My brother was killed in the autumn; it has
taken me all my time to write to them at home
since then. I am glad your letter did come through


at last. I feel I can write more freely of your
friend, though we had something in common in
our deep loss before. Comer’s friendship meant so
much to me; it was he that made me feel at home
when first I came, and he welcomed me back again
when I came back the second time. He was always
so gay and cheerful, always so good to all of us, his
men, when he was made sergeant of our platoon.
For a while we were very good friends; indeed,
when I was left to try and bandage his wounds, he
asked me to post your letter for him. His smile
then I reckoned was worth coming over here to see.
It was a great sorrow that we were not able to save
him. But he is not dead; he has but been called
to some greater work, for he is one of that great
band of men, not large in numbers, but great in
heart, of young men that I have known, that I have
respected, I may say loved, that have done their
work here already, and gained their reward. The
highest honour I would take it to be counted the
least among them; yes, I sometimes feel out of it
all here, like one who has stayed back, lingering too
long, beautiful though this garden is. Surely for
your loved one you need have no dismay. For you
is left the harder part; it is for the young women
that this is the greatest of all the tragedies. We
look to you to find out the sublime meaning of the
play, that the lesson for the world may not be lost.


It is for the strong heroine to raise up this broken
earth and make it more loving, more beautiful still.
There is little I can tell you, Miss H , of how
Corner met his wounds, except that he met them
patiently. We were working on the snow; the white
snow covered all we could see, and the bright sun-
shine made it sparkle. It was just after dinner
that a shell burst amongst us; several were
wounded. Mr. Davis, who was just speaking to
the sergeant was killed outright—the best officer
our platoon has had; but Gomer was given time to
show his grit before he died in hospital. That is
all. “Let not your heart be troubled,” Jesus said.
“No, at noonday, in the bustle of man’s work time,
Greet the Unseen with a cheer,”
is the voice of the poet.
Pardon me if I have rambled overmuch in this
letter, if I have not explained enough, or if I have
seemed to preach to you. May the dear Father
comfort you.
Yours very sincerely, J.G.J.
Easter Sunday.
My dear Mummie,
Many happy, happy returns of this day of yours.
I am glad to have seen this Easter time in France.
Last year I was in England. We have been camp-


ing out the week-end in the beautiful fields, with
their green crops just starting to grow, and the
skylarks singing. Good Friday was a beautiful day,
and what a feed we had—fowl and spuds we got
from a farmhouse. Our copse is full of flowers—
the little white everlasting flowers and golden stars,
and the “cowslips wan that hang their pensive
heads, and the glowing violet. The hawthorn and
trees are just being touched with green. A fine
bunch of letters was fetched out this morning, yours
of January 20, and a fine one from Ernie. He writes
me such splendid letters. Please thank him. He
knows these fields as familiar to me as those last
Sunday. Padre Blackwood came out to see us to-
day, and brought an Easter card. He says we have
been doing well. Thank you for vour long letter
and love to all.
Your ever-loving Gib.
, April 11.
Dearest Mother,
I have found a bit of notepaper in the derelict
lumber room, so as it is the day of our departure,
the day of our saying farewell, I am writing you a
note. Oh! wonder that a man should live to see
two whole years of this, and still be fighting on!
We can wear three blue stripes now, and won't we
swank when we go to London! It is a day, I think,


for giving thanks. 1 am conscious now of some-
thing I have been learning these two years. I feel
that I am stronger in body, anyway; I am an expert
digger now, and can march and not be weary. They
have just made me a gunner again, and I am glad,
I am last man in the team, but I think I can cariy
as much as any of them. It has been a great
thing, too, to see the changing seasons of these
foreign lands. J was so delighted to get your two
letters written on Grandpa s birthday and little
Netta’s. and one from Ernie, and a long one from
Dorothy, telling me all about their conference at
Sydney. It was only a week, too, since the last fine
bundle. The letters came at breakfast time. We
were camped for breakfast at a wood aftei match-
ing out for a spell, so we were all so glad, d here was
white blossom on the thorn at the edge of the wood,
and there were white Easter flowers and violets
and cowslips and daffodillies, too, and we had tea
and bread and jam and bacon, and letters. We are
camped now in good Quarters, and ate well fed.
Thank you for the rosebud in your letter and its
message of hope. We have a rose gat den heie, the
roses only just sprouting; but the cherries and pear-
trees are in bloom. The trim pear trees remind me
of the rich man’s garden in Surrey; but there is the
great gazonka hole. We live in the great house
that has been left. Oh! the incongruity! What


had I longed for all the winter? I have a quiet
room to myself. lam writing in an armchair now,
and I have a feather bed to sleep in! What more
of luxury? But it is too pitiful, too tragic, to be
humorous. I was so tired when I came here. I
sat down and looked in wonder at the neat bit of
carpet by the bedside and the pretty clean curtain.
Then I caught sight of myself in the mirror. What
was lin my mud-covered khaki doing here? It has
got too dangerous for the people to live here; they
have fled and left all, and the brown Aussies have
come in their place. These folks may be proud as
well as rich; this ruin may do them good, and we
must enjoy what comfort we can get. But I have
seen things that are pathetic; I have seen the poor
man flee away, aye, and madame, too, and the
children, and the cow—their only hope. lam writ-
ing now on a beautiful volume of Goldsmith from
the desecrated library, “Le Vicaire de Wakefield,”
English on one page, and French on the other, with
notes. If old Noll were to wander through these
villages now at the dawn of the year, what a lamen-
tation he would write. There have been days of late
of intense feeling, and T have often felt I would
write a great deal had I the time and paper; but I
cannot write much more now. My watch begins at
midnight. Sweet repose for a little while on a
feather bed, and a blanket. Good night. Friday.


12th. Sunset. The brightest day of all the spring.
What a beautiful day it has been! Yes, the old
winter has gone, with its snows and frosts. The
morning broke clear. I did an hour’s digging before
sunrise to give me an appetite for breakfast. We
did not have to do it, but I just went on with the
ditch by myself. A morning is no good when you
have just got out of bed and are sleepy. You want
to work at night to enjoy it. The clouds all blew
away to a bank in the east this morning, and then
the morning star came above it, and the sun looked
through with fire and climbed over. The mist from
the valley never rose high enough to dim his first
splendour. I have bathed in the sun all day, and
now there is the new April moon. I have been
reading “Freckles,’’ a book I found loitering out
here yesterday. It is a pretty story, and 1 can finish
it directly with a bit of candle. Sitting in an arm-
chair to-day, I became so absorbed that when
some one without boots opened the door of my room
I was just going to take my feet from the sunny
window, for I thought it was you who had come
to tell me lunch was ready, though there have been
two long years between. After my sunbath and the
digging and all, I was glad to get into the gi eat
bed, and slept till dinner time; but first I finished
the tale of the freckled boy and the swamp angel.
It is a gorgeous story. It is not easy to picture


all those trees and flowers of the swamp I have
never seen, and it is hard to appreciate the cool
and damp swampiness; but I can still remember our
hot days. With what delight you brought them back
to me when you mentioned how you slipped out
early to pick up the fallen peaches before the heat
should be on them! lam so glad Netta likes the
High School. Fancy her wearing a badge with
uon Sc hold e sed Vitae. By the way, I picked up a
paper to-day out by our posie with a picture of
Netta at school getting a medal of some sort. I’m
afraid I will never get a V.C. or anything. Never
mind, I can wear my three stripes now, and that is
something, isn’t it?
Sunday, April 14, 1918.
Dearest Mother,
It is a dull, chilly afternoon, and I am still in
France, but what think you? I have spent the
afternoon sitting in an armchair by the fire—a
bonza coal fire in a grate in a beautiful old sitting
room. We have all been sitting round it in easy
chairs. lam reading the “Vicar of Wakefield,” the
edition with the French translation and notes. It is
(juite a change from the Vankee tale I have just
enjoyed. I have been reading old Noll with great
delight, if only for finding that one phrase, “cal-
lous of contempt,” which education makes a man.


-p'th We have still a fire in our parlour, and lam
still enjoying the "Vicar.” I have given all my
notepaper away and every envelope but one, but i
have found an empty book, and will go on writing
in it. so that when I get a green envelope again I
may send it full. I have "salvaged it you must
understand; do not call it loot. We are living 1
beautiful house and living well, as we have never
lived before in France; but it is only m reading and
in writing to you that I can keep from seeing the
miserv of it all. We eat the potatoes m the cellar,
and read the books in the cupboard; but we are
defending the house, and I do not call it plundeimg.
I like to think that learned people have lived here.
I found the schoolroom yesterday, with well-worn
books on gardening and grammar and cosmogi ap y,
and even chemistry, algebra, and (meek, it i ge
dull I can learn the Greek verbs or read the annals
of Tacitus. I am only disappointed I could not hnd
the Odes or Virgil, and that the Euripides was not
Alcestis. But I may come across some old favour-
ite yet that I can read. Nor do I call it pilfeung
when I picked up a spoon by the wayside that had
belonged to a Scottie who was wounded, and his
little Testament, that was lying on the ground; for
I wanted something to read, and it was just.at
Easter time. So far 1 have only finished the rs
book, for I had to go back over some chapters like


the 10th a second time. What a beautiful book
Matthew is, and written by the man who left all to
follow! The wee book belonged to Jock Laidlaw.
I was just looking at his name one evening, and
noticed the familiar text written full below the
name: “Be strong and of a good courage, for the
Lord thv God is with thee whithersoever thou
goest”—the motto of one of the most famous of the
old conquerors. I had scarcely put the book back
into my greatcoat pocket when we all had to stand
to, and our trenches were subjected to a thundering
bombardment. It was the most magnificent barrage
I have ever been under. But it hardly made me
quake, for those words kept sounding in my ears as
loud as the approaching gazonkas. Marvellous to
relate, only one man was hurt out of all our com-
pany. It was one Sunday night when I went out
just after I had been writing to you, that I found
Peace instead of war. I picked up a text-book out
where we were watching, a very tiny text-book.
My Peace it was called, and I read them all before
the twilight was ended—366 of the best. “Of Thy
fullness all Ave have tasted” the one for that
day. Netta, in a not distant letter, wished me a
peaceful year. This year 1 thought would be more
warful for me; but there was a year of Peace. As
it is so tiny I will keep it for luck the rest of the
year. It has a primrose and a violet on the back of


it too There is often so much war it makes the
times seem dark, so dark sometimes it seems best to
give up hoping or looking forward to a holiday or
days of Peace, and to embrace despair or despera-
tion, or some careless resignation. Even the
Generals say nothing, but the uncertainty of the
final victory. There are some that are happy a
long as they can find something to eat or drink,
others seem to glory in their own misery, but no
there is ever some less dismal rumour conies L
will not believe that all is lost and never that
wrong will triumph. I still hope the Americans will
help us win, and keep all we hold most dear, in
one of your letters a while ago you said you were
2lad I wrote “Keep your faith shining. I wonder
did I say where I was quoting from It was
Parker’s prayer that I was thinking of. Just in case
vou do not know it, I will write it for you now.
“In times of darkness, teach us, O Lord, to be tiue
before Thee. May we keep our faith shining in the
midst of darkness, a beacon light to guide us over
stormy seas to a home and haven at last.. Father,
give us strength for our daily duties, patience for
our constant and our unaccustomed cross. In every
time of trial, give us the Hope that _ sustains, .he
Faith that wins the Victory, and obtains fulness of
Toy. Amen.” Yes, Mother, it is best to. keep
looking forward to some good that we can image


clearly, and to hope it will not be long. Whatever
happens to us must at least be as good as that; of
course it must. Even if those hopes do bring care
and anxiety with them, we can put them in our
haversacks and smile after all.
Irks care the crop-full bird?
Frets doubt the maw-crammed beast?
We must rejoice we are “allied to God” and can
“welcome each rebuff,” and “dare and never grudge
the throe.”
Ever yours, with fondest love, Gibrie.
April 20.
Dear Mother,
Someone found a spectacle shop in the town yes-
terday, so I went down and found a glass to fit
my watch. It is George’s watch, you know. I
broke the glass of it about Christmas time, and it
was nearly rusted through lying away so long and
under shellfire for the last four or five months; but
its wheels are going round again at last. When
I had got it going and wiped it with my oily rag, I
went down to the quarters for a parcel, and got a
great bundle of letters. There were almost too
many. I will never be able to reply to them. Thank
you all so much for the parcels, for the good things
to eat, and the handkies. and the books, and for all


your letters. One letter was from Mrs She
wanted to know something about her boy s grav >
and what had happened to his wrist watch It u
hard to know what I can write to comfort hen It
is hard to save mementoes at such a time ; it is hare ,
too, for us here to realize the feeling people have
with regard to relics of our mortality. His he
was rent and let his soul go free.” There was no
officer or anyone left that day to look after any-
thing. “It was in the battle, and he was buried at
Noreuil ” We must be satisfied with that. I have
a letter half-finished now to the wife of a lad who
was killed with us, and I helped to bury him. I have
not got my proper writing pad. nor can I get t
peace of mind to finish it. There were three
“Anzacs” from Den.’s battalion buried alongside
this lad, with three neat crosses all the same. One
was Major Henwood, who was an old High bchoo
boy. You ask me about the boy I called Mills, who
helped when our dear George was called away. 1
am sorry for the mistake. His name is Harold
Millar or Milar. He has gone home, but I don t
know where he hails from, unless somewhere up
north George Kidman, too; he is a fine chap 1
have often worked with; he is one of our good
S.B.’s now.


Sunday Morning.
The fog has lifted, the mists have blown away,
and it is a bright day again. The willows and hedges
are all getting green; we are only waiting for the
poplars and the great trees. I have been so mixed
with the bare trees —what I thought were elms must
be limes or linden trees, or something else. I wish
T knew them all. Do you know, I hardly care about
going to England now. I feel it might spoil the
impression of last spring. I am well now, too; I
never felt better. Perhaps it is the warmer weather
coming back. For the last two months I have
hardly had the touch of a cold, or as much as a sore
toe. Yes, I am all right now, but I hope we will
come home soon. I want to sit by the stove when
it is lit, and have an early cup of rain-water tea.
Do you ever get gum leaves for lighting now ? And
on a Sunday morning such as this how I would like
to hear Netta play her hymns on the bon new piano.
And with my waking thoughts
Bright with Thy praise,
Out of my stony griefs
Bethel I’ll raise;
So by my woes to be
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee.
That is what the beautiful girl wrote whose birthday
was the same day as mine.
Your ever-loving Gib.


Dear Daisy,
X have enquired from the pioneer at the corner
that your good man is still all right. He is along
a bit, he says, cutting down a wood, so I guess he
is in his glory. Thanks ever so much for your
cheerful letter. It made me laugh about dear old
Grannie; of course, she would never i ide tn
Grandpa’s chair, even if it went by motor Tell
her I was wearing Grandpa s socks that Aunt banny
made when we marched all night, and I never got
tired. We beat all records in marching, and got
there first, and we stopped the Hun, we stopped the
Hun! I have not yet answered Gran pa s beautiful
letter. Next time you are there you must remem-
ber me to them all. lam not attempting just now to
write anywhere but home, for we are having a
pretty strenuous “spell,” though we are getting
plenty to eat. I have finished reading the “Vicaire
de Wakefield.” At first I thought it was too excit-
ing to read here. It is wretched in an exciting pait
to be interrupted by a gazonka lobbing near, and
reminded that you may any minute have to lay the
book down. It is wretched, too, to fall asleep in the
middle of such a passage, and so lose all the excite-
ment. Then I grew more interested and more de-
lighted as the old parson’s misfortunes accumulated
and he conquered them all with his patience and for-
titude. It seemed the book would end not in the


ordinary bliss, but in the triumph over the most dire
calamities. Just then I fell asleep, but on the very
next page began, “Happier prospects begin to
appear. Let us be inflexible, and fortune will at
last change in our favour.” It was quite unexpected
on my part. How beautifully it all ended. It makes
me quite happy to think of it. I think I was telling
Mother about another lovely story I was reading
about a freckled boy with a wheel, who found a
swamp angel in the wood where he was on guard,
and about his big chickens that built their nest in
a log.
April 29.
Dear Mother,
Hurrah! I have found a Y.M. with some writing
paper, so I can be writing to you. I had lost my
paper, lost everything, in the' fight; 1 have been
near to losing heart; but it is bon to be able to write
to you, and I have so much left after all, such a lot
to be thankful for. We are out for a spell now,
and live in a beautiful stable, and have plenty of
food. Last time we had a spell we lived in an attic,
and, jumping down into the street to sit in the sun-
shine after dinner, I jumped almost on the top of
Charlie. We spent the evening together, a beautiful
evening too, but I had no time to write about it. We
had another bath this morning, and, oh! it was good,


and got home just in time for church. They had a
service in a barn, I think the same as I am in now,
where the Y.M. has come, and we sang “Oft in
Danger” and “For All the Saints.” It was awfully
fine. When I went home last night I found a letter,
another “Round Robin” one from “Clwydd.” writ-
ten on my birthday, but Ernie this time was back
among the writers. Isn tit good of them to remem-
ber? How bon last night to be reminded when I
was hardly expecting a letter; it meant, too. there
was another Aussie mail in, and there would be
more letters. As a crowning delight, I was going
to say I had been enjoying some good apricots, but I
laid my pen down when some one borrowed my
knife for supper, and I have not seen my good pen
since. It must be in the straw, but nothing will
avail to discover it. It was awfully fine to have that
service the other night. Padre Buckley spoke on the
words of the Easter card written by his cobber; I
sent you one on Easter Sunday. For we had been
delivered from the gazonkas of our enemies, and
some had crossed the beautiful river. Mac was
there, and sat next me at the service. He used to
deride me as religious, but I knew he did not really
mean it; and George Kidman, our worn-out 5.8.,
and only one of them left. I was sorry Scottie
Gordon, my oldest comrade, had not come back in
time, and then I learned he was numbered with the


slain. It made me feel less thankful for my own
deliverance. But I am glad I have met a man at
the war I loved so much, and I am glad our old
George knew him, too, and they dug and worked
together. It is May Day now, and I got up early
this morning, and was mess orderly. There were
the sweetest blossoms on the scraggy apple trees, but
these days our joys seem three parts pain. Hurray!
your letter has come. I thought it would to-day.
And Netta’s, and one from Mrs Harris, and they
were written just before Den. got home, and I know
he did get home all right by the cable. I like to
think of your brushing up the yard and the paths
against his home coming, and the Easter lillies to
decorate the rooms. I have been doing a lot of
digging to-day. It was a good morning for digging,
and hard toil does you good. It does me good to
get my tunic and gas bag off, and put all my weight
into a heavy pick. I may not be big or brave, or a
navvy who is naturally lazy, but by the application
of science I can swing a heavy pick with the best of
them. Men are better pals when they are working
hard together; and it makes us sleep better. I feel
so much stronger now than I did a year ago, and I
can stand many things much better. You know
how a “strong man rejoices,” so be not anxious
about me, Mother, now that Den. is home. The
Lord our God shall go with me whithersoever I go.


I was going to say how I had lost my socks. I lost
your good gloves and Trixie’s cap in my greatcoat
pocket; but it does not matter now that May is here.
Better to lose them in battle than throw them away.
But I have been so glad of them, so glad I had
them in my haversack at the first alarm; they have
been such a constant comfort the last month or two.
I lost the good compass, too, the Guild gave me as a
souvenir. I left my coat at the dressing station, i
had been using the compass to find the way when I
was helping carry out a wounded man on my back
gee he was heavy. lam so glad I read the V icar
of Wakefield” the other day. I have remembered it
of late during many varied experiences, and each
time I appreciate it more. 1 hat is the test, I should
say, of a good book and well written. Since I have
been reading the Jews’ version of the Psalms, I
reckon they are great. These days it is not always
easy to remember what I have written and what let-
ters 1 have replied to; it is not always easy to write
with equanimity. These are great experiences of
ours, though they are trying at times; but it is a
great privilege to be in it all, and 1 am still standing
the strain well. We have moved to a joint fuither
back for a bit, so I can get another letter away.
How bon it has been to have this little spell and to
get all the letters written on my birthday —they
seem so much to me; getting them now makes me


brave again. And I had such a fine swim in the
river, and found a cowslip on the bank. It was a
famous river to swim. We have swum the Lys, and
George and I once jumped over it; but this reminded
me of the Seine, and I looked up the passage in
your little book. Yes, Mother, “Love is still my
Lord and King;” "e’en tho’ thrice again the red fool
fury rage, Love shall never fail.” Our old bri-
gade, they told us to-day, had distinguished itself
in taking the village, and it has such an aristo-
cratic name. But were it a city, he that ruleth
his spirit is better. I will try to keep cheerful,
and you must not worry at all I will send you
the cowslips from over the river. Good-bye,
Mother dear.
Your ever-loving Gibbie.
(Extract of Letter to “A.H.S. Magazine.”)
It was Anzac Eve. A hot day it was—for w r e get
it hot sometimes, even in France; so hot it was that
eve of Anzac Day that we rose early and took our
breakfast out of doors, and made a sort of picnic of
it. We went right across the big field, and sat on
the bank of a stream, a stream that ran so clear that
every pebble on its bottom could be seen and every
leaf of the weeds that grew under the water. We
had just come “out” for a short spell—at least, we
were told it might be short—and we wanted to get


away from the war, even if only for a little while.
As for billets, who would live in a house? A
house any day might come toppling about your ears,
like the foolish man’s in the parable, much more a
billet! Any day I’d rather be covered by a bush,
like the bush that’s covering me now, with wall-
paper of green and decked with golden blossom, or
covered by the blue of heaven. And so we fell to
jumping to rest ourselves from the war, and to leap-
frog, if leap-frog can be called a rest. I only know
that by dinner I was getting stiff and sore, for we
played that day as we had not done since school.
It was Harry Slee, a High School boy, “le petit cor-
poral,” who led us in the games; and none could
beat him. In leap-frog no other could keep the
lead. In hopping he bumped out a fellow twice his
size. I only tore my shirt trying to throw him in
a cock-fight. By dinner we were tired, though we
were not to have much dinner, or much tea for that
matter, for the order came for us to “Fall in.” But
we sang as we marched through the village. Our
sergeant especially sang “Good-byee, don’t cryee,
don’t sighee; wipe the tear, baby dear, from your
eyee.” That was the favourite song. We seemed
to march all evening, then rested till dark, and
marched on again and carried all our load. Where
we were going we did not know. After a while
some guessed what we were doing, then the bullets


came like hail, when we came to the wire and got
through it in the dark. When we came to the slope
in the valley and the flares went up bright some
paused, as the practice is, so as not to be seen. But
I gripped the handle of my pick and ran through
the hail, like “dodging the drops” of a shower. But
our panniers and gear were heavy as we struggled
up the other side. They grew heavier still before
we stopped. Then we dug ourselves a trench with
the shovels we had brought It was near dawn when
we had “dug in.” and the great red fire we had
watched was burning low through the misty dark-
ness. Those who had wandered astray found their
right places before the light. But we were not all
there. Our “Little Corporal” was with us no
longer. He had fallen while leading his men—the
best section they were in our platoon. And he was
not the only one to fall. Harry had played his game,
and played it well. He had made his great sacrifice
for Liberty and for more, for the honour of our
Homeland and our School and all. When the fog
cleared we saw the skeleton of the great church
that had been burned and the city that was ours. We
had made the counter charge we had been ready
for so long. It was Anzac Day. I know Livy could
write a better description of our battle and make, no
doubt, more glory out of it; and he could offer
fitting thanks for a pair of socks received within


sound of the guns. But I have written this in
honour of one who did not get his socks, though,
maybe, some were sent him.
Somewhere, Sunday, May 12.
Dearest Mother,
When we came back here after our week’s
“picnic” summer had come down on the woods
while we were away. The apples in the little apple
patch are covered white with blossom, and the
beeches are in full leaf and look so beautiful and
fresh. When we came late last night it was a
thrush, I think, I heard in the wood. I heard the
blackbird singing at dawn, and the skylarks—they
sing all the day; but you generally hear them start
up when you are getting a bit grumpy or miserable,
brave little hearts! I have just been sent down for
rations, and to take letters. The sun set behind the
wood while I was there. O horrible spectre! The
beautiful wood all shattered so; yet, maybe to the
birds the shells are not less musical than the wood-
man’s axe. I read a quotation to-day, perhaps a
bit Scriptural, still it is good, for good times are
coming. It was this: “Then all the trees shall sing
for joy.” 17th. The reapers have begun to-day!
They are cutting the barley over on the hill, the
“free and happy barley.” It is green and shimmer-
ing now, but it will grow again. Oh! it was lovely


in the liver to-day while the band was playing- on
the green. There is a broad strip of turf, and daisies
m the swamp, and the band was practising there in
the shade of the great trees. This afternoon I took
a book and sat against a milestone in the shade, and
read “Lorna Doone,” and watched the soldiers
bathing. We have the kilometre rocks along the
Ti IVC U know ' These rivers are so different from
the Onka. and those others at home. lam glad they
can never be made like these, with distance pegs set
along the towing track. It’s more fun to have them
ever rush and roar, or dwindle into pools. But these
rivers are beautiful, and after I had read and
watched awhile, I had to go in again for another
swim before coming home to tea. It was delightful
to be carried through the midst of that pleasant
scene by the flow of the stream, and to look upwards
where the green branches seemed to touch the white
clouds that flecked the blue. All so bright it was.
The soldiers, half-dressed now, were sitting lazy on
the shady bank and reading the news. What is the
news I did not trouble to enquire. I am accus-
tomed now to do without it; I have forgotten the
s amelessness of men. The other bank was green
and golden, buttercups glistened in the sun- the
cowslips now are gone, they only last a little while
and are the more beautiful for that. Now the sun
has gone down I’ll be writing no more. Indeed


what more is there to be written, but just to send
my love for you and Day. and Net., so good night,
this calm evening, Mother dear.
Your ever-loving boy and ever-hoping Gib.
May 3.
Dear Netta. t . , -
Thank you very much for the happy birthday
card with the two queer birds, and for yom letter.
I have also got a letter from our good Miss M
of London Town. She sends me another tube of
ink pellets in case mine are used up. She says, Do
I remember my holiday last year? And that we
must look forward to my having another one soon.
Indeed, Net., we must. I will look forward to a
spell soon. I will look forward to leave starting,
and a ripping, ripping trip to dear old Blighty.
Hurrah!
Another Day. I have just been watching the sky-
larks that come over my ditch in the clay and flutter
and flutter and sing, and go up and up. Then they
soar and soar, and come slowly down, singing all
the time, and then stop. Now one came quite close
to sing, now he has gone again, and their chiipmg
is all mixed with the blue sky. I think two of them
have a nest in no man’s land. Mrs. Harris, when I
had a letter from her, said you played the hymns
so nicely on the organ at Sunday School. I have


been reading the Jewish version of the Book of
hsalms that was sent to another chap, Glen Tacob
who is in the hands of the enemy. The Fritz censor
would never pass psalms where they say “Scatter the
enemies of Jacob” and “Break their teeth, O Lord.”
and all that ; so I have been reading them instead.
They say also Save me from the hands of my
enemies. But my old cobber Glen, they tell me.
has grown as fat as can be over there. In this
TS 10 Vr he Psalms seem so beautiful, like poetry.
4th. We made a lovely “baby house” to-day, what
we call a ‘ humpy,” you know. Just by the barley
patch we pitched it. Oh, how the barley has grown
away above our knees, with heads that begin to hang-
down already. And the spring, the young maid, has
given us a lovely day. Who would not be blythe?
I have just been cutting an armful of the fresh bar-
ey for a pillow. Now I am sitting at our door
looking ov er the little crop to the tops of the green
ro mg hills, and the trees with all the freshness of
spring; the clouds behind are touched with pink near
the sunset, and the thin silver moon. The planes
agamst the sky seem lazy in the quiet of the evening
and the balloons are going down. But I was saying
about the humpy’ we made for ourselves by the
har i j'u WaS S 0 COS y snu & we wer e afraid we
would be moving away before to-night came to sleep
mF. But what could we want to finish the fun?


Well, next thing. Murph. came shouting “Parcels,
one for me! When I got there there were two!!
I knew one; it was ginger cake from London—two
ginger cakes! Miss M sent them, you know, to
celebrate Den.’s coming home! The other I could
guess; it was from Aussie, and had a hanky L badly
wanted wrapped round it anyway. It felt like a
packet of candles. We were saying we wanted a
candle. But a great packet of them! We wanted
something to read by them; we would have to get
something to cook with the candles, and heat our
shaving water. Mother had mentioned sending a
couple of pounds. When I sat in the humpy and
opened it I thought they would laugh. How great
was my surprise and delight. First a real handker-
chief, and figs, and toffee, a candle and soap, and a
book to read as well, all wrapped in a newspaper
for reading, too. For dinner we had ginger cake
and tea, and finished up with figs, and even ginger
cake and cocoa for supper! Nor is that all the good
things we have been having. We went to the can-
teen down by the river, and got apricots and plums
The village is so pretty with the apple trees, and I
saw white and purple lilac blossom, too. When we
came home they gave us out our packs, with writing
pads and felt hats and blankets. We had rice and
plums for tea. You don’t know the glory of a
shave and a wash-down in the swamp, where the


kingcups grow large and yellow, and I heard the
cuckoo down there to-night. Well, we must be go-
ing inside now and lighting the candle, and I must
have a look at “Lorna Doone,” the book Mother
sent. Next night. Yesterday was one of the most
glorious days. The sun was bright at seven when
I awoke, and the dew was still wet on the grass. We
went for a bath after breakfast, and got our new
shirts. I had not patience to wait for the hot water,
but went down to the river with the corporal, who
had been merry overnight, and dived into the run-
ning water. Fancy swimming after living a fort-
night with your gear on in a ditch—and we came
home to eat apricots out of a tin. Oh, the merry,
merry sunshine, and the freshness of the air. Talk
about rain on the unjust, there are we tearing up
the fields and woods, and trying who can worst
pollute the air; yet Nature makes it fresh again;
her green is growing everywhere and bursting full
of flowers to cover up our wretched scars, even as
they are being made. No, we cannot stop the spring.
Good Mother Nature mocks the nations as though
they were a drop in a bucket.” And in my heart
spring wakens, too; I forget the bullets that have
missed, and the stink of the shells that have blown
away the cobbers I have lost. I cannot feel that
they are dead. The battle is as far away as the snow-
clad fields of Fleurs. Yes, the last couple of days


have been like a fortnight’s holiday. I only want
to get in a week’s letters, and I will be ready again
to march to Berlin, or anywhere. But to-day I can t
even seem to get much writing done. You see,
have forgotten I am at war, forgotten almost, where
I am, and forgotten all since Anzac: Day. Its as it
I had been going home and could tell you then, but
I must tell you about the weed patch where I am
lying in the evening sun, and where I burnt my feet
and legs —as we used to do at the beach whi e
writing to you this morning. They smell much the
same as our old weeds at Kmgswood. You will not
remember Kingswood much, perhaps. I here is
pretty grass and tiny yellow clovers and pink gera
niums, and a plant that has a purple pea flower and
a pod. There are buttercups and great yellow
dandies They make the patch look silvery with
their domes of seeds, and in the evening they are
mostly blown away. There is a little white flower
I do not know, but the forget-me-nots I know, and
I will send you one to remember by. It has been
almost sultry, a real summer’s day. It was lovely in
the river this afternoon. To dive in from the
towing track reminded me of the Torrens. There
is a great wall of trees on the other side that catch
the sun. They are very tall, and have a sort of poplar
leaf, but are not so tapering as the common poplar.
Beneath the shadow of them the level green is


starred with tiny daisies and a buttercup or two.
They remind me of the Wey or the banks of the
si ver 1 harries. I guess you learn geography of
England. I have seen some of those famous old
r i Ver u S -n that you rea . d about > and climbed some of
? et a v ’ ew °f the country, and picked
wildnowers in the woods. The river made me
thirsty; and I am thirsty to read the English books
I have.
„ . June 9.
Dear Daisy,
I have just been to a service at the Y.M. I think
with the wind that is blowing they must have been
able to hear us sing “All Hail the Power” up in
the front line. We also sang that pretty hymn
us grace that we may conquer.” We had
a good sermon from Mr. Padre Buckley. The
padre has learnt to recognize the value of other
points of view, each man his own hillock, and he
has learnt over here, he says, the great value of
unity, which is only possible through diversity. You
must break the clay into pieces before you can
build the temple. We always have united worship
you know, in the Y.M., and Padre reckons when we
go home we will have to get more co-operation
between different Christian peoples. He gave a
good illustration from how the Americans, so


different from us, have the last few days been
fighting hard with us for just a common great
ideal and common sacred cause. And is it
not fine that they have begun by doing so well, by
proving themselves in such a brave manner. 1 must
first thank you now for the lovely snaps, x hey
have come out well, and the two of Mary are abso-
lutely lovely. I must go and see Charlie to-
morrow; he has come back to his old burrow, and
I expect has the pictures, too. The rain has cleared
away, and it is such a fine day, refreshed by the
little showers. The wheat grew about a foot in the
night; it was marvellous how it came out into ear
all of a sudden, and the ears shot up above the
leaves, and left all the poppies away behind. The
barley, too, is so high now that it shuts out the view,
and its heads, getting brown, bend down to look at.
you. You ought to see our poppies and the daisies
—not the tiny one-eyed daisies, but the great ones
like those growing on the flat at Raywood. You can
gather them in armfuls, and they are good for
making beds. But I got a bundle of poppy plants for
a pillow—the smell of poppies makes you sleep well,
you know —and they still keep blossoming though
picked a week ago, and they come out a little
wrinkled, but still glistening like crushed silk. And
I blocked my skylight with cornflowers. They never
fade, but keep their lovely blue better than coloured


glass. They are lovely growing with the poppies in
clumps among the grass, or in the cornfields, always
taller than the scarlets. For company, and to keep
the gnats away, I’ve got a couple of birds building
in the branches of my little wurlie. And the straw-
berries are ripening all around beneath the bushes.
They are little bigger than a pin’s head, but the
quality of their taste is good. I had a swim with
Charlie on Tuesday, and during the evening he
showed me some of his latest pictures that were
different from mine. I just want to say how much
I have been enjoying reading a good book at dinner
time. After a couple of chapters of a stirring love
tale like “Lorna Doone,” when “Dress for Parade”
goes, I wake up to find I am in the midst of a
quite different adventure, for so I find it best to
imagine this enterprise, however stirring it may or
may not be. What if it never finished! It is then
only like a tale that is broken in the middle, like
most of the stories I read, for I hardly ever get to
the end of them. I should say that your good man
looks as well as ever, and seems full of expectation
of good news. Cheero!
France, June, 1918.
Dear Mother,
When the skylark began to sing this morning and
the bit of moon struggled above the dark bank, and


there was a glimpse of the morning star through
the gathering clouds, then I could read your letters
that came last night. And it was a quiet morning!
Oh, how beautiful! What fresh hopefulness alto-
gether. They were in between letters from you and
Lorna and Day. Last night I could tell who they
were from by the feel of them, and see the date t>y
the flares, and Lorna’s always had the bluebird with
the motto. It was not for lack of candle that I
could not read them, but we had to fix the wires, and
it is awkward to read by Fritz’s flares. Daisy wrote
in pencil, and it took three flares to find the top end
of the page. The girls wrote from Port Willunga,
and you were all excited about Den. coming home,
as he had got as far as Fremantle! You all said
you were looking forward to the time when I would
be coming, too. Sure I will. What a vision of the
home-coming you have stirred up. Henceforth that
will be the measure of my expectation. And I feel
this warfare cannot be much longer. How diffe-
rent now from when you wrote those letters. How
different things may be by the time this reaches you.
You say you will look for the day when I come back,
and that there is work for me to do at home when
this job has been done —when we have finished
fixing the wires. I must first have the patience to
wait and brave all the dangers till then. But every
day’s marching, every night of watching, will bring


the great home-coming nearer. May this life of war
make me better able to do whatever there may be to
be done. And surely the Lord will deliver me from
the hands of my enemies. I was afraid I would
lose something from your letters last night in the
dark, and T dropped your tiny violets in the mud.
I did not expect to find them in the newspaper cut-
ting, and thought they were just a smudge of ink;
but thank you for the tiny flowers. It has come out
a bright day, and all the mud is drying in our trench.
Thank you all for your love and your letters, and
the fresh hope they have brought me.
Your ever-loving boy, Gibbie.
Sunday, June 30, 1918.
Dear Mr. V ,
I have just been finishing the “Private Papers of
Henry Ryecroft,” a book which Mother sent me a
long time ago for my birthday, and which Fritz
interrupted with his big offensive. As it had your
name written plainly on the cover—long since gone
—I thought I would just write and thank you for it.
Whether it was originally borrowed or stolen, I
cannot very well return it now. I wish I could keep
it and read some of it again; but I have to carry my
library in my pocket, and I managed to find another
chap who had not read it to give it to. So many,
alas! are not able to appreciate a book so dry and


interesting. Ryecroft was no democrat, like
Horace; he shunned the common crowd; and indeed
this war has, more than anything, disturbed in my
mind the very democratic principles we are fighting
for. Ryecroft had no time for science, but I don’t
agree with him there. It is rather the use we have
made of science that has brought so much trouble
upon us, and the neglect of human studies as well.
But we must not lose faith altogether in mankind,
in our Demos, through its failure to get wisdom
as well as knowledge, through its failure to use
science aright, through the failure of men to love
one another. Nor must we say through that that
the Lord, who is the only giver of victory, loves us
no longer. As our good parson says in his letter,
we do not argue the Fatherhood of God, who is un-
seen, from the brotherhood or brotherliness of men,
whom we see. As we had in sermon to-night, the
first commandment is to love the Lord, and it is only
because He is our Father that men are brothers,
motley crowd as we seem to be. I have been sadly
interrupted by the man I lent Ryecroft to. He came
to say how splendid it was. He liked that passage
where Ryecroft says of his solitary home, there
was no hatred in it at all, never an angry word.
Flow beautiful he makes the pictures of his little
home, and how sincere his delight in it seems. My
friend stayed talking till it was dark. Perhaps I


appreciated the book more because it treats of a life
so different from my own, and experiences strangely
opposite. Ryecroft looks back from a happy period
of tranquillity at the end of his life to a youth of
turmoil and struggle and uncertainty; while I look
back from a life that might be miserable enough but
for the memories of peace and sunshine and happi-
ness of my boyhood. And he lived in such close
companionship with Nature, with whom we are
bound to live so much by our war. Whether I live
in a green wurlie in summer or a frozen ditch in
winter, it is always fine to watch how little Nature
is affected by us in her course. She has the
spirit of persistence everywhere. The breezes are
still free; the spring still comes and brings its
flowers; and the autumn its rich harvest of colours.
I half dreaded coming to Ryecroft’s winter-time.
I read it in midsummer; but there were no horrors
in it. He stays secure indoors, and writes about
the beauties of England. He is truly a patriot,
though it might have broken his heart to have had
to do drilling for his country. One cannot but be
glad he never lived to see the war itself. Rut the
war has come upon us, and he makes us the more
glad to be fighting for England and for English
ideals; and I am sure that the great war, apart from
its issue, will do much—has done much already—to
purge our national life of many of those insidious


tendencies which he was so well justified in abhor-
ing. There is one quotation near the end of the
“Papers” that I think I can remember: “Non si
male nunc ct ulim sic erit” Though to-day is ill,
yet it shall not be so to-morrow. The whole book,
indeed, is a message of hope. I have been near to
the country that he writes of, and seen it in the full
glory of spring, and the author gives us a picture of
a brave life crowned with blessedness as beautiful as
that beautiful country of his in the clear sunshine
that breaks through the mist of a spring morning.
Sunday, June 23, 1918.
Dearest Mother,
I finished to-day the good book of “Lorna
Doone.” I am afraid I read the last part too
quickly, especially as events are crowded in so
quickly near the end. The great beauty of the book
is, I reckon, that it is never rushed on. The story
is told so calmly and deliberately, as if by a big man,
and the scenery never neglected. It is surely the
greatest charm of rustic life, more than in a town,
folks must live constantly subject to the varying
moods of Nature. Ever changing, and ever the
same for all, the just and the unjust, and yet affect-
ing every different mind differently. When I did
that journey down from London to the south of
Somerset there are two places I regret I did not


stop to see. One is Glastonbury. I did not go
there because I did not know it was the place where
Thomas Wingfold had his curacy. Now I regret I
did not take the road over the hills of the border
of Devon, but listened to a traveller who took me the
easy way along the river and on the good road. It
is strange I never thought of regretting it then when
I got a great puncture on the good road, and my
friend went on without even glancing back! Next
time I will take to the hills. John Ridd made some
good roads up there, too, and no doubt there is not
much war traffic on them even yet. But perhaps it
is better that I know the scenes of both books that
I have enjoyed so much only in a general way. One
thing about that West Country is its remoteness
and wildness still. We had a parting discourse this
morning from our good Padre Buckley. He is going
away to another battalion. It was a sermon charac-
teristic of him. “God forbid that I should glory
except in the Cross” was his text. He spoke of the
new form of religion there is in our forces that has
no form at all. All religious forms and schemes
of salvation are out of place if we have but the
Cross of our Lord to look to. and will each take up
our own and follow and glory in nought else. Then
he spoke of our Union Flag—a union of three
crosses, all so different and belonging to people of
such different character and temperament; yet each


was a cross, each was symbolical of sacrifice, and a
token of the leadership of Jesus, so all were united
to form the flag we were fighting for. I wonder has
any change in religious spirit reached Australia. Is
our own church stirred by it yet while we are
“delaying,” while the war is holding on to give them
time to stir themselves? And is the new learning
in sight out there? In England the Education Bill
is still unshelved, and we are starting our “scheme”
to be ready for our share in the new learning as soon
as we shall be home again. It is past the longest
day. When you get this it should be spring. When
winter threatens the Hun may the spring bring fresh
hope to all of you. With my fondest love,
Yours ever, Gib.
Dear Mother,
Twelve months ago I was away in England and
making holiday, went roaming round the country
on a wild adventure, seeing all the woods and
streams and meadows of our old Motherland, visit-
ing many of the sacred places where Englishmen
from olden times have worshipped and given thanks
in spring. Again this Whitsuntide I have been
making holiday, though stopping here in France.
This country has not, I know, the same associations
and interest that our dear England has for us. None
the less, it may interest you some to know how I


have been enjoying myself, and where I have been
spending my holiday. For this country is in the
melting pot of history even now; therefore I pur-
pose to write you something of my holiday and
what I have seen. My only regret is that I have so
little knowledge, so little power to write it well. The
names even of the birds and trees I find it so hard
to learn. Part of my delight has been in reading
“Lorna Doone.” I marvel at the wealth of the
writer’s descriptions. I have tried to pick up from
him the names of some of the trees, for many of
these trees grow in England, too. He seems to find
a name for everything he sees. His descriptions are
so apt that I often think I must have gone the rough
road over the hills in the south of Somerset instead
of riding on the more level track by the river. It is
strange fortune, now I consider it, that I should
have been punctured on the easy road by a bootnail,
and not so strange, perhaps, that the companion
who persuaded me to ride that road with him should
not turn back when I dropped behind, but left me
to patch my tyre with stamp paper. This year I
began my Whitsun holiday by plunging into the
big river; no, first there was the service. We sat
with our coats off in the shade where the daisies
were spread over the green and the buttercups were
golden. For, as Livy would begin, summer already
was at hand, and making her presence felt. What


could have been more fitting than the familiar words
in the lesson for that day to have them recalled to
us: “My Peace I give unto you; let not your heart
be troubled.” I went afterwards and washed in
the running water, and determined to forget we
were at war, and to have a holiday on my own.
Most of Sunday afternoon I spent in writing home
or sitting with a book at the edge of our barley field.
Towards evening, however, I strolled down to the
neighbouring village, and on the way smelt the white
hawthorn bush and picked a bit of lilac blossom.
There were some great trees in the little square by
the ancient church, and more overhanging the wall.
These, freshly clothed in green, on those hot days
had a depth of shade and colour like our old mul-
berry in November. These more than anything
gave a picturesqueness to the quaint old hyphen-
ated town. I slept well that night in my little bivy
between the barley and the patch of poppies. On
Monday morning I first refreshed myself before
starting on my journey by swimming the big river
again, and letting it bear me downwards on its great
flood, past the tall avenue of trees and cool shady
places; for it turned out quite a warm day. I
packed my grip, and, towards the end of the after-
noon, for then travelling is ever very pleasant. I set
out. I walked down through the little town and
beneath the great trees that grow near the chateau,


crossed the stream, and out over the rolling hills,
covered here and there with barley, here and there
with other kinds of corn, and passed the little clump
of wood that had reminded me so much of Salisbury
Plain. I had tramped along a mile and more before
I came to something of a hamlet, where our Charlie
greeted me. It seemed not long since I had seen
him there, or near, before; yet how much had gone
between. I had many tales of mighty deeds to tell,
and he walked some way with me, and made the
road seem shorter. And now the road went over
the hill and through another pretty town, now up
a pleasant valley. Often a fine landscape was ob-
tained of fields and woods and rolling hills, and a
glimpse of the river, and ever a church spire above
the clump of trees. Sometimes from higher ground
many steeples and towers could be counted; in the
distance—for the day was beautifully clear—the
high roof of a cathedral, though its city nowhere
towered above the woods. And more than one
cathedral could be seen. Let me pause a moment
on the hillside where we get the northern breeze, for
the spare socks in my pack are getting heavy, as they
will. I have seen ruins of temples in England; they
were often majestic still, and awesome with the
holiness of long ago and the relics of ancient ritual.
Covering the turmoil of their destruction is the ever-
creeping ivy that gives it all a calm serenity once


more, and the nettle growing within the ruined walls
makes them seem one with Nature again. Yet see
those two white stone towers that rise from * e
valley there, that even now reflects the light of the
western sun. An incompleted ruin! Aye, this is
the land to see a ruin; not covered here with grass
and ivy, not decked in tranquil loveliness, like those
ever-sacred walls; here the ruin still is sore an
raping, and you would stand and wonder to behold
it uncovered by the lapse of ages. Just look inside
that high arched doorway, as I have done, t here
is desecration for you! It was an unfinished
cathedral; it wanted yet the choir and trancepts, it
wanted yet the spires to point to heaven; but the
walls that are there seem the more massive, and
make it an imposing structure now. Yet how soon
may those walls be shattered, even as the rich adorn-
ments of the chancel are shattered now. And I have
seen a church a heap of flames, or was it not a
cathedral, too, though perhaps less famed? Illion s
temples robed in fire!” All night I saw it blaze,
and the misty darkness made the leaping flames an
awful red; and when the fire was done and the
temple left a skeleton, I have seen the ruthless Hun
strike its lofty tower as he would wreak vengeance
on a dead man’s bones. But broken, it did not fall,
and there above the hill you can see the top of it.
It stands majestic still. But we have tarried long


enough. After this, I journeyed near a swamp,
where I got no view any more, but got weary
enough of wandering, so that I was mighty glad to
find a quiet village where I could get comfortable
lodgings in a barn. Before I laid me down in so
humble quarters, I learned my good friend Jonathan
resided in that village, and he gave me a right hearty
welcome. At the post office it pleased me much to
find a parcel there. It brought me many candles
that I might the better read my book, and short-
breads that made my evening meal, for I had for-
gotten to make other provision for it. Now, this
village, though somewhat ancient in appearance,
was to me very quaint and picturesque, set as it was
among the rising fields, and having a double row, or
avenue, of poplars leading uphill, where the road
goes to the great city. These poplar trees, with
their pretty dark green in summer, and their pecu-
liar erectness, stand apart in their little rows, and
lend a quaint old-fashioned touch to these Simple
rural scenes. The fields themselves were very
pretty with their growing corn and clover and
flowers among the grass. They sloped down to the
hollow, where there was an orchard of apples, the
last blossoms scarcely blown, and in the hedge sur-
rounding them a white bush of hawthorn. Beyond
the orchard, the great glistening trees and a glint of
water, and beyond the trees the high rolling downs


shut out anything less peaceful or less lovely. At
the top end of the village, near the road, was a fine
great chestnut, cone-shaped, and full of blossom.
But what was noticed more from the fields were
the trees that were clumped in the centre of the
village around the high-roofed church. The steep
slate roof of the church reached above the treetops
and nearly as high as the little steeple itself, and
below the group of cottages there were great trees
again that filled the whole hollow with their
branches. I stayed there a couple of days, and
looked around it pretty well, and went to sleep each
moonlit evening beneath a magnificent double
avenue of trees. While I was in that place I went
down and explored the swamps. As the days kept
bright and almost hot the water gleamed among the
reeds delightfully, and reflected the willows and
other trees at its edge. Pleasant, too, to swim the
cool channels, and I soon discovered an old raft
among the rushes, no doubt constructed by a savage
race and washed up from some earlier age, and I
went paddling across the lagoon with a long bend-
ing twig. How the sun blazed down upon me as
I floated in the centre of those dark pools. Strange
pools, they were deep at the very edge, and in the
centre often so very deep I could scarcely bottom
them with my long stick. There were strange cur-
rents, too, between them, and in places very cold.


In one place this swamp opens out into a beautiful
lake. I wandered round it one evening just as the
sun was getting low and the band playing its last
music on the lawn. The anthem of the French they
played, and it sounded very fine across the water.
The next morning was dull and overcast, and it
was then I first realized how grand the Scotch
thistles are on a misty morning; I had hardly
noticed them in the patch of weeds where they grew
above the wealth of daisies and grass. On a dull
day, as you look into the wind, there is quite a
gleam of purple as they all look towards you. This
morning they were quite the brightest thing in
Nature but for a poppy. At the edge of the barley
there was a solitary scarlet, the first I had seen. As
the night was wet, I was fortunate in getting a tent
to sleep in, and the crops and flowers all benefited by
the showers. Next day the sun came out bright
again, and woke the yellow of the fields—buttercups
and dandelions and mustard weed in all their
wonted glory. And it’s well it was so, for it was a
gala day, the day of the great military aquatics,
when the warriors gave themselves to pleasure and
to sport down in the big pond. There were contests
of diving and swimming that would have been poor
and cold indeed but for the sun corrfirig out to watch
them. There was a stall for the boys to buy
oranges and cocoa-buck-shee, and music all the


while to keep them merry. Better than all were the
boat races. It takes Virgil, I know, to write of a
boat race, and Virgil would scorn to write of these.
They were rowed in positions with four oars apiece,
or I should say five. There was not the majesty
or thrill for him, not the excitement of a contest of
the roving Trojan band, yet I’ll make it no more
stirring than it was. There was John Burney in the
stern, helmsman and urger-on, with an old red cap
on his head. He stood and grasped the steering
oar. And the rowers sat straight on the high seats
of the pontoon, the captain rowing stroke. They
struck out boldly for the mark at the far end of the
pond. The band on the hank played its gayest tune;
but, alas! the gallant captain caught a crab, and,
dropping his oar, in the twinkling of an eye disap-
peared under the high seat. Then John Burney
would have slapped his thigh and twirled his little
stick, as is his way; but he rose to the occasion,
and with his two hands he grasped the steering oar,
while the crowd held their sides. The fat man,
putting his oar without a moment s delay in the
place of the lost one, pushed it through the water
standing up, while the captain, regaining his high
seat, pulled more furiously than before. But with
his greater weight and having no steersman now, the
crazy tub swung round, nor would it go towards
the goal, but crashed into her adversary. But she


did not sink nor did she strip her oars. They
struggled round the buoy together, and one pontoon
came home to the starting point while the other
went round in a circle, with John Burney pushing
his oar. These were the simple sports of the day,
and the sinking sun cast his glow upon the foliage of
the great trees by the water, and the little breeze
caught the white sail a boy had set in a round tub,
and carried it across the pond to where the band
was playing on the lawn. There was no more thrill
than that, yet the drab khaki crowd watched it with
delight and cheers. For what need had they of
thrill? Has not their work enough of it?
And they were making holiday. Or could
glittering Romans look more picturesque as
they lined the water’s edge in their dull garb,
with a few red caps near the diving board.
Have Romans ever done such deeds as they ? Have
they ever faced such fire unflinching? Then their
pastimes would be less desperate? No, there they
were together in the light of the evening sun across
the water, one of the finest brigades that has ever
fought in France, that has won the highest fame,
all that was left of them; and if I had never seen
the beauty of our hated khaki before, I thought it
fine then. Next day I witnessed a military function
no less grand, though of a different order. It was
the Sabbath of the Holy Trinity, and a solemn


church parade was held. The day was dull, and
the sun hid his smiling face amid the clouds, and
so gave greater dignity to the most regimental of
all military ceremonies. Different from the day be-
fore, there on the quiet hillside was all the pomp and
pride of discipline. Every soldier in his place, from
the colonel to the meanest ding-bat, every line exact,
and the choir stood up to the hymn unflinchingly,
and did their best to sing the sacred strains. As I
am not writing of military ecclesiastics, I will not
quote the sermon, but just add that after the C.O.’s
exhortation to be brave at church and fearless in
battle, the troops were dismissed with a holiday
after dinner. For several days I stayed in that place
contented; camping in my little wurlie of bushes,
rising early to go down where the stream was run-
ning, or when the sun was hot bathing in the deep
swamp hole among all those glistening trees. Each
day brought some new delight, and yet they so blend
their changing moods I cannot tell them one from
another. Some brought fresh flowers to the fields,
and to my eager eyes; now they are all mingled
in rich profusion and laughing with the wealth of
corn. One day it was red clover caught my eye; it
did not last long, and soon another red was. in the
field, as the poppies replaced its fading blooms. Yes,
the poppies soon came everywhere, first in the open
on the top of banks and slopes, then they flooded the


cornfields, and strove with the strong wheat in a
race towards the blue sky; they grew above the
daisies everywhere. Not long after the first poppies
was the cornflour; the centre blossom opened of first
one bush and then the others, each bush tall already
with a host of buds on long stalks ready to open
above the poppies. Everywhere the poppies came
there the cornflower also came, with its lovely blue
reaching up as majestic as the arch of sky itself.
One day —one of those days with a fresh breeze,
when sunshine alternated with the shadows of the
white clouds—going for a long walk to see the great
forest, and get a view of the big cathedral city from
the brow of the hill, I came on a weed patch with
all the flowers just blending in their right amount.
Daisies there were covering the ground with white
and with their yellow eyes, and a few buttercups,
there were some little white butterfly flowers strag-
gling among the great wealth of scarlet and blue,
and towering higher than all was the royal purple of
a few prickly thistle bushes, all in such a blaze, set
among the dark green corn. And yet the colours
seemed so simple and blended so softly together you
could never call them gaudy weeds, and as ever it is
in England they were rather lovely than gorgeous.
Then as the May month drew to a close, as it always
should do with the opening of the wild rose to Eng-
lishmen, the last and most lovely of the wild flowers


(though it grows better in our own hills than either
in England or in France), as at last the briar was
blossoming, I set out again across the fields, and
down the white dusty road until I came to the gates
of a castle, and there I paused. It was not that
I feared to go further; whether the castle belonged
to a marquis or an ogre, or to some beast lurking in
the leafy garden, I did not care; but I had to stand
at the gate and wonder, for I stood, it seemed, on
the threshold of Fairyland. Outside it was the
little town that held my gaze, rocking with the
unending traffic of the war. Down the steep street
came all the king’s horses and all his men, aye, all
his chariots and water carts, all his engines of war.
There came the hosts of the King of England and
of the King of France, men of every race and
colour, men of every continent, horses and mules
from all the world, and motors in endless proces-
sion, while the great gates of the castle stood open
inviting all to enter; yet all turned aside at the gate-
way and disappeared behind the high wall, all intent
on war. Within the open gate some magic spell
kept silence, or the great trees which arched the
entrance forbade the noisy crowd to enter. Through
those mighty trees were glimpses of another world,
a world all of peace. Those glimpses seemed to
extend so far into the beautiful garden that the trees
in the distance there seemed of gigantic size, and


the sunlight through so many shadows gave every-
thing there a wondrous beauty. When I had stood
thus awhile and wondered, I remembered I was
weary, and rested there in the shade. When at
evening the traffic stopped for a moment, then the
enchantment of the garden seemed to spread outside.
Just then the village church stood up among its
treetops on the hill above the steep street, and its
bell tolled out for the half-hour, then the peace
flowed out from the garden and filled the quaint old
street of the little village that clustered round the
castle gate, and all took on its ancient charm as a
bent old man trudged up the quiet street to seek his
bed. Then the traffic began once more, and I turned
away, and approached the castle itself, going
through where the wisteria hung on the old wall—
but enough of the old castle, though the events and
alarms of that night would in peace time fill a book.
Now. Mother, I hope there is nothing in these pages
that could serve the enemy, or that could incriminate
myself; but they concern my wanderings as a private
soldier and more wanderings of fancy than in
reality. I will not say how often I wandered out of
bounds, but I mean it all as a family and private
matter, and trust you will give no publicity to my
holiday in France, which, believe me, it was, rather
than French leave. At the end I give thanks to the
Lord of all for the spring, which ever brings its


holiday to every man and beast, be he just or unjust,
if only he will open his heart to it.
Ever your loving boy, Gib.
{Extract from a Letter to a Pal, found in a
pocket book.)
.... We spent the week-end camping out this
Easter. If you want a funk hole in our ditch, you
are welcome heartily; but you will have to excavate
one for yourself, and I would sooner have your
letters from the sunny homeland. Your letter came
out before breakfast on Sunday, and a very beauti-
ful long one from Mother, and some more. It was a
great day. I went out very early while the morning
star was yet half hidden in the clouds, and sneaked
across to the bit of wood, or copse, not far from
where you and I were last together, and found it full
of flowers. I had not been much struck by cow-
slips ; I had not seen them at their best in England,
crowded in a bunch, or growing later than their
proper time. But I came across them one afternoon
after the thicket had been bathed in the showers, the
tears, if you will, of the infant year. And how they
lit that leafless thicket with their smile. They near
outdid the daffodils I saw last year beneath the bud-
ding chestnut trees in England. I’m glad I’ve seen
Easter in France. We had an Easter service here
last night, and it was the commemoration of our


great fight. The last evening service where we had
Padre Blackwood was on September 3, when George
and I went together. Your father would have en-
joyed the service last night. Some Tommies came,
and there was hardly standing room. Mostly they
sat on the table, but we took our tin hats off—there
is reverence for you. We sang “Jesus Christ is
Risen To-day." Long’un—he is our sergeant now—
protested it was too hard, but I have not heard such
fine singing for a long time, though there was no
accompaniment. The padre had been to a burial,
but he said to look with joy at Easter to the morrow,
though the frame that binds us to the earth be
shattered and the clothes that keep us in the ditches
rent. For all of us each day is a day’s march nearer
home. Last night it helped to fill us with peace
that the world can neither give nor take away.
June 14, 1918.
Dear Mother.
Barney has just been telling me about the Dur-
ham that has got the V.C. Have I told you about
Barney ? the boy who used to pinch the quinces.
His mother used to keep the lollie shop in Jetty
Road and sell ice cream. He was in our gun team,
but he was a barber, you know, and didn’t pay
attention to the gun. When he was left out of the
Ypres stunt, I was left out as well, in case anything


should happen to the gun team. And Barney always
says that our dear old George was in his place rather
than mine when that great calamity did befall our
team. Still, the next time, when the corporal was
killed, too, and I was in hospital, Barney took charge
of the gun, and he took a gun into our last stunt,
and I happened to get into his team! It was when
we were up there that the Durhams came up so
brave and went running one after another out to
an old cafe in front, and joined the gap, and came
crawling and creeping back with their wounded, so
that it made us cry; and their stretcher bearers
went out in face of all the bullets in the broad day,
and fetched some more cases back. One of the
S.B.’s is the V.C. in the picture That is one of the
deeds that won it for him! And I had better tell it
all. I had seen one of our own men wounded on in
front where the sniper was, and said: “There’s a
chance of a V.C. when the fog thickens. But Jones,
a corporal, would not wait for the fog. He went
out in the daylight, and only got a bullet scratch
on his head and a couple of holes in his hat—not
even a Blighty—and he only got a Military Medal
afterwards for not going out when wounded. But
the sniper hit my little cobber in the left eye while I
was preaching to him not to look over—and we left
him in the little posie we dug together, and I put
Astlev’s motto on the little cross I made for him:


“Pro Deo et Patria,” and I got into Barney’s hole
with him, for he is very small. I was his No. 2 then,
and since all those barrages we have been the best
of friends. We made our hole a bit bigger, and old
Astley got into it too. It was then I questioned
him. and found he came from the corner of Hill
Street, and was withal an undergrad of my own
faculty! But to finish about Barney Kerin. He
got a stripe afterwards and an issue of M.M., and
he wanted me to go in with him again as No. 2,
but I stayed out, you know, again. Now he has
come back with a bad leg—he caught it on the wire
six weeks ago. I told you my old companion Scottie
Gordon was slain. He was George’s cobber, too.
They dug in together when first he came, and they
worked together under fire. Gordon and little
Kerin the Barber were ever the two driest characters
in the platoon, and ever the most generous to every-
one. But Dave got a stripe and an M.M. too, and
I am glad; the roughest of all the bombers, and so
of all the platoon. He spent all Christmas “blind”
in bed, and is poor at drill, yet worth a dozen in the
“line.” While I am at it I must tell you about an-
other friend I’ve made. Our debate last week on
“Which State was the Best” never came off, but I’m
glad we prepared it. After our officer drew out
because he was only thinking of leave, which he has
since got —Hurray!—and Mr. Yeatman would not


have it on, I asked the man next me at bayonets,
for I remembered George had said he was a bit of a
parson. So we worked it up together, for he was
quite willing, and a good arguer, he said. Since
then I have made quite good friends with Mr. Allan-
son. He likes the books in the Y.M., and reads all
day. He did have a stripe, but he asked them to
take it away! as he hated roaring. . It was the
padre told me University was coming here as we
cannot go to University. Charles and I reckon we
will both come home graduates. But I will still be
Your loving boy, Gibbie.
France, Monday, July 1, 1918.
Dearest Mother,
Now the sun has gone down, I must just write
you another line. It has been such a glorious day,
a regular scorcher of a dog day, and this is a sort of
New Year’s Day to me. We want one every half
in such years as these. The sun was as brave to-
day as it was on the New Year on the glistening
snow. I’m as full of hope still as I was then,
Mother. A Happy Half! I’ve been busy writing
to all the men I know. It is a change to be able
to put in some swear words after writing so much
to the ladies. I was interrupted in writing Mr.
V an appreciation of Henry Rvecroft which
you sent me, and which was really his, you know,


by A coming in to say what a splendid book it
was, for I had given it to him, so I did not make
much of a fist of the “appreciation.” I had a note
from Charles on Sunday from London ! Hurray ; I
am so glad he has got over there at last, for himself
and for poor old Day. It will be so fine for her to
have him there for a bit, though she is not there
herself. Then he will have his promotion. What
days to be having leave! Our Dave went on leave,
too, this morning, and it should be my turn again
this autumn. In the meantime I have begun a
couple more books to-day. Day. and Den. will be
glad enough, I daresay, in the springtime, so I hope
you will be glad, Mother, too. lam still left out of
the fighting over here. It is bon for me. I will
have to fight hard next time with a good grace. I
think the crisis will be over soon. When the danger
of being beaten, Mother, is gone, what then will be
the fear of peril or the sword or gazonkas or any-
thing else that can harm the body?
Ever your loving boy, Gibbie.
"Heaven over-arches you and me.
And all earth’s gardens and her graves.
Look up with me, until we see
The day break and the shadows flee.
What though to-night wrecks you and me,
If so, to-morrow saves!”
—Christina Rossetti.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
G. Hassell & Son, Currie Street. Adelaide




