

HOMES IN VICTORIA:
OR, THE
BRITISH EMIGRANT’S GUIDE TO VICTORIA,
TO ACCOMPANY PASSAGE WARRANTS.
«
N. W. POLLARD, C.E.,
VICTORIA N RAILWAY DEPARTMENT, j
DATE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE PUBLIC WORKS AT TRINIDAD, AND
SPECIAL AGENT OF THAT COLON Y IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
FOR EMIGRATION PURPOSES. PRIZE ESSAYIST TO THE MELBOURNE
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (1850), ON INTERNAL COMMUNICATION ; AND
SECOND PRIZE ESSAYIST TO THE GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA (I 860),
ON MANUFACTURES FROM THE RAW MATERIALS PRODUCED IN
VICTORIA.
No. 1.
VICTORIAN INSTITUTIONS & ESTABLISHMENTS.
MELBOURNE;
PRINTED BY /WALKER, MAY & CO., 99 BOURKE ST. WEST.




HOMES IN VICTORIA:
OR, HIE
BRITISH EMIGRANT’S GUIDE TO VICTORIA,
TO ACCOMPANY PASSAGE WARRANTS.
N. W. POLLARD, C.E.,
VICTORIAN EAIIWAY DEPARTMENT,
BATE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE PUBLIC WORKS AT TRINIDAD, AND
SPECIAL AGENT OF THAT COLONY IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
FOR EMIGRATION PURPOSES. PRIZE ESSAYIST TO THE MELBOURNE
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (1856), ON INTERNAL COMMUNICATION ; AND
SECOND PRIZE ESSAYIST TO THE GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA (i 860),
ON MANUFACTURES FROM THE RAW MATERIALS PRODUCED IN
VICTORIA.
NO. 1.
VICTORIAN INSTITUTIONS & ESTABLISHMENTS.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY & CO., 99 BOURKE ST. WEST.


HOMES IN VICTORIA.
I.—VICTORIAN INSTITUTIONS AND ESTAB-
LISHMENTS,
Ready for the Press, lo follow
2.—THE PHYSICAL FEATURES, CLIMATE, AND
PRODUCTIONS OF THE COUNTRY.
3.—FACILITIES FOR SETTLEMENT IN PASTORAL
AND MINING PURSUITS.
4.—FACILITIES FOR SETTLEMENT IN AGRI-
CULTURAL OCCUPATIONS.
S.—FACILITIES FOR SETTLEMENT IN MANU-
FACTURING INDUSTRY.
6.— COLLATERAL FACILITIES FOR ASSISTING
SETTLEMENT.


HOMES IN VICTORIA.
CHAPTER I.
VICTORIAN INSTITUTIONS AND ESTABLISHMENTS.
1. Political Fabric.—2. Ecclesiastical Establishments. —3. Ju-
dicial Institutions.—4. Municipalities,—s. Public Charities.
—6. Educational Establishments—Mechanics’ Institutions—
Elementary Schools —Grammar Schools —Melbourne Uni-
versity—Public Library.—7. Public Societies —The Royal
Society—lndependent Societies. —8. The Press.
That immigration is needed to a very large extent in
Victoria, is a statement which, hut few whose opinions
are of any value, or who have any weight in the
country, will attempt to gainsay t Millions of apres ol
unoccupied, but excellent, land invite it—the further
development of our wonderful mineral treasures invite
it —and a large list of raw materials wanting but a
sufficiency of labour to allow them to give birth to a
manufacturing industry, also invites it.
There are, indeed, but few who deny that this magni-
ficent province of the British empire does not stand in
need of more population ; but while there is almost a
unanimity of sentiment on the question itself, there
are a variety of opinions how best we are to secure the
boon—in what direction we should labour, to bring
most people to our shores.
That the disbursement of public money to assist the
immigrant to reach us is advisable, is now so generally
admitted as the first step towards our national pros-
perity, that it would be a senseless waste of time to
enlarge on it, unless it be to devise practical details for
the working of an organised system of immigration.
To this subject it is proposed at a future date to bestow
some attention; but the object of the present inquiry
is not in that direction: it is now purposed to assist in


file good work, not by any action taken in this country,
but by the collection of items of Victorian life, to place
before our countrymen in the old country, a picture of
the homes which we already enjoy, and to which, their
pioneer relatives, now not only invite them, but are
ready out of the public revenue of the country to assist
them to share;
It is as much because our position is not understood
in the mother country, as to anything else, that we
mainly owe the cessation of immigration during the
last two or three years. The wonderful “ finds ” while
we were surfacing our gold fields, of course attracted a
very large stream of immigration; but now that this
surface mining has nearly ceased, and that men have
I>etaken themselves to other occupations, or even to
other descriptions of mining itself, and that fortunes
are not picked up by poor people in a few days ; does
Victoria any the less present herself a country beyond
comparison desirable as a dwelling place for man ? We
hold a different conclusion.
That Victoria is a desirable home, ft will be our
task to prove ,• that she is a home incomparably superior
to the one we left, is not difficult to show; and it is
our intention on this occasion to examine the class of
institutions she has planted on her soil, showing that
while they are kindred in spirit to those of the British
Isles, the free air we breathe has given to them a tone
not enjoyed in England.
Victoria, the great gold-producing colony of the
British Empire, indeed presents to the intending emi-
grant a field for his industry with which no other
country in the world can compare; her resourcesa are
unbounded; her climatemogjt salubrious; her institutions
most liberal; and her strides in civilization such as
distinguish her among the nations of the earth.
It is in this, our loved country, that the Briton will
find all those civil and religious rights which are his
boasted birthright on his native soil, extended in their
proportions; liberty, both civil and religious, which has
taken so many centuries to come to maturity in the
mother country, was imported here by our first settlers,
and untrammelled by those impediments, which, in Great


Britain, stop progress, the people of Victoria have even
out-run the parent country, in realising those hallowed
benefits, of which the Englishman boasts, and for
which half the civilized world pants in vain.
Here no man is a political nonentity; all who are
untainted by crime, all who have reached man’s estate,
participate in making those laws which are to govern
them. Here we have no aristocratic element in our
political system to dictate to dependents how political
freedom shall be prostituted, for here we have shown
the mother country the advantage of that ballot, which
secures to the most humble the real exercise of his fran-
chise, unawed by the frown of the workmaster who gives
employment to the voter. Here we are in advance of
the mother country in our political system, for here
our representatives forget their duty at their peril,
inasmuch as the time they are uncontrolled -by appeals
to their constituencies is much shorter than in England;
here in fact exists as complete, if not a more complete,
democratic constitution than in the United Staftes >of
America, to which country so many of the sons of
the British Isles flock to make flee homes.
Yet this democratic element does not ride rampant,
but we have established also the safeguard of an Upper
Legislative Chamber to check rash legislation, and for
that chamber the suffrage only extends to those who
can show a property or intellectual qualificaion; these
two elements forming an aristocracy of wealth and
talent, instead of one of mere birth, by which
channels every man amongst us has ample opportunities
to command a control over the Senate of Victoria.
This contraction of the franchise .acts as that security
to property which every honest man must desire to see
in any political .system ; but besides this action it is an
incentive to industry and intellectual attainment, to
acquire that status in the country to winch honourably
acquired wealth and talent are justly entitled,
In this arrangement we recognise a vast improve-
ment on the British political system. In the British
system, birth and, with few exceptions in any
reign, nothing but birth bestows an entrance into the
aristocracy of the country. A great man every now


and again distinguishes himself, and the prerogative of
the Sovereign is exercised to ennoble him, but, unfor-
tunately, not on him only, but on his male, and some-
times on his female, descendants for ever, descends the
right to govern. The great and good are justly en-
nobled : but how often have we seen that even a primary
creation was injudicious; how often that the Sovereign
is advised to select unfit persons for political position ?
Such abuses exist not in Victoria —men do not here rise
by the simple “ fiat” of political party; they take their
station in our Upper Chamber of the Legislature, because
the voice of the men of property and intelligence of
their constituencies, think them fit for it, and if subse-
quently found unfit, their appointment is not irrevoc-
able, does not descend to their perhaps more unworthy
posterity. If bad men are returned to our Upper
Chamber, such bad men can, and very soon will be
ejected ; and here again must be claimed a large ad-
vance on that political fabric of which we were so proud
when we were living in the land of our forefathers, but
which, since our emigration, we have learned to be
defective, and have therefore amended.
In the British Legislature, the Peer sits not as the
guardian of the interests of the people; his seat was
originally given him to protect his own exclusive privi-
leges, and to guard the Crown from popular encroach-
ments. In Victoria we know no such separate in-
terests; the theory of our system is that all members of
our legislature hold their honourable positions as selec-
tions from the people themselves, returned to serve
their, constituencies and the country. We acknowledge
no separate, no privileged class; all belong to the
commonwealth, and therefore the legislature speaks not
in diversity of tongues, but in a common language, the
key-note of which is the public good.
This is, indeed, freedom much in advance of that
description of freedom which is enjoyed in the British
Isles; and in speaking of Victoria in the mother country,
it is often alleged that such democratic institutions
ignore a monarchy—that they are essentially repub-
lican, and will in the end lead us to attempt the estab-
lishment of a Republic. There cannot be a greater


mistake: there are no people throughout the British
dominions who are more loyal than those who dwell in
Victoria, there are no people who more admire a limited
monarchy than we do. We well know that a settled
government is a blessing. We are quite alive to the
fact that republican institutions keep a nation in a con-
stant state of political turmoil, and we as well under
Stand that the idea of a republican government being
the cheapest, is a delusion. We know that if monarchy
is liable to establish one set of favourites, republicanism
sets up many; if monarchy wastes thousands in keep-
ing up pageantry, republicanism spends millions ir
collusive dealings for power; and hence, with a good
many Americans among our people, with even a sprink-
ling of red republicanism and chartism resident in
Victoria, this country would be among the foremost of
the British Colonies to defend an imperilled monarchy.
Here the prerogatives of the Crown are viewed in
their proper light, the monarch is acknowledged as the
representative of the greatness of the county; and
while the regal power is thus viewed, every man well
knows that the Royal prerogatives cannot be abused,
while the humblest man can and does make himself
heard in the Legislative Assembly; and while the pro-
perty and intelligence of the country are amply repre-
sented in the Legislative Council, aiding the popular
branch of Parliament whenever any attempt may be
made by the Executive to outstep the bounds of the
Constitution, and at the same time checking any attempt
of the lower estate to forget that constitutional liberty
is not licentiousness rampant.
Such is a brief outline of the political constitution
under which the people of Victoria live; such the
“ Magna Charta” of our civil liberty, democratic it is
true, but still surrounded with proper safeguards for
property; still in accordance with sincere attachment to
the Crown of England. We are, in fact, at the present
moment, the beacon light to the British statesman to
show him how much farther he can advance British
liberty with safety; we have thrown off the swaddling
clothes of a dependent community, and shown that any
man who comes amongst us, even from England, is


still even more a free man when he lands in Victoria ;
and we have nurtured this specimen of the tree of
liberty in that sober and cautious manner which admits
of our fatherland learning- something from this young
member of his family; and when we invite immigrants
from the mother-country, we therefore do not ask our
friends in England to abridge one atom of that consti-
tutional liberty which they so justly value, which they
so much more largely enjoy than the communities of
Continental Europe; we do not ask them to abridge
this liberty, we ask them to come to Victoria to increase
it; we ask not to come to a country where the political
institutions will be new to them, but where all that
they have so long and ardently desired at home is
abundantly realised.
Such is the civil liberty enjoyed by the people of
Victoria ; no less in advance of Great Britain is she
in religious liberty. The freedom to worship God in
any form the conscience might dictate was long the
cause of bloodshed and disunion in England; barbarisms
innumerable were perpetrated under the hypocritical
garb of religion; compulsory penal enactments first
positively restricted a man to the way in which he
should seek an entrance into the realms of eternal bliss,
and it was not until the land was deluged with blood,
and that millions of treasure had been wasted, that the
mind threw off the thraldom of a State religion and
dared to be free—free, however, but in name y free
only when the master religious body had its wages
paid; free only like the slave who is permitted to earn
money in his extra hours; not really free ; not unfet-
tered completely y not untrammelled with the weight
of the burden which the State Religion, by Act of
Parliament, demands to support the so-called national
religion. Free, it is true, to build as many churches,
to pay as many clergymen as a dissenter chose, but
not free to object to contribute to support that Church,
the liturgy of which was unpalatable, and, in a very
large number of cases, the doctrines of which the
contributor believed to be the shortest road to eternal
damnation.
It is a farce to say that this slight modification of a


forced religion was religious liberty; and yet tliis was-,,
this still is, what the British people are pleased to glory
in, when they boast of the fatherland, as a country
where civil and religious liberty are household words.
The perhaps unpalatable, but, nevertheless, plain
honest truth is, that the people of England, Ireland, and
Scotland c!o not really enjoy religious liberty; the
Roman Catholics and other dissenters certainly do not;
and the people of the Established Church may outrage
the name of liberty if they please, but it is, neverthe-
less, tyranny and not liberty, when they thrust their
hands into the pockets of their dissenting brethren to
subsidize and often to pamper their own church, replete
with examples of Simony, cursed with the sale of
church preferment, and disgraced by a plurality of
benefices, taking the hard-earned bread from the good
pastor to pander to the luxurious habits of the aristo-
cratic and, generally speaking, incompetent and lazy
incumbent.
This is indeed an ugly picture of the religious liberty
enjoyed by the people of England—but everybody
knows that it is not in the least too highly coloured;
and although all civil disabilities, all prevention from
rising in the state, or graduating at the University
may have been removed, still the dissenter in the
British Isles is not on the same footing with the State
Churchman.
The people of the same nation, of the same country,
of the same parish, do not enjoy the same religious
status if they disagree with the dominant Church.
Here, then again, Victoria comes forth in an in-
viting aspect—when she asks both churchman and
dissenter to leave the unjust practices of the mother
country, and come to the land where religious freedom
is a practical and established reality—where the Church
of England eschews any ascendency over other
nominations of Christians—where her sons and her
daughters provide for her without the assistance of
forced contributions—where they take care that church
preferment is not disgraced by being brought under
the hammer of the auctioneer in the same way as pigs
in a market—where plurality is only countenanced,


when the zeal of the clergyman makes him actually
do the duty of more than one parish —and where the
funds of the church are not wasted, or prostituted to
support the idleness or debauchery of unworthy minis-
ters of her communion—where the dissenting churchmen
meet the members of the Church of England as
Christian brethren, and the clergy associate with one
another as fellow-labourers in the same vineyard—
where the tax-gatherer does not intrude for a church
rate, to embitter the feelings of those who having
liberally contributed to the wants of their own pastor
are not inclined to pay the minister of any other
church—where religion is recognised as a public good
to society, and not as a state machine to pension the
younger sons of the more privileged families—where
all contributing to the State draw in proportion to
what they contribute, the amount due to each being
determined by the census, thus making it a desirable
matter for each community to supply the State with
the requisite statistical information to enable the
Government to judge of the progress each denomi-
nation of Christians is making; and where no man
is asked whether he be a Dissenter, Catholic, or
Churchman before the highest offices of the State be-
fore official preferment, or before educational status are
granted to him.
Such is the religious liberty enjoyed by the people
of Victoria, and who can compare it with the boasted
freedom of England, and will not be forced in candour
to admit, that this young community is far in advance
of the parent State ? "What man can compare the re-
ligious liberty of Continental Europe with ours, and
will not at once admit that Victoria stands immea-
surably in advance of every European State in the
freedom of conscience enjoyed by her people in deter-
mining how they should worship the God who made
them.
Such is the quantity of the religious freedom of
Victoria; equally valuable is the quality of the reli-
glous opportunities enjoyed by the people, even of the
hurch of England, compared with those who live
at home.


The ordinances of our Church are as decently per-
formed as in the old country; our clergy are more
zealous, because they are, in the majority of instances, the
selections of their docks, and the assembled Church in
Synod gives the laity a voice in ecclesiastical affairs,
not enjoyed by our brethren in England. We have
set the example of doing away with the absurd notion
that the clergy alone constitute the Church; we have
demanded that the great body of the laity, like in the
Primitive Church, should be consulted when ecclesias-
tical affairs are to be determined, and while honouring
the minister as the pastor set over us to dispense holy
things, we have taken care not to let him forget that
he too is a man whose judgment is liable to err.
These are privileges not enjoyed by the Church of
England at home ; its unholy, its unscriptual alliance
with State matters, which so encumbers it as often to
destroy its usefulness, has no place in our system, and,
notwithstanding’ this separation, the Church of England
in Victoria is “ flourishing as the green bay tfee,” and
is an example to the Church in England to 11 go and
do likewiseto separate temporal from spiritual
things; to wipe an ecclesiastical absurdity from the
Constitution ; and to make the clergy confine them-
selves to holy things, and leave politics to Statesmen.
Here, indeed, ive have religious freedom, and it is
to such freedom that we invite the British emigrant;
it is to pay for what he feels does his soul good, and
for it alone, that we invite him to come and exchange
a solid reality for time-honoured absurdities, as fit for
our enlightened age as were the primitive costumes of
the ancient Britons for the fashion of the present day,
as the inhumanity of the savage for the Christian
soldier. In short, we invite him to come to exchange
qualified, for that enlarged, political and religious status,
in which no country in the world excels us.
But although Yictoria is in advance of the mother
country in both civil and religious liberty, yet all her
forms of government, all her religious exercises, are
those to which an* incomer has been accustomed from
his cradle. It is in their enlargement that he betters
them in this country; he will find that Victoria is but


setting a good example, and doing thing’s about which
England has been talking for half a century. The im-
migrant will not find any new principle, he will only
meet what he has been long panting for, and if this is
the case in his government and in his church affairs,
equally will he find a British spirit ruling in the ad-
ministration of justice.
Here, as in England, we find the palladium of
British liberty—trial by jury. Here, as in England,
every man is innocent in the eye of the law until a
jury otherwise decides. Here, as at home, no criminal
depends on the “ fiat” of a despot, hut here also he
does not go before a jury of his country a pre-judged
man, on the decision of a grand jury who know
nothing about law, and who often find a bill of indict-
ment against a man, and put him on his trial on the
most frivolous pretences, without his having an oppor-
tunity to prevent much mental anxiety and expense.
In the law officer of the Crown in Victoria are cen-
tred all the functions which pertain to the grand jury
in England, who, as a responsible minister, liable to
impeachment, dares not to trample on the property,
liberty, or life of a fellow-citizen. If a case be sent on
for trial, and there be no legal evidence to support an
indictment, it is at once quashed” where the stupidity
or unfair dealing of the magistrate wrongly decides in
a preliminary inquiry. To be convicted in Victoria a
man must have as fair a. trial as in England, and here
as there, all the safe guards ruling evidence are in force
and are administered with righteousness. Our judges
are placed in sufficiently independent circumstances to
command high talent on the bench, and, in this re-
spect, there is no place in Her Majesty’s dominions
where the ermine is more gracefully w'orn than in
Victoria.
All the occupants of our Bench are men whose legal
acquirements, and whose honest decisions, have won
them the respect of the country, while their rulings are
acquiesced in by the Bar as consonant with even-
handed justice.
It is not, however, in criminal jurisprudence alone
that Victoria has shown an example worthy of imita-


tion to the British courts of justice; equally have
amendments been attended to in the civil side of our
courts; there also trial by jury has been established,
but in its details it has been vastly improved. To the
principle of having’ even our civil disputes arranged by
our countrymen, we adhere ; but that every petty debt,
or that every case whatever, shall take twelve indus-
trious men from, their business, we ignore, and a jury
of four is considered a sufficient number to settle any
dispute, unless, indeed, the disputants themselves
think their case of sufficient importance to demand a
greater, number—in which case, either litigants can
make the requisition for a special jury of twelve; but
should the trial show that the demand was frivolous, it
then rests with the Judge to certify, or not, for the
extra cost of the enlarged panel.
These alterations in the British jury system have
worked exceedingly well in Victoria; they are worthy
of imitation in the parent State, and there as here, will
save men of business much valuable timej -But our
reform in the jury system of our forefathers has not
stopped here. In days of yore unanimity in a jury
was imperative, and an obstinate and, perhaps, collate-
rally-interested man could often obstruct the stream of
justice; this, too, has been provided for in the jury
system of this country. Unanimity is not always
necessary, and the finding of two-thirds of a panel is
often taken for a valid verdict.
Nor is petty civil justice neglected. All the reforms
effected by the Country Courts in England have been
engrafted on our system of jurisprudence; difference
of amount to be recovered in County Courts being - the
only change we have made. The jurisdiction of these
courts has been enlarged in Victoria with manifest ad-
vantage to suitors ; and the establishment of a yet
inferior court, where a Magistrate, and not a Judge
learned in the law, presides, has also been found to
work well, especially on the gold-fields, where justice
can be obtained for small sums without having to wait
for the slow and more expensive machinery of a County
Court. An appeal lies from this petty jurisdiction to
the County Court, and from the County Court to the


Supreme Court, and thus a wrong decision can he re-
viewed and corrected, and ultimate justice reach every
man who is forced into a court of law.
Justice; sober, honest, British justice is here done to
every man ; is so ramified, that we may truly say that
it is brought to every man’s door in Victoria, in the
same way, and with the same ruling spirit, as it is
dispensed in the United Kingdom. * There is no
amendment made in the law in England, suited to our
circumstances, which is not immediately adopted
here; while laws suited to our advanced political
system are of necessity ahead of the British code. It
is advisedly said that this progress is in advance of
the parent state ; for our improved political fabric
requires the re-organization of our code of laws, much
sooner than in England, and our different state of
society in like manner often requires a different degree
of advancement than would be wise in the mother
country. This aspect of affairs is already observable
in amendments made in the British laws imported
by the pioneers of the country; it is equally necessary
in our future legislation, and in this direction we cannot
advance a more striking instance than the g'rowing
feeling which has manifested itself to alter the law
of primogeniture.
The law of primogeniture is especially a part and
parcel of the aristocratic system of England; it ill
accords with our institutions which recognise no here-
ditary descent in the honours of the state. Beggary of
the junior members of a family to support the lustre of
a noble house is out 6f place in Victoria, and is already
practically ignoi’ed in the testamentary provisions of
of every just and tender parent, and long before this
cruel preference, this absurd element of family feuds
is abandoned in England, it will be swept from the
statute book of Victoria, as a remnant of the barbarism
of our forefathers in the feudal times.
In like manner must we advance beyond the pro-
gress of the mother country in adopting' a uniform
system in the registration and conveyance of property,
both for the purpose of giving increased security of
tenure, and also to facilitate and cheapen that absurdly


expensive system of conveyancing, which the “ rig-
marole” of legal acumen has engrafted on our juris-
prudence.
A step in this direction has already been made, and
during the last session of Parliament had well nigh
been successful; hut the measure was, however,
among the slaughtered innocents at the close of
the late lengthened parliamentary campaign. Its
re-introduction, its certainty ultimately to become
law is undubitable, for there is not a man in the
country who is not a lawyer, who is not directly
interested in it, and it is more than any responsible
government dare do, to omit it in their political pro-
gramme as a measure by which the Cabinet will stand
a fall.
The importance of this measure has become most
palpable, it is indeed a part, and a very important
part, of our improved liberal land policy; if wise to
encourage settlement on our lands, equally wise is it
to make the examination of title a easy
matter, requiring no sort of professional assistance —
equally wise so to facilitate transport of title from one
individual to another, and that these exorbitant charges
which have been copied from British conveyancing
shall no more be known in our advanced and yet ad-
vancing community.
In England the alteration of the law is beset with
difficulties, here we have nothing to prevent our re-
pealing it—here there is no reason why facility of con-
veyance should not work as well as it has done in the
sister Australian Colony of South Australia, as it has
done for half a century in those dependencies of the
British Crown which formerly belonged to Holland,
and as we have already put settlement within the reach
of every man, it surely must enhance the benefit an
immigrant will expect to derive in the country, if we
add that alteration of our code which shall simplify and
cheapen the transfer of land, and allow title to
pass without the intervention of the hungry lawyer.
From this sketch of our legal we turn to the Municipal
institutions of Victoria j here, again, we have adopted
the spirit of British Government. It is true that


our Municipalities are not as jet as vigorous as
those in the old country, nor could it he expected that
they should be so j they are but of few years’ growth
and are still in their swaddling' clothes; but, if
they have not shown the vigour, neither have they
exhibited the depravities of European Municipalities.
Many of them however, have given evidence, of
what may be expected of them when they are more
matured; many of them have most usefully applied the
tun ds, raised within their bounds, to local improve-
ment, and wherever they have been established, the
order and improvement of British towns appear ;
already they are teaching our people the art of self
Government, already they are demanding a decentra-
lisation of Government, and their fair share of endow* -
ment from the national domain, to be replaced by that
eleemosynary assistance from the State, which, during
their infancy, they have received. They have already
shown their utility, they are beginning to feel their im-
portance, and those already in existence have exhibited
the necessity for their further extension all over the
country. This was the case when Municipalities were
introduced in England, they have already proved to be
the cradles of civil liberty, in which the nurseling first
learns to value the more extended privileges enjoyed in
Legislature. Here, as in England, they begin to be
the school for the education of the future statesman,
the arena in which a rising man of a district first
shows his value to the commonwealth.
Curtailed and mutilated they certainly yet are ; for
it is as but yesterday when they came to be regarded
as political exponents, but now that it cannot be denied
that they are useful institutions, the public voice is
raised for their multiplication, for their extension, for
the increase of their powers, so as to relieve the
central Government of many of those duties which do
not belong to a Legislative body, but which are strictly
county and parish business, derogatory to the dignity
of the great Council of the country to deal with, but
which now absorb so much valuable time, and which
stop all useful Legislation.
It is to assist in the construction of many of these


municipalities—it is to participate in this local self*
government—it is to attain position in them, and from
them even to higher legislative honours, that we invite
the intending emigrant 5 he his condition what it may
in Victoria, he must, if a prudent man, sooner or later,
realise some property, and when he does, immediately
in these municipalities he becomes a person having
a direct interest in the improvement of the country in
which he lives; he is there taught that he is indeed a
part and parcel of the body politic, he feels his impor-
tance in local matters, he learns to value his more ex*
tended privileges in selecting who shall make the laws,
and even from among them who should rule the State.
Every man in the country thus becomes identified as
part and parcel of it, he feels his individual importance
in State affairs, and learns to love the country where he
enjoys such a high political status —he ceases to be in-
different about public affairs—he learns that govern-
ment is blit a machine set in motion for the well being
of society, and he ceases to be the malcontent which
deprived of political status his less fortunate ''connec-
tions in England very often become—he respects pro-
perty, for he himself is, or sees he can become, a man
of property; and understanding how sacred its possessor
considers it, if even not owning it, his prospective hope
makes him acknowledge that the duty of a good citizen
is to resist ruffianism and its counterpart agrarianism
and to conserve the peace.
Such is the tone of mind created in the minds of
those who live in the infant municipalities of Victoria,
and let us ask if the feeling is not in advance of those
who live in the mother country, in the municipal insti-
tutions of which there is always some clog, and in all
of which there is no chance of the poor man ever at-
taining a greater interest than getting a settlement on
the list of paupers supported by the parish unions.
Thanks be to God, Victoria has no such unions ; all
her sons can live by the sweat of their brows, all can
provide for emergency, and when even all do not, and
adversity comes on them like a thief in the night, then
the superabundance of those who are not in extremity
is never refused to an honest suffering brother.


Improvidence does here as improvidence does every-
where else, often puts men to extremities: this, however,
is the fault of those who are themselves the authors of
their own hardships, it is not traceable to want of
facilities in the country ; it can in nine cases out of
every ten, be proved home to the misdeeds of the
sufferers themselves. Sickness and calamity may, in
Victoria as elsewhere, overtake a man and destroy his
energy for a season, but when they do—Victoria shines
in brilliant colours, she eclipses every other country in
the world. The hospitals are established through the
length and breadth of the land, and private philanthropy
is most generously subsidized by the State; nor are
the indigent nor orphans of any creed or any clime
forgotten in her noble charities, which all around tell
that with our laws, with our political system, equally
have we planted those institutions which stamp the
mother country as a Christian nation, and which are so
many monuments to evidence a practical Christianity.
The charitable institutions of Victoria are by no means
confined to the metropolis, but it is there that they have
longest existed, and where they are most flourishing.
Chief among these is the Melbourne Hospital, an insti-
tution which gives both in-door and out-door relief to
thousands of sick people. Kindred institutions are the
Benevolent Asylum and the Melbourne Lying-in Hos-
pital, where, in the one case, the indigent and infirm
are cared for, and in the other, woman in her
greatest trial, is provided with a home and the require-
ments suited to her necessities.
These noble charities are instanced not because they
are isolated cases stamping our Christian feeling, but
because they are those which are most prominent, and
for which capacious buildings already exist, and also
because they are charitable institutions which admit
all persons whatever.
Both Protestants and Catholics have, besides these
general reliefs for those in indigent circumstances,
their special charitable houses for those who profess
these creeds. Both have their Orphan Asylums; both
their refuges for those who have strayed from the path
of virtue; both their associations for visiting and re-


lieving their sick and* needy, and in every respect is
the same philanthropy manifested which distinguishes
society in the old country.
These establishments are now being extended all
through the country; and an immigrant is not to
suppose that in leaving Melbourne he leaves those
charitable spirits who will care for his necessities,
should sickness or need overtake him. All through the
country he will find the public charities to apply to ;
and on the gold-fields, and in the country districts,
besides public charities, he will find that modest silent
fellow-feeling towards a needy brother, which has there
been taught in a greater degree, because it is there that
nearly everybody has, more or less, felt the need of
friendly assistance to a new arrival in years gone by.
A “ new chum” may be laughed at, but he is sure
to find those who will soothe his anxiety, and put him
in the way of taking his stand amon" the industrious
classes of the country, if he be willing and able to
work; and if he be not; if incapacitated by §ickness, if
not fortunate in at once finding employment, he will
still find either the public hospital or the philanthropist
in any part of Victoria he may select as his abiding place.
The lazy, the dissolute, and abandoned may and do
find difficulty here, but they would and ought, to find
difficulty anywhere, and Victoria is the last place in
the world to which they should have come, because
there is no place in the world where want of energy
or crime gets more severe handling from every honest man.
The country is full of men who hold out the right
hand of fellowship to, and encourage, the new arrival;
but Victorian philanthropy has shown a prudent con-
sideration for the in-comer immediately he lands on
our shores, to prevent him from falling into destitution,
in the establishment of an Immigrants’ Aid Society,
which institution, though last named, is not the least
important among those which hold out inducements
for population to settle in our territory.
The object of this Society is to afford advice and
temporary shelter to newly-arrived persons in need of
them, who are not Government Assisted Immigrants,
irrespective of creed or country, for the latter class


the Government makes separate provision, independent
of any counsel they will get from friends sending for
them under the admirable provisions for family re-union
now initiated, special notice of which will be reserved
for a future chapter.
Enough has been advanced to convince the intending
emigrant that, in Victoria, he will find the same care
for human nature as he does in the old country; he
will, in fact, find more; for there the poor are so
numerous that they often become burdensome, and,
consequently, the amount of relief which suffering
humanity can expect, is limited; and when the poor
man does get relief, it generally only amounts to that
consideration met in the Parish workhouse. Thank
God, these establishments are not known—are not
wanted in Victoria; her sick and poor go not into her
charitable institutions to be fed as burdensome paupers;
no man enters either Hospital or Asylum but for very
temporary relief, and while there, he is not, as in
England, treated less liberally than a convict. Good
substantial wholesome animal food, and cleanly accom-
modation is given to those whom misfortune may to-day
attack, and the bitterness of poverty is not made the
sin for which so many people are so severely punished
in British workhouses. All the charitable institutions
of Victoria have the stamp of philanthropy impressed
on them, and what is given to the poor man is given
with generosity—is given with that cheerfulness, which
tells that the donation comes from Christian charity.
Nor need the immigrant who desires to make his
home in Victoria think that those institutions which
are devoted to mental culture are wanting in the new
country. The Mechanics’ Institutions, which have
done so much good for the poorer classes in England,
which have afforded the labourer and the artizan the
means of improving his time after the toil of the day
is done, have been planted all over this country; gene-
rally speaking, however, like our municipalities, these
institutions have not yet been brought to that maturity
of which they are capable, but day by day they are
becoming more and more useful, and will soon have a
telling influence on the well-being of our people. They


are to some extent subsidised by the Government, and
the libraries connected with some of them are assuming-
respectable proportions. It is in them that mining and
agricultural science can best be locally fostered; it is
through their agency that the people who work among
our soils and ores can best be familiarised with the
principles which guide their occupations. The Municipal
bodies have as yet exercised but little control over them,
leaving them as quasi-Government establishments ; the
better understanding of municipal duties will, however,
soon cause these institutions to be taken under local
control, and, when they are locally reorganised, each
particular institution will assume the functions of a
popular instructor in the particular industry ruling in
the district.
The local Public Library, the local Economic Museum,
the popular Lecturer, will one and all be best associated
with the Mechanics’ Institutions; and when municipal
endowments are made, regard must be had to the
claims and utility of Mechanics’ Institutions, now sub-
sidised by the Government, but which ought to be
local schools and places for mental recreation, entirely
under the auspices and control of the municipal autho-
rities.
These popular educators of the adult population are,
however, but a very limited part of the exertion that
Victoria makes to disseminate knowledge. The diffu-
sion of elementary knowledge has been most carefully
attended to; in this element of national prosperity
Victoria far excels any other country in the world; she
certainly immeasurably excels Great Britain, both in
the comparative amount she disburses on this account,
and also in the description of education she has pro-
vided for all classes who chose to avail themselves of
her bounty.
It is, however, unfortunate that this national expen-
diture is not more economised—that we have not con-
fined ourselves to one system of training our youth,
but let sectarianism mar some of the benefits that this
large expenditure would effect.
National education has its staff, its schools, its
management,—equally has denominational education a


like establishment, and both these systems are subsi-
dised, and often made the means of qualifying the
usefulness of the opposing schools ; instead of one good
school, half-a-dozen indifferent ones are established in
the out-lying districts, and the intelligence of the
teacher is"sometimes measured by the small sums he
gets from this senseless division of the national funds.
This evil has been severely felt, especially in the
mining and country districts, and has at last invoked
the serious attention of both Government and Legis-
lature. A Bill to substitute one system of National
Education was introduced into Parliament during the
last session, but it, too, was among the slaughtered
innocents immolated. In the next session the question
of National Education will admit of more sober dis-
cussion, with the best hopes of a more satisfactory
solution of the difficulties which have been started to a
system of education purely secular, leaving to the
pastor and the parent the care of the immortal part of
the child.
The sum voted by the Legislature for Primary
Schools is about £125,000 per annum, which money,
under the two systems, during 1857, provided for the
education of 31,086 children, and the census of that
year gives some interesting statistics in connection
with these seminaries.
In 1851 the number of schools was 129, or one
school, for every 600 persons, and there were, including
those at private schools, of which there were 49 in the
country, 7,070 scholars under tuition. In 1857 the
schools had increased to 638, still about one to each
600 of our people, and the number of scholars reached
34,323, or about lin 11; so that all the disturbance
consequent on our gold discoveries, notwithstanding,
the children under tuition at the two dates were pre-
cisely in the same ratio, the only difference being that
there was in the later period a slight favourable differ-
ence in the intellectual status, viz., in 1851, 58 per
cent, of the population could read and write, in 1857
this per centage had advanced to 60 per cent.
Either of these returns show an intellectual status
of our people much beyond that of most European


nations, not even excepting England; and it shows this
gratifying fact, in the face of disturbing causes of an
unprecedented nature, having conspired to lead us to
suppose that the standard of education in the schools
of Victoria had been lowered instead of being increased.
Now that our society is more settled, —now that primary
schools are opened all over the country, this standard
of intelligence must advance; and if it does not it is the
people themselves, who neglect their opportunity, who
will be to blame, and not the Government nor the
Legislature, both having shown every proper solicitude
for training our youth in useful knowledge.
This annual grant of the Parliament of Victoria is
indeed munificent; of itself it is a noble example to
the rest of the world, but it is by no means all that our
Legislature has done to make the youth of the country
as intelligent as those of any other nation; besides
this, ample grants of land and a sum of £50,000 has
been distributed among the different religious denomi-
nations towards building Grammar Schools, and jilready
the Roman Catholics, the Church of England commu-
nity, and the Presbyterians have initiated a superior
class of schools, quite on an equality to those that the
British public can boast. Both at Melbourne and
Geelong, the Church of England Grammar Schools are
ornaments to the neighbourhoods in which they stand;
and the Melbourne establishment is giving earnest of
hereafter playing an important part in advancing the
country. A like position might be taken by the Gee-
long Grammar School, which, however, at present,
through imprudent management, is in debt, but this
debt would not mar its utility were it not that the
senseless bigotry of some of the clergy insist on its
being an exclusive establishment, and challenge co-
operation with the Presbyterians as a heterodoxical step,
quite beyond the amount of Christian brotherhood
which the two Protesting Churches should have for
one another—these narrow-minded clergymen have
retired within their insignificant shell, and the conse-
quence is that a most useful public seminary is closed.
Such disgraceful bigotry, worthy of those dark ages in
which the authors of so shameful a prostitution of the


Legislative endowment ought to have lived, is, however,
exceptional; and has led to the suspicion that the clergy
responsible for it, do not so much care for the dissemi-
nation of knowledge as for that proselytism, about which
they talk such scandal when they see it in any other de-
nomination of Christians. It has materially damaged the
previously well-sustained reputation of at least two
Church of England clergymen, and has partly brought
on them the censure of every member of the Church of
England, who hates priestcraft in his own Church
much more than these bigoted churchmen affect to
despise it in the members ot the Roman communion.
The Scotch College of Melbourne, equally with the
Melbourne Church of England Grammar School, de-
serves notice, and no man, be his condition in life what
it may, need regret coming to Victoria on the score
that his sons have not equal educational advantages
to those he would have possessed in the old country.
Nor is the Roman Catholic School to be left out; it,
too, is playing a most important part in building
up for us a high educational status. Among the
masters of this seminary are to be found men fit to
inculcate a high training in science and literature.
Primary Schools we have in abundance; in fact,
the great objection to those we have is that there are
too many, and it would be better if we had fewer, and
the lessened number had more masters under one con-
trol. Grammar Schools, both public and private too,
are in sufficient number to teach our more advanced
and better-to-do boys. We have yet to the list to add
an establishment where the highest academic honours
are attainable, and it too we have because the people
of Victoria, through their representatives, have deter-
mined that there shall be no drawback in our great
country, that she shall be rich in highly cultivated
talent as well as in mineral wealth.
Besides building a seat of learning, besides endowing
it with a very large grant of very valuable land, Parlia-
ment votes £9,000 per annum to support the University
of Melbourne. This institution can grant degrees of
Bachelors and Masters of Arts; Medicine, Laws, Music,
and Science will soon be added on examination, or


without examination ad eumdem, if a graduate from
some other University applies for the honour. There
are already two matriculation exhibitions of £SO each,
one for classics and one for mathematics, and there are
again two prizes of £6O for first-year men, besides
which there are two scholarships, tenable for two years,
of £IOO each. The Museum, Library and grounds are
worthy of the country, although but in their infancy.
The Professors are all men of great talent, and well
deserve the honourable and handsome stipends allotted
to them ; in fact, there are no pains spared to make
the Melbourne University a great seat of learning*—to
make its degrees honours which our youth shall covet
with the same avidity as those of Oxford or Cambridge,
and where they shall be trained to enable them, as they
have already at least in one instance done, to meet the
students of the Universities of the old country on equal
terms.
The Public Library is a. noble institution, of which
Victoria is justly proud ; in it the poorest man in the
country can have access to the best works extant, in
every department of literature or science, without fee
or reward. This gratuitous disseminator of knowledge
is both built and entirely supported at the public
charge, affording mental recreation and instruction to
the thousands who. avail themselves of it. It is a most
gratifying feature, on visiting the reading room, to see
what a large proportion of those who are studiously
engaged, are in the humbler walks of life. They may
be seen at their study, evidently taking in those large
draughts at the fountain of knowledge which makes
them better members of society, and stores their minds
with that information which cannot fail to advance
them in their several avocations. Let a man belong
to any handicraft, day by day he can, from nine o’clock
in the morning until ten o’clock at night, in the Public
Library of Melbourne, have access to the best authors
who have written on the sciences on which his occu-
pation depends. History, literature, fiction, and science,
all have their respective divisions in this Library; and
the female portion of the population are separately


provided for, and liave all the advantages of storing
their minds, which are extended to the males.
In her public educational establishments Victoria
has largely provided for the mental culture of her
people; from infancy up to manhood, it is a man’s
own fault, be he who he may, if he be not a man of
information, for in these public educational establish-
ments he is invited to drink, and drink deeply from
the fountain of knowledge, and these draughts, no
matter how deep, no matter in what direction, cost him
nothing.
Victorians have a right to be proud of their educa-
tional establishments; they can point to them with
confidence when they invite immigrants to come and
participate in them; and young though all of them yet
are, already they have had a great effect on the intelli-
gence of the people, and as they progress they are
bound to lead us to a still greater degree of prosperity.
The establishments hitherto named have been con-
fined to those of a purely public character, to those
which put dependence entirely, or nearly entirely, on
the public purse; besides these, Victoria has also
numberless public Societies, many of which draw en-
couragement from the Treasury.
Such an institution is the Royal Society of Victoria.
On the roll of this Society now stand a very large
number of the scientific men of the country, although
there are many who refuse to join it, in consequence of
a present suspected exclusiveness in the selection of the
Council; there may be, and at any rate there has been,
this closeness in the management of the Society, but if
it continue it is entirely owing to the supineness of
members, who have annually in their hands the
means to alter the composition of the Council, and to
whose want of energetic action must attach any blame
if the Council is sometimes too dictatorial.
There can be no question that this Royal Society
will do a great deal of good when skillfully directed,
and well deserves every encouragement it gets from
the State. In it ought to be congregated all our
savans, in every department of knowledge ; and when


it becomes possessed of general confidence, it must be
an admirable arena to draw thinking men together,
from which the great truths of science will be reflected
back to advance the intelligence of the whole com-
munity.
In return for the assistance which has been given to
it from the public revenue, the Government has already
asked this Society to show itself grateful for the public
patronage, in placing on its shoulders the work depen-
dent on the Expedition now exploring Central Aus-
tralia. It has likewise left at its direction the control
of £6OO, granted as premiums for the discussion of
subjects connected with the advancement of the country;
and it is understood that year by year a similar sum
will be placed upon the estimates to encourage those
who are competent to advise on public matters,, but
who are perhaps kept in obscurity by poverty, to come
forward and show themselves worthy not only of the
money and honour successful competition against all
comers will secure, but position in the public service
as being the men best fitted for employment in the
Civil Service,
These premiums are, in fact, a challenge to men of
intelligence to show themselves worthy of that public
employment, which heretofore it was much the fashion
in Victoria, as elsewhere, to give to dependents un-
worthy of it, and the result of this means of bringing
men out of obscurity entitles the Government to com-
mendation.
The awarding of these premiums has been entrusted
to the Royal Society as a competent scientific "body,
and must be viewed by them, as it will be by the
public, as a sacred national trust, from which personal
consideration and favoritism must be carefully
excluded. That it will be so viewed there is no doubt,
for, as already stated, the Royal Society includes in its
members some of the most honourable as well as some
of the best men in the country, who never will permit
charlatanism to ride rampant and destroy the usefulness
of the body. There has, however, been some symptoms
of this noxious weed, this charlatanism, growing* with
the good seed ; there still remains some of this poison


amongst it, and perhaps there always will be, but the
Royal Society of Victoria, as the representative of the
congregated scientific intelligence of the country, must
always rank as one of the useful institutions which will
mark her status in civilization, such charlatanism
notwithstanding.
But besides these subsidized societies, Victoria
boasts many others where science and the fine arts are
cultivated entirely by private subscription. She has
her Photographic Society, her Microscopic Society,
and a variety of others, in which mental improvement
is the object of the members. These are working in
silence, tut they are playing an important part in the
cultivation of the minds of the people, and some of
them are already widening their value in a practical
way.
The fine arts are, however, not well represented in
these Public Societies; Sculpture has no representative
institution, and it is but very lately that painting
could boast any congregated devotees, except in the
almost newly formed Photographic Society. Music
is, however, more fortunate —in this art Victoria is
making great exertion. The concerts of the Melbourne
Philharmonic Society would do honour to any of the
British Provinces. Both the instrumental and vocal
melody are of a high standard, the music selected for
these concerts being the grandest that the great
masters of harmony have produced.
Pour times in the year this Society gives its
concerts, chiefly confining its selections to oratorios,
but at times varying the bill of fare by judicious
selections from operatic music. The greatest talent
sojourning amongst us is always secured to assist at
these concerts, and to them the solos and concerted
music are of course assigned ; but the choral melody,
which accompanies the professional artistes, swells in
grandeur fitom the unprofessional devotees to music
resident ahiongst us, doing credit both to the per-
formers and the country. The whole is conducted by
an unpaid master in melody in a manner which keeps
pace with the finished excellence of the stringed, brass,
and reed instruments. The Melbourne Philharmonic


Society is justly a favourite institution, it lias won for
itself a high reputation, and it deserves all the praise
which is invariably accorded to it.
This Society does not, however, stand alone ; the
Musical Union, composed of members from all the
Philharmonic Societies, also discourses sweet music
and deserves a high rank. There is scarcely a suburb
that has not established its Choral Union, and done
its share in cultivating the science of sweet sounds.
The example has been followed by the inland towns,
and they, too, have their Musical Societies in great
abundance, and are making large advances in the
cultivation of this pleasing art.
In more than one instance have these Societies been
the means of bringing forward musical talent of high
promise; already, among both the ladies and gentlemen
who belong to them have we seen the germ of genius
that will ultimately take high rank even in the profes-
sional circle, and it may fairly be expected that with
the taste for music being cultivated to the extent it
now is, we shall not be long before we are in a great
measure independent of foreign assistance, except,
when any very distinguished artiste takes Australia
en route.
As elsewhere, so in Victoria, the Press plays an
important part in. educating the people, in keeping
them in connection with the other parts t)f the w'orld,
and in guarding their rights and liberties. There is
no spot on the globe where the Press is less untram-
melled than in Victoria. Its freedom, its boldness in
speaking on public affairs, and public men, is acknow-
ledged as a necessary institution for a free people, and
are exercised, not only without challenge, but with the
full recognition of the ruling power.
Woe be to that public man in Victoria who outsteps
the bounds of decorum ; woe be to that man who, even
in private life, transgresses those laws of society essen-
tial to the well-being of the people. There is no place
in the world where the Press uses its thunder with more
effect in such cases, and in doing so, it performs its
functions with that manly independence, regardless of
consequences, which characterises British journalism.


A new arrival in Victoria will find his newspaper as
free a medium of thought as those left behind in the
old country; and he will also find, that in exchanging,
his English newspapers for one in Australia, he does
not get an inferior article, and that he can read the
transactions of the world at as cheap a rate as he did
at home.
The Melbourne newspapers are all conducted with
considerable ability, and bear honourable comparison
with those of the mother country, in their u make-up,”
in the diversified and accurate intelligence they give,
and in the matter with which the columns are filled.
Men boasting high academic honours in England write
for them • and, in most cases, are generously recom-
pensed. The reporting staff has in it men who woxdd
do honour to any London paper, by the correctness
with which they give the sayings of those whose
speeches they take down; and, as regards those
gentlemen whose duty it is to attend to the debates in
Parliament, they are entitled to the highest encomium
for the truthfulness of their reports, because their reliefs
are far less than among the reporting staff of the
British Parliament, and because they very often have
enough to bewilder them, to understand the ideas
which honourable members propose to convey to their
audience; yet, with Parliamentary sittings often
passing midnight, as in London, so in Victoria, the
debate of the preceding night is faithfully recorded in
the next day’s paper, and is a standing dish at the
morning’s repast.
No less talent do our newspapers exhibit in their
commercial reports. This description of information
is conducted with great talent, and, whenever needed,
with a fearlessness which checks dishonesty. All the
dirty tricks of trade, all proceedings open to suspicion
of being repugnant to the honour of a British merchant
are exposed, be the perpetrators who they may; no
position, no patronage to the paper weighs an atom to
ward off any justly merited censure, and more than
one Melbourne trader has been prevented from victi-
mising the community from a wholesome regard for
the next morning’s commercial article.


Like the Parliamentary, the commercial reporting
staff of the Melbourne journals is most efficient, and it
kept up regardless of cost, Boardipg reporters, with
special boats and crews, cruise both at the Port Phillip
Heads and in Hobson’s Bay. Special telegraphic
agencies in connection with the Press are established,
to tell us what is going on in the sister colonies and
in the several country districts, at any moment in
the day the intelligence is worth a message ; and our
leading journal lately carried its arrangements so far, as
to spend a very large sum every month to bring the
latest items of news, known at Xden, by the Red Sea
Telegraph.
The judicial reporters are also numerous, and give
elaborate matter whenever any important case deserves
particular attention; and they at all times furnish us
with a faithful digest of what is going on in the several
Courts of Justice. Many of the gentlemen to
whom this duty is confided are themselves members of
the legal profession, and their labours are often of con-
siderable value to the legal student forming obstructs
of precedents for future generations.
Besides these regular reporters there are gentlemen
attached to our Press who are charged with the gene-
ral collection of passing events, and day by day two
or three columns testify to their industry and correct-
ness, in letting the public know what of interest is
passing. The duties of these gentlemen are extended
over a very large field, embracing sports, religion, the
drama, accidents, scientific and other meetings, and
innumerable other topics, which it is unnecessary and
impossible to particularise.
All the papers open their columns to correspondence,
and no man who has a real grievance, can complain
that he is debarred from making his case known. This
correspondence is often most interesting 1 , and questions
of the greatest public utility are eliminated in it. The
newspaper proprietors and the editorial staff are most
liberal in the space they allot to correspondence, and if
the matter be legitimate, and does not descend to per-
sonality, expression is open to all who chose to avail
themselves of it.


Selections of able articles is, of course, attended
to, and a good deal of discrimination is used by our
editors in this direction. It is in this duty that most
of the labour of the editorial chair lies, and it ofttimes
gives an editor as much trouble to know what to reject
as what to select. He must read a good deal, besides
which he must exercise no ordinary patience and per-
severance in dealing with the contributions submitted
to him. These items, and his leading matter, make
the duty of a Victorian editor no sinecure; and it is
not surprising that men of first-rate talent are always
to be found conducting our journals, nor that they are
paid liberally for the arduous duties they have to per-
form, —£1,500 was the salary of the editorial chief of
our leading journal some time back, and from two to
three guineas per article was the remuneration held
out to those gentlemen who contributed leading matter
to its columns. The other papers are not so liberal,
but even on them talent is honourably recompensed ;
and Victoria has nothing to be ashamed of, when she
places her editorials in competition with the average of
the leaders of the British journals.
But it is not only in the quality of the newspaper
Press that Victorians can fairly be self-complacent.
The number of papers also is quite in proportion to our
population, and the matter to which they severally
devote themselves, as well as the periods of their pub-
lication, bear a close similarity to British journalism.
The Argus, the Herald, and the Age, are three daily
newspapers published in Melbourne, with a population
of 80,000 smds. All the principal leading towns be-
yond the metropolis also have their daily sheets ; and
in almost every place dignified with the name of a town-
ship, a newspaper press has been established, issuing
either twice or three times a-week, according to the de-
mands of the population.
Besides these papers, all three of the metropolitan
papers publish a weekly edition, compiled from their
daily matter, and two of them also publish weekly
sheets, in which fresh editorial is introduced, ofttimes
varying in politics from the parent establishment.
Local weekly papers are common in the country dis-


tricts. These, however, do not close the list of
Victorian journalism; a large number of publications
issue from the press as exponents of special interests.
The sportsman, in Victoria, as in London, has his
Bell’s Life. The wit and lover of sarcasm is not dis-
appointed in Victoria, when a young’er son of the elder
Mr. Punch, of London, pays him a visit on Thursday,
and shows that, both in his cartoons and in his expo-
sure of human frailties, he is a worthy descendant of
his noble sire. The Sabbatarian has his organ in the
Christian Times. Horticulture and agriculture is dis-
cussed in the Gardeners’ Chronicle; and in the Mining
Journal of Victoria, mining and engineering questions
show a fulfilment of editorial duty equal to the London
counterpart of the same name. In short, every sort of
interest, every department of literature and science has
its organ, and all contribute their share to advance the
moral and intellectual standing of our people. The
Englishman’s friend, the Englishman’s pride, his free
Press, is not wanting in Victoria, and the immigrant
would not havp to regret the periodical literaturp which
he has left behind him when he comes to this country
to make an Englishman’s home.
Let it not, however, be supposed that, in leaving the
mother country, the enjoyment of British journalism
ceases; taking the average of the population at home
and in the colony, - it will be found that as many news-
papers are distributed on the arrival of each mail, as
would have been read, had the people reading them
remained at home. One penny carries a newspaper from
England to Victoria as safely as it carries the same
papers from one part of the United Kingdom to the
other, and when the enhanced earnings of our people
are considered, it will readily be seen that an arrival
can more easily afford to pay one penny, in addition to
the cost of the paper in England, than he could pay for
the paper alone when in the old country. An order and
remittance for any chosen paper puts it regularly in
the hands of every one requiring it, and no one, there-
fore, need regret that intelligence from his native town
does not reaclx him in Victoria.
From sixty to seventy thousand British newspapers


reach Victoria by every mail, and keep up old associ-
ations in a very gratifying manner; they reach us by
the most rapid means of communication which science
has devised, and in order that they may do so, Victoria
has charged herself with an enormous subsidy, paid to
the Peninsular and Oriental Company, for our postal
S6rvic6»
The British Government lately made an effort to
increase the postage on newspapers, but the injustice
was firmly resisted by the. Colonial authorities and
the Legislature at once determined, that even did the
country pay the extra charge, the incoming immigrant
should continue to have the connecting link between
the new and the old country, kept up by as cheap
penny postage as exists in England. ,
It is the same spirit that makes Victoria pay the
liberal provision for steam overland mails. She pays
this subsidy not merely for commercial purposes, but
she also intends that this subsidy shall soothe those
feelings which are harrowed by separation from menus,
by making cheap and rapid mail service bring our
relatives at home as near to us as possible.
Sixty thousand pounds is now paid; equally willing
is this country to double the amount of subsidy, pro-
vided the other Australian colonies and the mother
country will join in a bi-monthly communication. Iso
immigrant need fear that he will not have this bi-
monthly service; the social requirements of the com-
munity demand it; the commercial interests involve
demand it; the political safety of the country, m this
threatening condition of European affairs, demand it,
and whether a second mail route is established in con-
nection with Suez, or we make ourselves secure from
French infidelity by securing a second service, ma
Panama, two mail deliveries in Australia must be
established. , . . , AT •
The severance between the immigrant and his
British connections is rendered as soothing as it
can be; if not in person, if not orally, we have, at least,
ample opportunities of communicating our thoughts,
our hopes, our prospects, to the friends we have left;
and it is hereafter intended to show, that the road for


them to join us is so easy, and the reason why they
should do so, so great, that those of us who have
already come, and who now manifest anxiety about
communicating with our friends, are thus anxious in
order that, before long, those loved ones may travel
the same path across the ocean which we have
pioneered.
The above enumerated blessings are those that min-
ister to our material well-being in the land we have
come to, they are the benefits that affect the temporal
welfare of the people; no less inviting are the arrange-
ments which Victorians have made, to secure the
spiritual benefits valued in the old country.
Here the religious ordinances of every Christian creed
are as faithfully dispensed as in the old country. The
Sunday School, the Bible Class, the Prayer Meeting,
are all institutions that are as common here as in our
parent home. Bible Societies, Tract Societies, Evan-
gelical Unions, and every description of religious
association is now broadcast through the land; The
Sabbath is kept with the reverence due to the Sacred
day; our Churches and Chapels are filled with as
sincere worshippers of Almighty God as in England
herself; and crime and debauchery held in as great
detestation ; all the elements of a moral and civilized
community are discernible, and all that can elevate
man’s mind from earth to heaven carefully encouraged.
Such is Victorian society; such the Institutions to
which we invite our brethren in England; such the
home we have made for them; and in making this
home for ourselves and them we have endured [priva-
tions and trials to which they will not be subject; they
will not come as the pioneers of society; they will not
come to clear the track; they will not have to prospect
the mine; they will not have to drive Tasmanian
villainy from the country back to its native soil; they
will not have to introduce agriculture ; they will not
have to build a city of which any nation on earth may
be proud; they will not have to establish British
Institutions and British Associations; they will not
have to struggle with a dominant class, who formerly
ruled the country; all this has been done for them—


done by us, their brothers, who have g’one before them
and pioneered the way, who have now our settled
homes and our hospitable hearths at which to welcome
them, and in which we invite them to share.
These elements of national greatness invite not a
few, invite not a privileged class—they invite every
honest, every industrious man, be his condition, be his
country, be his creed what it may. They invite them
in unlimited numbers; they invite them in every voca-
tion in life, where man is accustomed to energetic
action; they invite them to come and make a great, a
powerful nation, and to do so in but a few decades from
the time when Victoria had nothing but a few foot-
prints of the most uncouth savage in creation, to show
that she was the dwelling-place of God’s creatures.
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOUBKE STREET WEST.


TO RIFLE VOLUNTEERS.
MESSRS. S. W. SILVER & CO.,
PATENTEES OF THE EBONITE RIFLE
SIGHTS, of which the accompanying Cut will serve to
show the utility, and which are more fully described in 4he
July Number of the. Colonial Mining Journal, refer Volunteers
to the Proprietor of the Journal who may wish to be supplied
with either the
RIFLE SIGHT OR EBONITE CLEANER,
A large number of these Sights will be sent forward so as
to meet the demands of Volunteers who may wish to have
them in time for the October matches.
VICTORIAN IMMIGRATION.
MESSRS. S. W. SILVER & CO.,
66 AND 67 CORNHILL, AND 3 AND 4 BISHOPGATE
STREET, LONDON,
OUTFIT PASSENGERS to the AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES, of any Class, in the best manner, and on
the most reasonable terms ; and have placed themselves in a
position to give every information and advice respecting Pas-
sages and Shipping, which the holders of Victorian “ Passage
W arrants ” may need.


THE COLONIAL MINING JOURNAL,
ISSUED ON THE FIRST THURSDAY OF EACH
MONTH,
JS a Newspaper devoted to the interests of the
Miners, and faithfully records the progress and improve-
ments in Victorian Mining.
The Colonial Mining Journal also devotes a considerable
share of its space to Railway and other scientific matter.
Office, 50 Collins Street East.
