

VTp-B ; W |j
I I sr H "' ' "• 'i
A I - \ B Vf ||
I i | * i I
nl .^f^VHHBHHHlH
I i' *" ft, * 4 mI * I
IA vw \>• 4>m
V ? ? ' * " J *
I & 1 t> -' \ « «/ Pi
f t * w || * I
I ' II * * »p - I
1 i v \W * " *1 *
« * *1 -
hHMHp i* & i*AHJ
,-•» If i 1 / - " w I i
■ H I ' 1' wMl


p
5?
7 *. \


HOMEWARD


APPRECIATION.
To T. Penleigh Boyd, well-known artist and one-time
Sergeant, who contributes the Cover, Frontispiece and
many sketches, and to Sapper Powis for other sketches
herein.


(gratings
To our esteemed contemporary, " Morean Murmurings,"
published on the protector in all oceans. We greet the
vessel and its officers and men, and offer an appreciation
for its part in our safe return home.
"Sisl* Ifrttattnta."


CONTENTS.
PAGE
OUR MAGAZINE 7
HOMEWARD .. .. .. .. 8
SIERRA LEONE .. .. .. .. 11
CAPETOWN .. .. .. .. 15
U.S. ARRIVAL IN FRANCE .. .. 18
IN MEMORIAM .. .. .. 19
VON HUN 20
THE WHITE MAN'S GRAVE .. .. 20
THE CAMPAIGN—AND AFTER .. .. 21
ONLY A PRIVATE 21
THE " DIGGER " 23
THE ACTS OF THE ANCIENT ANZACS .. 24
CONVOY SEPARATION 29
THE DESERT 29
"GOING HOME" 31
GENERAL OF THE " KNUTS" .. .. 35
To OUR O.C. .. .. .. .. 36
WE WANT DUDS .. .. .. 36
SHIP'S INSPECTION 37
AN INCIDENT .. .. .. .. 38
THE ATLANTIC 39
PAGE
SOMEWHERE IN FRANCE .. .. .. 41
TRY SMILING .. .. .. .. 41
THE PRESS .. .. .. .. 42
AUSTRALIA BOUND .. .. .. 43
HARD QUESTIONS .. .. .. 46
THE " SKITE " .. .. .. .. 47
UJFBUG PAMIIFLSFFY 48
THE AFTERMATH .. .. • • • • 49
To MINE DEAR VON .. . ■ • • 54
GERMAN THEATRE OF VARIETIES .. 55
ENTERTAINMENTS .. . ■ • • 5 6
CONCERTS .. .. .. .. .. 58
A SOLDIER'S SONG .. .. .. 60
" BILLY," THE CAPTAIN'S CANARY .. 62
THE " CRUTCHIE'S " LAMENT .. .. 62
COMPETITIONS .. .. .. .. 63
LIMERICKS .. .. .. .. .. 66
AUSTRALIANS .. .. .. .. 69
PIPS FROM PAPERS .. .. .. 70
To HER .. .. .. .. • • 74
OFFICERS AND MEN ON BOARD H.M.A.T.
"EURIPIDES" .. .. .. 75
ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
The Aft' Well Deck 8A
Types of Officers and Men .. .. .. .. 13
How One Feels on a Route March . . .. .. 22
Trials of the Provost Corps .. .. .. .. 30
The Military Staff .. .. .. .. .. .. 32A
H.M.A.T. A l4 32A
The Captain's Table .. .. .. .. . . 40
The Ship's Officers .. .. .. .. .. . . 48A
Medical Staff and Nursing Sisters .. .. .. 48A
The Officers Aboard (in three groups) .. .. .. 64A


' - , - V'V'V _ V * .
■ t %, .
■ ""-i ■ ' ' T




Homeward
on
H.M.T. Al4
March, 1918.
John Sands Limited, Printers,
Sydney.








" A War Baby."
Our Magazine.
A Record of the return to Australia of 1,500 members of the A.I.F.
HE title of our magazine is prompted by the fact that
all contributions were prepared during our voyage home.
The aim has been to make of it a record of the great journey,
and a memento likely to be appreciated by all those who
jjPliyP' returned from the Great Adventure by the H.M.T. "Eurip."
in February-March, 1918. As such we present it.
Our company is comprised of men of all ages, of all ranks, of all units in
the A.l.F.—and of sisters honoured by all men. Of the former are a number
running to sixty years of age, others 17 years, and even under, some of whom
yet fought on Gallipoli, and the whole company bearing evidence of physical
hurt or sickness. Of such is our number made up! Broken
physically? Yes! In spirit? Never! For the spirit that
moved the old man and the boy to volunteer and march off'
together to help stem the tide cannot be broken. As life lasts
so does such a spirit, and the heroes all, happy in that they
have done their duty and taken their part towards the destruc-
tion of the monster created and nurtured by the new civilisation
of Central Europe, go home with that indefinable feeling that
only the satisfied conscience can create.
We are grateful—not for our hurts—but that we have
been spared. In our gratitude let us also remember those
responsible for our safe journey over the seas. In spite of the
marine dangers through which we have passed, the journey
has, broadly, been uneventful. Can we pay a greater tribute
than this to the resource of the British Navy and to the
dogged persistence and pluck of the members of our Mercantile
Marine? In time a pen will suitably chronicle the greatness
of these welded, silent forces —in the meantime we offer our
humble and heartfelt appreciation to the commander and the
assisting officers and men of this great vessel for our safe
return.
Good luck, boys! May your battle scars soon heal, so
that you may long live to enjoy the freedom for which you
have so nobly fought. And good luck, ye mariners! May
you also be long spared to roam the seas, the freedom of which
you have played such a great part in holding for the race.
—L. J. H.
HOMEWARD


Homeward!
,IX painted ships upon a tainted ocean! Six argosies
om i n g heroes from the Abaddon of the Western
Front, doing their last stunt through the gauntlet of
's^"§§1 the sub-aquatic pirates! These merchant ships, scrim-
shawed with cubist camouflage, in colours well fitted
£s§2s! to ex P ress defiance to submarine savages, are doing a
maypole dance through the ocean, with one of Britain's
grey mastiffs of the seas as Maypole Queen,
and four of our potent Navy's terriers sniffing everywhere for unwelcome
strangers. This maypole dance, this zig-zag corroboree, this rampage through
the seas—call it what you will—continues until the Fritzian remora is shaken
off and we are once more in untainted waters. Our mental erethism then
subsides, and we have leisure for reflection both on the horrors of our hideous
past and on our delectable days to come.
We are amazed to find how difficult is this task of reflection. We had
not thought that the contact of our iron constitutions with the muds of the
Somme and Flanders had so oxidised our brains. We wonder whether this
coma of the intelligence is endemic to soldiers; whether, in addition, it infects
the General Staff, or whether it is epidemic to the war-worn world. We
accidentally pick up one of Balzac's works among the books distributed by the
Red Cross representative, and the question is solved.
"A soldier's life does not demand much thinking. Those who cannot understand
the lofty political ends involved and the interest of nation and nation; who cannot
grasp political schemes as well as plans of campaign, and combine the science of the
tactician with that of the administrator are bound to live in a state of ignorance; the
most boorish peasant in the most backward district in France is scarcely in a worse


jtrZi / : II t- \ (\
■ ■ v-' v- ' .y ? • '- 4 f "V f c? • < \ , -■'■ \.
1 ■ t 'I- - V /i f : - *
/, i -
.zh, \ if i. T
' / 1§
/ / ■ r;,, A I Iqte
/ r (1 .A-i'lfi! 1 1 •- :
!gW3E :r/- 4 - ' • •
f&l0kwF&%. " : $t$
IS' ; '
1 — f■ v -/V.W.*; ?^- : v j{*^
" ' *• ' //'
THE AFT' WELL DECK. P.B.




case. Such men as these bear the brunt of war; yield passive obedience to the brain
that directs them, and strike down the men opposed to them as the wood-cutter fells
timber in the forest. Violent physical exertion is succeeded by times of inertia, when
they repair the waste. They fight and drink, fight and eat, fight and sleep, that they
may the better deal hard blows; the powers of the mind are not greatly exercised in
this turbulent round of existence, and the character is as simple as heretofore.
"When the men who have shown such energy on the battlefield return to ordinary
civilisation, most of those who have not risen to high rank seem to have acquired no
ideas, and to have no aptitude, no capacity for grasping new ideas. To the utter
amazement of a younger generation, those who made our armies so glorious and so
terrible are as simple as children and so slow-witted as a clerk at his worst, and the
captain of a thundering squadron is scarcely fit to keep a merchant's day-book. Old
soldiers of this stamp, therefore, being innocent of any attempt to use their reasoning
faculties, act upon their strongest impulses."
These words not only absolve the General Staff, but set at high speed the
pistons of our mental and memorial engines.
We wonder whether for the last few years we have been mere automata,
like these soldiers of the Napoleonic wars. We reflect with dismay upon the
prospect of our remaining for the rest of our lives "as slow-witted as a clerk
at his worst." Tragedies (and comedy within tragedy) in which we were
actors on the stage of Armageddon, and which we thought we had forgotten,
are mirrored in our minds. Involuntarily our hand goes out for the clasp of
hands that have vanished, and our ears listen for the sound of voices that are
for ever still. We recall all those acts of love and tenderness under shellfire
which we have known and experienced, and we feel glad that we have so often
seen humanity in its true sublimity. We live over once more those "times of
violent physical exertion," during which we wondered whether we were mules
or men, and those succeeding "times of inertia," when we "repaired the waste"
by offering orgiastic orisons at the altar of Bacchus. We then realise for the
first time that we are here because we are physically unfit, because we are but
another handful of the "returned empties" from those orgies of strife and
destruction in which the weary Titans of the world delight to indulge. We
then decide to turn away from further contemplation of Armageddon; but,
at the same moment in which we look towards the Southern Cross, now above
us, our mind's eye casts a Parthian but pathetic glance at our "pals and
cobbers" still "sticking it" on Aceldama.
HOMEWARD


HOMEWARD
Yes, although, throughout that life of martial stress and pain from which
we are for the present released, home was a veritable Naboth's vineyard, it is
only now—almost at the end of our voyage—that we realise the goodness and
generous giving of God. Vita nova incipit. We are going homeward; we
are nearing home; home and its sweet concomitants are in our mental, almost
in our physical grasp. Although we are a military "omnium gatherum," these
thoughts make us truly a single unit, a battalion of returning exiles, hearted
as one. Our souls are not dead; we know what awaits us when once again
we foot our native soil. Our mothers, sisters, wives and sweethearts, who for
so long have watched and waited without weeping, are soon to shed tears of
joy for us. Our married men are looking forward to a pleasing wife, a home
and a lawn-mower, or, in the inverted phrase of Horace, " Linquanda tellus et
domus et placens uxor." Our bachelors have already made plans for twosome
trips to secluded holiday resorts. For all which we are about to receive we
are truly thankful, but what are we taking home in return? Most of us, like
Neoptolemus in the Siege of Troy, crossed the seas to finish the war, to turn
the Prussian Eagle into an apteryx, to make the wily Hun as extinct in
Europe as the woolly rhinoceros, and to win the Holy Grail of Peace for the
civilised world.
We are returning home, battle-scarred and worn, without having earned
either a triumph or an ovation, but having at least won for ourselves a voyage
homeward—homeward to Australia Fair.
—McD.


Sierra Leone.
to the steep slopes of the high hills and washed
by the warm tides of the Atlantic, lies the picturesque city
| of Freetown, the capital of the British Colony of Sierra
I The discovery of Sierra Leone, history tells us, took place
in the year 1462. But it was not till some three hundred years
later that British influence began to operate in this rich country, teeming as
it was with all the wealth of tropical climes.
The peninsula on which stands Freetown was bought by the Sierra
Leone Company from the native Kings, and with other portions ceded to
them, and to the British Government in 1320, began British occupation.
The Sierra Leone Company, with a quarter of a million pounds, had for
its chief objects the repatriation of slaves, either
captured from slave ships, or liberated in British
territory under the humane legislation that forbade
the trade within the British Empire. Thus Cowper
wrote: —
"Slaves cannot breathe in England: if their lungs
Imbibe our air, that moment they are free.
They touch our country and their shackles fall.
Spread on then,
And let it circulate through every vein
Of all your Empire, that where Britain's power
Is felt, mankind may feel her mercy too."
Freetown, then, has its roots in the soil of tears
and tragedy. It was born in the sorrow of sundered
lives, and nurtured in the atmosphere of mingled
emancipation and separation.
It was a motley mosaic of many tribes, with
varying degrees of civilisation such as cursed them
in their slavery.
HOMEWARD


It was, nevertheless, a haven of refuge for many thousands of negroes
from Nova Scotia, the West Indies, and such as were saved from the filth
of the reeking traders as they carried their huddled and broken victims to the
markets of America and other places.
Space forbids a lengthy article on the progress which followed in succeed-
ing years. The primary concerns of the Company were humanitarian and
religious; and such ideals have left a permanent and wholesome influence
during the past century.
The heroism of white missionaries and Christian teachers and traders,
who faced the fevers and diseases of this "white man's grave," is the finest
thing in the chapter of this tragic and romantic history.
To-day, schools and colleges, disseminating modern ideas and education,
are scattered throughout the colony, and find in the dusky sons of Africa
bright intellects capable of assimilating and practising the wisdom of the
white races.
Except for a few white officials the administration of the colony is in the
hands of the coloured people. They govern themselves, manage their public
institutions with credit, and manifest a keen and business-like interest in
everything that concerns the welfare of the people.
For a native town, Freetown stands a tribute to their enterprise and
government. The houses are substantial and sanitary, the streets well kept
and clean, the public buildings solid and picturesque.
British rule is embodied in the Governor and staff and the garrison which
occupies the substantial barracks that crown the prominent foothill round
which the town clusters.
The population to-day numbers about 35,000, of whom only a few hundred
are white. Of late years there has been a steady increase of Hindus, who find
a ready market for their tropical wares among the Africans.
It was a novel and pleasant experience to visit the town. The rollicking
good-humour of the negro, the mingling of many colours as the dusky women
flaunted their fashions, the quaint customs of the native tinged with English
ideas, and the frank, easy-going life, with its careless banter, made a bright
HOMEWARD


The Man from the Ranks. •'"• ; '■ ' '.- .' • " •/ Those Staff Guys!
FP ' " :
A Typical Member of the
Anzac Provost Corps.
HOMEWARD


-FTP'.
Moonlight between Sierra Leone and Capetown.
contrast to the listless and enervating sensations common to the Englishman
in the tropics.
The colony is rich in tropical resources and finds a ready market for its
palm oil, cocoa, kola nuts, ginger, ivory and fruits.
The total export trade before the war amounted to about £3,000,000 per
year; of that amount considerably over half went to the United Kingdom,
while of £2,000,000 worth imported, Britain contributed 75 per cent.
The people are intensely loyal in spirit, and there is even yet a pathetic
reverence for the old flag which flutters its message of freedom from the
residency looking down on the town.
—J. W. D.
HOMEWARD


* Subs."—Marine and Otherwise.
Capetown.
T the portal of the great South African Union lies the
picturesque city of Capetown, its capital. The first glimpse
of it from the sea impresses one with a sense of the sublime
and massive grandeur of African mountains. Encircling the
bay are the huge rough ranges, over which the wraiths of'
filmy mists come and go, and the cloud cloth on Table Moun-
tain seems spread by a mighty hand for a feast of giant tenants of giant
peaks.
Capetown lies at the foot of this mountain scheme, flanked on the left by
"The Lion," over 2,000 feet high, and in the near background is overhung
by the sheer cliffs of Table Mountain, 3,500 feet in height.
To-day the population of the city numbers, including suburbs, about
160,000. It possesses fine business houses, well-kept streets, and many places
of interest. Its climate is mild and dry, and very healthy. Many modern
industries flourish along the foreshores of the bay, and being the regular
port of call en route to Australia and the East, the harbour is always well
filled with shipping.
HOMEWARD


Like many new coutries, its beginning is shrouded in romance. The veil
of prehistoric mystery was lifted, first of all, by a Portugese navigator named
Bartholomew Dias, in the year i486, who rounded the Cape and bestowed on
it the very significant name, "Cape of Storms." Later on the name was
changed by the King of Portugal to that of "Cape of Good Hope," because, as
he reasoned, the discovery augured well for the possibility of reaching India
by sea.
For a century practically nothing further was done to colonise the country,
though many expeditions found their way round the Cape, and Portugal was
enriched by almost a monopoly of the sea trade of India.
At the close of the 16th century, the Dutch Republic began to compete
seriously with the Portugese for the trade of the East, and in the many
encounters which decided the issue with "sharpshot and cold steel," the
Dutch came off victors, and in a few years wrested the trade from the
Portugese.
In 1651 the Dutch East India Coy." made Table Bay a revictualling
station for their fleet, and thus began the first attempt to settle the shores of
South Africa. In those days the mountains —among
the stubby natural growth which has long since
been burnt out —provided a home for numerous wild
beasts, such as the lion, hyena and leopard, to which
even the wary Hottentot often fell a victim.
The vineyards which flourish in the colony owe
their origin to a vine that was introduced from
Germany in 1653. The timber trade was developed
and farming on a small scale commenced. It
is thus to Jan Van Reibeek, a surgeon of the
"East India Company," that the honour falls
of first attempting to colonise the Cape of
Good Hope. The story of succeeding years
requires more space than I can afford. In the
ebb and flow of natural fortunes, this distant
settlement was caught in the backwash of
conflicts.
HOMEWARD


AT BEACH POINT-LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT.
All the boys had the white girls, so the officers —?
It was not till the year 1806, when Cape
Colony fell one of the spoils to the victor
in the war between Great Britain and Hol-
land, that British rule commenced here.
Since then, through much bitterness of
spirit and much mistrust, the work of
colonisation has gone on. The present
South African Union is a tribute to the
courage, optimism and genius of men who
have toiled against tremendous difficulties.
Even to-day the complex problems —
political and racial—are almost the despair
of earnest statesmen. They call for a firm
and courageous policy which must be pur-
sued with great wisdom and tact, for under
the superficial constitution of the Union
slumber many elements which may yet mar
the ideal of a United South Africa.
Perhaps no name is more revered
ithroughout the Union by both Boer and
Briton than that of Cecil Rhodes.
He was a man who believed in Africa. J
To his faith and foresight may be attributed the scheme of the Cape to
Cairo Railway. When completed the length of this line will be about 5,700
miles, and will span the Zambesi River with the highest bridge in the world—
a cantilever steel bridge 380 feet above flood water. Rhodes lived and toiled
for a United South Africa. He knew no race distinctions. He never differen-
tiated between Boer and Briton. He recognised one South African
nationality. He did not live to see his dream of union materialise, but in
the accomplished fact of to-day we must recognise the untiring labours of him
who though dead still speaks to and inspires every true lover of South Africa.
In the grounds of his late home at Groote Schuur stands a magnificent
monument —a nation's tribute to a great man.
The design of the monument is the work of Mr. Baker. The Statue of
HOMEWARD


"Physical Energy," one of the finest things in the world, was executed by Mr.
Watts, and represents over 20 years' of anxious labour. Rhodes fancied it
immensely during his visit to Mr. Watts, and expressed the wish to see that
statue set up to commemorate the completion of the Cape to Cairo Railway.
It now stands to commemorate the life and spirit of Rhodes himself.
The house and magnificent estate of the late Cecil Rhodes was bequeathed
to the Government, and is reserved to the people as the home of their Prime
Minister. One might write at length of the many beautiful sights that
surround Capetown, but the most charming thing of all is the kindly spirit of
the people of that city.
One of the pleasantest memories of our homeward voyage will be that
of our visit to Capetown, and the warm hospitality of the people will live in
our minds a cherished debt of gratitude.
The various committees left nothing to be desired in their endeavours to
brighten the stay of our lads, and although they have their own Patriotic,
Red Cross and other funds, and a host of boys of their own to care for, these
good folk have taken on themselves the task of mothering other people's
boys. Over 300,000 such lads have enjoyed their homely hospitality during
the past year, and if one had a dull hour ashore, it was in spite of all the
thoughtfulness of our friends.
If ever the privilege falls to us of requiting their kindness in some measure,
we shall not be slow to prove our gratitude.
—J. W. D.
U.S. Arrival in France.
A short while back the first U.S. aviator flew across and alighted near a British
aerodrome. Walking across the field towards the sheds he espied an officer well
emblazoned with gadgets, and opened the conversation with:
"Say, stranger, are you the big noise round here?"
"If you mean the Commanding Officer, well, yes, I am," was the reply.
Well, look here," said the American; "can I leave my gasoline kite in your garden
city for an hour or so while I have a look round?" And he did.
—E. N. W.
HOMEWARD


In Memoriam.
(Written at the burial at sea of George White, 46th Batt.)
Another victim to this horrid war.
We say farewell; for we shall see no more.
Australia has one warrior less, to count,
And Germany one warrior less, to fight.
We lay you gently to your last account
In silent awe. We gave you to the waves ere night.
We cannot mark the place with monument,
But what a tomb to celebrate the brave!
For ages cannot scrap the document.
We can for ever say: There is his grave,
Within the bosom of those restless waves
And ocean's tears his bier for ever laves.
The crescent moon observed you disappear,
A thousand comrades saw you sink from view;
The planet Mars loked from its highest sphere
As the war-bugle played your last adieu.
Great Neptune's arms will round you ever keep,
Sea nymphs and syrens charm your long, long sleep.
Australia is surrounded by that sea
That this night has enwrapped you in its sheet.
Your funeral march is a long harmony
Of sound and foam and spray and wind and sleet.
You paid the debt that we all owe to time,
And round your rest your dirge's ceaseless chime.
You longed to see again that blessed shore
Which looms in all our hopes so radiant bright;
But you are part of those braves gone before,
That paid the utmost sacrifice for right;
Which make you all remembered to all time.
If Euripides had writ these memory rhymes,
You had been then remembered in all climes.
Farewell! The poor remains of what was brave and true,
Our dear, dear land now mourns and misses you.
And over yonder 'neath the Southern Cross
We shall remember this our woeful loss.
Around those mangrove shores where ocean beats,
We'll think it muffled drums our memory greets.
—Pte. A. O. B.
HOMEWARD


Von Hun.
An unpleasant spot is St. Omer,
A better place not hard to find;
Aerial torpedoes and monstrous bombs
Have ruined the peaceful and cultured mind.
Way up above the world so high,
Fritz soars across the moonlit sky
In aeroplanes, both great and small,
Causing exploding bombs to fall.
People rushing, filled with fright,
Out of their homes in the early night,
Making for dug-outs big and round,
Fifty feet below in the ground.
Anti-aircraft shells burst high,
Searching for Fritz up in the sky,
Yet through this atmospheric wall
Great thunderous bombs are heard to fall.
The warning given by the bells
Is heard across the winding dells;
All clear sounded, up goes the light,
The Froggies lose their maddening fright.
Again we seek our little beds,
In which to rest our weary heads,
Thankful for mercies good and kind.
While Fritzie leaves our town behind.
He wends his way home in despair,
Passing through the shell-torn air,
Dodging shells of sizes great.
Alas! he finds it's left too late,
Down he comes with a rushing dive,
Wriggling and turning, still alive,'
Until he like the bomb does fall
Against this great round earthly ball.
A crash is heard upon the ground,
Souvenir hunters gather around,
While Fritz in pieces rests asleep,
Planted in the ground some fathoms
deep.
Upon his grave is R.I.P.
So that everyone may see
That poor old Von, a hero bold,
Lies beneath the sod so cold.
Let Von Hun's death a lesson be
To other Hun's of low degree.
For the eye of poor old Archie Miller
Is far too keen for a baby killer.
—Gunner W. H. N.
The White Man's Grave.
Out on the calm, grey, clammy mist,
Hell hot, the red sun rose;
Broke out upon the slimy sea
(Men sail upon this slimy sea)
Where men play Fate— and lose.
Wild, rugged, scorched, the hills, and tall,
Rank, muddy streams that flow
Through mud flats where the hornbills call
(The dreary, lonely hornbills call).
That wail the dead men know.
Into this desolation came
The man—grim, solitary,
To this hell he, for wealth and fame
(What will not men for wealth and fame?)
From o'er some distant sea.
Sun-seared his soul, nor e'en a sigh
'Scaped from his dust-parched throat;
Thirst and fever fiend would vie
(For this man's soul at dice would vie)
His fate—they knew by rote!
The foetid swamps will have their day
When white men play with Fate;
Our white man lost—in mud he lay
(In steamy, slimy mud he lay),
The jackal's only mate.
The scarlet sun, beneath the slopes,
Beneath the feved cloud,
Sets on a white man's shattered hopes
(Such fevered, frenzied, futile hopes!)—
The hornbill calls aloud.
—R. G. K.
HOMEWARD


The Campaign-and After.
Wait, wait, wait, wait—waiting for a chance to go,
Left turn, right turn—can't you give us somethin' new?
Kit, kit, kit, kit—kit inspection all the time,
And we're all waiting yet to go.
Tramp, tramp, tramp, tramp—trampin' down toward the bay,
Left, right, front, rear—not a bloomin' girl to see;
Quiet, quiet, quiet, quiet—done in blinkin' secrecy,
For we're goin' out to fight.
Sea, sea, sea, sea—nothin' anywhere but sea,
Khaki, khaki—officers and cobbers, too,
Roll, roll, roll, roll—out upon the vasty deep.
Soon we'll be lettin' go at Fritz.
Mud, mud, mud, mud—duckboards and bloomin' mud,
Crump, crump, crump, crump—thank Gawd it was a dud!
Clang, clang, ding, dong—Fritz's puttin' over gas.
Gee! this is dinkum blanky war.
Throb, throb, throb, throb—how that cussed shrapnel hurts,
Sniff, Sniff, smell, smell—iodine, iodoform;
Wait, wait, wait, wait—waiting for a bloomin' board,
For they're boardin' me for home.
Sing, song, sing, song—on a Red Cross carrier,
Slow, slow, slow, slow—Oh! how the convoy crawls;
Blow, cold, cold, blow—in the roaring forties, ho!
Only another week for home.
—R. G. K.
Only a Private
He was only a common Private,
Arid we called him just plain Dan;
But he fought for King and country,
As a soldier and a man.
He fought on the Somme last winter,
And stuck it all through Messines;
'Till at last he got pipped by a sniper,
And now he's behind the screens.
There's a grave that is somewhere in
Flanders
That no one will ever find;
Walled in by old battered down trenches,
And covered with shell-holes behind.
No mention is made in the papers,
Not even a word is said;
The world carries on with its pleasure,
Not even a tear is shed.
He was only a common Private,
The son of a working man,
Who had fought and died for his country,
As only a hero can.
Let us hope that Dan is in Heaven,
Away from all troubles and cares;
Where a man is not judged by his calling,
Or the old ragged coat that he wears.
—Cpl. C. T.
HOMEWARD


How One Feels on a Route March.
THE START!
t The Start—to the tune of The First Five Miles—or Less.
It s a Long Way to Dear Australia."
The Last Hill. r. i. p. (rise if possible).
HOMEWARD


The "Digger."
FIRST, a man, a fighter; lastly a soldier—a soldier of no
mean order.
Bred in the hills, brought up in an atmosphere of
bush forest, bridle track, creek or plain; keen-eyed, confident
and self-possessed, living in an environment wherein he alone
can appreciate the glories of his native land; assuming a
responsibility for it which makes itself manifest to the utmost,
when his country is caught up in the vortex of a World War,
and when the Mother Country is calling out across the Empire
for her men to come and fight.
Then came the "Aussy." At first they knew him as
"Cobber," and "Cobber" still he is, but, of a verity, much
life in mud and dirt have ingrained and developed in him the
same characteristics as are displayed by the very fauna of his
native bush. He bounds like the very finest "roo" that ever
streaked across the clearing, digs in in a way that would put
the proudest wombat to shame; and, withal, shoots, when he
has learnt how to work the "regulation bundook," in a way that
would turn our old friend "Buffalo Bill" green (as the very
grass of his native prairie) with envy.
Thus we see him, displayed at the outset in his working
togs—the man and the fighter. But what of his "glad rags"?
Truly he joined up in his Sunday best —some didn't though,
we recollect. They gave him "blueys," for he had not qualified
as a soldier of the line . . . yet.
Soon, however, very soon, they gave him his uniform, better known to
Billjim as "glad rags," much to the delight of his girl pals, as he turned up in
tbe main street on Friday nights—he was surely a soldier now in every sense
of the term, to be numbered among the best of such.
He was soon absorbed into the vastness of never-ending monotony, of
toil, blood, thunder and mud—then he earned his name of "Digger."
Now, many have had to cry "Time," a breather for a space; they have
learnt the noble game, and now, a little tired of it, leave the new chums to
carry on till they get their second wind.
For many a "digger" the glory of the game has faded. Once again he
shall return to the bush land and the bridle track, and—who knows?—we
may find him digging in out there on the plains, or dreaming—on those clear
starry nights, by the stream where he first learnt he was a "digger"—of the
hells, the joys of France—now but a distant memory. —R. G. K.
HOMEWARD


The Acts of the Ancient Anzacs.
(Being one of many recently discovered records of
those great warriors.)
CHAPTER I.
1. And it came to pass in the third year of the Great War, that the wise
men and elders of the Adminaust did hold counsel together and reason, and
this was the manner of their reasoning:
2. Lo! there be many of the young men of our land who be sore stricken,
and suffering in divers ways from the great conflict.
3. Let them therefore be sent in ships back to the land of Aussie, each one
to his own place, for some are sick, and some are lame; halt also and blind
are many, and no more fit to be called warriors.
4. And others there be who are too young for to fight—war-babes such
as have not yet reached the half-score years and eight, and whom we cannot
therefore send forth to battle.
5. Let them also be gathered together and sent back with the sick ones of
the armies, that they may grow strong in their own country and return again
to fight for us in the fulness of time.
6. And behold many of the warriors of Aussie had sojourned long in the
land of Eng, and some there were who had taken unto themselves wives, and
others there were who were greatly loved by the young maidens of this
country.
7. For were not the young men of Aussie good to look upon, and had
they not great riches in their own land?
8. Yea! their ranches of cattle in Woolloomooloo which is in the east,
and their stations of sheep in Calgool which is in the west!
9. Therefore did the wise men counsel that there be also a ship for the
wives and the maidens.
10. And because the counsel was good it was so.
HOMEWARD


> ■ •' V " '• ■ ' ' ■ '{, ■ ■■ ■ ..
"Y"'
Fac-simile of Tablet in
Woolloomooloo Museum,
from which part of this narrative was translated.
[NOTE—To Professor F. H. Coad, A.S.C.A.I.F., Offsider
of the Aussie Historical Research Society, we are indebted
for the translation of this and other tablets found in the
course of his extensive excavations at Canberra.]




CHAPTER 11.
1. And it came to pass after many days, even as the wise men and elders
had decreed, and when all the sick ones and the lame had been gathered
together, each one to his appointed ship, then did those ships sail from the
land of Eng.
2. And the sailing thereof was towards the south and towards the east.
3. And with them was one other ship whereon were gathered together the
wives and maidens of many of the young warriors.
4. For the husband may not journey with his wife, neither the young man
with the maiden of his choice.
5. Now, on a certain one of these ships which is called the "Eurp-dees"
were warriors numbering many score, and captains and leaders too above a
few.
6. And maidens also were on this ship, and these were arrayed in garments
of grey with markings of red, and a headdress of white was upon their heads.
7. And the name of these maidens was Sis-teer—which, being interpreted,
means: We minister unto the sick.
CHAPTER 111.
x. Now on this ship was one great amongst the great, a leader of leaders,
and one mighty in battle.
2. And him they made O.C. troops, which is to say, Head Sherang.
3. And he spake unto his Adj, saying:
4. Gather ye the officers together in that chamber which is called the
lounge that I may make known unto them my will concerning many things.
5. And presently they got them every one to the lounge—the little Loots,
the great Loots, the Captains, the Majors, and the Colonels; and thus spoke
the O.C. unto them:
6. Behold I am he of whom ye have heard, O.C. Troops, surnamed
Head Sherang, and I am set in authority over ye.
7. Thus and thus mayst thou do, and the doing thereof be favourable in
my sight; but thus and thus thou mayst not do, lest peradventure by the
doing thereof ye incur my anger.
HOMEWARD


8. For I, thy 0.C., am a fierce O.C. when narked, and he that obeyest not
my commandments him will I surely straff.
9. Yea! like unto bricks numbering a thousand will I come upon him, and
he shall get it in the neck. Yea! verily he shall get it.
10. Hearken therefore and pay heed to my words, for we be many days
together on this ship.
11. And they hearkened, being seized every one with mighty terror and
great trembling.
CHAPTER IV.
1. And it came to pass on the third day that the warriors murmured
And another spake, saying:
2. What do we that our days may be not tedious upon this ship?
3- And one amongst them spake, saying:
4- Let us gather ourselves together that we may form a committ for the
making of games and of merryings.
5- And before the ninth hour they had so gathered.
6. Then he that had gathered them together spoke, saying:
7. What manner of committ will ye? and what shall be the size thereof?
And another spake, saying:
8. Let us each one nominate one member for the committ, and then if
that sufficeth not let there be power to add.
9. And this was favourable in the sight of that great company.
10. And this was the manner of the coming of the committ; yet no man
knoweth the number thereof, neither hath any man seen of its handiwork.
n. And some there were who excelleth at the throwing of the quoit, and
others there were who playeth mightily at the billiard which is deck.
12. Yet, when the winds blew and the seas were much troubled, there was
no throwing of the quoit, neither was seen the player of the billiard.
CHAPTER V.
1. Now, after many days came the ship "Eurp-dees" into a great port,
and the other ships came there also, even she which bore the wives and hand-
maidens of the warriors.
H O ME WARD


2. And the coming thereto caused great joy in the hearts of the warriors,
and in the hearts of the women was there great rejoicing also.
3. And flutterings too were in their hearts.
4. And at the second hour of the going down of the sun there was a
mighty gathering on the shores of that place—the husbands gathered with
their wives, and the young warriors with the maidens.
5. And they gat them every one into the city for to see of its beauties.
6. And behold the people of that place did give a royal welcome unto the
men of Aussie, and glad offering of tea, and offering of cakes, and offering
of fruit brought they them also.
7. And the hearts of the men of Aussie rejoiced with exceeding great
joy, and they spake one to another concerning it, saying in their own tongue:
"Bycrypes This'lldoomeh."
8. And some there were who gathered themselves together into parties of
five and parties of six, and did get them up into the mountain, some in the
cars which are motor, and some in the cars which are tram.
9. And the beauties of that place did make their hearts glad, and because
there was no evil in their hearts, neither in the works of their hands in that
day, were they allowed to go again on the second and on the third day.
10. And some of the maidens of that place were comely maidens, and
fair to look upon, and they looked with favour upon many of the young
warriors, giving them the eye which is glad.
11. So when the young men returned each one to his ship, did they say
one to another: Behold I have clicked, and I have had the time which is
bonzer!
CHAPTER VI.
1. Now the captain of that ship "Eurp-dees" spake unto the warriors,
saying:
2. Behold! this my ship is a good ship and exceeding swift.
3. Bid farewell, therefore, ye husbands unto your wives, and ye young
men unto your maidens, for ere the next crowing of the cock ye shall see
them no more for many days.
4. And all the warriors did gather themselves together on the side of
HOMEWARD


.h« ir ship, ,„d women and maideiis did theraselves
gether on the side of their ship.
5- And there was much waving of hands and waving of hanks, and of the
sending of signals was there much also.
6. And the husbands and the young- men did cpnri .
uu & men Q'u send a message to all the
women, saying:
7- Weep not; but be of good courap-e fnr
vou R„t the g ' 6go to P re Pare a place for
you. Rut the women made answer, saying:
s. Lo! there be no tears on this our ship, neither are we downcast
laughter Th" """ " nkling °' ev «" ° f -W
aughter which proceedeth from the sleeve.
10. And some there were who wondered concerning this message but
ers smiled as smileth the man of wisdom and the man of great experience.
CHAPTER VII.
1. And presently came this ship "Eurp-dees" unto the land of A ■
midst great rejoicings. ° f Aussie
strict. A " d * C °° COUrSe ° f Pe ° ple ga,hered ,here ,or ™"° me the
ken wamors, and there was -much glad commotion amongs, tha, multi-
tude, being cheers and the giving of cheers.
3- Yet some there were who entprprf 1
TTtrat-d a. j- te red not into the rejoicings—young
up their ** ~ **
4. And they cam. nigh unto ,h. young warriors, saying-
-- What ,s this thing we have heard concerning ye, how ye have brought
maidens from the land of Eng for to wife?
6. Are not the maidens ot Aussie fair as the maidens of Eng>
7- nd the young men were much troubled and sore afraid Yet thev
made answer excusing themselves, saying:
Id T e haVe been '° ng parted from ye, and the land of Eng is a cold
land, and cold were we, and lonely also. 5
9. Moreover we heard no. from ye, for ye did no, write even as ve had
promised, and they did tell us many things concerning ye
to. How tha, ye had looked favourahiy upon our broihers who wen, no,
28
H O MEWARD


forth to the Great War, but rather stayed at home that they might get them
the jobs which are soft and the wages which are high.
11. Moreover the maidens of the land of Eng are fair to look upon, and
well versed are they in the ways of women seeking husbands.
12. And we stood no earthly against their wiles.
13. And ere the setting of the third sun ye shall see them, and ye shall
know that it is even as we have said.
14. Then did the maidens wax angry with exceeding great anger, and
lifted up their voices crying in a loud voice:
15. Yea, we shall see them! Verily, verily we shall see them!
16. And many heard, and the wise men in that multitude did steal silently
away and hid themselves.
17. For it is not meek to witness the meeting of the women of Judea
with the women of Samaria—neither is it safe.
—Selah.
Convoy Separation.
The "lonic" grass-widowers say that the first port of call was not true to name, as
they could not "see 'er alone" there. It has also been suggested that the ship's name
be changed, and that the "Ironic" would be more suitable. Another case of "so near
and yet so far."
The Desert.
A light horseman transferred from Sinai to France met a mate who had not been
out in Palestine, and not having ever seen a desert, asked what it was like.
"The desert!" answered the sand-scarred one. "Well, it's just miles and miles,
and plurry miles of beggar-all."
—R. W.
"What did you do in the Great War, Dad?"
"All that I did was my bit, my lad.
Not much to brag about, all said and done;
But my little bit and the bits of others
Helps us along till the War be won."
—Sgt. J. M.
H O MEWARD


3Q
H O M E W A R D
TRIALS OF THE PROVOST CORPS.
Get off that blinkin' boatI"


"Going Home."
GOING home —the magic words beat tempestuously into the brains
of a thousand battered and broken warriors, crowding the carriages of
a troop-train at one of the busiest and largest railway stations of that
great and illustrious city of London. A shrill whistle echoed and reverberated
through the vaulted domes of the huge structure, the reluctant wheels of the
train creaked and groaned, whilst from every window of the long line of
carriages, tired, drawn faces looked their farewell on that wonderful capital of
the Motherland. The pulses of the giant engines throbbed and purred, the
wheels of the outgoing train revolved faster and faster, the tired humans
within the carriages closed up the windows, tossed their slouch hats into the
racks overhead, and, smiling bravely, sank back upon the crowded seats of
the troop-train. They were going home. For the moment nothing else
mattered. Their brave hearts, buoyed up by thoughts of home, gave no heed
to mundane matters. They were going back —back from the shadow of Death
—back from Armageddon. To-morrow they would be out upon the blue
sea. By Easter —God willing—they would be safely home in the harbours of
their native land. Nobly they had played their parts. Voluntarily and
unselfishly had they given of their hearts' blood for love of that great and;
glorious land that had given them birth. In the heart of the Motherland their
deeds will live for ever, their sacrifices will ring down the years. And how,
think you, will those broken warriors be received back in Australia? Will
they find honour in their own country for their noble sacrifices? Will they
be cared for and comforted during the coming years? Will a grateful country
give them their lawful rights, for which they have fought and bled—give
them that sustenance they have so nobly earned? Surely! Aye, surely. I
close my tired eyes—the troop-train rushes on into the night.
if « I » Sf *
I am back once again in my native land—back in the glorious sunshine.
I am in a great railway station, such as the one left behind in London —but
how different. On every side of the station-yard vast piles of wheat and
HOMEWARD


corn are stacked; the very platform is choked with mailbags, piled tier upon
tier-mail bags for the boys in the trenches. A strange silence is all around.
Ihe huge station is deserted, except for several rough-looking men, parading
up and down. What does it all mean? Surely these inhumans must know
that their country i s at war; surely they must realise the gravity of the
situation the horror of it all. As I look, I recall those disturbing rumours
that had filtered through to the trenches back in Flanders; rumours of strikes
and turmoil aye, even of disloyalty-back in Australia. Great God! Surely
they could not be true! I open my aching eyes. The troop-train still rushes
along As I fumble with trembling hands for my warrant, the train steams
mto the station of the seaport-out on the blue waters of the Sound the
transports are calling. I have been dreaming-I am going home-going
% % &
The broken warriors were safely aboard the transport. Troopship Al4
floated proudly upon a sea of troubled waters; the red cliffs of England were
fading from sight. Astern, the wake of the ship twisted and contorted like\
a huge python. Down between stifling decks sweated and panted the return-
ing warriors, stoically bearing this new burden; for were they not going
home? The wind blew itself out; the driving spindrift and white
horses cresting the waves of the Channel settled down to a
waste of dull, oily waters. The battered men came up from
between decks, clustering around the hatches; whilst from the smoke-room
and well-decks arose the sound of music and singing. Were they not
going home? Why should they not sing? What were the dangers of the
sea compared to those they had gone through. Spite of all the forced gaiety
the eyes of the men detailed for submarine-guard never faltered, for the
danger zone was not yet passed. Suddenly, a dark object loomed up on
the starboard bow; a warning blast ripped out from the siren of the leading
transport, which changed its course quickly, stearing straight down upon the
unwelcome intruder. Aboard Troopship Ar 4 , the submarine guard stood to
their posts, the gunners to their guns; the crew and the returning warriors
mustered quietly at their allotted boat-decks, whilst the convey drew closer
together. On the still air, an audible sigh of relief arose as the dark, sinister
HOMEWARD


m
* * <*
V' V-'; - /* r —. ~~ ,w '
THE MILITARY STAFF.
_..;._l_-_-;,_'.::1:,.;__£:.7..... : "
H. M. A. T. A 1 4.




object spouted a stream of water high in the air, then dived—the mystery ship
was but a lonely whale, as much concerned by the commotion as the com-
manders of the convoy. The broken troops went back to their various decks
—the dull routine of life aboard the transport was resumed. From the
smoke-rooms again came the sound of music and singing; but this time the
music was subdued; the singing was in a minor key; the songs told not of
war and clamour —the hearts of the boys were too full—the music spoke
mutely of home, the words of the songs were mostly of roses.
a -y
The danger zone was passed. A tropical sun struck fiercely down upon
the decks of Troopship A l4, when again the even tenor of life was broken.
An uneasy feeling of unrest appeared amongst the scarred warriors. Little
groups of men congregated in whispered consultation, dispersed, and gathered
again. Furtive, anxious glances from a thousand eyes alternated between
the door of the orderly-room and the bridge of the ship, where the imper-
turbable Captain, implacable as a Sphinx, walked back and forth. What
was the cause of all this unrest? Had the commissariat failed? Had there
been harsh treatment from overbearing officers, near—so near—the end of
the game? No! The boys had been treated royally by the ship's company;
the broken men had never so sympathetic and painstaking an officer as the
C.O. who was in command. Every opportunity had been afforded them of
making the voyage home a pleasant one. The noble sisters in charge of the
grievously wounded had worked untiringly and unceasingly for the comfort of
sufferers. Then what was upsetting these broken men, who up till now
had been nothing but a company of big, happy children going home. Outside
the doer of the orderly-room, a young soldier stood hugging to his breast
"Larry," the pet of Battery A, which he had somehow managed to smuggle
on board —a little Belgian dog born and reared within sound of the guns. Unre-
strained tears trickled down the cheeks of the sadly-wounded young soldier,
for had not his little canine friend accompanied him through all those terrible
days on the Somme? Was not that cruel scar on his little blunted nose the
result of a wound from a piece of shell fired by the fiendish Boche. And
now, because of the inscrutable laws of the sea, Larry must die; the fatal edict
HOMEWARD


had gone forth; his kind were not to be carried on a troopship to that fair
land of Australia. The tender looks of sympathy lighting up the faces of those
anxious watchers of the threatened tragedy augured well for the future of that
great land they were returning to, showing conclusively that the hell they
had passed through in Flanders and Gallipoli had not debased them; rather
had it ennobled them—given unto them a grace above their fellow-men.
And still the Captain of the ship paced back and forth on the bridge.
Suddenly a line of tiny flags fluttered up to the masthead; an answering array
climbed and fell on another of the convoy—not a troopship. A way out had
been found. Larry s life was saved, but he would have to change his quarters.
The hard, stern look on the faces of the broken warriors relaxed—once more
they resumed their dreaming—once more they were going home.
* * 2 H * «
"Land in sight!" The glad cry rises up from a thousand throats. The
boys are almost home—home to the land they have fought and bled for—
home to wives and sweethearts—home to dear old mothers and sturdy fathers
—home to the grandest country on God's earth. As the cliffs of the homeland
loom up on the horizon, again comes to me those sad misgivings; again comes
before my mind s eye the memory of my dream on the outrushing troop-train.
What will their welcome be? I look around on those happy smiling faces.
Six weeks of ship-board has brought back the colour to the cheeks, the fire to
the eyes of those broken warriors. They look so carelessly happy I feel
tempted to give them one last word of warning; to remind them that their
swords have been blooded; that theirs is the right to still uphold the honour
of the country they have fought for; that the destiny of a great continent still
lies in their hands. As I continue to gaze down upon the bronzed happy faces
my fears vanish, my faith is restored—my thoughts remain unspoken. I
throw up my hat, and join in their glad hurrahs, for I, too, am going home
going home.
—Lieut. P. F. Meredith.
HOMEWARD


General of the "Knuts."
General Charlie is my name,
Perhaps you've heard of me;
I came from Sunny Australia,
That dear land across the sea.
'Twas in that dear old country
I first started my career;
I posed as a veterinary surgeon
For an honest pint of beer.
I've doctored horses of all kinds,
Cows and dogs as well;
And learnt a bit about the game
Away out near Angerell.
One day I heard about the war
In the wild and woolly west;
So I thought I'd do my little bit,
And started off in jest.
Being some animal doctor,
Of course they picked on me,
And gave me a rank as Colonel
In the blinkin' A.M.C.
What Charlie don't know about soldiers,
You'll never hear it told;
And now I wear a big brown band.
And my cap is bound with gold.
Yes, now I'm a blinkin' General
In old Blighty across the sea;
Golden cords and medical boards,
That's all that troubles me.
Those blinkin' Aussie soldiers
Try to swing the lead on me;
And pose as crippled heroes,
Expecting a class C 111.
To show them that I'm Charlie
From across the bounding sea,
I give them a shock in the upper block.
By marking them 8.1.8.
At this I mean to carry on,
And ever hold my own;
'Till those blinkin' wounded soldiers
In the brain box have older grown.
Considering I've doctored horses
With medicines from oats or barley,
I reckon I've not done too bad
To be known as General Charlie.
—Gunner W. H. N.
HOMEWARD


To Our O.C.
Has the reader ever been O.C. Troops?
No? Then sympathise with those who have accepted the duty, and
particularly those who so act, and who at the time are more or less physical
duds by reason of the fact that they have been through the European furnace,
and have been rendered temporarily unfit in "doing their bit."
We take our hats off to Lieut.-Colonel A. C. Fewtrell, D.5.0., an officer
and a man, with a conscience and a determination to do his job conscientiously.
Surrounded by difficulties, up against problems peculiar to trooping, he
"carried on," and here we are at the end of a journey creditable in the extreme
to all who were officially connected with it. And all honour, too, to Major
Harbottle, D.5.0., his right-hand man, and a loyal and hard-working staff.
—L. J. H.
We Want Duds.
(With apologies to the composer of "Mother Machree.")
Therejs a spot in our trenches where nobody sleeps,
There's a spot where the dug-outs are piled up in heaps;
There are holes whose dark chasms are haunting me still '
For if the H.E.'s won't fill 'em I'm d dif we will.
Chorus:
Sure, I love dodging rum jars that fly through the air,
And the pineapples dropping around here and there;
For whiz-bangs and shrapnel I don't care a cuss,
But, God strafe his Minnies and send duds to us!
And when in the darkness those green lights appear,
We breathlessly listen that swish-swish to hear;
Our flight in the darkness when Minnies come nigh,
Is made bright by the light of the Very's on high.
Chorus.
Then the time comes at last when their strafing they cease,
And right through the line you would think there was peace
Were it not for the snipers and Maxims that sweep
With sweet tunes o'er our parapet soothing our sleep.
Chorus.
—Bill.
HOMEWARD


Lieut. Skylark, A.F.C., performs an involuntary-
spiral nose dive.
Ship's Inspection.
MID-ATLANTIC.
DIFFERENT officers on ship's inspection each have their little pet
manias re special neatness or cleanliness in one particular thing.
The ship's Captain's weakness was cups—nothing was right
unless the cups were spotless.
On rounds one day he dealt severely with the cups, and at close of deck
inspection informed the O.C. deck that sand was obtainable on ship's bottom.
Orderlies were commanded to procure same at once, and effect the im-
provement that soap and water had failed to do.
Result —next day ship's Captain highly pleased, with the exception of
one table.
"Spoiled the whole deck," was his verdict.
"Yes, spoiled the whole deck," echoed the C.O.
"Yes, spoiled the whole deck," re-
echoed the S.M.O.
"Yes, spoiled the whole deck,"
re-re-echoed the Captain of the day.
"What the blazes do you mean by
exhibiting cups like that," roared the
O.C. deck after inspection. "You've
never attempted to get sand. You
damned-well knew that there was
plenty on the ship's bottom."
"I did try, sir," said the mess
orderly.
"Rot," said the O.C. deck, "how
much did you try?"
"Well, sir, I was for two hours
leaning out of that porthole yester-
day with a cup in my hand, and I
couldn't even reach the flaming
bottom!"
—O.C. Deck.
HOMEWARD


An Incident.
HE was a Padre—and he was a man. Whether the latter be the result
of the exigencies of war this scribe sayeth not. But that he was
the possessor of all the qualities that appeal most to men, thousands
who have known him will bear testimony. Cheerful, chivalrous, sympathetic
—he typified the things for which he stood.
It was at a Base in France I first met him, where he watched the men
from his own land—Australia—pass on their way to the scene of war. There
he welcomed, there he cared for, and there he farewelled all who came and
went through that Base. He had a cheery word for all, and from the C.O.
to the latest arrival he was known and loved. The reason I will try to tell.
It was customary in that Base on certain days for the troops to be sent on
a route march, and the Padre often accompanied them. Round the camp,
within easy distance, were many beautiful woods, all of which were familiar
to him. On this particular morning the Padre obtained the C.O.'s permission
for the troops to visit one of these woods, and with bag in hand he led the 1
way. We marched along winding lanes until on the summit of a hill the wood
was reached. Then we found a place of great beauty, and at once the spirit
of it entered into each mind. It was as though we were in the interior of a
great cathedral. The dome was the azure blue of the heavens, towards
which high and lofty elm, oak, and beech trees lifted the glory of their
foliage. Some artist in the past had so directed their growth that they became
aisles for progress through the wood. The sun's rays penetrated them with
shafts of light, touching into loveliness their rich and tender leaves. As he
sank to rest the whole place would be lighted with the glory of his good-night
kiss.
The music was the glad song of the birds, richer and fuller than the
majesty of a pipe organ. Into this the Padre led us, and we marched with
softened tread. The word of command—given with almost bated breath—
and the troops sat at rest. It was then the Padre showed his interest in men's
welfare. He briefly spoke to them of the beauty of their surroundings, and
HOMEWARD


asked of the band a selection. It was an impressive selection, plaintive,
longing, yearning, as though the mystery of the place was seeking expression.
From his bag the Padre took a book, and in an instant we were listening
to Fitchett's "Fights for the Flag," in which he graphically describes the
battle of Salamanca. Incongruous to the surroundings, but filling men with
an enthusiasm for the task before them. From there he led us to the poets,
and we heard the note of chivalry that permeates the poems of Robert Service.
Again the band, in the midst of which the silvery notes of a bird were heard,
seeking to express its gladness of life. Then we listened to the magnificent
cadences of Tennyson, rich in their fulness of life and hope. Longfellow and
Robert Service again in their turn were made known to us, and "He was a
Gentleman," from "Ginger Mick," completed the selection.
The Padre had finished. But I looked round upon that gathering of men
and realised that here had depths been touched that augured well for the
days to be. They were finding themselves, unconsciously, in the nearness of
Nature, but the best was being developed within them.
A word of command, and quietly the troops formed in line, and moved
again to camp.
The Padre went with us, and we felt it had been good to be on those
heights with him.
And that is why I have said of him: He was a man—a man beloved.
—B. I. C.
The Atlantic.
The golden sun of countless ages
Descends beyond the swelling sea,
Bidding farewell to day's grey shadows,
Leaving night's darkness unto me.
The starry heavens, like a greeting smile,
Look down upon the watery graves,
Reflecting solemnity and world's perdition,
Upon the unceasing and angry waves.
Bold sea! untractable by the hand of man,
Whose fickle mind must bear humiliation to thy source,
What carest thou in the perdition of man's skill,
Or regard the hours of withering remorse.
—Gunner W. H. N.
HOMEWARD


The Captain's Table.
(Drawn by P.B.)


Somewhere in France.
If you can find your way to scattered trenches
Lost in the inky fastness of the night,
And never fall into the mud that quenches
All that remains of ardour for the fight.
If you can wade and never tire of wading
Knee deep through countless miles of clammy ooze;
If you can stand the constant serenading
Of German shells and not give way to booze.
If you can make a meal off plum and apple,
And wash it down with draughts of well stewed tea;
If you can force your brain and mouth to grapple
With mud-stained doles of cold maconochie.
If you can be polite when Minnie crashes
Amongst your sandbags at the break of day,
Or smile to watch a whiz-bang as it smashes
The work of weary hours in spiteful play.
If it amuses you to fight the Boches,
If you delight in rain and blood and clay;
If you can love the Staff in their goloshes,
And watch your best friends taken day by day.
If you are keen to try a fall with glory,
And count the horrors lost in victory won;
No matter if you're Socialist or Tory
You hurry up and take my place, old son.
—Sergt. J. M.
Try Smiling.
When the rations come up short,
And you don't get half you ought;
It's no use to raise a strafe,
That won't bring the other half.
Try smiling.
If your dinner you've begun,
And our playful friends, the Hun,
Drop a sausage on your plate,
Do not sing the hymn of hate.
Try smiling.
When you get the blooming hump
Carrying sandbags to the dump;
And to make things rather worse,
It comes on to rain, don't curse.
Try smiling.
When you feel as if the war
Might go on for ever more:
Just remember that it can't,
Then make up your mind it shan't.
Try smiling.
—Dingbat.
HOMEWARD


The Press.
In the days of Eve and Adam,
When the snake beguiled madam,
And Paradise was closed for good and
all;
When outside the gate they rested,
It was Adam who suggested
They should promulgate the story of the
fall.
Printing presses then were lacking,
But by dint of strenuous hacking
With a hammer and a chisel on a stone;
Signs and symbols they invented,
On a rock the tale was dented,
"Eve's eviction empties Eden. Snake
alone."
The idea, when once it landed,
Very soon became expanded,
Leaders, Adam wrote, while Eve was writ-
ing "Dress."
On, the work was gladly carried,
None were born, or died, or married.
But 'twas published in the "Palaeozoic
Press."
So the Press was duly founded,
And while plenteous rock abounded,
News was scarce and local talent even
less.
But the system proved most handy
When the stones were not too sandy,
Buildings leapt from last week's issue of
the Press.
Editorial joys were cloying,
It was really most annoying
When spring poets called with half a ton
of rhyme.
"Daily Mails" were used sa tiles,
And a man with last year's files
Could build himself a town from finished
"Times."
But the wheels of time unceasing,
Saw the Press's power increasing,
Pen and paper took the place of signs on
stone;
And the daily news was written,
Till with wooden type in Britain
William Caxton made a hand-press of his
own.
As the years kept slowly moving,
So the writer's art improving,
Brought the standard of perfection
seen herein.
And with reference to the latter,
We refer you to the matter
In the H.M.T. A 14's magazine.
—S.D.L.
HOMEWARD


Australia Bound.
A DAY ON H.M. CARRIER "A 14."
REVEILLE sounds! It is time
therefore for the Australia-
bound troops aboard H.M.
Carrier "Al4" to rise. In other words
"to show a leg." Now, rising promptly
is not one of the many excellent traits <
possessed by the average Australian
soldier.
As a matter of truth, this unpleasant ordeal—
rising—is carried out in a manner similar to the
traditional mode of progress attributed to a mythical
Mr. Brown's fabled cows. That is to say, there is
nothing simultaneous about the action. Rather it
is a prolonged series of spasmodic movements —as was the mode of progress
of the legendry bovine creatures already referred to. Nevertheless, a soldier
is not necessarily a "cow."
At last, however, after considerable urging, cajoling, and threatening,
principally by divers mess-orderlies, the last weary soul on each troop deck
has vacated and stowed his hammock. (It should be explained that a mess-
orderly is a voluntary soldier-rouseabout, and upon taking up his duties as
such is exempted from all others).
Morning ablutions are now in progress and of course, to paraphrase a
popular song, "There's a long, long line, a-waiting at the place where I wash."
Otherwise a queue.
At seven o'clock the buglers blow a general invitation for all hands
to proceed to the cook-house door." Everybody, of course, does not go. It
would be inconvenient to do so. The mess-orderlies alone comply, and what
is officially designated breakfast is brought by them to a hundred tables. I
say "officially designated," for it is called sundry other impolite and totally
HOMEWARD


unprintable names by those who consume, or attempt to consume, the inevit-
able "stew."
Immediately after this alleged meal, as after every other sumptuous
repast, all troops, excepting the mess-orderlies disperse to the upper or
promenade deck. The last named then proceed to clear away the grossly
insulted plates and mugs, and "tidy up" generally for the usual daily inspection.
Thus the day starts.
It is a generally agreed upon supposition that human nature demands
some form of occupation, be it mental or physical. On deck, therefore, in
groups, pairs or singly, men devise means to amuse themselves.
Some read. The reading matter involved ranging from the devotional
to the Deadwood Dick type.
Others write. Letters to those at home or to newly-made "Blighty
friends comprise the bulk of literary effort. Many play various card games.
A few indulge in a game of chess or draughts. The Red Cross Society and
the Y.M.C.A. provide the sundry requisites for the several forms of amuse-
ment just mentioned. All this time it is good to know that the ship is
making headway towards —home. "Be it ever so humble . ... "
There is, however, one important pastime —a game—which is not supplied
by either of the worthy institutions just referred to. The name of this!
game is "Lots," alias "House," and its requisites are supplied, and the game
itself controlled when played, by two or three enterprising young men who
may be called the promoters. It is a very popular game, for it necessarily
enables the player to have a mild "flutter" or gamble. Incidentally "House"
is the only gambling medium allowed by the Military Authorities, which fact
speaks voumes for their strict, puritanical morality.
The requisites for this exhilarating pastime are a set of special cards each
bearing three lines of numbers ranging from one to ninety; there being five
numbers on each line, or fifteen on each card. The remaining requisites are
ninety discs numbered, of course, from one to ninety. Apart from these last-
named, the only other "requisites" are the two promoters already referred to.
The latter must have an armour-plated gift of patience each, and in addition
must respectively possess voices like air raid warnings.
Each player takes a card. The numbered discs are then drawn from the
bag and loudly announced. If a player has a number on his card which
HOMEWARD


corresponds with a drawn number, he marks such number with a match or
similar counter. When he finds he has succeeded in drawing five numbers
in one line on his card, he shouts "House," and wins the game.
Sometimes it is agreed beforehand to play until someone has entirely filled
the fifteen numbers. Such a player is then the winner. Briefly, those are
the rules of "House." The particular manner in which the game is played
aboard this ship is as follows. The promoters choose a suitable time and
place, and then armed with their cards and bag of discs commence to announce
in stentorian voices, "Oo sez a 'buck-shee' card?" That is to say a free
gratis card; "buck-shee" being an Australian rendering of the Egyptian word
"bak-sheesh," meaning "Give alms."
They repeat their query time after time, and generally succeed in distri-
buting a score or so of "buck-shee" cards. The promoters give a money prize
to the winner of this first game. For all subsequent games the players them-
selves provide their own prizes, and in addition a percentage for the promoters.
Thus, for the next game a charge of threepence per card is collected by the
promoters, who give about four shillings and sixpence as a prize to the winner.
The odd sixpence they retain as commission from the five shillings collected
from twenty players. Once the cards are distributed and the money collected
the game starts. "She's a single line—worth 'arf a dollar; eyes down!" bellows
one of the promoters.
His partner immediately draws several numbered discs from the bag,
loudly proclaiming each number. Then our friend who just announced that
the prize was " 'arf a dollar" repeats each number to prevent mistakes. All
the players scan their cards. Several numbers have slang equivalents. These
have been invented because certain different numbers sound very much alike.
For instance, number seven might be mistaken by sound for eleven; fifteen
for fifty and so on. Therefore when the "dipper" brings sixty-six from the
bag he announces it at once as "clickety click," and is immediately mocked by
his partner.
Eleven may be thunderously next announced only to be echoed as "legs
eleven" by the interpreting partner. "Fifteen-one five." "Fifteen-one five"
comes the echoing bellow. And so the game proceeds. Many games of
"House" are in progress as I scribble. Assisted by the foregoing several
HOMEWARD


diversions, the morning passes away a little less tediously than would be
otherwise the case. Inspection is over. The bugle sounds for dinner. Dinner
passes. It defies description without resorting to profanity.
In the afternoon—when many have a nap if there is nothing else doing—
sometimes a concert is arranged. Many and varied are the "turns" which
volunteer their services. Soldier-professionals and aspiring amateurs appear
on the hatch, which serves as a platform. Artists whose offerings range from
female impersonations to a fiery rendering of "Eugene Aram" appear with
almost equal success. There are some good instrumentalists, together with
the inevitable ventriloquist and "doll." On other afternoons sports are held
to as wide an extent as shipboard conditions allow.
Card, chess and draught tournaments complete the amusement bill-of-
fare.
And so tea time arrives! And what a sumptuous repast it is!
At last it is over, and the ship's company pass the intervening hours
between tea time and bed time, in ways already described.
As a grand finale to the hilarities of the day, "Lights out" is sounded, and
the day ends as it began—with every man in bed, dreaming of Australia, to
which desirable place he is some two hundred miles nearer than when he
slothfully arose. Thus the homeward voyage proceeds.
—Na Poo.
Hard Questions.
Oh, tell me, does the setting sun e'er feel a sinking pain?
Why is (inform a "Puzled One") a weathercock so vane?
Do stars require a gun to shoot?
What makes a bucket pale?
What tailor makes the chimney's soot?
Who writes the comet's tail?
And why are dogs so lovable however much they whine?
Pray tell me, Mr. Editor, what makes the fir tree pine?
Why is a vessel's hind part stern?
Who sings the old hen's lay?
Please tell me, for I'd like to know, who wears the close of day?
HOMEWARD


The "Skite."
He made the girls in Blighty
Think that he was God Almighty,
And he went across to end the bleedin' war.
A private in position,
He'd refused to take commission,
Though offered him a thousand times or more.
Out where the heat is scorchin'
He'd worked and made a fortune,
On a station which he owned somewhere out back.
How hard he had to battle
To rear a million cattle
On a farm he owned somewhere near Barren Jack.
He was telling all the wenches,
He was straight out from the trenches,
He'd visited Westminster and the Tower.
In explaining Southern Crosses
He would talk of wild bush horses,
And make himself the hero of the hour.
I'm sure it would surprise you,
If I could put you wise to
This hero from the far-off Southern Cross.
He was what we call a bagman,
Or better known as swagman,
He was never known to ride a bloomin' horse.
He has no near relation,
And he never owned a station,
For working is a thing he never could.
He'd get in such a passion,
When he went to beg his ration,
If they asked him just to cut a bit of wood.
HOMEWARD


When he came to be enlisted,
They asked how he existed,
And he told them by the money that he owed.
The time they were embarking,
They thought that he was larking
When he asked if he might travel by the road.
He arrived in England duly,
Now I can tell you truly,
This chap has never been out to the war.
For Horseferry Road's his station,
He will stay there for duration,
And a better home he never had before.
In Australia you will think him
A full blown Anzac dinkum,
And a man who's fought his battles left and right.
While drinking wine and porter
He will talk of blood and slaughter,
And imagine he's the hero of the fight.
He will make you feel quite creepy,
Telling tales of Gaba Tepe,
And that bayonet charge across for Lonesome Pine.
In the pubs he will be painting,
All the barmaids will be fainting
When he draws the map of Flanders with his wine.
—Cpl. C. T.
Undue Familiarity.
A well-groomed but effeminate-looking A.A.M.C. Sergt. brought a man up to the
orderly room on the elastic charge of "Conduct to the prejudice, etc." On being asked
to state the charge, the Sergeant said that accused had approached him with a bewitching
smile and said, "Kiss me, Sergeant."
In concealing his amusement, the C.O. dismissed the case, on the ground that the
man must have intended it as a compliment to the Sergeant's appearance.
HOMEWARD


THE SHIP'S OFFICERS.
r -— t \ - xf ~~
Cs
f #
MEDICAL STAFF AND NURSING SISTERS.




The Aftermath.
By P. B.
HE Beenac Cricket Ground presented a gay appearance
¥ygßyg\M one sunny afternoon in early autumn. The local
£^Piinps Patriotic League had spread itself for the occasion,
having just received a considerable addition to its
funds from the proceeds of a bazaar recently held in
t^ie Mechanics' Institute. The Allies' flags and
streamers fluttered and waved in the slight breeze.
The country folk had turned out in force to
entertain the trainload of khaki that had come on their invitation to spend
the day. Knots of uniformed figures standing awkwardly together, loth to
leave each others' familiar companionship, were being gradually dispersed
by busy hostesses, and carried off in twos and threes to be introduced to
groups of equally shy country girls. Under the soothing influence of buns
and lemonade, their slight reserve was soon broken down, and the visitors!
settled themselves to enjoy the fresh air, pleasant surroundings and
companionship of the apple-cheeked damsels.
They were worn and weary, most of these poor chaps. Broken down
in health, perhaps short of a limb, or suffering still from the effects of a
serious wound. They were broken soldiers just recently returned from the
front, and had not yet lost that dazed sensation that had been with them
from the moment that they stepped ashore. Back home again after years
of stress and hardship, hustling from place to place, living for so long in the
unspeakable filth and misery of the trenches, with the ever-present menace
of death or torture. From that—to this!— Calm vale of content, peace and
plenty, smiling faces and kindly sympathy. No wonder they felt dazed,
poor chaps.
Two were standing a little apart from the rest, and were watching
the proceedings in a detached sort of way. Their eyes were fixed on a slight
HOMEWARD


young man in civilian clothes who was moving about amongst the men,,
chatting occasionally with a group, or assisting in the distribution of
cigarettes or refreshments.
"I wonder that chap has the hide to come to a show of this sort,"
remarked the taller of the two, who was called Bluey by his friends. Darkie
Town, his companion, scowled at the object of their remarks.
"It's an insult to us blokes, that's what it is," was his comment. " 'Course
he may have some good reason for not goin'," he continued; you cant
always judge by appearances."
"Oh! He's got a reason all right," remarked Bluey. Cold feet, or
p'r'aps he's married and makes that his excuse, which means there s two
cowards instead of one."
Further conversation was at this point cut short by the approach of
the object of discussion. On close inspection he proved to be a pleasant
looking young man. Clear grey eyes under somewhat heavy brows, a straight
nose, and thin well-formed lips that somehow gave a suggestion of strength
and self-repression.
"You chaps don't seem to be joining in the bun fight," was his first
remark. "Can I get you anything?"
"No, thanks, we don't want anything," replied Bluey coldly, scarcely
troubling to veil his feeling of hostility towards this pleasant looking shirker,
in his neatly fitting blue serge suit, and general air of well-dressed comfort.
"Well, look here," said the stranger confidentially, "I'm bored stiff with
this stunt and want to go back home. I wish you chaps 'ud come back
with me, and then I'll have some excuse to clear out. Will you? It's only
about a quarter of a mile from here, and I've some decent whisky and
cigars."
Little as the two men approved of their prospective host, they were not
proof against the attraction of an hour or two's rest in a cool house out
of the rather oppressive heat, apart from the other allurements he had
mentioned.
They strolled slowly down the dazzling village street, passed the Post
Office and Mechanics' Institute, and through the pine grove opposite the
one hotel that Beenac boasted, then turned sharply to the right over a
HOMEWARD


bridge which spanned a stream densely lined with wattles, then up a sharp
incline, which Bluey was forced to take in easy stages, as his injured knee
began to show signs of giving out. They answered numerous questions as
to what they intended to do after receiving their discharges, and also
regarding their experiences at the war, and what parts of the line they had
been in. At the top of the rise was a clearing across which a gate led
between an avenue of young trees, and then peeping through the gum saplings
showed the tiled roof of a quaintly picturesque cottage. They walked up
the drive and under a rose covered arch, past riotous beds of dahlias and
chrysanthemums, then up a couple of rugged stone steps and into the cool
recess of an ample porch. A rosy cheeked youngster of about five came
tearing round an angle of the house shouting "Hullo, daddy, mummy says—"
then stopped breathlessly, stared wide-eyed at the two soldiers, turned, and
ran back as quickly as he could.
"Here, Button," called his father, but a faint voice from the other end
of the path could be heard excitedly telling some invisible person about the
arrival of the two strange men.
• "Just make yourselves comfortable in these deck chairs," said their host.
"If you'll excuse me, I'll be back in a moment. By the way, my name is.
Bowen."
"Mine's Town," said Darkie, "and his is Newton," indicating Bluey with
his thumb.
"This chap has something to stay back for," said Darkie, when they
were alone, as he lay back luxuriously in his deck chair and gazed appreci-
atively at the peaceful surroundings. The sun-bathed garden stretched away
in a mass of gorgeous colours to a dark border of smoky grey gum saplings,
beyond which and showing through occasional clearings appeared the dark
blue of distant ranges. A small orchard laden with russet harvest bordered
the garden on one side, and below it again came crisply the rippling sound
of a running stream. "So he is married! That kid was a peach," he
continued.
A trim maid appeared at the door bearing a tray with a whisky tantalus,
soda, and glasses, and was followed up by Bowen with a large box of
Coronas.
5i
HOMEWARD


"My wife will be out in a few minutes," he said. "Help yourselves,
and don't stand on ceremony."
"You have an ideal home here," said Bluey.
Bowen was about to answer, when a woman appeared at the door
holding by the hand the little boy who shyly tried to efface himself in the
folds of her skirt. Bowen introduced her as his wife. She was calm and
cool, and placid and beautiful in a restful way. She had coppery hair and hazel
eyes, with the faintest suggestion of freckles on her skin, as if much of her
time was spent in the sunshine. In fact she seemed to embody the very
spirit of sunshine, as indeed did the whole family and surroundings. Here
was a veritable vale of peace and rest.
Bluey was feeling uncomfortable. "These people are shirkers and
cowards," he told himself. But a coward, according to all accepted theories,
should not be sunshiny and happy. Something was wrong, and his resent-
ment was still strong against them.
"What do you do to keep yourself occupied out here?" Darkie was
asking.
"Oh! the garden pretty well keeps me going, and then I have my work,
painting. I'm an artist, you know." This in response to Darkie's enquiring
glance. "Would you care to see some of my work."
He led the way through a door on the left into a big airy studio. A
great square window gave the necessary south lighting; through a small
leaded pane on the other wall was a charming glimpse of the orchard and
stream beyond. Bluey grunted internally. "Artist! eh—just the sorter
thing I'd have expected of him," he remarked to himself. Sketches were
piled up against the walls in profusion, and on an easel in the corner was
a large picture of a peaceful glade of wattles in soft evening light. The
sheer beauty of this canvas appealed even to the inartistic soul of Bluey,
and a pleasant half-hour was spent examining the numerous canvases which
were in various stages of completion.
Bowen again excused himself for a few minutes, and the two soldiers
were left alone in the great studio. Darkie pierced another cigar and
proceeded to light it, and Bluey's gaze was wandering idly round the room
when he espied a large pile of canvases which had not been previously seen
HOMEWARD


lying by themselves in a corner. He walked over to the pile, casually picked
one off the top of it, and immediately uttered a sharp exclamation.
It was a rough, unfinished sketch of a strip of shell-torn flat, fragments of
shattered gun carriages and half buried wire lay strewn about, gruesome
relics of torn human bodies lying in purple blackened patches of clotted
blood-stained ground. All the stark horror of those flats in Flanders was in
this sketch—the lowering rain-soaked sky, and the whole hideous horror-
stricken atmosphere of death and desolation. He looked round and found
Darkie peering over his shoulder. "By Jove! this chap's got some imagina-
tion," he said. Together, and feeling somewhat guilty, they looked furtively
through the remainder of the pile. It was all there, grim and horrible. Those
tortured nights when the drumfire breaks out along the line in a hideous
rumbling din, and the gas comes over in suffocating clouds, causing men to
crawl through the darkness, looking, in their helmets, like some evil creatures
from another world, with hands stretched waveringly like feelers in front of
them, and the clamour and stupefying confusion of an advance under the
barrage. It was all there.
With something like relief the two stood up when the last canvas had
been put back. It was too real to them. "Yes, that chap's got a hell of
an imagination."
They said good-bye formally to their host at the porch, and walked
slowly to the gate. Mrs. Bowen was standing there, hatless, the sunlight
turning her hair to gold. She was cutting back some Maman Cochet sprays
that were straggling over the path.
"I hope you've liked your visit to Beenac," she said. "Bob will have
enjoyed seeing some of the boys again. We don't see many people. Bob
can't do much flying around with that bullet in his lung. Oh, yes, didn't
you know. He had 19 months in France. Don't say anything to him aboutj
it, though; he hates to think he's not as fit as he ever was. Well, good bye;
do come again."
They walked slowly down the road with the rays of the setting sun
making a golden haze beyond the pine grove, and turning the whitewashed
walls a pale gold.
"I think I remarked that you can't always judge by appearances," said
Darkie.
"We'll have to leg it if we want to catch that coach," replied Bluey.
HOMEWARD


To Mine Dear Von.
Oh, Von, my leedle hero,
Ow broud I am ob you,
To zink you're fiden all day long,
Ond eaden dat awful stew.
I ofden dreams ob you by night,
Ond vish dot you ver ear;
But your leedle vace zo var away,
Is ever wid me, dear.
I gaze upon your votograph,
And mine arms about id entwine;
And I galls you "duck," and "dearie," too.
Oh! to zinks you'll someday be mine.
I knows do veil how prave you are,
You're as prave as prave can be;
Ond ven you come back do Berlin, Von,
Veel live near de Zeider Zee.
I vas read in de daily bapers
Vere de Zhermans vill vin de vaw;
Ond I 'opes doze ploomin Englishmen,
Vill drouble us no more.
Ond doze fullers you galls Orzstralians,
Vid a big 'at on dair 'ed;
Don't let dem gill mine leedle Von—
Now do mind vat I said.
Now I must glose mine leedle note
To mine Von zo sweet ond drue;
Ond remember all de appy daze,
I am dinkin, Von, ob you.
—Gunner W. H. N
HOMEWARD


German Theatre of Varieties.
(Previously Published.)
Proprietor: Manager:
Herr WILLIAM KAISER. WILHELM KAISER, Jun.
(Tel. 2 L.) (Tel. 2 L 2.)
COMING. COMING. COMING.
Farewell Visit before going to St. Helena.
PROGRAMME.
1. ULTIMATUM WILLIE, the greatest Comedian the world has ever
known, in all his latest successes:
"My Hopes Argonne." "My Aisne kind dearie O."
"Oh Lor-raine again." "Has anybody here seen Calais."
"Don't be Hun-happy." "Alsace, where art thou."
2. HERR GULLEM, and his Celebrated Company of Actors, in the Act
entitled "Al-lies."
Trio—"How ve Verdun," by Willie, sen., Willie, jun., and von Windyberg.
3. COUNT BRANCHOFF, the Diplomatic Dandy, in his world-famous
repertoire, including—
"Why I left Austria-Hungary."
"Tata Bel-grade," "We all love Sophia."
"Servia right, Servia jolly well right."
4. BARON VON WHOLEGG, the great Illusionist and Contortionist, in a
marvellous exposition of the "Scrap of Paper Trick," supported
by the renowned inventor, Count Ben Hardy.
5. The CROWN PINCH AND LOOT COMPANY, in the screaming farce:
"The Sham-Pain Shifters," an episode in the Pantechnicon of the'
German Army.
6. Engaged at enormous expense: COUNT VON PLUCK. First time out
of Europe, in the popular song, "Come Tsing-Tau me."
7. COUNT ROOF-FELL-IN, on a flying visit, in the great absurdity
"Can we Sea-plane," or "Berlin on the Spree."
8. ADMIRAL VON TRIPIT and HOPIT and Company, in the Stirring
Naval Drama, "DER TAG," or "The Luggage Label," in Four Acts:
Act 1. Von Tripit and his "gallant" men toasting "Der Tag."
Act 2. The same.
Act 3. The same again, please.
Act 4. The North Sea, June Ist, 1916: —"DER TAG."
Enter ADMIRAL JELLICOE—Exit GERMAN FLEET.
The whole to conclude with the stomach-stirring Cantata, entitled:—
"DEUTSCHLAND UNDER ALLIES."
"JA DEUTSCHLAND IN DER SOUP."
By the entire Company.


Entertainments.
ENTERTAINMENTS on the way were a huge success—those on the
troop decks arranged and controlled by an Amusements Committee,
and the organisation of the saloon productions in the hands of Lieut. McLaren
Morris as to stage productions, and Major Harbottle as to concerts. Few
"troopers" have had such programmes, and officers and men would endorse
the very highest appreciation it would be possible to put on paper.
Lieut. Morris brought a ripe knowledge and exceptional ability to bear
on the theatrical productions, and the performances in saloon and on troop
deck were of a class altogether above not only what could be expected on a
troopship carrying invalids, but superior to very many performances produced
ashore, where all properties and facilities are available. A sincere appreciation
is offered to the producer and the performers.
The Orchestra and Toy Symphony Band were "created" by Major
Harbottle, and this officer and Lieut. Bott and the other members mentioned
in the programmes hereunder provided music on quite 35 of the 45 days of
our journey.
From the ship's officers and staff—the captain down to the printer's devil
—there was a warm co-operation that made all the pleasure and entertainment
possible.
Beyond this reference space will not permit us to go, but the following
copies of programmes will record the main performances, and indicate those
who contributed on these and very many other occasions to the enjoyment
of what would otherwise have been a very tiring and difficult journey.
HOMEWARD


Entertainment
Held on board H.M.A.T. "Euripides,"
Monday, 25th February, 1918.
Doors opened at 8.30 p.m.
PROGRAMME.
1. Overture The Orchestra
2. Song .. "The Windmill" . Capt. Lloyd Davies
3. Song .. .. "Friend o' Mine" .. Sister Kendall
4. Song .. .. "Eileen Alannah" .. Dulcet Moore
5. Duet "Beauty's Eyes" Sister Kendall and Capt. Lloyd Davies
6. Entre-Acte The Orchestra
7. Farce Comedy—"THE DOCTOR'S PATIENTS"
Scene—Dr. Truelove's Reception Room.
Time—Morning.
Dr. Truelove (a mental specialist) .. Mr. F. Hewett
Dolly Truelove (his wife) Sister Odgers
Maria Tibbie (Dolly's Aunt) Sister Walsh
Jeremiah Pipkin (Frank's Uncle) . . Major Ellis
Dooley (an Irish servant) Lt. Sutcliffe
Dresses by Monte de Piete.
Scenery by "Chippy" and Assistants.
Lighting by The Well Deck Gas Company.
The Play produced by Lieut. Morris.
Carriages at 10 p.m.
Programmes: One Shilling each.
Proceeds towards Seamen's Orphanages.
HOMEWARD


Concert
Held on board H.M.A.T. "Euripides,"
Wednesday, 13th March, 1918.
In the Dining Saloon at 8.30 p.m.
PROGRAMME.
x. The Orchestra .. will have your toes beating time to the "New
Colonial March."
2. Capt. Lloyd Davies tells you what happens "When Bright Eyes
Glance." Beware!!
3. Mr. Morris .. .. will interpret two poems written on board by
Mr. P. F. Meredith.
Keep your seats while
4. Private A. Crane.. rags on the flute.
Don't interrupt
5. Mr. Conry .. .. no matter how bad his jokes may be—l owe
him money!
"Gems of Strauss."
6. The Orchestra .. would do this, and as they're four to one I
couldn't be expected to stop them, could I?
You will learn from
7. Sister Kendall .. of a "Friend o' Mine"; perhaps he's a friend
o' yours.
8. L-Cpl. Dwyer .. reminds us of Bairnsfather, until
9. The Orchestra .. bursts forth again with "Great Guns Selection"
—then you will all take a voice in
GOD SAVE THE KING.
HOMEWARD!


"Laugh and the World laughs with you!"
Concert
Held on board H.M.A.T. "Euripides,"
Saturday, March 16, 1918.
1 ,
° verture The Orchestra
Lt. Bott, Pte. O'Dwyer, Pte. Crane, Lance-Cpl. Stokes,
Pte. Langford.
Song .. "Chip of the Old Block" .. Mr. Sutcliffe
Recitation .. "The Last of the Light Brigade" .. Mr. Meredith
Duet .. "Nocturne" Capt. Davies and Sister Kendall
Selection .. "Haydn's Toy Symphony" .. The Orchestra
Major Harbottle and Assistants.
Son S "On the Staff' Mr. Conry
Sketch .. .. .. .. D r . Donald (Ship's Surgeon)
Song (Comic) .. .. .. .. Major Gwynne-Hughes
Entre-Acte The Orchestra
A Comedy in one Act, entitled:—
WHITEBAIT AT GREENWICH.
Scene—"The Buzzard's Flat." Time—Afternoon.
Benjamin Buzzard Mr. F. Hewett
Glimmer Mr. E. W. Gwynne
John Small Mr A Perray
Lucretia Buzzard Sister Walsh
■ • • • ■ • • • • ■ ■ Sister Farquhar
Scenery by P. J. Turpin (Ship's Coy.)
Properties by Mr. B. Harbord (Ship's Coy.)
Characters by "Dulcet Moore" (Ship's Coy.)
Dresses by "Promiscuous."
Lighting by Mr. McTurk (Ship's Coy.)
Play produced by Mr. Morris.
GOD SAVE THE KING!
H O MEWARD


A Soldier's Song.
"I KNOW WHERE HE IS."
(Composed by Eight Hoboes outside the Editor's cabin window.)
fi con molto expressione t .
<u
If you want to find the Pri-vate, know whdre he is, 1 know where lie is,
I know where ho lf you wuut to find the Private, 1 know whore he is.
up to his eyes in blood. I've seen him, I've seen him,
up to Ins eyes in blood. I've seen him, up to bis eyes in blood.
If you want to find the Corporal, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Corporal, I know where he is,
He's hanging out the old barb wire.
I've seen him, I've seen him hanging out the old barb wire,
I've seen him hanging out the old barb wire.
If you want to find the Sergeant, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is; /
If you want to find the Sergeant, I know where he is,
He's mopping up the Privates' rum.
I've seen him, I've seen him mopping up the Privates rum,
I've seen him mopping up the Privates' rum.
If you want to find the Quarter-master, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Quarter-master, I know where he is,
He's back in the transport lines.
I've seen him, I've seen him back in the transport lines,
I've seen him back in the transport lines.
HOMEWARD


If you want to find the Sergeant-Major, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Sergeant-Major, I know where he is,
He's crawling on his hands and knees.
I've seen him, I've seen him crawling on his hands and knees,
I've seen him crawling on his hands and knees.
If you want to find the Officer, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Officer, I know where he is,
He's down in the deep dug-out.
I've seen him, I've seen him down in the deep dug-out,
I've seen him down in the deep-dug-out.
If you want to find the Sister, I know where she is,
I know where she is, I know where she is;
If you want to find the Sister, I know where she is,
She's dressing the Diggers' wounds,
I've seen her, I've seen her dressing the Diggers' wounds,
I've seen her dressing the Diggers' wounds.
If you want to find the Padre, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Padre, I know where he is,
He's chasing us for church parade.
I've seen him, I've seen him chasing us for church parade,
I've seen him chasing us for church parade.
If you want to find the Doctor, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Doctor, I know where he is,
He's dishing out the number g's.
I've seen him, I've seen him dishing out the number g's,
I've seen him dishing out the number g's.
If you want to find the Provost-Marshall, I know where he is,
I know where he is, I know where he is;
If you want to find the Provost-Marshall, I know where he is,
He's minding the "Birds" at Warwick Square.
I've seen him, I've seen him minding the "Birds" at Warwick Square,
I've seen him minding the "Birds" at Warwick Square.
H O MEWARD


"Billy," the Captain's Canary.
"Billy," the Captain's canary and ship's mascot, has, up to the end of this
voyage, travelled 567,000 miles with Captain Williamson, covered by 22 round
trips from England to Australia and back again, and representing a bit better
than a trip to the moon and back. Billy's song prompts our poet.
TO "BILLY."
His colour's simple yellow,
His size is rather small;
His voice is very mellow,
He never mopes at all.
He's travelled o'er the ocean
Five hundred thousand miles;
Whate'er the vessel's motion,
Bill's always wreathed in smiles.
Mal-de-mer's unknown to Billy,
Though seas may roar and howl;
His menu isn't frilly,
But he's never heard to growl.
Whate'er to-morrow's bringing,
Or if the glass is low;
Like Major Hughes he's singing:
"Wherever he may go."
Historians' praise is zealous
Of the geese of ancient Rome;
But Billy isn't jealous,
Though the raging sea's his home.
Fritz may vow his hate on steam,
Submarines the seas may cram;
For the Prussian eagle's scream,
Billy doesn't give a damn.
Though my rhyme is rather silly,
And my muse is rather lame;
Here's good luck to you, Billy,
May it always be the same.
If you need a pal abeam you,
In the midst of war's alarms;
Just ring up the blooming emu
On Australia's coat-of-arms.
The " Crutchie's " Lament.
I'm tired o' these old sticks, mate,
I am, so 'elp ffie bob!
I'd like to chuck the blighters,
An' get another job.
It's up and down the gangway,
Along the bloomin' deck,
Which bein' very slipp'ry
Might cause a broken neck.
You goes to draw your boodle,
Up gangways three or four;
You gets ten paltry deenas,
Why can't they make it more?
They 'olds a boxin' contest,
The space is small, you see;
Some fellers might like fightin',
But blimey! not for me!
I'm tired o' these old sticks, mate;
I am, that's talkin' plain;
But many another "Digger"
Will ne'er come home again.
—"Crutchie."
H OMEWARD


Competitions.
COMPETITIONS of every known make and variety were promoted
throughout the ship, and the appended lists show the results. The
Amusements Committee organised and carried them through, and kept things
going right up to the moment anchor was dropped off the coast of Australia.
The Committee were:—Major Harbottle, Padres Le Maitre and Dains,
Lieuts. Foord and Israel, Rev. H. M. Riley, Sergt. Maher and Gunner
Warnkin. Mr. Riley, who represented the Australian Y.M.C.A., was
indefatigable, and the troops owed much more to him than was realised.
The publication of the results limits our reference to the organisers, but we
desire to assure the Committee of the everlasting gratitude of all aboard for
the efforts so successfully made to fill in the time-gaps that usually make a
long sea voyage so difficult.
Results:—
First Competitions.
INTER-DECK WINNERS.
Darts .. .. .. .. ..Pte. O'Donovan, "M" Deck.
Wall Quoits .. .. .. .. .. „ Mannix, "0" Deck.
Euchre .. .. .. .. .. .. Ptes. Morrissey and Perrin, "M" Deck.
DECK COMPETITIONS.
"B" DECK. "E" DECK.
Chess Pte. Webber. Chess Pte. McConnell.
Euchre .. .. [ " ent - Dominoes .. .. Cpl. Sims.
„ Rose. Wall Quoits .. .. Pte. Knight.
C DECK. Darts „ Corner.
Euchre .. .. ( Pte. McKinlay. Euchre .. .. (Cpl. Matthews.
( „ Nicholls. I Pte. Turner.
Dominoes .. .. „ Orchard. Draughts McConnell.
HOMEWARD!


"F" DECK. "O" DECK.
Chess Pte. Williams. Euchre (Pte. Leslie.
_ , ( „ Stephens. I „ Robson.
Euchre .... \ ' . „
( „ Cracknel!. Feather-weight .. ist Pte. Warton.
Draughts Williams. 2nd McAuley.
"M" DECK. Light-weight .. .. ist „ Macdonald.
„ , i Pte. Morrisey. 2nd „ Mawhiney.
Euchre
( „ Perrm. Welter-weight .. ist „ Swain
Draughts Mills, T. H. 2nd Leslie.
Dominoes Perrin, A. M.
Darts „ O'Donovan, J. Cock Fighting Pte. Macdonald, "B."
Wall Quoits O'Donovan, J.
Chess „ Adlam, G. B. Apple-in-Water „ Galbraith.
Second Competitions.
INTER-DECK WINNERS.
Games.
Bridge Ptes. McKay & Nicholls, "C."
Cribbage ,> Thompson & Gilmour, "K."
■Whist » Armstrong & Dowell, "A."
Quoits •• ». Alberry "O."
Wall Quoits „ Townend, "O."
Darts >» McConnell, "E."
Dominoes ~ Whiteley, "F."
Draughts „ McConnell, "E."
Chess .. Williams, "F."
Bun Eating „ Flanagan, "O."
Boxing.
Feather-weight ist Pte. Lavelle, O.
2nd „ Krantzcke.
Light-weight ist » Tufnell, O.
2nd „ Warton.
Welter-weight .. . .. ist „ Macdonald, O.
2nd „ Armstrong.
Middle-weight , Swain & Hill (draw), "O."
HOMEWARD


%£<£, r-s Jggf
THE OFFICERS ABOARD.




DECK COMPETITIONS.
"A" DECK. "F" DECK.
Bridge ..Ptes. Brian and Inman. Dominoes Pte. Whitely.
Whist . „ Dowell and Armstrong. Chess .. .. „ Williams.
Cribbage „ Parker and Auld. Draughts .. „ Williams.
Draughts „ Blanchfield. Bridge .. „ Buckman and Dight.
Whist .. .. „ Williams and Dight.
"B" DECK. Cribbage .. „ Jones and Small.
Chess .. .. Pte. Webber. Quoits .. „ Cole.
Draughts .. „ Sylvester. "G" DECK.
Whist .. .. „ Dixon and Davis.
Cribbage .. „ Hoffman and Ryan. Bfidge Ptes. Wilks and Richardson.
Bridge .. .. „ Jones and Simons. "M" DECK.
"C" DECK Deck Quoits Pte. Madden.
Wall Quoits „ Prince.
Bridge ..Ptes. McKay and Nicholls. Draughts .. „ Mills.
Cribbage . Pte. Wood. Chess.. .. „ Tickle.
Whist ..Cpl. Robinson and Dominoes.. „ Adlam.
Pte. Orchard. „ . ,
Darts .. .. „ McCarthy.
"E "DECK Whist .. .. „ McCarthy and Keen.
Bridge .. „ Olsen and Watts.
Wall Quoits .. Pte. Curtin, A. Cribbage .. „ McCarthy and Madden
Dominoes .. .. „ Pepper, F. W.
Chess „ McConnell, J. "O" DECK.
Darts „ McConnell, J. Draughts .. Pte. Nixon.
Deck Quoits .. „ Rigg, W. Dominoes .. „ Galbraith.
Draughts .. .. „ McConnell, J. 3 eck Quoits „ Alberry.
whist „ Mathews, C. Wall Quoits „ Townend.
„ Vinnicombe, W. Bridge .. „ Buckland and Lacke.
Crib „ Hunter, K. Cribbage .. „ Cooper and
„ Gallagher, W. Gnr. Macdonald.
gjjjgg „ Rice. Whist .. „ Smith and Johnson.
„ Vinnicombe. Darts .. .. „ Townend.
Guessing Competition.
Two "T's," two "O's," two "L's," and an "E," put them together and
spell them to me.
NOTE.—As this is our first and only issue, we will not be able to announce the
result. We pocket the prize, and put "Adjutant" as our guess.—Ed.
HOMEWARD


Limericks.
AS a result of a Competition open to the whole ship, some hundreds of
efforts were made. The first and second prizes went to Lieut.
McDonald and Sergeant Vale respectively, and in addition to their verses
some others suitable for publication in a magazine claiming a degree of
respectability are presented. Certain weird and woolly ones are witheld.
FIRST PRIZE.
There's a darling old "Digger" called "Gwynne,"
Some interesting yarns "Hughes" to spin;
But he's been in a funk
Since his tale of the "Monk,"
For the sisters are shocked at his sin.
SECOND PRIZE.
From Blighty back to the Antipodes
We sailed on the good ship "Euripides."
With men quite unfit,
Who had all done their bit
To punish those Hunnish stupidities.
« * #
On a transport going home to Australia,
The limericks were a horrible failure;
You ask for the reason,
You can search for a season,
But "Euripides" is the word that will nail yer.
« * &
A born actress on board named Lucretia,
In a drama was quite a good feature;
But one thing was amiss,
She recoiled at the kiss
Of Glimmer, the horrible creature.
HOMEWARD


There was a young man named Riley,
The troops they spoke of him highly;
He's a credit, they say,
To the Y.M.C.A.,
And he knows the work entirely.
it ■» 2
There was a ship called the "Euripides,"
Which sailed on the big and the little seas;
Her camouflage of paint
Made the "U" boats all faint,
To the joy of the troops who sleep-at-ease.
® 2 #
When in England, love became chronic,
He, affected, moved south for a tonic;
Then sailed o'er the seas
On the "Euripides,"
And she came on in the "lonic."
2 #
There was a young soldier so gay,
For a trip left his ship in the bay.
Went aboard the "lonic" from feelings platonic,
Now he's sorry, and feels like a jay.
2 2 *
Did it Ever Occur to You?
(Not a Limerick.)
Gardens, Weymouth, moonlit night;
Lovers talking, life seemed bright.
Youth embraces, grows more bold,
Tells the story ever told.
Gentle maiden hangs her head,
Sadly smiled, but kindly said,
"Ausie, dear, so long, good bye,
"I'm not smitten, and I'm shy."
« » «
There's a man on the troopship, I wager,
Whose appearance never fails to enrage yer;
He startles you up from your sweet morning doze,
As he slushes the deck with his bally old hose,
But, by jingo! he's the bloke that can raise yer.
HOMEWARD


'Tis a mob of homesick Kangaroos—
Seen enough of Fritz, whizbangs and ooze;
Some are minus a wing,
Or with eye in a sling,
But 'tis hard to find one with the blues.
-X X «
"Rounds!" cries the S.M. each day;
The officers pass on their way
For inspections severe,
With a word of praise here,
Which makes the boys keener, they say.
X » X
On a boat called the "Euripides,"
Some "Diggers" when on the high seas
Interfered with the stores,
Quite forgetful of laws,
But in future they'll not forget these.
X «-
Honk! Honk! Honk! The alarm!
Everyone fearless and calm;
But the "crutchies" are slow
Coming up from below,
I'm thankful my wound's in the arm.
-X- X «
The sailing ship asks for the breeze;
In a "U" boat the Hun daren't sneeze.
But we needn't care,
We're bound to "get there"
With steam, on the "Euripides."
H O MEWARD


Australians.
(Written after hearing a wealthy merchant speak disparagingly of Australia.)
We are not cotton-spinners all, but some love England and honour her yet.*'
We stand on the shores of Durban,
And watch the transports go,
To England from Australia,
Hurrying to and fro;
Bearing the men of a nation
Who are heroes to the core—
To stand or fall by the Mother-land,
And they're sending thousands
more.
We've watched the ships returning
With the crippled and the maim,
With limbs that trail and falter—
Their's an immortal name!
The deathless name of "Anzac"
That thrills from pole to pole,
The remnants of the heroes
On the long and glorious roll.
And now in their tens of hundreds
Came the men to fill their ranks,
And what can we do to show them
Our love, our pride, our thanks.
We can't do much (I own it),
But give them a passing cheer,
While the real elite beat a shock retreat-
Why, they saw one drinking beer.
He's a better man than you are,
You dear teetotal saint;
You do not drink—you will not fight—
What wonderful restraint!
We stand on the shores of Durban,
For we're not all made like you;
And the glorious name of "Anzac"
Thrills us thro' and thro'.
But all we can do is to cheer them,
And throw them a trifle from
shore;
We're not millionaires (like some
are),
Or, perhaps we would try to do
more.
They're coming in tens of thousands,
And here's to their honour to-day;
Here's to the sister Dominion
Who is showing us the way.
—Miss E. M. Campbell,
Durban, S.A.
H O MEWARD


Pips from Papers
(Published en Route).
Dingbats Daily.
"Honi Soi Qui Maly Pense." Published When Ready.
LITERARY ADVERTISEMENTS.
Thorne's "Treatise on Military Dress." Given away to Orderly Officer daily.
"How the Artillery Won the War." By "Sub." Price, 3d.
"How to Write a Leading Article." By "Senior Officer." Price, 1/6.
Spurs need not be worn.
"How to Dodge Duty and Join the Editorial Staff." By "One Who Knows.
Price, rod.
"How to Hypnotise the Opposite Sex." By Professor Wilcock. Price, 4%d.
"BRIDGE, and How to Play." By "Isaiah." Price, 7d.
"POKER." Taught by a Learner. Price, 5/-.
SHORT SPASMS.
* When knights were bold they wore their armour,
But see our knight in his pyjama;
The saints could not him surpass,
For he looks as bold as brass;
To him we therefore raise our hat,
For he possesses what others lack.
A WOULD-BE MEDICO.
A victim of 94 fights (or nights) paraded before Hector Mac to be
medically examined.
After close investigation it was decided by this medical expert that our
flying (or lying) man was suffering from "Wun Lung," swollen utensils, and
hyper-aggressive tendencies in the circumambient close.
Needless to say, Hector Mac is a lawyer and not a doctor.
Our Editor advises the patient to go ashore, and have the matter attended
to before getting much worse.
HOMEWARD


AN AWKWARD PREDICAMENT. (In Verse).
Time, 11.30 p.m.
Place—dark corner sun deck.
I didn't know what to do,
No, I didn't know what to do;
For there they laid with their feet in the air,
Nobody else but your humble was there:
Oh! Oh! Oh! said I to me.
Then I closed both my eyes—wouldn't you?
Then I took off my coat and I covered them up,
'Cause I didn't know what to do.
(This may be sung in public without fee or license).
The Saloon Scandal.
Edited by General Nuisance, D.A.C., M.G.C., D.H.Q., M.U.G.
We're out for fun—no harm intended,
Whate'er we say, don't be offended.
MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD IN SMOKEROOM, 7/2/18.
The C.O. opened with a long and interesting address, followed by many
requests and references to damaging ship's property, detached lifebelts, etc.
He then introduced the main object for which the meeting was convened,
and laid down the concrete formation, including a Chairman, thus leaving
the rules of debate generally misunderstood by the assembly.
Moved by the Y.M.C.A., seconded by a very heavy gentleman—"That a
committee be formed of all hands on board, with power to add, with a view
to promoting sports on the voyage."
Several amendments were lost overboard. Motion carried.
Moved by the Chairman, seconded by everyone—"That the motion be
rescinded." Carried unanimously. (Cheers.)
Moved by a very hairy gentleman, seconded by. the Y.M.C.A.—"That
the original motion be accepted." Carried unanimously. (Loud cheers.)
The meeting closed in peace and harmony to allow the bar to open.
—Yarra De Luxe.
HOMEWARD


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Muldoon: Yes, we have heard of fish knives being used for bread and butter,
but that was long ago.
Dinkum: Bet —Soup was correct. The M.O. did at first say tea, but an
analysis conclusively proved it to be soup—good, too.
Slim Jim: Yes, birds usually have two wings, but not in all cases do they
fly; for instance, the emu.
Dirty Dick: Certainly, baths can be obtained on board.
Atheist: Yes, you will have to remain upended until the Padre cooes the
dinner blessing.
Sandy Blight: Quite true; a cigarette can be seen for a mile and a half, but
it strains your eyesight. Luminous wrist watches are visible for four
miles.
Ignoramus: (i) Oh, no, H.M.T. "Euripides" is not French for tooth-pick?
(2) Nuts do not precede the soup.
Sister Angela: We do not like to say who is the best-looking man on the ship.
It must be terrible to be tied up in your position.
Blue Eyes: Certainly, the Padre can perform the marriage ceremony on board.
If he refuses the ship's commander can tie two into one.
Astonished: Oh, no. J. C. Jerusalem is not doing physical jerks; he is just
rehearsing a part for the forthcoming sketch.
THINGS WE SHOULD LIKE TO KNOW.
Who is the best-looking man on the ship?
Will the Adj. continue to make after-dinner announcements?
When the disorderly-room will catch the spring cleaning complaint?
The name of the book from which the Adj. learnt to play bridge?
What it feels like to be an hour late for an M.C.?
The name of the officer who does not make post-mortems on the last bridge
hand?
HOMEWARD


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Finest Fattening Tropical Hair Oil. Guaranteed to make hair grow on a troop
deck. Used to grow camouflage for gun positions in the great war.
Two good Camouflaged Megaphones. Will exchange same for second-hand
Ice-cream Suit.
The occupiers of deck space after dinner will let same for second house, good
positions, well sheltered and isolated. Apply to "Crowded Out."
For Sale, best make Turner and Douglas Bicycles, fitted with 40m. frames.
Inspection invited.
Rafts (untried), guaranteed to carry large numbers.
TO THE EDITOR.
r ' a g°°d churchman I should like you to use your influence to
infuse a little more religious fervour into our daily routine. I therefore
suggest that the Ship's Captain be approached (d this typewriter) with
a view to having the following hymns played on the dinner gong.
Reveille: Christians, awake!
Breakfast: Meekly wait and murmur not.
Orderly Room: For those in peril on the sea.
C.O.'s Inspection: When he cometh.
Dinner: Come, ye thankful people, come.
Physical Jerks: Go, labour on.
Lecture: Tell me the old, old story.
Tea: Praise God from whom all blessings flow.
Last Post: All are safely gathered in.
Lights Out: Peace, perfect peace.
Officers' Mess: Another little drink wouldn't do us
any harm.
Yours, etc.,
Robert E. Lee.
HOMEWARD


To "Her."
We've seen new lands since we crossed the foam,
And peoples strange to the folks at home;
But now we're nearing our native loam—
And the end of the Great Adventure.
We've seen strange sights, and girls a few—
Of England, France, and Egypt, too,
And now we're coming back to you—
At the end of the Great Adventure.
To our constancy we gladly swore,
If this we've kept to, less or more,
Is this return to our country's shore
All the end of the Great Adventure?
—S. D. L.
HOMEWARD


H.M.A.T. Al4, "Euripides."
Officers and Men on Board.
SHIP'S STAFF
Lieut.-Col. A. C. Fewtrell, D.5.0., O.C. Troops Captain O. Matthews - - Quartermaster
Captain A. Tootell - - - . Adjutant C.-Rev. E. Le Maitre - Chaplain (R C )
Lieut. P. W. Aspinall - - - Asst. Adjt. C.-Rev. J. W. Dains - Chaplain (Meth.)
MEDICAL STAFF
Col. T. M. Martin, C.M.G. - - - S.M.O. Major C. B. Pym M 0
Major R. E. Dunn M.O. Major D. Gwynne-Hughes - - . U .O.
Captain A. S. Johnson - - - M.O.
NURSING STAFF
Sister Scott, A. (in charge) - - A.A.N.S. 2310 Dvr. Hardy, S. P. - 6th Field Amb
Sister Farquhar, A. G. - - - A.A.N.S. 5010 Pte. Le Griflen, E. J. O. A.A.M C Dtls
Sister Campbell, L. - - - - A.A.N.S. 14245 Pte. Lehane, D. - 9 th Field Amb.
taster Kendall, E. J. - - A.A.N.S. 14363 Pte. Lenehan, H. E. 2nd AAH
Staff-Nurse Craven, M. E. - - A.A.N.S. 4195 Pte. O'Neill, A. S. - s tli Field Amb.'
Staff-Nurse Pike, E. - A.A.N.S. 45152 Pte. Fredrickson, G. E. - Ist AG H
Staff-Nurse Walsh, P. - . . A.A.N.S. 10324 Pte. Perrow, E. S. - - 3rd AG H
Staff-Nurse Odgers, V. - - - A.A.N.S. 13361 Pte. Thompson, J. - AA M C Dtls
Staff-Nurse Robinson, F. A. - - A.A.N.S. 9004 Pte. Watts, W. A. - sth Field Amb!
Staff-Nurse Smith, E. - - - A.A N S 13672 Pte. Woodcroft, E. C. - 2nd A.G.H.
Miss Raff, D - - . - Q.A.I.M.N.S.R. 13733 L.-Cpl. Anderton, W. W. - Ist A.A.H.
Miss Keogh, E. - - - Q.A.I.M.N.S.R. 24 L.-Cpl. Wood, R. - 1 S th Field Amb.
Miss Ricketts M - - Aust. Trained Nurse 18632 Pte Adams, W. J. - A.A.M.C. Dtls
12279 S.-Sgt. Crimmins, J. E. lothFieldAmb. 2426 Pte. Brown, C. - - 9 th Battn,
12684 Sgt. Wearne, H. - 11 th Field Amb. "937 Pte. Cox, M. M. - 9th Field Amb.
1061 Cpl. Pickles, J. W. - 7th Field Amb. 361 Pte. Curryer, G. L. - - Ist A.A.H.
2 937 L.-Cpl. Hall, TD L. sth Field Amb. 7 22 Pte. Quigley, B. - - 25th Battn.
7 2 L.-Cpl. Mark, J. M. - Ist Field Amb. 18663 Pte. Webster, R. - A.A.M.C. Dtls.
2514 L.-Cpl. Taaffe, W. A. A.A.M.C. Dtls. 6494 Pte Dihm, H. J. F. - 7th Battn.
2821 Pte. Copland, S. - A.A.M.C. Dtls.
HOMEWARD


INVALID OFFICERS.
Lt.-Col. E. N. Waters, V.D.
Lt.-Col. L. J. Hurley, C.M.G.
Major F. Harbottle, D.S.O.
Major J. R. Ellis
Captain H. C. Home
Captain R. S. Rankin
Captain A. C. Hinton
Captain W. F. Eather
Captain L. St. J. Allan, M.C.
Captain E. L. Da vies, M.C.
Captain R. C. Baillieu, M.C.
Captain C. A. Wittkopp, M.C.
Captain R. C. Knight, M.C.
Captain C. Durham.
Captain I. T. G. Turnbull, M.C.
Lieut. F. S. Conry
Lieut. A. S. Stow
Lieut. B. J. Boles
Lieut. E. L. Wilcock, M.C.
Lieut. J. McL. Morris
Lieut. H. W. Bott
Lieut. A. J. Fraser, M.C.
Lieut. G. H. Barton
Lieut. R. Walker
Lieut. E. F. McDonald
Lieut. G. H. Fredman
Lieut. E. W. Gwynne, M.C.
Lieut. R. R. Casboulte
Lieut. L. P. Israel
Lieut. B. T. Barnes
Lieut. L- McP. Heron
Lieut. J. B. Mair
Lieut. W. Shaffrey
Lieut. F. H. Coad
Lieut. R. B. T. Nix
Lieut. H. J. E. Veal
Lieut. J. C. Donaldson
Lieut. C. H. James
Lieut. E. G. Devison
Lieut. G. H. Wilkins
Lieut. A. Perray
Lieut. F. H. Allmond
Lieut. C. H. L. McGregor
Lieut. H. N. GrifSn
Lieut. G. C. Bowman
Lieut. A. L. Watson
Lieut. B. W. P. Webster
Lieut. P. R. P. Meredith
Lieut. J. R. Y. Bartlam
Lieut. F. J. McKeon
Lieut. H. S. Seward
Lieut. R. S. Sword
Lieut. J. G. McGibbon
Lieut. L. R. Andrews
Lieut. J. P. Kerr
Lieut. A. Callum
Lieut. T. H. Jackson
Lieut. J. T. Tarn
Lieut. A. J. Atkinson
Lieut. H. L. Kent
Lieut. B. I. de C. Cavanagh
Lieut. W. R. Harrison
Lieut. A. A. Bock
Lieut. J. T. Foord
Lieut. W. L. King
Lieut. A. B. Wadswortli
Lieut. N. E. Candy
Lieut. H. A. Clow
Lieut. E. C. H. Haxby
Lieut. C. E. Clarke
Lieut. L. H. Foote
Lieut. E. Dawes
Lieut. E. B. Waller
Lieut. M. H. Thomas, M.C. (R.P.A )
2nd Lieut. C. S. Suteliffe
2nd Lieut. W. T. Poynton
2nd Lieut. H. A. Hull
2nd Lieut. H. E. Miller
2nd Lieut. J. R. Albrey
2nd Lieut. H. J. Armstrong
2nd Lieut. T. J. Ballantyne
2nd Lieut. A. C. Hall
2nd Lieut. L. E. Walker
2nd Lieut. V. Francis
2nd Lieut. S. R. Adams
2nd Lieut H. Allen
Mr. Riley, H. M., Y.M.C.A. Representative
Mr. McArthur, Aust. Red Cross Representative
76
HOMEWARD


INFANTRY
7th INF. BDE. H.Q.
108 Pte. Darnell, James Harry
9th INF. BDE. H.Q.
229 Pte. White, Thomas Charles
15th INF. BDE. H.Q.
309 C.Q.M.S. Stafford, Thos.
Ist BATTALION.
6212 Pte. Alderton, Stanley Robert
226 Pte. Bjorkdahl, Carl
5341 Pte. Brandon, Charles Snowden
6969 Pte. Dodds, John Tulloch
635 0 D.-Cpl. Doyle, Thomas Joseph
6980 Pte. Firth, Harry Victor
6260 Pte. Hezlitt, Herbert James
506 Pte. Honeyman, Claude
6755 Pte. Jenkins, Frederick Daniel
3834 Pte. Kain, Edw. Sidney
3842 Pte. King, Frederick
3318 Pte. King, McCarthy
453 Pt e - Diuton, George William
511 D.-Cpl. Duders, Edw. Michael
4452 Pte. Martin, Noel Henry
1802 Pte. Pierce, James Fergus
6307 Pte. Shaw, Donald Edw.
399 Pte. Tod, George Duggon
7062 Pte. Turner, George
3127 Pte. Voysey, William
3513 Pte. Ward, William Arthur
4485 Pte. Woodley, William Alfred
2nd BATTALION.
4130 Sgt. Amey, Arthur Miller
6459 Pte. Austin, Arthur
717 Sgt. Bourke, James Emmett
822 Cpl. Brown, David Thomas
6729 Pte. Clarke, Elton Howard
616 Pte. Dow, David
7094 Pte. Edward, James
3788 Pte. Hamer, Thos.
6993 Pte. Jackson, Harry Deslie
2806 Pte. Dang, Dloyd
7270 Pte. Diddle, Samuel
534 C.S.-M. Maddigan, Clarence Claud
655 Pte. Magginness, Hy. James
768 Pte. Murray, James
2954 Pte. McCabe, John
6292 Pte. McCormick, James Albert
2832aa Pte. Osberg, Carl Edw.
Pte. Price, Norman Robert
5177 Pte. Plummer, Richard
6814 Pte. Pattison, George Edw.
2864 Pte. Ridley, James Daniel
6581 Pte. Smith, Richard
4268 a Pte. Smith, Deo. Francis
6090 Pte. Spurr, Harold Henry
1057 Cpl. Towers, Clarence
6843 Pte. White, J. F.
6842 Pte. Wall, James William
7054 Pte. Walsh, Walter William
6848 Pte. Weber, Guido Fritz L. C.
3rd BATTALION.
2777 Pte. Asquith, James Marshall
6463 Pte. Birkett, Sydney Wilfred
1589 Pte. Brown, Sydney
6228 Pte. Butler, Frank
3043 D.-Cpl. Duckworth, Horace Victor
1120 Pte. Plarvey, Herbert Victor
2613 Cpl. Hunter, Albert Frederick G.
6 393 Pte. Jacques, William Arthur
1780 Pte. Johnson, A.
3124 Pte. Kelly, R. Stanley
7034 Pte. Martin, Norman Dee
2885b Pte. McAlpine, Manson Davies
1163 C.Q.M.S. Pearce, John Fowler
6088 Pte. Rawnsley, Thomas William
2778 Cpl. Robertson, William
7321 Pte. Seymour, Harry
T 433 D.-Cpl. Smith, Sydney Harold
5755 Pte. Webber, Thomas Francis
4th BATTALION.
1493 Pte. Baikie, Robert
3028 Pte. Burrows, Arthur Belmont
5666 Pte. Coffey, Thomas
1 733 Sgt. Collins, Percy
6258 Pte. Delaney, Thomas Joseph
474 Pte. Farndell, Thos.
758 Dvr. Fusedale, Reginald Victor
4024 Gnr. Keen, Andrew James
2683 Pte. Damb, Walter Sidney
684 Cpl. Damont, Ed. Thomas
6284 Pte. Darkin, Eeslie
6760 D.-Cpl. Morley, Percy John
2247 Pte. O'Connor, John Joseph Fredk
6066 Pte. Pannett, George
6780 Sgt. Parker, Robert
2 75 2 Sgt. Schofleld, Aubrey Arthur
HOMEWARD


2843 Pte. Scotman, Jack
5776 Pte. Stent, John Gouldburn
6553 L.-Cpl. Still, Frank Sidney
2446 Pte. Susans, Alfred Charles
2829 Sgt. Sutton, Edwin James
7072 Pte. Waygood, Lloyd William
5789 Pte. Whittle, Richard John
sth BATTALION.
105 1 Pte. Barrett, Wallace
649 Pte. Benari, Albert Andrew
11 10 Pte. Clement, William Arthur
960 Pte. Dodds, Franklin James
858 Pte. Dowling, Michael Joseph
87 Dvr. Forbes, William
544 a Pte. Garner, Walter Charles Thomas
101 Pte. Gordon, Albert Victor
449 C.S.-M. Hall, Herbert Joseph
6503 Pte. Hanbury, Albert Ernest
2184 Sgt. Madden, Archibald
1576 Pte. Moore, Percy Charles
1080 Cpl. McKenzie, Samuel
6637 Pte. Reid, Keith
7308 Pte. Rankin, William
6568 Pte. Richardson, James Lewis
3388 Pte. Richardson, Lowen Hutton
6892 Pte. Small, Thomas
7079 Pte. Stephen, James Mair
704b Pte. Ward, Joseph Patrick
6657 Pte. Watt, Robert Tamar
5701 Pte. Williams, Arthur Gordon
6th BATTALION.
6709 Pte. Adlam, George
289 Pte. Bryan, Edward Patrick
4475 Pte. D'Arcy, John
6989 Pte. Dickson, Frank William
1661 Pte. Doenau, Harry
6492 Pte. Fullgrabe, William Henry
6768 Pte. Galbraith, Neil Campbell
3794 L.-Cpl. Hester, Victor
2642 Pte. Landt, Ernest Raymond
1 15 3 Pte. Miller, Arthur Edward
3393 Pte. McMahone, Thomas John
7281 Pte. McWiggan, William
971 Sgt. Nelson, Carlyle
596 Pte. O'Dwyer, Frank Joseph
232 Pte. Ogden, William Jas.
7063 Pte. Osier, George Edward
237 Pte. Poulter, Percy John
6832 Pte. Powell, Arthur
2028 Pte. Riley, William
3127 Sgt. Robinson, Robert Gooding
5201 Pte. Styles, Joseph
2050 Pte. Williams, Henry Skellett
7351 Pte. Worladge, Percival Montague
7th BATTALION.
6215 Pte. Alberry, A. W. P.
229 Pte. Bowers, Leslie
6707 Pte. Blake, Francis Thomas
417 A Pte. Cass, Peter
6743 Pte. Collison, Victor Ernest Robert
813 Sgt. Cooper, Leslie Francis
2179 Pte. Halliday, Clarence Eric
6764 Pte. Hunt, George
6287 Pte. Issell, Ernest Albert Charles
327 L.-Cpl. Jobling, Ernest
6550 Pte. McFarlane, Alexander
7522 Pte. McNamara, Michael
7548 Pte. Reynolds, David
719 Pte. Shacklock, Leonard John
6824 Pte. Southwall, Frederick Patrick
6821 Pte. Spencer, Percival
269 Pte. Summers, Albert William
7106 Pte. Teggeth, Charles Brooks
2827 Pte. Waldren, Alfred George
7563 Pte. Whitburn, H. C.
6944 Pte. Weir, Stephen Willson
5240 Pte. Williams, Francis
Bth BATTALION.
870 Cpl. Burns, Thomas Roy
6236 Pte. Cook, James
6128 Pte. Dennis, C. H.
5085 Pte. Fitzgerald, Frank
6265 Pte. Gallagher, Martin
6267 Pte. Gull, Joseph Stephen
903 Cpl. Holly, Jack
6783 Pte. Kennedy, William
5719 Pte. Lynch, James Francis
360 Pte. Matthews, Lancelot
7027 Pte. McCarthy, John
862 Pte. McQuade, John Peter
305 Pte. Mills, William Wright
4298 Pte. Parker, Herbert John
564 Pte. Pope, Bruce Alexander
3231 Pte. Powell, William James
406 Pte. Quinn, Patrick
2761 Cpl. Rattle, Frederick Berdo
1137 Pte. Rose, John
4324 Pte. Sellars, Bertram Norman
3453 Pte. Smith, Arthur Percival
5771 Pte. Weatherhead, Bert. Hubbard
6616 Pte. Wilson, Frank
HOMEWARD


9th BATTALION.
4334 Pte. Carr, John
5356 Cpl. Clayson, Joseph
AlOl6 Pte. Corner, Rupert
6964 8.-Cpl. Cuttiford, Cecil Reginald
104 Pte. Frost, H.
6750 Pte. Gallighan, Michael Galbin
4802 Pte. Hodges, Ernest Invicta
841 8.-Cpl. Hudson, Charles Sherwood
971 Pte. Bake, Albert Daniel
7104 Pte. Murray, Edward Stuart
3855 Pte. McGregor, Herbert
6625 Pte. Ryan, Patrick
7570 Pte. Shadwell, Norman George
1835 Pte. Sharpe, George Edward
1619 Cpl. Turkington, William George
63 2 7 Pte. Vurhaft, Joseph
1122 a Pte. Waller, William Edward
6850 Pte. Watts Ernest
85 8.-Cpl. Williams, Vincent Harry
2262 Pte. Wise, George Alfred
10th BATTALION.
3349 Pte. Eobban, George Murrison
3471 Pte. Newberry, William David
7077 Pte. Taylor, Joseph
nth BATTALION.
6803 Pte. Saunders, John William
2403 a Pte. Train, John
4348 Pte. Treloar, James Vivian
3004 Pte. Williams, Roy
266 Sgt. Walter, Bernard Gustave
12th BATTALION.
7704 Pte. Beale, Percy Henry
6545 Pte. Brown, Albert
2027 Pte. Garwood, George Harold
1524 Pte. Giffard, P. K.
337 Pte. Higgins, Eugene Winton
6497 Pte. Jones, William Douglas
6054 Pte. Eing, James
5435 Pte. Mcintosh, Daniel Thomas
1854 Pte. O'Mally, John
1560 Pte. Seaton, Colin Campbell
1568 Pte. Simple, Ernest Alfred
6597 Pte. Smith, Henry Norman
7117 Pte. Tierney, James Nelson
6606 Pte. Winter, Beslie Walter
13th BATTALION.
5668 Pte. Cameron, Andrew
3723 Pte. Collie, Charles Andrew
7235 Pte. Dowsey, William Ernest
1097 Dvr. Doyle, Joseph Henry
6002 Pte. Gifford, E.
611 Pte. Gunderson, Herbert Anton
6543 Pte- Jones, Ambrose James
51 15 Pte. Knox, J. W. G.
6582 Pte. Peacock, William Thomas
7065 Pte. Riddock, Thomas
6859 Pte. Young, Walter William
14th BATTALION.
3 2 34 Sgt. Blair, James Castle
291 Pte. Blanchfield, Henry Frederick
6968 Pte. Bredin, Henry Edgar
3302 Pte. Crow, Charles Edward
7007 Pte. Parr, Edgar
322 Pte. Green, Harold
3789 Pte. Haddon, Charles
220 Sgt. Hunter, Ernest
5134 Pte. Kirby, Allen Webb
6772 Pte. Downs, William
3409 Sgt. Mayer, Carl Herman
3401 Pte. McEwan, John Childs
6333 Pte. O'Farrell, William Ormond
5726 8.-Cpl. Ross, Frederick Saltoun
780 8.-Cpl. Self, Harold Herbert
1055 Pte. Stephenson, Beslie John
1165 Pte. Thompson, Ernest Henry
759 Pte. Whyte, Herbert Edward
7102 Pte. Wilson, James Muir
6834 Pte. Wilkinson, Arthur Vincent
1276 Pte. Young, Frank McFarlane
15th BATTALION.
1460 Cpl. Broadhead, Douglas Henry Allen
6726 Pte. Burley, William Arthur
2380 Pte. Carsten, Hans
7221 Pte. Chappell, Frederick Henry
4770 Pte. Cook, Harold
6244 Pte. Daniels, Francis
7349 Pte. Dawson, Thomas
6995 Pte. Hurley, Jeremiah
1 57 Pte. Jones, David Cadwalladar
5439 Pte. Kilpatrick, John A.
6802 Pte. Bangston, Frederick
5446 8.-Cpl. Bennon, Vincent Roy
924 Sgt. McAndrew, Roy Millar
2771 Pte. McCullum, Robert James
633° Pte. Parsons, Edgar
6565 Pte. Salsbury, Robt. Emilius Paynter
5585 Pte. Sells, John Richard
649 Pte. Smith, John Alexander
HOMEWARD


7053 Pte. Stevens, Murdoch
1833 Pte. Stover, William John
6966 Cpl. Ward, Charles Powers
6359 Pte. West, Oscar Stamwell
665 L.-Cpl. Wood, Percy Victor
6609 Pte. Woolass, George Ellathorpe
16th BATTALION.
1441 Pte. Stratton, Alexander Francis
17th BATTALION.
6764 Pte. Austin, Walter James
7217 Pte. Baroni, E.
5312 Pte. Bruce, Stanley Norman
4075 Pte. Buckman, Donald
7017 Pte. Byrnes, R. W. E.
5688 Pte. Cason, William Gratton
6286 Pte. Chambers, James Joseph
6901 Pte. Clarke, Lancelot Walter
6047 Pte. Daly, John Hubert
885 Sgt. Franklin, John
6307 Pte. Gillespie, William
5027 Pte. Hannan, Stephen James
6083 Pte. Kelly, Vincent Roy
6582 Pte. Lewis, Reuben
6684 Pte. Mansfield, George Gayford S.
610 Pte. McCarthy, John Thomas
969 Q.M.S. Newton, James Edward
6586 Pte. Page, S. T.
3455 Pte. Richards, Thomas
6160 Pte. Riddle, Alfred
1778 E.-Cpl. Sinclair, Ronald
6362 Pte. Smith, Ernest Joseph James
2535 Pte. Sproule, Reginald George J.
3633 Pte. Timmins, John
6387 Pte. Warry, Walter Horward
2293 Pte. Wheelan, Claude Joseph
6157 Pte. Witt, Ernest Harold
2811 Sgt. Wood, Robert
18th BATTALION.
804 Pte. Aitken, John Nesbitt B.
3017 Pte. Budgett, Hemy
6043 Pte. Chambers, George William
3815 Pte. Cox, Reginald Victor Dudley
5788 Pte. Cracknell, Edward Charles
3553 Pte- Curtis, Leonard
6949 Pte. Davis, D. H.
4408 Pte. Devane, Roger William
6065 Pte. Furlong, John Michael Murray
6099 Pte. Hayman, B. M.
6327 Pte. Hyslop, Daniel
5610 Pte. Jackson, William
6339 Pte. Kenner, Prank
3725 Pte. McCall, Edward
6695 Pte. McCarthy, Francis
6797 Pte. Moon, Francis Ernest
5853 Pte. O'Brien, William
759 Pte. Parkinson, Francis Joseph
6815 Pte. Phyland, A. M.
5858 Pte. Piper, Stanley
6922 Pte. Robinson, Walter Edward
1805 Pte. Seaton, Francis William
6144 Pte. Shotter, F. V. E.
71 11 Pte. Smith, N.
5470 Pte. Sullivan, Harry Theodore
6394 Pte. Sylvester, Joseph
724 Pte. Thomas, Frederick Harry
541 1 Pte. Thompson, George William Roy
5683 Pte. Watkins, Clive
2996 Pte. Wealand, Arthur
765 L.-Cpl. West, George Harold
5680 Pte. Wright, William Albert
19th BATTALION.
4364 Pte. Bray, Thomas Sydney
5542 Pte. Broadley, Joseph Hilton
6522 Pte. Byrne, Frederick
6293 Pte. Carroll, Bernard James
2886 Pte. Cusack, Francis
6062 Pte. Dimond, Robert Eeslie
5065 Pte. Edwards, Charles Harrex
193 1 E.-Cpl. Garratty, George
6323 Pte. Hayes, Francis Patrick
2174 Cpl. Hayne, Neville Poole
4493 Pte. MacNeil, James
6854 Pte. Mclvor, Francis
3904 a Pte. Milburn, Charles
2720 Pte. Nowlan, John Alexander
5950 Pte. O'Connor, Thomas
6124 Pte. Parrington, Henry
6127 Pte. Pimblett, Harold Plenry
5871 Pte. Quinn, Albert George
4216 Pte. Ramsbottom, James
1099 Pte. Ridley, John
317 Pte. Saull, William
631 x Pte. Smart, Alfred Samuel
4245 Pte. Stanley, Thomas
658 E.-Cpl. Stokes, Harold
5455 Pte. Stuart, George
6893 Pte. Tanner, Francis Sydney
5035 Pte. Towers, John Ernest
5939 Pte. Whitely, Alfred Tomlinson
6421 Pte. Williams, Frederick James
HOMEWARD


20th BATTALION.
6271 Pte. Ahern, Percy Ivo
5538 Pte. Bartlett, Arthur John
6282 Sig. Bogg, Thomas Clarence
5789 Pte. Bucknall, John Ernest
1667 Sgt. Bunyan, William John
1 5°3 Sgt. Burgess, Cleave Laurence
3976 L.-Cpl. Chippendale, George Comfort
5597 Pte. Hickey, Arthur Thomas
6354 Pte. Howard, Frank Haslam
4319 Pte. James, Cecil Reginald
4709 Pte. James, Matthew
6798 Pte. Johnston, Frederick
9 1 5 Sgt. Kuhlmorgan, John Carl
5857 Pte. Lawler, William Bernard
5941 Pte. McGreal, Thomas
6399 Pte. O'Keeffe, Herbert Gordon
6930 Pte. Palmer, W. O. T.
1296 Dvr. Payne, Albert Edward
3643 Pte. Poulton, John
3975 Sgt. Ross, Allan Stanley
6635 Pte. Scevity, Frederick Joseph
3896 Pte. Trevanion, Carl Osmond
6429 Pte. Tuckerman, Hilton Turnbull
6434 Pte. Wiles, Stephen Leonard
21st BATTALION.
318 Pte. Argent, James
5970 Pte. Brown, Frederick Gordon
815 Sgt. Carroll, William Edward
6788 Pte. Crees, R. E.
6949 Pte. Davis, D. H.
5134 Pte. Dunn, Joseph Henry
5326 Pte. Elliott, Clive Lamont
854 Cpl. Graham, Robert
4428 Pte. Gree, Henry Hunt
119 Sgt. Jones, James Edward
6434 Pte. Lee, Edward Thomas
2 49 1 Pte. McCormack, John
599° Pte. Noonan, Richard Hugh
637 Pte. O'Donnell, Edward
6367 Pte. Quin, Thomas John
6418 Pte. Ralph, John Thomas
6171 Pte. Rose, George Alfred
6940 Pte. Sonsie, L.
6387 Pte. Stredwick, Harold Leslie
6141 Pte. Thome, Charles Thomas P
6908 Pte. Wharton, J. A.
22nd BATTALION.
1791 Pte. Allen, Alec Andrew
2665 Cpl. Bellis, Edgar Marcham
2129 Pte. Castle, J,eslie Norman
6791 Pte. Cattaeh, William Samuel
5328 Pte. Coleman, Ernest Alfred
4677 Pte. Cullen, Alexander
6074 Pte. Davies, Charles Bagwell
4717 Pte. Green, Ernest
5122 Pte. Long, Ernest Wilfred Hugh
453 1 Pte. Lucas, Herbert Richard
5391 Pte. Martin, John Patrick
5064 Pte. McCallum, Duncan
6418 Pte. Owen, Edwin
227 Pte. Peterson, Leonard
5410 Pte. Rose, John
1083 Pte. Ryan, James O'Donnel
3934 Pte. Setchell, Thomas William
4795 Pte. Taylor, Thomas
1581 Pte. Ward, Eaurence Percy
6922 Pte. Wragge, John Henry
6456 E.-Cpl. Ziebell, Thomas Charles Albert
23rd BATTALION.
75 L.-Cpl. Bergstrom, Oscar Gilvert
3010 Pte. Bremner, Thomas Roy
6770 Pte. Buckland, B. P.
2603 Pte. Cliff, William George
5349 Pte. Pitzpatrick, John
5143 Pte. Galloway, Slierley
457 1 Pte. Good, Phillip Ernest
333° Pte. Harles, Frank
5610 Pte. Hogan, Henry John
6341 Pte. Hopper, George Thomas
5616 Pte. Jenkins, Sidney
443° E.-Cpl. Eeese, Leonard Levy
7261 Pte. Lewis, Frank
5411 Pte. McDonald, Colin Campbell
604 Dvr. McMillen, William John
5676 Pte. Roberts, William John
646 Cpl. Ryan, Edwin
842 Dvr. Scott, John
7346 Pte. Tighe, Alfred Ferdinand
6424 Pte. Waycott, Frank Perrin
6613 a Pte. Webb-Watts, Maurice Thomas
4786 Pte. Williams, Walter William
5906 Pte. Zarth, Gustave
24th BATTALION.
123 Sgt. Benain, Basil Quikampt
6288 Pte. Bock, Arthur Leslie
3791 Pte. Clement, Thomas Sim
4272 Pte. Cooper, G. V.
1698 Pte. Day, William Shepperd
4698 Pte. Gilder, Thomas
HOMEWARD


5824 Pte. Gill, George Allenby
6322 Pte. James, Alfred David
5039 Pte. Johnston, J. B.
6845 Pte. Kent, Robert
5617 Pte. Langley, Claude Charles L.
5055 Pte. McAlpine, Andrew Daunett
6967 Pte. McCauley, P.
5875 Pte. Mclnnes, Stephen
5068 Pte. Neil, Robert
4171 Pte. Newman, Joseph Fowler
5399 Pte. Northfield, Leslie John
5404 Pte. Padley, George
258 Pte. Peirce, Frank
6883 Pte. Pocock, A.
61 11 Pte. Pountney, John M.
4508 Pte. Quirk, Frank
4526 Pte. Service, James
3064 Pte. Shine, John Cornelius
355 Sgt. Vale, William Arthur
1791 Pte. Wayland, William
2227 Pte. Weales, Richard Arthur
59 10 Pte. Wilson, Carlyle Robert
25th BATTALION.
4663 Pte. Badham, Colin Lachlan
6778 Pte. Basley, Albert John
4377 Pte. Brough, Norman Alexander
6294 Pte. Courtnay, Douglas Hugo
4395 Pte. Coyte, Edward
854 Pte. Esbensen, Neils Peter Bnd.
6810 Pte. Galbraith, P. T.
2268 Pte. Harney, E.
6819 Pte. Hinchley, John
1793 Pte. Xmmon, Albert Gloster
6773 Pte. Jensen, Neils
5357 Pte. Johns, Thomas Edward James
6597 Pte. Lindsay, William
6344 Pte. Lloyd, David
4175 Pte. Messenger, Alfred Douglas
6358 Pte. McGratli, John Joseph
917 Pte. McLean, Arthur
6116 Pte. Morris, Charles Henry
5632 Pte. O'Kane, Daniel
4755 Pte. Partridge, Herbert George
5903 Pte. Ramsden, Percy
5641 Pte. Reece, Samuel David
4799 Sig. Rice, John Emanuel
6095 Pte. Stafford. Luther
2009 S.-Sgt. Tebble, Robert William Henry
6396 Pte. Varney, Ruben
543 1 Pte. Williams, David John
6399 Pte. Woodleigh, John
26th BATTALION.
4738 Pte. Brooks, Herbert
840 Pte. Campbell, William McGregor
3479 Pte. Clark, Edmond Royston
6050 Pte. Cimeen, Edward Ernest
5572 Pte. Dolan, Thomas
3482 Pte. Erickson, Otto
5606 Pte. Harris, Joseph
1644 Pte. Hayter, Basil
5869 Pte. Hopkinson, David
6944 Pte. Howarth, Tom Gregson
474 1 Pte. Jackson, William Stanley
910 Pte. Kingston, Howard Inglewood
6610 Pte. Malpas, K. H.
6348 Pte. McCormack, Phillip Matthew
1272 Sgt. Morriss, Dudley
637 Cpl. Muirhead, Henry George
5889 Pte. Oelkers, Norman William
6362 Pte. Osborne, Reginald Harry
3130 Pte. Rhode, Edward
1220 D.-Cpl. Riley, Joseph
1700 Sgt. Roberson, Charles Henry
6671 Pte. Templeton, Charles
6171 Pte. Thomas, James
6849 Pte. Thomsen, Thomas
541 5 Pte. Tomkins, Thomas Pancour
2516 Pte. Wright, Claude Thomas
28th BATTALION.
3586 Pte. Richards, Harry John
29th BATTALION.
3762 C.S.M. Brennan, Jas.
4281 Pte. Chesher, Clarence Frederick
507 D.-Cpl. Cope, Charles John
6244 Pte. Dowell, Leslie George
1371 Pte. Duncan, John Archibald
3559 Pte. Hill, Thomas
3802 Pte. Holland, Harry Oswald
399 Pte. Jordan, Leslie Edward J.
135 2 Cpl. Lovelock, Neville Clarence
4331 Pte. Mitchell, Thomas
2726 Pte. O'Gorman, Thomas
917 Pte. Rhodes, William John
3349 Pte. Robertson, George Crawford
3658 Pte. Scroggie, James
2616 Pte. Southall, Benjamin
6820 Pte. Spencer, Walter Henry
6872 Pte. Taylor, Donald
1445 Pte. Willsher, George Mansfield
HOMEWARD


30th BATTALION.
814 Pte. Anderson, James John Sidney
3231 Pte. Enright, John Joseph
2344 Pte. Green, William
2363 Pte. Hodge, John
4066 Pte. Kendall, Gilbert Horace
2699 Pte. Murphy, James Bernard
3015 Pte. Raindle, Leonard
4597 Pte. Reid, Mannie
9 Pte. Trompp, Charles Herbert
31st BATTALION.
4651 Pte. Bonner, Edward John
3782 Pte. Callaghan, Dennis Stephen
835 a Pte. Connole, Patrick
353 1 Pte- Cox, William Henry
4753 Pte. Cripps, Charles
4296 Pte. Driver, Herbert
3551 a Pte. Ellis, Edward Robert
3799 Pte. Ellis, Henry George Augustus
2899 a Pte. Fraser, Robert Horace
1568 Pte. Gebbett, Evelyn Barnard
1656 Pte. Glur, Edward
858 Sgt. Gotliard, Ernest James
3577 Pte. Hodgson, Edward
453 L.-Cpl. Hudson, Herbert James
9 Pte. Johnson, Bernard
4892 Pte. King, John Henry
1064 Pte. Langford, William Allen
2763 Pte. McKinnon, Hector
1944 Pte. Mills, John
5446 Pte. O'Mara, Daniel
3866 Pte. Osborne, Duncan Henry
3320 Pte. Roberts, John Clarence
749 Pte. Sevior, Thomas George
543 a Pte. Smith, William James
3547 Pte. Tomson, George Leslie
3899 Pte. Turner, Leslie
2989 a Pte. Underwood, Charles William
1062 Pte. Webb, Harold
4798 Pte. Yarrow, James Alexander
32nd BATTALION.
4084 Pte. Miles, David
33rd BATTALION.
1963 Pte. Ancaw, John Stanley
648 Pte. Bagley, L.
1300 Pte. Bilsborough, William Herbert
2952 Pte. Burkett, James
2766 Pte. Busse, Leonard George
3032 Pte. Curtin, Albert Ernest
3035 Pte. Dalton, Peter Thomas
3057 Pte. Fraser, Dahl
773 Sgt. Follett, Sidney Albert
2564 Pte. Gildey, Herbert Samuel
781 Pte. Harris, Frederick
2602 Pte. Marsh, Leslie George
1884 Pte. McCully, William Leslie
841 L.-Cpl. Nelson, Albert Thomas
845 Pte. O'Neill, Fleming B.
148 Cpl. Paton, Arthur James
5148 Pte. Peckham, John
1631 Pte. Smith, Ernest Clarence
2929 Pte. Swan, Leslie William
3388 Pte. Tavener, T. B.
2403 Pte. West, Steven Temple
204 Cpl. Williams, John Amos
34th BATTALION.
355 L.-Cpl. Armstrong, George Henderson
1872 Pte. Biggs, P.
1786 Pte. Brinkley, John
3262 Pte. Brown, A. F.
3270 Pte. Cleary, V.
2569 Pte. Fahey, Arthur Francis
2317 Pte. Halliday, James
460 Pte. Hoyland, Roy Henry
2094 Pte. Irwin, Jonathan
1 93 1 Fte. King, George Edwin
111 Pte. King, John Rutherford
824 Pte. Logan, John
1938 Pte. Moneghittie, Alfred John
1203 Pte. Nelson, Thomas
3397 Pte. Shaw, R.
197 C.S.M. Strong, George
2422 Pte. Webber, Harold Hayman
3128 Pte. Winslow, Edgar Wade
35th BATTALION.
7192 Pte. Armstrong, R. A.
1058 Pte. Auld, William Hamilton
3256 Pte. Bailey, L.
1783 Pte. Beaver, George Cheviot
2006 Pte. Brooker, Henry Stafford
7197 Pte. Burlingliam, Goulson
2555 Pte. Caroll, William Richard
3504 Pte. Carroll, George Clement
2052 Pte. Cooke, Rowland Cliff Dean
2194 Sig. Crothers, Robert
2422 Pte. Da vies, Stanley Gordon
408 Pte. Downing, Edward James
453 a Pte. Edwards, Alfred Ernest
3505 Pte. Ford. K. H.
HOMEWARD


7260 Pte. Harper, Charles
3430 Pte. Harper, J. D.
3320 Pte. Hatcher, C.
3379 Pte. Heron, J.
3330 Pte. Iler, H. C. G.
1823 Pte. Jones, Oliver Wynne
1 191 Pte. McAloon, Patrick
2107 Pte. McDowall, William Rees
33 54 Pte. McKenzie, D.
492 Pte. Mohr, Jack
345 1 Sgt. Nagle, Thomas
858 Cpl. Norris, William Alexander
1231 Pte. Ranns, William Thomas
1964 Pte. Reid, William Laidlaw
1987 L.-Cpl. Renehan, Francis Michael
3432 Pte. Robson, E. D.
567 Pte. Simpson, Ralph
2005 Pte. Sullivan, Thomas John
6634 Pte. Sutton, Leslie Richard
1895 Pte. Swinton, C. H.
928 Pte. Wilson, Donald George
3405 Pte. Workman, R.
929 Pte. Wright, Joseph
36th BATTALION.
1939 Pte. Benton, Charles Lloydell
3280 Pte. Cochrane, A. J.
3182 Pte. Corcoran, D.
2542 Pte, Christensen, C.
3169 Pte. Cliristopherson, B.
3185 Pte. Divorty, N. S.
3299 Pte. Dockerell, W. E.
3155 Pte. Gordon, F. F.
1658 Pte. Harris, Charles Harold
6569 Pte. Hennessy, Darcy Harold
2425 Pte. Hill, W. E.
1966 Pte. Hitchman, William Frederick
3413 Pte. Hume, H. C.
1792 Pte. Lake, Warwick John
2624 Pte. Leslie, A.
4565 Pte. Little, Harry
3349 Pte. Mannix, J.
3347 Pte. Mendez, I.
2617 Pte. Mitchell, T.
3359 Pte. Nicholls, George William
860 Pte. Pearce, Matthew Richard
31 11 Pte. Penny, A.
3364 Pte. Perrin, A. W.
615 L.-Cpl. Roberts, Thomas Henry
2122 Pte. Roy, Robert Paterson
2654 Pte. Ryan, Terence
2826 Pte. Staker, Stanley Bonham
3178 Pte. Thiele, E. E.
1246 Dvr. Thompson, George
195 Pte. Thomson, Charles Geo. Craven
3405 Pte. Wheeler, A. T.
3144 Pte. Wiggins, W.
206 Pte. Williams, Reginald Edwin
37th BATTALION.
207 Pte. Anderson, James
253 Pte. Cole, Leslie Walter
2796 Pte. Cornford, Joseph Caleb
5682 Pte. George, Charles
1564 Cpl. Lindsey, Ronald Miles
34° Sgt. Maher, John
1877 Pte. Martin, Phillip Patrick
2931 Pte. McDonald, B. J.
J 87 1 Pte. McFarlane, C. C.
1 33 1 Pte. McGuffie, Norman James
2238 Pte. Mitchell, Harold Alexander
31 14 Pte. Nolan, William
3126 Pte. Quirk, Harold
7060 Pte. Reilly, George
6069 Pte. Rigby, Thomas Davis
6844 Pte. Roberts, Sidney John
2146 Pte. Searle, Norman
7067 a Pte. Slielton, Alfred Gordon
1285 Pte. Sim, William
2 397 Pte. Smith, James
38th BATTALION
3015 Pte. Aitken, James Roy
2516 Pte. Ash, Norman Bishop
2778 Pte. Brown, Samuel Joseph
1818 Pte. Clark, Charles Henry
2056 Pte. Connelly, Michael John
276 Pte. Fenton, Colin
2577 Pte. Haynes, Henry Thomas
2091 L.-Cpl. Holland, Robert Leslie
1047 Pte. Jones, Edward Victor
6142 Pte. McDermott, Ernest John
2927 Pte. McGregor, Daniel Timothy
2790 Bug. Murray, Robert
1280 Pte. Ray, Geoffrey Sherwood
1272 Pte. Redman, James Herbert
7070 Pte. Rich, William George
3217 Pte. Richie, John Moore
2449 Pte. Scane, Bertrand Samuel F.
7091 Pte. Terry, S. W.
1019 Pte. Watson. William George
686 Cpl. Wheeldon, Hugh Grey
2672 Pte. Williams, Trevor
HOMEWARD


39th BATTALION.
2692 Pte. Caldwell, Allen
4524 Pte. Campbell, John William
412 Cpl. Carroll, Frederick Francis
434 Pte. Dean, Frederick
6020 Pte. Ferguson, James
880 Pte. Ford, Harold
455 Pte. Gray, Walter Alfred
918 Pte. Irwin, Arthur James
1669 Pte. Jewell, Richard Henry
3111 Pte. McGuire, Thomas William
1880 Pte. McMaster, Dugald
2200 Pte. Morgan, Charles Henry
3124 Pte. Oak, Roy John
1 39 1 E.-Cpl. Roberts, William Herbert
1906 L.-Cpl. Rook, Vincent Alfred
2196 Pte. Smith, Victor Wheeler
687 Pte. Swain, R. C.
616 Pte. Tonkin, Frank
2162 L.-Cpl. Trengrove, Alfred Rupert
40th BATTALION.
1117 Pte. Balmforth, John Tom
1093 Pte. Bannister, Samuel
3130 Pte. Beven, William Francis
2040 Pte. Blanch, Charles Henry
3611 Pte. Brittian, A. de C.
1837 Pte. Coppleman, H. C. J.
2829 Pte. Harrison, Charles Joshaway
1874 Pte. Jones, Alfred Russell
3632 Pte. Lavell, A. E.
2116 Pte. Martin, Wesley
887 Pte. McArthur, Jas.
724 C.S.M. Miller, Andrew Henry
2852 Pte. Miller, Thomas James
3637 Pte. Murray, H. J. D.
755 Pte. O'Beirne, John Bede
2871 Pte. Ready, Michael Matthew
5763 Pte. Scott, James Henry
2764 Cpl. Shoobridge, Rupert Oakley
3566 Pte. Wilkins, R. T.
41st BATTALION.
821 Pte. Bailey, George
589 Sgt. Brown, Charles Augustus
2278 Pte. Burton, Charles Blackall
2538 Pte. Butler, Daniel Thomas
2900 Pte. Collins, Percy Charles George
842 Pte. Cooke, Edwin Alfred
3298 Pte. Goldsworthy, Jacob
183 Cpl. Hays, Samuel Edward
2326 Pte. Hoffman, Thomas Joseph
2321 Pte. Howell, Henry Herbert
202 L.-Cpl. Johnston, William Henry
3101 Pte. Leitch, Thomas
2100 Pte. Kehl, Albert Walter Samuel
1870 Pte. McDonald, Thomas
2368 Pte. McLaughlan, Charles John
2610 Pte. Merton, William
913 Pte. Mills, Alexander William
250 Pte. O'Keefe, John
2632 Pte. Patch, Donald Arthur
2946 Pte. Renton, Henry
966 W.O. Russell, John
2388 Pte. Smith, Herbert Henry
2870 Pte. Smith, Robert James
3671 Pte. Wallace, Alfred Ernest
42nd BATTALION.
2772 Pte. Biggs, H. H.
763 Pte. Casey, Matthew Bionel
1826 Pte. Dunnings, Alfred Charles
3294 Pte. Fergus, Hugh
1909 Pte. Hillman, Samuel Benjamin
3399 Pte. Hixon, A. W.
2830 Pte. Houghton, Bert Gregory
396 Pte. Judd, Albert
3320 Pte. Justo, Robert Goomersindo
831 Pte. Kearin, John
1884 Pte. Nolan, Arthur
2856 Pte. Nomnus, Gilbert Brierley
3359 Pte- Nykvist, Ernest Victor
2675 Pte. O'Connell, James
1947 Pte. O'Driscoll, Thomas
2147 Pte. Phipps, George Henry
2282 Pte. Riggall, William John
1110 Cpl. Ross, Gordon
3381 Pte. Spence, Charles Elton
3125 Pte. Taylor, S. F. B.
721 Pte. Tremayne, John Henry
235 Pte. Turton, Alfred Harry
1922 Pte. Wallace, R.
3394 Pte. Wishart, A. McC.
1738 Pte. Yorkston, Thomas Forrest
43 rd BATTAUON.
5659 Pte. Bonney, William
45th BATTALION.
1111 L.-Cpl. Connop, James Valentine
2821 Pte. Douglas, Nat.
3008 Pte. Eustice, Charles
173 1 Pte. Gould, Alfred Eeslie
3504 Pte. Jones Walter James
H O MEWARD


47 2 Pte. O'Toole, Christopher John
2266 Pte. Page, William Frederick
902 Pte. Prince, William Herbert
1394 Pte. Ranson, William
3465 Pte. Thomas, Richard
2708 a Pte. Thompson, David
3724 Pte. Thompson, Thomas
46th BATTALION.
2148 Pte. Bartlett, Charles Henry
2143 Pte. Bishop, Herbert William
2680 Pte. Higgins, Harold Thomas
4523 Pte. Kilminster, Robert Lionel
7648 Pte. McPhee, William Hugh
1381 Pte. Quinn, Michael Andrew
2245 Pte. Rechenberg, John Frederick Wm
3454 Pte. Rodgers, William James
1776 Pte. Searles, Ernest John
2770 Pte. Vagg, Thomas Alfred
396 Pte. Wyld, Herbert Thomas
47th BATTALION.
5027 Pte. Adler, George Andrew
3022 Cpl. Bowker, John William
4274 L.-Cpl. Carfrae, George Ed. Swinton
2982 Pte. Cleary, Thomas
3676 Pte. Davies, Robert Llewellyn
4163 Pte. Fuller, Everard Ewen
3827 Pte. Heathwood, Walter Graham
2291 Pte. Hilder, Arden Arthur H.
2758 Pte. McFadyen, James Thomas
2303 Cpl. Newnham, Austin
2299 Pte. O'Connor, Arthur William
4068 Pte. Parker, Austin Edward
2933 Pte. Reid, William John
3075 a Pte. Richardson, John
2708 Pte. Ross, George
3848 Pte. Salotti, George Dominica
2600 Pte. Wade, William
1978 Pte. Wagner, Harry
48th BATTALION.
3 112 Sgt. Grinlington, Joseph Vincent
4664 Pte. MacLelland, John
49th BATTALION.
5046 Pte. Butler, Samuel Walter
3265 a Pte. Cobb, Stanley
820 Pte. Dentith, Victor George
6759 Pte. Green, James Samuel
2813 a Pte. Haylock, Ladas
5402 Pte. Kean, Stephen
2927 Pte. Kindregan, Patrick Hardiman
6501 Pte. Lofts, Luke Alfred Ronald
3425 Sgt. Manders, Frederick Leslie
2941 Pte. Moore, Harry
1848 Pte. Murray, Percy Harry
2195 Pte. Norris, Plenry
7031 Pte. O'Brien, J. P.
3294 Pte. Patterson, Frederick
3879 Pte. Pridmore, Albert Edward
435 R.S.M. Sargood, John
3000 Pte. Simons, William Ernest
2854 Pte. Smith, Charles Ernest
2014 Pte. Soolsovsky, Jan.
3 5 0 5 Sgt. Smith, Norman Stanley
4584 Pte. Stevenson, Robert
2704 Pte. Vaughan, Jesse
3247 Pte. Warnock, James Thomas
3013 Pte. West, Henry Francis
5118 a Pte. Whalin, Peter John
3010 Pte. Wilson, Arthur Charles
50th BATTALION.
906 Pte. Edwards, Albert John
52nd BATTALION.
2371 Pte. Anderson, Martin Gregory
2880 Pte. Barker, John William
2402 Pte. Cooke, Cornelius James
2053 Pte. Cullinan, William John
2013 Pte. Feeney, Peter Martin
3176 Pte. Hayes, William James
3177 Pte. Hodge, John
2247 Pte. Hyatt, Roland Gilbert
2193 Pte. Juler, William Kund.
2920 Pte. Lang, Arthur Robertson
4533 Pte. Loftus, Tasman John
1621 Pte. Lynch, Frederick James
2711 Pte. McGregor, George
3145 Pte. McNamara, William
1966 Pte. Read, Percival John
2163 Pte. Saunders, Robert
3518 Pte. Thompson, William Joseph
5211 Pte. Wood, Leslie Andrew
53rd BATTALION.
*537 Pt e - Berger, John Francis
5654 Pte. Buchanan, Thomas Watts
5674 Pte. Carroll, James
4766 Pte. Delves, Francis William
98 Pte. Hansen, Charles Peter
!673 C.S.M. Hare, Vivian Arthur
4912 Pte. Kay, George
2186 Pte. Kearney, John James
3379 Pte. Lloyd, Alexander Aiton
HOMEWARD


3493 L.-Cpl. McKnight, Norman Lance
1714 Sgt. Oxley, Alfred Thomas
2723 Pte. Peak, Sidney Nicholas James
3687 Pte. Robinson, Alfred
3525 a Pte. Smith, Arthur Alexander
6624 Pte. Spiller, Henry
1995 Pte. Smith, F. C.
2745 Pte. Thomas, Gwilym Martin
2748 Pte. Vircoe, Cecil Ernest
3160 L.-Cpl. Ward, James
588 Pte. Whyte, Richard Hercules
3482 L.-Cpl. White, Alexander Patkin
2998 Pte. Wood, George
304 Pte. Wyse, Norman Sidney
54th BATTALION.
2143 Pte Brennan, John Thomas
4267 Pte. Burton, Thomas Lambert
3394 Pte. Hughes, Henry James
5117 Pte. Ingram, Frank
3145 Pte. Leaver, Albert Clyde
3412 Pte. Leonard, Andrew Henry
3420 Pte. McCormack, James Desmond
2480 Pte. Redpath, William Alexander
3450 Pte. Reeve, Hubert James
2214 Pte. Rcss, Arthur Ernest
2736 Pte. Seton, L. C.
3528 Pte. Smith, R. J.
3456 Pte. Smith, Wallace Lyle
3439 Pte. Turner, Henry James
3c 13 Pte. Windred, William Henry
55th BATTALION.
1867 Pte. Allsop, William
5031 Pte. Arnold, Allan John
4742 Pte. Barker, James Lochee
3139 Pte. Dover, Thomas
5104 Pte. Higginson, John
3442 Pte. MacNamara, Victor
3863 Pte. Mason, Francis
3438 Pte. McLean, Sidney
2203 L.-Cpl. Nicholson, Arthur Douglas
2850 Pte. Orchard, George
1974 L.-Cpl. Taber, Percy Ernest
1705 Pte. Teague, William Francis
2700 Pte. West, William Dickson
56th BATTALION.
2623 Pte. Bell, Thomas Leighton
2869 Pte. Bragg, Leonard Gent.
2390 Pte. Chambers, Thomas Walker
153 T.-Sgt. Cockfield, Park
35° I Pte. Cole, Alfred Robert
2389 Pte. Collins, Frederick Spencer
3221 Pte. Dubos, R.
3139 Pte. Fitzpatrick, John Patrick
2170 Pte. Gibbon, John Alfred Inman
3109 L.-Cpl. Grew, Joseph Charles
791 Pte. Hayden, John
3246 Pte. Hornsby, James
5131 Pte. Israel, Hector R.
3560 Pte. Mclntyre, Richard Donald
4878 Pte. Potter, Sidney
1770 Pte. Sayers, George
2512 Sgt. Warrington, Percival
1749 Pte. Webb, Joseph Albert Benjamin
5475 Pte. White, George (died at sea,
14-2-18)
3491 Pte. Wertheim, Jacob
2929 Cpl. Wilkinson, Frank Everett
57th BATTALION.
3721 Pte. Dumble, Edgar George
3399 Pte. Grey, Reginald Dennis
2441 Pte. Lack, R. E.
3047 Pte. MacMillen, John
3515 Pte. Madden, Royston Thomas
1144 Sgt. Riley, George Robert
4587 Pte. Rowe, Victor Manley
1663 Pte. Taylor, Horace Harry
58th BATTALION.
2151 Pte. Doolan, Martin
2655 Pte. Gleeson, Richard Patrick
2039 Pte. Inglis, Eric Fullerton
2467 Pte. Kersting, Albert Victor
2228 L.-Cpl. Lucardie, William John
2477 Pte. Nicholls, Herbert John
2948 Pte. Poulter, Richard Sidney
3208 Pte. Poyett, Heriot McDumie
3629 Pte. Rowbottom, Christopher Thos.
1819 L.-Cpl. Shannon, Leslie John
5451 Pte. Slater, Thomas Francis Joseph
614 L.-Cpl. Smith, Robert Arthur
2844 Pte. Wallace, Ralph Dorran
59th BATTALION.
5027 Pte. Adams, Arthur
3281 Pte. Alexander, Norman
2147 Pte. Cowley, Francis William
2899 Pte. Edmunds, Henry
2900 Pte. Fisher, Percy William
3098 Pte. Irvine, James
180 Pte. Kowarzik, Francis Edmund
HOMEWARD


3186 Pte. Laidler, William
54 0t L.-Cpl. Mills, Frederick James
Pte. Mills, Henry James
1250 Pte. O'Callighan, James Kelly
2241 Cpl. Palmer, George Isaac
3234 Pte. Richardson, Robert
3248 Pte. Smith, William Harry
3345 Pte. Young, Louis
60th BATTALION.
1881 Pte. Bond, A. G.
2633 Pte. Brewer, Norman Henry
2650 a Pte. Collier, Francis
2659 Pte. Couch, Clyde George
2034 Pte. Dickson, James
2nd ANZAC L.H.R.
343 Pte. Stonhill, Arthur Wilfred
Ist F.A. BRIGADE.
5855 Pte. Barton, G. W.
.31977 Gnr. Hudson, Robert Burton
4395 Gnr. Lewis, James Allan
5899 Gnr. Spicer, Cyril Mortlock
10090 Dvr. Staples, Fredk. Charles August
387 Sgt. Watson, Walter E. D. Leslie
2nd F.A. BRIGADE.
3°437 Gnr. Bage, Lewis Francis
3428 Gnr. Chinnick, Richard James
: 392 Sgt. Galbraith, Ean
4999 Dvr. Hooker, Thomas Harold
942 Cpl. Palin, Walter Ralph
1962 Dvr. Peet, Charles James
29975 Gnr. Roberts, George Edward
5560 Gnr. Taylor, Leonard Joseph
420 Gnr. Thomson, Robert Eglington
1274 Dvr. Treahy, Frank
2285 Dvr. Woods, Harry Albert
3rd ARMY F.A.B.
30608 Gnr. Atkinson, Francis William
*957 Bdr. Gilmour, James Edward
21396 Sgt. Player, Humphrey William
2038 Gnr. Rex, Arthur Richmond
23 1 3 Cpl. Watt, Alexander Warrand
27966 Gnr. Woodward, Harold Thos. John
4th F.A. BRIGADE.
33°97 Gnr. Butler, Samuel John
1619 Bdr. Hill, Stanley Parkin
LIGHT HORSE.
ARTILLERY.
2145 Pte. Donaldson, Walter George
5377 L.-Cpl. Johnson, Alexander Keith
3103 a Pte. Ladner, Leslie Gordon
1935 Pte. Lucas, E. J.
4658 Pte. Mclndoe, Alexander Campbell
2740 Pte. Oldfield, Thomas William
4866 Pte. O'Malley, James Francis
2946 Pte. Osborne, Eric Leslie
1 753 Pte. Steele, James Arthur
267 C.Q.M.S. Vipond, John Henry
3259 Pte. Walker, Frank Charles
2771 Pte. Whare, Edwin Douglas
2284 Pte. Wilson, Samuel Ernest Shiner
3263 L.-Cpl. Youlden, Joseph Edgar
4th L.H. REGIMENT.
3123 Tpr. Stevens, Hector Charles Laurence
*376 Gnr. Lawn, George
11501 Dvr. Lowe, H.
9424 Dvr. O'Dea, Charles David
2 9356 Gnr. Small, Grantley Allen
9334 Gnr. Treacy, Reginald Barttam
sth P.A. BRIGADE
7563 Gnr. Cooper, George Benjamin
11570 Dvr. Dobson, Arthur John
8864 Cpl. Graham, Phillip Mason
7202 Cpl. Miles, Stanley James
2 9335 Gnr. Phillips, Charles Thomas
30275 Gnr. Ryder, Rupert
1427 Gnr. Somerville, Vivian Charles
25602 Gnr. Whitehead, Frederick Charles
6th ARMY P.A.B.
4441 Gnr. Brennan, Martin Francis
28194 Gnr. Craymer, Frank Harold
31499 Dvr. Pascoe, Alfred Edgar
7th F.A. BRIGADE.
18849 P.-Sgt. Camfield, Henry
22806 Gnr. Green, Henry
32014 Gnr. Lewisson, Charles
19330 Gnr. Nelson, Harry
32137 Dvr. O'Hara, John Joseph
18718 Gnr. O'Neill, Thomas Francis
21008 Gnr. Rockwell, Alex. G. R.
*8536 Sgt. Sheehy, Michael James
21275 Pdi- Swirgsdin, Peter
23102 Gnr. Williams, Charles Henry
HOMEWARD


Bth F.A. BRIGADE.
21914 Bdr. Atchison, Bernard Mitchell
23054 Cpl. Halley, James
19601 Sgt. Peck, Ronald
19684 Ptr. Pennycook, Benjamin
20190 P.-Sgt Phillips, William Henry
20336 Dvr. Rhodes, William James
19821 Dvr. Richardson, I.eslie David
19822 Gnr. Simmonds Gilbert
27823 Gnr. Simms, Alexander
21287 Gnr. Todd, John Ray
19604 Sgt. Wood, Stewart Andrew William
10th P.A. BRIGADE.
4769 Bdr. Cargill, Thomas
1430 Gnr. Clement, A. W.
21382 Gnr. McKinley, John
.1187 Dvr. Reid, James Graham
nth P.A. BRIGADE.
2107 Bdr. Bourke, Arthur Joseph
1869 Pte. Plannery, Edw. Patrick
157 Gnr. Hanneberry, Michael Patrick
26803 Gnr. Kennedy, Thomas Calder
4833 Gnr. Dock, Eric James
3113 Sgt. Neill, Arthur Ernest
3112 Gnr. Walsh, William
27201 Gnr. Westerweller, Wallace Lawrence
3535 Bdr. Wilson, Harold
12th F.A. BRIGADE.
1954 Cpl. Burnside, James
23048 Gnr. Connelly, John Victor
100 Dvr. Porbes, William John
3452 Dvr. Hutchings, Lloyd
275 Dvr. Puckering, John Richard
29666 Sgt. Ryan, Thomas Francis
13th P.A. BRIGADE.
2 5538 Gnr. Allen, John James
1927 1 Sgt. Fairweather, John
26220 Fit. MacNicol, Roy W. D.
1469 Gnr. McDonald, L. J.
292 Gnr. McDonald, W. M.
16062 Gnr. Olsen, Carl Martin
341 Bdr. Potter, Llewellyn Hy.
2075 Gnr. Summers, John
14th P.A. BRIGADE.
4449 Cpl. Butler, John Joseph
1815 Gnr. Harris, Eric Brentell
22047 Sgt. Jordon, Arthur Predk. William
27506 Sgt. Kerr, Alec Oscar
9930 Dvr. Knight, William John
3405 Dvr. Miller, James Galbraith
32738 Gnr. Nelson, Worrell Henry
2432 Cpl. Sides, Frederick James
3903 Gnr. Stewart, Valentine Edw.
15699 Gnr. Warn, Sydney Edw.
3293 Gnr. Williams, H. T.
22nd P.A. BRIGADE.
8549 Bdr. McNeilage, George Campbell
36th H.A.G.
775 Gnr. Carey, John Leslie
852 Gnr. Kelehar, Lorrie Hunter A.
3374 Gnr. Scott, P. J.
12th ARMY B.A.C.
1762 Sgt.-M. Fleming, Tlios. William
Ist D.A.C.
27485 Dvr. Bristow, Aubrey Rhys
28086 Dvr. Browne, George William
10558 Dvr. McLeod, John Drummond
29161 Cpl. Stewart, Keith King
26286 Gnr. Woodward, Charles
2nd D.A.C.
10391 Sgt. Bollen, Alfred John
28074 Sig. Carver, C. C.
27314 Dvr. Pranks, Henry Edw.
28048 Dvr. McQueen, Reginald Allen
3rd D.A.C.
30167 Sgt. Belot, William Leslie
20216 Bdr. Napier, Charles
21292 Gnr. Williams, John William Milton
19726 Gnr. Wishart, Archibald
4th D.A.C.
3275 Dvr. Crbokshanks, B. W.
1282 Gnr. Lalor, John
sth D.A.C.
2060 Gnr. O'Reilly, John William
2063 Dvr. Pearson, Harold Joseph
2556 Dvr. Thompson, John
1529 Dvr. Warfe, Albert Victor
ARTILLERY DETAILS.
31024 Gnr. Arnold, George Edwin
2194 Gnr. Jacks, Percy Alfred
3697 Gnr. McLean, Charles Kenneth
415 Gnr. Madin, Charles Edward
3597 Gnr. Willmott, William Thomas
HOMEWARD


TRENCH MORTARS.
2nd Div. T.M.B.
3809 Pte. Hunter, Kenneth William James
sth Div. T.M.B.
464 Gnr. Kelly, Richard
2nd L.T.M.B.
2680 Pte. Hunt, William James
9th L.T.M.B.
1823 Pte. Wilkes, Harold Joseph
12th L.T.M.B.
27112 Pte. Jenyns, William Wesley
3984 Pte. Stewart, James Edw. Earl
2708 Gnr. Warnkin, Albert Stuart
Ist F. COY.
16 L.-Cpl. Clarke, Marcus Adamson
199 Sap. Wilson, Samuel
2nd F. COY.
2082 Sap. Alford, John Kell
19 Cpl. Lamond, John Cameron
24 L.-Cpl. Milligan, Walter Stewart
4th F. COY.
4031 Sap. Bennett, George
14953 Sap. Laws, Frank Wesley
4099 Sap. Stanley, John
6th F. COY.
16522 Sap. Cooper, Reuben
7th F. COY.
2425 Sap. Toms, William Henry
10th F. COY.
10290 Sap. Long, Sidney Frederick
10342 L.-Cpl. Ronald, Ernest Allen
10190 L.-Cpl. West, William Hantrey
nth F. COY.
9518 Dvr. Fowler, Peter Charles
15767 Dvr. Salmon, Charles Francis
13th L.T.M.B.
67 Cpl. Robinson, Kennedy Adam
Ist M.T.M.B.
5588 Gnr. Newing, Robert
V. 1 A.H.T.M.B.
4391 Bdr. Harold, Clarence James
V. 4 A.H.T.M.B.
1996 Pte. McGinty, Frank Michael
12 th F. COY.
14958 Sap. Sager, Edmund
14th F. COY.
4130 Sap. McDonald, Alexander
3958 Sap. Williams, James
15 th F. COY.
1 57 2 5 Sap. Price, William Lindsay
4603 Dvr. Roy, Robert McMillen
ENGINEER DETAILS.
16462 Dvr. Allington, Hector Archer
18177 Dvr. Kerby, Samuel
Ist Div. SIG. COY.
2884 Sap. Beavis, Harry
2489 Sap. Orde, Kenneth Cambridge
15678 Sap. Pepper, William Frederick
8562 Sap. Scorer, Hy. Reg. Llewellyn
5819 Sap. Winter, William Leonard
3rd Div. SIG. COY.
8424 Sap. Hosking, Benjamin Edgar
4th Div. SIG. COY.
5094 Cpl. Peterson, Valdemar
2880 Sap. Rooney, Samuel
ENGINEERS.
TUNNELLING COMPANIES
Ist TUN. COY.
557° Sap. Madden, William George
53 8 3 Sap. McShea, William Valentine
3658 Sap. O'Byrne, John
3382 Sgt. Scott, John
3372 Sgt. Steley, Henry Lewis
2nd TUN. Coy.
778 Sap. Cran, William Henry
792 Sgt. Parke, Francis William
3828 Sap. Prince, Thomas Martin
725 Sap. Walls, William
HOMEWARD


3rd TUN. COY.
5970 Sap. Costello, Michael
1174 Sgt. Simon, Herbert Frederick
1391 Sap. Sutherland, Donald
6075 Sap. Williams, Hedley James
6078 Sap. Williamson, Vernon Malcolm
ist M.G.C.
733 Cpl. Craig, Robert William
734 L.-Cpl. Dowse, Albert Edward
2620 Pte. Planuagan, W.
2896 Pte. Gane, Elmore Aubrey
84 Cpl. Rigelsford, Arthur John
3rd M.G.C.
336 Pte. Cowan, Leslie Gordon
sth M.G.C.
340 L.-Cpl. Beck, Athol Glenmitice
956 Pte. Mcintosh, Charles
392 Pte. Murray, Lester Carl
469 Pte. Norris, William Henry
477 Pte. Warden, Charles
427 Pte. West, Daniel
6th M.G.C.
389 Pte. Curran, Lawrence Anthon;
928 Cpl. Moffat, Edward
473 Pte. Wells, Alan
7th M.G.C.
597 Pte. Comer, Plorace Walter
441 1 Pte. Crowe, Samuel John
244 Pte. Kerr, James Ronald
473 Pte. Towler, Jack
Bth M.G.C.
91 Sgt. Peters, Alfred
9th M.G.C.
706 Gnr. Atkinson, William Chris.
nth M.G.C.
489 Pte. Baglini, Albert Oreste
442 Cpl. Dawson, Leon. Stewart
137 Pte. Slatter, Alexander
TUN. DETAILS.
53 Sap. Breakwell, George
5963 Sap. Bushell, Thomas William
6003 Sap. Kirwan, Gerald Cussen
6634 Sap. McCullough, Andrew
6024 Sap. McGilvery, John
7229 Sap. Mullen, Patrick
6944 Sap. O'Brien, John
12th M.G.C.
600 Pte. Heffernan, Ernest Joseph
4971 Pte. Kerr, Douglas
13th M.G.C.
172 Pte. Chave, William
14th M.G.C.
2612 Pte. Carson, William Lancaster
642 Pte. Nolan, Hubert John
5419 Pte. Neill, William Emmett
5438 Pte. Poowd, Alfred John
15th M.G.C.
4245 Pte. Croft, John Henry
16th M.G.C.
471 Pte. Gregory, Albert Edward
23rd M.G.C.
333 Pte. Stephens, Charles Seymour
24th M.GIC.
434 Pte. Crane, Percy Raymond
426 A L.-Cpl. Rathbone, William Edward
25th M.G.C.
3785 Pte. Coulston, Thomas
M.G. DETAII.S.
3001 Pte. Fitness, C. H.
3087 Pte. Judge, E. C.
6851 Pte. Mawhinney, T.
5371 Pte. McLeod, Archibald Charles
3823 Pte. Rigg, Walter
6648 Pte. Williams, John
MACHINE GUN CORPS
ARMY SERVICE CORPS
4th COY. A.A.S.C.
166 Dvr. Large, Alexander Harold
6th COY. A.A.S.C.
11 20 Dvr. Willmott, Arthur Hurgott
9th COY. A.A.S.C.
2040 Pte. Ferguson, Robert
15th COY. A.A.S.C.
6048 C.S.-M. Bassett, William
HOMEWARD


23 rd COY. A.A.S.C.
10549 Dvr. Wheatley, Frederick John
2nd FIELD BAKERY.
8202 Cpl. Vinnicombe, Walter George
sth BAKERY.
2882 Pte. Watts, James
3rd D. TRAIN.
10900 Dvr. Murray, Frederick Calvert
733 L.-Cpl. Turner, George
4th D. TRAIN.
10187 Dvr. West, Ernest Albert
2nd D.S.C.
1875 Dvr. Back, Richard
R. 2185 Dvr. Croy, Orinond
13107 Dvr. O'Donovan, Joseph
Ist PIONEERS.
3064 Pte. Bainbridge, Bartholomew
2087 L.-Sgt. Blake, Patrick Millen
1531 Pte. Dunne, John
3107 a Pte. Gallagher, William Edward
4219 Pte. Heim, Methias Thomas W.
3336 Pte. Houlshan, C.
3063 L.-Cpl. Knight, Joseph James
2641 Pte. MacGregor, Charles Andrew
3869b Pte. McNaughton, Hugh
3381 Pte. Morris, T. Christopher
2156 Pte. Nichols, Faulder
2728 c Pte. O'Keefe, Peter Timothy
2222 L.-Cpl. Pinder, Arthur Ernest
4293 Pte. Powis, Frederick
3221 Pte. Roberts, Walter
2676 Sgt. Stiles, Leo Charles
2429 Pte. Willis, Harry Thomas
2nd PIONEERS.
2094 Pte. Dempsey, Thomas John
2256 Pte. George, Chas. Allen
2632 Pte. Herald, Norman
2647 Pte. Kilpatrick, Frederick John
1951 Pte. Laurenson, George Godfrey
2676 Pte. Mortlock, George Raymond
2411 Pte. Nicol, William Hutchessor
2762 Pte. Oliver, John Thomas
2421 Pte. Perring, John Joseph Collin
2227 Pte. Smith, William Augustus
2421 Pte. Temple, James
2748 Pte. Trengone, Horace Raymond
3700 Pte. Wilson, James
2479 Pte. Wilson, John
Ist AMMUNITION SUB-PARK.
11803 Dvr. Kent. John William
6295 Dvr. Lloyd, William
4th AMMUNITION SUB-PARK.
2181 L.-Cpl. Dwyer, Michael Tom
19 Pte. Goodbrand, William Gordon
287 Dvr. Malmberg, Walter Edward
22nd D.U.S.
4219 W.O. Hope, Joseph Paterson
A.S.C.M.T.
2380 A Dvr. Biddle, Robert
3rd PIONEERS.
729 Pte. Baines, Edward Albert
732 Pte. Baker, Leslie Lawrence H.
2204 Pte. Forster, Albert
1562 Pte. Kilburn, Stanley E.
2853 -Pte. McConnell, James
845 Pte. McKay, George Francis
2871 Pte. Perini, Victor George
901 Cpl. Strickland, Percy Lawrence
2914 Pte. Wheeler, Albert George
4th PIONEERS.
3349 Pte. Betts, Edward
4735 Pt e - Bow, Charles Edward
3084 Pte. Davis, Frank
141 L.-Cpl. Gordon, William
4070 Pte. Gudenswager, Geo. Henry Fairs
2641 Pte. Isaacs, Percy Wynyard
2161 Pte. McCosh, Thomas
1901 Pte. Morisey, William Robert
3897 Pte. Nickols, William Pemell
2701 Pte. Riley, Albert
2458 Pte. Roland, Norman Percy
2204 Pte. Seabrook, Walter
530 Cpl. Sims, John
1945 Pte. Stafford, John
3198 Pte. Stewart, Edward
2718 Pte. Stoddart, John
3446 Pte. Sutherland, George
4128 Pte. Thompson, Henry
1449 Pte. Warren, Frank
1951 Pte. Whitlaw, Thomas Graham
PIONEER BATTALION.
HOMEWARD


sth PIONEERS.
3253 Pte. Clayton, William
3247 Pte. Hodge, James
3409 Pte. Quinn, jno.
4272 Pte. Sullivan, Arthur
507 Pte. Swanborough, Fred. Leopold
AUSTRALIAN ARMY MEDICAL CORPS
Ist FIELD AMBULANCE.
14846 Pte. Beck, Richard
9180 Pte. Matthews, James Joseph
2nd FIELD AMBULANCE.
6375 Pte. Holmes, George Arthur
218 Pte. Mahaffy, William Gilbert
259 Pte. Webster, Herbert Russell
3rd FIELD AMBULANCE.
1781 Pte. Wilkinson, Ronald Dacre
sth FIELD AMBULANCE.
1 7535 Pte. Ginsberg, Aaron
6th FIELD AMBULANCE.
14310 Pte. Dight, Eric William
166 Pte. Harrower, Leslie
14320 Pte. Wearne, Arthur James
14439 Pte. Worman, G. Gilbert
7th FIELD AMBULANCE.
3552 Pte. Bernard, Edw. Julius
15524 Pte. Hall, William
3564 Dvr. McGill, Robert
13642 Pte. Richardson, George Harry
Bth FIELD AMBULANCE.
6599 W.O. King, Tom
4763 Pte. Redland, James Ninian
6747 Dvr. Smith, Alfred Edwin
13661 Pte. Tickle, Victor George
12th FIELD AMBULANCE.
1757 Pte. McGoldrick, Edw.
13th FIELD AMBULANCE.
6411 Pte. Curie, Ernest John
14th FIELD AMBULANCE.
10027 Pte. Boardnian, John Moss
HI L.-Cpl. Hadden, Roy Leslie
15 th FIELD AMBULANCE.
15880 Pte. Muir-Morris, Clarence Cliff
17th FIELD AMBULANCE.
7364 Pte. Edwards, William
2nd A.C.C.S.
7383 Pte. Woodford, Lionel
3rd A.C.C.S.
14009 Sgt. Young, George Tom
ist A.G.H.
3956 Pte. Moran, V. P.
2nd A.G.H.
688 Sgt. Green, Harold Leslie
3391 Pte. Stewart, R. H.
3rd A.G.H.
10278 Pte. Potts, Henry James
5699 Pte. Westcott, Ed. James
Ist AUXILIARY HOSPITAL.
3971 Pte. Bradbeer, Frank
2nd AUXILIARY HOSPITAL.
11242 Pte. Julian, William Howard George
10143 Pte. Sellwood, William
A.M.C. DETAILS.
2515 Pte. Barnes, W. G.
748 Pte. Browne, Joseph Edw.
5306 Pte. Burton, S. B.
3549 Pte. Flannagan, A. F.
10991 Pte. Keenan, H. D.
18280 Pte. Kendrick, Henry Edward
2684 Pte. King, J. J.
6323 Pte. Krantzche, W.
4271 Pte. Langham, H.
7029 Pte. Mason, K. H.
30 Cpl. Mills, Roland
18172 Pte. McDonougli, Cyril Thomas
4037 Pte. McGrath, Patrick John
6099 Pte. McMillen, A.
17825 Pte. Nicholls, John Arthur
6137 Pte. Purkiss, W. L.
5097 Pte. Raymond, L.
6128 Pte. Sadlier, S. G.
7315 Pte Sorrell, A. A.
2657 Pte. Walton, C. G.
4516 Pte. Wattie, James
7336 Pte. Williams, H.
Ist A.D H.
2862 Pte. Lyons, N.
6291 Pte. O'Brien, J. P.
3339 Pte. Poole, J. V.
7082 Pte. Stevens, W. A.
2231 Pte. Stettler, P. J.
6136 Pte. Tuffnell, H. T.
3479 Pte. Townend, L. H.
HOMEWARD


MISCELLANEOUS
2nd Div. H.Q.
1008 Pte. Wilson, Robert
ATTST. VET. HOSP.
6512 Pte. Howe, Robert Edw.
7070 Pte. Vingoe, John
H.Q. Ist Div., B.D.
3802 S.-Sgt. Kelly, Francis Lewis
15th A. L. R.O.D.
6546 Sap. Elmer, George
62b Sap. Pethebridge, John Anthony
664 L.-Cpl. Thompson, Robert Henry
16th A.L. R.O.D.
1816 Cpl. Matthews, Charles James
179 C.S.-M. Pettiett, William George
17th A. L. R.O.D
1024 Sap. Grills, Phillip
60th RAIL. COY.
1414 Sap. O'Connell, Joseph
60th COY. R.O.D.
11 C.S.-M. Barlow, Frederick
ATJST. R.O.D. DETAILS.
4804 Sap. Blackwell, Ernest Frank
sth Div. SAE. COY.
1159 Pte. Moody, Richard
ANZ. PROV. CORPS.
149 Sgt. Mclvor, William
,5787 Cpl. Roy, William
A.A.O.C.
119 Sgt. Maltby, Charles Elwin
A. POST. CORPS.
1866 Pte. Richard, Neville Beresford
E. & M. M. COY.
5 Sgt. Boyd, Theodore Penleigh
3rd Div. SAL V. CORPS.
5026 Pte. Prestage, Robert
ANZAC SECTION 3rd ECHELON.
678 Sgt. Drummond-Hay, William
HOMEWARD




WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA BY
JOHN SANDS LTD., SYDNEY




